7619 S100393 99836235 493
A PLAINE AND EASIE EXPOSITION VP∣ON THE LORDS Prayer in Questions and Answers. By that faithfull Servant of God, Mr. EDVVARD ELTON, Bachelour in Diuinitie, and late Preacher of Gods Word at S. Marie Magdalens Barmondsey, neere LONDON. LONDON, Printed for ROBERT MYLBOVRNE, and are to bee sold at his Shop at the great South doore of Pauls. 1624.
A Plaine and easie Exposition vpon the Lords Prayer in Questions and Answeres. I Come now to speake of Prayer; and in particu∣lar of that Forme of Prayer which Christ hath giuen vs, Math. 6.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and Luke 11.2, 3, 4. After this manner therefore pray yee. Our Father which art in Heauen, hallowed bee thy Name. Thy Kingdome come. Thy will bee done euen in earth as it is in heauen. Giue vs this day our daily Bread. And forgiue vs our Debts, as we also forgiue our Debters. And lead vs not into temptation; but deliuer vs from euill. Amen. And before wee come to that; some generall things are to bee premitted. Quest. VVhat is Prayer?Philip. 4.6. Dan. 9.8.9. 1 Sam. 1.15. 1 Ioh. 5.14. Ioh. 14.14. 1 Tim. 2.1.2. Answ. Prayer is an humble, hearty and holy request made according to Gods will, and offered vp by Faith to God in the Name of Christ, for things needfull for the bodie or soule. Quest. What is the Spirit of Prayer?Zach. 12.10. Psal. 62.8. Rom. 8.26. Iud. ep. vers. 20. Answ. A speciall grace and worke of the Holy Ghost, en∣abling vs to powre out our soules to the Lord with vnspeak∣able sighs and groanes. Quest. To whom must wee direct our Prayers? Answ. To God alone, euen to one God in Trinitie, and to none other. Psal. 50.15. And this might be prooued at large. The Papists reason against this: and they bring rea∣sons to proue it lawfull to pray to the good Angels,  and to the Saints departed: as first this; Honour is to bee giuen to the good Angels and Saints de∣parted, and according to their excellency which is heauenly:
therefore we may call on them, and pray to them. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; honour is due to the good Angels and Saints departed, yet such as hath warrant in Gods Word (that is) that we beleeue they are in eternall happinesse with Christ; we publish and set foorth their faith, pietie, constancie and other vertues in the Church, and that we propound them to our selues and others for imitation, and not that wee call on them or pray to them. It is lawfull to call vpon men liuing, and while we liue to∣gether, we may request one anothers prayers, 1. Sam. 7.8. Rom. 15.30. Therefore it is lawfull to pray to the Saints departed. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; It is no good consequent, wee may request the liuing to pray for vs, therefore the dead: Because for the first we haue both precept and promise, but for the other, nei∣ther precept nor promise. If it be not lawfull to pray to the Saints departed, it is ei∣ther because they cannot pray for vs, or because they will not, or because they know not what we pray for; but (say they) the Saints in heauen can now much more pray for vs then they could while they were liuing in the earth, and they are now more willing to pray for vs, because their loue is greater then when they were on earth, it being now perfect; and as the Angels know the conuersion of a sinner, and re∣ioyce, Luke 15.10.Luk. 15.10. so the Saints departed know our pray∣ers. Therefore it is lawfull to pray to them. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; It is true, the Saints departed can pray for vs, and their loue being now perfect, they are willing, and doe wish well to the whole militant Church, and to all the members of it equally and indifferently, but that they pray for particular persons cannot be proued. Againe, there is not the same reason why the Saints de∣parted should know things said or done by vs on earth as the Angels doe; for the Angels are appointed ministering Spirits, Heb. 1.14.Heb. 1.14. and know many particulars that come to vs, and
many of our priuate necessities, but the Saints departed doe not, being alwayes in heauen absent from vs, yet the worship, and consequently the Inuocation of An∣gells is forbidden, Coloss. 2.18. Much more of the Saints departed, they neither hearing nor knowing what wee pray for. God reueiles to the Saints departed what is prayed for: therefore we may lawfully pray vnto them. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; it appeares not in any place of the Scripture, that God reueiles to the Saints departed what is prayed for. Againe, to what end should we pray to them, if they know not what we ake, but by reuelation. Gen 48.16. The Angell which hath deliuered mee from all e∣uill, blesse the children: Iacob called on the Angell who had de∣liuered him from all euill, and said, that his name, and the name of his dead Fathers Abraham, and Isaac should bee na∣med on them. Therefore it is lawfull to pray to the good An∣gels, and to the Saints departed. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; by Angell in that place is meant Iehouah, the Sonne of God, the second person in Trinitie, who is cal∣led the Angell of the Couenant, Malac. 3 1. And so it is ex∣pounded, Hosea 12.4, 5. Iacob (saith hee) had power ouer the Angell, and preuailed: he wept, and prayed vnto him: he found him in Bethell, and there hee spake with vs. Yea, the Lord God of Hostes, the Lord is himselfe his memoriall. The Angel hee found in Bethell, was God, Genesis 32.28. Because thou hast had power with God, thou shalt also preuaile with men. Againe, where hee saith, Let my name, and the name of my Fathers, Abraham and Izaac bee named vpon them,Gen. 48.6. his meaning is not, tht they should call on his name, or the name of his dead fathers, but that they should in the world bee called by his name, and by the name of his dead fathers: The like phrase is vsed, verse 6. of that Chap∣ter: As women are sayd to bee called by their husbands name, Isai. 4.1.
Iob 5.1. Eliphaz saith, Call now, if any will answere thee, and to which of the Saints wilt thou turne thee. Therefore it is lawfull to call vpon, and to pray to the good Angels and Saints departed. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; first, by Saints, Eliphaz vnderstands not Saints departed and in heauen, but Saints on the earth. Secondly, the phrase (turne thee) doth not signifie Inuo∣cation, or calling on, but as if Eliphaz had sayd, Giue mee (oh Iob) if thou canst, any of the Saints of God, who if he were pressed with any calamitie, that did not suffer the same for his sinnes: That is the drift of the Holy Ghost in that place. Quest. To which of the persons in Trinity doth prayer belong? Answ. To euery person: wee may direct our prayers to God the Father, to God the Sonne, and to God the Holy Ghost, so as wee doe it with due obseruation of some neces∣sary cautions to God the Father, Mat. 6.9. Examples, Math. 26.39. Iohn 17.1. Ephes. 3.14 To God the Sonne, Acts 7.59. Reuel. 22.20. To God the Holy Ghost, as no doubt the Pro∣phets did being sent by him, Isai. 48.16. and for all the Tri∣nitie, 2 Cor. 13.13. Quest. What are the cautions that are duly and necessarily to be obserued in directing our prayers to the persons in the Trinitie? Answ. Two especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; when wee direct our prayers to one person in Trinitie, wee must in minde and heart include the other: because though the persons in Trinitie bee distinct, yet in all the duties of Gods worship performed by vs, the name of any Person, Father, Sonne, or Holy Ghost, is to bee taken essentially, not personally: and wee are to conceiue the Fa∣ther subsisting in the same Godhead or diuine nature with the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost. Againe, in all outward actions the persons in Trinity work together, and are only distinguished in the manner of work∣ing: therefore we must not seuer them in woship. Quest. VVhat is the second caution that is duely and necessa∣rily
to bee obserued, in directing our Prayers to the persons in the Trinitie? Answ. This; when we pray to Christ, we must not seuer his two natures, his Godhead from his manhood; but we must call on him as he is God and man: for though his manhood is not to be worshipped with religious worship, for it selfe, or by it selfe, because by it selfe it is a creature; but as it is per∣sonally vnited to the Godhead, it is part of that person which is true God, and therefore to be worshipped with one and the same worship that the Godhead is to be worshipped. Heb. 1.6. When hee bringeth his only begotten Son into the world, he saith, Let all the Angels of God worship him. The Angels of God must worship the first begotten Son of God brought in∣to the world (that is) God and man. Quest. In whose name must we pray? Answ. In the name and mediation of the Lord Iesus Christ only. The reasons why we should so do, Ioh. 16.23, 24. 2 Cor. 1.20. 1 Tim. 2.5. Heb. 4.15, 16. 1 Iohn 2.1, 2. Quest. What is it to pray in the name of Christ? Answ. It is to beseech God to heare our prayers,Dan. 9.18. Rom. 8.34. Heb. 10.19. &c. not for any thing in our selues, or in any other in heauen or in earth, but only for the worthinesse and merits of Christ Iesus, con∣tinually offered to him for vs. Quest. In whose name and mediation did the Patriarks, Pro∣phets, & the people of God pray before the Incarnation of Christ? Answ. In the name and mediation of Christ to come, as they beleeued in him to come: for as his Sacrifice was ef∣fectuall before his Incarnation and comming in the flesh, hee being the Lambe slaine from the beginning of the world, Reuel. 13.8. so was his Intercession: therefore they had their Priest, who did onely enter into the Sanctuary, and carry the names of the children of Israel before the Lord, and the peo∣ple stood without, Exod. 28.29. which did signifie and poynt out Christ. Rom. 8.26, 27. The spirit it selfe maketh request or intercession for vs with sighs which cannot be expressed: Hee maketh request or intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God: there∣fore we may make him our Intercessor, and pray in his name.
Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the meaning of that place is, that the holy Spirit of God himselfe doth cause vs, and make vs able to make request to God for our selues, hee breathing into our hearts such motions, whereby wee call on God earnestly, as Reu. 22.17. he inflameth the Church with a vehement desire of comming to God by prayer. The Papists plead for the merit and worthinesse of our selues, and of the Saints departed, that wee may come to God in Prayer, in confidence of our owne merits and the merits of the Saints departed: as first for our owne, they obiect; biection.Psal. 86.62. Dauid (say they) prayes for preseruation, be∣cause he was mercifull: so 2 Kings 20.3. Hezekiah desired God to remember him, because hee had walked before him: therfore we may pray to God in the confidence of our owne good workes, and desire to bee heard for our owne worthi∣nesse. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Dauid and Hezekiah in the places alledged, did not plead the merit of their owne righteousnes and good works, but onely testifie that they were the children of God, and such men to whom God had promised to be good and gra∣cious; and did onely assure themselues, that Gods promise of helpe and deliuerance belonged to them in paticular, be∣cause they were of that number, as Psal. 34.15. For the merits of the Saints departed, they obiect. Exod. 32.12, 13. Moses desired God to remember A∣braham, Isaac, and Israel his serunts. So likewise Psalm. 132.10. the faithfull pray, For thy seruant Dauids sake refuse not the face of thine Annoynted. Therefore wee may come to God in prayer and desire to bee heard for the merits of the Saints departed. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; in the places alledged, neither Moses, nor the faithfull desired helpe from God for the merits of Abra∣ham, Isaac, and Israel. But Moses did onely remember the co∣uenant and promise which God made with the Patriarchs, of
helping and protecting their posteritie; and therefore hee saith, To whom thou swearest by thine owne selfe,Exod. 32.13. and saydest vnto them, I will multiply your seed as the starres of the heauen, and all this land that I haue spoken, will I giue vnto your seed, and they shall inherit it for euer: and the faithfull likewise did only put the Lord in minde of his couenant made with Dauid, as ap∣peares ver. 11. The Lord hath sworne in truth to Dauid, and hee will not shrinke from it (saying) of the fruit of thy body will I set vpon thy throne. The Papists further say, wee may make the Angels and  Saints our Mediatours to God, to appeare in per∣son before God for vs, and to pray for vs; and for these they vse Arguments. And first for Angels they cite Zachar. 1.12. The Angell prayed to God for Ierusalem, and the cities of Iudah. Therefore wee may make the good Angels our Mediatours, and intreat them to pray for vs. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; first, that was a propheticall vision, and not a thing acted and done. Againe, if it were a thing done, by the Angell is meant Christ the second person in the Trinitie: and therefore hee is called the Lord, ver. 20.Zach. 1.20. Reuel. 8.3. Another Angell came and stood before the Al∣tar, hauing a golden Censor, and much odours was giuen vnto him, that hee should offer with the Prayers of all Saints vpon the golden Altar which is before the Throne. Therefore Angels doe offer vp prayers, and wee may desire them to offer vp our prayers. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; By Angell in the place alleaged is not meant any created Angell, but Christ Iesus, the Angell of the Co∣uenant, who is called Michael, Reuel. 12.7. For first there is shewed by vision, that which was shadowed out by figure in the time of the Law, by the Priest with his golden Censor, with sweet Odours at the golden Altar. And Aaron with his golden Censor, with sweet Odours at the golden Altar, was not a figure of any created Angell, but only of the Lord
Iesus. And againe it is there sayd, the Angell offered vp the Prayers of all Saints wheresoeuer vpon the face of the whole earth, which cannot bee done by any created Angell, but on∣ly by the Lord Iesus. Odours are here giuen to the Angell; but Christ needs not any thing to be giuen to him, in him is all fulnesse. Therfore it seemes Christ is not there meant. Quest. How is this to be answered? at. 3.17. Coloss. 1.19.20Answ. The meaning of those words, much odours was giuen vnto him, is, that much grace, and fauour, and full acceptance of his most sweet mediation, is vouchsafed him of his father, in him his father is fully well pleased. The arguments for the mediation of the Saints. Jere. 15 1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before mee, yet mine affection could not bee towards this people: cast them out of my sight, and let them depart. Moses and Samuel being dead were wont to pray for the Iewes: therefore wee may make the Saints departed our Mediatours, and intreat them to pray for vs. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the first sentence is conditionall, and affirmes nothing; and the meaning of it is, if Moses and Samuel should now stand in the breach, as they were wont. Psal. 106.23. to turne away my wrath from this people, they should not preuaile, I would not heare them, nor pardon the sinne of this people. Secondly, that place may thus be expounded; if any one or two such excellent men as Moses and Samuel were, should stand before me, and intreat for this people, they should not preuaile: this sense is confirmed, Ezek. 14.14. Reuel. 5.8. The foure and twenty Elders fell downe before the Lambe, hauing euery one harpes, and golden vialls full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints. Therefore (say they) the Saints in heauen offer vp the prayers of the faithfull that bee on earth, and we may intreat them to pray for vs. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Reuel. 5.10.Answ. Thus, the vision of the foure and twenty Elders is to be vnderstood of the Saints liuing in the militant Church
on earth, ver. 10. whose hearts are as vialls of pure gold, and their prayers offered vp by faith in Christ, are as sweet o∣dours. Psal. 141.2. Secondly, if by the 24 Elders,Reuel. 5.9. the Saints in heauen be vn∣derstood, yet it is nothing to the purpose; for they did not desire any thing of God for the liuing, but onely praised Christ the Lambe, as appeares vers. 9. Reuel. 6.10. The soules of the Martyrs cry for vengeance on their persecutors. Therefore they do much more pray for mer∣cy for their brethren, and we may make them our Mediators, and intreat them to pray for vs. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; this is a vision, not a thing acted, & the cry of the Martyrs is to be vnderstood of their cause, & not of their soules, as Gen. 4.10. Abels blood cried for vengeance: so the blood of the Martyrs is as it were crying to God, and wil at length bring his punishing hand on their persecutors, Luke 18.7. Quest. In what manner must we pray? Answ. For the right framing of Prayer fiue things are re∣quired especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; knowledge and vnderstanding; we must know what things may lawfully be asked,1 Ioh. 5.14. 1 Cor. 14.15. and how God will haue them asked, as things that concerne eternall life & saluation, and are simply promised, wee are to pray for absolutely; and things temporall which are promised with condition, we are to aske and pray for, with condition of Gods will. Quest. What language must be vsed in prayer? Answ. Either our owne language, or a language knowne vnto vs, and vnderstood of vs; because we must know that the things we aske are agreeable to Gods will: and in prayer the heart must giue assent to the voice, 1 Cor. 14, 15. The Lord knoweth what we would haue, though we pray in an vnknowne tongue: therefore wee may pray in an vn∣knowne tongue. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; It is not sufficient that the Lord knowes what we aske in prayer, but wee our selues must also know it, be∣cause
without our owne vnderstanding we cannot pray in faith, and with a feeling of our wants, as we ought. ction.Isa. 19.18. the Prophet saith, Fiue cities in the land of Egypt shall speake the language of Canaan. Therefore say th Papists, we may pray in an vnknowne tongue. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the meaning of the Prophet in that place is, that the heathen should turne from their Idolatry,. 19.19. and wor∣ship and serue the Lord with the Israelites, and consent with them in the worship of the Lord, as appeares, vers. 19. Quest. What is the second thing required for the right fra∣ming of Prayer? Answ. This; that we direct our Prayers to God, right∣ly conceiued as hee hath reuealed himselfe in his Word, in Vnitie of essence, and Trinitie of person, with all reuerence and humilitie: for Prayer is part of Gods worship; and if it be not directed to him rightly conceiued, wee worship an Idoll. Quest. What is that reuerence that is required in prayer? Answ. It is a serious consideration and thinking on Gods great Maiestie, and an earnest intention, and fixing of mind and heart on God, without distraction of mind & wandring thought, & a setting our selues before the Lord as a beholder, witnes, and Iudge of our secret thoughts and inward intenti∣ons. Eccles. 5.1. And this reuerence is signified by lifting vp our hands in Prayer: and hence is prayer called the lifting vp of our soule to God, Psal. 25.1. 2 Kin. 19.4. Quest. What is that humilitie that is required in Prayer? Psal. 130.1. Ier. 14.7. Dan. 9.5.7.8. Luk. 18.13. Psal. 143.6.Answ. It is a true sense and feeling, and a true acknow∣ledgement of our owne particular vnworthines, and vilenes, sinnes and misery, with a longing desire of grace from God for the supply of our wants. Quest. What is the third thing required for the right framing of Prayer? Mar. 11 24. Iam. 1.6.7. Psal. 55.22. Psal. 78.41. Isai. 28.16.Answ. This, assurance to be heard, submitting our selues to the will of God, both for the time and for the manner of gran∣ting our requests. Quest. After what maner doth God grant the requests of his children?
An Either by giuing them the things they desire, or by de∣nying the things desired, and giuing them some thing else e∣quiualent and proportionable to it, or better, which may be more for his glory and their good. Thus Moses prayed that he might enter into the Land of promise, the Lord denied him, and in stead of that temporall blessing, gaue him an eternall inheritance in heauen, as appeares Deut. 3.25.26. and Deut. 34.4.5. compared together. Question. Whereupon is assurance to bee heard in Prayer grounded? Answer. On the promise of God,Psal. 50.15. Psal. 65.2. Ioh. 16 23. Heb. 4.15.16. and on the Mediation of Christ, we must know and beleeue that God hath promi∣sed to heare our Petitions and grant them, and that Christ will be our Mediatour to God his Father, and then assurance to be heard will follow. Act. 8.22. Peter bid Simon Magus pray with doubting whether he should haue remission of his sinnes, or no; in that he saith, if it be possible. Therefore faith and assurance to be heard, is not necessary in prayer. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; in that place, Peter did doubtfully promise remission of sinne to Simon Magus; if he did pray to God, not because praier ought to be made with doubting and diffi∣dence, or that true penitent sinners ought not to conceiue certaine hope of remission: but to shew the greatnesse of Simons sinne, and to shew that he doubted whether Simon would by true repentance and faith,Act. 8.23. seeke for mercie and pardon of his sinne, and, that he thus doubted it appeares in the verse following, the 23 verse; for I see thou art in the gall of bitternesse and in the bond of iniquity. God hath sometimes heard, and doth heare the prayers of vnbeleeuers, as appeares Psal. 107. The Prophet there sheweth it by many particular instances. Therefore faith and assu∣rance to be heard, is not necessary in prayer. Quest. How is this to be answered. Answ. Thus; God doth sometimes releeue the oppressed, and heare their grones and cryes, though they be vnbeleeuers not because either their persons, or prayers doe please him:
but for the execution of his Iustice and iudgements on those that wrong them. Jam. 5.4. the cries of the oppressed bring downe the iudgements of God on the oppressours. 2 Sam. 12.22. When Dauid prayed for the life of his child, he doubted whether God would giue it life or no. Therefore faith, and assurance to be heard is not necessary in prayer. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Dauid not knowing whilst his child was li∣uing, whether God would continue the life of it or no: hee prayed for the life of it being a temporall blessing conditi∣onally if the Lord saw it good; and so he had assurance that the Lord would heare him as he prayed, and that appeares in that presently after the death of his child hee was comforted, as hauing obtained that he prayed for. It was expressely signified to Dauid by Nathan, that the child should die.2 Sam. 12.14. vers. 14. and so Dauids prayer was against Gods will reuealed, and therefore not of faith. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Dauid knew not what kinde of threatning that was, that the child should die, whether absolute or con∣ditionall;2 King. 20.1.2 0 7. he might thinke it was with a condition, as if hee did not throughly repent of his sin, or if he did not earnest∣ly call on God for the child, as Hezechiah did when the Pro∣phet told him that he should die and not liue: he prayed vers. 3. and the Lord heard him, vers. 5. and added vnto his daies fifteene yeares vers. 6. Quest. For whom are we to pray? Answ. Not only for our selues, but for others also. Psal. 50.15. Num. 14.19. Coloss. 4.2.3. Iam. 5.16. Quest. May we pray for all others? Answ. For all the men in the world, as they make one whole bodie together,Ioh. 17.20. Psal. 122.6. 1 Tim. 2.1.2. 2 Thess. 3.1. we may not pray; because there bee some in that body, though vnknowne to vs, whom God in his iust Iudgement hath reiected: and Christ prayed not for the world, John 17.9. but for all Gods elect, and for the whole Church of God, and for men of all sorts and degrees, places and conditions in the world whatsoeuer, especially for publike persons, Magistrates or Ministers, wee may and we are to pray.
Quest. May we pray for particular persons seuerally, or no? Answ. For particular persons whether they be good or bad,Gen. 17 18. Gen. 18.23. Gen. 20.17. Exod 32.11.12 Mat. 5.42. Luk. 23.34. Acts 7.60. 1 Ioh. 5.16. whom either we our selues doe know, or others make known to vs to stand in neede of our prayers, though they bee our enemies and persecutors, we may and we are to pray seue∣rally: vnlesse it be apparant that any one hath committed the vnpardonable sinne: for such an one we may not pray. Question. What perticular persons are we principally to pray for? Answ. Such as doe beleeue in Christ,Rom. 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.23. Ephes. 6.18. and repent of their sinnes, and are the seruants of God, and such as in the iudge∣ment of charity, we are to account Saints. Quest. What are the persons for whom we are not to pray? Answ. Either such as are reprobates, if wee could know them, or such as ae dead and departed this life: and that for three reasons especially. Quest. What is the first of those reasons? Answ. This; Prayer for the dead is vaine and nothing a∣vaileable: for the soules of all men and women after their departure out of this life, are either in Heauen or in Hell; and the Saints in Heauen neede not our prayers, and the dam∣ned in Hell cannot be helped by them: and therefore prayer for the dead is vnlawfull. Eccles. 11.13. Mat. 25.31.32. &c. we find two sortes of men only mentioned, Sheepe & Goate, blessed and cursed, and two places to which they are sent, Heauen and Hell. Quest. What is the second reason, why we are not to pray for the dead? Answ. This; the time of grace and mercy, and pardon of sinne is only in this life, and after death there is no remission of sinne: therefore prayer for the dead is to no purpose, and so vnlawfull. 2. Cor. 5.10. Quest. What is the third reason, why we are not to pray for the dead? A. This; prayer for the dead is not of faith, because it is not warranted in the Word of God; either in the Old Testament by any precept, promise or example, or by any sacrifice or oblation to be offered for the dead: or in the New Testament
by any thing expresly propounded, or by good consequēce to be gathered, and being not of faith, it is a sinne, and vnlawfull. Not to meddle with Purgatory which is idle & friuolous; but to come to some Obiections which the Papists make, thereby goeing about to proue that prayer for the dead is lawfull and necessary, and the first is Nehem. 1.6. Both I and my Fathers house haue sinned and Dan. 9.6.8, Nehemiah, and Daniel, did make confession of their owne sinnes; and the sinnes of their forefathers, and prayed for the pardon, both of their owne sinnes & the sinnes of their forefathers, being then dead. Therefore it is lawfull to pray for the dead. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Nehemiah and Daniel, in the places alled∣ged, confessed the sinnes of their forefathers, and prayed for the pardon of them, not in regard of their forefathers that were departed, and could not be helped by their prayers, but in regard of themselues that God would not impute vnto them now liuing, the sins and offences of their forefathers: and thus (no doubt) good King Iosiah prayed, 2 Kings 22.13. when he said, Goe yee and enquire of the Lord for mee, and for the people, and for all Iudah, concerning the wordes of this Booke that is found: for great is the wrath of the Lord that is kindled against vs, because our fathers haue not obeyed the words of this Booke, to doe according to all that which is written therein for vs. This seemes no good answere: for the Lord doth not im∣pute the sinne of the father to the children, Ezech. 18.20. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; it is true, the iniquitie and wickednes of the father shall not hurt the sonne, no more then the righteous∣nes of the father shall profit or helpe the sonne, if the sonne forsake the wickednesse of the father: but if hee follow the wickednesse of his father, he makes himselfe guiltie, not on∣ly of his owne wickednesse, but also of the wickednesse of his father. Thus the Lord hath threatned in the second Com∣mandement; and thus Christ threatned the Scribes and Pha∣risies, Math. 23.35. That all the innocent blood that was shed
upon the earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous, vnto the blood of Zacharias the Son of Barachias, whom yee slew betwixt the Temple and the Altar, 2 Chron. 24.22. might come vpon them, and be required at your hands. Mat. 5.25.26. Say the Papists, here mention is made of not comming out of prison till satisfaction be made, which doth imply, that after satisfaction is made, there shall be de∣liuerance, and by prison here, cannot be meant Hell, for out of Hell there is no redemption, but Purgatorie: and there∣fore prayer for the dead is lawfull. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; First, those words are a parable, and proue nothing, and the drift of Christ in them, is to stirre vp men to brotherly reconciliation, and not to proue the rigour of the Law. Secondly, though they be more then a parable, yet they make not for their purpose; for the word ( till, doth not there signifie a certaine time, but eternitie:Mat. 5.26.  &c vs{que}  till or vntill. and thus the word is taken Mat. 1.25.  &c. And thus in the Old Testament. 2 Sam. 6.23.  vsque in diem mortis suae, and Psal: 110.1.  donec dis∣posuero &c. spoken of Christ, we may not therefore conclude that Christ shall raigne no more. Mat: 12, 32. Here say they, wee see that some sinnes are forgiuen in this world, and some in the world to come: there∣fore we may pray for the dead. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; first this is no good conclusion, the sinne, against the Holy Ghost is not forgiuen in this world, nor in the world to come:Ex puris ne∣gatiuis nihil concluditur. therefore some sinnes are forgiuen in the world to come, it followes not according to the rules of Art, for of pure negatiues nothing can be concluded. Secondly, that place must be expounded by another: Mark 3:29: where Christ saith, hee that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost shall neuer haue forgiuenesse, but is culpable of eternall damnation. Question. What are the persons against whom wee may pray?
Answ. Generally all the enemies of our saluation, and al∣so wicked persons in particular, two cautions being duly obserued. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; we must be moued to pray against them, be∣cause they are the enemies of God and of his Church, and do oppose the truth and religion of God and good things: and not out of our hatred, or our owne priuate reuenge; for wee must not seeke to reuenge our selues. Rom. 12.19. Thus Paul prayed against the false Apostles, not in respect of his owne cause, but in respect of the cause of God. Gal. 5.12. Quest. What is the second caution to be obserued in our pray∣ing against wicked persons in particular? Answ. This; if they be our enemies only, we must pray against their bad dealing and sinne,2 Sam. 15.31. Act. 4.29. Psal. 83.9.10. not against their persons; if they be Gods enemies we must pray against the bad cause they maintaine, simply and absolutely; but against their per∣sons, with condition, if otherwise Gods Church cannot bee preserued, or his truth maintained; that then God would cut them off and destroy them. The Prophets and Apostles prayed simply and absolutely, against wicked persons; as Dauid Psal 140.9.10. And Paul against Alexander the Copper Smith 2. Tim. 4.14. Quest. May not we doe the like? Answ. No; they were extraordinarie men, and had the Spirit of discerning who were incurable enemies of God, and who were not, and were carried with a pure zeale of Gods glory not mixed with hatred, or corrupt desire of re∣uenge; and we are but ordinarie men, endued with ordina∣rie gifts, and haue not a like Spirit to discerne of the persons of men, what they are: and our zeale of Gods glory is mix∣ed with many corrupt affections; and therefore wee praying simply and absolutely, it may be said to vs as Christ saide to his Disciples, Iames and Iohn, ye know not of what spirit ye are. Luke. 9.54.55. Quest. When must we pray? Answ. Continually, and at all times without ceasing, and we are not to thinke prayer needelesse, or vnseasonable at
any time. 1 Thes. 5.17. Luk 18.1. Ephes. 6.18. Quest. How must we pray continually? Answ. Thus; either by set and solemne prayer, and in more large and ample manner, and vpon set and certaine oc∣casions: as at the beginning of the workes of our callings, at the receiuing of the creatures of God,Psal. 55.17. Coloss. 3.17. 1 Tim. 4.4.5. Nehem. 2.4. or at our going to rest; or by a sudden and secret lifting vp of our hearts to God by a wish, or sigh, or groane of the Spirit, according to the present occasion. If we must pray continually, then we shall vse repetitions in prayer, which Christ forbids. Mat. 6.7. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; repetitions in prayer are not simply for∣bidden and altogether vnlawfull, holy men haue vsed them, 1 King. 8.23. to verse. 54. Salomon repeates some things sea∣uen or eight times. Psal. 136. Dauid repeates for his mercy endureth for euer, at the end of euery verse, they being 26. verses in the Psalme. Dan. 9.18.19. But such repetitions as are idle and vaine (that is) void of faith, and feeling of our wants, and are vnreuerently vttered, rather to hold out time then to expresse the affection, such as the Heathen vsed, and such as the Papists vse, who thinke to be heard if they repeat a certaine number of prayers, are vnlawfull and forbidden. Isai. 1.15. Quest. What is the place where we must pray? Answ. There is no place vnfit for prayer,Mal. 1.11. Ioh. 4.20.21. 1 Tim. 2.8. Mat. 14.28. Luk. 23.42. Act. 21.5. Mat. 6.6. it may be made in any place, and it is not now tyed to one place more then to another in regard of holinesse: for Prayer sanctifies the place, and not the place Prayer, but only in regard of order, the publike place of meeting for the worship of God, is the fittest for publike prayer, and a priuate place for priuate prayer, and a secret place for secret prayer. If we may pray in euery place, then we may imitate Hy∣pocrites, and pray in the open streete, whom Christ reproues Mat. 6.5. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; hypocrites whō Christ reproues, pray in the open streete for vaine glory, purposely to bee seene of men,
and that we may not doe: but we may in our hearts pray to God, and sigh and grone to God, walking in the streete, or in the open market; so as the outward signes of prayer bee concealed from the sight of men: and thus Nehemiah pray∣ed euen in the Kings presence. Nehem. 2.4. If no place be exempt from prayer, then we may pray in Idoll Churches. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; After Idolatrie is remoued from Idoll Churches we may pray in them: Elijah sacrificed in the same place where Baals Priests did. 1 King. 18.13. Quest. What is the will of God reuealed, according to which we must pray? Answ. It is the will of God reuealed throughout the whole Scripture, concerning the duty and exercise of prayer: the Scripture recording to that purpose many excellent prayers of holy men, but especially in that portion of Scripture deli∣uered by Christ him selfe, and propounded by his holy Euan∣gelists Mathew and Luke. Mat. 6.9. Luke. 11.2. Our Father which art in Heauen, &c. Quest. What are the generall things contained in those words deliuered by Christ himselfe, and propounded by his holy Euan∣gelists? Answ. They are three. First a Preface or enterance into Prayer, in these words, Our Father which art in Heauen. Se∣condly, the matter of prayer consisting of sixe Petitions. Thirdly, a conclusion, for the confirmation of prayer in the last words, For thine is the Kingdome, the Power, and the Glory, for euer and euer. Of these in Order. Quest. What doth the Preface containe? Answ. A description of the true God to whom we pray, who is set out by an argument of relation, Our Father, and by the subiect or place, which art in Heauen. For the first of these. Quest. What is meant by the word Father? Answ. Principally the first Person in Trinitie, yet so as we must in heart and minde conceiue also the Sonne and the
Holy Ghost. Because here the name of Father stands in rela∣tion to vs, and is to be taken essentially, and to be vnderstood of the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, subsisting in the same God-head, and diuine nature. God is our Father in Christ, for by him we are reconciled to God his Father, and he who is our Father in Christ, is not Christ himselfe: Therefore by the name (Father) Christ is not here meant. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Christ may bee considered either as a me∣diatour, God and Man in one Person; and so it is not he that doth receiue into fauour, but hee by whom, and through whom, we are receiued into fauour with God: or he may be considered as God the Sonne, the second person in Trinitie, of the same eternall Essence with the Father, and so hee doth receiue vs into fauour: and so hee is heere to be vnder∣stood vnder the word Father: and hence hee is sometimes called Father: as Isa 8.18. expounded of Christ. Heb. 2.13. Isai. 9.6. Quest. How is God our Father? Answ. Three wayes;Luk. 3 38. Act. 17.28. Ioh. 1.12.13. Ioh. 3.6.8. 1 Pet. 1.22.23 Either by creation as wee are his creatures. Or by acceptation, as we are his children by adop∣tion and grace, in and through Christ the Mediatour: or by a second creation, which is our regeneration as we are regene∣rate and borne a new, by the spirit of God. Quest. How are we to call on God as our Father? Answ. Not as he is our Father by creation, but as hee is our Father by acceptation, and we his children by adoption and grace, in and through Christ the Mediatour: and as he is also our Father by regeneration: for as wee are Gods crea∣tures only, we cannot come to him as to our Father,Ephes. 2.3. Rom. 8.15. wee ha∣uing defaced his Image by sinne, and falne from our first state of creation, and made our selues children of wrath by Nature. Quest. What vse are we to make of this argument of rela∣tion, Our Father, in that we are taught in prayer, to call God our Father? Answ. It serues both for the information of our Iudge∣ment
touching prayer, and also for direction in the dispositi∣on of our hearts in prayer. Quest. What doth this argument of relation (Our Father) informe vs of our iudgement touching prayer? sai. 63.17. hilip. 4.6. oh. 1.12.13. Galat. 4.5. 1 Ioh. 3.1.Answ. That God only is to be called on in prayer: for in prayer to be tearmed Our Father, is proper to God, and hee alone is our Father, both by adoption and grace, and also by regeneration and new birth, and that we are to come to him in prayer, only in the mediation and intercession of Christ: because in him, and through him only, are wee accepted for the children of God, by adoption and grace. Quest. How doth this argument of relation (Our Father) derect vs in the disposition of our hearts in prayer? Answer. Two waies: first in respect of God, and second∣ly in respect of our brethren. Quest: What doth it direct vs vnto for the disposition of our hearts in prayer, in respect of God? Answ. To two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; a holy boldnesse and confidence in prayer; in that we direct our prayers to him who is our Father,Psal. 103.13. Isai. 49.15. Luk. 11.15. Rom. 10.12. Heb. 4.16. yea our kinde, louing, and tender father, who pittieth his chil∣dren more then any earthly Father or Mother doth, or can pi∣tie their children: it teacheth vs to come to God in prayer, cheerefully, and confidently, and with good hope that he wil grant our holy requests, and will not denie vs his good spi∣rit, nor any thing that he see good for vs. Quest. What is the second thing that this argument of relati∣tion Our Father, doth direct vs vnto for the disposition of our hearts in prayer, in respect of God? Answ. This; reuerence, humilitie, and child-like feare and obedience,Malac. 1.6. 1 Pet. 1.17. Ioh. 42.6. Luk. 15.18.19. Iam. 4.6. in that we are to call on God as our Father: it teacheth vs to come to him in prayer, with all reuerence and humilitie, and with a child-like feare, & with a full pur∣pose in our hearts to carry our selues as dutifull children to∣wards him at all times, and neuer wittingly and willingly to offend him in any thing. Quest. What doth this argument of relation Our Father, di∣rect
vs vnto, for the disposition of our hearts in prayer, in respect of our brethren? Answ. To two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; Christian loue,Isai. 1.15. 1 Tim. 2.8. and good affection towards our brethren, In that we are to call on God as our Father: it teacheth vs, that wee must in prayer to God, haue in our hearts loue to our brethren, children of the same Father, with vs. Quest. What is the second thing which this argument of rela∣tion (Our Father) doth direct vs vnto, for the disposition of our hearts in prayer, in respect of our brethren? Answ. This; a remembrance of others,Iam. 5.16. Ephes. 6.18. as of our selues in prayer: in that wee are to call on God (as our Father) it teacheth vs that in our prayers wee must bee mindfull of o∣thers as iust occasion is offered, and be petitioners to God for them as well as for our selues, as hauing God their Father as well as wee. Quest. May not a man or a woman in prayer say my Father, or my God? Answ. In prayer which they make in secret by themselues alone they may, but not in publike or with others;Mat. 26.39. Rom. 1.8. yet in prayer they make in secret by themselues alone, there must be that loue and affection towards others, which must bee ex∣pressed in publike, and with others. Now to the second argument whereby God is de∣scribed in this Preface (namely) the subiect or place, which art in Heauen. Quest. What doth the word Heauen signifie? Answ. In Scripture the word (Heauen) is taken in three significations. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; it signifieth all that Region which is aboue the earth and waters, to the Moone, which is called Ayre. Thus Gen. 1.8. Psal. 8.8. Mat. 6.26. Luk. 12.56. the face of Heauen. Hosea. 2.21. Quest. What is the second proper signification of the word Heauen, in Scripture?
Answ. This; it signifieth all the Celestiall Orbes, from the highest Region of the Ayre to the first moouer; together with the first mouer: as the azure skie or Firmament, where∣in the Sunne, Moone, and Starres are placed. Thus Gen. 1.14. Gen. 15.5. Jerem. 33.22. Mat. 24.29. Quest. What is the third proper signification of the word (hea∣uen) in the Scripture? 2 Cor. 12.2.4. Act. 3.21.Answ. This; it signifieth the seate of the blessed Angells and Saints, whither Christ is ascended, and from whence he shall come to Iudgement, which is called the third Heauen and Paradise. Quest. What is heere meant by the word Heauen, In that we are taught to say,Psal. 11.4. Isai. 57.15. Isai. 66.1 cited by Stephen Act. 7.49. Obiection. Our Father which art in Heauen? Answ. The highest Heauen, the seate of the blessed Angels and Saints, whither Christ is now ascended, and where hee sits at the right hand of his Father, and from whence he shall come to iudge the World. God is infinit and incomprehensible, hee filleth Heauen and Earth: 1 King. 8.27. and he is euery where at one and the same time. Quest. How then can he be said to be in Heauen? Answ. God is saide to be in Heauen, not because hee is there locally circumscribed, as if he were included with∣in the compasse of Heauen (Iob. 22.14.) or were so in Hea∣uen as if hee were in no place else, but in three other re∣spects. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; because hee is most glorious and pure, free from all corruption, alteration and change, and inuisible. The Heauen is as it were a curtaine drawne between vs and the glorious maiestie of God. Psal. 102.26.27.104. & 2.1 Tim. 6.16. Colos. 1.15. Quest. What is the second respect, in which God is said to bee in Heauen? Psal. 2.4. & 115.3.Answ. This: because his powerfull prouidence and Wisedome, and Iustice, and Mercy, is made manifest from thence to vs.
Quest. What is the third respect in which God is saide to bee in Heauen? Answ. This; because there hee doth especially manifest the tokens of his diuine Maiestie:1 Cor. 13.12. 1 Iohn 3.2. he doth there immediate∣liy and vsiblely, exhibite and manifest the fulnesse of his glo∣ry to his Angels and Saints. Quest. What vse are we to make of this argument, whereby God is described by the place or subiect where he is, which art in Heauen? in that we are taught in prayer to say Our Father which art in Heauen. Answ. It serues both for confutation of some erronious and foolish opinions, & also for instruction touching payer. Quest. What erronious and foolish opinions are hereby con∣futed? Ans. Two opinions of the Papists: First in that they thinke that an Image of gold, siluer, wood, or stone,Psal. 123.1. Coloss. 3.1. is a fit meanes to put vs in minde of God: for God being in heauen, we are in prayer to lift vp our hearts to heauen aboue all earthly things, and not to poare on an Image. Secondly, in that they thinke God is nearer vnto vs in one place then in an other, and therefore goe on pilgrimage from place to place: for heauen is equally distant from all places,Ioh 4.23. and distinction of place in regard of Gods presence and holi∣nesse, is taken away. Quest. What other opinion is confuted by this argument, where∣by God is described by the place or subiect where he is, which art in heauen: in that we are taught in prayer to say, Our Father which art in heauen? Answ. This; the foolish opinion of ignorant persons, who thinke that God sits in heauen like an old man with a Crown on his head, and a Scepter in his hand;Deut. 4.15.16. 1 Tim. 6.16. which is a carnall con∣ceit of Gods maiestie, which is heauenly and most glorious: and it is forbidden in the word of God. Quest. What doth this argument, whereby God is thus discri∣bed that he is in heauen, teach vs touching prayer? Answ. Three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; steadfast trust in God, and assurance to be
heard if wee pray aright for things lawfull, after a lawfull manner in the name of Christ: for God is not only a Father willing to heare and to helpe vs, but in Heauen also: and so a God who both seeth our wants, and is of all power able to grant our lawfull desires, and to giue vs whatso∣euer hee in his wisdome sees meete and good for vs: Psal. 33.13. Hee looketh downe from heauen, and then vers. 18.19. his eye is vpon them that feare him, and vpon them that trust in his mercy, to deliuer their soules from death, And to preserue them in Famine; and Psalme, 102.19.20. and this comforted Christ against the power of his ene∣mies,Math. 26.53. that his Father was able (if it pleased him) to deli∣uer him. Quest. VVhat is the second thing that this argument, whereby God is discribed that he is in Heauen, doth teach vs touching Prayer? Answ. This; that we are to pray with all reuerence, and with heauenly affections and meditations,Eccles. 5.1. Exod. 3.5. auoiding all light∣nesse, and vnseemely behauiour; because wee pray to him who is so high aboue vs,2 Chron. 32.20 and that wee are to pray also with feruencie, that our prayer may ascend into Heauen: we are to put off our shoes when we come to God, (that is) our or∣dinarie affections. Quest. What is the third thing that this argument, where∣by God is described that hee is in Heauen, doth teach vs in Prayer? Answ. This; that we are especially to aske such things in prayer, as are most fit for him to giue, (that is) things heauen∣ly and spirituall: Mat. 6.32.33. your heauenly father know∣eth that you haue neede of all these things: but seeke yee first the Kingdome of God and his righteousnesse, and all these things shall be ministred vnto you. Now to the matter of the prayer called the Lords Prayer, consisting of sixe petitions. Quest. How are the petitions of that Prayer deliuered by Christ, and propounded and distinguished? Answ. Thus: the three first petitions concerne God sim∣ply and meerely, and the other three concerne our selues.
Quest. Why are the petitions that concerne God simply and meerely set in the first place? Answ. For two reasons especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Deut. 10.14. 1 Chron. 29.11.12. 2 Chron. 20.6. Exod. 32.32. Rom. 9.3. because God is the Soueraigne and absolute Lord of all Creatures; and he must be simply and absolutely regarded: all respect of our selues, of our owne bodies or soules set apart: and wee ought to bee content to want our necessary food, and remission of our sinnes, if it might be for the glorie of God, and that God might haue glory by it: and hence we find that some haue beene so zealous of Gods glo∣rie, as they haue preferred it before the saluation of their owne soules. Question. What is the second reason, why the petitions that concerne God simply and meerely are set before thsoe that concerne our selues? Answ. This; because God hath made all things for his owne glorie, and his glory is the end of all the Creatures, and of all the counsels of God: and his glorie must bee the highest end of all our actions,Prou. 16.4. 1 Cor. 10.31. and the first thing in all our intenti∣ons: and hence the Prophet exhorts the Creatures of all kindes to praise God, and to giue glory vnto him, Psalme 148. whole Acts. 12.23. Herod was smitten because he gaue not glorie to God. Quest. How are the three first petitions distinguished? Answ. Thus; the first concernes the end, Gods glory it selfe: and the second and third concerne the meanes whereby that end may be attained, the Kingdome and will of God, for God is glorified when his Kingdome is aduanced, and his will obeyed. Now to the first Petition. Hallowed be thy name, Quest. What are we to vnderstand by the name of God? Answ. The name of God in Scripture, is taken in two ac∣ceptations. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; for God himselfe, who though he be in his Essence vnconceiuable, yet he is reuealed in his Word to be
the only true God: Thus Psal. 20.1. The name of the God of Jacob (that is) the God of Iacob. Isa. 26.8. so the name of Christ is taken for Christ himselfe. John 1.12. Quest. What is the second acception, in which the name of God is taken in Scripture? Exod. 3.14. Exod. 6.3. Exod. 33.18.19 Exod. 34.5.6.7. Psal. 104. Psal. 138.2. Cantic. 1.2. Act. 9.15.Answ. This: For any thing whereby the glory of Gods nature is made knowne to vs: as first, his great and holy Titles, as Iehouah, Lord, God, Iesus, Christ, and such like. Secondly, his essentiall attributes or properties, as his Power, Wisedome, Truth, Goodnesse, Iustice, Mercy, and such like. Thirdly, his Word, worship and holy Ordinances. Rom. 2.24.Fourthly, his Workes, Creatures and gifts, whether out∣ward in or about the body: as health, strength, beauty, & such like: Or inward in the soule, as knowledge, faith, loue, and such like. Quest. What are we to vnderstand by the name of God in this petition, Hallowed be thy name? Psal. 44.5. Psal. 68.4. Psal. 86.9.Answ. Both God himselfe, and all things whereby hee is made knowne vnto vs. Question. What is meant by hallowing of the name of God? Leuit. 10.3. Ezech. 38.23.Answer. This; the seuering of the name of God, and the setting of it apart from all profane, vnholy and common a∣buse, to a reuerent, holy, and an honourable vse of it, whether we thinke of it, speake of it, or vse it any manner of way: Thus the Sabbath is said to bee hallowed, in that God hath consecrated it to his seruice and the exercise of Religion. Exod. 20.11. Gods name is holy and pure in it selfe. Quest. How then can we who are sinfull and impure, hallow and sanctifie it? Answ. We hallow and sanctifie the name of God not by adding any holinesse to it,Deut. 28.58. Psal. 96.8. that is impossible, it being infinite∣ly holy in it selfe; but by acknowledging it to bee most ho∣ly, and by honouring it as most holy: as by thinking of it, speaking of it, and vsing it as a most holy thing, both after an holy manner, purely, and to a right and holy end, as
wisdome is said to bee iustified of her children, (that is) ac∣knowledged and declared to be iust, Luke 7.35. Quest. What is then the summe of this petition, Hallowed be thy Name? Answ. This; that as God himselfe, his titles, attributes,Isai. 8.13. Ezech. 36.20.21.22.23. word, and works are most holy and pure in themselues, so they may be both of vs, & of all others acknowledged in thought, word, and deed with all reuerence, and may be set apart from all profanation, and be vsed after an holy manner, and to a right and holy end. Quest. What are the things we pray for in this petition, Hal∣lowed be thy Name? Answ. They are either such things as respect God him∣selfe, or such things as concerne our selues and others. Quest. What be the things we pray for in this petition that re∣spect God himselfe? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Exod. 15.1.2. to 20. Psal. 83.9.18. Psal. 106.8.47. Isai. 5.15.16. Ezech. 28.21. Eze. 36.22.23. Ezech. 38.23. that God would worke all such things as may bee matter of his praise, and may bring glory to his great name, and may giue men iust occasion to honour him, whe∣ther they be good things and mercies towards his children, or iudgements on the wicked. Quest. What is the second thing we pray for in this petition, that respects God himselfe? Answ. This; that God would not bring such things vp∣on vs, we being his Church and children, which might make wicked ones take occasion to profane his great and holy name,Deut. 9.25.26. &c. Iosh. 7.7.8.9. as God said he would not suffer his name to be pollu∣ted among the heathen, by suffering them to preuaile against his people. Ezec. 39.7. he thereby teacheth, that wicked ones take occasion to insult against his people, and himselfe their God. It is a dishonor to his Maiestie; and in this petition we pray it may be preuented. Quest. What be the things wee pray for in this petition, Hal∣lowed be thy Name, that concerne our selues and others? Answ. Fiue things especially. Quest. What is the first of those?
sal. 100 3. Ierem. 9.24. Hosea 6.6. Iohn 17.3.Answ. This; that the excellency and glory of Gods Maie∣stie and holines may be truly known of vs, and of all others, and that we and others may take notice of it as it is reuealed in his word, and in his works, and so farre forth as it is fit for the knowledge and vse of man: for they that know not God, cannot possibly glorifie his name. Quest. What is the second thing we pray for in this Petition, that concernes our selues and others? Answ. This; that the excellencie of Gods glory, and Ma∣iestie, and holinesse may be truely acknowledged of vs, and of all others, in all the meanes and wayes of his, wherein he manifesteth his glory; that we and all others may acknow∣ledge how mightie, wise, iust, and gracious hee is in all his workes: for men may in some measure know God, and yet not acknowledge him as God, Psal. 67.2. Rom. 1.21. They did not acknowledge God as they ought to haue done; they had not a reuerent opinion of God, nor did thinke honou∣rably of Gods eternall power and Godhead appearing in his creatures. Quest. What is the third thing we pray for in this Petition, that concernes our selues and others? 1 Peter 3.15. Luke 5.6. Acts 3 10. Psal. 116.12. Psal. 119.120. Psal. 139.17. Isai. 66 2.5. Psal. 19 10. Psal. 119.97. Numb 20.12. Heb. 4.2.Answ. This; that both our hearts and affections, and the hearts and affections of all others may be religiously and re∣uerently moued according to the known iust occasion giuen, either from the workes of Gods power and prouidence, or from any part of his word, as to a reuerent admiration in re∣gard of some extraordinary worke of God, to thankfulnes in regard of his workes of mercy; to feare and trembling, and humiliation, in respect of his Iudgements; and to a loue of God in regard of all his works: and so for his word, to feare at the threatnings of it, to reioyce in the comforts of it, and to beleeue and loue euery part of his word; this is to sancti∣fie God in our hearts. Quest. What is the fourth thing we pray for in this Petition, that concernes our selues and others? Psalm. 51.15. & 40.9, 10. Psal. 50.23. Hosea 14.3.Answ. This; that both wee and all others may haue our mouths opened, and tongues vsed to speake either of God, of his Titles, Attributes, word, & workes; or to God with re∣uerence,
and especially to praise him for all his mercies. Quest. What is the fifth thing wee pray for in this Petition, that concernes our selues and others? Answ. This;Math. 5.16. 1 Pet. 2.12. 1 Tim. 6.1. Titus 2.10. 1 Tim. 4.5. that both we and all others may lead a godly and an vpright life, and may glorifie God in all our actions, and in our lawfull callings, and in the vse of all his creatures, sanctifying them by the Word and Prayer. Quest. What are the things we pray against in this Petition, Hallowed be thy Name? Answ. All such things as either in our selues or in others, or from our selues or others, are meanes to obscure, or deface, or to hinder Gods glory, and to dishonour his holy name. Quest. What are the things either in our selues or in others, that are meanes to obscure or deface, or to hinder Gods glory, and to dishonour his holy name? Answ. Three things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; ignorance of God,1 Cor. 15.34. Ephes. 4.18. Math. 22.29. Iohn 4 22. as he is made knowne in his word, and in his works, whereby we or others are carried to a contempt, or at least to a neglect of the excellencie and glory of Gods Maiestie and holinesse manifested in his word and works, and wherby we and others runne into errors, and into false and foolish opinions, either touching God, or the worship of God, Exod. 5.2. and of this speaks Bildad, Iob 18.21. And thus doe the Papists and ignorant persons. Quest. What is the second thing either in our selues or others, that is a meanes to obscure, or deface, or to hinder Gods glory, and to dishonour his holy name? Answ. This; pride of heart, wherby we or others do seeke our owne praise and glory, and to arrogate and take that glo∣ry and praise to our selues, as to our owne wit, strength,Habac. 1.16. Hab. 2.4. Dan. 4.27. Act. 12.23. abi∣litie, or meanes, that is due to God, and are proud of our own gifts; and in doing good things, doe secretly seeke applause a∣mongst men. 2 Thes. 2.4. Antichrist is said to exalt himselfe against God, and to sit in the Temple of God, shewing him∣selfe to be God, (that is) taking to himselfe power to forgiue sins, to open and shut heauen, to dispence with Gods lawes, and such like, as the Pope doth.
Quest. What is the third thing either in our selues, or in others, that is a meanes to obscure or deface, or to hinder Gods glory, and to dishonour his holy name? Isai. 1 2.3. Ierem. 5.7.8. Psalm. 78.32. Mark. 6.12.Answ. This: dulnesse and deadnesse of heart, whereby our af∣fections, or the affections of others are not stirred and moo∣ued according to the qualitie of Gods works or word, and the parts of his worship; and whereby wee or others doe not consider, as we ought, the wisedome, power, iustice, and mer∣cie of God appearing in his creatures & workes of his pro∣uidence. Quest. VVhat be the things from our selues or others, that are meanes to obscure or deface, or to hinder Gods glory, & to dishonor his holy Name? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Gen. 21.9. Numb. 11.6. Psal. 78.19. 2 Pet. 3.4. Iud. ep. v. 16.Answ. This; profanesse of speech, when we or others doe either vnreuerently, or wickedly and blasphemously speake of God, of his Titles, Attributes, Word, or Workes; as by ordinary and rash swearing and blasphemie, by moc∣king and scoffing at or with the workes or word of God, complaining of his prouidence, murmuring at his Iudge∣ments, carping and cauilling at his word, and such like. Quest. What is the second thing from our selues and others, that is a meanes to obscure or deface, or to hinder Gods glory, and to dishonour his holy Name? 2 Sam. 12.14. Rom. 2.24. 1 Tim. 6.1.Answ. This; profanesse and impiety of life, when we or others doe liue an euill and a scandalous life. Now to the second Petition, that concernes God simply and meerely; Thy Kingdome come. And first concerning the meaning of the words of this Pe∣tition; Thy Kingdome come. Quest. What is meant by Gods Kingdome? Answ. Gods kingdome doth signifie such an order or state, in which God doth gouerne, and persons and things are sub∣iect, & is in Scripture taken in two acceptions, one generall, the other more speciall. Quest. What is the first and generall acception of Gods king∣dome in Scripture?
Answ. This; it is taken for that soueraigntie and power,Psal. 29.10. Psal. 95.3. & 102.19. which God as Creatour exerciseth ouer all persons and things, disposing them all to their proper ends for his owne glory, and whereby God doth order and rule all creatures in heauen and in earth; yea, the damned, and Deuils in hell. Quest. VVhat is the second more speciall acception of Gods kingdome in Scripture? Answ. It is twofold. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; it is taken for Gods speciall regiment and gouerment among the Iewes onely, among whom God ruled as King, and that in outward things, both in the time of peace, and in the time of warre, Numb. 23.21. 1 Sam. 8.7. when the people would needs haue a king, the Lord said, they had cast him away, and not Samuel. Quest. VVhat is the second speciall acception of Gods King∣dome in Scripture? Answ. This; it is taken for that spirituall regiment and gouernment, which God through Christ exerciseth in his E∣lect, working his will not only by them, as he doth by the ve∣ry Deuils themselues, but also in them by his holy Spirit, and that in this life, making them in part willingly subiect and obedient to his will reuealed, both in heart and life, which is called the Kingdome of grace; and in heauen making them absolutely and perfectly obedient to his will, which is called the Kingdome of glory: of this Dauid speaks, Psal. 110.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 15.15. Rom. 14.17. 1 Cor. 6.9. the Kingdom of glo∣ry: so Ephes. 5.5. Quest. What are wee then to vnderstand by the Kingdome of God in this Petition, Thy Kingdome come? Answ. Not Gods Kingdome in the generall acception of it; for that is alwayes euery where,Luk. 17.21. 1 Cor. 4.20. 1 Cor. 6.9. and no creature can hin∣der it: but Gods spirituall gouernment and power, which he through Christ exerciseth in his Elect by his holy Spirit, both in earth and in heauen, both his kingdome of grace, and his kingdome of glory. Quest. Who are subiects of Gods kingdome thus taken? Answ. Both the Angels, and the Saints in heauen, and such
also as liue in the Church on earth, which are true subiects, as all true beleeuers are,Reuel. 15.3. wheresoeuer they be in any part of the world. Quest. Are not hypocrites, who make profession of obedience to Gods will reuealed, subiects to Gods kingdome? Mat. 8.12. 1 Ioh. 2.12.Answ. True subiects they are not, but counterfeit subiects; and so they are sometimes called children of the kingdome. Quest. VVhat is the law by which Gods kingdome thus ta∣ken, is gouerned? Ioh. 22.22. Isai. 53.1. Mark. 1.14. Rom. 3.27.Answ. The whole Word of God, written in the Bookes of the Old and New Testament. Quest. What is meant by the comming of Gods kingdome spo∣ken of in this Petition, Thy Kingdome come. Answ. Three things are thereby meant. Of which in order. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; the beginning, erecting, and setting vp of Gods spirituall regiment and gouernment in such persons as belong to Gods election,Ierem. 31.18. Act. 2.41.47. Act. 13.48. Coloss. 1.13. in whom as yet it is not begun, by conuerting those that belong to Gods election effectually, who yet are not conuerted, and by working true faith, and true repentance, and holy obedience in them. Quest. What is the second thing meant by the comming of Gods kingdome spoken of in this Petition, Thy Kingdome come? Psal. 92.12. Mat. 13.8.23. to 33. in many parables. 2 Pet. 3.18. Mat. 12.28.Answ. This; the inlarging and increasing of Gods spiritu∣all regiment and gouernment in those persons in whom it is already begun and set vp, by confirming and bettering those that are effectually conuerted, and doe beleeue, and by wor∣king in them a greater measure of true faith, and true repen∣tance, and holy obedience. Quest. What is the third thing meant by the comming of Gods kingdome spoken of in this petition, Thy Kingdome come? 1 Cor. 1.8. Philip. 1.6. 1 Thess. 5.23.24.Answ. This; the bringing of Gods spirituall regiment and gouernment to full perfection in his elect, by perfecting in them both their sanctification, and their saluation. Quest. VVhen is Gods spirituall regiment and gouernment brought to full perfection in his elect? Answ. At two times.
Quest. VVhat is the first of those?Luke 16.22. Luke 23.43. 2 Cor. 5.6.8. Philip. 1.23. Answ. The end of their liues, and presently on their death, and then onely in their soules, being then translated to the ioyes and glory of heauen, and fully sanctified, and fully glo∣rified, Rom. 6.7. Quest. What is the second time when Gods spirituall regiment and gouernment is brought to full perfection in his elect? Answ. The day of Iudgement,Mat. 25.34. Luk. 21.28.31. Romans 8.23. Ephess. 4.13. when Christ comes the se∣cond time to iudge the world; and then both in their soules and bodies: their soules and bodies being then vnited toge∣ther againe, and made partakers of perfect holinesse & fulness of ioy and glory in heauen. Quest. What is the summe of this Petition, Thy kingdome come? Answ. This; that the spirituall regiment and gouernment,2 Thess. 3.1. Reuel. 22.20. which God through Christ exerciseth in his Elect by his holy Spirit, may be begun, erected, and set vp in such persons as belong to Gods election, in whom as yet it is not begun, and may be inlarged and increased in those persons in whom it is already begun and set vp, and may be brought to full perfec∣tion in all his elect in their full sanctification & glorification of their soules at the end of this life, and both of their soules and bodies at the generall day of Iudgement. Quest. VVhat are the things wee are to pray for in this Peti∣tion, Thy Kingdome come? Answ. Either such things as appertaine to this life, and concerne Gods kingdome of grace here in this world, or such as appertaine to the life to come, and concerne Gods king∣dome of glory in heauen. Quest. VVhat are the things wee pray for in this Petition, that appertaine to this life, and concerne Gods kingdome of grace heere in this world? Answ. Foure things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; the effectuall calling and conuersion of such as belong to Gods election,Gen. 9.27. Isai 60.1. &c. to 16. Mathew. 8.11. Rom. 11.25.26. that so many of the Iewes and Gentiles as belong to Gods election, may be effectually cal∣led and conuerted, and may haue good rulings ouer them in
their hearts and liues by his holy Spirit,Act. 26.18. 2 Tim. 2.25.26 2 Pet. 1.4. making them also Kings in part by ouercomming the corruption that is in the world through lust. Quest. What is the second thing we pray for in this petition, that appertaines to this life, and concernes Gods kingdome of grace heere in this world? Answ. This; the further renewing and quickning of our selues and others,Isai. 44.3.4. Ephes. 3.16.17 2 Thess. 2.17. who are effectually called and conuerted by the powerfull working of Gods holy Spirit, that God would by the powerfull worke of his good Spirit more and more renue in vs and in others, who are effectually called and conuerted, his owne Image, and quicken vs by his grace, and continually increase in vs all those heauenly ver∣tues, that of his mercie hee hath begunne in vs, and so more and more rule in our hearts and liues by his holy Spirit. Quest. VVhat is the third thing we pray for in this petition, that appertaines to this life, and concernes Gods kingdome of grace heere in this world? Answ. This; all such meanes as serue both for the effectu∣all calling and conuerting of such as belong to Gods electi∣on, and for further renewing and quickening of such as are effectually called and conuerted, and for the good of Gods Church heere in this world; that God would giue all the meanes that serue to those ends, called the Rod of his power, Psal. 110.2. and his standard or signe, Isa. 11.12. Quest. VVhat are those meanes that serue for the effectuall calling and conuerting of such as belong to Gods election, and for the further renewing and quickening of such as are effectually cal∣led and conuerted, and for the good of Gods Church in this world? Answ. Either such meanes as serue for the publishing of the Word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, or such as serue for the free publishing of it, and for the vpholding and coun∣tenancing of it being published. Quest. VVhat are the meanes that serue for the publishing of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, which wee pray for in this Petition?
Answ. Able and faithfull Ministers of the Word and Go∣spell, that God would send forth men fitted with gifts,Deut. 33.8.10. Mat. 9.37.38. Ephes. 6.19.20. Coloss. 4.3. 2 Thess. 3.1.2. Deut. 33.11. and of willing minds to employ their gifts, and that faithfully and powerfully in all Ministeriall duties, to the glorie of his Name, and to the edification of the body of Christ; and that he vould vouchsafe them free libertie to exercise their gifts and Ministeriall offices. Quest. VVhat are the meanes that serue for the free publish∣ing of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, and for the vpholding and countenancing of it being published, which we pray for in this Petition? Answ. Foure especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; godly, zealous, and carefull Magistrates: that God would giue to his Church euery where such godly Ma∣gistrates as may bee zealous in promoting his pure and holy religion with all their power,Eccles. 10.16.17 Isai. 49.23. 1 Tim. 2.1.2. and in countenancing his holy truth, and in procuring the good of his seruants, & especially of his faithfull Ministers, and in repressing all vngodlinesse and wicked persons in all places vnder their gouernment. Quest. VVhat is the second meanes that serues for the free publishing of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, and for the vpholding and countenancing of it being published, which wee pray for in this Petition? Answ. This good and godly lawes: that godly Magistrates may make good and godly Lawes for the establishing of the whole truth of the word of God, and his holy Religion a∣mongst their subiects, & for the keeping of their subiects in obedience to both the tables of the Commandements of God, and may see those lawes duely executed. Thus did Jehoshaphat 2 Chro. 19.5. to the end of the chapter: and such a law did King Darius make, though an heathen king, Dan. 6.26. 1 Tim. 2.2. The Magistrates dutie is to procure that his subiects may liue in all godlinesse and honestie. Quest. What is the second meanes that serues for the free pub∣lishing of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, and for the vpholding and countenancing of it being published, which wee pray for in this Petition?
Answ. This; the helpe of priuate persons within the com∣passe of their places and callings for the furtherance of the Gospel, that priuate persons within their places and callings may indeauor to helpe forward, and to promote the doctrine of the Gospell by instruction,Deut. 6.7. Rom. 16.3.9. Phile. ep. v. 24. Coloss. 4.11. by good counsell, by admoni∣tion, and by consolation, as iust occasion is offered to them, and especially by conferring on the doctrine of the word de∣liuered in the publike Ministery of it with their children, or seruants, or neighbours. Quest. What is the fourth meanes that serues for the free pub∣lishing of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, and for the vpholding and countenancing of it being published, which we pray for in this Petition? Answ. This an holy vnitie and agreement in the Church, especially amongst the Ministers of the Word and Gospell,Ioh. 17.11. Act. 2.46.47. Act. 4.32.33. Ephes. 4.3. Philip. 1.27. Philip. 2.2. 1 Cor. 1.10. Galat. 2.9. that God would ioyne together the members of the Church in one holy truth, and make them to be of one mind & iudge∣ment, and of one heart, and to speake one and the same thing, and especially that God would make the Ministers of the Word and Gospell to giue the right hand of fellowship one to another, and to ioyne together as one man in their lear∣ning studies, labours, speaking, writing, and in all their abi∣lities, to the furtherance of the Gospell. Quest. What is the fourth thing wee pray for in this Petition that appertaines to this life, and concernes Gods kingdome of grace here in this world? Answ. This; the blessing of God on the meanes that serue for the effectuall calling and conuerting of such as be∣long to his Election,Psal. 122.6. Isai. 62.7. and for the further renewing and quickening of such as bee effectually called and conuerted, and for the good of Gods Church heere in this world, that God would vouchsafe to make the meanes effectuall to those ends. Quest. What are the things we pray for in this Petition, that appertaine to the life to come, and concerne Gods Kingdome of glo∣ry in Heauen? Answ. These; the perfecting of the number of Gods elect, and the speedy comming of Iesus Christ to Iudgement, that
God would perfect the number of his elect, and that Christ would hasten his comming to Iudgement,2 Tim. 4 8. Reuel. 22.20. Coloss. 3.4. 1 Ioh. 3.2. when all Gods cho∣sen shall appeare with him in glory, and be wholly glorified in their bodies and soules, and raigne with him in the euerla∣sting ioyes, and glory of heauen. 1 Cor. 15 24. At the second comming of Christ the king∣dome of Christ shall haue an end; he shall then deliuer it vp to God the Father: therefore it seemes that we are not to pray for the second comming of Christ to Iudgement. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; Christ his Kingdome it selfe is eternall, be∣cause hee is God equall to the Father, and the Head of his Church; but the manner of the administration of his king∣dome by preaching of the Word and Gospell, by the Sacra∣ments, and by discipline, is not eternal, but shall end at Christ his second comming, and Christ shall then cease to doe the office of a Mediatour; and that is the meaning of the holy Ghost in that place. Quest. May one that is truly called and conuerted, and a child of God, pray for his owne death, and the separation of his soule from his body, or no? Answ. A child of God,1 King. 19.4. Iob 3.21.22. Philip 1.23. 2 Tim. 4.8. and such a one as is truly called and conuerted, may not desire or pray for his owne death, and the separation of his soule from his body simply and absolutely, or through impatiency in regard of some affliction on him; but as death is a freedome from the corruptions and tempta∣tions of this life, and a passage to the happinesse and glory of heauen, and to an immediate fellowship with Christ, & with his Saints in heauen: a child of God may desire and pray for his owne death, and the separation of his soule from his body; yet so as he doe not out of his desire, hasten the time of his death, but for that to submit himselfe to the good wil of God: it was the fault of Elijah, and Iobs weaknesse. Quest. May the friends of a childe of God, and such as wish well to him, desire and pray for his continuance in the bo∣dy, or no? Answ. They may lawfully doe it, so as it be with due ob∣seruation of two cautions.
Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; they are so to desire, and so to pray with con∣dition of Gods will, submitting their wills therein to the good will of God; for so wee ought to pray in that case, that the will of the Lord may bee done, as they did, Acts 21.14. Quest. What is the second caution to be obserued by the friends of a child of God, in their desiring and praying for his continu∣ance in the body? Answ. This; they are to desire, and so to pray not onely out of their loue to the partie in some priuate and particular respect; but also out of a desire, that the partie being con∣tinued in the body, may doe more good, either in the Church or Common weale, according to his place and calling, and measure of gifts and grace giuen to him: and thus much the Apostle doth imply, Philip. 1.24, 25, 26. Quest. VVhat are the things we pray against in this petition, Thy kingdome come? Answ. All such things as do either hinder or obscure Gods kingdome of grace here in this world. Quest. What are those things that doe either hinder or obscure Gods kingdome of grace here in this world? Answ. They are either things inward, or things outward. Quest. VVhat are the inward things that doe either hinder or obscure Gods kingdome of grace here in this world, which we pray against in this Petition? Rom. 7.14.24. Ephes. 4.17.18 Mat. 3.2.Answ. These; the pronesse of our corrupt nature to euill, and the power of our corruption, and the rebel∣lions of it, whereby wee or others are in any degree in bondage vnder sinne and Satan, and whereby Satan keepes vs or others any way in his slauerie, or at any time preuayles against vs in any measure: as ignorance, blindnesse of minde, hardnesse, dullnesse, deadnesse, and vnfeelingnesse of heart, infidelitie, impenitencie, and such like. Quest. What are the outward things that doe either hinder or obscure Gods kingdome of grace heere in this world, which wee pray against in this Petition?
Answ. Eyther such things as are meanes to hinder or obscure the publishing of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ; or such things as are meanes to hinder or obscure the free publishing and passage of the Word of God, and the Gospell of Christ. Quest. What are the things that are meanes to hinder or ob∣scure the publishing of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, which we pray against in this Petition? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; such Ministers as are either insufficient,Isai. 56.10.11.12. Hoze. 4.6. 2 Cor. 3.6. 2 Tim. 2.15. 1 Cor. 14.2.3. Iere. 23.15. &c. to 33. Ezech. 13.3.4. to 20. Mat. 5.15.16. 1 Tim. 5.2. or in any sort vnconscionable or scandalous; as such Ministers as are either ignorant, and cannot teach Gods people commit∣ted to their charge, or doe take on them to teach, and doe it vnskilfully; or such as are vnfaithfull in executing their Ministeriall duties; as those that are either idle, and do not the duties of their Ministery at all, or doe them but in part; or are vnsound and vnprofitable in their teaching, or doe teach flatteringly, and seeke to please men, and sooth them vp in their sinnes, or such Ministers as liue wickedly and scanda∣lously: all these are meanes to hinder or obscure the publi∣shing of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, and we pray against them in this petition. Quest. What is the second thing that is a meanes to hinder or obscure the publishing of the word of God, and the Gospel of Christ, which we pray against in this Petition? Answ. This; all erronious and false Doctrines and Su∣perstitions, as the Doctrine of Paganisme, Turcisme, Iu∣daisme, Papisme, Arminianisme, Anabaptisme, and such like: for all and euery of these, and the like; doe poyson the soules of men, and are meanes to hinder and obscure the pub∣lishing of the word of God, & the Gospell of Christ, and wee pray against them in this Petition. 2 Tim. 2.17. They fret as a canker. Christ giues a caueat to beware of such, Math. 16.6. so the Apostle, Phil. 3.2. Quest. What are the things that are meanes to hinder or ob∣scure the free publishing and passage of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, which we pray against in this Petition?
Answ. Sixe things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; want of Magistrates and gouernours in the Church; from whence must needs follow dsorder and con∣fusion,Iudg. 17.6. Iudg. 19.1. euery man being left to himselfe to doe what him li∣steth without controlement: for better is a tyranny, then an Anarchie; better it is to haue a Tyrant then no gouernour at all. Quest. What is the second thing that is a meanes to hinder or obscure the free publishing and passage of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, which wee pray against in this Petition? Answ. This; wicked and mischieuous deuices, and practi∣ses of wicked Magistrates,Exod. 2.23. Pro. 29.2. Act. 4.17.18. & 20. compa∣red. Act. 12.1. to 7. who seeke by all meanes they can to aduance heresie and superstition, and to set vp the king∣dome of Satan, and doe exercise cruelty and tyranny against the true worshippers of God, and doe persecute the true pro∣fessors of his holy Religion. Quest. What is the third thing that is a meanes to hinder or obscure the free publishing and passage of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, which we pray against in this Petition? Answ. This; wicked and vngodly lawes; such lawes as doe either giue toleration to some false and strange religion,Dan. 3.4.5.6.10. Dan. 6.7.8.9. or such as tend to the hinderance of the true and pure wor∣ship of God and his holy Religion. Quest. What is the fourth thing that is a meanes to hinder or obscure the free publishing and passage of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, which we pray against in this Petition? Answ. This; diuisions, and dissentions, and schismes, which Satan by his instruments raiseth vp in the Church, whereby he seeks what he can to disturbe the peace of the Church, and to destroy the truth and vnitie of it, and to rend the Church in pieces, that he may easier preuaile against it, when it is diuided: for he knowes, as Christ saith, that a kingdome di∣uided against it selfe cannot stand, Math. 12.25. and these are some of the Tares that the enuious man sowes in the Church, that hinder the growth of the wheat. Math. 13.24, 25. Rom. 16.17. Quest. VVhat is the fift thing that is a meanes to hinder or
obscure the free publishing and passage of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, which we pray against in this Petition? Answ. This; enormious and foule sinnes that raigne a∣mongst vs as Atheisme, profanesse,Psal. 119.136. Mark. 3.5. Luk. 19.41.42 2 Pet. 2.7.8. contempt of Gods word and holy Ordinances, Blasphemy, Sabbath-breaking, oppres∣sion, crueltie, pride, and the like: these we are to mourne for, and so to pray against, as things that are meanes to hinder or obscure the free publishing and passage of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ. Quest. What is the sixt thing that is a meanes to hinder or obscure the free publishing and passage of the word of God, and the Gospell of Christ, which we pray against in this Petition? Answ. This;Psal. 2.9. Psal. 69.24. Rom. 16.20. wicked men that belong not to Gods e∣lection, and are vtter enemies to the Church and the members of it, and the Deuill and his Angells; that such wicked men may bee crushed with a rodde of yron, and speedily brought to their iust destruction, and that Satan and his Angells may bee shortly brought vnder our feete. Now to the third Petition that concernes God simply and meerely. Thy will bee done in earth, as it is in Heauen: and first of the Order of this Petition. Qust. Why is this Petition, Thy will be done, &c set after the former, Thy kingdome come? Answ. For three reasons. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This;Rom. 6.16. Eph. 2.1.2.3. because true and sound subiection to the holy will of God followes the comming of Gods King∣dome in the order of Nature, and is a manifestation that his Kingdome is come, and that men are subiects of Gods Kingdome, and that God doth rule in their hearts by his holy Spirit: for when men are subiects of Gods King∣dome, then they beginne to obey his will, whereas be∣fore they reboll against him, and are the slaues of sinne and Satan. Quest. What is the second reason why this Petition, Thy will be done, is set after that, Thy kingdome come?
salm. 40.7.8. al. 1.16. Math. 26.42. ohn 5.30.Answ. This; because dutie bindeth the subiects of Gods Kingdome to obey Gods will, and to submit themselues to it in all things. Quest. What is the third reason why this Petition, Thy will be done, is set after that, Thy Kingdome come. Answ. This; because though wee bee the subiects of Gods Kingdome,Ezech. 36.26.27 Phil. 2.13. Heb. 13.21. and be disposed by grace, and made fit to doe the will of God; yet we cannot doe it vnlesse God moue vs to the doing of it; nor yet continue in doing his will longer then hee vpholdeth vs in the doing of it: therefore wee pray after Thy Kingdome come, Thy will be done. Quest. What are the generall things contained in this Petition, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen? Answ. These three things. First, the matter of it, the thing prayed for, the doing of Gods will. Secondly, the persons by whom the will of God is to bee done, implyed in these words, In earth. Thirdly, the manner of doing it, as it is in heauen. Now to the meaning of the wordes of this Petition. Quest. How are we to conceiue of Gods will? Answ. Thus; Gods will in it selfe is onely one sim∣ple and vndiuided, as God himselfe is: but vnto vs it is diuersly propounded;Deut 29.29. and so it may bee distinguished into his hidden and secret will, or his will signified and reuealed. Quest. VVhat is Gods hidden and secret will? Ans. The will of God, which either in respect of the time is not yet manifested by the euents which afterwards come to passe,Prou. 27.1. Iohn 21 21.22 Acts 1.67. Psal. 36.6. Rom. 11.33. or which in respect of our vnderstanding we are not able to conceiue the incomprehensible depth of, in some par∣ticular euents, either good or euill. Quest. VVhat is Gods signified and reuealed will? Answ. The will of God, which is made knowne to vs ei∣ther in his written Word,Iob. 1.21. or by some euent; for the will of God is signified and reuealed to vs, not onely in the Scrip∣ture, but also by particular euents, either good or euill. Hence Iob sayd, the Lord had taken away his oxen, and
Camells, because it was manifested to him by the euent, that God willed the taking of them away. Quest. What then are we to vnderstand by the will of God in this Petition, Thy will be done, &c. Answ. The whole will of God reuealed,Mat. 7.21. Mark. 3.35. Act. 21.14. whether it bee by his written Word, or by some euent; and in part Gods secret will, touching some particular things which in time may come to passe. Quest. What is meant by doing Gods will? Answ. It hauing relation to men (as here it hath) impli∣ed in those words (in Earth) it signifieth both a yeelding of obedence to God in all things that he in his written Word requires to be done of vs, and by vs,Deut. 6.1.2.3. Psal. 143.10. 1 Pet. 4.2. 1 Sam. 3.18. 2 Sam. 15.26. Mat. 26.42. Iob 1.21. and also a submitting of our selues vnto him willingly, in all things he layes on vs to be suffered of vs, and by vs; resoluing before such things be laid on vs, to suffer them patiently when they come, whatso∣euer they shall be: and when they are on vs, quieting our selues, and resting contented in the good will and pleasure of God therein reuealed. Quest. What are we to vnderstand by these words in this Peti∣tion, in Earth, or on Earth? Ans. The word (Earth) in this Petition is put by a Me∣tonymia of the subiect: for man liuing in the world, or dwell∣ing on the face of the Earth: let men on Earth doe the will of God, as Christ saide: Iohn. 17.4. I haue gloryfied thee on Earth. Quest. What are we to vnderstand by the word (Heauen) in this Petition?Psal. 103.20. Answ. The word Heauen in this Petition, is likewise put by a Metonymia of the subiect, for the blessed Angels and soules of the Saints departed, and now glorified in Heauen. And so wee pray: Let men on Earth doe the will of God, as the blessed Angels and soules of the Saints departed, and now glorifi∣ed, doe it in Heauen. Quest. Can wee that liue on the Earth, doe the will of God as the blessed Angels and Saints doe it in Heauen? Answ. In the measure and degree of obedience wee can∣not, but in the likenesse and similitude, we may and ought to
doe the will of God as the blessed Angels and Saints doe it in Heauen: for the word (as) being a note of comparison in this petition, it imparts a likenesse and resemblance, and not an equalitie or like quantitie of degree; so that here we pray to performe obedience, not equall in measure and degree to the obedience of the Angels and Saints in Heauen, wee yet liuing in the Earth or on the Earth, though wee must endeauour after it: but such obedience as is like to theirs, and that wee may bee like to them in the manner of our obedience. Quest. Wherein stands the likenesse of our obedience to Gods will, to the obedience of the blessed Angels & Saints departed? Answ. In three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in willingnesse: wee are to doe the will of God willingly and without constraint, for so the Angels and Saints do it in Heauen. Hence the Angels are said to come & stand before God, ready to doe his will. Iob. 1.6. And hence they are saide to haue wings. Isa. 6.2. Quest. What is the second thing, wherein stands the likenesse of our obedience to the will of God, to the obedience of the blessed Angels and Saints departed? Psal. 103.20. Mat. 18.10. Psal. 119.60.Answ. This; in readinesse: wee are to doe the will of God readily and speedily, for so the Angels and Saints departed doe it in Heauen. Quest. What is the third thing, wherein stands the likenesse of our obedience to the will of God, to the obedience of the blessed An∣gels and Saints departed? Psal. 119.6. Luk. 1.6. 2 King. 23.25. Psal. 119.112.Answ. This; in faithfullnesse, wee are to doe the will of God faithfully in all the parts of it, not by halfes or peece∣meale; doing some things and leauing others vndone: and sincerely, and without hypocrisie, and constantly: for so doe the blessed Angels wherein soeuer God imployeth them, and the Lord sending them to execute some iudgement, they ne∣uer giue ouer till the Lord say it is sufficient, stay thine hand: as 2 Sam. 24.16. Quest. What is then the summe of this petition. Thy will bee done in Earth, as it is in heauen?
Answ. This: that whatsoeuer God reuealeth to vs in his written Word, which he would haue vs to doe, may be obey∣ed: and whatsoeuer also God makes knowne to vs by the e∣uent, which he would haue vs to suffer, may be willingly sub∣mitted vnto, with a resolution before such things doe come, to suffer them patiently when they come, whatsoeuer they shall bee; and when they are come, to beare them with quietnesse and contentednesse in the good will and pleasure of God therein reuealed: and that the will of God may bee thus obeyed and suffered, both of vs and of other men, liuing in this world, euen as willingly, as readily,Psal. 119.101.128. Coloss. 1.9.10.11. Coloss. 4.12. and as faithfully (namely) in all the parts of it: and sincerely, and constantly, as the will of God is obeyed by the blessed Angels, and by the soules of the Saints departed, and now glorified in Heauen. Now before we come to speake of the things pray∣ed for in this petition, for the better clearing of it, some questions or obiections are further to be propounded and answered: as first it may bee said. Gods will must needs be done, for God is omnipotent and doth whatsoeuer hee will, neither can any creature or power withstand his will. Isai. 40.18. and so confessed by Iehosae∣phat, 2 Chron. 20. what neede we then pray, that Gods will may be done. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus: Gods secret will, the will of his good plea∣sure cannot bee withstood, but must needs come to passe: but his will reuealed in his Word, may bee and many times is resisted and withstood: Mat. 23.37. Acts 7.54. eue∣rie sinne is a breach of the law of God, and so a resisting of his will, It will be saide againe: Gods will, howsoeuer propounded (namely) his will reuealed in his Word, is a powerfull will and cannot bee frustrate: for if a thing being willed by God howsoeuer, should not come to passe and bee effected, it were either because God willed amisse, or wanted power to worke
that hee willed; either of which were blasphemie once to thinke: therefore it seemes needlesse to pray that Gods will may be done. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Gods will reuealed in his Word, comman∣ding duties to be done, hath diuers ends: it serues, either for obedience, or for triall, or for conuiction: and so though it bee a powerfull will, and haue effect in all men; yet not in e∣uery man the same effect, nor attaines the same end in all men: in some by Gods grace it worketh obedience, in some it worketh only triall of some inward grace, and in some it worketh only conuiction: and so it is neuer frustrate, but at∣taines one of these ends in euery man. Gen. 22.2. God bid Abraham kill his Sonne Isaac; it was not Gods will and pur∣pose that Abraham should obey that commandement simply, and slay his Sonne, as the euent declared; but his will was by that commandement, to make triall of Abrahams affection and true feare of God. vers. 1. and vers. 12. compared toge∣ther: and so Exod. 5. God bid Pharaoh let his people goe: now that commandement, was not a commandement of obe∣dience in Gods secret purpose, but only a commandement of conuiction, to conuince Pharaoh of rebellion and hardnesse of heart. Gods will reuealed in his Word, attaining one of these ends; either obedience, triall, or conuiction, in euery man. Quest. What neede we pray that it may be done? Answ. As God hath determined the end, so also the meanes to come to it; we must therefore vse prayer as a spe∣ciall meanes for attaining grace,Heb. 13.21. that we may obey the will of God reuealed in his Word: for so wee are to take Gods will made knowne to vs in his Word, commanding duties as a will to be obeyed, leauing Gods secret purpose of triall or conuiction to himselfe; and so pray that the will of God may be powerfull in vs, as it is propounded to vs, (namely) as a will requiring obedience in all his children. If God sometimes in his will reuealed in his Word, com∣mand that which in his secret purpose, he hath determined
shall neuer come to passe, as in that Commandement giuen to Abraham of sacrificing his Sonne Isaac: Gen. 22.2. Then Gods will reuealed is sometimes contrary to the will of his good pleasure. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; when God in his will reuealed requires obe∣dience, which in his secret will he intends not in some men, but only their triall or conuiction: that Commandement is not contrary to his secret purpose, but rather a fit meanes of accomplishing of his purpose in those men, as in the example propounded: God in his secret counsell decreed to make tri∣all of Abraham, whether he would for his sake, offer his Son Isaac in sacrifice or no, and to that end he gaue him that com∣mandement, (offer thy Sonne for a burnt offering) not as a Commandement of absolute obedience, but of triall: and so was that Commandement a fit meanes of accomplishment of Gods secret purpose: and therefore though it seeme con∣trary to Gods secret will, yet it is not, if wee consider the scope and end of it, that being in Gods secret purpose, only the triall of Abraham. Quest. Gods will being manifested by particular euents, good or euill, how is God free from willing euill, and from being the authour of euill? Answ. Euill is two fold, euill of punishment,Isai. 45.7. Amos 3.6. or euill of sinne: the first of these God willeth, and is the authour of, for punishment being a worke of Iustice against sinne is good, and therefore willed and wrought by God. Touching the se∣cond sort of euill, euill of sinne; some say that God only bare∣ly permitteth, and suffereth it to be done, and no farther; as the Schoolemen say: Deus respectu reati culpae, non habet actum positivum, sed tantum negativum, non vult impedire. Which is true, but not the whole truth. Quest. How may that appeare? Answ. Thus: if God permit sinne, hee doth it either wil∣lingly or against his will: if willingly, then it is not by bare permission, by a powerfull working permission, if against his will, then is he not omnipotent to let & hinder that thing he willeth not, and that is blasphemie to thinke.
Quest. How then are wee to conceiue of Gods willing of the euill of sinne? Answ. Concerning that, we are to learne two distinctions. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This: there be two things in sinne, the subiect or matter of sin, which is either a motion, a qualitie, or an acti∣on: or the forme of sinne, that which maketh the motion, qualitie or action, to be a sinne, and that is transgression of the law of God properly called by some, deformitie of the motion, qualitie or action. Quest. What is the second distinction we are to learne? Answ. This; there is difference betweene sin it selfe sim∣plie considered in it selfe & by it selfe, and the euent of sin, or the comming to passe of sin, for sinne it selfe is euill, but the comming to passe of sinne is good, in respect of the end to which it is by God disposed (namely) his glory in the mani∣festation of his Iustice and Mercy. Quest. These two distinctions learned, how then are we to con∣ceiue of Gods willing of the euill of sinne? Answ. Thus: God willeth the motion, qualitie or action, which is the subiect or matter of sin,Act. 17.28. for he is the first mouer or efficient in euery motion and action, as it is a motion or action: but he willeth not the deformitie, prauitie or euill∣nesse of the motion or action. For example, in the act of Theft and taking away of another mans goods, the action of mouing the body, of stirring the seuerall ioynts, and reach∣ing out of the hand, whereby the goods are taken hold of, are willed and wrought by God. But the applying of those actions to this end, that our Neighbour may thereby be depriued of his goods, and we by them inriched: this is the deformitie of those actions, & not willed nor effected by God. Againe, God willeth not sin simply considered in it selfe as it is sin, and against his Commandement, but only willeth the euent, or comming to passe of sinne. Quest. How doth God will the euent, or comming to passe of sinne? Answ. Thus; not by effecting it, but by with holding his
grace from his creature, and not hindering it when he might, if hee would, and so only by consequent God willeth the e∣uent of sinne, be not hindering it, hee willingly permits it to be done for a good end, (namely) the glory of his name in the execution of his Iustice, or the manifestation of his mercie. God often punisheth one sinne with another, now all sinne is eu ll if wee respect it selfe, but as it is a punishment of some former euill, in that respect it is not e∣uill, but iust and a good thing, and so the euent or com∣ming of it to passe is willed by God. Thus we are to vn∣derstand that God willed the hardening of Pharaohs heart. Exodus 9.12. the deceiuing of Ahab with a Lie.2 Thess. 2.11. 2 Chron. 18.22. And thus hee willeth the delusion of such as are deceiued by the deceiuable working of Antichrist, the Pope of Rome and his Emissaries, the shaueling Locusts, Jesuites and Priests. Quest. What are the things we pray for in this Petition. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heauen? Answ. Either things generall, or things more speciall. Question. What are the generall things we pray for in this Petition? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; deniall of our selues and of our owne wills;Luk. 9.23. Gen. 6.5. Gen. 8.21. that God would make vs renounce our owne wills, which are naturally in bondage to Satan, and are auerse and con∣trary to all spirituall goodnesse, and of themselues are prone to will, and doe actually will nothing but that which is euill, and against Gods holy will, and would make our wills pliable to his holy will, and able to will and wish that which his holy will alloweth. Our wills are naturally auerse and contrary to all spiritu∣all good, and of themselues prone to will, and doe actually will nothing but that which is euill, but being renewed by grace, and in the state of grace. Quest: Haue they not then power in then to will that which is truly and spiritually good? A. Of themselues, & by themslues, our wills haue no such po∣wer though they be renewed & in the state of grace, they are
then able not of themselues, or by themselues, but only by grace,1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. 3.5. 1 Cor. 13.9. freely to will spirituall good, and to will euill, and that only in part, not perfectly in the time of this life. Quest. What is the second generall thing we pray for, in this petition? Answ. This: that the rule of our liues may bee Gods re∣uealed will,Deut. 19.29. Psal. 129.105. his will reuealed in his Word: that we may make not Gods secret and hidden will, but the reuealed will of God, his will made known in his Word, which is the law or only rule of things to be done, the rule of our liues, and of all our thoughts, words and actions. Colos. 3.16.Coloss. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisedome, so as wee rightly vnderstand it, and rightly applie it to our particular actions and occasions. 1 Iohn. 2.27. Gods elect true beleeuers are taught all things of the spirit of God; and therefore it seemes we may depend on the teaching of the spirit, and on reuelations from Heauen, and not on Gods will reuealed in his Word, nor make that the rule of our liues. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus: First, the meaning of Saint Iohn is, that Gods elect and true beleeuers, hauing receiued the Spirit, they are inwardly taught of the spirit, and haue their minds inlightened, and their iudgement cleare, and need not that any man should teach them to discerne the truth taught, from errour and deceite, as appeares vers. 26. Againe, Secondly, the Word of God and the Spirit, euer goeth together, the Spirit shineth in the Word and is power∣full by the Spirit, and we must be taught of God; but it must bee by his Word, the Lord puts them together. Isa. 59.21. And the Apostle calls his preaching, the ministration of the Spirit. 2 Cor. 3.8. Quest. What are the more speciall things we pray for in this petition: Thy will be done, &c. Answ. Either such things as concerne obedience to Gods will, commanding duties to bee done, or such as concerne submission to his will in things to bee suffered of vs, or by vs.
Quest. What are the things wee pray for in this petition, that concerne obedience to Gods will, commanding duties to bee done? Answ. Three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. Knowledge of Gods will reuealed in his Word, commanding good duties, that we may come to the know∣ledge of Gods will made knowne to vs in his Word, touch∣ing the good duties he requires of vs; either as we are Chri∣stians in our particular places and callings, states and condi∣tions of life: for how should we doe the will of God, vnlesse we know it: as how can a Seruant doe things pleasing to his Master, when hee knowes not what his Master would haue him to doe. Isa. 8.19.20. the Lord sends them to the Law and to the Testimonie, if they speak not according to this Word; it is because there is no light in them. Quest. How may we come to the knowledge of Gods will re∣uealed in his Word, commanding good duties? Answ. By vsing the meanes that serue to that purpose,Deut. 4.1. Psal. 1.2. Psal. 119.97. Pro. 2.1. to. 6. Psal. 119.18.33.34. diligently, and carefully: as by hearing & reading the Word, by meditating in it, & by conferring on it, and by seeking to God in prayer, for the right vnderstanding & knowledg of it. Quest. How much knowledge of Gods will reuealed in his Word, commanding good duties must we come to, that wee may o∣bey that will of God? Answ. So much knowledge as may direct vs in the doing well, & may guid vs in euery good action:Pro. 4.5.7. Pro. 19.2. Ma. 22.29. we must distinctly know the will of God made knowne in his Word, so far as it may direct vs in euery good action; for euery good action, yea euery good motion of the mind, will and affections, must be guided by the rule of goodnesse, the Word of God, & that rule must be distinctly knowne of vs, or else it cannot bee a rule to vs. Mat. 22.29. Yee erre (saith our Sauiour Christ) not knowing the Scriptures; not only in iudgement but in practise. Quest. What is the second speciall thing we pray for in this pe∣tition, that concernes obedience to Gods will, commanding duties to be done?
Psal. 119.32.36 Tit. 3.8. 1 Pet. 1.14.15. 2 Pet. 1.5.Answ. Strength of grace, care and endeauour to doe the will of God reuealed in his Word, both in our generall and particular callings: and that as the will of God ought to bee obeyed: for it is but hypocrisie to vse this petition, Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heauen, and yet neuer care nor en∣deauour to obey the will of God: and therefore if we vse this petition aright, we desire that the will of God may be done. Quest. How is the will of God reuealed in his Word, obeyed as the will of God ought to be obeyed? 1 Tim 1.5. Mat. 6.1.2.5. Luk. 18.11.12Answ. Thu; when the obedience that is yeelded to it, comes from a sanctified soule, and is performed in loue to God, and in conscience towards God, because God com∣mands it; and with a desire to please him, and with a due re∣spect to his glory. God doth approue good duties done, though it be by vn∣beleeuers; as the obedience of Children to their Parents, though those Children be vnbeleeuers, yet their obedience is pleasing to God: Colos. 3.20. therefore it seemes not need∣full that obedience to Gods will reuealed in his Word, should alwaies come from a sanctified soule, that it may bee such as it ought to be. Quest. How is this to be answered? Rom. 8.8.Answ. Thus; good duties done by vnbeleeuers, are ap∣proued of God, as they are considered in the abstract in themselues, and by themselues; for so they are things com∣manded of God, & simply good in themselues but in concreto, in the concrete, as they come fom vnbeleeuers and are their personall actions: they are not approued of God. God doth sometimes reward the good actions of vnbelee∣uers, and therefore it seemes they ae pleasing to God. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; God doth sometimes giue outward blessings euen to the ciuill obedience and outward good carriage of hypocrites and vnbeleeuers; not because it pleaseth him as it is their personall obedience, but only of his meere rich good∣nesse, and abundant mercie. 2 King. 10.30. Because Jehu dili∣gently executed the Lords will in desroying the house of Ahab, the Lord promised him that his sonnes should sit vp∣on
the Throne of Israel, to the fourth generation: yet was he but a carnall man, vers. 31. Quest. What is the third speciall thing that we pray for in this petition, Thy will be done, &c. that concernes obedience to Gods will commanding duties to be done? Answ. Perseuerance and continuance in obeying Gods wil reuealed in his Word,Galat. 6.9.53. Philip. 3.13.14 2 Thess. 2.17. 2 Thess. 3.13. Apoc. 2.10. Mat. 5.48. 1 Cor. 11.1. Ephes. 5.1. Obiection. both in our generall and particular callings, and in euery state and condition of life: that God would make vs able to continue constant in our obedience to his will made knowne to vs in his Word, without fainting or falling backe; and that we may set before vs the best ex∣amples for our imitation and may ayme at perfection. Gods Children cannot faint nor fall backe from their obe∣dience to Gods will; they are kept by grace from falling a∣way from God, and from goodnesse. Therefore it seemes needlsse for them to pray for perseuerance and continuance in their obeience. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; spirituall fainting is twofold, either a faintaing and falling bcke altogether, and a falling cleane away from an holy course: and this cannot befall Gods Chil∣dren. Jer. 32.40. Or, a fainting in part (that it) a slacking, and remiting somthing of an holy course: and this may and doth befall Gods Children: Reuel. 1.4. and therefore they haue neede to pray for perseuerance and continuance in their obedience. Perfection of Obedience in degree, cannot be attained in this life: therefore it seemes a vaine thing to ayme at it. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; though we cannot attaine to perfection of obedience in degree in this life: yet it is our duty to striue towards it, as those that are willing to obey God, and to doe his will to the vttermost of their power; and in time we shall come to it if wee faint not: Gala. 6.9. Once man could o∣bey Gods will perfectly, and he shall againe obey it perfect∣ly in Heauen: and therefore it is not a vaine thing to ayme at it. Quest. What are the speciall things we pray for in this petition
that concerne submission to Gods will, in things to bee suffered of vs, or by vs? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; strength to beare afflictions as they ought to be borne before we be in a affliction: that we may be proui∣ded aforehand of strength to beare afflictions, and may haue it readie to vse,Coloss. 1.11. Ephes. 6.15. Heb. 10.36. and to put in practice when time shall serue. Luke. 21 19. It must be ours not by vsurpation, or by lawfull vse and occupation, as a thing borrowed for the present, but by iust title and right of possession. Quest. What is the second thing we pray for in this petition, that concernes submission to Gods will, in things to be suffered of vs, or by vs? Rom. 5.3. 2 Cor. 6.4. Coloss. 1.11. Iam. 1.2. Reuel. 13.10.Answ. This; strength and patience in the time of afflicti∣on and triall, that God would giue vs in all euills, trialls and afflictions we endure, though they bee great and continued long on vs, to make his will our will, and to beare them pa∣tiently and ioyfully; and vnder them to blesse the name of the Lord as Iob did. Job. 1.21. Now to the matter of Deprecation, things to bee prayed against in this Petition. Quest. What are the things we pray against in this petition. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heauen? Answ. Either such things as are contrary to obedience to Gods will, commanding duties to be done, or such things as are contrary to the submission to Gods will, in things to be suffered of vs, or by vs. Quest. What are the the things we pray against in this petition, that are contrary to obedience to Gods will, commanding duties to be done? Answ. Either such things as doe vtterly and wholly, and euer resist and withstand obedience to Gods will, command∣ing duties to be done. Or such things as are impediments or hinderances to that obedience that ought to bee yeelded to Gods will commanding duties to be done. Q. What are those things that do vtterly & wholly, & euer re∣sist and withstand obedience to Gods will, commanding duties
to be done, that we pray against in this petition? Answ. They are these; Satan, sinne as it is sinne,Zach. 3.1. 1 Ioh. 3.4. 2 Pet. 1.4. Rom. 8.7. whether it bee originall or actuall: and that corruption that is in the World through Lust, through inbred euill concupi∣scence, that is in our nature called flesh, or the Old man: wee pray against the will and power of Satan, and the power of sinne, and the corruptions which are vtterly and wholly, and euer contrary to all spirituall goodnesse. Rom. 8.7. it is () enmitie against God, it is not subiect to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Quest. What are the things that are impediments and hin∣derances to that obedience that ought to be yeelded to Gods will, commanding duties to bee done, that wee pray against in this Petition? Answ. Either things inward, or things outward. Question. What are the inward things that are impedi∣ments and hinderances to that obedience that ought to bee yeel∣ded to Gods will, commanding duties to be done, that we pray a∣gainst in this Petition? Answ. Three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Ans. This; Ignorance of Gods will reuealed in his word,Hozea. 4.6. Ephes. 4.18. Heb. 5.12. 1 Tim. 1.13. teaching the good duties that God requires of vs in our ge∣nerall or particular callings, states and conditions of life, e∣specially wilfull and affected ignorance, when the meanes of knowledge are vouchsafed to vs. Question. What is the second inward thing that is an im∣pediment and hinderance to that obedience that ought to be yeel∣ded to Gods will, commanding duties to be done, that we pray a∣gainst in this Petition? Answ. This;Deut. 10.16. Psal. 95.8. Pro. 23.35. Isai 56.12. Iere. 44.16.17. Rom. 2.4.5. 2 Tim. 3.13. a setled purpose and full resolution to conti∣nue in sin, and an hardening of the heart against all good in∣struction, counsell, admonition, threatning, or any other meanes that either are, or can be vsed to the contrary, to drawe to repentance. Quest. What is the third inward thing that is an impediment and hinderance to that obedience that ought to be yeelded to Gods will, commanding duties to be done, that we pray against in this Petition?
Answer. Hypocrisie: a false, hollow and deceitefull heart, when men purpose to liue in sinne,Isai. 29.13. Isai. 48.1. Iere. 5.2. Mat. 15.7.8. 2 Tim. 3.5. and yet outwardly for by respects, make shew of godlinesse and honestie. Quest. What are the outward things that are impediments and hinderances to that obedience that ought to be yeelded to Gods will, commanding duties to be done, that we pray against in this Petition? Answ. Fiue things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This: irreligion or profanesse, when men re∣grard not Gods Word, nor his worship; but liue as if there were no God nor Deuill, Heauen or Hell, nor conscience to be made of any thing: examples we haue of the like. 2 Chro. 33.10. 2 Chron. 36.16. Quest. What is the second outward thing that is an impediment and hinderance to that obedience that ought to be yeelded to Gods will, commanding duties to be done, that we pray against in this Petition? Answ. Wilfull and open rebellion against Gods will re∣uealed in his word,Deut. 9.24. Deut. 31.27. 1 Sam. 15.23. Act. 7.51. when men openly and peremptorily resist Gods will made knowne to them out of his word, and eui∣dently and directly vrged on their consciences, and witting∣ly and willingly doe the cleane contrary to it. Quest. What is the third outward thing that is an impedi∣ment and hinderance to that obedience that ought to be yeelded to Gods will commanding duties to be done, that we pray against in this Petition? Mat. 6.24. Mat. 13.22. Rom. 12.2. 1 Tim. 6.9.10. 2 Tim. 4.10.Ans. This: worldlinesse, when men or women giue them∣selues wholly to seeke the things of this world, the profits, commodities, honours and preferments of it, and by not and earnest pursuite doe seeke after earthly things, though it bee by good and lawfull meanes: much more by vnlawful means, as vsurie, extortion, and such like. That geedy hunting after them will make men settle on their dregs, and will make them looke for no other happinesse but in those things. Quest. What is the fourth outward thing that is an impedi∣ment and hinderance to that obedience that ought to bee yeelded to Gods will, commanding duties to be done, that we pray against in this petition?
Answ. This;Malac. 1.13. Galat. 6.9. 2 Thess. 3.13. backwardnesse and wearinesse in well do∣ing, manifested by word or deede, or by any gesture, as tush∣ing, puffing, and such like. Quest. What is the fift outward thing that is an impediment or hinderance to that obedience that ought to be yeelded to Gods will, commanding duties to be done, that wee pray against in this Petition? Answ. Inconstancie in doing good duties, when men or women are no sooner in a good duty, but they are presently out of it againe; and out of the lightnesse and vanitie of their minds, on duerie trifling occasion are soone and suddenly carried away from doing of a good duty. Hosea. 6.4. John. 5.35. They which cryed Hozanna to Christ, Mar. 11.9. short∣ly after, cried crucifie him, crucifie him. Mark. 15.13.14. Quest. What are the things we pray against in this petition, that are contrary to submission to Gods will, in things to be suffe∣red of vs, or by vs? Answ. Either things inward in heart, or outward things. Quest. What are the things inward in heart, that are contra∣ry to submission to Gods will, in things to be suffered of vs, or by vs, that we pray against in this petition? Answ. Motions and stirrings that arise in the heart, a∣gainst the worke of Gods prouidence,Hest. 3.5.6. 1 King. 21.4. Psal. 43.5. Ionah. 4.8.9. Luk. 15.28. in the time of any pres∣sure, crosse, affliction or triall; as when men or women are greeued, discontented, and dspleased in their mindes for the worke of God on them or towards them, in laying his hand on them, and afflicting them in any kinde whatsoeuer, and doe inwardly fret and repine against that hand, and worke of God. Quest. What are the outward things that are contrary to sub∣mission to Gods will in things to be suffered of s, or by vs, that we pray against in this petition? Answ. Such things as in the time of affliction or triall, are expressed either by word or deede. Quest. What are the things that in time of affliction or tri∣all, that are expressed by word, or deed, that we pray against in this Petition?
Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; a complayning against Gods prouidence, touching present hard condition, that men or women hold themselues in,Gen. 30.1. Eccles. 7.12. Iud. ep. v. 16. in comparison of others: as when men or women complaine that they are not as others bee, in health, in strength, at libertie, or the like; or they haue not that plenty of wealth that others haue; they see others lustie and strong, and in health, or rich, and themselues are weake feeble, and sicke, or poore; and they breake out into a com∣plaint and say, why am not I as others are, or God might haue made me as they are. Quest. What is the second thing, in the time of affliction or triall, that is expressed by word, that we pray against in this Pe∣tition? Gen. 4.13. Exod. 16.23. & 7. compared together. Numb. 21.5. Deut. 1.27. Iob. 1.22. 1 Cor. 10.10. Iud. ep. v. 16. 1 Sam. 28.7. 1 Sam. 31.4. 2 Sam. 17.23. Act. 16.27.Answ. This: a mumuring and breaking out into bitter tearmes against God; when men or women being vnder the hand of God in any affliction or triall, doe foolishlie charge God, that he deales hardly and cruelly with them. Quest. What are the things that in time of affliction or triall that are expressed by deed, that we pray against in this petition? Answ. They are these: any impatient gesture or behaui∣our, or seeking of ease or deliuerance by vnlawfull meanes: as when men or women being vnder the hand of God, in any affliction or triall, doe shew forth any impatient beha∣uiour, or doe seeke to ease or to deliuer themselues by any meanes vnlawfull, as by seeking to witches. Now to the Petitions that concerne our selues, which are also three. First in generall, this que∣stion may be made. Quest. What doth this order of petition, in that we are first to vse petitions that concerne God simply and meerely, and then such as concerne our selues, teach vs? Answ. Thus much: that we are then allowed, and not till then, to seeke good things for our selues; when we haue first minded and sought those things that concerne Gods glorie, in the aduancement of his Kingdome, and in the dooing of
his will: because vnto godlinesse onely belongs the promi∣ses of this life, and of the life to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. Quest. How are the three Petitions that concerne our selues, distinguished? Answ. Thus; the first concernes outward and temporall good things of this present life; and the two other concerne spirituall good things appertaining to an heauenly life. Quest. VVhy is that Petition that concernes temporall good things, which are lesse worth, set before those that concerne spi∣rituall good things, which are better worth, and more to bee estee∣med and desired? Answ. For two reasons especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This, because though they be not the chiefest good things, yet they are as helpes to enable vs to spiritual duties;Gen. 28.20.21. Pro. 30.8.9. & they are meanes to make vs walke on more comfortably in an holy course of life. Quest. What is the second reason why the Petition that con∣cernes temporall good things, which are lesse worth, is set before those that concerne spirituall good things, which are better worth, and more to bee esteemed and desired? Answ. This; because they are as steps whereby our weake faith may better ascend to lay hold on spirituall good things, and may be also more confirmed touching spirituall good things: for we are weake in faith, and sometimes men trust in God for the pardon of their sinnes, and yet distrust God for the prouision of their bodies:Numb. 11.21.22.23. and by the exercise of our faith, in depending on God for lesser matters, as our dai∣ly bread, we may come more firmely to rest on him for the pardon of our sinnes, and other spirituall good things, Mat. 10.9. to 32. Christ sending foorth his Disciples to preach, speaks not a word to strengthen them in the assurance of the pardon of their sinnes; but he doth many wayes encourage them against persecution, and want of outward good things, implying their infirmitie therein. Now to the first of those three Petitions that con∣cerne our selues in particular. Giue vs this day our daily Bread, Math. 6.11.
Quest. What are the generall things contained in this petition, Giue vs this day our daily bread? Answ. They are these: First, the thing we desire and pray for, namely, Bread. Secondly, the circumstances thereto appertaining: As first the manner, how wee would haue the bread which we aske; that is by free gift, Giue. Secondly, the persons for whom we aske it in the word Ʋs. Thirdly, the time for how long we desire it, This day. Fourthly, the proprietie, whose bread wee craue, (namely) Ours. And fiftly, the quantitie and qualitie of the bread we aske, in the word, Daily. Giue vs this day our daily bread. Now to the meaning of the words of this Petition. Quest. What are wee to vnderstand by the word (Bread) in this Petition? Answ. Both that which wee properly call Bread, which is made of the flower of graine,Gen. 14.18. Gen. 3.19. Gen. 18.5. Exod. 2.20. Exod. 18.12. Pro. 27.27. Pro. 31.14. Leuit 26.26. Deut. 8.3. Mat. 4.4. Isai. 3.1. Hag. 1.6. and is fit for mans bodily nou∣rishment, and also all outward good things and meanes whatsoeuer, that serue for the sustentation, comfort and re∣freshing of the body, and are meete and needfull for the pre∣seruation of this present life, and outward good estate; and theblessing of God on those things and meanes, that they may effect that good for which we vse them: as meate, drink, apparrell, physicke, sleepe, house, harbour, fruitefull seasons, good Ayre, and the like: and through the blessing of God, nourishment and strength by foode, health by physicke, warmth by apparell, wealth by honest labour, and such like. Quest. Why doth Christ in this petition name (bread) rather then any other particular outward good thing? Answ. Because, of those things that pertaine to our be∣ing, and continuance of our life, Bread is the chiefe & most needfull thing; and we can better want flesh or fish, or any other thing that pertaine is to the body and this present life, then Bread: it is hence compared to a staffe or stay. Leuit. 26.26. Isa. 3.1. Quest. What are we to vnderstand by these words (giue vs) in this Petition?
Answ. That God would of his meere free grace vouch∣safe to vs, and to all his children, outward good things meete and needfull for vs:. &c. the least of which we are vnable by any seruice or labour of ours to attaine, and much lesse to merit & deserue at his hands, we being lesse then the least of his mer∣cies and truth, as Iacob said, Gen. 12.10. Quest. What is meant by (this day) in this petition? Answ. By the day, or for the day, as Luke. 11.3.  is meant the present day or present time, or present occasion of vsing Bread; That God would giue vs outward good things and meanes, meete and needfull for vs: not for a Weeke, a Month, a Yeare, or such like; but for the present day or present time, or present occasion of vsing them: Mat. 6.34. No man is sure to liue till to morrow, his soule may bee taken away this night. Luk. 12 20. Quest. May we not desire that God would giue vs such out∣ward good things and meanes, as may be meete and needfull for vs for heereafter, and for the time to come? Answ. Simply & absolutely we may not; but we are to rest on the good prouidence of God, for such things to be giuen vs, as hee in his wisedome shall see fit and good for vs; yet may we purpose, God continuing our health and strength, by our diligent labours in our honest callings, and by pray∣er, and without dstrustfull care, euery day to seeke those things at the hands of God. 1 King. 3.11. God was well pleased with it, that Salomon asked not riches though hee had abundance of riches: so Pro. 30.8. hee asked not riches nor store for the time to come, but food conuenient (that is) daily bread. Philip. 4.6. Be nothing carefull, (that is) with dis∣trustfull and carking care. If wee must aske of God outward good things meete and needfull for vs onely for the present day or present time, or present occasion of vsing them, then it seemes to bee vnlawfull to lay vp money or money worth a∣gainst olde age, or the time of sickenesse, or for po∣steritie. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Laying vp of money or money worth against
old age, sicknesse, or for posteritie; that money or money worth being gotten by honest labour,Pro. 6.6.7.8. Gen. 41.47.48.49. Ioh. 6.12.13. Act. 11.29.30. or by some good and lawfull meanes; and the duties of equitie, loue, and mercie we owe to the Church, to the Commonwealth, or to the poore not neglected, is lawfull, and a dutie wee are bound to, so as it be with prayer to God for a blessing on the same: and with a resting on Gods prouidence euery particular day, and not on those things so prouided and laid vp. Mat. 6.19. Christ forbids to lay vp Treasure on Earth; therefore it seemes vnlawfull to lay vp Money, or Money worth against old age, the time of sicknesse, or for po∣steritie. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Christ there speakes not simply, but com∣paratiuely; as if he had said, lay not vp worldly treasures, chiefely, immoderately, and only so as ye neglect Heauenly Treasure. Quest. What are we to vnderstand by this word Our, in this Petition? Pro. 5.15. 2 Thess. 3.12.Answ. Such bread, and such outward good things, whereto wee haue true right and title, both before God, and also be∣fore men. Quest. How haue we true right and title to outward good things, before God? Mat. 15.26. 1 Cor. 3.22.23.Answ. Thus; when we haue a spirituall title to them, in and through Christ, wee being his members and beleeuing in him; for our right in the creatures was lost by Adams fall, and is now through Christ his redemption, restored againe to all that truly beleeue in him. Quest. How haue we true right and title to outward good things before men? Answ. Thus: when we haue a ciuill title to them, and by Gods prouidence haue possession of them by some honest meanes allowed of men,Psal. 128.2. Hab. 2.6. as by our honest labour and indu∣stry, or by inheritance, or by the gift of friends, or such like, 2 Thes. 3.12. The Apostle willeth the Thessalonians to eate their owne bread, () that is, which they haue earned with the labours of their hands.
Quest. What is meant by (daily) in this Petition? Answ. The word () ( Panem nostrum supersubstantialem da nobis hodie) signifies bread put to our substances day by day, and the meaning is,Pro. 30.8. Eccles. 5.11. Luk. 12.5. 1 Tim. 6.8. such outward good things and meanes as serue to preserue our being, life, and health from day to day, and such a mea∣sure and proportion of those things and meanes as is meet and conuenient, and may best agree with our nature and charge, and our particular calling and condition of life: this was Iacobs prayer, Gen. 28.20. Quest. What is then the summe of this Petition, Giue vs this day our daily bread? Answ. This; that God would of his meere free grace vouchsafe to vs, and to all his children, both that which is properly called bread, and also all other outward good things and meanes that are meet and needfull for the sustentation, comfort and refreshing of the body, and preseruation of this present life, with his blessing on the same, and that for the present day, the present time, and present occasion of vsing them, and whereto wee haue true right and title, both before his holy Maiestie, and also before men; and namely such as serue to preserue our being, life, and health from day to day, and such a measure of them as is mee and conuenient, and may best agree with our nature and charge, and particular calling and condition of life. This Iob calles appoynted food, Iob 23.12. Prou. 30.8. called Conuenient food. Iames 2.15. Dayly food. Ʋers. 16. Things needfull for the Body. Quest. What need rich men, persons who haue great abundance of outward good things, whose barnes and store-houses be full, vse this petition, and aske of God their daily bread? Ans. Though men or women haue plentie and great abun∣dance of outward good things, yet the vse, and comfort,Numb. 11.33. 2 King. 7.19.20. Iob 20.22.23. Dan. 5.4.5. Hag. 1.6. Luk. 12.15. and safetie of those things commeth from the Lord, which except the Lord giue, either they loose their goods by some acci∣dent and casualtie; or hauing them, haue no power to vse them, or vsing them, they find no good nor comfort in them, and by them; therefore they haue need still to vse this
Petition, Giue vs this day our daily bread. Some men or women haue their wealth and outward good things by inheritance. Prou. 19.14. They were borne to the things they possesse, they were giuen to them, or they bought them, or did obtaine them by hard labour and pines takig: therefore it seemes they haue not those good things giuen them of the meere free grace of God. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; though wealth and outward good things bee receiued from Ancestors,1 Chron. 29.12.14.16. Hoze. 2.8.9. 2 Cor. 9.10. Deut. 8.17.18. as from Fathers, Grandfathes, great Grandfathers, or came by the gift of friends, or bee gotten by purchase, or by hard labour, yet God is the first donour, and in all these things his free gift to bee ac∣knowledged: for God giues power to Ancestors, Fathers, Grandfathers, great Grandfathers, to get and keep lands and goods, and a will to leaue them from hand to hand to their posteritie, or hee puts it into the hands and hearts of friends to bestow them, or hee giues money or others things wherewith they are bought, or he giues wit and strength to labour for them. Now to the matter of Petition, things prayed for in this Petition, Giue vs this day our dayly Bread. Quest. VVhat are the things wee pray for in this Petition, Giue vs this day our daily bread? Answ. Fiue things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Iob 36.31. Psal. 104.28. Psal. 145.15.Answ. This; that God would vouchsafe to supply our wants, touching the outwards good things of this life, ser∣uing either to satisfie our hunger, or quench our thirst, or to preserue vs from the extremities of heate and colde, winde and weather, or to restore our defects in Nature, vouchsafing things that are requisite and necessary to that purpose. Quest. What are the things we craue at the hands of the Lord, that are requisite and necessary for the supply of our wants concer∣ning outward good things of this life? Answ. Such things as are meanes ordinarily causing and
procuring the supply of our wants in that kind. Quest What are the things that are meanes ordinarily causing and procuring the supply of our wants, touching the outward good things of this life? Answ. Either such as bee common ordinary meanes, and further off; or such as be more speciall and neerer ordinary meanes. Quest. VVhat are the common meanes and further off, ordi∣narily causing and procuring the supply of our wants, touching the outward good things of this life, which wee pray for in this Petition?Leuit. 26.19. Deut. 28.23. Hoze. 2.21.22. Iob 38.25.26. &c. Psal. 147.8. Ierem. 5.24. & 14.22. Zach. 8.12. Iam. 5.7. Psal. 144.13. Isai. 55.10. Answ. These; a right disposition of the heauens and seaso∣nable weather, the former and the later raine, frost, snow, mist, dewe, and whatsoeuer other creature God hath appoin∣ted for that purpose, fruitfulnesse of the earth, increase of cat∣tell, and the like. Quest. VVhat are the more speciall and neerer meanes ordi∣narily causing and procuring the supply of our wants, touching the outward good things of this life, which wee pray for in this Petition? Answ. Two especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; wit and skill to order and dresse grounds,Gen. 2 15. Gen. 4.2. Gen. 18.6.7. Gen. 27.14. Gen. 47.36. Exod. 31.34.36. 2 Sam. 13.8.9. Pro. 31.13.19. Act. 18.3. and cattell, and to make vse of the good creatures of corne, wooll, flaxe, fruites, hearbes, and such like, that God would giue to men, and to vs in particular, gifts and skill to that end, that wee may know how and when to plant, to set, to reape, and sowe, and how to make the good creatures of God that we find in the world fit for food clothing, Physick, and for other good vses. Adam had perfect skill to dresse the ground, Gen 2.15. Quest. VVhat is the second more speciall and neerer meanes ordinarily causing and procuring the supply of our wants, touch∣ing the outward good things of this life, which we pray for in this Petition? Answ. This; strength and willingnesse to imploy that wit and skill which God hah giuen vs,Gen. 3.19. Pro 31.13. to 27. to make vse of his good creatures, and that with diligence and painefulnesse, that
God would make men, and vs in particular, able and willing to excercise that wit and skill wee haue,Act. 20.24. Ephes. 4.28. 2 Thess. 3.10.12. 2 Tim. 2.6. in some honest and good employment, and that wee may not eate the bread of Idlenesse. Quest. VVhat is the second thing wee pray for in this Pe∣tition, Giue vs this day our daily bread? Answ. This; that God would maintaine and preserue that wealth,Psal. 3.5. Psal. 16.5. Psal. 119.91. Coloss. 1.17. and those outward good things we haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by his good prouidence: for hee that giueth those things, is also the maintainer and preseruer of them; and he must vphold our Lot, as well as deale vs forth our portion. All things consist and are preserued in their essence and state, and sustayned in their substances, quanti∣ties, qualities, motions, and actions: and if hee withdraw his preseruing power from them, they perish, and come to nothing. Quest. VVhat are the things we craue at the hands of God in this Petition, that serue to maintaine and to preserue that wealth, and those outward good things we haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by the good prouidence of God? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; the immediate hand and prouidence of God, to watch ouer those things continually, that God would vouchsafe to watch ouer the outward good things wee haue and enioy,Iob. 1.10. Psal. 55.22. Psal. 127.1.2. Psal. 91.10. and are cast on vs by his good prouidence, and would keepe them safe vnder his owne good hand and proui∣dence at all times. Quest. What is the second thing we craue at the hands of God in this Petition, that serues to maintaine and preserue that wealth, and those outward good things wee haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by the good hand and prouidence of God? Answ. This; whatsoeuer is a meanes seruing Gods proui∣dence, and which God vseth ordinarily to that purpose, that God would vouchsafe to vs the meanes that serue his proui∣dence, & that he vseth ordinarily for the maintenance & pre∣seruation of that wealth, and those outward good things wee haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by the good prouidence of God.
Quest. What are the meanes that serue Gods prouidence, and that he vseth ordinarily for the maintenance & preseruatiō of that wealth, and those outward good things wee haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by the good hand an prouidence of God? Answ. Either such as are inuisible, and not seene by the eye of the body; or such as are seene, and wee may take no∣tice of. Quest. What are the meanes seruing Gods prouidence, and that hee vseth ordinarily for the maintenance and preseruation of that wealth, and those outward good things we haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by the good prouidence of God, that are inuisible and not seene with the eye of the Body, which wee pray for in this Pe∣tition? Answ. They are the good Angels of God:2 King. 6.16.17. 2 Chron. 32.7. Psal. 34.7. Psal. 91.11. that God would vouchsafe by his good Angels to guard and keepe safe that wealth, and those outward good things wee haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by his good prouidence. Quest. What are the meanes seruing Gods prouidence, and that hee vseth ordinarily for the maintenance and preseruation of that wealth, and those outward good things we haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by the good prouidence of God, that are seene, and we may take notice of, which we pray for in this Petition? Answ. Either publike meanes, or priuate meanes. Quest. VVhat are the publike meanes seruing the prouidence of God, and that hee vseth ordinarily for the maintenance of that wealth, and those outward good things wee haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by the good hand and prouidence of God that are seene, and wee may take notice of, which wee pray for in this Petition? Answ. Three especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; good Magistrates, such as are wise and pro∣uident for the common good,2 Chron. 19.5.6.7. 1 Tim. 2.2. Iudg. 3.28.29.30. Iudg. 4.14. 2 King. 18.7.3. that Good would vouchsafe to giue vs such Magistrates, as may both make wholesome Lawes, and execute the same iustly and truely as occasion is offered, for the quiet and peaceable gouernment of the com∣mon wealth, and may also by lawfull and iust warre defend their subiects and countrey.
Quest. What is the second publike meanes seruing Gods proui∣dence, and that he vseth ordinarily for the maintaining and preser∣uing of that wealth, and those outward good things wee haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by his good prouidence, that is seene and we may take notice of, which we pray for in this Petition? Answ. This; valiant, expert, & skilfull captaines and soul∣diers, such as haue both strength & skill to fight as they ought to doe,2 Sam. 23.8. to the end. Isai. 3.2.3. for the defence of their countrey; That God would vouchsafe to giue vs such captaines and such souldiers, as be∣ing strong and valorous, may be ready on a iust and lawfull calling, to fight resolutely and wisely for the defence of our liues and liberties: such a Captaine was Cornelius, Act. 10.1, 2. and such a souldier he had, vers. 7. Quest. What is the third publike meanes seruing Gods proui∣dence, and that he vseth ordinarily for the maintenance & preser∣uation of that wealth, and those outward good things wee haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by the good prouidence of God, that is seene and we may take notice of, which we pray for in this petition? Answ. Learned and experienced Physicians, and such as are carefull for the health of the body; and generally all such skilfull Artificers as doe labour about the things that are necessarie for the continuance of our outward good and welfare,Iere. 8.22. Luk. 10.34. Coloss. 4.14. Gen. 4.22. 1 Sam. 13.19. Isai. 3.3. both in the time of peace, and in the time of warre, that God would vouchsafe to vs such Physicians, and such Artificers. Quest. What are the meanes seruing Gods prouidence, and that hee vseth ordinarily for the maintenance and preseruation of that wealth, and those outward good things wee haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by his good prouidence, that are seene and wee may take notice of, which we pray for in this Petition? Gen. 31 26. to 31. Pro. 14.35. Pro. 17.2. 1 Tim. 3.4. Tit. 1.6. 1 Sam. 25.16. Iere. 15.20. 2 King. 6.32. Ioh. 20.19. Nehem. 4.9.17.18.Answ. These; Industrious, painefull, and faithfull ser∣uants, frugall children; walles, barres, doores, and other ne∣cessary fences: That God would would vouchsafe vs such ser∣uants, such children, and such fences. Quest. What is the third thing we pray for in this Petition, Giue vs this day our daily bread? Answ. This; that God would giue vs leaue to vse that wealth, and those outward good things we haue & enioy, and
are cast on vs by his good prouidence: for though God doe supply our wants touching outward good things, and doe  maintaine and preserue those outward good things we haue and enioy; yet vnlesse he also giue vs leaue,Eccles. 5.18. Eccles. 6.2. and make vs able to vse them, we are not the better for them. Quest. What are the things wee craue at the hands of God in this Petition, that serue to make vs able to vse that wealth, and those outward good things we haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by the good prouidence of God? Answ. Either things inward, or things outward. Quest. What are the inward things? Answ. Two especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;1 Cor. 8.7.8. 1 Tim. 4.3.4.5 Coloss. 3.21. a setled perswasion of mind and conscience touching the lawfulnesse of the vse of that wealth, and those outward good things we haue & enioy. That God would giue vs to be setled and perswaded in mind and conscience, that we may lawfully vse that wealth, and those outward good things we haue and enioy, & are cast on vs by his good prouidence, we vsing them with prayer and thanksgiuing, and moderate∣ly and soberly, and to right ends: for if there be a scruple in conscience, touching the lawfulnesse of them, it makes men or women vnable, as we may see in superstitious persons; Pa∣pists dare not eat flesh, or white meates, though they haue a∣bundance at certaine times, as Lent, Ember weekes, Fasting dayes, and such like; yea they hold it a foule sinne, and no lesse fault then to kill a man. Quest. What is the second inward thing? Answ. This; quietnesse and contentednesse of mind in re∣spect of that portion of wealth and outward good things,Eccless. 5.9.10. 1 Tim. 6.10. Ppilip. 4.11.12 Heb. 13.5. it pleaseth God to measure out vnto vs; that God would make vs well contented with that wealth, and those outward good things wee haue and enioy, and are cast vpon vs by the good prouidence of God, for discontentment with our present e∣state, & lingring after that we haue not, & would haue, makes men or women vnable to vse their present portion with cō∣fort; and discontented persons are poore in the midst of great wealth, and are tormented with a desire of wealth to come.
Quest. What are the outward things that serue to make vs a∣ble to vse that wealth, and those outward good things we haue and enioy, and are cast on vs by the good prouidence of God which wee pray for in this Petition? Answ. Two especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; health and soundnes of body; that God would vouchsafe to giue and to continue to vs,2 Sam. 19.32.35. Iob. 7.3.4. Pro. 15.15. as he in his wisdome shall see meet, health and strength, and soundnes of body: for if God send sicknesse, or some extreame weaknesse of body; that makes men or women vnable to vse their wealth and outward good things with comfort, & they find sweet things then bitter to them. Quest. What is the second outward thing? Leuit. 26.6. Iob 11.18.19 Psal. 144.14. Zach. 3.10.Answ. This; outward peace and freedome from the inua∣sion and fury of enemies, that God would vouchsafe to giue and to continue to vs, as he in his wisdome shal see meet, out∣ward peace and freedome from the power and rage of ene∣mies: for if men or women bee inuaded by enemies, and bee vnder their power and rage, they can take little or no comfort in the wealth and outward good things they haue and enioy. Quest. What is the fourth thing we pray for in this Petition, Giue vs this day our daily bread? Answ. This; that God would giue vs a true taste and fee∣ling of that good and that comfort that is offered to vs in the wealth and outward good things wee haue and enioy, and which we are made able to vse. For as God doth supply our wants,Eccles. 2 24.25.26. Eccles. 5.17. Act. 14.17. touching outward good things, and doth maintaine and preserue our wealth and outward good things wee haue and enioy, and doth make vs able to vse them: so doth he also giue vs a true taste and feeling of the good, and that comfort that is offered to vs in the wealth and outward good things we haue and enioy. Quest. What are the things we craue at the hands of God in this petition, wherby we may come to haue a true taste & feeling of that good and that comfort that is offered to vs in the wealth and out∣ward good things wee haue and enioy, and which we are made able to vse?
Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; a right discerning of that good and com∣fort that is offered, in the wealth and outward good things we haue and enioy, and which we are made able to vse, that God would giue vs rightly to discerne of the good and com∣fort that is offered to vs in them, as that therein is offered to vs not onely some good, and some contentment to our bo∣dies, but a taste also of Gods bountie and goodnes to vs; and of his care and prouidence ouer vs, in that he hath made them and giuen them to vs for our good; yea, of his speciall good∣nes and mercy to vs, we being his children:Psal. 104.2. verse 32. Rom. 1.20. Iud. ver. 10. for heerein wee go beyond the bruit creatures, that feed vpon the creatures, and vse them as they are guided by sense, as sight, taste, fee∣ling, and by appetite, but discerne not the goodnesse and comfort that is offered by them: and by thus discerning of them wee may come to haue a true taste and feeling of that good that is offered to vs in the wealth and outward good things we haue and enioy. Quest. What is the second thing whereby we may come to haue a true taste & feeling of the good and comfort that is offered to vs in the wealth and outward good things we haue and enioy, & which we are made able to vse, which we pray for in this Petition? Answ. This; cheerefulnesse and honest delight in the vse of the outward good things of this life; that God would giue vs to vse them with cheerefulnes, and with honest delight,Deut 12.18. Deut. 26.11. Nehem. 8.19. Pro. 17.22. Psal. 104.15 Isai. 9.3. Galat. 5.22. so as our delight in them bee moderate, and doe neither hinder, nor draw vs away from things heauenly and spirituall; and so as our chiefe dlight be in Christ, and in the things of a bet∣ter life, wee thus delighting in the vse of the outward good things of this life, we may come to haue a true taste of that good and that comfort that is offered to vs in the wealth and outward good things we haue and enioy. Quest. What is the fift thing wee pray for in this Petition, Giue vs this day our daily bread? Answ. This; the blessing of God on the outward good things and meanes wee haue and enioy, and doe vse, tending to the preseruation of this life; that God would by his
blessing make them effectuall for our good and comfort, and for those good ends for which wee vse them:Leuit 26.26. Pro. 10.22. Hag. 1.6. for the best outward good things and meanes are vnprofitable, and as a deafe Nut, and doe vs no good at all, if God withhold his blessing from them, and suspend the vertue of them, Luke 12.15. The rich mans plentie could not continue his life. vers. 19.20. Quest. VVhat must this teach vs? 1 Tim. 4.4.5. 2 Chron. 16.12 Psal. 20.7. Psal. 146.3.4.5. Iere. 17.5.Answ. Thus much; that wee are to craue of God a bles∣sing on all the outward good things we haue and enioy, and doe vse, tending to the preseruation of this present life; and are also wholly and only to depend on him in the vse of them for a blessing on them. Now to the matter of Deprecation. Quest. What are the things we pray against in this petition, Giue vs this day our daily bread? Answ. Foure things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; whatoeuer is an hinderance to the supply of our wants, touching the outward good things of this pre∣sent life: That God would vouchsafe to avert and turne a∣way whatsoeuer is or may be a meanes to hinder or keepe from vs outward good things neefull for the sustentation, comfort and refreshing of the body, and preseruation of this present life. Psal, 34.9.Psal. 34.9. It is Gods promise, that nothing shall be wanting to them that feare the Lord:1 Tim. 4.8. therefore wee may pray against things that hinder the supply of our wants, tou∣ching the outward good things of this present life. Quest. What are the things that are meanes to hinder or keepe from vs outward good things needfull for the sustentation, comfort and refreshing of the body, and the preseruation of this present life, which we pray against in this Petition? Answ. Either such things as come from Gods hand, as punishments for sinne, or such as come from our owne cor∣ruption. Quest. VVhat are the things that come from Gods hand, as punishments for sinne? Answ. These; vnseasonable weather, as a wet and cold
Summer, an hot and drie Winter, no raine, no frost, no snow, and such like; vnfruitfulnesse, and barrennesse of the earth,Leuit. 26.18.19.20. Deut. 28.18.22 23.24.40.42. Psal. 105.29.30. to 30. Psal. 107.34. Ierem. .29. Pro. 26.1. Deut. 7.14. and of plants and trees; blasting, withering, or falling of fruits before they be ripe, or spoile of corne or fruits, by wormes, caterpillers, grashoppers, and such like; barrennes of cattell, beasts, fishes, and foules. Quest. What are the things that come from our own corruption? Answ. These; the giuing of our selues to ease, idlenesse, sloath, and sluggishnesse; and either spending the time in eating and drinking, sleeping, and walking,Pro. 6.9.10.11 Pro. 10.4.5. Prou. 18.9. Pro. 20.13. & 21.17. & 24.30. to the end. Pro. 28 19. 2 Thess. 3.11. and following sensual pleasures, in company keeping, in pastime, in gaming, and such like: or altogether lying idle, wee being able to labour, and neglecting the duties and workes of our honest and lawfull callings. Quest. What is the second thing we pray against in this peti∣tion, Giue vs this day our daily bread? Answ. This; whatsoeuer it is that doth annoy the body, or doth any way tend to the hurt of our welfare and outward good estate in this life:Leuit. 26.25.26. Deut. 28.48. to 58. Iudg. 2.14. Ierem. 5.15.16.17. Deut. 32.24. Isai. 5.13. Ierem. 29.17. Ezech. 5.17. Mat. 24.7. Deut. 28.21. 1 King. 8.37. 1 Chron. 21.14. that God would avert and turne away whatsoeuer is or may bee any annoyance to our bodies, or may tend to the hurt of our welfare and outward good estate in this world; as warre, famine, scarcitie of bread, and other food, plague, pestilence, and other mortall and dangerous diseases. Quest. What is the third thing wee pray against in this peti∣tion, Giue vs this day our daily bread? Answ. This; whatsoeuer is an hinderance to the comforta∣ble vse of the outward good things of this present life, which we haue and enioy; that God would vouchsafe to avert and turne away from vs whatsoeuer is, or may bee a meanes to hinder vs in the comfortable vse of the outward good things of this present life, which we haue and enioy. Eccles. 2.24, 25,  26. The sound and comfortable vse of the creatures is Gods gift to good and godly men and women: and therefore wee may pray against whatsoeuer doth hinder vs in the comfor∣table vse of them: So Eccles 5.17, 18, 19. Quest. What be the things we pray against in this petition, that are meanes to hinder vs in the comfortable vse of the outward
good things of this present life wee haue and enioy? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Psal. 119.36. Pro. 15.27. Hab. 2.9.10. 1 Tim. 6.9.10. 1 King. 21.4.Answ. This; couetousnesse, which is an immoderate and an vnsatiable desire of hauing much wealth and outward good things of this life, and a greedy seeking after those things: for when men or women desire and seeke after out∣ward riches greedily and insatiably, and hauing much would still haue more, they are full of distrustfull and distracted cares and of needlesse feares and doubts, and of worldly sorrowes, and of many distractions which hinder them in the comfortable vse of the outward good things of this present life, which they haue and enioy. Quest. How may we know a sober and moderate desire of the outward good things of this life, which is lawfull from an immo∣derate desire of them which is vnlawfull? Answ. Thus; a moderate desire of the outward good things of this life, is satisfied and contented with such a measure of them, as the Lord in his wisdome sees to be meet and necessa∣ry, both for the sustentation of nature, and the preseruation of this present life, and for the maintenance of that lawfull state, condition and dignitie, in which a man or woman is, as a naturall thirst, so satisfied with one draught, as another is not cared for. But an immoderate desire of the outward good things of this life is neuer satisfied; but the more a man or woman hath of those things, the more they desire: and the enioying of one thing desired, is but the beginning of desire of another: as an vnnaturall thirst, which a Drop∣sie or an Ague causeth, the more a man drinks, the more hee desires. Prou. 30.8. Feed me with food conuenient, a mode∣rate desire. Quest. What is the second thing we pray against in this peti∣tion, that is a means to hinder vs in the comfortable vse of the out∣ward good things of this life, which we haue and enioy? Answ. This; Prodigalitie, which is a lashing and laui∣shing out in expences beyond the compasse of abilitie and calling, & a mispending of the outward good things of this life, either in superfluous or lewd expences on our selues
or others, for the backe or belly, or other sensuall delights. For when men or women doe so lash out in their expences,Pro. 15.10.11. Pro. 23.20.21 Luk. 15.13.14.15.16. and so mispend their goods, they peruert the right vse of the creatures of God, and bring on themselues sicknesses, diseases and many euills and inconueniences; and so hinder them∣selues in the comfortable vse of the outward good things of this life, which they haue and inioy. Quest. What is the fourth thing we pray against in this peti∣tion, Giue vs this day our daily Bread? Answ. This;Pro. 4.17. Pro. 28.8. Pro. 30.9. Hab. 2.6. Ephes. 4.28. whatsoeuer is an vnlawfull meanes of get∣ting the outward good things of this life. That God would neuer suffer vs to vse any indirect or vnlawfull meanes, or courses to get wealth and outward good things of this life: as lying, stealing, defrauding, cousening, cheating, oppressiō, vsurie, vnlawfull acts and trades, and such like. Now to the Petitions that concerne Spirituall good things, appertaining to an heauenly life, which are two. Mat. 6.13.13. And forgiue vs our debts, as we also forgiue our debters. And lead vs not into tentation, but deliuer vs from euill. And the first qustion may be made: Quest. Why is there but one short petition for daily Bread, and the outward good things of this life; and two petitions and those larger, concerning spirituall good things, appertaining to an hea∣uenly life? Answ. Because,Pro. 4.7. Mat. 6 33. Ioh. 6.27. though God giue vs leaue to aske for out∣ward good things for this life, which are meanes to make vs walke more comfortably in an holy course of life: yet hee would haue vs principally to seek for things spirituall as the chiefe good things: and hee doth thereby teach vs, that the care of our soules must bee double to the care of our bodies. Question. How are the two petitions that concerne spiri∣tuall good things appertaining to an Heauenly life distingui∣shed? Answ. Thus; In the first we pray for grace, for remission of sinne: and in the second, for perseuerance in grace, and strength against temptation.
Quest. What is the ground of these two petitions? Ierem. 31.33.34. Iere. 32.40. Ezech. 36.25.26.27.Answ. The promise of God; for the Lord in the coue∣nant hee hath made with his Church and people, hath pro∣mised both forgiuenesse of sinne, and also strength against temptation. Now to the first of those petitions that concerne an heauenly life. Forgiue vs our debts, as wee forgiue our debters. First for the Order. Question. VVhy doth this Petition Forgiue vs our debts &c. follow next after that, Giue vs this day our daily Bread? Answ. For two reasons. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; because, though we haue daily Bread, and plentie and abundance of outward good things of this life; yet we are miserable if we want the pardon of our sinne, and then the outward good things of this life are but giuen vs as our portion,Psal. 32.1.2. Iob 21.7. to 22 Psal. 17.14. Iam. 5.5. and to fat vs against the day of slaughter, and to leaue vs without excuse, and to encrease our iudgement and condemnation: and therefore presently after we pray, Giue vs this day our daily Bread. we are taught to pray Forgiue vs our debts. Quest. What is the second reason? Answ. This; because sinne is the cause of want of daily Bread,Psal. 59.2.3. Iere. 5.23. and if it bee not taken away by Gods mercie, it doth hinder and keepe from vs the outward good things of this life; it causeth dearth and scarcitie, and brings many other euills; and therefore presently after request to God for daily Bread, we adioyne petition for pardon of sinne. Quest. What are the generall things contained in this petition, Forgiue vs our debts, as wee forgiue our debters? Answ. They are these: First, the request it selfe which wee make to God, namely for the pardon of our sinnes, For∣giue vs our debts. Secondly, the insinuation of it, by an argu∣ment from a comparison of the lesse to the greater; that if we who are in as much corruption, and but a sparke of mer∣cie doe forgiue others: Then doe thou Lord who art the
fountaine of mercy forgiue vs, But we forgiue others, there∣fore doe thou forgiue vs: for thus it is Luke. 11.4. Forgiue vs our sinnes; for euen wee forgiue euery man that is indebted to vs. Now to the opening of the words of this petition, Forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters. Quest. What are we to vnderstand by the word Debts, in this Petition? Answ. Trespasses or sinnes, of what nature, kind or qua∣litie soeuer they be, sinnes Originall and Actuall,Mar. 11.25.26. Luk. 11.4. Coloss. 11.13. both the want of that holinesse and puritie that ought to be in vs, and the staine and corruption of our nature, and euery alte∣ration, and the least declining from the Law of God, in thought, word, and deed. Quest. Why are trespasses or sinnes called Debts?Mat. 18.32. to the end. Answ. By way of similitude and resemblance, because they make vs debters vnto God. Quest. How doe our sinnes make vs debters vnto God? Answer. Not in themselues as aberrations from the Law of God, and breaches of it, for we owe not sinne to God, that is not the thing we are bound to yeeld vnto him; we are bound by the Law of God to yeeld the contrarie (namely) obedi∣ence: but in respect of punishment which wee are bound to vndergoe for our sinnes,Deut. 27.26. cited Galat. 3.10. Ezech. 18.4. Rom. 6.23. Iam. 2.10. and satisfaction due to Gods iustice for the offence of our sinnes. For as a debt amongst men binds the debter, either to make satisfaction, or to suffer the penaltie of the Law, as to goe to prison, and such like: So our sinnes binde vs, either to satisfie Gods iustice, or else to suffer the punishment due to vs for them, which is the curse of God, death and damnation: so are our sinnes debts, and make vs debters to God. Quest. What are wee to vnderstand by the word forgiue, in this petition? Answ. The acquitting and setting of vs free from the guil∣tinesse of sinne, and from the punishment which by reason of sinne, we haue made our selues liable vnto: and the accep∣ting of vs, and vsing of vs, as if we had neuer offended by our sinnes.
Quest. How come we to bee acquitted, and set free from the guiltinesse of sinne, and from the punishment, which by reason of sinne, wee haue made our selues liable to? Answ. Only by the death and passion of Christ Iesus; God vouchsafing to accept his death and passion,Isai. 53.5. Rom. 4.25. 1 Pet. 1.18.19. for full payment and satisfaction to his Iustice for our sinnes, and for the me∣rit of the death of Christ our suretie; freely and fully dischar∣ging vs from the guilt and punishment of our sinnes: and e∣steeming our sinnes as no sinnes, or as if they had neuer bin. If Christ hath satisfied for our sins, if it bee for the merit of his death, that God doth discharge vs from the guilt and punishment of them: then it seemes that God doth not freely forgiue vs our sinnes. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; in regard of Christ, the forgiuenesse of our sinnes is not free;Rom. 3.24. Ephes. 1.7. he hath paid the full ransome for our sins: but in respect of vs, it is euery way free, wee conferring no merit thereto, nor any way purchasing it: it is the meere free grace and mercie of God, that our sinnes are forgiuen. Quest. Are we to vnderstand, vnder the word forgiue in this petition, only the acquitting and freeing vs from the guiltinesse of sinne, and from the punishment which is due to vs for the same? Answ. No; not only that, but our whole iustification in the sight of God;1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21. Philip. 3.8.9. wee are to vnderstand vnder the word for∣giue in this petition, not only freedome from the guiltinesse and punishment due to sinne; but also acceptation of vs as iust in the sight of God, and worthy of life eternall by impu∣tation of Christ his righteousnesse. Those whom God once iustifieth and forgiueth their sins, he neuer remembers sinne against them. It seemes then need∣lesse for iustified persons thus to pray, Forgiue vs our trespasses or sinnes. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. This: iustified persons whose sinnes are already forgiuen, doe not in vsing this petition, aske that God would iustifie them; but they aske continuance of Gods grace, that his mercifull pardon may be to them a gift without repen∣tance,
and that he would bee pleased to continue that his fauour to them: and withall they aske, that God would ma∣nifest and make knowne to their hearts and consciences, the daily forgiuenesse of their sins, by a new application of par∣don for new sinnes daily committed; and would more and more strengthen their assurance of the pardon of their sinnes, and so make them feele true peace of conscience, and true ioy in assurance of his loue to them in Christ. Thus Dauid being iustified, prayed Psal. 51. whol. Thus Paul, intreated the Saints (though they had truly repented at their conuersion) to be reconciled to God. 2 Cor. 5.20. Quest. What is meant by the word (vs) in this petition? Answ. Both our selues and others also, yet liuing on earth,Luk. 23.34. Act. 7.60. that belong to Gods election; whether already called, or yet vncalled, yea though they be our enemies. Quest. What are wee to vnderstand by these words (Our debters) in this Petition? Answ. Not such as are indebted to vs by some ciuill co∣uenant, or by lawfull bargayning,Leuit. 19.13. Psal. 15.3. 1 Cor. 6.8. Coloss. 3.18. and do owe vnto vs mo∣ney or money worth; but such as haue offered or done vs some iniurie or wrong, bringing detriment or hurt to vs in our bodies or goods or good names. Quest. How are such as haue offered or done to vs some iniu∣rie or wrong, bringing detriment or hurt to vs in our bodies, goods, or good names, our debters? Answ. Both in respect of satisfaction or amends, which in equitie ought to be made, for the iniurie or wrong offered or done: & also in respect of that punishment which the wrong offered or done, iustly deserues. Quest. How then doe we forgiue such as haue offered or done vs some iniurie or wrong, and in that respect are our debters? Answ. Not by remitting the iniurie or wrong they haue offered or done to vs, as it is properly sinne and transgres∣sion of the Morall Law of God; for so the remission of it be∣longs only to the Lord, and none can forgiue sinne but God only: Luke. 5.21. but by remitting either the satisfaction and amends which ought to bee made for that iniurie or wrong, or the punishmn which that wrong offered or done
to vs, iustly deserues, or both: and by remitting all reuenge for that iniurie or wrong,Leuit. 19.18. Pro. 19.11. Rom. 12.19. Coloss. 3.13. in not requiting euill for euill, nor returning punishment for it in way of requitall; either by thought, word or deede; not carrying in vs any hatred or purpose of reuenge for it. Quest. Can wee at all times remit the punishment which the wrong offered or done to vs, iustly deserues? Answ. No: in some case of offence or wrong offered or done to vs we cannot: as when the offence or wrong tends not only to our hurt in particular, but also to the publike hurt: and the qualitie of the offence done is such, as if hee bee suffered to escape vnpunished,Deut. 19.19.20 Iosh. 7.24.25. Rom. 13.4. the Common wealth is in danger to suffer much detriment, for then were the state of Magistracie vnlawfull, whose Office is to punish offenders. Some other particular questions. Quest. May we not in some cases of offence, or wrong offered or done to vs, seeke and vse the helpe of the Magistrate for redresse of those offences or wrongs? Answ. Yes, in some cases wee may: as when the iniurie or wrong is dangerous to our liues,Act. 23.17. Act. 25.11. or to our estates; our liues are vniustly sought by some, or our estates are in danger to be ouerthrowne by them: we may then lawfully seeke and vse the helpe of the Magistrate, for our succour and defence: yet so as we then carry not in vs any lust, or the least desire of reuenge; for that were to make the Magistrate an instrument of our malice. Question. May a man lawfully vse this petition, and yet commence a suite of Law, and bee plaintife against another in a manifest iniurie or wrong offered or done to him, touching his Land or goods, thereby to recouer his right, and to obtaine satis∣faction or no? Answ. Hee may lawfully doe it, so as it bee with due ob∣seruation of such things as ought to bee obserued in the doing of it. Quest. What are those things? 2 King. 8.6. Deut. 20.10.11.12.Answ. These; that it bee in a matter of waight and spe∣ciall importance, not on euery trifling occasion; and that it
bee after all other meanes tried and vsed: as helpe of friends and neighbours to arbitrate and compound the matter,1 Cor. 6.5.6.7. 1 Cor. 13.4.5. if it may bee, vsing Lawe in the last place, and as the last remedie: and that it bee without all hatred or desire of reuenge: for a man may bee an aduersarie to another, and not his enemie: and hee may retaine love and bee an other mans aduersarie: but so hee cannot and bee his e∣nemie. Quest. What is meant by the word (as) in this petition, For∣giue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? Answ. The word (as) in this petition, doth not signifie or note out, either the measure of our forgiuenesse, or the manner how we forgiue other: as if wee did desire that God would forgiue vs in the same manner that wee forgiue o∣thers, or so much as wee forgiue others: for our for∣giuenesse is mingled with much corruption, and want of mercie: but it doth only note the very act of forgiue∣nesse, and the certaine truth of our forgiuing of others: as if we should say, Lord forgiue vs, as we doe certainely and truly forgiue others. Luke. 11.4. It is said, Forgiue vs our sinnes, for euen wee forgiue euery man that is indebted to vs. Therefore it seemes that our forgiuing others, is the cause for which God is mo∣ued to forgiue vs, so say the Papists. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the word (For) doth not in that place im∣plie the cause, but the signe or effect; that our forgiuing of others, it is a signe that God doth freely forgiue vs: or an effect of Gods forgiuing vs, assuring vs that God hath for∣giuen vs: we feeling our selues disposed by grace, & ready to forgiue other, it is a signe we are such persons to whom Gods forgiueness belongs: & we thereby come to know more sure∣ly that God hath forgiuen vs. Luk. 7.47. The womans loue was not a cause of great forgiuenesse, but a fruite and signe of Gods forgiuenesse: as Psalm. 86.2. Dauid being mercy∣full, was not a cause of Gods preseruation of him, but a signe that God would preseue him. So our forgiuing others is no cause why God should forgiue vs; but a signe that
that wee are such to whom Gods forgiuenesse belongs, as Mat. 5.7. Nehem 5 19. Quest. Why hath this petition a speciall argument particular∣ly ioyned to it, and no other? Mat. 6.14.15.Answ. Because Christ would thereby signifie to vs, the weakenesse of our faith touching the pardon of our sins, and thereby also shew vs, how we may best strengthen our weak∣nesse by forgiuing of others. Quest. What is then the summe of this petition, Forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? Answ. This; that the Lord would be pleased to accept the death, and passion of Christ Iesus, as a full payment and sa∣tisfaction, for all our sinnes, both originall and actuall; and for the sinnes of all his elect on the earth; and for the merit of his death,Isai. 43.25. Isai. 44.22. Mat. 1.21. Mat. 11.28. Rom. 5.9. would freely and fully acquit vs and set vs free from the guiltinesse of all our sinnes, and from the punish∣ment due to vs for them; and would also accept vs as iust in his sight, & as worthy of eternall life, for the merit of Christ his righteousnes imputed to vs; and hauing already iustified vs, that hee would continue his grace and fauour to vs; and also make knowne to our hearts and soules the daily forgiue∣nesse of all our sinnes, by a new application of pardon of new sinnes daily committed; and would more & more strengthen our assurance of the pardoning of our sinnes, and so make vs feele true peace of conscience, and true ioy in the assurance of his loue to vs in Christ. And that this the Lord would doe as certainely and truly as we forgiue others, who haue offe∣red or done vs wrong, in respect of our bodies, goods or good names. Now to the matter of petition, things wee pray for in this petition. Quest. What are the things we pray for in this petition. For∣giue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? Answ. Sixe things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Mat. 9.12. Psal. 130.3.4. Psal. 143.2.Answ. This; mercy from God in and through Christ, for the pardon of all our sinnes: we finding our selues to stand in neede of Gods mercy, and being fitted for the receiuing of
it, for a man will neuer aske that which hee needs not, or whereof hee feeleth no want: hee that is sicke and feeles his sicknesse, he only will seeke and aske meanes of health. Quest. How are we fitted for the receiuing of Gods mercy, for the pardon of our sinnes? Answ. By three things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Rom. 3.20. & 7.7. a true sight and knowledge of our sinnes and the crse of the Law due to sinne; wee being brought to a sight and knowledge of our sinnes, and conuinced of them by the Morall Law of God. Galath. 3.19. It was added because of the transgressions (that is) for reuealing of sinne and the punishment thereof, and for conuincing of men touching their sinnes. Quest. What is the second thing by which we are fitted for the receiuing of Gods mercy, for the pardon of our sinnes? Answ. This;Ezra. 9.5.6.7. Dan. 9.7.8. Luk. 15.21. Act. 2.37. a true sense and feeling of the waight and burthen of our sinnes, and a true apprehension of the in∣tollerable burthen of Gods wrath due to the least of our sinnes, and so a true touch of conscience, or compunction of heart for them. Quest. What is the third thing by which we are fitted for the receiuing of God mercy, for the pardon of our sinnes? Answ. This: an humble, hearty, willing,1 Ioh. 1.9. Iob 31.33. Ezra. 9.6. Luk. 15.18.19 Luk. 18.13. and free confessi∣on and acknowledgement of our sinnes to God, and that par∣ticularly, of our knowne sinnes without excuse or extenua∣tion, arising from hope of ease and pardon, and withall a full purpose, and resolution of heart to forsake them: out of an hatred and wearinesse of sinne, and a loathing of it because it is sinne. Quest. May not men make a sound and comfortable confession of their sinnes to God in the time of their sicknesse, or when they lie vnder the hand of God in some great distresse? Answ. A confession and acknowledgement of sinne, may be made to God, in truth and with comfort in the time of sicknesse, and other great distresse: but if confession of sinne
be only forced out through sicknesse, or other great distresse: as the confession of a Malefactor is by the wracke, or some other torture; and if that sicknesse or distresse were not, or were remoued, men would not confesse their know sinnes; then is that confession comfortlesse, and no better then the cofession of Cain. Gen. 4.13. and of Pharaoh. Exod. 10.16. and of Iudas. Mat. 26.4 Quest. Is a particular confession of knowne sinnes, alwaies necessarie? Answ. No, it is not: if a man humble himselfe for his sins with a purpose to confesse them particularly, and be preuen∣ted by time, so as he cannot lay them open as he would; then a generall confession will be accepted of God, as appeares in the Thiefe on the Crosse, who being preuented by death, made no particular confession of his sinne, yet on his generall confession hee was accepted. Luke. 23.41.42.43. Quest. What if a man see his sinnes and feele the waight of them, and be truely touched in conscience for them, and desire to confesse them to God, and yet is not able to vtter the words of con∣fession; may he then bee fitted for the receiuing of Gods mercy for the pardon of them, or no? Answ. A man seeing and feeling the waight and burden of his sinnes, and being truly touched in conscience for them; doe heartily, truly, and soundly desire to confesse them to God, and be hindered by the greatnes of griefe, or weaknesse of body, or the like; yet he is then fitted for the receiuing of Gods mercy for the pardon of them. Psal. 32.5. I thought (saith Dauid) I will confesse against my selfe my wicked∣nesse vnto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sinne. Luke. 15.18. The Prodigall purposed to con∣fesse his sinne; then verse. 20. the Text saith when hee was yet a farre off, his Father saw him, and had compassion on him; then verse. 21. followes his confession, Mat. 26.75. we reade of Peter weeping bitterly, but not a word of any confession; no doubt hee purposed to confesse his sinne, but it may be his griefe was so great that hee could not vt∣ter
it in words, but the Lord accepted that his sound purpose expressed not in words but in bitter teares, and vouchsafed mercy to him. Hosea. 14.3. It is said, take to you words, and turne to the Lord, and say vnto him, take away all iniquitie and receiue vs graciously; so will we render the Calues of our lippes. It seemes then that words of confession of sinnes are simply ne∣cessary, that we may be fitted for the receiuing of Gods mer∣cie for the pardon of our sinnes. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus: that place is to be vnderstood of publike humiliation for sinne, in which the words of confession of sinnes must alwayes be vsed: but in priuate humiliation for sinne by priuate persons, words of confession of sinnes, are fit, conuenient, and profitable, yet not alwaies simply neces∣sary: for a man may pray effectually for the pardon of his sinne, and yet vtter neuer a word. Exodus. 14.15. 1 Sam. 1.13. and the spirit doth pray in Gods Children somtimes with sighs vnutterable. Rom. 8.26. Que. What is the second thing we pray for in this petition, For∣giue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? Answ. This: mercie from God, in and through Christ, for the pardon of those sinnes wee haue committed, and falne into againe, after repentance of frailty and against our purpose, wee being truly humbled for them: for Christ heere bids vs pray for the pardon of sinnes indefinitely Luke. 17.4. Christ bids vs forgiue our brethren that sinne against vs seauen times in a day, if they seeke it at our hands: and much more will the Lord, who is infinite in mercie, forgiue vs some sinne committed, againe and againe, on our true repentance. 1 Iohn. 2.1 2. Hee speakes to the regenerate, that if they sinne they haue an Aduocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the iust. Gen. 12.19. and then Gen. 20.2. Quest. Is not a relapse and falling into sinne againe after re∣pentance, a desperate case and hopelesse? Answer. No: it is a dangerous case, as a relapse into
some strange disease is dangerous, and may cost a man the losse of his life: but yet a relapse into sinne, is not desperate and hopelesse, because it is pardonable and may be forgiuen. Isai. 1.16.17. God calls Apostataes to repentance with promise, if they bee turned to him. vers. 18. Quest: What is the third thing we pray for in this petition, Forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? Answ. This: that God would by his good spirit apply to vs the pardon of our sins daily, and by the same Spirit would more and more witnesse to vs, and assure vs that our sinnes are pardoned, and strengthen our faith to full assurance of it, we being already iustified in his sight. Rom. 8.5.16. Galat. 3.14. By faith we receiue the spirit, (that is) more fully and manifestly dwelling in vs, to our sanctification and assurance, touching our redemption, and the pardon of our sinnes. 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephes. 1.13. The spirit is compared to a seale, be∣caue he confirmes vs in our faith, and assurance of the par∣don of our sinnes. Quest. What reason is there for it, that we being already iusti∣fied, and hauing our sinnes forgiuen, are still to seeke and craue for∣giuenesse at the hands of God? Answ. Because it is needfull that God should as well con∣tinue his grace and fauour to vs, touching the pardon of our sinnes, as giue it to vs at the first: and that God should actually pardon our sinnes daily committed: hence Da∣uid prayed for actuall forgiuenesse of sinnes: Psalme 51.1. though Nathan had told him that his sinne was forgiuen. 2 Sam. 12.13. Quest. What is the fourth thing we pray for in this peti∣tion, Forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? Psal. 103.2.13 Malac. 3.17. Isai. 53.5. 2 Pet. 2.24.Answ. This; that God would spare vs, as a Father doth his children, remouing from vs, for the merit of Christ his death, all those punishments which our sinnes might iustly bring vpon vs: for, forgiuenesse is no forgiuenesse, if there be not remission both of the guilt of sinne, and of all punish∣ment due for the same.
Quest. Doth not God for the merit of Christ his death, pardon the fault and eternall punishment of sinne, and yet retaine a tempo∣rarie punishment to be inflicted on them that haue sinned: so say the Papists? Answ. No, he doth not; remission of sinnes and redemp∣tion by the blood of Christ, are equiualent, of equall reach and signification. Ephes. 1.7. Colos. 1.14. And redemption by the blood of Christ, is freedome from the curse of the Law, which is both of all plagues heere in this world, and all paines and torments after this life is ended. Quest. How may it farther appeare, that God pardoning the fault & eternall punishment of sin, be retaines a temporary punish∣ment to be inflicted on them that haue sinned. Answ. By two reasons especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This: If God inflict any punishment on him whose sinnes are taken away by the blood of Christ, as John. 1.29. Behold the Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the World: then is he vniust, it is all one as to require payment and satisfaction of a debt forgiuen, which were most vn∣iust: but there is no iniustice with God, and therefore he re∣taines not a temporarie punishment to be inflicted on them that haue sinned. Question. What is the second reason by which it may ap∣peare, that God pardoning the fault and eternall punishment of sin, he retaines not a temporarie punishment to be inflicted on them that haue sinned? Answ. This: If it bee true that when God doth not par∣don sinne, hee retaines the punishment of it; then it fol∣lowes necessarily on the contrary, that when hee doth forgiue sinne hee retaines not any punishment due to it. Some whose sinnes are pardoned, haue notwithstanding, sicknesse, pouertie, contempt, and other temporarie euils laid on them: therefore it seemes though sinne be forgiuen, yet all the temporarie punishment is not remoued from them that haue sinned.
Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; sicknesse, pouertie, and the like; to them who haue the pardon of their sinnes, are corrections and fa∣therly chastisements, and are laid on them for many good ends; as to worke in them amendment, and care to avoid sinne, and for the exercise of faith, triall of their patience, and stirring vp the languishing graces of the spirit of God ready to die in them; and so they are tokens of Gods loue, & not punishments of sinne forgiuen, nor proceeding from an angrie and displeased God. Heb. 12.6. Quest. What is the fift thing we pray for in this petition, For∣giue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? 2 Cron. 13.18.19. Psal. 51.18. Iam. 5.15. 1 Ioh. 5.16.Answ. This; mercy from God, in and through Christ for the pardon of the sinnes of others that belong to Gods electi∣on; that others as well as our selues belonging to Gods e∣lection may haue their sinnes pardoned. Quest. May we pray that God would pardon the sinnes of o∣pen notorious wicked persons or no? Answ. It being vnknowne to vs how the Lord will deale with men, that yet liue in impenitencie and grosse sinnes, and seing they are of our owne flesh, we are to pity them, and in commiseration of them hoping the best in charity, wee may pray, that if they belong to Gods election, the Lord would haue mercie on them, and pardon their sinnes. Exod. 32.31. Moses prayed earnestly and vehemently for the pardon of the peoples sinne, hauing committed a great sinne. 1 Sam. 15.25. Samuel mourned and prayed for Saul. It is supposed that the Lord had mercy on Saul at Steuens prayer Acts. 7.60. Quest. May not our prayers, wee being true beleeuers, bee availeable for other true beleeuers, who are weake in faith, and tender hearted, and are so oppressed with the waight of their sinns, as they can only sigh and groane out their requests to God for the pardon of them, but cannot vtter and expresse their re∣quests? Answ. Yes, they may, if they be offered vp to God in faith, and with feruencie: for herein lies a principall part of the communion of Saints, that a poore weake member
of the Church, whose prayers are only sighs and groanes, is partaker of all the holy prayers of all the people of God dispersed ouer the face of the whole earth,Rom. 12.5. Iam. 5.16. 1 Cor. 12.25.26 his fellow mem∣bers. Quest. What is the sixt thing that we pray for in this petiti∣on, Forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? Answ. This; that God would by his grace dispose our hearts to a ready, willing, free and full forgiuing of others,Ephes. 4.32. Coloss. 3.12.13 and would make vs able truly to say, wee forgiue others who haue offered or done vs wrong, bringing detriment or hurt to vs, in our bodies, goods or good name, euen as God for Christ his sake forgiueth vs. Quest. Why is it needfull that wee so pray, that God would dispose our hearts to a ready, willing, free, and full forgiuing of others? Answ. For two reasons especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Ans. This;Tit. 3.3. Galat. 5.20. Gen. 27.41. because by nature we are backward & altoge∣ther vnwilling to forgiue such as haue offered, or done vs wrong. Wee commonly plead many things against it; as that the matter is so grieuous and so foule, wee could for∣giue any wrong but this; that wee haue deserued better at their hands that wrong vs; and we neuer meant them harme: or wee haue often forgiuen them the like of∣fence before, with warning that they should neuer doe the like; and such like. Quest. What is the second reason? Answ. This: because our ready, willing, free, and full for giuing of others,Mar. 11.25.26 Mat. 5 7. 1 Ioh. 3.14. will bee an argument both to pleade for mercie with God, and also to assure vs that wee are such persons to whom Gods mercie belongs, for the par∣don of our sinnes. Now to the matter of Deprecation. Quest. What are the things we pray against in this petition, Forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? Answ. Fiue things especially. Quest. What is the first of those?
Psal. 51.3. Psal. 119.59. Isai. 44.19. Iere. 8.6. Hag. 1.7.Answ. This; want of knowledge and sight of sinnes, and a want of due consideration of it: that God would turne a∣way and keepe from vs blindnesse of minde, in respect of our sinnes, and would not suffer vs to liue and continue in knowne sinnes; or at least in sinnes that might be dis∣cerned and knowne of vs, without any consideration of them, either putting out of our mindes the thought of our sinnes altogether, slightly thinking of them, and slubbering ouer the matter carelesly, as that we are all sinners, and the best haue their infirmities, and the like. Quest. What is the second thing we pray against in this peti∣tion, Forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue ou debters? Rom. 2.5. Heb. 13.13.Answ. This: hardn sse of heart, and vnfeelingnesse of sinne, and want of remorse and true touch of conscience for sinne. That God would keepe vs from being hardened in our hearts, and from euery dgree of deadnesse and vnfee∣lingnesse of conscience, in regard of our knowne sinnes, or such as we may easily discerne and know, being grosse and foule. This is called a stony heart. Ezech. 11.19. & 36.26. Quest. What be the degrees of deadnesse and vnfeelingnesse of conscience, in regard of knowne sinnes, or sinnes that may bee discerned and knowne, that wee pray against in this Pe∣tition? Answ. Two especially. Quest. What it the first of those? Ans. This: slumbering, or benummednesse of conscience; as when a mans conscience doth not accuse nor trouble him for any sinne,Gen. 42.21. Gen. 50.15. 2 Chron. 33.10 11.12. Mat. 2.3. vnlesse it be most foule, fearefull, or capitall: and not alwayes for such a sinne, but only in the time of some grieuous sicknesse or distresse. Quest. What is the second degree of deadnesse and vnfeeling∣nesse of conscience, in regard of knowne sinnes, or sinnes that may bee discerned and knowne, that wee pray against in this Pe∣tition? Exod. 7.13. Exod. 8.15. &c. Zach. 7.12 Ephes. 4.19. 1 Tim. 4.2.Answ. This: searednesse of conscience; as when a mans conscience is vtterly past feeling, and doth not accuse or trouble him for any sinne, no not for great sinnes, and for
most foule and fearefull sinnes. This iudgement befell Pharaoh. Quest. VVhat is the fruit of these two degrees? Answ. This; the spirit of slumber or securitie in sinne,Isai. 28.15. Iere. 48.11. Zeph. 1.12. Mat. 24.38.39. 1 Thess. 5.3. which possessing the hearts of men, makes them thinke and say in their hearts, they are free ftom all Gods Iudgements, and that they are in no danger of hell, death, or damnation. Quest. VVhat is the third thing wee pray against in this Pe∣tition, Forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? Answ. This; an opinion of our owne righteousnesse,Deut. 9.4. Iere. 2.35. Mat. 9.13. Luk. 15.7. Luk. 18.9.10. Reuel. 3.17. and a conceit of our owne goodnesse: That God would keepe vs from that opinion and conceit, that we are sufficiently righteous, and need no repentance, which is the common conceit of the naturall man, and of ignorant persons; as come to a natural & ignorāt person, aske him whether he can keepe the commandments of God or no; he will answere, he can, so well as God will giue him leaue, and that hee loues God with all his heart, and his neighbour as himselfe. There bee none amongst vs, but they will confesse them∣selues to be sinners; and therfore none can thinke such a wic∣ked thought, that they haue no need of repentance. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus these two things may stand together, a man may in generall termes confesse himselfe to bee a sinner, and yet thinke that he is righteous: and some may and doe ac∣count great sinnes little sinnes, and little sinnes no sinnes: and some may and doe account vice vertue; as drunkennesse, good fellowship; pride, comelinesse, handsomnesse, or decen∣cie; couetousnesse, thrift, or good husbandry; and swearing, a note of a braue mind. And some may and doe account sin∣cere profession of religion too much, strictnesse and hypocri∣sie; as Isai. 8.18. Isai 59.15. He that refraineth himselfe from euill (that is) from the common sinnes of the time, maketh himselfe a prey: and where these things are, though the mouth say, I am a sinner, yet the heart thinkes, I am righ∣teous. Q. What Followes on an opinion of our owne righteousnesse, that wee are sufficiently righteous, and need no repentance,
which wee pray against in this Petition? Answ. Eyther a contempt, or too light esteeme, and no regard at all of Christ, and of his righteousnesse, and his merits, Math. 9.11. The whole need not the Physician: (that is) they that iudge themselues whole, and thinke they are righteous, will not regard Christ the Physician of the soule: Rom. 10.3. to establish and set vp their owne righte∣ousnesse, and to contemne Gods righteousnesse. Quest. VVhat is the fourth thing wee pray against in this Petition, Forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? Answ. This; malice and pride of heart, whereby men are naturally and strongly bent to reuenge,Leuit. 19.18. Pro. 14.29. Pro. 16.32. Pro. 19.11. Rom. 12.19. and will beare no iniurie or wrong offered or done to them. That God would keepe vs from malicious proud hearts; hearts strongly bent, and carried to malice and reuenge. Colossians 3.8. Wrath (that is) the sinfull motion of the heart against another, desiring reuenge for some iniurie done. Quest. What is the fruit of malice and pride of heart, where∣by men are naturally and strongly bent to reuenge, and will beare no iniury done, which we pray against in this Petition? Answ. This; violent and reuengefull speeches and beha∣uiour,Gen. 34.25.26.31. 2 Sam. 3.9. 2 Sam. 14.30. Hest. 3.5.6. Coloss. 3.13. and a returning of euill for euill in way of requitall, and a pleading for it: as men vse to say touching those that haue offered or done them wrong; May we not serue them as they haue serued vs, and deale with them as they haue dealt with vs? Haue we not reason for it? Haue we not iust cause so to doe? Quest. What is the fift thing we pray against in this Petition, Forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters? Rom. 1.30.Answ. This; implacablenesse, mindes and hearts that are averse and contrary to any reconciliation, being once offended. That God would keepe vs from being of such minds and hearts, as being once offended, will neuer bee re∣conciled againe. Such was the heart of Saul, that would by no meanes bee appeased towards Dauid, 1 Samuel 24.18, 19. though hee confessed himselfe to bee faultie, and Chap. 26.21.
Now to the sixt Petition, the third of those that concerne our selues, and the second of those that concerne spirituall good things, Math. 6.13. Luke 11.4. Lead vs not into temptation; but deliuer vs from euill. Quest. VVhat is the reason of this order, after wee haue cra∣ved pardon of our sinnes, wee are thus to pray, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. There be two speciall reasons of this order. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;2 Cor. 2.11. 2 Cor. 7.5. 2 Cor. 12.7. Ephes. 6.11.12. Luk. 11.21. because the forgiuenesse of sinnes and grie∣uous temptations are in this life inseparable companions; and none in this world are more beaten and buffetted with temptations, then Gods children and true penitent sinners. Wicked persons are neuer troubled with temptations, but liue in peace, because they are already vnder the power of Satan. Quest. What is the second reason of this order, that after wee haue craued pardon of our sinnes, we are thus to pray, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. This; because as we must be carefull to craue mer∣cie from God for the pardon of our sinnes past:Can 5.3. Mat. 12.43.44.45. Ioh. 5.14. Ioh. 8.11. so are wee also to be carefull to preuent sinnes to come; and to that end we are to craue ayd and strength from God against sinne to come, that wee may not offend our good and gracious God and Father hereafter, as we haue done before. Quest. VVhat necessitie is there of vsing this Petition, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. It is of necessary vse in three respects especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in respect of our owne corruption, and readi∣nesse to yeeld to temptations to euill, and our weake∣nesse to withstand them; wee through our corruption be∣ing prone to euill, and altogether vnable of our selues, and by any strength of our owne, to withstand the least temptation to euill. Quest. VVhat is the second respect in which this Petition,
Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill, is of necessary vse? Psal. 142.4. Pro 20.17. Ephes. 4.22. Heb. 3.13. & 11.25.Answ. This; in respect of the subtill and deceiuing na∣ture of sinne; sinne blinding the iudgement, and there being many allurements to draw vs to the practise of sinne, as plea∣sure, profit, and the like. Quest. VVhat is the third respect in which this Petition, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill, is of necessary vse? Answ. This; In respect of Satan our enemie, who is both strong,Mat. 4 3. Ioh. 8.44. 2 Cor. 11.14. Ephes. 6.12. 1 Pet. 5.8. Reuel. 12.3. subtill, malicious, and cruell, and is also euer busie in assaulting vs, and seeking to draw vs to the practise of euill and sinne, euery where casting the bayts of sinne before vs, in our meate, drinke, apparell, and such like, to cause vs to abuse it; and in all our actions, in euery thing we goe about, and in euery place where we come, obseruing where wee are weakest, and there setting vpon vs, and neuer wanting occa∣sions to prouoke vs to sinne. Quest. What are the generall things contained in this Petiti∣on, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. They are two; first, the request it selfe which wee make to God, Lead vs not into temptation. Secondly, the explanation of it, in the words following, but deliuer vs from euill: as if we should say, Lord, lead vs not into temptation, but so deliuer vs from it, that we bee not o∣uercome of the euill of it. Now to the opening of the words of this Petition, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill. Quest. VVhat is meant by temptation? Answ. Temptation in a generall sense, signifieth a proo∣uing, or a taking triall of a thing or person: It is Metapho∣ricall, as by pearcing thorow a thing is tryed what is with∣in, whether it be sound or no. And temptation is either good or euill. Quest. VVhat is a good temptation? Answ. This; when God taketh triall of man, and proueth him either for the manifestation of the grace he hath bestow∣ed on him, both to himselfe and to others; or for the discoue∣ring
of his weakenesse, making him see how vnable he is to stand without Gods continuall assisting grace. Thus God tried Abraham. Gen. 22.1.2. And the Israelites, Deut. 13.3. And thus afflictions are called tentations. Iam. 1.2. Quest. What is an euill temptation? Answ. It is either when a man tempteth God, or when the Deuill tempteth man. Quest. What is mans tempting of God? Answ. This;Iob. 23.10. Luk. 18.22. when man leauing his ordinarie way of way∣ting on God in the vse of ordinarie and lawful meanes, takes on him to proue by vnlawfull meanes, whether God bee so powerfull, iust, and mercifull, as the Scriptures doe affirme him to be. Quest. What is the Deuills tempting of man? Answ. This; when the Deuill moueth, allureth,Exod. 17.2. Deut. 6.16. Psal. 78.18.19 and pro∣uoketh man to sinne, and laboureth to bring him into sinne, and so withdrawes him from God, to his temporall and eter∣nall destruction: and this is meant by temptation in this pe∣tition, Lead vs not into temptation. And hence is the Deuill cald the Tempter: Mat. 4.3. and continuing in anger wee are said to giue place to the Deuill. Ephe. 4.26.27. Quest. How doth the Deuill moue, allure, and prouoke man to sinne, and labour to bring him into sinne? Answ. Ordinarily and vsually, two waies. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; by outward effects,Iob. 31.1. Mat. 4.3.8. Iosh. 7.21 Pro. 23.31. 1 Ioh. 2.16. the Deuill making externall obiects, such as the outward senses doe perceiue, as outward prosperitie, aduersitie, beauty, strength, riches, euill example, and such like occasions, of stirring vp the corrup∣tion of the nature of man, whereby man is prone to euill and sinne. Quest What is the second way by which the Deuill doth ordi∣narily, and vsually moue, allure and prouoke, a man to sinne, and labour to bring a man into sinne? Answ. This; by inward suggestion,1 Chron. 21.1, Ioh. 13.2. Act. 5.3. the Deuill suggest∣ing and offering euill to the minde of man, and thereby solici∣ting, and stirring vp his corruption to yeeld to the doing of euil.
Quest. Doth not Satan sometimes tempt to sinne alone, with∣out the stirring of the corruption of our nature? Answ. Yes, he doth, and that so grossely, that the very flesh is ashamed of it, as by temptations that are against the light of nature, euen nature corrupted; as for a man to kill his owne louing and beloued father or mother, where there is no hope of gaine, or matter of displeasure to prouoke to it; and by thoughts of Blasphemie against God the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, against the Word of God, and his holy Ordi∣nances, and such like: these are meerely from Satan himselfe, and not from the corruption of nature. Quest. How may we know that some temptations are meerely from Satan, and not from our owne corruption? Answ. Thus; if temptations being against the light of Nature, doe come furiously, and like the flashings of light∣ning suddenly, either without any dependance on former cogitations, or without any occasion of any outward ob∣iect at all: so as we cannot imagine how they should come; and withall they haunt vs, and will not be put away; but the more wee striue against them, the more they come on vs, and withall are contriued subtilly and artificially; then are they from Satan meerely, and not from mans corruption. Quest. What is it to bee led into temptation? Answ. To be led or carried into temptation as the word signifieth, is to bee ouercome of temptation to euill, and sinne; a man is led or carried into temptation, when tempta∣tion possesseth him, and preuailes ouer him, and holds him, af∣ter it hath assaulted him. Quest. How doth God lead into temptation to euill, which we pray that he would not doe, Lord lead vs not into temptation? Answ. God leads into temptation to euill and sinne two wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? 2 Sam 24.1. compared. 1 King. 22.22. 2 Cor. 12.7.Answ. This; by letting Satan loose to tempt a man, he gi∣uing him power in some measure, that he may tempt him and preuaile ouer him to the committing of euill and sinne. Quest. VVhat is the second way by which God leades into temptation to euill and sinne?
Answ. This; by desertion, by withdrawing his grace,2 Chro. 32.31. Psal. 8 12. Rom. 1.24.26. both the light of knowledge, & the gouernment of his spirit from a man, and by leauing him to himselfe, either for a time, as he doth sometimes his owne children, or vtterly as he doth some wicked persons whom hee iustly giues ouer to their owne lusts, and the power of Satan. Quest. Doth God so let Satan loose to tempt a man, and leaue a man to himselfe in temptation to euill, as he onely looketh on and suffers Satan to tempt him, without hauing any hand or worke at all himselfe in the temptation? Answ. No, he doth not,2 Sam. 24.1. Isai. 19.14. & 63.17. Rom. 1.26.28. Gods permitting of Satan to tempt a man to sinne, is not a bare permission, God onely looking on, and only suffering Satan to tempt him: but it is a power∣full working permission. Quest. If Gods permitting of Satan to tempt a man to sinne bee not a bare permssion, but a powerfull working permission, and God hath an hand and worke in it: How then is not God the au∣thour of sinne? Answ. Temptation to sinne is not simply and absolutely euill, but in some respects it is good: as it is an action it is good, and of God, in him we liue, moue, and haue our being, Act. 17.28. And as it is limitted, ordered, & guided to a good end, it is also good, and of God, as it is plaine in the sinne of Iosephs brethren, Genes. 45.5, 6. and so God hath an hand in temptation to sinne, so farre foorth as it is good: but as it is euill hee workes it not, but willingly permits it, and is not the authour of it. Iam. 1.13. God tempteth no man: therefore no temptati∣on to sinne is the action of God. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the meaning of that place is, that God doth not stirre vp or moue any mans heart to sinne, or infuse euill and sinne into his heart. 1 Kin. 12.15. It is said that King Rehoboam following the counsell of the yong men, hearkened not to the people, and in not hearkning to them he sinned, and it is said it was the ordi∣nance of the Lord, or the Lord was the cause; therfore it seems that God is sometimes the author & cause of some mens sins.
Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; Rehoboams not hearkening to the people there spoken of, is to be considered not only as his euill act com∣ming from him, left to himselfe and to the councell of his young Councellors, but also as a punishment of the King∣dome of Israel; and as a meanes to bring to passe the prophe∣sie of Ahijah, as it is said in the text, in which respect it was good, and was caused of God. Quest. What are we to vnderstand by (euill) in this peti∣tion Leade vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill. Answ. Euill here signifieth in generall, euery thing what∣soeuer it is, that may or doth harme and hurt vs; not only in re∣gard of our owne sence and feeling; but in truth, as that which doth harmfully, either hinder our vnion with God, and seuer vs from him; or diminish our comfortable fellow∣ship and communion with him; wherein stands our true blessednesse. Quest. What are the euill things that may doe harme, or hurt vs, either by hindering our vnion with God, or by diminishing our comfortable fellowship and communion with him? Answ. These; either Satan, who is the maine and princi∣pall euill:Ioh. 17.15. Rom. 12.9. Galat. 1.4. 1 Pet. 2.11. or other our spirituall enemies; as sinne, the World, the Flesh, and whatsoeuer else Satan vseth, as his a∣gent and instrument in temptation against vs: hence is Sa∣tan called euill, or the euill one. Mat. 13.19. and that euill one is called the Deuill. vers. 39. Quest. Why is the Deuill called the euill one? Answ. Because he is in himselfe exceeding euill, and his sinnes are in the highest degree sinfull, and he practiseth sins of all sorts and degrees; for all the sinnes that be in the world, are from him, either originally or by furtherance; and he al∣so commits euill and wickednesse continually without cea∣sing:. hence compared to an hunger-bitten Lyon, who go∣eth about seeking whom hee may deuoure, 1 Pet. 5.8. the most wicked man that is or euer was, will sometimes doe good: as Pharaoh, Exod. 10.16. and Saul. 1 Sam. 15.30. Herod. Mar. 6.20. But the Deuill doth nothing but practise
wickednesse continually, and neuer ceaseth: therefore hee is iustly called the euill one. Quest. What is meant by the word (deliuer) in this Petition? Answ.Rom. 7.24. Coloss. 1.13. By deliuering is here meant a powerfull rescuing and freeing of vs, wee being neither able nor willing of our selues to helpe our selues from the power of Satan, and of all other our spirituall enemies, and from the danger of tempta∣tion to euill and sinne, by the power of grace, and by the Spi∣rit of God. Quest. What are we to vnderstand by the word (vs) in this Pe∣tition. Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. Both our selues and others also of Gods children, who either are, or may be tempted to euill and sin, the best of Gods children being in danger to bee tempted to foule and grieuous sins, as Abraham was, Gen. 20.2. Dauid, 2 Sam. 11.2, 3. yea Christ himselfe, Mat. 4.1, to 11. verse. Quest. What is then the summe of this petition, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. This; that God would not either let Satan loose to tempt vs, or any of his chosen children,Luk. 22.40. Eccles. 7.28. Rom. 16.20. 2 Cor. 12.9. and giue him libertie in any measure, that hee may tempt vs to euill and sinne, or withdraw his grace from vs, and leaue vs to our selues; that so Satan may either as hee doth ordinarily, by outward obiects, or inward suggestion, stirring vp our corrup∣tion, whereby wee are prone to euill and sinne, as some∣times hee doth by himselfe, without stirring vp our corrup∣tion, moue, allure, and prouoke vs to sin, and labour to bring vs into sinne; but that he would be pleased powerfully to re∣scue and to free vs from the power of Satan, and of all othr our spirituall enemies, and from the danger of temptation to euill and sinne by the power of his grace, and of his owne good and holy Spirit. Now to the matter of Petition, things wee pray for in this Petition. Quest. What are the things we pray for in this Petition, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. Seuen things especially. Quest. What is the first of those?
Answ. This; strength of grace aforehand to withstand temptation to euill and sinne, that shall at any time be laid a∣gainst vs, and such helping graces as are needfull to that pur∣pose. Quest. What are the helping graces that are needfull for vs aforehand, to withstand temptation to euill and sinnne that shall at any time be laid against vs, that we pray for in this Petition? Answ. Two especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? 2 Cor. 2.11. 2 Cor. 11.3. Ephes. 6.11.Answ. This; spirituall wisdome to see and discerne the sub∣tilties of Satan, and his cunning deuices, whereby hee doth commonly allure men to sin, and seeke to bring them into the practise of sinne: That God would make vs wise to spie out and to know and discerne those subtilties and sleights, and craftie deuices that Satan vseth to insnare men in sinne, and to bring them into the practise of it. Quest. VVhat are the subtilties and sleights, and cunning de∣uices of Satan, whereby he doth commonly allure men to sinne, and seekes to bring men into the practise of sinne, that wee doe entreat God in this Petition to make vs wise to spie out and to know, and discerne? Answ. They are many, and it is not in mans power to find them all out, but the principall and chiefe of them are sixe. Of which in order. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; his hiding the danger and vglinesse of euill and sin, as the misery he knowes sinne will bring on men, and his presenting of it vnto them vnder the face and appearance of some good, as safetie, credit, pleasure, or gaine, they shall get by it. Thus hee dealt with Eue, Gene. 3, 4, 5. with Saul, 1 Sam. 15.9. Quest. What is the second subtiltie, sleight, and cunning de∣uice of Satan, whereby hee doth commonly allure men to sinne, and seekes to bring men into the practise of sinne, that wee intreat God in this Petition, to make vs wise to spie out, and to know, and discerne? Answ. This; his presenting of euill and sinne vnder such considerations as may seeme to lessen it, and to make it seeme
not so dangerous; as that it is once, or for a short time they shall holde that course,Pro. 7.18.19.20 2 Sam. 11.4. Psal 50.21. Eccles. 8.11. and they may breake it off when they will; that the best men haue fallen, and haue notwithstan∣ding repented, and been saued, and so may they; that it shall be kept secret; that God is mercifull, and will not presently punish, and the like. Quest. VVhat is the third subtiltie, sleight; and cunning de∣uice of Satan? Answ. This; his fitting and framing his temptations ac∣cording to the naturall dispositions of men, or according to the sexe, or according to the different conditions and cal∣lings, and estates of men or women in the world, or accor∣ding to their age or gifts of body or minde; as Cain, malici∣ous to murder, Genes. 4.8. Iudas couetous to sell his Master, Math. 26.14, 15. In want, to distrust and vse vnlawfull meanes, Math. .2, 3. In discontent, to impatiencie; and if we be of high spirits, then to lay violent hands on ourselues, as 2 Sam. 17.23. If rich or in high place, to pride, dis∣daine, oppression, Epicurisme, and such like, Prou. 30.9. The Tradesman to deceit; the Seruing-man to idlenesse and gaming; the Preacher to man-pleasing, or selfe-pleasing, and the like, Gal 1.10. Quest. What is the fourth subtiltie, sleight, and cunning de∣uice of Satan? Answ. This; his taking occasion from the good things and graces that bee in men, to draw them to sinne, and his labouring to wound men with their owne weapons: as finding faith in men, and a resting on Gods proui∣dence, hee perswades them to presumption, and to doe that which carries a shew of a strong faith. Thus hee laboured with Christ, Math. 4.6. Finding some zealous, and fer∣uently affected, hee labours to preuent their zeale and fer∣uencie, Rom. 10.2, 3. Philip. 3.6. Such as are sober and moderate, to become remisse and carelesse, dead and heart∣lesse, Reuel. 3.15. Some carefull and forward in Prayer, hea∣ring the Word, and other holy duties, hee makes them negli∣gent in their particular places and callings; and so in many other particulars.
Quest. VVhat is the fift subtiltie, sleight, and cunning deuice of Satan, whereby hee doth commonly allure men to sinne, and seeke to bring them into the practise of sinne, that wee intreat God in this Petition to make vs wise, to spye out, to know, and to discerne? Answ. This; his transforming himselfe into an Angell of light,2 Cor. 11.13.14.15. Ezra 4.2. Nehem. 6.2.4. Acts 13.50. Act. 16.16.17. of taking on him the person of a Magistrate, or Mini∣ster, and vsing the fittest instruments to effect his pur∣pose; as the counsell or example of the wisest, learnedst, or wealthiest, men of chiefe reputation, clothing vice in the habit of vertue; as couetousnesse, good husbandry, and such like. Quest. What is the sixt subtiltie, sleight, and cunning deuice of Satan? Answ. This; his tempting to some sinne, hee cares not much whether men yeeld or no, hoping to get a greater con∣quest of them by not yeelding; as thus, when by not yeel∣ding men grow proud, vaine-glorious, secure, confident, and the like: this cunning hee vsed in tempting of Christ, Math. 4.3. The words of the temptation seeme to import, that he sought onely the working of a miracle; yet the De∣uill rather intended that hee would not worke it, so as he might haue brought him to doubt of his being the Sonne of God. Quest. VVhat is the second helping grace that is needfull for vs afore hand, to withstand temptation to euill and sinne, that shall at any time bee layd against vs, that we pray for in this Petition? Pro. 4.23. Mat. 26.45. 1 Thess. 5.6. 2 Tim. 4.5. 1 Pet. 5.8Answ This; Spirituall watchfulnesse to preuent the sub∣tilties, sleights, and cunning of Satan, whereby hee doth commonly allure men to sinne, and seeke to draw them to the practise of sinne, that God would make vs wary and circumspect, and watchfull ouer our owne hearts, and wayes, that wee bee not circumuented by the subilties, sleights, and cunning of Satan, whereby hee doh common∣ly allure men to sinne, and seeke to draw them to the practise of sinne? Quest. VVherein stands that spirituall watchfulnesse to
preuent the subtilties, sleights, and cunning of Satan? Answ. In two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in watching our speciall and strongest cor∣ruptions,Hab. 1.16. Act. 19.25. Pro. 28.14. and in being iealous ouer our selues in regard of the sinnes to which wee are most prone, and most naturally inclined, as our sweet sinnes, Iob 20.12, 13. our profitable sinnes, and the like. Quest. What is the second thing? Answ. This; in keeping continuall watch against all occasions of euill,Pro. 6.8. Psal. 119.37. 1 Cor. 10.23. and chiefely against such things as ei∣ther haue been occasions of euill to vs, or such as wee haue found our selues in danger to fall by, as company, and things and delights indifferent lawfull in themselues, yet dangerous in regard of our being carried to an immoderate vse of them. Quest. What is the second thing we pray for in this Petition, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. This; strength of grace to stand without falling into sinne in the time of temptation; that God would in the time of temptation, when we are tempted by Satan to any sinne, stand by vs with his grace, and would then adde grace to grace, euen new grace to former, and keepe vs from falling into sinne to which we are tempted, and would then make vs find his grace sufficient for vs to vphold vs; as 2 Cor. 12.9. Quest. Is not a childe of God able to stand without fal∣ling into sinne in the time of temptation by the strength of grace that is in him, vnlesse God adde grace to grace, euen new grace to former? Answ. No, he is not,Mat. 26.33.35. Ephes. 6.10. the best of Gods children haue need in the time of temptation to sinne, that God should stand by them with his grace, and should adde grace to grace, euen new grace to the former. Quest. How doth God stand by vs with his grace, and adde grace to grace, euen new grace to former, and so keepe vs from fal∣ling into sinne in the time of temptation? Answ. Thus; by vouchsafing his holy Spirit to worke in
vs effectually to the strengthening of vs against that temp∣tation.sal. 51.12. Quest. How doth the holy Spirit of God worke in vs effectu∣ally, to the strengthening of vs against temptation when wee are tempted by Satan to any sinne? Answ. Three wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; By stirring vp the gifts and graces of God that be in our soules, and by bringing into exercise, and ma∣king vs able to exercise and to vse them,Gen. 20.11. Pro. 14.27. Gen. 39.9. Nehem. 6.11. 1 Pet. 5.9. and by the vse and exercise of them, to resist Satan tempting vs to sinne: as our faith, our feare of God, our loue to God, our care to please God: for these and the like graces may bee in vs, and not in exercise; but being in exercise they doe enable vs to repell, and to beate back Satans temptations to euill and sinne. Quest. What is the second way? Answ. This; by putting good motions into our hearts, and good and holy meditations into our mindes,Gen. 39.9. Psal. 50.4.5. Heb. 11.25. touching the greatnesse of sinne we are tempted to, and the vglinesse of it, and the danger of it, and the fruites that will follow on the committing of it: as that it is against the infinite maie∣stie of God, that it will deface in vs the Image of God, and make vs like the Deuill: that the pleasure and seeming good of it, is but short and momentary; that it will bring with it horror of conscience, & perplexitie of minde, an intollerable burthen, & make vs liable to the curse of God; all plagues and iudgements in this world, and eternall woe and miserie in the world to come. Quest. What is the third way? Psal. 119.11. Mat. 44.7.10. Ephes. 6.17.Answ. This: by bringing to our remembrance the Word of God, which we haue hid in our hearts, and by ma∣king vs able to haue such places and sentences of Scrip∣ture ready against temptation, that are direct against it. Thus Joseph preuailed against the temptation of his Ma∣sters wife, by remembring the seauenth Commandement. Genesis. 39.9. Quest. What is the third thing we pray for in this Petition,
Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. This; strength of grace to stand without falling into sinne in the continuance of temptation:Gen. 39.10. Iudg. 16.6. &c. 16.17. 2 Cor. 12.7.8. that in the time of temptation continued, when we are tempted by Satan a∣gaine and againe, oftentimes to the same sinne, God would vphold vs by his grace, and would then make vs able to stand fast, and to hold out without yeelding: for Satan will not cease to assault vs againe and againe with the same temptati∣on to the same sinne, hoping in time to winne our consent, and to giue vs the foyle. Quest. How doth God make vs able to stand fast, and to hold out without yeelding in the time of temptation continued, when wee are tempted by Sathan againe and againe to the same sinne? Answ. Two wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Psal. 119.117. Mat. 25.2. by making vs perseuer and continue in im∣ploying and well vsing the good gifts and graces of his spi∣rit that be in vs; as our faith, our feare of God, our loue of God, our care to please God, and the like: for the more grace is vsed and exercised, the more it is increased and strengthe∣ned. Lot was kept from vncleannesse in Sodome, the Lord there making him continue his feare of God, and his care to auoyd that sinne in the midst of Sodome; but when he was in the mountaine, and began to slacke his feare of God, and his care to please God, then he fell to drunkennesse and incest, Gen. 19.30. to the end. Quest. VVhat is the second way. Answ. This; by stirring vs vp,Psal. 38.9. Rom. 8.26. Psal. 34.3. Mat. 26.39.42.43.44. 2 Cor. 12.8. Luk. 18.13. and making vs able to vse speciall & extraordinary prayer, and to powre out our hearts before God after an extraordinary manner, and aboue our vsuall custome, by such prayer as is expressed by deepe sighes and groanes, lowd crying, often repeating the same petiti∣on, and by vnvsuall motions of the parts of the body with sighes, and especially when we are tempted by Satan againe and againe. Quest. What is the fourth thing we pray for in this Petition, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill?
Answ. This; if God see it good so to humble vs, as by lea∣uing vs to our selues for a time to let vs take a fall,sal. 51.12. and to be foyled by temptation to euill and sinne: that then hee would not let vs faile finally, but that hee would graciously raise vs vp againe by sauing repentance. Quest. Cannot a childe of God, hauing beene foyled by temptation to euill and sinne, and fallen into sinne, recouer and raise vp himselfe againe by sauing repentance, by the power of grace that is in him? Answ. No, he cannot; the best of Gods children hauing been foyled by temptation to euill,Zach. 12.19. Luk. 22.61.62. and fallen into sinne, can∣not recouer and raise vp himselfe by sauing repentance, vn∣lesse God giue it to them. A childe of God cannot finally fayle, and fall from grace. Quest. What need hee then being fallen into sinne, pray that God would raise him vp againe by sauing repentance? Ezech. 36.37. Ioel. 2.32.Answ. Though God will certainly raise vp his child be∣ing fallen into sinne by sauing repentance, and will certainly giue it vnto him in his due time, yet hee will haue his child humbled for his sinne, and will haue him in obedience to him to craue repentance at his hands: the certaintie of the thing in Gods purpose takes not away our obedience to God. Quest. VVhat is the fift thing wee pray for in this Petition, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Zach. 3.1.2. Rom. 16.20. Iud. vers. 6. Reuel. 20.2.3. 1 Ioh. 3.8.Answ. This; a restraint of the malice and power of Sa∣tan against vs, and a restraint of the power of our spirituall enemies, the world and our own corruption: That God would tye vp Satan, and by his almighty power restraine and re∣presse his malice and power and not suffer him to exercise his malice and power against vs; and would also restraine and represse the power of other our spirituall enemies, as of the world, of our owne corruption, and the like. Reuel. 20 7.8. Satan is now loosed, and hath libertie to doe what he can against vs; and therefore it seemes to bee in vaine now to pray that God would restraine and represse his malice and power against vs.
Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus, the meaning of that place is, that Satan is now loosed, not simply, but comparatiuely in regard of former restraint: as when a Dog that hath beene tyed vp very short and close, hath his chaine let out farther, or lengthened, hee may be said to be loosed, and so Satan is said to be loosed. Quest. What is Satans power against vs, that wee intreat God in this petition, to restraine and represse? Answ. It is a power, if God doe not keepe vs,Luk. 11.21. 2 Cor. 4.4. Reuel. 12.3. 1 Pet. 5.8. Ephes. 6.12. to carry vs to any euill, & to bring vs to as feareful sins as euer any were brought vnto, and to destroy vs vtterly in a moment, both soules and bodies. Hence Satan is called the strong man ar∣med, the god of this world, a great red Dragon, a roaring Lyon, principalities and powers. Quest. Hath Satan power to enforce vs to sinne, and to carry vs to euill and sinne violently, if God doe not keepe and pre∣serue vs? Answ. No, he hath not;Iam. 1.14.15. Mat. 4.6. Satan can not simply and direct∣ly force vs to any sinne, hee hath no power to constraine our wills, and to make vs sinne except we be willing, for that is against that nature which God hath giuen to the wil of man, to be enforced; and the Deuill is the father of sinne, but our owne concupiscence is the mother, and what can the father do without that mother. Quest. How then doth the Deuill carry vs to euill and sinne, if God doe not keepe vs and preserue vs?Gen. 3.6. Iosh. 7.21. Dan. 3.12.13. Dan. 6.10. Answ. By a perswading flight, partly by deluding the minde and iudgement by fayre allurements, as by promise of ease, safty, profit, pleasure and the like: and partly by feares, and terrours, by some meanes or other, he perswades the will to yeeld to him; if he could force our wills, he would then neuer faile of his purpose, God permitting him to tempt. Thus Eua, Thus Achan, Thus Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego; and Daniell to cease praying. Quest. If a place be by Gods permission haunted by the Deuill, and abused by some euill spirit, and hee hath there power to doe hurt, may a man frequent or abide in such a place or no? Answ. A man may not voluntarily thrust into such a
place, it is as absurd for any needlesly to aduenture into such a place, as to goe to a Lyons denne, or to come within the chaine of a madde Dog, or an hunger-bitten Beare. The Deuil is as a Lyon. 1 Pet. 5.8. and a Dragon. Reu. 12.13. Quest. If by Gods prouidence we bee called to liue in such a place, what are we then to doe? Iud. ep. v. 9.Answ. We must then, not stand to reason with the Deuill, but betake our selues to God by humble and hearty prayer, and complaining of Satans vexation and make God our shelter and defence, both for soule and body. Now touching our other Spirituall enemies, the world and our owne corruption. Quest. What is the power of the world, that we intreat God in this petition to restraine and represse? Num. 24.11. Pro. 7.16. Mat. 4.9. 2 Tim. 4.10.Answ. It is a power to allure and to draw vs to euill and sinne by pleasures, profits, honours and preferments of it: the world holding out and presenting these things as baytes to entangle our hearts, and to insnare our affections with a minde towards them, and with a loue and liking of them a∣boue measure; thereby to bring vs to the practise of euill and sinne. Quest. How doth God restraine and represse that power which the world hath to allure, and to draw vs to euill and sinne, by the pleasures, profits, honours and preferments of it? Answ. Two wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Psal. 131.1.2. 1 Cor. 7.31. Galat. 6.14. 1 Tim. 6.9.Answ. This; by weaning and withdrawing our hearts from the world, and from the things of it, and making vs vse this world and the things of it, as though wee vsed them not: and so to vse them as that we set not our hearts on any earthly thing, either to loue it or feare it; and making vs as dead men to the world, as weaned children: and as hee that will bee rich, so hee that will haue pleasures, profits, ho∣nours and preferments in the world, shall fall into diuers temptations. Quest. What is the second way? Answ. This; by putting into our minds holy thoughts, and holy meditations, concerning the pleasures, profits and
preferments of this world, as that they yeeld not that good they seeme to promise: they promise peace and felicitie,Gen. 25.33.34. Eccles. 1.2. & 2 1 1. & 12.8. Isai. 40.6. Mat. 16.28. Act. 25.23. 1 Cor. 7.31. 1 Tim. 6.17. and yeeld nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit, and they are vaine and insufficient to giue vs true content; that they are fickle and fugitiue, vanishing and transitorie; and that in the sinfull inioying and vsing of them, wee loose better things: as peace of conscience, & it may be our owne soules, and wee sell Heauen for a messe of Pottage, as Esau did his birthright. Quest. What is the power of our owne corruption, that we in∣treat God in this petition, to restraine and represse? Answ. It is a power to send forth into the soule,Mat. 15.19. Rom. 7.5. Galat. 5.17.19.20.21. Iam. 1.14. and to fill it with euill thoughts, sinfull motions and lusts, and to send forth sinne and euill workes, in and by all the powers of the soule, and in and by all the parts and members of the body. Quest. How doth God restraine and represse that power which our owne corruption hath to send forth into the soule, and to fill it with euill thoughts and sinfull motions, and to send forth sin and euill workes, in and by all the powers of the soule, and in and by all the parts and members of the body? Answ. Either by limiting it and keeping it in, by the na∣turall temper and constitution of the body,Gen. 20.6. Rom. 13.3.4. Deut. 30.6. Psal. 51.10. Coloss. 2.11. or by feare of shame and punishment, or by desire of honour and reward, and the like: or by mortifying of it, and by the power of his grace, abating and weakning the strength of it, and by little and little killing and abolishing it: and his worke of mortification, we especially pray for in this petition. Quest. What is the sixt thing wee pray for in this Petition, Leade vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. This; an increase of grace and spirituall strength,Psal. 51.12. Psal. 119.32. Ephes. 3.16. Philip. 1.9.11. Coloss. 1.9.10. Heb. 13.21. 2 Pet. 3.18. whereby we may be enabled to euery good worke, and such helpes as may further vs in well doing; that God would in∣crease and perfect the good worke of grace in vs, enabling vs thereby to euery good worke, and would afford vs such helpes as may further vs in weldoing. Psal. 51.12. Establish me with thy free spirit, because it sets vs euery day more and more at liberty, out of the reach of sin and Satan.
Quest. What are the helpes that may further vs in weldoing, that we pray for in this petition? Answ. Foure especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Psal. 119.33.34 Isai. 8.19.20. Iere. 8.9. Coloss. 1.9.10. Pro. 15.22. Pro. 19.20. Pro. 27.9. Dan. 4.24. 1 Cor. 7.25. 2 Cor. 8.10.Answ. This; holy instructions, and good and holy aduice and counsell: That God would vouchsafe to vs holy instructi∣ons, in and by the publike ministrie of his Word, and by our priuate reading of it, and good and wholsome and holy ad∣uice & counsell, from such as are endued with heauenly wis∣dome, and are able holily and wholsomly to aduise & counsell vs touching the good waies of God. Quest. What is the second helpe? Answ. This; holy exhortations and incouragements, that God would bee pleased to afford vs such as are able and willing to exhort vs,2 Chro. 20.20. & 32.7.8. Act. 18.27. Rom. 1.11.12. Coloss. 4.11. and to stirre vs vp, and to encourage vs to euery good duty. Quest. What is the third helpe? Answ. This; good examples and good companions: that God would vouchsafe to set before vs,Psal. 119.63.115. Pro. 13.20. 1 Cor. 15.33. Philip. 3.17. the examples of good and holy men and women, and would afford vs such to liue and conuerse withall, and to be our associates and com∣panions, as are holy and truly religious. Quest. What is the fourth helpe that may further vs in weldo∣ing, that we pray for in this Petition? Answ. This: Gods blessing on the holy instructions, good aduice and counsell, and on the holy exhortations and encouragements;Pro. 10.22. 1 Cor. 3.6.7. and on the good examples and good com∣panions that the Lord doth afford to vs: That God would be pleased to blesse all these things to vs for our good, for with∣out his blessing they can doe vs no good. Quest. What is the seauenth thing we pray for in this Petition, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. This; that what strength of grace, either afore∣hand or in the time of temptation, and in the temptation continued; or what raising vp being foyled by temptation, and falne into some sinne; or what restraint of Satans malice and power, or of the power of the world, or of the corrupti∣on of nature; or what increase of grace and spirituall strength,
and helpes that may further vs in weldoing, wee craue at the hands of God for our selues,Luke 22.32. Iohn 17.15. that the Lord would vouchsafe the same to all others his elect, yet liuing on the face of the earth; that they may be kept from falling into sin, and may liue holily as well as our selues. Now to the matter of Deprecation, things wee pray against in this petition, Lead vs not into tempta∣tion, but deliuer vs from euill. Quest. What are the things we pray against in this petition, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. Foure things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; Satans temptations, actions, and intice∣ments to euill and sin: That God would not suffer Satan to assaile vs by any temptation to sin, but would of his mercy keepe vs from knowing temptations to sin. Mat. 26.41. 2 Cor. 12.8. The Apostle prayed not only to bee vpheld in temptation, but that the buffetings of Satan might depart from him. Quest. Are we to pray against Satans temptations and in∣ticements to sinne, and that God would keepe vs from knowing temptations to sin absolutely, or no? Answ. No, we may not; but from knowing of them only so farre as may stand with Gods will and pleasure, and so far as may stand with his glory and our good: as Christ prayed that the Cup might passe from him. Mat. 26.39. and God hath promised that hee will giue the issue with the temptati∣on, that we may be able to beare it. 1 Cor. 10.13. Satans temptations, motions, and inticements to euill and sinne, are in Gods purpose to our good, we being Gods children: and they are also directed by God to our good, and through them God worketh much good vnto vs, & effecteth grace vpon sin, as Rom 8.28. All thinges worke together for the best, to them that loue God. Therefore it seemes we may not pray against Satans temptations at all. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Satans temptations to euill and sinne, are
to be considered, not only as they are in Gods purpose, and in the effect that he produceth by them, who is able to bring good out of euill: but they are also to be considered, as Satan intendeth hurt in them, and by them produceth sinne: & so we may and ought to pray against them, according to the De∣uills intent & worke; and to intreat God to turne the Deuills effect produced by them to our good, as God himselfe inten∣deth and woketh so that we may say as Dauid doth, It is good for me that I haue beene afflicted. Psal. 119.71. So of Satans temptations: it is good for me that I haue beene tempted. Quest. What is the second thing we pray against in this Peti∣tion, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Ans. This: such things as being either simply euill, or in themselues indifferent, may be meanes or occasions of sinne to vs that God would auert and turne away, and keepe from vs, such things as being either simply euill, or in themselues indifferent, may bee meanes and occasions to vs, through our corruption, to draw vs to sinne. Dauid held it a mercie of God, that he was kept from that sin, to which he was oc∣casioned by Nabals churlish answer. Gen. 25.32.33. Pro. 30.8.9. Agar prayed that God would keepe from him extreame pouertie and abundance, which might be occasions of sinne to him, as of denying God, of stealing, and taking that which was not his. Some of Gods seruants haue beene exceeding poore, as Lazarus and Paul, and some haue beene very rich; as Abra∣ham, Dauid, and Joseph of Aremathea, and yet haue walked holily and vprightly: it seemes therefore not lawfull to pray against either extreame pouertie, or abundance of wealth: but rather we are to pray for Pauls gift, to know how to want, and how to abound. Phil. 4.12. Quest. How is this to be answered. Answ. Thus: extreame pouertie or abundance of wealth are not simply and absolutely to be prayed against: but on∣ly for the danger of sinning, which they often bring men vn∣to: riches in themselues moue not men, nor bring them to forget or blaspheme God; but when vanitie is not remoued
from the possessors of them, such effects do alwaies follow, & rich persons wanting grace, cōmonly giue themselues to trust in riches, to ease and to brauery, to surfetting, and to a thou∣sand vices. Deut. 32.15. And so extreame pouertie many times driues men through their owne corruptions to impa∣tiency, to take Gods name in vaine, to vnlawfull shifts and such like If such things as may be occasions of sinne to vs, are to be prayed against; then good things as prayer, giuing of almes, and such like, which are sometimes occasions of pride, and of vaine-glory, are to be prayed against. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; occasions of euill are either giuen to our cor∣ruption, as from things either simply euill or indifferent; or not giuen, but only taken by our corruption, as they are from good things and good duties which wee are commanded to performe: and these are not to bee prayed against, because of the occasion of euill meerely taken from them. Quest. What is the third thing we pray against in this Peti∣tion, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answer. This; spirituall desertion, Gods forsaking of vs, by withdrawing his grace, and the assistance of his holy spi∣rit from vs, and by leauing vs for a time, and giuing vs ouer to the power of the Deuill, and of our owne lusts, that God would not withdraw his grace and assistance of his holy spi∣rit from vs, and leaue vs to our selues, and giue vs ouer to the power of Satan, and of our owne lusts, and so let vs fall into sinne which euer followeth on Gods forsaking of vs, and is commonly a punishment or correction for some former sinne. Thus it was with Hezekiah. 2 Chro. 32.31. Psa. 119.8. Quest. What are the sinnes for which God doth commonly withdraw his grace from men, and leaue them to themselues, and giue them ouer in this speciall manner to themselues? Answ. Fiue especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This: a refusing, or a slight and formall receiuing of the truth, when men receiue not the truth of the Word
of Go, and especially of the Gospell, with a liking of it, and with a true loue to it:Iohn 3.19. 2 Thess. 2.10.11. 2 Tim. 4.34. it is iust with God to depriue them of it, and withdraw his grace from them, and leaue them to themselues. Quest. What is the second sin for which God doth commonly withdrawe his grace from men and leaue them to themselues, and giue them ouer in speciall manner? Ans. Abusing and not making a right vse of that know∣ledge that men haue:Rom. 1.21.22.23.24. 1 Cor. 8.1. when men doe abuse their knowledge to a lifting vp of themselues aboue others, or to maintaine some errour or sinne: it is iust with God to withdraw his grace from them, and to leaue them to themselues. Question. What is the third sinne for which God doth com∣monly withdrawe his grace from men, and leaue them to them∣selues, and giue them ouer in speciall manner? Answ. This; a willingnesse to be ignorant of the truth, and a wilfulnesse in the practise of euill and sinne:Psal. 81.8.9.10 11.12. Ier. 44.25.26. Ezech. 14.45. 2 Thess. 2.12. when men are willingly ignorant, and will not receiue knowledge, though meanes of knowledge be offered to them and vsed, or are wilfull and obstinate in the practise of euil and sinne: it is iust with God to withdraw his grace from them, and leaue them to themselues. Question. What is the fourth sinne for which God doth com∣monly withdraw his grace from men, and leaue them to themselues and giue them ouer in speciall manner? Answ. This; idlenesse, when men liue either without a lawfull calling, or negligently in their honest and lawfull calling: it is iust with God to withdraw his grace from them, and to leaue them to themselues. Thus it was with Da∣uid. 2 Sam. 11.1.2. and for this, God gaue Sodome ouer to vn∣cleannesse. Ezech. 16.49. Question. What is the fift sinne for which God doth com∣monly withdrawe his grace from men, and leaue them to them∣selues, and giue them ouer in speciall manner? Math. 26 8.9. Iohn 13.4.5. Math. 26.14.15.16.Answ. This: an allowance of some secret and close sinne: when men allow themselues in some secret and close sinne, not knowne to the world, it is iust with God to giue them
ouer to some open grosse sinne, as Judas allowing himselfe in the sinne of couetousnesse, God gaue him ouer to Treason to betray his Master. Quest. What is the fourth thing we pray against in this peti∣tion, Lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill? Answ. This: Satanicall practises, such practices wherein Satan hath a speciall hand and worke, and wherein wee ioyne with Satan if we vse them: as Magicke, Sorcerie, Charmes,2 Tim. 4.18. Witch-craft, and the like: that God would keepe vs from all such Deuilish practises: for it is grosse hypocrisie to pray to be deliuered from euill, and especially from the euill one, Satan, and yet to giue our selues to the practice of those things wherein Satan hath a speciall hand and worke. Now to the conclusion for confirmation of pray∣er, deliuered by Christ himselfe in these words, For thine is the Kingdome, Power, and Glory, for euer. Amen. These words are not found in the Euangelist Luke, but in Mat. 6.13. they are expressed, and it is sufficient that one Euangelist hath recorded them. Quest. What are the generall things contained in these words, For thine is the Kingdome, the Power and the Glory, for euer, Amen? Answ. These: first, a reason why we aske all those things that are contained vnder these sixe Petitions a foregoing at Gods hands, because his is Kingdome, Power, and Glory for euer: in these words, For thine is the Kingdome, the Power, and the Glory, for euer. Secondly, a shutting vp of our requests in the word Amen. Now to the opening of these words, of the reason, For thine is the Kingdome, Power and Glory, for euer. Quest. What are we here to vnderstand by the word, Kingdome?Gen. 14.19. Gen. 17.1. 1 Cro. 29.11. Ans. Absolute soueraignety, and right ouer all things, in which respect God is the absolute Lord, & owner of all things that are: and hath also soueraigne and absolute authoritie
ouer all things, ruling and gouerning them, and bringing them into absolute subiection as it pleaseth him. Question. What are wee here to vnderstand by the Word Prayer? Psal. 115.3. Mat. 3.3.Answ. Omnipotence, Almightinesse, whereby God is able to doe whatsoeuer hee will, and whatsoeuer is a worke of power, and is able to doe more then either he doth or will doe. Question. What are wee here to vnderstand by the word Glory? Psal. 29.2. Psal. 96.7. Luk. 2.14.Answ. Fulnesse of Maiestie, brightnesse, excellencie and worthinesse, to which all honour, praise, glory, and high estimation is most due, and most properly belonging, and to be giuen. Que. What is here meant by the word (Thine,) thine is King∣dome, thine is Power, thine is Glory? Iud. vers. 8. Psal. 62.11. Dan. 2.37.Answ. Thus much; that Kingdome, Power and Glory, doe belong to God particularly and alone, and to none o∣ther originally and absolutely though these Attributes bee communicated to some creatures; as to Angels, and to Prin∣ces, and Magistrates, as Gods Vicegerents on Earth; yet God alone hath them originally of himselfe, and absolutely without dependance. Quest. What is here meant by the word for euer, or for ages. Answ. For euer, or for ages, here signifies, not as some∣times in the Scripture it doth,1 Tim. 1.17. Reuel. 1.4. a certaine and distinct time, but eternitie: and by these words for euer, or for ages; is meant that Kingdome, Power and Glory, doe belong to God eternally without beginning or end. Isa. 41.4. Satan hath a Kingdome contrary to Gods Kingdome, and hence he is called the God of this world: 2 Corin. 4.4. and the Prince that ruleth in the Ayre. Ephes. 2.2. and in his practise he continually rebells against Gods will reuealed: and therefore Gods Kingdome is not absolute. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus: though Satan and his Angels, and all o∣ther
his instruments doe oppose against Gods Kingdome, and against his will reuealed in his Word;Iob 1.12. Iob 2.6. yet God ouer-rules them and restraines them at his pleasure, and most wisely disposeth of all their oppositions and workes, to his owne glory and the good of his people, and their owne ruine. Satan hath power to sinne which is not from God, there∣fore Go alone hath not all power. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; to sinne is no power but rather a want of power, and sinne is from impotencie and weakenesse, and not from power; & all the strength & power that Satan hath in mouing, stirring, or working, is of God and from God. Quest. What are the things offered from those words, Thine is Kingdome, power and glory for euer, being rightly vnder∣stood as they haue been opened? Answ. Either some speciall things, or things more ge∣nerall. Quest. What are the speciall things offered from those words, Thine is the Kingdome, power and glory for euer, being vn∣derstood, as before they haue been opened? Answ. They are two things: First, arguments seruing to strengthen and to suppot our faith in prayer: and secondly, a forme of praising God, to whom we pray. Of these in order. Quest. What are the arguments seruing to strengthen and to support our faith in prayer, contained in these words, Thine is Kingdome, Power and Glory, for euer? Answ. They are foure. 1. from the Kingdome of God. 2. from the power of God. 3. from the glory of God. 4. from the eternitie of his Kingdome, Power, and glory. Quest. How doth Gods Kingdome, his absolute soueraigntie and right ouer all things, serue to strengthen and to support our faith in prayer? Answ. Thus: the due consideration of it makes vs in our prayers, to rest and relie on God our Souraigne Lord and King, as most willing to dispose of all things for our good:
as we promise to our selues peace, protection, welfare, and the benefits of subiects from earthly Kings being good, whose subiects we are: so we duly considering that God is the ab∣solute Lord and King in Heauen and Earth, wee thereupon perswade our selues that he will procure all good to vs, who liue vnder his gouernment and are his subiects. And so is Gods Kingdome his absolute soueraigntie and right o∣uer all things, a notable proppe to our faith in prayer. Psalme. 5.2. Psalme. 29.10. The Lord remaineth a King for euer; then he subioynes: verse. 11. The Lord shall giue strength vnto his People, the Lord shall blesse his People with peace. Psalme. 84.3. O Lord God of Hosts, my King and my God. the Verse. 8. O Lord God of Hosts, heare my Prayer? Quest. How doth Gods power, his omnipotencie, his al∣mightinesse serue to strengthen and to support our faith in Prayer? Answ. Thus; the due consideration of it, makes vs in our Prayers to rest and to relie on God, as most able to doe vs good, as most able both to giue vs all good things we craue at his hands in the name of Christ, according to his will, both for our soules and bodies, and also to auert and turne away from vs all those euils wee pray against; for it is not enough that God hath Kingly authority ouer all things, vnlesse he hath also power of working all things for our good: a King may haue a large heart to wish well to his Subiects,om. 4.20.21. phes. 30.20. and yet haue weake hands, and bee vnable to doe them good: but God being our Soueraigne Lord and King, and also Almightie, the consideration of it is a speciall proppe to our faith in Prayer. Genesis. 18.14. Sarah is stird vp to beleeue the promise. So Ieremiah. Jeremi. 32.2. Behold I am the Lord God of all Flesh: Is there any thing too hard for mee. So the Virgin Mary. Luke. 1.37. Question. How doth Gods glory, his fulnesse of Maie∣stie, brightnesse, excellencie and worthinesse; to which all honour, praise, glory, and high estimation is due, serue to strengthen and
to support our faith in prayer? Answ. Thus: the due consideration of it makes vs rest and relie on God for the hearing of our prayers, and for the granting of our lawfull requests,Psal. 65.1.2. as a thing standing with the gory of his great name; it being Gods honour to heare and grant the requests of his Children; and to blesse them with all good things spirituall and corporall, the consideration of it is a speciall proppe to our faith in prayer. Quest. How doth the eternitie, the euerlastingness of Gods Kingdome, Power, and Glory, serue to strengthen and to support our faith in prayer? Answ. Thus: the due consideration of it makes vs in our prayers to rest & relie on God for the hearing of them, & for the granting of our lawfull requests at all times, and in what state or condition soeuer we be; in health, in sicknesse, in prosperitie, in aduersitie, or in any affliction of body or minde. For God hauing absolute soueraigntie ouer all things, and being almighty and a most glorious God, it standeth with the glory of his great name, to blesse his Children with all good things; and Kingdome, Power,Ps. 145.1. to. the end. Isai. 40.27 to 3 and Glory belonging to him eternally and for euer, wee can at no time sue to God for fauour, mercy, grace, or good things spirituall or corporall in vaine, wee suing to him as wee ought: and so the consideration of the eternitie of Gods Kingdome, Power, and Glory, is a speciall prop to streng∣then and to support our faith in prayer. Now to the second speciall thing, offered from this forme of praysing God. Quest. What is the forme of praysing of God, that is offe∣red from these words, (Thine is the Kingdome, Power, and Glorie for euer)? Answ. This it is; a free, willing, and thankefull ac∣knowledgement of Kingdome, Power, and Glory, to be∣long to God;Iud. vers: 25. Reuel. 1.6. and an ascribing and giuing of these three things to him, which doe generally comprehend all matter of prayse and thankesgiuing that is due to God. Thus
did Dauid blesse God: 1 Chronicles. 29.11.12. Question. How doe wee freely, willingly, and thanke∣fully acknowledge Kingdome to belong to God, and ascribe and giue Kingdome to him? h. 12.7.8.9  the end.Answ. Thus; when we freely, willingly, and thank∣fully, acknowledge Gods soueraigntie ouer euery creature, and that good and that excellencie that is in any creature, is Gods right and interest to be disposed of at his own good pleasure, and doe ascribe the ordering and disposing of euery creature, and the good of euery creature, wholly and only to God. Quest. How doe we freely, willingly, and thankefully, ac∣knowledge power to belong to God, and ascribe and giue power to him? Answ. Thus; when we freely, willingly, and thankefully acknowledge the power that is in euery creature of working or effecting of any good,sal. 62.10.11. sal. 96.7.8. an. 2.20. to 23 to bee deriued from the power of GOD, and doe ascribe the power that any creature hath to doe vs good; and the good wee receiue from any thing in any kinde whatsoeuer, spirituall or corporall, to come from the powerfull hand of God, and that it is Gods power that makes any thing serue for our good, and for our comfort in any measure. Quest. How doe wee freely, willingly, and thankefully ac∣knowledge glory to belong to God, and ascribe and giue glory to him? Psal. 50.23. Psal. 145.1.2.3 Ac. 3.8.Answ. Thus; when we freely, willingly, and thankefully ac∣knowledge the Lord, to be most worthy of all praise, for the good that is found in any creature; and we finding good and comfort spirituall or corporall from any thing, doe ascribe and giue praise and glory to God for the same: and that wholly and only. God is perfection of glory in himselfe, and therefore hee needeth no glory or prayse from vs. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; our prayse of God is not needfull in respect of God himselfe; but in respect of vs it is needfull, wee
being creatures are bound to praise God our Creator; and it is our chiefe good and happinesse to praise him, and to giue glory to his name. Quest. What are the generall things offered from this, that power is heere giuen to God, being considered apart and by it selfe? Answ. Foure things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This: that God is to be feared aboue all creatures, for though Satan and the great men of the world, wicked Princes and Rulers haue dominion and power;Nahum. 1.5.6, Mat. 10.28. Iam. 4.12. yet their power is not of themselues, but from God; and they can doe nothing but by power and permission from God: but God of himselfe can saue or destroy, his is power originally and absolutely. Quest. What is the second generall thing offered from this, that power is here giuen to God, being considered apart and by it selfe? Answ. This;Dan. 4.31.32 Iam. 4.10. 1 Pet. 5.6. that submission is to be yeelded to God in all our afflictions, when we are vnder the crosse, any tribula∣tion or affliction; wee are to humble our selues vnder the mighty hand of God without resistance or repining: for it is he who correcteth vs who is Almightie, able to doe what he will, his is power. Quest. What is the third generall thing offered from this, that power is here giuen to God, being considered apart & by it selfe? Answ. That power and abilitie to doe any good in any kind whatsoeuer, is to be sought for at the hands of God; when we are to performe any worke or any duty, either of Pietie and Religion towards God, or of loue and mercy, ei∣ther towards our selues or others: wee are to seeke to God, that by power, strength and grace from him: we may be in∣abled to doe it: his is power. 1 Sam. 2.8. hee raiseth vp the poore out of the dust: and lifteth vp the Begger from the dunghill to set them among Princes, and to make them inhe∣rit the seate of glory, in his owne might. Question. What is the fourth generall thing offered from this, that power is here giuen to God being considered apart and by it selfe?
A. This; that all Gods promises and all his threatnings, shall certainely and effectually be accomplished,King. 17.23. . 55.11. e. 44.29. Cor. 1.20. as hee hath promised or threatned; nothing can stop or hinder him, or frustrate and make void his purpose, in making good what he hath either promised, or threatned: his is power, hee is strong to performe whatsoeuer it pleaseth him. Quest. What is in generall offered from this, that glory is heere giuen to God, being considered apart and by it selfe? am. 2 30. h. 5, 44.Answ. This; that true honour, glory and praise, in the world, comes to men only from God, and is giuen to man of God; his is fulnesse of glory, and of his fulnesse doth he im∣part some measure of glory and honour heere in this world, to such as honour him and seeke it in weldoing. Heb. 11.2. By faith manifested in the fruites of it, our Elders were well reported of. iection.Some worthy Seruants of God liue obscurely, and are of no reckoning in the world; yea they are accounted base and contemptible, as the filth of the earth. 1 Cor. 4.13. Quest. How then doth God impart a measure of glory and honour heere in this world to such as honour him, and seeke it in weldoing? Answ. First, God sees obscurity as well as pouertie to be meete and profitable for some of his children. And againe, the holy seruants of God are basely accounted of in the world only by men of the world, that cannot dis∣cerne who are to bee honoured: and they are reproached of them for weldoing; and that is their gloy. Heb. 11.26. Moses preferred it, and esteemed the rebuke of Christ, grea∣ter riches thn the treasures of Egypt: and when they lie vn∣der disgrace in the world, then are they honoured in the hearts of ll Gods Children that know them, which is true honour. Quest What are the generall things offered from these words, Thine is the Kingdome, Power and Glory, for euer. Answ. Eiher such things as these words doe offer being ioyntly considred: or such things as they doe offer being considered seuerally.
Quest. What are the generall things offered from these words ioyntly considered? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Philp. 4.6. Coloss. 3.17. Coloss 4.2. 1 Thess. 5.17.18 that praise and thankesgiuing to God must be ioyned to prayer: that wee must as well giue thankes and praise to God, as pray vnto him for grace, and for things needfull: as in the six Petitions we make request for things needfull, so in these words wee giue praise and thankes to God. Quest. What is the second generall thing offered from these words ioyntly considered? Answ. This; that in prayer we must abase our selues be∣fore God, and vtterly denie our selues,Gen. 32.10. Dan. 9.7.8. and all that is in vs of our selues, and in humilitie of heart freely acknowledge our owne vilenesse and vnworthinesse, and vnfainedly confesse that shame and confusion belongs to vs, and that all power, praise, and glory is due to God. Now to the generall things offered from these words considered seuerally. Quest. What are the generall things offered from this, that kingdome is heere giuen to God, being considered seuerally and by it selfe? Answ. Three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; that God alone can make and giue lawes tru∣ly and properly binding the consciences of men,Iam. 4.12. Reuel. 1.6. and that he is the onely Law-giuer, and hath power to make lawes, bin∣ding the consciences of all men properly; yea, of the greatest Monarchs in the world is his kingdome. Rom. 13.5. We must be subiect to the higher powers, to Magistracie, not because of wrath onely, but for conscience sake: therefore it seemes that Princes and Magistrates may make lawes binding mens consciences. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Princes and Magistrates may make lawes binding mens consciences, not simply and properly as they bee their lawes, but onely in relation to Gods will reuealed
in his Word, and so farre forth as they be agreeable to Gods lawes, and not contrary to common honesty, equitie, reason, or religion; and so their Lawes binde not mens consciences simply as Gods lawes doe, but only respectiuely as they haue respect to the Lawes of God; so they are to bee obeyed for conscience sake. Quest. What is the second generall thing offered from this, that Kingdome is heere giuen to God being considered seuerally, and by it selfe? Answ. This; that we must giue to God simple and abso∣lute obedience;Gen. 17.23. Sam. 12.14. sai. 48.18. Princes and Magistrates must bee obeyed so far as they command in the Lord, and for the Lord: but God must be obeyed simply and absolutely, and perpetually in all his commandements without exception, seeme they neuer so hard, or contrary to flesh and blood: is his Kingdome. Quest. What is the third generall thing offered from this, that Kingdome is heere giuen to God, being considered seuerally and by it selfe? sal. 2.9.10. sal. 110.2.Answ. This; that we must not be discouraged when wee are called to suffer any thing for the truth, and holy religion of God: for though tyrants rage and bend their force and might, yet we haue our God a King aboue them all, for whom we suffer, and he can rule and ouercome them, and at his plea∣sure confound them: is his Kingdome. Now to the close and shutting vp of our requests in the word Amen. Quest. What doth the word Amen signifie? Answ. The signification of it is according to the placing of it either in the beginning of a speech or sentence, or at the end of a speech or sentence. Quest. What doth the word Amen signifie, when it is placed at the beginning of a speech or sentence? Answ. An earnest asseueration, or a vehement affirma∣tion; and it is as much as verily, truly, or indeed, and in very truth, and the like thus vsed Math. 5.18. Mar. 3.28. Iohn 14.12. & 16.20. Quest. What doth the word Amen signifie when it is placed at the end of a speech or sentence?
Answ. Two things,Iere. 11.5. Rom. 1.25. either a wish of the heart to obtaine what hath been vttered and spoken; or else a perswasion of the heart that the thing shall be obtained. Quest. VVhat then doth the word Amen here signifie, Thine is kingdome, power and glory for euer. Amen. Answ. It being heere a shutting vp of prayer,Nehem. 8.6. Psal. 106.48. 2 Cor. 13.13. and of the Petitions before mentioned, it signifieth and testifieth both our earnest desire, and heartie wish, that so it may be as wee haue prayed, and also our full assurance that so it shall bee as wee haue prayed, and our assured expectation to obtaine things asked at the hands of God, according to his pro∣mise. Quest. What may be gathered from the word Amen, being thus vnderstood, and as it is a shutting vp of Prayer? Answ. Foure things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; that Prayer and thanksgiuing to God ought to bee made with vnderstanding, when wee pray or giue thankes to God alone by our selues, wee are to vnderstand what it is that wee vtter before God, and when wee pray or giue thanks to God with others, and are the mouth of others in prayer to God, either in publike or in priuate, we are to expresse our desires in such words, as those with whom wee pray or giue thanks may vnderstand in such a known tongue,Psal. 47.7. 1 Cor. 14.15.16 Obiection. that Amen may be said to our petitions and thankesgiuings. The word Amen is an Hebrew word, and so a word of a tongue vnknowne to the common sort of people; and if one word in prayer of speciall vse may bee in an vnknowne tongue, why may not many words of an vnknowne tongue bee vsed in prayer, and so a whole prayer bee made in an vn∣knowne tongue? Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; though the word Amen be an Hebrew word, and so a word of a tongue vnknowne to most men, yet by the vse of it, it is become as familiar and as well knowne as any other English word: as many Latin words, as Nisi prius, Ha∣beas corpus, and such like other termes of law by common vse are become familiar, and well knowne in our English tongue.
Quest. What is the scond thing that may bee gathered from the word Amen, being rightly vnderstood, and as it is a shutting vp of prayer? Answ. This; that Prayer and thankesgiuing to God ought to be made in truth of heart: when we pray or giue thanks to God,sal. 17.1. ere. 20.23. ose. 7.14. either by ou selues alone, or with others in publike or in priuate, or doe ioyne with others when they pray or giue thankes to God, our hearts must be lift vp to God, and must ioyne with the vttering of euery request and thankesgiuing that is vttered by the tongue: and wee must pray and giue thanks to God heartily and vnfainedly, so as we may say A∣men to our owne and to other mens petitions and thankesgi∣uings, with whom we pray or giue thanks. Quest. What is the third thing that may be gathered from the word Amen, being rightly vnderstood, and as it is a shutting vp of Prayer? Answ. This; that Prayer and thankesgiuing to God ought to be made with an holy feruency, earnestnes, and importuni∣tie,ai. 37.17. an 9.19. at. 7.7. when we pray or giue thanks to God either by our selues alone, or with others in publike or in priuate, we are to doe it with an holy feruency of spirit, doubling and redoubling our requests and thanksgiuings; for the adding of the word A∣men doth import a repeating and redoubling our petitions and thankesgiuings. Quest. VVhat is the fourth thing that may bee gathered from the word Amen, being rightly vnderstood, and as it is a shutting vp of Prayer? Answ. This; that Prayer and thanksgiuing to God ought to be made with faith grounded on the promise of God: when we pray or giue thanks to God,Tim 2.8. am. 1.6.7. Ioh. 6.14. either by our selues, or with others, in publike or in priuate, we are to do it with faith, re∣sting on Gods promise: for Amen is a word of faith, expres∣sing full assurance that it shall be as we haue prayed. Thus, through the mercy of God I haue passed through the Lords Prayer, and handled the Pre∣face, sixe Petitions, and the Conclusion of it. Now a question or two in generall touching the vse of it.
Quest. Are we onely to vse the words of the Lords Prayer, and not any other forme of prayer? Ans. We are not to refuse this forme of prayer, nor the v∣sing of the very words of the Lords prayer,Luk. 11.2. compared with Hoze. 14.3. for that were a proud contempt of Christ his Ordinance; yet wee are not to confine our selues only to the words of the Lords prayer, and to vse no other words: Christ neuer intended to binde vs to the forme of words, but of the matter; and it were extreame idlenesse & superstition to vse the words of the Lords prayer alone, and none other. In the dutie of Prayer, varietie of words is required, for the powring forth of our soules before the Lord. Quest. What is then the vse of the Lords Prayer? Answ. It serues as a paterne and direction to bee imita∣ted and followed, or at the least, aymed at in the framing of our prayers to God at all times, and on all occasions: for vn∣lesse our prayers bee framed according to the Lords Prayer, they cannot be pleasing to God. Quest. Must wee of necessitie follow all the petitions of the Lords Prayer, in framing a prayer. Answ. No, but only those petitions which doe principally concerne the present time, place, and occasion;Act. 4.24. to. 31 Coloss. 1.9.10. for oftentimes according to the occasion, some one petition is more then the rest to be imitated and followed. Iude Epist. vers. 25. . HOMO DEO, LVTVM FIGVLO. Eltonus.
GODS HOLY MIND TOVCH∣ING MATTERS MO∣rall, which himselfe vttered in Tenne Words, or Tenne COM∣MANDEMENTS. ALSO CHRISTS holy Mind touching Prayer, deliuered in that most holy Prayer, which himselfe taught vnto his Disciples: Discouered by the light of his owne holy Writ, and deliuered by Questions and Answeres. By the late Reuerend and faithfull Preacher of Gods word, Mr. EDWARD ELTON, Bachelour in Diuinitie, and Pastor of Saint Mary Magdalens Barmondsey, neere London. I haue seene an end of all perfection, but thy Commandement is ex∣ceeding large. Psal. 119.96. For the Law was giuen by Moses, but grace and truth came by Iesus Christ. Iohn 1.17. LONDON, Printed by A.M. and I.N. for Robert Mylbourne, and are to bee sold at his Shop at the great South doore of Pauls. 1625.
To his Dearely and Welbeloued Friends, the Inhabitants and Parishioners of St. Marie Magdalens in Barmondsey, I.H. in Soule desireth, and from his heart wisheth an increase of sauing grace, with all true happinesse on earth, and eternall glorie in Heauen. IT is not my purpose, neither doe I think it needfull for me to enter into commendation of the Author of this worke, whose worth is so well knowne to you, that for the space almost of twentie yeeres inioyed his la∣bours, and are witnesses of his watchfulnesse, faithfulnesse, diligence, and painfulnesse in his Ministerie, euen beyond strength of bodie; yea, some of you (I doubt not) being the Seales of his Apostleship,1 Cor. 9.2. the Lord by his Ministerie working your conuersion, and calling you out of darkenesse into his marueilous light.1 Pet. 2.9. Neither will I speake of the excellencie of
the Worke, nor shew how commodious it may bee to Gods Church: for these are done by one better able, though the Worke will sufficiently commend it selfe to euery honest-hearted and indifferent Reader. I would ra∣ther make bolde to giue you a word of ad∣uertisement, exhorting you not to mourne im∣moderately, (though neither you nor I my selfe can sufficiently bewaile our losse) but to reade his Works diligently, whereby he being now dead, speaketh vnto you the same things that hee taught you while hee was aliue, and liued amongst you: and among others, labour to acquaint your selues well with this Worke of his, and be often conuersant in the reading of it; wherein is layd before you what God requireth of you in his Law, and whereby you are taught how to behaue your selues both toward God, and toward man; and shewed in a good measure both what may bee done, and what ought not to be done. And let me intreat you, not to rest in the bare reading of these things,ut. 4.6. but get them into your hearts, that you may keepe them, and doe them; whereby you shall shew your selues wise indeed,eut. 6.3. and so shall it goe well with you. See that as hee
went before you by sound doctrine, and in a holy life: so ye be followers of him, as he fol∣lowed Christ: and then shall you in the end be taken vnto him to inherit that glory which he already in part enioyeth.1 Cor. 11.1. But if you be care∣lesse to keepe and doe these things heere layd downe before you, he himselfe, his former la∣bours and paines taken with you, and these his Workes, whereby he is in a sort still calling vp∣on you, shall be witnesses against you. Take heed it be not said of any of you,Gal. 4.11. that Labour hath been bestowed vpon you in vaine. To this his Exposition, or opening of the Commandements, is annexed his fruitfull Exposition of the Lords Prayer, teaching vs what Prayer is, to whom we are to pray, for what, &c. Let it bee your care also to make good vse of this, so shall you haue much comfort. I am the bolder to ex∣hort you hereunto, because it pleased the Lord to call me, and you to make choyse of mee, to bestow my poore Labours among you: now though I cannot doe what I ought, and would doe; yet my hearts desire is,Rom. 10.1. that you might be saued; and my daily prayers shall bee, that the Lord would bee pleased to blesse and make prosperous, both this and all other good
meanes, and lawfull endeauours, or paines ta∣ken for that end, that when you haue done the businesse, and finished the worke for which you were sent, and haue finished your course with comfort heere on earth, you may bee taken vnto Christ, to haue your abode in heauenly glory, and your inheritance among all them which are sanctified. Yours in the Lord Iesus, and in the seruice of the Gospell, IOHN HILL.
To the Christian Reader. THere are two principall employments of a Chri∣stian man, Practise, and Prayer, which two ought to goe ioyntly hand in hand the one with the other, through the whole tenour of each mans life. For by the one is obedience exhibited to Gods will: by the other is helpe and aide craued and procured at Gods hands. Both our Prayer therefore ought to be accompanied with Practise, and our Practise to be seconded with Prayer. For the neglect of the one is a temp∣ting of God; the neglect of the other is a presuming too much of our selues: Since that neither without our endeauour can any blessing of God be expected, nor any endeauour of ours without his blessing auaile ought. But such is mans misery since the fall of our first Parents, that naturally we faile much and come far short in the knowledge of either of these; neither of our selues well knowing what to doe, nor to aske; and therefore both doing that oft igno∣rantly that we ought not, and asking those things vnaduisedly, that are not fit to be asked. Now for the better reformation of our errours in either kind, it hath pleased God, of his gracious good∣nesse, to afford vs in his Word some speciall helpes and meanes of direction, as well for our practise as for our prayers. The maine direction that God hath giuen vs for our Practise, is comprised in the Decalogue, or the Ten Commandements deliuered in Mount Sinay: the maine direction for our Prayers is contained in that forme of Prayer, which our Sauiour himselfe deliuered to his Disciples in the Gospell. But these both being but briefe Sums, consisting of generall Heads only, and the particular as well Acti∣ons as Necessities of mans Life being infinite; there needeth ex∣plication and vnfoulding of either for the due application thereof to such particular occurrents, as mens daily affaires & occasions minister matter of in either kind. To which purpose as many ho∣ly and learned men of God haue taken paines, and made publike their godly labours for the good of Gods Church; so this our reue∣rend and religious Brother, the Authour of this Worke, now at rest
with God, hath not come behind any of them in his endeauours ther∣in. Who, as he spent himselfe while he liued, in the Lords worke for the benefit of others, straining himselfe euen beyond that which the strength of his body would well beare, to instruct those whom God had committed vnto his charge: so hee hath left heere to posteri∣tie such a worthy Monument of this nature, as may afford plenti∣full light to those that are willing to make vse of it, for the direct∣ing as well of their suites as their liues. In commendation whereof I shall need to say little, because the Worke sufficiently commen∣deth it selfe. Only this I will say of it, that by that short view that I haue had libertie and leasure to take of it, it appeareth vnto me both to be answerable to other the Authour his iudicious & religi∣ous labours already extant; and for perspicuity of Method, plenty of Matter, and multiplicity of Questions and Cases of Consci∣ence resolued in it, to goe beyond any that I haue hitherto seene in this argument. And albeit difference of Iudgements may be about some particulars therein discussed, (which in so great variety is not to be maruailed) yet I doubt not but that the diligent Reader, that maketh conscience of his courses, shall heere find sound & suf∣ficient ground as well to settle his Iudgement as to regulate his practise in an innumerable number of such questions and cases as the occurrents and occasions of his life may produce. The worke (it seemeth) was prepared by the Authour himselfe for the Presse, and printed also some part of it before his discease, and had it beene the Lords will, I should heartily wish, that hee had surui∣ued to haue seene the finishing and publishing of it himselfe. But the Lord hath prouided better for him, and putting an end to his Labours, hath translated him thither, where he enioyeth now the reward of them. In the way to which end if this worke of his shall further thee, (and it is thine owne fault if it doe not) giue the glo∣ry to God; and be thankefull to him, who hath afforded so plentiful light in these latter times vnto vs, ouer that which former ages haue had. To his gracious blessing (without which neither this nor ought else can auaile ought) commending thee, this worke, and thy perusall of it, I take leaue of thee, and rest Thine in the Lord, Tho: Gataker.
GODS HOLY MINDE TOVCHING matters Morall, which him∣selfe vttered in ten words, or tenne Commandements: discouered by the light of his owne holy Writ, and deliuered by Questions and Answers. The Preface or entrance. Quest. WHat is the Law of God? Ans. A Doctrine giuen of God,Exod. 20.1. Deut. 5.5. Rom. 2.15. Exod. 32.15.1 Iohn 1.17. Rom. 7.7.12. first written in the hearts of men, and afterwards in Ta∣bles of Stone, in the dayes of Moses, commanding honest and iust things to be done, and forbidding the contrary. Quest. How is the Law of God giuen by Moses, distinguished? Ans. Thus, into Morall, Ceremoniall, and Iudiciall.Deut. 6.1. Quest. What is the Morall Law?1 Iohn 2.7. Luke 16.17. Luke 10.27. Rom. 10 5. Ans. The eternall law of God, commanding perfect o∣bedience to the will of God reuealed, aswell in mans nature
as in his actions, and forbidding the contrary. Quest. How is the Morall Law eternall? Ans. Thus, it abideth for euer in this world and in the world to come, not in the manner of commanding (Thou shalt not Kill,Mar. 6.18. 1 Cor. 13.8. or Lust, or the like;) but for the matter of it which is holinesse, loue of God, and obedience to his will. Quest. What is the Ceremoniall Law? Ans. It is that Law that God gaue to the Iewes by the hand of Moses, concerning their solemne Customes, Rites and Ceremonies about the manner of the outward worship of God.Ephes. 2.15. Deut. 6.1. Quest. How were the Ceremonies appointed by that Law, di∣stinguished? Ans. Thus, some of them were Historicall shewing some mercy of God vouchsafed to his people,Deut. 6.24. Heb. 10.1.2.3.4.5. &c. Leuit 16.27. and Heb. 13.11 12. compared together. Coloss. 2.17. Heb 9.1.2.3.4. &c. to 12. or for the remem∣brance of some other thing: And some of them were ty∣picall, that is, types and figures of Christ, and of things to be fulfilled by him. Quest. How long was the Ceremoniall Law to continue? Ans. In the full force and necessary vse of it, till the death and ascension of Christ, and no longer. Quest. What is the Iudiciall Law? Answ. It is that Law, that God gaue to the Iewes by the hand of Moses, concerning the order and ciuill gouernement of the Common wealth of Israel.Deut. 6.1. Quest. Is that Law still in force or no? Ans. So farre forth as it did concerne the particular state and condition of the Iewes Common wealth, and the circumstances thereof,Luk. 16.16. it is not in force. The Law (that is, both the Ceremoniall and Iudiciall) and the Prophets endu∣red vntill Iohn. But as it hath in it common equitie, as bee∣ing agreeable to the lawe of Nature, and seruing directly to confirme any of the tenne Commandements, or to vphold the good of the Familie, Church, or Common-wealth, it is still in force, for so farre forth it is Morall, and binds the Conscience as the morall doth. Quest. What are the other generall things to bee considered, before we come to speake of the Commandements seuerally?
Ans. These three; The Preface to the Commandements. The deuision of them. And some generall rules that are to be obserued in expounding of them. Quest. What is the Preface to the Commandements? Ans. It is set downe Exod. 20.2. I am the Lord thy God, which haue brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of bondage. Quest. What is the purpose of God in that Preface? Answ. Both to shew that he hath authority to giue a Law to his people, and to require their obedience to it, and also that in, and by that Law he wisheth them speciall good: and to this end he vseth three speciall reasons. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. The first is taken from the name Iehouah, I am Ie∣houah, I am the Lord, and therefore I haue power and autho∣ritie to command. Quest. What signifieth the name Iehouah? Ans. Three things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. That the Lord hath his eternall beeing of him∣selfe. Exod. 3.14. Reuel. 1.8. Quest. What is the second? Answ. That the Lord is he,Iohn 44.24. Rom. 11.36 Heb. 1.3. by whom all other things that are, haue their beeing and are sustained. Quest: What is the third. Ans: That all the Lords promises and threatnings shall come to passe, and that what he saith he will certainely make it good.Exod. 6.3. I appeared vnto Abraham to Izack and to Iacob by the name of Almightie God, but by my name Jehouah was I not knowne vnto them, because he did not performe his promises to him but to his Children. Exod: 7.5. Quest: What is the second reason vsed in this preface? Ans: The second reason is from the couenant of grace, whereby the Lord assureth his people that he is their God, and that he will forgiue them their sinnes, and will giue them all good things needful for their soules and bodyes. (I am the
Lord thy God,Ierem. 32.38.) which are the very words of the couenant of grace. Quest: What is the third reason vsed in this preface? Ans: The third is taken from gods mercy, in the won∣derfull deliuerance of his people, the Isralites, out of Egipt, and house of cruell bondage, and seruitude: which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Quest: How doth that deliuerance from Egypt concerne vs? Ans: That temporall benefit in times past bestowed on Israel, was a type or figure of the deliuerance of the Church of God, from all euills and enemies both bodily, and spirituall: and especially of the spirituall deliuerance of the church of God from the miserable thraldome of sinne, Satan, death,Iere. 16 14.15. Luk. 1.71.72. and Hell. The lesse deliuerance, was but a shadowe of the greater, and vnder the name of Israel all the faithfull are spoken to, as the Apostle witnesseth Gal. 3.7.Galat. 3.7. So much of the preface. Quest: How are the commandements deuided? Exod. 34 28. Deut. 4 13.Ans: Two wayes. First, into ten commandements, or ten words. Secondly; into Two Tables. The first con∣tayning our duty to God,Exod. 31.18. Deut. 9.10. Mat. 22.36.37. in the foure first commandements. And the second, our dutie to our neighbour, in the other six commandements. Christ being asked which is the great com∣mandement; He answereth, thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thine heart,Mat. 22.38.39.40. with all thy soule, and with all thy mind. This is the first and the great commandement. And the second is like vnto this: thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe, On these two commandements, hangeth the whole Law and the prophets. Quest: Why is our duty towards god first prescribed, and then our duty towards our neighbour? Ans: For two reasons. First, because our dutie towards God is greater, and more excllen, then our duty towards our neighbour; according to the Apostles rule.Act. 4.19. It is better to obey God then men: and therefore Christ calls the comande∣ments of the first table, the geat commandement. Mat. 22.38.Secōdly, to teach vs that no ciuill duties, as of iustice, chastity sobriety, and such like, are pleasing to God, if
they proceede not from an heart setled aright in the true worshipp & feare of god:1 Tim. 1.5. the end of the commande∣ment is loue, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience and of faith vnfained. Quest: How may we proue that there be foure commandements of the first table, for the Papists make but three, putting the two first into one, and seauen to the second, diuiding the last into two? Ans: Thus; the first and second commandement differ one from the other, in sence and matter; for one may offend a∣gainst the first commandement; as they that worship the Sunne, moone, and starres, and yet make no grauen image: & some may offend against the second, and not against the first:2. King. 16.12. Colos. 2.23. as they that worship the true God after a false manner, and, therfore they are two distinct commandements. Concerning the diuiding of the last commandement af∣terward. So much of the diuision of the commandements. Quest. What be the generall rules that are to be obserued, in the expounding of the commandements? Ans. They are principally fiue. Quest. What is the first? Ans: This,Nehe. 8.8. Mat. 15.4.5 we are to make no exposition of any comman∣dement, but agreeable to the scripture. Quest. What is the second? Ans. Euery commandement must be vnderstood, as re∣quiring exact and perfect obedience,Mat. 5.22.28.34. Gal. 3.10. both inward and out∣ward, both of soule and body, as Christ expoundeth some of the commandements. Quest: What is the third? Ans: This: that where any duty is commanded,Mat. 4.10. 1. Cor. 15.34. Ephes. 4.28. there the contrary sinne is forbidden: and where any sinne is for∣bidden, there the contrary duty is required. Quest: What is the fourth? Ans: This, that vnder one maine sinne expressely for∣bidden, or one maine duty expressely commanded, all other sinnes of that kinde are forbidden,1 Ioh. 3.15. Mat. 5.21.22. and all other duties of the same kinde are commanded. Quest. What is the fift? Ans: That with any maine sinne forbidden, or any maine
duty commanded,1. Thes. 5.22. Iud. Epist. v. 23. all occasions, meanes, and furtherances hereto are also condemned or required. Now to the Commandements seuerally, and first a word of the distinction of the foure first Commande∣ments of the first Table. Quest. How are the Commandements of the first Table di∣stinguished? Ans. Thus, the first teacheth to haue the true God for our God, and the other three teach that holy profession that wee are to make of the same God. Quest. What are wee to consider in that holy profession of God? Ans. The parts of it, which are these. The solemne worship of God prescribed in the second Commandement. And the glorifying of God in the affaires of this life, which are prescribed in the third Commandement. And secondly, the time appointed for that holy professi∣on inioyned in the fourth Commandement. Of these in Order. Quest. What are the words of the first Commandement? Answ. Those we finde Exod. 20.3. Thou shalt haue none other Gods (or strange Gods) before me. Quest. What is meant by other Gods, or strange Gods? 1 Sam. 7.3. Phil. 3.19.Answ. Not such as are by nature Gods, or can be Gods, but such as are reputed and taken in the world to be Gods. Quest. What is meant by these words, before me? Answ. In my face or presence, that is neither openly nor closely, no not in heart; for wheresoeuer it bee, there is the presence and face of God.Gen. 17.1. Heb. 4.13. God saith to Abraham, walke be∣fore me, and be thou vpright, or without hypocrisie. Quest. What is then the summe of this Commandement? Answ. This, That wee are to haue the true God for our God, and none other. This Commandement being negatiue, we will first shew the sinnes forbidden in it. Quest. What are the sinnes forbidden in this Commandement?
Ans: In Generall these three First, Atheisme, or deniall of God. Secondly, all false opinions of God. Thirdly, confidence in creatures. Quest: How many sorts of Atheisme be there? Ans: Two, first,Psal. 14.1. 2. King: 6.33. 2. Kin. 7.2. Malac. 2.17. & 3.14. Ephes. 2.12. when a man doth say or at the least thinke there is no god at all, or denies his Attributes: Secondly, when a man hath a false god in stead of the true God. Quest: How doth a man come to the first kinde of Atheisme? Ans: By two steps or degrees. Quest: What is the first step to that kinde of Atheisme? Ans: To imagine that God seeth vs not,Psal. 10.11. Zephan. 1.12. or doth not re∣gard vs. Quest: What is the second step to this kind of Atheisme? Ans. To imagine that God is not so sharpe and so seuere in punishing sinne as the scriptures set him forth to be.Psal. 50.21.22. Eccles. 8.11. Quest. How many wayes hath a man a false god in stead of the true God? Ans. Two wayes. First when a man doth place and wor∣ship that which is not God, in the roome of the true God; as the heathen did, who worshipped the sunne, moone, starres,Act. 19.27.15. and such like. Secondly,Philp. 3.19. Colos. 3.5. Iob. 31.24 2. Cor. 4.4. when a man thinkes some other thing besides the true God to be his chiefest good; as the Voluptuous man, his pleasure; the Couetous man, his wealth. Hence the Di∣uell is called the God of this World; because the men of the World iudge their owne courses wherein they walke, the best thing in the world for them. So much of Atheisme. Now to the false opinions of God. Quest. What are the false opinions of God, forbidden in this Commandement? Ans: They are of two sorts. First when men thinke they may ioyne others to God and do not acknowledge him alone: and Secondly, when men do not acknowledge God as he is, and as he hath reuei∣led himselfe in his word. Quest: How many wayes doe men ioyne others to god and doe
not acknowledge him alone? Ans. Three waies: First, by professing more then one Religion. Secondly, by praying to others, besides the true God. Thirdly, by magicke or witch-craft. Of these in Order. Quest. How doe men professe more then one Religion? Answ. When they hault betweene two opinions, and thinke they may worship God, and others also; and may make a mixture of different Religions. Quest. Where finde we this sinne condemned? Answ. In these places of Scripture. 2 Kings 17.32.33.41. Zephan. 1 5. Deut. 22.10.11. 1 King. 18.21. Quest. How doe men pray to others, besides the true God? Answ. When they call on others, in prayer, besides the true God, and thinke that they are able to heare their pray∣ers, and to helpe them: As the Papists doe on Angels, and Saints. Quest. How may it appeare that this is a sinne? Ans. By these reasons: First, this is to giue religious worship to creatures, which belongs only to God. Deut. 6.23. Deut. 10, 20. expounded by our Sauiour Christ. Mat 4.10. Secondly, this giues infinitenesse to creatures, and know∣ing of the hearts of men;Ierem. 17.10. Act. 1.24. which things are proper to God a∣lone. Thirdly, this giues sacrifice to creatures, which is to bee offered to God only.Exod. 22.20. Acts 14.14. Barnabas and Paul rent their cloathes, when the people would haue offered Sacrifice vnto them. Now I will answer an Obiection or two, that the Pa∣pists make out of the Scripture, for their praying to Angels and Saints departed. First, they obiect Gen: 48.16. where Iacob cal'd on an An∣gell, and the name of his dead Fathers, Abraham and Izhack. Therefore, it is lawfull to pray to the Angels, and Saints dparted. Quest: How is this to be answered? Ans: Thus, First by Angell is meant the Angell of the
Couenant. Malac. 3.1.Malac. 3.1. the Sonne of God the second Per∣son in Trinity: so it is expounded Hosea. 12.4.5.Hose. 12.4.5. Jacob (saith he) had power ouer the Angell and preuailed; he wept and pray∣ed vnto him, hee found him in Bethell: The Angell hee found in Bethell was God. Secondly, where he saith, let the name of my Fathers Abra∣ham and Izhak it is a phrase of Scripture signifying thus much; let them be held and accounted, as belonging to the Stocke and Family of my Fathers, and numbred among their Sonnes: the like phrase is, Isai. 4.1. Secondly, they obiect Job. 5.1. To which of the Saints wilt thou turne? Therefore (saith the Papist) it is lawfull to pray to the Saints. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; 1. By Saints, are not meant Saints in Hea∣uen, but on the Earth. 2. That phrase (Turne thee) doth not signifie invocation, but giue me oh Job, if thou canst any of the Saints; who if he were pressed with any calamitie, that did not suffer the same for his sinnes. That is the drift of E∣liphaz in that place. Now to the third way. Quest. How doe men ioyne others to God by Magicke or Witch-craft.? Ans. Two wayes; first, by being Magicians or Witches themselues: Secondly; by seeking to Magicians or Witches, and vsing their hlpe. Quest. What is it to be a Magician or a Witch? Ans. It is either on a secret, or an open compact with the Deuill, wittingly and willingly to consnt to vse his helpe for the working of wonders: Psal. 58.5. Deut. 18.11. Quest. How many waies doe Magicians or Witches, vse the helpe of the Deuill? Answ. Three wayes. First, by superstitious diuination; taking on them, by the helpe of the Deuill,Deut. 18.10. Leuit. 20.27. to reueale secrets by the flying of Foules, and the intralls of Beasts, and the like. Secondly, by iugling; aking on them,Exod. 7.11.12.22. by the helpe of the Deuill, to worke wonders beyond the order of Nature. Thirdly, by charming or inchaunting, taking on them, by
the helpe of the Deuill, in the vse of certaine words or cere∣monies; to procure present hurt or present helpe; as by the name Iesus,Act. 19 13. by the signe of the Crosse, by Salt, and such like. Quest. Where find we this sinne of Witchcraft forbidden? Answ. In these places of Scripture: Exod. 22.18. Deut. 18.10. Galat. 5.20. A worke of the flesh: Reuel. 21.8. Reuel 22.15. Quest. What is it to vse the helpe of Magicians or Witches? Answ. To consult and aduise with them, with a perswa∣sion, that they are abl to doe the things, wee desire, and seeke for, at their hands. Quest. How may this appeare to be a sinne? Answ. By these reasons: 2. King. 1.3.16. Isai. 8.19. Leuit. 20.6.First, this is a going from God, and a seeking to the Deuill. Secondly, this the Lord forbids, and threatens to pu∣nish seuerely. Thirdly, if a man truly repent, hee will abhorre this cu∣rious Art. Acts 19.19. Now to the second sort of false opinions of God, for∣bidden in this Commandement, (namely) when men doe not acknowledge God as hee is, and as hee hath reuealed him selfe in his Word. Quest. How is it that men doe not acknowledge God as he is, and as he hath reuealed himselfe in his Word? Answ. Thus; when men haue erroneous, and vaine opi∣nions of God;Rom. 1.21. and thinke of him, according to their owne vaine, and foolish imaginations. Quest How many wayes doe men erre in their opinions of God, and thinke of him according to their owne vaine and foolish imaginations? Answ. Three waies: First, in their conceit and opinion of his Essence and Nature. Secondly, in their conceit and opinion, of the Persons of the Godhead.
Thirdly, in their conceit and opinion of his Attributes. Of these in Order Quest. How doe men erre in their conceit, and thinke vainely of God, in respect of his Essence and Nature?Psal. 96.4.5. I a. 37.19. Ierem. 14.22. 1. Cor. 8.5. Ans. Two waies: First, in making a multiplicitie of Gods, and thinking there bee many Gods; as the Heathen did, and doe. Secondly, when men thinke and conceiue God to be that which he is not: as ignorant persons doe, who thinke him to be an old man sitting in Heauen, with a crowne vpon his head; or as the Heathen did, who thought him to be like to creatures, as gold, or siluer, or stone grauen by art,Act. 17.29. and the inuention of man. Quest. How doe men erre, and misconceiue of the Persons of the Godhead? Ans. Foure wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Ans. This, when men affirme and hold one God, but de∣nie the Three Persons; as some ancient Hereticks did of old; and as the Turkes and Iewes doe at this day; who denie Christ the second Person in Trinitie. Quest. What places of Scripture condemne this sinne? Answ. Such as plainely declare the Trinitie of Persons: as Gen. 1.26. Mat. 3.16.17. Mat. 28.19. 2 Cor. 13.13. 1 Iohn 5.7. Quest. What is the second way? Answ. This, when men hold not only the distinction of the three Persons, but a diuision also of the substance; as that the three Persons, be three Gods; as the Tritheists did. Quest. What places of Scripture condemne this sinne? Answ. Such as shew the vnitie of the Godhead, and the Trinity of Persons: as Iohn 10.30. 1 John 5.7. Quest. What is the third way? Answ. This; when men hold not Christ, the Sonne of God to be very God, but affirme him to bee made and created, as the Arrians doe. Quest. What places of Scripture, condemne this sinne? Answ. Such as plainely prooue the Godhead of Christ;
as Isai. 7.14. Isai: 9.6. Mat. 1.23. Iohn 1.1. Rom. 9.5. Quest. What is the fourth way whereby men erre, and mis∣conceiue of the persons of the Godhead? Ans. This; when men hold the three Persons of the God∣head, to bee but three names, and titles giuen to God in the Scripture: as the Patripassians did. Quest. What places of Scripture condemne this sinne? Answ. Such as shew the distinction of the Persons of the Godhead; that the Persons are truly distinguished one from the other: as Gen 3.22. Mat. 28.10. 1 Iohn 5.7. Quest. How doe men erre in their conceit, and opinion of the Attributes of God? Ans. When they haue not a right apprehension, and con∣sideration of his Attributes. Quest. What are the Attributes of God, that men doe not rightly apprehend and consider of? Ans. Not so much his simplicitie, his eternitie, and such like, which haue not relation to the creatures; but those especially that haue relation to the creatures. Quest: What be those? Ans: Thse fiue; his Knowledge, his Power, his Truth, his Iustice, and his Mercy. Of these in Order. Quest. What is it not to apprehend, and consider Gods know∣ledge aright? Answ. This; when men doe not rightly, and duely consi∣der, that God ses and knowes all things: Psalme. 94.7. Isai 29.15. Quest: What is the fruit of this, when men doe not rightly conciu, and consider Gods knowledge? Answ The sinne of Hypocrisie, it makes men seeme to be tat which they are not, and to cotent themselues with a shew of ol nesse.Ezech. 8.12. Iob. 22.13.14. Eliphaz holding Job to be an hypocrite, thus chargeth him: but thou sayest (saith he) how should God know? can he iudge through the darke Cloud? The Clowdes hide him that hee cannot see, and hee walketh in the Circle of Heauen
Quest. What is it not to apprehend, and consider Gods Power aright? Answ. This; when men doe not rightly conceiue,Ierem 5.21.22. Psalm. 90.11. Mat. 10.28. 1 Cor. 10.22. and duely consider, that God is able to doe whatsoeuer hee will; and especially that he is able to arme all the creatures against them for their sinnes, and to punish their soules, and bodies in this life; and for euer in Hell. Quest. What followes on this, when men doe not rightly con∣ceiue, and duely consider the power of God? Answ. Two things: First, contempt of God. Secondly, a proud tempting of God. Quest. Wherein doe men shew contempt of God? Answ: In two things. First, in contemning his threatnings,2 Chro. 33.10. 2 Chro. 36.16. Iai. 5.19. Isai. 28.15.22. Pet. 3.3.4. 2. Chron. 28.22 Ierem. 5.3. Amos. 4. from v. 6. to 12. and making light account of his iudgememts denounced against them, for their sinnes. Secondly, in taking no profit by his punnishments. A number of plagues sent, but none could moue them to re∣pent: as cleanenesse of Teeth, scarcenesse of Bread, Drought, Blasting, and Mildew, and such like. Quest. Wherein doe men shew a proud tempting of God? Answ. In three things. First, in muttering against God: Num. 14.11.Nom. 14.11. Nom. 14.2. Exod. 17.7. Psal 78.18.19. Mat. 4.6.7. Act. 5.9. Malac. 3.15. And all the people muttered, verse 2. Secondly, in desiring experience of Gods power. Thirdly, in trying whethr God be such a powerfull God of vengeance, as the Scrptue sets him forth to be. Quest. What is it, not to apprehend and consider Gods truth aright? Answ. This; when men doe not rightly conceiue, and du∣ly consider, that God is most true in his Word, and will cer∣tainely make good,Psal. 57.10. Nom. 13.2.32. 2 Pet. 3.4 9. whatsoeuer he hath promised or threat∣ned. Nomb. 13.3. The Lord said, he would giue vnto the Children of Israel, the Land of Canaan. Then verse 32. they reason against Gods Truth. Quest. What followes on this, when men doe not rightly con∣ceiue, and duely consider the Truth of God?
Ans: Two sinnes. First, incredulity or vnbeliefe. Secondly, impaciency. Quest: Wherein doe men shew incredulity or vnbeliefe? Gen. 19 14. Psal. 11 6.11. Nom. 11.21.22.23. Rom. 4.20. Psal. 42.5. Heb. 10.38. Pro. 3.5.Ans: In two things. First, in doubtfulnes, when men doubt, and call into question the truth of gods wod. Secondly, in diffidence or distrust, when men withdraw their hearts from the truth of God, made knowne in his word; and doe not wholly rest on that, at all times. Quest: Wherein doe men shew impaciency in respect of Gods truth? 2. King. 6.33. Isai. 28.16. Habac. 2 3.4.Ans: In their fainting in the time of triall, and not way∣ting on God, for the accomplishment of his word, and pro∣mise for their good. Quest. what is it, not to apprehend and consider Gods iustice aright? Gen. 18.25. Ierem. 51.56. Nahum. 1.2.3. 2 Thes. 1.5.6. Rom. 2.5.6.7.8.9.Ans. When men doe not rightly conceiue, and duly con∣sider, that God is iust in all his wayes, and especially that he is the iust iudge of all the world, and will one day render to euery one according to his workes. Quest: What followes on this, when men doe not rightly con∣ceiue and duly consider the iustice of God? Ans: Three things. First, carnall security. Secondly, spirituall slothfulnesse. Thirdly, rash and inconsiderate zeale. Quest: What is to be carnally secure? Ier. 8.6. Mat. 24.38.39. Luk. 12.19. Luk. 21.34.35.Ans: This; when a man giues himselfe wholly to fol∣low the profits, and pleasures of this life, and neuer thinkes of his sinnes heartily and seriously. Quest. What is to be spiritually slothfull? Ier. 48.10. Rom. 12.11. Reuel. 13.15.16.Ans: This; when a man is cold or lukewarme in the loue of God, and of his truth, and of his seruants, and performes good duties, heauily, drousily, and negligently. Qust: What is to be rashly Zealous? Luk. 9.54.Ans. When a man would haue God presently according to his desire, to powre out his wrath and vengeance on such
as highly dishonour him. Luke, 9.54. Qust. What is it, not to apprehend, and consider Gods mer∣cie aright? Answ. This, when men doe not rightly conceiue,Exod. 34.6.7 2. Chron. 30.9. Isai. 55.7. Ierem. 31.20. Iam. 5.11. and duely consider, that God is freely inclined to helpe, ad re∣lieue his creatures, being in misery; and especially, that hee is ready to grant to poore sinners, that are penitent, pardon of sinne, and acceptance in Christ, to life euerlasting. Quest. What are the fruits of this, when men doe not right∣ly conceiue, and duely consider the mercy of God? Answ. Thse foure sinnes. 1. Desperation. 2. Presump∣tion, 3. Impenitency. And 4, Enuying of Gods grac in others, or his mercy to others. Quest. What is Desperation? Answ. To want hope, or rather to be out of hope of ob∣tayning mercy at the hands of God, to helpe and relieue, in the time of neede. Quest. In what necessities doe men shew themselues despe∣rate, and out of hope of obtayning mercy at the hands of God? Answ. Sometimes in outward necessities;1. King. 19.4. 2 King 7.4. 1. King. 6.18. Act. 16.27. men dispai∣ring of Gods mercy, for their helpe in things of this life. Sometimes, in spirituall necessities, men dispayring of Gods mercy, for the pardon of their sinnes, that lye heauy on their soules and consciences; as Caine, and Iudas. Quest. What is Presumption? Answ. This; to be bold to doe euill, on a vaine confi∣dence and false perswasion, of obtaining mercy at the hands of God. Quest: Wherein are men bolde to doe euill on a vaine con∣fidence, and perswasion of obtayning mercy at the hands of God? Ans: In two things. 1. First, in the affaires of this life,2. Sam. 4.5.7. Eccles. 11.6. men giuing them∣selues ouer to idlenesse, and to take their ease and pleasure, and yet perswading themselues, that God is so mercifull as he will neuer see them want. 2, Sam. 4.5.7. Eccles. 11.6. a pre∣cept to the contrary. 2. Secondly, in spirituall things,Deut. 29.19 20. Psal. 19.13. men neglecting the meanes of saluation, and going on wilfully in their sinnes, and
yet perswading themselues that God will be mercifull vnto them. Deut. 29 19.20. Psal. 19 13. Dauid prayed, keepe thy ser∣uant from presumptuous sinnes, let them not raigne ouer me Iude. 4. Quest: What is Impenitency? Psal. 130.4. Rom. 2.4.5.Ans: Out of hardnes of heart, and the want of the true feare of God, purposely to continue, and to goe on in sinne without repentance. Quest: What is it to enuie gods grace and mercy in others, or to others? Gen. 3. Mat. 27.18. Act. 11.2.3. 1 Ioh. 3.12.Ans. This; to greiue and repine at the good things, God hath vouchsafed to others, whether inward or outward; and to hate the good things themselues; which is the Deuills sinne. Now to the third sinne in generall forbidden in this commandement, namely confidence in creatures. Quest. What is that confidence in creatures, that is forbidden in this commandement? Psal 20.7. Isai. 2.22. Ierem. 17.5. Zach. 4.6.Ans: This when men so rest and rely on the creatures, as they thinke they are able and sufficient of themselues, to doe them good: and withdraw their hearts from the Lord. Quest: What are the things that men rest on and thinke able of themselues, to doe them Good? Ans: These. Either themselues, or other men, or other things. Quest: How doe men rest on themselues, and put confidence in themselues? Pro. 28.26. 2 King 18.35. Isai. 10.13. Mat. 26.33.35.Ans: Thus; when men rest and relie on some good thing that is in themselues, and thinke that able of it selfe to helpe them, and to doe them good; as their wit, their wisdome, their eloquence, their strength, their beauty, and such like. Quest: What are the fruits of this, when men rest on them∣selues, or some good things in themselues? Ans: These two. First, Pride, or arrogancy. Secondly, Vaine glory, and carnall boasting. Quest: What is the Pride, or arrogancie that followes this?
Ans: It it this; when men ascribe the good they doe,Deut. 8.17.18. Daniel 4.27. Habak. 1.16. Acts 12.22, 23. not to God, but to something in themselues, and take the praise of it which is due to God, to themselues. Quest: What is the vaineglory, or carnall boasting that fol∣lowes on this? Ans: This; when men glory in their good gifts,Iohn 5.44. Luke 10.20. Galat. 5.26. 1 Cor. 4.7. as if they had them of them-selues, and not from God; and doe re∣ferre all they haue or can doe, to their owne priuate glory and aduancement. Quest. How doe men rest on other men, and put confidence in them? Ans: Thus;Isai. 36.6. Ierem. 17.5. Hester 6.6. 2 Chron. 16.12 when men rest and relie on some good thing in others, and thinke that able of it selfe to helpe them, and to doe them good: as on other mens wit and policie, skill, strength, kindnesse, or the like. Quest. How doe men rest on other things, and put confidence in them? Ans: Thus, when men rest and relie on other things,1 Tim. 6.17. Psalm. 62.10. Ierem. 49.16. Obad. v. 3, 4. Psal. 146.3. as able of themselues to helpe them, and to doe them good; as on riches, strong holds and defenced places; honour, authority, and high place, and such like. Job 31.24. Now to the Affirmatiue part of this Commandement. Quest: What are the duties commanded in this first Com∣mandement? Ans: These two: First, that the minde and heart haue a due respect to God. Secondly, that wee haue confidence in God, and rest in him alone. Of these in Order. Quest: How hath the mind and heart a due respect to God? Answ. Thus,Isai. 8.13. 1 Chron. 28.9. Ierem. 9.24. Ierem. 24.7. Iohn 17.3. when wee set vp and sanctifie the Lord in our hearts & minds, wee adore & worship him, acknowledg∣ing and confessing him to be such a God, as he hath reuealed himselfe to be in his Word, and workes; and looking to him in all our thoughts, words, and workes. Quest: What is the ground of this acknowledgement and con∣fession?
Psal. 9.10. Hose. 4.1.6. Coloss. 1.10.Answ. This, true knowledge of God, as hee hath made himselfe knowne in his Word; both in his Essence, Persons, Properties, and Workes. Quest: Wherein is this acknowledgement and confession of God expressed? Answ: In these three things especially. In Faith, in Hope, and in Loue. Quest. What is that Faith wherein our acknowledgement of God is expressed? Psal. 73.25. Heb. 11.6.Answ: This, when we beleeue the Trinitie, euen the Fa∣ther, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, to be the true and only God; and wee beleeue all the truth of God reuealed in his Word. Quest: How many sorts of faith be there? Answ: Foure sorts or kindes. Quest: What is the first of these? Heb. 11.6. Heb. 6.1.Answ: This; the Faith of beginnings or fundamentall faith, apprehending the Essence, and Beeing of God. Quest: What is the second sort? 1 Cor. 13.2.Answ: This; the faith of miracles, apprehending the power of God. Quest: What is the third sort? Answ. Historicall faith, apprehending the truth of God, and beleeuing all things to be true,Iam. 2.19. that are written in the Scriptures, Quest: What is the fourth sort? Answ. Iustifying faith, particularly apprehending, and applying the mercy of God and the merits of Christ,Gala. 2.16.20. Rom. 3.26. called the faith of the Sonne of God, and the faith of Iesus. Quest. Are all these sorts of faith commanded in the first Commandement? Answ. No; only the first, second, and third sorts, and not the fourth. Quest: How may that appeare? Answ. By these reasons. First, the Morall Law requires no more then that; which was imprinted in the heart of man by nature, as the Morall Law was: Rom. 2.14.15. but faith
in Christ was not so, that is wrought by Grace a∣boue Nature. 2 Thess. 3.2. Ephes. 2.8. Secondly, Faith in Christ is not a Worke of the Law, they are opposed one to the other. Romans 3.28. Rom 4.5. Quest. What is that hope, wherein our acknowledgement is expressed? Answ. When we looke vp to God,2 Chro. 20.1. Isai. 8.17. Psal. 27.14. Psal. 37.7. Rom. 8.24.25. patiently expecting his presence, and assistance in things to come; and wayting on him, for the giuing of euery good thing, that he hath pro∣mised in his owne good time. Quest: What followes on this hope? Answ. Spirituall fortitude,Psal 27.14. Ephes. 6.10. Isa. 48.1.2.5. or spirituall courage and boldnesse. Quest: VVherein standeth spirituall fortitude, courage, and boldnesse? Answ. In three things. 1. In spirituall securitie. 2. In constancie in good things. 3. In patience, in trouble and aduersitie. Quest. VVhat is it to be spiritually secure? Answ. This;Psal. 3.5.6. Psal. 55.2. Nehe. 6.11. On the carefull vse of all the good meanes of good; to be certainely assured that God who is able, will of his goodnesse, according to his promise, doe vs good at all times. Quest. VVhat is it to be constant in good things? Answ. This; to continue and to go on in doing good,Iohn 1.6.7. 1 Chro. 28.10.20. Dan. 6.10. Mat. 10.28. Heb. 11.27. Gen. 50.20. 2 Sam. 16.10.11.12. Heb. 12.27 Iam. 5.11. Deut. 6.5. Luke 10.27 Acts 17.8 Iames 1.17. and not to feare, nor to be discouraged by any opposition, look∣ing to the power and goodnesse of God. Quest. What is it to be patient in trouble and aduersitie? Answ. This, willingly and cheerefully to vndergoe the afflictions laid on vs; looking to the hand of God whence they come and expecting from him in his good time, a good issue out of them. Quest. What is that loue wherein our acknowledgement of God is expressed? Answ. This, when we acknowledge God to be goodnes it selfe, & the giuer of al good things, & because of his goodnes
towards vs, we loue him aboue all things. Quest: Wherein is our loue to God manifested? Answ. In these things especially: Malac. 3.16. Psal. 119.55. 2 Tim. 4.8. Psal. 27.4. Psal. 84.1.2.3.4. Psal. 119.97.131 Psal. 16.3. 1 Iohn 5.1. 1 Iohn 2.4.101. First, in often thinking and speaking of God to his glory, and desiring his presence. 2. Secondly, in louing his Word and Ordinances, as Prayer, Preaching of the Word, Sacraments, and such like. 3. Thirdly, in louing his Children and Seruants. 4. Fourthly, in louing his glory, and being zealous for that aboue all things. Exod. 32.12.32. Luk. 14.33. Psal. 66.9. Iohn 12.21. Iohn 15.14.5. Fiftly, in doing the will of God cheerefully. Quest. What are the effects of our acknowledgement of God, to be such a God as he hath reuealed himselfe in his Word? Answ. They are of two sorts. 1. First, such as properly haue respect to God. 2. Secondly, such as haue more neere respect to our selues. Quest. What are those effects that properly haue respect to God? Answ. These two. 1. First, an holy submission to the Maiestie of God. 2. Secondly, the feare of God. Quest. What is that holy submission to the Maiestie of God? Answ: This; when we submit our selues to the greatnes and Maiestie of God absolutely,Gen. 18.27. Psal. 83.18. Dan. 9.4 and for himselfe; because of his excellency aboue all creatures, and because he is our Cre∣ator, and Soueraigne Lord of our bodies and soules, and of all that euer we haue. Quest. What is that feare of God, that is an effect of our ac∣knowledgement of God, to be such a God as he hath reuealed him∣selfe to be in his Word? Answ. This; when we stand in awe of Gods Iustice and Power,Isai. 8.13. Leuit. 19.14. Ierem. 10.6.7. ob. 12.29. in punishing sinne, and so wee make him our only feare and dread.
Quest. What followes on this feare of God? Answ. Two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; An hatred of sinne,Pro. 8.13. Iob. 31.23. Gen. 20.11. Rom. 3.18. and a carefull auoyding of the offence of God; and a feare to offend him, in any thing whatsoeuer. Iob 31. Iob hauing cleered himselfe, not only of grosse sinnes; but also hauing shewed many good effects, of the graces of Gods Spirit in him, in the performance of good duties, he saith, verse 23. Gods punishment was fearefull vnto me. Quest. What is the second thing? Ans. A care to approue our selues to God in all things.Gen. 5.21. Heb. 12.28. Quest. How many sorts of Gods feare be there? Ans. These two. 1. A Child-like feare, a feare of God, as children. 2. A Seruile feare, a feare of God, as Seruants. Quest. How doe these two differ one from the other? Ans. In two respects especially. First, in the beginning and cause,Psal. 130.4. 1 Pet. 1.17. for the child like feare of God, comes from the loue of God, whom Gods Children feare to offend, because of his goodnesse and mercy. But Seruile feare ariseth from the consideration of the Iustice, and wrath of God.1 Iohn. 4.11. Secondly, in respect of the obiect;Gen. 39.9. Rom. 13.5. for child-like feare of God, is set on sinne it selfe, Gods Children fearing sinne principally, because it is sinne and offends God. But seruile feare, is set on the punishment of sinne, men fearing onely the wrath and vengeance that followes on sinne. Quest: How may we know that we truely feare God? Ans: By these two things. 1. First, if wee take notice of his threatnings,Isai. 66.2. Deut. 4.10. Psal. 52.6. and Iudgements against sinne, and tremble at his Word. 2. Secondly, if no reward can allure vs;Exod. 1.17. Dan. 3.18. nor any punishment man can lay on vs, can driue vs to
commit sinne. Quest. What are the effects of our acknowledgement of God, that haue more neere respect vnto our selues? Answ. These two. 1. First, the deniall of our selues. 2. Secondly, humilitie. Quest. What is that deniall of our selues? 1 Cor. 3.7. 2 Cor. 3.5. Mat. 16.24. Luk. 9.23.Answ. This, when wee abase our selues euen to nothing, and hold our selues to be as nothing of our selues. Quest. Wherein is that deniall of our selues expressed? Answ. In two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Pro. 3.7. 1 Cor. 3.18. Rom. 8.7.Answ: This, an vtter renouncing of our owne Reason, Will, Affections, and all wee haue within vs, as things that of themselues are enmitie to GOD, and all good∣nesse. Quest. What is the second? Gen. 12.1.4. Gen. 22.1.2.9.10. Heb. 11.8. Deut. 33.9. Mat. 4.20. Luk. 5.11. Acts 20.24.Answ. A submitting of our selues both in our soules and bodies, to Gods Wisedome and Will in all things, though they bee neuer so crosse, and contrary to our willes and desires. Quest. What is that humility, that is an effect of our acknow∣ledgement of God? Answ. This; when because of Gods Excellencie and ho∣linesse, and our vilenesse and sinfulnesse, wee acknowledge that wee are not worthy of the least of Gods mercies,Gen. 32.10. 1 Chro. 29.14.15.16. 1 Cor. 4.7. 1 Cor. 1.31. but that the good things we either haue, or doe, are the free gifts of his rich grace, and from his free bountie; and wee giue to him alone all the praise and glory, of all good things we ei∣ther haue or doe. Quest. What are the fruits of this humilitie? Answ. They are foure. Quest. What is the first of those? 1. Cor. 15.9. 1 Tim. 1.15.Ans. This; it makes men thinke most basely of themselues, in regard of their owne sinnes and corruptions. Quest. What is the second? Rom. 12.10. 1. Cor. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. Phil. 2.3.Answ. This; it makes men esteeme better of others then of themselues, hauing the same good giftes that they haue,
and to giue to them that respect and honour that is fitting and due to them. Qust. What is the third? Answ. This;Phil. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.7. it makes men content with their particu∣lar places, callings, and conditions of life, vsing their gifts therein to the glory of God, and the good of others. Quest. What is the fourth? Answ. It makes men not to presume to doe any thing be∣yond that ability and strength that is giuen them.Psal. 131.1. Rom. 12.3. Now to the second generall Dutie commanded in this first Commandement, namely, confidence in God, and resting on him alone. Quest. What is that confidence in God, and resting on him a∣lone, that is required in this Commandement? Ans. This; when we stedfastly cleaue to God,2 Chro. 20.2. Psalm. 37.3, 5. Prou. 3.5. Ierem. 17.7. and rest on him alone, casting our burden onely on him, and committing our bodies and soules, our liues, our goods, and all that wee haue, into his hands at all times Quest. What are the grounds of this confidence? Answ. They are especially three. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; a due consideration and acknowledgement of Gods power, that hee is able to doe vs good, though all things in the world bee against vs; and that all helpes in the world can doe vs no good, but as his hand and power is in them, and makes them effectuall for our good. Gen. 15.1. Psal. 62.8, 9, 10.Genes. 15.1. Psal. 62.8, 9, 10 Dauid exhorts the people, Al∣wayes to trust in God, and to powre out their hearts before him, because hee is our Hope:Psal. 27.1, 2, 3 2 Tim. 1.12. and then hee shewes that the children of men are vanitie, and the chiefe men are lyes and altogether lighter then vanitie. Then verse 10. Trust not in op∣pression, nor in robbery, and bee not vaine; and if riches increase, that we should not set our hearts thereon. Then vers 11. Power belongeth vnto God. Quest. What is the second ground? Answ. This; a due consideration,Psal. 33.18, 19. Psal. 84.11.12. Psal. 91.2. and acknowledge∣ment of Gods good prouidence and mercy, that the eye of his good prouidence and mercie watcheth ouer vs, disposing
all things for our good,Psal. 33.18.19. Psal. 84.11.12. and that he looks on our wants and necessities, and of his mercy is ready to releeue them. Psal. 91.2.Psal. 91.2. I will say vnto the Lord, O mine hope and my fortresse, he is my God, in him will I trust And then in the verses following he saith, Surely he will deliuer thee from the snare of the hunter, and from the noysome pestilence, he will couer thee vn∣der his wings, thou shalt be sure vnder his feathers; his truth shall be thy shield and buckler. &c. Quest: What is the third ground of this confidence? Deut. 7.17.18 19. 1 Sam. 17.37. Psal. 34.6.Ans: This; A due consideration of the former experi∣ence of gods power and prouidence, both towards our selues and others. Mat: 16.9.10.Mat. 16.9.10. Christ checks his disciples, for not hauing due consideration of this former experience of Gods power and prouidence. Do ye not (saith he) perceiue, neither remember the fiue loaues, when there were fiue thousand men, and how many baskets tooke yee vp? neither the seauen loaues when there were foure thousand men and how many baskets tooke yee vp? Quest: How may we know that we haue confidence in God, and rest on him alone? Ans: By two things especially. Quest: What is the first of those? 2 Sam. 10.9.10.11.12. 2 Chron. 32.5.6.7.8. Nehem. 4.9.Ans: This; when we carefully vse good things and means God giues vs; and yet wee vse them only as meanes, and we looke vp to the Lord for helpe, and comfort, and good by them. Quest: What is the second thing? Rom. 4.18.19.20.21.Ans. This; when we rest and relie on the bare and naked promise of god, hauing his promise without meanes. Thus did Abraham. Quest. How may wee come thus to rest on the promise of God? Exod. 34.28. Mat. 4.2. Iosh. 3.16. Iosh. 10.13. Dan 3.27. Dan 6.22.Answ. Thus; If we duely consider the Lords manner of working, that he worketh sometimes by meanes, some∣times without meanes, and sometimes contrary to meanes: as Moses did Quest. What are the effects of confidence in God, and resting on him alone?
Ans: These two; first, a conuersation voyd of couetous∣nesse and distrustfull care. Secondly, inuocation or calling on the name of God. Quest. What is that conuersation voyde of couetousnes, and distrustfull care? Ans. This;Pro. 16.3. Mat. 6.25. to the end. 1 Tim. 6.6.7.8.9 1 Pet. 5.7. Heb. 13.5.6. When men exercise themselues diligently in the Duties of their lawfull Callings; dealing therein iustly and truly with euery one; and minding only to get things, honest and needfull for them, and leaue the successe of all their labours and endeuours, to the good prouidence and blessing of God, and trust God with that. Quest: How may we know, that doing our duties diligently, in our lawfull callings: we leaue the successe of all our labours to the blessing of God, and we trust him for that? Answ. By these two things. 1. First, if our hearts be not taken vp with needlesse feare of want or losse, while we enioy good things;Mat. 6.31.34. Iob. 1.21. or with immoderate sorrow, when good things are taken from vs. 2. Secondly, if our mindes be not troubled,Mar. 4.19. Luk. 8.14. Ezech. 33.3. and perplex∣ed with thoughts of our worldly affaires, in perfor∣mance of heauenly duties: as in Prayer, hearing of the Word, and such like: so as those thoughts make vs weary of Gods worship. Now to inuocation. Quest: Wherein stands that inuocation and calling on the name of God, that is an effect of confidence in God? Ans: In two things. 1. In petition. 2. In thankes giuing. Philip. 4 6.Philip. 4.6. Quest. What is petitions? Ans. A crauing at the hands of God alone,Dan. 9 17.18. Psal 50.15. Iames. 1.5. as the foun∣taine of all goodnesse, and giuer of all good things, such things as are wanting and needfull for our selues, and for others. Quest. How many sorts of petition be there? Ans: These three. 1 Fi st, supplication, when we entreat god to remoou some euill from our selues.
2. Secondly, Prayer, when wee intreat God to bestow some good thing ou our selues. And 3. Thirdly intercession, when we intreat God to giue some good thing to others, or to remoue some euill thing from others. 1 Tim. 2.1.1 Tim. 2.1. Quest. What is thankes-giuing? Psal. 103.1. to 6 Psal. 108.3.4. Ephes. 5.20.Ans. This; when we giue laud and thankes to God for good things, either promised, or bestowed on our selues or others. Quest. Wherein stands that giuing laud & thankes to God? Answ. In ascribing to God, absolute Soueraigntie ouer the good things wee haue,1 Chro. 29.11.12.13. Iud. Epist. v. 25. Reu. 4.11. Mat. 6.13. that wee haue them from him and not of our selues; and acknowledging his prouidence and power: in that wee haue those good things, and that they serue for our good, and accordingly giuing him due honour and glory. Thus we haue heard also the duties required in the first Commandement.Comman. 2. Now to the second commandement. Quest. How differ the first and second Commandements, one from the other? Answ. Thus; the first Commandement, teacheth to haue the true God for our God and no other: And the second com∣mandement prescribeth the solemne worship of the true God. Quest. What are the words of the second Commandement? Ans: Those we finde Exod. 20.4.5.6. 4. Thou shalt make thee no grauen Image, neither any simi∣litude of things that are in Heauen aboue, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the waterts vnder the earth: 5. Thou shalt not bow downe to them, neither serue them: for I am (Iehouah) the Lord thy God, a Jealous God; visi∣ting the iniquitie of the Fathers vpon the Children, vpon the third generation, & vpon the fourth of them that hate me: 6. And shewing mercy vnto thousands, to them that loue me, and keepe my Commandements: Quest. What are the generall things contained in those words? Answ. These two. First, a precept or Commandement. Secondly, a confirmation of the Commandement by ar∣guments, perswading to the obedience of it. The Com∣mandement
in these words: Thou shalt not make thee any gra∣uen Image, neither any similitude of things that are in heauen a∣boue, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the wa∣ters vnder the earth: Thou shalt not bow downe to them, neither serue them. And the confirmation in the words following; for I am Iehouah thy God, a Iealous God, visiting the iniquitie of the Fathers vpon the Children, vpon the third generation, and vpon the fourth of them that hate me: and shewing mercy vn∣to thousands to them that loue me and keepe my Commande∣ments. Of these in Order. First of the Commandement. Quest: What are the parts of the Commandement? Answ: These two: 1. First, it forbids the making of any grauen Image, or similitude of any thing in Heauen, in Earth, or in the waters vnder the earth. 2. Secondly, it forbids the bowing downe to Images, and similitudes, and worshiping of them. Now to the words. Quest. What is meant by grauen Image? Answ. A Picture proportioned and fashioned out of stone, wood, or mettal, by caruing, grauing, or the like: so the word signifies. Quest: What is meant by similitude? Answ. A Picture painted in a plaine Table, or on a cloah or the like, and made only of colours. Quest. What is meant by things that are in Hea∣uen? Answ. Celestiall and heauenly bodies, as the Sunne,Deut. 4.19. 2 King. 23.11. Ierem. 44.18. Deut. 4.17. Moone and Starres, and Foules, and Birds. Quest. Are not Angels and things in the highest Heauens likewise meant? Answ. Not properly, because they cannot bee represen∣ted but by borrowing the forme or shape of visi∣ble things, beeing spirituall; yet vnder the visible celestiall bodies they are also comprehended. Quest. What is meant by things in earth?
Deut 4.17. Exod. 8, 26, Rom, 1.23,Ans. Beasts of the earth. Quest. What is meant by things in the waters, vnder the Earth? Deut, 4, 18. Rom, 1: 23,Answ. Fishes, and all manner of creeping things. Quest. What is the meaning of those words, thou shalt not bow downe to them, neither serue them? Answ. Thus much; thou shalt not adore them, and yeeld to them religious worship and seruice, either inward or out∣ward, testified by bowing downe, or by vsing any other act or gesture of religious adoration to them. Isa. 44.15.Isai, 44, 15, Quest. What is the summe of this Commandement? Answ. This; that we worship and serue the true God, not by any deuice of our owne, but only according to his Nature & Will, reuealed in his Word. Deut. 12.30.31.32.Deut, 12, 30, 31, 32. Now this Commandement being Negatiue, we will first shew the sinnes forbidden in it. Quest. What are the sinnes forbidden in this Comman∣dement? Answ. In generall, these three. 1. All manner of Idolatry. 2. Contempt of the outward worship of God. 3: Humane deuices in the Essentiall worship of God: or superstition. Of these in Order. Quest. How many sorts of Idolatrie be there? Answ. Two. Inward, and Outward Idolatry of the Heart, and of the Hande. Quest. VVhat is the inward Idolatrie of the Heart? Answ. This; when men misconceiuing God, and ima∣gining him to be that which he is not,Ezech, 14, 3.4, 7 doe worship him ac∣cording to that misconceite, and foolish imagination: for then they worship an Idoll of their owne braine. Quest. VVhat is the outward Idolatrie, of the hand? Answ. This; when men make an Image, or similitude, and erect and set it vp for religious vse. Deut. 27.15. 1 Iohn 5.21.Deut, 27, 15, 1 Iohn, 5, 21, Little children keepe your selues from Idols: that is from Images made for religious vse.
Quest. May not an Image or Picture bee made for any vse at all? Answ. Yes, if it be onely for Politicall, or Historicall vse,Exod. 31.4, 5. Math. 22.20, 21 and not for Religious vse: for there is great vse of Pictures in describig of Histories, drawing of Mappes, and such like. Christ findes no fault with the Image and Picture of Caesar. Quest. How many wayes doe men make and erect an Image for religious vse? Answ. Two wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This, when men make and erect an Image repre∣senting some false and fained God, as the heathen did: Or representing some thing that is not God; as the Papists doe the Images of Angels and Saints departed, to bee adored and worshipped. Quest. Where finde we this condemned? Answ. In these places of Scripture, Exod. 23.24. Deut. 7.25. Deut. 12.3. Quest. What is the second way? Answ. This; when men make and erect an Image for the representing of the true God, and of Christ, to worship it. Quest. How may this appeare to bee a sinne, and a breach of Gods Commandement? Answ. 1. By euidence of Scripture, which condemnes the making of any representation of God, as Deut. 4.15, 16. Yee saw no image of God, but onely heard a voyce; therefore it is not lawfull to make and erect any Image of the true God, Isai. 40 18, 25. Acts 17.29. Rom. 1.23.Isai. 40.18, 25. Actes 17.29. Rom. 1.23. Secondly, by these reasons. 1. First, God is infinite and incomprehensible, & there∣fore cannot be represented by an Image. 2. Secondly, it is a most vile debasing of the Maiestie of God, to liken him to a corruptible man. 3. Thirdly, any representation of God made by the hand of man, is a dead thing, and so more base then the meanest liuing creature; therefore God will not bee so represented.
Now some obiections are to be answered. First, the Scriptures doe ascribe to God humane parts, as hands, eyes, eares, feet, and such like: therefore say some, It is lawfull so to expresse, and so to resemble God. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the Scriptures in ascribing humane parts to God, speake metaphorically, by way of similitude, and vse those borrowed speeches onely for our vnderstanding and capacitie. Secondly, Christ tooke on him mans nature; hee became man like to vs: therefore, say some, he may be resembled, and an Image of him may be made. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Christ being both God and Man, the chiefe thing that makes him Christ, is his God-head, and that cannot bee expressed by an Image; and therefore an Image made to resemble whole Christ, must needs be a liuing Image, leauing out the chiefe part of Christ, which is his God-head: so that an Image made of Christ, either separateth his God-head from his Man-hood, or else it makes his God-head to be such, as may bee circumscribed: both which are grosse errours; therefore there may no Image of Christ be made. May not Christ as well be painted with colours, as set be∣fore vs with words in a Sermon? Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. No: the one, God alloweth in his Word, name∣ly, the describing of Christ in speech, in the Preaching of the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments, but not the other. The Papists obiect againe; They worship not the Image of God, or of Christ, but God or Christ, in, at, before, or vnder the Image. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Two wayes. 1. First, God and Christ will not bee so worshipped, they haue no warrant in the Word of God so to worship them. 2. Secondly, God or Christ being worshipped in, at,
before, or vnder an Image, a Crucifixe, Bread in the Sacrament, or such like, are thereby made Idoles, and to those that so worship them, are tur∣ned into Idoles. Quest. How may this appeare? Ans. First, by euidence of Scripture, as Psal. 106.19, 20. Secondly, by this reason; Thereby they bind the presence, the grace, and operation of God and Christ to Images; and so make God such a God, and Christ such a Christ, as will bee present, and will heare them at Images; and so indeed they make them Idoles, and worshipping God and Christ in that manner, they worship Idoles of their owne braine. They obiect further, They intend not to worship an I∣dole, but onely the true God, the Maker of Heauen and earth in an Image. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; First, no intention of man makes the true worship of God, but onely Gods will. Secondly, the Israelites did thus; they intended to wor∣ship the true God in the Golden Calfe, Exod. 32.5.Iudg. 2.11, 12, 13. yet that is called an Idole, Actes 7.49. so the Israelites worshipped Baal, Asteroth, Idoles fetched from the Gentiles: but their intent therein was,Hosea 2.16. to worship the true God in those I∣doles. Men may bow to the Chaire of Estate, the Letter of the  Prince, without Idolatry; therefore much more to the Ima∣ges of God, of Christ, and of the Saints. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the reason is not alike, for 1. First, reuerence, or bowing downe to the Chayre of Estate, or the Letter of the Prince, is meerely ci∣uill, and in ciuill respects performed: but bowing to Images, is religious. 2. Secondly, bowing to the Chayre of Estate, or the Letter of the Prince, is according the Princes will: but bowing to Images is not according to Gods will, but directly against it. Images be Lay-mens Books, and they serue to put them in
minde of God, and of Christ, therefore they may be vsed. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Euery kind of Booke is not good; there be books of Magicke, of Coniuring, and of lewd matters: and there bee dangerous lying and deceiuing Bookes;Ierem. 10.8, 15. Habak. 2.18. and such Bookes are Images, and therefore they may not be vsed. Moses caused the Cherubims to bee made ouer the Arke, and a Brazen Serpent for the people to looke on: therefore it is lawfull now to make Images for the vse of Religion. Quest. How is this to be answered? Exod. 25.18. Numb. 21.8.Answ. Thus; first, the Cherubims & Brazen Serpent were no inuentions of men, but were made by Gods owne com∣mandement, and appointment. Againe, the Cherubims, and the Brazen serpent, were made, not to be adored and worshipped; but to represent, or signifie some things fit for that time, when the ceremoniall Law was in vse; as the Cherubims stretching out their wings, signifi∣ed, that God had his wings as it were, spread out for the pro∣tection and shelter of the Church at all times;Iohn 3.14. and the Brazen Serpent was a type and figure of Christ; and when it was worshipped of the people, Kings 18.4. Hezekiah brake it downe, and is commended for it. Quest. What is further forbidden vnder the name of Ido∣latrie? Answ. Two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Hosea 13.2. Deut. 7.25, 26. Exod. 23.13. Psalm. 16.4.Answ. This; any allowance or approbation of Idolatry, by presence at idolatrous seruice, as at a Masse, or the like; by speech, by gesture, by silence, by keeping of reliques, mo∣numents, or remembrances of Idoles vndefaced. Deut. 7.2, 3. Ezra 9.2, 12, 14. 2 Chron. 19.2. Psal. 106.35, 36 Malac. 2.11. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16.Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; all vnnecessary dealing and familiaritie with Idolaters, by ioyning with them in marriage, by seeking helpe of them, or fauouring them, and assisting them in word, or deed. Heere some doubts touching these two things for∣bidden, are to bee answered, as some may mooue this doubt.
Quest. Is it absolutely, and altogether vnlawfull to bee present at Idolatrous seruice? Ans. No; a man may be there by compulsion, being vio∣lently haled and drawn thither, or hauing a calling therunto, he may be there with a purpose to obserue, and withall to re∣proue that seruice: but to be there with consent of mind, or outward act of body, signifying consent, as vncouering of the head, bowing or bending of the body, that is altogether vn∣lawfull. 1 Kin. 18.26, 27.1 King. 18.26, 27. Elijah was present at the seruice of Baal. 1 King. 13.1, 2.1 King. 13.1, 2 The Prophet of God was present at the Idolatrous seruice at Bethel. Wee read, 2 King. 5.18. That Naaman the Syrian being healed of his Leprosie, vowed to offer neither burnt sacrifice, nor offering vnto any other God, but vnto Iehouah; yet herein (saith he) the Lord bee mercifull vnto thy seruant, that when my Ma∣ster goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and leaneth on mine hand, and I bow my selfe in the house of Rimmon: When I doe bow downe I say, in the house of Rimmon, the Lord bee mer∣cifull vnto thy seruant in this point. And the Prophet Elisha an∣swered him Goe in peace. Therefore it may seeme, that either his bowing downe in the house of Rimmon was no sinne, or the Prophet dispenced with him for it. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. In Naamans speech is implied a request to the Pro∣phet, that he would pray for him, that God would keepe him from falling into that sinne; and the Prophets answere, Goe in peace, is to bee vnderstood, not as a toleration, or permis∣sion: for hee saith not, Goe and doe so; but as a promise to helpe him with his prayers, and keepe Naaman that he should not so sinne. Quest. If the Prophet knew it to bee a sinne, why did hee not reprooue him for it? Answ. Because hee perceiued that Naaman was not ignorant, but knew well the thing to bee a sinne, and was afraid of falling into it, and therefore was not to be taught or reprooued, but to bee comforted and confirmed against it, with promise of Gods grace and assistance, to preserue him free from it.
Now for the matter of Marriage with Idolatrous Gentiles. Some may alledge that Sampson married with a woman of the Philistims, Iudg. 14. Therefore it may seeme lawfull to marry with Idolaters. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Sampson did so marry by diuine instinct, and by the speciall appointment of the Lord, Judg. 14.4. Quest. Is a true beleeuer being married to an Idolater, to doe the duties of marriage to that Idolater? Answ. Yes: it is the rule of the Apostle, that Marriage, and the Marriage duties are to be preserued of the beleeuing partie with the Infidell,1 Cor. 7.12.13. if the Infidell bee content to dwell with the Beleeuer. Quest. Doth not the Beleeuer by doing the duties of Mar∣riage to the Idolater, become the member of an Idolater; as hee that couples himselfe with an Harlot, becomes the member of an Harlot? Answ. No; the case is not alike: for he that couples him∣selfe with an Harlot, commits the same sinne the Harlot doth, and is an Adulterer as the Harlot is, and so is one with the Harlot: but the beleeuing party married to an Idolater, and doing the duties of Marriage to that Idolater, doth not therein partake with the Idolater in his Idolatry, no more then a wife that hath a Drunkard to her husband, partakes with her husband in his drunkennesse, in yeelding to him the dutie of Mariage. Quest. Doth not Idolatry, being spirituall adultery, giue iust cause of Diuorce? Ans. No, it doth not: for no sinne by it selfe, as it is a sin, giues iust cause of diuorce, but as it is a sinne breaking the knot and bond of Marriage. Now, no kinde of Idolatry breakes the knot of Marriage, therefore Diuorce may not be made for Idolatry. Quest. What is contempt of the outward worship of God? Ezech. 22.8. Math. 22.5. Luke 14.18, 19, 20.Answ. This; when men basely and lightly esteeme of the holy ordinances of God, and of the duties and parts of Gods worship, and thereupon either altogether reiect them, or a∣buse them.
Quest. How many wayes doe men contemne the holy ordinances of God, and the duties and parts of Gods worship? Answ. Two wayes, either inwardly, or outwardly. Quest. What is the inward contempt of Gods ordinances, and the duties and parts of his worship? Ans. This; whē men in their hearts contemne them,Malac. 3.14. Iob 21.15. 1 Cor. 1.18, 21. & think basely of them, & hold thē to be foolish, vain, & vnprofitable. Quest. What followes on this inward contempt of the ordinan∣ces of God, and the duties and parts of his worship? Ans. Either the neglect of them altogether, as it is in Re∣cusants, Brownists, and such like; or an intermission of the du∣ties of Gods worship,2 Chron. 30.5. as in those that seldome came to the Word or Sacraments; or an hypocriticall and formall com∣ming and performance of them, wherof the Lord complains, Isai. 29.13.Isai. 29.13. cited and explained, Mat. 15.7, 8.Math. 15.7, 8. Quest. What is the outward contempt of Gods ordinances, and the duties and parts of his worship? Answ. This; when men openly manifest their contempt of them, either by word or deed, as the people did of Manna, Num. 11.6.Num. 11.6. and as the Philosophers did, Act. 17.18.Actes 17.18. And wee reade of one Pope, that cast the Sacrament into the fire; and some Papists haue called our Communion-Ta∣ble, an Oyster-table. Quest. How farre forth doe men contemne the Ordinances of God, and the parts of his worship? Ans. Either in part, as the preaching of the word, 1 Thes. 5.20.1 Thess. 5.20. or the Sacraments. 2 Chron. 30.10.2 Chron. 30.10. Hezekiah sent to call through the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, euen vnto Zebu∣lun, And they laughed them to scorne, and mocked them. Or in whole, when men contemne all the Ordinances of God, and all the holy duties of Religion, Psal. 14.4.Psal. 14.4. they call not vpon the Lord: and this is properly called prophanenesse. Hebr. 12.16.Hebr. 12.16. Gen. 25.34,Gene. 25.34. Quest. What is the highest degree of this contempt of the or∣dinances of God, and the parts of his worship? Ans. When men loath and abhorre them, as 1 Sam. 2.17.1 Sam. 2.17. Quest. VVhat are humane deuices, or Superstition in Gods worship?
Answ. Not an excesse of that worship of God that is warranted by his word, as the Papists say; but all such things in the worship of God, as are inuented and deuised by men: and are either contrary to, or diuers from the rule of Gods word, Isai. 29.13. Mat. 15.9.sai. 29.13 Math. 15.9. Quest. May not men that are in place of gouernment, appoynt some things concerning the publike worship of God, which are not expressely set downe in the word of God? Answ. Yes, they may; so as the things appoynted by them be according to the generall rules of the Word,1 Cor. 11.16 34. 1 Cor. 14.33, 40 which are these; That all things be done to edifying, and in order, and without offence. Quest. How many wayes doe men deuise things in Gods wor∣ship, either contrary to, or diuers from the rule of Gods word? Answ. Two wayes, either by adding something to the essentiall worship of God: or by detracting and taking away something from it, both forbidden, Deut. 12.31. Quest. What are the things added to the worship of God? Answ. Either things meerely deuised by men, and such as haue no warrant at all in the word of God but are contra∣ry to it: of which sort are all Popish Superstitions, as their fiue Sacraments added to the two ordained by Christ; their Masses, Pilgrimages, Prayers on Beads, Processions with the Crosse, their crossing of the Bread and Wine in the Sa∣crament of the Lords Supper, Spittle, Salt, Creame, and the like added to Baptisme. Or, things in themselues indifferent, made necessary parts of Gods worship; as to forbeare this or that kind of meate for Religions sake, to put holinesse in dayes and times, and such like, Mark. 7.3, 4. putting holinesse in them. Quest. How doe men detract, and take away something from the worship of God? Answ. Thus; when they mangle the worship of God, and take from it that which God hath appointed to be vsed in it, as the Papists doe, who in the administration of the Sacra∣ment of the Lordes Supper, take away the Cup from the people, the Lord hauing appoynted both Bread and Wine to be receiued, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28, 29.
Quest. What are the sorts of humane deuices in the worship of God? Ans. These two: They are either such as men take vp of themselues, on a bare and naked good intent, without warrant from the word of God, & thinke thereby they worship God, which is properly called will-worship, 1 Sam. 13.9, 10, 13. Col. 2.23. Or they are such as haue been deuised by others their Ancestors, and receiued from them, properly called, the traditions of the Elders, Eze. 20 18. Mat. 15.2. Mark. 7.3. Quest. Are all traditions of the Elders touching Gods wor∣ship, to be reiected and held vnlawfull? Answ. Not all are not, but onely those that are meerely humane, and are not agreeable to the general rules set downe in Scripture: for the Church may prescribe rules or traditi∣ons touching the time and place of Gods publike worship, and touching the order and comlinesse to be vsed in the same; and such Traditions being rightly prescribed, are to bee ob∣serued. Paul commends the Corinthians,1 Cor. 11.2. for remembring all the things, and keeping the Ordinances that he deliuered vn∣to them. The Councel at Ierusalem decreed, that the churches of the Gentiles should abstaine from things offered to Idols,Actes 15.28. and blood, and that is strangled, and from fornication. Quest. When are Traditions touching the time, and place, and order, and comelinesse, rightly prescribed? Answ. When these foure things are obserued. 1. When the things appointed to be done, are not chil∣dish, or absurd. 2. When they bee not imposed as parts of Gods wor∣ship. 3. When they bee seuered from the opinion of merit. 4. When the Church is not burdened with the number of them. Luke 10.16. He that heareth you, heareth me. Therefore say the Papists, The very commandement of the Pastors and spi∣rituall gouernors of the Church, is sufficient, touching some things to be done in the worship of God. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; First, that place is properly to be vnderstood,
not of all Teachers, but of those that were immediately sent out by Christ, & had infallible assistance of the spirit of God. Secondly, if it be spoken of all Teachers, it must be vnder∣stood with that limitation that is expressed,Math. 28.20. teaching them to obserue all things whatsoeuer I haue commanded you. An intent to honor God, and to serue him, is somtimes ac∣cepted of the Lord: as in Dauid, 1 Kin. 8.18. therfore say they, Men may do things in the worship of God on a bare good in∣tent, without warrant from the word of God. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; An intent to honor and serue God, grounded on the word of God, and agreeable to it, is indeed acceptable to God: as Dauids intent was; but an intent to worship God, not grounded on the word, is not pleasing to God. A woman powred on Christs head a boxe of Oyntment, Mat. 26.7. and she had no commandement so to doe; and yet Christ saith, verse 10. That shee had wrought a good worke: Therefore some things may be done pleasing to God, without warrant from the word of God. Quest. How is this to be answered? Ans. Thus; though she had no particular commandement, yet had she a generall; for the worke she did, was a testifying of her faith; and that was commanded. Manoah offered sacrifice, who was of the Tribe of Dan, Iudg. 13.19. and none ought to offer sacrifice, but of the Tribe of Leui. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Manoah did not sacrifice, but brought it to the Angell, whom he thought to be a Prophet; he presented it, and the Angell did wonderously, whiles Manoah and his wife looked on. 1 Sam. 7.17. Samuel sacrificed at Ramah, whereas the place appointed for sacrifice was before the Arke. Therefore men may doe something in the worship of God, without warrant from the Word. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; to sacrifice was a thing commanded but the place of offring sacrifice was indifferent, before the building of the Temple.
Againe, he was a Prophet, and had extraordinary directi∣on of the Spirit. Now to the Affirmatiue part of this second Com∣mandement. Quest. What doth the second Commandment require, or cōmand? Answ. In generall thus much. That the true God be wor∣shipped with spirituall worship, & after a spirituall manner. Quest. Wherein stands the spirituall worship, or the worship∣ping of God after a spirituall manner? Ans. In two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; when men worship God, not by carnall rites,Exod. 25.9. Deut. 12.32. Isai. 1.12. and ceremonies, and humane deuices; but in such things as are agreeable to the will of God reueiled in his word. Quest. What is the second? Ans. This;Iohn 4.23, 24. Isai. 1.13, 14, 15. Isai. 66.3. when men worship God in things & duties com∣manded of God in his word, in such sort & maner as is agree∣able to the nature of God, in spirit & in truth, that is, inward∣ly in their hearts and soules, and truly without hypocrisie. Quest. What is the ground of spirituall worship, or worshipping of God after a spirituall manner? Answ. True and sound knowledge of the expresse will of God, touching all the parts of his woship,Iohn 4.22. Micha. 6.6, 7, 8. Math. 15.9. Eccles. 4.17. and touching the manner of the performance of them: It is vaine worship of God, to teach for doctrines mens precepts. Quest. Wherin is this spiritual worship of God to be expressed? Ans. In the exercise and performance of those things, that concerne the holy and solemne seruice of God. Quest. What are those things? Answ. The true and ordinary meanes of holinesse, and the parts of Gods worship. Quest. What are the ordinary meanes of holinesse, and the parts of Gods worship? Answ. These three especially;Acts 2.41, 42. Acts 20.7. Prayer both publike & pri∣uate, standing in petition, and thanksgiuing to God: The Mi∣nistery of the word of God: And the Sacraments. Quest. How is the spirituall worship of God expressed in the vse of these things?
Answ. When these things are not onely vsed, but they are vsed after an holy manner. Quest. How is prayer vsed after an holy and spirituall manner? Sam. 1.15. sal. 42.4. sai. 37.4. amen. 3.41.Answ. Thus; when together with the voyce, lifting vp of the hands and eyes towards heauen, kneeling downe, vncoue∣ring the head, and the like gestures of the body vsed, the heart is also lift vp to God with a pure conscience. Quest. Are not kneeling downe, lifting vp of the hands and eyes towards heauen, vncouering the head, and such like, carnall Rites and Ceremonies. Ans. No; they are such as are ordained of God; & warranted by the word of God; & they are such as do further the lifting vp of the heart & soul to true piety, & spiritual meditations. Quest. How is the ministery of the word of God vsed after an holy and spirituall manner? Answ. Thus; when the word of God is not onely preach∣ed and heard outwardly by the body, but inwardly also by the heart and soule; when the heart & soule preacheth, then is the ministery of the word on the Ministers part vsed after an holy and spiritual manner: and when the heart & soule heareth the word of God, then is the ministery of the word on the hearers part, vsed after an holy and spirituall manner. Quest. When is the word of God preached, not only outwardly by the body, but also inwardly by the heart and soule? 1 Cor. 11.23. 1 Pet. 4.11. Actes 26.25. 1 Cor. 2.4. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25Ans. When the truth of God is deliuered by the Minister of God, as the truth of God, reuerently, soberly, purely, & power∣fully in the euidence and demonstration of the spirit of God. Quest. When is the word of God heard, not onely outwardly by the body, but also inwardly by the heart and soule? Ans. When together with a silent, diligent & reuerent at∣tending to it, and a listening to it with care, the heart & soule also heares it, and is affected towards it, as it ought to be. Quest. When doth the heart and soule heare the word of God? Hebr. 4.2. 1 Thess. 2.13. Isai. 66.2. 2 King 22.19. Iam. 1.21, 22.Answ. When it giues assent to the whole truth of God preached, and beleeues it, whether the thing deliuered be pro∣mise, or commandement, or threatning; and receiues it as the word of God with feare and trembling, and with humilitie, and meeknesse, and with subiection to it.
Quest. When is the heart affected to the word of God, prea∣ched as it ought to be? Answ. When it is fixed on it,Psal. 119.72.97. Psal. 119.49.50. Iud. Epist. v. 20. Rom. 15.4. louing it and delighting in it, as a most sure stay and foundation to build on at all times, and for all matters both of direction and comfort. Edifie your selues in your most holy faith, that is, in the word beleeued. Quest. How are the Sacraments vsed after an holy and spiri∣tuall manner? Answ. On the Ministers part when they are administred, not only by the body, but also by the heart and soule: and on the Hearers part when they are receiued, not only by the body, but also by the heart and soule, in such as be of yeares and discretion. Quest. When are the Sacraments administred, not only by the body but also by the heart and soule? Answ. When the Minister in the administration of them, not only vseth aright, such outward elements and actions as are to be vsed, but in sanctifying and setting them apart to their right vse, his heart doth also desire that they may be∣come profitable to the receiuers; to those Sacramentall ends and vses, for which they are ordained. Christ blessed the bread in giuing of thankes, and he brake it,Mat 26.26. 1 Cor. 10.16. and gaue it to the Dis∣ciples, and saide, take, eate; this is my body. Quest. When are the Sacraments receiued, not only by the body but also by the heart and soule? Answ. When the receiuers not only vse aright, such out∣ward actions as are of them to be vsed in receiuing of them; but doe also rightly and seriously minde and consider the things and actions, vsed in the Sacraments,Acts 8.37.38. 1 Cor. 10.16. 1 Cor. 11.28. and doe in their hearts performe those inward actions, that are signified by their outward actions. Quest. What are the helpes and furtherances of the true and spirituall worship of God? Answ. They are such things as doe binde, and stirre vs vp to the performance of holy duties. Quest. What are those things that doe binde and stirre vs vp to the performance of holy duties? Answ. These two, speciall vowes and Fasting.
Of these a little further seuerally. Quest. What is a vow? Answ. A vow is a Religious promise made to God. Iudg. 11.36. touching the doing, or leauing vndone of some thing, or things, that are lawfull and possible. Quest: Is a vow to be made only to God? Answ. Yes to God alone, and to no other, and that for these reasons. 1. Because a vow properly consisteth in a purpose of the heart, and God alone knowes the intent and purpose of the heart. Deut. 23.21. Eccles. 5.3.4.2. Because God alone can punish the breach of a vowe made. Quest. How many sorts of vowes be there? Answ. These two; generall, and speciall. Quest. What is a generall vowe? Answ. That which is common to all Christians, and con∣cernes them all, as a part of the trueworship of God; name∣ly a promise of all holy obedience, made first in Baptisme, and renewed in the Lords Supper; and further continued, in the spirituall exercise of inuocation and repentance: 1 Pet. 3.21.. it is called stipulation of a good conscience, that is the promise of a good conscience to God. Quest. What is a speciall vow? Answ: That which is particular and personall, and con∣cernes only some special persons, vpon some special occasiōs. Quest: How is this speciall vow distinguished? Answ. Thus; It is either such a vow as was in vse amongst the Iewes, and did peculiarly belong to the Church, vnder the Old Testament; or it is such a vow, as more peculiarly belongs to the Church vnder the New Testament. Quest. What was that vow, that was in vse amongst the Iewes, and did peculiarly belong to the Church, vnder the Old Testament? Nom. 6.2. Nom 3. from vers. 3 to the end. Leuit. 27. wholAnsw: The vow of some ceremoniall duty, in way of ser∣uice to God freely; made only by such as had speciall occa∣sion so to vow. Quest. What is that vow that more peculiarly belongs to the
Church vnder the New testament? Answ. It is that, whereby a man freely, and of his owne accord, without any particular commandement of God, or some speciall occasion, promiseth to performe some outward worke, or bodily exercise for some good end. Quest. Is not such a speciall vow, a part of Gods worship? Ans. No, it is not; but only a helpe, stay, and furthe∣rance of the worship of God: 1 Tim. 4.8. where bodily ex∣ercise is opposed to godlinesse; therefore godlines or the worship of God, stands not in them. Rom. 14.17. Psal. 76.11. Ʋowe and performe vnto the Lord your God, all yee that bee round about him: let them bring presents vnto him that ought to be feared. Quest. How is this to be answered? This, say the Papists, is a cōmandement that binds all men, both vnder the Old & New Testament: & therefore to make vowes, is a necessary duty, & so a part of the worship of God. A. That place is properly to be vnderstood of vowing of ceremonial duties, as appeares by the words following; all ye that be round about him; for there in Dauid alludes to the māner of the people vnder the Law: againe (he saith) bring presēts vnto him that ought to be feared, & so it is a Commandement peculiar to the Old Testament, and binding the Iewes only. Secondly, if that cōmandement be taken generally, as bind∣ing all, both Iewes & Christians; then Dauid speakes of vow∣ing of praise & thankesgiuing, or of thankfull obedience to God, as may appeare by the vse of the Word in other places of Scripture: Psal. 50.14. Psal. 56.12. and that is a gene∣rall vow, and so it makes nothing for the prouing of spiri∣tuall vowes, to be parts of Gos worsh p. The Papists alleadge Isai. 19.21. where the Prophet spea∣king of the time of the Gospell saith, the Egyptians shall know the Lord, & shal vow vowes vnto the Lord; therefore say they, spciall vowes are parts of God worship vnder the new Te∣stament. Quest. How is this to be answered? Ans: Thus; the Prophet in that place, expresseth & signifi∣eth the spirituall worship of the New Testament, by the
mance of holy duties? Answ. It is a religious fasting, that is such a fasting as is ioyned with the exercises of religion; namely prayer, and humiliation. Quest. What is that religious fasting? A. It is a free, & voluntary abstayning from al sustenance of the body,Dan. 10.2.3. Ioel 2.16. 1 Cor. 7.5. and from all delights of the sence for a time, for a religious end, and such as is referred to religious ends. Quest. How many sorts of religious fasting be there? Answ. Two, Publike, and Priuate. Quest: What is a publike religious fasting? Answ. It is such a fasting as is appointed by the Church, and by the ciuill Gouernours and Magistrates, on great waighty,Ioel 1.14. Ioel 2.15. Ionah 3.7.8 2 Chron. 20.3. & publike occasions, & is publikely performed by diuers Families, assembling in one, or in many cōgregations. Quest. Must there be set times of the yeere, appointed for pub∣like fasting, of necessitie to be obserued? Answ: No, it is in the libertie of the Church and the Gouernours, to appoint the time of publike fasting, as espe∣ciall occasions are offered. Mat. 9.15.Mat. 9.15. they must fast as occasions of mourning are offered. Leuit. 16.29. there is a set time of publike fasting appoin∣ted by God himselfe. Quest. How is this to be answered? Ans: That set time of publike fasting, was comman∣ded of God, as a part of the Legall and Ceremoniall worship, which ended in the death of Christ. Zach. 7.5. There were set times of publike fasting appoin∣ted & obserued; namely the first & the seuenth moneths, there∣fore there may be now set times apointed for publike fasting. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; These times of publike fasting, were appoin∣ted and obserued, on occasion of the Captiuity of the Church in Babylon; as it appeares in the text: and they ceased on the deliuerance of the Church. Quest. What are the occasions, on which publike fasting is to be appointed? Answ. They are two.
Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;1 Sam. 7.6. 2 Chron. 20. Hest. 4.16. Iudg. 20.26. On the euills that either are feared to come on the Church, or are already felt lying on it; as sinne, and the iudgements of God for sinne. Quest: What is the second occasion? Answ. This; on the desire of good things,Act. 13.2.3. and blessings spirituall or temporall, that are needful for the Church. Quest. Are all persons bound to obserue the exercise of publike fasting, being appointed? Answ. Yes; all are bound to obserue it,Mat. 12.7. 1 Sam. 14.29.30. vnlesse it be those that through weaknesse of vnderstanding, or weakenesse of body, are not able to keepe it: as Children, aged or sickly per∣sons, and such like. Quest: What is a priuate religious fasting? Answ: It is such a fasting,Act. 10.30. Mat. 6.17.18. Hest. 4.16. Zach. 12.12. as is taken vp and performed priuately, either solitarily by one man alone, on speciall oc∣casions peculiar to himselfe: Or by a priuate Family on spe∣ciall occasions moouing them thereunto. Quest. What are the occasions, on which men are to vse pri∣uate fasting? Answ. They are either publike occasions,Ierem. 13.17. Ezech. 9.4. 1 Cor. 7.5. not considered by such as be in authoritie. Or they are priuate occasions, either concerning some particular persons, or a whole Fa∣milie. Quest: Is a religious fast a part of Gods worship? Answ: No, it is not in it selfe, but only a stay, an helpe,Rom. 14.17. 1 Cor. 8.8. 1 Tim. 4.3. and furtherance to the worship of God; neither in abstaining from meate; the Apostles calleth the commanding to abstaine from meate, as a matter of religion, a doctrine of Deuills. Now the Papists proue religious fasting to be in it selfe, a religious Act, and a part of Gods worship; bringing the examples of Tobie and Judith, but these are Apocryphicall, and the example of Hester. Hest. 4 16. And they say she pleased God by fasting. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. That she pleased God by fasting aright, we grant; but that proues it not to be a part of Gods worship, for one may please God, not only by the right vse of the parts
of Gods worship; but also by the right vse of things in∣different. Example of Anna, Luke 2.37. that she serued God with fastings and prayers, night and day. Here say they the word () signifies diuine worship,. Luc. 2.37. due to God alone. There∣fore fasting is an Act of Religion, and a part of Gods wor∣ship. Quest: How is this to be answered? Ans: Thus; The meaning of the place is this, that An∣na serued, or worshipped God, with earnest and feruent pray∣ers; her seruing or her worshipping of God, stood in her praying to God; and her fasting was added as an helpe to make her praying more feruent: and that this is so, may ap∣peare by the like speech,, Mat. 17.21. Mat. 17.21. Where Christ saith, this kinde goeth not out, but by prayer and fasting (that is) ear∣nest prayer, and continued prayer; hauing humiliation ioy∣ned with it, for fasting is not a proper meanes of casting out Deuills, but prayer ioyned with fasting Quest. When is a Religious fasting, publike or priuate, rightly obserued? Answ. When being appointed, or taken vp on iust occa∣sions, it is obserued in a right manner, and to right ends. Quest. What is the right manner of obseruing a Religious fasting, publike or priuate? Ezra. 8.21. Nehe. 9.2. Iere. 14.12. Isai. 58.3. to 7. Psal. 69.10. Iudg. 20.26. 2 Sam. 1.12. 2 Sam. 3.5.Answ. This; when, together with abstayning from all sustenance of the body, and all the delights of the sence for a time; there is also an humbling of the soule before God. Quest. How long is a Religious Fast to continue? Answ. At the least from Morning, vntill the Euening. Quest. What are the right ends of Religious fasting? Answ. Not to merit, nor to satisfie for sinnes, nor there∣by to worship God, nor to honour the Saints, as the Papists teach; but there be three other right ends of it. Quest. What is the first of those ends? Deut. 32.15. Psal. 109.24. 1 Cor. 9.27.Answ. This; to subdue the rebellion of the flesh, to cha∣stise nature; yet so as nature be not destroyed, nor disabled, for the seruice of God in our callings afterwards. Quest. What is the second?
Answ. This; to stirre vp deuotion, to make vs more fit for holy Meditations, and to confirme the attention of our minds in hearing the Word, and in Prayer.Luke 2.37. 1 Cor. 7.6. Hence Fasting and Prayer many times are ioyned together. Quest. VVhat is the third end? Answ. To professe our guiltinesse before the Lord, and to testifie our humiliation for our sinnes, Psal. 35.13. Hence in the fast of Niniueh, not onely men,Ionah 5.7, 8. but euen the beasts were forbidden to eate or drinke water. Hitherto of the Commandement. Now to the Confirma∣tion of it by Arguments perswading to the obedience of it in these words: For I am (Jehouah) the Lord thy God, a iealous God, visiting the iniquitie of the fathers vpon the children, vpon the third generation, and vpon the fourth, of them that hate mee; And shewing mercy vnto thousands, to them that loue mee, and keepe my Commandements. Quest. What are the arguments heere expressed, perswading to the obedience of this Commandement? Answ. Besides the Argument before in the Preface, the Arguments are partly from the nature of God, and partly from the effects of his Anger and Loue. Quest. What are the arguments that are from the Nature of God? Answ. They are these two attributes, that he is Strong, and that hee is Iealous: For I am (Iehouah) the Lord thy God a iealous God, or a iealous strong God: for so the word ( el) rendred God, signifieth. Quest. What is the argument from the effect of God anger? Answ. This; that hee is a God visiting iniquitie, visiting the iniquitie of the fathers vpon the children vpon the third gene∣ration, and vpon the fourth of them that hate me. Quest. What is the argument from the effect of Gods Loue? Answ. This; That hee is a God shewing mercie to thou∣sands, Shewing mercy vnto thousands, to them that loue and keepe my Commandements. Of these in Order. Quest. VVhat is intended, in that God saith, hee is a strong God?
Answ. Two things: First, in that he is able to punish the disobedient,ahu. 1.3, 4, 5, 6 euel. 18.18. and to execute his wrath and vengeance on such as breake his Commandements. an. 5.17. Dan. 20, 21, 22. om. 8.31.Secondly, that he is able to maintaine, protect, and defend all such as truely worship him against all that oppose them. Quest. VVhat is intended and meant, in that God saith, Hee is a Iealous God? Answ. Three things. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; that God loues his Church, which hee hath taken to be his Spouse,Hose. 2.19, 20. Ierem. 2.2. with exceeding superabundant holy loue; his Church and the members of it, yeelding to him that constant loue, feare, reuerence, and worship, that is due to his holy Maiestie. Quest. VVhat is the second? Answ. This; that God is exceedingly offended for Idola∣try, and cannot by any meanes endure that men should im∣part themselues to any other besides himselfe, and vnder any colour, giue the loue, the feare, the reuerence, and worship that is due to him,Deut. 7.26. to Idols. They are made accursed, like the abomination, that bring Idols, which are abominable and accursed, into their houses. And hence the Lord com∣plaines, that the Israelites committed fornication with idols. Iere. 3.1, 2, 6, 7, &c. Ezec. 16. from ver. 15. to 34. Quest. What is the third thing? Answ. This; that as Iealousie makes a man sharply to pu∣nish his wife taken in adultery:Prou. 6.34, 35. Ezech. 16.38, 39, 40. so God will powre his ven∣geance, and execute his wrath most sharply on spirituall a∣dulterers, that is, on Idolaters. Quest. Iealousie is a fault in men, how then can that agree to the holy Maiestie of God? Answ. Iealousie is attributed to God, not as a vexation of minde, such as the husband is tormented with, against the wife, or the wife against the husband; but by way of simili∣tude or likenesse, for our vnderstanding; to giue vs to vnder∣stand, that as a iealous husband cannot endure the lewd and vnfaithfull dealing of his wife: so the Lord cannot abide it, and suffer it, that his feruent loue should bee abused, and that
men should in any measure yeeld that loue, reuerence, feare, and worship that is due to him, to any other. Quest. What is meant in that God saith, He is a God, visiting the iniquitie of the fathers vpon the children to the third and fourth generation? Answ. This; that hee is a God,Ierem. 5.9. Hose. 4.9. taking notice of iniqui∣tie, and punishing it. Quest. VVhy doth God say, Hee is a God visiting the ini∣quitie of the fathers vpon the children to the third and fourth ge∣neration? Answ. Thereby to set foorth the greatnesse of his anger against Idolatry, in that it reacheth to the punishing of their children to the fourth generation. Quest. Why is mention made of the third & fourth generation? Answ. This reason may be giuen of it,Iob 42.16. because men may liue to see their off-spring to the fourth generation. Quest. How can it stand with the Iustice of God, to punish the iniquity of the fathers on the children; or with that, Iere. 31.30. Euery one shall die for his owne iniquity; and Ezek. 18.4. The soule that sinneth, it shall die; and vers. 20. Answ. First, as an Husband may iustly put away both his adulterous wife, and her adulterous children:1 King. 14.10. 1 Kin. 21.21, 22 so the Lord may iustly forsake, and punish both wicked Pa∣rents, and wicked Children of such Parents, as hee threatens. Secondly, the Lord punisheth the iniquitie of the Fa∣thers on the Children, if the Children tread in the steps of their Fathers, and doe imitate and followe the euill example of their Fathers, and learne their wayes, and partake with them in their sinnes: therefore he sayth, Hee is a Iealous God, visiting the iniquitie of the fathers vpon the children of them that hate him,Ezek. 16.47, 5 (that is) of them that con∣tinue to hate him. Judah is reprooued for following the sinnes of her Sisters, Samaria, and Sodome,Ezek. 18.10, 11 12, 1. and doing worse then they. If the fathers bee euill, and the children euill, they shall bee punished, not onely to the third and fourth generation, but to the thousand generation.
Quest. How is this to be answered? Ans. It is true, the generation of the wicked shall be puni∣shed for euer, so long as they continue euill; but the exempla∣ry sinnes of the fathers are said to bee visited onely, to the third and fourth generation; because so long the impietie of the fathers may be had in remembrance: and so, not only the particular sins of the wicked children are punished, but the exemplary sins of their fathers also concurring with them. If children bee punished, because they doe partake with their fathers in their sinnes, then they beare not their fathers sinnes, but their owne. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; wicked children of vngodly parents are pu∣nished, not only for their owne sinnes but for imitating their fathers sinnes also: for the iniquity of the fathers & the chil∣dren, may concurre together to make one punishment. Quest. Wherein doth the Lord shew his wrath in punishing the children of idolatrous parents? Answ. Especially, in taking from them his grace, and the light of his truth; & giuing them vp to blindnes of mind, and hardnesse of heart: and hence it is, that they are fully bent to follow the idolatrous wayes of their parents, & they excuse their Idolatry by the example of their parents. Daniel re∣proues Belshazzar,Dan. 5.22. that though he knew his fathers pride, and the punishment thereof from the Lord, yet hee had not hum∣bled his heart. Quest. What is meant by these words, Of them that hate me? Ans. Thus much; of them that pretend loue to me, and yet indeeed by their Idolatry, declare their hatred of me. Quest. Is Idolatry and Superstition hatred of God? Answ. Yes it is: howsoeuer Idolatrous and superstitious pretend loue to God, and imagine they loue God exceeding∣ly in their good intents, and honest meanings; and they care not what they spend and bestow on him, thousands of Rams, and Riuers of Oyle tenne thousands, and their sonnes and daughters, as Micah. 6.7.Micha. 6.7. and spare no paines in whipping themselues; yet all this is but hatred of God Quest. How may this appeare to be hatred of God?
Answ. Both by the euidence of Scripture, 2 Chro. 19.2. And by reason also; because Idolaters,Ierem. 3.6. Hosea 4.16. and superstitious persons doe those things that are most hatefull to God, and which hee accounts as open rebellion against him. All men by the instinct of nature, delight to haue a God ac∣cording to their owne imaginations, and him they will loue and honour. Quest. Can any then be so vile as to hate God? Answ. Though man doe not by nature hate God,Rom. 1.30. yet hee wants the true loue of God: and that want of loue may so in∣crease, as that some may become haters of God. Quest. Wherein doe men shew hatred of God? Answ. In two things specially. First, in doing those things God hates, and forbids. Secondly, in hating his Ministers, and Seruants,Iohn 7.7. because they testifie against their euill works. Quest. What is meant by Shewing mercy to thousands, to them that loue him, and keepe his Commandements? Ans. Doing good to many generations of the faithfull suc∣cessiuely; for here a certain number is put for an vncertaine. Quest. Why doth God say, that he shewes mercy to thousands to them that loue him, and keepe his commandements, when as be∣fore hee speaking of punishment, mentions onely three or foure ge∣nerations? Answ. To shew the extent of his mercy,Exod. 34.6, 7. Psalm. 103.8. Lam. 3.32.33. and that hee is more inclining to mercie, then to seueritie: because hee be∣stowes good things, of himselfe; but hee renders euill, being thereunto vrged by the sinnes of men. Quest. Doth Gods mercy reach to all and euery one that de∣scend of faithfull parents to a thousands generations? Answ. No,Ezech. 18.10, 11, 12, 13. but onely to such as goe on in the steppes of their godly parents, and obey God as they did: therefore heere it is sayd, To them that loue mee, and keepe my Com∣mandements. Quest. What is meant by these words, To them that loue mee and keepe my Commandements? Answ. To such as shew their loue by their obedience, to this, and the rest of my Commandements.
Quest. Doe men then shew loue to God, in keeping his Com∣mandements? Answ. Yes, they doe: for true obedience to Gods Com∣mandements, 14.15, 21. n 5.3. comes from loue; and true loue to God, is testi∣fied by obeying his Commandements. Quest. Why doth God ioyne this promise to this Commande∣ment, which belongs to the keeping of all the Commandements? Answ. Because the first and second Commandements are the ground and foundation of all the other Commande∣ments. Now to the third Commandement. Quest. How differ the second and third Commandements one from another? Answ. Thus; The second Commandement prescribes the solemne worship of the true God. And the third prescribes the glorifying of that God in the affaires of this life. Quest. What are the words of the third Commandement? Answ. Those we finde, Exod. 20.7. Thou shalt not take the name of Iehouah thy God in vaine: for the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his Name in vaine. Quest. What are the generall things contained in these words? Answ. These two. First, a Precept, or Commandement. Secondly, a Commination, or a threatning denounced against the breakers of it. The Precept, in these words, Thou shalt not take the Name of Jehouah thy God in vaine. The threatning, in the words following, For the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his Name in vaine. Of these in order. Quest. What is meant by the Name of God? Answ. Not any name properly giuen him; for God is in∣finite, and cannot be comprehended in a name; but any thing whatsoeuer it is, by which God makes himselfe knowne to men,Exod. 3.15. Psalm. 68.4. Psalm. 44.5. Actes 9.15. Psalm. 8.1. that is the name of God, as his holy titles, his attributes, his holy word and ordinances, and his workes. Iehouah the God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham, Izhak, and Iacob. Iehouah our Lord.
Quest. VVhat signifies the word (Take?) Ans. It is a word borrowed from excellent and precious things, which for their excellencie may not bee touched, ta∣ken vp, or lifted vp, without licence: for the word properly signifies to lift vp. Quest. What is then meant when God saith, Thou shalt not take the name of Iehouah thy God? Answ. Thus much; thou shalt not take into thy minde, or mouth; or, as it were, touch the sacred and glorious Name of the Lord thy God, with thy mind, or mouth. Quest. VVhat is meant when God saith (in vaine?) Answ. Thus much; for no cause, or no matter, or euery light and trifling occasion, rashly, idlely, carelessely,Prou. 12.11. or contemptuously. Quest. VVhat is the summe of this Commandement? Answ. This; that by no meanes, or in any thing we pro∣phane, nor abuse the Name of God: but that by all meanes, and in all things we aduance his glorious Name. Psal. 29.2. Now this Commandement being Negatiue, we will first shew what it forbids. Quest. VVhat is forbidden in this Commandement? Answ. In generall, all manner of prophanation, and abuse of the Name of God. Quest. VVherein stands the prophanation, and abuse of the Name of God? Ans. In abusing either his titles, or his attributes, or his workes, or his word and ordinances. Of these in order. Quest. How are the holy titles of God abused? Ans. Thus; when men take them into their mouthes, and vse them in their speech vnreuerently, & without due respect. Quest. How many wayes is that done? Ans. Two wayes; either without an oath, or with an oath. Quest. How are the holy Titles of God vnreuerently vsed in speech without an oath? Answ. Thus; when men mention any of Gods titles, as Lord, God, Iesus, in their common talke, rashly, carelessely, and vnreuerently. Deut. 28.58.Deut. 25.58.
Quest. How many wayes are Gods titles mentioned in com∣mon talke rashly and carelessely? Answ. Foure wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; In foolish admiration, as when on some sud∣den accident, or strange report, men breake out, and feare not to vtter these or the like wordes, and to say, Good God, Good Lord, O Iesus, O Christ, Lord haue mercie on vs, what a thing is that? naming Gods Titles without any feare or re∣uerence.lip 2.10. Philip. 2.10. Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; In idle wishes and imprecations, as when men in a passion wish ill vnto themselues, or to others, and vse the name of God in their wishes; as when they say, I pray God I may neuer stirre, if such a thing bee not so; God con∣found me, and such like; or iestingly, God speed, meaning no∣thing lesse; or God bee Iudge betweene mee and you: exam∣ple,ne. 16.5. Genes. 16.5. Quest. What is the third? Answ. This, In cursing; as when men say, Gods curse light on such an one, or such a thing; or, the vengeance or plague of God be on thee,m. 3.9, 10. Sam. 16.7, 8. or take thee. Jam. 3.9, 10. 2 Sam. 16.7, 8. Quest. What is the fourth? Answ. This; in praising God for euill things, as when theeues thank God for their booty, or vsurers for their gaine, or Gamesters for their good lucke, and such like: the like ex∣ample we haue, 1 Sam. 23.21.1 Sam. 23.21. Quest. How are the Titles of God vnreuerently vsed in speech with an oath? Ans. Thus; when men vse any of Gods titles, and sweare by them in their speech lightly, and profanely. Quest. How many waies are Gods titles abused in swearing by them? Answ. Three wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Ans. This; when men call God for a witnes of vaine and friuolous things,Ierem. 23.10. Hosea 4.2. Mth. 5.57. by vsuall swearing in their ordinary talke. Iere. 23.10. Hoz 4.2. Mat. 5 37.
Quest. What is the second way? Answ: This; when men call God for a witnesse of their fu∣rious, angerly, passionate swearing; or swearing reuenge, that they wil be meete with such an one: 1 Sam. 14.39. 1 Sam. 25.34. or of their wicked purpose. Mark. 6.23. Quest. What is the third way? Answ. This; when men call God for a witnesse, of an vn∣truth, by swearing falsely, or forswearing themselues. Leuit. 19.12. Zach. 5.4. Ans. How many wayes doe men forsweare themselues? Ans. Three wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Ans: This; when men sweare that which they know, or thinke to bee false, and that either directly against their knowledge or thought. Mat. 26.27. Or deceitfully, as when being examined before a Ma∣gistrate, they answer not according to the intention of the examiner, but according to another meaning, which they frame of themselues and sweare to it. Quest: What is the second? Answ. This; when men sweare that which they meane not to doe. It is a note of an vpright man, who though hee sweare to his owne hinderance be changeth not. Psal. 15.4. Quest. What is the third? Answ. This;2 Chro 36.13. Ezech. 17.13.15.16. when men sweare to doe a thing which they also meane to doe, and is lawfull to bee done, and yet after∣wards they doe it not. Quest. Is it alwayes periury, when men sweare to doe a thing, and afterwards doe it not? Answ. No, in some cases it is not. Quest: What are the particular cases in which it is not periurie? Answ. First, in this; if after the oath taken, God make the thing promised, impossible to be done. Secondly, in this; if the thing that men sweare to doe, bee not simply required to be done, but either the doing of that thing, or some other thing proportionable to it; as in the Penall Statutes of Societies and Incorporations; that is such
Statutes as concerne only outward order and decency; as touching apparrell, gesture, and such like. Quest. What are the sinnes contained in periurie? Answ. They are three. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; lying, the vttering and maintaining of a lye. Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; the calling on God to be a witnesse to a lye: wherein men, as much as in them is, make God and the De∣uill both alike. Iohn. 8.44. Quest. What is the third? Answ. This; the calling for a curse on men, wishing God to be a witnesse of their speech, and a iudge to reuenge, if they sweare falsely. Quest. When is periury most grieuous? Answ. When men forsweare themselues before a Ma∣gistrate in publike, and in a matter to be publikely tried, ac∣cording to Truth and Iustice. Q. What is the highest degree of vnreuerent vsing Gods titles? Answ. Blaspheming of them. Quest. How are Gods titles blasphemed? Answ. By speaking basely, contumeliously, and reproach∣fully, of any of Gods titles, Leuit. 24.11.15.16.Leuit. 24.11.15.16. the word () signifies smote,perforauit. or pierced thorough the name of Ie∣houah. Thus did Iulian the Apostata. Quest. How are the attributes of God abused and prophaned? Isai. 6.3.Answ. Thus; when men thinke, or speake of them other∣wise then beseemes the perfect purity and holinesse of them; they being absolutely holy and pure. Quest. How many waies is that done? Answ. Two wayes; either by thinking or speaking of a∣ny of them rashly, and vnreuerently: or by peruerting any of them to a wrong vse, and not applying them to that good vse, for which God hath reuealed them. Quest. What are the attributes of God, that are most commonly abused and prophaned? Answ. These; his Power, his Prouidence, his Iustice, his Mercy, his Patience.
Of these in Order. Quest. How is Gods power abused? Answ: Thus;Exod. 5.2. Psal. 12.4. 2 King. 18.30.34.35. 2 King. 7.2. when men either call the greatnesse of his power into question: Or when men thinke, or speake of it carnally, and carelesly, and contemptuously. Quest: How is Gods prouidence abused? Answ. Thus; When men being vnder the hand of God, doe fret, and shew themselues offended with the work of his prouidence, and grudge against it. Quest. How many wayes is that done? Answ. Two wayes;Deut. 1, 27. either by Murmuring against the prouidence of God; directly and in plaine tearmes, speaking grudgingly against it. Or by speaking grudgingly, against the work of his prouidence, vnder other names; as vnder the name of fortune or chance, and the like: and say, what ill lucke was that! what misfortune was that! and such like. Quest: How is the Iustice of God abused? Answ: Thus; when men either thinke or say,Psal. 50.21. Malac. 3.13.14.15. that God approues or likes of sinne, or of wicked sinners, who speake stout words against the Lord. Quest: How is Gods mercy abused? Answ: Two wayes; as first, when men peruert it, & mis∣apply it, presuming on ti, to harden their hearts in sinning, & say, God is merciful, & such like.Deut. 29.19. It is called a roote of bitternes Secondly, when men speake basely, and contemptuously of Gods mercy; as when they say, speaking of a thing trifling, it is not worth God a mercy: this is an abuse of Gods mercy. Quest: How is Gods patience abused and prophaned? Ans: Thus; whē men on Gods patience, & forbearāce for a time, to punish thē for their sins, think or say,Zephan 1.12. Rom. 2.4. that God will neither do good nor euill, & that they shall neuer be punished. Quest: How are the workes of God, abused and prophaned? An. Thus; when men thinke, or speake of any of his works, or vse any of them vnreuerently, & without due respect. Quest: What are the works of God that are so abused? Ans. They are either the wonderful, & vnsearchable works of God within himselfe, as his eternall election, and repro∣bation. Or the externall, and outward workes of God. Quest. How are the wonderfull works of God eternall election,
and reprobation, thought or spoken off, vnreuerently? Rom. 9.19.20. Rom. 1 33.Answ. Thus; when men cauill against them, and seeke to bring them within the compasse of their owne shallow rea∣son; and out of the bitternesse of their hearts, open their mouthes against Gods iustice. Quest. How are the outward workes of God thought, or spo∣ken off, or vsed vnreuerently? Answ. Two wayes; either when men see not God in his workes, or when they vse them not, as they ought to be vsed. Quest. What are the outward workes of God that are so a∣bused? Answ. They are either the workes of Creation, the Crea∣tures of God, or the workes of Gods administration, and of his prouidence. Quest. How are the Creatures of God abused? Answ. Fiue wayes especially. Quest: What is the first of those? Answ: This; when men thinke, or speake basely of any of the good Creatures of God,Num. 11.6. Psal. 78.18. debasing the goodnesse of them, and discommending them; as when they finde fault with such meates as God hath giuen them to eate, being whole∣some and good. Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; when men deride the workemanship of God in any of his creature,Gen. 21.9. 2 Kin. 2.23. especially in men or women, in regard of some naturall defect, deformitie or infirmitie, ei∣ther of body or minde; as blindnesse, lamenesse, weaknesse of vnderstanding, or the like. Quest. What is the third? Answ. This; when men beholding any of Gods crea∣tures,Psal. 19.1. Psal. 1 39.14. giue not him the due praise and glory of his wisedome and power, appearing in them. Quest. What is the fourth? Answ. This; when men peruert any of the creatures of God to a wrong vse, either contrary to, or differing from that good vse,Gen. 1.14. for which God hath ordained them; as when the Papists consecrate Water, Salt, and such like; to restore the minde to health, and to driue away Deuills; or when
men vse Amulets (that is) preseruatiues against inchaunt∣ments, to driue away the Witch, and such like,Isai. 47.13. made of herbes or the like, and hang them about their necks to that purpose. Or when Astrologers take on them, by the Heauens and Starres, to foretell things to come. Quest: What is the fift? Answ. This; when men sweare by the creatures;Ierem. 5.7. as Bread, Salt, Light, or such like: or by the Saints, or their owne Soules. Quest. What are the Creatures that men doe most of all a∣buse, in swearing by them? Answ. These; the body of Christ, and the parts and mem∣bers of his blessed body: as his Armes, Legges, Heart, Sides, Head, and such like. Quest. How may it appeare to be a fearefull abuse of Christ his body, and the parts of it, to sweare by them? Answ. By two reasons: First, because this is to account Christ his body and the parts of it, as God himselfe; for what men sweare by, that they make able to witnesse the truth, and to punish them if they sweare falsly. Secondly, because men in swearing by his body, and the parts of it, doe as much as in them is, crucifie Christ againe; and shew themselues worse then the Iewes that crucified him: for if they had knowne him,1 Cor. 2.8. they would not haue crucified the Lord of Glory. Now some obiections are to be answered, made in defence of the two last things; as first, some ob∣iect that Preseruatiues against inchauntments made of herbes; and such like may bee vsed, because many times they take effect; and God (say they) hath prouided a salue for euery sore. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the efficacie that herbes haue in them, is either naturall, and giuen them by creation: or it is giuen to them by some new and speciall appointment of God since th creation: now there is no efficacie in herbes to preserue
from Deuills, either by the gift or Nature in the Creation; or by Gods appointment since the Creation; but the effect they bring forth in that kinde, is by Satanicall operation. Now for the swearing by Creatures, some obiect, first that Mat. 23.21.22. where Christ saith, whosoeuer sweareth by the Temple, sweareth by it, and him that dwelleth therein; and he that sweareth by Heauen, sweareth by the throne of God and by him that sitteth thereon: heere (say they) Christ reproues it not, therefore it may be lawfull. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Christ doth not there allow swearing by Creatures, but Christ confutes that nice distinction of the Pharisees; that it was nothing to sweare by the Temple, but he that sweareth by the gold of the Temple offendeth. verse, 16. And sheweth that in swearing by the Temple, they could not auoide swearing by God, the Temple beeing the place of Gods habitation. Genesis 42.15. Ioseph did sweare by the life of Pharaoh, now Ioseph was a holy man, and yet sware thus: therefore it may be lawfull. Quest: How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; It was Iosephs infirmitie; who, though hee worshipped the true God, yet he had learned to speake as o∣ther Courtiers did, and that of common vse and custome, as as appeares by his twise vsing the same words. ver. 15.16. Or more cunningly to conceale himselfe from his Bre∣thren, then of purpose to sweare; therefore his example is no warrant for vs. It is vsuall for men, in taking an oath, to lay their hand on a booke, the Bible or Testament; therefore it is lawfull to sweare by Creatures. Quest: How is this to be answered? Answ. Men vsing this externall signe of laying their hands on a Booke, doe not sweare by it, no more then Abrahams seruant did sweare by his Masters thigh, when hee put his hand vnder it: Gen. 24.2. for he sware by the name of God. vers. 3. And the Angell, Reu. 10.5.6. lift vp his hand to Hea∣uen,
but sware by him that liueth for euer. Quest. What are the workes of Gods prouidence, that are com∣monly abused? Answ. Either such workes of his prouidence, as fall out and come to passe in the common course of this life; or the workes of his mercy, his blessings, benefits, and such like: or the workes of his iustice, his Iudgements. Of these in Order. Quest. How are the workes of Gods Prouidence, that fall out, and come to passe in the common course of this life, abused? Answ: Thus; when men haue such an opinion and conceit of those workes, of Gods prouidence, as hath no ground for it, either in the Word of God, or in the course of Nature; but is a meere superstitious fancie: as for example, that it is vn∣luckie for one in the Morning to put on his shooe awrie, or to put the left foot shoe on the right foote; to haue Salt fall towards him, and such like: and on the contrary, that it is a signe of good lucke to find old yron, to haue drinke spilled on him. This is an abuse of these workes of Gods prouidence: the Lord hath not appointed these things to manifest his will in things to come. Q. May not one guesse and coniecture some things by naturall dreams? A. Yes; the constitution of his body, and to what sin he is most naturally inclined, one may probablie coniecture: but not things to come either good or bad. Q. How are the workes of Gods mercy, his blessings, & benefits abused? Answ. Two waies especially. Quest. What is the first of those? A. This; when men receiue Gods blessings,1 Sam. 15.17.18.19. 2 Sam. 12.7.8.9.10. Isai. 5.1.2.3.4. Mat. 21.33.34. & good things publike or priuate; cōmon to them with others, or peculiar to themselues, in respect of soule or body vnthankfully, or re∣quite them vnkindly, as the husbandmen the Vineyard. Qu. What is the second? Ans. This; when men sweare by any worke of Gods mercie, as the death and passion of Christ, or by any good gift of God; as by their faith,Ierem. 5.7. their troth, and such like; which are workes of grace, and gifts of God; this is to sweare by the things that are no Gods. And this is to abuse those workes of mercy, & those gifts of grace.
Now to the abuse of the word of God, and his holy Ordinances seuerally: and first of the Word of God, the Scripture. Quest: How is the Word of God the Scripture, in particular abused? Answ. Two waies. Quest: What is the first of those? Pet. 4.11. ai. 22.12.13. Pet 3.4.Answ. This; when men take any part of the Word of God into their mouthes, and vse it in their speech; either vnreue∣rently, idlely, and vainely; or in mockage, and make a mocke at it. Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; when men peruert the Word of God, or a∣ny part of it, and turne it to a wrong vse. Quest. How many waies is that done? Answ. Foure waies. Quest. What is the first of those? 1 Tim. 14. & 6.4 Tit. 1.14.Answ. This; when men vse any part of the Word of God to curious, idle, and needlesse questions. Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; when men vse any part of the Word of God, any part of the Scripture, to iesting and prophane mirth; and to moue laughter, doe make iests of the Scripture phrase, as Iulian the Apostata, who was wont to reach Chri∣stians boxes on the eares; and withall, to cite Mat. 3.39. And to denie Christian Soludiers their wages, and a∣ledge Mat. 5.3. Quest: What is the third? 2 Sam 6.14. Eccles. 3.4.Answ. This; When men vse any part of the Word of God, for the maintenance and defence of any error, here∣sie, or sinne: Mat. 4.6. So voluptuous and sensuall per∣sons, alledge Scripture for the defence of their idle recrea∣tions. So Couetous persons, in defence of their Couetous∣nesse, abuse that: 1 Tim. 5.8. Exod. 22.25. Deut. 23.19. So angry persons that, Mark. 3.5. Ephes. 4.26. And so in other sinnes. Quest. What is the fourth? Answ. This; when men turne any part of Gods Word to a Charme, or Sorcerie; and vse the words or sentences of
Scripture; either for the curing of paines, and bodily diseases of men or beasts: or for the finding againe of things that bee lost, and the like: as those words. Iohn 1.1. In the beginning was the Word &c. are vsed to be written in paper and hung about mens neckes to cure an ague. This is a sinfull peruer∣ting of the Word of God. The words bee good that are vsed, and the effect is good that followes on the vse of them, (namely) good health, for the most part, restored to the sicke partie: therefore they may be vsed. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the words are good in themselues, but bee∣ing abused to a wrong end, they become euill words to them that so abuse them: and the Word of God being peruerted to such an end, as hee hath not appointed, becomes the De∣uils word to them that so peruert it. And so the cure wrought by the words of Scripture, so vsed, is not of God, but from the Deuill. Quest. How may that appeare? Answ. Thus; that cure of diseases that is of God, is ei∣ther naturall and ordinarie, or it is extraordinarie and by miracle. Now the cure of diseases by the words of Scripture is not naturall and ordinary; because the word of God is not giuen to cure bodily diseases: neither by miracle; be∣cause Gods power is not tied to certaine words, be they ne∣uer so good. Therefore the cure of diseases so wrought is not of God, but of the Deuill. The Deuill regards not the good health of men, he cares not for it. Answ. Simply he doth not, but to another end he doth; that by bringing ease to the body, he may bring the soule in bondage; changing himselfe into an Angell of light. Now to the abuse of the holy Ordinances of God; and first of the Sacraments. Quest. How are the Sacraments in particular abused? Answ. Two waies; Either by ascribing and giuing to the Sacraments, that belongs not to them; or by peruerting and applying them to a wrong vse.
Quest. How many waies doe men ascribe and giue that to the Sacraments that belongs not to them? Ans: Three waies especially. Quest. What is the first of those? . 4.10.11. es. 5.26. t. 3.21.Answ. This; when men giue to the Sacrament, power to conferre and giue grace, ex opere operato, by the very worke wrought; that is, by force and vertue of the worke done, the word done and said in the Sacraments; so say the Papists. Rom. 4.10.11. Righteousnesse was imputed to Abraham, before hee was circumcised: and circumci∣sion was added afterward as a seale of the righteousnesse of faith. Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; when men giue to the Sacraments absolute necessitie; and hold them simply, and absolutely necessary to saluation; as Baptisme to Infants: and that an infant dying without baptisme, dies without Christendome. And the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in the time of ex∣treame sicknesse; this is to tye Gods grace to the out∣ward elements which is free:n 3.8. Iohn 3.8. The wind bloweth where it listeth, (that is) God giues grace, and vouchsafes fauour to whom, when, and where it pleaseth him. biectionIohn 3.5. Verely, verily, I say vnto thee, except a man bee borne of water and of the Spirit, hee cannot enter into the kingdome of God: therefore say some, baptisme is absolute∣ly necessary to saluation. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ: Thus; First, that place is not to be vnderstood of infants, but rather of men of yeeres. The answer to Nicode∣mus question,n 3.4. verse 4. How can a man be borne which is old? doth imply so much. Secondly, it is not necessary that the word (water) should signifie materiall water,t. 3.11. no more then the word (fire) Mat, 3.11. should signifie materiall fire. Quest. What is the third? Answ. This; When men giue adoration to the Sacraments, as the Papists do to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, they adore it with the highest degree of worship,t. 4.10. which is proper
to God. Mat. 4.10. Quest. How are the Sacraments peruerted, and applyed to a wrong vse? Ans: Thus; when they be applied either to such things, or to such vses as God hath not appointed them; as baptisme to the consecrating of Bells, to driue away euill spirits, and to haue power against thunder, lightnings, and the like. The Bread and Wine remaining in the Sacrament of the Eucha∣rist to be carried about, and to be applied to the sicke, for the curing of their diseases: this is a sinfull peruerting of them: the Lord neuer ordained them to these vses. Now to the abuse of prayer. Quest. How is Prayer in particular abused? Ans. Two wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? A. This;Iam. 4.3. 1 Iohn 5.14. whē men pray for such things as are not agreeable to the will of God; as when they pray for the dead, & the like. Quest: What is the second? Answ. This; when men vse prayer to vnlawfull ends, as to Sorcerie, Enchauntment, and the like. The prayers that Sorcerers and Enchanters vse, are good prayers; as the Lords Prayer, and the like: and they vse them to blesse men or beasts, and to wish good to them, & the effect is good that followes on the vse of such wishes and prayers, (namely,) good health and ease to men or beasts, by such prayers: therefore they may be vsed. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. As before; the prayers are good in themselues, but being vsed to sorcerie & to charme, they become euill to them that so vse them; and the better, and the more holy the prayers are, the worse they are being so abused. Quest: What is the reason of that? A. This; because thē they becom most dishonorable to God; best pleasing to Satan; most hurtful to them that so vse them. Quest: May not men vse prayer to this end, to bee reuenged of their enemies? Ans: No, they may not; men may vse pray∣er against the bad dealing, and sinne of their enemies;2 Sam 15.31. Act. 4.29. but not to be avenged of their persons.
iectionIudg. 16.28. We reade that Sampson prayed to God, and besought him that he might be auenged of the Philistims for his two eies; therefore it may seeme that men may vse pray∣er to be auenged of their enemies. Quest: How shall we answer this? Answ: Thus; Sampson was appointed of God to bee a Iudge, and Captaine ouer his People Israel, to auenge the iniuries and wrongs done to them, and to himselfe by the Philistims: and though he was then a Captiue, yet as he was able, he went on in the execution of that Office, and called on God to strengthen him in the execution of it; not from the desire of any priuate reuenge, but with a pure zeale to Gods glory, and to discharge his duty: and so this example is nothing to the purpose. I will adde a word touching the abuse of a lot which is an ordinance of God, appointed for spe∣ciall ends: and the abuse of it, is a breach of this Commandement. Quest. How is a lot in particular abused? Answ. Two wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; When men vse it vnreuerently, as in light and trifling matters, or in way of sport, for a lot ought to be v∣sed reuerently, and in waighty matters; the whole disposi∣tion of it, beeing immediately from the hand of God. Pro. 16.33.26. Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; When men peruert it, and vse it to wrong ends; as to search their fortune, and what successe thy shall haue in their affaires; by casting a Die, opening a Booke, and the like: this is to peruert a Lot, the proper vse of it beeing to decide great controuersies, which cannot other∣ise be determined: Pro. 18.18. Thus it was vsed in Sauls choice: 1 Sam. 10.21. In diuiding the Land of Canaan: Iosh. 14.2. In finding out Achans Theft: Iosh. 7.15. In Ma∣thias choice: Acts 1.26. Now to the Affirmatiue part of this Comman∣dement.
Quest. What is required and commanded in this Comman∣dement? Answ. In generall; a sober, religious,1 Cor. 10.31. Mat. 6.9. and honourable vsage of Gods holy name: and that in all things, we giue him his due glory. Quest. What is the ground of that? Answ. A true zeale of Gods glory aboue all things in the world; namely a burning loue of God,Num. 25.7.8. 1 King. 19.10. with an holy an∣ger, indignation and griefe, for such things as tend to the dis∣honour of God; or doe any way impeach, or hinder his glory. Quest. Wherein stands that sober, religious, and honourable vsage of Gods holy name? Answ. In two things; 1. In yeelding due reuerence to the name of God. And 2. in making a wise, and holy confes∣sion of the truth of God. Quest. How many waies doe men yeeld due reuerence to the name of God? Answ. Two wayes; either in speech, or in action: either in word; or in worke, or in deede. Quest. How doe men yeeld due reuerence to the name of God, in their speech? Answ. Thus;Pro. 31.26. Psal. 71.15. when they hauing occasion to vse the name of God in their speech, doe wisely make mention of it with reuerence, and to good vse and edification. Quest. How many waies is that done? A. Either without an oath, or in the lawfull vse of an oath. Quest. Wherein is the wise and reuerent mention of the name of God, without an oath, to be expressed? Answ. In speaking; either of his holy titles, or of his at∣tributes, or of his Word, or the parts of his worship, or of his workes. Quest: How doe men make a wise and reuerent mention of Gods holy titles? Answ: Thus; when they vse them in their speech,Deut. 28.58. Rom. 9.5. only in serious matters, and with feare and trembling, and to the good of men, and the praise of God. Quest. How do men make a wise and reuerent mention of the Attributes of God
Ans. Thus; when they breake forth into such a declaration of Gods power,0.9.10.6.16.07.8. wisdome, goodnes, mercy, & such like, as both themselues & others are, or may bee thereby stirred vp to magnifie those holy Attributes, and more earnestly to praise God for the same. Quest. How doe men make a wise and reuerent mention of the Word of God, and the parts of his worship? 6.7. 7.30 31. 0.21.Answ: Thus; When they speake of them with such care and reuerence, as beseemes the holinesse and excellencie of them, and apply them only to those good vses, for which God hath ordained them. Qu. How do men make a wise & reuerent mention of the works of God?15. to 23.136. whol 145.17. An. Thus; when they speake of them, whether they be works of God within himselfe, or outward workes of God; of creation, of administratiō, of mercy or iustice; with reuerence, and with an approbation of the goodnesse, and ex∣cellencie of them; & doe giue God the due praise of his wise∣dome power, and goodnesse, appearing in the same. Quest: What are the workes of God that are especially thus to be spoken of? Answ: These two. Either the wonderfull works of God within himselfe, of eternall election, and reprobation, which men are to speake of most reuerently, and with a wonderfull admiration of the vnsearchable depth of them. Thus the A∣postle speakes of them: Rom. 11.33.34. Oh the deepenesse of the riches, both of the wisedome and knowledge of God! How vnsearchable are his Iudgements, and his Wayes past find∣ing out. And hee concludes vers. 36. Of him, and through him, and for him, are all things. Or the outward workes of Gods prouidence, that are most contrary to mens owne affections and desires; as their crosses, losses, and afflictions: for which, men are to magnifie and blesse the name of God. Thus Iob: Iob. 1.21. Nebuchadnezzar at the end of seauen yeeres misery. Dan. 4.34. So much of the wise and reuerent mention of Gods name without an oath: Now to the wise and reue¦rent mention of his name, in the lawfull vse of an oath.
Quest. How doe men make a wise and reuerent mention of Gods name, in the lawfull vse of an oath? Ans. Thus; when they sweare by the Name of God law∣fully, hauing a lawfull calling thereunto. Quest. Is it then lawfull to sweare by the Name of God? Answ. Yes, when men haue a lawfull calling thereunto,Deut. 6.13. Deut. 10.20. and doe it lawfully, God commands to sweare by his Name. Quest. How may it appeare to bee a reuerent vse of Gods Name, and a glorifying of his Name to sweare by it lawfully, and an a lawfull calling? Answ. By three reasons. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; because by an oath lawfully taken, God is acknowledged to bee the Searcher and knower of the hearts and secret thoughts, and a witnesse of the things that bee hidden from men. Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; because by an oath lawfully taken, on a law∣full calling, God is acknowledged to bee a witnesse of the truth, and a most earnest defender of it, and a most seuere re∣uenger of a lye, and of such as forsweare themselues; and these be the proper Offices of God alone. Quest. VVhat is the third? Answ. This; because by an oath lawfully taken, on a law∣full calling, controuersies which hinder Loue,Hebr. 6.16. and hurt Chri∣stian Charitie, are ended. Now some obiections of the Anabaptists, who hold the vse of an Oath altogether vnlawfull, and refuse it, because (as they say) they would not take Gods Name in vaine, are to be answered. They obiect first, that the Lord in the Old Testament did onely permit Swearing, as hee did some other things that were euill; and that Christ hath quite taken away the same. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Ans. Thus; Christ hath onely taken away those things, which made a partition, either betweene God and his cho∣sen, namely, their sinnes; or betweene the Iewes and Gen∣tiles, as the Ceremonies whereby the Iewes were distin∣guished
confirmed with an oath, and the other of things to come, namely, when any thing is promised to men with an oath. Quest. How must a man take an oath, whether an affirming oath, or a promising oath, when hee hath a lawfull calling there∣vnto? erem. 4.2.Ans. Hee must looke that hee sweare, in Truth, in Iudge∣ment, and in Righteousnes: these three vertues are required in the right manner of swearing. Quest. What is it to sweare in truth? Answ. Swearing in truth respecteth two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; that the thing we sweare, to be a truth; and that we know it so to bee, or at least thinke it so, and be per∣swaded in Conscience it is a truth: for God must not bee brought for a witnesse to a lye;ohn .44. because that were to make him like the Deuill. Quest. VVhat is the second? Answ. This; that we sweare simply and plainely, without fraud,sal. 15.4▪ sal. 24.4. or deceit; not swearing one thing, and meaning ano∣ther, but meaning as we sweare, and intending to performe that truth which we promise with an oath. Quest. What is it to sweare in Judgement? Answ. This; to sweare with deliberation, and due consi∣deration, both of the nature and greatnesse of an oath, wher∣in God is called to witnesse the truth, and to iudge and pu∣nish vs, if we sweare falsely, and of the matter we sweare to, and of the particular circumstances of time, place, and per∣sons before whom we sweare; and in taking the oath, to haue in vs a reuerent awe, and feare of Gods Maiestie. Hence it is called The Lords oath, Exod. 22.11.Exod. 22.11. And hence, feare the Lord,Deut. 6.13. and swearing by his Name, are ioyned together. Quest. What is it to sweare in righteousnesse? Ans. To sweare in righteousnes, respecteth three things. First, that the thing we sweare, to be iust and lawfull, and such as may stand with piety & charity. Sam. 25.22. Dauid failed in this. Secondly, that our calling to sweare be iust and warrant∣able, as on the authoritie of the Magistrate, or on some ne∣cessary cause of our lawfull calling.
Thirdly, that our swearing bee directed to a right end,Hebr. 6.16. namely, the glory of God, and peace among men. Quest. Doth an oath being taken alwayes binde a man to the keeping of it? Answ. An oath taken touching things certaine, lawfull, and possible, alwayes bindeth, and is to be kept, though it be made to our enemies. Quest. Whence hath an Oath a binding power? Answ. From such particular commandements of God, as require the keeping of Oathes lawfully taken: as that, Num. 30.3. Math. 5.33.Num. 30.3. Math. 5.33. Quest. Doth an Oath taken by creatures binde a man to the keeping of it? Answ. Yes, it doth; for though it be vnlawfull in the man∣ner, yet in the substance it is an oath, and therefore ought to bee kept. Quest. How is it in substance an oath? Answ. Thus; a man swearing by a creature,Math. 23.22. sweares by God indirectly: because euery creature is a signe of Gods presence, and God is to be seene in euery creature. Quest. Doth an oath taken by false Gods or Idols, binde them that take it, to the keeping of it? Answ. Yes, it doth: for though it be vnlawfully taken, yet in effect it is an oath; because the false God or Idoll by which the oath is taken, is a true God in the opinion of him that sweareth. Thus the oath of the Turke by his Mahomet. And the oath of Laban, by the gods or Idols of Nachor, Gene. 31.53.Gene. 31.53. Iacob accepted it. Quest. Doth an oath binde a man, when by the keeping of it, losses and hinderances doe follow? Answ. If it be of a thing lawfull,Psalm. 15.4. and the losse or damage be but temporary, or priuate, it doth binde. Quest. Doth an oath, to which a man is brought by errour, fraud, or guile, binde him to the keeping of it? Answ. If it be of things lawfull and within his power, it bindeth and must be kept. Joshua and the Princes oath to the Gibeonites was kept; and the breach of that oath by Saul,Iosh. 9.19. 2 Sam. 21.1. to 9. cau∣sed three yeares dearth, and was not satisfied.
The oath made to the Gibeonites was contrary to Gods com∣mandment, Deu. 29.16, 17. and therfore ought not to be kept. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Ans. Thus; that commandement is to be vnderstood with this exception,Iosh. 2.11.12. 13.14. Ioh. 6.22. 1. King. 9 20.21 vnlesse any did submit themselues, as Rahab did, who therefore was spared. And Salomon spared the Amo∣rites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hiuites, and Iebusites, and made them Tributaries. Quest. Doth a constrained oath, to which a man is brought by feare and compulsion, bind him to the keeping of it? Answ. If it be of things lawfull and possible, it doth; be∣cause in an oath a man stands bound to the Lord, as if a man sweare to a thiefe for the sauing of his life, to bring him some of his owne money or goods; he is bound to performe it, be∣cause the losse is priuate: but if hee further sware to be silent, and not to disclose the theife, he is not bound to performe his oath, but to discouer him to the Magistrate; because the kee∣ping of that oath is in some sort to maintaine theft, & to com∣municate with the sinne of the thiefe: and it tends to the hurt of the commonwealth; and therefore ought not to be kept. Quest. When is it that an oath being taken, binds not a man to the keeping of it, but may lawfully be broken? Ans. There be six particular cases in which an oath taken, binds not to the keeping of it, but may lawfully be broken. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; when it is made of any thing directly against the word of God, and tends to the maintenance of sinne: for all the power an oath hath to bind, is from the word of God: and therefore being against the word of God, it hath no pow∣er to binde; & an oath must not be a bond of iniquity. Hence it was,1 Sam. 25.22. that Dauid, when he had made a rash vow to destroy Nabal;1 Sam. 25.32.23.34. 1 Sam. 19.23. hee reioyced when Abigail by her comming, stayed him. And though hee sware to Shimei to saue his life, yet afterwards, vpon better consideration hee commanded his sonne Salomon that hee should not count him innocent.1 King. 2.9. Mat. 14.9. He∣rod was deceiued, when he thought he was bound by his oath to performe his promise. Quest. What is the second?
Ans. When it is made against the good and wholesome Lawes of the Kingdome whereof a man is a member:Rom. 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. for Gods commandement, binds to keepe the good lawes of men. Quest: What is the third? Ans: This; when it is taken by such persons as want suffici∣ent reason and discretion; as yong children, fooles, and mad-men. For conscience cannot be bound, where vnderstanding cannot discerne what is done, and where hee that sweareth wants reason and vnderstanding, to discerne what he doth. Quest. What is the fourth? Answ. This; when it is taken by such persons, as are vn∣der the tuition & gouernment of others, and haue no power to bind themselues;Numb. 30.4, 5, as by Children that are vnder the go∣uernment of their Parents. For it is the Law of Nature, that hee which is not in his owne power, cannot bind himselfe without the consent of his gouernours. Quest. What is the fift? Answ. This; when it is made of a thing impossible, and out of a mans power; for that is a vaine oath, and a mocking of God; because a man cannot haue a serious purpose, when he sweareth to doe that which he knowes he cannot doe. Quest. What is the sixt? Answ. This; when the oath is taken touching some thing, or things, that are lawfull to be done, and afterwards the same things become either impossible to bee done, or vnlawfull: for then God himselfe may be said to reuerse that oath, and God frō heauen frees a man from it, & it ceaseth to bind. For example, a King sweares to a forraine Prince to aide him, and to defend him, and his people against his enemies: and af∣terwards, that Prince becomes an enemie to him, and to his Religion, and people, & then the Kings oath binds him not. The Papists ad another case wherein an oath binds not. Say they, the supreame power, that is, the Bishop of Rome, the Pope, may dispence with a lawfull oath, and free a man in conscience from the bond of a lawfull oath. Quest. Is this true or no? Answ. It is false. Because in a lawfull oath,1 Sam. 20.8. 2 Sam. 21.7. man is not only bound to man, but is thereby also immediately bound to God
himselfe; and therefore a lawfull oath is not dispensable by man, neither can any creature dispence with it, it is called The Lords oath.2 Sam. 21.7. Now to the second branch, namely, of yeelding due re∣uerence to the name of God in action. Quest. How doe men yeeld due reuerence to the Name of God in action? Answ. Thus; when their actions tend to the glory of God; and whatsoeuer they doe,1 Cor. 10.31. Coloss. 3.17. they doe it to that end, that God may bee honoured and glorified. Quest. How many wayes is this done, that the actions of men tend to Gods glory; & whatsoeuer they doe, they doe it to his glory? Answ. Two wayes: either in generall, or in particular. Quest: How doe the actions of men in generall tend to the glory of God? Math. 5.16. 1 Pet. 2.12. Reuel. 2.13.Ans. Thus; when men liue holily, and so behaue themselues, as that in their whole conuersation, and in all their dealings they bring glory to the name of God. Quest. How doe the actions of men in particular tend to the glory of God? Answ. Two wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Psalm. 119.105 Luke 8.15.Answ. This; when the power and fruit of the Word of God, and other meanes of saluation is expressed in their par∣ticular actions, as occasion is offered. Quest. VVhat is the second? Answ. This; when men doe sanctifie all Gods blessings and benefits bestowed on them,1 Tim. 4.5. and his chastisements and afflictions layd on them, and his ordinances, and the works of their callings by the word of God, and by prayer. Quest. How doe men sanctifie these things by the word of God? Ans. Thus; when they take instruction from the word of God, touching the lawfull vse of them: and doe learne from thence to vse them after an holy manner:Psalm. 119.24 and in respect of time, place, affection, and a right end, doe vse them as they are taught by the word of God. Quest. How doe men sanctifie Gods blessings and benefits by prayer?
Answ. By petition, and by thanksgiuing. Quest. How is it done by petition? Answ. Thus; when men goe to the Lord by prayer, and craue the assistance of his grace,Gen. 24.12. 2 Chron. 16.12 Iohn 6.11. Actes 27.35. Actes 21.5. and his blessing in the law∣full vse of his blessings, ordinances, and works of their cal∣lings, as particular occasion is offered to them; as for good successe in their businesse, for a blessing on their meates and drinkes, and on their Phisicke in the time of sicknes, on their iourney when they goe abroad. Quest. How doe men sanctifie Gods blessings and benefits by thankesgiuing? Answ. Thus; when they magnifie the name of the Lord, and returne to him praise and thankes for his grace, ayd, and blessing vouchsafed to them in the lawful vse of his blessings, ordinances, and workes of their callings,Gen. 24.27. Deut. 8.10. Exod. 18.10. 2 Sam. 22.1.10 the end. as occasion is like∣wise offered; as for good successe in their affaires, for the good creatures of God, their meats, drinks, and other necessa∣ries bestowed on them; for deliuerance out of trouble, for vi∣ctory ouer their enemies. Now, to the second generall branch wherein the sober, religious, and honourable vsage of the name of God standeth, namely, the making a wise and holy confes∣sion of the truth of God. Quest. What is it to make a wise and holy confession of the truth of God? Answ. This; to confesse the whole truth of God, and his religion, and euery part of it plainly, boldly, and religiously;Isai. 44.5. Math. 10.32, 33 Marke 8.38. when, and wheresoeuer any iust cause of such confession is offered. Isai. 44.5. I am the Lords (that is) euery one shall o∣penly confesse himselfe so to be. Quest. How many wayes is this done? Answ. Two wayes: either by word, or by practice. Quest. How doe men make a plaine, bold, and religious confes∣sion of the truth of God by word. Answ. By Christian Apology, and profession of the truth of God in word;Rom. 10.10. 1 Pet. 3.15, 16. which is when men are ready to confesse the truth of God and his religion, & doe with feare and meeknes confesse it so oftē, as on iust cause they are therunto required.
Quest. When is it that men are required on iust cause to con∣fesse the truth of God in word? Answ. At two times. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? lm. 22.22. Thes. 5.11.Answ. This; when they are thereunto required, either in publike by the Magistrate, or in priuate by friends, peacea∣bly, and without violence, for the glory of God, and for the good of themselues and others. Quest. VVhat is the second? t. 10.18, 19. ct. 5.27, 28, , 30, 32, 33. ct. 26.1. &c.Answ. This; when they are thereunto drawn by violence and force of enemies and persecutors of the truth of God. Quest. Are men to make a plaine and bold confession of the truth of God before obstinate and malicious enemies of the truth? Answ. Yes, they are, if they be thereunto called, and do see Gods glory endangered, and his truth spoken against & slan∣dered: thus did Stephen, Act. 7 whole. Act. 6. ver. 9. Some rose vp, & ver. 11. They suborned false witnesses, Act. 22.1. to 22. Quest. How doe men make a plaine, bold, and religious confes∣sion of the truth of God by practice? Answ. Two wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; when men shew forth the truth of religion by their practice, though it be with danger to lose their liues for it. Thus did Daniel, Dan. 6 10, 11. Abraham built Altars a∣mongst Infidels, Gen. 12.7, 8. Gen. 21.33. Quest. What is the second? Act. 7.58, 59. Act. 22.20. Hebr. 11.37. Reuel. 2.13.Answ. This; when men witnesse and seale the doctrine of faith, and the truth of religion by their cheerefull suffering; yea, by shedding of their bloud, without fare or shrinking, being thereunto called. Quest. How shall a man know that he is called to suffer, and to shed his blood for the doctrine of faith, and truth of Religion? Ans. By two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Ans. This; if he finde that God puts into him the spirit of courage and fortitude,Act. 20, 22, 24. and giues him resolution to abide, and to stand out against the force of all enemies of the truth. Quest. VVhat is the second?
Answ. If he be in the hand and custody of the Magistrate, and God in his prouidence doe cut off all lawfull meanes of escaping, and the Magistrate do then inflict on him tortures, and torments, and doe take away his life for his truths sake,1 Pet. 2.19. he is called to suffer and to shed his blood; for the Magistrate must be obeyed in suffering that he layeth on vs, though it be vniust, and we suffer wrongfully. Quest. May not a Christian lawfully flie for his saftie in th time of persecution, when the Church is persecuted by enemies of the truth? Answ. Yes, he may, if the danger be certaine and present, and God in his prouidence offer him a lawfull meanes and way to escape,1 Kings 18.33. Math. 10.23. Actes 8.1. and he find not himselfe sufficiently strengthe∣ned to beare extremitie; and that he be not hindered by the bond of his priuate or publike calling. Quest. May a Minister that hath a Pastorall charge, flie in the time of persecution? Ans. If either his particular congregation be dispersed by enemies,Exod. 2.15. 1 Kings 19.3. Iohn 10.39. so as he hath no hope to gather and call them backe againe: or if the persecution bee directed against his person, and his life be aymed at, hee may with consent of his flocke goe apart for a time. Quest. May not the people hinder him, and not suffer him to flie? Answ. They must bee so farre from hindring him in this case, as they ought rather to succour and relieue him.Acts 9.24, 25, 29.30. Acts 19.30. Persecution is the hand of God, and from his hand wee may not flie. Therefore it is not lawfull to flie in the time of persecution. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; first, a man being persecuted for the truth, and hauing libertie to flie, and flying doth not flie from Gods hand, but from the wrath of his enemies, to saue his life, for further good vse of Gods Church. Secondly, euill things comming from the hand of God, may be auoyded, if God shew a lawfull way and meanes how to auoyd them; as famine, sicknesse, the sword, and such like; and so from persecution.
biecti.Math. 10.28. Feare not them which can kill the body onely, &c. If a man must not feare them, then hee must not flye from th m. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. This Text is to bee vnderstood of such feare as tends to Apostasie, and by which a man feares men more then God; and by which hee is vrged to tempt God, by doing something contrary to his will, and that out of his cal∣ling; but lawfull flight tends not to Apostacie, neither doth it argue feare of man more then of God; neither is it a doing of any thing contrary to Gods will: but it is an v∣sing of meanes offered, according to Gods appointment, lest wee should tempt him, and bring to our selues vnnecessary danger. So much of the Commandement. Now to the Commination, or threatning denoun∣ced against such as breake this Commandement, in these words: For (Iehouah) the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse, that taketh his Name in vaine. Quest. What Arguments are included in this threatning de∣nounced against such as breake this Commandement? Answ. The arguments here included, are two. First, the greatnesse of the punishment, that shalbe inflicted on offenders against this Commandement. ahum 1.3, 6. Sam. 2.25.Secondly, the ineuitablenesse of it; for in that the Lord himselfe will punish them, is implyed, that their punishment shall be great, and that it shall be vnauoydable. Quest. What is intended and meant by those words, Iehouah will not hold him guiltlesse, that taketh his Name in vaine? Ans. Thus much; God will hold and account him guilty and wicked, and wil execute a sharp & seuere punishment on him: for whom the Lord holds innocent, he punisheth not. Quest. What is then the summe of this threatning? Answ. This; that howsoeuer mans Law for the most part take not hold of offendors against this Commandement, and they escape punishment amongst men;Psalm. 1.5. Ierem. 23.10. Zach. 5.3, 4. Malac. 3.5. yet God will not acquite them, nor suffer them to escape his iust and fearefull Iudgements.
Quest. Whence is it that the Lord will seuerely punish offenders against this Commandement? Answ. From the exactnes of his Iustice, which cannot let sinne passe vnpunished; and especially a sinne so foule and hainous, as is the transgression of this Commandement. Quest. Is then the transgression of this Commandement so foule and so haynous a sinne? Answ. Yes, it is; though men make light of it, and commonly punish such as rob a man of his goods more se∣uerely, then they doe such as rob God of his glory: yet the prophanation of Gods name, is accounted a most haynous sinne before God. Quest. How may it appeare, that the prophanation of Gods Name is a most haynous sinne? Answ. By three reasons. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Ans. This;Prou. 16.4. Rom. 11.36. Isai. 42.8. Isai. 48.11. Gods glory is the last and principall end for which all things are ordained: and Gods glory is most deare to himselfe: and therfore the robbing of him of his glory, and the prophanation of his name, is a most hainous sinne. Quest. VVhat is the second? Answ. This; In prophaning the Name of God men shew most insolent contempt of God: for they are led to breake o∣ther Commandements; either on a false opinion of worship∣ping God, as in Idolatry, or the like; or for their credit, profit, pleasure, or the like: but for the breaking of this commande∣ment, they can pretend none of these things. Quest. What is the third? Answ. This; the Lord appointed in the Iudiciall Law,Leuit. 24.14. Leuit. 5.1. not onely the Basphemer himselfe to bee punished by death; but also euery person that should heare blasphemy, or a false oath, and not reueale it: therefore the breach of this Commande∣ment is a foule and a hainous sinne. So much of the Commination, and of the third Commandement. Come wee now to the fourth Commandement. Quest. How differs the fourth Commandement from the second and third Commandement?
Now before I come to stand on the affirmatiue part of this Commandement, which is first in order, it is needfull to shew how far forth this commandement is ceremoniall, and how farre forth morall: because some are of opinion, that the keeping holy of the se∣uenth day, is in the number of those Ceremonies that are abrogated by Christ. Quest. How farre forth is this Commandement Ceremoniall, and belonging to the Iewes? Answ. In three respects. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in respect of the strict rest that the Iewes were commanded to keepe on the Sabbath,od. 31.13. as a type and fi∣gure of internall sanctification of Gods people, and of their rest from all sinne. Quest. Wherein stood that strict rest required of the Iewes? xod. 16.23. xod. 35.3. xod. 16.29. umb. 15.32.Answ. In these things: In that they might not prepare or dresse that which they should eat; nor kindle a fire, nor take a iourney any whither, for any matter or businesse of their owne, on the Sabbath day. We read, that Ioshua and his company compassed the wals of Jericho seuen dayes together, of which the Sabbath was one, Iosh. 6.15. How then is it true, that the Iewes might not take a iourney on the Sabbath day? Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; That was by the speciall commandement of God the Law-giuer, as it appeareth, Iosh. 6.4. Quest. What is the second? Deut. 5.5.Answ. This; in that the Iewes were to obserue & keepe the Sabbath as a remembrance of their deliuerance out of Egypt. Quest. What is the third? Deut. 5.14. Exod 31.17. Num. 28.9, 10.Ans. This; in that the Iewes were to obserue & keepe the seuenth day from the creation of the world, and that with sa∣crifices, rites, and ceremonies proper & peculiar to that day. Quest. Doe not wee Christians obserue and keepe the same day for the Sabbath that the Iewes did? Reuel. 10.1.Ans. No; we keepe the day following the Iewes Sabbath, namely, the first day of the weeke, which is called The Lords day.
Quest. Who changed the day? Answ. The Apostles of Christ being infallibly assisted by his Spirit in their ministerie did change the day,Act. 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.1.2. and them∣selues kept the first day of the weeke, and ordained it to bee kept in all Churches. For collection for the poore, followed the preaching of the Word. Paul kept the Iewes Sabbath, as well as the Lords day. Act. 13.14. and Act. 16.13. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. The Apostles did this, in regard of the weaknesse of the Gentiles, and Iewes newly conuerted, who were not fully perswaded of the abrogation of the Iewish Sabbath. Quest: Why did the Apostles change the day, from the Iewes Sabbath, to the first day of the weeke? Answ: Because on that day,Iohn 20.19.26. Christ rose againe from the dead and perfected the great worke of redemption. Quest: May not the Church, if it thinke good, alter the day againe? Answ: No; because it hath not Apostolicall power, nei∣ther can it haue a greater cause then the Resurrection of Christ, and the worke of Redemption. Quest. How far forth is this Commandement Morall, and perpetuall, and belonging to vs? Answ. In two respects. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in that it requires a certaine seauenth day, to be kept as a day of holy rest, for the preseruation of the ministerie of the Word, and solemne worship of God;Isai. 58 13. and the practise of holy and good duties: especially in the publike assemblies Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; in that it freeth all from bodily labours,Exod 23.12. and especially Seruants and Cattle; which on other dayes, doe seruice to their owners. Quest. How may it appeare that this Commandement is in these respects, Morall and perpetuall? Answ. By foure reasons especially. Quest. What is the first reason?
Answ: This; The Sabbath, the seauenth day was appoin∣ted and kept by God himselfe in Paradise before the fall of man;n. 2.23. and the reuealing of Christ, when there was no cere∣mony, nor neede of any ceremony, and there was but one condition of all men. biectionIt was made a ceremony afterward. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. That is no good argument to proue it ceremoniall; for Matrimony was ordained in Paradise, and afterward made ceremoniall; to signifie the spirituall vnion betweene Christ and his Church, and yet Matrimony is perpetuall; and so is the Sabbath of the seauenth day. Quest. What is the second reason? Answ. This; the reasons annexed to the fourth Comman∣dement are generall; and belong to all, both Iewes and Christians; and the equitie of them is perpetuall: as that, sixe dayes shalt thou labour and doe all thy worke,od. 20.9.10. but the seuenth day, is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; it is the Lords: God himselfe ceased from his worke that day, and blessed it; there∣fore the Commandement it selfe is morall, and perpetuall. Quest. What is the third reason? Answ. This; This Commandement is one of the Tenne, and so reckoned in the Word of God:Deut 4.12.13.4. Deut 5.22. Deut. 10.4. and it was written by Gods owne finger in Tables of Stone; and immediately giuen out by the Lord himselfe: whereas all the Ceremo∣nies belonging to the Iewes, were giuen by the ministerie of Moses. Quest. What is the fourth reason? Answ. This; Mat. 24.20. Christ foretelling the destructi∣on of Ierusalem, which should be forty yeares after his ascen∣sion, when all Iewish Ceremonies were abrogated; bids his Disciples pray that their flight be not in the Winter, neither on the Sabbath day. Now if this Commandement had beene ce∣remoniall, they might haue fled with as little care and griefe on that day, as on any other. In the New Testament there is no difference of dayes, and if we haue,Gala. 4.10. Colos. 2.16. or make difference of the dayes; wee are no bet∣ter then Iewes.
Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ: Thus; those places are to be vnderstood of obser∣uing dayes, after the Iewish or Heathenish manner; and of the Feasts of the Iewes, and of difference of dayes, that was in force by the ceremoniall Law; and therefore the Apostle saith of Sabbaths, meaning not the Sabbaths of the Lord;Leuit. 23.35.38.39. but the first and last day of their great Feasts: as the Passeouer, Penticost, and the Feast of Tabernacles. The Sabbath of the seauenth day was vnknowne to the Gentiles, therefore not morall; for that which is morall, was ingrafted and written in nature. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; though the Gentiles did not discerne aright the Lords Sabbath, yet they knew by the glimmering light of Nature, that a time should be set a part from worldly busi∣nesses, & be bestowed on matters cōcerning Religion: there was no Nation almost among the Gentiles, which had not some Festiualls for the exercise of their Religion; which shewes that it was written in nature, that some time should bee appointed for the solemne worship of God. Now to the Affirmatiue part of this Commande∣ment, as it is morall. Quest: What is required and commanded, in this fourth Commandement? Ans. In generall thus much; an holy rest vnto God,Exod. 16.23. Exod. 35.2. on the seuenth day in euery weeke, called the Sabbath, or the Lords day; that on that day we cease from our owne world∣ly workes; and dedidate it wholly to an holy vse, and that our rest on that day be sanctified; a rest to be holden only to God. Quest: What is to bee done, that we may be fit to keepe a holy rest vnto God on the Sabbath. Ans. This; that we prepare our selues to the keeping of it. Quest. Wherein stands that preparation? Answ. In doing two things. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; that wee thinke on the Sabbath before it come, and so dispose of our selues and our affaires, that wee may freely and duely attend on the duties of the SabbathLuk. 23.5.
when it is come: this is signified by the word Remember. Quest. What is the second? Eccles. 4.17. Psal. 26 6. Ezra. 7.10.Answ. This; that on the Sabbath, wee rise early in the morning, and fit our selues for the performance of publike duties, by taking account of our hearts and liues; and by priuate prayer, for the pardon of our particular sinnes, and for the supply and increase of those graces we stand in neede of; and for a blessing on the ministerie of the Word, and o∣ther holy Ordinances of God; that the Preacher may so speake, and we so heare, that God may haue glory, and wee good. Quest. Wherein standeth the keeping of an holy rest to God, and the sanctifying of our rest on the Sabbath? Psal. 110.3. Isai 58.13. Deut. 33.3.Answ. In doing the duties of the Sabbath with reue∣rence, as before the Lord of Heauen and Earth; and with cheerefulnesse and delight, both in publike and in priuate. Quest. What are the duties that are to bee done in publike on the Sabbath? Answ. They are of two sorts; they are either workes of piety, or workes of mercy. Quest. What are the workes of pietie that are to be done? Answ. They are such spirituall workes, as tend to the solemne and publike worship of God: and they are three in number. Quest. What is the first of those? Nehem 8.3.8. Luk. 4.16 to 21 Act 13 14.15.16. & 20.7.Answ. This; a reuerent, and an attentiue hearing of the Word of God, purely and faithfully preached, or read in the publike assembly. Quest: What is the second? Answ. This; a ioyning with the Minister and Congre∣gation,Act 2.42. Act. 16.13. Psal. 2. 1 Cor. 14.15.16 Colos. 3.6. publikely assembled, with assent of minde, and fer∣uent affection of heart in publike prayer; and calling on the name of the Lord, in thankesgiuing and singing of Psalmes. Quest: What is the third spirituall worke, tending to the publike worship of God, to be performed on the Sabbath? Answ: This; a reuerent and frequent, and often commu∣nicating in the Sacraments, publikely administred by the Ministers of the Church,Act 20.7. 1 Cor 11.2. lawfully called into one place,
which was most commonly on the Sabbath day. Now heere some particular doubts, touching com∣muninating in the Sacrament, are to bee answe∣red: and first concerning Baptisme, as the first question may be this. Quest. How are we to communicate in the Sacrament of Bap∣tisme, publikely administred? Answ. By being present at that Sacrament, and not de∣parting from it without great and vrgent necessity before it be ended; and by witnessing the worke done by the Mini∣ster, by consenting to it, and making vse of it to our selues;Luk. 1.58.59. and by ioyning with the Minister in prayer, and thankes∣giuing to God, for adding another member to the Body of the visible Church. Quest. Is the Sacrament of Baptisme to bee administred only on the Sabbath day? Answ. No, not on that day only; we finde it was admi∣nistred on other dayes, Act. 8.38. Act. 16.33. but it is to be administred on that day, rather then on any other day. Quest: How may that appeare? Answ. By this reason; Baptisme is a publike action of Religion, whereby a member is to bee receiued into the Church; & at the administration of it, prayers are to be made by the whole congregation for that member; and all are thereby to be put in mind of the benefits of that holy Sacra∣ment: and therefore it is rather to be administred on the Sab∣bath day, then on any other day. Now touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Quest: How often are wee to communicate, and to bee made pertakers of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, administred on the Sabbath? Answ. So often as it is administred in that Congregation whereof we are members; vnlesse by sicknes, or some other necessary impediment we be hindred: 1 Cor. 11.26.Act. 2.42. and the death of Christ is often, yea continually to be remembred. Quest. Is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to bee admini∣stred only in publike?
Exod. 12.6. 2 Chro. 35.5.6. 1 Cor. 11.18.20. to 25.Answ. Yes; onely in publike and not in priuate, it be∣ing a publike seale of the couenant of grace, and the band of Christians. Men hope to get great good by the Sacrament administred to them, on their death-beds in priuate. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Gods appointment must not be broken, for mens priuate affections. Quest. What is to bee done, of such as are necessarily hindred and kept from the publike duties of the Sabbath? Psal. 42.1.2. Psal. 63.1.2. Ezech. 11.16.Answ. They must with sorrow, for that restraint, vse pri∣uate duties more carefully: and they must remember Gods promise, that hee will bee a sanctuary vnto them, when they are necessarily kept from his House and Sanctuary. Quest: What are the workes of mercy that are to be done in publike on the Sabbath day? 1 Cor. 16.1.2. Rom. 15.26. 2 Cor. 8.3.4.Answ: These; Collection is to be made for the poore, and almes to be giuen for the reliefe of the poore; whether they bee those that dwell amongst vs, or those that be captiues and strangers. Quest. Are all bound to performe this dutie of almesgiuing, on the Sabbath? Luk. 11.41. 1 Cor. 16.2. Ephes. 4.28. Act. 11.28.29.Answ. All are bound to giue of that which is their owne, and according to their ability. Now to priuate duties. Quest. What are the priuate duties that are to be done on the Sabbath? Answ. They are likewise of two sorts, either workes of piety, or workes of mercy. Quest. What are the workes of piety to bee done in priuate on the Sabbath? Answ. They are such workes as tend to the further edify∣ing, and building vp of our selues and others in knowledge, and in grace and holinesse: and they are in number sixe. Quest: What is the first of those? Psal. 119.11.97. Luk. 2.51.Answ. This; a due and serious meditation on the Word of God, which we haue heard; that we rest not in the publike hearing of it; but that wee thinke and ponder on it in our
hearts, and labour to applie it in euery part of it particular∣ly, to our selues continually; but specially on the Sabbath. Quest. What is the second of those workes? Answ. This; Examination and holy conference,Act. 17.11. Mar. 4.33.34. Deut. 6.7. and that we call to minde the thinges deliuered in the publike ministerie of the Word; and examine how they were proued, and what vse was made of them; and that we talke and conferre of them, with our families and others: and whet them on our selues and others. Quest. What is the third of those workes? Answ. This, priuate prayer; that we priuately humble our selues before the Lord, and craue a blessing on his ordi∣nances, wee haue beene made partakers of; and giue him thankes for the good we haue receiued by them. Iohn 17.17. Christ prayed for his, sanctifie them with thy truth, thy Word is truth. 1 Cor. 3.6.7. It is God that giues increase,Iam. 1.5. Act. 16.16. and at his hands it must be sought by prayer. Quest. What is the fourth of those workes? Answ. This; priuate reading of the Scriptures,Iohn 5.39. Reu. 1.3. which though it ought to bee done euer day, yet especially on the Sabbath: Deut. 17.9. The King must read therein. Quest. What is the worke of piety, to be done in priuate on the Sabbath? Answ. This; singing of Psalmes: that we sing Psalmes to the praise of God, and to the stirring vp of spirituall ioy and cheerefulnesse in our hearts. Isa. 58.13. wee should call the Sabbath a delight. Exod. 15.1. I will sing to the Lord; Jam. 5.13. Is any merry? let him sing especially. Quest. May we not vse musicall instruments, to stirre vp ioy and cheerefunesse in vs, on the Sabbath? Answ: No we may not;Amos 6.5. because they commonly carry a∣way our hearts from heauenly meditations; & doe rather fill them with carnall pleasure, then with spiritual ioy & delight. Quest: What is the sixt worke of piety, to be done on the Sab∣bath in priuate? Ans. This; meditation, and due consideration of the works of God: that we thinke off, & duly consider the works of God and his creatures; and especially his workes of mercy; as
the great worke of our Redemption by Christ, and the work of his prouidence;Psal. 92.4.5.6. in making his Creatures obedient and seruiceable to vs for our good: Psal. 92. being a Psalme or Song of the Sabbath. vers. 4.5.6. Now to the works of mercy to be done in priuate, on the Sabbath. Quest. What are the workes of mercy, that are to be done in priuate on the Sabbath day? Answ. They are such duties of loue, as concerne either the good of the soules or bodies of our brethren; or such as respect their outward peace and quietnesse. Quest. What are the duties of loue, to be done in priuate on the Sabbath, concerning the good of the soules of our brethren. 1 Pet. 4.10. 1 Thes. 5.11.14Answ. They are these; That wee within the compasse of our callings; and according to the measure of grace, and gifts giuen vs; doe instruct, exhort, admonish, reproue, and com∣fort those that be about vs, and others; as iust occasion is of∣fered; especially these things are to be done on the Sabbath. Quest. What are the duties of loue to be done on the Sabbath in priuate, concerning the good of the bodies of our brethren? Nehe. 8.12. Mark. 3.3.4.5. Luk. 13.10 to 19. Ioh. 5.8.9. Ioh. 9.14.Answ. They are these; that we visite the sicke, and doe them what good we can; relieue the poore and needy, and such as be in prison, or in any other miserie, according to our abilitie: Christ healed the man that had the withered hand, on the Sabbath: The woman that was crooked or bowed to∣gether: The sicke and diseased man, eight and thirty yeeres: The man borne blind. Quest. What are the duties of loue, to be done on the Sabbath in priuate, concerning the outward peace of our brethren? Mat. 5.9. 1 Cor. 6.5.6.Answ. These; that wee endeuour to preserue the good name of our brethren, and labour to reconcile such as be at variance and discord, among themselues: especially this is to be done on the Sabbath. Now to the Negatiue part of this Commandement. Quest. What are the things to be considered in the fourth Com∣mandement, as it is Negatiuely propounded in those words: In it thou shalt not doe any worke;Exod. 20.10. thou, nor thy sonne, nor thy daugh∣ter, thy manseruant, nor thy maid, nor thy beast, nor thy stranger
that is within thy gates? Answ. Two things. First a prohibition: In it thou shalt not doe any worke. Secondly, the extent and reach of that prohibition: Thou, thy Sonne, thy Daughter, thy Man-seruant, thy Maid, thy Beast, thy stranger. Quest. What doth the prohibition forbid? Answ: In generall, a doing of such things and workes,Ier. 17.24. as doe any way hinder the keeping of an holy rest to God, on the Sabbath. Quest: What are the workes that doe hinder the keeping of an holy rest to God on the Sabbath? A. They are either works of profit, or works of pleasure. Quest. What are the workes of profit that doe hinder the kee∣ping of an holy rest vnto God on the Sabbath? Ans. They are the common labours in our ordinary cal∣lings and course of life; whether they be such as are vsuall in the sixe dayes, or such as are vsed at certaine speciall times in the yeare or moneth, as occasion is offered. Quest. How is the keeping of an holy rest on the Sabbath, hin∣dred by the labours of our callings that are vsuall? Answ. Three waies. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; when on the Sabbath,Isa. 58.13. Luk. 8.14. our hearts and minds are taken vp with thoughts and cares, about our ordinary worldly workes and businesses; wee are thinking of them, plotting and casting about, how they may be done. Quest. What is the second of those waies? Answ. This; when on the Sabbath wee are talking,Isai. 58.13. Amos 8.5. and speaking of our ordinarie worldly workes and businesses; in making bargaines, in reckoning with seruants, with lobou∣rers and workemen, hyring of labourers, appointing them their worke, and the like. Quest. What is the third of those waies? Answ. This; when on the Sabbath,Exod. 16.28.29 Exod. 31.14. Nehe. 13.15.17 Ier. 17.22. Mar. 16.1. we doe our ordinarie worldly works and businesses, in whole or in part, be it neuer so little a part of them; as setting forward of any of our worldly workes, against the day following.
If wee doe not some part of our worldly workes on the Sabbath, wee shall not bee able to maintaine our selues, and our families. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; this layes an imputation on the Lord him∣selfe: for the maintenance of our selues and families, is from the hand and blessing of God; and it is his blessing that maketh truly rich: and the doing of our worldly works, or any part of them on the Sabbath,k. 12.15. o. 10 22. r. 17.27. being expresly forbid∣den by God, brings the curse of God with it, and not a blessing: therefore they are no gainers that worke on the Sabbath. Quest: Are we so strictly bound to cease from all workes and labours, as that no worke at all may be done on the Sabbath? Answ: No, we are not; for the strictnesse of rest on the Sabbath, was ceremoniall and did belong to the Iewes only, and is abrogated by the death of Christ. The fourth Commandement is a Law giuen as well to Christians as to the Iewes; and therfore it bindes both alike. Quest: How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the fourth Commandement binds Christi∣ans to keepe a seuenth day for the Sabbath, and an holy rest on that day; but it binds them not to the same strict manner of keeping that rest, as it did the Iewes. The reasons annexed to the Commandement, doe equally bind all, both Iewes and Christians: therefore the Comman∣dement it selfe. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the reasons annexed to the Commandement, doe equally bind all touching the dutie commanded; but not for the manner of performance. Q. What are the workes that may be done on the Sabbath, & not hinder the keeping of an holy rest to God, on that day. Answ. They are of three sorts. They are either such works as concerne the practice, and performance of publike duties of the Sabbath: or workes of present necessitie; or workes of Christian libertie. Quest. What are the workes that concerne the practice, and
performance of publike duties that may be done on the Sabbath? Answ. They are such workes as are necessarily to be done in, and about the publike worship of God;Act. 1.12. 2 Kin. 4.23. Mat. 12.5. and doe necessa∣rily concerne the actions of piety belonging to that day: as a Sabbaths dayes iourney, to heare or preach the word of God. The priests vnder the Law, killing beasts for the sacrifice; so the sounding of Trumpets, Bells, or the like; for the gathe∣ring of the people together. Quest. What is a Sabbath dayes iourney? Answ. Not a mile or two, but so far as a man may conue∣niently goe for some good purpose; as to preach or heare the Word of God, without any hinderance of the ordinary exer∣cises of that day; and without wearisomnesse, either to his body or minde, by which he is made vnfit for the worship of God and holy duties. Quest. What are the workes of present necessitie, that may bee done on the Sabbath, and not hinder the keeping of an holy rest to God on that day? Answ. They are such workes of mercy, as concerne the immediate preseruation of the temporall life, or liuely-hood of a man or beast; or that serue to the good estate of either of them, and that either in ordinarie cases; or in such as by the prouidence of God, fall out extraordinarily:Luk. 13.15. Luk 14.5. Act. 20.9.10. as watering of Cattle, foodering of Sheepe, and such like: drawing a beast out of a pit; quenching of a fire dangerous to a house, or the like exigents and sudden dangers Quest. Watering of Cattle, foodering of Sheepe, and the like, are ordinary worldly works: How may they be done and not hinder the keeping of an holy rest to God, on the Sabbath day? Answ. Thus; when men doe them not as their owne workes, respecting their owne profit, but meerely as the workes of mercy; regarding the necessitie of the creatures; and in doing of them, haue their mindes and hearts taken vp with holy meditations of thankfulnesse to God, for his mer∣cie, in vouchsafing those creatures for their vse, and making them seruiceable vnto them; and of imitating the creature,Pro. 12.1 in being content with the foode that is giuen them. Question. In some particular ordinarie callings, there
is an vsuall necessitie of doing the labours of them; it falls out that they are to be done almost euery Sabbath: what are men to doe in such cases? Answ. There is a two fold present necessity; one which men contract and draw on themselues, and another which is laid on them by the immediate hand, & prouidence of God; and men must consider what kinde of necessity it is, that lies on them; and accordingly carry themselues. Quest. What is that necessitie of doing the labours of their callings on the Sabbath, that men contract and draw on them∣selues? Answ. This; when men either out of a couetous minde, take on them more businesse in their callings, then they can dispatch in the sixe dayes in the weeke; or for want of wise and well ordering their businesse, it being such, as if they would well and wisely order, the things might be done the day before, or the day following: or when men through negligence, or forgetfulnesse, doe bring on themselues, some ordinarie businesse on the Sabbath: that is contracted necessitie. Quest: What is to be done in this kind of necessitie? Answ. Men are not to labour in such necessitie as this is, on the Sabbath; because then the worke is not properly their owne worke, as they are of this or that trade or calling; but a worke of their lust, and of their owne corruption. Quest. What is that necessitie of doing the labours of their callings on the Sabbath, that is laid on men by the immediate hand of God? Answ: This; when not through any neglect, ouersight, or other corruption of their owne; but by the immediate pro∣uidence of God, some businesse of their ordinarie calling is laid on them, which could not be done the day before, neither can be left vndone till the day after. Quest. What is to be done in this kind of necessitie? Answ. In this necessitie we may labour on the Sabbath, some cautions being obserued. Quest. What are those cautions?
Answ. They are foure. First, that their labour bee with as little hinderance of them, from the publike holy exercises, as possibly may bee. Secondly, that in labouring, their mindes bee exercised in holy meditations. Thirdly, that they make not their work, a work of gaine, but of mercy, or tending to a worke of mercy. Fourthly, that it serue to the immediate preseruation of the life, health, or good. 1 King. 19.8. Elijah continued flying from Iesabell to saue his life, many Sabbaths together. 1 Kings 20.29. They fought vpon the Sabbath.Mat. 12.7. Mark. 3.4.5. Thus Phi∣sicians may giue counsell, and minister Phisicke. The Chi∣rurgian may cut and launce, and powre in Oyle, for the curing of woundes. Midwiues may helpe women in trauell. Quest. What are the workes of Christian libertie, that may be done on the Sabbath, and not hinder the keeping of a holy rest vnto God on that day? Answ: They are such workes,Mat. 12.1.2.3. Mark. 2.27. as in the time of the Old Testament, did belong to the strict rest which the Iewes were commanded to keepe on the Sabbath, and such as they might not doe; and yet wee may doe now vnder the New Testament, in the time of the Gospell: as prouision and dres∣sing of necessary foode, making of fires, making of beds, and such like. Mat. 12.1.2.3. Mark. 2 27. The Sabbath was made for mans good and comfort, and not men for the rest alone: if they had not eaten Corne they had fainted, and had beene made vnfit for the sanctifying of the Sab∣bath. Luke. 6.5. Quest. How may the workes of Christian liberty bee done on the Sabbath, and not hinder the keeping of an holy rest vnto God on that day? Answ. Thus; when they are done without hindering the doers of them; as Cookes and such like, at feasts vsually and ordinarily, from the publike holy exercises: as when they are done in the time before, or after, or betweene the pub∣like exercises; and when the doers of them haue their
mindes exercised with holy and heauenly meditations. Dauid longed for water but would not drinke, because it was the blood of the men that went in ieopardy of their liues.am 23.15..17. And our Christian libertie is not to bee abused. Galath. 5.13. Quest: May not such as haue not prouision of foode of their owne, goe or send to the Cookes or Ʋictuallers and fetch prouision, or cause them to prepare foode for their present neede on the Sabbath? Answ. If they bee in health and strength of body, or any way able to fetch in and prepare such foode, as may sustaine Nature, the day before; they are not to goe or send for it on the Sabbath: but if they be sicke, or weake in body, or so ex∣treame poore, as they haue neither credit nor money, but what happily is giuen them on the Sabbath; they may goe or send for it on the Sabbath: and in these cases, being cer∣tainely knowne to them, Cookes and other Victuallers, may dresse and prepare for them, and let them haue things need∣full; because these bee cases of present necessitie, laid on them by the hand of God: the cautions before spoken off, obserued. And so much touching the labours of our cal∣lings that are vsuall. Now to such as are vsed at certaine speciall times of the yeare or moneth. Quest. How is the keeping of an holy rest on the Sabbath, hindered by such workes as are vsed at certaine speciall times, in the yeare or moneth? Answ. Three waies likewise. Quest. What is the first of those? Isa. 58.13. Mat. 13.22.Answ. This; When on the Sabbath our mindes and hearts are taken vp with thoughts and cares, about such businesses as fall out at certaine times in the yeare or month; we are thinking how they may be done. Quest. What is the second of those waies? Answ. This; when on the Sabbath, wee are talking of such businesses as fall out at certaine times; as of going to
Faires, Markets, about Law matters; of Planting,Isa. 58.13. Iam. 4.13. Set∣ting, Sowing, Reaping, Mowing, and such like: especial∣ly on the Sabbath. Quest. What is the third of those waies? Answ. Thus;Exod 34.21. Nehe. 13.15.16. to 23. when on the Sabbath wee doe such busines∣ses, as fall out at such times; wee take iourneyes, wee goe to Fayres, and there buy and sell: we plant, sette, sowe, reape, mowe, and such like. Quest. In the time of Haruest, the weather proues catching and vnseasonable; sometimes faire, and sometimes foule, and the Corne is now ready, and if it bee let alone, it is like to be lost and to rotte on the ground: may not men in such a case as this, labour and carry in their Corne on the Sabbath day, pro∣uing fayre? Answ. No, they may not,Gen. 7.11.12. Gen. 8.2. Iob. 36.27.28. Iob. 37.6.7 Ier. 5.24. because the danger is not present but eminent, it is not yet come, but like to come; and as it is in the Lords hand, and hee can open and shut the windowes of Heauen, and restraine the shewers; and hee sends the former and latter Raine in due season: and therefore men must cast the whole remedie on him: and in Haruest time men must more carefully keepe the Sabbath, then at any other time in the yeare. Quest. How may it appeare that men are bound to keepe the Sabbath more carefully and conscionably in the time of Haruest, then at any other time? Answ. By three reasons especially. Quest: What is the first of those? Answ. This; In Haruest time men doe most of all toyle, and weary both their owne bodies, and the bodies of their Seruants and Cattle; and they haue most neede of rest from their bodily labours on the Sabbath day following: and if then they worke, they deale most vnnaturally with themselues,Exod. 23.2. and iniuriously with their Seruants and Cattle. Quest: What is the second reason? Answ. This; The labour of the sixe dayes in Haruest time is so great, that men cannnot conueniently on
those daies, giue themselues to the duties of Gods wor∣ship, either publikely or priuately; and therefore in that sea∣son, they are to make more conscience of keeping the Sab∣bath. Quest. What is the third reason? Answ. This; in haruest time, wee are partakers of Gods bounty in a greater measure; and wee reape the fruits of the Earth, more abundantly then at any time of the yeare be∣sides: and wee are then to be most thankefull to God for his blessings. biectionSome may say, some kinde of fruit of the earth, for exam∣ple; Saffron, if it bee not gathered on the day in which it comes forth it perisheth. If then it come on the Sabbath, may it not be gathered on the Sabbath. Answ. If it bee certainely so as men doe affirme; it may then bee gathered on the Sabbath; these cautions obserued. 1. That as many gather it as can conueniently be got∣ten, that no publike exercise of Gods worshippe bee o∣mitted. 2. That their mindes be holy and spiritually exercised, that gather it. 3. That they whose fruit it is, testifie that they seeke not their owne gaine in gathering it; but meerely the pre∣seruation of the Creature; by giuing it to the poore, if hey bee wealthy, or by imparting something of it to their more needy brethren; if they be of meaner condition. The Papists say, such workes may bee done on the Sab∣bath, as are permited by the Prelates and Ordinaries; and such as by long custome haue beene vsed. Quest. Is this true or no? Answ. It is false; neither custome, nor authority of man, or Angell, can giue libertie for such workes to bee done on the Sabbath,am. 4.12. Mat. 5.18. as are not warranted by the Word of God: the law of God is immutable, therefore none can dispence with it. Now to the workes of pleasure, whereby the holy rest on the Sabbath is hindered.
Quest. What are the workes of pleasure that doe hinder the keeping of an holy rest to God on the Sabbath? Answ. They are of two sorts. Either lawfull in themselues, and such as at other times may be vsed. Or, such as are simply in themselues vnlawfull at all times. Quest. What are those workes of pleasure that are lawfull in themselues? Answ. These; either set or solemne feasting or banquet∣ting, as at Mariages, at the admitting of men into their ciuill Offices, or in like occasions. Or they bee some kindes of recreations and exercises of the body. Quest. How is the keeping of an holy rest on the Sabbath hin∣dred by set and solemne feasting and banquetting? Answ. Thus; when those things are vsed on the Sabbath; and thereby Cookes, and other seruants and officers are im∣ployed in their ordinary workes, and are toiled exceedingly: and those that doe feast and banquet, are hindred, and haue their minds withdrawne from the serious performance of ho∣ly duties, both publike and priuate. Feasting,Isai. 5.12. Luke 21.34, 36 Iob 1.5. and want of consideration of the works of the Lord commonly goe toge∣ther. Christ would haue men to eate, that they may bee fit to watch and pray, especially on the Sabbath. Quest. Is it lawfull to marry on the Sabbath, or no? Answ. It is lawfull; but the marriage feast is rather to be kept on another day, then on the Sabbath: because of hinde∣rance and distraction in holy duties. Quest. Is it lawfull to drinke wine, or other strong drinke, or to eate delicates and dainties on the Sabbath or no? Answ. If men haue these things prouided, and ready at hand of their owne, or in the house where they are on the Sabbath, they may vse them on the Sabbath; so as they vse them moderately, and for the better enabling of them to per∣forme holy duties both in publike and priuate. Eccles. 10.17. Salomon would haue Princes to eat in time, and for strength, and not for drunkennesse. Much more then, other men. Quest. May not such as haue not Wine, or other strong
drinkes, or delicacies of their owne prouided and ready at hand, goe or send abroad for such things on the Sabbath? Answ. If they be in health or strength of body, and able to endure without them, they are not to goe or send abroad for such things on the Sabbath. But if they bee sicke, or weake in bodie,sal. 104.15. rou. 31.6, 7. Tim. 5.29. and their present weakenesse necessarily requires such things, and they haue them not already pro∣uided of their owne: then they may goe or send for them abroad on the Sabbath. And in these cases being certainly knowne, Vintners may let them haue Wine; Apotheca∣ries and others may let them Aqua vitae, Conserues, and such like: because these bee cases of present necessitie layd on them by the immediate hand of God: the cautions before spoken of obserued, the wine and other things onely payd for, this may bee done on the Sabbath. Quest. VVhat are those Recreations, and Exercises of the bodie that are lawfull, and such as at other times may bee vsed? Answ. They are such moouings of the body as bee ho∣nest and moderate, and carry with them an honest and de∣lightfull exercise of the minde, and serue to the refreshing of the body and minde, as Shooting, Tennis-playing, Stoole-ball-playing, Wrestling, Running, and such like. Quest. How is the keeping of an holy Rest on the Sabbath hindered by this kinde of Recreations, and Exercises of the Body? Answ. Thus; when Recreations, and Exercises of this kinde are vsed on the Sabbath, especially in time of diuine Seruice, and thereby the Sabbath is made a day, not of holy rest, but of carnall rest: such a day as the people made, Exod. 32.6.Exod. 32.6. Seruants must needs haue some recreation, and some re∣freshing from their painefull toile in the weeke dayes; other∣wise how shall they be able to indure? Quest. May not they then haue lawfull bodily recreation al∣lowed them on the Sabbath? Answ. No, they may not, when they should be employed in Gods Seruice: men must allow their seruants moderate
rest, and lawfull recreation at other times.Prou. 12.10. (A righteous Man regardeth the life of his Beast: much more then of his Seruant:) but it must bee on the dayes of labour, and not on the Sabbath: because recreation belongs not to rest, but to labour: and it is vsed, that men may by it bee made more fit no labour: and therefore it must be graunted them on the dayes of labour in the weeke. Quest. May not sicke persons vse lawfull recreation, as Chesse-playing, or the like on the Sabbath? Answ. If they bee extreamely sicke, they are rather to giue themselues to praying, then to playing.Iam. 5.13, 14. If they bee not so dangerously sicke, they need it not: but if they can busie their Hearts, Hands, and Bodyes about playing: the consideration of GODS mercie to them in their late Visitation, ought to mooue them to refresh themselues on the Sabbath especially, with reading the Scriptures, and other good Bookes, in holy conference, or singing of Psalmes. Quest. VVhat are the workes of pleasures simply in them∣selues vnlawfull, that hinder the keeping of an holy rest on the Sabbath? Answ. They are either such as are knowne sinnes, as surfetting, Drunkennesse, Whoredome, Swearing, and the like, or such as goe vnder the name of Sports and Re∣creations. Quest. How is the keeping of an holy Rest on the Sabbath hindred by workes of pleasure that are knowne sinnes? Ans. When such workes are done on the Sabbath:Isai. 56.2. Ezek. 23.38, 39. Rom. 13.13. for then to commit any knowen sinne, to sweare, to quaffe, to fol∣low whoredome, to play the harlot, is to keepe an holy day to the Deuill, and not to God: and it is then most abomina∣ble to the Lord especially. Quest. Is a known sinne committed on the Sabbath, more grie∣uous, then if it were committed on any other day? Answ. Yes, it is. Quest. How may that appeare? Answ. By this reason; if that which is no sinne on ano∣ther day bee a sinne on the Sabbath; as to digge, to plowe,
and such like, as it is; then that which is a sinne in it selfe; as to steale, to be drunke, and such like, must needs bee greater, and more haynous being done on the Sabbath: because, be∣sides the sinne of stealing, swearing, or the like, the Sabbath is also thereby broken and prophaned, and so a double sinne is committed. Quest. What are the workes of pleasure at all times vnlaw∣full, that goe vnder the name of sports and recreations? Answ. They are such delights as haue a manifest defiling of good manners, in doing, or in beholding; hauing in them allurements, and prouocations, either to lust and vncleane∣nesse; or to crueltie, or to couetousnesse, and such like. Quest. How is the keeping of an holy rest on the Sabbath hin∣dered by these vnlawfull workes, going vnder the name of sports, and recreations? Ans. When these are vsed on the Sabbath: for these be∣ing vnlawfull at all times as they bee; much more vnlawfull are they on the Sabbath. We reade of a kinde of dancing commended in the Scrip∣tures, as that of Miriam, Exod. 15.20. 2 Sam. 6.14. Dauid danced before the Arke. 1 Sam. 18.6. The women at Dauids returne from the slaughter of Goliah: therefore dancing is lawfull and warrantable by the word of God. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; that kind of dancing was not mixed, lasci∣uious, of men and women together; but single, of men by themselues, and of women apart by themselues; and the cau∣ses of it was spirituall ioy, and the end of it praise & thanks∣giuing to God; and the manner of it, was not with wanton gestures, and with amorous songs, but with Psalmes of praise and thankesgiuing. Eccles 3.4. There is a time to dance. Ierem. 31.4. Goe foorth in the daunce of them that bee ioyfull: Therefore Dancing is lawfull. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Ans. Thus; those places speake not of dancing proper∣ly, but of hearty reioycing, signified by dancing. Againe, the Prophet speakes by way of comparison, as if
hee had said, as men are wont to doe in daunce: and compari∣sons in Scripture are many times drawne from things vn∣lawfull in themselues, as from the vnrighteous Iudge;Luke 16.1, 2, 3. 1 Thess. 5.2. from the thiefe in the night. Now to the extent of the Prohibition, in these wordes: Thou nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, thy manseruant, nor thy mayd, nor thy beast, not thy stranger. The meaning of the words we heard before: now to stand a little to shew how farre that Prohibition is extended. Quest. How farre is that Prohibition, (In it thou shalt not doe any worke; thou, nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, thy manser∣uant, nor thy mayd, nor thy beast, nor thy stranger) which forbids the doing of ony thing or worke that may hinder the keeping of an holy rest on the Sabbath, extended? Answ. To all men and women of yeares of discretion, of what place, calling, or condition soeuer in the world, and to all other things that may bee set a worke by them; and espe∣cially the charge is heere layd on such as bee Superiours and Gouernours, whether in priuate, or in publike. Quest. Why is heere mention made of the Manseruant, and of the Maidseruant? Answ For two reasons. First,Deut. 5.14. that they might haue some ease and rest from their labours. Secondly, that they might also haue libertie to attend on holy duties, both in publike and in priuate; and so might care for, and looke to their owne saluation, as well as their Ma∣sters, and Gouernors. Quest. Why is mention made of the Beast in this extent? Answ. Not because any dumbe creature can sanctifie the Sabbath, but for three other reasons. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; because mercy and compassion is to bee ex∣tended to the dumbe creature, that it may sometimes bee spa∣red, and haue some rest from labour.Deut. 22.4. We find a law made for the neighbours beast fainting vnder the burthen. Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; because the beast cannot bee employed, but man also must be busied in attending it, and looking to it.
Quest. VVhat is the third reason? Answ. This; that by the sight of cattell resting from their labours, men might be put in minde of their dutie, to keepe an holy rest on the Sabbath:Ionah 3.7. as in publike Fasts the beasts were enioyned Abstinence, that men seeing them to mourne in their kinde, might bee stirred vp to griefe and sorrow for their sinnes. Quest. Doth this Prohibition reach onely to such things as haue life, as to the Oxe, the Asse, and the like? Answ. No, but to liuelesse things also, as a Mill, or a Boat, or the like; because such things cannot be set aworke, but by the helpe of mans hand. Quest. What is meant by the word (stranger?) Answ. As it had respect to the Iewes: any one that was an Alien to the Common-wealth of Israel,Exod. 22.21. an Eth∣nicke, an Heathen, or such like: but more generally, thereby is meant any one, that is not of that place or charge, whether priuate or publike, whereof wee haue the rule and gouernment. Quest. Why is heere mention made of the stranger? Answ. Lest harme might come to Gods people, in behol∣ding the example of strangers, they being suffered to breake the Sabbath, by doing either works of profit, or of pleasure. Nehemiah would not suffer Heathen men, who knew not God, nor cared for the Sabbath, to come with wares vnto Ie∣rusalem vpon the Sabbath.Nehem. 13.21. Quest. How farre is the Master, or Gouernour of a Family bound to cease from doing of such things, and workes, as doe hinder the keeping of a holy rest on the Sabbath? Answ. Not onely in his owne person, but in all that be vnder him; hee is to looke to all others that bee vnder his roofe and charge: yea, euen to Strangers, and Guests, that on the Sabbath bee within his libertie and power; that they also cease from all workes of profit and plea∣sure, as well as himselfe; as the Inne-holder, Vintner, Victualler, and others that keepe Houses of common receit,Ioshua 24.15. Gen. 18.19. must looke vnto it: I, and my House will serue the Lord.
Quest. How farre is a Gouernour in publike, a Magistrate, bound to cease from doing of such things and workes, as doe hinder the keeping of an hoy rest vnto God on the Sabbath? Answ. Not only in his owne person, but in all that be vn∣der his gouernment; he must looke to all others, yea,Exod. 31.15. & Numb. 15.33. compared to∣gether. euen to strangers that bee within his libertie, and iurisdiction on the Sabbath: that they also cease from all workes of profit and pleasure, as well as himselfe. Quest. How may it further appeare, that Masters and gouer∣nours, whether in priuate or publike, are bound not onely in their owne persons to cease from all works, profit and pleasure; but to look also to all that be vnder them, that they doe so likewise? Answ. By three reasons. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; a good Gouernour, whether in priuate, or publike,Rom. 13.4. 1 Pet. 2.14. is bound to gouerne for the good of those that bee vnder him; and greater good hee cannot doe to them, then to restraine them from so foule a sinne, as the breach of the Sabbath is; and to cause them on that day to attend on holy duties, both in publike and priuate. Quest. What is the second? Answ. This; euery Gouernour, whether in publike or pri∣uate, that hath lawfull authority, hee hath it from the Lord, and he stands in his stead, & to him he must giue an account, not only how ciuilly,Rom. 13.1. Psalm. 82.1. but also how religiously he hath gouer∣ned those that be any way vnder his gouernment. Quest. What is the third? Answ. This; though the Lord will punish inferiours that breake the Sabbath, by doing workes of profit and pleasure, yet more seurely will he punish Gouernors and Superiours, if they vse not their authority to restrain them as they ought; as Inne-holders, Vintners, Victuallers, and such like; that re∣straine not such as are in their houses, but suffer men to bee drunke in their houses on the Sabbath: they pull downe the heauy hand of God on themselues, and they shall be more se∣uerely punished. Because Elies sonnes ran into a slander,1 Sam. 3.13. 1 Sam 4.11.18. Numb. 25.3, 4. and hee stayed them not, they were slaine; but Elie himselfe was more grieuously punished.
Quest. How are Masters and Magistrates to restraine such as bee vnder them, or strangers being within their libertie, on the Sabbath, from workes of profit, or from workes of pleasure? Nehem. 13.21.Answ. By Commandement, by admonition or reproofe, if these will serue the turne: if not, by correction and pu∣nishment, as Nehem. 13 21. Quest. May a Master or Magistrate command and compell those that be vnder his charge, his seruants and such like, to attend on the duties of pietie in publike, on the Sabbath, or no? Answ. He may; because therein he commands that which God himselfe hath commanded,2 Chron. 34.32.33. Luk. 14.23. as that men on the Sabbath assemble together to heare the word of God, and to performe publike holy duties; and if such as be vnder his charge, yeeld not to his commandement, he may compell them to doe it. Heere some Obiections of the Anabaptists and Papists are to be answered: and first of the Anabaptists. The Kings of Israel might compell men to the Sacrifices and Ordinances of the Old Testament; to Circumcision, and the Passeouer; because they were carnall, and purged not the Conscience, Hebr. 9.9, 10. But no mortall man whatsoeuer he bee, can compell any man to offer the Sacrifices of the Newe Testament, which are Spirituall, and purge the Conscience, except hee can beget Faith in him, and con∣uert his soule. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the sacrifices and ordinances of the Old Testament, are not said to be carnall in respect of the sacrifi∣ces of the New Testament, but in comparison of Christ, with whom they are there compared: neither was there such dif∣ference betweene the Sacraments of the Old and New Te∣stament, as if the Sacraments in the Old Testament had been carnal, and the Sacraments vnder the New, spirituall; for they are both one in substance, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.1 Cor. 10.3.4. And so Magistrates may now as well compell men to attend on publike duties of pietie, as the Kings of Israel might. Obiections of the Papists. To compell some men to attend on publike duties, is to make them goe against their Conscience, which the Ma∣gistrate
ought not to doe, as the Papists say. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the conscience being mis-informed, meanes are to be vsed, that it may be rightly informed. Now attend∣ing on the publike exercises of Religion, is a meanes by which the conscience may come to be rightly informed; and so no sinne in the Magistrate to compell men to vse that meanes. Men ought to be perswaded to performe publike duties of piety; and they are to be induced to beleeue, and not to bee compelled; for the will cannot be compelled. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; it is true indeede: men are first to be dealt withall by perswasion; but if that will not serue the turne, then by compulsion. Againe, the Magistrate doth not take on him to compell men to beleeue, that is not in his power; but hee compells them only to come to the publike assemblies, to heare the Word of God, to learne the truth of Religion,Rom. 10.14.17 that so faith may be wrought in them; the preaching of the Word being the meanes appointed of God to that purpose. Quest. May a Master or Magistrate command and com∣pell those that bee vnder his charge, to receiue the Sacrament of the Lords Supper or no? Answ. He is to vse all good meanes,2 King. 23.21. 2 Chron. 14.4. 1 Cor 11.29. to perswade all that be vnder him, being of yeares and discretion, to a desire of that Sacrament: and he may also command and compell them to receiue it, they being carelesse of it; vnlesse he find them altogether ignorant and vnwilling: for then to compell them to receiue it, is to cause them to profane the Lords holy Ordinance, and to eate and drinke their owne dam∣nation. Quest. How farre is a child being of yeares and discretion, or a Seruant, bound to cease from doing of such things and works as doe hinder the keeping of an holy rest on the Sabbath. Answ. From the works of pleasure altogether, and from the works of profit also altogether; both in respect of the
Child or Seruants owne profit;od. 35.2. ech. 20.20. or the profit of the Parents, or Masters, or Gouernours; vnlesse it bee in case of present necessitie, comming by the immediate hand and prouidence of God: for then the Child or Seruant (the cautions before named, being obserued) may worke. If Parents command the Child, or the Master command his Seruant to do an ordinary worldly worke on the Sabbath, being neither a worke of Christian libertie, nor a worke of present necessitie comming by the immediate hand of God; as a Taylor commanding his Child or Seruant, to carry home a piece of worke, a suite of apparell, or such like. Question. What is the Child or Seruant to doe in such a case? phes. 6.5. it. 2.9. Pet. 2.1 8.Answ. A Child or a Seruant, is not stubbornly or scorne∣fully to refuse the doing of the worke; but hee is with meekenesse, and gentlenesse, and in all humilitie, to desire and intreat that hee may not doe it: and to vse all good meanes to perswade the Parents or the Master, that he may be forborne: hee must know his place, and carry himselfe answerable to it. Quest: What if a Master will not forbeare his Seruant in such a case on his intreaty, but will vrge him to doe the worke; and if he doe it not, will correct him most sharply, and it may be cast him out of his seruice, which haply may bee the losse of his freedome, and to his vtter vndoing, in respect of his outward estate: what is the seruant to doe in such a case? Exod. 1.17. 1 Sam. 22 17. 1 Pet. 2.18.19.20. Act. 5.29. Rom. 3.8.Answ. He is not to doe the thing being euill, and a sinne in it selfe; but rather patiently to vndergoe any punishment his Master shall lay on him; for the least e∣uill of sinne is not to bee done, that the greatest good may come thereof. So much of the Negatiue part of the Comman∣dement, the prohibition, and extent of it. Now before we come to the reasons annexed, wee will speake a word of the length of the Sabbath, when it begins and ends.
Quest. How long is the Sabbath day, how many houres doth it containe? Answ. It containes twenty foure houres as well as any other naturall day. Psalm: 92. being a Psalme of the Sab∣bath, Verse 2. Dauid saith, He will declare the louing kindnes of the Lord in the morning, and his truth in the night, making the night a part of the Sabbath. Christ saith, (Ioh: 11.9.) There are twelue houres in the day. How then doth the Sabbath containe foure and twen∣tie. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; hee there speakes according to the manner of the Iewes, who deuided euery artificiall day into twelue houres. Quest. When doth the Sabbath beginne, and when doth it end? Ans. It begins at midnight on the Saturday, and ends at midnight next following. Mat: 28.1.Mat. 28.1. Mark 16.1.2.Mark. 16.1.2 Ioh. 20.1.Ioh. 20.1. compared together, it appeares that the Iewes Sabbath ended at the dawning of the first day of the weeke, and then the Lords day our Sabbath began, Act: 20.7.Act. 20.7. Gen. 1. It is saide, that the euening and the morning made the first day, the second day, the third day, &c. There∣fore the Sabbath is to begin in the euening, and to end at the next euening. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Moses there speakes not of the vse of time in regard of the Sabbath, but onely that the Lord in appoin∣ting of dayes, began the day at the euening, and therefore that is no good consequent, for the case is otherwise in the constitution of time, then it is in the vse of time consti∣tuted. Leuit: 23.32. From euen to euen shall yee celebrate your Sabbath, threfore it must begin at the euening. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; that place is to be vnderstood, not of the Lords ordinarie Sabbath, but of the feast of reconciliation, which was to be kept from euen to euen.
Now to the reasons which the Lord vseth to moue to the obedience of this Commandement. Quest. How many are the reasons annexed to this Comman∣dement, perswading to the obedience of it? Answ. They are in number foure. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. The first is a reason from the Lords liberall al∣lowance of six dayes for our workes and businesses: that in equitie we are bound to cease from our owne workes on the Sabbath,od. 20.9. because the Lord so largely imparteth sixe dayes of seauen to vs, and reserues but one to himselfe. Quest. What is the second reason? Answ. The second reason is from the Lords owne right, that the seuenth day is his day, and not ours: and that hee hath set it apart to himselfe, and to his owne seruice, in those words, Exod: 20.10.od. 20.10. The seuenth day is the Sabbath of Iehouah thy God. Quest. What is the third reason? Answ. The third is a reason from the Lords owne pra∣ctice and example, that hee himselfe on the seuenth day rested from his worke of creation. Exod: 20.11. In six dayes Ieho∣uah made the Heauen, and the Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seuenth day. Quest. What is the fourth reason? Answ. The fourth reason is from the hope of blessing, that the Lord hath set apart the Sabbath, not onely as a day of seruice to himselfe, but also as a time and meanes of bles∣sing to all that carefully and conscionably obserue it in those words: Therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hal∣lowed it. Of these reasons in particular, and in order. For the first. Quest. Are those words, sixe dayes shalt thou labour and doe all thy worke, a Commandement binding vs to labour the whole sixe dayes without intermission, and so as we sinne if we la∣bour not in them all?
Answ. To labour diligently in a mans Calling, is com∣maunded of God:Gene. 3.19. 2 Thes. 3.10.11 yet those words are not a Commande∣ment, but a permission, giuing vs free libertie to worke all the sixe dayes: or rather, a remission of the Lords owne right, hee hauing all the dayes of the weeke at his appoynt∣ment. Quest. How may it appeare, that those words, Sixe dayes shalt thou labour, and doe all thy worke, are not a Comman∣dement, but a permission? Answ. By this reason;Exo. 23.14. to it Leu. 23. whole. Ezra 3.10. Nehem. 12.27. Ioel. 2.15. the Lord himselfe separated some of the weeke-dayes, to such Solemnities and Feastes, as the Iewes were to obserue in time of the Olde Testament: and he also gaue libertie to his Church in all ages, on speciall oc∣casions to set apart, one, or more of the sixe dayes, either to publike Fasting, or to solemne reioycing for some be∣nefit receiued. Quest. May the Church then set apart some of the sixe dayes of the weeke for holy meetings and assemblies; and being set apart, may they bee obserued? Answ. On spciall occasions the Church may appoynt such dayes; and being appointed, we may obserue them,Iohn 10.22, 23. some cautions being obserued. Quest. What are those cautions? Answ. They are two. First, that the appoyntment and obseruation of them, bee held a thing indifferent,Exod 35.3. Exod. 16.23. Exod. 12.16. and not of absolute necessitie, and binding the Conscience, as the Commandement of the Sabbath doth: the Iewes were not so strictly bound to obserue their Festiualls, as the Sabbath. Secondly, that the appoyntment of them bee voyd of Superstition, not placing the woship of God in them, nor greater Holinesse in those dayes, then in other dayes, but that they bee appoynted onely for the Assemblie of Gods people; for the exercise of the Word, and Prayer. Galat. 4.10.Galat. 4.10. Quest. Haue wee free libertie so to worke all the sixe dayes of the weeke, as that wee are bound to no duties of Gods wor∣ship on those dayes?
o. 6.7.20.Answ. No; the Lord so giueth vs sixe daies to worke in, as that the worship of God be not neglected in priuate pray∣er, 5.17. o. 2.24. and other holy duties in the Family; and hearing of the Word in publike also, as occasion serueth. Quest. How farre are we bound to attend on the preaching of the Word of God on the weeke dayes? o. 39.10 nd. o. 24 33. . 7.21. n. 4.2.Answ. Ordinarily so farre as we haue opportunity, and any liberty from vsing the lawfull meanes of the preseruati∣on of our liues, and from the necessary duties of our lawfull callings, and according to the measure of our libertie; in these respects we are more or lesse bound to attend vpon the ministerie, and preaching of the Word; vpon the sixe dayes of the weeke. Quest. May not such as are enforced to worke on the Sabbath day in case of present necessitie, laid on them by the immediate hand of God, set a part one of the sixe dayes, to keepe a Sabbath dayes rest on it? Answ. No, they may not; because the Lord no where in his Word requires it, and because they working in the case of present necessitie laid on them by the prouidence of God, they breake not the Sabbath; if so be in their labouring they obserue the cautions before laid downe. And so much of the first reason. Now to the second. The seuenth day is the Sabbath of Iehouah thy God, it is the Lords right. Quest. What may we further gather from these words, the seuenth day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God? Answ. The danger of prophaning the Sabbath, either by works of profit or works of pleasure; they that so doe, they rush on their owne distruction. Pro. 20.25.ro. 20.25. It is a destruction for a man to devoure that which is sanctified, or dedicated to the Lord? Quest. Is the Sabbath being set a part of the Lord to his owne seruice, holier then another day? Answ. In the nature of the day it is not, for then it could not haue beene changed from the last day of the weeke to the first; but in respect of the vse of it, it is as the water in Baptisme is holier then other waters; not in it selfe, or
by inherent holinesse; but in respect of the vse of it in that Sacrament. Quest. May not the Church hauing power, set a part dayes for holy meetings, dedicate and consecrate those daies to the ho∣nour of Saints or Angels? Answ. No it may not; it is the priuiledge of God to ap∣point a day of holy rest, and to set it apart to his owne ser∣uice and honour. Exod. 16.23. Too morrow is the holy rest vn∣to the Lord. Exod. 35.2. Times and seasons are only in his power, therefore he only is to haue the honour of them.Act. 1.7. Mat. 26.13. Christ promiseth, that the charitable act of Mary Magdalene wrought on him, should be recorded & re∣membred: therefore say the Papists, the good works of the Saints may be recorded, to their honour and commemorati∣on; and holy-daies may be dedicated to them. Quest: How is this to be answered? Answ. The good works of the Saints may be remembred to the honour of God, without their holy daies. Againe, Christ appointed no holy-day for Mary Magda∣lene, but a memorie of her in the preaching of the Gospell: therefore this makes nothing for the dedication of dayes, to the honour of Saints and Angels. Now to the third reason from the Lords owne ex∣ample: In sixe dayes the Lord made the Heauen and the Earth, the Sea, and all that is in them,Exod. 20. and rested the seuenth day. Quest: Doth the example of the Lord, here bind vs necessari∣ly both to worke and to rest as the Lord did? Answ: No; it doth not in all particulars:Gen. 24.63. Psal. 119.164. Mat. 14.23. for sixe dayes are permitted vs to doe what wee haue to doe in them, so that if the works of our callings, either fall out in the order and couse of them to be none at all on some dayes; or may iustly be put off from one day to an other, we may then on those dayes cease from bodily labours, and bestow the time either on holy exercises; as meditation, prayer, reading, singing of Psalmes, holy conference, and such like; or on honest and lawfull recreation. Quest. What may we further gather from these words: In
sixe dayes the Lord made the heauen and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; the greatnesse of Gods power, that he is able to bring to passe great matters in a short time;. 32, 17.6. in that hee spent no longer time then sixe dayes in framing the whole world, and all things in it. Quest. Why did the Lord take so much time as sixe dayes to make the world in; hee could haue made it with as much ease in a minute of an houre, as in sixe dayes? Answ. It was his pleasure to make the world, and all things in it, in sixe distinct dayes; that wee might thereby haue fitter occasion distinctly and seuerally to consider of the seuerall Creatures: for if the Lord had made the world in a moment, it had not been so easie and plaine for our Me∣ditation. Quest. What is the second thing? Answ. This; the Creation of the Angells, though the particular time, and day of their Creation cannot bee set downe cerainely: yet hence wee may gather, that they were created within the compasse of the sixe dayes: for they had a beginning, and were created of God; and being things in heauen, wee may gather, that their creation was in the compasse of sixe dayes. Quest. Why was not the creation of the Angels spoken of par∣ticularly, in setting downe the creation of all things? Ans. Because, if it had been particularly specified, it would haue been thought, that the Angels had helped God in ma∣king the world, as some haue thought. Quest. How is God said to haue rested the seuenth day? Answ. Not as being weary in working, but that hee ceased, and left off to worke; and that not simply, but onely from his worke of Creation; for by his prouidence hee worketh still in the preseruation and gouernment of all things created, Iohn 5.17.hn. 5.17. So much of the third reason. Now to the fourth and last reason, the Lords blessing of the Sabbath day.
Quest. What is the blessing that is here set on the Sabbath, in that it is said, the Lord blessed it? Answ: This; that the Lord doth make the Sabbath, being obserued and kept as it ought to bee, an effectuall meanes of good, both to the soule and to the body. Quest. What then followes on this, that the Lord blessed the Sabbath day? Answ. This;Isa. 56.4. to 8. Isa. 58.13.14. Iere. 17.24. to 28. that the keeping of an holy rest to God on the Sabbath, brings the speciall blessing of God, not only on the soule, but on the body and outward estate also: and the breaking of the holy rest on the Sabbath, either by works of profit, or works of pleasure; brings the curse on body, soule, and whole estate. Quest. May we looke for a more speciall blessing from God on the Sabbath day, then on other daies of the weeke; wee perfor∣ming the same holy exercises on those dayes, that wee doe on the Sabbath? Answ. Though we may looke for a blessing from God, on those houres that wee redeme from our outward callings, and spend in holy exerciss on the weeke daies, yet wee may looke for a more speciall blessing from God on the whole Sabbath (wee obseruing it as it ought to bee obserued) by reason of Gods owne ordinance and promise: as wee may looke for a blessing from the Lord on priuate prayer,Psal. 84.1.2.3.4.10. Zach. 8.21. Mat. 1 8.20. rea∣ding of the Word of God, and such like; yet a greater bles∣sing may we looke for, euen by the Lords owne promise on the holy exercises performed in publike. Quest. How did the Lord sanctifie the Sabbath? Answ. Two waies; by his example,1 Tim. 4.5. and by his Word and Commandement, setting it a part to a religious and holy vse, and to be spent in holy and good duties. Quest. What may hence be gathered, that the Lord did sancti∣fie the Sabbath? Answ. Thus much; That the Sabbath of the Iewes, and the Sabbath also of the new Testament, the Lords day, is of diuine institution, and not appoited by tradition of the Chuch as the Papists teach: for it belongs only to the Lord to sanctifie the Sabbath, both of the Old and New Testament,
and being sanctified and set apart by the Lord himselfe to holy vses. The obseruation and keeping of it is by diuine appointment, and not by the tradition of the Church. Quest. Why did the Lord annexe to this Commandement so many and so strong reasons to perswade to the obedience of it; and propounded some other Commandements without any reason at all? Answ. Both because this Commandement is more spiri∣tuall, and not so deepely imprinted in nature, as some o∣ther Commandements are; as namely those that forbid mur∣der, adulterie, and such like. And because also hee would haue men to haue a speciall regard of obseruing and keeping this Commandement, the keeping of the rest depending on the keeping of this. HItherto of the Commandements of the first Ta∣ble containing our duty to God. Now to the Commandements of the second Table,The Second Table. which concerne our duty to our Neighbour. Quest. What agreement is there betweene the Commande∣ments of the first and second Table? How are they like one to the other, as Mat. 22.38.39? Ans. They agree, and they are like one to the other in three respects. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; they are both parts of our obedience to God; for God is to be obeyed in both Tables, he comman∣ding them both; and though the duties of the second Table be done immediately to men; yet indeed they are done to God also:Ephes. 6.1.7. Colos. 3.18.23.24. as where obedience to such as be in authoritie is called for, it is required in the Lord, and as to the Lord? Quest. What is the second? 1 Cor. 6.9.10Answ. This; The same punishment, euen euerlasting death, is threatned against euery transgression; as well of the second, as of the first Table. Reuel. 21.8.Reu. 21.8. not only the fearefull and vnbeleeuing, and the abhominable, and sorcerers, and
Idolaters; but murtherers, and whore-mongers, and all liers, shall haue their part in the Lake, which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Quest: What is the third? Answ. This; they are ioyntly to be obeied, they are not to be seuered in our obedience; obedience to one without o∣bedience to the other cannot profit vs: hee that feares God must loue his brother, and a man cannot truly loue his bro∣ther, vnlesse he first feare God,1 Iohn. 4.20. whose Image he reuerenceth in his brother. Quest. How many Commandements be there of the second Table? Answ. Only sixe and not seuen, as the Papist teach, diui∣ding the tenth into two. Mar. 10.19. Christ repeating the Commandements of the second Table, addeth this moreouer, Thou shalt hurt no man; therefore it seemes there bee more then sixe Comman∣dements of the second Table. Quest: How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Christ doth not in those words, Thou shalt hurt no man, adde a Commandement; but therein sets downe a generall containing the summe of all the rest. Rom 13.9. The Apostle rehearseth only fiue Comman∣dements. Thou shalt not commit adulterie. Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steale. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse. Thou shalt not couet: and omitteth that Commandement, Honour thy Father and thy Mother, &c. It may seeme therefore that that Commandement belongs not to the second Table: and so there be but fiue Commandements of the second Table. Quest: How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; that Commandement is not there particu∣larly rehearsed: because the Apostle had in that Chapter, trea∣ted before of the duty towards higher powers and superiors, who are comprehended vnder the name of parents. Quest. Why is the Commandement of honouring Parents, the first of the second Table? Ans. Because it is the very foundation & bond of obediēce, to the other commandements that follow; for if that Com∣manded
bee well obserued both of superiours, inferiours, and equalls, there will bee no failing in any duty required in the Commandements following. Quest. What are the words of the fift Commandement? Answ. Those we finde. Exod. 20.12. Honour thy Father and thy Mother, that thy dayes may bee prolonged vpon the Land, which Iehouah thy God giueth thee. Question. What are the generall things contained in these words? Answ. These two. First, a precept in these words: Honour thy Father and thy Mother. Secondly, a confirmation of that precept, by a promise made to such as yeeld obedience to it, in the words follow∣ing. That thy dayes may be prolonged vpon the Land, which the Lord thy God giueth thee. Of these in Order. First of the Commandement, Honour thy Father and thy Mother, &c. Malac. 1, 6. 1 Tim. 6.1.Quest: What signifies the word (Honour)? Answ. Thus much; that men yeeld that due respect, and duety to euery one, that any way concernes the dignitie which God hath bestowed on them, and especially the dig∣nitie of Superiours. Quest. What is that dignity that God bstowes on men, where∣unto honour belongs?Dan. 2.38. Psal. 82.1.6. Dan. 7.9. Ans: It is any part of Gods Image imparted to them, euen any thing bestowed on men, wherein they are like to God, and doe resemble his Maiestie; as in Magistrates, there is a resemblance of the power and glory of God. In a∣ged persons a resemblance of the eternitie; and the like. Leuit. 19.32. Isa. 49.23. 2 King. 6.21. 2 King. 13.14. 2 King. 5.13. Iob. 29.16.Quest. What is meant by Father and Mother? Answ. Not only naturall Parents, but others also, that are our superiours in age, in place, or in giftes. Quest. Why did the Lord vse the name of Father and Mo∣ther, to signifie and to comprehend all other Superiours, rather then the name of King, or Prince, or such like? Answ: For three reasons especially.
Quest: What is the first of those? Answ. This; because the gouernment of Fathers is the first and most ancient of all other, and the societie of Father and Mother, is that, from whence all other societies doe come. Quest. What is the second reason? Answ: This; because the Lord would haue all Superiours to haue the affection of Fathers towards their inferiours; and all inferiours, to haue the affection of Children towards their superiours: that so both of them may doe their duties out of loue, and with ioy;Psal: 103.13. and therefore the Lord expresseth his loue, by the loue of a Father. Quest: What is the third reason? Answ. This; because the name of Father is most amiable, and allureth to obedience; and the Lord punisheth most se∣uerely, the breach of duty towards parents: as Cham. Gen. 9.25.Gen: 9.25. Absalom. 2 Sam. 18.9.2. Sam: 18.25. Quest. Why is here particular mention made of Mother? Answ. Because Children are most apt and ready to de∣spise their Mother, in regard of her infirmities.Pro. 23.22. Mat. 23.9. Christ saith, call no man Father vpon the Earth, for there is but one, your Father which is in Heauen. Quest. How shall we answer this? Answ. Thus; Christ doth not there forbid the name of Father simply, but only as it is affcted and sought after am∣bitiously; as it was in the Pharisees: and his meaning is, that we should not call any Father on earth, as wee call God our Father (that is) to put our trust in him, and to make him the authour and preseruer of our life. Quest. What is then the summe of this commandement? Answ: This; that by thought, word, and deede;Iud: epist: v: 8. Prou: 30.11. Rom: 1.30. we yeeld that due respect and duty, that belongs to the dignitie which God hath bestowed on others, they bearing his Image, either in respect of age, of place, or of gifrs. This commandement being Affirmatiue; I will first stand on the Affirmatiue part of it. Quest. What is required and commanded in this fift Com∣mandement?
Answ. In generall thus much; it requires all due respect, and all due carriage of inferiours towards their superiours; and by necessary consequent of superiours also towards their inferiours, and of equalls among themselues; that euery one carry themselues as becomes him, in regard of that relation that hee hath to others; either as a superiour, an inferiour, or equall. Of this in generall, and then more particularly. Quest. Wherein standeth that due respect, and due carriage of inferiours in generall, towards their superiours. Answ. In two things; first in yeelding to them due reue∣rence, both inward and outward: and secondly, in a care and endeuour to deserue well of them. Quest. What is that inward reuerence that inferiours are to yeeld to their superiours? Answ: This it is; a reuerent opinion and estimation of them;Leuit. 19.3. 1 Sam. 10.26. Rom. 13.1.2. Ephes. 6.5. that they thinke and esteeme of them reuerently, in regard of Gods Ordinance, in setting them ouer them: and because they beare Gods Image. Quest: What is that outward reuerence, that inferiours are to yeeld to their superiours? 1 Sam. 1.15. Leuit. 19.32. Gen. 18.2. Mark. 10.17. Exod. 18.13. 1 King. 2.19.Answ. It is a manifestation of their inward reuerence, both by word and deede, both by reuerent speeches, and by reuerent behauiour; as by rising vp before them, baring the head, bowing the knee, giuing them the chiefe seat; and the like. Quest. Wherein stands that care and endeauour of inferiours, to deserue well of their superiours? Answ: In yeelding two things to them; obedience and thankfulnesse. Quest. What is that obedience that inferiours are to yeeld to their superiours? 1 Pet. 2.13.14. Heb. 13.17. Pro. 15.5.Answ. This; they are willing to submit themselues to their lawfull commandements, and to their admonitions, re∣proofes, and corrections. Quest. What is that thankfulnesse that inferiours are to yeeld to their superiours? Answ. This; they are not only in words, thankfully to
acknowledge their goodnesse towards them;Gen: 47.25. 1. King: 5.417. but to indea∣uour also to requite them by doing good to them againe. They are only to be reuerenced, but to be thankfully recom∣penced. Quest. How are inferiours by way of requitall to doe good a∣gaine to their superiours? Quest. Two waies. First, by yeelding them their helpe in outward things;Rom: 13.6.7. Gal: 6.6. 1. King: 2.1.2. if they stand in neede of it. Secondly, by praying for them. Quest. What if superiours be vnworthy of honour, and faile in their duty; are not inferiours then discharged from yeelding ho∣nour to them? Answ: No they are not: for inferiours are to looke, not only to the persons of their superiours, or to their actions a∣lone, but to the ordinance of God; who hath placed them aboue them. And the failing of inferiours in their duty, is not excused by the fayling of their superiours. Quest: Wherein stands that due respect and due carriage of superiours in generall whatsoeuer they bee towards their in∣feriours? Answ. It standeth either in yeelding that which is due from them to all that are any way inferiour to them in age, place or gifts; or in yeelding that which is due from them towards such as are inferiours to them, more specially in re∣spect of place, and are vnder their power and gouernment. Quest: What are the things that are due from superiours to all that are any way inferiour to them? Answ. They are three in number. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This:Iob 29.7.8. Philip: 3.17. Tit: 2.7. 1. Pet: 5.3. superiours are to goe before their inferi∣ours in an holy conuersation and good example, shewing forth all grauitie according to their place by their counte∣nances, gestures, words and deeds. Quest. VVhat is the second thing due from superiours towards their inferiours? Answ. This; superiours are in meekenesse of Spirit to yeeld to their inferiours in good things, respecting them as
their brethren, Deut: 17.20.Deut: 17.20. The Kings heart must not be lif∣ted vp aboue his brethren, 2. King: 5.13.14.2. King: 5.13.14. Quest. What is the third thing due from superiours towards their inferiours? Iob 31.13. Rom: 14.3.Answ. This; superiours (keeping and maintaining their state and place) are to be affraid to wrong or despise the mea∣nest of their inferiours. Quest. VVhat are the things that are due from superiours to∣wards their inferiours that bee vnder their power and gouern∣ment? Answ. They likewise are three in number. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Deut: 17.19. 1. Sam. 2.30. 2. King: 23.1.2.3.Answ. This; they are to rule them in the Lord, and to endeauour that God may bee honoured by all that are vnder their gouernment. God reprooues Eli for letting his sonnes dishonour him. Quest. What is the second thing due from superiours towards their inferiours, that be vnder their power and gouernment? Rom: 13.4. Isai: 49.23. Numb: 11.12. Gen: 18.19. Gen: 9.26.27. Heb: 11:20;Answ: This; they are to seek the good of their inferiours, the good of their bodies, and the good of their soules by pro∣uiding good things for them, by protecting and supporting them, by giuing them good instructions, commandements, and counsels, by praying for them, and blessing them accor∣ding to the power they receiue from God. Quest. VVhat is the third thing due from superiours towards their inferiours, that be vnder their power and gouernment? Psal: 101 6.7. Rom: 13.3.4.Answ. This; they are in wisedome and discretion to vse their authoritie ouer their inferiours, to the fauouring, coun∣tenancing, and rewarding the good and such as doe well, and to the discountenancing and punishing the bad and euill do∣ers according to their faults and offences. Quest. VVherein stands that due respect and due carriage of equals amongst themselues in generall whatsoeuer they be? Philip: 2.3. Rom: 12.10.Answ. In a modest preferring each other before them∣selues both in opinion and practice. Now to the due respect and due carriage of inferiours towards their superiours, of superiours towards their inferiours, and of equals amongst themselues more particularly.
Quest. How many waies doe certaine persons men or women stand in relation one to another, either as inferiors, or superiours? Answ Two waies; either in priuate as in the family, or in publike, as in the common wealth. Of these in Order. Quest: What is the relation of certaine persons, either of supe∣riority or inferiority in the Familie? Answ. It is either that which is naturall; as betweene Parents and Children, or that which is by calling and condi∣tion, as betweene husband and wife, or betweene Master and Seruants. Of these seuerally, and first concerning Children. Quest. VVherein standeth that due respect, and due carriage of children towards their parents? Answ. It stands in yeelding three things to them. Reuerence. Obedience, and Thankefulnesse. Quest. VVhat is that Reuerence that Children are to yeeld to their Parents? Answ. It is two-fold. Inward, and Outward. Quest. What is the inward reuerence that children are to yeeld to their parents? Answ. This; they are both in minde and in heart to re∣uerence their parents, by thinking and esteeming reuerently of them; and by louing them and fearing them,Leuit. 19.3. Malac. 1.6. Heb. 12.9. in regard of their authority ouer them; and of Gods Image which they beare as they be parents, be they neuer so meane or poore. Quest. What is the outward reuerence that children are to yeeld to their parents? Answ. It is the declaration of their inward reuerence,Gen. 22.7. Gen. 48.12. 1 King. 2.19. by their reuerent behauiour towards them, both in their words and gestures; signified and expressed by giuing them reue∣rent titles, by bowing their bodies before them, by vncoue∣ring of their heads in their presence, if sonnes; by an humble and lowly countenance and carriage, when their parents ei∣ther speake to them, or they to their Parents.
Quest. May Children kneele before their Parents when they entreat them to pray to God to blesse them? Answ. Yes, they may; for they may bend and bow downe their whole bodyes before them, as wee may see in the ex∣ample in the place before alleadged. Gen. 48.12. he did reue∣rence downe to the ground before his Father; therefore Children may kneele before their parents. Isai. 45.23. Euery knee shall bow vnto mee (saith the Lord) The knees are proper to God alone, therefore knee∣ling to Parents is not lawfull. Quest. How shall we answer this? Answ. Thus; that is meant of religious bowing, reue∣rence, worship, adoration, and subiection proper to God alone: and not of ciuill reuerence and bowing, which may be giuen to men; as appeares Psal. 22.29. Rom. 14.11. apply∣ed to Christ. Quest. Are children to reuerence both the Father and the Mo∣ther equally? Answ. Yes, they are; reuerence is equally to be yeelded by Children to their Father and to their Mother as they are Parents; but if any personall gift, or grace of wisedome, or vertue, doe appeare more in the one then in the other; be it in Father or in Mother, in that respect more reuerence is there to be yeelded. Quest. What is that obedience that Children are to yeeld to their parents? Answ. This; it is a willing and hearty yeelding (so far forth as children are able) to the voice and to the will of their Parents, a yeelding from the heart willingly as they are able, to that which is said to them by their Parents, or by their Parents willed to be done, or suffered of them. Quest. Wherein standeth that willing and hearty yeelding of children to the voice, and to the will of their Parents? Answ. In two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Gen. 24.15. Pro. 1.8. Ephes. 6.1.Answ. This; it is a cheerefull yeelding (so farre forth as they are able) to those things which their parents teach,
or counsell, or commaund,Coll. 3.20. 1. Sam. 2.25. being things very honest and lawfull though they bee neuer so base or paine∣full. Quest. What is the second thing wherein that willing and hearty yeelding of children to the voice and will of their parents standeth? Answ. This;Prou. 13.1. Prou. 15.5. Heb. 12.9. it is a quiet and a patient suffering of that which their parents doe inflict and lay on them in word or deede, bee it admonition, reproofe, or cor∣rection. Quest. Is a good child to yeeld obedience to a wicked father or mother? Answ. A good child is to obey his wicked father or mo∣ther as they bee parents, and beare the office of father and mother, for so they beare the image of God; but not as they be wicked persons, and command wicked things: for parents are to be obeyed onely in the Lord.Ephes. 6.1. Quest. Is the sonne being a Magistrate and the father none, or inferiour to him, to yeeld obedience to his father? Answ. In things that concerne not his place and office be∣ing honest and lawfull, the sonne is to yeeld obedience to his father; and in things also that may further him in the execution of his office the sonne is to obey his father as Moses did, Exod: 18.24.Exod. 18.24. But if the father counsell or cōmand any thing against his place and office, then the sonne is not to obey him. Quest: To which of the parents are children to yeeld obedi∣ence, they counselling or commanding diuers or contrary things, yet honest and lawfull things, and such things as may bee yeelded vnto? Answ. Obedience is rather to bee giuen to the counsell or commandement of the father, then of the mother; if the father and mother counsell or command diuers or con∣trary things, because the man is the head of the woman,1 Cor. 11.3. Ephes. 5.23. and chiefe gouernour of the family. Quest: Are children to yeeld obedience to the father and mo∣ther in law?
Exod. 18.24. Ruth: 3.5. Micha: 7.6. Luk. 2.51.Answ: Yes, they are; obedience is due from children, not onely to naturall parents, but also to step-father, and to step-mother: Christ was subiect or obedient to his supposed father. Quest. Wherein is that obedience that children are to yeeld to their parents, especially to be expressed? Answ. In two things being of speciall waite and con∣sequence. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in the choyce of a fit and lawfull calling, children are therein to be directed at the discretion of their parents, and to yeeld to them, they making choyce of a fit and lawfull calling for them. 1. Sam: 8.1.1. Sam. 8.1. Mark: 6.3.Mark: 6.3. Christ before his Baptisme liued vnder his father in that calling at the trade of a Carpenter. Quest. May not children being out of their nonage, being past twelue or foureteene yeeres of age take on them a calling, and enter into an order of religion without the consent and will of their pa∣rents: yea, against their consent, as the Papists teach? Answ. No, they may not; a child, sonne, or daughter is not exempted from obedience to parents at any age, and the father may make voide the vowe of his child, though pertayning to Gods worship. Nom: 30.6.Nomb. 30.6. there∣fore children are not to enter on a calling without the pa∣rents consent. Quest. What is the second thing wherein the obedience that children are to yeeld to their parents is to be expressed. Deut: 7.3.Answ. This; in the matter of marriage, children are therein to bee ordered and disposed of by their parents, and in that businesse the parent is the principall agent and dis∣poser of the Childe. Ier: 29.6.Ier: 29.6. 1. Cor: 7.38.1. Cor: 7.38. Gen. 21:21. Gen: 24.3.4.Gen. 21.21. & 24.34. Isaack being forty yeares old was disposed of by his father, Gen: 28.1.2.Gen. 28.1.2. Iudg: 14.1.2.Iudg: 14.1.2. Though Sampson was inflamed with the loue of a woman of the Philistimes, yet hee durst not take her till shee was giuen him of his Father. Quest. If the Father command his Sonne or his Daughter
to marry being marriageable, is the child to obey the commande∣ment of the Father? Answ. The Father commanding the child to marry be∣ing marriageable, the child is to obey; two things concur∣ring with the commandement of the father. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; if the commandement be without compul∣sion the child being willing to marry,Gen. 24.57.58. for the sonne is not to be compeld to marry against his will, nor the daughter a∣gainst her will. Quest. What is the second thing? Answ. This; if the father command the child onely thus farre, to marry with a person well qualified, of honest life and conuersation and of sound religion, as Isaack comman∣ded Jaacob, Gen: 28.1.2.Gen. 28.i.2. and not with this or that par∣ticular person, the childe hauing no minde there to match. Quest. Are children to bee ordered by their parents, and to haue their consent in their second marriages? Answ. Though the consent and good will of parents in second marriages bee not absolutely necessary; yet it is to be thought fit and conuenient, because children in some re∣gard exempted from parents authoritie, doe not withstand∣ing owe duty to them, and they are to testifie it by being ad∣uised by them in some sort in their after bestowing of them∣selues in marriage. Quest. What is that thankefulnesse that children are to yeeld to their parents? Answ. This; it is not onely an acknowledgement in word of the goodnesse and loue of their parents towards them, and of their care ouer them for their good: but a care and an en∣deauour also in children so farre as they are able to answere that goodnesse, loue, and care of their parents by doing good to them againe. Quest. Wherein standeth that care and endeauour of children to answere the goodnesse, loue, and care of their parents by doing good to them againe? Answ. In foure things.
Quest: What is the first of those? ro. 10.1. & 15.0. ro. 23.15.16.Answ. This; in yeelding comfort to their parents by their honest and good life: children are to endeauur to bring ioy and comfort to their parents by their honest and good car∣riage. Quest: What is the second thing wherein stands the care and endeauour of children to answere the goodnesse, loue, and care of their parents by doing good to them againe? Gen. 47.12. Ruth. 2.18. 1. Sam. 22.3.4.Answ. This; in succouring and relieuing their parents in case of want: children are according to their ability to relieue their parents being poore, aged, distressed and helpe∣lesse, with food and rayment, and other necessaries. Ioh: 19.26.27.Iohn. 19.26.27. Christ commaunds Iohn to be a sonne to the Virgine Mary his mother,1 Tim. 5.3. and to prouide for her. Quest. What is the third thing wherein stands the care and endeauour of children to answere the goodnesse, loue, and care of their parents by doing good to them againe? 1 Tim. 2.1.2.Answ. This; in praying for their parents: children are to pray as for all in authoritie, so especially for their pa∣rents. Quest. What is the fourth thing wherein stands the care and endeauour of children to answere the goodnesse, loue, and care of their parents by doing good to them againe? Gen. 48.1. & 25 9. Gen. 35.29. & 50.12.13.Answ. This; in comforting their parents as they are a∣ble in time of their sicknesse: and in committing their bodies to the graue being dead, after an honest and seemely man∣ner. Mat: 8.21.22. Christ said to one of his Disciples (who said to him, Suffer mee first to goe to bury my father) follow mee, and let the dead bury their dead: Therefore it may seeme not to bee a duty of children to bury their dead parents. Quest: How shall we answere this? Answ. Thus; Christ there speakes comparatiuely, that in comparison of following him, and preaching the Gospell to which that Disciple was called, he should neglect the bu∣riall of his father: therefore Luk. 9.60.Luk. 9.60. Christ saith, Let the dead bury their dead, but goe thou and preach the kingdom of God.
Quest. Is thankefulnesse to bee yeelded by children equally to both parents? Ans. Yes, it is; children are to shew themselues thanke∣full as they are able both to father and mother: they being both one, no difference is to be made betweene them in that respect. Quest. Are base borne children to yeeld reuerence, obedience, and thankefulnes to their parents? Answ. Such children are by the ciuill law exempted from all dutie and obedience to such parents: and it were iust if such parents as doe violate the law of marriage should re∣ceiue no benefit by the fruite thereof: yet their piety is commendable if they performe these duties of their owne accord. Now concerning Parents. Quest. Wherein standeth the due respect and the due carriage of parents toward their children? Answ. It stands in two things, first, in educating and bringing vp their children: and secondly, in a wise disposing of them being brought vp. Quest. What is that education that parents are to yeeld to their children? Answ. This it is; parents are to be carefull both of the preseruation of the liues of their children, that their chil∣dren may both liue and haue their liues preserued: and that they may also liue well, and lead a godly life, Ephes. 6.4.Ephes. 6.4. Quest. Wherein are parents to expresse their care touching the preseruation of the liues of their children? Answ. In two things especially. Quest: What is the first of those? Answ This;Mat. 7.9.10. 1 Tim. 5.8.10. parents are according to their ability to yeeld and to giue to their children such competent food and cloathing: and other necessaries as be fit for them, and agree∣able to their age: as breast-milke is first to bee giuen of the mother to the infant, and when it is weaned, other food fit for it. Quest: Is then the mother to giue such to her child; and her selfe to nurse it vp?
en. 21.7. Sam. 1.22. sal. 22.9. uke 2.7. am. 4.3.4.Answ. Yes she is; the mother is her selfe to giue such to her owne child, and to wrap it in swadling cloathes: nature it selfe teacheth this dutie, and no meat is more naturall to the child then the mothers milke. Quest. May not the mother in any case commit her child to a nurse? en. 24.59. nd 35.8. 2. Sam. 4.4.Answ. Yes she may; in case of want of health, or ability or any other iust impediment: the impediment being iust and not pretended out of wantonnesse, nicenesse, trouble or the like. Quest. What is the second thing wherein parents are to ex∣presse their care touching the preseruation of the liues of their children? Answ. This; parents are as God giueth them abilitie, by diligence in their callings, and a carefull vse of all good and lawfull meanes, and a wise ordering of their expences, to prouide,1. King. 21.3. Pro. 29.14. 2 Cor. 12.14. and to lay vp somthing for the maintenance of their children in time to come: so as they pinch not themselues in things necessary, nor neglect the doing of that good which they are bound to doe to the Church, common wealth, or poore: and wisely to order and to dispose of those things they haue prouided for the good of their children. Quest. How are parents wisely to dispose of the things they haue prouided for the good of their children? Gen. 5.5.6. Isai. 38.1 Nomb. 27.7.8.Answ. Thus; by disposing of them by will or otherwise, as shall be thought fit in their life time, giuing most to them which are the best of their children, and haue most grace in their heats, preferring the sonne deseruing well before the daughter in bestowing of their lands and possessions. Quest. Wherein are parents to expresse their care in brin∣ging vp their children that they may liue well and lead a god∣ly life? Answ: In foure things. Quest. What is the first of those? Gen 21.3.4. Luk. 1.59.60.61. &c. Luk. 2.21.Answ: This; parents are to be carefull that their children newly borne may with all conuenient speed, and in due order be admitted into the true visible Church of God by baptis∣me, and haue a fit name giuen to it.
Quest. What is the scond thing wherein parents are to ex∣presse their care in bringing vp their children? Answ. This; parents are not onely to teach their children ciuility and good manners, and to traine them vp in learning and humane knowledge and affaires:Deut. 4.10. Deut. 6.7.20.21. Deu. 11.19. but they are also to in∣struct them in religion, and to endeauour to sow the seeds of godlinesse and Religion in their hearts so soone as they are able to speake,Prou. 22.6. Ephes. 6.4. 2 Tim. 3.15. and come to the vse of reason and vnderstan∣ding: and to endeauour, that as their children grow in yeares, so they may grow and increase in knowledge and grace. Quest. May parents teach their young children words of pie∣tie, they being not able to conceiue, and to vnderstand the meaning of them? Answ. Yes they may, and they ought to teach their young children so soone as they are able to heare and speake words, the words and termes of goodnes: they will afterward when they come to more dscretion, conceiue and remember them,Prou. 22.6. Ephes. 6.4. and that to good vse. Quest. How are parents to deale in instructing their young children in learning and religion? Answ. So, as their children may take it with delight: some∣times allowing them in moderate manner to play,Zach. 8. and to vse recreations fitting for their yeares. Quest. What is the third thing wherein parents are to ex∣presse their care in bringing vp their children, that they may liue well, and lead a godly life? Answ. This;Kings 1.6. Prou. 13.24. Prou. 19.18. & 23.13, 14. Hebr. 12 7, 9. parents are to check and to rebuke their chil∣dren, when they offend and doe amisse, in word to reprooue them discreetly if that will serue the turne; if not, they are t giue them seasonable, due, and moderate correction, 1. Kig. 1.6. Dauid was faultie herein. Quest. How are parents to order their correction, that i may be due and moderate? Ans. Thus; they are as neere as they can to  their cor∣rection to the nature and qualitie of the offen of the child, and to consider how often or seldome the ild hath so offen∣ded, and to corrct it with compassion in their hearts, and with a lifting vp their hearts to God in prayer, that he would
giue them wise hearts to giue correction, and the child a soft heart to receiue it patiently, and to profit by it. Ephes. 6.4. Colos. 3.21. They must not be rigorous, lest they bee discou∣raged. Quest. What is the fourth thing wherein parents are to ex∣presse their care in bringing vp their children, that they may liue well, and lead a godly life? en. 28.1. & 8.15, 16.  Chro. 29.19. ob 1.5.  Sam. 12.16Answ. This; parents are to pray for the good of their children; and for the blessing of God on their bodies, and on their soules. Quest. Wherein standeth the wise disposing of children by their parents; their children being brought vp, and now of some riper yeares? Answ. In two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in the choyce of a fit and lawfull calling: parents are to make choyce of a fit and a lawfull calling, and course of life for their children being of some yeares; and to dispose of them in that calling.enes. 46.34. nes. 47.3. Gen. 4.2.Genes. 4.2. Adam brought vp one in husbandry, and the other in keeping of sheepe. Quest. How are parents to bee guided in making choyce of a calling fit for their children? Answ. By the inclination and gifts of their children: pa∣rents are to obserue both the inclination and naturall gifts of body and mind that are in their children, and accordingly to dispose of them in some honest calling: those children that ex∣cell in gifts of body, are to bee put to such callings as are to bee performed by the labour of the body;Prou. 20.11. Dan. 1.4. and those that ex∣ell in gifts of mind, are to bee applied to those callings that a performed by wit and learning. Quest. What if parents finde their children fit for diuers cal∣ling▪ what must they then doe? An. They are then to make choyce of the best calling, and findin their children being sons, of pregnant wits, and endued with e best gifts, they ae to apply them to the best and most excellen callings: as Hannah did dedicate Samuel vnto the Lord all the dayes of his life:1 Sam. 1.11. 1 Cor. 7.21. 1 Cor. 14.1. wee must labour for the best gifts, therefore for the best callings.
Quest. What is the second thing wherein standeth the wise dis∣posing of children by their parents; their children being brought vp, and now of riper yeares. Answ. This it is, the matter of Marriage:Gen. 21.21. Gen. 24.3, 4. Gen. 28.1, 2. Gen. 38.6. Ierem. 29.6. 1 Cor. 7.36. parents know∣ing their children to bee marriageable, and not to haue the gift of continency; they are to vse their best endeauour to prouide fit matches for them in time; or at the least to aduise them thereunto by themselues, or by their friends. Quest. How are parents to deale in prouiding fit Marriages for their children? Ans. Thus;Gen. 24.3, 4. Gen. 27.46. & 28.1, 2. compa∣red. Deu. 7.3, 4 Iosh. 15.16. parents are heerein to haue a speciall respect to wisdom and pietie, and as neere as they can to match their children with such as truly feare God. Quest. May not parents respect riches, & other outward things in bestowing their children in Marriage? Answ. They may not simply and onely respect riches, and other outward gifts in bestowing their children in mariage;Gen. 6.2. Gen. 29.17, 18 Prou. 31.30. Eccles. 7.13. but if riches and other things concurre with wisedome and pietie, they may in some part respect them, so as wisdom and pietie be chiefly regarded of them. Quest. May parents bestow their children in Marriage, being young, and not yet marriageable? Answ. No, they may not;Gen. 24.57. the consent of the parties vpon soundnes of iudgment is needfull in the matter of Marriage, which young children cannot giue. Now to that relation that is betweene certaine per∣sons in the family; of Superioritie and inferioritie, which is by calling, as betweene the husband and wife; and first concerning the wife. Quest. Wherein standeth the due respect, and due cariage of the wife towards her husband? Answ. In yeelding three things vnto him, namely, Subiection, Loyaltie, and Faithfull Loue, Helpe, and Comfort. Quest. What is that subiection that the wife is to yeeld to her husband? Answ. This; an humble, ready,Gen. 3.16. Rom. 7.2. and willing yeelding and
submitting of her selfe to the gouernment of her husband.Ephes. 5.22, 23 24. Col. 3.18. Quest. Wherein standeth the wiues humble, ready, and willing submitting of her selfe to her husband? Answ. In yeelding two things vnto him? Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. Reuerence both inward and outward. Quest. What is the inward reuerence that the wife is to yeeld to her husband? Ans. This; shee is to carry in her mind a reuerent opini∣on and estimation of her husband, she is to thinke reuerent∣ly of him,Ephes. 5.23.33. 1 Pet. 3.2. and to carry in her heart a reuerent awe and feare to offend him in any thing, acknowledging him as her Head, though he be neuer so poore or meane in the world. Quest. What is the outward reuerence that the wife is to yeeld to her husband? Gen. 18.12. 1 Pet. 3.6. 1 Tim. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.Answ. It is a manifestation of her inward reuerence by outward meeknesse and lowlinesse, expressed in her speech, giuing him reuerent titles and termes: and in her counte∣nance, and in all her behauiour towards him. Quest. What is the second thing wherein standeth the wiues humble, ready, and willing submitting of her selfe to her husband? Answ. Obedience, in being obedient to her husband. Quest. What is the obedience that the wife is to yeeld to her husband? Answ. This; shee is willingly to yeeld her selfe to be com∣manded,Gen. 12.5. Gen. 13.1. & 31.4.16, 17. 2. King. 4.22. 1 Pet. 3.6. gouerned, and directed by him in all things honest and lawfull, though they bee neuer so crosse and contrary to her owne minde; according to her abilitie, doing what hee giues in charge to be done, and forbearing to doe that which hee forbids. Quest. Is a wife that is very wise, and more fit to gouerne then her husband, hee being of meaner parts, and of weaker iudgement, to yeeld her selfe to bee gouerned by her husband? Answ. If the husband be franticke or mad, and altogether bereft of the vse of reason,Ephes. 5.22. Coloss. 3.18. Titus 2.5. the wife is not bound to subiect her selfe to his gouernment: but if hee haue the vse of rea∣son, though it bee but in small measure, shee is not exempt from yeelding obedience to him, though she be neuer so wise:
the Apostle speakes generally, Ephes. 5.22. Coloss. 3.18. Tit. 2.5. 1 Sam. 25.19. Abigall went out and told not her Hus∣band, who though he was foolish, yet not altogether void of vnderstanding. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. The case was such, as that Nabal and all his Fami∣lie were in danger to loose their liues, and if she had consul∣ted with Nabal, it is likely he would haue hindred her from going, therefore she went and acquainted him not with it, as it appeares vers. 34.1 Sam. 25.34. Quest. Is a good and gracious wife to yeeld obedience to a wic∣ked husband? Answ. As he is her Husband she is, for so he beares the I∣mage of God, be hee neuer so vile; but not as he is a wicked man and commands wicked things: for Wiues are to submit themselues to their Husbands in the Lord. Coloss. 3.18.Coloss. 3.18. Quest. What is that loyaltie and faithfull loue, that the Wife is to yeeld to her Husband? Answ. This;Por. 2.17. & 31.12. Rom. 7.2. Tit. 2.4. a constant keeping of the Marriage couenant made with her Husband, and a constant yeelding to him all duties of loue that concerne her so long as they liue together, with desire to giue him all holy contentment. Quest. Wherein is the loyaltie and faithfull loue of the Wife to her husband, to be expressed? Answ: In two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in her chastity:Pro. 31.11. Tit. 2.5. 1 Tim. 3.11. she is to be chast and faith∣full both in her mind and body to her Husband, and to keepe her selfe to him only. Quest. What is the second thing, wherein the loyaltie and faithfull loue of the wife to her husband, is to be expressed? Answ. This; in her secresie: shee is to keepe secret the honest intents, sayings, and doings of her husband, which he would not haue discouered; and to hide and couer his faults from all, sauing those who may helpe to better him, and pray to God for his amendment Pro. 11.13. of a faithfull heart. Pro. 12.4. by her busie tongue. Pro. 11.13. both for chastity and secresie.
Quest. What is that helpe and comfort that the wife is to yeeld to her husband? en. 2.18.  Cor. 11.9Answ: This; she is to bee helpefull and comfortable to him, both in respect of his body and outward estate, and also in regard of his soule. Quest. What is the helpe and comfort the wife is to yeeld to her husband in respect of his body? en. 27.9. ro. 31.15.23. ccles. 4.9.10.Answ. This; she is according to her ability, to vse her best endeauour to preserue his body in health; and if it bee sicke to tender it, and to looke to it with all carefulnesse and diligence. Quest. What is the helpe and comfort the wife is to yeeld to her husband, in respect of his outward estate? Answ. This; she is as much as concernes her in her place, to helpe him in the gouernment of the Family, and as the Lord makes her able, to be prouident for his estate, by exer∣cising her selfe in some profitable imployments,1 Tim. 5.15. Pro. 31.13. to 29. by appoint∣ing her Maides their worke, and ouerseeing them therein; and by wise ordering of her children and seruants, instructing and admonishing them, as occasion is offered. Quest. What is the helpe and comfort the wife is to yeeld to her husband, in respect of his soule? Answ. This; she is to vse her best indeauour, to refresh his heart with comfort in the time of heauinesse and sorrow,Iob. 19.17. 2 King. 4.9.10. 1 Tim. 2.1.2. and to stirre him vp, and to helpe him forward in good du∣ties; and to ioyne with him in the performance of them, and to pray for the good of his body, and the good of his soule. Now touching the Husbands duty towards his Wife. Quest: Wherein stands the due respect, and due carriage of the Husband towards his wife? Answ. In three things. 1. First, in a wise and right vsage of his power and authority ouer his wife. 2. Secondly, in tender loue to her. 3. Thirdly, in giuing honour to her. Quest. Wherein stands the wise and right vsage of the Hus∣bands power and authority ouer his wife?
Answ: In two things. Quest: VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; in vsing it so,Gen. 3.16. Ephes. 5.23. 1 Cor. 11.3. as that hee keepe and main∣taine his preheminence and superiority; in all things carry∣ing himselfe as the head and gouernour of his Wife. Quest: What is the second thing, wherein stands the wise and right vsage of the Husbands power and authority ouer his VVife? Answ. This; in vsing his power and authority, not as a Tyrant ouer his Wife, after his owne lust and pleasure; but so as may be for her good in all things, and so as his gouern∣ment be void of rigour and bitternesse;Gen. 2.22. 1 Pet. 3.7. Colos. 3.19. for he must bee her guide, Pro. 2.17. and gouerne her as the head doth the body, and as Christ the Church. Ephes. 5.23. and as brought to him of the Lord, as his yoake fellow, and heire with him of the same grace of life. Quest. VVherein stands the husbands tender loue to his wife? Answ. In this;Gen. 2.24. Mat. 19.5.6. Mark. 10.7.8. in cleauing to his wife as one with him∣selfe by the bond of Marriage, in the true loue and affection of his heart; in speciall manner louing her aboue all others. Quest. Wherein is the husband to expresse his tender loue, and speciall affection to his wife? Answ. In loue both to the body of his wife, and in loue al∣so to the soule of his wife. Quest. Wherein is the husband to expresse his speciall loue to the body of his wife? Answ: In two things. Quest: VVhat is the first of those? Answ. It is this;Pro. 5.19.20. Malac. 2.14.15. the Husband is to content himselfe with the loue of his owne wife only, and to keepe himselfe to her alone, both in his mind and body. Gen. 24.67. Isaack loued Rebecca, and had no more wiues but her, though in those dayes men had many wiues. Quest. How is the Husband to manifest his contentation, that he is content with the loue of his owne wife only? Ans. By being willing to haue his abode with her as much as may bee, and as his calling will suffer him;1 Pet. 3.7. Gen. 26.8.9. Isai. 62.5. Pro. 5.18.19. and by liuing cheerefully with her, letting her haue all comfortable
familiarity with him. Quest. What is the second thing wherein the husband is to ex∣presse his speciall loue to the body of his wife? 2 Sam. 12.3. Ephes. 5.29.28.Answ. This; the Husband is carefully to regard the good of the body of his wife, as he regards the good of his owne body. Quest. How is the husband to manifest his carefull regard of the good of the body of his wife? Gen. 30.30. Exod. 21.10. Pro. 27.27. 1 Tim. 5.8. Gen. 20.16.Answ. By prouiding as the Lord makes him able, all things needfull and fitting for her maintenance, according to his place and calling, for the time of his life, and after his death, if he die before her, prouiding meate, drinke, ap∣parrell; and ordering all things prouided to the best for Gods glory and her good; and by protecting her, as much as he is able from all iniuries, both at home and abroad. Quest. Wherein is the husband to expresse his speciall loue to the soule of his wife? Answ. In this; in dwelling with her as a man of know∣ledge and vnderstanding,1 Pet. 3.7. Ephes. 5.25.26.27. 1 Cor. 7.16. being carefull, and vsing his best endeauour in wisedome and discretion to doe good to the soule of his wife; and to edifie, and to build vp her soule in grace and goodnesse, and to helpe her forward in the way of Saluation. Quest. How is the Husband to manifest his care, and his wise endeauour to doe good to the soule of his wife, and to edifie, and to build vp her soule in grace and goodnesse? Answ. Two waies. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; in going before his wife in good example; the Husband is to carry himselfe so wisely and so holily, as that his wife may see in him a patterne of holinesse and wise∣dome: for he is to bee her guid. Pro. 2.17.Pro. 2.17. hee is her Head: Ephes. 5.23.Ephes. 5.23. and he is wisely to lead her, and to goe in and out before her. Quest. VVhat is the second way whereby the Husband is to manifest his care, and his wise endeauour, to doe good to the soule of his wife? Answ. This; in vsing his best endeauour, either to plant
good things, or to encrease them being already implanted in the soule of his wife, by teaching and instructing her; by gi∣uing her good counsell, by encouraging and comforting her,1 Cor. 14.35. 1 Sam. 1.8. 2 Sam. 12.24. Gen. 25.21. Gen. 30.2. 2 Sam. 6.21. Iob. 2.10. and by praying for her: and likewise in vsing his best endea∣uour to amend, and to cure the things that are amisse in her, and to reclaime her when she doth offend in word or deede, the offence being such as lyeth in his power, to reclaime her from by seasonable and louing admonition, or reproofe, as occasion is offered. Quest. How is the husband to order his admonition or reprofe of his wife, that it may be seasonable and louing? Answ. Thus; he is not to admonish or reproue his wife, either when himselfe, or his wife are in heate of passion, or before others: but afterwards, and then with a quiet heart; and with compassion, that she may see that hee seekes not to ease himselfe on her, nor her disgrace; but that he seekes the good and saluation of her soule; for all reproofes must bee vsed in fit time, and when they may doe most good.Pro. 25.11.12: Quest. May the Husband correct his wife or no? Answ. No, he may not; wee find not in Scripture, either precept or example to that purpose. 1 Pet. 3.8. For the wife must not be affraid of terrour, or slauish feare. And the Hus∣band and the Wife are one flesh, and none but a madde man will beate his owne flesh. Husbands are to loue their wiues, as Christ loueth his Church; now Christ sometimes correcteth his Church with strokes, therefore Husbands may correct their wiues with stripes and strokes. Quest. How shall we answer this? Answ. Thus; Christ is not only the Husband, but also the absolute Lord and King of his Church; and so is not the Husband ouer his Wife, he hath not such absolute power o∣uer his Wife. The authority of the husband ouer his wife, is in some sort ciuill; it is as the authority of the Magistrate: now the Ma∣gistrate hath power to correct & to pnish offenders. There∣fore the Husband may correct and punish his wife offending. Quest: How is this to be answered? Answ Thus: the authority of the Husband, is not as the
authority of the Magistrate, in the degree of it; for the Ma∣gistrate hath power of the Sword, to inflict punishment in the case of offence; but the husband hath no such power: the hus∣bands power is only directorie, or at the most, reprehensiue: he hath power to direct, to counsell, and to command; or at the most to admonish,os. 3.19. or reproue: but we find not in Scripture power giuen to the Husband, to punish his wife; that cannot stand with the loue the Husband oweth to his wife. iection.What if the Husband be a Magistrate, may not he then in∣flict punishment on his wife, in case of offence deseruing pu∣nishment? Answ. As he is an husband he may not; but only as he is a Magistrate, the offence being such as is punishable by the Magistrate; yet then punishment is rather to be inflicted on her by another, then by himselfe. Quest. What if the wife grow to extreamities, and be despe∣rately peruerse and out of order; what is the husband then to doe? Answ. The husband is to beare her extreamities as much as is possible, as part of his crosse laid on him by the Lord: but if her extreamities be such as cannot be borne without danger of his life, or whole estate, then the husband may in∣forme the Magistrate of his danger, and the Magistrate by his power may take order with her. Quest. Wherein stands the husbands giuing honour to his wife? Answ. In three things. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Gen. 2.18.21 Pro. 31.27. 1 Tim. 5.14.Answ. This; in making account of his wife, as his com∣panion and yoake fellow, and fellow helper: allowing her to helpe him in the gouernment of the Family; and leauing her, she being able and faithfull, in some houshold matters to her owne will, and to her owne iudgement and discretion: and maintaining her authority and honour, amongst children, seruants, and others in the house. Quest. What is the second thing, wherein the husband is to giue honour to his wife? Answ. This; in a wise and patient suffering, and bearing with the naturall infirmities of his wife: as her hastinesse, flownesse,Rom. 15.1. Galat. 6.2. 1 Pet. 3.7. waywardnesse, anger, and other passions and per∣turbations, so farre forth as they are displeasing to him. The rule is generall.
Quest. What is the third thing wherein the Husband is to giue honour to his wife? Answ. This;Gen. 21.12. 1 Sam. 1.23: in suffering himselfe sometimes to be admo∣nished or aduised by his wife. Quest. Is the Husband, being a man in high place, a great man, a Magistrate, to giue honour to his wife, accounting her his companion, bearing with her naturall infirmities, and suffering himselfe sometimes to be admonished by his wife, she being but of meane parentage or condition, before marryage with her? Answ. Yes, it is generall, and belongs to euery husband without exception, to giue honour to his wife: the Apostles speake indefinitely. 1 Pet. 3.7.1 Pet. 3.7. Now concening Masters and Seruants: and first touching Seruants. Quest. Wherein stands the due respect, and due carriage of Seruants towards their Masters? Answ. In yeelding foure things to their Masters: namely Reuerence. Subiection: Faithfulnesse, and Thankefulnesse. Quest. What is that reuerence that Seruants are to yeeld to their Masters? Answ. It is two fold: inward, and outward. Quest. What is the Inward reuerence, that Seruants are to yeeld to their Masters? Answ. This;Malac. 1.6. Ephes. 6.5.6.7. Colo. 3.22.23.24. 1 Pet. 2.18. They are to thinke and to esteeme reuerent∣ly of their Masters, and to carrie in their hearts a reuerent awe and feare of them, descerning Gods Image in them; and that they stand in Christ his stead to them, in regard of their authority and power as they be their Masters; though they be neuer so poore or meane in the world. Quest. Are Seruants to esteeme reuerently of wicked and vn∣godly Masters, such as are not members of Christ: and to carry in their hearts a reuerent feare of them, as bearing Gods Image, and as standing in Christ his stead to them? Answ. As they be their Masters they are; though they be neuer so vile: for a Master, as he is a master is designed of the
Lord to that Office, and hath his power from him; and how∣soeuer he be qualified, as he is a Master he beares the Image of God, and stands in Christ his stead to his Seruant, and the Seruant is so to account of him. 1 Tim. 6.1. He speakes of ser∣uants that had Infidell Masters, as appeares. vers. 2. Quest. Is not a Seruant bound to esteeme more reuerently of his Master, being religious and truly fearing God, then if he bee wicked and vngodly? Answ. Yes; he is bound to esteeme reuerently of his Ma∣ster, being religious, in a double respect: he is to carry in his heart a reuerent awe and feare of him as he is his Master: and he is also to reuerence him, and to loue him as he is reli∣gious: 1 Tim. 6.2. beloued (that is) beloued of God, or wor∣thy to be beloued. Quest: What is the outward reuerence that seruants are to yeeld to their Masters? Answ. This; it is a manifestation of their inward reue∣rence: they are to manifest their inward reuerence and feare of their Masters, by their reuerent behauiour towards them, both in word and deede: as by giuing them reuerent titles, by bowing to them, by standing bare in their presnce, if men seruants;King. 5.13.5. o. 27.18. cts. 10.7. and by an humble and submissiue countenance and carriage, either when their Masters speake to them, or they speake to their masters. Quest: Are seruants to yeeld like measure of outward reuerence to all masters, of what place or calling soeuer they be? Answ. As they be their masters they are; for so they doe equally beare the Image of God before them, and are equally to be reuerenced: but if the master be not only a master, but also a Magistrate or a Minister, or such like; in that respect, more reuerence is to bee yeelded to him by his seruants, be∣cause therein also he beareth the Image of God. Quest. VVhat is that subiection that seruants are to yeeld to their Masters? Answ. This; It is an humble, ready, and willing sub∣mitting of themselues to the exercise and practise of that speciall authoritie and power that their Masters haue ouer them.Tit. 2.9.  Pet. 2.18.
Quest. Wherein standeth that humble, ready, and willing sub∣mission of Seruants, to the exercise and practise of the authority, and power that their masters haue ouer them. Answ. In yeelding obedience to their Masters,Ephes. 6.5. Colos. 3.22. the sub∣mission of seruants to the exercise and practise of the autho∣ritie and power their Masters haue ouer them: it stands in being obedient to their Masters. Quest. What is that obedience that Seruants are to yeeld to their Masters? Answ. This; it is a ready and willing yeelding to the voice, and will of their Masters, euen a cheerefull yeelding to that which is said to them of their Masters, and willed by their Masters to be done, or suffered of them. Quest. Wherein standeth the ready and willing yeelding of Seruants to the voice and will of their Masters? Answ. In two things. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Ans. This; it is a ready and a cheerefull yeelding, so farr as they are able, to those things which their Masters teach them, or counsell them, whether they be things that pertaine to their honest and lawfull callings, and be their ordinary workes; or they be dutyes of Piety and Religion:Gen. 24.2.3.4. & 9.10. 1. Sam. 15.15. Luk. 7.8. Luk. 17.7.8:9. and a ready and a cheerefull doing (as they are able) of things com∣manded by their Mastes, being things fitting, honest, and lawfull, though they be neuer so base, or neuer so laborious and painefull. Quest. What is the second thing, wherein stands the ready and willing yeelding of Seruants, to the voice and will of their Masters? Answ. This;Gen. 16.6.8.9. 1 Pet. 2.18.20. Tit. 2.9. it is a meeke and patient bearing of that checke, rebuke, or correction that is laid on them, by their Masters; yea though the correction be without iust cause, or vnreasonable, and more then it ought to be. Quest. Is a good, a gracious, and religious Seruant, to obey a wicked and gracelesse Master? Answ. As he is his master, he is, though neuer so vile,Ephes. 6.5. Colos. 3.22. 1. Cor: 7.23. but not as hee is a wicked man, and commands wicked things: as to lye, to sweare, to breake the Sabbath, and such like:
for masters, are but Masters according to the flesh, they haue not power ouer the seruants soule and conscience, to impose any thing vpon it that is vnlawfull. Ephe. 6.5. Colos. 3.22. 1 Cor. 7.23. The Apostle forbids seruice to men (that is) in things not commanded by God, nor warranted in the Word of God. Quest. Is a Seruant, being a Iourneyman or hyred but for a day; or one whose Master is his Brother, his Ʋncle or his Kinsman, bound to such duty and obedience as other Seruants are? Answ. Yes, as he is a Seruant he is; euery Seruant is bound to yel duty and obedience to his Master, as he is his Ma∣ster: though he be his Brother, his Vncle, or his Kinsman, as if he were not: and during the time that hee is in his Ma∣sters seruice, how long, or how shot a time soeuer it bee. Ephes. 6.5. Colos 3.22. The Apostle speakes indefinitely, Gen. 29 15.16. &c. Iacob serued his Vncle Laban. Quest. Are not seruants bound to some more particular du∣ties and seruices of their Masters then to others? en. 15.2. en. 24.2. en. 39.5.9.Answ. Though Seruants are not to refuse the doing of any thing, commanded by their Masters in the time of neede, being able to doe it: and the thing being fitting to their sex, and honest, and lawfull; yet they are bound more to their particular duties, and seruices that concerne them, in respect of their order and degree, and in regard of their quality, and condition in the Family,at. 24.45. uke. 2.8. om. 12.7. then they are to other duties and seruices: as if they be Shepheards, or Butlers, or Carters, or Stewards, or such like. Quest. Are Seruants to be directed by the will of their Ma∣sters, and to depend on their direction in euery particular thing, so as they may doe nothing without their Masters di∣rection? Gen. 39.5.6.8Answ. If their Masters will direct them in euery parti∣cular, they are to follow their direction, beeing honest and lawfull,Exodus. 3.1. vnlsse they can otherwise perswade them: but if Seruants be appointed by their Masters, their businesse and imployment in generall,Mat. 24.44. and be trusted by them for the do∣ing of it; they may then doe the particular things be∣longing
to that businesse, without their masters speciall di∣rection. Quest. What is that faithfulnesse that Seruants are to yeeld to their Masters? Answ. This;Coloss. 3.22.23. Tit. 2.10. it is a yeelding of sincere and single hear∣ted seruice to their Masters, and a doing their best endea∣uour in euery thing, to answer that trust their masters doe repose in them. Quest. Wherein is that faithfulnesse that Seruants are to yeeld to their Masters, euen their sincere and single hearted seruice, and their endeauour in euery thing to be expressed? Answ. In three things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; In diligence and painefulnesse;Ephs. 6.5.6. Col. 3.22.23. Gen. 24.33. Gen. 31.40. Seruants are to be diligent in doing that busines they are set about by their Masters; and to doe it with the vttermost strength of their minds and bodies, or both, according to the qualitie of the businesse: and that as well in the absence, as in the presence of their Masters. Question. What is the second thing, wherein that faith∣fulnesse that Seruants are to yeeld to their Masters, is to bee ex∣pressed? Answ. This; in trusty seruice,Mat. 25. from 19. to 29. Titus. 2.10. Gen. 31.38.39. Gen. 39.6.8. in a care of their Masters good and profit, and lawfull aduantage: they are at all times to bee as carefull and thrifty for their Masters and their Fa∣milies, as they would bee for themselues, and their owne Families. Quest. What is the third thing, wherein that faithfulnes that seruants are to yeeld to their Masters, is to be expressed? Answ. This; in secresie,2 Sam. 15.13. 2 King 6.11. Micha. 7.5.6. and care of their masters good name; Seruants are to keepe secret the honest intents, say∣ings, and doings of their Masters, which their masters would not haue discouered: and as much as may bee, to hide and couer their Masters wants and infirmities, and not to blaze them abroad. Quest. What is that thankefulnesse that seruants are to yeeld to their Masters? Answ. This; it is not only an acknowledgement in word of
their Masters care ouer them for their good, and of the good they receiue from them (their Masters being carefull, as they ought to be for their good) but a care and an endeauour also in Seruants, so farre as they are able, to answer that care of thir Masters, and that good they receiue from them, by do∣ing good to them againe. Quest. VVherein standeth that care and endeauour of Ser∣uants, to answer the care of their Masters for their good, and the good they receiue from them, by doing good to them againe? Answ. In three things. Quest. What is the first of those? en. 39.8.9. al. 101.6:7. o. 14.35.Ans. This; in yeelding comfort, and in binging credit to their Masters, by their honest, religious, and good carri∣age: Seruants are to endeauour to bring comfort, and cre∣dit to their Masters, by answering that regard that is had of them, and that good that is done to them of their Masters, by their honest and religious good life. Quest. What is the second thing, wherein stands the care and and endeauour of Seruants, to answer the care of their Masters for their good, and the good they receiue from them, by doing good to them againe? Answ. This; in praying for their Masters, and for di∣rection and good successe in their Masters businesse:Tim. 2:1.2. en: 24.12. Ser∣uants are to pray for all in authority, so especially for their Masters. Quest. VVhat is the third thing, wherein stands the care and endeauour of Seruants, to answer the care of their Masters for their good; and the good they receiued by them, by doing good to them againe? Answ. This: in praysing God for the good gifts of their Masters,1 Tim. 2.1.2. Gen. 4.27. and for the paines they tooke with them for their good, and for the good successe they find in the workes and businesses of their Masters: for their masters being good and religious, and honest, they haue the benefit of their gifts and paynes. Quest. Are Seruants to yeeld thankefulnesse to their masters that are carelesse of doing good to them; and to vnkind and hard dealing Masters?
Answ. Though seruants cannot bee truly saide to yeeld thankfulnesse to such masters, they receiuing no good from them; yet they are in conscience towards God to doe that which concenes them, in carrying themselues honestly and religiously in the seuice of such masters:Ephes. 6.7.8. Coloss. 3.23.24. euen for the credit of their masters, and in praying for them that God would giue them better hearts: and in praying for good successe in the workes and businsses they are set about by such masters, looking for their reward from the Lord. Seruants are not to faile in their dutie, because the masters are carelesse of theirs. Quest: What if masters bee extreamely couetous and hard to their seruants, and doe wrong them extreamely in their food, in their wages and other things, what are seruants then to doe? Answ. They are (as much as may be) to endure the coue∣tousnes and hardnesse of their masters, during the time that they serue them,Gen. 31.41.42. as part of their crosse laide on them by the Lord; and in patience to commit their wrongs to the Lord, who will one day ease them: but if the wrongs done to them by their masters be such as cannot be endured without dan∣ger of life, or vtter vndoing,Coloss. 3.25. they may then acquaint the ma∣gistrate with thir case, and the magistrate may and ought to relieue them. Quest. Wherein stands the due respect and due carriage of ma∣sters towards their seruants? Answ. In two things. First, in a wise and right vsage and xercise of their power and authority ouer their sruants. Secondly, in being helpefull to their seruants for their good. Quest. Wherein stands the wise and right vsage and exercise of that power and authority that masters haue ouer their ser∣uants? Answ. It stands both in dealing iusly with their seruants,Coloss. 4.1. and also in doing that which is equall and conscionable to them. Quest. Wherein stands the iust dealing of masters with their seruants?
Answ. In three things. Quest: What is the first of those? Answ. This; in requiring of their seruants, not onely things lawfull and possible, but things also proportionable to their abilitie and strength, for as masters are not to suffer their seruants to be idle, so they are not to oppresse them, or to ouer-burden them with workes and businesses. Leuit: 25.46.euit▪ 25.46. Ouer your brethren the children of Israel, yee shall not rule one ouer another with cruelty. Prou: 12.10.rou: 12.10. A righteous man will not ouer-load his beast, but regards the life of it, much more then, the life of his brethren. Quest: What is the second thing wherein stands the iust dea∣ling of masters with their seruants? Answ. This; in yeelding to their seruants meate, drinke, and apparell fitting for them in regard of their seruice, and in regard of their order and degree, and their qualitie and condition in the family; or competent wages to prouide the same, being carefull that their seruants haue their meate, drinke, and their whole wages in due season, Deut: 24.14.15.eut▪ 24.14.15. Prou: 31.15.21.rou: 31.15.21. Mat: 10.10.at: 10.10. The worke man is worthy of his meat (that is) of all necessaries for the maintenance of this life. Leuit: 19.13.euit: 19.13. Iam: 5.4.am: 5.4. Quest: What is the third thing wherein stands the iust dea∣ling of masters with their seruants? Answ. This; in yeelding to their seruants iust censure and correction for their faults: masters must not censure and cor∣rect their seruants without iust cause, or excessiuely; but they are wisely and discreetly to admonish, and to checke and re∣buke their seruants when they doe amisse with words,Prou: 19.29. Prou: 29.19. Exod: 21:20. if that will serue the turne: if not, they are then to giue them seaso∣nable, due, and moderate correction. Quest. How are masters to order their censure and correction of their seruants, that it may be iust, and due, and moderate? Answ. Thus; they are not to take notice of euery little ouer-sight, or of small offences of their seruants, but to wincke at them, and to let them slip; and if the fault be grea∣ter, deseruing admonition, or rebuke, or correction, they are then to measure it, not according to the nature and qua∣litie
of the offence, and to the condition and state of the person; and to consider how often or how seldome the ser∣uant hath fallen into that fault, and to rebuke or correct the seruant not in rage or passion, but with compassion and mourning in their hearts for the sinne of the seruant, and with a desire to helpe him or her out of it, entrea∣ting the Lord to make it profitable to that purpose. Eccles: 3.23. Luk: 12.47.48. Ephes: 6.9. The Apostle bids men not to be ready to threaten, &c. not so often or so as many doe; much lesse otherwayes to abuse them. Quest. What if a seruant remaine stubborne or disobedient, and be not bettered by iust, and due, and moderate correction: what is the master then to doe? Answ. If the master haue many times giuen his ser∣uant iust and due correction,Psal. 101.7. Ioh: 8.35. and haue sought to God for a blessing on it, and yet the seruant is nothing amended by it; but he findes that the seruant is still obstinate, stub∣borne and disobedient, then the master may an ought to remooue such a seruant, and to put him or her out of his seruice. Quest. Wherein stands the equall and conscionable dealing of masters with their seruants? Answ. In three things. Quest: What is the first of those? Answ This; in yeelding to their seruants moerate rest from their labours, and lawfull and seasonable recreati∣on, without which sruants cannot continue with any cheerefulnsse in the duties of their callings: and especial∣ly, masters are bound in conscince to allow their seuants liberty to sanctifie the Sabbath, to keepe an holy rest to God on that day both in publike and priuate: and hence it is said, that thy seruant and handmaid may rest, and the stran∣ger may bee refreshed, Exod. 23.12.Exod: 23.12. Deut: 5.14.Deut: 5.14. Prou: 12.10.Prou: 12.10. He will allow his beast rest, much more his ser∣uant. Quest. What is the second thing wherein stands the equall and conscionable dealing of masters with their seruants, and their do∣ing of that which is equall and iust with them?
Answ. This; in being carefull for their seruants when they fall sicke in their seruice, prouiding according to their abilitie things needfull for them in time of their sicknes: the master is bound in conscience to prouide according to his abilitie, all good meanes for the recouery of the health of his sicke seruant, and that he may haue good vsage in the time of his weakenesse. Mat: 8.5 6.Mat: 8.5.6. The Centurion tooke the best way to haue his seruant healed. 1. Sam: 30.13.1. Sam. 30.13. If a mans Horse or Oxe bee diseased hee will seeke out for meanes to cure his disease; much more should hee doe so for his ser∣uant. Quest. May not a master stoppe and keepe backe so much of his seruants wages as hee hath spent on him, and laid out for him in the time of his sickenes? Is a master bound in conscience to giue his seruant his whole wages, hee being sicke on his hand a long time, and not able to doe him any worke? Answ. The master is bound in equitie and conscience to giue his seruant his whole wages though hee bee sicke on his hand a long time, and he may not abridge him of any part of his wages for the time of his sickenesse; because the seruant is then restrained from working, not by his owne negli∣gence, but by the hand of God: and it may be he hath gotten his sickenesse by his faithfull paines taking in his masters ser∣uice, as Iacob said, Gen: 31.40.Gen. 31.40. &c. Quest. What is the third thing wherein stands the equall and conscionable dealing of masters with their seruants, and their do∣ing of that which is equall and iust with them? Answ: This; in yeelding to their seruants according to their abilitie some further recompence ouer and aboue their wages when they depart from them, according to the good and faithfull seruice they haue done them, and according to the time they haue beene with them. Deut: 15.13.14.Deut: 15.13.14. the Lord commanded that when there was a manumission, the master should giue the seruant a liberall reward of his sheepe, and of his corne, and of his wine, wherewith the Lord had bles∣sed him. Quest. What if a seruant haue stollen and purloyned from his master in the time of his seruice, may not then the master
stoppe so much of his wages as the losse comes to at his going a∣way? Answ. If the seruant be truly penitent for his fault,Philem. Epist. 18.19. and the master be able to beare the losse, hee is rather to forgiue him; but if either the seruant bee not penitent for his fault, or the master not able to beare the losse; he may then lawful∣ly make stoppe of his wages. Quest. Wherein are masters to bee helpefull to their seruants for their good? Answ. In two respects. First in regard of their calling. Secondly in regard of Religion. Quest. How are masters to bee helpfull to their seruants for their good, in regard of their calling? Answ. They are to see them follow the workes of their calling, and they are to ouersee them in their workes, and to direct them in the doing of them;Pro. 29.21. Exod. 35.34. Pro. 31.27: not onely so as may bee for their owne present good and lawfull benefit; but so also as may bee for the good of their seruants in time to come, teaching them wherein they are vnskilfull and neede teach∣ing especially in their trade and mysterie, faithfully open∣ing that to them, & so as they may best & most easily learne it. Quest. Are Tradesmen and Artificers bound to impart their whole skill to their seruants, and to acquaint them with all they know concerning their trade? Answ. If they bee such seruants as they haue taken on condition to teach them their trade, they are bound to impart to them what they know touching that trade that may law∣fully bee vsed, and they are not to conceale any thing from them that may bee therein helpefull to them:Psal. 15.4. for men are to communicate their good gifts of what kind soeuer to others so farre as they may be for their good; especially, where they are bound to it by couenant. Quest. How are masters to be helpefull to their seruants for their good in regard of Religion? Answ. Two wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; they are to be carefull that their seruants
keepe an holy rest to God on the Sabbath; endeauouring to fit them for publike holy exercises, and bringing them to the publike assemblies in due time, and looking that there they behaue themselues religiously the whole time of the exercise; and after the publike exercises are ended, taking account of that which they haue heard, that they may profit in know∣ledge and holy obedience. Exod. 20.10. The charge is prin∣cipally laid vpon the Master. Psal. 42.4. Act. 10.24.33. Seruants haue as great right in the Sabbath, the Word and Sacraments, as their Masters. Quest. What is the second way, whereby Masters are to bee helpefull to their Seruants, for their good, in regard of christian Religion? Ans. This; they are carefully, diligently in priuate to instruct their Seruants in the holy Scriptures, and in the grounds of Religion, that they may grow in knowledge; and may reape benefit by the publike ministerie of the Word;en. 18.19. eut. 6.7. osh. 24.15. erem. 10.25. and they are daily to pray with them, and for them, that the Lord would bestow on them all needfull graces. Quest. Is a Master necessarily bound at all times, in his owne person to instruct his Seruants, and to pray with them, and for them? Answ. He is; vnlesse hee bee either sicke and weake, and not able to doe those things, or be hindered by publike im∣ployment on a lawfull calling, so as hee cannot at sometimes performe them; if it bee so, then hee may lawfully haue and vse a deputie: and thus much may be gathered out of that speech of Christ. Mat. 24.45.46. Hitherto of the first way whereby certaine persons, men or women; doe stand in relation one to ano∣ther: either as Inferiours or Superiours, in a pri∣uate Family. Now to the second way whereby persons stand in relation one to another in pub∣like, and that either in Church or common wealth. Quest. What is the relation of certaine persons, either of Su∣perioritie, or Inferioritie in the Church?
Answ. It is that which is betweene the Minister and his People; or betweene the Pastor and his Flocke. Of these seuerall; and first concerning the people or flocke. Quest. VVherein stands the due respect, and due carriage of the People or Flocke, towards their Minister or Pastor? Answ. In yeelding foure things to their Minister or Pastor. 1. Reuerence. 2. Submission. 3. Assistance, and 4. Thankefulnesse. Quest. What is that Reuerence that people are to yeeld to their Minister or Pastor? Answ. This;1 King. 17.18. 2 King. 4.16. 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor. 5.20. 1 Thess. 2.13. Tit. 17. they are to haue him in reuerent account and estimation; they are to esteeme of him reuerently in their hearts, and to expresse their reuerent estimation of him both in word and deede; and especially they are to heare him (teaching the truth of God) with reuerence: euen as a mes∣senger sent to them of God, and as standing in Christ his stead, and as Gods Steward and disposer of his seruants to them, be he neuer so weake or poore. Quest. What is that Submission that people are to yeeld to their Minister or Pastor? Answ. This;Exod. 24.3.7. Ioh. 10. to 6.27. Hb. 13.17. they are willingly to yeeld themselues to be taught and guided by them; they are to heare and to know his voice, and to obey his doctrine truely deliuered to them out of the Word of God, and to follow him as the sheepe of Christ in his holy doctrine and conuersation. Quest. Are people to yeeld themselues to be taught and gui∣ded by a wicked Minister; and as the Sheepe of Christ, to heare him and to follow him? Answ. As he is a Minister, and teaching the truth of God purely and soundly, and agreeable to the word of God: they are to heare him, and to be guided by him:Mat. .1.2, 3. but not to follow him as he is a wicked man, and of wicked life and conuersation: for that is his sinne,1 Cor. 11.1. and therein hee is not to be followed.
Quest. What is that Assistance that people are to yeeld to their Minister or Pastor? Answ. It is two-fold: people are to yeeld to their Mini∣ster or Pastor assistance two wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Rom. 15.30.31 Ephes. 6.19. Colos. 4.3.4. 2 Thes. 3.1.2. Philem. Epist. 22. Heb. 13.18.Answ. This; they are to assist him by their prayers, they are to pray for him that the Lord would giue him both abili∣tie and libertie to execute and to fulfill his ministeriall-of∣fice, and that hee would giue him strength, courage, and power to stand against men and diuels that seeke by force or subtiltie to discourage him, and either to driue him away, or to hold him backe from the faithfull discharge of his duty. Quest. What is that thankefulnes that people are to yeeld to their Minister or Pastor? Answ. This; it is not onely an acknowledgement in word of their Ministers care ouer them, and of his paines taken with them for their good, hee being well qualified, and being faithfull and carefull, and taking paines with them as hee ought for their good: but a care and an endeauour also in people so farre as they are able, to answere that care and paines of their Minister, and the good they doe or may receiue from him by doing good to him againe. Quest. Wherein stands that care and endeauour of people to answere the care and paines of their faithfull Minister, and the good they doe or may receiue from him by doing good to him a∣gaine? Answ. In two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Isai. 52.7. Philip: 2.29Ans. This; in reioycing in him, and giuing thankes to God for him. People are to reioyce and to praise God for the good gifts of their Minister, and for his faithfull care ouer them, and paines taken with them for their good: for the Minister being qualified with gifts fit for his calling, and faithfully discharging his duty, the people haue the benefit of his gifts and paines. Quest. What is the second thing wherein stands the care of the people to answere the care and paines of their Minister or Pastor,
and the good they do, or may receiue from him, by doing good to him againe? Answ. This;1. Tim: 5.17.18. Deut: 12.19. Gal: 4.15. 1. Thess. 5.12.13. 1. Cor: 9.7, 8, 9, to 16. Gal: 6.6. in yeelding him double honour (that is) both singular loue for his workes sake, and also sufficient maintenance both in regard of his person and calling. Quest. Is the Minister to haue his maintenance by set stipend, or by common and voluntary contribution from the people? Answ. Rather by set stipend, as by tithes and other dues, then by common and voluntary contribution, both for the a∣uoiding of many inconueniences, as of flattery and such like; and because also a set stipend comes nearer to the order ap∣pointed by God for the maintenance of the Priests vnder the Leuiticall lawe. Here some obiections of the Anababtists are to be answered. Paul laboured with his hands in making of tents. Act: 18.3. that he might not bee chargeable to any. 1. Thess: 2.9. 2. Thess: 3.8. Therefore Ministers and Preachers are to maintaine themselues by their labours, and not to be chargeable to the Church. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Pauls example proues not that Ministers are to maintaine themselues by their labours. For first, Paul himselfe receiued exhibition. Philip: 4.16. Secondly, when he would not take any thing of the church of Corinth, and of some others, it was for speciall reasons; as namely, Least he should bee a burden to them, 2. Cor: 11.9. that false Apostles should not slander him and his Ministery, that hee was giuen to filthy lucre, verse 12. that he might giue example to others. 2. Thess: 3.9. It was vnlawfull for the Apostles to take any reward for their labour. Mat: 10 8 9. Therefore so it is for Preachers at this day. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; first that text is specially to be vnderstood
of the extraorinary gift of working miracles, as appeares by the wordes, vers: 8. which Christ hauing freely be∣stowed on the Apostles hee would haue them to vse freely, not seeking thereby to inrich themselues; therefore Pe∣ter saide to Simon Magus. Act. 8.20. Thy money perish with thee. Againe, if it be vnderstood of preaching the word as of working miracles, it is to bee taken as a precept onely, for∣bidding filthy lucre, and making marchandise of the word, preaching the word onely with a purpose to benefit them∣selues, to feede their belleys and such like, which things are forbidden in other places of Scripture. 1. Tim: 3.3. Tit: 1.7. Now concerning the Minister or Pastor. Quest. Wherein stands the due respect and due carriage of the Minister or Pastor towards his people or flocke? zech: 3.17. zech: 33.7. ob. 33.23.24. ct. 20.28.31. eb: 13.17. 1. et: 5.2.Answ. In watching carefully or faithfully ouer his peo∣ple, diligently ouerseeing them, and carefully endeauouring to doe good to their soules, both to gaine and call them to God that are not called: and also to preserue and keepe them in Christ that are called. Quest. Wherein is the Minister or Pastor to expresse and to shew forth his faithfull watching ouer his people or flocke, and his carefull endeauour to doe good to their soules? Answ. Both in vsing and applying his gifts for the best good of their soules, and also in going wisely in and out be∣fore them. Quest. How is the Minister or Pastor to vse and to apply his gifts for the best good of the soules of his people? Answ. Two wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by diligent and faithfull preaching the pure word of God to them,Ier. 3.15. 1. Cor. 9.16. 2. Tim. 4.2. in season, and out of season. The Minister or Pastor is diligently and faithfully to preach the pure word of God to his people for the best good of their soules. Quest. How is the Minister or Pastor to preach the pure word of God to his people for the best good of their soules?
Answ. Thus; he is to open to his people,Nehem. 8.8. Ier. 23.16.28. Ezech. 13.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. 1. Cor. 2.4. Tit. 1.9. 2. Tim. 2.15. the will of God reuealed in his word, faithfully and truly expounding that to them, that they may vnderstand it; and to deliuer to them sound and wholsome doctrine, and that in plainenesse and power, to their capacity and consciences; and to make right vse & application of it to them: giuing to euery one his por∣tion as neede shall require, and as iust occasion is offered. Quest. How is the Minister or Pastor to apply his doctrine to his people, and to giue euery one his portion as neede shall re∣quire and as iust occasion is offered? Answ. By instructing the ignorant,Heb. 5.12. 2. Tim. 2.25. 2. Tim. 4.2. Tit. 1.9.10.11.12. Act. 18.28. Isai. 58.1. Tit. 2.1.6.15. Ier: 23.14.17. Ezech. 13.10.11.18.22. 1. Cor. 14.3. and endeauouring to build vp his people further in knowledge of the truth of God, by refuting errours that either the whole flocke, or any of them are tainted withall, or may fall into; by exhorting and stirring them vp to piety, and all good duties: by admonish∣ing them that are vnruly, and wisely rebuking and reprouing them for their corruptions and sinnes; and that with meek∣nesse or sharpnesse as iust occasion is offered: by strengthe∣ning the weake, and comforting such as stand in neede of comfort▪ and are iustly to be comforted. Quest Is the Minister or Pastor thus to instruct, refute, ex∣hort, admonish, rebuke, and comfort only in publike?Ierem. 23.2. Ezech. 34.4. Act. 20.20. Ans. No; but in priuate also, as any iust occasion is offered. Quest. Is the Minister or Pastor bound to teach his people euery truth of God; and may not he in teaching conceale from them any part of the truth at any time? Answ. He is to teach and to instruct his people as they are capable, in euery truth of God, profitable and needfull to saluation: and not to conceale any thing from them that is needfull to be knowne to Saluation. Acts. 20.20.27.Act. 20.20.27. compa∣red together: but if either his people bee vncapable of the Doctrine, and not fit to receiue it,Ioh. 16.12. Mark. 4.33. Heb. 5.11. Act. 20.20.21. it may bee concealed till they be prepared for it: or if the teaching of a lesser truth, will hinder the teaching of a fundamentall truth, then the les∣ser truth may be concealed, that the fundamentall truth may be taught and take place: for the Minister must in wisedome fit his doctrine to his people, so as it may do them most good, and build them vp in faith and repentance.
Quest. What is the fourth way whereby the Minister or Pa∣stor is to vse and to apply his gifts for the best good of the soules of his people? Cor: 4.12. at: 24.45. rou: 27.23. hillip: 2.19. Sam: 12.23. hillip: 1.9. oloss. 1.3.9. . Thess. 1.2. . Thess 2.13. . Thess. 1.3.1.Answ. Both by a wise and right dispencing of the Sacra∣ments to them, and also by praying for them, and praysing God on their behalfe: the Minister or Pastor is wisely to dis∣pnce the Sacraments to his people, examining them how fit thy be to partake in those holy things of God: & instuctig them, and endeauouring to make them fit to partake in them to their comfort: and hee is also to pray for their spirituall good, and to praise God for the spirituall good that is be∣stowed on them. Quest. What if the Minister finde any of his people vnfit to partake in the Sacrament, what is he then to doe? Answ. If he finde any of them altogether vnfit, either in regard of ignorance,Mat: 7.6. or obstinacy in sinne, hee is to kepe them from the Sacrament: for they being admitted to it they prophane the holy ordinance of God to themselues. Quest. Is the Minister or Pastor to pray for the spi∣rituall good of his people, and to praise God for it onely in pub∣like? Coloss. 1.1.3.9. Ier: 13.17:Answ. No; but in priuate also, as any iust occasion is offered. Quest. How is the Minister or Pastor to goe wisely in and out before his people? Exod: 28.30. Phillip: 4.9. 1. Tim: 4.12.Ans. Thus; in going before them in all holy example, and being a pattene of holy life to them. Exod: 29.30. V∣rim and Thummim, light and perfection, knowledge & good life must goe together. Quest. Wherein is the Minister or Pastor to shew himselfe a patterne of good life to his people? Mat: 5.14, 15, 16. 1. Tim: 4.12. Tit: 2.7. 2. Tim: 2.3. 1. Tim: 3.4.5.7 1. Cor: 9.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.Answ. Both in doing good things, and in the practice of euery good worke, and also in suffring, being carefull wise∣ly and religiously to gouerne both himselfe and his whole fa∣mily, and being afraid to giue the least offnce that may bee to any. Quest. How long is the Minister or Pastor to shew forth his carefull endeauour for the good of the soules of his people or flocke?
Answ. So long as he liueth, and as much as is in his power,2. Tim: 2.2. 2. Pet: 1.12.13.14.15. after his departure and death. Now to that relation of certaine persons: either of superiority, or inferioritie in the common wealth. Quest. What is that relation of certaine persons, either of su∣periority, or inferioritie in the common wealth. Answ: It is a fourefold relation; it is either in regard of 1. Authoritie, or 2. Age, or 3. Gifts, or 4. Care. Quest. What is that relation of certaine persons; either of su∣perioritie, or inferioritie in the common wealth, in regard of au∣thoritie? Answ. It is that which is betweene the Magistrate and the subiect. Of these seuerally, and first concerning the subiect. Quest. Wherein standeth the due respect and due carriage of the subiect toward the Magistrate? Answ. In yeelding foure things to him. Reuerence. Submission. Fidelitie, and Thankefulnes. Quest. What is that Reuerence that subiects are to yeeld to their Magistrate? Ans. It is two-fold, Inward, and Outward. Quest: What is that inward Reuerence that subiects are to yeeld to their Magistrates? Answ: This; they are to thinke,1. Sam: 10.26.27. Psal. 81.1.6. Eccles: 10.20. Rom: 13.1.7. and to esteeme reuerent∣ly of their Magistrates, and to carry in their hearts a reue∣rent awe and feare of them, acknowledging Gods image in them, and that they haue their authoritie from God, and are ordained of God, and are his deputies, and stand in his stead as they be Magistrates.
ection.1. Pet: 2:13. Submit your selues to all manner ordinance of man, therefore the magistrate is mans ordinance. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the magistrate is said to be the ordinance of man, not because he hath his power and authoritie from man, and not from God; but because God hath left it to mans dis∣cretion to appoint particular sorts and kinds of magistrates in the common wealth, according to the state of the common∣wealth and the manner of gouernment therein vsed, as euery state and kingdome hath seuerall sorts of gouernment. Que: Are subiects to thinke and to esteeme euerently of wicked and vngodly magistrates, & to carry in their hearts a reuerent awe and feare of them, acknowledging that they beare Gods image and and haue their authority from God? Answ. As they bee their magistrates, they are; though they be neuer so vile and wicked:Sam: 24.6.7. Tim: 2.2. for a magistrate, as he is a magistrate is deputed of God to that office, and hath his power and authority from him, and beares his image: and in that respect though hee bee wicked, hee is to be reuerenced in the hearts of all that are vnder him. Thus Dauid accounted Saul the Lords annointed. 1. Sam: 24.6.7. Quest. What is the outward reuerence that subiects are to yeeld to their magistrates? Answ. This; it is a declaration and shewing forth of their inward reuerence: subiects are to expresse their in∣ward reuerent awe & feare of their magistrates by their out∣ward reuerent behauiour towards them both in word and deed;Sam: 15.20. Dan: 4.16. Act: 26.25. Iud: epist: v. 8. 2. Sam: 9.6.8. 1. King: 1.23. 2. King: 3.14. Act: 24.10. as by giuing them titles of honour and reuerence due to them, by bowing to them, by standing bare in their presence, by keeping silence in courts of iudgements till they be called to speake; by an humble and submissiue coun∣tenance & carriage, either when magistrates speake to them or they speake to their magistrates. Quest: Are subiects to yeeld the like measure of outward re∣uerence to all their magistrates? Answ. No; though all are to bee reuerenced as magi∣strates,1. Pet. 2.13. yet not all with the like measure and degree of reuerence; but some with a greater, and some with a les∣ser
degree, according to the order, and degree, and place, and office they hold in the common wealth; as greater honour and reuerence is to be giuen to the supreame ma∣gistrate, then to the subordinate, and him that is vnder him. Quest. What is that submission that subiects are to yeeld to their magistrates? Answ. This; it is an humble, ready,Rom: 13.1.2.5. 1. Pet: 2.13. and willing submit∣ting of themselues to the exercise and practice of that autho∣ritie and power that their magistrates haue ouer them. Quest. Wherein standeth that humble, ready, and willing sub∣mission of subiects to the exercise and practice of the authoritie and power that their agistrates haue ouer them? Answ. In yeelding obedience to their magistrates: the submission of subiects to the exercise and practice of the au∣thoritie and power that their magistrates haue ouer them,Tit▪ 3.1. stands in being obedient to them. Quest: Wherein are subiects to expresse and to shew forth their obedience to their magistrates? Answ. In two things. Quest: What is the first of those? Ans. This;Iosh: 1.16.17. 1. Sam: 16.19.20. 2. Sam: 15.14.15. 1. King: 2.25. 2. King: 10.25. in yeelding willingly & readily so far as they are able to those things that their magistrates doe command, keeping and performing according to their abilitie the ex∣presse cōmandement of their magistrate in all things honest and lawfull. Quest. What is the second thing wherein subiects are to ex∣presse their obedience to their magistrate? Answ. This;2. Sam: 19.27.28. Prou: 24.21.22. Act: 25.11. Rom: 13.4. in a quiet and patient bearing of the censures and punishments that their magistrates lay on them for their offences, in breaking their good and wholsome lawes, though it be to the losse of their liues. Quest. What if the magistrate commaund and require any vn∣lawful or vniust thing of his subiects, what are subiects then to doe? Answ. In such a case as this, subiects are not to rebell and to rise vp against the authority of their magistrates, but they are wisely to consider who it is that cōmands,Rom: 1.4. and what it is that is commanded, and accordingly to carrie themselues. Q. How are subiects to carry themselues in respect of their magi∣strates
commanding and requiring any vnlawfull or vniust thing? Answ. Thus; if it be the inferiour Magistrate that com∣mands or requires any vniust thing, the subiect that is grie∣ued is to make his complaint to the superiour and highest Magistrate, and to sue to him for redresse. Act. 25.11. But if it be the Prince himselfe and supreame magistrate that commands or requires any vnlawfull or vniust thing, then subiects are to consider what it is that is commanded, and accordingly to carry themselues. Quest: How are subiects to carry themselues in respect of the thing commanded by the Prince being vnlawfull, or vniust? am. 22.17. n. 3.16.17. n. 6.10.11.. . 4.16.20.Answ. Thus; if the thing commaunded be against pietie and ther duty towards God, and bee against the commande∣ment of God; then subiects are rather to submit themselues to any punishment that shall be laid on them, euen to death it selfe, then to yeeld to that commandement. But if the thing commanded concerne the temporall state of subiects, as in grieuous and intollerable impositions, taxes, payments and the like; subiects are to make no resistance at all, but to endure such burdens with patience, vntill by good meanes,King: 18.14: as by prayer to God, and making meanes to their go∣uernours they may be eased. Because such impositions are laid on subiects by hard and tyrannyzing gouernours,b. 34.30. ozea 13.11. as crosses or punishments from the Lord for their sinnes. 1. King: 21.3. Naboth refused to yeeld his vineyard to A∣hab the King, when hee would haue had it; and therefore, it may seeme, that subiects may refuse to yeeld to their Prince when he requires some grieuous tax at their hands. Quest. How is this to be answered. Answ. Thus; Naboths case in not yeelding his inheritance to the Kings desire was singular, & he did wel in not yeelding it, because that belonged to the speciall policy of that nation not to alienate their inheritance from one tribe to another, that a distinction of their families and tribes might be kept, that it might be known of what tribe & family the Messiah should come; and therefore that proues not, that subiects may refuse to yeeld to their Prince when he requires some grie∣uous taxe at their hands.
Quest. What if the life of a Subiect be sought by the Prince vn∣iustly, and his life be by indirect meanes assaulted; or the chastity of his wife, or the life of his children: what is the Subiect then to doe? Answ. Though the Subiect in these extreamities,1 King. 19.3. 2 King. 6.32. Act. 9.24.25. 2 Cor. 11.32.33 is not to rise vp against his Princes authority; yet the law of nature binds him either by flight, or by hiding, or by other lawfull meanes, to defend him and his. Quest: May not Subiects rise vp against their Prince, being a cruell Tyrant, and either depose him, or cut him off and take a∣way his life? Answ: Where the Prince is receiued on condition, that if he rule well and lawfully,1 Sam. 24.14. 1 Sam. 26.9.10.11. then he shall continue his Autho∣rity; if not, he shall lose it: there, not euery priuate person, but the Ouerseers or States appointed to that purpose, may either depose, or on resistance, take away the life of a Ty∣rant: but if the authority of the Prince be absolute, and set∣led on him; either by election, or conquest, or inheritance: there, Subiects may not rise vp against their Prince being a Tyrant; nor seeke either to depose him, or to take away his life, but must leaue him to the hand of God alone. 2 Chron. 26.20. Vziah the King, taking on him presump∣tuously to burne Incense on the Incense Alter in the Tem∣ple, Azariah the Priest resisted him, and cast him out of the Temple, and deposed him from his Kingdome, say the Pa∣pists: therefore say they, it is lawfull for Subiects to depose a Tyrant. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus;2 Chron. 26.18. to 22. 2 King. 15.5. Azariah and the Priests first resisted Vz∣ziah, not by violence or force, but only by word and admo∣nition. vers, 18. Againe, they did not depose him from his gouernment, but he being smitten by the hand of God with leprosie, they cau∣sed him according to the law, to goe out of the Temple and to dwell apart, hee being thereby disabled to gouerne; yet still the right of gouernment did belong to him, and hee held it; and Jotham his Sonne did only gouerne his house, and iudge the people. vers. 2.
iection.2 Chron. 23. Iehoiadah the high Priest deposed Queene Athaliah from her Kingdome, and set vp young Ioash to be King; therefore the Pope hath authority to depose Kings and Emperours. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Iehoiadah the High Priest was next to the King in blood. 2. Chron. 22.21. and one of the States of the Land, and hee together with all the States and Peeres of the Land stood for the right of Ioash, as appeares vers. 1.2. and helped him to his right which was vsurped by Athaliah; for she was an Vsurper, and Ioash was the right Heire. Quest. The Papists say the Clergy are to be exempted from the iurisdiction of the ciuill Magistrate, both their Persons, Lands, and Possessions: is this true or no? Answ. No, it is false; all persons are to submit them∣selues to the iurisdiction of the ciuill Magistrate, both their persons and goods. Rom. 13.1. euery soule without ex∣ception. Gen. 47.26. The Lands of the Egyptian Priests were free from the taxe of the first part: therefore the Clergie are ex∣empted from the iurisdiction of the ciuill Magistrate. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; it was because their Lands were not sold to Pharaoh as the peoples were, as the Text it selfe saith. Eccle∣siasticall persons may inioy immunities and priuiledges be∣stowed on them by Christian Princes; but they are not to challenge them by diuine right. Quest. What is the fidelitie that Subiects are to yeeld to their Magistrates? 1 Sam. 22.14. 2 Sam. 20.2.Answ. This; it is a yeelding of loyall and sound hearted loue to their Magistrates. Subiects are to shew themselues loyall and sound hearted in their loue to their Magistrates; constantly cleauing to them, and not shrinking from them when they haue neede of them, nor deceiuing them at any time, nor in any thing, wherein they ought to bee faithfull to them. Quest. Wherein are Subiects to expresse their fidelitie, euen their loyall and sound hearted loue to their Magistrates?
Answ. In three things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in a tender care of their Magistrates honour and dignitie, endeauouring as much as they are able,1 Sam. 19 2.4.5.6. &c. 2 Sam. 24.3. Ierem. 36.25. within the compasse of their places and callings, to keepe their Ma∣gistrates from doing any thing that may blemish them in their place and office; as being such as may speake to their Magistrates, speaking plainely to them, yet reuerently and dutifully: and by disswading them as much as they may from that which is amisse, when they see they are about to doe any euill; and not flattering and soothing them vp in any euill course. Quest: What is the second thing wherein Subiects are to ex∣presse their fidelitie, their loyall and sound hearted loue vnto their Magistrates? Answ. This; in standing as much as they are able,2 Sam. 15.21. 2 Sam. 18.3. 2 Sam. 21.17. for the defence of the life and state of their Magistrates; and especially in defending to their vttermost power, the life of their Prince, the supreame Magistrate; though it bee to the losse of their owne liues. Quest. What is the third thing wherein Subiects are to ex∣presse their fidelitie, their loyall and sound hearted loue vnto their Magistrates? Answ. This; in keeping secret the honest intents,2 King. 6.11. 2 Sam. 17.15.16. Hest. 2.21.22 sayings and doings of their Magistrates, which they would not haue made knowne: and in discouering of treasons, conspiracies, practices and dangers, intended against their liues and per∣sons; and especially against the life and person of their Prince, and supreame Magistrate. Quest. VVhat is that thankefulnesse that Subiects are to yeeld to their Magistrates? Answ. This it is, not only an acknowledgement in word, of their Magistrates care ouer them for their good, and of the benefits they enioy vnder their wise and good gouern∣ment; their Magistrates being carefull as they ought to bee for their good: but a care, and an endeauour also in Subiects so farre as they are able, to answer that care of their Magi∣strates, and that good they doe or may receiue by their good
gouernment, by doing good to them againe. Quest. Wherein stands that care and indeauour of Subiects to answer the care of their Magistrates for their good; and the good they doe or may receiue from them, by doing good to them againe? Answ. In three things. Quest: What is the first of those? at. 22.21. om. 13.6.7.Answ. This; in yeelding them outward helpe and sup∣port, willingly and cheerefully paying to them Subsidies, Taxes, and other payments necessarie for the maintenance of their estate; especially, the estate of the Prince, both in time of peace, and in time of warre. Quest. What is the second thing, wherein stands the care and endeauour of Subiects, to answer the care of their Magistrates for their good, and the good they doe, or may receiue from them, by do∣ing good to them againe? King. 1.39.1.29.7. Tim. 2.1.2.Answ. This; in praying for their Magistrates: Subiects are to pray for their Magistrates, especially for their Prince, or supreame Magistrate; for his person, state, and good and happy gouernment. Quest. What is the third thing, wherein stands the care and endeauour of Subiects, to answer the care of their Magistrates for their good, and the good they doe, or may receiue from them, by doing good to them againe? Answ. This; in praysing God for the good gifts of their Magistrates, the right vse of their authority, and the blessing of God on their publike actions that concerne the common good:Tim. 2.1.2. the good of their Subiects both in Peace and Warre. Psal. 21. a Psalme of thanksgiuing after victory. Now concerning Magistrates. Quest. Wherein stands the due respect, and due carriage of the Magistrate towards his Subiects? Answ. In a wise and right vsage of his good gifts, his wisedome,ai. 49.23. om. 13.4. Tim. 2.2. and of his power and authority ouer his Subiects, in vsing and applying his gifts and authority in that place and office which he holdeth in the Common wealth, for the best good of his Subicts, and of the Common wealth. Quest. How is the Magistrate to vse and to apply his gifts,
and his power and authority in that place and Office which hee holdeth in the common wealth, for the best good of his Subiects, and of the common wealth? Answ. Three waies. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by a carefull promoting,2 King. 18.4. 2 King. 23.3.4.5.6. to 21. 2 Chron. 17.6 2 Chron 34.31. to the end. 1 Tim. 2.2. and aduancing of true Religion, and the pure worship of God; and by discoun∣tenancing and dfacing of all vngodlinesse, and all false and idolatrous worship, according to his place and power: the chiefe Magistrate according to his place and power, and the inferiour Magistrate according to his. Quest: How farre is the chiefe Magistrate, the supreame go∣uernour carefully to promote and to aduance true Religion and the pure worship of God; and to discountenance the contrary? Answ. Both in his person, and also as much as he may, in all that be vnder his gouernment. Quest: How is the chiefe Magistrate to promote, and aduance true Religion, and the pure worship of God, and to discountenance the contrary in his owne person? Answ. Thus;Deut. 17.18.19. 2 Sam. 6.24. 2 Chron. 19.3. by taking knowledge of the true Religion himselfe, and imbracing it, and practising it in his owne person. Quest. How is the chiefe Magistrate to promote, and to ad∣uance true Religion and the pure worship of God; and to discoun∣tenance the contrary in those that be vnder his gouernment? Answ. Three waies. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by making and establishing in his King∣dome, such good and wholesome Lawes and Orders, as serue to maintaine and vphold the truth of Religion: and to inhi∣bit and put downe all false Religion, and to keepe out of his Kingdome and Dominion, all confused mixture of Religion; and by seeing those Lawes and Orders duly executed. 1 Chro. 23. Dauid disposed the Ministeriall Offices of the Taber∣nacle, and appointed Leuits and Priests their order and courses.Iudg. 17.6. 2 Chron. 35. from 1. to 9. Iosiah kept the Passeouer himselfe, and gaue commandement concerning the preparati∣on and performance of the same.
Quest. What is the second way by which the chiefe Magi∣strate is to promote and to aduance true Religion, and the pure worship of God; and to discountenance the contrary, in those that be vnder his gouernment? ng. 9.1.2. ng. 22.14.49.23. hro. 19.8.9. hro. 31.2.Answ. This; by prouiding as much as hee may, that his Subiects may be taught the truth of Religion, and instructed in the waies of God; to that end, planting and maintaining Schooles of good learning, and Vniuersities in his domini∣ons; and looking that able and sufficient Pastors bee set ouer seuerall Churches in his Kingdome. Quest. What is the third way, by which the chiefe Magi∣strate is to promote and to aduance true Religion, and the pure worship of God; and to discountenance the contrary in those that be vnder his gouernment? Answ. This; by taking order that Pastors and Teachers doe their dutie,ing. 23.4. hro. 29.4.5. in preaching true and sound doctrine, and in other administrations, countenancing the good and faith∣full;ing. 2.26.35. ing. 10.25. d. 22.20. uit. 24.26. and discountenancing the carelesse and negligent: and remouing such as be erronious and scandalous, and deserue to be remoued: and by taking order that the people yeeld themselues to bee taught and guided by their Pastors, for the good of their soules: and that Heretickes, Idolaters, Blas∣phemers and such like, bee punished according to their offences. Now some Obiections are to be answered, made by Papists, against the power of Princes in the matter of Religion. First they obiect Isai. 60.10. Kings shall come and serue the Church in the time of the New Testament: therefore the Church is not to be subiect to Princes, but they to it: and so Princes haue no power to order any thing in the matter of Religion. Quest. How is this to be answered? An. Thus; in the Church there be two things; the persons of men and the things of God: Princes are subiect to the Church, not in regard of the persons of men, though they be beleeuers, but in regard of the things of God: as the Word, Sacraments, Faith, and such like: and so this makes not a∣gainst Princes power to make good and wholesome Lawes,
for the maintenance of the Truth of Religion, and the pure worship of God. Kings and Princes are as sheepe, and Ministers and Pastors Sheapheards; therefore Princes are vnder Ministers, and so they haue no power to order any thing in matter of Religi∣on; and they may not take on them either to reforme, or to remoue such Ministers as faile in their administrations. Quest. How is this to be answered? Ans. Thus; Kings and Princes are as sheepe, not in re∣gard of the persons of Ministers, but in regard of their Mini∣strie; and yet not simply in regard of that, but only so farre as the Word is rightly taught, and the Sacraments duly admi∣nistred: and Ministers in regard of their persons are subiect to their owne Princes, and their Princes in regard of their gouernment are Shepheards ouer them, Isa. 44 28. therefore Princes haue power either to reforme or remoue such Mini∣sters as faile in their administrations. Quest. How farre is the inferiour Magistrate carefully to promote and to aduance true Religion, and the pure worship of God, and to discountenance the contrary? Answ. Both in his owne person, and also as much as hee may in all that be vnder his power and authority. Quest. How is the inferiour Magistrate to promote and ad∣uance true Religion and the pure worship of God, and to discounte∣nance the contrary in his owne person? Answ. Thus; by taking notice of true religon himselfe,Psal. 2.10.11.12. Psal. 148.11. and by imbracing it, and practising it in his owne person, according to his place and calling. Quest: How is the inferiour Magistrate to promote and ad∣uance true Religion, and the pure worship of God, and to discoun∣tenance the contrary in those that bee vnder his power and au∣thoritie? Answ. Two waies. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Nehe. 13.10.11.14.17.25.28. by a diligent and carefull ouerseeing of his vnder Officers, he being one that hath Officers vnder him, and by looking to them that they prforme their duty in promoting true Religion, and the pure worship of God,
and in discountenancing the contrary, so farre as concernes them in their Places and Offices; encouraging the good and faithfull, and discountenancing, reprouing, and censuring such as be carelesse and negligent, according to their faults and offences. Quest. What is the second way by which the inferiour Ma∣gistrate is to promote and aduance true Religion, and the pure worship of God, and discountenance the contrary in those that bee vnder his power and authority? Isa. 22.21.22. Iere. 38.4.6. Micha. 3.2. Rom. 13.3.4.Answ. This; by executing duly and impartially those good Lawes and Orders that are established for the mainte∣nance of true Religion, and the pure worship of God, to his vttermost power, so farre as concernes him in his owne place and Office, to the countenancing of good causes of Religi∣on and religious persons; whether Ministers or others: and to the discountenancing and repressing of bad and wicked causes and persons; as Heretickes, Idolatours, Blasphemers, and such like. Quest. What is the second way by which the Magistrate is to vse and apply his gifts, and his power, and authority in that Place and Office which he holdeth in the common wealth, for the best good of his Subiects, and of those that be vnder his power and authority? Answ. This; by a carefull prouiding for the peace and safety,Rom. 13.4. 1 Tim. 2.2. and quietnesse, and outward welfare of his Subiects, according to his place and power; the chiefe Magistrate ac∣cording to his place and power, and the inferiour Magistrate according to his. Quest. How is the chiefe Magistrate, the supreame gouer∣nour, to prouide for the peace, safety and quietnes, and outward welfare of his Subiects? Ans. Thus; by vsing his power, both for the establishing and the setling of peace and quietnes amongst his Subiects; and for the establishing of their outward welfare: and also for the keeping and maintaining of their peace and quiet∣nesse, and outward welfare; and for the preseruing of it from all disturbance. Quest. How is the chiefe Magistrate to vse his power for the
establish ng and setling of peace & quietnesse amongst his Subiects, & for the establishing of their outward welfare? Answ. Thre waies. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This;Isa. 10.1.2. Psal. 122.3. by making such good and wholesome Lawes in his Kingdome, as serue to settle vnitie and concord, and e∣quitie and iustice amongst his Subiects; and by seeing those Lawes duly executed, that euery one of his Subiects may (as much as is possible) haue his right, and that which in equi∣tie and conscience belongs to him; and that none of them be any way in body, goods, or name, wronged or oppressed. Quest: What is the second way, by which the chiefe Magi∣strate is to vse his power for the establishing and setling of peace and quietnesse amongst his Subiects; and for the establishing of their outward welfare? Answ. This;Exod. 18.21.22 2 Sam 8.15.16.17.18. 2 Chro. 19.5.6.7.11. by a wise and carefull choice of his vnder gouenours, both in time of peace and in time of warre; looking that they be qualified as they ought to be; that they be men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating coue∣tousnesse. Quest. What is the third way, by which the chiefe Magi∣strate is to vse his power for the establishing and setling of peace and quietnesse amongst his Subiects; and for the establishing of their outward welfare? Answ. This;1 King. 1.12. Po. 16.14.15. Pro 20.26. Rom. 13.3.4. by putting downe the wicked enemies of peace, & by maintaining and defending the quiet, and peace∣able, and innocent that seeke to him for succour. Quest. How is the chiefe Magistrate to vse his power for the keeping and maintaining of peace and quietnesse: and for the pre∣seruing of the outward welfare of his Subiects? Answ. Three waies. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;1 Sam. 8.11.12. to 20. by requiring only so much outward helpe and support from his Subiects, as is meete and necessary for the maintenance of his estate, either in the time of peace or warre;1 King. 12.14. not oppressing them with exactions and grie∣uances.
Quest. What is the second way by which the chiefe Magi∣strate is to vse his power for the keeping of peace and quietnesse, and for the preseruing of the outward welfare of his Subiects? 1 King. 5.4.5.6. 1 Chro. 9.19.Answ. This; by making lawfull Leagues of friendship and peace, with his neighbour Princes and Gouernours. Quest. What is the third way, by which the chiefe Magi∣strate is to vse his power for the keeping and maintaining of peace and quietnesse, and for the outward welfare of his Subiects? Idg. 4.14. 2 Sam. 20.6.7. 2 King. 18.7.8.Answ. This; by standing for the libertie of his King∣dome and Subiects, if neede be, by force of Armes, by fight∣ing for it; either for the defending of it against the sediti∣ous and rebellious within his Kingdome and Dominions; or against the common forraigne enemies of it; or for the re∣couering of it againe being lost. Question. How is the Inferiour Magistrate to prouide for the peace and safety, and quietnesse, and outward welfare of his Subiects, and such as be vnder his gouernment? Answ. Foure waies. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Nehem. 5.1.2.3.4. to 15.Answ. This; by a diligent and carefull ouerseeing of his vnder Officers, being one that hath some vnder him; look∣ing to them that they performe the duty that concernes them, touching the peace and safety, and quietnesse, and outward welfare of men where they haue to doe: that they deale iustly and truly, and equally, betweene man and man; and that they wrong no man in any cause or mat∣ter which they haue to deale withall: encouraging the good and faithfull, and discountenancing, reprouing, and censuring such as bee carelesse and faulty according to their offnces. Quest: VVhat is the second way, by which the Inferiour Magistrate is to prouide for the peace, and safety, and quiet∣nesse, and outward welfare of his Subiects, and such as be vnder his gouernment? Deut. 1.13.15. Num. 11.16. Act. 24.19.Answ. This; by acquainting himselfe with the good Lawes and Customes of the Land and Kingdome where hee holdeth his Office; and by being skilfull in all those causes
that shall come before him: that he may wisely rule and go∣uerne all sorts of men that he hath to deale withall; and may wisely apply his knowledge to euery particular occasion. Question. VVhat is the third way, by which the Inferiour Magistrate is to prouide for the peace, and safety, and quiet∣nesse, and outward welfare of his Subiects, and such as bee vnder his gouernment? Answ. This; by admitting willingly all iust complaints,2 Sam. 15.3.4. Pro. 18.17. Leuit. 19.15. Deut. 1.16.17. Deut. 16.18.19 Iudg. 19.30. 1 Sam. 8.3. Pro. 17.23. Isa. 1.23. Hose. 4.18. and taking notice of all agrieuances that are brought before him: throughly examining them by all due circumstances; and hauing so examined them, by putting difference be∣tweene good and bad causes, and persons; and deciding those causes so examined, vncorruptly; giuing iust iudgement without partiality or respect of persons: and without recei∣uing of bribes and gifts to peruert iudgement. Some particular cases. Quest. Is it vnlawfull for a Magistrate to receiue any gift at all, in respect of the causes and controuersies of men that hee is to deale withall? Answ. Aduocates, Counsellours and such like,2 Sam. 15.3.4. Pro. 18.17. Leuit. 19.15. Deut. 1.16.17. &c. may law∣fully take their fees, so as they exact no more then is due to them; for they are but pleaders, not giuers of sentence: and Iudges also may lawfully take their set fees that are al∣lowed them in euery cause, and that publike allowance that is appointed them, (Nehem. 5.14.18. Nehemiah was allowed though he tooke it not) but not any gift ouer and aboue to peruert iudgement. Quest. May not a Iudge take a gift ouer and aboue his publike and set allowance, to giue iust iudgement in a case that he hath to deale withall? Answ. A gift is not to be giuen to a couetous Iudge,Act. 24.27. Pro. 21.14. ouer and aboue his set fee, to moue him to giue right iudgement in a good cause; but to a Iudge that is carried on with rage and furie, and stird vp in some other respect against right and equity, a gift may be giuen ouer and aboue his set fee, to pacifie his anger, and to moue him to giue iust iudgement. Hester by her banquet pacified the King,Hest. 5.4. Hest. 7.1. yet the Iudge is faulty that so taketh a gift ouer and aboue his publike and
set fee; because hee ought to giue iust and right iudgement without it. Quest. Is a Iudge to giue sentence of Death against an inno∣cent party, being cast by false euidence, and found guilty of mur∣ther, or the like by false witnesses, if he himselfe know the partie to be innocent or no? Answ. No, he is not in this; the iudge ought rather to giue ouer his Office and dignitie,1 King. 21.9.10. to 15. Pro. 24.11.12. if there be no other way to deliuer the innocent, then to giue sentence against him and to be guilty of his blood: if priuate men neglignt here∣in be condemned,Ioh. 19.4. much more the publike Iudge Pilate, who condemned Christ by false witnesss, when he knew him to be innocent. A Iudge is to informe his conscience by his priuate know∣ledge in things that concerne his owne particular: but in publike matters he is to take his information by publike eui∣dence: and therefore he may condemne an innocent partie, being found guilty of murther or such like; though he him∣selfe know him to be innocent. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ Thus; a Iudge is to take his information in pub∣like matters, by publike euidence, if it bee not against the truth knowne to himselfe; but if it be, then he is not to giue sentence according to that euidence: for so doing, he sinnth against his knowledge and conscience. The Iudge that giues sentence of Death against an inno∣cent partie found guilty by publike euidence; he knowing him to be innocent doth not put him to death, but they which accuse him and witnesse against him. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; though false accusers and witnesses are the chiefe in this action, yet the Iudge is accessary because hee consenteth to them: otherwise Pilate that washed his hands and new Christ to bee innocent, had not sinned in condem∣nig Christ. The Iudge that followes not his euidence though false, iudgeth against Law; and therefore he may condemne the innocent partie, being cast by false witnesses.
Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; he that acquitteth an innocent party cast by false witnesses, goeth not against the intendment of the Law which would haue no innocent party to be condemned; but false witnesse to be punished. Quest. What is the fourth way by which the inferiour Magi∣strate is to prouide for the peace, safety, quietnesse, and outward welfare of his Subiects, and those that be vnder his gouernment? Answ. This; by seeing or taking order,Iosh. 7.24. Rom. 13.4. that due & seaso∣nable execution be done on offenders & malefactors, accor∣ding to the iudgement passed on them; for otherwise Lawes are in vaine, and iudgement according to the Lawes: if they be not put in execution. Quest. What is the third way, by which the Magistrate is to vse and apply his gifts, and his power, and authority, in that place and Office which hee holdeth in the Common wealth; for the best good of his subiects, and of such as be vnder his gouernment? Answ. This; by a careful procuring of ciuill honesty, good manners, and good order amongst his subiects,1 Tim. 2.2. according to his place and power: the chiefe Magistrate according to his place, and the inferiour Magistrate according to his. Quest. How is the chiefe Magistrate to procure ciuill hone∣stie, good manners, and good order amongst his subiects? Answ. Thus;Rom. 12.17. Phil. 4.8. Eccles. 5.8. 1 King. 15.12. by making such good lawes and Orders in his Kingdome, as serue to maintaine ciuill honesty, good manners, and good order amongst his subiects; and to inhi∣bite and put downe all things that are contrary thereunto; and by seeing those Lawes and Orders duly executed; look∣ing to it as much as is possible, that his Subiects walke or∣derly, being euery one imployed according to his ability in some honest and lawfull calling: and that all lewd persons and practices, and all occasions of lust and vnthriftinesse be remoued; as stewes, houses of filthinesse, houses of ga∣ming, and the like. Q. How is the inferior Magistrate to procure ciuill honesty, good manners, & good order amongst such as be vnder his gouernment? Answ. Thus; by executing duly and impartially, both by himselfe & by such as be in office vnder him, good Lawes &
orders made for the maintaining of ciuill honesty, good man∣ners and good order amongst those that be vnder his gouern∣ment; and for the inhibiting and putting downe of those things that are thereunto contrary: for the inferiour Magi∣strate is as the hand of the chiefe Magistrate, & good Lawes and Orders are to no purpose, if not executed by such as are put in trust. Quest. Wherein stands the execution of good Lawes and Or∣ders made for the maintaining of ciuill honesty, good manners, and good order, and for the inhibiting and putting downe of things contrary therevnto by the inferiour Magistrate? Answ. In three things. Quest. What is the first of those? 2 Thes. 3.10.11 12. Iob. 30.5.6.7.8.Answ. This; In setting such poore persons as be lustie and strong to worke, and not suffering them to be idle, and to make begging and wandring their trade of life; but punish∣ing them according to Law, if they bee found roauing and wandring; and in seeing that no maintenance or allowance be giuen to such without punishment, vnlesse they will settle themselues to some honest labour and imployment. Quest. What is the second thing wherein stands the execution of good Lawes and Orders made for the maintaining of ciuill honestie, good manners, and good order; and for the inhibiting and putting downe of things contrary thereunto, by the inferiour Magistrate? Deut. 15.7.8. to 13. Iob. 29.13.14.15.16.Answ. This; in taking order that such persons as be aged, or weake, or be blind, or lame, and not able to labour: or such as haue strength of body and vse it, and yet cannot earne so much as to maintaine themselues and their Families, bee in some compleat sort helped and relieued; that they bee not constrained to begge their bread. Quest. What is the third thing, wherein stands the execution of good lawes & orders made for the maintaining of ciuill honesty, good manners, & good order; & for the inhibiting & putting down of things contrary therevnto, by the inferiour Magistrate? Leuit. 18.24.25.27.28.29. Deut. 23.17. 1 Sam. 2.22.Answ. This; in seeing as much as possibly he may, all lewd persons and practices, & all occasions of filthynes & vnthrif∣tinesse remoued: as stewes, houses of filthynesse, and houses
of gaming, and such like. Now to that relation of certaine persons of superi∣oritie and inferiority, in the Common wealth, which is in regard of age. Quest. What is that relation of certaine persons, either of su∣periority or inferiority in the Common wealth, which is in regard of age? Ans. It is that which is betweene persons more auncient in yeares, and persons that are younger in yeares. Of these seuerally: and first concerning persons younger in yeares. Quest. Wherein stands the due respect, and due carriage of per∣sons younger in yeares, towards those that are more ancient, in re∣gard of their yeares? Answ. In yeelding two things to them. Quest. What is the first of them? Answ. This; reuerence both in heart, word, and deede;Leuit. 19.32. Iob. 30.1. Isa. 3.5. 1 Tim. 5.1.2. esteeming reuerently of them in regard of their age, as a print of Gods Eternitie; and shewing forth their reuerent opini∣on of them, by giuing them titles of reuerence due to them in their place; and by giuing them the vpper hand, by bowing to them, by rising vp before them, and the like. Quest: What is the second thing that younger persons are to yeeld to those that are more auncient, in regard of their yeares? Answ. This; modest behauiour towards them,Iob. 32.4.6.11.16.17. Tit. 2.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. not presu∣ming to speake before them in matters of waight, but keep∣ing silence till they haue spoken. Now touching persons more auncient in yeares. Quest. Wherein stands the due respect and due carriage of per∣sons more auncient in yeares, towards persons that are younger in yeares? Answ. In yeelding two things to them. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; good aduice, counsell and direction,Iob. 32.7.9. 1 King. 12.6.7.8. Tit. 2.4. as oc∣casion is offered; aged persons must wisely aduise, counsell & direct younger persons in good things, as occasion is offered. Quest. What is the second thing that persons more auncient in yeares, are to yeeld to persons younger?
Pro. 16.31. Isa. 65.20. Tit. 2.2.3.Answ. This; good example: aged persons are to giue good example to younger persons, and to goe before them in a wise, sober, graue, and holy conuersation. Now to that relation of certaine persons, either of Superiority or Inferiority in the Common-wealth, which is in regard of gifts. Quest. What's that relation of certaine persons either of Superiority or Inferiority in the Common wealth, which is in re∣gard of gifts? Answ. It is that which is betweene such as haue good gifts of mind or body, or other outward good gifts; and those that want those gifts, or are inferiour to them in gifts. Of these in Order: and first of those that want gifts, or are inferiour to others in gifts. Quest. Wherein stands the due respect, and due carriage of those that want good gifts, or are inferiour in gifts towards those that haue good gifts of minde or body, or outward good gifts? Answ. In yeelding two things to them. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; an acknowledgement of their good gifts, and a reuerent regard of them for the same,Gen. 41.38.39. Dan. 4.6. Mat. 3.11. 1 Pet. 3.15. according to the measure of their gifts, & according to the excellency & kinde of them: as they are more reuerently to respect those that haue good gifts of minde, and the graces of Godsspirit in them, then those that haue only good gifts of body or out∣ward good gifts; though they also are to be respected in re∣gard of those good gifts. Quest. Are men to bee reuerenced for their riches and out∣ward good gifts? Luk. 16.9. Pro. 3.9. 1 King. 18.3.4. Luk. 7.4.5.Answ. Not simply for their riches & outward good gifts, but for the right vse of them; and as they are made instru∣ments to vphold and maintaine vertue. To honour rich men, is to haue the faith of Christ in respect of persons which is forbidden. Jam. 2.1.2.3. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the Apostles meaning is, that men ought not to preferre riches before piety; and hee there disswades Christians from honouring rich men being vngodly; and de∣spising
and reiecting godly poore men because they are poore. Quest. What is the second thing that those that want good gifts, or any inferiour to others in gifts, are to yeeld to those that haue good gifts of minde, and the graces of Gods Spirit? Answ: This; imitation of their good gifts,1. Sam: 9.9. Ioh: 4.19.20. to 27. Philip: 4.9. and making a a good vse of them to themselues: they are to imitate the ver∣tues and graces that are in others, and to labour for them in themselues. Now touching the persons that haue good gifts of minde. Quest: Wherein stands the due respect and due carriage of such as haue good gifts of minde or body, or outward good gifts to∣wards those that want those good gifts, or are inferiour to them? Answ. In vsing those good gifts to the glory of God,Rom: 14.7. Rom: 15.1. 1. Cor: 12.7. and to the greatest good of those that want them; not lifting vp themselues aboue their brethren, but bending down, and ap∣plying their gifts to the best good of others: thus men are to vse their wisedome, their knowledge, their strength, their wealth and such like. Now to that relation of certaine persons; either of superioritie or inferioritie in the common wealth, which is in regard of care. Quest. What is that relation of certaine persons, either of su∣perioritie or inferioritie in the common wealth, which is in regard of care. Answ. It is that which is betweene such as haue care of o∣thers, or shew forth their care for the good and benefit of o∣thers, as Schoolemasters, Patrons, benefactors and such like, and those that receiue benefit, or may receiue benefit from o∣thers. Quest. Wherein stands the due respect and due carriage of that doe, or may receiue benefit from others? Answ. In a kinde acceptance of the least benefit,Gen: 40.23. 2. Chron: 24.21.22. Act: 22.3. Rom: 16.2.3.4 and a thankfull acknowledgement of it, and a louing remembrance of them for it as any occasion is offered: and in vsing it to Gods glory, and to their owne best good.
Quest. Wherein stands the due respect and due carriage of such as haue care of others, or shewe foreth their care for the be∣nefit of others towards those that doe or may receiue benefit from them? King: 2.9. b: 29.16. ct: 22.3.Answ: In taking the best and wisest course that they can that the benefit they intend to reach out to others, may bee most profitable to them that are, or shall bee partakers of it: as Schoolemasters are to take the wisest course they can for the good of their Scholars. The Negatiue part of this Commandement. Quest. What doth the fift Commandement forbid. Answ. Two things in generall. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. The want or neglect of due respect, and of due courage of inferiours towards their superiours, and by con∣sequent of superiours towards their inferiours, and of equals amongst themselues, and so the omission of any of those du∣ties that are required of inferiours, superiours, or equals one towards another; whether generall, or particular. Quest. What is the second thing forbidden in this Comman∣dement? Answ. Whatsoeuer is contrary to the due respect, and due carriage of inferiours towards their superiours, and of superiours towards inferiours, and of equalles one to∣wards another, and doth diminish or impeach the dignitie that God hath bestowed on others. Of these seuerally. Quest. What are the things that are contrary to the due re∣spect and due carriage of inferiours towards their superiours? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Leuit: 20.19. Deut: 27.16. Gen: 9.22. Prou: 30.11.17. Iud: vers: 8. Exod: 22.28. Eccles: 10.20. 1. Tim: 5.19.Answ. This; a light and a base esteeming, a despising and contemning of superiours, as the Anabaptists doe in their iudgment & opinion, shewing forth that light estimation, & that contempt of them by contemptuous words, gestures or deedes; as by wishing ill to them, by mocking and scorning of them, by speaking ill of them, and reuiling them, by smi∣ting of them or the like.
Quest. What is the second thing that is contrary to the due respect and due carriage of inferiours towards their superi∣ours? Ans. This; disobedience to superiors;Deut: 21.18. Rom: 1.30. when inferiours are stubborne, and refuse to yeeld obedience to their superiours as they ought. Quest. Wherein doe inferiours shew foorth their disobedience towards their superiours? Answ. In two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Gen: 28.8.9. 2. Sam: 15.10.11.12. Mat: 21.30. Tit: 2.15. in resisting the lawfull authoritie of their superiours, refusing to bee gouerned by them, and in con∣temning their good counsels, and their iust and lawfull com∣mandements. Quest. What is the second thing wherein inferiours doe shew forth their disobedience towards their superiours? Answ. This;Gen: 16.6.9. Deut: 21.18. Prou: 13.1. Tit: 2.9. in resisting their superiours when they ex∣ercise their power ouer them, in admonishing, reprouing, or correcting them; then murmuring, or rising vp against them, or flying from them. Quest. What are the things that are contrary to the due re∣spect and due carriage of superiours towards their inferiours? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; a light, vaine,2. Sam. 6.20. Zeph: 3.4. Rom: 2.17. to 26. Tit: 2.15. wicked and vnseemely carriage of themselues in the sight of their inferiours; when superiours carry themselues lightly, vainely and wickedly, and vnseeming them in respect of their age, place or gifts before their inferiours, and thereby not onely bringing dishonour to God, in whose place and roome they stand as they be superiours; but bring also iust disgrace and contempt on their owne persons, or on their places or gifts. Quest: What is the second thing that is contrary to the due respect and due carriage of superieurs towards their inferiours? Ans. This;Prou: 28.15. Zeph: 3.3. Coloss: 3.19: 1. Pet: 5.3. the abuse of that authoritie & power that God hath put into their hands ouer their inferiours: when superi∣ours abuse and peruert that authoritie and power that God hath giuen them for the good of those ouer whom they are
set, to the hurt and wrong of those that be vnder them. Quest. How doe superiours abuse that authoritie and power that God hath put into their hands ouer their inferiours? Answ. Two wayes. Quest: What is the first of those? 1. King: 12.31. 2. Chron: 13.9. Eccles: 10.5.6.7 Micha: 3.2. Isai: 5.23. Ezech: 13.18.21.Answ: This; when they exercise it to the fauouring, countenancing, and aduancing of the wicked and vnworthy, and the discountenancing, disgracing, and putting downe, and keeping vnder of the godly and well deseruing. Quest. What is the second way by which superiours abuse that authoritie and power God hath put into their hands ouer their inferiours? 1. Sam: 2.23. Ephes. 6.4.9. Coloss. 3.21.Answ. This; when they exercise it, either with too much lenitie, or with too much seueritie. Quest. What is that which is contrary to the due respect and due carriage of equals amongst themselues? Mat: 20 24. Mat: 23.6.Answ. This; the aduancing and preferring themselues one aboue another, either in opinion or practise, and disdayning one another. Quest. Whence is it that inferiours, superiours, or equals doe things contrary to the due respect and due carriage that they owe one to another? Prou: 13.10. Num: 12.1.2. Ioh: 19.10. 2. Tim: 3.2.3.4. Zach: 11:16. 1. Tim: 5.13. 1. Pet: 4.15.Answ. It proceedes, either out of pride and arrogancy, or selfe-loue, or carelesnesse, not to know their duty, or know∣ing it not to practise it; or curiositie, men busying themselues with the duties of others, and medling with things not ap∣pertayning to them. The confirmation of the fift Commandement. Hitherto of the precept, now to the confirmation of it by a promise made to such as yeeld obedi∣ence to it in these words. Exod: 20.12. That thy dayes may bee long in the land which the Lord thy God giueth thee. Quest: How is it that the Apostle calls this the first Com∣mandement: which promise, Ephes: 6.2. seeing there is a large promise of shewing mercy to thousands, to them that loue God, and keepe his Commandements, annexed to the second Commande∣ment?
Answ. This is the first Commandement that hath a spe∣ciall and particular promise, the other promise annexed to the second Commandement is generall to all those that loue God, and so not restrained onely to that precept; but is ex∣tended generally to the obedience of the whole law. Quest. What is the blessing promised in these words, That thy dayes may bee long in the land which the Lord thy God giueth thee? Answ. Length of dayes, long life and prosperitie,Ephes. 6.3. Deut: 5.16. and whatsoeuer belongeth to a mans welfare and well beeing in this life. Quest. Why is the blessing of long life and length of dayes pro∣mised to them that honour their parents, rather then any other par∣ticular blessing? Quest. For this reason, because parents are instruments and meanes of this life, therefore it pleaseth the Lord to make this promise, and to giue them long life for a blessing who dutifully and respectiuely behaue themselues towards their parents. Quest. Is long life in this world a blessing, and a thing to bee desired? Answ. Yes it is;Eccles: 9.4, 5, 6, 10. Psal: 6.5.6. for our temporary life is giuen vs that in it we may vse all good meanes to attaine to life and salua∣tion, and it is the time of repentance, and the time of grace and of saluation. Mans life in this world is full of trouble and griefe, and subiect to many miseries: Moses saith, Psal: 90.10. The time of our life is threescore yeares and ten, and if they bee of strength fourescore yeeres, yet their strength is but labour and sorrow. And Eccles: 12.1. Salomon calles old age, euill dayes and yeeres wherein we shall say we haue no pleasure; therefore long life and length of dayes may seeme to be rather a discommoditie then a benefit or blessing. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. The answere to this is two-fold. Quest. What is the first answere? Answ. This; mans life in this world is full of trouble and misery, not of it selfe, but by mans owne fault, and therefore
notwithstanding the troubles and miseries of it, in it selfe it is to be esteemed a benefit and blessing of God. Quest. What is the second answere? Philip: 1.22.23 Heb: 12.10.11. . Pet: 1.10.Answ. This; troubles and miseries of this life are sancti∣fied to Gods children, and made good and profitable to them, and to them they are sweetned with supply of inward com∣fort, and the Lord giues grace to his children liuing long in this world to increase in grace and goodnesse, and to gaine vnto themselues more assurance of eternall life, and there∣fore though mans life bee full of miseries; yet as God promiseth continuance of it to his children it is a great bles∣sing. Quest. What is that land here spoken of in this promise, That thy dayes may bee long in the land which the Lord thy God giueth thee? Answ. In respect of the Israelites the land of Canaan, which was giuen them of the Lord for a possession; but in respect of vs it is to bee vnderstood generally of any place wheresoeuer wee bee in the world: that such as honour their parents, they haue right of dwelling in that place where they be from the Lord, whose is the whole earth, Psal: 24.1.Psal: 24.1. Therefore the Apostle puts it downe generally, Ephes: 6.3.Ephes: 6.3. Quest. How is long life and length of dayes in this world a blessing peculiar to such as honour their parents, seeing the wic∣ked, and disobedient to parents sometimes liue long? Answ. For the most part it falleth out that the wicked and disobedient to parents, are punished with vntimely death, Prou: 20.20. Prou: 30.17. But if God giue long life to them in this world, it is either in mercy to bring them repentance,Iob: 31.13.14. Eccles: 8.12.13. Isai. 65.20. Rom. 2.5. they being such as belong to Gods election: or in iudgement to heape more misery on them in this life, sometimes in the same kinde by the stubbornenesse and dis∣obedience of their owne children and inferiours, and to leaue them more inexcusable at the day of iudgement, and to heape greater wrath on them. Quest. How is the promise here made fulfilled, seeing some that honour their parents are taken away and die in their youth?
Answ. So farre as long life may bee good,Gen: 25.8. Iob: 42:17. 1. King. 14.13. Isai: 1.57.1. and a benefit to Gods children; so farre God giueth it to them, but if hee in his infinit wisedome see it better for them to be gathered to their fathers, and so to bee free from sinne, and from being infected with the corruptions in the world, or from the miseries and euils to come: hee takes them away, and hee recompenceth the want of temporall life, with eternall life. But is it not Gods promise, for he here promiseth long life in this world. Quest. How is that to be answered? Answ. Thus; the Lord taking his children from earth to heauen in their yonger dayes doth not breake his promise, but increaseth his blessing, as hee that promiseth a penny and giueth a pound breakes not his promise: so the Lord is not to be challenged of breach of promise. Quest. What things may bee further gathered from this pro∣mise, that thy dayes may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giueth thee? Answ. Three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Coloss. 3.20. that due respect and due carriage of infe∣riours towards superiours, of superiours towards inferi∣ours, and of equalls one towards another is greatly pleasing to God. Quest. What is the second thing. Answ. This;2. Sam: 13.14.28.29. 2. Sam 15.1. that the best course that parents can take that it may goe well with their children, is to instruct and nurture them in godlinesse, and to bring them vp in the feare of the Lord: and that they that are carelesse and neglect this duty, (doe as much as in them is) shorten the dayes of their children. Quest. What is the third thing? Answ: This;Psal: 31.15. Eccles: 8.8. that long life in this world commeth not by nature or good constitution of body, but of the good plea∣sure and prouidence of God, the Lord granting it, and bles∣sing the meanes to that purpose.
Now to the sixt Commandement. Thou shalt not kill. Quest. Why is the Commandement that forbids killing or murder, next to that of honouring parents? Answ. For two reasons. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; because the Lord hauing in that Comman∣dement of honouring parents, established degrees amongst men, and humane societies; nothing is more necessary for the continuance and safegard of humane societies, then that the life of man be preserued. Quest: What is the second reason? Gen: 4.5. Gen: 27.41. Gen: 37.4.5.8.20.Answ. This; because murder commonly comes from the breach of the fift Commandement, and the breach of the fift and sixt Commandements commonly goe together: the first murder that euer was, came from a desire of superioritie, be∣cause Cain thought himselfe not so greatly fauoured of God as Abel; so Esau, so Iosephs brethren. Quest: Why is the Commandement that forbids murder set before the other Commandements that follow? Iob: 2.4.Answ. Because the greatest hurt and wrong that can be done to a man is touching his life, death taking away a mans being simply, which other wrongs doe not, and of all earthly things life being most precious to a man, and in greatest ac∣count with him. Quest. What are the words of the sixt Commandement? Answ. Those that we finde, Exod: 20.13. Thou shalt not kill, or thou shalt doe no murder. Quest. Doth this Commandement forbid killing of any thing that hath life? Gen: 9.3. 1. Cor: 10.25. Deut: 22.6.7. Prou: 12.10.Answ. No it doth not; notwithstanding this prohibition the Lord hath giuen to man libertie to take away the life of some creatures; as of herbes, plants, and of bruit creatures, being appointed fo the nourishment of man, and wee may
lawfully kill them for our vse, time and place, and other cir∣cumstances being duly obserued, and so as in killing of bruit creatures we are not cruell, nor put them to more paine then we must needes. Quest. VVhat is then meant by the Word, Kill or Murder, Thou shalt not kill, or thou shalt doe no murder? Answ. Any kind of wilfull hurting or endammaging of the life and person of man.Gen. 9.5. Quest. What is the ground of that prohibition, Thou shalt not wilfully hurt or endammage the life and person of man? Answ. Both the participation of the same image of God, and also of the same flesh. In that all men beare the same image of God as they bee reasonable creatures, and euery man is also of the same flesh comming of one roote, namely, of Adam:Gen. 9.6. Isai. 57.7. Act. 17.26. and therefore for one man to kill or murder ano∣ther is a wrong to Gods image, and repugnant and contrary to nature; for it is contrary to nature for a man to be cruell to his owne flesh Quest. What is the summe of this Commandement? Answ. This; that the life and person of men bee not any way by man impeached, hurt or endammaged,Gen. 9.5.6. but that it be by man euery way, and by all good meanes pre∣serued. Now this Commandement being negatiue, I will first shew what it forbids. Quest. What doth this Commandement forbid? Answ. In generall euery thing whatsoeuer that tendeth to the hurt or hinderance of the life of man; either the life of his body, or the life of his soule, And first concerning the hurt or hinderance of the life of the body of man. Quest. What are the things that hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Answ. They are either things of practice, or things of o∣mission. Quest: What are the things of practise, that doe hurt or hin∣der the life of the body of man?
Answ. They are either inward in the heart, or outward in word or in deede. Of these in Order. Quest. What are the inward things in the heart that doe hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Answ. They are in number foure especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Mat. 5.22. Eccles. 7.11.Answ. This; Hastie, rash, vnaduised, vniust and sinfull anger. Quest. What is rash, vnaduised, vniust, and sinfull anger? Answ. Such as is either hastily conceiued without iust and sufficient cause, or the cause being iust and weighty, such as is directed amisse: as either against the person, or against the offence only,Num. 24.10. 1 Sam. 17.28. Ephes. 4.26. Gen. 49.6.7. Dan. 3.19. as it is an offence to men, as an iniury and wrong bringing hurt and dammage to men, and not as an of∣fence to God: or such as exceedeth either in time or in mea∣sure, and becomes hot fiery anger, furious and raging, troubling the minde, and making a man or a woman forget duty to God and men. Quest. What is the second inward thing in the heart, that doth hurt or hinder the life of the body of man. Leui. 19.17. 1 Iohn. 2.9.11. 1 Iohn. 3 15.Answ. This; malice or hatred, which is old anger or con∣tinued wrath; and it is anger or wrath kept close in the heart, cloaked and couered for a time with purpose to doe hurt, and waiting for oportunitie to doe mischiefe: such was Cains anger. Gen. 4.5.8. Quest. What is the highest degree of malice or of old and con∣tinued anger? Answ. Such a malicious affection as is implacable and can neuer be appeased, but is full set at all times, and by all meanes to doe mischiefe: such was the affection of Saul to∣wards Dauid, who though hee wept and acknowledged his fault to Dauid, 1 Sam, 24.17.18.19.20. and againe confes∣sed his sinne, saying behold I haue done foolishly, and haue erred exceedingly;Psal. 120.6.7. Rom. 1.30. 1 Sam. 26.21. yet malice was so deepely roo∣ted in his heart, as he sought Dauids death till his owne dying day. Quest. What is the worst kind of malice or hatred?
Answ. This; when men malice or hate others,1 Ioh. 3:12. Mat. 10.22. 1 King. 22.8. Ioh. 7.7. either for the good things they see in them, or for telling them of their faults, though they pretend oher causes of their hatred. Quest. What if an enemy be a wicked man, is it not then law∣full to hate him? Answ: No; we may indeed hate his sinne but not his per∣son. Psal. 139.21.22. Dauid hated them not in respect of their persons, but in respect of their sinne as they were ene∣mies to God. Luke, 14.26. Christ saith, If any man come to me and hate not his Father and Mother, & Wife, & Children, & Brethren, & Sisters, & his owne life also: it may seeme therefore that hatred is not vnlawfull. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; hatred of Father and Mother, and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, is not there simply com∣manded nor simply allowed: but the meaning is, that in the comparison of Christ, and of the constant profession of his Gospell, Christians are to dispise Father, Mother, Wife, Chil∣dren, Brethren, Sisters; yea to hate them, as appeares,Chap. 10.37. Mat. Quest. What is the third inward thing in the heart that doth hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Answ. This; enuie, whereby men grieue and repine at good things that others haue, which they would haue and can∣not; whether they be good things of the minde, or body, or outward good things; & doe hate them for those good things: for enuie is a compound of carnall griefe and hatred. Thus the deuill was a murtherer from the beginning; Ioh. 8.44.Gen. 26.14.15 Gen. 30.1. Nomb. 11.28.29. Mat. 27.18. in that he enuied the good estate of our first parents, & neuer rested vntill hee had thrust them out of it. Thus the high Priests of enuie hated Christ for his most excellent sayings and do∣ings. Quest. Whence comes it that men enuie others and grieue and repine at the good things of others?Gal. 5.26. 1 Tim. 6.4. 1 Cor. 13.4. Answ. Out of pride and out of abundance of selfe-loue. Quest. How farre doth enuie carry an enuious person in sinne? Ans. Both to a wishing of euill and hurt to another and the fall of another,Pro. 17.5. Pro. 24.17.18. Iob. 31.29.30. and to a reioycing in the hurt and euill and the fall that comes to another.
Exod: 15. Moses and the people sung praise to God at the destruction of Pharaoh. 1. Sam: 25.39. Dauid reioyced for Nabals death. Prou: 11.10. It is said, When the wicked pe∣rish there is ioy: Therefore it may seeme that men may re∣ioyce at the fall of others their enemies. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Moses and the people, and Dauid reioyced at the ruine and fall of their enemies, not out of an en∣uious mind, simply delighting in their destruction, but for the execution of Gods iustice on their enemies; and for his mercy in deliuering them from danger and from the hands of their enemies: and thus Gods Children may reioyce at the ruine and fall of their enemies that do perscute them & the Church of God: not out of enuie, pleasing themselues in the hurt of any,Psal. 58.10.11. be they neuer so wicked and vile; but out of loue to God and to his glory; for the manifestation of his iustice: they may magnifie and praise his iustice in punish∣ing such wicked persons. Question. VVhat is the fourth inward thing in the heart that doth hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Answ: This; desire of reuenge, which is when men to sa∣tisfie their owne corrupt and troubled minds for wrong done, or supposed to bee done to them;Leuit. 19.18. Luk. 9.54.55. desire to requite euill for euill, and to right themselues by extreamity and by punish∣ment in full proportion, according to their reuengefull mindes. Iudges. 16.28. Samson prayed to God and besought him that he might bee strengthened, to bee avenged on the Phi∣listims; it may seeme that hee had a desire of reuenge, and therefore men may sometimes desire reuenge. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Samson was raised vp and appointed of God to bee a Iudge and Captaine ouer his people Israel, to auenge the iniuries and wrongs done to them and to himselfe by the Philistims: and though hee was at that time a captiue in the hands of the Philisims; yet as hee was able hee went on in executing of his Office,
and he called on God to prosper him in the execution of it, being thereunto carried, not with desire of priuate re∣uenge, but with a pure zeale to Gods glory in discharging his duty, though he lost his life in doing of it, and so his ex∣ample is no warrant for any to desire reuenge. Reuel: 6.10. The holy Martyrs vnder the altar crie out How long Lord holy and true, doest not thou iudge and auenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth; It seemes therefore they desired reuenge and full vengeance on those that haue shed their blood, and so it is not vnlawfull to desire re∣uenge. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the holy Martyrs in heauen are brought in vnder a vision crying for vengeance, not out of any desire of reuenge, not in respect of any wrong or cruelty shewed to them; but out of a loue and burning zeale to the glory of Christ, that Christ might be glorified in the confusion of his enemies, and their crying for vengeance is rather to shewe what iudgement of God abideth for their cruell persecutors, then what minde they beare towards them; and that their cause cryeth for vengeance as Abels blood did, Gen: 4.10.Gen: 4.10. And to shewe that howsoeuer the Lord delay for a time, yet hee hath not forgotten the blood of his seruants, but that it cries in his eares, and that hee will one day bring their cruell persecutors to their account: that is the meaning of the place, and so this is no warrant to desire reuenge. Psal: 94.1.2.3. The Psalmist prayes to God the auenger that he would take vengeance on the wicked, and hee prayes in faith with a desire to obtaine what he prayed for. There∣fore we may likewise desire reuenge. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the words of the Psalmist there, are rather a prophesie and a prediction, then a prayer. Againe, the Psalmist there prayes for vengeance on the wicked, not out of a corrupt desire of priuate reuenge as they were his enemies, but as they were the enemies
of God incureable, which hee was able to discerne; and out of zeale to Gods glory, and the good of his Church, that the name of God might not be longer blasphemed, nor his Church oppressed, and cruelly wronged, and so this is no warrant for reuenge. Quest. May not men in vsing the lawfull helpe of the Magistrate for righting of the wrongs done vnto them, de∣sire reuenge; the Magistrate being Gods Minister to take vengance on them that doe euill, Rom. 13.14? Answ. No, they may not; for so doing they make the Magistrate but an instrumnt of satisfying their cor∣rupt desire, and they abuse the lawfull helpe of the Ma∣gistrate. Men are to vse the helpe of the Magistrate in the wrongs done to them, onely with a desire to relieue themselues,Rom: 12.19. Philip: 4.5. and to helpe forward the common peace, and that Gods iustice and goodnesse may bee manifested for the bettering of those that wrong them. Rom: 12.19. Auenge not your selues, either by your selues, or by the helpe of others: therefore desire not reuenge. Quest. What are the things outward in word that doe hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Answ. They are in number fiue especially. Quest: What is the first of those? Prou: 12.18. Mat: 5 22. Rom: 3.14. 1. Co: 6.10. 2. Ephes: 4.31.Answ. Bitter and cursed speaking, hard, spitefull, ve∣nemous and prouoking tearmes: when men breake out into brawling, rayling, reuiling and reproachfull tearmes one a∣gainst another. Quest. What is the worst kind of rayling and reuiling? Answ. This; when men either raile and speake euill of religion it selfe,2. King: 1.4. Act: 24.14. Mt. .11. 1. Pet 4.14. or de raile and reuile religious per∣sons for religions sake, because they are religious and doe truely feare God and make conscience of their wayes. Quest. Are hard words and bitter tearmes alwayes vnlaw∣full, and may they neuer be vsed? 1 Sam: 13.13. Ib: 2.10. Isai: 1.10.Answ. Hard words and bitter tearmes may sometimes be vsed, and not be cursed speaking: as when publike persons,
Magistrates or Ministers, or other gouernours in families,Luk: 13.32. Luk: 24 25. Gal: 3 1. by vertue of their place and calling vse them not in way of reproach, but in way of iust reproofe, and in loue inten∣ding the good and amendment of those they doe re∣proue,. Quest: What is the second thing in word that doth hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Answ. This;Iudg: 8 1.2.3. Prou: 15.1. Phillip: 2.14. wrangling and contentious speach betweene parties disagreeing; neither partie will yeeld, but each one striues to haue th last word, whereby difference and disa∣greement betweene them is increased. Quest. What is the third thing in word that doth hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Answ. This; crying,Ephes. 4.31. and vnseemely lifting vp of the voyce: when men or women being at variance in priuate speeches, doe through choler and malice lift vp their voy∣ces, and speake so loud that they may bee heard a farre off; and thereby they are more encouraged, and incensed one a∣against another. Quest. What is the fourth thing in word that doth hurt or hinder the life or the body of man? Answ. This; threatning speech,Psal▪ 94.4. Act: 9.1. when as men or wo∣men from an inward dislike and rage in their owne priuate cause doe giue out threaning words against others, as that they will be meete with them and the like. Qust. What is the fift thing in word that doth hurt or hin∣der the life of the body of man? Answ. This; mocing, scoffing, and deriding speech,2. Kings 4.23. Ioh. 1 . Act 2.1. 2. Sam  20. Ephes. 5.4. when as men or women out of hatred and contempt of others doe either in plaine tearmes and wordes mocke and deride them, or gird and taunt them, or iest on them by priuie and close nippes, thereby see∣king to disgrace them, and to glad their owne hearts, and to make themselues and other merry by grieuing of them. Quest. What is the worst kind of mocking, scoffing, and de∣riding?
Answ. This; when men mocke and scoffe, and taunt o∣thers for well doing,2. Chron: 36.16 Psal: 69.11.12. Psal: 119.51. Heb: 11.36. and for refraining from euill, for their pietie and religion, and for the vertues and graces that God hath giuen them. Thus Ismael mocked Isaack. Genes: 21.9.Gen: 21 9. compared with Gal: 4.29.Gal: 4.29. 1. King: 18.27 Elijah mocked Baals Priests, and iested on them at noone and saide, cry aloud for he is a God: it may seeme therefore that mocking of others, and iesting on them is not alwayes vnlawfull. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Elijah mocked Baals Priestes, not with a minde to please himselfe in their disgrace, and to make him∣selfe and others merry by grieuing of them: but hee vsed that manner of speaking out of his zeale to Gods glory, thereby the more plainely to discouer to them the grosse∣nesse of their Idolatry, in that they were so foolish as to worship such a God as could not heare; and the more sharpely to reprooue them for the same. Thus did Isaijah with the grosse Idolaters of his time, Isai: 44.16. Therefore the practice of Elijah doth not warrant mocking, and scof∣fing, and deriding. Quest: What are the things outward in deed, that doe hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Answ. They are either in countenance, and in some ge∣sture and carriage of the body, or of some part of the body: or they are other acts and deedes. Quest. What are the things in countenance, and in some ge∣sture and carriage of the body, or of some part of the body, that doe hurt and hinder the life of the body of man? Gen: 4.5. Gen: 31.2. 1. Sam. 25.17. Mat: 9.24. Mat: 27.39. Luk: 16.14. Act: 7.54.Answ: All signes and gestures of the body that expresse rash anger, contempt, and despite of heart towards another, or others one or more; as lowring, casting downe the coun∣tenance, disdainefull, froward and churlish behauiour, nod∣ding or shaking the head in contempt, snuffing, tushing, gee∣ring, gerning, flinging away in a chafe, or the like. Deu: 25.9. The law of God did permit a widow to spit in the face of her husbāds brother, or next kinsmā before the Elders
of the City or Place, if hee refused to raise vp seede to his Brother. Quest. How then is euery gesture of the body, expressing con∣tempt of another, a thing that doth hurt or hinder the life of the body of man, and a degree of murther? Answ. The Lord might command her so to doe, to mani∣fest his great dislike of the want of loue in him towards his dead Brother. Againe, the word may be fitly translated, Deut. 25 9.  and spit in his sight (that is) spit on the ground before him, that hee might see her: and that seemes to be the true meaning of that place. Deut. 4.37.Deut. 4.37. God is said to bring the Israelites out of Egypt in his face (that is) in his sight: therefore this is no warrant for a∣ny such gesture, expressing the contempt of another. Quest. What are the other acts and deeds that doe hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Answ. They are such as either hurt or hinder a mans owne life, or the life of another or others, one or more. Quest. What are the acts and deedes that hurt and hinder a mans owne life? Answ. They are either present meanes of the taking a∣way of a mans owne life, and of selfe-murther; or lingering meanes of taking of it away. Quest. What are the present meanes of taking away of a mans owne life, and of selfe-murther? Answ. They are such as doe presently bereaue a man of his life; as when a man or woman layes violent hands on him∣selfe, or her selfe, and doe murder themselues, by hanging themslues, by drowning, or the like:Ephe. 5.29. which is a sinne most monstrous and vnnaturall. Quest. Whence comes it that men or women lay violent hands on themselues; and what may be the causes of selfe-murder? Answ. Commonly these; horror of conscience, and dispaire of Gods mercy, as in Judas, Mat. 27.4.5. Feare of worldly punishment or shame, 1 Sam. 31.4. 2 Sam. 17.23. Monstrous pride, when men or women will not bee at all, vnlesse they may be as they list themselues; as when they are plunged into remedilesse & extreame penury, and want of outward things.
Judges 16.30. Samson killed himselfe and hee sinned not in so doing: it may seeme therefore that selfe-murder may be sometimes lawfull. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; first, it cannot be properly said that Sam∣son did kill or murder himselfe: he died indeed in the executi∣on of his Office, which was to auenge the iniuries and wrongs done to himselfe and to the Israelites, by the Phili∣stims: yet his intent was not to kill himselfe, but only to take reuenge, though it were to the hazard, and to the losse of his life. Secondly, he had a speciall direction of Gods spirit to do as he did, and his example is speciall; for he was in his death a figure of Christ, as he conquered his enemies more in his death then in his life: so did Christ. Quest. For the auoyding of some great danger, or some great sinne: as deniall of Christ in the time of persecution or the like, may it not be lawfull for men to make away themselues. Mat. 10.23. 1 Cor. 10.13.Answ. No, it may not; in such cases God hath not ap∣pointed that as a lawfull remedie; but men are then to helpe themselues (if possibly they can) by flying away, or by other lawfull meanes; and they are to haue faith in the promise of God, that he will giue an issue in euery temptation. Quest. What are the lingring meanes of taking away of a mans owne life, and of selfe-murder. Answ. They are such as fret and weaken the body, and im∣paire the health of it by degrees, and by little and little. Quest. What are those things that fret and weaken the body, and impaire the health of it by degrees? Answ They are foure especialy. Quest. What is the first of those? Pro. 23.29.30. Isa. 5.11. Hose. 7.5.Answ. Intemperancie in dyet, surfeting, riot, and excesse in eating and drinking, which brings sicknesses and diseases on the body. Quest. What is the second lingring meanes, fretting and weakening the body, and impairing the health of it by degrees? Pra. 20.4. Pro. 21.25. Pro. 2.18.19.Answ. Idlenesse, and vnchastity, and abusing of the body to whodome and vncleanesse; whereby men or women bring
grieuous and foule diseases on their bodies.1 Cor. 6.18. Quest. What is the third lingring meanes of taking away of a mans owne life, and of selfe-murder? Answ. A carelesse and wilfull neglect,2 King. 20.7. 1 Tim. 5.23. a refusing of the good meanes of help, that serue to preserue the life of the bo∣dy: as wholesome dyet, cloathing and physicke; especially in the time of sicknesse. Quest. What is the fourth lingring meanes of taking away of a mans owne life, and of selfe murther? Answ. This; a vountary rushing into danger, either cer∣taine and vnauoydable, or very likely, whithout any iust calling from God: as when men rush into houses infected with the plague, ride through dangerous places needlesly without weapons, in a brauery take on them to ride, runne, or goe so farre in such a time, which they cannot doe without hurt to their bodies, only for a little gaine or such like,Mat. 4.6.7. which is a tempting of God. Quest. May not the body be weakened, and the health of it bee impayred by inward causes alone, without any outward act or deede? Answ. Yes it may, and many times it is;1 Tim. 6.10. Psal. 55.23. Pro. 17.22. as by distrustfull carking care, worldly sorrow, griefe, enuie, and the like. 2 Cor. 7 10. Psal. 112.10. Pro. 14.30. Quest. What are the acts and deeds that hurt or hinder the life of another, or others, one or more? Answ. They are either acts and deeds proper only to publike persons and gouernours; whether they bee Magi∣strates, o guenurs in the Family, or common to publike persons, and to priuate persons. Quest: What are the acts and deeds proper only to publike per∣sons and gouernours; whether Magistrates or Gouernours in the Family, that hurt and hinder the life of another, or others, one or more? Answ. They are foure especially. Q st. What is the first of those? Asw. This; any wicked and vniust Law, Statute,Exod. 1.15.16.22. Dan. 3.4.5.6. Ordi∣nance, Edict, charge or command, made or giuen by publike persons and gouernours: when publike persons and gouer∣nours
abuse their authority and power tyrannously,Dan. 6.7.8.9. Mat. 2.16. to en∣trap or to destroy others by any wicked and vniust Law, Sta∣tute, Ordinance, Edict, or command. Quest. What is the second act and deed, proper only to publike persons and gouernours: whether Magistrates or Gouernours in the Family, that doth hurt and hinder the life of another, or o∣thers, one or more? Answ. This; giuing of vniust and wrong Iudgement, a∣warding of sentence in causes iudiciall, contrary to right and equitie:Amos. 2.6. Amos. 6.12. 1 King. 21.11.12.13. Pro. 17.15.26. Luk. 23.24.25. when publike persons giue vniust iudgement in mat∣ters ciuill, concerning Lands or goods, or in matters cri∣minall concerning the body or life, doe wittingly and wil∣lingly giue wrong iudgement, either to the condemning of the innocent, or to the iustifying and deliuering of the guil∣ty and euill doer: herein they are murderers. Quest. VVhat is the third act and deede, proper only to publike persons and gouernours; whether Magistrates or Gouer∣nours in the Family, that doth hurt or hinder the life of another, or others, one or more? Exod. 23.7. 1 Sam. 22.17.18.19. Acts. 12.2. Iam. 5.6. Gen. 16.6. Leuit. 25.43. Deut. 25.2.3.Ans. This; the inflicting of vniust and vndue punish∣ment on others: when publike persons, Magistrates, or Go∣uernours in the Family, out of their rage and passion, either punish the innocent and such as haue not offended, or they exercise tyrannous cruelty and extreamity in correcting and punishing them that doe offend; and doe punish offen∣ders vnmercifully. Quest. May not publike persons and gouernours bee cruell in sparing offenders and malefactors? Answ. Yes, they may: in sparing those that ought to bee punished, they many times bring the plagues of God on whole societies, on Townes, Cities or Counnryes; and they lay them open to Gods vengeance,Num. 35.31.32 33.34. 1 King. 2.31.32. which is great cruelty. 1 Sam. 15.1 Sam. 15.26. Saul spared Agag who should haue beene slaine, and that caused the Lord to take away the Kingdome from him and his posterity. vers. 26. Quest. What is the fourth act and deede proper only to pub∣like persons and gouernours; whether Magistrates or Gouernours in the Family, that doth hurt or hinder the life of an other or o∣thers, one or more?
Answ. Cruell oppressing of others; when Magistrates,Gen. 10.8.9. Iere. 22.13.17. Micha. 3.1.2.3. Zph. 3.3. Iam. 5.4. or Gouernours in the Family, do cruelly wrong and oppresse those that be vnder them: as by laying too heauy burthens on them, by getting what they can from them for their owne priuate gaine; by vsing their labours for little or no wages and the like: whereby they make them wearie of their liues. Quest. What are the acts and deeds common both to publike and priuate persons, that hurt or hinder the life of another, or others one or more? Answ. They are either such as tend to the hurt of the bo∣dy of another or others, and yet for the present take not away the life: or such as doe hurt the body and take away the life of another, or others one or more. Quest. VVhat are the acts and deeds common both to pub∣like and priuate persons, that doe hurt or hinder the life of the body of another or others, one or more; and yet for the present take not away the life? Answ. They are fiue especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; hard and cruell dealing with others,1 King. 21.15, 16. Pro. 11.26. Isa. 5.8. Amos. 8.4.5.6. 1 Thes. 4.6. 1 Cor. 6.8.10. Iam. 2.6. oppres∣sing and wronging them; either by encroaching on them by violent extrtion, as inclosers; such as ioyne house to house: such as ingrose commodities, as Corne, or the like; or by fraud and circumuention in bargayning; or by troubling and vexing them with vniust suites and vndue courses in Law, or other molestations: whereby they are worne out, and depriued of meanes of life. Quest. VVhat is the worst kinde of oppressing and wrong∣ing of others? Answ. This;Exod. 22.21.22 Deut. 24 14 17 Ierem. 22.3. Zach. 7.10. when men oppresse and wrong impotent feeble▪ poore persons, strangers, Fatherlesse, Orphants, or Widowes. Quest. VVht is the second act or deede common both to pub∣like and priuate persons, that tendeth to the hurt of the body of another, or others, one or more; and yet for the present take not a∣way the life? Answ. This; Combining with others, and conspiring
with them, and lying in wait for the killing, or for the mis∣cheiuing of another or others, one or more. 2 King. 9.14.15. 2 King. 25.23.24. Iere 11.19.21. Iere. 18.18. Pro. 1.11. Acts. 23.12.13. Quest. What is the third act and deede common both to pub∣like and priuate persons, that tendeth to the hurt of the body of ano∣other or others, and yet for the present takes not away the life? Iudg. 16.9. &c. 1 Sam. 18.25. Mat. 26.48. Act. 7.52. Mat. 10.21. Luk. 21.26.Answ. This; the betraying of another or others, into the hands of those that vniustly seeke his or their life and ouer∣throw; especially the betraying of the Prince and chiefe Magistrate, or of those to whom men are bound by some neere and speciall bond: as of Father, Mother, Wife, Chil∣dren, and such like. Quest. What is the fourth act and deede common both to pub∣like and priuate persons, that tendeth to the hurt of the body of another or others, and yet for the present takes not away the life? 2 Sam. 17.1.2.3 Pro. 1.10.11. 2 Sam. 11.14.15. & 12.9. com∣pared. 2 Sam. 2.14.15.16.Answ. This; procurement and stirring vp of such meanes and instruments as may take away the life of another or o∣others; by counsell, by inticement, by writing, by hyring some to lye in waite to kill them; by stirring vp either for pleasure or cruelty, to quarrell or fight one with another; or the like. Quest. What is the fift act and deede common both to pub∣like and priuate persons, that tends to the hurt of the life of the body of another or others: and yet for the present takes not a∣way the life? Ezod. 2.13. Exod. 21.15. Leuit. 24.19. Deut. 27.24. Mat. 26.67. Acts. 23.2. 2 Cor. 11.24.25.Answ. This; Vniust violence with the hand in striking, beating, wounding, or mayming of another, or others; espe∣cially striking, beating, wounding, or mayming of Parents or Superiours. Quest. What are the acts and deeds common both to publike and priuate persons, that hurt the body and take away the life of another, or other? Answ. They are either such acts and deeds as by manifest violence shed the blood, and take away the life of another or others: or by some secret and cunning deuice, doe shed the blood, and take away the life of another or othrs. Of these in Order.
Quest. What are the acts and deeds common both to publike and priuate persons, that by manifest violence shed the blood, and take away the life of another or others? Answ. They are acts and deeds whereby men doe openly and willingly take away the life of another, by sword,Gen. 4.8. 2 Sam. .27. 2 Sam. 4.6; 7. Mat. 14.10. dag∣ger, knife, gunne, rope, or any like instrument and meanes whatsoeuer. Quest. When is the sinne of taking away the life of another or others openly by sword, dagger, knife, rope, gunne, and the like in∣strument and meanes whatsoeuer, most vile and odious? Answ. When it is committed without regard either of place, calling, or condition; or of nature, or of multitude. Quest. How is it committed without regard of place, calling, or condition? Answ. Thus; when a man openly and willingly, by sword,1 Sam. 24.7.14. 1 Sam. 20.9.10 11. 1 King. 16.7.9 2 Chro. 24.21. 1 Thes. 2.15. Mat. 2.16. 1 Pet. 3.6. dagger, knife, rope, or gunne, sheds the blood, and takes away the life of his Prince, or other Magistrate ouer him; of his Pastor, of his Master, especially when they are executing their office; or of an Infant, or such like; or when the wife o∣penly and willingly by sword, dagger, knife, rope, or gunne, sheds the blood, and takes away the life of her husband; or the husband openly and willingly by sword, dagger, knife, rope, or gunne, sheds the blood, and takes away the life of his wife: the husband is not to strike his wife, much lesse to shed her blood, or take away her life. Quest. How is the sinne of taking away the life of another, or others, openly and willingly by sword, dagger, knife, rope, or gunne, committed without regard of nature? Answ. Thus;Gen 4.8. Iudg. 9.6. 2 King. 3.27. 1 Tim. 1.9. when a brother openly and willingly by sword, dagger, knife, rope, or gunne, sheds the blood, and takes away the life of his brother or sister, the father the child; and especially the child the life of the father or mother. Quest. How is the sinne of taking away the life of another or others, openly and willingly by sword, dagger, knife, rope, or gunne, or such like instrument, or meanes committed without regard of multitude?Gen. 34.25. Gen. 49.5.6.7. 1 Sam. 22.18.19. Answ. Thus; when it is done on many by adding murder to murder, though they be strangers. 2 Kin. 10.7. Act. 12.2, 3.
Quest. Is shedding of the blood, and taking away the life of another or others, by sword, dagger, knife, gunne, or the like instru∣ment and meanes of death alwayes vnlawfull and a sinne? Answ. No; it is sometimes lawfull, and no sinne at all. Quest. How is it lawfull, and no sinne at all? Answ. In three cases. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; when God commands it exraordinarily; so Abraham might lawfully haue killed his sonne Isaac, the Lord bidding him to doe it, Gen. 22.2.Gen. 22.2. Ioshua had commandement from God to destroy the Canaanites, Iosh. 1.4, 5, 6.Iosh. 1, 4, 5, 6. Quest. VVhat is the second case wherein the taking away the life of another or others, is lawfull? Answ. This; when the Lord stirres vp men extraordina∣rily by his Spirit, and by speciall instinct to doe it, as Phine∣has was, Num. 25.7, 8.Num. 25.7.8. Psal. 106.30, 31.Psal. 106.30.31 and as Samuel was, 1 Sam. 15.33.1 Sam. 15.33. Quest. VVhat is the third case wherein the shedding of the blood, and taking away the life of another or others, openly and wil∣lingly by sword, dagger, knife, rope, gunne, or the like instrument of death is lawfull? Answ. This; when men are directed by the written word of God to doe it? Quest. How are men directed by the written word of God to doe it? Answ. In three cases. Quest. What is the first of those? Gen. 9.6. Exod. 2.27, 28.29. Deut. 17.5.6.7. Iosh. 7.24.25. 1 King: 2, 31, 46, Rom: 13.4.Answ. This; In case of publike Iustice, when Princes and Magistrates doe by direction from the Word of God, and according to wholesome Lawes grounded on the same, giue sentence of death against malefactors that deserue death: and then executioners vnder them, doe by their appoynt∣ment shed the blood, and take away the liues of those male∣factors so condemned. Quest. What is the second case wherin men are directed by the written word of God to shed the blood, and to take away the life of another or others, openly & willingly by sword, dagger, knife, rope, gunne, or the like instrument or meanes of death?
Answ. This; in case of lawfull and iust warre,Gen. 14.14.15.16.19.20. Exod. 17.9.10 Mat. 8.9. Luk. 3.14. Act. 10.1.2.3. when Prin∣ces and gouernours on iust and weighty causes, as for the de∣fending of the libertie of their countrey, either against rebel∣lion within, or inuasion of enemies without; or for the reco∣uering of it being lost, or for the defence of religion, and the truth of God, and the like, doe vse the sword in warre, and do wage battell, and their Souldiers doe in warre so vndertaken kill their enemies. 1 Chron. 22.8. God refused Dauid, and would not haue him to build his temple, because he was a man of war and blood: therefore it may seeme vnlawfull for Princes and Gouernors to wage battell, and to make warre. Quest: How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Dauid was not refused, as if the Lord had disallowed the battels that hee fought against the enemies of God: for Dauid saith, The Lord taught him to fight, Psal. 18.34, 39.Psal. 18.34 39. Psal. 144.1.Psal. 144.1. but because the Temple was a figure of Christ, whose kingdome should bee peaceable, and therefore that the shaddow and the Body might fully agree, the Lord would haue the materiall Temple to bee builded by Salomon, a peaceable man. Math. 5.44. Christ bids vs Loue our enemies. Quest. How then may Princes wage warre with their ene∣mies, and slay them? Answ. Princes are to loue their enemies, yet so as they loue their owne subiects more dearely: for Loue is to begin at home, and is first to bee expressed to those that are nee∣rest to vs, and then to those that are further off in degree, e∣uen to our enemies: and therefore Princes may and ought to wage warre with enemies that doe violently assault their Subiects, and they may and ought to take away the liues of such enemies, if otherwise their Subiects cannot bee safe. Quest. What is the third case wherein men are directed by the written word of God to shed the blood, and take away the life of an other or others openly and willingly by sword, dagger, knife, rope, gunne, or the like instruments or meanes of death?
Exod. 22.2.Answ. This; in case of necessarie and iust defence, when a man is of necessitie for the defence of himselfe driuen to kill another or others, and hee doth it iustly and in right manner. Quest. When is a man of necessitie driuen to kill another or others, for the defence of himselfe, and for the safegard of his life? Answ. When hee is openly, and so suddenly assaulted, as that hee can by no other meanes defend himselfe, and saue his life, either by yeelding, or by going backe and flying, or by some suffering, or by helpe from others, or from the Magi∣strate; the Magistrate being absent, and it being full of dan∣ger to wait for his comming: in this case God puts the sword into the priuate mans hand. Quest. How doth a man in necessary defence of himselfe kill an other or others iustly and in a right manner? Answ. When hee doth it presently in the time of the as∣sault, and whilest the violence is offered:) for if hee doe it afterwards, it is not iust defence, but reuenge:) and hee doth it also with an intention onely to defend himselfe, and not to kill, and with a mind that had rather not kill: and he so strikes the party that assaults him, as that he is sorry for the necessi∣tie of hurting him. Quest. May not a man in some cases defend himselfe and others by voluntary combat, by single fight, by fighting with another, hand to hand, and so fighting kill another? Answ. No, he may not; voluntary combate or single fight betweene man and man is neuer lawfull in any case whatsoe∣uer; because in euery voluntary combate men hazard their liues without warrant from God, which is a tempting of God, and the killing of a man in such a combate is murder. Heere some particular cases are propounded and obiected. As first this; Voluntarie Combate, or Single fight is a triall of Inno∣cencie, and of trueth and right, and an ending of quarrells, and controuersies: therefore it may seeme in these cases to be lawfull.
Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus;Nomb. 35.30. Deut. 17.6. Iosh. 7.19. Heb. 6.16. other meanes are appointed of God for the triall of Innocency, and of truth and right, and of ending quarrels, as witnesses, evidences, open confession, & an oath, and not a voluntary combate; and vsually in a voluntary com∣bate the stronger party preuailes and ouercomes, and not he that hath the more iust cause. A man may defend himselfe and his owne life by fighting with a thiefe that assaults him: why then may he not defend himselfe and his life (leaue being granted him by the Magi∣strate) by combating and fighting with a false accuser, one that accuseth him falsely of some foule crime and fact deser∣uing death before a Iudge, and so seekes to spill his blood by the helpe of the Magistrate. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. There is great difference betweene iust defence against the assault of a thiefe, and combate with a false accu∣ser: for a man is put to it on the sudden to defend himselfe against a thiefe; but combate with a false accuser, is of con∣cluded and set purpose. And againe, in iust defence against the assault of a Thiefe, there is, or ought to bee an intention onely to defend, and not to kill: but in combate with a false ac∣cuser, there is a full purpose and resolution to kill: and therefore though the one bee lawfull, yet the other is not. In the time of warre, the hazard of the losse of many, and the shedding of the blood of many may be stayd by a single combate betweene two Champions appointed by the two armies, to trie the matter. Therefore in that case it seemes that a combate is lawfull. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Though there bee lesse danger of hazarding one mans life, then a whole armie; yet if the cause bee good and iust, it is to be maintained with all the strength that may be, and not to bee layd on the courage and power of one man, who in likelihood vnlesse the Lord doe in special manner sup∣port and assist, may be ouercome, and lose the victory.
Quest. What if the army that hath the better cause be wea∣ker then the army of the enemies, may it not then commit the mat∣ter to bee tryed by combate? Sam. 14.6. Chro. 14.15. Chro. 20.12.Answ. No, Combate is no meanes appointed of God for triall in that case, but the army that hath the better cause, and is weaker, is to commend it to the Lord, and vnder his shield and name to fight it out, it being as easie with the Lord to defend and saue by a few, as by many. I passe by that, that a man is disgraced for euer, vn∣lesse  hee take a Challenge: some examples are ob∣iected, as that Exod. 2 11, 12. Moses and the Egyptian fought a combate, they fought hand to hand, and Moses slew him: therefore sin∣gle combate seemes sometimes to be lawfull. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Moses was stird vp and called of God to be a deliuerer of his brethren out of the hands of the Egyptians; for God had then called him to that office, though his calling was not yet fully manifested to his brethren, and so that act of his of smiting and killing the Egyptian was a publike act of his calling,Act. 7.23.24.25 and was a beginning of the execution of his office, which was afterward to be fully performed: therefore being a publike person his example is not to the purpose. 1 Sam. 17.48, 49, 50, 51, 52. wee read that Dauid fought with Goliah the Philistim hand to hand, & had good successe, he ouercame him: it may seeme that single combat is lawfull. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the act of Dauid in combating with Goliath, was by the speciall and extraordinary instinct of Gods Spi∣rit, and by extraordinary motion wrought in his heart by the Lord on the hearing of Goliahs blasphemie: and there∣fore that act of his is no more to bee imitated and follow∣ed of vs, then the Israelites spoyling the Egyptians, Exo∣dus 12.36. or the fact of Phinehas, Numbers 25.7, 8. and the like extraordinary deedes are rather to be admired then followed. Qu. How many wayes do men openly & willingly shed the blood and take away the life of another or others by sword, dagger, knife,
rope, gunne, or other instrument or meanes of taking away the life? Ans. Two wayes, either with deliberation, or on a sud∣den and without deliberation. Quest. How doe men openly and willingly shed the blood of an other, or others, by sword, dagger, knife, rope, gunne, or such like in∣strument or meanes of death with deliberation? Answ. Thus;Deut. 19.11.12 Gen. 4.8. 2 Sam. 3.27. 2 Sam. 20.9.10 when they doe it out of hatred and fore-thought, and desire of reuenge, and out of a grudge carried in their hearts long before. Quest. How doe men openly and willingly shed the blood of an other or others, by sword, dagger, knife, rope, gunne, or other in∣strument or meanes of death on a sudden, & without deliberation? Ans. Thus; when they doe it being thereunto carried,Gen. 4.23. Nomb. 35.16. to 24. 1 Sam. 20.30.33. 2 Sam: 2.22.23. ei∣ther by sudden passion of anger, without all former malice, and they doe it in their heate, rage, and fury; or they doe it in the time of some vile and sinfull distemper, as in the time of drunkennesse, and the like, which is called Manslaughter: for in the time of a mans rage, or in the time of his vile and sinfull distemper, his will is free, though his reason bee blin∣ded: of this we read, Gen 4 23. And this manslaughter the Lord calls Murder, Num. 35.16, 17, 18. compared with that, vers. 20. to 24. Quest. What if a man kill another or others by some instru∣ment and meanes of death casually hauing no purpose to doe him or them any hurt, which is commonly called Chance-medly; is that a sinne against the sixt Commandement or no? Ans. No, properly it is not; yet casuall killing is some∣times sinfull, and in some respects blame-worthy, and some∣times it is altogether blamelesse. Quest. How is casuall killing sinfull and blame-worthy? Answ. Thus; when it falles out and comes to passe by meere ouersight and negligence; as if a Phisician through carelesnesse mistake the medicine and so kill his patient, which might by his care haue been preuented: that act of his is sinfull and blame-worthy, in regard of his negligence and vnwarie dealing. Quest. How is casuall killing altogether blamelesse? Ans. Thus; when it falls out and comes to passe by meere
accident, which cannot bee helped, as when one heweth wood,Deut. 19.5. Chron. 19.10 the Axe head flyeth off, and killeth one that standeth by, or the like. Quest. What are the acts and deeds common both to publike and priuate persons, that by some secret and cunning deuice doe shed the blood, and take away the life of another or others? Ans. They are acts and deeds wherin men doe willingly, yet vnderhand, and by meaes not presently discerned, shed the blood, and take away the life of another or others, one or more, and that foure wayes especially. Quest, VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; by poysoning an other or others wittingly and willingly,Psal. 69.21. Mark. 16.18. by giuing an other or others poyson, or cau∣sing it to bee giuen to them in their meate, drinke, or any o∣ther way by poyson killing them and bereauing them of their liues. Quest. VVhat is the second way by which men doe willingly yet vnder-hand, and by meanes not presently discerned, shed the blood of another, or others? Answ. This; by witchcraft, and inchantment, and sorcery, when men wittingly and willingly vse the help of Witches, Sorcerers and Inchanters, and by the helpe of Witches, Sor∣cerers,Exod. 22.18. Reuel. 9.21. and Inchanters, doe kill another or others; or when Witches, Inchanters, and Sorcerers do of their owne accord, by the helpe of the Deuill kill another, or others. Quest. VVhat is the third way by which men doe willingly, yet vnder-hand, and by meanes not presently discerned, shed the blood of another or others? 1 King. 21.19. 2 Sam. 12.9. Act. 2.23.Answ. This; by some publike and craftie practice cause another or others, to shed the blood of another or others. Thus Ahab was a murderer, 1 Kings 21 19. Quest. What is the fourth way by which men doe willingly, yet vnder-hand, and by meanes not presently discerned, shed the blood of another or others? Answ. Thus; by couaying something into the body of a woman with chil, hurtfull to te child, purposly to destroy it: when men wittingly and willingly giue or cause to bee giuen to a woman with childe some hurtfull thing in meate,
drinke, or medicine, that may destroy the child, and so destroy it, and cause an vntimely birth; or a woman her selfe being with child, doth purposely take some hurtfull thing in her meate, or drinke, or some hurtfull medicine to destroy her childe, and doth thereby destroy it,Exod. 21.22.23. it may bee to couer her whoredome. Quest. What if a woman haue but lately cenceiued, and the Child in her wombe is not yet perfectly formed and endued with life; if then either another giue her something, or cause something to be giuen her; or the woman her selfe takes something to destroy her conception, and doe hereby destroy it, or cause her to miscarrie: Is it murder or no? Answ. Yes, it is: whosoeuer wittingly causeth a woman hauing conceiued with childe, to miscarry, may bee said to haue killed a man; yea, the vsing of meanes by medicines or the like, to hinder procreation, and to destroy a womans fruitfulnesse, is secret murder; and the destroying of the na∣ture by men, is also secret murder,Gen. 38.7.9. it was the sinne of Er and Onan, Gen. 38.7, 8. Hitherto of the things of practice that hurt or hinder the life of the body of man. Now to the things of omission. Quest. What are the things of omission, that hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Answ. Two things especially; the one inward in the heart, the other outward. Quest. What is the thing of omission inward in the heart, that doth hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Answ. This; want of pitie & feeling compassion towards such as are in any knowne misery and distresse of body,Rom. 1.30. Rom. 12.15. Colos. 3.12. Heb. 13.3. 1 Ioh. 3.17. and are to be pitied: when men omit or refuse to pitie such as are in knowne misery and distresse of body, and like to perish, being such as are to be pitied, and do harden their hearts, and shut vp their compassion from them. Quest. How doe men shew themselues most wanting in pitie towards such as are in any known misery and distresse of body, and are to bee pityed? Answ. Thus; when they insult ouer them,Psal. 69.26. and make them∣selues
merry with their misery,ob. 19.21.22. ob. 25.9.10.11 and so adde to their distresse and misery. Quest. Are not all that are in knowne misery and distresse of body to be pitied? Answ. All that are in knowne misery and distresse, are to be pitied,1 Sam. 15.9. 1 King. 20.34.41. compared as they are men or women of the same nature with vs; yet such as are in deserued misery, and haue brought mi∣sery vpon themselues, and as malefactors suffer iust punish∣ment for their euill deeds, are not in that respect to bee pitied: that is foolish pitie. Quest. What is the thing of omission outward, that doth hurt or hinder the life of the body of man? Pro. 21.13. Isai. 58.7. Iob. 31.16.17.18.19.20.21.Answ. This; the omitting of the workes of mercy, that ought to be performed to such as are in any knowne distresse of body; when men being able, and hauing power & meanes, doe omit or refuse to yeeld helpe to them whom they ought to helpe being any way distressed in body, and knowne to them either by sight or by hearing, to stand in need of their helpe, in respect of the body: that is a thing of omission outward. Quest. How doe men omit the workes of mercy, that ought to be performed to such as are in any distresse of body, and knowne to them to stand in need of helpe, in respect of the body? Answ. Two wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Luke. 16.21. Mat. 25.41.42.43. Luke. 10.20.31.32. Iam. 2.15.16.Answ. This; when they doe not that good to their distres∣sed bodies that they ought, according to their need, and ac∣cording to their owne abilitie. Luke 16. The rich man was cast into hell, not for hurting the poore man, but not for re∣lieuing him, verse 21. Quest. What is the second way by which men omit the workes of mercy that ought to be performed to such as are in any distresse of body, knowne to them to stand in need of helpe in respect of the bodie? Answ. This; when they doe not turne away that euill, and that hurt from their bodies, that they ought, being able to turne it away, either by their speech, or by their hands and power, or any other way; as when men speake not for
such as are vniustly molested and condemned,Sam. 20.34. &c. to 43. 1 King. 18.4. Pro. 24.11.12 it may bee to die, especially being Magistrates, and able to deliuer them by speaking for them: or when men seeing others ready to pe∣rish, it may bee to destroy themselues, to cut their owne throats, or the like, doe not rescue and deliuer them from dan∣ger, being able to doe it. Quest. When is either the want of pity towards such as are in knowne distresse of body, and are to be pitied or the omitting of the workes of mercy that ought to bee performed to such as are in any knowne distresse of body most vile and odious? Answ. When men either want pitie,1 Sam. 30.11.12.13. Iob. 19. to 22, Rom. 12.20. Gal. 6.10. or being able to yeeld helpe, doe omit the works of mercy to such as they are bound to, by some neere and especiall bond of place, calling, or condition, or of nature or grace; as to father, mother, hus∣band, wife, master, seruant, and such like; or to the Saints and children of God, being to be pitied, and to be helped in regard of their knowne distresse of body. 1 Sam. 30.11, 12, 13. Thus deale masters that starue their seruants, Iob 19.13, 14, 15. &c. to 22. Rom. 12.20. If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if hee thirst, giue him drinke: much more to those that we are bound to by some neere and speciall bond. Hitherto of hurting of the life of the body of man. Now concerning the hurt or hinderannce of the life of the soule of man. Quest. What are the things that hurt or hinder the life of the soule of man? Answ. They are either such things as hurt and hinder the life of a mans own soule, or such as hurt and hinder the life of the soule of another, or the life of the soules of others. Quest. What are the things that hurt or hinder the life of a mans owne soule? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; his sinning against God,Pro. 6.32. Pro. 8.35. Ezech. 18.4. Rom. 2.5. and especially his liuing and continuing in any knowne sinne wilfully and ob∣stinately, when a man liues in any knowne sinne, especially a grosse sinne, and goes on in the practice of it wilfully and obstinately, and will not bee reformed, hee thereby murders
his owne soule,it. 3.11. and is guiltie of selfe-murder in regard of his soule. Quest. What is the second thing that doth hurt, or hinder the life of his owne soule? Zach 7.11.12. Heb. 2.3. Reuel. 3.1.Answ. This; his carelesse neglecting, or his wilfull reiec∣ting of the meanes that God hath ordained to saluation, for the beginning and continuance of spirituall life in the soule; as the Word preached or read, the Sacraments, Prayer, and the like; when a man doth carelessely neglect, or wilfully reiect these meanes of spirituall life, and of saluation, hee thereby murders his soule, and is guiltie of selfe-murder in respect of his sule. Quest. How doe men carelessely neglect, or wilfully reiect the meanes of spirituall life and of saluation, and so murder their owne soules? Answ. Three wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Pro. 1.24. Pro. 28.9 Isai. 66.4. Ierem. 7.13. Act. 13.16. 1 Cor. 11.26.Answ. This; by not hearing the word of God preached ordinarily, and by not reading the Word of God, and other good Bookes, and by not vsing the Sacraments, Prayer, and the like, when they may, and when they ought to vse them. Quest. What is the second way by which men doe carelessely neglect, or wilfully reiect the meanes of spirituall life, and of salua∣tion, and so murder their owne soules? 1 King. 17.13.14. Ier. 25.4.5.6.7. Ier. 44.16.17. Ezech. 33.1. Act. 7.51. Act. 18.6.Answ. This; by not yeelding to the Word of God truly and faithfully preached to them, and by resisting and with∣standing the Spirit of God in the Ministery of his Messen∣gers sent to them. Quest. What is the third thing by which men doe carelessely neglect, or wilfully reiect the meanes of spirituall life, and of salua∣tion, and so are guiltie of murdering their owne soules, or selfe-murder? Ioh. 3.19. 2 Thes. 2.10.11 2 Tim. 4.3.4. 2 Pet 3.16.Answ. This; by giuing heed to fables and fancies, and not to the truth of the word of God in loue to it, and by corrup∣ting and peruerting the word of God. Quest. What are the things that hurt or hinder the life of the soule of another or others? Answ. They are either things common to all persons,
that are of yeares and discretion; or things proper to superi∣ours, and especially to Ministers. Quest: What are the things common to all persons being of yeares and discretion, that hurt or hinder the life of the soule of another or others? Answ. They are either such things by which men hinder one another or others, in the way of spirituall life and sal∣uation, or such things by which men cause the fall or damna∣tion of another or others. Quest. What are the things by which men hinder another or others, in the way of spirituall life and saluation? Answ. Two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by giuing offence to another or others, ei∣ther by word or deed, when a man either saith or doth any thing that giues an offence to another or others; and where∣by another or others are occasioned to fall to sinne; he there∣by hinders them in the way of spirituall life and saluation. Thus Peter was an offence to Christ though hee tooke it not. Mat. 16.23. Mat. 18.6.7. Quest. How doe men giue iust offence to another or others, and occasion them to fall and sinne? Answ. Two waies. Quest: What is the first of those? Answ. This; by leading an open wicked,Exod. 34.12. 2 Sam. 12.14. sinfull and scan∣dalous life; when a man liues wickedly and scandalously, and so sinnes as that another or others may take notice of it, hee thereby giues them iust offence, and occasioneth them to sinne. Quest. When doth an open wicked sinfull and scandalous life, and sinning so as others doe or may take notice of it, giue grea∣test offence and doe most hurt? Answ. When it is either to to the iust offence of many,Pro. 29.12. 1 Cor. 5.2. 1 Sam. 2.17. 2 Sam. 12.14. as the whole Church or congregation; when a man that is of speciall note for place and calling, or for profession of Religion, liues wickedly and scandalously; or by some foule sin giues iust cause of offence. Quest. What is the second way by which men giue iust offence
to another or others,at. 17.27. om. 14.21. Cor. 8.9. &c. the end. Cor. 10.28.29 and occasion them to fall and sin? Answ. This; by abusing of Christian libertie in things indifferent vnseasonably, not in fit time and place and be∣fore fit persons. Quest. Who are the persons before whom things indifferent may be vsed? Answ. Such persons as are strong and more fully in∣structed in the doctrine of Christianity, and haue sound knowledge touching things indifferent; and are rightly in∣formed touching the indifferency of those particular things that are vsed: that they are things neither good or euill in themselues or in their owne nature:Rom. 15.1. but may be vsed well or ill, and may also not be vsed well or ill. Quest. Who are persons not fit to haue things indifferent v∣sed before them? Rom. 14.1.2 3.13.20. 1 Cor. 8.9.10.11 1 Cor. 9.22.Answ. Such persons as professe the truth of Religion, and yet are weake in knowledge, and not so well instructed touching things indifferent: especially touching the indiffe∣rency of those particular indifferent things that are vsed. Quest. Is the vse of things indifferent to be forborne in re∣spect of all that are ignorant and not so well instructed touching the indifferency of them? Answ. No; it is not in regard of such as are simply igno∣rant, it is to be forborne for a time, but in respect of such as are wilfully ignorant or malicious, and seeke aduantage a∣gainst Christian liberty to ouerthrow it: the vse of things indifferent is not to be forborne. Leuit. 19.14. Mat. 18.10. Act. 16.3. Gala. 2.3.4.5.11.12.13. Peter by that fact of his hardened the obstinate Iewes whome he should haue with∣stood openly. Peter in that fact of his condescended to the weaknesse of the Iewes, and therefore therein he sinned not. Quest. How is this to be answerd? Answ. Thus; Peters fact considered simply by it selfe was not a sinne, but the circumstances of it make it a sinn, in that he abstained not among the Iewes at Ierusalem, but at Anti∣och amongst the Gentiles, where a little before he had done the contrary: and he did auoid the scandall of the Iewes, but
it was to the hardening of those Iewes who came to spie out the libertie of the Gentiles; and it was with greater offence to the Gentiles whom he constrayned by his example to doe like the Iewes. vers 14. Quest. What if the Magistrate command the vsing of a thing indifferent not as part of Gods worship or as necessary to sal∣uation; but as a thing indifferent may be commanded: may it then be forborne in regard of such as are simply ignorant of the indiffe∣rency of it? Answ For a certaine time it may, so as it bee not with contempt of he Magistrates auhority, but only to yeeld to their weakenesse that are so ignorant: but altogether and at all times it may not be forborne: for men that so doe yeeld, not as they ought to the lawfull power of the Magistrate, and they giue him iust cause of offence and if others be offn∣ded; a man vsing it after a certaine time, they take offence vniustly, whee none is iustly giuen; and they are offended for doig of a lawfull thing and a duty,Mat. 15.12. as the Pharisees were with Christ. Quest. What is the second thing by which men hinder another or others, in the way of spirituall life and saluation? Answ. This; by daunting and discouraging another or others from a good and holy way;Pro. 12.18. Ezech. 13.22. when men seeke to daunt and discourage another or others from going on in the way of true holinsse, by mocking, scoffing and deriding them; by threatning them, by punishing them for well doing and the like: they doe as much as in them is, hinder their salua∣tion and become their soule-murderers. Quest. What are the things common to all persons beng of yeeres and discretion, by which men cause the fall or damnation of another or others? Answ. Foure things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by prouoking another or others any way to sinne: when men by bad counsell, by perswasion,Gen. 3.4. Num. 31.16. 2 Sam. 16▪ 21. Pro. 1.10.11.12 13.14. Isa 56.12. Mat. 27.20. or any way by word or deede doe excite and stirre vp, or draw on another or others to some euill; as to anger, to reuenge, to drunkennesse or the like: Thus Satan stirred vp Eua to sinne,
and therefore is he said to be a murderer from the beginning. Iohn 8.44, Quest. What is the second thing common to all persons being of yeares and discretion, by which men doe cause the fall or damna∣tion of another or others? Answ. This; by encouraging and heartning another or o∣thers in sinne;Iob 8.20. 2 King. 3.14. Ier. 23.14.17. Ezech. 13.22. as when men praise others when they doe ill, or doe openly countenance sinners and lewd persons. Quest. What is the third thing common to all persons being of yeares and discretion, by which men cause the fall or damnation of another or others? Psal. 50.18. Pro. 29.24. Isai. 1.23. Ephes. 5.7.Answ. This; by consenting to another or others, and by partaking with another or others any way in sinne, and in doing of euill. Quest. What is the fourth thing common to all persons being of yeares and discretion, by which men cause the fall or damnation of another or others? Answ. This; by sowing dissentions amongst men, and by stirring vp contentions, brawles and quarrels betweene parties; especially betweene such as by the bond of nature or grace, or any other neere bond are ioyned together: as betweene parents and children,Pro. 6.19. Pro. 10.12. brethren, husband, wife, and such like: this the Lord hateth: it comes from hatred. Quest. How doe men sow dissentions and stirre vp contentions brawles and quarrels betweene parties, and so cause their fall or their damnation? Leuit. 19.16. Pro. 11.13. Pro. 25.9.10. Pro. 26.20. Ezech. 22.9.Ans. Thus; especially by carrying tales betweene par∣ties, and by disclosing both the secret intents and faults of the one to the other; for by that meanes men are stirred vp to contention: and many times on the hearing of a false tale, men doe rashly condemne the innocent, and so are caused to fall into a foule sinne. Now to things proper to Superiours, and especially to Ministers. Quest. What are the things proper to superiours, and especi∣ally to Ministers, that doe hurt or hinder the life of the soule of another or others? A. They are either things of omission, or things of practice.
Quest. What are the things of omission proper to Superiours that are not Ministers, or to Ministers not as they are Mini∣sters but as they are Gouernours in their priuate Familie, that doe hurt or hinder the life of the soule of another or others? Answ. They are such good things omitted as ought to be performed by them to their inferiours for the good of their soules. Quest. How are good things omitted by Superiours that are not Ministers; or by Ministers, not as they bee Ministers, but as they are Gouernours in their priuat Families, which ought to be performed by them to their inferiours, for the good of their soules? Answ. Two waies especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Gen. 18.19. Deut. 6.7. Iosh 24.15. Ephes. 6.4. when they vse not the meanes by which their inferiours, their children and their seruants; and such as be any way vnder their charge, may be taught and instructed in the knowledge of God and of good things that concerne their saluation: when they haue no care either to teach those that are committed to their charge, as they ought, the know∣ledge of God and of good things: or are carelesse to bring them to the publike ministerie of the Word, and as much as is in them, to see that they profit by it to their sanctifi∣cation and saluation. Question. What is the second way by which good things are omitted by Superiours that are not Ministers; or by Ministers not as y are Ministers but as they are Go∣uernours in their owne priuate Families, which ought to bee performed by them to their Inferiours, for the good of their soules? Answ. This; when they doe not hinder their inferiours and such as bee vnder their charge, as much as they may, from falling into sinne; or doe not seeke to reclaime them when they haue sinned,Num. 25.4. 1 Sam. 2.23.24 1 Sam. 3.13. 1 King. 20.42. by due reproofe or due pu∣nishment accoring to their power; but rather doe winke at their faults, or vse too much lenitie in censuring of them.
Quest. What are the things of practice proper to superiours that are not Ministers; or to Ministers not as they are Ministers, but as they are Gouernours in priuate Families, that doe hurt or hinder the life of the soule of another or others? Answ. They are such euill things done by them as doe minister matter of infection and poyson to the soules of their inferiours, or they goe before them in the practice of sinne; in swearing, in lying, in gaming, in drinking, and in all kinds of sinfulnesse, and so make their houses as it were Nurseries, and Seminaries of sinne. Psal. 101.2.sal. 101.2. Dauid was farre from this. Pro. 11.29.Pro. 11 29. they are said to be troublers of their owne houses that corrupt them with sinfulnesse. Pro. 15.27.Pro. 15.27. Quest. What are the things of omission proper to Ministers as they be Ministers, and haue charge of the soules of others, that doe hurt or hinder the life of the soule of another or others? Answ. Two things especially; the one inward in the heart, the other outward. Quest: What is the thing of omission inward in the heart, pro∣per to Ministers as they be Ministers and haue the charge of the soules of others, that doth hurt or hinder the life of the soule of ano∣ther or others? Answ. This; want of pitty and feeling compassion to∣wards them,Mat. 9.36. Mar 6.34. whose soules they haue the charge of, in regard of the miseries and wants of their soules: when Ministers ei∣ther omit or refuse to pitty those whose soules they haue ta∣ken the charge of, in regard of the miseries and wants of their soules. Quest. Whence comes it that Ministers want pitty towards them whose soules they haue charge of, in regard of the miseries and wants of their soules? Answ. From hence; because they either doe not see and take notice, or they will not see and take notice as they ought, of the miseries and wants of the soules of their peo∣ple, though they bee told of them and made acquainted with them.Pro. 27.23. Q. What is the thing of omission outward proper to Ministers as they be Ministers, and haue the charge of the soules of others that doth hurt or hinder the life of the soule of another or others?
Answ. This; the omitting of such good things as ought to be performed by them, to those whose soules they haue ta∣ken the charge of, for the good of their soules. Quest. How doe Ministers omit the good things which ought to be performed by them to those whose soules they haue taken the charge of, for the good of their soules? Answ. Two wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Isai. 56.10. Iere. 2.34. Pro. 29.18. Mat. 5.13. Mat. 15.14. when through insufficiencie being idle Pa∣stors, dumbe Dogges, and blind Guides: they doe not at all preach and admonish their people of their sinnes, and the dan∣ger they are in by reason of their sinnes. Quest. What is the second way by which Ministers omitte the good things which ought to be performed by them to those whose soules they haue the charge of, for the good of their soules? Answ. This; when, though they be able,Ezech. 3.17.18. Ezech. 33.7.8. Ezech. 34.2.3.4.8.9.10. Zach. 11.15.16 17. Acts 20.26.27.28. Heb. 13.17. yet either through sloath and negligence, being present with their people; or by reason of their absence, they being not resident and abi∣ding among their people as they ought: they doe either not preach to their people, and admonish them of their sinnes plainely and faithfully, or they preach to them very seldome. Quest. Is the absence of a Minister from his people whose soules he hath taken the charge of, altogether vnlawfull so as in no case he may be absent from them? Answ. Vsuall, ordinary and willfull absence from them, is altogether vnlawfull; yet there be three cases wherein a Minister may lawfully bee absent from his people whose soules he hath the charge of, so as he prouide, as much as pos∣sibly he may, that his people may be taught and admoni∣shed, and that they be not by his absence endangered. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; In case of sicknesse, or any violently with∣holding of him, by imprisonment or the like: when a Mini∣ster is by sicknesse or imprisonment kept and held from his people for a time: Thus Epaphroditus was withheld by sicknesse. Phil. 2.26.27.28. Quest. What is the second case wherein a Minister may
lawfully bee absent from his people whose soules hee hath taken charge of, he prouiding as much, as possibly he may, that his people be not by his absence endangered? Answ. This; In case of publike imployment by the Church, when a Minister is for a time, either by his owne people im∣ployed in some necessary,Coloss: 4.12. waighty, and publike businesse for their good: or is by publike authoritie, sent for a time a∣bout some necessary, waighty and publike businesse, for the good of the whole Church. Thus Epaphroditus, Phil. 2, 25.hilip. 2.25. Thus Epaphras, Coloss. 1.7.Coloss. 1.7. Quest. What is the third case, wherein a Minister may law∣fully be absent from his people, whose soules he hath taken charge of, he prouiding, as much as possibly he may, that his people be not by his absence endangered? 1 King. 18.4. Act. 9.29.30.Answ. This; In case of open persecution, when a Mini∣ster is so persecuted as that he is enforced to flye, and sees no hope at all to procure his safety. Quest. What are the things of practice proper to Ministers as they be Ministers, & haue the charge of the soules of others, that do hurt or hinder the life of the soule of another or others? Answ. They are either things in their teaching, or in their manner of liuing and leading their liues. Quest. What are the things in a Ministers teaching, that doe hurt or hinder the life of the soule of another or others? Iere. 6.14. Iere. 23.17.31.32. Ezeh. 13.1.16. Rom. 16.18. Ephes. 4.14. 1 Tim: 6.3.4 Tit. 1.10. Mat. 15.4.5.6.9.Answ. They are either flattering teaching, or corrupt teaching; when Ministers in their teaching either flatter and sooth vp their people or any of them in their sinnes; or they deliuer to their people, or to any of them, ei∣ther vaine and curious things, or corrupt, erronious and false things, whereby their mindes are troubled or in∣fected. Quest. What are the things in the manner of the Ministers liuing and leading his life, that doe hurt or hinder the life of the soule of another or others? Answ. Such euill things done by them in the sight of their people,1 Sam. 2.24. Iere. 23.14. Galat. 2.13. as doe minister matter of infection to their soules, when Ministers goe on in the practice of sinne open∣ly, and liue wickedly and loosely, in the face of their peo∣ple:
they doe thereby infect their people, and draw many after them to the same course of life. Now to the Affirmatiue part of this Sixt Com∣mandement. Quest. What is required and commanded in the Sixt Com∣mandement? Answ. In generall, euery thing whatsoeuer, that tendeth to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of man; and to the well-fare and safety of his body and soule. And first concerning the maintenance and preser∣uation of the life of the body of man, and the wel∣fare and safety of his body. Quest. What are the things that tend to the maintenance, and preseruation of the life of the body of man, and to the well-fare and safety of his body? Answ. They are either such things as tend to the mainte∣nance and preseruation of the life of a mans owne body, and to the welfare and safety of his owne body: or such things as tend to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of the body of another or others, and to the welfare of the life of the body of another or others. Quest. What are the things that tend to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of a mans owne body, and to the welfare & safetie of his owne body? Answ. Two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; the procuring and vsing of all good and lawfull meanes within his power and according to his abi∣lity, that serue to keepe and defend his body from violence, and from danger and hurt. Quest. What are the good and lawfull meanes, that a man is to vse according to his ability and power, that serue to defend his body from violence, and from danger and hurt? Answ. Foure especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;1 Sam. 21.8. Mat. 26.51.5. 1 Pet. 2.20. the turning away of vniust violence offered to his body, by, or from others, if he be able, by his owne po∣wer & strength, so far as his place and calling will suffer him: for a Seruant or a Subiect must not by his owne power
withstand the vniust violence offered or done to his body by his Master or Superiours. Quest. What is the second good and lawfull meanes that a man is to vse according to his abilitie and power, that serues to defend his body from violence, and from danger and hurt? . 27.42.43. d. 2.15 ings 19.3 t. 2.13 t. 12.14.15 m 7.1. m 8.5.9. t. 14.5.6Answ. This; the auoiding of the hands of such persons as seeke by violence to hurt his body and to shed his blood vn∣iustly, by flying from them, or hiding himselfe from them, or the like; hee being not able to withstand them in regard of their power or greatnesse: if hee bee not hindered by his priuate or publike calling. Question. What is the third good and lawfull meanes that a man is to vse according to his ability and power, that serues to defend his body from violence, and from danger and hur? Kiing. 1.12.. ou. 16.15 om. 13.4. biection.Answ. This; the seeking and vsing of the helpe of o∣thers, and especially of the Magistrate, Gods Liuetnant to keepe his body from vniust violence. Mat. 5.39. Christ saith, resist not euill, but whosoeuer shall smite thee on the right cheeke turne to him the other also; there∣fore it may seeme vnlawfull to vse the helpe of any to defend the body from vniust violence. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Christ there forbids priuate reuenge, and returning low, for blow; by priuate persons in way of re∣uenge, and of recompensing euill with euill: as appeares by comparing this verse with the verse before, and not the vsing of the assistance and defence of the publike Magistrate. Quest. What is the fourth good and lawfull meanes that a man is to vse, according to his ability and power, that serues to defend his body from violence, and from danger and hurt? Gen. 12.10 Gen. 26.1. Ruth. 1.1 Genes. 7.7. Prou. 22.3. Luke 21.20.21Answ. This; the avoiding of such things as may hurt his body, as a generall Famine, contagious Sicknesse, Sword, Floods, Fire, or the like: by flying from them, and by re∣mouing his body from one place to another, by shrouding his body vnder some couert: if hee bee not hindred by his place and calling, and so as it be not to the hinderance and hurt of another.
Obiections against flying in the time of plague and pestilence. Plague and pestilence is from the had f God, and from his hand we cannot flie, his hand can finde vs out whither soeuer we goe: threfore it is not lawfull to flie in the time of plague and pestilence. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the argument is not good, for euill things comming from the hand of God may bee auoyded, if God shew a way and meanes how to aoid them: as fire on an house comes from the hand of God, Iere. 17.27.Iere. 17.27. yet it may and ought to be auoided. Psal. 19.6 7.10 God promiseth to the godly that they shall be deliuered in the time of plague and pestilence: and to flie in the time of plague is to distrust this promise of God; and therefore it is not lawfull to flie. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; that promise is to be vnderstood with con∣dition if God see it good for them; they vsing all good meanes for their safety: and so for a man to flie in the time of plague and pestilence, if he be not hindered by his place and calling; and so as it be not to the hurt or hinderance of another or others, is not to distrust Gods promise; but to vse the good meanes offered according to Gods appointment, least he should tempt God. Men are to visite the sicke and to come to them, Mat. 25.39.43. therefore it is not lawfull to flie from them in the time of sicknesse. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ: Men are not bound to visite such as are sicke of a disease dangerously contagious,Leuit. 13.46. 2 King. 15.5. but may auoide them if they bee not hindred by their place and calling, and so as it bee not to the hinderance or hurt of another or others: the Lepers amongst the Iewes were to bee seuered from their brethren. Quest. What is the second thing that tends to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of a mans owne body; and to the well∣fare and safety of a mans owne body?
Answ. This; the procuring and vsing of all good and law∣full meanes, according to his abilitie and power, that are helpefull and profitable for the continuance of health and and strength of his body, and for the preuenting of sicknesse and weakenesse of body, and for the recouery of health and strength of his body when they are impayred. Quest. What are the good and lawfull meanes that a man is to procure and to vse according to his abilitie and power, that are helpefull for the continuance of the health and strength of his body, and for the peruenting of sicknesse and weaknesse of body, and for the recouery of health and strength of his body when they are im∣payred? Ans. Foure especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Gen. 28.20; Pro. 30.8. Mat. 6.11. 1 Tim. 5.23. Eccl. 10.16, 17Answ. This; necessary and wholesome foode, cloathing and lodging, vsing them seasonably and moderately. Quest. May not a man sometimes vse meate and drinke more then for meere necessity? Answ. Yes, he may; a man may sometimes vse meate and drinke,Psal. 104.15. Eccles. 5.17. Luk. 5.29. God giuing them to him, for honest delight; so as it be not to surfetting and drunkennesse, and to the oppressing of his body, making it vnfit for good duties of religion, or of his place and and calling. Quest. May not a man sometimes on speciall occasion abridge himselfe of his ordinary and necessary foode? Ezra. 10.6. 1 Cor. 9.27. Coloss. 2.23.Answ. Yes, he may; a man may and ought sometimes on speciall and iust occasion, to humble and afflict his body by fasting; yet so as he doe not weaken, abolish, or destroy na∣ture, and make his body vnfit for any good duty. Quest. Man not a man or a woman haue and vse cloathing and apparrell more then for meere necessity, and more then serues meerely for the continuance of the health and strength of his or her body, and for the preuenting of sicknesse and weaknesse of body, and for the recouery of health and strength of body, when they are im∣payred? Gen. 41.42. Iudg: 5.30. Mar. 11.8.Answ. Yes, they may; a man or a woman may haue and vse cloathing and apparrell (God giuing it to them) for or∣nament and comelinesse; so as it be not to the setting out of
the vanitie and lightnesse of their minds and wantonnesse;Isai. 3.16. Zeph. 1.8. 1. Tim. 2.9.10. Luk. 16.19. or the pride of their hearts in the forme or fashion of it, or be∣yond their abilitie: or vnfitting for them in regard of their Sex, age, degree, place, calling, and office; and so as it bee not alwayes alike. Luke. 3.11. Hee that hath two coats let him part with him that hath none, it seemes therefore not lawfull to haue and to vse two coats, or more cloathing then for meere necessity. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the meaning is not that it is not lawfull to haue and to vse more then one coat; but that men and wo∣men must be ready to giue of their abundance to them that want: for Christ himselfe had two coats, John 19.23. and Paul had both a cloke and other apparrell. 2 Tim. 4.13. Quest. What is the second good and lawfull meanes that a man is to procure and to vse according to his ability & power, that is helpefull and profitable for the continuance of the health and strength of his body; and for the preuenting of sicknesse and weak∣nesse of body, and for the recouery of the health and strength of his body when they are impayred? Answ. This; honest and lawfull mirth,2 King. 3.15. Pro. 15.13. Pro. 17.22. Nehem. 8.10. Eccles. 3.4. Philip. 4.4 and reioycing in an holy manner, and sometimes in vsing the helpe of musicke by singing or playing on an instrument of musicke, or by hearing others sing or play, so as it be with moderation, and in due time and season. Quest. What is the third good and lawfull meanes that a man is to procure and to vse, according to his ability and power, that is helpefull and profitable for the continuance of the health and strength of his body, and for the preuenting of sicknesse and weake∣nesse of body; and for the recouery of the health and strength of his body when they are impayred? Answ. This; the helpe of Phisicke and Chyrurgery as occasion is giuen, vsing good and lawfull medicines;Exod. 21.19 2 King. 20.7. Iere. 8.22. Mat. 9.12 2 Chron. 16.12 and not trusting in them as able to doe any good of themselues, but intreating the Lord for a blessing on them. Quest. What if a man or a woman in the time of their sicknesse or weakenesse of body, hauing vsed Physicke, finde no helpe or ease
by it, but are rather weaker and worse, what are they then to doe? Answ. They are not then altogether to leaue the vse of Physicke, but still to vse it in some other kinde if they be able to take it; for if one kinde of Physicke doe them no good, another may by the blessing of God on it; as Diet or Cordi∣alls,. 28.15.  or such like; and they are to leaue the issue and euent to God, and to liue by faith, wayting on God for a blessing, and quieting their hearts in his will whatsoeuer comes to passe: He that beleeues makes not hast. Isa 28.15. Quest. What is the fourth good and lawfull means that a man is to procure, and to vse, according to his abilitie and power, helpefull and profitable for the continuance of the health and strength of his body, and for the preuenting of sicknesse and weakenesse of body; and for the recouery of the health and strength of his body when they are impayred? Answ. This; honest and lawfull exercise, mouing and stirring of his body,oh. 10.23. Sam: 1.18 en. 27.3. and that seasonably and in fit time and place, and without iust offence of any; and more or lesse as the state of his body requires, and as his calling will suffer him; as walking, running, leaping, shooting, tenis-playing, hunting, and the like. Quest. What are the things that tend to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of the body of another, or others, and to the welfare and safety of the body of another or others? Ans. They are either things inward in the heart, or out∣ward things. Quest. What are the things inward in the heart that tend to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of the body of ano∣ther or others? Answ. Foure especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; a kinde and louing disposition and affection of heart,Ephes. 4.32. Galat. 5.22. Coloss. 3.12. kinde heartednesse towards all, whereby men or women are tractable and easie to be vsed, and to be imploy∣ed for the good of others whatsoeuer they be, in any thing wherein they may doe them good as occasion is offered; without hurt or wrong to themselues or others.
Quest. What is the second thing inward in the heart, that tends to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of the body of another or others, and to the welfare and safetie of the body of another or others? Answ. This; such a meeke and calme disposition of heart,Eccles. 7.11. Mat. 11.29. Ephes. 4.2. Gala. 5.23. Coloss. 3.12. 1 Pet. 3.4. as is neither prone to prouoke, nor easily prouoked to anger by iniuries and wrongs offered or done, when men are of quiet and meeke spirits when iniuries are offered or done to them. Quest. What is the highest degree of meekenesse and quiet∣nesse of heart, in regard of iniuries and wrongs offered or done to men? Answ. Long suffering; which is,Nom. 12.3. Pro. 14.29. Pro. 15.18. 1 Cor. 13.4. Gal. 5.22. Coloss. 3.12 when men or women be∣ing much and often prouoked by iniurious words or deeds, doe notwithstanding quietly passe them ouer, and put them vp, and are still quiet and calme, and not prouoked to anger. Quest. Wherein is meekenes and long suffering to be expressed? Answ In two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in a quiet bearing with the infirmities and frailties of others, as hastinesse, slownesse, importunitie, rash∣nesse, and with passions and perturbations appearing in their actions, so farre forth as they are troublesome, and grieuous, and displeasing to vs:Galat. 5.2. Ephes. 4.2. Coloss. 3.13. not bearing with open offences and sinnes of men, but admonishing and reprouing for such sins, keeping within the compasse of our calling. Quest. What is the second thing wherein meekenesse and long suffering is to be expressed? Answ. This; in a free remission of reuenge,Mat. 6.12. Ephes. 4.32, Coloss. 3.13 neither car∣rying in our hearts any purpose of reuenge for wrongs done to vs, or supposed to bee done, nor returning punishment and euill for euill, in way of requittal for them. Quest. VVhat is the third thing inward in the heart, that tends to the maintenance, and preseruation of the life of the body of another or others, and to the welfare and safetie of the body of a∣nother or others? Answ. This; an inward fellow-felling of that which be∣fals
others in respect of their bodies and outward estates,om. 12.15. Cor. 12.25.26▪ when men are inwardly touched and affected according to the knowne outward estate and condition of others. Quest. How are men inwardly fellow-feeling touched and af∣fected according to the knowne outward estate and condition of o∣thers? Answ. Two wayes. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Psal. 35.27. Luk. 1.58. Philip. 1.26.Answ. This; by reioycing with others that haue iust cause of reioycing for their outward good and prosperitie seene or heard of: not in respect of their ill-gotten goods, in prospering in knowne sinne. Quest. What is the second way by which men are inwardly fel∣low-feeling, touched and affected, according to the knowne outward estate and condition of others? Answ. This; by mourning and greeuing with others that haue iust cause of heauinesse: mourning▪ and griefe for the outward euill, distresse, and aduersitie seene or heard of, and by pitying them,Psal. 35.13.14. Ephes. 4.32. Coloss. 3.12. Heb. 13.3. 1 Pet. 3.8. and by being tender hearted towards them: not with such as sorrow when they ought to reioyce, nor pi∣tying men or women in respect of deserued misery, and iust punishment brought on themselues. Quest. What is the fourth thing inward in the heart, that tends to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of the body of another or others, and to the welfare and safetie of the body of another or others? Rom. 12.18. Galat. 5.22. Coloss. 3.15. 1 Thess. 4.11.Answ. This; an heart disposed to peace and quietnesse, and a care and desire to maintaine concord and good agree∣ment amongst men, as much as is possible and in our power. Quest. VVherein is an heart disposed to peace and quietnesse, and a care and desire to maintaine peace and good agreement a∣mongst men, to bee expressed? Answ. In three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Pro. 17.14. Pro: 19.11. Pro. 20.3. Iam. 3.17. Gen. 13 8.9. Math. 17.27.Answ. This; in passing by offences so farre as they con∣cerne vs in particular, and may be passed ouer without hurt or wrong to our selues or others; and sometimes for quietnes sake, in parting from our owne right.
Quest. What is the second thing wherein an heart disposed to peace and quietnesse, and a care and desire to maintaine peace, concord, and good agreement amongst men, is to be expressed? Answ. This; in construing things in the best sense,2 Sam. 10.3. 1 Cor. 13.5. and taking euery thing, if it be possible, in the best part. Quest. What is the third thing wherein an heart disposed to peace and quietnes, and a care and desire to maintaine concord and good agreement amongst men, is to be expressed? Answ. In medling onely with our owne matters and bu∣sinesses,1. Thes. 4.11. 1 Pet. 4.15. and such things as concerne vs in regard of our cal∣lings and conditions of life. Now to the outward things that tend to the mainte∣nance of the life of the body of another or others. Quest. VVhat are the outward things that tend to the main∣tenance and preseruation of the life of the body of another or o∣thers, and to the welfare and safetie of the body of another or o∣thers? Answ. They are of two sorts: either such as serue to avert and to turne away euill, wrong, hurt, or danger from the body of another or others, or such as serue for the good, helpe and comfort of the body of another or others. Quest. What are the outward things that serue to avert and to turne away euill, wrong, hurt, or danger from the body of ano∣ther or others? Answ. They are either in speech, or in action: in word, or in act or deed. Quest. What are the outward things in speech or in word that serue to avert and to turne away euill, wrong, hurt or danger from the body of another or others? Answ. Such words and speeches vttered and spoken as are for the defence and helpe of innocent persons that are help∣lesse, being either vnder the hands of oppressors,Pro: 12.6 Pro: 24.11.12▪ or followed by oppressors seeking to hurt and to wrong them either in their bodies or liues. Men are, as they are able, and accor∣ding to their place and calling, to open their mouthes, and to speake for the defence and helpe of them that are knowne to them to bee oppressed in their bodies or liues, being innocent and helplesse, especially being such as they are
bound to by some neere and speciall bond. Quest. How are men to speake for the defence and helpe of such as are knowne to them to be wronged and oppressed in their bodies or liues, being innocent and harmelesse persons, and helpe∣lesse? Answ. Three wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by speaking for them as they are able, and according to their place and calling,en: 37, 21.22. Sam: 20.32. Hest. 7.3.4.5.6. in priuate to the face of their oppressor or oppressors, to disswade him or them from offering or doing wrong vnto them in respect of their body or liues. Thus did Reuben, Gen. 37.21, 22. Thus did Ionathan, 1 Sam. 20.32. Hest. 7.3, 4, 5, 6. Quest. What is the second way by which men are to speake for the defence and helpe of such as are knowne to them to be wronged and oppressed in their bodies or liues, being innocent and harmelesse persons, and helplesse? Hest. 4.8. Iob. 29.12 to 19. Pro. 31.8.9. Iere. 38.7.8.9 Luk. 23.13.14. to 22.Answ. This; by speaking and pleading for them as they are able, and according to their place and calling, either as Witnesses, or as Aduocates, or as Iudges publikely in some open Court, for the freeing of them from wrong done or of∣fered to be done to them in respect of their bodies or liues, especially they being poore fatherlesse, widowes, or strāgers, or being religious, and yet such as either cannot or dare not plead for themselues. Quest. What is the third way by which men are to speake for the defence and helpe of such, as are knowne to them to be wronged and oppressed in their bodies or liues, being innocent and harmeles persons, and helplesse? Act. 12.4.5. Rom. 15.30.31 2 Thess. 3.1.2Answ. This; by speaking for them as they are able to God in prayer, by commending their case to the Lord, and calling on him in prayer for their succour and reliefe. Quest. What are the outward things in act or deed that serue to avert and to turne away euill, wrong, hurt or danger from the body of another or others? Answ. Such acts and deeds done, as are for the helpe and succour of innocent persons that are helplesse, being either vnder oppression and wrong, or pursued by oppressors, see∣king
to hurt and wrong them in their bodies or liues. Men are, as they are able,Exod. 2.17.18.19. Iudg. 2.10 Iudg. 3.9.15.31 and according to their place and cal∣ling, to doe such things as serue▪ for the helpe and succour of innocent persons that are helplesse, especially of such as they are bound to by some speciall relatiō, against the known euils and wrongs either already done to them, or in doing or in∣tended to be done to them in respect of their bodies or liues. Quest. What are men to doe for the helpe and succour of in∣nocent persons that are helplesse, especially to such hauing knowne euils and wrongs already done to them, and being vnder op∣pression and wrong in respect of their bodies or liues? Answ. They are as they are able, and according to their place and calling,Iob 29.12.17 Prou. 24.11. to vse their power and strength for the re∣scuing and deliuering them from vnder their oppressions and wrongs. Thus did Abraham, Gen. 14.14.15.16 Thus Dauid 1 Sam. 30.17, 18. Quest. What are men to doe for the helpe and succour of inno∣cent persons that are helplesse, especially of such as they are bound to by some neere and speciall bond, when knowne euils and wrongs are in doing, or intended to bee done to them in their bodies or liues? Answ. They are then, as they are able, to interpose their power and strength to defend and to saue them from those e∣uils and wrongs, either as they be priuate persons, or as they be Magistrates. Quest. How are men as they bee priuate persons to interpose their power and strength, to defend and to saue innocent persons that are helplesse, especially such as they are bound to by some neere and speciall bond, from knowne euills and wrongs that are in doing or intended to bee done to them in their bod es or liues? Answ. Thus; by vsing their hands, their purses,Iosh. 2.4.6. 1. Kings 18.4. their paines so farre as they are able, to protect and to saue them from vi∣olence or spoyle, especially when violence or spoyle intended is sudden, and the Magistrate absent, and it is dangerous to stay for his comming. Quest. How frre are priuate persons to interpose their po∣wer and strength to defend and to saue innocent persons that are helplesse, especially such as they are bound vnto by some neere and
speciall bond, from knowne euils and wrongs that are in doing or in∣tended to be done to them in their bodies or liues? Sam. 21.15.6.17. om. 16.4.  Iohn. 3.16.Answ. Sometimes to the hazard and aduenturing their owne liues; as when it is to the defending and sauing of the bodies and liues of such as are speciall instruments of Gods glory, and of common good, either in the Church or Com∣mon wealth. Quest. How are men as they bee Magistrates to interpose their power and strength to defend, and to saue innocent per∣sons that are helplesse, especially such as they are bound to by some neere and speciall bond, from knowne euills and wrongs that are in doing, or intended to bee done to them in their bodies or liues? Exod. 18.21. Rom. 13.4. Exod. 2.11.12 Act. 7.24.Answ. Thus; by drawing out, and vsing the sword, ac∣cording to their place and power to protect and to saue them from violence or hurt, whether it bee in doing or intended to bee done, either to their owne Subiects or For∣reiners. Now to the outward things that serue for the good, helpe, and comfort of the body of another or o∣thers. Quest. VVhat are the outward things that serue for the good, helpe, and comfort of the body of another or others? Answ. They are also either in speech or in action: in word, or in act and deed. Quest. VVhat are the outward things in speech or in word, that serue for the good, helpe and comfort of the body of another or others? Tit. 2.3. 1 Pet. 3.16.Answ. Such words and speeches vttered and spoken, as do expresse meeknesse, gentlenesse, kindnesse and loue to those to whom they are vttered and spoken. Quest. What are the words and speeches wherein men are to expresse meeknesse, gentlenesse, kindnesse and loue to those to whom they are vttered and spoken. Answ. They are of three sorts especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; Their salutations: when men meet with others, they are to salute them, being their equalls or inferiours by
their names or surnames:Ioh. 1.38. Ioh. 20.16. Iudg. 6.12. Ruth. 2.4. Luk. 1 28. Luk. 10.5. Iohn. 20.19. and to salute their Superiours by names of Honour or Office, giuing them such Titles of reuerence as belong to them, wishing them good health, prosperitie, or good successe, and the like, as occasion is offered. 2 Kings 4.29. If thou meete any salute him not; and so Christ bad his disciples Salute no man by the way: Luke 10.4. There∣fore it may seeme vnlawfull to salute others when we meete with them. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the intent of those places is not to forbid men to salute others, but that Gehazi and the Disciples should onely for that time omit the practice of the duties of com∣mon courtesie, so farre as they might hinder or delay the performance of waightier matters. Ioh. Epist. 2. vers. 10. If there come any vnto you, and bring not this doctrine, receiue him not to house, neither bid him God speed: therefore it seemes not lawfull to salute others. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the meaning of that place is not to forbid common courtesie of man to man, but acquaintance and familiarity with Heretikes, especially such acquain∣tance and familiaritie as may seeme to giue allowance and approbation to their wicked courses, as appeares Romanes 16.17. Quest. What is the second sort of words and speeches wherin men are to expresse meeknes, gentlenes, kindnes, and loue to those to whom they are vttered and spoken? Answ. This; their answeres:Iudg. 8.2.3. 1 Sam 25.10.11.12.13. Pro. 15.1. 2 King. 18.36. 1 Sam. 1.15. men are to giue to others soft answeres, such as may neither kindle nor increase anger in them; and when they are rayled on, they are not to rayle a∣gaine; and when they are hardly spoken of, they are either to bee silent, or onely to make a iust and manifest defence of their owne innocency. Dan. 6.21.22. Joh. 8.48.49. 1 Pet. 3.9. Quest. What is the third sort of words and speeches wherein men are to expresse meeknes, gentlenes, kindnes, and loue to those to whom they are vttered or spoken? Ans. This; their admonitions & iust reproofs: when men do
admonish or iustly reproue their brethren for their faults committed of ignorance,Gen. 13.8. Galat. 6.1. or of frailtie. Quest. What are the outward things in act or deed that serue for the good, helpe, and comfort of the body of another or others? Answ. They are either in countenance and in some ge∣sture and carriage of the body, or they bee other acts and deeds. Quest. What are the outward things in countenance, and in some gesture and cariage of the body that serue for the good, helpe, and comfort of another or others? Gen. 31.2.5. Gen. 33.10. 1 Sam. 25.17 Prou. 16.15. Gen. 23.7.12Answ. All such lookes, and all such gestures of the body as doe expresse meeknesse, gentlenesse, kindnesse and loue to another or others, without dissimulation, as looking on an other with an amiable and cheerfull countenance, shewing a mans selfe affable, easie to be spoken to, and to admit talke or conference with others, as occasion is offered, or to heare an∣other or others, either in complaint or suite; bending and bowing of the body in an humble and courteous manner. Quest. VVhat are the other outward acts and deedes that serue for the good, helpe, and comfort of the bodie of another or others? Answ. They are of two sorts. Quest. What is the first of those? Gen. 14.18. 2 Sam. 10.28 31. 1 King. 10.10.13. Ier. 40.5. Acts 20.38Ans. Such acts and deeds done as doe expresse kindnesse and loue to those to whom they are done, and are for the con∣tinuance of the health, welfare, comfort, and good estate of the body of another or others; as bestowing of gifts, bene∣fits, and good turnes on others, sending of gifts and pre∣sents to them, accompanying them in their iourneyes, and the like. Quest. VVhat is the second sort of outward acts and deeds, that serue for the good helpe and comfort of the body of another or others? Answ. Such acts and deeds done as doe expresse kind∣nesse,Iob 31.16.17.18.19.20.21. Prou. 21.13. Prou. 31.20. and loue, and tender affection to those to whom they are done, and are for the relieuing of another or others be∣ing in any knowne want and distresse of body. Men are as
they are able, and as they haue power and meanes,Isai. 58.7. Math. 25.35.36.41.43. to reach out their helping hands for the reliefe of such as ought to be relieued, being any way distressed in their bodies, and known to them, either by sight or by hearing to stand in need of re∣liefe, in respect of their bodies. Quest. How far are men bound according to their abilitie and meanes to reach out their helping hands for the reliefe of such as ought to bee relieued, bing any way distressed in their bodies, and knowne to them by sight or by hearing, to stand in need of reliefe in respect of their bodies? Answ. Sometimes to the entertainment of them to bed or board, or both,Iob. 31.32. Iudg. 19.20.21. Rom. 12.13. Heb. 13.2. 1 Pet. 4.9. especially they being strangers and har∣bourlesse, and for the Lords cause, and for a good conscience persecuted. This dutie of entertaing of strangers and harbourlesse, was peculiar to the primue Church, when Christians were banished and thrust out  house and home, and wandered vp and downe in the time of the tenne bloody persecutions, and therefore not now to be practised. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; In those times there was greater need of the practice of this dutie, then now in the setled state of the Church, but yet it reacheth to all times, and that appears by the sentence that Christ shall giue on the Sheepe and Goats, Mah. 25. it is sayd, verse 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, &c. As Gods prouidence shall offer strangers to vs harbourlesse and persecuted: so wee are to giue them entertainement ac∣cording to our abilitie. Quest. To whom are men chiefly bound according to their abilitie and meanes to reach out their hlping hands for their reliefe, being any way distressed in their bodies, and knowne to them to stand in need of reliefe, in respect of their bodies? Answ. To such as they are bound to by some neere and speciall bond of place, calling, or condition,Iob 19.13. to 22. Leuit. 25.35. Rom. 12.13. Galat. 6.10. or of nature or grace, as to Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Children, Master, Seruant, or to the Saints and children of God. Quest. What if a man be able to releeue but one being in
want, and distresse of body, and his owne father or mother and his owne childe are at the same time in like want and distresse of body, and knowne to him so to bee: which of them is he then to releeue? Mat. 15.4.5.6. Mar. 7.10.11.12.Answ. Rather his father or his mother then his childe, because hee owes more debt and dutie to his parents, from whom hee had his substance and being, then to his children, who haue their substance and being from him: therefore Christ preferres the releeuing of parents before Free-will offerings. Quest. VVhat if a man, bee able to releeue but one being in want and distresse of body; and his owne father or mother be∣ing not religious, and another that is not of his kindred being re∣ligious and fearing God, are at the same time in like want and distresse of body, and knowne to them so to be: which of them is he then to relieue? Answ. Rather his father or mother then the other partie, because hee is thereunto bound, both by the bond of Nature in speciall manner, and also by religion, and by the comman∣dement of God. Math. 12.49, 50. Christ esteemes his Disciples, and doth esteeme those that doth the will of God his Father, and so are religious and truely feare God, as his brethren, and as his mother, and so are we to esteeme of them: therefore we are to releeue such as are religious, though not of our kindred, ra∣ther then our father or mother that are not religious, being at the same time in like want and distresse of body, and knowne to vs so to be. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; wee are indeed to esteeme such as are reli∣gious, being not of our kindred, as deare to vs as our pa∣rents, as they stand in relation onely to vs; but when they come in comparison with our parents, and they and our parents though not religious, are set before vs at the same time in like want and distresse of body, wee are not then to releeue them, and to neglect our parents: for so doing wee sinne not onely against Religion, but against the Law of na∣ture also.
Quest. What if a man bee able to releeue but one in want and distresse of body; and a stranger or an enemy is in extreme want and distresse of body; and like to perish, and a friend or a kinsman is in great want and distresse, but not in such extremitie, and the want and distresse of both is knowne to him: which of them is he then to releeue? Answ. Rather the stranger or his enemy,Mat. 5.44. Luk. 6.35. Rom. 12.20. then his friend or kinsman: for the state and condition of men or women in want and distresse of body is principally to be respected, without any difference of persons. Quest. Is the body of another onely to be respected while it is aliue, and is nothing to be done vnto it when it is dead? Answ. Yes, there is a dutie belongs to the dead body of another. Qu. What is the dutie that belongs to the dead body of another? Answ. The buriall of it in such honest and seemely man∣ner,Gen. 23.19. Gen. 25.9 Gen. 50.13. Iere. 22.19. as is agreeable to the nature and credit as well of those which remaine aliue, as of the partie deceased, with mode∣rate mourning. Mat. 24.60. Acts 8.2. 1 Thes. 4.13. Now to the things that tend to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of the soule of man, and to the welfare and safetie of mans soule. Quest. What are the things that tend to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of the soule of man, and to the welfare and safetie of the soule? Answ. They are either such things as tend to the main∣tenance and preseruation of the life of a mans owne soule, and the welfare and safetie of his owne soule: or such things as tend to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of the soule of another or others, and to the welfare and safetie of the soule of another or others. Quest. What are the things that tend to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of a mans owne soule, and to the welfare and safetie of his owne soule? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; a carefull auoyding of all such things as tend to the destroying of his own soule, as all sorts of sinnes,
especially knowne sinnes,Pro. 11.19. Rom. 2.5. 1 Pet. 3.20.11. and liuing and continuing in any knowne sinne willingly and obstinately, and with delight. Quest. What is the second thing that tends to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of a mans owne soule, and to the welfare and safetie of his owne soule? Deut. 30.19.20 Rom. 10.14.17 1 Pet. 2.2. Pro. 16.17.Answ. This; a carefull vse of the meanes that God hath ordained both for the beginning, and for the continuance of grace and of spirituall life in the soule, both in publike, and in priuate; as of the word of God preached or read, Sacra∣ments, Prayer, and the like. Quest. How do men carefully vse the meanes God hath ordai∣ned for the beginning, and for the continuance of grace, and of spi∣rituall life in the soule? Pro. 2.1.2.3.4. Pro. 4.20.21. Pro: 7.1.2.3.4. Pro. 8.33. Isai. 55.3.Answ. By diligent attending on them, and by vsing them conscionably, and with care to be bettered and to profit by them: this we find required in many places of Scripture. Co∣loss. 3.16. 1 Thes. 2.13. Quest. How doe men carefully walke in the way of life, and of saluation?Ephes. 2.10. Philip: 2.12. 2 Pet. 4.5.6. to 12. Psal. 92.14. 2 Pet: 3.18. Answ. By diligence to finish their owne saluation, by ad∣ding daily one measure of grace to another, and by making their owne calling and election sure by the fruits of faith. Quest. What are the things that tend to the maintenance and preseruation of the life of the soule of another or others, and to the welfare and safety of the soule of another or others? Answ. Such things as serue for the procuring or helping forward of the spirituall life and saluation of another or o∣thers: men are as they are able, and according to their place and calling, and as present occasion is offered, to pro∣cure or to helpe forward the spirituall life and saluation of another or others.1 Cor. 10.33. Quest. How are men, as they are able and according to their place and calling, and as present occasion is offered, to procure and to helpe forward the spirituall life and saluation of another or o∣thers? Pro. 11.30. Dan. 12.3. Rom. 15.2. Iam. 5 19.20.Answ. By doing such things as tend to the winning of their soules, and to their edification in grace & goodnes. Quest. What are the things that men are to doe tending to the
winning of the soules of others, and to their edification in grace and goodnesse? Answ. Sixe things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; they are as they are able,Gen. 18.19. Deut. 6.7. Pro. 1.10. P o 31.1. Ioh. 1.35. to 45 Act. 20.26.27. Coloss. 3.16. and according to their place and calling, and as present occasion is offered, to teach and to instruct others to knowe God, and the good wayes of God; and to counsell, and to aduise them in suh things as concerne their sanctification and saluation, e∣specially such as bee vnder their charge; they being such as haue the gouernment of others, and are ouer others in publike or in priuate, as Ministers and Gouernours in the family. Quest. May not inferiours sometimes teach and instruct, ad∣uise and counsell their Superiours? Answ. Yes, they may,1 Sam. 25.23. to 32. Iob. 31.13. Act. 18.26. and they ought sometimes to teach and instruct their Superiours, finding them fit and willing to bee taught, instructed, aduised, and counselled by them, and dealing with them with reuerence, and with humilitie. Math. 28.19. Ministers are commanded to teach and bap∣tize, and so it belongs to the Ministers of the Word onely to teach others; and therefore not to Gouernours in the family. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; it belongs to the Ministers of the Word onely to teach as Ministers; but yet gouernors in the family may teach as gouernors in another kind of teaching. Quest. VVherein stands the difference betweene the teaching of the Ministers of the Word, and the teaching of Gouernours in the family? Answ. In two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; Ministers of the Word teach in the name of God, and by authority from Christ, as in his roome and stead,Tit 2.15. 2 Cor. 5.19.20 and as his Ambassadors: and hence they are called Men of God, seruants of God; but Gouernors in the family teach only by the authoritie of an husband, a father or master. Quest. What is the second difference betweene the teaching of the Ministers of the word, and of gouernors in a family?
Answ. This; the teaching of Ministers of the Word de∣pends onely on the teaching of Gods Spirit by his Word.Ezech. 3.17. Deut. 18.18. 2 Cor. 3.8. But the teaching of Gouernors in a family depends on pub∣like teaching, and must be ordered by it; and they must teach nothing but that they haue learned and receiued from the publike Ministery, and is agreeable to it. Quest. What is the second thing that men are to doe tending to the winning of the soules of others, and to their edification and building vp in grace and goodnesse? Answ. This; they are as they are able, and according to their place and calling, and as present occasion is offered, to prouoke and to excite and stirre vp others to holinesse and to well doing, and to hearten, and to encourage them in well doing, especially such as bee vnder their charge, they being such as haue the gouernment of others.Pro: 27.17. Heb. 10.34. Prou. 27.17. A man is to whet his friend to knowledge, ioy, loue, diligence, and Zeale. Quest. How are men, as they are able, and according to their place and calling, and as present occasion is offered, to prouoke, and to excite, and to stirre vp others to weldoing, and to hearten and to encourage them in well doing? 2 Chron. 19.9. 2 Chron. 20.20 2 Chron. 32.7. 1 Thess. 5.11. 1 Tim. 5.1.2. Hebr. 3.13. Rom. 1.3. 1 Cor. 11.2.Answ. By perswading and by exhorting them to good things, and by praising, commending, and countenancing them when they doe well. Quest. What is the third thing that men are to doe tending to the winning of the soules of others, and their edification and buil∣ding vp in grace and goodnesse? Answ. This; they are, as they are able, and according to their place and calling, and as present occasion is offe∣red, to admonish and to reproue others, when they see or know them to offend and to doe euill, and to sinne, so as they de it fitly and seasonably. Quest. How doe men reproue others fitly? Answ. When their reproofe is fited to the quality of the person whom they reproue,Leuit. 19.17. Luke 17 3. Coloss. 3.16. 1 Thess. 5.14. 2 Tim. 2.4. Tit. 2.15. and to the nature and quality of the off nce for which the person i reproued. Quest. How is the reproofe fitted to the quality of the per∣son reproued?
Answ. Thus; when men reproue their equalls louingly and friendly,Gal. 6.1. 1 Tim. 5.1. 2 Sam. 12.1. Tit. 3.13. Nehem. 5.7. Iob 2.20. Prou. 29.17.19 their Superiours (hauing a calling so to doe) by reuerent and humble exhortation; their Inferiours sharpely, the fact being notorious, scandalous, or dan∣gerous: and such of their Inferiours as ouer whom they haue speciall authoritie, as their Children, Seruants, Subiects, or the like, sometimes by due chastisement and correction. Quest. How is reproofe fitted to the nature and quality of the offence, for which the person is reproued? Answ. Thus; when men reprooue others for sinnes and offences committed of ignorance or frailtie,Iude epist. ver. 22.23. 2 Cor. 13.2. with gentle∣nesse; and for sins and offences committed of malice, pride, and presumption, with sharpnesse and seueritie. Quest. How doe men reprooue others seasonably? Answ. When they doe it in such a time as the reproofe may doe them most good: as when they discerne them to be willing to hare reproofe, they are no scorners,Psal. 141.5. Prou. 9.8. 1 Sam. 25.36.37 and that they are capable of reproofe, they are not drunke, nor in heat of passion. Quest. VVhat if men being but priuate persons, doe know another or others to practice some thing that tends to the hurt of the Church or Common-wealth; as to plot Treason, or to inter-meddle in treasonable practices, or the like, are they then priuate∣ly to admonish and to reproue them? Answ. In such a case they are not, but they are then to discouer them to the publike Magistrate,Deut. 13.6.7.8 9 Hest. 2.21.22. that by him they may bee dealt withall according to the nature and qualitie of the offence. Question VVhat if men beeing but priuate persons, doe knowe another or others, to intend to kill and to murder another, and to lye in wayte purposely to take away his life, are they then priuately to admonish and to reprooue them? Answ. No; in this case also they are bound to discouer them to the publike Magistrate:Act. 23.16.17. for the life of a man or wo∣man is to be preferred before the credit of such as seeke vn∣iustly to take it away.
Quest. What is the fourth thing that men are to doe tending to the winning of the soules of others, and to their edification and building vp in grace and goodnesse? Answ. This; they are as they are able, and according to their place and calling,Gen. 50.21. Sam. 23.16. Sam. 10.2. ob 6 14.15. sai. 40.1.2. Mat. 14.27. 1 Thess. 4.18. 1 Thess. 5.14 and as the present occasion is offered, to comfort others, when they see or know them to stand in need of comfort, in regard of their troubles and distresses, e∣specially in regard of the troubles and distresses and afflicti∣ons of their minds and consciences for sinne, so as they doe it wisely and seasonably. Quest. How doe men wisely and seasonably comfort others that are troubled and afflicted in their minds & consciences for sinne? Answ. When they duly consider the person afflicted, as whether it be a man or woman, young or old, hauing know∣ledge or wanting knowledge, whether by nature fearefull and melancholike or no, whether a vsuall sinner or no, and the like, and accordingly to apply comfort: and when they doe it in such a time as comfort may doe the partie affcted most good; as when they discerne the partie afflicted to bee fit for comfort,Iob 16.2. Iob 19.21. Isai. 50.4. as being humbled rather for sinne then for outward shame, or the like, and not grieued onely with a generall notion and sight of sinne, but extreamely throwne downe with the burden of particular sinnes. Quest. VVhat is the fift thing that men are to doe tending to the winning of the soules of others, and to their edification and building vp in grace and goodnesse? Answ. This; they are as they are able, and according to their place and calling,Ier. 42.2.3. Gen. 43.29. Gen 48.15. 1 Chro. 22.12. Iam. 5.15. and as present occasion is offered, to pray for others standing in need of their prayers, for the good of their soules, and especially such as they are bound to, by some neere and speciall bond, as of nature or of grace, or of place or calling, and condition, and the like. Quest. What is the sixt thing that men are to doe tending to the winning of the soules of others, and to their edification and building vp in grace and goodnesse? Answ. This; they are as they are able, and according to their place and calling, and as present occasion is offered to giue good example to others,Math. 5.1. 2 Cor. 9.2. liuing in their sight without
giuing iust offence, and walking before them in the practice of good things, especially to such as they are bound to,1 Pet 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.1. by some neare and speciall bond of nature, place, calling or condition. Now to the seauenth Commandement Exod 20.14. Thou shalt not commit Adultery. Quest. Why is the Commandement that forbids Adultery, netxt to that that forbids Killing or Murder? Answ. For this reason, because next after iniurie done to the person of man or woman,Gen. 2.24. Mat. 19.5. 1 Cor. 6.16. there is none greater then that which is offered or done to the ioynt person: as the wife is to the Husband, and the Husband to the Wife, they two being but one flesh. Quest. What are the words of the seauenth Commandement? Answ. Those we finde, Exod. 20.14. Thou shalt not com∣mit Adulterie. Quest. What is the meaning of the words of this Comman∣dement? Answ. This; thou shalt not thinke, will, speake,Mat. 5.18. 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Thess. 4.3.4. or doe any thing whereby thine owne chastitie, or the chastitie of a∣nother or others may be hurt or hindered. Quest. What is the-ground of this prohibition: thou shalt not thinke, will, speake, or doe any thing whereby thine owne chasti∣tie, or the chastitie of another or others may be hurt or hindered? Answ. Both the preseruation of a speciall part of Gods I∣mage in man,Gen: 20.9. Gen: 26.10. chastity being a speciall part of Gods Image in man; and therefore Adultery is knowne to be a sinne by the light of nature: and also the propagation of an holy seede to be made by man on earth, God hauing appointed one man to one woman to that end. Mat. 2.15.Mat: 2.15. Quest. Why is Adultery heere named, rather then any other sin of the same kinde? Answ. For two reasons especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ, This; because it breakes the couenant of marri∣age,Pro: 2.17. whereby married persons bind themselues not only one with another but to God himselfe (who hath appointed the Ordinance of Marriage) th they will faithfully and truely
keepe their faith plighted one to the other. Quest. What is the second reason why Adulterie is heere na∣med, rather then any other sin of the same kinde? Answ. This: because it brings pollution into the Ordi∣nance which God hath sanctified for the propagation of an holy seede, and makes confusion in Stocks and Families through bastardy: and many times brings the child of the A∣dulterer into another mans possession, to his great wrong and indignity. Quest. What is the summe of this Commandement? Answ. That chastitie bee not any way hurt or hindered, either in our selues or in others, but that both in our selues & in others,Tit. 2.5. it be euery way and by all good meanes preserued, Ioseph was carefull of his. Gen. 39, 9.Gen. 39.9. Now this Commandement being Negatiue: I will first shew what this Commandement forbids. Quest. What doth this Commandement forbid? Answ. In generall, all manner of vncleanes, and fleshly defilement: and all things that doe hurt or hinder chastity in man or woman. Quest. What are the things that doe hurt or hinder chastity in man or woman? Answ. They are either things inward in the heart, or out∣ward things. Quest. What are the inward things in the heart, that do hurt or hinder chastity in man or woman? Answ. They are filthy imaginations, and vnchast thoughts, and inward lusts and motions of the heart to vncleannesse,Mate. 5.28. Coloss. 3.5. whereunto the heart doth giue consent: or purposes and de∣sires of the heart to any act of vncleannes, and fleshly de∣filement. Quest. When are inward lusts and motions of the heart to vncleannesse, whereunto the heart giues consent, most vile and odious? Answ. When they are so violent and strong, as that they continually boyle and burne within, and giue a man or woman no rest,1 Cor. 7.9. but are euer stirring and prouoking them to
the committing of some filthy act of vncleannesse: 1 Cor. 7 9 It is better to marry then to burne, (that is) to haue within a continuall feruencie of lusts, in the heart.Hosea 7.4. Coloss. 3.5.Coloss. 3.5. inor∣dinate affection. Quest. VVhat are the outward things that doe hurt or hin∣der chastity in man or woman? Answ. They are either things going before the act of vn∣cleannesse and fleshly pollution: or the act of vncleannesse and fleshly pollution it selfe. Quest. What are the things that goe before the act of vnclean∣nesse and fleshly pollution? Answ. Either things farther of, as preparatiues and pro∣uocations to it: or things nearer to it. Quest. What are the preparatiues and prouocations to the act of vncleannesse? Answ. They are either such things as stirre vp filthy lust, and make the body fit for vncleannes: or such things as helpe forward that fitnesse. Quest. What are the things that stirre vp filthy lust, and make the body fit for vncleannes? Answ. Foure especiall. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. Gluttony, or excesse in eating and pampering of the belly with meates:Ier. 5.8. Ezech. 16.49. Rom. 13.13. Hosea 7.6. as when men or women either eate ordinary meates immoderately, till they doe thereby glut themselues, or they vse delicates and curious dainty meates deliciously and vnseasonably, especially such as haue grea∣test force to encrease and to stirre vp filthy lust, purposely to encrease and to stirre it vp in themselues. Quest. What is the second thing that stirrs vp filthy lust, and makes the body fit for vncleannesse? Answ. This; Drunkennesse or excesse in drinking,Gen. 19.32.33.34.35. Prou. 23.30.31.33. as when men or women doe take into their bodies strong drinke, Ale, Beare, Wine, or compound water exces∣siuely till they doe thereby surchage nature, and disorder the powers of reason, and inrage their naturall affections, and pecially when thy doe vse wines and strong drinkes, wantonly and vnseasonably, and of purpose to stirre vp
filthy lust:sai. 5.11. om. 13.13. phes. 5.18. after drunkennesse followes chambering and wantonnesse, omnis profusio et turpitudo. Quest. What is the third thing that stirrs vp filthy lust, and makes the body fit for vncleanesse? Answ. This; lustfull dreames comming from surfeiting and drunkennes. Hence come nocturnall pollutions spoken of, Deut. 23.10. Quest. What is the fourth thing that stirrs vp filthy lust, and makes the body fit for vncleanesse? Answ. This; Idlenesse, as when men or women spend their strength and time God giues them,2 Sam: 11.1.2. Ezech: 16.49. 1 Tim. 5.13. wherein they ought to be imployed in some honest labours of minde or body, in ex∣cessiue sleeping, and in sluggishnesse, in ease and in doing nothing; but following their sensuall pleasures. Quest. What are the things that helpe forward the fitnesse of the body for vncleannesse? Answ. Seauen especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; any light, vaine, immodest, either setting out of the body, or carriage of the body; as by riotus, lasci∣uious,Ezech. 16.49. Pro. 7:10. 1 Tim: 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3. 1 Cor. 11.14. 2 King. 9.30. Iere. 4.30. Isai. 3.16. to 24 garish, disguised, and new fangled attire; by long shag hayre, by platting, cutling, frizling, powdering, or colou∣ring of the haire; by painting the face, by laying out the naked breasts, by stretching out the necke, by mincing or tinkling with the feete. Quest. May not men or women seeing a fashion of attire vsed in a strange Countrey and not in vse in their owne Countrey, take it vp and vse it in their owne Countrey? Answ. No, they may not: the Lord hath threatned to vi∣site such as weare strange apparrell. Zephan. 1.8.Zephan. 1.8. Quest. May not a man or a woman hauing some deformity in his or her body, labour to couer it? Answ. Yes, they may; so as they set not a new forme or face, or a new habit on the body: for dissembling is vnlaw∣full aswell in deede as in word. Isaie prophesied naked, therefore it may seeme lawfull to lay out the bare breasts. Quest. How is this to be answered?
Answ. Thus; that which the Prophet did, was done by the especiall commandement of God, and to a speciall end; and therefore is not to be imitated. Quest. VVhat is the second thing that helpes forward the fitnesse of the body for vncleannesse? Answ. This; the keeping company with lasciuious, wan∣ton, and fleshly persons: and frequenting of lewd houses,Gen. 39.10. Psal. 50.18. Pro. 5.8. Pro. 7.7.8.9.10. &c. Ephes: 5, 5, 7 houses of filthinesse: when men or women ordinarily, with∣out any warrant or calling, keepe company with filthy per∣sons, and frequent lewd houses, especially at vnseasonable times. Quest. VVhat is the third that helpes forward the fit∣nesse of the body for vncleannesse? Ans. This; immodest, vnchast, ribald and filthy spea∣king, when men or women vtter rotten and filthy speeches,Ephes. 4.29. Ephes. 5.3.4. Coloss. 3.8. tell filthy tales, or sing songs, and sonnets, and ballads of loue and lightnesse, and of abhominable filthinesse, rotten speeches. Quest: What is the fourth thing that helpes forward the fit∣nesse of the body for vncleannesse? Answ: This; reading of vnchast and filthy bookes; bookes of loue matters and daliance, and filthinesse: 1 Corin 15.33.1 Cor. 15.33.  some render the words euill speakings, or euill communication, some euill conuersings: I take it, we may vnder∣stand the word thus, conuersing with others in their euill spea∣kings, sayings or writings: and so reading of vile and filthy bookes, fitter to be burnt as these were. Act. 19.19. Quest. What is the fift thing that helpes forward the fitnesse of the body for vncleannesse? Answ. This; idle and curious looking of men on women, or of women on men; when men or women curiously looke on the beauty, feature, and proportion of the body one of another:2 Sam: 11.2. Iob. 31.1. 2 Pet: 2.14. thus did the sonnes of God behold the daughters of men, Gen. 6.2.Gen: 6.2. Thus Potiphars wife beheld Ioseph. Gen. 39.7.Gen: 39.7. Gen. 34.1.2.Gen. 34.1.2. Dinah went out to see the Daughters of the Land, and when Shechem saw her, he tooke her and lay with her, and defiled her? Quest. May not a man looke on the beauty of a woman, or
a woman looke on the beauty of a man, and sin not? King. 10.7.8Answ. Yes, they may; and they ought thereby to take occasion to glorifie God, as the Queene of Sheba by behold∣ing Salomons person, and hearing his wisedome, did take oc∣casion to glorifie God. Quest. What is the sixt thing that helpes forward the fitnesse of the body for vncleannesse? Ans. This; the looking on lasciuious, filthy and vnseem∣ly pictures,Nomb. 25:1.2.3. Ezech: 23.14. Ephes. 5.3.4. and the beholding of filthinesse, loue matters, and light behauiour of men and women, represented and set out, not only by speech, but by gesture and by conuaiances and deuices in Stage Playes and Comedies. The Israelites were brought to fornication by the sight of the filthy Idoll Baall Peor. Quest. What is the seauenth thing that helpes forward the fitnesse of the body for vncleannesse? Answ. This; immodest and wanton dancing, mixt dan∣cing of men and women together,Exod. 32.6. Iob. 21.11.12. Mar. 6.21.22. in number and measure artificially: especially after solemne feasts, and at merry meetings, with many wanton and lasciuious gestures ac∣companying the same. Exod. 22.6. The people sate downe to eate and drinke  and they rose vp to play. (that is) as the best interpreters say, to dance wantonly af∣ter they had eaten and drunken, Iob. 21.11.12. Mar. 6.21.22. after the banquet Herod made the daughter of Herodias come skipping and dancing in, to please Herod, wherewith his a∣morous and lustfull eye was entangled, and Iohn Baptists head begged. Quest. What are the things going before the act of vncleanness and fleshly pollution, nearer to it then preparatiues or prouocations vnto it? Answ. They are three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; vsing and wearing of apparrell not fit for the sexe,Deut. 22:5. Iob 24.15. Gen. 38.15. as when men put on and goe in womens apparell; or women put on and goe in mens apparell, that they may not bee knowne, but may more easily come to commit fil∣thinesse.
Quest. What is the second thing going before the act of vnclean∣nesse, and nearer to it then preparatiues or prouocations? Answ. This; wanton kissing, and imbracing, and vn∣chast touching and dalliance:Gen. 39.12. Pro. 7.13. Deut. 25.11.12 when men or women do wan∣tonly kisse or embrace one another, or doe vnchastly touch or dallie one with another. Quest. VVhat is the third thing going before the act of vn∣cleannesse and fleshly pollution, and nearer to it then preparatiues or prouocations? Answ. This; mouing, intising, and perswading to the very act of vncleannesse and fleshly pollution,Gen. 39.7.10 12 Pro. 7.13 to 21 as Iosephs Mistress did, she was not ashamed to moue him with her own mouth to lye with her. Quest. What are the acts of vncleannesse and fleshly pollution that hurt or hinder chastity in men or women? Answ. They are either with ones selfe or with others. Quest. How is chastity hurt or hindered in man or woman with themselues? Answ. By effeminate wantonnesse,Gen. 38▪9. 1 Cor. 6.9. and by doing as Onan did: when men or women abuse their owne bodyes, and by any way or meanes doe prouoke and procure themselues to doe as Onan did. Gen. 38.9. The Apostle calls them that so doe, effeminate persons or wantons. 1 Cor. 6.9. Quest. How is chastity hurt or hindered in man or woman with others? Answ. Either with one other, or with many others. Quest. How is chastity hurt or hindered in man or woman with one other alone? Answ. Thus; either by married persons, man and wife be∣tweene themselues, or by others that are not marryed one to another. Quest. How is chastity hurt or hindered by married persons, man and wife betweene themselues? Answ. Either in respect of their enterance into marriage, or in regard of their after proceeding and vse of it. Q. How is chastity hurt or hindred by married persons, man & wife betweene thēselues, in respect of their enterance into marryage? Answ. Thus; when they company together and haue secret
society one with another as man & wife, & yet are either such as entred into that state and condition,Exod. 22.16.17. Deut: 7.3. Iere. 29.6. 1 Cor: 7.38. Leuit. 18.6. to 18. Leuit. 20.19 20.21. Mar: 6.18. 1 Cor. 5.10. without the due con∣sent of their parents, neither hauing it at the time of their en∣trance, nor hauing gotten it afterwards; or they are such as ought not to haue married together, being within the de∣grees of Consanguinity or Affinity, forbidden in the Word of God. Quest. May cosen germans, brothers children, or sisters chil∣dren marry together or no? Answ. The marriage of cosen germans is not expresly forbidden in the Word of God, yet in sundry respects being inconuenient and inexpedient, it ought not to be done accor∣ding to the saying of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.23. All things are lawfull for me, but all things are not expedient. Quest. May a man after his wife is dead, marry her sister or no? Answ. No, hee may not; for as a woman may not mar∣rie with two brothers, one after another, Leuit. 18.16. Leuit. 20.21. so a man may not marry with two sisters, there the same proportion holds both wayes. Leuit. 18.18. The Lord doth not there forbid a man to marry two sisters, one after another; but to marry them both together, and therefore after a wife is dead, a man may mar∣rie her sister. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; that place is thus to be read, thou shalt not take a woman to her sister; that is one woman to another, and it is not to be vnderstood of marrying two sisters together; but of hauing of two wies or women together, and so it proues not that after the wife is dead, a man may marry her sister. Deut. 25.5. The Lord commanded that a man dying with∣out Issue, his brother should take his wife and raise vp seede to him: and therefore it seemes lawfull for a woman to marry two brothers, and so for a man to marry two sisters, Quest. How is this to be answered Answ. Thus; those words are a speciall exception of that law, Leuit. 18.16. & are peculiarly directed to the Israelites,
and did giue them only that libertie for a time, for the conti∣nuance and preseruation of their Tribes and Families di∣stinct one from another till the comming of the Messiah: and that priuiledge must not be extended to any other sort of men whatsoeuer. The prohibitions Leuit. 18. are Mosaicall and ceremoniall, and therefore do not bind vs now vnder the New Testament. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Those prohibitions are grounded on the law of Nature, for God did cast the Canaanites out of the Land, who had only the law of Nature to guide them, and were not bound to the ceremoniall Law of Moses, because they were therein defiled,Ezech. 22.10. Mar. 6.18. 1 Cor. 5.1. Leuit. 18.24.25. therefore they are morall; and so they are accounted both by the Prophets, and also in the New Testament. Quest. How is chastity hurt or hindered by married persons, man and wife betweene themselues, in regard of their after procee∣ding and vse of marriage? Answ. Two wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; when they vse the marriage bed intempe∣rately and immoderately, not for procreation, or for yeeld∣ing due debt one to another, or for the auoyding of for∣nication; but meerely for the satisfying of their vnbridled pleasures: for as a man may be a drunkard by taking into his body his owne strong drinke excessively, and a glutton by excessiue deuouring of his owne meate: so may one bee fil∣thy & vncleane by the immoderate vse of the Marriage bed. 1 Thes. 4.4.5. not to doe any thing vnbeseeming honestie and temperance of Marriage. Heb. 13.4. Marriage (being vsed as it ought) is honourable amongst all. Quest. What is the second way by which chastitie is hurt or hindered by married persons, man and wife betweene themselues in regard of the vsed of their marriage? Answ. This; when they company together and vse the marriage bed vnseasonably. Quest. How doe married persons companie together and vse their marriage bed vnseasonably?
Answ. Two wayes Quest. What is the first of those? Gen. 18.11. Leuit. 18.19. Leuit. 20.18. Ezech. 18.6. Ezech. 22.10.Answ. This; if they company together and know each other whilst it is with the woman after the manner of women: as Gene. 18.11. when God and nature reqire that they should forbeare the marriage bed, and keepe themselues a∣sundr. Quest. What is the second way by which married persons com∣pany together and vse their marriage bed vnseasonably? Answ. This; if they company togther and know each o∣ther in the time of publike humiliation; in the time of a so∣lemne fast vsed in regard of some grieuous calamity,2 Sam. 11.11. Ioel. 2.16. Zach. 12.12. 1 Cor. 7.5. either imminent and like to fall on the Church or common Wealth, or already on it: when they ought to giue themselues by mutuall consent, to fasting and prayer. Quest. How is chastity hurt or hindered in man or wo∣man one with another alone by such as are not married one to another? Answ. Two wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; when such as are not married one to ano∣ther, doe commit some act of vncleannesse and fleshly defile∣ment one with another, which is vnnatural & against nature. Quest. How do such as are not married one to another commit some act of vncleannesse and fleshly defilement one with another, which is vnnaturall and against nature? Answ. Thre wayes, Quest. Which is the first of those? Leuit. 18.22. Leuit. 2.13. Rom. 1.26.27. 1 Cor. 6.9. 1 Tim. 1.10.Answ. This; by Sodomitrie, or by committing the sinne of Sodome, which is vncleannesse and defilement of the body committd betweene them that are of one and the sme sexe; as by man with man, or by woman with woman. Quest. Why is this sinne called Sodomitrie, or the sinne of Sodome? Answ. Because the Sodomites are the first wee read off to haue committed this sinne,Ge. 19.4.5.6.7 and they were outragious in the committing of it. Quest. How doth this sin appeare to be a great & grieuous sin?
Answ. Both bcause the light of nature condemnes it, and because it is commonly a punishment of other foule sins; and because also it is a sinne, which they commit whom God hath giuen vp to a reprobate sense Rom 1.26.27.Rom. 1.26.27. Quest. What is the second way by which such as are not mar∣ried one with another, commit the act of vncleannes & fleshly de∣filement one with another, which is vnnaturall & against nature? Answ. This; by beastiality which is vncleannesse and de∣filement of the body, committed by man or woman with a bruite beast, forbidden Leuit. 18.23.Leuit. 18.23. and condemned to death, Leuit. 20.15.16.Leuit. 20.15.16 Q. What is the third way by which such as are not married one with another, commit some act of vncleanness & fleshly defilement one with another, which is vnnaturall and against nature? Answ. This; by vncleannesse and fleshly defilement of the body, committed by man or woman with the Deuill; as Witches doe, by their owne confession: for the Deuil may appeare in a bodily shape, and may sometimes (the Lord suf∣fering him) vse the body of a man or woman as hee vsed the body of the Serpent: Gen. 3.1.Gen. 3.1. and so may haue company with those, who either haue familiarity with him, or giue themselues much to filthinesse. Q. What is the second way by which chastity is hurt or hindred, with one other alone, by such as are not married one to another? Answ. This; when such as are not married one to another, doe commit some act of vncleannesse and fleshly defilement one with another which is naturall, and according to the course of nature corrupted. Quest. How doe such as are not married one to another, com∣mit some act of vncleannesse and fleshly defilement one with another which is naturall, and according to the course of nature corrupted? Answ. Two wayes.Gen. 19.33. to 37. Gen 35.2. Gen 49.4. Gen. 8.18. 2 Sam. 13.14. Ezech. 22.11 Mar. 6.18. 1 Cor. 5.1. Quest. Which is the first of those? Answ. This; by committing the sinne of Incest, which is vncleannesse and defilement of the body, committed be∣tweene man and woman that are neere in bloud & of kindred one to another, either by consanguinity or affinitie.
Quest. What is the second way by which such as are not mar∣ried one to another, doe commit some act of vncleannesse and flesh∣ly defilement one with another which is naturall, and according to the course of nature corrupted? Answ. This; by vncleannesse and defilement of the body, committed betweene man and woman, that are not neere in blood, nor of kindred one to another, either by consanguini∣tie or affinitie. Qust. How is that done? Answ. Two waies. Quest. What is the first of those? Gen. 34.2. 1. Cor. 6.9.18. 1 Cor. 10.8. Coloss. 3.5. Heb. 13.4.Answ. This; by fornication, which is vncleannesse and fleshly defilement of the body committed betweene man and woman being both single and vnmarried persons. Here some things saide in dfence of fornication are to be answered. Gen. 19 8. Lot offered his daughters to the men of Sodome when they called for the strangers that were come into his house to abuse them, which (say some) hee would not haue done if fornication had beene a sinne: therefore it seemes that fornication is no sinne. Quest. How is this to be answered? Ans. Thus; that fact of Lot cannot be iustified nor ex∣cused, it was euill and a sinne; though his purpose was by a lesser euill to preuent a greater; for no man may do the least euill or sinne for the procuring of the greatest good that can be. Rom. 3.8. And so that fact of his proues not fornication to be no sinne. 2 Pet. 2.7. The Apostle cals Lot a iust man, therefore hee was blamelesse in that fact of his, in offering his daughters to the rage of the Sodomites. Quest: How is this to be answered? Answ: Thus; though Lot be called a iust man, yet it fol∣lowes not that euery particular act of his was iust, for then his incest with his two daughters might finde defence. Hosea. 1.2. The Lord commanded Hosea to take a wife of fornication; therefore fornication is not simply euill, and in it selfe a sinne. Quest. How is this to be answered?
Answ. Thus; that which the Prophet did (if he did take a wife of fornication) he did it not of his owne head, but by Gods speciall appointment who is Lord of his owne law, and may dispense with it at his owne pleasure, as hee com∣manded Abraham to kill his sonne Izaack. Gen. 22.2. which if Abraham had done he had not sinned, though the sixt Commandement forbid killing and murder: because he had Gods speciall commandement for it; so that fact of Hosea proues not that fornication is not simply euill, and in it selfe no sinne. Acts. 15.29. The Apostles reckon vp fornication amongst things indifferent, therefore it is a thing indifferent. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; it followes not, that fornication is a thing indifferent, because in that place it is ioyned with things in∣diffrent; for it was not the purpose of the Apostles to shew what things were indifferent, or what vnlawfull, but what thigs were most offnsiue, and what things did chiefely trouble the Churches and offend the weake Iewes, and and those were eating of blood, and things strangled, and the fornication of the Gentiles. Quest. What is the second way by which vncleannesse and de∣filement of the body is committed betweene man and woman that are not neere in blood nor of kindred one to another, either by con∣sanguinitie or affinitie?Gen. 26.10. Leuit. 18.20. Leuit. 20.10. 2 Sam. 11.4. Ier. 5.7.8. 1 Cor. 6.9. Heb. 13.4. Deut. 22.2.23.24. Answ. By Adultery which is vncleannesse and defile∣ment of the body, committed betweene man and woman, be∣ing either both of them married persons, or one of them a married person, or at the least contracted. Quest. Is Adultery a more grieuous sinne in man or in wo∣man, or is it equally as great and as grieuous a sinne in the one as in the other? Answ. In some respect it is a more grieuous sinne in the man, and in some respect it is a more grieuous sinne in the woman, and in some respect it is equally as great and grie∣uous a sinne in the one as in the other. Quest: In what respect is Adultery a more grieuous sinne in the man then in the woman?
1 Pet. 3.7. Ephes. 5.23. 2 Sam. 12.1.14Answ. In respect of the quality and condition of the per∣son, because the woman is the weaker vessell, and the man is the head of the woman, and is or ought to bee more strong; and because also his example, especially hee being a publike person doth more hurt. 2 Sam. 12. Nathan is sent to Dauid, not to Bathsheba, because his example did more hurt. Quest. In what respect is Adultery a more grieuous sinne in the woman then in the man? Answ. In respect of the inconueniences that follow on it, as ignominie and shame of houses, and families confusion of inheritances & thrusting of false Heires in the place & roome of true and lawfull Heires. Quest. In what respect is adultery a sinne equally as great and grieuous in both sexes in the man as in the woman, and in the woman as in the man? Leuit. 20.10. Deut. 22.22.23Answ. In respect of the speciall and particular law of marriage, where by the husband and wife are bound one to another equally, and that most neerely and most strictly: the sinne is equall in both Sexes, therefore the Apostle saith 1 Cor. 7.4. The wife hath not the power of her owne body, but the Husband: and likewise also the husband hath not the power of his owne body, but the wife: and by the law of Moses, both the adulterer and the adulteresse were equally punishable, and were both to be put to death. Job. 31.9.10. Iob saith if he had beene an adulterer, then let his wife become an adulteresse. It seemes therefore if the hus∣band commit adultery, then his wife may doe the like and be excusable, and that she may doe it as a iust reward of his vn∣faithfullnesse towards her. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the Lord may and dth many times, in his iust iudgement punish sinne with sinne, and that in the same kinde; as the adultery of the husband with the adultery of the wife, and the adultery of the wife with the adultery of the husband; and that is Iobs meaning, that the Lord might so haue punished him, if he had beene vnfaithfull to his wife: but neither may the wife purposely become an adulteresse, because her husband is an adulterer, nor the husband purpose∣ly
become an adulterer because his wife is an adulteresse, they may not take on them so to punish the sinne one of the other. Quest. When is any act of vncleannesse and fleshly defilement which is naturall and according to the course of nature corrupted, in any kind; whether incest, fornication or adultery, most vile and odious?Gen. 34.2. Deut. 22.25. 2. Sam. 13.14. Answ. When it is committed by violence and force, which is called rape, as it is thought that was of Shechem. Gen 34.2. Quest. How is chastitie hurt or hindered in man or woman, with many others? Answ. Two wayes. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This;Leuit. 19.29. Deut. 23.17. Ezech. 16.28.29. by vncleannesse and defilement of the bo∣dy, committed by man or by woman, with many others at large; as when a man commits filthinesse with many women whatsoeuer they be:Hosea 4.2. or when a woman doth prostitute her body to many men, and commits filthinesse with many men whatsoeuer they be. Quest. What is the second way by which chastitie is hurt or hindered in man or woman with many others? Answ. This;Gen. 2.24. Deut. 17.17. Mth. 19.5. Leuit. 18.18. Math. 2.15. 1 Cor. 7.2. by vncleannesse and defilement of the bo∣dy, committed by man or woman with many others to whom they seeme to be bound by the bond of marriage: as when a man hath more then one wife at one and the same time, and hath carnall copulation with them, or when a woman hath more then an husband at one and the same time and hath car∣nall copulation with them. Gen. 16.2.3. Abraham had more then one wife at one and the same time. And (Gen. 29.28) so had Jacob. 1 Sam. 1.2. El∣kanah. 1 Sam. 25.42.43. Dauid and many other holy men, had more then one wife at one and the same time: therefore it seemes lawfull for a man to haue more then one wife, at one and the same time. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; though the Lord hauing promised to make Abrahams seede as the Stars of Heauen, & as the sand of the sea shore. Gen. 22.17. was pleased to suffer variety of wiues for a time, as a meanes to increase that posterity, and so it was in some sort excusable; yet it was a fault and a fayling in the Patriarkes, and in holy men of old, and cannot bee
iustifyed and defended as a thing lawfull and void of sinne. After lawfull diuorce for Adulterie, the partie innocent hauing not the gift of continency, on leaue obtained of the Church and christian Magistrate, may lawfully marry ano∣ther; and so it will come to passe that the husband shall haue two wiues both liuing at one time, or the wife shall haue two husbands both liuing at one time. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; neither the husband being the party inno∣cent, and marrying another after lawfull diuorce, hath two wiues both liuing at one and the same time: nor the wife being the party innocent and marrying another after lawfull diuorce hath two husbands both liuing at one and the same time: for after lawfull diuorce, the parties diuorced are not man and wife: the bond of marriage is quite broken. The Papists obiect Rom 7.2.3. A wife is bound to her hus∣band while he liueth, and if the man be dead then she is at libertie: therefore say they nothing but death dissolues the bond of Marriage. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the Apostle there hauing no occasion to entreate of diuorce, speakes of marriage as it stands whole and sound by Gods Ordinance, that by the Ordinance of God, marriage continuing vndissolued till death, the woman is bound to her husband so long as he liueth: and therefore he saith not that nothing dissolues the bond of marriage but death: but though the bond hold during life, yet by death it is dissolued: that is his meaning. 1 Cor. 7.10.11. Let not the wife depart from her husband, but if she depart let her remaine vnmarried: therefore say they after lawfull diuorce, the parties diuorced are man and wife still, and the innocent partie may not marry with another. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the Apostle there speakes not of diuorce for Adultery, but of other seperations caused by dissentions in marriage: and they that seperate hereupon ought not to mar∣rie: and therefore he saith if she dpart, let her remaine vn∣married, not if she be put away, and let her not depart as be∣ing
in her owne choyce whether to depart or no: now in the case of diuorce for adultery, shee is to depart whether shee will or no. Now to the Affirmatiue part of the seuenth Com∣mandement. Quest. What doth the seuenth Commandement require? Answ. In generall two things. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; Chastitie both inward and outward, which is cleannesse and puritie both of the soule and of the body of man or woman, touching the matter of generation. Quest. VVherein stands inward chastitie and cleannesse, and puritie of the soule of man or woman touching the matter of ge∣neration? Answ. In a freedome by grace from fleshly concupi∣scence, the heart being by grace freed from filthy, vncleane,Math. 5.28. Math. 15.19. 1 Cor. 7.37. Coloss. 3.5. and vnchast thoughts, and from inward filthy lusts and from purposes and desires to any act of vncleannesse and fleshly defilement. Quest. VVherein stands outward chastitie and cleannesse, and puritie of the body of man or woman, touching the matter of ge∣neration? Answ.Gen. 39.8.9.10.12. 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Thess. 4 3 4. 1 Tim. 4.12. Tit. 2.. Reuel. 15.4. In not putting in execution the concupiscence of the flesh in any act of vncleannesse and fleshly defilement in any kind whatsoeuer, either with themselues or others, be it with one other, or with many others. Quest. What is the second generall thing the seuenth Comman∣dement requires? Answ. This; a carefull vsing of such things as are helpes to preserue chastitie, and doe tend to the preseruation of clannesse and puritie both inward and outward, both of the soule and of the body of man or woman touching the matter of generation. Quest. VVhat are the things that helpe to preserue chastitie, and doe tend to the preseruation of cleannesse and puritie both of the soule and of the body of man or woman, touching the matter of generation? Answ. Seuen things especially.
Quest. What is the first of those? Gen. 20.11. Gen. 39.9. Eccles. 7.28.Answ. This; the feare of God in respect of his word and Commandement, that forbids vncleannesse and fleshly de∣filement, both of soule and body in any kind whatsoeuer. Quest. What is the second thing that helps to preserue chastity, and tends to the preseruation of cleannesse and puritie, both of the soule and of the body of man or woman, touching the matter of generation? Psal. 119.9.Answ. This; a true delight in the word of God, and in his holy ordinances. Prou. 2.10.16. compared with Pro. 5.1.2.3 Pro.. 20, 621, 23, 24. Quest. What is the third thing that helps to preserues chastity, and tends to the preseruation of cleanness & purity both of the soule and the body of man or woman, touching the matter of generation? Answ. This; modesty or shamefac'tnesse, which is an ho∣ly abhorring of all filthinesse and fleshly defilement,Ephes. 5.3.4. accom∣panied with a carefull obseruing of Christian comlinesse, and with a certaine griefe and feare, least any thing vncome∣ly should be committed. Quest. VVherein is modestie or shamefac'tnes to bee expressed, and to appeare? Answ. In three things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Gen. 4.1. Psal. 51. title. Pro. 10.19. Pro. 7.11.Answ. This; in speech and in words, men and women are to expresse their modestie in decent talk and chaste speeches, vsing as seemely words as may bee chosen, when they are to mention things that may moue blushing, and vsing little and submisse speech. Quest. What is the second thing wherein modesty or shame∣fac'tnesse is to be expressed and to appeare? Answ. In countenance and in gesture, and in carriage of the body and outward behauiour,Gen. 24.65. Iob. 31.1. Pro. 6.25. Pro. 7.13. Ierem. 3.3. Tit. 2.3.7. men and women are to ex∣presse their modesty in so looking & so carrying their eyes & countenances as that they neither thereby expresse the filthy lust of their owne hearts, nor giue iust occasion to stirre vp the concupiscence of the heart in others: and in grauitie of their carriage and outward behauiour. Quest. What is the third thing wherein modestie or shame∣fac'tnesse
is to bee expressed and to appeare? Answ. In apparell:1 Tim. 2.9.10. 1 Pet. 3.3.4. men and women are to couer their bo∣dies with decent and comely apparell, and so to attire them∣selues, as that in their apparell they doe expresse the vertues of their minds, and the graces that be in their hearts, especi∣ally modesty, shamefc'tanesse, & frugalitie. Quest. Wherein stands decency and comlinesse of apparell? Answ. In two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in couering the whole body with it,Gen. 3.10.21. Deut. 28.48. Ezech. 16.7. some parts excepted: men and women are to couer their whole bo∣dies with apparell, leauing onely their hands and faces o∣pen and bare for necessitie sake, Gen. 3.10, 21. By sinne came shame on the whole body, and the Lord made and appoyn∣ted the wearing of garments for the couering of the defor∣mitie of our naked bodies. Deuter. 28.48. Nakednesse is a cuse: therefore affected nakednesse is monstrous and most vile. Quest. What is the second thing wherein stands decency and comlinesse of apparell? Answ.Deut. 22.5 Mat. 11.8. Zeph. 11.8 1 Cor. 11.16. Philip. 4.8. 1 Pet. 3.5 In being decent and comely for the forme and fa∣shion of it, which is when it is according to the sex, and ac∣cording to the office and calling and to the order and degree that men or women are in the societies of men publike or priuate, and according to their ability, & framed according to the ancient custome of the place and country where they liue, and to the example of the grauest and of the most godly and sober men and women of their order and place. Qust. May not men and women vse ornaments of gold, siluer, precious stones, silkes, veluets, laces, and the like? Answ. Yes, they may;Gen. 24.22.47: Gen. 41.42. Exod 2 some necessary cautions in vsing of them being duly obserued. Psal. 45.13, 14. Mat. 6.29. Isa. 18 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. ver. The Prophet condemnes in particular certaine ornaments of bracelets, tires of the head, eare-rings, rings, and diuers other ornaments; and therefore it seemes altogether vnlawfull to vse such particular orna∣ments, or the like. Quest. How is this to bee answered?
Answ. Thus; some ornaments there reckoned vp by the Prophet were indeed meere vanities, and should not haue bin vsed at all; but other particulars were in themselues lawfull, and the Prophet did not simply condemne but onely the abuse of them, in that they were made instruments and signes of the pride, wantonnesse, vanitie and lightnesse of the women of Ierusalem, as appeares ver. 16. 1 Tim. 2.9. and 1 Pet. 3.3. The Apostle forbids wearing of gold and costly apparell, therefore it seemes vnlawfull to vse ornaments of gold, siluer, precious stones, silkes, veluets, la∣ces, and the like. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the Apostles in those places doe not simply forbid ornaments of gold, siluer, precious stones, silkes, vel∣vets, laces, and such like, but the abuse of them in riot and excesse, directing their speeches to women, who in all likeli∣hood were excessiue in outward adorning and trimming of their bodies, and accounted outward ornaments of golde, pearle, siluer, and such like, their chiefe ornaments, and so neglected modestie and humilitie, the chiefe ornaments of Christians: therefore Paul saith, Let them array themselues in comely apparell, with shamefac'tnesse and modestie, not with broy∣dered hayre, or gold, or pearle, or costly apparell. And Peter saith, Whose apparelling let it not be outward with broydered hayre, and gold put about, or in putting on of apparell; ver. 4. but let the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt with a meeke and quiet spirit, which is before God a thing much set by. Quest. What are the necessary cautions to be obserued in vsing ornaments of golde, siluer, precious stones, silke, veluet, laces, and the like? Answ. They are three especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; that they bee vsed sparingly, and with moderation,Dan. 5.16.17.29. compared. Math. 11.8. and according to the place and calling, order and degree of men and women, and according to the exam∣ple of the grauest and most godly and religious of their place, order, degree and age. Quest. What is the second necessary caution to bee obserued in
vsing ornaments of gold, siluer, precious stones, silkes, veluets, la∣ces, and the like? Answ. This; that they be vsed not alwayes alike,Iere. 2.23. Luk. 16.19. but ac∣cording to the times and seasons. Quest. VVhat is the third necessary caution to bee obserued in vsing ornaments of golde, siluer, precious stones, silkes, veluets, la∣ces, and the like? Answ. This; that they bee vsed to a right end,Gen. 24.15. Pro. 7.10.16. 1 Cor. 12.2 1 Thess. 4.4. not to the gaining of praise amongst men, or to the getting of a name of ric and great persons, to the purchasing of loue from stranger (as harlots doe) but onely to the honouring of the body, tha therein God may be honoured, and not with any delight in them otherwise. Gen. 24.15. the simplicity of that age is to be considered, they did not set teir delight on out∣ward ornaments. Prou. 7.10.16. The harlots practice. Quest What is the fourth thing that helpes to preserue cha∣stitie, and tends to the preseruation of cleannesse and puritie both of the soule and body of man or woman, touching the matter of ge∣neration? Answ. This; temperance or sobrietie,Gal. 5.13. 1 Tim 3.2. Tit. 1.8. Tit. 2.12  Pet. 1.6. which is a moderate and sober vse of such things as belong to the body, agreeable to the time, place, and persons. Quest. Wherein is temperance and sobrietie to bee exercised and expressed? Answ. In three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This, in dyet:Pro. 23.29. to 33. Ecles. 10.17. Luk 21.34. Ephes. 5 18. 1 Cor. 9.27. 2 Cor. 6.6. men and women are to exercise tem∣perance and sobrietie in their eating and drinking, vsing meats and drinkes onely so farre forth as they may serue to refresh nature, and to make them fit for the seruice of God and man; and sometimes in conuenient abstinence, abstai∣ning from the necessary and ordinary food of their bodies for a time, as need doth require, and as their strength may beare, without abolishing and destroying nature. Quest. VVhat is the second thing wherein temperance and so∣brietie is to be exercised and expressed? Answ. This, in sleepe: men and women are to exercise temperance and sobrietie in their sleeping, onely taking so
much sleepe as may make them better able to doe all good duties that concerne them towards God and man,ro. 20.13. Cor. 6.6. Cor. 11.27. sometimes refraining from sleepe, and watching as need requires, and as they are able: so as it be not to the destruction of na∣ture. Quest. What is the third thing wherein temperance and so∣brietie is to be exercised and expressed? Rom. 13.14: Cor. 7.29.30. Galat. 5.13.Answ. This; in lawfull pleasure and honest delights, men and women are to exercise temperance and sobritie in their lawfull pleasures and honest delights, vsing them onely so farre forth as they bee no prouocations to flshly lustes, nor hinderances to them in good duties towards God or man. Quest. VVhat is the fift thing that helpes to preserue cha∣stitie, and tends to the preseruation of cleannesse and puritie both of the soule and body of man or woman, touching the matter of generation? Sam. 11.2. 4. Ezech. 16.49. 1 Tim. 5.13.Answ. This; diligence and painefulnesse in good duties, men or women are euer to be doing some good thing, either in their generall calling, as Christians, or in their particu∣lar callings. Quest. What is the last good thing wherein men or women are to bee diligent and painefull for the preseruing of their chastitie, cleannesse and puritie both of their soules and bodies touching the matter of generation? 2 Cor. 12.7.8.Answ. Prayer to God that hee would purifie and purge their hearts: for hee alone it is that must purge them from filthy lusts. Quest. VVhat is the sixt thing that helpes to preserue cha∣stitie, and tends to the preseruation of cleannesse, and puritie both of the soule and the body of man or woman touching the matter of generation? Answ. In single estate hauing not the gift of continen∣cie,2 Cor. 7.2.9.56. 2 Tim. 4.3. taking the benefit of holy Marriage when other meanes auaile not. Quest. May not a man or a woman being vnmarried, vow to liue in single estate, and out of the state of Marriage perpetu∣ally?
Answ. A man or a woman that is vnmarried being assu∣red that he or shee hath the gift of continencie,1 Cor. 7.37. may resolue and purpose with themselues to liue and lead a single life, and may vow so to liue, so long as that gift continuth:Mat. 19.11. 1 Cor. 7.7.9. but no man or woman may vow perptuall chastitie in a single estate, because Continencie is the gift of God, who gius it not to all but to whom hee will, and when hee will, and as long as he will. Obiections of the Papists. Mathew 7.7. Aske and yee shall receiue. Christ bids vs aske, and wee shall receiue: therefore say they, if a man or a woman pray for the gift of continencie, they may ob∣taine it, and so may vow perpetuall chastitie in the single estate. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; some giftes of God are generall, and ne∣cessay to saluation as Faith, Repentance, and the like. And some gifts of God are speciall, not giuen to all, nor needfull to saluation, but imparted onely to some, as health, wealth, continencie, and the like. Now that promise of Christ, Aske and yee shall receiue, is meant of things necessary to saluati∣on, and not of peciall gifts: for some may pray for them, and yet neur receiue them; therefore that place makes nothing for that purpose. God hath giuen to all men sufficient strength, that if they will vse the meanes, they may haue the gift of con∣tinencie: for sufficient grace is giuen to all, though not effectuall. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; neither sufficient nor effectuall grace is gi∣uen to all to liue chastly in a single estate,1 Tim. 5.14. but it is a rare and speciall gift giuen onely to some. Math. 19.12 Some haue made themselues chaste for the king∣dome of heauen; (that is, say they) haue vowed perpetuall cha∣stitie in a sinl estate. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the manig is not that some haue vow∣ed Chastitie in single life; but that some hauing the
pend on him,1 Tim. 5.8. for whom he is to prouide as for himselfe. Quest. What are the words of the eight commandment? Answ. Those we fin Exod. 20.15. Thou shalt not steale. Quest. VVhat is the meaning of the words of this Comman∣dement? Leuit. 19.11.12 1 Thess. 4.6. 2 Pet. 2.14.Answ. This; thou shalt not hurt or hinder by any vn∣lawfull way or meanes, the wealth or outward good estate either of thy selfe, or of another or others one or more. Quest. What is the ground of this prohibition, Thou shalt not hurt or hinder by any vnlawfull way or meanes the wealth or out∣ward good estate, either of thy selfe, or of another or others, one or more? Gen. 32.10. Iudg. 11.23.24 1 Sam. 2.7. Pro. 22.2. 2 Sam. 24.24. Iohn. 4.8. Iohn. 6.5. Act. 11.36. Act. 16.14.Answ. This; the maintaining of euery mans peculiar and seuerall right and interest in that portion of wealth and outward good things which God hath giuen him, the Lord giuing wealth to men and the measure of it as it pleaseth him, and their peculiar right and interest in it being by his appoyntment, that there may bee duties of loue practi∣sed, and dealings betweene man and man in buying and selling, borrowing and lending, in giuing almes, and the like, as he hath reueiled in his Word, hee will haue that right maintained; and therefore hee giues his Law for the main∣tenance of it. An obiection of the Anabaptists. Act. 2.44. Christians in the primitiue Church had all things common: therefore peculiar right and distinct proprietie in wealth is not by Gods appointment. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Act. 4.32. Act. 5.4.Answ. Thus; that communitie of things was particular for that place, and peculiar for that time; and it was a com∣munitie not in possession, but onely in the vse of things. And the things were not then so indifferently common among Christians in the vse of them, as that euery one might take what hee would:Act. 4.35. but things in common were distri∣buted according as euery one had neede. Therefore it still remaines a truth, that peculiar right and distinct proprie∣tie in mens wealth and outward good things, is by Gods ap∣poyntment.
Quest. Why is the Inhibition heere deliuered vnder the name of theft, Thou shalt not steale? Answ. That men might be moued, if not for Conscience, yet for very shame, to refraine from the sinnes forbidden in this Commaundement, the name of theft being most oppro∣brious and odious, euery one by nature abhorring it to bee deemed or tearmed a thiefe. Quest. What is the summe of this Commandement? Answ. That by no vnlawfull way or meanes wee hurt or hinder the wealth and outward good estate of our selues or of others,Deut. 24.7. Pro. 6.30. Iohn. 12.6. 1 Cor. 6.10. but that by all good waies and meanes we preserue and further the wealth and the outward good estate both of our selues and of others. Now this Commandement being Negatiue, I will first shew what it forbids. Quest. VVhat doth this Commandement forbid? Answ. In generall, euery thing whatsoeuer that tends to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of man. Quest. VVhat are the things that tend to the hurt or hinde∣rance of the wealth and outward good estate of man? Ans Either things inward in the heart, or outward things. Quest. VVhat are the things inward in the heart that tend to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of man? Answ. They are inward longings and lustings of the heart after another mans goods, the heart giuing consent to them:Ioh. 7.21. Micha. 2.2. 2 Pet. 2.14. 1 Iohn. 2.16. or they are couetous desires in the hearts of men or women, of that wealth which is none of theirs, though they neuer seeke to get it wrongfully. Quest. Is all desire of wealth and of outward riches altoge∣ther vnlawfull? Answ. No; desire is a naturall affection of the heart, and being towards any good thing, as wealth and outward riches are, it is lawfull and good, when it is with due measure and moderation, according to the nature of the thing desired. Quest. When is the desire of wealth and outward riches mo∣derate and lawfull?
gardly sparing when there is necessary cause of spending:Eccles. 2.26. Eccles. 4.18. Eccles 6.1.2. as when a man or a woman cannot find in their hearts to take their part of the wealth that God hath giuen them, but do de∣priue themselues of the vse of that which they haue in their owne keeping, and do pinch their owne bellies & backs, and starue thēselues, especially in the time of sicknes & weaknes. Quest. VVhat are the things that tend to the hurt or hinde∣rance of the wealth and outward good estate of another or others, one or more? Answ. Such things as tend to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate either of the Church or of the Common wealth, or of some priuate person or persons one or more. Of these in order. Quest. What are the things that tend to the hurt or hinde∣rance of the wealth and outward good estate of the Church? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. Sacriledge, or Church-robbery, Rom. 2.22. which is committed two wayes. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by diminishing, or by withdrawing or taking to ones selfe, in whole or in pat, those things that either by the commandemnt of God, or by the free and voluntary gift of man,Iosh. 7.21. Iosh. 6.19. Pro. 29.25. Mat. 3.8.9.10. or by the law of man are appoynted and set apart to religious vses, as for the maintaining of the Ministers of the word, or for the maintaining of Vniuersities and Schooles of Learning, or for the reliefe of the poore, or doe any way be∣long to the seruice of God, as places appoited for people to meet in to worship God, commonly called Churches; Com∣munion Table, Cup, Cloth, Bookes, or the like; and such was Achans sinne, Iosh 7.21. compared with Iosh. 6.19. Quest. What is the second way by which Sacriledge or Church robbery is committed? Iere. 23.1.2. Ezech. 34.2.38Answ. This; by employing things appoynted and set a∣part to religious vses, to other ends and purposes, and by abusing them especially by such as haue the benefit and vse of them, as when the Ministers of the Word abuse their
outward meanes appoynted for their maintennce,Philip. 2.21. Iudg. 9.4. Dan. 5.2.3. Mat. 21.12.13. to maintaine themselues in Idlenesse, adding liuing to liuing, and doe fed themselues, but feed not the people that de∣pend on them, or doe mis-spend their meanes in ryot and excsse, as in keeping Haukes, Hounds, in Carding, Dicing, and the like: of such the Lord complaines, Ierem. 23.1, 2. Ezek. 34 2, 3, 8. Quest. May lands or goods giuen to Idolatrous and Supersti∣tious vses be conuerted and employed to other vses or no? Answ. They may; and it is lawfull to conuert such lands and goods to the true seruice of God; and therin is no wrong at all offred to the Will of those that gaue them: for their generall intendment is obserued, the applying of them to sacred vses, though the particular vse bee not kept, which they (led with errour) intended. Ioshua 6.19. the Lord com∣maunded the Siluer, & Gold, and vessels of Brasse and Iron of Je∣richo, should bee consecrate vnto the Lord, and should come into the Lords Treasury. Quest. Is there not sometimes a spirituall sacriledge? Answ. Yes, there is; when the preaching of the Word,Iere. 23.30. Ioh: 10.8. and administration of the Sacraments is taken away from the Church. Quest. What is the third thing that tends to the hurt or hin∣derance of the wealth and outward good estate of the Church? Answ. Simony, or buying and selling of Church-offices or places to exercise those Offices in; and consequently buying and selling of the Mysteries and Sacraments of the Church, and of spirituall things for priuate gaine, which is properly Simony, and was the sinne of Simon Magus,Act. 8.18.19. 1 King: 5.20 21. Mat. 23.14. Acts 8.18, 19. Of Gehazi, exacting a reward for the gift of healing, 2 Kings 5.20, 21. &c. And this is the sinne of those who sell their Prayers for money, Math. 23.14. And this is the sinne of the Popes Chapmen, who sell Pardons, and remission of sinnes for money, Dispensations, Reliques, and such like. Quest. What are the things that tend to the hurt or hinde∣rance of the wealth & outward good estate of the Commonwealth? Answ. Three things especially.
Answ. They are things done either by the buyer or the seller, or by both. Quest. What are the things done by the buyer, that tend to the hurt or hindrance of the wealth, and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. Three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Pro. 20.4. Isai 5.20. Mat. 7.12.Answ. This; the extenuating of the goodnesse of the things which the buyer cheapneth contrary to his owne knowledge, either by himselfe or by another: when the buyer debaseth the things he would buy, and dispraiseth them a∣boue measure, and that against his owne conscience and knowledge; or sets another to vnderbid for them, that hee may get them better cheape. Quest. What is the second thing done by the buyer, that tends to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. This; the taking aduantage of the sellers simplici∣tie or present necessity, to buy his commoditie for lesse then it is worth: as when the buyer knowing the seller to bee sim∣ple and vnskilfull in selling his commodity,Gen. 23.9.13. Leuit. 25.14.15.16. being young, simple, or silly witted: or that the seller must needs sell for present money, the seller it may be making his moane to the buyer and telling of his present neede, he seekes to get his commodity, if he can, for halfe the worth of it: and some∣times gets that for one penny, which he knowes is worth three, and would not be had for lesse, were not the sellers pre∣sent neede so great. Gen. 23.9.13. Abraham would giue the price,  so much as the field was worth. Leuit. 25.14.15.16. whence it is cleare, that in buying a man must shew loue to the seller: and how is that done when hee takes more from him thn he giues preying on his necessity? Gen. 25.30. to the end, Iacob tooke aduantage of Esaus present neede, to buy his birthright for a portion of meale, his birthright being much more worth: therefore it seemes that the buyer may take aduantage of the sellers necessity. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; that fact of Jacob was extraordinary, and
no rule for vs to follow: for Iacob knew by his Mothers in∣struction, that the Lords purpose was to deriue the birth∣right to him, and he tooke the occasion and opportunity that was offered of buying it, being thereunto moued by the spi∣rit of God; therefore his fact will not warrant the buyer to take aduantage of the sellers present necessity. Quest. What is the third thing done by the buyer, that tends to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. This; the making of bad payment of the price agreed on betweene him and the seller:Gen. 23.16. Iere. 32.8.9.10. Gen. 43.12 as when the buyer hauing agreed to giue the seller so much for his commodity, either giues him nothing at all or lesse then he should giue, or giues him that which he knowes to be counterfeit stuffe for good: or for his good ware, wittingly and willingly, giues him base or counterfeit coyne: or if the seller mistell the mo∣ney, and tell short of the price he should receiue, the buyer reserues it to himselfe as gaine well saued. Thus did not A∣braham. Gen. 23.16. Quest. What are the things done by the seller, that tend to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth, and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. Fine things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; the praysing, commending and extolling the things he hath to sell, and is about to sell aboue the knowne goodnesse and worth of them: as when the seller prayseth the things hee hath to sell, and is about to sell, and extolleth them aboue measure, and farre beyond that which he knows and is perswaded touching the goodnesse and worth of them, and saith they are so good, as there is no better of that kinde to bee had for money, when hee knowes they are faulty: or they are so much worth, and they stood him in so much, and he hath beene bidden so much for them: hap∣pily vnder a colour by his owne wife, or his friend,Psal. 15.2. Isai. 5.20. or his partner and the like; that he may sell them the dearer and get the more for them. Psal. 15.2. his tongue speakes that which his heart and conscience tells him is false.
Quest. What is the first thing done by the seller, that tends to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Leuit. 25.14.15.16. 1 Thess. 4.6.Answ. This; the raysing of the iust price of things, and the wracking of the prices of things hee hath to sell, to the oppression of the poore, when the seller according to his owne greedy and gripple minde, raiseth the price of his com∣modities. 1 Thess. 4.6.  modum excedere in augen∣dis rerum precijs. The thing is mine owne I haue to sell. Quest. May I not make of mine owne what I can? Answ. No; a man may not make of his owne what hee can,Mat. 7.12. Galat. 5.15. to the hurt and wronging or oppressing of another or o∣thers, one or more: that is against the rule of Christ. Mat. 7.12. and that Galath. 5.15. Quest. How then is a man to set the price of his commodity that he hath to sell? Answ. Not according to his owne greedy minde, but according to the rule of quitie, that is, according to the va∣lue of the thing, and benefit it is like to yeeld to the buyer. Leuit. 25.14.15.16. They were to value their fruites, Corne and such like, according to the number of them, and benefit that might come to the buyer, and according to the number of yeares of the Reuenues. And so must a man prize his com∣modity according to the value of it, and benefit it is like to yeeld to the buyer. Quest What are the things done both by the buyer & the seller, that tend to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth & outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Isai. 55.2. Act. 19.24.Answ. The buying and selling of things either vnprofi∣table and hurtfull; as Cards, Dice, and such like: or things tending meerely to maintaine pride and vanity; as pain∣tings, complexions, and such like: or tending meerely to maintaine superstition; as Beads, Crucifixes, & such like. Quest. What are the things done in borrowing & lending, that tend to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good e∣state of some particular person or persons, one or more? A. They are things done either by the borrower, or by the lender.
Quest. What are the things done by the borrower, that tend to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ Two things epecially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; the not returning, or not restoring a∣gaine the thing borrowed to the lender as it ought to bee re∣turned or restored, which is done three waies. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by not returning,2 King. 6.5. Psal. 37.21. Pro. 3.27. Rom. 13.8. or not restoring the thing borowed to the lender at all when the borrower: doth keepe backe the thing borrowed from the lender altogether, and doth not meane to returne or to restore it to him or her of whom he hat borrowed it, if he can retaine it. Quest. Wht is the second way by which the borrower doth not returne, or not restore againe the thing borrowed to the lender, as it ought to be returned or restored? Answ. This; by not returning, or not restoring the thing borrowed to the lender in due time, and at the time appoin∣ted for the returning and restoring of it; but keeping it o∣uer and aboue that time, without the consent of the lender: when the borrower doth keepe the thing borrowed longer thn the ime appointed, for the returning and restoring of it, and doth deferre and put off the lender, he requiring the thing lent, from day to day, and from time to time, and it may be driues the lender to recouer it by Law, which was lent in loue. The Iewes had a Law that the debter that did de∣fer to pay his debt, should bee sould, and himselfe, wife and children should become slaues to the Creditor, as appares 2 King. 4.1 Pro 3.28. Quest: What is the third way by which the borrower doth not returne nor restore againe the thing borrowed to the lender, as it ought to be returned or restored? Answ: This; by not returning, or not restoring againe to the lender the thing borrowed, which is spent in the vse of it, as Wine, Bere, Bread, Flsh and such like; both as much and euery way as good as was lent in the same kind, or by not returning or restoring the thing borrowed
which is not spent in the vse of it, whether it be a liuing thing, as a Seruant, an Hors, an Oxe, or the like: or a ting without life, as Money, Garments, Hushold stuffe; an Ar∣tificers Toole, Instrument or Vessell, or such like, both as much and euery way as good as it was lent: but either lesse or worse money then was lent, wittingly and wilingly, as Bankerupts, who sometimes breake that they may escape by paying halfe or a quarter of their debt:Exod. 22.14. 2 Kings 4.7. or other things hurt or spoyled, or any way in worse case then they were lent through the borrowers want of care and good vsage of them, without offer of du satisfaction for the dammage, and with∣out making due satisfaction, being required. Quest. What is the ground of this, that the borrower is to re∣store the thing borrowed as good as it came to his hands, or if it be hurt or spoyled through his negligence or want of care and good vsage, that he is to make satisfaction for the dammage? Answ. This; because the borrower only receiues benefit by the thing lent, so long as he hath the vse of it; there∣fore he is in equitie bound to make it good, in regard of the least fault that shall come to it thorow his want of care and good vsage. Quest. What if the borrower be by the immediate hand of God, not by any negligence or default of his, disabled and cannot returne the Money or other thing he hath borrowed: what is hee then to doe? Pou. 6.3. Math. 18.26.Answ. He is then to humble himselfe to the lener, and to request him to be fauourable to him, and to purpose restitu∣tion, and to promise payment whensoeuer God shall make him able; and if God make him able, to performe it. Quest. What if the lender be dead, and none appointed to re∣quire the Money or other thing in the borrowers hand, nor a∣ny order left to exact it: what is the borower then to doe? Numb. 57.8. Dan. 4.24. Luke 19.8.Answ. The borrower is then to returne the Money, or o∣ther thing borrowed, to the Children of the lender, if hee haue Chilren; if he haue none, to the next of his kindred, or for want of such, if they cannot bee found, then to the Church, or to the pore. Quest. What is the second thing done by the borower that tends
to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. This; the borrowing of any thing especially money, either to ill ends and purposes, or after an vnlawfull manner. Quest. How doth the borrower borrow a thing, especially mo∣ney, to ill ends and purposes? Answ. Thus; when hee borroweth either to maintaine himselfe in pride, riot or excesse: or he borroweth that by the thing borrowed, he may hurt or wrong another or others in his or their wealth and outward estate: as when one hath sufficient meanes of his owne to mannage his trade, so as hee may liue well by his trading, and gaine and thriue by it, yet borroweth that he may haue wherewith to ouersway others of the same Trade, and to keepe them vnder, that hee alone may come forward in wealth,Isai. 5.8. Hab. 2.6.9.10. and others may either stand at a stay or goe backwards: this is the euill eye, Pro. 28.22.Pro. 28.22. when a man thinkes all lost that comes not to his purse. Quest. How doth the borrower borrow a thing especially mo∣ney, after an vnlawfull manner? Answ. Thus; when he borroweth it on vsurie, that is, so as he couenanteth with the lender to returne to him, not only the thing lent in the full quantitie of it, but something ouer and aboue only in liew and recompence of the lending of it: Ierem. 15.10. I haue neither lent on vsurie (saith the Pro∣phet) nor men haue lent vnto me on vsurie, yet euery one doth curse me. Implying that if he had done either, there had been iust cause why he should be euill thought of. Borrowing on vsurie, doth not hurt or hinder the borrowers wealth or outward good estate, he being a tradesman: and ha∣uing a good trade, he may vse the thing borrowed so as hee may giue vse for the loane of it, and yet gaine by it: there∣fore it seemes not vnlawfull for such an one to borrow on Vsurie. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; though the borrower on vsurie, may so vse the thing borrowed as he is able to giue vse for the loane of it, and yet gaine by it: yet he gets that gaine out of those
with him,Deut. 23.19. Nehem. 5.10.11. Psalm. 15.5. Prou. 28.8. to returne to him not only the thing lent in full number, weight and measure, and the full summe and quan∣titie of it, but also an ouerplus, and something ouer and a∣boue only in liew and recompence of his lending. Exod. 22.25. If thou lend money to my people (that is) to the poore with thee, thou shalt not be as an vsurer vnto him, yee shall not oppresse him with vsurie: only the lending on vsurie which is biting and oppressing is forbidden. Therefore not simply all lending on vsurie. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the words are  yee shall not impose vsurie on him, and all vsurie imposed on the poore and needy is oppression of them; yea all lending on vsurie, whether to the rich or to the poore is biting, and what soeuer is lent on vsurie is called a biter, and is said to bite. Deut. 23.19. Thou shalt not giue to vsurie to thy brother: as v∣surie of money, vsurie of meate, vsurie of any thing that is put to vsurie or which biteth,  so the Hebrew phrase signifieth euery thing or any thing which biteth. Againe, any addition or encrease aboue the thing lent, re∣quired by couenant is condemned Ezech. 18.13.17. Exod. 22.25. and Leuit 25.35.36. Lending on vsurie to the poore, is forbidden, therefore it seemes lawfull to lend on vsurie to the rich. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the consequence is not good, Pro. 22.22. we are forbidden to robbe the poore, because he is poore, wee may not thereupon inferre: therefore we may robe the rich, because he is rich: and Deut. 23.19. no mention is made of the poore, but vsurie is forbidden towards a brother whether he be rich or poore. Deut. 23.20. To a stranger thou maist lend vpon vsurie, there∣fore lending on vsurie may be practised to some, and so it is not simply vnlawfull. Quest. How is this to be answered? An. Thus; the word  there vsed signifies not any stran∣ger whatsoeuer, but that stranger or this stranger, that is
the remnant of the Canaanites whom the Lord had appointed to be rooted out, and would haue by little and little consu∣m d: & the people of God might then lawfully vse the Sword against them, and kill them and therefore they might then al∣so lawfully keepe them vnder with vsurie, and so that place makes nothing to proue Vsurie lawfull. The Law that forbids Vsurie is not morall but a iudiciall Law amongst the Iewes, and therefore it belongs not to vs. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; If it were a iudiciall Law among the Iewes,Ezech. 18.10.11.12.13. Ezech. 22.6.1 the equity of it is perpetuall, and belongs to vs. Againe, Vsurie is reckoned amongst the transgressions of the morall Law, yea among the abominations, great and grieuous transgressions of Gods Law; as Idolatrie, Murther, Incest, and the like. The Apostles of Christ reckoning vp particular sinnes in the New Testament, neuer once make mention of vsurie: therefore it seemes not to be altogether vnlawfull. Quest. How is this to be answered? Ans. Thus; the argument is not good, being drawne from one part of Scripture negatiuely: it is sufficient that vsurie is forbidden in the Old Testament, and there recko∣ned vp among the breaches of the morall law of God, which is common and perpetuall. And againe, the Apostle reckoning vp many particular sinnes, Galath 5.19.20.21. concludes with these words and such like, thereby implying all other breaches of the morall Law of God. Mat. 25.27. Thou oughtest therefore to haue put my money to the exchangers, and then at my comming should I haue recei∣ued mine owne with aduantage. Christ heere saith the sloath∣full seruant should haue put forth his Masters money to the exchangers, that his Master at his comming might haue re∣ceiued his owne with vsurie: and therefore he is so farr from condemning vsurie, as he approues of it. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Christ there speakes by way of similitude, and his similitude is not to bee pressed further then the pur∣pose
sinne of vsurie, and lending with a couenant for gaine, which derogates from the wisedome of God and his prouidence in ordering and dispo∣sing of things, but I passe by them. Quest. Is only Money lent after an vnlawfull manner, name∣ly on Vsurie? Leuit. 25.37. Deut. 23.19.Answ. No; meate and other things may be lent on vsury, and not money alone, and whatsoeuer is lent, being a thing that encreaseth not, or yeelds no fruitfull vse arising out of the nature of it, with a couenant of gaine in liew of the len∣ding of it, without any labour, cost, or hazard of the lender, is lent on vsurie. Quest. Is all increase receiued on the lending of money or the like things, altogether vnlawfull? Answ. No; there be some particular cases wherein a man may lawfully receiue increase, on the lending of his money, or the like things. Quest. What are those particular cases? Answ. They are three especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; when the encrease and an ouerplus is freely giuen him, by an able and willing borrower; that is such an encrease as is neither couenanted for, nor intended, nor re∣quired by him for his loane, but is giuen by the borrower freely,Pro. 18.24. Coloss. 3.15. 2 Tim. 3.2. and only in way of thankefulnesse to requite his cour∣tesie; the borrower hauing found benefit by the thing lent to him, for vnthankfulnesse is abhorred of all, and both the Law of Nature and the Word of God, requires to doe good for good. Quest. May not the lender couenant with the borrower con∣ditionally, to haue part of the gaine arising out of the vse of the thing lent to him, if he doe gaine by it? Answ. No, he may not: a man putting money or the like thing into another mans hands, may couenant with him to haue part of the gaine arising out of the vse of it, if he do also couenant with him to beare his part of the losse he shall su∣stain without his default: for that is properly patnership, and not lending.
Quest. What is the second case wherein a man may lawfully receiue increase on the lending of his money, or other like thing? Answ. This; when encrease and an ouerplus is giuen him in way of recompence and satisfaction, for that certaine and apparant losse which he hath sustained after the time appoin∣ted, when the borrower should returne the money, or other thing lent to him, and he doth not, but either out of his neg∣ligence or his vnfaithfulnesse makes delay and returnes it not; and so by his delay is the effectuall cause of the len∣ders hinderance or losse: for in all equitie he that is the ef∣fectuall cause of another mans certaine losse, is bound (if he bee able) to make recompence, 2 Cor. 8.13, 14. In giuing,2 Cor. 8.13.14 the receiuer is not to be eased, and the giuer grieued, and so in lending. Quest. What if the lender be willing to forbeare the borrower for a time after the money or other thing that hee hath lent is due to him, and doe then voluntarily incurre some losse, may the lender take recompense for that losse? Answ. No, he may not; recompense may be taken by the lender when he forbeares against his will, and when hee su∣staines ceraine and vnauoydable losse or hinderance onely through the borrowers default. Exod. 21.18, 19.Exod. 21.18.19 allowance is not to bee made for a mans voluntary ceasing from his worke, but when hee ceaseth against his will, hauing beene smitten and wounded by another man, so that hee cannot worke: and so in the case of lending. Quest. VVhat is the third case wherein a man may lawfully receiue increase on the lending of his money, or the like thing? Answ. This; when increase and an ouerplus is giuen him on his true aduenture proportionable to his hazard, hee ha∣uing indeed and truth, and directly, and not in pretence on∣ly aduentured and hazarded his money or goods in the hands of the borrower, the borrower hauing vsed it, and gained by it, hee may then lawfully take part of the gaine, it is cast on him by the good prouidence of God. Iudges. 11.23, 24. 1 Sam. 2.7.Iudg. 11.23.24. 1 Sam. 2.7. as when one deliuers to a Marchant, who is to go beyond the seas a summe of money or goods for him to vse and manage as hee shall thinke fit for his aduantage, condi∣tioning
Answ. They are things done either by the hirer, or by the letter of things to hire. Quest. What are the things done by the hyrer, that tend to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or persons one or more? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; the not returning of the thing hired as it ought to bee returned. Quest. How is that done? Answ. Thus; when the hyrer either returnes not the thing that he hath hyred at all: as hauing hyred an horse to ride on to a certaine place, he rideth quite away with him; or not at the time appoynted for the returne of it, but he wittingly & purposely keepes it ouer and aboue that time, without the consent of the letter, or not in the state that hee receiued it, but either hurt or spoyled through his owne default, without making due satisfaction for that hurt or spoyle: as when one hauing hyred ground, makes waste on it, or weares out the heart of it:Pro. 3.27. Act. 28.30. or hauing hyred an house, doth deface it or spoile it, or let it runne to ruine carelessely, and makes it vn∣tenantable; or hauing hyred an horse or the like, doth ouer-labour the beast, or willingly so hurt it, as it is lamed or spoi∣led, or such like. Quest. What if the thing hyred be hurt or spoyled, or perish in the hands of the hyrer without his default; is then the hyrer to to make it good? Answ. No, he is not; because as the letter retaines the pro∣pertie of that which is let:Exod. 22.15. so he is also to beare the hazard of it: and if it miscarry without the hyrers default, it mis∣carries to the letter, and not to the hyrer: he is onely then to pay the hyre of it. Quest. What is the second thing done by the hyrer, that tends to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. The not paying of the hyre agreed on betweene him and the letter,Rom. 1.30. Leuit. 19.13. Deut. 24.14.15 as it ought to be paid for the thing hyred, whether it bee a thing to bee vsed, as house, shop, chamber,
land, or the like, or a mans labour, but either withholding it,Iob. 7.2. Iere. 22.13. Mat. 3.5. Iam. 5.4. Gen. 31.42. or changing it, or not paying of it in due time. Quest. What are the things done by the letter of things to hyre, that tends to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and out∣ward good estate of some particular person or persons one or more? Answ. Three things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; the letting of a thing to hyre at an vnrea∣sonable rate; which is done either directly, or indirectly, and vnder a colour. Quest. How is a thing let to hyre at an vnreasonable rate di∣rectly? Answ. Thus; when it is let for more then can bee raysed and made of the vse of it in the iudgment of any that knowes and is able to iudge of it: as when the Land-lord racketh his rents, and raiseth them to such a rate, or taketh such excessiue Fines, as that the Tenant by all his care, labour and paines, and by his stocke on the land, house, shop, or such like, can∣not make his owne, or liue by it: or when a man lets his cattell, their young ones, their milke, their labour in draw∣ing, and such like, for more then can be made of the vse of them in any mans iudgement who is able to iudge:Isai. 3.14.15. Amos. 8.4. Mica. 3.3. this is to eate vp the vineyard, and to spoyle the poore, and to grinde the faces of the poore, and to make the needie of the land to faile, and to eate the flesh of the poore. Quest. How is a thing let to hyre at an vnreasonable rate in∣directly and vnder a colour? Answ. Thus; when it is let for an indifferent rate in re∣spect of the vse of the thing it selfe, yet so as the letter will not stand to the hazard of it, but makes the hyrer couenant with him absolutely, to make the thing hyred good to him at all times without any allowance, in respect of any casual∣tie that shall come, though the thing hyred being subiect to many casualties, doe perish without his default. For exam∣ple, a man lets another three, foure, or more Kine, to finde them meate, and to haue the milke of them at such a rate, for a yeare, or more or lesse time; yet so, as hee bindes the hyrer that he shall from time to time make good to him the number
of his kine,1 Thess. 2.5. if any of them die, and shall returne to him at the time appoynted either the same kine or others in full num∣ber, and in as good plight as they were deliuered: this is to let them at an vnreasonable rate indirecty;1 Thess. 4.6. and this is coloured couetousness, and defrauding of a poore brother. Quest. What is the second thing done by the letter of things to hyre, that tends to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth & outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. This; the letting of a thing to hyre of worse qua∣litie then is pretended: as when the letter lets that to the hy∣rer for his vse, which he knowes will not serue his turne: for example,Rom. 1.29. 1 Thess. 4.6. an Horse to ride on to a certaine place, which hee knowes will faile him before hee comes thither: this is de∣ceit, one of the sinnes of the Heathen, who were giuen vp to a reprobate sense, Rom. 1.29. and this is circumuenting and de∣frauding of a brother. 1 Thess. 4.6. Quest. What is the third thing done by the letter of things to hire, that tends to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth & outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. This; the withholding from the hyrer the vse of the thing let to him to hyre, either in whole or in part: as when one hauing let house, shop, land, and such like, he takes away and withholds from the hyrer the vse of it in whole or in part,Isai. 16.14. Ephes. 6.6. Coloss. 3.22. Gen. 31.40. before the time appoynted be come that it should re∣turne to him: or when a seruant or labourer withholds his seruice or labour from him who hath hyred him in whole or in part, in the time that hee is hyred, as by loytering, and by neglecting his seruice and labour. Quest. What are the things done in pawning, and in taking things to pawne, that tend to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. They are things done either by the pawner, by the partie who layes things to pawn: or by the party who takes any things to pawne. Quest. VVhat are the things done by the pawner, by the partie who layeth things to pawne, that tend to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more?
Answ. Three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; the pawning of such things as ought not to be laid to pawne; as when one pawneth his life,Exod. 22.26.27. Deut. 24 6.12.13. or the life of another, as Reuben did, Gen. 42.37.Gen. 42.37. or, as when one pawneth his owne wearing clothes, which are for his present vse, ha∣uing no other to couer his nakednesse withall, and to keepe his body from the iniury of weather: or hauing wife and children, hee pawneth the wearing clothes of his wife or children, which are for their present vse, hauing no other to couer their nakedness, and to keepe their bodies from the in∣iury of weather: or when one pawneth such tooles and instruments as hee hath for his necessary and present vse to worke withall, and to earne his maintenance: for that which may not be taken to pawne, may not be laid to pawne. Quest. What is the second thing done by the pawner, by the partie who layeth things to pawne, that tends to the hurt or hin∣derance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. This; the pawning of things to ill ends and purpo∣ses: as when one layes a thing to pawn that he may compasse and effect some wicked purpose; or that he may haue where∣with to follow his riot and excesse, his drunkennes, and ther∣by wronging wife, children, and those that depend vpon him. Gene. 38.17, 18. Pro. 11.29.Gen. 38.17.18. Pro. 11.29. He that troubleth his owne house, that is, afflicts them with misery, shall inherit the wind, bring all to nothing. 1 Tim. 5.8.1 Tim. 5.8. If not to prouide, bee to denie the faith, then much more to trouble, spoyle, robbe, and de∣stroy the family. Quest. What is the third thing done by the pawner, by the partie who layeth things to pawne, that tends to the hurt or hin∣derance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. This;Gen 38.20. Nehem .3.4.5. the not fetching home of his pawne at the time appoynted for the redeeming of it, by doing that which ought to be done for the redemption of it, being able to redeeme it; but letting it still lie in the hands of the partie to whom it is pawned, to his losse or hindrance for then he is
Quest. VVhat is the third thing done by the partie who ta∣keth things to pawne, that tends to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and outward good estate of some particular person or per∣sons, one or more? Exod. 22.26.27 Deut. 24.12. Ezech. 18.7.12.16. Ezech. 33.15.Answ. This; the not returning and not restoring the pawne at the time appoynted for the returne of it, as it ought to bee returned: as when the partie who hath the pawne either keepes it backe from the pawner altogether, or makes delayes, and puts him off from time to time, though the time appointed for the returne of it be come, and though the pawner be ready and willing to doe that which ought to bee done for the redemption of it. Quest. VVhat are the things done out of the matter of con∣tract, that tend to the hurt or hinderance of the wealth and out∣ward good estate of some particular person or persons, one or more? Answ. Two things; either vniust taking away of that wealth or any part of it, that belongs to another or others, one or more; or the conspiring with those who vniustly take a∣way the wealth or any part of it that belongs to another or others, one or more. Of these in order. Quest. How is that wealth or any part of it that belongs to another or others, one or more vniustly taken away? Answ. Three wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. By open violence and force. Quest. How is open violence and force exercised on that wealth or any part of it that belongs to another or to others, one more? Answ. Two wayes. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Exod. 22.2. 1 Sam. 2.15.16 Luk. 3.14.Answ. This; by laying violent and strong hand on that wealth which belongs to another or to others, one or more, or on any part of it, whether by sea or by land, and taking it to ones selfe as a prey: when one will haue it be∣cause hee will, though hee can alledge no shaddow of right or title to it, and takes it away by force as a prey, and as a bootie for his owne vse, as those doe who rob by the
high wayes, or breake into houses or ground, or as Pyats do on the sea. Quest. May not a man being imployed in publike seruice by sea, or by land, for the repelling or repressing of Pyrates or of common professed enemies of the Countrey where hee dwelles or abides, lay strong hands on the wealth of a Pyrate, or on the wealth of a common professed enemy of that Countrey, and (if he can) lawfully take it to himselfe as a prey, and as a bootie for his owne vse? Answ. If hee be either commanded, or leaue bee granted to him by the Prince, Lieutenant Generall, Captaine, or Gouernour vnder whom hee is, to take what hee can get from a Pyrate, or from a common and notorious enemie, hee may: if not, then the spoyle gotten from a Pyrate,1 Sam. 30.20.21. to the end. or from a common enemie, is to bee brought to the chiefe Gouernour whatsoeuer hee bee, and by him it is to bee dis∣posed proportionably according to euery mans seruice and worthinesse. Quest. What is the second way by which open violence and force is exercised on that wealth or on any part of it, that belongs to another or to others, one or more? Ans. By making hauocke and spoile of the wealth which belongs to an other or to others, one or more,Exod. 22.5.6. 2 Sam. 14.30. or of any part of it meerely of euill will and enuie, or of meere delight in mischiefe, without any profit or benefit to the spoy∣ler: as when one sets fire on an other mans House or Corne, or doth hurt, maime, or spoyle any of his Cat∣tell, or layes open his fence purposely, that Cattell may goe into his ground and spoyle his grasse, or his Corne, or the like. Quest. What is the second way by which that wealth or any part of it that belongs to another or others, one or more, is vniustly taken away? Answ. This; by secret and priuy stealth. Quest. How is that wealth or any part of it that belongs to an other or others, one or more, taken away by secret and priuy stealth? Answ. Three wayes especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those?
Exod. 2. 1. Iosh. 7.21. Iob. 24.14. Zh. 5.3.4. 1 Thess. 5.2 Reuel. 3.3.Answ. This; by pilfering, conuaying, and secret carry∣ing away that wealth which belongs to another or to others, one o more, or any part of it: as when one secretly either in the night, or in the darke, or in a secret place, where no eye of man can see, layes theeuish hands on that thing which his Coscience tells him hee hath no right to, but it belongs altogether to another. Quest. What is the second way by which that wealth or any part of it that belongs to another or others, one or more, is taken away by secret and priuy stealth? Luk 16.1. Tit. 2.1. Philm. .11.Answ. This; by secet and vniust wasting and consuming, and drawing fom that wealth which belongs to another or to others, one or more, or any part of it, being such as one may come to without suspition: as when a seruant doth se∣cretly waste and consume and draw from the wealth of his Master which hee hath vnder his hands, and may come to without suspition. Quest. When is secret and vniust wasting and consuming, and drawing from that wealth which belongs to another or others, one or more, being such as one may come to without suspition, most vile and most odious? Iudg. 17.2. Pro. 28.24.Ans. When children deale so with their parents, as when children doe spend their parents goods riotously; or doe care∣lessely, or by some ill meanes runne themselues into debt and then make their parents pay it; or as Lords ouer the goods of their parents, doe what they list with them. Quest. What is the third way by which that wealth or any part of it that belongs to another or others, one or more, is taken away by secret and priuie stealth? Answ. Thus; by secret incroaching on another mans wealth or possession,Deu. 19.14. Deut. 27.17. Pro. 22.28. as when one doth deceitfully remooue the bounds, and displaceth the land-markes of his neigh∣bour, to enlarge his owne bounds; or when one doth change the marke of his neighbours cattell, his sheepe, his oxen, hor∣ses; or of his pewter, or linnen, or the like, and put his owne marke in stead of his neighbours. Quest. When is secret incroaching on another mans wealth or possession most vile, and most odious?
Answ.Pro. 23.10. Pro. 22.22.23. When a man doh encroach on the wealth or pos∣session of the fatherlesse and helplesse, and of such as are without the helpe and defence of man. Quest, VVhat is the third way by which that wealth or any part of it t ongs to another or others, one or more, is vniustly taken away? Answ. This; by fraud and deceit. Quest. How is fraud and deceite vsed in taking away that wealth or any part of it, that belongs to another or others, one or more? Answ. Either in respect of the persons, or in regard of the things that belong to another or others, one or more. Quest. How is deceit and fraud vsed in respect of the persons that belong to another or others, one or more? Answ. Thus; by alluring,Exod. 21.16. Deut. 24.7. 1 Tim. 1.10. and by entising away by word or deed, as by perswasion, or by gifts, any person or persons that belong to another or others, one or more, as the childe or the seruant of another or others, one or more. Quest. How is deceit and fraud vsed in regard of the things that belong to another or others, one or more? Answ. Seuen wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by peruerting the Law,Exod. 23.6.8. Deut. 16.19. 1 Sam. 8.3. Pro. 17.23. Isai. 1.23. or corrupting Iudg∣ment in cases touching lands or goods: as when a Lawyer or a Iudge doe wrest the Law, and giue false Sentence or Iudgement, touching lands or goods, for friendship or for bribes. Quest. VVhen is the peruerting of the Lawe, or cor∣rupting Iudgement case touching Lands, most vile and most odious? Answ. When it is done vnder colour of Equitie, Con∣science, and Religion, and those things are pretended in the doing of it. Thus it was with Ahab and Iezabel, 1 Kings 21.8, 9. &c. to 17.1 King. 21.8.9. &c. to 17. Quest. VVhat is the second way by which deceit and fraud is vsed in respect of things that belong to another or others, one or more?
Answ. This; by vsing and practising vnlawfull Arts and courses to get that wealth,Deut. 18.10.11 Ephes. 4.28. or any part of it that belongs to another or others, one or more; as Iuggling, Char∣ming, Coniuring, Witch-craft, and Sorcerie, playing the Wiseman, Fortune-telling, Stage-plain, Fencing, carrying about Apes and Beares, Fidling and Piping vp and downe the Countrey, pretending to be Egyptians, and the like, mentioned in the Statute of this land touching Rogues, Anno 39. Elizabethae. Quest. VVhat is the third way by which fraude and deceit is vsed, in respect of the things that belong to another or others, one or more? Answ. This; by false dealing in matters of trust, tou∣ching lands or goods:Exod. 22.7.8. Leuit. 6.2.3.4. Galat. 3.15. 1 Tim. 6.20. as when Factors deale falsly with those who trust them with their goods; or when such as haue things left with them to keepe for a time, either deny the things, or hide them, or conuay them out of the way, or doe any way withhold them at the time when they should returne them to the owners; or when Executors doe falsifie the Will of the dead, and withhold Legacies from those to whom they are giuen, or doe any way defraud Orphans of their porti∣ons in whole or in part; or when Gardians and Feoffees in trust, doe falsifie the trust reposed in them, in things commit∣ted to them in trust. Quest. VVhat is the fourth way by which fraud and deceit is vsed, in respect of things that blong to another or others, one or more? Exod. 23.4. Leuit. 6.3.4. Deut. 22.1.2.3.Answ. This; by concealing things strayed or found, and keeping them, and withholding them from the right owner being knowne. Quest. VVhat is the fifth way by which fraud and deceit is vsed, in respect of the things that belong to another or others, one or more? Pro. 13.7. 2 Thess. 3.10. 1 Tim. 5.16.Answ. This; by pretending pouertie and want without iust cause, and by taking Almes when men or women haue no need; whereby they doe defraud the poore, and take that which belongs to such as are truely poore. Prou. 13.7. Thus doe they who are lustie and strong, and yet
wander vp and downe. 2 Thess. 3.10. 1 Tim. 5.16. Quest. VVhat is the sixt way by which fraud and deceit is vsed, in respect of the things that belongs to another or others, one or more? Answ. This; by gaming for money and gaine, especial∣ly at vnlawfull games, as Cards, Dice, and such like; by dea∣ling falsely, as cogging, or vsing false shifts in gaming: for gaming for money and gaine is both vniust, the looser is vn∣iustly dispossessed of his money, and the winner is wrong∣fully possessed of it; and also a thing of ill report, and therefore ought not to bee vsed, Philip. 4.8. and gaming for money and gaine is a peruerting of the end of lawfull ga∣ming, which ought to bee onely the refreshing of the body or minde. Quest. Is it simply vnlawfull to play for any money at all, the game being lawfull? Answ. No; if the play bee for a small matter, the losse whereof is no hurt to him that looseth it, and if it bee ap∣plyed to a common good, and bee bestowed in some honest meeting for the increase of loue, then it is lawfull: other∣wise not. Quest. VVhat is the seuenth way by which fraud and deceit is vsed, in respect of the things that belong to another or others, one or more? Answ. This; by vsing deuices and subtilties of wit, to get that wealth or any part of it that belongs to an other or others, one or more; as lying, vsing another mans name,Gen. 27.19. 2 King. 5.22. pretending skill to doe an other good by Physicke, or the like, or any manner of cousenage, which is common∣ly called Coney-catching, or Cheating, or liuing by mens wits. Wee reade Genesis 30. from verse 37. to the end, that Iacob vsed a cunning deuice, namely, of pilled and straked roddes layd before the Sheepe in Ramming-time, to deceiue Laban, and to inrich himselfe. Therefore it seemes law∣full sometimes to vse deuices and subtilties of wit to get that wealth or some part of it, that belongs to another or o∣thers, one or more.
Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; that which Iacob did in laying pilled or stra∣ked rods before the sheepe, hee did it by Gods appoyntment and direction, Gen. 31.9, 10, 11, 12.en. 31.9,0, 11, 12. And againe, the meanes hee vsed was not artificiall or fraudulent, but naturall; not depending on mans skill, but on Gods blessing: and God gaue an extraordinarie blessing to the meanes, thereby to recompence Iacobs sore labours, whome Laban would haue sent away emp∣tie, had not God so prouided for him, Gene. 31 40, 41, 42. And therefore that fact of Iacob will not warrant vsing of deuices and subtilties of wit to get that wealth or some part of it, that belongs to another or others, one or more. Quest. How doe men or women conspire with those who vn∣iustly take away that wealth or any part of it that belongs to an∣other or others, one or more? Answ. Foure wayes especially. Quest. Which is the first of those? Pro. 1.11.12.13.14. Psal. 64.5.Answ. This; by counselling, perswading, comman∣ding, or by hyring, or any way plotting with another or o∣thers, to take away that wealth or any part of it, that be∣longs to another or others, one or more, by any vniust way or meanes. Quest. What is the second way by which men or women doe conspire with those who vniustly take away that wealth or any part of it, that belongs to another or others, one or more? Psal. 50.18. Ephes. 5.11.Answ. This; by being present with them when they doe vniustly take away that wealth, or any part of it that belongs to another or others, one or more, and consenting to them by silence, and not reprouing of them. Quest. What is the third way by which men or women do con∣spire with those who vniustly take away that wealth, or any part of it, that belongs to another or others, one or more? Answ. This; by receiuing and harbouring of them, who haue vniustly taken, away that wealth, or any part of it,Pro. 29.24. 1 Tim. 5.22. that belongs to another or others, one or more, and hiding and concealing them, and pleading for them, and by
receiuing and hiding, and concealing the things thy haue vniustly taken away, Pro. 29.24. therein they pertake with them in their sinne which the Apostle forbids. 1 Tim. 5.22. Quest. What is the fourth way by which men or women doe conspire with those who vniustly take away that wealth or any part of it, that belongs to another or others, one or more? Answ. This; by fauouring, and by vpholding those who vniustly take away that wealth, or any part of it that be∣longs to another or others, one or more by impunity:Isai. 1.23. Rom. 1.31. as when such as haue power to punish them, doe either suffer them to escape vnpunished, or doe punish them very slightly: or by feeding and cloathing stout and lusty rogues, or beg∣gers and the like. Now to the Affirmatiue part of this eight Com∣mandement. Quest: What doth the eight Commandement require? Answ. In generall; euery thing whatsoeuer that tends to the helpe or furtherance of the wealth and outward good estate of man. Quest. What are the things that tend to the helpe and out∣ward good estate of man? Answ: Either things inward in the heart, or outward things. Quest. What are the things inward in the heart, that tend to the helpe or furtherance of the wealth and outward good estate of man? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; a stayednesse of minde, and a setled purpose in the heart of man or woman,Mat. 6.32. 1 Tim. 6.9. to seeke riches and outward good things only so farre as they may in the vse of lawfull meanes, and may looke for the blessing of God on their en∣deauours; and so farre as the Lord shall be pleased to offer them matter, and to giue them iust occasion so to doe, and no further. Mat. 6.23. All these things the Gentiles  seeke, that is set themselues to seeke, or seeke with all their might. 1 tim 6.9. they that wil be rich () they that purpose and resolue with themselues they will haue abun∣dance
fall into temptation, and the snare of the deuill. Quest. What is the second thing inward in the heart, that tends to the helpe or furtherance of the wealth and outward good estate of man? Eccles. 4.8. Mat. 6.11. Philip. 4.11. 1 Tim. 6.6.7.8. Heb. 13.5.Answ. This; a contentednesse of minde, with that part and portion of wealth, and of outward good things, whether it be little or much which God hath allotted: when a man or a woman is well pleased, and likes well of that portion of wealth whatsoeuer it be, which God is pleased to giue to him or her. Quest. What is the ground of contentednesse of minde, with that portion of wealth and outward good things which God hath allotted to any? Mat. 6.25.26. &c. to the end. Heb. 13.5. &c. the last words.Answer. This; a resting by faith on the promise of God, and a depending on his prouidence without distrust∣full care. Quest. What are the outward things that tend to the helpe or furtherance of the wealth and outward good estate of man? Answ. Either such things as tend to the helpe or furthe∣rance of a man or a womans owne wealth and outward good estate: or such things as tend to the helpe or furtherance of the wealth and outward good estate of another or others, one or more. Quest. What are things that tend to the helpe or furthe∣rance of a man or a womans owne wealth and outward good estate? Answ. Things that concerne either the getting of wealth, or the keeping of it, or the vsing of it. Of these in order. Quest. What are the outward things concerning the getting of wealth, that tend to the helpe or furtherance of a man or a wo∣mans owne wealth, and outward good estate? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; an honest and lawfull particular calling, wherein euery one of yeares is to walke, and to be imployed Eccles 1.13. Mark. 6.3. Christ liued with Joseph in the cal∣ling of a Carpenter till the time of his Baptisme.Ephes. 4.18.
Quest. Is it a sufficient personall calling to attend on the per∣son of another, as those doe we call seruing men, or no? Answ. To wait and to attend on the person of another, vn∣lesse it be on the person of a Prince, or on the person of a man of great place and state, is not a sufficient calling: besides the office of wayting on the person of a man or woman of inferiour place, there must be some other particular calling: as Butler, Cooke, Horse-keeper, or the like. Acts. 10.7. Cornelius his wayting man was also a Souldier by his calling. Quest. What is the second outward thing concerning the getting of wealth that tends to the helpe or furtherance of a man or a womans owne wealth and outward good estate?Gen. 3.19. Psal. 128.2. Pro. 10.4. Pro. 13.4. Pro. 22.29. 2 Thess. 3.10. Gen. 31.40. Answ. This; diligence and painefulnesse, and faithfull labour in that honest particular calling, wherein a man or a woman is set: euery one being able to take paines, man or woman must be diligent and painefull in the labour, and in the duties that belong to his or her particular calling. A man hath great Lands and liuing, by which he can main∣taine himselfe without any particular calling, and without labour and paines in any calling. Quest. Is such an one bound to haue a particular calling, and to be imployed in it with diligence and painefulnesse? Answ. Yes, being able he is and must, not withstanding his Lands and liuing, walke in some honest particular cal∣ling, either in the Church or common wealth, and be diligent in it: Adam in his innocency had all things at his will, and wanted nothing, yet then God imployed him in a particular calling. Gen. 2.15. Question. What are the outward things concerning the keeping of wealth that tend to the helpe or furtherance of a man or a womans owne wealth and outward good estate? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; frugalitie or thriftiness, a man or a woman must haue a care to saue that wealth which God hath giuē to him or her, looking warily to it that nothing be lost or perish
through their default:Deut. 26.15. Pro. 27.23.24. Ioh. 6.12. and ordering of all things to the best, for the increase of it by honest and lawfull meanes. Quest. What is the second outward thing concerning the kee∣ping of wealth, that tends to the helpe or furtherance of a man or a womans owne wealth and outward good estate? Answ. This; peaceablenesse: a man or a woman must haue a care to keepe and hold his or her owne wealth with peace,Gen. 13.8. 1 Cor. 6.5.6. avoyding law and contentions as much as is possible, some∣times putting vp wrongs and departing from their owne right for peace sake. Quest. What are the outward things concerning the vsing of wealth, that tend to the helpe or furtherance of a man or a womans owne wealth, and outward good estate? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? 1 King. 10.5. Psal. 112.5. Pro. 13.23. Pro. 24.3.4. Pro. 31.15.21.Answ. This; a wise, conuenient and seasonable dispen∣sing of that wealth which God hath giuen to any, to the ho∣nest maintenance of themselues and families, (if they haue a familie:) a man or a woman hauing wealth and outward good things, must apply that wealth, and those outward good things with discretion, and seasonably according to the na∣ture of them, to the good of themselues, and of those that belong to them (if they haue any) that doe depend on them. Quest. What is the second outward thing concerning the vsing of wealth, that tends to the helpe or furtherance of a man or a wo∣mans owne wealth, and outward good estate? Answ. This; a moderation in spending that wealth which God hath giuen to any person:Pro. 21.17. Pro. 24.27. Luk. 14.28.29.30. Luke. 15.13. a man or a woman hauing wealth and outward good things, must order and limit their expences to the proportiō on their meanes, not liuing at an higher rate, exceeding measure in diet or apparell, or dri∣uing a greater Trade, or taking on them to compasse greater matters then their meanes will reach to. Quest. What are the outward things that tend to the helpe or furtherance of the wealth and outward good estate of another or others, one or more?
Answ. Foure things especially. 1. Iust dealing with another or others one or more, in respect of wealth, and outward good things. 2. Yeelding helpe to another o others one or more, in outward things, standing in neede of helpe that way. 3. Procuring the wealth of another or others, one or more. 4. Restoring of things vniustly gotten, or taken away from another or others, one or more. Of these in Order. Quest. Wherein stands iust dealing with another or others, one or more, in respect of wealth and outward good things? Answ. In foure things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in a willing yeelding of that which is due to euery one bearing office in the Church,Mat. 17.25. Mat. 22.21. Rom. 13.7. Mal. 3.8.9.10. or in the Com∣mon wealth; euery person man or woman being able, is wil∣lingly to yeeld that tribute and custome, and those tenthes and tythes, and other things that are due from them to euery one to whom they are due, bearing any publike office in the Church, or in the Common wealth. Quest. What is the second thing wherein iust dealing with an∣other or others one or more, in respect of wealth and outward good things standeth? Answ. This; in vsing truth and simplicity and plainnesse,Psal. 15.2. Leuit. 2.14. Pro. 20.14. Deut. 25.13.14.15. Pro. 11.1. Ezech. 45.10. both in word and deed, in bargayning, in buying and selling, and in hyring and letting: euery one man or woman must speake the truth in bargayning, not falsely, and contrary to to their owne knowledge, either commending or discom∣mending of the things they are about to buy, or sell, hyre or let: and they must deale simply, plainely and truly, both touching the matter, substance and quality: and for the number, waight and measure, of the things bargained for; with respect had to the profit one of the other, as to their owne. Quest. What is the third thing wherein iust dealing with an∣other or others, one or more, in respect of wealth and outward good things standeth?
Answ. This; in keeping of all iust and lawfull couenants in the matter of contract betweene person and person, or persons,Psal. 15.4. Pro. 28.20. Ezech. 17.15.16 Rom. 1.30. Couenant breakers. Gen. 31.41. Coloss. 4.1. one or more: as in buying and selling, in borrowing and lending, in hyring and in letting, in pawning and ta∣king things to pawne. A man or a woman must keepe and performe all iust couenants in matter of contract betweene them and another, one or more, though they be to their hin∣derance: thus masters are to keepe couenant with their ser∣uants, such as set others on worke, with their labourers. Quest: Is a man or a woman bound to keepe and performe a co∣uenant in matter of contract betweene them and another or others, one or more, into which they haue beene drawne by fraud and sub∣tilty, and by deceite, or no? Iosh. 9.18.19. 2 Sam. 21.1.2.Answ. If the couenant be lawfull and in their power to performe, they are to keepe it, vnlesse a release bee granted by the party or parties, with whom it is made. Quest. What is the fourth thing wherein iust dealing with another or others, one or more, in respect of wealth and outward good things standeth? Mat. 5.4.7. Luk. 6.33. Coloss. 3.15. 2 Tim. 3.2.Answ: This; a ready yeelding of that which is due to any person or persons by way of requital, a man or a woman hauing receiued friendship, or some good turne in outward good things, from another or others, one or more, must re∣turne the like if they bee able, and if neede bee to them of whom they receiue it. Quest. Wherein stands yeelding helpe to another or others, one or more, in outward things standing in neede of helpe that way? Answ. In two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those two things? Iob. 31.16.17.18.19.20. Psal. 12.9. Pro 31.20: Luk. 11.41. Act. 9.36. 1 Ioh. 3.17.Answ. This; in a ready and willing giuing to another or others, one or more, and communicating to their necessities in outward things: euery man or woman being able and ha∣uing wealth and outward good things of their owne must giue to others, and communicate to their necessities in re∣spect of outward things. It may be a man or a woman hath but a meere competency of outward things to supply the necessity of nature, and to maintaine the estate wherein they are.
Quest. Is such an one bound to communicate to the necessity of an other or others in outward things? Answ. Though they who abound in riches,1 Tim. 6.17.18 Luk. 3.11. Luk. 21.2.3.4. 2 Cor. 8.2.3. are principally bound to communicate to the necessity of others in out∣ward things, yet he or she that hath but a meere competency of outward things to supply the necessity of nature, must sometimes giue somthing out of it to relieue those who want necessaries belonging to nature. Quest. Is a man or a woman being in debt, bound to communi∣cate to the necessities of another or others, one or more, in outward things? Answ. If a man or a woman be indebted more then they are well able to pay, they are not, vnlesse it be in case of ex∣treame necessity: as when one is in danger to bee famished or starued, or in perill to be vtterly ouerthrowne in his whol estate: and then it must be with a purpose to make satisfacti∣on to their creditors to the vttermost of their power:Pro. 5.16.17. 1 Cor. 16.2. For a man or a woman must giue reliefe to others of that which is their owne. Quest. Is a woman of her selfe bound to communicate to the necessities of others in outward things? Answ. Of the things that she hath of her owne,Pro. 30.20. 1 Tim. 2.10. peculiarly belonging to her selfe, either by exception before marriage, or by graunt from her husband after marriage, shee is bound to communicate to the necessitie of others. But of the things that are common both to her husband and her selfe, she is not bound; neither may she communicate to the necessity of others, of those things without the consent of her husband, either in expresse words or in generall tearmes: as when her husband allowes her to giue,Ephes. 5.24. 1 Pet. 3.1. but meanes not any particular, vnlesse it be in some particular cases: for both the law of Nature, and the Word of God in∣ioynes her obedience to her Husband in all things honest, lawfull, or indifferent. Quest. What are those particular cases wherein the wife may communicate to the necessitie of others, of those goods that are common without the consent of the husband?
Answ. They are three especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; If the Husband be a foole or a mad man, and not able to mannage his estate,Psal. 112.5. for then he cannot order his giuing with discretion as he ought. Quest. What is the second case wherein the wife may commu∣nicate to the necessity of others, without the consent of the Hus∣band? Answ. This; if her giuing serue to preserue the life or good estate of her husband and family:1 Sam. 25.19.34.35. as Abigailes did, when she gaue to Dauid. Quest. What is the third particular case wherein the wife may communicate to the necessity of others, without the consent of her Husband? Mat. 12.11.12.13. Acts. 20.9.10.Answ. This; in case of extreame necessity, when the necessity of the receiuer requires present reliefe, especially if her husband be absent or farre from her, so as his consent cannot in time bee asked or obtained: for present and ex∣treame necessity dispenseth with propriety, as it doth with the outward seruice of God. Through the bond of Marriage, the communion which is betweene man and wife, reacheth both to their persons and goods. Gen. 31.16. Therefore the wife may sometimes, out of the cases named, without the consent of her husband com∣municate to the necessity of others, of those goods that are common both to her husband and to her selfe. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the communion of goods on the wiues part, reacheth only to the vse of them, the propriety of them is still in the Husband; the wife hath only right and title to vse all her husbands goods for the good of her owne person, but not a propriety in them. The wife is inioyned workes of mercy aswell as her hus∣band and they are comm ned in her as well as in her hus∣band, and shall be rewarded being done by her, as by her hus∣band: and therefore she may sometimes out of the cases na∣med, wihout the consent of her Husband, communicate to the necessities of others.
Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; workes of mercy are inioyned the wife as well as the husband of that she hath of her owne, and they are commended in her as in her huband, and shall be rewarded being done by her, as if by her husband, if they be done or∣derly and as they ought, and not otherwise, and so that prooues not that the wife may communicate to the necessitie of others without the consent of her husband. If the wife may not out of the cases named, communicate to the necessity of others of the goods common to both with∣out the consent of her husband, shee is in a worse condition then a seruant. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. No▪ she is not; for she hath right and title to vse all her husbands goods for the good of her person, which the seruant hath not. Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herods Steward, and Susanna and many other women did minister to Christ of their goods, Luke 8 3. therefore the wife may sometimes out of the ca∣ses named, communicate to the necessitie of others without her husbands consent. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; there is nothing to the contrarie, but that those women did so, so by the generall consent of their hus∣bands, and that they had the consent of their husbands in generall tearmes, and therefore their example proues not that the wife may communicate to the necessitie of other, sometimes out of the cases named without the consent of her Husband. Quest. To what persons is a man or a woman hauing wealth and outward good things of their owne, bound to giue and to com∣municate to their necessities in outward things? Answ. Not onely to such persons as are absolutely poore, being either in common want, or extreame want.; but also to those who for the present, by reason of some sudden ac∣cident doe want, and stand in neede of releefe, though other∣wise of good meanes; as when one is forced to seeke and to
to craue relief being brought into present necessity through persecution,Deut. 15.11. 2 Cor. 8.14. Ephes. 4.28 1 Ioh. 3.17. Heb. 13.2.3. shipwracke, fire, robberie, or the like. Quest: In what order is a man or woman hauing wealth and outward good things of their owne, bound to giue and to communi∣nicate to the necessityes of others in outward things? Answ. First, with respect to the state and condition of the parties that stand in neede of reliefe. Secondly, with respect to the persons that are to bee relieued. Quest. How is a man or a woman hauing wealth and outward good thing of their owne, bound to communicate to the necessities of others in outward things, with respect to the state and conditi∣on of the parties that stand in neede of reliefe? Answ. Thus; They are to releeue those who are in great neede, before those whose wants are but common and ordinarie: and those who are in extreame necessity and ready to perish though they bee their enemies, before their kindred and friends being in want,Exod. 23.4.5. Pro. 25.21. Rom. 12.20. Luk. 10.33.34.35. yet not in such ex∣treame want: and among such as are in extreame neces∣sity, those who are first cast on them by the prouidence of God. Quest. How is a man or woman, hauing wealth and outward good things of their owne, bound to communicate to the necessities of others in outward things, with respect to the persons that are to he relieued? Mar. 7.11.12. 1 Tim. 5.8.Answer. Thus; the want and necessitie of the persons being alike, they are first to relieue those to whom they are bound by the bond of blood, kindred and alliance; as their parents, children, and such like: and then others to whom they are not so bound. Quest. How are they who haue wealth and outward good things of their owne, bound to communicate to the necessities of those to whom they are not bound by the bond of blood, kindred & alliance? Answ. Thus; the want and necessity of the persons being alike,Deut. 15.7. to Mat. 25.35. Ioh. epist. 3.5. they are first to releiue those that are nearer to them in habitation and neighbourhood, and then those that are fur∣ther of; and amongst those that are either neare to them, or
further of, such especially as are of the houshold of faith.Galat. 6.10. Quest. How much is a man or a woman hauing wealth and outward good things of their owne, bound to giue and to communi∣cate to the necessitie of others in outward things? Answ. The particular measure of reliefe to be giuen,2 Cor. 9.6.7. 2 Cor. 8.13. 1 Cor. 16.2. Iam. 2.16. the Scripture hath not determined, but a man or a woman must giue liberally, yet not all that they haue, nor to their owne griefe or oppression, vnles it be in case of extreame necessi∣ty, and they must proportion their giuing according to their owne ability, and to the necessityes of the receiuers as neare as they can. Luke. 12.33. We must giue, though it be by selling of our possessions; therefore all we haue. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Christ his meaning is that wee must bee ready to forgoe all that we haue, if it bee any hinderance to vs in true piety, and to the true profession of the Gospell;Luk: 12.34. as appeares by the words following, and by Mathew. 6.19.20. Therefore this proues not hat wee must giue all that wee haue. Quest. What is the second thing wherein standeth the yeelding of helpe to another or others one or more in outward things, stand∣ing in neede of helpe that way? Answ. This;Exod. 22.25. Deut. 15.8. Psal. 37.26. Psal. 112.5. Mat. 5.42. Luk. 6.35. in free lending to another or others one or more, as occasion is offered; a man or a woman being able and hauing wealth and outward good things of their owne, must freely lend to others such outward good things as they haue necessarie vse of, for some good purpose for a time. Quest. What if the partie to whom something is lent, bee not able to returne the thing lent, bee altogether vnable to make pay∣ment of it againe: what is then to bee done by the man or woman that lent it? Answ. If the partie to whom something is lent,Nehem. 5.11. Isai. 58.6. Mat. 18.33. be vtterly decayed in his or her outward estate, by the immediate hand of God on it; or bee brought to extreame pouerty, then the man or woman that lent it must freely
forgiue the debt,ehem. 5.11. sai. 58.6. Mat. 18.33. and ought not to require the thing lent. Quest. Wherein stands the procuring the wealth of another or others, one or more? Answ. In three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Pro. 22.26.27. Philem epist. vers. 19.20.Answ. This; in a wise and a discreet vndertaking and becomming Suretie for another or others, one or more as occasion is offered: a man or a woman being able, must sometimes vndertake, and become Suretie for an other or others, one or more, in their need, if the persons for whom they vndertake bee honest and diligent in their pla∣ces and callings, and bee driuen to vse their helpe in that kind, on iust necessary, and good occasions, and so as it be not beyond their owne ability, or to the weakning of their owne estate. Quest. What is the second thing wherein stands the procuring of the wealth of another or others, one or more? Gen. 31.38.39. Gen. 39.6.7. Tit. 2.10.Answ. This; in dealing faithfully with the goods of another or others, one or more, being trusted with them: Thus seruants ought to deale with the goods of their Masters they are trusted withall. Thus Factors, and thus Executors, and Feoffees in trust are to deale faithfully according to the trust reposed in them. Quest. What is the third thing wherein stands the procuring of the wealth of another or others, one or more? Answer. This; in auerting and turning away harmes from the goods of another or others, one or more. A man or a woman knowing any hurt or harme intended a∣gainst the goods of another or others, one or more, as that they are like to bee robbed, or the like, must giue them warning of it,Exod. 23.4.5. Deut. 22.1.2.3.4. and giue them the best counsell they can how to auoyd it: or seeing any of their cat∣tell or goods in danger to be hurt, or perish, they are to doe the best they can to saue them from hurt and from peri∣shing. Quest. Wherein stands restoring of things vniustly gotten or taken away from another or others, one or more? Ans. In this; in making recompence and satisfaction for the
things vniustly gotten or taken away from another or others one or more:Exod. 22.1.2.3. &c. to 15. Ezech. 18.7. Ezech. 3.15. Dan. 4.24 Michah. 6.10. a man or a woman must make recompence and satisfaction to another or others, one or more: for whatso∣euer their consciences charge them, that they haue vniustly gotten or detayned from them: as, for things they haue got∣ten from them by vsurie, by violence, by secret stealth, or by fraud or the like: or for things that haue beene lent to them or left with them in trust: or the things they haue found, or the like, which they haue vniustly with hold from them. Quest. How is a man or a woman to make recompence and satisfaction to another or others one or more, for things they haue vniustly gotten or detained from them? Answ. Thus;Leuit. 6.2.3.4.5 Num. 5.6.7. 2 Sam. 12.6. Luk. 19.8. by returning to them either the same things euery way as good as they were when they first had them, with an ouerplus answerable to the dammage they haue by the want of them: or else things of the same kinde euery way as good as they were, both for quantity and for the worth and value of them, with so much ouer and aboue, as they haue sustained losse or hinderance by the want of them for the time they haue wanted them. Quest. What if goods vniustly gotten or detained, be for their quantity or value vnknowne: how is then recompence and satis∣faction to be made? Answ. Recompence and satisfaction must then be made according to their owne iudgement,Pro 6.31. Luk. 19.8. who haue vniustly got∣ten or detained them: and according to the iudgement and discretion of others, that are wise and conscionable, and that with the most as it shall be thought fit. Quest. What if the partie or parties, from whom goods haue beene vniustly gotten or detained, be either dead or vnknowne, how is then recompence and satisfaction to be made? Answ. If the partie or parties be dead, then recompence must be made to their children if they haue any;Nomb. 5.8. Dan: 4.24. Luk: 19.8. if they haue none, then to the next of their kindred; or if none can bee found, then to the Church or to the poore: and if the partie or parties from whom the goods haue beene vniustly gotten or taken, be vnknowne, then recompence or satisfaction
must be made to the Church, or to the poore. Question. What if a man or a woman that should make re∣compence and satisfaction for goods vniustly gotten and detayned, be not able to doe it, and haue not wherewithall, what are they then to doe? Answ. They must then shew themselues willing and ready to doe it, by a plaine and full confession of their fault, and by crauing pardon for it, with a full purpose, if euer God make them able to make full recompence and satisfaction, for in this case that holds good. 2 Cor. 8.12.2 Cor. 8.12. Quest. What if the partie or parties, from whom goods haue beene vniustly gotten or detained, on the discouery of the wrong done to them, will take aduantage to vse extreamity against him or her that hath done the wrong, what is then to be done? Answ. In this case it is the iudgement of the best Di∣uines, that a third person, one that is of good accoumpt for wisedome, Religion, and honestie is to bee chosen, to whom the secret may safely be reuealed, and hee is to bee intreated to deale betweene them, and to conuey to the partie or par∣ties wronged so much, as will answer their losse and dam∣mage in the behalfe of the partie that hath offended, concea∣ling his or her name and the particular fault, entreating not to enquire after it, and to rest satisfied with that is brought to them. Now to the ninth Commandement. Exodus. 20.16. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy Neighbour. Quest. What reasons may be giuen touching the order of this Commandement, that forbids false witnesse bearing? Answ. Two especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; witnesse bearing is commonly in matters of controuersie touching goods, that there be no vniust getting of them, either in matter of contract or out of contract, or a∣ny other way which was forbidden in the former Comman∣mandement, and therefore this Commandement followes fitly on the former.
Quest. What is the second reason touching the order of this commandement, that forbids false witnesse bearing? Answ. This; in the fifth commandement the Magistrates duty is commanded, and in the three next commandements, Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt not steale: Such sinnes are fore∣bidden as, being knowne,Rom. 13.4. Deut. 19.15. are to bee punished by the Magi∣strate, he being set for the punishment of the wicked, and for the defence of the godly: and that the Magistrat may punish offenders and breakers of those commandements, according to the truth, he must doe it by witnesse: and therefore this commandement touching true witnesse bearing, and auoy∣ding of false witnesse, followes fitly on the former. Quest. What are the words of the ninth Commandement? Answ. Those wee finde Exod. 20.16. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy Neighbour. Quest. What is here meant when the Lord saith, Thou shalt not beare false witnesse? Answ. The words doe properly signifie, thou shalt not answer false witnesse against thy neighbour; in speciall, thou shalt not answer falsely in publike before a Magistrate: the word (answere) is sometimes in Scripture vsed in a more ge∣nerall for the word speake, as Math. 11.25. and so it is here to be taken, as if it had beene said, thou shalt not speake any thing, whereby thou maist hurt the good name and credit of thy neighbour. Quest. What are we here to vnderstand by the word Neigh∣bour? Answ. Not onely one that is nere to vs in place and habi∣tation,Isai. 58.7. Luk. 10.36.37. or one to whom we are knit in speciall manner by the bond of nature, or some other speciall bond, but any one who∣soeuer that is of the same flesh, of the same nature with vs, any man or woman whatsoeuer. Quest. What is the ground of this prohibition, thou shalt not speake any thing whereby thou maist hurt the good name and credit of any one that is of the same flesh, of the same nature with thee? Answ. This; both the maintenance and preseruation of truth amongst men,Deut. 32.4. Tit. 1.2. which makes much both for the glory of God, who is Truth it selfe, Deut. 32.4. And also for the good
of men, for all vse of speech of man to man depends on the truth of it;Iosh. 7.19. Zach. 8.16. Ephes. 4 25. Pro. 22.1. without truth in our speeches, humane societies and dealings betweene man and man cannot be maintained, and also the maintenance of the good name both of our selues and others, which is better then riches. Quest. What is the summe of this Commandement? Mat. 7.1. Philip 4.8. 1 Cor. 13.5.Answ. That the good name, credit, and estimation, either of our selues or others, be not any way hurt or hindered, but that it be by all good meanes maintained and preserued. Now this Commandement being Negatiue, I will first shew what it forbids. Quest. What doth this Commandement forbid? Answ. In generall, whatsoeuer is contrary to the truth, and tends to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of man or woman. Quest. What are the things that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of man or woman? Answ. Either such things as are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of a man or a womans owne good name; or such things as are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good ame of another, or others one or more. Quest. What are the things that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of a man or a womans good name? Answ. They are either things inward in the heart, or things expressed and vttered by the tongue. Quest. What are the things inward in the heart, that are con∣trary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of a man or womans owne good name? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; selfe conceitednesse and an ouerweening of their owne excellency:Pro. 26.12. Luk. 18.11. Act. 12.22.23. 1 Cor. 8.1.2. when a man or a woman doe thinke themselues either to be that which they are not, or to haue that in them which they haue not: or are too highly concei∣ted of the good things they haue, and in their owne swelling
conceit doe magnifie themselues in regard of their owne good gifts aboue others,Galat. 6.3. Philip. 2.3. and thinke basely of others in com∣parison of themselues. Quest. What is the second thing inward in the heart that is contrary to the truth, and tends to the hurt or hinderance of a man or a womans owne good name? Answ. This; too base and too meane a conceit and an vn∣derweening of the good things that be in themselues; when a man or a woman doe thinke that either they haue not that grace, and those good things, or not that measure of grace and of good things that indeed they haue. Thus sometimes doe sound and true hearted Christians in time of tentation, if they haue lost their feeling for a while, and cannot finde that reioycing in God and in good things they were wont, they thinke themselues to be but hypocrites, and that they haue no true grace in them at all, and so they beare false witnesse a∣gainst themselues. Iob 27.5, 6.Iob. 27.5.6. Iob would not so doe. Psal. 7.8.Psal. 7.8. in causa particulari, &c. 2 Cor. 1.12.2 Cor 1.12. 1 Cor. 4.3. I iudge not mine owne selfe. A man or a woman cannot certainly and truely iudge of themselues and of their owne goodnesse: and therefore they cannot but either ouer or vnderweene the good things that be in themselues. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the meaning of that place is, that the Apo∣stle rested not in the iudgement of his owne conscience tou∣ching himselfe, and his faithfulnesse in his office and calling, as the highest iudgement, and as sufficient to cleare him be∣fore the Iudgement seate of God: his Conscience was able, and did certainly and truely witnesse to himselfe his faithful∣nesse in his calling, but he durst not rest in that as sufficient to cleare him, and to iustifie him before the Iudgement seate of God, the Lord could find matter enough against him to condemne him notwithstanding that. Iob 4.18. And therfore that place proues not that a man or woman cannot certainly and truely iudge of themselues, and of their owne goodnes, and so cannot but either ouerweene or vnderweene the good things that be in themselues. Quest. What are the things expressed & vttered by the tongue,
that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of a man or a womans owne good name? Answ. Three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Pro. 27.2. Isai. 65.5. Mat. 19.20. Act: 8.6. Rom. 1.30.Answ. This; vain-glorious boasting and bragging, when a man or woman doe speake great things of themselues, to get them praise and commendation amongst others; and doe say that either they are that which they are not, or haue that goodnesse in them which they haue not, or haue done this or that good; or that others by their meanes haue done this or that good, when there is no such matter. Quest. What is the worst kind of boasting and bragging, and when is boasting most vile and odious? Psal. 52.1. Isai. 66.5. Ierem. 7.9.10.Answ. A boasting of wickednesse and sinne, when a man or woman do boast and brag of the euill and wickednes they haue done, or are able to doe, as of matter worthy praise and commendation. Quest. Is all boasting vnlawfull, and may not a man or wo∣man sometimes speake of the good things that bee in themselues, or of the good they haue done, to their owne praise & commendation? Answ. There is sometimes a necessary and lawfull kind of boasting; a boasting which may and ought to be vsed: as when a man or woman is disgraced, and their disgrace tends to the dishonour of God, and to the disgrace of the Gospell, and of Religion, they may then boast of the good things that are in them, or of the good they haue done, so as it be in an holy manner, with a due acknowledgement of Gods grace with modestie, and without disgrace to any. Thus the Apostle was forced to boast, 2 Cor. 11.16, 17, 21, 22, 23, &c. Galat. 2.6, 7, 8. Quest. What is the second thing expressed and vttered by the tongue contrary to the truth, that tends to the hurt or hinderance of a man or a womans owne good name? Gen. 3.12.13. 1 Sam. 13.11.12.13. 1 Sam. 15.15.21 Luk. 14.18.19.20.Answ. This; the lessening and extenuating of their faults, when a man or woman by speech extenuate, and lessen, and seeke to excuse themselues for the faults they are guiltie of, and are iustly charged withall. Quest. Is it altogether vnlawfull for a man or woman to ex∣cuse
themselues for the things done by them, which are charged on them as faults? Answ. It is altogether vnlawfull for a man or woman to excuse themselues for things done by them, which are char∣ged on them, as faults being euill and sinnefull, so farre as they are euill and sinnefull: but for the things done by them, which are charged on them as faults being not e∣uill and sinnefull, they may lawfully excuse themselues. Thus did Reuben, Gad, and halfe the Tribe of Ma∣nasseh, Ioshua 22.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Thus did Dauid, 1. Sam. 17.29. 1. Sam. 22.14, 15. Math. 12.3, 4, 5, &c. Quest. What is the third thing expressed and vttered by the tongue contrary to the truth, that tends to the hurt or hinderance of a man or a womans owne good name? Answ. This; vniust accusing of themselues,Pro. 13.7. Isai. 56.3. when a man or woman doe by speach either denie or extenuate and lessen the graces and gifts God hath bestowed on them, and say contrarie to that which they knowe and thinke in a kinde of proud humilitie, they haue now it nor wealth, and they are not able to doe this or that good thing. Quest. What are the things that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. They are either things inward in the heart, or things expressed and vttered by the tongue. Quest. What are the things inward in the heart that are con∣trary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. Foure things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; light and wrongfull suspition,Iudg. 15.2. 1 Sam. 1.13. 2 Sam. 10.3. Ierem. 43.3. Luk. 7 39. Act. 28.4. 1 Tm. 6.4. and euill sur∣mising, when a man or woman doe causelessely misdeeme of another or others, one or more, and within themselues con∣clude, that they are guiltie of some euill, and doe surmise and suspect some euill by them without any euident or sufficient cause or ground.
Quest. May a man or woman then sometimes lawfully and iustly suspect euill by another or others, one or more? Answ. Yes, they may, if the suspition arise on a probable and sufficient cause, and the thing suspcted bee not certainly concluded, but left in suspence and doubt; and if the suspition be to a good end, as to beware of the partie suspected, and of his euill, then it is lawfull and iust. Thus did Abraham, Gen. 20.11.Gen. 20.11. Gedaliah the sonne of Ahikam was too blame, that hee would not suspct bloody. Ishmael, that was sent to kill him. Ierem. 40.16. & 41.12,Ierem. 40.16. Ierem. 41.12. &c. Math. 10.17.Mat. 10.17. It is the rule that Christ giues, that we should suspect euill men, and take heed of them. Quest. Whence comes it that men or women doe causelesly su∣spect euill of another or others, one or more? Answ. Either from their weaknesse of iudgement, or from their owne guiltinesse of sinne,Act. 28.4. 1 Sam. 24.10. 1 Cor. 13.7. or from some ill affection: men or women doe causelesly suspect euill of others, either be∣cause they want sound & good iudgement, or because them∣selues are wicked and guiltie of foule sinnes, or because they are ill affected, and their hearts are taken vp with enuie or hatred against them whom they suspect. Acts 28.4. The Bar∣barians were weake in iudgement. 1 Sam. 24.10. Saul was suspicious of Dauid, because hee had deserued euill of him. 1 Cor. 13.7. Loue couereth all things, and want of loue is the cause of euill suspition. Quest. What is the second thing inward in the heart, that is contrary to the truth, and tends to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Mat. 7.1. Rom: 2.1. Rom. 14.3.4.10.Answ. This; rash, vncharitable, and vniust iudging and condemning of another or others, one or more; when a man or a woman in their hearts doe rashly, vncharitably and vn∣iustly iudge and condemne another or others, one or more, and thinke disgracefully of them Quest. How doe men or women in their hearts rashly, vn∣charitably, and vniustly iudge and condemne another or others, one or more, and thinke disgracefully of them? Answ. Two wayes; either in respect of their persons, or in regard of thir words and deeds.
Quest. How doe men or women in their hearts rashly, vncha∣ritably and vniustly iudge, and condemne another or others, one or more, and thinke disgracefully of them in respect of their persons? Answ. Thus; when they thinke otherwise of their persons then they ought to doe, in regard of some slips, infirmities, euill reports; or in regard of some crosses, or some strange ac∣cident that befalls them. Thus Iobs friends iudged him an hy∣pocrite, Iob. 4.5.8. Psal. 41.1. Luke 13 2, 3, 4, 5. Quest. How doe men or women in their hearts rashly, vncha∣ritably, and vniustly iudge and condemne another or others, one or more, and thinke disgracefully of them in regard of their words or deedes? Answ. Thus; when they think or iudge otherwise of their words or deeds then they ought to doe: as when they either thinke and iudge ill of the good speeches or actions of o∣thers. Thus doe wicked men of the good speeches and acti∣ons of Gods children,Act. 2.13.15. 2 Sam. 10.3. 2 King. 5.7. Isai. 11.3. Rom. 1.29. or doe take their speeches or actions that are indifferent, in the worst part, or doe think and iudge things that are spoken or done amisse by them, worse then they are; and doe think a light and a small offence, and a little failing in their speech or behauiour, to be a great offence, and more foule and griuous then it is; when Christ spake com∣fortably to the sicke of the palsie, Mat. 9.2. the Scribes and Pharisies said he blasphemeth, ver. 3. Quest. What is the third thing inward in the heart that is con∣trary to the truth, and tends to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. This; inward contemning, and thinking basely of another or others, one or more, and disdaining of them; Sam. 6.16. Isai. 53.2.3. Mat. 18.10. when a man or woman do carry in themselues base, contemptuous, and disdainefull thoughts of others, and doe in their hearts despise them for worldly respects, as because they are poore, or of meane callings, or deformed in body, or of meane gifts, or in great distresse, or the like. Psal. 15.4. It is a note of one that shall dwell in the Lords Tabernacle, and rest in his holy Mountaine, that hee contem∣neth a vile person: It seemes therefore that a man or woman
may lawfully in their hearts contemne others that are base and vile. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the meaning of that place is, that Gods children may and ought in their hearts to contemne such as are vile and base sinners in whom sinne reigneth, and who commit sinne with greedinesse, and are to euery good worke reprobate, though they be great or wealthy in the world, in regard of their wickednes and sin. Thus Antiochus Epiphanes Dan. 11.21.Dan. 11.21. is called a vile person. And the Lord saith, 1 Sam. 2.30.1 Sam. 2.30. They that despise me, shall be despised: and so that place prooues not that a man or woman may in their hearts con∣temne others that are base in worldly respects. What if notorious wicked men bee Magistrates and Go∣uernours? Quest. May we then contemne them in our hearts? Answ. As they be wicked men, and haue altogether defa∣ced the image of God touching holinesse and righteousnesse, they may be contemned; but as they are Magistrates or go∣uernors, they beare before vs the image of Gods power and authoritie▪ and in that respect honour and obedience is due vnto them in the Lord. Quest. What is the fourth thing inward in the heart that is contrary to the truth, and tends to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others, one or more? 2 Cor. 12.6. Iud. vers: 16.Ans. This; admiring of others, and magnifying of them in the inward conceit of the heart aboue their worth. When a man or a woman do admire and thinke more highly either of the persons of others, or of their gifts or of the things done by them, then there is iust cause, and then they ought. Quest. VVhen is vniust admiring of others, and magnifying of them in the inward conceit of the heart most vile and most odious? Act. 8.10.11. Act. 20.30. 2 Cor. 11.20. Psal. 49.18.Answ. When men or women do admire another or others, one or more, and do magnifie them in the inward conceit of their hearts for their errors and sinnes. Thus do seduced per∣sons admire and magnifie their false teachers and seducers; and thus also doe some admire others for their sinnes.
Quest. What are the things expressed and vttered by the tongue that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hin∣derance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. Either things expressed and vttered to another or others one or more, or things expressed and vttered of ano∣ther or others, one or more. Quest. What are the things expressed and vttered to another or others, one or more, that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. Either things vttered vainely, or things vttered falsely. Quest. What are the things vttered to another or others, one or more, vainly, that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. They are things vttered without reason,1 Tim. 5.13. 2 Sam. 17.18. Pro. 10.19. Iam. 1.19. and out of season: when a man or woman are pratlers, and too full of words, and do keepe nothing secret, but tell whatsoeuer they know, and doe needlessely publish the secrets or infirmities of others to their discredit. Quest. VVhat are the things vttered to another or others, one or more falsely, that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ: Two things especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This, lying:Exod. 23.7. Leuit. 19.11. Psal. 101.7. Pro. 12.22. Ephes. 4.22. Coloss. 3.9. 2 King. 5.25. Gen. 3.45. Ioh. 8.44. Ierem. 5.31. Ierem. 23.25.26.32. 1 Tim. 4.2. when a man or woman doe wittingly and willingly speake that which they know is false, with a mind and purpose to deceiue. Quest. What is the worst kinde of lying, and when is lying most foule and most odious? Answ. When it is either to cloke and smother ouer a sinne already committed, or to make way for sinne, and the doing of some euill, or when it is to hurt or to intrap another or o∣thers, one or more, and to draw them into some errour or sin, or into some danger. Quest. May not a man or a woman sometimes in speaking wit∣tingly and willingly, put one word, or one thing for another?
Answ. Yes, they may and not lye, as they may sometimes vse Metaphors, and other figuratiue speeches to expresse the truth more significantly;Iudg. 9.8.9. 2 Sam. 12.12. &c. 2 King. 14.9. Mat: 21.33. to 42. or they may somtimes vtter a thing supposed or fayned, a parable to lay forth the truth more profitably, that the truth may bee more clearely discerned, and more sincerely acknowledged: or they may sometimes speake something not contrary, but besides, or diuers from the truth, and yet not lye; as when parents who would in∣sinuate to their little children the dangers of some pit or ditch, they say to them, Take heed, there is a Beare, or a Bull-beggar. What if our owne life, or the life of another or others, one or more be endangered, and may be redeemed by vsing a lye? Quest. Is it not lawfull in that case to lye? Rom: 3.8.Answ. No, it is not, lying being in it owne nature simply euill, it may not bee vsed for the sauing either of our owne life, or the life of any other. Of two euils the lesse is to be chosen. Now it may so fall out, that a lye may bee a lesse euill, then that which may fol∣low on the telling of it: for example, It may bee that a man by telling of a lye may keepe close an innocent person, that lyes hid from another who seekes his life, and intends to kill him; and by saying hee knowes not where he is, though he doe know, hee may hinder the one from murdering, and the other from being murdered. It seemes that in this case a lye may be admitted. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; that rule of two euils, the lesse is to be cho∣sen, is to be vnderstood of such euills as are punishments, or inconueniences, not of such euills as are sinnes; no euill of sinne is is to be admitted at all, neither will it stand good in the sight of God to escape a greater sinne by committing a lesser. And in the case propounded, a man may auoyd both lying, and also the discouering of him that lies hid: for hee may either be silent, or say, he knowes where he is, but he will not discouer him: & this he is rather to doe, then to lye, or to discouer him, though he do therby expose himselfe to danger, through the rage of him that pursues the innocent partie.
It may be that a lie may further the saluation of another, as it may haply serue to discouer an heretike, and to reclaime him from his heresie; or it may serue to bring an heathen man from Paganisme to Christianitie. Quest. May it not bee lawfull in that case to lie? Answ. No, it is not lawfull to lye for the saluation of men;Iob 13.7. 1 Cor. 15.15. God will not haue vs to lye for his cause, much lesse may wee lye for the best good of men. Ephes. 4 25. Christians are to cast off lying, and to speake the truth one to another, because they are members one of another: therefore it seemes that Christians may lawfully lye to Infi∣dels, and to such as professe not the same truth with them, for they are not members one of another. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the Apostles reason there must be conceiued, as binding beleeuers and professors of the Gospell more strictly to speake the truth one to another, and not to lye one to another, because being members of the same body, its more grieuous for them to lye one to another, then to lye to others: but it followes not that therfore they haue libertie to lye to Infidels, & to such as differ from them in Religion, lying be∣ing euill and sinfull to whomsoeuer it be. Gen. 20.2. Abraham said, that his wife Sarah was his sister: and Gen. 26.7. Isaac said of his wife, that shee was his sister: therefore it seemes lawfull sometimes to lye. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Abraham vttered no vntruth, but only con∣cealed part of the truth, as appeares ver. 12. Againe, the lies of holy men are recorded in Scripture, not with approbation, and for our imitation, that we should doe the like, but as their falls & infirmities, and that their faults and slidings might be warnings to vs. The Mid-wiues of Egypt saued the male children aliue, Exod. 1.19. And Rahab saued the Spies, Iosh. 2.5. by lying, and they are commended for so doing: therefore lying is sometimes lawfull. Quest. How is this to be answered? Ans. Thus; the things they did are commended, not their
manner of doing them: the things they did were workes of mercy, and fruits of faith, and the true feare of God; but they failed in the manner of doing of them: and therefore their examples in lying are not to be imitated. How can faith, and the true feare of God, and a manifest sinne stand together? Answ. Faith, and the true feare of God, and continuance in any knowne sinne, cannot stand together; but faith, and the true feare of God, and a manifest sinne of frailtie may well stand together? Quest. May not a man or a woman in speaking to others sometimes suppresse the truth, and conceale it either in whole or in part? Answ. Yes, they may; when the speaking of the truth is vnnecessary, and they are not called to speake it, either in the matter of Religion, or in ciuill causes; and the speaking of it is ioyned with dammage or danger, either of themselues or others, though they may neither deny the truth, nor vtter an vntruth, yet they may thē conceale the truth, either whol∣ly, or in part, Gen. 20.2. Thus was Samuel taught to doe, 1. Sam. 16.2. Hee was by command from the Lord to conceale the principall cause of his comming to Bethlem. Quest. May not a man or a woman being asked a question, make answere to it in words, contrarie to that which they know to bee true, reseruing something in their mindes to make their answere good, and so giue an equiuocating answere: as being asked by one that hath power and authoritie to examine them, Whether they were in such a place, and at such a time? may they not answere, they were not, though they were, reseruing in their minde to tell it to you, or not with their heeles vpward, or the like? Answ. No, they may not; for if they so doe, they invert the order and nature of things, and make falsehood truth, and truth falshood; and they turne affirmatiues into negatiues, and negatiues into affirmatiues; and by this deuice it is all one to say, I was not in such a place, with a mentall reserua∣tion, as to say, I was. And againe, he that truly feares God, he speakes the truth in
his heart, Psal. 15.2 he hath truth both in his heart & mouth. Ierem. 38.26, 27. Ieremiah the Prophet, by the aduice of the King, gaue an equiuocating answer to the Princes, when they asked him of the speech that passed betweene the King and him: and therefore an equiuocating answere may some∣times be giuen. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; Ieremiah did neither lye, nor equiuocate in his answere to the Princes: he told them the truth in part, though not the whole truth, touching the speech that passed betweene the King and him, as appeares, vers. 15, 16. There∣fore his example will not warrant the giuing of an equiuo∣cating answere. 1 Kings 22.15. Michaiah answers King Ahab in words contrary to that which he knew: for he knew the King should perish, yet he bids him Goe vp and prosper, equiuocating with him: therefore it seemes lawfull sometimes to answer by e∣quiuocation, and to giue an equiuocating answere. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the Prophet spake those words, Goe vp and prosper, according to the meaning of the false Prophets iro∣nically, and in scorne, not with any purpose to deceiue, but in such a sense as was knowne to the King, and the King knew his meaning, and therefore charged him to speake seriously, vers. 16. and so his example will not warrant the giuing of an equiuocating answere. Luke 24.28. Christ going to Emaus, made as though he would haue gone further, and yet did not: and therefore say the Pa∣pists, it is lawfull to equiuocate. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; Christ made as though hee would haue gone further, not with any purpose to deceiue those Dis∣ciples, but to make triall of their humanitie: he meant as hee seemed to goe further, but hee was ouercome by their courteous importunity to yeeld to them, as it followes vers 29. They constrained him to stay with them: he yeelded to the sweet violence of their courteous humanitie, as the An∣gels of God did to the vrgent request of Lot, Genes. 19.3.
Therefore this act of Christ proues not the lawfulnesse of an equiuocating answere. iection.Iohn 7.8. Christ said to his brethren, I will not goe vp to the Feast at Ierusalem, meaning (as Bellarmine expoundeth it) not as the Mssiah, but in secret, or not with them, and yet after∣ward he went, ver. 10. therefore (say the Papists) it is lawfull to giue an equiuocating answer. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; Christ there speaketh plainly as he meant: for he said, he would not goe vp yet, or now, because his time was not come: and though he went vp not long after, yet his first saying did stand: for that (yet) was not then come, Iohn 2.4. Though Christ would not shew a miracle to turne water into wine at his mothers bidding, saying, Mine houre is not yet come; yet ere the Feast was finished he did it: they might as well say, that Christ did there equiuocate with his mother; and therefore that place proues not, that an equiuocating answer is to be giuen. Quest. VVhat is the second thing vttered to an other or o∣thers, one or more, falsely and contrary to the truth, that tends to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Prou. 27.14. Math. 22.16. Acts 12.22. Acts 24.2.3.Ans. Such speech as setteth either praise or dispraise where it should not; when a man or woman doe either prais or dis∣praise another or others, one or more, to their faces vniustly. Quest. How doth a man or woman praise another or others, one or more, to their faces vniustly? Answ. By flattering of them; when a man or woman in their words and speech vttered to another o others, one or more, do to their faces praise, commend, & extoll, either their persons or their gifts, or their actions aboue that which they know or thinke, either to get fauour with them, or some way or other for their owne aduantage. Quest. Is it alwayes vnlawfull in words and in speech to praise and commend the persons, gifts, or actions of another or others, one or more, to their faces? Answ. No, it is not; it is sometimes fit and expedient in words to praise & to commend the persons, gifts, or actions
of another or others, one or more, if onely due praise and commendation bee giuen,Exod. 39.43. Iosh. 22.1.2.3. Rom. 13.3. and if it bee done to right ends, as either to confirme or encourage them in well doing, or to comfort such as are too much deiected with the sight and conscience of their owne vnworthinesse and sinnes. Quest. When is flattering of another or others, one or more, most vile and most odious? Answ. When it is with hatred and malice in the heart,Psal. 12.2. Psal. 28.3. Psal. 55.21. Mat. 22.16. when a man or woman doe flatter others, and speake faire to them, and commend them to their faces, and yet hate them in their hearts, and speake euill of them behind their backes. Quest. What is the most hurtfull and dangerous kind of flat∣tering? Answ. That which is vsed in things that concerne the state of the soule;Pro. 29.5. Iere. 6.14. Iere. 23.32. Ezech. 13.18. Rom. 16.18. 1 Thess. 2.5. as when men or women doe flatter and sooth vp others in their sinnes, and doe call their vices vertues, and commend them as vertues, especially in publike. Quest. How doth a man or a woman dispraise another or o∣thers, one or more, to their faces vniustly? Answ. Thus; when in their words & speech vttered to an other or others, one or more, they doe contrary to their owne knowledge, and ut of enuy, dispraise and carp either at their prsons, or at their good gifts and graces, or at their good actions, with a purpose either to disgrace, or to discourage them, and doe call good, euill, as Isa. 5.20. Thus dealt Iobs friends with him, as we may read in many Chapters. Iob. 16.20. his friends spake eloquently against him, to haue discouraged him, and to haue brought him to call his vprightnesse into question, which he said, I will neuer take away mine innocencie from my selfe, I will keepe my righteousnesse, and will not forsake it, Job 27.5, 6. Quest. What are the things expressed and vttered by the tongue of another or others, one or more, that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others, one or more▪ Answ. Either things on the part of the speaker or speakers, one or more, or things on the part of the hearer or hearers, one or more.
Quest. What are the things on the part of the speaker or speakers, one or more, vttered of another or others, one or more, that are con∣trary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. They are speeches vttered of another or others, one or more, either in priuate, or speeches vttered in publike. Quest. VVhat are the speeches that are vttered of another or others, one or more, in priuate, that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or o∣thers, one or more? Ans. Speeches vttered either in the presence of the party or parties, one or more, of whom they are spoken; or they are speeches vttered behind their backs, & out of their presence▪ Quest. What are the speeches vttered in the presence of the par∣tie or parties, one or more, of whom they are spoken that are contra∣ry to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of that partie or parties, one or more? Answ. Speeches falsely charging some euill on another or others, one or more, to their faces, either contrary to know∣ledge, or on some light suspition: when a man or woman doe in their speech,Ier. 37.13.14. 1 Pet. 2.12. either contrary to their owne knowledge, or on some light suspition without any euident and sufficient cause or ground, falsely charge another or others, one or more, to their faces, that they haue spoken or done, or were or are about to doe this or that euill. Thus dealt Irijah with Ieremiah, Iere. 37.13, 14. Quest. VVhat are the speeches vttered behinde the backes, and out of the presence of the partie or parties, one or more, of whom they are spoken, that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of that partie or parties, one or more? Leuit. 19.16. Pro. 11.13. &c. 20.19. Ezeuh. 22.9. Rom. 1.29.30. 2 Tim 3.3.Answ. Tale-bearing, backe-biting, and slandering spee∣ches, and malicious defamations: as when a man or wo∣man doe either out of their hatred or enuy, maliciously re∣port ill of another or others, one or more, and doe speake of their faults and defects behinde their backes, to such as will giue eare to them. Quest. How many wayes do men or women carry tales, back-bite,
and slander, and maliciously defame another or others, one or more, behind their backes? Answ. Two wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Pro. 18.8. Rom. 1.29. 2 Cor. 12.20. by whispering ill of them when they do se∣cretly and closely speake ill of another or others, one or more, and doe make a malicious report of their faults and defects behind their backs, by roūding in the eare or eares of such as will heare them: of such speaks Dauid, Psal. 101.5. Quest. What is the second way by which men or women doe carry tales, back-bite and slander, and maliciously defame another or others, one or more, behind their backes? Answ. By speaking ill of them more openly;Psal. 15 3. Rom. 1.30. 2 Cor. 12.20. as when a man or woman do speak ill of another or others, one or more, and doe make a malicious report of their faults and defects behind their backs: so as two, or three, or many that are to∣gether in a priuate place may heare them; and these are pro∣perly called back-biters. Quest. What are the effects both of whispering ill, and of spea∣king ill more openly of another or others, one or more, behinde their backes? Answ. Not only the hurt of them in their good names,2 Sam. 16.3.4. Pro. 16.28. Pro. 26.20. Ezech. 22.9. but sometimes also in their goods, somtimes in their friends, and somtimes in their liues; & the talebearer & backbiter increa∣seth hatred among enemies, & soweth discord among friends. Quest When is whispering or speaking ill most vile and odious? Ans. When the report of ill that is either whispered or spo∣ken more openly of another or others,Gen. 39.14. 2 Sam. 16.3. Iere. 18.18. Amos. 7.10. 2 Tim. 3.3. 2 Cor. 11.13. one or more behinde their backs, is false, and the man or woman that do make that report, do deuise & faine things which they whisper or speak more openly of them; or when the malicious report of ill that is either whispered or spoken more openly of another or o∣thers, one or more behind their backs, is coloured ouer with faire pretences; as when the whisperer or backbiter saith he is sorry that the party of whō he speaks, hath done such a thing, or is this or that way faulty; or that he speaks not of malice, but of good will; that hee is constrained to speake; that the party to whom the tale is told, must keep it secret, or the like.
Quest. May not a malicious ill report bee made of another or others, one or more, behind their backes, without either whispering ill, or speaking ill more openly by the tongue? Answ. Yes, it may; a man or a woman may make a malici∣ous ill report of another or others, one or more, and may de∣fame them behind their backs by writing, which is called Li∣belling, or a reporting ill by the penne: for that which may not be spoken, may not be written; the tongue and the penne are compared, Psalm. 45.1. My tongue is as the penne of a swift writer. iection.It may be a man or a woman whispering ill, or speaking ill more openly of another or others, one or more, behinde their backs, doe speake nothing but the truth. Quest. May they not so doe? Answ. If they do either whisper ill, or speak ill more open∣ly of another or others,al. 52.2.3.0.10.12. Pet. 4.8. one or more behind their backs, & in so doing do vtter nothing but the truth; yet if they speak that truth out of hatred, and with an intent or a desire to hurt the partie or parties of whom they speake, they are back-biters and slanderers. It was true which Doeg reported of Dauid and Abimelech the Priest, 1. Sam. 22.9, 10. but because his report was out of hatred and to an ill end, hee is accounted a slanderer. Quest. May not a man or a woman then speake of the faults, and of the offences of another or others, one or more, behinde their backes, nor mention them at all? Answ. Yes they may in two cases lawfully. Quest. What is the first of those? Gen. 37.2. Mat. 18.15. 1 Cor. 1.11.Answ. This; if they haue first admonished the partie or parties whose faults and offences they speake of, priuately, and they are not bettered by their priuate admonition, they may then, so as it be in loue, and with a desire of their a∣mendment, speake of those faults and offences behind their backs, to such as haue power to redresse them. Quest. What is the second case wherein a man or woman may lawfully speake of the faults and offences of another or others, one or more, behind their backes? Answ. If it bee necessary that the partie or parties, one
or more to whom they speake, should be forewarned of those faults, in regard of danger either of some mischiefe, or some infection that may come to them from the same: as we may say to another or others one or more, take heede of such an one, I know he or she intends such a mischeife toward you: Act. 23.16. so when infection is feared from the partie or parties one or more; some one may say to another one or more, take heede you be not familiar with such a man or such a woman, for he or she is giuen to drunkennesse, to swearing, to whoredome or the like; and is not to bee accompanied withall. 1 Cor. 5.11. Quest. What are the speeches vttered of another or others one or more in publike, that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others one or more? Answ. Speeches publikely vttered, either in the absence and behind the backe, or in the presence of the partie or par∣ties one or more, of whom they are spoken. Quest. What are the speeches publikely vttered in the absence and behinde the backe of the partie or parties one or more, of whom they are spoken, that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of the partie or parties, one or more? Answ. Speeches either falsely charging some ill on another or others one or more, behinde their backs, and that either a∣gainst knowledge or on some light suspition: or truly char∣ging some ill on them behind their backs, out of malice, or for some by respect by way of publike information, without any calling thereunto: as when a man or woman doe either falsely, and that against knowledge, or on some light suspiti∣on, or truly out of their meere malice,Amos. 7.10. Act 25.2. or with respect to their owne profit only, informe some open Court, or some Magi∣strate and publike person, of some ill spoken or done by an∣other or others one or more, behinde their backes, being not called nor required so to speake. Thus did the Chaldeans. Dan. 3 8. to 13. Dan 6.13. Quest. What are the things publikely vttered in the presence of the partie or parties one or more, of whom they are vttered, that
are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of the partie or parties one or more? Answ. They are speeches vttered in open place of Iustice and iudgement, falsely, charging some ill on another or o∣thers, one or more in their presence, either by the Iudge or Iudges, one or more: or by Aduocates and Pleaders, or Pa∣trons of causes: or by Iurors, or by accusers, or by witnesses, one or more. Quest. What are the speeches vttered in open place of Iustice and iudgement, falsely charging some ill on another or others, one or more, by the Iudge or Iudges, one or more? Exod. 23.7. Leuit. 19.15. Pro. 17.15. Luk. 23.24.Answ. Speeches vttered by the Iudge or Iudges one or more, in giuing false sentence and vniust iudgement, against another or others one or more, being before them to bee ex∣amined and tried touching some matter of crime: as when the Iudge or Iudges one or more, doe either contrary to their owne knowledge, or without due examination and proofe, for feare, fauour, malice or the like, pronounce one or more being before them to be examined and tryed, guilty of some crime, and doe giue sentence against them for the same. Quest. What if the partie that is before a Iudge to be exami∣ned and tryed touching some crime, doe confesse himselfe guilty of that crime: is that confession sufficient to leade the Iudge to giue sentence against him? Answ. A bare confession is not sufficient, but a confession made after due examination taken on pregnant presumpti∣ons is sufficient:Iob 29.16. Pro. 18.13. for a man or a woman may confesse against themselues an vntruth, being vrged thereto by feare or threatning, or by a desire on some griefe to be put out of the world, or being perswaded it is the best course to saue their liues and to obtaine libertie, they may on simplicitie bee induced to confesse that which they neuer did, against themselues. Quest. What if the partie that is before a Iudge to bee exami∣ned and tryed touching some crime, be conuinced of that crime by witnesses: is that alwayes sufficient to leade the Judge to giue sen∣tence against him?
Answ. No, it is not; witnesses may be false,Deut. 19.18.19 and such as are not to be admitted, & the Iudge is to fift them throughly and to punish them if he finde them to be false. Quest. What are the speeches vttered in open place of Iustice and iudgement, by Aduocates, Pleaders, and Patrons of causes, falsely charging some ill on another or others one or more, in their presence? Answ. Speeches vttered by Aduocates, Pleaders and Pa∣trons of causes, in their false and vniust pleading against one or more, being in some open Court to bee examined and tried touching some matter of crime: as when Aduo∣cates, Pleaders, and Patrons of causes doe either contrary to their owne knowledge, or on light information, for feare, fauour, malice, or for their fee, vtter they care not what vn∣truths, and false calumniations in their pleading against one or more being in some open Court to bee examined and tryed touching some matter of crime:Pro. 25.18. Act. 24.2.5.6. hence then are their speeches compared to sharpe arrowes, wounding the good name of the innocent. Quest. What are the speeches vttered in open place of Justice and iudgement, by Iurors, falsely charging some ill on another or others one or more in their presence? Answ. Speeches vttered by Iurors in giuing vp a false and vniust verdict against one or more, being in some open Court to bee examined and tryed, touching some matter of crime: as when such as are on a Iury, doe either contrary to their owne knowledge, or on slight euidence without due proofe, for feare, fauour, malice, or the like: in their ver∣dict pronounce, one or more being examined in an open Court touching some matter of crime, guilty of that crime. Pro. 14.25.Pro. 14.25. so Iuors. Pro. 17.15.Pro. 17.15. not only Iudges but Iu∣rors also. Question. Who of a Jury are most faulty in giuing vp a false and vniust verdict against one or more being in some open Court to bee examined and tryed, touching some matter of crime? A. He or they, who either out of their malice, or for a bribe or such like, haue labored with the rest of the Iury, and haue
drawne them to ioyne with them in the same periury and corruption in giuing it vp.sai. 5.23. Quest. What are the speeches vttered in open place of Iustice and Iudgement, by accusers falsely charging some ill on another or others, one or more in their presence? euit. 19.16.Answ. Speeches vttered by accusers, whereby they doe vniustly and wrongfully accuse one or more, being in some open Court to bee examined and tryed, touching some mat∣ter of crime. Quest. How many waies doe men or women vniustly and wrongfully accuse one or more being in some open Court to bee ex∣amined, touching some matter of crime? Answer. Two wayes especially, Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by doing it themselues, when men or wo∣men doe in their owne persons,Mat. 15.3. Act. 16.20. Act. 17.6.7. Act. 18.13. &. 25.7. wittingly, willingly, and maliciously, put vp an vniust and wrongfull accusation a∣gainst one or more, being in some open Court to bee exami∣ned, touching some matter of crime. Quest. What is the second way by which men or women doe vniustly and wrongfully accuse one or more, being in some open Court to be examined, touching some matter of crime? 1 King. 21.10: 11. &c. Mat. 26.59.60. Act. 6.11.Answ. This; by doing it by others, when a man or a wo∣man doe maliciously sub-orne another or others one or more, vniustly and wrongfully to accuse one or more being in some open Court to bee examined and tried, touching some matter of crime. Quest. What are the speeches vttered in open place of Iustice and iudgement, by witnesses falsely charging some ill on another or others one or more in their presence? Exod. 23.1. Pro. 6.19. &. 19.5.Answ. Speeches vttered by witnesses, whereby they doe vniustly testifie against one or more, being in some open Court to be examined and tryed, touching some matter of crime. Quest. How many waies doe witnesses vniustly testifie against one or more, being in some open Court to be examined and tryed, touching some matter of crime? Answ. Three wayes especially.
Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by affirming something against them as witnesse, which they know is directly and materially false;1 King. 21.13 Acts 6.11.13. Acts 24.9. as when a man or woman doe wittingly and willingly for feare, fauour, malice, or for a reward, being suborned so to doe: affirme as witnesses that which they know is directly false, against one or more, being in some open Court to be ex∣amined and tryed touching some matter of crime. Quest. What is the second way by which witnesses doe vniustly testifie against one or more, being in some open Court to be exami∣ned and tryed, touching some matter of crime? Answ. This; by denying and concealing of something knowne to themselues to bee true, and which they ought to speake: as when a man or woman doe wittingly and willing∣ly for feare, fauour, malice, or for a reward; denie or con∣ceale, that which they know is true and ought to be witnes∣sed by them, being called so to doe: whereby one or more being in some open Court to be examined and tried, touch∣ing some matter of crime, come to be vniustly conuicted and condemned. Thus did the Iewes. Act. 24 21.Acts 24.21. Let those them∣selues say if they haue found any vniust thing in me, as if hee had said, these, if they would, can witnesse that they found no vn∣iust thing in me, while I stood in the Councell: but they conceale the truth. Quest: What is the third way by which witnesses doe vniustly testifie against one or more, being in some open Court to bee exami∣ned and tried, touching some matter of crime? Answ. This; by affirming something against them, as wit∣nesses, craftily and deceitefully; as when a man or woman doe wittingly and willingly for feare, fauour, malice, or for a bribe, being suborned so to witnesse something against one or more, being in some open Court to be examined and try∣ed touching some matter of crime: either by taking from the truth, or by adding to it, or by changing of it; as by wrest∣ing their sayings to another sense then they were spokē. Thus dealt the witnesses against our Sauiour Christ, Mat. 26.61. compared with John. 2.19,
Quest. How may the vglinesse of the sinne of false witnesse bearing in open place of Iustice and iudgement appeare? Answ. By this; because it is there deliuered vpon oath, so that a false witnesse in open place of iudgement, is guilty not only of false witnesse bearing, but of periurie also; where∣by he polluteth the holy name of God, wrongeth the inno∣cent, abuseth the Iudge and Iury, and all that are present, and that vnder religion of an oath. Quest. Whether is false witnesse bearing in open place of Justice and iudgement, or slandering in priuate, more grieuous? Answ. In respect of the oath taken, and of the greater in∣famie following on it; false witnesse bearing in open place of Iustice and iudgement, is more grieuous then priuate slan∣dering: the thing spoken of being the same, and the circum∣stances of it being alike. But the priuate slanderer may haue a more malicious intent, then he which falsely deposeth in o∣pen place of Iustice and iudgement: and if his false report in priuate touch his Neighbours life, he is more iniurious then he which publikely witnesseth falsely, where the crime bringeth not the life in question. Question. What are the things on the part of the hearer or hearers one or more, vttered of another or others one or more, that are contrary to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of another or others one or more? Answer. Speeches heard and willingly receiued and en∣tertained by the hearer or hearers one or more, being con∣trary to the truth, and tending to the hurt or hinderance of the good name of the partie or parties one or more of whom they are spoken:Exod. 23.1. Psal. 15.3. Prou. 17.4. as when a man or woman doe giue eare to, and willingly receiue and entertaine such speeches as are vttered of another or others one or more, contrarie to the truth, and tend to the hurt or hinderance of their good names. Quest. How many waies doe men or women giue eare to, and willingly receiue and entertaine such speeches as are vttered of an∣other or others one or more, contrary to the truth, and tending to the hurt and hinderance of their good names?
Answ. Two wayes especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; by beleeuing, and easily giuing credit to flying tales & ill reports, that are made of another or o∣thers one or more, not knowing the thing or things reported to be true, and thereupon iudge amisse of them, or hating them, or contemning them:Gen. 39.19. 1 Sam. 24.10. 2 Sam. 16.4. Prou. 14.15. Ier. 37.15. Acts 14.28. as when a man or woman are too credulous, and do too easily beleeue the report of ill that is made of another or others one or more, and doe presently on the report, not knowing the thing or things reported to be true, and without sufficient euidence and ground, thinke ill of them, or hate them, or contemne them. Quest. Who are most faulty in beleeuing, and easily giuing credit to flying tales and ill reports that are made of another or o∣thers one or more, not knowing the thing or things reported to be true? Answ. They who beleeue them and giue credit to them so farre, as they blaze or spread them further abroad,Exod. 23.1.  Psal 15.3.  and it may bee adde to them, and thinke they are excusable in so doing; because they are not the first Authours of them. Exod. 23.1. The word  of the roote  signifies thou shalt not take vp, and so it importeth both the first ray∣sing, and the after receiuing, and reporting of a flying tale: so Psal. 15.3. Quest. What is the second way by which men or women doe giue eare to, and willingly receiue and entertaine, such speeches as are vttered of another or others one or more, contrary to the truth, and tending to the hurt or hinderance of their good name? Answ. This; by hearing of ill reports that are made of an∣other or others one or more, not knowing the thing or things reported to be true, yet suspecting them to be false; with pa∣tience and silence, and shewing no dislike to them at all, ei∣ther by countenance or speech, or turning away, or the like: as when a man or woman do heare ill reports that are made of another or others one or more, they not knowing the thing or things reported to be true,Prou. 25.23. Ephes. 5.11. in silēce & with a smiling counte∣nance, & such behauiour as they seeme to approue of them as
commending the reporter or reporters one or more, bidding them to their Table, or some way or other countenancing or rewarding them. Quest. Who are most faulty in hearing ill reports that are made of another or others one or more, with patience and silence, and in shewing no dislike of them at all? Answ. They who on their owne knowledge can testifie that the thing or things reported be false and iniurious, and yet either for flatterie, or for feare of displeasing, are silent and doe not open their mouthes to cleere the innocent, and to shew the truth of the matter: this is to sinne against the Law of Nature, which teacheth vs to doe as we would be done by, Mat. 7.12. and we would that others hearing vs tradu∣ced, and knowing vs innocent should speake in our defence: and therefore we must doe the like. Quest. How may the vglinesse of the sinne of hearing and wil∣ling receiuing and entertaining of speeches vttered of another or o∣thers one or more, contrary to the truth, and tending to the hurt or hinderance of their good names, appeare? Answ. By this; because it argues a delight in hearing the faults and offences of others, which is a note of a wicked person;Pro. 17.4. Reuel. 22.15. and in so doing, men or women take pleasure in hearing those things whereby God is dishonoured, the salua∣tion of others hindered, their good name impayred, and the iudgements of God prouoked. Quest. When is hearing and willing receiuing and entertai∣ning of speeches vttered of another or others, one or more, contrary to the truth, and tending to the hurt or hinderance of their good names: whether it be light beleeuing of ill reports, or hearing them with patience and silence, and shewing no dislike of them at all, not knowing the thing or things reported to be true, most vile and most odious? Answ. When men or women doe heare, and willingly re∣ceiue and entertaine,Psal. 38.16. Ierem. 20.10. 1 Tim. 5.19. and doe either easily beleeue, or heare with patience and silence, and without shewing any dislike at all, ill reports that are made of such as are truly religious and truly feare God, not knowing the thing or things repor∣ted to be true: as if some impudent person, shall come and
buze in their eares some odions tale against true professours of the Gospell; they presently imbrace it, and it goes for currant with them, as if nothing were more sure: this is most vile and odious. Quest. When is hearing and willing receiuing, and entertai∣ning of speeches vttered of another or others, one or more, contrary to the truth, and tending to the hurt or hinderance of their good names: whether it be by light beleeuing of ill reports, or hearing of them with patience and silence, and shewing no dislike of them, not knowing the thing or things reported to be true: most pernici∣ous and most hurtfull? Answ. When Magistrates, such as bee in authority, doe heare and willingly receiue, and entertaine,Gen. 39.20. 1 Sam. 22.17.18.19. Hst. 3.13.14. and doe easily beleeue or heare with patience & silence, and without shew∣ing any dislike at all, ill reports that are made of another or others, one or more, not knowing the thing or things repor∣ted, to be true. Quest. Whether is the tale bearer, or the tale hearer and recei∣uer, a more grieuous sinner? Answ. The tale hearer and receiuer; because the tale hearer and receiuer, is not only guilty of the same offence with the tale bearer; but he encourageth him in his sinne, & he giues being to the slander: a theefe may rob his Neighbour of his goods without a receiuer, but a tale bearer cannot rob a man of his good name, nor yet impayre his credit, vnlesse there be another or others, one or more, to heare and to admit his slanders: he may shew his malice, but the partie of whom he speakes he cannot hurt, vnlesse there be one or more to heare him. Quest. May not a man or woman heare, and willingly receiue and entertaine the report of ill, touching another or others, one or more, at all? Answ. Yes, they may in two cases lawfully. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This;Gen. 37.2. 1 Cor. 1.11. if they haue power and authority ouer the partie or parties one or more, whose faults are reported, and may examine them, and finding them faulty, may admonish or punish them for the same. Quest. What is the second case wherein a man or woman may
lawfully heare, and willingly receiue and entertaine the report of ill, touching another or others, one or more? Answ. This; if it be expedient that they should bee fore∣warned of the ill that is reported, in regard of the danger to them, either of iniurie or of infection. Thus Paul might heare the report of his sisters sonne. Acts. 25.16. so one may heare and willingly receiue an ill report, for the auoyding of their company, they being not to be accompanied withall. Now to the Affirmatiue part. Quest. What doth the ninth Commandement require? Answ. In generall; whatsoeuer is agreeable to the truth, and tends to the helpe or furtherance of the good name of a man or woman. Quest. What are the things that are agreeable to the truth, and tend to the helpe nnd furtherance of the good name of a man or woman? Answ. Either such things as are agreeable to the truth, and tend to the helpe and furtherance of a man or a womans owne good name; or such things as are agreeable to the truth, and tend to the helpe and furtherance of the good name of an∣other or others, one or more. Quest. What are the things that are agreeable to the truth, and tend to the helpe and furtherance of a man or a womans owne good name? Answ. They are either things inward in the heart, or things expressed and vttered by the tongue. Quest. What are the things inward in the heart, that are a∣greeable to the truth, and tend to the helpe and furtherance of a man, or a womans owne good name? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Sam. 18.18. Prou. 3.7. Isai. 5.21. Rom. 12.16. 2 Cor. 10.12.13.14. 2 Cor. 13.5.Answ. This; a right iudgement and estimation of them∣selues, & of their owne good gifts; neither ouer-weening, nor vnderweening of them. A man or woman are to know them∣selues to be that which indeede they are: & truly & rightly to iudge of themselues, and of the good things that be in them and of the measure of them: they are to know, and to iudge truly of their owne wants and infirmities.
Quest. What is the second thing inward in the heart, that is agreeable to the truth, & tends to the helpe or furtherance of a man or a womans owne good name? Answ. This; a loue of their owne good name, and a care of their credit, expressing that by all good endeauour,Prou. 22.1. 2 Cor. 8.20.21. Phil. 4.8. to get a good name, and being gotten, to keepe it: and if at any time it be through sin impayred or lost, to recouer it. A man or woman must loue their owne good name, and haue a care of their credit: & they are to endeauour by all good meanes, to get a good name; and hauing gotten it, to continue it: and it being at any time, by some sinne impayred or lost, to re∣couer it. Quest. How is a man or woman to endeauour to get a good name, and hauing gotten it, to keepe it?Prou. 10.7. Luke 1.6. Iohn 1.47. Acts 16.2. Rom. 14.18. Heb. 11.2. Eccles. 10.1. 1 Sam. 2.30. Answ. By liuing religiously, embracing the truth of God in loue to it, and practising it in an holy life, sincerely and without dissimulation, keeping a narrow watch against e∣uery sin, and with an honest and vpright heart, seeking Gods glory in euery thing. Quest. How is a man or woman to recouer a good name, it be∣ing either impayred or lost through sin? Answ. By true repentance, and vnfeigned conuersation,2 Cor. 2.7.8. Coloss. 4.9. Philem. epist. vers. 10. and turning to God, and breaking of that sin, and by testify∣ing the same before men, by amandment of life. Quest. Is a man or a woman bound to seeke the approbation of men, & are they to approue themselues & their actions, to men? Answ. Though they may not be men pleasers,Galat. 1.10. Rom. 15.2. 1 Cor. 10.33. Rom. 12.17. 2 Cor. 8.21. by framing and tempering their speeches and their actions according to the corrupt humours, and wicked affections and dispositions of men, yet may they please them in that which is good to e∣dification: and they may and ought to seeke the approbati∣on of men, some cautions being duly obserued. Quest. What are the cautions that are to be obserued in seeking the approbation of men? Answ. Foure especially. Quest. What is the first of those? A. This; that it be a seeking of Gods approbation also, and with a seeking of that in the first place: a man or woman may
and ought to seeke the approbation of men, in their speeches and actions, 5.44.  12.43.  2.52. . 14.12. r. 10.18. so as they rest not in that alone, but withall doe seeke to be approued of God, & do seeke for his approbation in the first place: & then in the second place to be approued of men. Quest. What is the second caution that is to be obserued in seeking the aepprobation of men? 6.26.  5.41.Answ. This; that it be without ambition and vaine glory, and without seeking popular applause: a man or woman, may and ought to seeke the approbation of men, so as they be not addicted to popular applause, and do not immoderately seeke the approbation of the multitude, and to get themselues fame with all sorts of men, both good and bad. Quest. What is the third caution that is to be obserued in see∣king the approbation of men? Ans. This; that it be without giuing the least iust occasion of offence to any; a man or woman may, and ought to seeke the approbation of men,r. 10.32. t. 2.12. yea of wicked men, so farre as they giue not the least iust occasion of offence to them. Quest. What is the fourth caution that is to bee obserued in seeking the approbation of men? A. This; that it be with a carefull & conscionable doing of their duties in their particular honest & lawful places & cal∣ling.or. 4.3. or. 6.8. A man or woman may and ought to seeke the approba∣tion of men; so as it be in a carefull and conscionable doing of their duties in their particular, honest, and lawfull places & calling: fearing neither the faces nor the censures of men. Quest. What are the things that are expressed and vttered by the tongue, that are agreeable to the truth, and tend to the helpe & furtherance of a man or a womans owne good name? Answ. Three especially. Quest. What is the first of those? rou. 10.19. rou. 13.2. ath. 12.36. Tim. 4.7.  Tim. 2.16.Answ. This; speaking sparingly, and avoyding vaine bab∣bling. A man or a woman must bee sparing in speaches, in their ordinarie communication: and they are to auoyd fraud, and foolish talke, and idle and fruitlesse speeches. Quest. May not a man or woman speake of worldly matters? Answ. Yes, they may; so as it bee in due time and place, and so as their speeches therein sauour of grace,Prou. 15.23.  Coloss. 4.6. and bee for the good one of another.
Quest. What is the second thing expressed and vttered by the tongue, that is agreeable to the truth & tends to the helpe & fur∣therance of a man or a womans owne good name? Answ. This; a wise and discreete speaking, when they haue occasion either to mention their vertues & good things, or their faults and euill things to men. Quest. Wherein stands a man or a womans wise & discreet spea∣king, hauing occasion to mention their vertues and good things to men? Answ. In speaking of them with modestie:Pro. 27.2. Ioh. 8.13. 1 Cor. 15.9. a man or a wo∣man hauing occasion to mention the good things that are in themselues, or the good things done by them, tending to their commendation, to men, they are to speake of them with mo∣destie, and so as their speech incline rather to the defect then to the excesse; and so as they rather extenuate them then boast of them, and giue men occasion to iudge them arrogant or vaine-glorious. Quest. Wherein stands a man or womans wise and discreete speaking, hauing occasion to mention their faults and euill things to men? Answ. In speaking of their knowne faults and corrupti∣ons to men, the vttermost they can against themselues;Galat. 1.13. 1 Tim. 1.13.15 yet so as they giue no suspition of pride or hypocrisie, and so as they doe not disgrace themselues so much as they make themselues able to doe lesse good then otherwise they might. And in speaking of their secret faults and corruptions to men only when it is fit and meete for them so to doe. Quest. When is it fit and meete for a man or woman to speake of their secret faults and corruptions to men? Answ. In two cases only. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; in case of secret offence and wrong done to another or others one or more. A man or woman hauing se∣cretly offended and wronged another or others one or more: it is fit and meete they should freely & of their owne accord, and plainely acknowledge that offence & wrong to them, and craue pardon of them for it; if they can come to them: so as the partie or parties wronged be such as will not take aduan∣tage
on their acknowledgement, and vse extreamity against them for the same, and so that place Mat. 5.23. is to bee vn∣derstood. Qu. What is the second case wherein it is fit & meete for a man or woman to speake of their secrot faults and corruptions to men? Answ. This; in case of trouble of minde and conscience. A man or woman being troubled in minde and conscience for some secret fault & corruption, it is fit and meet they should freely & of their owne accord, 5.16. . 4.8. lay open the thing that trou∣bles their conscience, and speake of it to another or others one or more, so as it be to such as can and will, being pitty∣full, minister a word of comfort and counsell to them: and to such as are faithfull, and will keepe things secret that are reuealed to them. Quest. What is the third thing expressed and vttered by the tongue, that is agreeable to the truth and tends to the helpe or fur∣therance of a man or womans owne good name? Answ. This; a speaking in defence of their owne good name when neede requireth.am. 1.15. or. 12.11.12 A man or woman must (as they are able) speake in the defence of their owne good name, and of their owne innocency when neede requireth, so as they doe it modestly and vnwillingly. Quest. What are the things that are agreeable to the truth, & tend to the helpe or furtherance of the good name of another or o∣thers one or more? Answ. Either things inward in the heart, or things ex∣pressed and vttered by the tongue. Quest. What are the things inward in the heart that are a∣greeable to the truth, and tend to the helpe and furtherance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. They are three things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? en. 37.33. Mat. 7.1. Mat. 26.10.11 Mar. 10.13.14 Rom. 1.29. 1 Cor. 13.5.Answ. This; a charitable opinion and estimation of an∣other or others one or more, and a thinking the best of things said or done by them, & a taking of them in good part so farre as truth & reason will giue leaue. A man or a woman are to thinke and to iudge charitably both of the persons of others, and of their words and deeds, so far as they may with
truth and reason, and where there is no euident cause to the contrary: and they are to interpret things that are said or done by them being euill, yet doubtfull and vncertaine, and such as will beare two constructions in the best part, and in the most fauourable manner that may be. Quest. What is the second thing inward in the heart, that is agreeable to the truth, and tends to the helpe and furtherance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Ans. This; a true loue and an hearty welwishing to the good name of another or others, one or more:Mat. 1.19. a man or wo∣man must carry in their hearts a true loue and good affection to the credit of another or others, one or more: and they are heartily to wish well to their good name. Quest. How may a man or woman know that they truly loue, and heartily wish well to the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. By two things. Quest. What is the first of those?Rom. 1.8. 1 Cor. 12.26. Galat. 5.22. Answ. This; by reioycing for their credit and good esti∣mation, they knowing them on good grounds, to be in good credit, and in good estimation. Quest: What is the second thing whereby a man or woman may know that they truly loue and heartily wish well to the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. This;Ezech. 9.3.4. 1 Cor. 12.20. by greeuing when they know they deserue discredit and disgrace, when they heare a true report of the same ill spoken or done by them, whereby they are iustly blemished, an their reputation is iustly diminished. Quest. What is the third thing inward in the heart that is a∣greeable to the truth, and tends to the helpe and furtherance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. This; a staiednesse of iudgement touching ill reports that are made of another or others one or more. A man or woman hearing an ill report made of another or others one or more, not knowing the thing or things reported to be true; they are to suspend their iudgement touching the person or the persons, and touching the thing or things reported, and not presently and easily to beleeue them, but to make further
search into them, as they may, not going beyond the bounds of their calling. Psal. 15.3. Pro. 17.4. This the Lord teacheth by his owne example. Gen. 11.5. Gen. 18.21. Quest. What are the things expressed and vttered by the tongue that are agreeable to the truth, and ten to the helpe or furtherance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. They are things vttered either to another or others, one or more, or of another or others one or more. Quest. What are the things vttered to another or others, one or more, that are agreeable to the truth, & tend to the helpe or furtherance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answer. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? 5.2. . 8.16. . 4.25.Answ. This; a speaking of the truth from the heart, sim∣ply and plainely as it ought to be spoken. A man or a woman must speake the simple truth to another or others one or more, without ambiguity or doubtfulnesse, or doubling: and as neere as they can, so as their words may bee cleare to the vnderstanding of the hearer or hearers, one or more. Quest. How ought the simple and plaine truth to be spoken? m. 22.9.10 . 8 19. m. 17.18.16.17.Answ. With good affection and with a louing heart, with an intent & a desire to doe good by speaking of it, & seaso∣nably, a man or woman hauing a calling to speake it. Quest. What is the second thing vttered by the tongue to an∣other or others, one or more, that is agreeable to the truth, and tends to the helpe and furtherance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. This; a wise and discreete speaking to another or others, one or more, for their good, as iust occasion is offered. Quest. Wherein stands a wise and discreete speaking to another or others one or more, for their good, as occasion is offered? Answ. In two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? . 15.4. o. 19.20. ct. 18.26. oloss. 3.16. Thess. 5.11.Answ. This; in giuing them wholesome aduice & counsel in matters of doubt, & in directing them in the waies of God, and exhorting and stirring them vp to walke threin in loue and wisedome. A man or woman must, as they are able and as occasion is offered, keeping themselues within
the bounds of their callings, wisely and in loue both giue wholesome counsell to others in matters of doubt, and also direct them in the wayes of God, and exhort and stirre them vp to walke therein. Quest. What is the second thing wherein standeth a wise and discreet speaking to another or others, one or more, for their good, as occasion is offered? Answ. This;Leuit. 19.17. Mat. 18.15. Luk. 17.3. Coloss. 13.6. 1 Thess. 5.14. Tit. 1.13. in giuing them sound and seasonable admoni∣tion and iust reproofe for their knowne faults and sinnes in loue and wisdome. A man or a woman must, as they are able, and as occasion is offered, keeping themselues within the bounds of their callings, wisely and in loue admonish and reprooue others for their knowne faults and offences. Rom. 16.17. The authors of heresies, schismes, and dissentions are to be auoyded, and we are to haue nothing to do with them; therefore they are not to be reproued. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; that place must be vnderstood with a par∣ticular limitation, that they must be auoided after once or twice admonition, Tim. 3.10. Quest. How doth a man or woman wisely, louingly, and seaso∣nably reprooue another or others, one or more, for their knowne faults and offences? Answ. By doing it with due obseruation of some rules that are necessarily to be obserued in the doing of it. Quest. What are those necessary rules that are to bee obserued in reprouing of others for their knowne faults and offences? Answ. Three especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. This; that the reproofe bee fitted,1 Kin. 5 13. 1 Tim. 5.1.2. Luk. 23.40. Tit. 1.13. Galat. 6.1. 2 Thess. 3.15. as neere as may be, to the qualitie and condition of the party reproued, and to the nature of the offence for which the partie offnding is iustly reprooued. A man or a woman must as neere as they can, fit their reproofe of the knowne faults of others, to the qualitie and condition of the persons whom they doe re∣proue; friendly reproouing their equalls reuerently and sub∣missiuely exhorting their Superiours, and sharply and yet in loue and compassion reprouing their inferiours: and they
must also as neere as they can,d: epist. vs 2.23. fit their reproofe of the known faults to the nature of the offence, reproouing sinnes com∣mitted of ignorance or humane frailtie with mildnesse and gentlenesse; and sinnes done of malice, of pride and presump∣tion, with sharpnesse and seueritie. Quest. What is the second necessary rule that is to be duely ob∣serued in reprouing of others for their knowne faults? Answ. This; that the reproofe be vsed in the fittest time and season,Sam. 25.6.37. ro. 25.11. when it may doe most good, both to bring the partie reprooued to a sight of his sinne, and to reclaime him or her, bee it man or woman from that sinne. A man or wo∣man must (as neere as they can) take the fittest time to re∣prooue the knowne faults of others, and then reprooue them when they may doe them most good by their reproofe; as they are not to tell a man of his fault being drunke, or in the heate of his passion, but afterward when he comes to himselfe. Quest. What is the third necessary rule that is to bee duely ob∣serued in reprouing of others for their knowne faults? Answ. This; that the reproofe of others for their sinnes knowne onely to our selues or to others but a few, be vsed as secretly as may be, and without open disgrace to the party or parties reprooued.Mat. 18.15. Luk. 17 3.  Pet. 4.8. A man or woman must bee as secret as they may, in reproouing others for their sinnes knowne one∣ly to themselues or to others, but a few, and must be carefull of their credit in reprouing them, and not disgracing them openly before many: for open disgracefull rebuking of men will rather harden them in their sinnes, then reclaime them from sinne. Prou. 27.5. Open rebuke is better then secret loue: It seemes therefore that men for their knowne sinnes are to bee rebu∣ked openly. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; by Open rebuke in that place, is not meant rebuke in the presence of many, or openly, but pri∣uate rebuke giuen to the face of the offender, and not be∣hinde his backe, which may be betweene the reproouer, and the reprooued alone.
1 Tim. 5.20. Them that sinne, rebuke openly, that others may feare: Therefore men are for their knowne sinnes to be reprooued openly. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; those words, Them that sinne, rebuke openly, are not a generall commandement giuen to all, but a speciall commandement giuen to Pastours or Gouernours of the Church, that they should reprooue those Elders, and conse∣quently all such as were conuinced of any crime by witnes∣ses, & that before all men; that is, before the whole Church, & and not before all men in euery place and assembly where they offend, and that appeares, ver. 19. Quest. Is a man or a woman euer bound to the dutie of re∣proofe; and are they at all times bound to reprooue others for their knowne faults and offences? Answ. No; in some cases they are not bound, there be some particular cases wherein a man or a woman is not bound to reproue others for their knowne faults and offences. Quest. What are those particular cases? Answ. Three especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. If the party or parties one or more, offending,2 Cor. 2.6.7. haue truly repented of their faults and offences, and haue giuen apparant signes of their vnfained repentance, they are not then to be reproued for those faults and offencs: for the end of reproofe is to reclaime the offender; and if hee be already reclaimed, there is no place left for reproofe. Quest. VVhat is the second particular case wherein a man or woman is not bound to reprooue others for their knowne faults and offences? Ans. This; if it be certaine and euident,Pro. 9.7.8. Pro. 23.9. Mat. 7.6. that the reproofe will do no good: for where there is no hope of amendment, (which is the end of reproofe) the reproofe is to be omitted, especiay if it be so farre from bettering the partie repro∣ued, that it makes him or her much worse. The Magistrate ceaseth not to punish male factors, though it be so, that they haue either truely repented of their faults or offences, or that they are not bettered by punishment:
to the helpe and furtherance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. Either things vttered by such as sit as Iudges in some open place of Iustice and Iudgment; or things vttered by others that are lawfully called to speake before them, ei∣ther as Aduocates and Patrons of causes, or as Iurours, or as witnesses. Quest. What are the things that are vttered of another or o∣thers. one or more in publike, by such as sit as Iudges in some open place of Iustice and Iudgement, that are agreeable to the truth, and tend to the helpe or furtherance of the good name of another or o∣thers, one or more? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. This; the absoluing and acquitting of such as come before them, and after due examination and triall touching some matter of crime laid against them,ro. 18.5. ro. 31.9. ere. 26.16. Luk. 23.14. o. 22. are found guiltles; & the pronouncing of them innocent, and free from the crimes falsely obiected against them: such as sit as Iudges in open place of Iudgement, are to absolue and acquite such persons as before them haue bin duly examined and tried, touching some matter of crime, and found guiltlesse; and they are o∣penly to pronounce them innocent, and free from the crimes falsely obiected against them. Quest. What is the second thing vttered of another or others, one or more in publike, by such as sit as Iudges in some open place of iudgement, that is agreeable to the truth, and tends to the helpe or furtherance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Iob. 29.25. Rom. 13.3.Answ. This; a due encouragement of such as are before them, and on some iust occasion are made knowne to them to bee honest and good, and to deserue well, and a giuing of them due praise and commendation for their well doing. Such as sit as Iudges in open places of Iudgement, are to encourage such persons as come before them, being made knowne to them on iust occasion to be honest and good; and they are to praise and commend them, wherein they doe any way iustly deserue well. Quest. What are the things vttered of another or others, one
or more in publike, by such as are lawfully called to speake in some open place of Judgement, either as Aduocates, or as Iurours, or as witnesses that are agreeable to the truth, and tend to the helpe and furtherance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. Speeches vttered by them in the defence of the good name of another or others, one or more, and for the clearing of their innocencie, when they are to their know∣ledge openly wronged, and falsely accused of some crime:Pro. 12.6. Pro. 14.25. Pro. 24.11. Aduocates, Iurours, and Witnesses, that are lawfully called to speake in some open place of Iudgment, must there speake in the defence of the good name of others; and for the clea∣ring of them whom they know to be falsely accused of some crime. Quest. When are Aduocates, Iurors, and Witnesses that are lawfully called to speake in some open place of Iudgement, especi∣ally bound to performe this dutie? Answ. When the parties openly wronged,Iob. 29.12. Pro. 31.8. and falsely ac∣cused, are helplesse, and either cannot, or dare not speake for themselues. Quest. What are the things on the part of the hearer or hearers, one or more, touching things vttered by the tongue of another or o∣thers, one or more, that are agreeable to the truth, and tend to the helpe or furtherance of the good name of another or others, one or more? Answ. Two things especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. A ready receiuing of the good report that is made of another or others, one or more,Hest. 9.4. Act. 16.2.3. 1 Cor. 13.7. so farre as truth and rea∣son will giue leaue. A man or a woman must willingly and readily receiue the report of good that is made of others, one or more, so farre as they may with truth and reason, and they not knowing any thing to the contrary. Quest. Who are most and principally bound to this dutie, rea∣dily to receiue the report of good that is made of others, one or more, so farre as they may with truth and reason, and they not knowing any thing to the contrary? Ans. They who are bound to the particular parties, one or more, of whom the report is made, by some neere bond, either of nature or religion, or place & habitation, neighborhood, or
the like; for a man is especially to loue and regard those that are more neerely knit to him: hence the Apostle saith, 1 Tim. 5.8. If there be any that prouideth not for his owne, and namely for them of his houshold, he denieth the faith, and is worse then an In∣fidell. And Salomon saith, He that raiseth vp contentions among brethren, Prou. 6.19. is most odious. iectionProu. 14.15. The foolish man will beleeue euery thing. It is a fault, and the part of a foole to beleeue euery thing that is brought to him: Therefore it seemes that a man or woman must not readily receiue the report of any good that is made of others, one or more. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the meaning of that place is, that one who is silly for his owne soule, and ignorant in the matters of God, and of Religion, is ready to yeeld to any thing that is sayd to him, to draw him into errour or sinne, and hee rashly giues credit to euery vaine tale that is told him, and hee hearkeneth to euery spirit, and to euery deceiuer, that misse-leads him contrary to that, 1 Iohn 4.1.Iohn 4.1. and so it makes not against this, that wee must readily receiue the re∣port of any good that is made of others, one or more, so farre as we may with truth and reason, and not knowing any thing to the contrary. Quest. VVhat is the second thing on the part of the hearer or hearers, one or more, touching things vttered by the tongue of another or others, one or more, that is agreeable to the truth, and tends to the helpe or furtherance of the good name of another or o∣thers, one or more? Answ. This; a shewing dislike of whisperers and tale-bearers,Exod. 23.1. Psal. 15.3. Prou. 25.23. when a man or woman doe heare ill reported of an∣other or others, one or more, by such as they haue iust cause to suspect, and to think to be whisperers or tale-bearers, they are to shew their dislike of them, either by countenance, or speech, or by gesture, or the like. Quest. Who are most and principally bound to this duetie, to shew dislike of whisperers and tale-bearers? Psal. 101.5.Ans. Magistrates, by such as be in any place of authoritie and superioritie.
The tenth Commandement. Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours house, neither shalt thou couet thy neighbours Wife, nor his Manseruant, nor his Maid, nor his Oxe, nor his Asse, neither any thing that is thy neighbours. Quest. What difference is there betweene the tenth Comman∣dement, and the other Commandements foregoing? Answ. This; in the former Commandements is forbidden both the euill act, and also the euill thought setled, & with full & deliberate consent of wil; but in the tenth commandement is forbidden the euill thought, and euery motion and stirring in the soule that is contrary to charititie and loue of others, though no liking or consent of will be giuen to it. Quest. What are the words of the tenth Commandement? Answ. Those we find, Exo. 20.17. Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours house, neither shalt thou couet thy neighbours wife, nor his manseruant, nor his mayd, nor his oxe, nor his asse, neither any thing that is thy neighbours. Quest. VVhy is this Commandement set downe in so many words, and so many particulars? Ans. Because in this commandment the Lord laies a more strict rule, and a straighter charge on the soule of man, then flesh and blood would willingly beare: for men would haue their secret euill thoughts, & their least euill affections free, and not subiect to any law; and they thinke it too rigorous, and too hard to haue them called into question, & to be con∣demned therefore; the Lord is, as it were, constrained to set downe this commandement by particular branches, that men might find no evasion, nor any way to wind themselues from vnder the compasse of this commandement. Quest. Are these words, Thou shalt not couet thy neighbors house, thou shalt not couet thy neighbors wife, nor his man-seruant, nor his mayd, nor his oxe, nor his asse, neither any thing that is thy neigbours, onely one Commandement, or two as the Papists teach? Answ. Onely one commandement and not two; for that which is here put downe in the first place (thou shalt not couet thy neighbors house) is put in the second place; and that which
is here put in the second place touching the neighbors wife, is put in the first place: which Moses would not haue done, had they bin distinct precepts: he there making a repetition of the Commandements. 5.21. And again, the Apostle Paul speaks of concupiscence, of coueting, or of lust, as one precept, Rom. 7.7. therefore these words make but one Commandement. ction.Those things that are so diuers, that one may bee coueted and not the other, belong not to one precept, but one may co∣uet his Neighbours wife, and not couet any thihg of his be∣sides: and therefore these two kinds of couetings, of the wife and of the house, belong not to one Commandement. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; by this reason the two first Commandements of the first Table, are two distinct precepts which the Pa∣pists confound and make but one: for one may be guilty of Idolatrie & false worship, who yet holdeth but one God. Se∣condly, that proposition of coueting that which is not ioy∣ned with another thing, belongs not to the same precept, is false, for one may couet a mans house & ground, that couets not his Oxe,ing. 21.2.3 or Asse: as Ahab did, who coueted Naboths vine∣yard. And so by this rule, as many particulars as are heere set downe which may be seuerally coueted, so many particular precepts against coueting there should be. ection.The act of Adultery, and the act of Theft are diuers, and belong to two diuerse precepts: therefore diuers concupi∣scences tending to these diuers acts, are to be diuided into two precepts. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the argument is not good, because the acts of Adulterie & Theft are forbidden in two diuers precepts, therefore concupiscences tending thereunto should be so: for there is difference betweene the conceptiō of sin, & the birth and perfection of it: when sin is brought forth and perfected, then it appeareth of what kinde it is; but being yet in the seed and conception, it cannot be so distinguished. 1 Iohn. 2.16. The lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes are distinguished, therefore they are distinctly forbidden, and be∣long not to one and the same Commandement.
Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eies, being two distinct lusts, are distinctly to be expressed: but it followes not therefore that they are to be distinguished into two precepts, and that they belong not to one and the same Commandement, and so it still remaines a truth, that the last precept which forbids all manner of coueting, is not to bee deuided into two precepts, but is one whole and intire com∣mandement, consisting of diuers particulars. Quest. What are the generall things contained in these words. Thou shalt not couer. &c. Answ. These two things. First a prohibition, a forbid∣ding of lust or coueting, Thou shalt not couet or lust after. And secondly, a reckoning vp of some particulars, that lust may be vnlawfully carried vnto, & which may be vnlawful∣ly coueted and lusted after: as the Neighbours house, the Neighbours wife, his man seruant, his maide, his Oxe, his Asse, or any other thing that is his. Quest. What is here meant when the Lord faith, Thou shalt not couet? Answ. The word couet,Ierem. 4.14. Mat. 15.19. Iam. 1.14. signifieth both inwardly to thinke on something in the minde, and also in the heart to incline to∣wards it with delight, and to long a feer it, yet without any consent of will or purpose of heart to seeke after it: and so the meaning of these words Thou shalt not couet, is this. Thou shalt not inwardly thinke on, and withall haue thine heart inclined to, with pleasure and delight, and long after that which belongs to another or others, one or more: to his or their losse or hinderance, or misliking, though they will giue no assent to get it or to seeke af∣ter it. The word Neighbour is here to be taken as in the ninth Commandement: for any one of the same flesh, and of the same nature, which is any man or woman whatsoeuer. Quest. What is heere meant by house, Thou shalt not cou thy Neighbours house? Answ. Not only the timber, and other materiall things whereof the house is made, and the frame of it, but also any o∣ther thing belonging to it: as furniture within it, grounds without it, yeelding any fruite or benefit, and euery
thing in or about the house, ground or field, moueable, or vn∣moueable, which is either for profit or for pleasure. Quest. What are we here to vnderstand by Wife? Ans. Not only the wife who is one flesh with her husband by matrimoniall bond, and his chiefest treasure, Gen. 39.9. but the husband also who is one flesh with his wife: for as man is restrained of his lust to his neighbours wife, so is woman to her neighbours husband; and the law reacheth not to one sex alone, but to both. Other things in this Commandement need not be stood vpon. By any thing that is his: the Lord comprehends in these words euery thing how small soeuer in our account, that belongs to our neighbour. Quest. What is the ground of this prohibition, thou shalt not in thy minde inwardly thinke on, and withall haue thine heart inclined to with pleasure and delight, and long after that which belongs to another or others, one or more, to his or their losse or mis-liking, though thy will giue no consent to get it, or to seeke after it? Answ. Both the maintenance of inward purity according that original purity in righteousnes & holines in which man was first perfectly created according to the image of God. 1.27. s. 4.24. And also the maintenance of true and perfect obedience to God, not onely in the purpose and resolution of his heart, and in his words and deeds, but also in his most secret thoughts, and in the in-most hidden motions of his soule,t. 27.26. and so stand in all the words of the Law to doe them. Quest. What is the summe of this Commandement? Answ. That in the least thought, and in-most inward dis∣position of the heart we decline not from the rule of charitie and loue of others, either the loue of God or men, but that in our most secret thoughts and motions of our soules,k. 10.27. we keepe our selues within the rule of true loue towards others, both towards God, and towards men. Loue thinkes not euill. 1. Cor. 13.5. The Negatiue part of this Commandement. Quest. VVhat doth the tenth Commandement forbid?
Answ. Two things in generall. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. The proness and inclinations of our corrupt na∣ture to euill, whereby a man or woman is naturally prone to thinke, will, or affect any thing that is forbidden in the Law of God, and contrary to the true loue of God or man. Rom. 6.12. The Apostle speakes of sinne and the lusts of it; and this is called the law of the members, Rom. 7.23. and the flesh, Galat. 5.24. distinct from the lusts of it. Quest. Is pronesse and inclination to euill in euery man and woman naturally?Psal. 51.5. Ephes. 2.3. Answ. Yes, it is in euery man and woman descending from Adam by naturall generation: euery man and woman comming from Adam by naturall generation, is conceiued and borne in sinne, and so hath an inbred pronesse, and in∣clination to euill, and to that which the Law of God forbids. If pronesse and inclination to euill bee in man and wo∣man by nature; why then doth God giue a Law against it: for being naturall, it seemes not to be euill, or at least it cannot be helped. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; pronesse and inclination in man or wo∣man to euill, is now naturall, and cannot bee helped, be∣cause man is now fallen from the state of innocencie, in which hee was created: but it was not so before the fall of man; God made not man prone to euill by creation, but man brought that pronesse on himselfe by his vo∣luntarie falling from the state of innocencie, in which hee was at the first created: and therefore though pro∣nesse to euill in man or woman bee naturall, yet it is e∣uill; and though it cannot bee helped, yet that is through mans owne voluntary fault, and God doth still iustly giue a law against it. The Anabaptists obiect against this, Psal. 51.5. Behold I was borne in iniquitie, and in sinne hath my mother conceiued me: Say they, Dauid there confesseth not his owne sinne, but his mothers sinne; that is, the curse or pu∣nishment for sinne layd on Eua, and so on Dauids Mother,
Gen. 3.16. Therefore it proues not that Dauid was concei∣ued and borne in sinne. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Dauid had there no purpose, nor any cause or occasion to confesse the punishment for sinne layd on Eua, and so on his mother; but to acknowledge, and to set out his owne vilenesse, as appeares by the Context: which hee doth, not onely by confessing his actuall sinnes, but also the root of them, his naturall corruption: and ther∣fore that Exposition of theirs is contrary to the meaning of that place. tion.If Dauid here confesse his owne estate, then he confesseth to God, and desireth him in mercy to consider and behold him whereof he was made, as Psal. 103.14. of dust, weak flesh, vn∣able to resist the tempter, when the law came to him; through which weaknesse hee was ouercome in those horrible sinnes of Murther and Adultery. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; It cannot be that Dauid doth there desire God in mercy to consider him, as made of dust and weake flesh, vnable to resist the tempter: for that had been rather an extenuating and an excusing of his sinnes, then a set∣ting himselfe out as a grieuous sinner, which was the pur∣pose of Dauid. Againe, the matter of Dauids making is not there spoken of, but the corruption and sinne in which hee was framed and made; and so the manner of his making, that in his frame and making he was sinfull and corrupt, and the corruption of sinne did cleaue vnto him. biection.The soule of man comes from God, the matter of the body from the parents; and the soule comming from God is very good: therefore whole man is not conceiued & borne in sin. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; the soule of man as it comes from God, is very good; but being placed in the body, and ioyned with the bo∣dy, it is presently depriued of the image of God, as a iust pu∣nishment for the sin of Adam & all men in him, according to that order which God set downe in the Creation, that what∣soeuer
euill Adam procured, he should not onely bring it on himselfe, but on all his posteritie; and by vertue of that order,Rom. 5.12. the whole man both soule and body is conceiued and borne in sinne. Hence it is said, Genes. 5.3. that Adam begate a child in his owne likenesse. And that which is borne of a woman cannot bee cleane, Iob 25.4. Quest. What is the second thing the tenth Commandement forbids? Ans. This; the effects & fruits of the proness and inclinati∣on of our corrupt nature to euil, that are inward in the soule. Quest. What are those effects and fruits? Answ. Two especially. Quest. VVhat is the first of those? Answ. Euill and inordinate concupiscence, euery motion,Rom. 6.12. Galat. 5.17. Coloss. 3.5. euen the first motion comming from the rebellion of our na∣ture, whereby we are stirred vp to euill, and doe with delight think any thing contrary to the loue of God or man, though we neuer giue consent of will to commit that euill, as fond wishing and woulding, delightfull remembrances, and medi∣tations of euill, Rom. 7.7. called the lusting of the flesh. In our nature now corrupt, the motion, appetite, or de∣sire to such things as tend to the conseruation of nature is not euill, but such is concupiscence or appetite after meat, and drinke, and the like: therefore concupiscence is not e∣uill and a sinne. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; Motions and appetites after meat and drink, and such like, tending to the conseruation of nature, are not euill of themselues, and as they be naturall motions; for they were in Christ, he was hungry and thirstie: but if they be immoderate and exceed a iust measure, they are euill. Againe, there be other concupiscences and desires besides these, as after another mans house, or wife, or the like, which are euill, and cannot be so excused. The Papists obiect Jam. 1.15. When lust or concupiscence hath conceiued, it brings forth sinne: and therefore lust or concupiscence it selfe is no sinne, but onely brings forth sinne.
Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; it is no good consequent, Lust or concu∣piscence brings forth sinne; therefore it is no sinne: for one sinne may bring forth another: and we way rather thus con∣clude, lust or concupiscence brings forth sinne, therefore it is sinne: for the proper cause and mother of euill must needs be euill it selfe. n.That concupiscence remaining after Baptisme, is not pro∣perly sinne, nor forbidden by the Commandement of God, namely thus, sinne maketh guiltie before God of eternall death, and liable to condemnation: but the regenerate are not guiltie of eternall death: therefore concupiscence in them is no sinne. Quest. How is this to be answered? Answ. Thus; by this reason, there is no sinne at all in the regenerate: 1. for there is no condemnation at all to them, they be∣ing in Christ. Againe, neither concupiscence nor any other sinne shall condemne the regenerate; but that is not because concupi∣scence is no sin in them, but because both it and all other sins are pardoned to them in Christ, and so not imputed to them. on.Originall sinne is taken away in Baptisme: therfore con∣cupiscence is no sinne in the regenerate. Quest. How is this to bee answered? Answ. Thus; there be three things to be considered tou∣ching originall sinne:. 13.23.  2.1. the disagreement it hath with the Law of God, the corruption of nature, and the guiltinesse of it and the punishment due to it: in regard of the guiltinesse of Gods wrath, & also in regard of the punishment due to it, it is taken away in Baptisme; but in regard of the disagreement it hath with Gods Law, and the corruption of nature, it is not taken away, but still remaines in the regenerate, yet weakned through sanctification. Quest. Are delightfull remembrances of euill in the time of sleepe, as delightfull dreames of euill, sinfull and forbidden in this Commandement? Answ. As they be either fruits of corrupt nature, and do sa∣uour of nature, & be agreeable to mans corruption, which is
repugnant to Gods will, or be suggested by Satan,Deut. 23.10. Deut. 13.1.2. Ierem. 23.23. Ierem. 29.9.. they are euill and sinnefull, and forbidden in this Commandement: as vnchast dreames arising from the concupiscēce spoken of, Deut. 23.10. Such were the dreames of false Prophets, told by them, to draw men from the true worship of God to Apostacie. Delightfull remembrances of euill in the time of sleepe, as delightfull Dreames of euill cannot bee helped or a∣voyded. Quest: How then are they euill and sinfull? Answ. Though they cannot bee helped or auoyded,Eccles. 5.. yet comming from our owne disorder in diet, in speech or medi∣tations in the day time, they are fruites of our corruption: and the cause and occasion of them, is our selues; and so are euill and sinfull, as Eccles. 5.2. Quest. What is the second effect and fruite of the pronesse, and inclination of our owne corrupt nature to euill, that is inward in our soules? Answ. A suffering our selues to bee infected with those motions that Satan,1 Chron. 21.1.2. Luk. 22.3.4. Act. 5.3. Ephes. 4.23. or euill men doe put into our mindes, contrary to the true loue of God or man: by yeelding to them, and delighting in them, and hauing our hearts tickled with delight in them. A man cannot withstand the motions to euill, and con∣trary to the loue of God or man, that Satan brings to his minde, he hath no power of himselfe so to doe. Quest. Why then doth God giue to man a law to withstand them? Answ. Man had power to withstand them, in his state of innocencie, wherein God created him: but man lost that power by his voluntary fall from that state, and therefore God may and doth still giue and continue a law to man to withstand them. Question. Are motions to euill that are cast into the mindes of men by Satan, and presently reiected and compelled, sins or no? Answ. No, they are not, vnlesse they be receiued by some degree of delight or assent  for Christ was moued and temp∣ted by Satan, to infidelitie, to tempt God, to Idolatrie; yet
his holy heart receiued not those motions and temptations: 4.2. to 11.  14.30. so they neuer became his sinnes. Question. How shall we know the motions of euill that be in our mids, are put in our minds by Satan, and that they are not from the rebellion of our owne nature? Answ. Thus; if they be against the light of nature cor∣rupted, as for a man to kill his owne deare and louing Father or Mother, when there is no hope of gaine by it, or matter of displeasure to prouoke him thereunto: and so when blas∣phemous thoughts against God, come into our mindes furi∣ously and suddenly, like flashings of lightning, and wee can∣not imagine how or on what occasion wee should conceiue such thoughts;r. 12:7. and the more we striue to beate them away, the more they come vpon vs: and withall they are contriued subtilly, and artificially: then they are from Satan, and mes∣sengers of Satan. Question. How may the vglinesse of the euill motions in the soule of man, whether comming from the rebellion of our nature, or suggested by Satan, appeare? Answer. By two reasons. Quest. What is the first of those? eut. 27.26. lat. 3.10.Answ. This; because the curse of God, both in this life, and in death, and after death; euen the paines and torments of the damned in Hell, are due to the person of man or wo∣man, for them. Quest. What is the second reason by which the vglinesse of e∣uill motions in the soule of man, either comming from the rebel∣lion of our nature, or suggested by Satan and receiued, may ap∣peare? Answ. This; because such motions are the roote, and be∣ginning of all euill,Gen 6.5. in gesture, and word, and deede: for first there is a motion to euill in the soule, then delight in it, and from that comes consent of will, and after consent of will, followes execution of action. Now to the Affirmatiue part of this tenth Com∣mandement. Quest. What doth this tenth Commandement require? Answ. Two things in generall.
Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. Originall purity in all the powers and faculties of the soule,Deut. 6.5. Luk. 10.27. 1 Thess. 4.3. 1. Thess. 5 23. 1 Tim. 1.5. and an holy disposition and inclination of the soule, whereby a man or woman is at all times disposed to thinke well, and affect that which the Law of God requires, and is agreeable to the rule of perfect loue both of God and man. Quest. VVhat is the second thing the tenth Commandement requires? Answ. The inward effects and fruits of original puri∣ty in the soule, and of an holy disposition, and inclination of the soule. Quest. What are these inward effects and fruites? Answer. Two especially. Quest. What is the first of those? Answ. Good and holy motions of the minde and will,Psal 119.15.97.111. Rom. 7.22. 2 Cor. 10.5. Galat. 5.17. Ioh. epist. 3.2. whereby wee are stirred vp to good things, and to doe with delight, thinke and will, that which is agreeable to the true loue of God and man; is holy wishings and longings after good things: especially such things as concerne the glory of God, and the good of the soule; and delightfull remembran∣ces, and meditations of good things. Quest. What is the second inward effect, and fruite of origi∣nall purity in the soule, and of an holy disposition and inclination of the soule? Answ. A suppressing of euill thoughts, and motions to e∣uill, whether comming from the flesh within,Pro. 4.23. Mat. 16.22.23. or from Satan or euill men without: and a keeping them from taking any place in our mindes by the least assent to them, or the least deligt in them. Quest. What meanes are to be vsed to suppresse euill thoughts, and motions to euill, and to keepe them from taking place in our minds? Answ. Three especially. Quest. What is the first of those?Iob. 42.2. Psal. 94.11. Psal. 139.2.13. Act. 1 24. 1 Thess. 2.4. Answ. This; a rememberance and due consideration of this that God sees the verry secrets of our hearts, and that all our most hidden thoughts are naked and open to his sight.
Quest. What is the second meanes that is to be vsed to suppresse euill thoughts, and motions to euill, and to keepe them from taking place in our minds? Iob. 31.1. Psal. 119.37. Pro. 17.24.Ans. This; a couenanting with our outward senses, and a resoluing fully with our selues, by Gods grace that none of them shall be the instruments, the beginning or the occasion of sinne, in heart or life; and a carefull avoyding of all oc∣casions and obiects of lust. Quest. What is the third meanes that is to be vsed to suppresse euill thoughts and motions to euill, and to keepe them from taking place in our mindes? Answ. This; frequent, earnest and heartie prayer, often and earnest calling on the Lord,Psal. 119.36. Mat. 26, 41. Ephes. 6.18. that he would giue vs wise∣dome to discerne of the motions to euill, and strength against them: and that hee would incline our mindes and hearts to good things. Quest. Is it possible for any man or woman in this life, to keepe the morall law of God perfectly? Mat. 5.22.28.34. &c. Rom. 7.14.Answ. No: it is not possible, because the law of God is spirituall, and forbids not only the externall euill act, but al∣so the internall euill thought and motion to euill in the soule of man, though no consent of will be giuen to it; and it re∣quires absolute and perfect obedience to it, as well in the soule as in the body: and we are full of weakenesse and cor∣ruption and carnall in part, though we be regenerate. Quest. What vse then is there of the Morall Law of God, see∣ing it is impossible to keepe it perfectly in this life? Answ. It serues to teach vs the constant and vnchang∣able nature of it selfe,Leuit. 18.5. Ezech. 20.11. Rom. 3.20. 2 Cor. 3.7.9. Galat. 3.24. and to be the rule of our liues, and to shew vs the corruption of our natures and our weakenesse: and what we cannot doe, and so to humble vs, and to driue vs from it selfe, to seeke after grace and mercy in Christ. FINIS Decalogi.
