7736 S117606 99852818 18169
CERTAINE ARGVMENTS TO PER∣SWADE AND PROVOKE THE MOST HONORABLE AND HIGH COVRT OF PAR∣liament now assembled, and also all other in any high au∣thority, or in any grace, and credite with them that are in high authoriy, to promote and advance the sincere Ministery of the Gospell; as also zealously to speake for the Ministers therof now degraded, deprived, silenced, or admonished, or afterward like to be called into question, for Subscription, Ceremonyes, strict observation of the booke of common prayer, or for other conformitie. 1 Sam. 2.30. Them that honor me I will honor: and they that dispise me, shall be despised. Math: 12.30 He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathereth not with me, scattereth. Therefore, 1: Cor: 16.13. Watch ye: stand fast in the faith; quite you like men, and be strong. Imprinted 1606.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, Honorable, Worshipfull. etc. TOuching these arguments following, my humble petiti∣on to the Christian reader (of whatsoever sorte and cō∣dition) is this, that they may not be taken as procee∣ding from one suspecting any religious Noble man or gentleman of the Parliament house, but rather from one as with all thanks to God, acknowledging the godly forwardnes of many in both houses, so also earnestly desiering to quicken the zeale of the best, and to provoke all other, to take the cause heere handled to heart, not onely as the cause of poore distressed men, but as the cause of God; yea, to accompt it also the maine cause of the whole land, of your selues and all your posteritie, and therefore to prefer the same (according to the daily most godly prayer of your selues, in your house of Parliament) before all other causes whatsoever, either concerning any particuler persons, or the whole common wealth. Whereas I haue perswaded them to whom I haue directed these reasons to vse all meanes they may for the doeing of any good; I desire that my words may not be vncharitably construed of any other meanes then such, as are sutable to the cause, viz. of good honest, lawfull, peaceable & agreable to every mans calling. The like charitable construction I craue of any other wordes, which some parhaps may maliciously wrest against my self & the cause. Wheras also some may seeme to pretend feare of his most ex∣cellent Maiesties displeasure to hinder their zeale and courage; such I entreate to consider, how dishonorable (if not disloyall) it is, in good causes to feare the displeasure of a Prince, who besides his
most Christian education from his infancy, hath long time publikly given so many worthy testimonyes of his piety and godlines. Loue thinketh no evill of any, much lesse of such a Christian Prince, It beleiveth all and hopeth all of every brother, much more of a religious King. It is the glory of a King not only to find out the secrets of other, but also sometime to cō∣ceale his owne. Therefore it is not meete by present wordes or deedes, (whereof sometime there may be a deepe reason) alwayes to iudge of the mind. Iehu pretended one thing (when he procla∣med a sacrifice for Baal) but he intended another: Ioseph a long time delt roughly (both in word and deede) with his brethren; yet in the end he sheewed himselfe most lovinge and kind vnto them. Our Saviour (for the triall of the woman of Canaan) see∣med a long time to repell her sute, for her daughter, first by si∣lence, 2. by a sharp reprehension of his Disciples petitioning in her behalfe: and 3. by a more sharp answer to her selfe. At the last notwithstanding, he did most graciovsly open the treasures of his riche compassion towards her, and sent her away with a bun∣dant comforte. Constantius the Father of Constantine the Great (as Evsebius reporteth lib. 1. de vita Constantini, cap. II.) at his first entrance into the Empire, made solemne procla∣mation, that all which served him in his Court, should ei∣ther worship Devills, (after the manner of the Heathen) or giue over their places of dignity and honor, and so to be bannished from his Court. But by this meanes when he had tryed them that were faithfull, then (to the farre greater honor of his Princely wisedome and piety, then if he had plainly and simply at the first professed the Christian religion,) He disgraced those that had so revolted from God, and rebuked them with a most Princely and religious rebuke, saying, That they were Traitors to God, and vnworthy the service of an Empe∣rour. For how (quoth he) can they keepe faith vnviolat to∣wards
the Emperour, which are manifestly convinced to be vnfaithfull to the most excellent and mightie God. On the contrary, those that for conscience had forsaken their pla∣ces, and given over their honors, he most highly graced, as those that would be faithfull to the Emperour, because they had been so vnto God: yea, he pronounced them worthy to be reckoned among the cheife and principall frends of the Emperour, and to be worthily much more esteemed, than Treasuries full of great riches. Therefore also he prefer∣red some of them to speciall attendance vpon his owne person, and other some he advanced to the cheife goverment of the Em∣pire vnder himselfe. I leaue the application of these things. Onely I wish such con∣sideration of them, that men may not be rashe (vpon any supposed apparances) to iudge Christian Princes, especially who in fromer times haue many wayes testified their sincere religiō: yea I wish less censuring of them, and more earnest praying for them in secret before him that seeth insecret & hath promised to reward openly yea as David blesed the Lord God of Israell, and the counsell of Abigail, and Abigaill her self, for keeping him from sheading innocent blood, 1 Sam. 25.32. &tc. so (to omit what thanks you may haue from his most excellent Maiesty) who also knoweth, how euen they, that for the present doe most re∣sist the matters heerafter pleaded for, will in the end blesse God & your counsell, and your selues for staying them from their proceed∣ing in their hard courses against the ministery of the Gospell, & the salvation of the people depending thervpon? Finally, albeit I could haue added many other arguments to these that I haue here written for the further wheting of the zeale of those to whom these causes principally appertayne yet seing these doe a rise to such a quantite; I thought it best to spare the further paynes of my selfe, and of the reader: hoping that these which I
haue written, shall be sufficient so to kindle the zeale of them that loue the Lord Iesus and his truth, that they shalbe so full of matter (as Elihu speaketh of himselfe Iob 32.19) that their spirit within them, shall compell them, and that their bel∣lyes shall be as the wine which hath no vent, and like the new bottles that burst, that so they may speake to take breath, and open their lipps for answer of them (if any such doe sheew themselues) that doe oppugne, or shall op∣pugne the sincere ministery of the gospell. In which hope I commend them to God, and to the word of his Grace. Errata page 10. lin: 28. repreesing for repressing page 12. lin: 9 put in, it, at the end page 11 lin: 1 thines for thinges page 13, lin. 19 after suckling make a comma ibid: lin: 26 for sware read sweare page 14 lin. pen: for agd, read and ibid: lin: vltim: for mounks, read monks page 16 lin: 11 for raa¦dy read ready page 17 lin: 5 for wouds read words page 19 lin:  alination for alienation ibid: lin: 19 inmitating for inmitating page 15 lin: 20 for use read use.
CERTAINE ARGVMENTS TO PRO∣VOKE THIS PRESENT HIGH COVRT of Parliament to zeale, for the Ministers now silenced. For the ground of all that followeth (to omitt with∣out long discourse that principall poynt that the Gospell is the power of God vnto salvation (as that which I hope is doubted of none) It is to be considered that the Ministers in perticular aboue mentioned,  are the Ministers of Christ, sent by God, and in grace and favor with God. This is euident. 1. by the hatred of all sortes of the wicked and vngodly men, Papists Athists & Carnall Gospellers in speciall manner against them. If ye were of the world (saith our savyour) the world would loue his owne, but because ye are not of the world but I haue chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Ioh. 15.19.2. By their vnblāeable life in all other things, the matter only of Conformity excepted. This hath bin & dayly is acknow∣ledged by those that are Iudges against them for the said Conformity. And albeit contempt, singularity, and am∣bition be obiected vnto them, yet how vniustly this is ob¦iected, doth evidently appeare by the manifould reproch¦es, the great molestations, losse of liuing, to the vndoing of them selues their wiues and Children, and many other wronges, iniuryes, & indignities which they haue suffred and dayly doe suffer 3. As by their guifts wherwith they are furnished for their callinges, and by their paines and dilligence accordingly in their callinges, so especially by
the blessing of God vpon their said paines and dilligence in the knowledg & obedience of the people in such places where they liue, and in the mutuall loue and peace of such people among them selues: wheras in other places men for the most parte are ignorant of all duty to God and man, and therefore prophane, irreligious, contentious, and apt to sedition & rebellion as all experience teacheth vs. This argument iustificth their calling. For how could they so preach to such effectes of knowledge, godlines, loyalty, peace and loue except they were sent Rom. 10.15. That which the Apostle saith to the Corinthians in the like behalfe touching his Apostlship, may also be said in this touching the ministery and calling of these men vnto those people where they are and among whom the Lord hath so blessed their ministeriall labors, Are ye not my worke in the Lord? If I be not an Apostle to other, yet doubtle I am vnto you: for yea are the seale of my Apostleship in the Lord 1. Co 9.1.2. And againe, ye are our Epistle written in our hartes, which is vnderstood and read of all men in that ye are manifested to be the epistle of Christ, ministred by us & written not with ink but with the spirit of the liuing God, not in tables of stone but in fleshy tables of the hart 2. Cor. 3.2.3. Sith it is so, not to speake & put forth your selues in be∣half of thes men is to spare speach & paynes for God him selfe & for Christ Iesus. Exod. 16 2. 1. Sam. 8.7. Luk. 10.16. If they are said to deny bodily food aparrell & lodging vnto Christ himselfe, that deny these thinges to the least of his elect, Math. 25.40. May not they much more be said to spare speech and paines for Christ, that spare their speech & paines for the everlasting salvation of many thousand soules. yea this cannot be denied, sith all the Godly haue put on the Lord Iesus Gal. 3.25. And are flesh of his flesh and
bone of his bone Ephe. 5.30. Finally let this argument the more prevaile with all men in regard of all that Christ Iesus (whose cause this is shewed to be) hath suffered and done for vs. 2 It is also to be considered that the ministery of the Ghospell, is not only for earthly men,  but also for heauen ly Angels. Therefore as the Cherubins were commaun∣ded to be sett with their faces towards the Mercy seate. Exod. 25.20. as looking and listening after the Oracles of God that should be geiven frō the mercy seate to the Church, so it is not onely somewhat obscurely said concerning those thinges that are shewed by them that preach the Gospell by the holy Ghost, that the Angells doe desier to behold the saide thinges, 1. Pet. 1.12. But least any man should thinke that to be vnderstood onely of the accomplishing of the matters preached in the finall, and perfect salvation of the elect & whole Church; it is also plainely and most perspecuously written, that one cheife end, purpose, and intent of prea∣ching the said Gospell, and the vnsearchable riches of Christ in the Gospell contained, and of making cleere vnto all men the fellowship of the mystery of the Gospell, was this, that now vnto principalities and powers in heavenly places, (that is unto An∣gels) might be knowe by the Church (not the great salvation of the Lord) but the manifold wisdome of God. Ephes. 3.10. To speake therfore for the Gospell & for the sincere mi∣nistery & Ministers therof, is to speake not only for God, but also for the Angels. To spare speaking & other paines taking for the Gospell and sincere ministery thereof, is to spare speaking and taking paynes for God himselfe & for his blessed Angels: and so consequently, to provoke both the Lord himselfe of heaven & earth, and also the whole host and army of heaven against vs. For, what else may
be hoped for where there will not so much as earnst words be spoken for God, or for his Angels? 3 As Ioseph having interpreted the Dreame of Pharaoh his cheife Butler touching his reconciliatiō againe to the grace of Pharao,  and the recovery of his former pace of honorable service before Pharao, desiered him to haue him in remembrance when he shohold be so reconciled & restored, Gen. 40 14. So it is recorded by the holy Ghost, & acknowledged by the said Butler, as a great fault, that he had not remebred Ioseph but forgottō him Gen. 40.23. & 41.9. If it wereso great a fault in Pharao his Butler, not to remember & speake for one Ioseph, that had interpreted one dreame touching his reconcilement to a mortall Prince: and the recovery of an earthly preferment, (nether of which notwithstading he knew not how long he should enioye, at the most he could not enioye them any longer then during onely na∣turall life) how great then is the fault of all those, that neg lect to speake for many ministers of the Gospel, that haue not once but often, & dayly interpreted many mysteries of God, toucing their reconciliatiō with God himselfe & their everlasting advancmēt in heavenly places Ephe. 2.6. To walke in white with Christ Iesus, yea, to sit also with him in his throne, as he himselfe sitteth in the throne of his Father? Apoc. 3.5. & 21. Yea verely, as the fault of the Butler was the lesse, because being enlarged he had none to remember him of that duty, so the fault of thos shalbe the greater, that haue many dayly to put them in minde therof, and to provoke them thereunto, and yet for all that doe hold their peace. 4 The whole Army of Israell spake with great courage in behalfe of Ionathan thus,  Shall Ionathan dye who hath migh∣tely delivered Israelle? God forbid. As the Lord liveth, there shall not one hayre of his head fall to the ground, for he hath wrought
with God this day. 1. Sam. 14.45. Were this cōmon people that lived under the Law, & which had not had so plenti∣full & cleere instruction as is now revealed by the gospel, were this common people (I say) so zealous for Ionathan in regard onely of a bodily deliverance, from bodily eni∣myes, whereof he had not been the author, but onely an instrument of God; and shall not this high Court of Parliament now assembled, being the cheife flower of this whole Realme of England, and representing the whole Realme, be zealous and earnest for many whom God hath used as his instruments, & who haue wrought with God and dayly would so worke with God (if they may haue liberty) for the spirituall deliverance of many thousandes from spirituall enimyes, even to turne them from darknes to light, and from the power of Sathan to God, that they may haue forgiunes of sinnes, and inheritance among them that are sainctified by faith in Christ. Actes 26.18? 5 It is not to be frogotten,  with what courage & good successe Nchemiah spake for the materiall Ierusalem to Artashasht an heathen and prophane King Neh. 2.2. &c. as also how most vertuous & noble Q. Esther, being indeed provoked by poore Mordecai, adventured her selfe to speake to the like conditioned King Ahashuerosh, in be∣halfe of the old people of God the Iewes, for preventing of their bodily bloudsheed, notwithstanding she had not been called vnto the King in 30 dayes before, and notwithstan∣ding there were a law of the King, that whosoever man or womā should come vnto the King in the inward Court not called, should dye, except such as to whom the King should haue held forth his golden rod. It is not (I say) to be forgottē, but reli∣giously to be remembred, how notwithstanding the fore∣saide danger and her former feare and weaknes in that re∣spect,
yet at the last shee promised Mordecai to adventure her selfe saying, If I perish, I perish: and how also after pra∣yer and fasting of her selfe and her Ladyes, and of the rest of the Iewes in Shushan for her, she entred to the King & spake for her people: and what gratious successe she had, notwithstanding the power and might of their cheife ad∣versary, and his great grace and favour with the King. Did these persons so adventure themselues to speake be∣fore such Kings, and did the God of heaven giue such gracious successe in their attemptes? And shall Christian Noble men & gentlemen now assembled in high Court of Parliament, where they may speake, and other in other places of authoritie and grace and favour with christian Princes, feare to speake for the people of God, to a christi∣an King, whose education from the Cradle in all pyety, former raigne and goverment, and religious profession hitherto, doe giue better encouragement: God forbid? And farr be all such feare and cowardlines from all that professe and know the Gospell of Iesus Christ. Yea, if there by any so fearefull and cowardly, let them seriously consider the second wordes and message of Mordecai to Ester. Thinke not that thou shalt escape in the Kings house more then all the Iewes: For is thou houldest thy peace at this tyme, comfort and deliverance shall appeare to the Iewes out of ano∣ther place, but thou and thy Fathers house shall perish. Who kno∣weth whether thou art come to the Kingdome for such a time. Ester, 4.13. Let them (I say) wisely and in the feare of God consider this message, to provoke themselues to the more zeale and christian bouldnes, with all humilitie and mo∣destie. Let them not thinke that they by their greatnes shall procure a better ministery of the Gospell to them∣selues and their houses then other haue. If it be restrained
from other, as of late it hath been, they shall not long en∣ioye more liberty thereof then other. Yea, if they at this tyme and in that place where there is such fredome of speech hold their peace, and doe not with all their guifts and graces of knowledg, wisedome, zeale, compassion, modesty, and humility that may be, put forth themselues in furtherance of the sincere ministery of the Gospell, and removing the lets and impediments thereof: suerly helpe may come in these thinges vnto the Church by some o∣ther meanes, but let thē take heed that the Lord of hostes call them not to an accompt & other reckoning for this their fearefulnes. Further to ad one other example breif∣ly, If fearefull Ioseph of Arimathea went boldly to Pilate & asked the body of Iesus, And if Nicodemus (before as feare∣full as the said Ioseph) joyned with him in the honorable buriall therof when Christ was dead, and the whole state being enimyes vnto him, had now prevailed and gotten that which long they had laboured for against him, yea, when all the Disciples had forsaken him, and some of the cheifest Champions had denyed him, Oh how dishono∣rable with men, and inexscusable and vnanswerable be∣fore God shall it be, that so many having learned more of Christ then either Ioseph and Nicodemus, or all the Dis∣ciples themselues had then learned, and having also be∣fore boldly professed and promised much for him, and living in a kingdome professing Christ and maintainying his Gospell, and under a most gratious & religious King, and being in place of freedome of speech and now also assembled cheifely and principally for that end (for what are all statuts for the Common wealth without regard of the Church) how dishonrable (I say) with men, and how inexscusable and vnanswerable before God & his Sonne
Iesus Christ when he shall come to judgment shall it be, that such persons in such a kingdome, vnder such a Kinge in such a place, at such a time, shall not dare to speake for whole Christ Iesus, risen againe from the dead, ascended into the heavens, there sitting in all power, glory and ma∣jestie? Yea finally being readie to come to judge both the quicke and the dead, both men an Angels? Oh therefore yee that loue this Lord Iesus, Christ, take heed of such fearefulnes, yea, feare so to be a fraide of speaking for him, for his Gospell and for his servantes. 6 Let the great heavines of many Congregations,  Men, Weomen, Children, Masters & servants, of all ages and conditions, be pittifully considered. God regarded the weeping of bond Hagar, and reprobate Ishmaell in the want of the water of this life. Gen. 21.16. He graciously re∣spected the poore women that complayning of the cruel∣ty of their Husbands in forsaking them, and vexing them by takinge other wyues, had covered his Aulter with their teares. Malac. 2.13.14. The Lord Iesus also pytied the people, yea, his bowel; yerned within him, to see them scattered as sheepe with∣out shepheard: Math. 9.36. Mar. 6.34. yea he did graci∣ously respect the petitions of many touching the bodily miseryes of their children, frends, and servants, yea the suits of some for bodily comfort of their children though themselues were not of the children of Israell but Heathē and Cananits, and litle better in that respect then Doggs. Math. 15.22. How then should the spirituall miseryes of many thowsands, partly already deprived, and partly like to be deprived of their faithfull Pastors, who haue broken the bread: and powered out the water of eternall life vn∣to them, and performed the dueties as it were of loving
bands, and who by such Pastors and Preachers, haue been turned from darknes to light, and delivered from the power of Sathan vnto God, and who now therefore in the want of them, doe cover the Lords Aulter with teares, and make lamentable mone (as the Turtle Doue, that hath lost her mate) for help to themselues and theirs, against the pre∣sent and future spirituall calamities, how I say ought all these things to wring and wrest, pity and compassion fro all in authority to wards them? O therefore let not their mone and lamentation be neglected. 7 To regard these Ministers hitherto spoken of, is to re∣gard the whole land. For it is not to be doubted, but that it may be spoken of them: as well as of some other, that, they are the Chariots and Horsemen of England, as the like is acknowledged for Israell, not onely of Elia by Elisha, 2. king 2.12 but also of Elisha by Ioash a wicked King of Israel, 2. King. 13.14. If God be with vs who can be against us; Rom. 8 31. And if the Almightie be our defence (as Eliphas speaketh to Iob, Iob 22.25.) We cannot but be in peace and safity. Now God hath not promised to be with any for their defence, but such as receiue his Gospell. In the Ministery also of the Gospell, consisteth the wealth and honor of e∣very people, Pro. 3.16. Psa. 46.12. And the glory of every kingdome, as the glory of Israell did in the Arke. 1. Sam. 4.21.22. And the peace of Nations. For therefore as well as for other respects, the Gospell is called the Gospell of peace Ephe. 6.15. compared with Isai. 2.4. and 11.6. and 65.25. Finally, the whole outward prosperity of all Kings & kingdomes consisteth principally in the pure worship of God, and the menaes that commends the same 2. Chro 14.14.17.10.27.6.24.26. 2. King. 18.7. Therefore they cannot be faithfull to Kings & kingdomes, neither to themselues
that neglect the true worship of God & the meanes ther∣of. Therefore also as Ester said of those that provoked A∣hashuerosh against the Iewes, so may it be said of all those that perswade the suppression of the Gospell and of the ministers thereof, Such adversaries cannot recompence the Kings losse Ester 7.4. If therefore ye will not respect the state of Ministers, their wiues and children, yet respect your selues, your wiues and children, yea, our King and whole kingdome, even touching the outward estate of your selues & yours, of King and kingdome. And if yee loue the safitie, peace, wealth, and glorie of King, and Kingdome, and of your selues and youres, then speake & doe, what you all, and e∣very one of you may, for the Gospell & ministery therof. 8 It is the duety of all Princes & Magistrates,  and also of their Courtes, to execute iustice and iudgment in the morn∣ning, and to deliuer the oppressed &c. Ier. 21.12.22.2. espe∣cially to do iustice towards the soules of men. Therefore this especially doth belong to this high Court of Parli∣ament as being the highest Court we haue for iustice and iudgment vpon earth. As Abraham therefore said vnto God, Shall not the Iudge of all the world doertght Gen. 18.25. so say I to this present court, shall not the highest Court of all this, Kingdome doe right? Yea this is the more at this present to be considered, because this iustice that now I speake of, is not only the Iustice of God, but also of this Land. For it is abundantly of late proued, that all the late proceedinges, against the ministers, in repreesing of their ministery, and in depriving them of their free houldes, is contrary to the lawes of this kingdome, both to Charta Magna, and also to many statutes. The same is to be vnderstood of the oath ex officio of ma∣ny
of the late Canons, and of diuers other thines. It is al∣so against reason, that the besest Cobler and Tinker can∣not be eiected from his free hould of but ten shillings by the yeare, but by a Iury of 12 men, and before some of his Maiesties Iudges in sollemnte forme of lawe, and that the ministers and Ambassadors of Christ Iesus, in the mat ters of eternall life, should be case out of their free hould, of what worth foeuer, by one man only, and not only without any Iury, but also without any complaint or ac∣cusation against them. If it be obiected that this that I haue said to be the iustice of this kingdome, is but the opinion of some priuat per∣sons, let the ministers finde fauor with this high Court of iustice, to haue the former canses in the said Court de∣bated, as many the like haue bin hearetofore & daily are. Shall priuat causes be resepected by you, yea shall matters of purveyors and such like of small moment for the com∣mon wealth, come before you, and be so largely discus∣sed and handeled by you, and shall not so many publique causes of so many, of such quality, and for the Church be regarded? yea not the cause of God him selfe? shall God and his sonne Christ Iesus, in the cause of his Gos∣pell and ministers thereof, stand as it wear at your parlia∣ment house dore knocking, and craving to be let in, & to haue their causē heard, & shall not your dore be opened? Beware of this, least ye knock also at heaven dore, & there be none found to open, or to answere vnto you. 9 May if further please them to whom this present writing is directed, to call to minde the promises made to them, that shew any kindnes to any of the Children of God & disciples of Christ, especially to any Prophet in in the name of a Prophet Mat. 10.41. As also to consider that
God is not vnrighteous, that he should forget such worke & labor of loue. Heb. 6.10. but that he is faithfull that hath promised. Heb. 10.23. and that God is not as man, that he should ly nei∣ther as the sonne of man, that he should repent: hath he said it & shall not he do it? and hath he spoken, and shall not he accomp∣lish it? Numb. 23.19. He that made Saule, (though vnnaturall to his owne children, 1 Sam. 14.49. and a cruell murderer of the preists of the Lord. 1. Sam. 22 18.) to shew mercy to the Kenits, (as were the rocke to yeeld water) 1. Sam. 15.6. For the kind∣nes of Iethro, (otherwise called Keni, Iudg. 1.16) towards the Israelits, in giueing onely good counsell to Moses, for the better outward goverment of the Israelits, 400. yeares before Exod. 18.17. Shall he forget, the kindnes, that shall be shewed to the Ministers of the Gospell, and to the people committed vnto them, and depending upon them, for the food and salvation of their soules? Was the kindnes of the Shunamite, towards one pro∣phet Elisha, plentifully recompenced; 1. by the guift of a Sonne after long barrennes; 2 by restoryng her said sonne to life being dead, 2. Kings 4-16.3 by forewarning her of a famine to come, and admonishing her, to provide for her selfe Chap. 8.1. 4 by directing her, by God his gratious providence, to come with petition to the King, for resti∣tution of her lands (that had been seised in her absence to the Kings use) at that very instante, when Gehazi was tel∣ling the King the great acts of his M. Elisha, and particular ly how he had raised this womans sonne from death to life: (by which her commyng in such a season she present ly obtayned, not onely her lands, but also all the meane profites that in time of her peregrination, had been taken by the Kings receiver:) was (I say) such little kindnes of
this woman, to one prophet, so plentifully recompensed; and shall not the favour that is shewed to many Ministers of the Gospell, (the least wherof, for office is greater then Iohn the Baptist, who notwithstanding was greater then any prophet, and then whom there was not a greater, a∣mong the sonnes begotten of weomen, Math. 11.9.) shall not (I say) such kindnes towards such Ministers as are in so great reckening with God, be remēbred & rewarded? 10 On the contrary consider, who hath said,  Touch not myne annoynted, and doe my prophets no harme: psal. 105.15; As also what is threatened, to them that doe the least harme, to the least children of God, even in their outward states, Yea, what God commaunded to be written against the Amalikits, and sware to performe, onely for resisting his people, in their iorney towards the earthly Canaan, which was but a type of the heavenly. Exod. 17.14.15. And what also afterward (even 400. yeares after the premises) he caused to be executed by Saule against them, without any pity or compassion, towards any man, woman, infante, or suckling Oxe, Sheepe, cattell, or Asse 1 Sam. 15.3. Was it so heinous be∣fore the Lord, to hinder his people in their iourney to∣wards the earthly Canaan, & shall it be a light thing with men now, not to further the elect in their meanes of, and iourney vnto, the heavenly Canaan, tipically prefigured, by that earthly? If the Lord did also sware, by the excellencie of Iacob, that suerly he would never forget the crueltie, that was excerci∣sed by the rich men of Iudea, against the poore of the land, in their outward state, yea, that the very land should tremble, and that every one should mourne that dwelled therin &c. For the the said sinne. Amos 8.7. Will the same Lord then, which is alwayes the same in Iustice, as well as in mercy, lightly
passe by any cruelty towardes the soules of his people? Let not the states assembled in this High Court of Parliament, or in any place of authority, grace, and favor, where their word spoken in his place, May be like vnto Ap∣ples of gould with pictures of silver, Pro. 25.11. Let them not (I say) wash their handes of this argument, because they haue no hand in any proceeding against the Ministers, or in restrainying of their ministery: fith it is all one so to pro¦ceed &c. And not to heelp them that are so proceeded against by other especially when power is in their hands to helpe. For it must never be forgotten, which is written for an everlasting truth, and a perpetuall instruction, (Curse ye Meroz: (sayd the Angell of the Lord) curse the inbabi∣tant thereof, because they came not to heelp the Lord, to heelp the Lord against the mightie. Iudges 5.23. In which place this is likewise worthy the observation of all men, that they are esteemed not to help the Lord, that came not out to help his people. If there were so fearefull a curse pronoū¦ced by the Angell of the Lord gainst them that did not helpe his people, against the mightie enimyes of their outward state, may they think themselues secure & with out daunger, that heelp not the Lord and his people, a∣gainst the mighty that oppugne the everlastying salvation of their soules? 11 Pharao in the tyme of dearth, provided at his owne cost for the Idolatrous Preists of Egypt, that they might not fell their land: Gen. 47.22. Shall then so christian a king dome, as this long tyme hath been, in the time of plentie proceed so hardly against the painfull ministers of the Gospell, that they, their wiues and children shall weepe agd mourne for want? And will no man open his month in their behalfe? Were the Mouncks and Friers at the disso∣lution
of their Idolatrous houses, (in the twilight of the Gospell,) provided for duringe their liues, though they never had done any good? And shall the ministers of the Gospell, that haue converted many to God, and spent themselues, and wasted their patrimony, first, in fitting themselues for the worke of the ministery, and after by their sufferings and troubles, so that they haue nothing left for their comfort in their age, be neglected? Though this hath not been regarded, by those that deprived thē, yet farr be it, from this most Honorable Court, that any heart would be found therein so hard and stony, as not with commiseration to pity them. 12 Much also may the prayers of such ministers for this Court of Parliament, and for every state and degree ther of, and for other, be regarded: for the prayer of the righte∣ous availeth much if it be fervent, Iames 5.16. And the pra∣yers of the Saints are compared To Harpes & golden vialls full of odours &c. Apoc. 5.8. God would haue Abimelech King of Gerar, to make such accompt of this argument, that for the same he would haue him to uso Abraham the better, Gen 20.7. Nether did the Apostle Paule onely; for this cause, most earnestly craue the prayers of the meanest christiās, in those Churches to which he wrote: but also wicked Pharao did eanestly desire the prayers of Moses and Aaron, Exod. 8.8. Darius also, though an heathen King, did there∣fore commaund all things necessary, for the building of Ierusalem, to be a boundantly ministred to the Iewes, that they might pray for the Kings life, and for his sonnes, Ezra 6 10. How much more then ought such christian assemblies as this present High Court of Parliament is: to labonr the more, for the comfort of God his children, especially
his faithfull ministers, that thereby they may be incoura∣ged to prayer the more earnestly, for them and theirs. 13 Suerly (saith our Saviour) The harvest is great,  and the laborers are fewe, praye ye therefore the Lord of the haruest, that he would thrust forth laborers into his harvest. Math. 9.37.38. Will our Saviour, haue all to pray the Lord of the har∣vest, that he would thrust forth laborers into his harvest, and may any men then, by head & shoulders thrust labo∣rers out of his harvest? It would be accompted madnes, for a man to thrust laborers out of his owne harvest, whē his harvest is raddy for the sickle, and he hath not laborers enough; But it is impietie to thrust laborers out of the Lord his harvest, especially such, as whom himselfe had before thrust forth into his harvest, furnishyng them with sickle and all other thinges necessary? And lastly, such as had done good service in his harvest? Againe, will our Sa∣viour, haue men onely to praye the Lord of the harvest, for thrusting forth of laborers into his harvest, and will he may they thinke, that they are onely to praye for their dayly bread, and that they need to doe nothing else for the getting thereof. 14 Whosoeuer (saith our Saviour) shall be ashamed of me and of my wordes,  of them shall the sonne of man be a shamed, when he shall come in his glory, and in the glory of the father, & of the holy Angels: Lue. 9.26. Is this to be understood onely of the tyme of persecution, and not also and much more, of the dayes of peace? Or are not they a shamed of Christ and of his wordes, that will not speake for him and his word? Nay let the contrary branch of the opposition tou¦ching the promise, made by our Saviour for the confes∣sing of them before his Father which is in heaven, that shall
confesse him before men, suppresse this vaine imagination: Lastly touching this poynt will they not be a shamed of Christ, but confesse him and his words before Tyrants, in the time of fiery triall, that will not shew themselues zealous for Christ and his wovds, before a State favourig and professing Christ & his words, in the dayes of peace? Truely God by his almightie power, and rich grace may mightely strengthen such men in the dayes of trouble, (notwithstanding their present feare and weaknes) but certainly in reason this is litle to be hoped for. Let no mā therfore flatter or deceaue himselfe with any such poore, simple, and shiftfull conceite. 15 Your zeale touching the Papists for more securitie against them heerafter,  that therby they may be the more easily converted from their damnable heresies; is worthy everlastyng renowne. But may it also please you to con∣sider, to what end there shall be more severe lawes made, for the bringing of them to Church, if there shall not lik∣wise be provision, that when they come there they may haue such ministers as shalbe able substantially, and soūd∣ly to confute their heresies, and to instruct them in the truth: and not such, as against whom in respect of their in sufficiency and weakenes, they shalbe able to take excep∣tion: yea whom also they shall deride: yea, and finally, by whom they shall be more confirmed in their heresies: or at the least the more, hardened against the truth. Will any man say ther may be suffieient ministers enough, though all those that are called refractary, and vnconformable be expelled? I hope the wisedome of the meanest of your Honorable assembly is such, that he will heare this an hū∣dred times, before he will beleiue it once: For sith all that now are, and were before any proceeding against those
before mentioned, were not enough, sufficiently to fur∣nish every Congregation, what will the paucity be. when from those, so many hundreds as able as any other shal∣be detracted. 16 Tovching the matters of trouble,  and molestation to the ministers hitherto mentioned, viz. Subscription, Ceremonyes, the strict observation of the booke, and o∣ther Conformity, all men know, what division & conten∣tion ther hath been betwixt the ministers of the word in this kingdome, and their brethren, as in other Churches reformed, so especially in the former part of his Majesties Dominion Scotland; and what hath been written by one parte (especially by the conformable part) in disgrace and reproch of the other. But especially, great hath been the contention and controversie heere at home: much more indeed for & about thes things, then for or about any poynt of Doctrine. This is evident, not onely by most bitter invectiue ser¦mons, private raylings, and publicke disgracefull bookes against them: (the most Cōformitans thinking that they never preach, speake, or write any thing well, except in their preaching, talke & writing, they scourge those whō they call Puritan, prescise, scismaticall, and refractary mi∣nisters) but also by the actuall severitie against them. For it may be trulie said, that in one yeare, and in one Diocesse, more haue been for these causes suspended and deprived, then in full 46 yeares throughout the whole Realme of England, either for vnsufficiencie, or for any matter of scā∣dall: albe it it cannot be denyed, that in some one Diocesse, their are more ignorant & scandolous ministers worthy of deprivation, then there are conformable ministers in all Diocesses.
By this controversie and contention among the mi∣nisters, ther hath been no lesse dissention and alination of mindes and hartes, betwixt other of his Majestiessubjects for the same things: yea, much seperation of many from their ministers, as likwise betwixt themselues. Now how dangerous this is for his Majestie and the whole land, as it doth appeare by the encrease and courage of the com∣mon adversaryes the Papists, according as the ministers and people for those causes haue been molested and dis∣graced, so it is further evident by reason. Because as the concord, peace, and good agreement is a principall part of the strenght of a King and kingdome, so their discord and contention, cannot but be daungerous for King and kingdome. For our Saviour himselfe (speaking according to the common speech of other) saith, That a kingdome de∣vided against it selfe, cannot stand. Marc. 3.24. What is therefore to be done in this case? How may these controversies and contentions be well pacified, and best compounded? Verily by inmitating therin God him∣selfe, the God of peace. For as he is and must be acknowled∣ged best of all, so heerin also, he hath given vs the best pre∣sident, the best patterne. What is that? When he faw the great division and hatred betwixt the Iewes & the Gen∣tiles, he tooke away the partition wall betwixt them, which was also called by the name of hatred, because for it the Iewes had hated the Gentiles, and the Gentile likewise the Iewes. What was the partition wall? The law of commaun∣dements standing in ordinaunces, that is in Ceremonyes, which he himselfe had given to the Iewes. Ephe. 2.14.15 For thereby, cannot be understood the morall law, which from the beginning had as well concerned the Gentiles, as the Iewes; But the Ceremoniall law being that, in re∣spect
wherof, the Iewes in pride had contemned the Gen tils, and for which the Gentils likewise, in no lesse mallice had envied the Iewes, as having such a law by thēselues as for the which, they neither would not might commu∣nicate with the Gentils in their heathenish worship: the Lord therefore did altogether remoue the same, that so not onely they which were once farr from God, might be made neere by the bloud of Christ (whereby the partition wall was broken downe) but that they also that had ben before twaine, might be made one (as it were two houses made one, by breaking downe of one wall, or two feildes layd into one by taking away of one hedg) that so there might be peace. The Lord might haue communicated the Ceremo∣nies of the Iewes vnto the Gentils, or geiven new vnto both. But sith he made this peace onely by removing those Ceremonyes together, that himselfe had once in∣stituted, and did not ordayne any in their place, then con∣sider I (beseech you) in your godly wisedōes, how much more it behoueth all those Ceremonyes and ordinances, which were onely invented by man, to be vtterly remo∣ved, having especially no necessary use, but being rather bones of contention betwixt brethren, and children of the same Father and Moother, and coheyres of the same inheritāce: as also people of the same Nation, and subjects of the same King and Soveraigne. Yea consider (I beseech you againe) the more seriously, how necessary it will be, thus to make peace, not onely because this. peace will be exceedingly beneficiall (as hath been shewed) to King & kingdome, (especially the common adversaryes so now combining themselues against vs) but also because it wil be a worke most acceptable to God. For Blessed are the peace makers for they shall be called the children of God. Math. 5.9
17 In the next place (that I may heape vp many thinges to geather,  and contriue many arguments into one) I doe offer to your wise and godly considerations, the works of God a mongst vs: his works of Iustice, and his works of mercy: togeather with the ends for the which he hath wrought them before vs, and the vses, which he would haue vs to make of them. First therefore be yee pleased to call to minde, the late mightie and fearefull pestilence, wherby in all places (almost) of the land, but cheifely here in London, the Lord made heapes upon heapes. Doth the Lord chastise particular persons, that he may teach them in his law, Psal. 94, 12. Drawe them neerer vnto him, and make them more plentifully partaker of his holines? Heb. 12.10. Yea, and that they may be more zealous & amend. Revel. 3.19 And are not these as well the ends, why he chastiseth whole States, Churches and kingdomes, as the sinnes of whole States, Churches and Kingdomes, are the causes that first moue him so to chastise them? Yea, is not this the more to be considered, because this rod of God doth still remaine and linger, as here in London, so also in divers other places of the land? For doth not the Lord heereby intimate vnto vs, that yet that is not performed by vs which he looked for from vs? Againe, is it altogether to be neglected, that he hath so mittigated this his severity towards vs as he hath? And that he hath in parte commaunded his Angell to put vp his sword, and not to sinite so many as before he had dōe. And doth not the Lord by smyting vs in such sorte, ther∣after that if for all this we shew no better fruits of amend∣ment, he will plague us yet scaven tymes worse? Levit. 26.18. By healing vs also in part, doth he not admonish vs, that if we do not yet repent, but conrinewe still to sinne against
him, a worse thing shall come vnto us? Iohn 5.14. O ye that doe now represent the body of this land, consi∣der of this matter. What shall I heere speake of our late great danger, by the late most bloudie, horrible, vnnaturall and monstrous conspiracy of the Papists; as against all in generall, so spe∣cially against you that are now assembled, in this high Court of Parliament? Would the Lord haue every per∣son to provoke his owne soule, to prayse the Lord, for redee∣ming his soule from the graue Psa. 103.4. And would he not haue the whole land, and specially you that are now assē∣bled in high court of Parliament representing the whole land, and in speciall manner delivered, to enter into seri∣ous consultation & deliberation with your selues, what to render vnto the Lord, for all his benifits towards you? psa. 116.12 Though Hezekiah having recovered health, went first into the house of God, and made there a psalme of thanks givinge for his recovery, which yet remaineth in holy writ, as an everlasting moniment of his thankfulnes; yet because in other things, he was not generally so circum∣spect and carefull, of all obedience to God as he should haue been, but his heart was lift vp with in him, it is sayd that he rendred not vnto the Lord, according unto the reward besto∣wed vppon him; and that therefore wrath came from the Lord against him, aganst Ierusalem, and against Iuda. 2 Chro. 32.25 So let this be considred, that yee may provoke yourselues to the more publike testimony of thankfulnes, for our late publike deliverāce. And because mercy (even towards the bodyes of men) is more desired then sacrifice, and that therefore mercy towards their soules, is much more ac∣ceptable vnto God, (for which cause it is there said, that the Lord doth also more desier the knowledg of God, then burnt
offrings. Hos. 6.6.) Therefore also as God his goodnes to∣wards the whole land is knowne to all the world, so let all the world knowe, and let all ages to come be witnesses, of our thankfulnes for the same, by your present mercy towards the Church. He that biddeth vs to call vpon him in the day of our trouble, and promiseth to deliver us, requireth also that we should glorifie him. psal. 50.15. How much more then ought we to glorifie him, being in the day of our trouble delivered, before we called vpon him? Verely (most Honorable assembly) in this respect our deliverance is the greater, then the deliverance either of the Iewes from the bloudy intent of Haman, or of our selues in the yeare 1588. For the Lord did not worke thos deliverances with out the meanes of prayer and fasting: but this, his owne right hand hath brought to passe, be∣fore that ever we did open our lipps vnto him in that be∣halfe. Yea, herein is our deliverance also the greater, be∣cause though the mischeife plotted against vs was but bo¦dily, yet the mischeife plotted against our and all posteri∣ty was spirituall, even to haue reduced them, to the for∣mer bondage of popish blindnes, superstition, and Idola∣try, so to haue perished everlastingly: and therfore we that should haue been consumed touching our bodyes, and outward states in this intended massacre (if it had procee∣ded) should haue ben much better, then they that should haue lived. As it be-longeth therefore to all at all tymes to glorifie God for this great deliverance, so specially it be-longeth to you that are now assembled in this high-Court of Parliament. The Lord careth not for any observation of a day on∣ly in remembrance of his mercyes, nor for bate words in commendation and celebration of his goodnes, except
that otherwise we doe dispose our way a right: For this is the best prayse whereby he is glorified. psa. 50.25. Yea even now, and at this Session, doth the Lord require this of you. For hath not his hand of sicknes in many places continued, & doth it not still hoover over vs, from before the first sum∣moning of this Parliament, to this present Session? And did not God reveale his mercy revealing the late treason, and delivering vs from it, immediatly before the last Ses∣sion, that your meeting might be proroged, whereby in the time of Interim, ye might haue the more leasure, the better to deliberat and consult, what at this your assem∣bly might most make for the glory of his name, and the good of his Church? And will ye now dissolue your met ting without doeing of further matter in that behalfe, then yet ye haue done. Againe, are not many of you auncient, and in that re∣spect never againe to be of any other Parliament? which also of the youngest and lustiest of you knoweth, either that he shall liue to an other Parliament, or to another Session of this Parliament? Or if he shall liue to another Parliament, that he shall be chosen to be againe thereof: Or livyng to another Session of this Parliament, that he shall haue health and strenght to be present thereat. Are not some worthy men, that were at the former Sessions of this Parliament, now at rest with the Lord? Yea are not some other that were livyng & in health at the time of the last Session, now also (before the beginyng of this Session) gathered to their Fathers. Yea further, because divers of the minsters deprived and silenced (being partly very aged) & partly consumed with godly greife, (not so much for the owne troubles, (as for the desolation of the Churches, both presently
seene, and for future tymes by the present to be progno∣sticated, in as much as many most vnworthy persons are thrust into their places, (in which consideration, as Elisha wept, by me spirit of prophecie, to fore see the miserable havocke that Hazeel should make of the people of Israel, touching their bodies, 2 Kings 8.11.12. So what christian heart can refraine weepyng and bleeding, to fore thinke of the spirituall spoyle, that will be made in the Church by blind guides, corrupt teachers, and careles: yea wicked and vngodly Pastors) because (I say) many faithfull mini∣sters deprived and silenced, partly by age, and partly by godly greife, are so neere the finishing of their rase, that the ground for their graue is in a manner all ready measu∣red, therefore ye that are the Lords worthies now assem∣bled in this High and Honorable Court, doe that, that is to be done by you, for the glory of God, and comfort of his Churches and Ministers, with the more speed and ex∣pedition, that such servants of God as are so neere their end, may yet be somewhat revived and comforted before their end, and blesse you and yours before they dye, and so take their leaues also of you and yours, with the more peace and ioye to their owne soules. As your house of parliament at the last Session there∣of, should passiuely haue been the house of blood, yea the fountaine (in some sorte) of blood, that even from thence should haue flowed streames and rivers of blood through out the whole land, so let it at this Session be actiuely the house of comfort, yea a fountaine of comfort, that from thence may flowe a river (as it were the river of God) and a floude of spirituall comfort, ioye and gladnes to all the land. To all the land? Yea to all Nations that know the Lord and call upon his name: yea to all posterity. As the 26
first day of the last Session should haue been, a day of dark∣nes and of blacknes, a day of cloudes and of obscuritie (as Ioel speaketh chap. 2.2.  let the last day of this Session be a bright and cleare suneshine day, a day of light, a day of comfort and refring from the Lord. As the Lords eni∣myes, the blood and mercyles papists (merciles to them selues in muring themselues heertofore & of late, and therefore  more mercyles vnto other) as these men would ha made themselues, as a fire to devoure all be∣fore thē d as a flame to burne vp all be hind them. Ioel 2.3. So be you at are the children of God, & should therefore be mer¦cifs your Father also is mercifull Luc. 6.36. Be ye (I say) as there the rayne; even as the first and the latter rayne, Ioel 2.4. As their wrath should haue been like the roaring of a-Lyon, (as Salomon speaketh of the wrath of a King) so let your favour be (as Salomon speaketh of the favor of a King) like the dewe upon the grasse. Pro. 19.12. By this mercy that hetherto I haue (as it were at the barre of your Iustice) pleaded for, and provoked you vn∣to, ye shall not only treasure up comfort to your selues a∣gainst the day of your death, when ye shall most stand in neede of comfort, but ye shall also make your old age the more honorable; yea after your dayes heare ended, your name and memory will be honorable with all posteritie. Wherfore did Deborah say that Iael the wife of Heber should be blessed aboue other women, yea blessed aboue other women dwel ling in tents? Iudg. 5.24. Because with an hammer shee had driven a nayle so deepe into the head of Sisera sleeping in her tent, that he did never a wake. If such a sentence of blessednes were prophecied of Iael, for makeing away only an outward enimy of the out word state of the Church, how much more shall ye be
blessed, yea blessed aboue many former Parliament men, if as some haue made a beginning of the desolation of the whore of Rome in these landes, so ye shall make perfect that beginning, and vtterly take away whatsoever of her ornaments yet remayning, wherwith she and her priests were wont to be decked, and are yet decked, & wherwith also her Idols were wont to be worshipped, and are yet worshipped? And if as other haue already (in some sort) begunne to driue the nayle into the head of the Archeni∣my (next vnder Sathan himselfe) of the spirituall state of the Church, so ye shall also driue the same further? Yea if likewise as the Papists comforted themselues tou∣ching their contrived and hoped for destruction of our persons, and of our religion, saying (in dreaming sort) a∣mong themselues, as Moses said to the Israclits, these men & this religion which ye haue hitherto seene, ye shall never see a∣gaine, so likwise ye by the sword of the word of the Lord, and of your authority, (as it were by the sword of the Lord and of Gidcon, Iudg. 7.20.) if (I say) ye shall so cut of the tayle of the said whore of Rome, and (as it were) her brāch and rush, that there shalbe no more hope left to her lovers heere amongst vs, of ever committing the like spirituall fornication with her heerafter, that heretofore they haue done: that so we may cōfortably apply the former words of Moses to our selues and to our children, touching the Romish religion and all the appurtinances therof, which we haue seene, that we shall never see them againe Exod 14 23 Yea let the late conspiracie of the papists before men∣tioned, provoke you so much the more carefully, & firm∣ly to abolish their whole religion, to the least hem, of eve∣ry garment and Ceremony thereof, as also the more suer∣ly to establish the Gospell with all thinges appertainning
therevnto, and every holy meanes for the best supporting thereof, by how much more, the cursed fruites thereof, hu proclaimed it and dayly doe proclaime it, to be odi∣ou and abominable in the sight of God. Lastly, though the were then disapoynted, yet your wisdome is such, that ope ye neede not be admonished, either not to thinke that they will heereafter be idle, and giue over their occupation, of wicked and treasonable imaginatiōs, or not to neglect by all good meanes possible, to prevent whatsoever nature treacherie & conspiracie, yet they shall in their darknes, further practise against vs. 18 To conclude therefore, whilst ye haue time, and whilst it is called to day, feare that ye shall never hereafter haue the like time and oportunitie that now ye haue; and therefore as Bathsheba said to her most princely sonne Le∣muell, Open thy mouth for the dumme, and in the cause of all the  of destruction, open thy mouth, iudge righteously, and , afflicted and the poore, Pro. 31.8.9. So say I, to all them that by their place may any way doe good to the Church of God, and to any afflicted & poore members thereof. Yea as the said Queine Bathsheba saith before, giue yee strong drinke, to him that is ready to perish, and wine vnto them that haue greife of heart, that he may drinke, and forget his povertie, and remember his miserie no more, Pro. 31.6.7. So  wn all them that are of any authoritie, or in any  of grace and favour, especially this present high Court of Parliament, to giue a plentifull boll of the strōg dke of theire comfortable favour, yea an whole flagon full of the wine of their grace, that they that are now poore, and haue been long heavie hearted for the corrup∣tions & ruins of Syon, and that in the greif of their hearts are readie to perish, may drinke so deeplie therof, that they
may forget their povertie, and remember their misery no more. Iob said, that he had not contemned the iudgment of his ser∣vant, neither of his mayd, when they contended with him. Iob. 31.13. How much lesse then is the iudgment of the mi∣nisters of the Gospell, yea, of the mother of vs all (the Church of God) yea, of God himselfe, of Christ Iesus, of the holy Angels, of our selues and our posteritie, and final lie of King and kingdome (as hath been sheewed) to be neglected? As Haman said of the Iewes to Ahashuerosh, that they were a people scattered and dispersed amonge the people in all provinces of his kingdome, having lawes divers from all people, and not observing the Kings lawes, and that therefore it was not for the Kings profite to suffer them. Ester. 3.8. So I am not Ignorant that these ministers of the Gospell, of whō I haue now in these Arguments made so often mention, are charged as enimyes to the state, perturbers of the Church, seditious, schismaticall etc. But if it were lawfull and free for these men to expo∣stulate with the state touching the former matters, as Da∣vid did with the Lords annoyntrd Saule, they might not only say with David, wherefore doe ye giue eare to mens words, that say, behould David seeketh evill against you? 1 Sam. 24.10 But they might also plead their innocency, as Dauid doth his verse 12, Vnderstand and see that ther is neither evill, nor wickednes in us, neither haue we sinned against you. But in the meane time, this they may boldly say, that as the former hath been an old accusation in all ages, even against the best frends of the Church and state, so it is answered by the D. King in his 42. lecture upon Ionas pag 171. out of Augustine, that such accusations are rather by consiction the by conviction. And therefore as our most gratious Queene of most happie memory Queene Elizabeth, before she was
Queene, in her distress, in the dayes of Queene Mary, wrot with her Diamond in a glasse windowe at woodstoocke, Much suspected by me, Nothing proved can be. Even so may these men both speake and write, the same of themselues. As for such accusers as are alwayes provoking all men, especially Princes, and Nobles against them, I wish them to take heed of that fearefull cursse, wherwith David, cur∣sed those children of men before the Lord, that had sturred vp Saule against him, and that by that meanes had cast him out from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying goe serue other Gods, 1 Sam. 26.19. For my part I pray, that God may giue them a better minde, that so they may rather be the blessed of the Lord. Touching other also that haue been or are forward, in si∣lencing, depriving, or otherwise molesting of ministers, for omission of Ceremonies, not observing the booke of Common prayer in that strict manner that they doe vrge the same, and for other conformitie, (though in other things they doe and cannot but iustifie them) I am so farr from wishyng the least evill unto them, that I doe hartely praye the Lord (who hath the hearts of all in his handes) to worke such a gratious change in them, that they may by all meanes as much further the worke of God, as by their former dealing they haue hindred the same. That so they may haue all true honor in this life, and be eternal ly blessed in the life to come. Finally concernyng our most gracious Soveraigne, I haue prayed, I doe praye, and whilest I liue I will praye for him, as Salomon prayed for himselfe, 1 Kings 2.45. Let King Iames be blessed, and let his throne be stablished before the Lord forever: yea, so I pray the
Lord to blesse him, with our Noble Queene and all their Royall issue, that their earthly kingdome being ended, they may haue the heavenly, and there raigne with Christ Iesus, the King of Kings for ever, and ever. To this prayer, let all the people say Amen.
