A3406 R828 11946400 51322
AN ANSWER TO THE Dragon and Grashopper, In a Dialogue between an Old Monkey AND A Young Weazel At the Three Cranes Tavern in the Poultry, where they are daily to be seen. AS ALSO Some Remarks upon the Amsterdam and London AESOP's. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1698.
ANSWER TO THE Dragon and Grashopper, &c. THE repeated Rumours of so many Aesop's  Amrstrdam, Tunbridge, Bath, White-Hall,  speaking thro' the feigned Mouths of Asses Wo Foxes, Dogs, Owls, &c. And last of all dead D∣ons and Grashoppers, hath so animated an Old Monkey  a Young Weazel, at the Three-Crain-Tavern in the P∣try, that they are resolved to speak as well as the  and thereupon last Saturday began a serious Confere which is not yet ended, where any Person who has  curiosity, may there be further satisfied by occular ¦monstration. However, what has hitherto passed ¦tween them, I have here inserted, which for diver sake, I hope will be accepted. MONKEY. How now little Animal; why so bold to enter  Cabbin without asking my leave? WEAZEL. Most Reverend Sir, I have been lately surprized in a  therefore pray pardon my Silence, for oftentimes Traps are  for Words, us well us Wolves and Weazles. MONKEY. 'Tis very true; But that's not the Answer to my Que∣on: I ask you once more, why you came here, and  what cause? for it is not ordinary for a Weazel an Monkey to be Associates, especially in a Tavern.
WEAZEL. Sir, with submission to your grave Worship, I am  up an Extranordinary Message, no less than in the Quality of bassador from that High and Mighty Strte-Animal Menheer ¦ashopper, on the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. MONKEY. Oh, high Preferment indeed! But Cousin, you mi∣e the Person and Place too, your business, I suppose, with the Dragon on Bow-Steeple, for you Master and he e had a great Controversie of late; but I fear thou art  humble a Creature to approach his Prefence, he's ud and lofty. WAEZEL. I know his Disposition well enough; however my business present is not with him, but to acquaint thee that there is a aty of Peace on Foot between them, therefore I leave thee approach his presence; for my part, I have not the are on so much as to think of it. MONKEY Hey, hey, what is it come to that, to make choice a Monkey for Mediator? Sure the Bear that beat the um, might have been thought more worthy of that nour, for he speaks their Language better than I can. WEAZEL. is true, Monsieue Dragon gave that Creaturea favour∣e Character at their last Conference, but Menheer Grashop rejected him as a Counterfeiter, and not as a true Imitator of ir Speech and Actions, and made choice of thee, a wise, so  Creature, every way qualified for such a mighty un-dertaking. MONKEY. So, so, Cousion, I find the Old Proverb true with a ness, viz, Like Master, like Man. I see thou hast learn
their Art of Flattery to a Hairs-breadth; but no wond when Grashoppers are advanced, if VVeazels Chatter  Authority. However, to be plain with thee, I don care to meddle with two such lofty Figures, for they a both Damnable brazen-sac'd, and will stand to nothing long, let their Promises be never so fair, they being  Nature unsteady and mutable; and indeed 'tis in vain  expect any other from two Weather-Cocks, who are su∣ect to be turn'd by every shuft of Wind. WEAZEL. Most grave Sir, pray be not Angry with me, for  charging my Office; tho' they be mutuble, let us be fix'd; If t are lofty, we are lowly; If they are proud, let us be humble If they quarrel, let us agree; If they contend we'll conform;  them hate, we'll love one another; If they he Hypocrites, we'll  Honest; Therefore by my Consent, let's (now we are thus luc∣net) divers our selves only with some private (th' innoce discourse, laugh at their Folly, and leave them to themsver. MONKEY. With all my Heart; but before we proceed, tell  your Opinion, (for I know you are Cunning enoug what People will say, if it should be known that the M∣key and VVeazel have been Discoursing together, beca 'twill not be believed that beast have the Gift of Speaking. WEAZEL, VVhy, if it comes to that, I'll speak through the Lang of Balaam's Ass, in the very Face of them: Nay and more  that, if some should be so Atheistically obstinate, and account  Fictious and too far fetch'd, I'll come nearer home, and  themseveral Speaking Asses under their own Roofs; tho' per far short of Balaam's Ass for understanding; for she never  but when she had occasion, but those do it when they have  therefore why not thee and I for our Diversion? MONKEY. Hah, hah, ha! thou art a Creature of a very pleas
nversation; thou hast now hit the Nail on the Head  since I have avoided that troublesome Task of being diator between those who are never like to agree, let eave off this Ass-like talk, and return again to them hat thinkest thou of this high advanced spungy Animal  Insect, the Grashopper? WEAZEL. You or I may think of him what we will; I am sure the People  gone after him, and he now plainly tell you in what Gor∣ the VVind stands. MONKEY. How? the People gone after him! I hope not so far, t they may find the way back again, notwithstanding ists, Fogs, and Bad VVeather, which have lately hap∣ned; and as for his Directing where the winds sits, -Steeple Dragon will perform that, if not better;  in my Opinion it goes much Truer, tho' not so well as  should do. WEAZEL. No wonder if they Err in their true Course, when they conti∣ually Jar one against another; for tho' they are turn'd both with e Wind, yet one Wind doth not always turn them. I remember  other Day at their Dispute, the Grashopper boastingly told he Dragon to his Face, that she and her Sons had Out-witted im, by leaping over his Stumbling-blocks, meaning Oaths, acraments, &c. or indeed any thing else that lies in their way o Greatness. MONKEY. Well, and 'tis not yet forgotten since they both took Hands, (but now farther assunder) and leap'd over a Dreadful Stumbling-block by one Consent, though I be∣lieve one of them (but I won't say which) Repents the Bargain. I suppose you understand my meaning.
WEAZEL. Yaw, Menheer Monkey; but Divines tell us that late R∣pentance is very Dangerous, especially when the Sinner's case  desperate and deplorable: But I have no skill in Divinity therefore leave your Worship to make the Application MONKEY. All that I shall say  it, is, that tho' late Repentance not commendable, nor to be trusted too, yet it is bette than never, tho' many times  proves a great O∣stacle to it, aad sometimes  it: But what is it  thee and I, let them look to that. WEAZEL Nay, for my part, it shan't troubl , nor I  will  some of them much; However, out of , I  but pity their wilful Rashness, (I was going o say Ignorance  but considering that some (nay many) of  so plent¦fully endowed with the Gifts of Natural as  Qua¦fications, they may justly be acquitted from all manner of Suspiti of being guilty of the latter, tho' not altogether from the former MONKEY. Why, prethe no Body accuseth them either of th one or the other, unless it be their own Conscience, an perhaps many of them are Pistol-proof against that to for having assumed the Nature of weather-Cocks, a Stor can but turn them, and a Calm finds them as the last win left 'em; therefore here's (seeming) Safety enough, o would think, notwithstanding the many Scare-Crow which often hover over (nay, and sometimes light upon  their Heads, to theirs as well as others Amazement. WEAZEL. Pray Mr. Monkey, let us leave these Weather-Cck Storie and Discourse a little of the Times: Pray what News is n on foot? MONKEY. Truly none at all, as I heare of, for the Discourse  turn'd into Fables and Fictions; all the Talk is, that O
Aesop that Fablemonger, was lately seized at Tunbridge, his dget rifled, and all his Papers exposed; a-mong which ere found (as some say) both Truth and Treason, but so nningly Interwoven, as they could scarcely be discerned om one another. However, the Old Blade was so Criti∣ upon his Examination, that he was judged Lunatick, nd so committed to Bedlam (not Newgate) since which, ree more Aesop's have starced up from Bath, VVhite-hall, and Amsterdam, who all speak through the Ass, Lyon, Dog, Volf; Fox, Grashopper, Ant, Owl, Bat, &c. forcing these armless and senseless Beasts and Animals speak those Truths which themselves dare not own. This is all the ews which I hear. WEAZEL. But among all these Brutes, I hear neither of the Monkey  Weazel so much as mentioned; therefore to put a stop to the urther Rise of any of these perilous bold Fellows, we'll speak for r selves, otherwise they'l have a fling at us, by laying Magical harms upon us, to speak Treason when we think none, which ill bring us into Scandal, and down-right Contempt. MONKEY. Ay, but we'll keep out of their reach, for while they se their Slanderous Tongues, we'll use our Wits to a∣oid them. However by the by, I'll tell thee a Secret which ne of these Aesop's discovered t'other Day to a Friend of ine, that a —of the Grashoppers Gang, was to have his eeth drawn very shortly, which if true, (which I don't uch doubt of) the poor stragling half starv'd Sheep will ettle again, and feed upon their Old Common without ear; for tho' he may still hunt them, he can't hurt them, nd indeed he may Bark, but not Bite 'em. WEAZEL. This is brave News indeed; but some Aesop's say that another ill come in his Room, who has Teeth as big as the former, hich if so, he may bite too, if he pleases.
MONKEY. Ay, but he's quite of another Nature, (as I am inform being Mild, VVise, Peaceable, Prudent and Charitab besides, he's a great Friend to the Dragon, therefore con∣quently of different temper from any of the Grashop Society. WEAZEL. I am glad to hear of it with all my Heart, for it is not  unreasonable, but quite opposit to the order of Nature for Grashop∣pers to insult over Dragons. Well, Reverend Mr. Monk since such pleasant and desirable News as this has reach'd  Ears, (if it seems agreeable to your Gravity) now we are  Tavern, we'll shake off our Beastly Nature, and rejoyce ou Glass of Sack, like human Creatures; for we are Branche the Creation as well as they. MONKEY. Why, truly tho' I am not naturally given to Excess,  I was never so precisely Nice, as to deny any Inno Diversion, especially on such a happy occasion as thi But methinks, to compleat our Joy, a Loyal Drink Song, commonly call'd a Health, would be very seasonab but I'll leave you to that, for my Voice is very unplea WEAZEL. Indeed, Sir, I can't boast neither, of making any Harm Sound, yet rather than we'll lose this favourable Opportu I'll do the best I can for a Conclusion. Here's a Health to those Boys That are Loyal t'th' King, To the Dragon advancing, VVhose Praise's we'll Sing: He our Church now revives, Drink about by Consent, VVe shall Lead happy Lives Can we be but Content. Then the Glass to the Bri Fill it up with all hast, And in Sack let us swim; For the time it will wast, And while Grashopper Ze Do with Envy repine, VVe will Chear up our VVith the Juice of the V FINIS.
