A3297 R12752 12647359 65173
THE ANSWER OF The New Converts OF FRANCE, TO A Pastoral Letter FROM A PROTESTANT MINISTER. Done out of the French Copy Publish'd there with Permission. Publish'd with Allowance. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, for his Houshold and Chappel. 1686.
THE ANSWER OF THE NEW CONVERTS OF FRANCE, To a Pastoral Letter from a Protestant Minister. IT is not, Sir, to give you an Account of our Conduct that we now write to you; we know you are not in the Circumstance of approving it, and we are much troubled at it. Nor is it to Answer either your injurious Lan∣guage, or your Menaces; the Holy Ghost confirms us against them both, when he
tells us,1 Pet. 3.13, 14. Who is he that can hurt you, if you do only that which is good; but and if you suffer for Justice sake, you shall be happy. Fear not what they would make you fear, nor trouble your selves; but sanctifie our Lord God in your hearts, and be always ready to satisfie every one that asks you a reason of the hope which is in you. It is therefore in obe∣dience to these last words we have now broken that profound Silence, in which the Moderation that our Faith, as yet but tender, inspires into us, would retain us, were we not oblig'd to render an Account of that Faith, and to hinder the weak from being scandaliz'd at the Reproaches you have cast upon us, and the Church from being dishonor'd by those who are not happy enough to know her. We shall not distinguish among us, as you have done, the Libertines, those Christians whom you call cowardly; nor those whom you think you honor by the name of simple Apo∣states: because we cannot believe, but that Division was rather a Figure and an Artifice then any real Effect of your Sincerity. For we are perswaded there is not one of these
three pretended States, tho' never so Im∣pious and Libertine, but your Zeal would willingly draw back again into your Party, and not one but you would rejoyce to see become a Martyr for your Religion. The haste you would thereupon make to re∣voke the Sentence against them, should make you consider with how much rash∣ness you have pass'd it. Doubtless, Sir, you never thought of this, when you durst pronounce, There was no further sacrifice remaining for their sins, and like a God upon Earth, condemn'd them to devouring Flames. Without examining too nicely this Judg∣ment, God himself lets us see the rashness, of it,Psal. 109. when he assures us the Priesthood of Jesus Christ shall never have an end, be∣cause he will offer eternally the Sacrifice of his Cross for the Redemption of Sinners. The transgressions even of the wicked,Ezek. 18.22, 23. say what you will, God will not remember, as the Scripture tells us, from the moment he con∣verts himself from them: for I will not (saith the Lord by the mouth of his Prophet) the death of a sinner, but that he should return
from his wickedness and live. But without doubt you will say this Conversion consists in returning into your Church, which in your Letter you invite us to. But can this Proposition move a Christian, if it could not have been propos'd to him through every Age. since the Death of Jesus Christ? And could this have been done Two hun∣dred years since, before you had any such thing as a Church? It is of no purpose to tell us, as we have so often heard, That your Church subsisted always, but that it was invisible. For can the Church subsist without Faith;Rom. 10.14. and Faith, saith St. Paul, without Preaching; and Preaching with∣out some Action that is both publick and visible? Have not you your selves taught us,Conf. de Foy. 28. That where the Word of God is not re∣ceived, and where the Sacraments are not in use, no Man can judge, properly speaking, that there is a Church. All these Consequen∣ces have they not made you own, That at that time the State of the Church was dis∣continu'd? How then could any one pro∣pose to a Neophyte to embrace that Faith which they could not make him know?
Nevertheless can we, Sir, believe, that for so vast a time, that according to your selves is from the Fourth or Fifth Age to this day, in which you tell us the visible Church, which was no other but the Roman, was fill'd with Errors, or at least since the Tenth Age, when you assure us she was fall'n into all manner of Superstitions and Idolatries: Can we (I say) believe, that during so long a space of years, the Gates of Heaven were shut, the Blood and Death of Jesus Christ were ineffectual, the Kingdom of the Saviour of Mankind ceased, and the Em∣pire of the Devil was full, entire, and ab∣solute within the House of the Son of God? Do's not Jesus Christ himself teach us to the contrary,S. Mat. 16.18. S. Luc. 22.32. S. John 14.16. That the gates of hell shall not prevail against his Church? and that he has pray'd for her, that her faith shall never fail; in short, that the holy Spirit shall re∣main with her for ever? We formerly, Sir, believ'd according to the ancient Principles you taught us, That is was enough to shew the truth of these words; That there was a small number of the Faithful who liv'd according to out∣ward
appearances, in the Communion of the Roman Church, but whose Hearts you assur'd us never adher'd to its Worship; But now you not only bid us preserve our selves from that Illusion, but also tell us, that nothing is more criminal then such a thought; That such a Devotion is injurious to God; That God requires all or nothing; and that since he is the Redeemer of both, he will be glorifi'd by both. For 'tis not enough (say you after St. Paul) to believe in your heart to justice; but you must profess it with your mouth to salvation. We believe you, Sir, and we acknowledge our selves oblig'd to you for so kindly contributing to confirm us more and more in the Church we are so lately enter'd into, by leaving us no fur∣ther doubt of the newness of yours: For from henceforth where can we believe your Church subsisted during so many Ages, when you had neither Temples, nor Service, nor Assembly, nor Preachers, nor Sacra∣ments, nor Faithful? You have endeavor'd hitherto to come off by telling us, as occasi∣on serv'd, sometimes that it was visible, and sometimes that it was invisible. You said your
self to M. de Meaux, That before the Refor∣mation,P. 120. the truly Faithful were mingled with the rest in the same outward Profession. But thanks be to Heaven, we are now likewise taught by you, that we cannot believe with∣out Illusion, That one of the Faithful can pre∣serve himself in the outward Communion of the Roman Church, altho' his Heart do's not in∣cline to the Worship; and that there is no∣thing more criminal then such a thought. There remains then no further doubt, but that, according to your selves, not only the State of the Church, but even the Church it self, to make use of your own Distinctions, was discontinu'd and abroga∣ted for the space of many Ages, for that it could not maintain it self within the Com∣munion of the Roman, which alone had Churches and publick Worship: How can we reconcile this with what the Holy Ghost teaches us, That the Church is the Handy-work of the Son of God;Ephes. 5.25, 26, 27. That she is his most dear and faithful Spouse, that he pur∣chased upon the Cross by the Effusion of his most precious Blood; That he himself is the Head;1 Tim. 3.15. That she is the Pillar and Ground of
Truth; That she is to be our Judge in all our Controversies,S. Mat. 18.17. and so Infallible, that whoso∣ever do's not submit to her Decisions, is to be esteem'd as a Heathen or Publican; in short, That he will never forsake her, and that he will be always with her to the end of the World? A Christian instructed in such Les∣sons drawn out of the Holy Writ, can he find any difficulty to incline favourably towards the Roman Church, which you your selves confess has stood from Jesus Christ and the Apostles down to this Day, either in full Purity, or at least with some Alterations that you pretend have crept into it? We will not enter into an Exami∣nation of the Errors that you impute to it, that is not now our Business: but we must needs say for our own Justification, That among those that gave us the greatest hor∣ror, there are some of them in which we see you had more Obstinacy on your sides then Reason. The Real Presence, for Example, of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, was always repre∣sented to us as a Rock of Scandal in the Roman Church, as a Shelve to Shipwrack
Salvation, and as a Monster in Religion: yet this Doctrine, detestable as it is, was nevertheless receiv'd into your Church, and into your Communion with the Lutherans, who never doubted of it, and Preach'd it publickly. It is in vain to tell us, The Lutherans 'tis true believe that Jesus Christ is present in the Sacrament, but they don't adore him: For not only your own Wri∣ters, as Calvin, Beza, and others, condemn their Practice in this, but maintain, That if Jesus Christ be in the Bread, he ought to be there adored: And your own Church has declar'd by the Mouth of Daillé,P. 66. That if the Subject matter which is call'd the Sacra∣ment of the Eucharist, be in its substance not Bread, as she believes, but the Body of Christ, as those of Rome hold, it is evident that it may and ought to be ador'd, because the Body of Christ is an adorable Subject: Seeing then according to you it is allow'd to believe, that Jesus Christ is in the Sacrament; it ought likewise to be permitted, according to your own Tenets, and according to your own Authors, those who believe him present, are oblig'd to adore him there. So
that properly speaking, the Adoration of the Sacrament is nothing else but a Cavil that you make with the Church of Rome, to colour your Division: As the Com∣munion under one Species is another much more visible, and as ill grounded. Every one (say you) ought indifferently to receive the Cup,Dim. 53. according to the Command of Jesus Christ, against which it is unlaw∣ful to attempt any thing. By this Article of your Faith we have been always possess'd with a belief of the necessity of Commu∣nion in both Kinds, and always thought the contrary Practice an overthrowing of the Constitution of the Sacrament: nor should we yet have doubted of it, had not your own Practice at length open'd our Eyes, and disabus'd us. But now when we hear you determine in your Discipline, That the Bread alone ought to be Administred to such as cannot drink Wine,Art. 7. c. 12. provided they make a Protestation that it is not through contempt: Now when we see this Custom establish'd in your own Temples, why do you condemn that in the Church of Rome, which you allow and practice in your
own? If the Command of the Cup be positive, it is indispensible; if the Com∣munion in both Kinds be of Divine Insti∣tution, it cannot admit of a Modification. But (say you) are we oblig'd to Impossibi∣lities? Without examining this pretended Impossibility, which you suppose in the Faithful upon very slight Grounds, we will suppose it with you. But ought this want of Possibility in any to receive a Sacra∣ment, destroy the Sacrament? This In∣firmity may dispence with a Person from Receiving the Sacrament, and justifie his abstaining from it: but it can justifie neither Minister nor Church that gives it so divi∣ded and separated, if God has declar'd it indivisible and inseparable. In fine, if the retrenchment of one of the Species be a violation of the Sacrament, and of the Command of Jesus Christ, no Church nor Reason can authorize it. What can we then conclude, when we see your Church, as well as that of Rome, practise the same Retrenchment, but that the Communion in both Kinds is neither of necessity, nor commanded.
It is much the same concerning the Real Presence. A Man that beholds Christianity divided between the Adherents of Rome; Luther, and Calvin, and finds that by the Doctrine taught in the Churches of the two first, it is absolutely necessary for his Sal∣vation to believe, That Jesus Christ is really and substantially in the Eucharist; and hears you your selves saying, That this Belief, a∣gainst which you are such declar'd Ene∣mies, is no obstacle to Salvation;Daillé Apol. p. 43. that it contains nothing contrary either to Piety or Charity, or the Honor due to God, or the Welfare of Mankind; could this Man de∣termine with himself to follow any other Doctrine then that which he is assur'd of on all Sides to be absolutely necessary, or at least no way prejudicial to Salvation? Believe us, Sir, these insensible, tho' im∣portant Steps of yours, have had greater power over our Consciences, then all the Dragoons, so terrible and so barbarous as your Pen has study'd to describe them. But suppose the apprehension of them had made some of us reflect upon these things, which perhaps we had otherwise never so
much as thought of; would this conclude any thing but what St. Paul saith, That Kings are Gods Ministers for our good? Can you blame any Christians for Examining the Causes of a Persecution before it comes upon them, since Jesus Christ has pro∣mis'd to recompence only such as suffer for his and for Justice sake? The Spirit of the Gospel, do's it oblige us to meet Death boldly for Error, or for Truth? or is it the Suffering, or the Cause for which they suffer, that makes the Martyrs? If the Cause then be found to be Man's, and not that of God's, have you reason to disclaim against those who have only avoided tempo∣ral Punishments, to preserve themselves from those which are more terrible and eternal? 'Tis then the proof of this Cause that de∣serves your nearer application. Do not think to excuse your selves by reason of the too great extent such an Examination appears to have, to fill us with greater Confusion and Sorrow for leaving your Church; you needed only to convince us of this one Ar∣ticle of your Faith, which saith,Art. 31. That God rais'd up certain Men in an extraordinary man∣ner,
to Model the Church anew, that was fall'n into Ruine and Desolation; Convince us, we say, but of this, and we shall always think our selves miserable for being such Rebels against the Order of Divine Providence, and endeavouring by our Infidelity to de∣stroy the Work of God. But you cry, It is in vain, seeing we can't believe it to be the Work of God, nor have any faith for this extraordinary Mission. 'Tis true, Zuinglius, Luther,Luth. Tract. de Ver. Eccl. Reform. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3. Sect. 4. St. John 5.31. and Calvin have born that Testi∣mony of themselves: 'Tis true, they have given themselves the Titles of Apostles and Evangelists; but since Jesus Christ has said, speaking of himself, If I bear testimony of my self, my testimony is not true, what credit can that Testimony claim that your Pa∣triarchs have only given of themselves? Where then shall we begin to judge? for every extraordinary Mission is vain and useless, if it brings not its Proof and Evi∣dence to those in favour of whom it is sent. Shall we know their Authority by their Miracles, by their Works, or by their Doctrine? Their Miracles were never known; the Works of such as are Enemies
to Virginity, to Vows of Chastity, Fasting, Abstinence, Austerities, Penance, Confession of Sins, and to the Pains requir'd for their Expiation, are too opposite to the Spirit of the Gospel, either to perswade or edifie. Their Doctrine supposes their Mission, as St. Paul tells us, and therefore proves it not: for How shall they Preach, saith he,Rom. 10.15. un∣less they be sent? Without so much as Examining this Doctrine to the bottom, their Divisions, and the Contradictions that were between themselves, and remain to this Day among their Followers, in the chief Mysteries of Faith, are they not whol∣ly opposite to Truth, and the Unity of the Spirit of God? Luther will have it, That in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, be∣sides the Bread, the Body of Christ is really, truly, and corporeally contain'd. Calvin denies that the Body of Jesus Christ is contain'd in the Sacrament, but tells us it is however communicated there, and really and substantially receiv'd. Zuinglius on the contrary says, That Jesus Christ is neither contain'd, nor receiv'd, nor communicated in or by the Sacrament, but only the Figure
of Christ's Body, and the Effects of his Death and Passion. Did the Apostles and Evangelists of Jesus Christ teach after this manner? Do we find among them Con∣tradictions in the Mysteries of Faith, or in their Doctrine? What then, Sir, would you have us think of these three Apostles and Evangelists of your Reformation? Into which of their Countries (for every one of them has his own particular) would you have us go to live in the Profession of the Truth, as you advise us in your Letter? For 'tis in this Sence we understand the Re∣solution which you cunningly suppose we have made, to stay in the Bosom of Rome only till we have put our Affairs in order. It seldom appertains to any but to God, to penetrate so deep into the Hearts of Men: However, Sir, make use of what time you have to determine to which of your three Evangelists we ought to submit, and which we ought to relie upon. Otherwise be not surpris'd that we live and enjoy one another in that City, where generally all our Fathers and yours, excepting it may be two or three since
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, have been bred up; that we live peaceably in the same Church in which they liv'd, and therein seek that Salvation we hope they have found. Permitted to be Printed. Given this Sixth of February, 1686. DE LA REYNIE. FINIS.
