C1748 R25979 9308913 42684
CERTAIN QUERIES, Worthy Mature Consideration: TO Beget good affections in the Peoples hearts, by purging secret ill hu∣mors out of the Body of the Commonwealth, and that it may be restored to perfect health. By several Lovers of a peaceable Government. London, Printed in the Year 1659.
SEVERAL QUERIES. 1. WHether a Protectorian, a Presbyterian, an Independant, an Protector of De∣linquents, an accuser of the Brethren, a receiver of Gifts, a countenancer of Presbyteri∣an Priests that sent horses to the Earl of Holland, who with his wife and family took their abode at a Priests house, who when the King was at Oxford, sent his man thither with money to a friend with the King; and did procure a Patent from the King, by which he enjoys about 400 li. per annum. Which Priest was also on horseback to meet the Earl of Holland, and prepared a horse for his man to ride in the Earl of Hollands Army; and did ride about and encourage his Parishioners to stand all as one man, for the Earls Armie, against the Parlia∣ment: and also another Presbyterian Priest sent his horse to the Earl, and took Acquittance for it, to shew his good service to his King; and many o∣ther Presbyterian Priests were ready with their
horses, which were protected as godly Ministers; and those Justices which did take the Depositions against them, he desired them to forbearto proceed, alleadging one was his Kinsman; and he hoped he was an honest man, and he would take it as a fa∣vour to him. The Justices replied they were satisfied upon the Oathes of many, that he was an Enemy to the State, and had sent money to Oxford: and a Railer against the Army, an Encourager of o∣thers to rise as one man against the Parliaments Army. So the Justices refused his desire; for which he fell out with them, and was mighty angry, and could never endure them since; and when he had gained of the Protector to be Major General of Kent and Surrey, he with the help of the Secretary of State and others, gets those Justices out of the Commission for the peace, Militia, and the set∣tling of the Ministers; and thus he rewarded them for their good service to their Country, when none would appear for the Commonwealth but them till after Dunbar Fight: and thus by his power of Major Generalship, he gave them the rout that a∣cted for the Commonwealth, and endeavours now to keep them out, and hath alwaies taken part with those Justices that were for the King and a single Person. Whether this be a fit person to be one of the Committee of the Army, Navy, and Gover∣nour of Dover, and Major General for Kent and Surrey. 2. Whether an Ambodexter, a Cavalier, an
accuser of the Brethren, a Parish Clark, a small Priest, a Pope in his belly, a King, a single Person, a Weather-cock in his head, a Presbyterian, an In∣dependant, one while a Leveler, to be Major Gene∣ral Raynsboroughs Major, and then against them; and when the Army kept Council at Putney, what was Debated in the day, he acquainted the King at Hampton Court at night, to get favour with him; and went over for Ireland; but when he was to do service, pretended himself to be sick, and desired to go for England; but before the General would let him go, committed him to prison, after some time turned him going: then he bought Debenters, and some Lands; and afterwards when the Army went for Scotland, he got to Command a Troop to be raised in Surrey, for to be sent into Scotland. In Sur∣rey he took horses the best he could lay hand on, and left the best of them at Thybals Park, and some in other Parks, and goes for Scotland; and on the March dismounts those Souldiers that had the best horses, and left some by the way, and some in Scot∣land; and he comes for England, and sells those horses. An arand Coward, a great asserter of un∣truths: give him honour and money, and assure him he shall not fight, you may send him to the De∣vil of an errand: an enemy to all good men and godliness, but meerly to serve his own turne; be a fit man to serve in the Commission in Surrey, and to Command the Surrey Troop, and to have a great trust in the Tower of London.
3. Whether that great light, that lay moultring in the North among the Coal-pits, and it's said, That he should say of himself, was a Nebucadnezer, and had been seven years at grass; which light being set on fire by the Spirit of God, came thun∣dring out of the North into the South, rending and tearing those thick clouds of darkness of Monar∣chy, which hath over spread this Nation for well neer these seven years, these three Nations being Egyptionated and captivated with bondage of a single Person and all his adherents: whether this thundring Moses to this our Israel, this Jonathan to David, this Northern light with the North-East winde, taking hold of those Coals which were co∣vered over with those Monarchal ashes in the South, which kindled such a fire which devoured Saul and Pharaoh and their Hosts, to let our Israel go free: whether this light doth not shine so clear in their Consciences, that they see an absolute necessity to purge themselves of the Babylonish Garments, and to cast away those croking Frogs and Babylons Brats, that our Israel may meet with no more plagues in their Wilderness, but may go free into their rest, and sit down in their Canaan under their Vines and Fig-trees? 4. Whether the light in your conscience do not tell you, that there was as great a light, and hope of Englands poor Israel going free from bondage from Babylons brats, seven years ago, before you eat grass, as now, which the poor Israel of England
thought they had been the Threshing Instruments in Gods hand to deliver this our Israel: but when they consulted with flesh and bloud, & went down to Egypt for help, and enquired of the Wise Men there, how soon did God leave them, to the great grief and extream sorrow of all good men, to stand and behold so great a light, so great a Moses to fall to the dust, with a signet of his high displeasure upon poor England, for looking for help from him, when he had left them? 5. Whether or no you are not satisfied in Con∣science, that if a thorough purge be not made of such, that are either open or secret Enemies or Neu∣ters to the Commonwealth, and likewise encou∣rage those that you are satisfied in Conscience are true and faithful to the Commonwealth without a single Person or House of Lords: and if a thorough Reformation be not made according to Righteousness and Justice, without respect of per∣sons; whether you do believe that the People will put trust in you any more, be it under what pre∣tences of Religion soever? FINIS.
