c3061 15345436 103440
His Majesties GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Munday the 28th of January, 1677/8. Published by His Majesties Command. C R HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms EDINBƲH, by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Sacred Majestie. 1678, CƲM PRIVILEGIO.
His Majesties GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Munday, the 28th of January, 1677/8. My Lords and Gentlemen, WHen We parted last, I told you, That before We met again, I would do that which should be to your Satis∣faction; I have accordingly made such Alliances with Holland, as are for the Preservation of Flanders, and which cannot fail of tha d, unless prevented either by the want of due Asses to support those Alliances, or by the small regar  Spaniards themselves must have to their own presion. The first of these I cannot suspect, by reason of your repeated Engage∣ments to maintain them: and I know you are so wise, as to consider, That a War, which must be the necessary Consequence of them, ought neither to be prosecuted by halves, nor to want such assurances of Perseverance as may give Me encouragement to pursue it; besides, it will not be less necessary, to let Our Enemies have such a prospect of Our Resolutions, as may let them see certainly, That we shall not be weary of Our Arms, till Christen∣dom be restored to such a Peace, as shall not be in the power of any Prince alone to disturb. I do acknowledge to you, That I have used all the means possible, by a Mediation, to have procured an Honourable and Safe Peace for Christendom; knowing how preserable such a Peace would have been to any War, and especially to this Kingdom, which must necessarily own the vast Benefits it has received by Peace, whilst its Neighbours onely have yet smarted by the War: But finding it no longer to be hoped for by fair means, it shall not be My fault if that be not obtained by Force, which cannot be had otherwayes.
For this Reason I have recalled My Troops from France, and have consi∣der'd, That although the Dutch shal do their parts, We cannot have less on Ours, then Ninety Sail of Capital Ships constantly maintained; nor less then Thirty or Fourty thousand Land-men, (with their Dependencies) to be em∣ployed upon Our Fleets, and elsewhere. And because there shall be no fear of Mis-employing what you shal give to these Uses, I am contented that such Money be appropriated to those Ends, as strictly as you can desire. I have given Testimony enough of My Care in that kind, by the progress I have made in Building the New Ships, wherein, for the making them more useful, I have Directed such larger Dimensions, as will cost Me above one hundred thousand pounds more then the Act allows. I have gone as far as I could in Repairing the Old Fleet, and in buying of necessary stores for the Navy, and Ordnance; And in this and other Provisions, for better Securing both My Forreign Plantations, and the Mands nearer home, I have expended a great deal more then the Two hundred thousand pounds you enabled me to Borrow upon the Excise, although I have not found such a Credit as I expected upon that Security. I have born the Charge both of a Rebellion in Virginia, and a new War with Algiers: I stand Engaged to the Prince of Orange for My Nieces Portion; and I shall not be able to Maintain My constant necessary Establishments, unless the New Impost upon Wines, &c. be continued to Me, which would otherwise turn only to their Profit, to whom We least in∣tend it. I hope these things will need little Recommendation to you, when you con∣sider your Promises in some, and the Necessity of the rest; and to let you see that I have not only employed My T and Treasure for your Safety, but done all I could to remove all sorts of usies, I have married my Niece to the Prince of Orange, by which I hope  ve given full Assurances, that I shall never suffer his Interest to be ruined, ian be assisted, as I ought to be to preserve them. Having done all this, I expect from you a plentiful Supply, suitable to such great Occasions, whereon depends not onely the Honour, but (for ought I know) the Beeing of an English Nation, which will not be saved by finding faults afterwards, but may be prevented by avoiding the chief Fault of doing weakly and by halves, what can onely be hoped from a vigorous and through prosecution of what We undertake. These considerations are of the greatest Importance that ever concerned this Kingdom; and therefore I would have you enter immediately upon them, without suffering any other Business whatsoever to divert you from bringing them to good Resolutions. FINIS.
