C487 R7529 13239123 98610
Capt. Vrats's Ghost TO Count Coningsmark, BY A WESTERN GENTLEMAN. WHat's this disturbs my Quiet, and my Sleep, And doth such Rustling of the Curtains keep? Ah Captain! What? my dear Vrats's Ghost, Who for my sake, Life, Fame, and Credit Lost; And yet, none could of his Discovery boast? Curst Man! Behold the Wretch, who for thy Cause, Against Religion, Justice, and the Laws, In Treach'rous Counsels did himself Ingage, And basely Murder'd, where he knew no Rage. What? Though Men brib'd may be, do'st fondly Hope Vengeance to scape? No more than I the Rope. From Stygian Lake I come, thy Doom to Tell; What Furies in thy Breast shall ever dwell; What Tortures in thy Mind, what raging Hell Of Torment, and Despair, both Day and Night Thou still shal't bear about. No Joy, Delight, Nor Peace expect; in Court, in Camp, in Field, Alone, in Company; think nought shall shield Thee from the constant haunt of each Man's Ghost, Who by thy Means, or for Thee, Life has lost. Not One, or Two bold Actions in the Wars, Nor Souldiers Wounds, nor yet Ten Thousand Scars Shall e're wipe off this Blot, this Infamy, Which thus thy Scarlet, with a deeper Dye Hath stain'd; the War-like Trophees of thy Fame, Thy Stock, thy much before Reputed Name. Who was't thus basely brought unto his End The Loyal Monmouth's Wealthy Western Friend? When Men shall ask; His Blood shall upwards Mount, And cry, the Treach'rous Wiles of Northern Count. As through the Abbey wondring strangers pass, To view the Fabrick, Tombs, and painted Glass; When the Great Thynn's Rich Monumental Shrine (Which, like the Moon, 'mong lesser Stars doth Shine,) Containing Sacred Relicks, Dust Divine; They see, and by the Epitaph certifie'd, How that by Murder he untimely dye'd: Desire to know, who was the Cause; the Clarke With Truth shall soon reply, Count Coningsmark. How hated wilt thou be, abhor'd thy Name, When in the everlasting Leaves of Fame Posterity shall read, and after-Ages, Instructed from the Pens of Learned Sages,
Shall understand, this Rich, Young, English Spark Dy'd by the Trains of a False Coningsmark? Base▪ Wretch! What, though Great Thynn's much greater Soul Be Mounted far above the Starry Pole, And his dead Corps secur'd lies under Ground? Think not to scape the Furies thee surround, The Cry, the Crime, the Stain, the Blot, the Guilt Of his warm Blood for thee most basely spilt. When thou Vrats's Balmed Corps shalt see, Think how he suffer'd, and how dy'd for Thee: But also think, 'twas thy base Treach'rous Deed, That caus'd his Dth, as Thynn before to Bleed. If I a Souldier liv, and Dog-like dy'd, Know, that it was to softer up thy Pride. Had not Revenge, or rather cruel Rage, For a defeated Match, made thee Ingage In a Design, to take thy Rival's Life, By cow'rdly means, in hopes of his Rich Wife; In Life, in Death a Valiant Souldiers Fame I might have had; but now a Murth'rer's Name. My Fury therefore now expect to feel, And deeper Wounds, than made by sharpest Steel. Vrats's Ghost shall dog thee up and down, And haunt thee from this City to that Town. Hope not thy Captain will be brib'd agen; His Ghost now Thee must vex, not other Men. 'Tis now Resolv'd. Revenge to take, he aims, For Thynn's Blood, Venge'nce, and his own, he claims. Rouze up thy self. Do'st not thou yonder see, How Sterne's Pale Ghost, inraged, looks on Thee? Must his Blood unreveng'd be, who, deceiv'd By me, for thee a Murd'rers Doom receiv'd? Poor Ignorant Borisky's angry Ghost, See with what Rage it comes thee to accost? Must He that Fatal Shot for ever rue, His Corps in Chains be hung to all Men's view And Spect'cle made to Forreigners for you? Hast, hast, ye angry Ghosts; come on apace, Let's take our full Renge now in this place: Our Deaths, as well as Thynn's, for Venge'nce cry: Wee'l not bear all the crime, nor Infamy; He was the Cause, and therefore 'tis but due, He bear a part, a share, with Me and You. What, though Discharg'd from England he be Fled? His Guilt is ne'r the less for the Blood shed. We might, (had not he prompted) to this Time Have liv'd; Let's punish then in Him the Crime. Hast then ye Furies, all your Tortures bring, Your Snakes, your Racks, each Scorpi'n's lasting Sting. "Come on Alecto, with thy Flaming Whip, And firk the Counts young Hide: Thus make him Skip. So cried the Ghost. The Count lifts up his Head, Amaz'd, with Fury leaps out of his Bed, And calls for Light: 'Twas brought: The Ghost strait Fled. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for J. V. in Fleet-Street, 1682.
