C5148 R224251 9981614 44450
A COLLECTION OF New SONGS: With a Thorow-Bass to each SONG, for the Harpsichord, Theorbo, Lute, or Spinett. Sett to Musick by Mr. Gillier. LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple-Change, Fleetstreet. 1698. Where may be had the Proposals of the Musick-Lottery, as also Dr. John Blow's New Harpsichord-Book.
To my Honoured Friend, Capt. WORTLEY. Honoured Sir, HAving your Opinion and Approba∣tion of the Composing These my First SONGS in English; and knowing of your being a Judge, do think my self Ob∣liged to Dedicate them to you, hoping the favour of your Acceptance, which will be an Honour to, Sir,  Your most Humble Servant, GILLIER.
A New SONG Sung by Mr. Pate, Sett by Mr. Gillier. OH Lovely, Love╌ly; Oh Love╌ly, Lovely Sy╌ren now give o're, for I too much was Char╌m'd, was Charm'd be╌fore; such sof╌t Me╌lodious sounds as these do kill with Trans╌port while they please: Such sweetness in each Strain ap╌pears, appears, such sweetness in each Strain appears th'are
too di╌vine for mor╌tal Ears: They wound with plea╌sure and in╌spire a╌maze╌ment in the heav'nly Quire, they wound with plea╌sure and in╌spire, in╌spire a╌maze╌ment in the heav'nly Quire; In╌spire, in╌spire a╌maze╌ment in the heav'nly Quire. See, see, see, see, see, see
Angels crow╌d to hear you Sing, see Angels crow╌d to hear you Sing, to hear you Sin╌g, to hear you Sing; Charm'd when you touch, when you touch each trem╌bling String, and know not which they'd ra╌ther do, fly, fly,
fly to their throne, or stay with you, fly, fly, fly to their throne or stay with you. See, see, you. A SONG Sett by Mr. Gillier. LOve, Love╌'s a blind passion a lan╌guishing fol╌ly; Love, love's a blind passion a lan╌guishing fol╌ly, chills all our brisk hours with a dull me╌lan╌cholly, it Jol╌li╌ty damps, and en╌ra╌ges de╌spair, and en╌ra╌ges de╌spair; in the Spring of our years brings, brings a winter, a
winter of care, care; then let us throw off the fond trifling Toy, trifling Toy, the passion is childish, and Cupid's a Boy, a Boy, a Boy, and Cupid's a Boy: Then let us throw off the fond trifling Toy, the passion is Childish and Cupid's a Boy, and Cupid's a Boy; bring, bring to my Arms a more So╌lid, a So╌li╌der Joy; bring, bring to my Arms a more So╌lid, a So╌li╌der Joy, a So╌li╌der Joy.
A New Song Sett by Mr. Gillier. Sung by Mr. Leveridge. PRepare, prepare, prepare, prepare for brisk A╌lar╌ms, Ar╌mi╌da hath a Thousand, hath a Thou╌sand, a Thousand Charms; prepare, pre╌pare, prepare, prepare for brisk Alarms, Ar╌mi╌da hath a Thousand, hath a Thou╌sand, a Thousand Charms; Ungarded Hearts to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to
Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms. Where e're she comes she Lau╌rel gaines, and o're Love's bound╌less Empire reigns; and o'r╌e Love's bound╌less Empire reigns: her Wit's di╌vine, her look se╌rene, be╌witching, be╌witching, 'tis her gracefull Mion; Her Voice Enchants, her Smile inspires with plea╌sant thoughts, and so╌ft de╌sire:
her Voice Enchants, her Smile inspires with plea╌sant thoughts, and so╌ft de╌sire, and so╌ft de╌sire, and so╌ft de╌sire; no force is proof a╌gainst her Darts, Rea╌son too weak will prove; shea's Skill in all her sub╌tle Arts of Empire and of Love: fl╌y, fl╌y, fl╌y, re╌sist╌less
are her Charms, fly, fly, fl╌y, re╌sist╌less, re╌sist╌less are her Charms; in vain, in — vain, in vain, in vain you take up Arms; in vain, in — vain, in vain, in vain you take up Arms; in vain, in vain, in vain, in vain you take up Arms; in vain, in vain you take up Arms; in vain, in vain you take up Arms.
A New Song Sett by Mr. Gillier. Sung by Mr. Freeman. THe Lott is Cast, I must no more, my Dear Jos╌si╌nian's Eyes a╌dore; my dear, dear Jos╌si╌nian's Eyes a╌dore, no more, no more Jos╌si╌nian cast your Charms, 'tis Honour bids me shun thy Arms; no more, no more Jos╌si╌nian cast, cast, ca╌st your
Charms, 'tis Honour bids me shun thy Arms; Oh! cru╌el God to throw — thy Dart, when he and I must live a╌part, when he and I must live a╌part, part: my Vows a╌las I make in vain, with╌in my Heart Jos╌si╌nian reigns, our mingl╌'d sigh╌s no Jo╌y can
find, our mingl'd sighs no Jo╌y can find; we live yet prisoners of the mind, through Priest╌craft bound our Souls are free, and they may love immor╌ tal╌ly, im╌mor╌tal╌ly, and they may love immor╌tal╌ly, im╌mor╌tal╌ly.
A SONG Sett by Mr. Gillier. OH! why false man did'st thou my heart be╌tray in ev╌'ry part, in ev╌'ry way; in ev╌'ry part, in ev╌'ry way, in ev'ry part, in ev╌'ry way? Oh! why false man, false man di╌d'st thou my heart be╌tray? Tell me, tell me thou more than man, thou ve╌ry Devil, what thou saw'st in my poor heart of e╌vil? Tell me what thou saw'st, what thou saw'st in my poor heart, my
poor heart of e╌vil? Tell me, tell me thou more than man, thou ve╌ry Devil; what thou saw'st, what thou saw'st in my poor heart, my poor heart of e╌vil? what thou saw'st, what thou saw'st in my poor heart of e╌vil? Was it not all pure, in╌nocent and just? was it not, was it not all pure, in╌no╌cent and just? did I not, did I not in thy dear Arms, in thy dear Arms whol╌ly trust? was it not, was it not all pure in╌no╌cent
and just? did I not, did I not in thy dear Arms, in thy dear Arms whol╌ly trust? did I not, did I not in thy dear Arms, in thy dear Arms whol╌ly trust, in thy dear Arms whol╌ly trust? A New Song Sett by Mr. Gillier. LOng have I lov'd but all in vain, long, long, long have I lov'd, but all in vain; the Nymph will ne're be kind, will ne're be kind, she still in╌sults when I com╌plai╌n, no
Tears can change her mind, mind: All, all I can wish, is on╌ly this, where e're, where e're she lo╌ves, that she may ne╌ver, ne╌ver, never, ne╌ver, ne╌ver tast that Bliss which she de╌nies to me; ne╌ver, ne╌ver, never, ne╌ver taft that Bliss, which she de╌nies to me. FINIS.
