D1091A 12293548 58945
THE LORD STRANGE HIS DEMANDS: Propounded to the Inhabitants of the Town of MANCHESTER, concerning a paci∣ficction, and laying down of Armes: WITH The valiant Answer and Resolution of the Commanders and Souldiers, in denying and withstanding the said Demands. ALSO The names of the Scots Elders and Ministers chosen by the Commissioners of Scotland to be sent to the Assembly of Divines appointed by the Parliament to be holden at London for the setling of Religion. LONDON, Printed for Th. Cook. October 8. 1642.
THE LORD STRANGE his Demands of the Inhabitants of MANCHESTER. Also a Catalogue of thse Elders and Ministers that were chosen by the Commissioners of the Generall Assembly of Scotland, to be sent to the Assem∣bly of Divines in England. THe late Lord Strange, now Earle of Darby, having strongly besie∣ged the towne of Manchester in the County Palatine of Lancaster, and lien before it with his Forces, to the number of two thousand Foot and six hundred horse, with 8. or 9. Peeces of Ordnance, from the four and twentieth of September to this present, since which time many shot have been discharged on both sides; the Lord Strange planted his Ordnance in two severall places, and
plaid very fiercely upon the Towne, and so hath continued night and day ever since, but hath done very little or no harme! his Musketiers have made ma∣ny furious assaults against the town, and were as bravely withstood by those of the towne, who most couragiously de∣fended their works, & made good their quarters against the enemy, beating them off, and killing above an hundred of them (among which were some Commanders of note) without the losse of one man. His Lordship seeing that by force he could not prevaile against the towne, hee sent a messenger to desire  parley with the inhabitants of the towne, but they would not condescend unto it, till after foure or five messages from his Lordship, and then they agreed that there should bee a cessation of Armes on both sides, from tuesday in the after∣noone, till seven of the clock the next day; in the mean while the L. Strange propounded these demands following:
1. That they would lay downe their armes, and deliver them up to his Lord∣ship. 2. That he might march through the town with his Army, which were both denied. 3. That they would deliver him a thousand pound in money. 4. Then he demanded but two hun∣dred Muskets. 5. Seeing none of these would be granted, rather then be frustrate in all his demands, in his last message he desired but fifty Muskets, and he would raise his siege and leave the town. After some debate and serious consul∣tation concerning these demands be∣tween the Commanders and common souldiers, a peremptory and resolute an∣swer was returned his Lordship by the unanimous consent of them all, that he should not have so much as a sword. The towne hath now held out a com∣plete fortnight, and still continues with an undaunted resolution to stand it
against him. Many of his souldiers run away, and confesse they have neither meat nor money, but what they get by robbing. Captain Bradshaw hath beha∣ved himselfe most valiantly, to his ever∣lasting renown. The enemy have dis∣charged their Ordnance above three hundred times, and the Musketiers have done what they could, and yet have we not lost one person in the fight, but a boy unarmed standing upon a stile, but the townsmen have killed above a hundred, and taken eighty prisoners of the ene∣mies. A Catalogue of the Elders and Ministers of Scot∣land appointed by the Commissioners to be sent to the Assembly of Divines in England for setling of Religion. CErtain Letters are sent from Scot∣land to the Parliament, and read in the House of Commons, dire∣cted to the Lord and Commons now
assembled in the high Court of Parlia∣ment of England, in manner of a Re∣monstrance, wherein they did declare the sense that they have of the great di∣stractions and distempers of this King∣dome, tending to the subversion of the long established government thereof, and the confusion of the whole State, and in the end would prove the distru∣ction of that their Kingdome of Scot∣land; and therefore the Lords and Commons of that Kingdome are resol∣ved to present a Petition to His Majesty, with such reasons as they conceive may move him to an accommodation of peace & agreement with both his Hou∣ses of Parliament; but if the same should be rejected, they are resolved to assist the Parliament with force of armes, to de∣fend their just cause, and to bring all de∣linquents and incendiaries that have di∣sturbed the peace of the Kingdome, and caused these troubles, to condigne pu∣nishment, which the House with great joy and much thankfulnesse accepted of.
The Parliament seeing distractions divisions, and schismes to be crept into the Church, have made choice of an as∣sembly of divers reverend and learned Divines for the setling and reforming of Religion: and the Commissioners of the generall Assembly of Scotland have made choice of three Elders, and six Ministers to be present at the Assembly of Divines here in England. The Elders are The Earle of Cassells. Lord Maitland. Sir Archibald Johnston The Scots Ministers are, M. Henderson. M. Douglasse. M. Rutherfurd. M. Bayly. M. Gelaspe. M. Borthvicke. FINIS.
