d1153 10685045 45493
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE Castle of Entertainment: AS ALSO The Wonderful Increase of the Race OF THE HUFFS, Together with The Relation of their First Original, as it was Attested by Old Mother Huff In strange Characters, and since Discover'd and Copied out by a Pilgrim in the Year 1668. IT fortuned in August 1668, that two Pilgrims went out of the Famous Castle in Parsonage Island, to visit on foot a Forein Shrine they had never before seen. They had scarce gone any weary Steps before by a small House lately Inhabited by a Knight of Actaeons Order, and his Wandering Lady, in whose room now resides Sir Joannes
Winnow-corn and Dame Skreen-face his Wife. From thence they went by one of Vulcan's Forges; then ascending up a short Hill, and so through a plain even way, that brought them to another longer Hill, on both sides beautified with goodly Fabricks. Arriving to the height they viewed a Chapel on their right hand, where looking up to see where the Wind sate, (the better to steer their course) their Expe∣ctations became frustrate, for the discourteous Weathercock had taken his flight and forsook his Perch. From thence they suddenly passed through a very High Gate, arched over with an Edifice of Brick, much differing from the Form of the Aegyptian Pyramids. Thence taking their way on their left hand, they entered into solitary Groves through lower Gates, till they came to a certain Thicket, bearing the name of wicked Cain, but on what account so called those silent Trees could not inform them; they nevertheless were con∣fident, that neither that Fratricide, nor any of his Posterity, ever came thither, much less planted that Wood. Thus ru∣minating in their thoughts, they found Diversion by behold∣ing a sumptuous Fabrick there erected. Having some time admired it they went on, till they exchanged those melan∣choly Paths to an open Desart on a Mountain, which invi∣ted their eyes to delightful Objects round about. Among the rest one that seems wonderful to report; for on a Hill they beheld a Harrow of such vast extension, that it lay upon more ground than Ten Yokes of Oxen with Ten Ploughs can plough in Ten Days. Through this pleasant way the Pilgrims still continued their Travel along by the Pillar of Salutation, and then near to the Tower of the four flying Streamers, till at last by diligent labour and strict inquiry they arrived at the place desired. What signal Favours they there received from the Munifi∣cence of Persons of high Honour, as also the Courtesies shew'd to them from others of lower Rank, shall here be wholly omitted, because meriting better Record in the Regi∣ster of Grateful Memory, and therefore above the scope of this Discourse. It shall here then suffice to relate onely what an admirable Cave they beheld within those Territories, so strangly framed by Nature, that it seemed in all respects quite
contrary to other common Caves; for whereas they lie fixed under ground, and are dark and empty, this appeared high above ground, in frequent motion, pleasantly lightsom, and replenished with commendable Endowments. The Pilgrims having there presented their obliged Ho∣mage, departed thence toward the Castle of Entertainment, by the Invitation and Conduct of a courteous Knight in Black Armour, in company of a single Damosel, and her Sweet∣heart a merry Falconer, where after a short Journey (partly by Water, for they seldom trod on dry Land) they soon ar∣rived. They found the Castle seated on the side of a Moun∣tain in a small Grove of shady Trees, but of an indifferent proportion, neither high nor large, but well contrived into little Rooms, all within sound of the Sentinel's Trumpet; well defended not onely by its own proper Garrison, but also by Auxiliary Forces in great numbers daily repairing thither. The Gates standing open towards the top of the Mountain, they resolutely entered in without the least Re∣sistance or dispute; where no sooner set down, but there were some brought in whose Faces were full of Black Pat∣ches; whom when the Black Knight aforesaid had espied, he caused them without mercy to be destroyed as many as appeared in his sight, some drowned, and others broken in pieces on a Wooden Engine, so long till the elder of the Pil∣grims (not enduring any longer to behold so cruel a Massa∣cre) was enforced to call away the other Pilgrim and depart; and by the way, far enough from the Castle, upon an invi∣sible Pillar, in Characters so strange were never yet perused, read as followeth. I Mother Huff, having in my Youth been crossed in Worldly Affairs, (though always subtil and covetous) for which cause in my elder years I betook my self to yonder Castle, where I adopted one Yesticus Huff for my Son, who (by the assistance of other his Associates) composed for my use an Enchanting Liquor, so pleasant to the Taste, and lofty in Operation, that in short time it filled my Castle with Guests, and my broad Pouch with jingling Cash. Soon after it chanced that my said Son Yesticus grew enamour'd of a Damosel named Flourca, whom by the power of my Charms I procured to be fetch'd (hood-wink'd in a Bag) from the Tower of the four flying Streamers, and having craf∣tily
sifted our her Heart, in fine I adorned her with Beauty Spots, and brought my Son and her together; from which Conjunction in few hours were produced many Dozens of young little Huffs; nor were they improperly call'd so, for no sooner were they in view, but they presently swell'd bigger, and were huffed up through the Ambi∣tion naturally derived to them from their Father, who ever sought for Superiority, and was therefore exiled from a Boarded House near adjacent, called Hoop Castle, when first I took him into my house. In brief, this Spotted Huffing Progeny daily multiplied so fast, that the report thereof spread throughout the Countrey, by which means I got the Name of Mother Huff, which to this day I own, as I do them also for my adopted Of-spring. But such was the cruel Fate that attended them, that my Neighbours in jealousie, lest they should over-run their Confines, conspired against them, laid violent hands on them, and did murther them daily before my face; yet it did the less grieve me, for that notwithstanding they still encreased, and I hope will still do. And now considering that I grow old, and must die and leave them whether I will or no, lest my Name and Fame should pe∣rish among them, I have here erected this Monument in these unknown Figures, to declare to Posterity their wonderful Original, and my sin∣gular good Affection towards them, wishing them still to reside in my Castle, which I bequeath to them and their Successors for ever, on these conditions, that henceforth it be called the Castle of Entertainment, and that the Gates should stand open all day in an hospitable manner, to admit any in for their Money, and not otherwise, according to my own Laudable Custom: And so I bid the World Farewell. The Pilgrims having taken a Copy thereof, it is here written for private Recreation, and not for publick Benefit. FINIS.
