D2053 12244797 56904
THE Roman Generalls: OR THE DISTRESSED LADIES. By J. D. of Grayes-Inn, Gent. Quis Martem Tunica tectum adamantina Dignè scripserit? Horat. Ode 6. LICENSED, Novemb. 7. 1667. Roger L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Herrick, and are to be sold at his Shop at Grayes-Inn-Gate in Holborn. 1667.
To the Right Honourable ROBERT Lord BROOK, Baron Brook of Beauchamp-Court, Lord Lieu∣tenant of Staffordshire. My Lord, THE Roman Generalls humbly begg, that They may walk abroad under Your Honourable Protection; It being as dangerous for a Poem to appear in Publick without a good Patron, as it would be for a Ship richly fraught, to sail among Pirats without a Convoy. The Criticks of Our Times pouring in, whole Broad-sides of Censure, before They Know, whether the thing may prove Prize or not. They are Ingenious in Other Mens Books, but seldom in Their Own, and think every Imprimatur, gives them Licence to become Ridiculous: Like the Bear they think their own Issue most beautiful; and there∣fore, whatsoever the Product of their Brains be, they think may pass, without any Elaborations of Art to lick it into fashion. For My Part, I can scarce without a
Blush, Christen this Infant of My Fancy, with the Name of a POEM, since I am conscious of its want of Merit. But if Your Lordship vouchsafe to find to it, Your Accep∣tance may raise it to that Title: For as Lead, or some such inferiour Mettals, though They have but little worth in Themselves, yet from Their Stamp, They re∣ceive Value and Estimation. The Story is Heroick, and in that, as far above a Common Patronage, as it is un∣worthy of Yours. I have neither altogether followed, nor yet declin'd History, lest by the One, My Play might be took for a Piece translated out of Livie or Lucan, or by the Other, for an Idle Romance; but like the Tra∣vellor, for Delight, sometimes I follow, and sometimes I quit My Road. Your Lordship may blame Me, that I spent My time in Writing of a Play, when I might have improv'd My Self in the Study of the Law; truly, I made it My Diversion, not my Study; for after I had read a Sect or two in Littleton, I then to divert My Self, took Caesar's Commentaries, or read the Lives of My Roman Generalls, out of Plutarch. I Know the Common Fate of a Play, it seldom Lives more dayes then the Word has Letters in't, unless some more then Common Influence preserve it longer. So that 'tis alone Your Lordships fa∣vourable Acceptance, which can preserve Mine to a lon∣ger Date, which is already confident of Your Protection, since Your Early Services for Your Countrey, have allied You to the Glory of the Roman Generalls. My Lord, I am the Admirer of Your Honor, and the obliged Servant of Your Lordship's Goodness. J. DOVER.
PROLOGUE. THE Poet had design'd His Play should be, Bestow'd on Both the Houses Nursery. His modest Judgement, deemed it most fit, In Nurseries to plant Young Twiggs of Wit. Thinking to shun A Publick Censure, since They count Ten People There, an Audience. Thus A Dull Sermon may be took for good, Preach't before few, where 'tis not understood. So He would shun the Censure of this Age, Where Poets for Their Playes are brought o'th' Stage. But new Resolves did tell Him, that 'twas worse, To set the Roman Gen'rals out to Nurse, Then to expose Them to the World; since They, Are Champions able to defend His Play. As for the Ladies which are in Distress, The Author does presume, You can't do less, Then entertain Them, which Acceptance will, Render Them happy, and Him grateful still.
Dramatis Personae. I. Caesar. His two Generals. M. Valerius. Curio. Pompey. Consuls. Senators. Crassus his Ghost. Uxama. A Spanish Lord, in Love with Selania. Selania: A Sardinian Lady. Astragia and her Sister: Two Distressed Ladies. Parmeno. Servant to Uxama taken Prisoner, with Six other Spaniards. An Augure. Souldiers.
THE Roman Generalls: OR THE Distressed Ladies. ACTUS I. SCENA PRIMA. Caesar's Tents as in Gallia. J. Caesar, Valerius, Curio, Souldiers. Caesar. THE Enterprise as I would wish succeeds, And the Proud City trembles at Our Deeds. Who aims at Greatness, or at publick fame, By some great Action must advance His Name. I look not on My Birth, but what I've done, Can Glory be intail'd upon the Son? Fortune and Resolution both intend This great beginning, for some glorious End. Whil'st Valiant Crassus, do's in Asia stay, Pompey in Spain, and I in Gallia, We to the World shall give Decrees; and Rome, Proud Rome Her self must in subjection come.
Enter a Messenger, He presents a Letter to Caesar, which He reads in private. Valer. He, who His Countrey serves, with Justice may Challenge, nay force Rewards, if None will pay. It is a grief distracts a Gen'rous Mind, When more to Chance, then Merit is assign'd. Merits more great than Caesar, who can plead? What He hath done for Rome Respect should breed. Curio. Who ever sav'd a Town by His Defence, And did expect the Town for Recompence? What though Great Caesar, hath in Battle stood, For to maintain Romes Int'rest with His blood? 'Tis but a Debt that's due. Let that suffice, Must She Her self, become Her Champion's Prize? Valer. But if such Acts meet envy for Return, It Kindles Passion, and it makes us burn. When Senators repay such Deeds with spite, As Our Own Carvers, We Our selves requite; And then Our publick Power We reduce, To private Ends, and to peculiar Use. Caesar having read the Letter, seems troubled. Curio. What Cloud of Fortune Sir, invades the Light, And masques those beams, with which You shone so bright? Strange Intervenes of Chance, that can molest A Mind where Glory has the Interest. Caesar. Crassus is slain; Two only Left behind, To run that race of Glory, We have design'd. My self and Pompey, Who grow greater thus When as His part too, must be shar'd by Us. Though He be fell, yet Thou shalt find O Rome, That I and Pompey, will pronounce Thy Doom. He should have shar'd Thy Greatness, but since dead, Wee'l part the Stake, and humble Thy Proud Head. How fell the Roman?— Messeng. — Sir 'till fresh supplies Of Parthian Arrows darkned all the Skies,
Whose poys'ned Heads, joyn'd with unequal force, Kill'd Our Brave Generall, and beat Our Horse, 'Till then Hope led Us on; for Victory Upon a Doubtful Wing, did seem to fly. Crassus fought still; as Lyons scorn to yield. But 'gainst unequal Dogs maintain the Field: Not by their Valour overcome, but force, We rally'd up some of Our scatter'd Horse. Crassus with These retreats to th' Asian Shore, And like the Sea, foams that He can't do more. Block't up by Asian Horse; at last He rides, Into the Sea, like Neptune on the Tides. Expecting in that Field no Enemy, Unless like Him, He had resolv'd to dye. At last the gallant Parthian General, Both to partake His glory, and His fall, Follow'd Brave Crassus: whil'st th' Insulting Waves, Present at Once Their Triumphs, and Their Graves. Their mutual wounds gave tincture to the flood, And purl'd the Sea, with Clarrets of Their blood. When the Barbarians saw Their Gen'ral dye, They made strange Outcries, and began to flye. It may seem strange, but yet Great Sir, 'tis true, We were O'recome, ev'n whil'st we did pursue. They us'd their Bows in flight, and in short space, Kill'd more, then when They fought Us face to face. Thus fell Our Fortune— Caesar. —'Tis but just We shou'd Who share His Glory, recompence His blood. Enter another Messenger. Messeng. Pompey's return'd with Victory from Spain, But Crassus by the Parthian Arms is slain. Caesar. Ill News like a Contagion spreads too fast, And in its slowest pace, makes too much haste. Messeng. Neither Marcellus Sir, nor Cato Now, Envy the Lawrells, which do crown Your Brow. Each face is crown'd with smiles, and All concurr, By gen'ral Vote, to choose You Consul Sir.
But first Great Sir, You must Your Troops disband. Caesar. No Man's secure, if He unarmed stand. Your Message friend, suspition do's create, Their Love I fear's but Vizard to Their Hate. They fain would have Me, to disband My Men, That so I might become a Prey to Them. Curio. First with Your Army march to Rome, and then, If You think fit, You may disband Your Men. This Sir's Your safest Way, and by this Course, What They refuse to give, You've Power to force. If We lay down Our Arms, We do as They, Who some officious Constable obey, Who in the King's Name, do's command Their Swords, And then presumes to give Them sawcy Words. Valerius. Although They urge it was the Antient way, To come unarm'd, Yet pray You Sir disobey. From These Our Swords, We safety may expect, And from Their malice, may Our selves protect. Whil'st in Our Ensigns conquering Eagles fly, All Birds of Lesser Prey must quit the Sky. Curio. Our Ancestors, Who Candidates did stand, For Consulships, or other high Command. To be chose Senators, or so; still first, Lay'd down Their Arms, and did the Senate trust. But 'tis not safe for You; We rather may, Pervert such Customs, then our selves betray. Valerius. Greatness 'till Now, might but a Shrub's height own, Which Now in You, Great Sir, a Cedar's grown. And hence, They do repine at Your bright Fame, And by Their hatred, would Ecclipse Your Name. Your Greatness Sir, strikes Their Ambitious Head, The Lyon which They fear, They'd trample, dead. A Will They have, but 'tis the Power They want, If you lay down Your Arms, That Power You grant. Caesar. My Lords! Your sober Councils I approve, The Senat's hate I fear not, but Their Love. Pretending Love, they think to gain their Ends, For so disguis'd, we know not foes from friends.
Dogs that intend to bite, do seldom Bark, But with their silent Chaps, they wound their Mark. Love they pretend, but Envy they design, Castles we cannot scale, we undermine. But let them still pretend; in vain they set Lime-twigs for Caesar's hands; in vain the Net. In vain such Serpents shew a painted skin, That think to tempt my fingers to their sting. For by your Councils, being thus forewarn'd, Wee'l keep our selves secure, whil'st thus forearm'd. Cato and proud Marcellus I defie, At abject Preys Eagles disdain to flie. Fortune my Name above their Pride, has born, And as they envy me, so them I scorn. Give Order for the Armies March. That Fate Exe. Valer. & Curio. Which France hath felt. I'le make Rome tremble at. Her Senators and Consuls too, shall stand As thunderstrook, when I do lift my hand. If they refuse to do what I think Just, I'le lay Rome's stately Towners in the Dust. Break up her Treasure, and my self requite, For all the Service I have done in fight. Her Borders with the noise of Drums I'le fill, And strike Convulsions, in her seven top't Hill. Enter Valerius & Curio, Colours flying, the Drums beat a March. Those Eagles have brought Conquest on their wing, And to us yet, this Sword victorious been, Over the greater part o'th' world. And now, Proud Rome shall know, what Roman hands can do. Exeunt Omnes, the Drums beating a March.
The Scene is a Tempestuous Sea. Two Ladies are discover'd as cast on Shoar on a Planck. 1. Lady. What Shoar is this, that we are cast upon? 2. Lad. Alas! some forraign Coast to us unknown. 1. Lad. Let's humbly Kiss it, what so e're it be, Since from devour'ing Seas, it sets us free. 2. Lad. Here we perchance may spend our Dayes in grief, Strangers in forraign Lands, find cold relief. And when grief spins our time, we cannot say We Live, but rather dye our time away. 1. Lady. But yet our Sex, sure will some pitty move, Or else our Beauty will procure some Love. Have Storms been so Injurious as to plough, Furrows on ours, as on the Ocean's Brow? We want our Glasses to consult, let's spie Our forms i'th' Mirrhors of each other's Eye. Is all our Beauty gone, and all our Arts, Our Charms and Graces, which did conquer hearts? Cannot these Quivers yield one Dart, may prove, To wound with Pity, or to wound with Love? 2. Lad. Alas! that Power is gone: We hope in vain, That such mild Basilisks can Conquest gain. 'Tis not the Martial but the Am'rous Crew, That Women conquer, and that Eyes subdue. This Land perhaps contains a Race of Men, With hearts of Stone; what Weapons have we then? When all our sighs and tears have no more force, Then drops on Marbles, and meet no Remorse. 1. Lad. Were this the Land, where cruel Scythians dwell, Or were it some inhospitable Cell. If once the fire of Love, did warm their mind, 'Twould make the Scythians Courteous, Tigers kind. Why since in ev'ry Breast, Love do's controul, Ad warm the North, as well as Southern Pole,
Should we despair, or fear our fate, although, These people in their Breasts, had Alps of Snow? 2. Lad. I am for going back to Sea again, Wee'l flote, to seek new fortune on the Main. Perhaps the Planck, as well may us restore, Unto our Native, as a forraign Shoar. 1. Lad. No. Being safe, let us not trust the waves, Let we our Countrey seeking, find our graves. Hark how the Winds do blow, and Seas do roar, I fear this Countrey, but I fear them more. 2. Lad. The Sea seems troubled at our fate; and moans, Weeping in waves, whil'st Rocks do Eccho groans. The Winds do murmur, at our shipwrack't fate, And chide the Seas, 'till they new storms create. 1. Lad. No more I'le trust the Sea, though she should smile, Then I would do the weeping Crocodile. If we return again, we do as they, Who fly one Bear, to be another's Prey. Wee'l try our Fortune here at Land. We may Hope better Chance, Night ushers in the Day. 2. Lad. May the kind Gods, whose eyes with just respect Look down, obnoxious Innocents protect. Exeunt hand in hand. The Scene is an Italian Plain, Where an Augure is discover'd as amongst Sheep. A Nymph passeth by, scornfully, He Sings. THE SONG, Augure. NYmph why so coy? you hope in vain, To cool my Bosom with disdain. Scorn can no more my heat asswage, Then Payls of Oyle a fire's Rage. If you would quench my hot desire, Contribute fuell to the fire, For nought my Breast can satisfie, Unless You burn, as will as I.
The Nymph Answers, Nymph I'le never burn in flames again, But pay your falshood with disdain. If Scorn cannot assuage your beat, Nor make you from my Love retreat. My absence shall put out the fire, When it wants fuell 'twill expire. I will remove the scornfull guest, And thus I'le satisfie your Breast. The Augure Answers, Augure. If that your Rebel thoughts foreknew, Or thought your Absence could subdue My Love. You then would use that Art, To make a Conquest of my heart. But you a Conquest hope in vain, Whil'st you the Fortress do maintain, I'le never raise the Siege, but sware, To make an everlasting War. The Nymph Answers. Nymph. When I beleaguer'd you with Love, You in the Siege did constant prove. And seem'd as much to scorn the Foe, As now, your falshood, makes me do. From your Example I am grown, So wise as to maintain my own, With useless Troops of Words be gone, Invade not my Dominion. Exit Nymp. He follows her hastily, and returns solus. Augure. The day is overcast, methinks I see, Laborious Ants and the Industrious Bee.
Ants to their Hillocks travel with their Packs, Bees flying to their Hives, with thighs of Wax. These do foretell some Rain; besides the Sheep Feeding so fast, I know the Heav'ns will weep. But let it rain, I'le to you Shepheard's Bower, And sing, whil'st spungy Clouds weep down the Shower. He is going off. Enter Faeries. Faer. Stay! stay! What mak'st thou on our Faery ground? Seest thou not here a Ring, where we daunce round? Pinch him, till blood come, nothing shall suffice, They pinch him Aug. Accept Lamb's blood then for a Sacrifice. He cryes out. Faer. Nought can suffice for coming on our ground, Unless like us, thou knew'st to daunce a Round. Aug. I cannot daunce, but I can Pipe at need, Pan ne're in all his Life had better Reed. Faer. Sit down, and with thy Pipe begin a strain, It shall suffice. Wee'l trip it o're the Plain. The Augure sits down, the Faeries daunce an Antick Measure round him, singing as they daunce. Faeries sing and daunce. WE daunce an Antick Round, Blew Rings on the Ground, Shall alwayes be found, Where we keep Rendezvous. We love the kind Swains, Who delight on the Plains, At night comes their gains, When we think on their Shoes. Pinch the next, pinch him round, Untill there be found, Like the stains on our ground, Blew spots in his Arms. Wee'l daunce and Wee'l sing, Whil'st we alwayes do bring, In our fingers our Sting, And rejoyce at his Harms. Exeunt.
The Augure rises and speaks. Aug. I've been a Piper made indeed I'me sure, This wind, these water Musick did procure. The rain I did foresee, fell from mine Eyes, Here lyes the Shower in Tears, and these the Skyes. These Faeries were the Ants and Bees, which bring, Not in their tails like them, but thus their sting. But Night draws on, and Heav'ns resplendent Eye, Winks as 'twould say, Sister approach the Skie. Enter Valerius, Attendants. Valer. Are you an Augure?— Aug. — Yes. Valer. — I'm hither sent. By Caesar, for to bring you, to his Tent. Aug. Sir, I must begg this Night to be at home, And in the Morn, I'le tell him things to come. Exeunt severally. The Scene is a Grove. Enter the two former Ladies. 1. Lad. We have wander'd all this Day, within this Grove, Wee'l lodge to Night, that we may dream of Love. And so delude the tedious time away; Night locking up our griefs, till break of Day. 2. Lad. The day grief's Term time is, but then Night brings A short Vacation, on her sable wings. Let us lie down to sleep, grief hidden Lies, Whil'st slumber shuts the Casements of our Eyes. They lye down, Flagilets play, a Flourish within the Grove, to the Tunes of Birds. Both rise. 1. Lad. 'Tis Philomel, who by her warbling Lay, Bids a good Night to'th' Planet of the Day. 2. Lad. The Birds are gone to roost, the Lawrels nod, They seem to listen. As Daphne slept, or started at the God. The Sun's to Thetis gone, to take his rest, Betwixt the Azure Pillows of her Breast. Under these Courteous shades, wee'l lodge to Night, Till on her scarlet Wings, Morn brings the Light. Exeunt hand in hand into the Grove.
ACTUS II. SCENA PRIMA. Caesar is discovered asleep in his Pavilion, a Page playing on a Lute, and two Souldiers standing Sentinel. Enter the Augure. Caesar ariseth and come on the Stage. Caesar. HOw now? Can you foretell Events to come, Or do you know, what is decreed of Rome? Aug. Command your Men away, the things you'l hear, Should not divulged be, to ev'ry Ear, Caesar Nods. Exeunt. The Augure circles with his Wand, and speaks. Birds appear, Eagles, and Vultures. Whether to the Left or Right, The winged Troops do take their flight. If to the Left, it dos portend, Some Evil will accrue i'th' End. If to the Right it does presage, Prosperity will crown the Age. Caesar. What mean those Vultures, and yon Eagles? Aug. — Bloody War, And more then them, yon Blazing-Star, Which in the Eastern quarter shines, Men speak by Words, the Gods by Signs. Strange Omens in a time so short, Predicting Birds do now report, Tarquin's Lust did End the Kings, And two Mens Pride Romes Ruine brings. She by one blow shall lose far more, Then many Battles gain'd before. Great Sir, in Sybill's Books 'tis said, 'Till by a Prince her Bands be lead,
Rome o're the Parthians can't prevail, And Sybills Books do seldom fail. The Parthians do our Power disdain, Remember Crassus there was slain, Vengeance for his death pursue. Caesar. I have Foes at home, that I must first subdue. Aug. Behold a Dismal sight, see where The Ghost of Crassus does appear. Crassus passes by the Pavilion. Caesar stands as frighted. Ghost. If thou dost fear, I will away. Caesar. Can Caesar fear? stay Crassus stay, Ghost. The Senate masque their fatal harms, As Circe once her poys'nous charms. Come not on the Icy ground, The Senate would thy Power confound. Perfidious Pompey broken hath, Those Vows by which, we seal'd our faith, When we did combine of late, For to share the Roman State. Since Julia's and my Death, I know, He dos contrive thine Overthrow. Thy safety in thine Army lyes, Boldly thou may'st his Power despise. He shall be overthrown by thee, But then Great Caesar, think on me. Caesar. The Augure tells me, Sybill's Books have said, That by a Prince the Romans must be led, Before the Parthians can be conquered. Ghost. True. But when thou art a Prince, say, Wilt thou then March to Asia, For to revenge my death?— Caesar. — If e're I come, To sway the Scepter, as the Prince of Rome, I will.— Ghost. — Enough. I must away, The Morn dos usher in the Day. My Ghost hast's to the Asian Flood. Exit. Caesar. I'le pacifie thy Ghost with Parthian Blood. Exit.
The Scene is the Lawrel Grove. Enter the two Ladies as from out the Grove. 1. Lad. The Stars start from their Dreams, and seem to say, We must unto our Mansions float away. Lest staying here, Heav'ns resplendent Eye, Should put us out, as Glow-worms of the Skie. For now the Champion of the day dos rise, And routs those Common Link-boyes from the Skies. A Flourish from Flagilets within. Both. Hark, Hark.— 2. Lad. 'Tis Philomel, whose warbles seem to say, Make Room there, for the Planet of the Day. 1. Lad. Would Night again begloom'd this glorious place, Whose winged Tenants mock us to our Face. Might an Eternal sleep our Sense delude, Who late were Inmates to that Solitude. That we might find like them who Opium take, Our Souls i'th' other world, when as we wake. My sorrow whil'st I speak my Tears exacts, And turns my weeping Eyes to Chataracts. She weeps. 2. Lad. Why weep'st Secreta? come discharge your Mind, Sorrow when 'tis declar'd, relief may find. 1. Lad. 'Tis most unjust my sorrow to reveal, 2. Lad. 'Tis most unkind your sorrow to conceal, Your Shipwrack't fortune I did share at Sea, Let me at Land in grief your sharer be. 1. Lad. If in my grief you should a sharer be, The Shipwrack would be worse, then that at Sea. 2. Lad. Not knowing of your sorrow, whil'st you cry, I'm Shipwrack't by the Tempests in your Eye. 1. Lad. If in mine Eyes such Tempests you do find, You'l find far greater Tempests in my Mind. 2. Lad. Come speak your Mind, that I at last may prove, My self your friend, and manifest my Love.
For in your grief I'le share, 'tis some redress, To have Campanions when we're in Distress. 1. Lad. You force my tears and tongue. First Madam know, That to Sardinia I my Birthright owe. My Name's Selania; I to Spain did come, When bloody War call'd brave Uxama home, 2. Lad. You call'd your self Secreta.— Selania. —'Tis no shame, If Love be all the fault, to change one's Name. My Name's Selania, when yerst while in Spain, Thousands by Pompey's bloody Sword were slain, The Brave Uxama taken Prisoner, And carr'd to Rome, to grace his Triumphs there. I went in hopes to find him out at last, But with you, on this unknown Shoar am cast. Uxama gone, I could not longer stay, Shadows pursue the substance ev'ry way. But like an Amazon did take up Arms, Such is the power of Love's forcing Charms. Nor was it more then just, that I should be, Disguis'd for him, who was disguis'd for me. He call'd himself Oranges or our Isle, And stamp't his Fortune from my frown or smile. She weeps. Lady. I pity your hard fate, nor is mine less, Though not in Tears, I'm Rival in distress. Grief's like a River which dos silent creep, And makes but little Noise if it be deep. Spare fruitless Tears, in vain you do deplore, What once being lost, you never can find more. Selania. Who from so small a Tribute, can refrain, As Tears, although the tribute be in vain? We weep dead friends, although each Tear that's shed, Prove but a needless payment to the dead. Merchants may mourn their Loss, though tears they spill, Do with more water drown the Treasure still. My dear Uxama who conceal'dst thy Name, And call'dst thy self Or anges.— She weeps. Lady. —You're too blame.
To yield to passion, and give way to tears, Cast away sorrow and subdue your fears. I'de fain divert you from your grief; I'le sing And see if musick may diversion bring. Selan. Madam, I wish whil'st for my grief you seek a Cure. You may a Balsome for your own procure. Exit as into the Grove. Musick and Voices. THE SONG. THou God of Love, whose Quivers hold Shafts of Heat, and shafts of Cold. When hot we do Love's flame indure, When cold they do disdain procure. Whose points are sharp and strong enough, To pierce through Maile or coats of Buff. Which can from hearts of flint strike fire, To catch the tinder of Desire. Then dive the Seas, and there create, In Neptune flame, in Fishes heat. Then mount the Skies, and with new fire, Snatcht from the Sphears the Gods inspire. That Jove himself becomes the prize, Being shot with darts from Danaes Eyes. Such power has the God of Love, He Empires greater rules then Jove. Though the cold Zone should gird with Art, Or ribs of Ice immure a heart, Yet ribs of Ice would thaw with Love, And the cold Zone would torrid prove. Enter the Lady, and with her another Lady in the habit of a Shepherdess. Lady. Madam. I've met with a kind Shepherdess, Who vows she will take part in our distress.
Selan. Kind Maid I would not have thee change thy state, And for our sakes become unfortunate, Shepherdess. Madam, Please you to give me leave, I will attend Your sate, 'till happiness dos crown the end. Selania and the other Lady whisper. I find they know me not; and this disguise Dos hide distress'd Astragia from their eyes. I need not ask for to attend their fate, When as mine own makes me unfortunate. Though we were shipwrackt all, yet now I find, The gods in this our meeting do prove kind. My Sister's Lov'd by one, whom I do Love, I will her Faith, and his Affection prove, I'le try if she Love him; and then I'le know, Whether he Loves Astragia, or No. Enter Uxama disguis'd, like a Shepherd, with a Hook in his hand. Uxama. What are you? are you Stars fell from the Skies? Or Apparitions which deinde mine eyes? Speak if like me, you be of humane Race. What make you all thus early at this place? Lady. Coming along last night, we lost our way, And waited here the conduct of the day. Uxama. Please you sweer Ladies to accept of mine? Where lies the place, for which you do design? Selan. In Italy. I fear w'are far from thence. Uxama. Th'Imperial City's not far distant hence. Selania seems transported. Selan. Thanks you tempestuous Seas. How things succeed When shipwracks are so fortunate decreed. Aside. Chance hath preferr'd my wishes, and I'm come, Where I shall see Oranges now at Bonee. Uxama. What's that! Oranges! do you know that name? Selan. That name adds a new fewell to my flame. Aside.
Uxama. A Pris'ner call'd Oranges as 'tis said, Must put the Garland on great Pompey's head, But then must die. For Pompey thinks it good, Two of the Ensigns should be steept in's blood. Selania swouns, the others help her. Then hung in Janus's Temple, for to be The bloody Trophies of his Victory. Lady. Help, Help, the Lady Swouns.— Exit Shepherdess. Uxama helps Enter a Souldier. Sould. — Hold Ravisher. Ʋxama. It is this Lady not thy sword I fear. Sould. What didst thou think of two to make a Rape, And that just Heaven would wink at thy escape? Thou pay'st thy life for injur'd innocence. Ʋxama. Lend here thy help, o prithee get thee hence. Sould. Defend thy self, or else submit to death. Ʋxama. Poor Criminals tamely may resign their breath; The justice of my cause dos bid me stand In opposition to the Hectors hand. They fight. Enter the Shepherdess. Shepherdess. Hold Hold, — Can pitty be a crime? he brought relief, Unto a Lady almost dead with grief. They fight on, The Shepherdess takes an Arrow out of the Ladies Quiver, and throws at the Souldier, at which Uxama runs in and disarms him. The Shepherdess receives a small wound. Lady. The wound's not deep I hope.— Ʋxama. — Now thy own Blade Sends thy black Soul to the infernal Shade. But 'twere a crime, if hasty passion should Before her blood's wip't off, let out thy blood. He wipes the sword. Will you inflict his death or else shall I? The Souldier claps behind the Lady. Sould. You shall this armour pierce before I dye. Lady Hold, Hold. Let him not die at all for us. Ʋxama passeth at him. Sould. Thanks to my Armour which defends me thus.
Ʋxama. Will you save him who sought to ruine us? Selania. Hold Hold. Give him his sword— passeth at him. Ʋxama. —Here Souldier take Your Sword, thank them, and blame your rash mistake. Gives him his Sword, he lets go the Lady, and speaks to the Shepherdess. Sould. I humbly thank your mercy, but I crave You'd take away that Life, which you now save. For since I spilt your blood, you justly may, Let out all mine, and then those drops repay. He profers his sword. Shepherdess. Mercy prevails with me, it is not good That drops should be repaid with streams of blood. Sould. Have I when Pompey yerst did Spain invade, Cut through the Spanish Squadrons with my Blade? Have I of times through bloody dangers run, Outfac'd grim-War, and valiant actions done? Contemning death, I alwayes did ingage, Where war, and slaughter seemed most to rage. Knowing that conquest yields but little honour, If bloody dangers do not wait upon her. Well. It never shall be said I lost the Day, And conquer'd by a Shepherd went away. For here I vow, I'le not my shame outlive, But do refuse that life, which you would give. He goes to fall on his Sword, Uxama with his book, strikes the sword from under him, the Souldier takes the Dart, strikes himself, and falls. What weapon was more fit then this? since I Gave you a wound with mine, by yours I die. A Parchment and Keyes fall from him Which are taken up by Uxama. Selan. What gen'rous spirits these brave Romans have, Their lives once blur'd with shame, they will not save. Who like these gallant Romans, thus dare dye, May brave their Fate, and fortune may defie. Uxama opens the Parchment and reads. These are to satisfie all, whom it may concern, that M. Rivulus hath
leave to be absent from the Army for the space of a Moneth, during which time he is appointed by the order of Pompey the Great, to oversee and take into his Custody the Spanish Prisoners; and more∣over he shall order every Pris'ner to bear a Branch of Lawrel, upon the day of the celebration of Pompey's Triumphs, in all subjection before the Conquerour. M. Afranius. Those are belike the Keys o'th' Prison Gate. Selan. Now my distress may make me fortunate. Aside. Uxama. M. Afranius! Afranius, one of Pompey's Gen'rals, who In the late Spanish war did bravely do. Who still with Varro and Petreius stays, And bloody Ensigns now in Spain displays. Ah my poor Countrey, by a fatal stroke, Brought in subjection to the Roman Yoke. If 'twere within my power to regain My Countrey's Pristin freedom: then O Spain My life I would most willingly forego, That from my death, thou might'st Victorious grow. Selan. Grant O kind Heaven this Shepherd prove my friend, For by his help I may attain my End. The Souldiers habit, and that Parchment may, Unto my Dear Ʋxama make the way. Aside. Those Keyes if they unlock the Prison Gate, May set him free, and may prevent his fate, And then Selania will be fortunate. I'le try him. — Kind Swain, I'd beg a favour at your hand. Uxama. Madam. You need not beg, but may command. Selan. If to your Countrey you such kindness owe, Now free the Spaniards, and that kindness show. Uxama. My love to Spain, with honour must agree. Honour sayes No. Though love would set them free. The chaunce of War hath made them so. Selan. —What then Chaunce gives you means to set them free again.
Ʋxama. Ah Madam! Should I say that I do lye Bound with your Hair, and fetter'd by your Eye; Or should I tell you that I do become, A greater Pris'ner here than they at Rome. Would you vouchsafe to set me free? Alone From you, I must my freedome have or none. Just so it fares with them. They Pris'ners be, 'Till he who made them so, dos set them free. Selan. Those chains you talk'd of first, with greatest ease, May be put on and off, as Pris'ners please, Witchcraft hath Spells like these; what one dos chain, A nobler Beauty can release again. But now your power's absolute alone From you they must have freedome, or from none. Uxama. Madam! I bring my Life in question, but for you, I'le venter both my life and fortune too. Would you have all releas'd or only one? Selan. I'm most inclin'd for him, whom yerst you said, Must put the Garland on great Pompey's head, But then must die. I only wish him free, Though Death's more wellcome, then Captivity. Propose your own reward.— Uxama. —If that I may, Your smiles I'le only covet for my pay. Uxama and Selania whisper. She gives him a Letter. Lady. This Shepherd sure is sprung from noble Race, What sweet behaviour, dos his person grace! Shepherdess. No matter how descended from his Birth, The purest gold it self was once but earth. They wear the badge of honour, who are known, Not by their Fathers actions, but their own. Selan. Mistake in them, will the design prefer, And your admittance get to th'Prisoner. That done, you by those Keyes may set him free. Uxam. I'le be the author of his liberty. I find his Fate her pitty much doth move, I call it pitty, but I know 'tis love. Aside. Exit.
Selan. Assist the Act you gods, who alwayes prize Mercy before the bleeding Sacrifice. Spare but Oranges Hecatombs I'le slay, And heaps of Incence on your Altars lay. But if such meaner Offerings you despise, Spare him, and let me be the Sacrifice. Exeunt omnes. Uxama returns and speaks. Solus. Uxama. Since my Selania's death, I ne'r could find So rare a beauty, such a matchless mind. But in this Lady, both have took such place, Her vertuous mind seems Rival to her face. In all so like Selania, I must own, Souls surely have a Transmigration. Pardon Selania, if I love in her, Those vertues which in thee I did preferr. Did not the Adriatick Sea intomb Thy Beauty, where the sportive Fish do come, Not to devour, but unto Kisses bent. And from thy Lipps receive their nourishment. I should have thought thee here, but 'tis I find Thy Picture, may it like thy Self prove kind. Had not a gen'rous Youth observ'd the waves. How eagerly they op't their liquid graves, As if ambitiously the waves were bent, Each striv'd to be thy weeping Monument. Had not he seen thee drowned, who must thank Kind Heaven for his safety on a Plank, I should have vow'd thee living; but I find Thou'rt gone; but yet in her thou'rt left behind. But why think I of Love? when I must be The Author, of her Lovers Liberty. These Keys must set him free, or else he dies. Suppose I suffer it, it may suffice, If I pretend I came too late, or say, Strong Guards of Souldiers, at the Gates did slay. But can I thus resolve, and think I love? When I not faithful, but perfidious prove.
Or think that love, can like the Phoenix rise, From out her Lovers Ashes, when he dyes! Ah love all thy suggestions are in vain, What love commands, my honour dos restrain. I'le go and set him free, although I be, The Author of mine own Captivity. Exit. The Scene is Rome. Enter two Senators in Gowns. 1 Sen. Sure of this City there can come no good, Whose new built walls were bath'd with humane blood. Inhumane Founder, must thy Brother dye? Thou from a Wolf did'st suck the Cruelty. 2 Sen. I fear those Twins nurst by a Wolf portend, Some homeborn Wolf will spoil her in the end. 1 Sen. Caesar they say and Crassus did combine, And Pompey too in a most high design, To share the Roman Greatness, but the death Of Crassus and of Julia give her breath. She, being Caesar's Daughter, He, his friend, Do by their deaths, give the design an end. Whil'st Julia liv'd she did debar all strife Betwixt them two, one's Daughter, t'other's Wife. Those Twins of Fame, then which the World affords, None more ambitious, none more potent Lords. 2 Sen. Caesar and Pompey both do strive I know, Like neighbouring Cedars which shall highest grow; Whose lofty tops, when shaken with the Wind, Fall foule upon each other; thus you'l find Whilest for vain glory equally they strive, The one the other's Ruine will contrive. But Heavens prevent; the props once took away, The Building soon dos run into decay. Exeunt.
The Scene continues. Enter the Shepherdess in mans Apparel. Shep. I've try'd my Sisters Lover, and I find, That he affects her with a constant mind. And now in this Disguise, I mean to try, Her love to him, and prove her Constancy. And if I find she do inconstant prove, Her falshood I will expiate by my love. I then will tell him that I love; and he, What he once sought in her, shall find in me. Astragia Loves, but will suppress her flame, Unless my Sister first resign her Claim. Selania and my Sister sav'd, I find, The gods seem'd cruel, to appear more kind. No sooner I arriv'd, but loe I found An armed man, lie sleeping on the ground. I humbly kist the Shoar, and Heavens did thank, For my protection, on a floating Plank. The Souldier wak'd, and sighing oft did say. Have you not heard of one Selania? I said in short, I saw her cast away. He tore his hair, with passion so possest, The Sea seem'd calm, to th' Tempest in his breast. Sure it was rais'd from Love. When Windmils go, 'Tis only Wind that can transport them so. Would I could meet him that I might excuse The rash report, and tell him better news. Selania lives. — — On Planks we safely find, When gods are Pilots, and their breath the wind. Finis Actus Secundi.
ACTUS III. SCENA PRIMA. The Scene is Italy. Caesar, Ʋalerius, Curio, Souldiers. Caesar and Valerius in private Conference. Caesar. VAlerius No. I firmly have design'd, If favours will not, by constraint to bind. Curio with these shall to the Senate go, Curio Bows. And give 'um notice what I mean to do. Letters. When they do understand my full intent, Perhaps they'l them cease to be insolent. But if they should accept what I propose, You need not my intentions then disclose. In vain we do besiege the yielding Town. Who by a smile can conquer, needs not frown. Caesar in private conference with Curio. Valer. I fear whil'st Caesar dos so high aspire, That his ambition will set Rome on fire. I know the Senate with unlevel'd eyes, Look on his greatness, through a false disguise; Pretending Love, when they intend to do, All that their hate and pride can prompt them to. Caesar Romes Empire hath o're Kingdoms spread, Who where he came or lookt, still conquered. Hence springs their hate; shall Stars that shine less bright. Envy the Sun, whence they derive their Light? I wish his Letters may acceptance find, Or else shee'l know, too soon what he'has design'd. When he infests her, with intestin Wars, And Like a Viper, through Her bowels tears.
Caesar gives Curio the Letters trim'd with Lawrell. And speaks. Caesar. I'le have it so.— Curio. —Can Civil War procure? Caesar. War may make Rome less proud, me more secure. Curio. We ill secure our selves by shedding blood. Caesar. We may less evils act, for greater good. Curio. Yet Sir remember by this fatal strife You ruine her, who first did give you life. Rome, Who o're Mighty Kingdoms dos command. Caesar. The greater part, were conquered by this hand. But as, when on Foundations we do lay Too great a weight, the building dos decay: So Romes own greatness for her ruine calls, Who under insupported Glory falls. Thus Sisyphus his stone, when with much pain Rowl'd up the Hill, soon tumbles down again. Nature a term of greatness dos assign, Which once being past, things more and more decline. Curio. Nations subdu'd whilest we at home do fight, By safe incursions may regain their right. As when two Lyons quarrel for the prey, In comes a Wolf, and carries it away. Sir, be advis'd, let it be never said That Rome was ruin'd, by the Man She bred. The glorious Sun, whose Rayes salute the Earth, Untill her teeming womb gives all things birth. Dos not consume her, though she often lies, And dos Eclipse his Glory from our eyes. Sir, 'Tis enough that all the world dos know, That Rome her greatness to your hand should owe. Caesar. Heavens! should owe! Your spirits faint I find, What! thoughts of Civil War do scare your mind. Should owe! dos she not then? if she deny, My Sword shall give her sawcy tongue the lye. You did advise me to go arm'd: 'tis strange Your Council in so short a time should change.
Curio. Your pardon Sir, 'twas my advise 'tis true. But now you may a better course pursue. Councils like Seamen as they cause do find, Must tack about according to the wind. First Sir, for Cato and Marcellus send, A seeming friendship may make each your friend. Perhaps to your proposals they'l consent, Oblige the Senate, and the War prevent. Not that I fear a War, but shall obey, And follow dangers, when you lead the way But yet 'tis madness, if we chuse to run Into a storm, whose fury we may shun. Caesar. They'l not their safety forfeit at that rate, To trust themselves with me, whom they do hate. My Letter speaks 'um fair, if that won't do, I shall expect the rest be told by you. Curio. —Sir, I obey your Will. Caesar. —'Tis fit, Since Pompey's Army, that they mine admit. Else I may justly think they do design, To side with Pompey, and my Cause decline. Has he done more for Rome then I have done? Who have proud Nations to her Empire won, Th' outragious Gauls, who with their num'rous swarms, Made Macedonians tremble at their Arms; Who wasting Asia, and disposing things, Did insolently make and unmake Kings This hand did Conquer; There I gave decrees, Then wounded Neptune's bosome with wing'd Trees. The Gauls no more presuming of their might, I did the World divided Britains fight. The Germans from their Youth inur'd to War, Whil'st neither Hills nor Seas my Course could bar; Whose Martial minds still haughty thoughts have bred, Yerst saw the Rhene, with their own blood run red. Nations where e're I went, did trembling stand, Who with my Sword, carr'd Conquest in my hand.
Nor did they ever think themselves secur'd, Though moted in with Seas, or Hills immur'd. Those Eagles for their prey, have Kingdoms won, And conquer'd both the Mansions of the Sun, Nothing could ever yet controul their force, Nor Alps, nor Pyren Hills could stop their Course, Whose wings with Conquest imp't, spread uncontroul'd, Disdaining Southern heat, and Northern cold. The Acts that I have done, my glories raise, My Deeds in number do exceed my Daies. Curio. You by your Conquests have inlarg'd Rome's Bounds; By which they think your Power too much abounds. Caesar. Who dare to lodge such thoughts within their minds? Curio. They whom your bright Meridian glory blinds. Caesar. They who do think my glories to suppress, As well may think to make the Sun shine less. Thou think'st in vain proud Rome my high-born Soul, Will Cringe so low, as to let thee controul. No, Rome thou dost mistake; though Jove should shroud, Or case thee in the bowels of a Cloud, Yet Gyant-like, I'd heap up Hills so high, If he'd not yield thee up, I'd scale his Skie. Should he transport thee past remotest Seas, Or carry thee to the Antipodes, I'd pass those Seas, or shute some Gulf and go, To scourge thy Damn'd ingratitude below. I would pursue thee ev'ry way, where force, Could not arrive, I'd damn thee with my Curse. Caesar walks in a Passion. Valerius and Curio whisper. Caesar comes and speaks. Caesar. Valerius! What do you think is fittest to be done? Valer. The way that's safest Sir 'tis best to run. Caesar. My safety dos depend upon your Swords. Valer. Love greater safety then our swords affords. Caesar. Nought to a Prince can more inconstant prove, Then strength that's builded on the peoples love.
Unhappy Monarch, whose ill founded State, Stands on his Subjects Love, or on their hate. He holds at Will the Scepter, and must be, A Tenant to his Crown by Courtesie. His spirit's mean, Who dares not to controul, Is made a Subject by his dastard Soul. Valer. Love's a foundation that will ne're decay. Caesar. Yet oft in Ruine doth the builder lay. The Peoples love may like the Sea awhile, Whil'st Calms salute her surface, seem to smile, But by the Winds saluted, by and by, The rough imbrace, makes her invade the Skie. Whose foaming Billows post unto the Shore, And flit for fury, that they can't do more. Thus in affection do the Vulgar prove. Inconstant. There's the Weathercock of Love. Lend me brave Souldiers, but your Swords, and where Rome dos deny to Love, I'le make her fear. Val. & Curio. Our Swords and Lives are yours great Sir.— Sould. Vivat Caesar.— Vivat Caesar.— Caesar. Jove would not firmly in his Heaven stand, But that he holds the Thunder in his hand, That Idol, Greatness, which most men adore, Is gotten with great pains, and kept with more. It never can be truly kept secure, But by those means, which did it first procure. But I waste time.—Curio make haste to Rome, And tell the Senate that from Me you come. Give 'um My Letters, if they do command, That Pompey all his Army shall disband, I to the same conditions then will stand, And Mine dismiss, if not, I think it Just, Since they to His, I to my Army trust. And then, what they refuse, I'le force, and Might Shall be the Arbitrator of my Right. And when by Pompey's Army, I'm withstood, I'le march to Rome, through reeking fields of blood.
Thus what a Torrent's force impeaches, more, Swels th' uncontrouled streams, and makes them roar. When Pyramids do burn, whose tops aspire, Engines are useless, and can't reach the fire. Excunt, Caesar, Valerius, and Souldiers at one door. Curio at the other. The Scene lyes in Italy. Enter Astragia habited as before leading her sister. Ast. I cannot in my Language periods find, For to express the Vertues of your Mind. Rhet'rick's too scant; all Metaphors in one, Speaking of You, are diminution. Hyperbole's no figure, and in this Auxesis too is but a Miosis. My tongue mine Admiration can't impart, Accept mine eyes, as Agents for my heart. Madam 'tis just you should accept the same, Since from your eyes mine admiration came. Lady. I can't with dumb Embassadors conferr, Fond Youth thine eyes want an Interpreter. Ast. Madam the Language may be understood, As easie, as a dumb Man's Signes for food. And as to him you'd charitable prove, So let me now experience your love. Lady. Can'st thou love one, thou never saw'st till now? Ast. Like motion, Love dos in an instant grow. I cannot doubt your vertues since I know, Distress and vertue, both together go. Lady. I am distress'd upon the score of Love. Ast. Upon that score, I would distressed prove. But Madam can distress from Love arise, When as all blessings Center in your eyes? Your Lover's absence can you count distress, When you may tread new wayes to happiness?
Lady. Who do new Lovers before old preferr, Walking new paths of Love may chance to err. And whil'st they quit the Course, they stear'd before, May leave the Indies, for a Barren Shore. Ast. Pursuing Love you cannot go astray, When vertue guides your beauty in the way. Who'd go to th' Indies, if at home they could Find Pearls of equal price, and mines of Gold? So that Love's progress now may ended be, If what you sought in him, you find in me. Lady. Much more sweet youth, unto thy vertue's due. I blush to tell thee, that I Love thee too. Ast. But may I hope that you Love me alone? For Love resents a Rival in his Throne. Lady. Ah! Gen'rous Youth, thou art the only guest, That I admit to lodge within my Brest. Ast. Say, Madam, have you ever Lov'd before? Lady. Not on my own, but on my Sisters score. Distress'd Astragia, where so e're thou art, Thy Sister means to give away thy heart. I know thou Lov'st the man, who once Lov'd me, But in thy Love, he may more happy be. I therefore do resign all claim; that she In him, may happy prove; and I in thee. Astragia weeps. But why these tears sweet Boy? You must not cry, Unless you mean to drown me in your eye. Ast. How can I chuse but weep, to think I shou'd, Deceive a Sister, which dos prove so good. Ah Madam I have cause to weep, you'l say, When you do know I am Astragia. Pulls off her Peruke. Lady. Propitious Gods with blessings don't destroy, We wept for sorrow once, but now for Joy. How quickly my affection thou had'st won, Thy vertue's strong, that could subdue so soon. What greater blessing could there be, then this? She, who my Lover was, My Sister is. Ast. Whil'st others leave self int'rest to controul, Honour the Bias was, that lead thy Soul.
For what could cause thee to resign thy claim? Lady. Because I knew, yours was the nobler flame. Your Love exceeded mine: 'twas therefore fit, That to the strong, the weaker should submit. Ast. Could you all this for poor Astragia do? Lady. Dear Sister can I do too much for you? Not doing this, I should unworthy prove, 'Tis fit that honour should give Laws to Love. Exeunt. The Scene is Rome. Enter the two former Senators. 1 Sen. The time yields nothing but distracting care, And gives a prospect only to despair. Since Julia's death, Pompey aspires so high, Admits no Rival, nor Equality And Caesar is so great a Conquerour, He'l ne'r admit of a Superiour. And this I fear will cause Domestick Jarrs. 2 Sen. Their Armies are ingag'd in forrain Wars. Part of great Pompey's Army dos remain, Under the Valiant Afranius in Spain. Caesar's in Gallia, sure they'l never come, And thence remove the Wars, to bring 'um home. 1 Sen. Pray Heavens Amen. I wish they never may, I would not live to see that fatal Day. But shall I fear? Who with Ambition thirst, Imbibe the poyson, 'till at last they burst. And with their ruine draw on thousands more, And make it universal, on that score. Enter to them Uxama. A Boy bearing Lawrels after him, and Garlands. Is this a Time for Triumphs? when we may Rather expect this Empire should decay. Ah Rome, Thy greatness, dos draw on thy Fate, What Atlas can support thy tott'ring State? 2 Sen. How goes Report?—
Uxama. —Grave Senators! I hear News, which with terrour, will invade your eare. Curio's Just now arriv'd, 'tis Thought that he, From Caesar brings some dreadful Embassy. Whil'st Caesar with his Army as they say, A day's march distant from the Town dos stay, Expecting his return from Rome; I fear, He'l turn your Triumphs to a bloody War. 1 Sen. Wise Cato told the Senat as a friend, To what all Caesar's deeds would turn i'th' end. If that his Pride were not controul'd in time, Made great by Conquests, He too high would clime. But Pride's best Curb'd, still by as proud a one, A Diamond must cut a Diamond, or none. Therefore I think we wisely did admit Great Pompey's Army.— 2 Sen. Ne'r think that Caesar will to force submit. He has an Army, and may come secure, And force by foul, what fair means won't procure. And when his force, by Pompey's is withstood, Our Eagles then will prey on Roman blood. Lo, when two Clouds of Fire and Water meet, They kiss in Lightning, and in Thunder greet. Exeunt Senators Uxama stayes. Ʋxama. What are these troubles in the State? When I Reflect on those, which in my Bosome lie? No Civil War, like that within my Breast, Where love and honour equally contest. Honour comes arm'd with Glory in her hand, And thus methinks she speaks: Ʋxama stand. What must Love's passions thus distract thy mind? And must my Mansion, be to Love resign'd? Can Love preserve thy Name? 'tis I that must, Like to the Phoenix spring from out thy dust. Love with thy body dies, but I controul, And keep thy name immortal like thy Soul, But now comes love, and thus methinks dos say, Dost thou refuse bold Rebel to obey?
Who take my Weapons from her eyes, and owe The Twist unto her hair which strings my Bow. Enter Selania undiscover'd. Eagles which build aloft, shall teach their Young, To try their Eyes at hers, and not the Sun. June still resides upon her Cheeks, and ows Unto her Breath, the perfumes of each Rose. He discovers her. I must confess, I'm conuer'd by surprise, Love dos pursue too fast, when honour flies. Selan. Have you releas'd the Pris'ner?— Uxam. —Madam, he Has Liberty; but you have fetter'd me. Aside. Selan. Did you appoint him, for to meet me here? Ʋxam. I thought the place not safe, the Prison's near. But in a Pilgrims habit sent him,— Selan. —Whither? Uxam. Unto you Plains.— Selan. —Will you conduct me thither? Ʋxam. Madam I wait upon you.— Selan. —Since you prove Thus generous, Let that express my Love. Gives him a Purse. Uxama. I prize your favours, but refuse the gold, The service done for you should not be sold. The name of servant when't relates to you, Both payes the service, and gives honour too. Exeunt. The Scene is some Italian Plain. Enter Astragia nd her Sister. A Pilgrim is discover'd asleep. Lady. Ha. A weary Pilgrim sleeping on the ground, Thy quiet breast is with contentment crown'd. These fresh and fragrant Plains, thy Eyelids close, With a secure, and undisturb'd repose.
Here wandring Streams do in soft murmurs flye, And Court sweet sleep, to lodge within thine eye. Ast. Let's wake him.— Lady. —Pilgrim awake, arise. Stamps with her foot. Chase away drowsie slumber from thine eyes. Enter Selania and Uxama. The Pilgrim rises. Selan. Did you most holy Sir, a stranger see? Uxama. If that you mean the Pris'ner, this is He. Selan. You have mistook.— Orang. —There's no mistake in it. Oranges never was in fetters yet. Unless you count the man in fetters lyes, Whom you have captiv'd by your powerfull eyes. Madam he lives, is free, and kept secure, By a Disguise, I did for him procure. Selan. Be blest good man for ever, since that breath Calls back my soul, both from despair and death. And dos Oranges live, you Powers divine, Your Altars daily shall with Incence shine. Ʋxam. What Labyrinth is this? things seem to me Riddles in love, and all a Mysterie. Orang. I hear his Voice.— Selan, —You fancy that you hear, I wish his happy Voice would bless my ear. Orang. But for a little time subdue your fears, His sight shall bless your eyes, his voice your ears. Provide to meet him, at you Lawrel Grove. Selan. I shall not fail appointments made by love. Orang. Thither I'le bring him to you.— Selan. —May'st thou be Ever as happy, as thoul't then make me. Exeunt. Uxam. Poor Semel, I now must try thy Fate, And burn in flames which I would shun too late. I by this Goddess ruin'd, thou by Jove, The one by Lightning, and the other by Love. Exit. Finis Actus Tertii.
ACTUS IV. SCENA PRIMA. The Scene is the Capitol. Musick Playes a soft Strain. Enter Lictors bearing bundles of Rods and Axes, before the two Con∣suls, who hold a Garland of Lawrel betwixt them, after whom, Pompey bare-headed, in a Triumphant Gown, Next Senators. They ascend the Degrees, Six Spanish Pris'ners, each bearing a bough of Lawrel, and a Garland of Grass, usher'd in by two bearing Ensigns, Crying out, Subacta Hispania twice. All plac'd, the Con∣suls rise and put the Garland on Pompey's head. Cons. TRiumphant Lawrels we place on thy head, Who to our Empire Spain hast conquered. Musick Playes as before. Two Pris'ner's come out, and Cry Io Triumphe, twice. They lay down their Garlands and speak. Both. Garlands of Grass We offer for to show, That Land was conquer'd, where this Grass did grow. Musick Playes as before. Two more Cry Io Triumphe, twice, and do as the former. Both. These mighty Sir, we at your feet do lay, And all Subjection, to our Conquerour pay. The Last come out and do as before. Crying out Io Triumphe, twice: Both. Vouchsafe dread Conquerour to cast down your eye, Upon these Emblems of your Victory. They take their places. The Musick Playes aloud. The Pris'ners run into the Measure of a Daunce. After a while, are interrupted by Fame, who comes winged, with a Trump in her hand, and thus speaks to them, then to Pompey. Fame. No more.— No more.—
I am resolv'd, that I my self will fing Great Pompey's Triumphs, and upon my Wing, Upon these golden Plumes, thy Fame shall Flie Unto both Poles, those limits of the Skie. I Goddess Fame, will with thy Trumpet sound, Each Accent of thy Name, where World is found. I'le rescue thee from Time.— Time winged, bald, &c. interrupts Fame. Time. Fame Thou mistak'st, thou dost not know my Power, I Marble Monuments, and Brass devour. I see proud Cityes often as I flye, Founded so strong, they might my power defie. But when perhaps, I next take wing that way, Those Cityes then, are run into decay. The aged Nestor when compar'd with me, The Infant Boy dy'd in Minority. The Thred of Life by Lachesis is spun; And all things dye, their fatal Glass once run. I to decay, the strongest things do fend, Eagles and Ravens have one common End. The long liv'd Stagg, and Oak, do both at last, Reach to those Points of Time, which ne're are past. Though strength and years should in one thing combine, Yet time will come, when they must both resign. Now Fame; What think you, do you think I've Power, And that in time, I can his Name devour. Fame pauseth and speaks. Fame. No, for the gods that power to me give, That though men dye, by me their names may live. What's mortal in that man, I leave to thee, But what's immortal, I do take to me. Exit Fame. Envy appears seeming to have Snakes For her Tresses, interrupts Time. Time. From me and Envie. — Envy. Speak for your Self bald pated fool, I will Let's Army cast up Hills unto the Skie, To be the Trophies of his Victory,
Let him build Pyramids, or Temples raise, Or carve his Acts in Mausolean Brass. I'le scratch those Hills to Dust, that Winds again May blow'um, 'till they'r level'd with the Plain. Those Pyramids and Temples I'le Erase, My Aqua fortis Teeth shall eat the Brass. Time. Envy be gone, the gods thy Power restrain, Mad dogs may rage, which cannot break their chain. Exit Envy. From Both of Us, thou hast redeem'd thy Name, To Pompey. And by thy Actions got immortal Fame. If such thy Morning glory be, what when, Thou shalt arrive at thy Meridian? Exit Time. All come down upon the Stage. Enter Curio with Letters in his hand trim'd with Lawrel, and a Dart at his Girdle. Curio. I do in order Sir to my command, Gives a Letter to a Consul. These letters humbly offer to your hand. This Letter is to You.— Gives it to a Senator. Sen. — To Me, from whom? Curio. This Sir, and that do both from Caesar come. Consul. Curio your Master dos too high aspire, He thinks to force us sure, to his desire. But he mistakes, first tell him, that he must Disband his Army, and the Senate trust. Who would be Consul, must not take the course, Of an ambitious man in Power, Force. He must lay down his Arms.— Curio. — He thinks it fit, Since Pompey's Army, that you his admit. Else he may justly think, you do design, To side with Pompey, and his Cause decline. 2 Consul. Curio not so, for though we were most strong, We would not use our Power to do Wrong. We keep his Army to defend our Right, And to protect us from injurious Might. Curio. I wish you Pompey's Army would disband.
Pompey. That wish is high Presumption Sir in you, Will you advise the Consuls what to do. Wish that your Master would his Troops disband, By mine it is that we secure do stand. Which if the Consuls should disband, we may For ought I know become your Master's prey. Curio. If that this Plea be just, great Sir, then too My Master may suspect the same from you. Pompey. 'Tis fit, we Caesar's Pride controul in time, Lest through Ambition he too high should clime. Curio. Great Caesar with your self, takes it on trust, All he attempts to make him great, is Just. Curio takes Pompey aside. Can you tax him with pride, and think of late, How you combin'd to share the Roman State? Who by ambition then was lead? can you, Charge him, when you your self are guilty too? And whil'st from that design you thus retreat, I know you study means to grow more great. But don't his Ruine, as the Means, contrive, For can his fall, rise to your glory give? Pompey. I'le hear no more. — The Consuls have decreed, he ne're shall come In Arms, unless he force his way to Rome. Curio. Since 'tis deny'd, I promis'd to declare, What Caesar did Command. A Civil Warr. Throws down his Dart. Great Caesar is resolv'd to take this course, What you deny him in, he means to force. The highest in the Heavens, who know events, Know that constrain'd I come from Caesars Tents, As an unwilling Herald to proclaim, A War must be Rome's ruine, and her shame, A War which all true Romans must bemoan, And when our hands do wound, our hearts must groan. Exit Curio. 1 Consul. The World is but a Tennis-Court, where Fate, Tosses the men for Balls, and playes the State.
Bandy'd about, they rise and do descend, Whose glories hazard oft their fatal end. Hath Caesar by his Conquests made Rome great, That he at once in her, might's Wars repeat? Or that those Kingdoms to her Empire lain, In fighting her, might be fought o're again? Or did he Nations to this end subdue, That all in her, might at one time accrue? No. We must stop his Pride, lest we indure, What our delay, may put beyond our cure. Let's sit in Council, and with speed conclude, What course is fittest for to be pursu'd. Pompey. Since you my Army did admit, I'le do, What honour and your safety bind me to. His fury I'le withstand, and for Romes good, Like the kind Pelican, I'le spend my blood. Enter a Messenger hastily, a Perspective in his hand.] Consul. What is thy message, that thou seem'st afraid? Mess. I fear great Sir, that we are all betray'd I through this glass did distant objects spye, When Lo an Army marched in mine eye. I stood a while, in which they drew so near, That Sir by this, I fear they'r almost here. An Other Messenger hastily. 2 Mes. On the Tarpean Hill I stood, which yields A fair prospect to the Italian fields, Where Caesar's Army march'd, and where it came, Towns still burst forth with a most dismal flame. Horrour and Outcryes posted through the Skye, Resolve to conquer, or resolve to dye. Cons. To Arms. To Arms.— Pompey. Command that Crimber with his utmost force, Charge the right Wing, with my Italian horse.
You the left Wing, You in the Rere fall on't, With my Thessalian horse, I'le charge the Front. If he be beat, Or by our Power be slain, Italia by his Death, her peace will gain, But if we lose the fortune of this day, We next will fight him at Pharsalia. Caesar beware, least whil'st thou soar'st too high, I pull thy Towring Eagles from the Skie. Exeunt Omnes. The Scene is the Grove. Enter Ʋxama. Solus. Uxama. This is the fatal Place, to which Both tend, She for to meet her Lover; He his end. His Glass of life, or mine, is almost run, One of us two, sets with this Evening Sun. Both can't enjoy; Loves individuum Makes it a Blessing, which belongs to one. Men ne're were partners yet to an Estate, Let him take all, who dos survive his fate. The fire of Love like to the common fire, The fewel being gone, dos strait expire; Or like sight, which, Philosophers do say, Would cease to be, were objects took away. So that his death alone, I find can prove, The only means that's left to gain her Love. Die then; And teach all Lovers a new Art, That Love which wades through blood must reach the heart. Kisses his Sword. Exit. Finis Actus Quarti.
ACTUS V. SCENA PRIMA. The Scene is the same Grove. Enter Oranges, Musick following of him; he having a Paper in his hand, gives it to one of them. Orang. THE Song.—Goe place your selves within the Grove. This Evening we will dedicate to Love. This is the Sign. When I do stamp begin, First Play a strain or two, and after Sing. Stamps. Exeunt as into the Grove. One returns hastily and speaks. Musick. An armed man lyes sleeping on the ground, With a drawn Sword.— Orang. — Has he receiv'd no wound? Exit as into the Grove, he returns suddainly. Orang. Things are arriv'd where I would wish, and now To Fortune more then to design I owe. His sleep suggests a course I will pursue, Which he will blame me for, and thank me too. Sleep is deaths emblem, and it may be said, Whil'st sleep locks up our senses we are dead. This of her Lover I'le report and say, That by his side his fatal Weapon lay. Perhaps she may dispair. I know, distress Gives greater relish unto happiness. Blessings expected lose much of their rate, Unlookt for when they come they've estimate. I by this means shall try her faith, and find, If death can change the tenure of her mind. Forgive me dearest Master, what I do, Is but to try her constancy to you.
I'le tell her as I came I found him lye All gor'd, thus spoke, then wisht me close his eye. Enter Selania and the associate Lady, habited as before like Amazons: They stand undiscovered. Most holy Father if you chance to find A Virgin beauty, as if heavens combin'd And joyn'd with Nature for to make her fair, That with the Queen of Beauty might compare; For such she is, tell her that I was slain In seeking her, disguised like a Swain, Say my expiring Soul did wait a while, For had she come, she'd cur'd me with a smile. Tell her, her beauty hath a double skill, Her smiles can keep alive, her frowns can kill. Say that Oranges dying did bequeath, All Legacies of Love in his last breath. They appear. Selania takes a Dart out of her Quiver. Selan. Selania will not long survive thy death. She is prevented by the other Lady. Lady. Hold Madam, hold.— Selan. — Do not so cruel prove, To hinder the last act of Constant love. Lady. What you do call an act of love, would seem Rather despair in you, then love for him. Selan. Why do you thus prolong my misery, And save alive, one who resolves to dye? You by this cruel kindness seem to strive, My Soul being gone, to keep my corps alive. Suffer this Dart to pierce my breast, that by My death I may confirm my Constancy, For I have vow'd, why then is death deny'd? I'd not outlive that day on which he dy'd.
Orang. Madam! Let not distracted thoughts disturb your Brest, Nor that your vow, rule with such interest. Oranges Lives, but is not lov'd by you. Selan. If he were here, he'd tell you 'twere not true. Orang. Can you love one that yet you never knew? Oranges vows he knows you not.— Selania. —Can he Forget his solemn vows so soon, and me? Should this be true, 'twould more distract my mind, I'd rather have him dead then prove unkind. Orang. Madam he loves you, but you love not him. Selan. Then were I guilty of the highest sin. My breast is kindled with more noble fire, Then pouder like to burn, and strait expire. I love Oranges so, that for his sake, This dangerous voyage I did undertake. And till I find him out, I'le spend mine Age, Either thus Arm'd, or else in Pilgrimage. The Ladyes whisper. Orang. Her love' arriv'd at strange perfection, Penelope her self is now out-done. Since in such constancy she dos excel, Some Vestal flame must be her Parallel. Selan. You say Oranges lives?— Orang. —Madam 'tis true. But vows to dye, if not belov'd by you. I promis'd he should meet you here, and bring His wounded heart to be your Offering. Which he now layes at th' Altars of your Eyes, Burnt by those beams to be your Sacrifice. And though mistaken bounty set me free, Reduce me not into captivity. Pulls off the disguise. Selan. Are you then the Oranges that was freed. Orang. Madam to me, that blessing was decreed. And if you love me not upon that score, You make my bondage worse then 'twas before.
Fetters till now, did but my body bind, But your perfections captivate my mind. Why weep you Madam? Let your Chimick love She weeps. Convert those tears to Oyle, that they may prove Matter for some new flame, which may impart A warmth unto my poor dispairing heart, Which in expectance of your sentence lyes, Like a tame Lamb prepar'd for Sacrifice. Selania. You bring an Off'ring which I must refuse. Orang. If I offend in ought, let love excuse. I must confess what's offer'd at your shrine, Should like your self have something that's divine. Selan. It were unjust, to give another's due, Unto a stranger which I never knew. Orang. Although a stranger, yet do not despise, The flame that you have kindled by your eyes. Selan. I will with tears endeavour to suppress, The flame you talk of, and to make it less. She weeps. Orang. Rivers of tears cannot suppress desire, Nor Seas of Water ever quench Love's fire. Whil'st tears bedew your Cheeks, you do but more Inhaunce your beauty's lustre on that score: As Roses sprinkled by the drops of Dew, Do smell more fragrant, and more lovely shew. Fair Maid, too late you do begin to shroud Those Twins of light under a watry Cloud. And I too late alas! forbear to look Upon those Stars, when I am Planet strook. Since I am call'd Oranges, let that name, Give me some title, to my Name-sakes claim. Selania. If to the Name alone, my Love were due, Then I might Justly pay the debt to you. But 'tis a debt, I must to merit pay. Orang. Presumption past a pardon 'twere, to say Merit might reach you, or deserts might stand, And Love your free gift saucily command. Selan. He who I love, may plead deserts to me. Orag. If that in love, there might a merit be,
Or he who lov'd might but deserving prove, I'd boldly then plead merit, since I love. Selan. My love to honour and to vertue's due. Orang. Though I won't say, I have 'um both, 'tis true, Yet I do love them both, in loving you, Selan. Sir, I am preingag'd, let that suffice. Orang. The Antidote's too late, to him who dyes. Too late we take the Taper from the flie, When he is burnt so, that he needs must dye. Selan. Since I have thus far gone, I'le let you know His name, to whom my love and vows I owe. Orang. Oranges is it not?— Selan. — He once did own That for his Name to keep himself unknown. His Name's Uxama, whom if I forget, I quit the Pearl to take the counterfeit. Orang. Ʋxama said you? sure that generous guest, Only deserves to live within your Brest. Madam I quit my claim, and do implore Only your pardon, who begg'd love before. Durst I presume his Rival, Glow-worms might Rival the Sun, with all his beams of light. I knew his love long since, and constancy, Turtles no more shall now love's Emblems be. And as I know his faith, so now I prove Your constancy to him, and equal love. This moment puts a period to distress, Which once being past dos sweeten happiness. He stamps. The Musick Playes within. Enter the Lady Singing Selania admires. THE SONG. COme Hymen, come, 'tis Thou alone, Of these two lovers can'st make one. Who one in heart already be, As when two flames unite we see.
Thou lazy God make haste away, And do not thus consume the day, Which is beholding for supplyes, To the bright Planets of her Eyes. Astragia advances with a Garland on her head and a Torch in her hand, as Hymen. Hymen make haste prepare the Church, And do not stay to light thy Torch. Make ready the Solemnities, And Light thy Taper at her Eyes. Ʋxama advances, to whom Oranges bows, and Uxama looks earnestly upon him. The Turtles on the Altars mourn, Hymen make haste, or I'le be sworn, Thou never shalt be thought Divine, Wee'l only Worship at her Shrine. Uxama to his Servant. Uxama. Parmeno! The Ladyes whisper. How cam'st thou here?— Parmeno. —I came Sir to provide, That you might meet your Mistriss like a Bride. Uxama. My Mistress, ah! Parmeno she is dead. Parmeno. They by her Ghost my fancy has been lead. Parmeno goes to take off his upper Garment. Sir give me leave to take off your disguise, Then see if you are known unto those Eyes. Ʋxama. What dost thou mean Parmeno?— Parmeno. —Sir I pray Let me disclose you to Selenia. Selania gazes upon him. Lady. Selania! Madam! cast your eyes on me, Her eyes are fixt with some strange Extasie.
Selan. Yee Gods, as once ye helpt me in distress, So now support me under happiness. Such throngs of blessings, with Uxama come, That in my breast, they hardly can find room. Ʋxama. The Persians don't with adoration run Kisses her hand. Greater then mine, to welcome in the Sun. Alas Selania, I have been mislead, Report came to my ear, that you were dead. I had resolv'd not to survive your Fate, But then your sight did new resolves create. I striv'd in vain my passion to subdue, And liv'd, because she seem'd to live in you. In this respect alone the diff'rence lay, I lov'd but knew not 'twas Selania. Selan. When from Sardinia you return'd to Spain, Report came to my car, that you were slain. I strait imbarqu't for Spain, when I came there, All did affirm you were took Prisoner. Then in this garb I firmly did decree, To dye in the attempt, or set you free. I was misguided by th' assumed name, For the report still of Oranges came. It was my love that did suspect your fate, Knowing that you, had us'd that name of late. Uxama. I was too blame. Parmeno why did you, Presume to call your self Oranges too? Parmeno. When I was bore in Fetters Sir from Spain, I did despair my freedom to obtain. Using Oranges name, the means I knew, You then to gain my freedom would pursue. Since you by mutual vows had both agreed, Either imprison'd, should at last be freed. If either Plot, or Ransome, might but be A means, whereby, the Captive might be free. But then.— A noise of Arms within. Selan. —A noise of Arms invades mine ear, Uxama. Your Vertues guard you, and you need not fear.
You may the god of War himself defie, He must resign to Loves Artilery. Ceaseth. To the other Ladyes. Where ere you look, you conquer by surprise, Conquest still waits on those victorious eyes. Caesar did take his Motto sure from you, Who where he came or lookt, did still subdue. Those glances like the Cephalian Dart wound still, And Parthian like, whil'st you do flye, you kill, A noise of Arms again. Caesar and Pompey are ingag'd I fear, And by the Noise, their Armyes should be near. Please you wee'l walk awhile within the Grove, And there discourse the Adventures of our Love. Exeunt omnes. Uxama leading Selania as into the Grove. The Scene is the appearance of an Army. The Armyes fight o're the Stage, Pompey retreats. Enter Pompey hastily his Sword drawn. Pomp. Have I in War, as many actions done, As that proud Eastern Conqueror the Sun, Of Fortune rather then of Macedon! The amazed World fill'd with astonishment, Made haughty Nations tremble, where I went! Took Mithridates King of Pontus! More The Iberians never conquer'd yet before. Beat the Albanians twice! to the great Sea, The Roman Empire spread in Lyhia! Spain to the Atlantick, and Albania, To th' utmost limits of the Hircanian Sea! Triumph'd so late, and am I beat so soon? A Prodigy the Sun should set at Noon. Have I Victorious been abroad, that now, At home, I should receive my overthrow?
Enter one of his Generals hastily, his Sword drawn. Pompey. How stands our Army?— General. —Sir prepar'd to flye, If you think fit, or else resolv'd to dye. The field is overspread with slaughter'd men, And bloody conquest dos incline to them. Resolve some course, before it be too late. Pompey. Wee'l head our men again, and try our fate. General. 'Twere not couragious, but 'twere desperate. Fly to your Army, which dos now remain Under your valiant Generals Sir in Spain. Fighting such Odds, 'tis Just as if you came, And with one Bucket sought to quench a flame. The game of War, should not be play'd, nor set Upon the odds, but on an even bett. Pompey. True valour never thinks on odds, but knows, In War there is a chaunce and boldly throws. Let's to the field again, and something do, Both for our honour, and our Countrey too. Exeunt. The Scene is the former Grove. Enter Uxama leading Selania. Astragia and her Sister. Parmeno servant to Uxama. Ʋxama. Prithee go on Selania to relate, The manner of the Shipwrack, and your fate. Selan. The Winds began to roar, and Tempests now, Do plough deep furrows on the Oceans Brow. The dismal Clouds do curtain up the Skies. And masque the guides of Heaven from our Eyes. No light appears, but when the Thunder comes, And Midwifes Lightning from the Cloud dark Wombs. One in our Barque (as if Seas could not) tries To drown himself in Waters from his Eyes.
Such were his sighing accents, that the Wind, Did seem a Calm, to th' Tempests in his Mind. We all expecting to be cast away, The generous youth stood up, and thus did say. Vouchsafe to hear yee gods of Cicily, If to those Vows, my lover constant be, Safely conduct this Barque unto the Shore, But if grown false, I humbly do implore That I may perish here, and that the Waves May swallow me, into their liquid Graves. Just now out Ship was wrackt, and each one strives, Upon the floating Planks to save their Lives, The Sea was calm'd and winds do blow no more, But what might serve, to drive the Planks on shore. This Lady and my Self had both design'd, For the Italian Coast, the Heavens prov'd kind, And to the wisht for shore, our Plank conveigh, But sure the youth did perish in the Sea. Parmeno. Madam! I'm glad that after such Distress, You are arriv'd at so much happiness. Lady. Once the companion of your harder fate, Your better fortune I congratulate. And as Ʋxama dos restore your Joy, So now Astragia dos my grief destroy. Astrag. Before your Lovers, I your love prefer, If that by your example I do err, It is but Just you should the fault excuse. Since that his love, for yours, I do refuse. And may you now in him as happy prove, To Selania. As dos Astragia in her Sisters Love. Ʋxam. Things gain'd with ease, we do contemn; but prise Those blessings which from dangers do arise. Love like to Conquest, should be pris'd the more, If that through dangers, it was sought before, Since our adventures then were dangerous, Let it be said none lov'd so well as us. A noise of Arms.
Enter three or four Souldiers as flying. Uxama and Parmeno draw. Sould. — Plunder I'faith. Uxama. — Pray Ladyes do not fear, These Cow-hearts flye the field to meet death here. They fight. Uxama is taken, they sieze the Ladyes. Ast. Search Ages past and Records for their fate, The fair have seldome proved fortunate. Enter Julius Caesar, Valerius, Curio and Souldiers. Caesar. What Fugitives are these? that thus presume To Captive others, when Death waits on them? They are seized by Caesar's Souldiers. The Day was bloody, Curio! Pompey fought, And the Victorious Lawrels bravely sought. Curio. He fought with Resolution Sir 'tis true. But the Victorious Lawrels are your due. Valer. Conquest while in equal Ballance stood, And War took equal tribute from our blood. Curio. The Scale of Conquest which stood ballanc'd thus, Being by your valour turn'd, inclin'd to us. Valer. What can withstand your Power? when Eagles flye, All Birds of lesser prey, must quit the Skie. Caesar. I do suppose to Spain that Pompey's fled, Since by Afranius there his Troops are led. With dreadful Ensigns I will march to Spain, And though his Armys joyn, the War maintain. The Gates of Janus now must open lye, And ne're shall shut till death dos close his Eye. Valer. March on great Caesar till your Arms controul, As far as th' Artick and Antartick Pole, Curio. And plant the Trophies of Victorious Arms, By Sea and Land where ever Titan warms. They are going off, Selania to Caesar. Selan. Vouchsafe for to accept our thanks as due, Since we all had our freedoms Sir from you.
Though we confess our Obligation's more, Then thanks can pay, and gratitude's too poor. Caesar. In freeing you I have more honour gain'd, Then in the field, though conquest I obtain'd. To this dayes fortune I ascribe far more, Than to those many fields I fought before. Glory in this chiefly redounds to me, Not that I Pompey beat, but set you free. FINIS.
EPILOGUE. IF at a Feast, You should not chance to lite Upon one Dish, unto Your Appetite, You would condemn the Cook; just so You'l say, If not one Act prove good, throughout the Play. I Vow I did design to have good Cheer, Since You are like to pay for what is here, Which if rejected, or approv'd but Course, I'm sure the Stationer will fare the worse. But if the Entertainment You approve, He humbly beggs some token of Your Love. The Poet, if the Play no favour meet, Resolves for to do Pennance, in each Sheet; And will presume no more to be in Print, Since His first Coyn miscarry'd in the Mint. Your Kind Acceptance may prevent My fate, 'Tis the Kings Stamp, that gives the Mettal Rate. The Rate's inhaunc't, and 'tis made Currant too, So shall this Play, if it be stampt by You.
