F1688 R24338 8141670 40930
A Fourth PAPER Presented by divers CITIZENS of the CITY of LONDON, Sept. 12. 1682. To the RIGHT HONOURABLE the LORD MAYOR and Court of Aldermen. To the Right Honourable the Lord MAYOR and Court of Aldermen, THE Citizens of London having according to their just Rights, by several Charters granted, and by divers Acts of Parliament Confirming the same, Elected Thomas Papillon and John Dubois Esquires, to be Sheriffs of Lon∣don and Middlesex, for the Year ensuing▪ and your Lordship and this Court from time to time delaying the calling forth the said Persons to Seal their Bonds, and take upon them the said Office▪ as by the Laws and Customs of this City you ought to have done▪ and though the Citizens have often attended upon this Court to demand their just Rights herein, and particularly upon the fifth Instant did renew their Requests, and of Right demand that your Lordship and this Court would forthwith cause Proclamation to be made for the said Thomas Papillon and John Dubois to appear and Seal their Bonds and take upon them the said Office, yet your Lordship replyed that the Paper was to the same Effect with the former, and that Mr. Box had since Submitted to a Fine, and that your Lordship would call a Common-Hall to Elect another to join with Mr. North, which we were then ready to give An∣swer to, but were not Permitted: We do therefore now in the Name, and on the behalf of our selves and fellow-Citizens, Pro∣test against the pretended Election or Confirmation of the said Mr. North and Mr. Box; and we conceive that if your Lordship and this Court refuse to call forth Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois to Seal their Bonds, and shall endeavour to Impose Mr. North upon us, or cause a Common-Hall to be called under pretence of Elect∣ing any other Person to join with the said Mr. North, that such a Proceedure would be a manifest breach of your Trusts, and high Violation of our Undoubted Rights and Priviledges, which by all lawful wayes and means we are resolved to maintain, therefore we do again of Right demand that the said Thomas Papillon and John Dubois be immediately sent for to Seal their Bonds, to take the Office of Sheriffs upon them.
THE Lord MAYOR'S PROCEEDINGS, &c. Upon the Delivery of the PROTESTATION. UPon the reading of this Protestation, the Lord Mayor desired the Citizens to withdraw, and after that Court had Debated it, they should be call'd in for an Answer, as had been Practiced upon the De∣livery of the former Papers, which being done, the De∣bate was managed with so much Strength of Reason, by those Aldermen who being faithful to their Oaths, asserted the Antient Liberties of the Citizens, that the other Party not being able to Answer their Reasons, nor willing to expose themselves by undoing all they have done by adhering to them; the Lord Mayor not making good his Promise of calling in the Citizens, who waited for his Answer in the long Gallery, took up his Sword, went out at the other Door unknown to the Protestators, which was all the Answer he gave them. London, Printed for E. Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil. 1682.
