F1758 R30467 11326784 47472
THE CAUSE WHY Adam & Eve Were driven out of PARADICE, AND THE JEWS Out of their own Land of Canaan, By GEORGE FOX. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark, in George-Yard in Lombard-street. 1683.
The cause why Adam and Eve were driven out of Paradice, and the Jews out of their own Land of Canaan. 1. Here you may see the Cause of Adam and Eve being drove out of Paradise. 2. And the Cause of the destruction of the Old World. 3. And the Cause of confounding Nimrod and his Company. 4. And the Cause of the Jews going so often into Captivity. And the destructions that came so often upon them. And the confusion that is and hath been among the Christians, where all may Read, Hear and Fear, that they take warning and turn from such evils, lest the Judgments of God come upon you that came upon Adam and Eve, and the Old World, and the Jews, and their Fore∣fathers that disobeyed God and Christ, and the good Spirit that he gave them: for no unclean thing shall enter into the Paradice and Kingdom of God, not into the holy City new Jerusalem, though the unclean do enter into the great City of the Whore of Babylon. Adam and Eve were driven out of Paradice for their disobedience. And for disobedience Cains stock, and the Old World were de∣stroyed. For disobedience Nimrod and his Company were confounded and Scattered. And for disobedience the Jews were drove and carried Captive out of their own Land of Canaan. And for disobedience to the same Light, Power and Holy Ghost, that the Apostles and the Church were in in the Apostles daies, the Christi∣ans in name and not in power and nature, are without the heavenly holy City New Jerusalem: An unjust man is an abomination to the Just, and he that is upright in the way, is an abomination to the wicked, Prov. 29.27. In God I will praise his Word, in God will I put my
trust: I will not fear what flesh can do unto me, Psal. 56.4. Thus saith the Lord, I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh, and they shall be drunk with their own blood as with sweet Wine, and all shall know that I am the Lord, Isa. 49.26. THe Lord God is holy and pure, therefore he would have all his people to be holy and pure, and there∣fore consider what the Lord in the Old and New Testament Commands you to forsake, and com∣manded that you shall not do. In Exodus the Lord saith, Thou shalt not Kill. Thou shalt not Steal. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy Neighbour. Thou shalt not commit Adultery. Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours House, thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours Wife, nor his Man-servant, nor his Maid servant, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbours; these things are forbidden in Exod. 20. in the Old Testament, and much more in the New, for Christ saith, You have heard that it hath been said of old time (to wit) in the Old Testament, Thou shalt not commit Adultery, but I say, whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath committed Adultery with her already in his heart; and here you may see the Law took hold of the outward act, and the Gospel took hold of the inward act; For out of the heart pro∣ceeds the Evil thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false Witnesses, Blasphemies, these are the things which defile a man, Mat. 5. & Mat. 15. And these evil things are in Man and woman, yea, done or committed before they be acted outwardly: And therefore the Apostle saith in 2 Cor. 5. Every one shall give an account of things done in the body, for, saith he, we must all appear before the Judg∣ment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad. Know∣ing therefore the Terrour of the Lord, we perswade men, &c. To shun that which is bad and evil, and cleave to that which is good, and lust not after Beauty in thy Heart, but keep thee from the evil woman; from the flattery of the Tongue of a stranger; neither let her take thee with her Eye-lids. For by means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of Bread: and the Adulteress will hunt for thy precious life. But whoso committeth Adultery with a woman, lacketh under∣standing: he that doth it, destroyeth his own soul, and a wound and
dishonour shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away, Prov. 6. and you may see in Prov. 2. This strange woman which flatters with her words, who forsaketh the guide of her youth the Spirit of God, and forgetteth the Covenant of her God. For her house en∣clineth to death, and her paths unto the dead. None that goeth unto her returneth again, neither take they hold of the paths of life. And there∣fore that thou maist walk in the way of good men, and keep in the paths of life, Prov. 2. This is the Exhortation of the wisdom of God to follow; For the mouth of the strange woman is a deep pit, and he that is abhorred of the Lord, shall fall therein, Prov. 22. And you may see in Prov. 5. how Solomon exhorts to the study of Wisdom, and sheweth the mischief of Riot and Whoredom; and Prov. 7. how the filly young man, void of understanding, in the twilight in the evening, in the black and dark night how he was de∣ceived by the speeches and attire of the Harlot, whose House is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death: And this well∣favoured Harlot deceived the young man under pretence of Reli∣gion; for she pretended, she had Peace Offerings, and she had paid her Vows, and the good man was gone from home; and this Whore abides not in her house, but is without in the streets, and lyeth in wait at every corner; she is out of her house from the spi∣rit of God, whored from that; and so Christ the good man is not within, and so that whorish spirits habitation is in the twilight and darkness, and would beget others either to spiritual Adultery, or carnal Adultery; one while this whorish spirit is loud and stub∣born, and another while with flattering Speeches, all that keeps with the spirit of God, and the light of Christ in their Hearts will keep out of her way that leads to Hell, and the Chambers of death. In Jer. 3. how Jeremiah complains against Judahs vile whore∣dom and committing Adultery, and Judah was worse than back∣sliding Israel, who said, She is gone upon every high Mountain, and under every green tree, and there hath played the Harlot. And thou hast polluted the Land with thy whoredoms and thy wickedness, and thou hast a wheres forehead, thou refusest to be ashamed. Here you may see what a sad condition the Jews came into, when they forsook the Lord; and therefore let Christians beware that they be not found in the same practice, and so come under the same Judg∣ment, as you may read in Jer. 3. and 5. you may see the Judg∣ments of God upon the Jews for perverseness and Adultery, for
the Lord saith, How shall I pardon for this, my Children have for∣saken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods; for when I had fed them to the full, then they committed Adultery, and assembled them∣selves by Troops into the Harlots Houses. They were as fed Horses in the morning, every one neighing after his Neighbours Wife: Shall not I visit for these things, saith the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? and the Prophets shall become wind; and the Word is not in them. Now let them that are called Christians in Christendom look to themselves, and see if they be not found in this spiritual and natural whoredom that the Jews were found in, though they made a profession of the Scriptures of the Old Te∣stament; and they that go under the name of Christians, may make a profession of the New Testament in words; but Jeremiah saith the Word was not in those Jews that run into these wickednesses, neither is it in those called Christians that runs into spiritual or car∣nal whoredom, For the Word of God is a fire, and hammer, and a Sword to beat and cut down, and burn up the evil matter and its fruits. And in Jer. 29.23. speaking to the Jews, Because they have committed Villany in Israel, and have committed Adultery with their Neighbours Wives, and have spoken lying words in my Name, which I have not commanded them, even I know and am a witness, saith the lord; therefore is their destruction foretold. And Jeremiah saith in Chap. 9. O that I had in the Wilderness a lodging place of away faring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them: for they be all Adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men. Their tongue is as an arrow shot out, it speaketh deceit: one speaketh peaceably to his Neighbour with his mouth, but in his heart he layeth wait for him. Shall not I visit for these things? saith the Lord. And therefore saith the Lord, I will make Jerusalem heaps, a den of Dragons; which was the chief City of worship amongst the Jews; and did not the Lord bring his Judgments upon it? And Jeremiah saith, My heart is broken because of the Prophets; and all my bones shake, and I am like a drunkenman, and like a man whom wine hath overcome, because of the Lord, and because of the Word of his holiness, for the land is full of Adulteries: for because of Swearing the land mourns, &c. Their course is evil, and their forces not right. I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem a horrible thing, they commit Adultery, and walk in lies; they strengthen also
the hands of evil doers, that none doth return from their wickedness: they are all of them unto me as Sodom (to wit) the Lord, and the Inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah, Jer. 23. And Jeremiah saith, I have seen thine Adulteries, and thy neighings; the lewdeness of thy Whoredoms, and thine abominations on the hills in the fields. Wo be unto thee, O Jerusalem, wilt not thou be made clean? Jer. 13. And again he saith, Thou hast polluted the Land with thy Whoredoms, and with thy wickedness; and through the lightness of her whoredoms, to wit, the Jews, and committest Adultery with Stocks and Stones. Here you may see the carnal and spiritual Whoredom among the Jews, who were the greatest Professors of the Old Testament in their day, and yet the greatest disobeyers of God; let them that calls themselves Christians, be warned of their sins, and of their Judgments. And the Lord saith, Will you steal and murder, and commit Adultery, &c. and come and stand before me in this horse, which is called by my name; and saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and say we are delivered to do all these abomi∣nations, this House which is called by my name is become a den of Rob∣bers; so God rejected the vain confidence of the Jews, and the sa∣crifice of the disobedient, Jer. 7.9. And Job speaks against the Murderers and Adulterers, he saith, They are of those that rebel against the light; they know not the waies thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof, the murderer rises with the light, killeth the poor and needy, and in the night is as a Thief; The eyes of the Adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying no eye shall see me, and disguises his face in the dark. They dig through houses which they had marked for themselves in the day time; they know not the light, for the morning is to them as a shadow of death; then here was some terrour upon the Adulterers, if they were known; but as drought and heat consumeth the Snow waters, so doth the Grave those that have sinned, &c. The womb forgets him, the worms shall sweet∣ly feed upon him, he shall be no more remembred, and wickedness shall be broaken as a tree, Job 24.15, &c. See how loathsom wicked∣ness and adultery was in days past. And Solomon saith in Prov. 23. For an Whore is a deep ditch, she layeth in wait as for a prey, and in∣creaseth the transgressors among men; and this by experience is seen. And Hosea shews Gods Judgments upon the Jews for their spi∣ritual and carnal whoredom in the first Chapter; and further saith,
By swearing and lying, and killing and stealing, and committing adul∣tery, they break out, and blood touches blood: therefore shall the Land mourn, for wheredoms have caused them to err; they have gone a whoring from under their God, they have committed whoredom con∣tinually; read the Chapter throughout, and there you may see the abominations and wickedness of the Jews, and of their spiritual and carnal whoredom, whom God threatens with his Judgments; and in Hosea 2. he saith, Let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her Adulteries between her breasts, lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day she was born; and make her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry Land, and slay her with thirst; for the Lord saith, I will not have mercy upon her Children, for they be the Children of whoredoms. They are all Adulterers, as an Oven heated by the Baker, who ceaseth from raising after he hath kneded the dough, un∣til it be leavened, &c. Hos. 7. where you may see Gods reproof and wrath against the manifold sins of the Jews, throughout the whole Book; and therefore let all that goes under the name of Christians, beware of these sins of the Jews, lest the wrath of God comes upon you. And the Lord sent Isaiah to reproove and declare against the Jews and their whorish Idolatry, and saith, The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart, and merciful men are taken away; none considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come. But draw near hither ye Sons of the Sorceress, the seed of the Adulterer, and the Whore, against whom do ye sport your selves; against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue; are ye not Children of transgression a seed of Falshood, Isa. 5.7. And David saith, Seeing thou hatest instruction, and casts my words behind thee. When thou sawest a thief, then thou consentest with him, and hast been partaker with Adulterers; thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue foameth deceit. Unto such wicked ones God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou shouldest take my Covenant in thy mouth, &c Psal. 50. so every one that names God and Christ, must depart from iniquity. And in Mal. 3. the Lord saith, I will come near to you to Judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the Sorcerer, and against the Adulterer, and false Swearer, and against those that oppress the Hireling in his wages, and the Widow and the Fatherless, and that turn aside a stranger from his right, and fear not me, saith the Lord of Host. Here you may see
God is both Witness against Wickedness, and the Judge of it. And Ezekiel the Lord sent to pour out Judgments upon the Jews for their Adultery, and said, That they were old in Adul∣teries; and they went a whoring after the Heathen, and were polluted with their Idols, and had forgotten the Lord, and cast him behind their backs; Through their lewdness and whoredoms they have committed Adultery, and blood is in their hands. And you may see the 23 Chapter throughout, They have commit∣ted whoredoms in Egypt: they have committed whoredoms in their youth: there were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised the teats of their Virginity. O let all that are called by the name of Christians have a care of this spiritual and car∣nal whoredom, and Ezek. 6. I am broken, saith the Lord, with their whorish heart which hath departed from me, there∣fore the Lord threatens his Judgments upon them. And again, the Lord declareth against the Jews monstrous whoredom and adultery, as you may see in the 16 Chapter throughout, they are compared through their lewdness and whoredom, and wickedness to Sodom. And in Ezek. 43. they are exhorted to put away their whoredoms and abominations which had de∣filed God's holy Name; so ought all that are called Christians to put away such things that defile God's Name. You may see how the Lord forbids Adultery in Levit. 20. and you may see what Judgments came upon Israel, who committed Adultery with the Children of Moab; and how the Lord brought his Judgments upon Israel, and them that they committed Adul∣tery withal, as in Numb. 25. for the Lord said and command∣ed, That there should be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a Sodomite of the Sons of Israel, Deut. 23. Then surely there ought not to be a whore, nor a Sodomite amongst them that are called Christians; but when either Jews, Christians, or others, rebels against God's good Spirit he hath given to in∣struct them, then they run into whoredoms and adultery, and are as bad as the Sodomites, and profane the Name of God and his Son Christ Jesus. And what became of Jezabel, and all her Priests, who was called, The Mother of Whoredoms and Witchcraft, as in 2 Kings 9.22. Did not her whoredoms, and her bloo∣dy
Spirit, act together in wickedness and blood-shedding. And the Lord sent Nahum to declare against Nineveh, and the misery and ruin thereof, and saith, Wo to the bloody City, it is full of lies and Robbery, and therefore because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the well-favoured Harlot, the Mistress of Witch∣craft, that selleth Nations through her whoredom, and Fami∣lies through her Witchcraft. Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of Host, and I will discover thy Skirts upon thy face. I will shew the Nations thy nakedness, and the Kingdoms thy shame, and I will cast abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile; and will set thee as a gazing stock, and all they that look upon thee shall fly from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste, Nahum. 3. Now Nineveh had repented at Jonahs Preaching; but see what whoredoms and wickedness she was run into, which brought her destruction; and therefore let all that go un∣dr the name of Christians, take heed of such evils, lest they bring Judgments and destruction, and ruin upon themselves. And Jacob's sons were not able to bear nor endure that She∣chem should ravish or defile their sister Dinah, Gen. 34 that they should deal with their Sister as with a Harlot; and it grived them, and they were wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel, and therefore that folly is to be kept out of Christendom. And Joseph who was tempted by his Mistress the Egyptian Woman, though he was her bought Slave and her Captive, yet Joseph said unto her, How then can I do this great wicked∣ness, and sin against my God, Gen. 39. But as David said God ordained in Joseph a Testimony against such wicked things; when Joseph was in Egypt, and God established a Te∣stimony in Jacob, and Joseph succeeded him in the Testimony of God, Psal. 78. & 5.81. & 5. for David saith, He esta∣blished a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel. (Mark) In which he commanded their Fathers that they should make them known to their Children, that the Genera∣tion to come might know them, even the Children which should be born, who should rise and declare them to their Children, that they might set their hopes upon God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his Commandments: so all that keeps this Law and Testimony of God in their hearts will testifie
against all such evils before mentioned, and judge them. And the Scribes and Pharisees said unto Christ, in Mat. 12. We would see a sign of thee; and Christ said unto them, An evil and adulterous Generation seeks after a Sign, but thereshall be no Sign given to it but the sign of the Prophet Jonas. For as Jonas was three daies and three nights in the Whales bel∣ly: so shall the son of man be three daies and three nights in the heart of the Earth. Here is a sign for the evil and adulterons Generation, who rebels against the good Spirit that God hath given to instruct them, that with his Spirit they might see Christ the substance of all Signs; and Christ said, Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adul∣terous and sinful Generation; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed when he cometh in the Glory of his Father, with his holy Angels, Mark 8. & 38. So we must not be ashamed to confess the truth before an adulterous Generation that are adulterated from the Truth; Know ye not, saith the Apostle, That the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulte∣rers, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. Now they that do think that such as lives in these Evils, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, they are deceived. And again, the Apostle saith to the Galatians, Now, saith he, the works of the flesh are mani∣fest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Ʋncleanness, La∣sciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Heresie, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revilings, &c. of which I tell you before, as I have also told you in times past, that they which do such things, shall not inhe∣rit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. Therefore they are deceived that live in such things, and thinks they shall inherit the King∣dom of God; and the Apostle saith, Your bodies are the mem∣bers of Christ, speaking to the Corinthians, and he bids them Fly Fornication; Every sin that a man doth, is without the body: but he that commits Fornication, sins against his own body, as well as against the Lord's Law and Gospel, and therefore ye are bought with a price: glorifie God in your bodies, and in your Spirits, which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.
And the Apostle tells the Ephesians in the 5.3. But Fornicati∣on and all uncleannoss; or coveteousness, let it not be named amongst you, as becometh Saints: neither filthiness; nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving of thanks. For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor coveteous man who is an Idolater, hath any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God; Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the disobedient; be not ye therefore par∣takers, to wit, in such things before mentioned, for they that live in and practice such abominable things, before mentioned, and to think to have an inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God, where no unclean thing enters, they deceive them∣selves, Therefore let us cast off the works of darkness, and put on the armour of light, let us all walk honestly (to wit) true Christians) as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envy; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof, Rom. 13. James saith in Chap. 4. Ye lust, and have not: ye kill and de∣sire to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not, ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your own Lusts. Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of this world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of this world, is the enemy of God; and therefore all you that go under the name of Chri∣stians; consider to whom ye are enemies, and with whom ye have friendship. And in 2 Pet. 2. he shews how God spared not the Angels that sinned, nor he spared not the old World that sinned, but brought a flood upon the World of ungodly, and saved Noah, &c. the Preacher of Righteousness; and God turned the Ci∣ties of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, and condemned and overthrew them for their sin, wickedness and ungodliness, making them an example unto all those that after should live ungodly, and delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, for that righteous man dwelling amongst them, in see∣ing and hearing, vext his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.
And now is not spiritual Sodom, which makes a great profes∣sion of the Old and New Testament, as great a grief to the righteous souls, who hears and sees their unlawful deeds? And the Apostle saw in this day such as had forsaken the right way, which were as natural bruit Beasts, and should perish in their own corruption, and shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, as they which count it pleasure to riot in the day time, spots they are and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own de∣ceivings, while they feast with you; so the Apostle hath mark'd them to be known by their spots and blemishes, having eyes full of adultery, that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls, a heart they have exercised with coveteous practices. Cursed Children; so their hearts were not only full of Adultery, but the Apostle could see that their very eyes were full of Adultery; and so is it with the same spirit now. Such who have forsaken Christ the right way; these are Wells which have no water in them, and Clouds which are carried about with a Tempest, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever: so Clouds ye know are high, and ye know what the Tempest is; so they are known by the Tempest, that is, in their Spirit, and their Clouds and their great swelling words of vanity, &c. These are they that promise liberty, and themselves servants of corruption, and they that are overcome by them are brought into bondage, and it is better for such never to have known the way of righte∣ousness, then after they have known, to turn from the holy Commandment; but it is happened unto them the Dog is turned to his vomit, and the Sow to the wallowing in the mire. And are not the days of Scoffers come, which walk after their own un∣godly lusts, and not after Christ. You may see how the Apo∣stles especially Paul, Peter, James, John and Jude bore a Te∣stimony against all manner of looseness, and such who had known the Truth, and run into evil, that their latter end would be worse than their beginning. And you may see in Rev. 17. the mother of all abomination, A woman arrayed in purple and Scarlet, with a golden Cup in her hand, sitting upon the Beast, which is great Babilon, the mo∣ther of Harlots, who harloted from God's good Spirit; this mother of Harlots is the abomination of the Earth, which is drunk with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus. This
woman the false Church, who is whored from the Spirit of God, which is drunk with the blood of the Martyrs and Saints. He doth say, She is drunk with Wine, only this drunken Whore is mad and in a rage and fury for the blood of the Saints. But what becomes of her in the end, is not she burnt in the fire? and the Beast, false Prophets and the Devil? and the Lamb and the Saints will have the victory over them; and this great Whore or false Church, who is whored from the Spirit of God, is the Spirit of all them that be harloted from the Spirit of God in∣to the evil destroying. And all those that are led by the Spirit of God, they are of the woman the true Church that is in God, and are of the Church of the First-born, which are written in heaven and heavenly Jerusalem that is above, is their mother, and they sing Hallelujah, and Glory, and Honour, and Praises to the Lord God, for true righteousness are his Judgments; for he Judgeth the great whore which corrupted the earth with her Forni∣cation, and hath avenged the blood of his Servants at her hand, Hal∣lelujah, Rev. 19. And in Rev. 18. you may see what great lamentations are from the high and low (to wit) the harlots which see the down-fall of their Mother the whore, who is whored and harloted from the Spirit of God, what crying and saying, Alas, alas, there is; and what rejoycing of the Apo∣stles and the Prophets, yea, the very Heaven rejoyceth at the down-fal of this whore, yea whorish Spirit, and false Church, for in her was found the blood of the Prophets and Saints, and all that were slain upon the earth, hath been found in this who∣rish spirit, who have whored from the Spirit of God and the Lamb. And in Rev. 21. he saith, He that overcometh shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all lyars shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Whosoever is not found written in the book of Life, is to be cast into the Lake of Fire; and therefore what good will all your profession do in Christendom, if ye be found in these sins and evils before mentioned, and your names not written in the Lambs Book of Life before the foundation of the World; for they that have right to the tree of Life, walk in
the light of the Lamb, and believe in it; such are they that en∣ters in through the Gate into the heavenly City New Jerusalem, and have their fathers name written in their fore heads, For without this holy City new Jerusalem are Dogs, biters of the Lambs of Christ, and Sorcerers, and whoremongers, and mur∣derers, idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lye; all such deceivers, and defilers, and corrupters of themselves and others, are without the holy City of God new Jerusalem, Rev. 22. For whoremongers and Idolaters God will judge, Heb. 13 4. And therefore all that love God and his Son, is to judge such evils, and turn from them (before mentioned) if you will come into favour with God; and here you may see what wickedness hath been all along, and in all Ages since man and woman fell from the Image of God; and amongst such that rebel against God's good Spirit which he hath given them in the time of the Law. And God pours out of his Spirit upon all flesh in this Gospel-day; and all such as rebel against this good Spirit of God, what Idolatry and other evils, whoredoms, Adulteries and Fornications are amongst them, who, as I said before, do rebel against God's good Spirit, which grieves the Lord and his righteous People, for which God will Judge. And such as acts such things before mentioned, and lives in them, the Lord tells them, They shall not enter into his Kingdom, nor into his holy City New Jerusalem, for no unclean thing comes into his holy City, or holy Kingdom, for they that come into this holy City or Kingdom, must be made clean with the blood of the Lamb. And what became of Adam and Eve who disobeyed the Lord, were they not turned out of Paradice, the Garden of God, the Garden of pleasures, into the earth. And what became of the Old World, who disobeyed and grieved the Lord's Spirit? did not the Lord bring a Flood up∣on them, and destroy them all? who saved righteous Noah and his Family. And what became of Nimrod, that mighty hunter before the Lord, and them that followed him; did not the Lord say, No∣thing will be restrained from them which they imagined to do; and so the Lord confounded them, and scattered them abroad from Babel, upon the face of all the Earth, Gen. 11. This was the fruits of them that followed their imaginations, and not the Lord and his Spirit.
And what became of Sodom and Gemorrah for their wickedness and filthiness? did not the Lord destroy them and their Cities by fire, and saved just Lot? Gen. 19. And what became of the Jews, to wit, the house of Israel? and the House of Judah? who rebelled against God's good Spirit, who disobey∣ed the Lord, and persecuted his Prophets, who went early and late to warn them of the Judgments that would come upon them, but they nei∣ther regarded the Lord nor his Prophets? Did not the Lord bring the Heathen upon them, which carried them out of their own Land which flowed with Milk and Honey, into Captivity under the Heathen, in which nature they were gone into, who rebelled against God and his Spirit. And what became of the Jews after they came again into their land, who rebelled against Christ and cryed up Caesar, and Crucified Christ, and persecuted his Apostles; and did not Christ say, Tat their Temple shuld be thrown down, and the City compassed about with Armies, and the Jews scattered over all Nations? And did not this come to pass after Christ was risen? And did not the Jews also rebel against Titus, when he came to besiege Jerusalem? so they did not only rebel against Christ, but re∣belled against the Heathen at last; and what became of them but destru∣ction and calamity, who under a pretence of worshipping God and crying up the Temple, and outward Jerusalem, and making an outward profession of the Old Testament, but resisted the Holy Ghost, and rebelled against God's good Spirit, and his Son Christ Jesus, in their deceitful hypocri∣tical profession, and living in Idolatry, and Spiritual, and carnal whore∣dom and Adultery. And what becometh of the false Prophets, and Beast of the Whore, and all her Harlots that is whored and harloed from the Spirit of God, must not they all have their end in the Lake of fire that burns with brimstone with the Devil, the God of the world, and the Prince of the Air, who rules in the hearts of the Children of disobedience, that disobeys God and his good Spirit. And the Prince of the Air makes many Fowls of the Air with his soul airy spirit, by his oul air in whom he rules, and he is the Ruler in all the Children of the disobedient, which disobey God's good Spirit, he rules in them with his ary unclean spirit, who blinds the disobedient with his dust and air; for dust is his meat, who is out of the Truth, and abode not in it, in whom there is no Truth; and all that disobey the holy Spirit of the Lamb, are his followers and subjects; and he in whom there is no truth, rules in them, who is the author of all sin, cor∣ruption and darkness, whose end is in the Lake of fire that burns with Brimstone, and his Followers; but the chast Virgins follow the Lamb, and they that are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons of God, and walk in the truth, and worship God in Spirit and Truth; his truth is over the head of the Devil, and he is out of it, and cannot get into it, for there is no truth in him, and therefore he and his Followers are not like to get into the Truth, that Gods Children worship God in. THE END
