g12 8751693 41735
THE Horrid, Direful, Prodigious, AND DIABOLICAL PRACTICE OF THE JESUITS DISCOVERED. Fully laying open The Means, Manner, and Circumstances, whereby they inveagle and seduce inhumanely, some Ʋnwary Protestants, to the utter Ruine and Damnation of their Souls. Seasonably offered for the good of the Three NATIONS. By a Lover of the Church of England, E. G. LICENSED, Feb. 20. 1679. LONDON, Printed for A. C. 1679.
THE Horrid, Direful, Prodigious, AND DIABOLICAL PRACTICE OF THE JESUITS Discovered, &c. THis Narrative was wrote several Months ago; but then, such was the Papistical Interest, that it was thought it would be lookt upon as a Ridicule, and an aspersion de∣sign'd; and though many were well know∣ing then, and those consequently of a growing and spreading evil, yet it could not be thought convenient to have this true Narrative blasted.
But now thanks to Providence, England hath no Puppies, in the least Blind, all can see; there∣fore this truth may receive an acceptance fit for its Integrity. The Jesuits have plaid their pranks in all unfortunate places to which they could get ad∣mittance; but this Novelty for ought I know, is one of the most pernicious Engines, most per∣verting Machine, and destructive Instrument that ever could be used to damnation of Mor∣tals Souls. I was a little more shy in putting this to the World, though I had it from the hand of one whose veracity was as dear to him as his Life, and now will find equal credit with the inge∣nious as it can merit. A Person of Quality being in some stress beyond Sea, found the Inquisition so severe, that he was forc'd to consult a Jesuit, to whose neat and clear conveyance into England, he stands oblig'd for his Life. Some years had past before he met this same person again, and observe, how things may happen: Beyond Sea this person was in as
great Authority as most of his Order, and as much Reverence paid to his Dignity; but so now he is met in the Streets of London, in the Habit of a Costermonger, crying Pippins; by reason of the croud that then hapned, he had an opportunity fully to view this old Acquain∣tance; hesitations and struglings feiz'd and sur∣priz'd him, but a recollection following, ob∣lig'd him to pretend to buy some of the Fruit, and because it was not convenient in the Street, he desir'd the Cryer to walk into a House that was hard by: being of his Acquaintance, and having got him into a Room, he imbrac'd him very cordially, as one would do the person that had preserv'd his Life, calling him by his name; to which he return'd, he was no such man, and knew not him, that caress'd him; but the Gentleman reply'd, he should be the un∣gratefullest Man in the World, if he did not know one, and serve him that had given him his Life, not without some danger to his own; he added, no disguise could change a Face that made such impression in his Heart; so urged him with such sudden and home Memorandums,
that after several Evasions, the Jesuit consider∣ing what obligations the person lay under to him, lest worse should follow, freely declar'd he was the person suppos'd, which he should not have confess'd to any that would not have priz'd his Life as his own. The Gentleman re∣ply'd, if he was not generous he must be grate∣ful, and bade him be as secure as he could wish. He was doubly engaged. First, as a Gen∣tleman to whom a secret was committed; Secondly, as a person to whom he owed his present being, as an instrument of providence: but, sayes he, Father, in the name of Goodness, what makes you in this posture? He was then a little tardy and shy in his Answers; and being interrupted by the busy Drawer, he defer'd fur∣ther inquiry until he had presented the Jesuit with three or four Cups of thanks, which prov'd a Key to open his mysterious mind; for he told him in short, he might know by his Profession and Order, that he was Educated to be a Labourer in Christs Cause; to omit no opportunity to Proselyte the World; to bog∣gle at no difficulty, to run all hazards, try all
means universally to establish his Kingdom; you must note our institution, first, was to be Christs Militia, for the Church of Rome found it ought to have a Lifeguard Militant, that it might be Triumphant; we are not only bred to School Divinity, the Titular Arts and Phi∣losophy, but to all sorts of Mechanick Profes∣sions Theorically; but the Gentleman reply'd, That was no Answer to his Question; what made him assume such a strange Habit? He answered what I last said is more to the pur∣pose than you yet apprehend; but to be plain with you, under this Coverture I have. liberty to discourse the Plebeians, and the Gregarians, and to model them into such Principles as is suitable to my Ends; for such must be the Instru∣ments to reduce England to its Pristine Religion and Happiness: we have interest enough in the great ones, men of Brains will adhere to them when occasion serves, but for the stiff-necked herd multitude, or rabble Enemies to sense and reason, they must be wrought upon by such operations as suit their passions, which gives Life to the glympse of that knowledge
they measure things by; literature and reason they abominate as Atheistick. The Gentleman then said, which way can you work upon them? You are so much my Friend, said the Jesuit, that I will tell you, because I am sure I can depend upon you; my Trade here is to in∣fatuate, and Fanaticallize the Souls of the aforesaid Droans, whose humming and num∣ber may croud us into our design; for with a Powder which dissolves undiscernably in any liquor, drunk by any Man, Woman, or Child, I can erase out of their mind the memory of any thing heretofore most familiarly known to them, and nothing will appear but the naked passions which their temperature necessitated them to, according to which I infuse Notions which commonly cleave to them during Life; nay, it may be it becomes so inherent, that it is transmitted to Posterity. Do you convert them all Papists? sayes the Gentleman; No, no, that will not do my business, we never concern our selves with any but Leading Men, whom others are glad to follow as proud Apes. You cannot tell how this Powder divests them
of all their former thoughts, and leaves nothing un-eradicated but the simple passions. Those I find addicted to Love, I turn them to Ran∣ters, and possess them with Amorous Affecti∣ons; where I find Admiration prevalent, I clap in Notions strangely mystical, make them Praeadamites, and the like: where I find disgust and distast reign, those I make Independents; where Antipathy, aversion, or reluctancy domineer, those I turn to Anabaptists; where I find bold∣ness and audacity, there I fix the Pelagian Opi∣nion; where I find anger and revenge, there I place perpetual animosity and Execration, who go under the name of Muggletonians; where I find mirth and comical airyness, I make them everlasting Scepticks; where I find confidence I teach presumption, of which sort are the Pres∣byterians; where I find hope, there I establish the Fifth Monarchy; where. I find fears, mis∣giving and jealousy, there I plant Quakerism; where I find ardent zeal, those I possess with such a fervency and eagerness of spirit, as turns them Witnesses. But, sayes the Gentleman, do you make no Papists at all? I answered you that
before, sayes the Jesuit; but if the Catholicon exposes a person pityful, compassionate, and rich, there I sow the Seeds of Merit, and reap a plentiful Crop to the use of our Church; ei∣ther in their Life time, or after by their Wills. But methinks, said the Gentleman, if you can do this, it may be more for your advantage to make them all Papists. To tell you the truth, the English turn'd Protestants under a damn'd Ascendant, and their temperaments are so ob∣stinate, refractory, headstrong, willful, and naturally so given to treachery, that the Com∣monalty are scarce fit to be trusted; but my business is not so much to Convert, as to Pervert; for we have tryed long enough in order to the first, and only had our labour for our pains: Now if we can but distract them, our aim is attain'd; for a House divided cannot stand. We have put in their Noddles the tearm of dis∣senting Brethren. Sayes the Gentleman, are these all the sorts you named before? Some Schismaticks and Hereticks there are besides, says the Jesuit; and also where we find despair, scorn, shame, envy, grief, hatred, those we
possess with an Opinion, that there is no God at all. After a Bottle or two had past, the Je∣suit told the Gentleman, he seem'd to distrust what he had reveal'd; but since he saw that he had a Man out, if he gave him leave to call him in, he would present him with a Pippin, into which he put two Grains of yellowish Powder, which he promis'd should do him no harm; the Fellow eat the Pippin greedily, but with∣in less than an hour, he appear'd something Frantick, and said he found a numness and stu∣pidity seizing all his senses; his Eyes began to dim, his Hearing to fail him, a Qualm to seize his Stomach, which made the Gentleman look a little concern'd on the Jesuit; who smil'd, and said, Upon my Life you need fear no harm, I can tell you by its operation what's the result of it; you shall find him in a passionate fit of Love. Friend, sayes he to the Servant, take this Glass of Wine, and you shall be well pre∣sently; but ordered the Gentleman to call the Drawer, and bid him put him upon the Bed, and cover him; in the mean while, the Gen∣tleman asked him, whether he had invented
that Powder? he answered, no; one that was of the Society, an Adeptist, and great Pyrotech∣nite invented it in Queen Elizabeths time, and here in England founded the Puritanical Order, which is since by degrees swarm'd into Presby∣tery, Classical, Parochial, Provincial, Synodi∣cal; in those dayes Confidence was the general passion that the English were subject to; that begot Presumption, which begot Predestination, which begot all manner of Villany; hence issu∣ed spiritual Justification, the Devil and all. Hold, said the Gentleman, we call them here Eng∣lish Jesuits. Call them what you will, sayes the other, had they Learning to their inclinations, we might fear them more than we do. It's true, they imitate us, and when parts concur, they are the fittest Incendiaries, and Ministers of much activity; witness the late times, when they call'd us Murderers, and Thieves, while they were the Assassinators and Robbers. Vil∣lany is so truly bred in the Bone, that it will never be removed but by Death. So mark the end of it, the Gentleman being weary of his discourse, told him, he would go and see how
his Man did. The Jesuit told him, he should find him in a very loving humour, and so it fell out; the poor Fellow could not speak, but was kissing the Pillow, his own Hands, em∣bracing and hugging the Coverlet, clipping himself; with all the gestures of a deep Amoretto. The Master was concern'd for his Servant, but the Jesuit said, he would be cured by the next Morning; now if he had any Vice, he might by inculcating of the opposite Virtue, fix him as he comes to himself; for whatever impres∣sion he received in that. Juncture, that would only remain with him which he then had stamp'd upon him. The Gentleman replyed, he saw enough, not to suffer his Servant to be any further tampered with; he caused one to sit up all Night with him, who was next Morn∣ing pretty well recovered, and said, he was easy all the while, and thought he could be well satisfied to continue so always; he be∣liev'd he was for some time bereft of his Senses, nay, of the very power of thinking; but when he came to have any apprehension, nothing could be more easy, innocent and pleas'd than
he was; neither too hot, nor too cold, hun∣gry nor thirsty; a fine tranquillity seised his Soul, with such an equanimity, that he forgot all past injuries, and he had no thought of pains to come; he was in peace, amity, and concord with all the World; and that nothing troubled him now, but that he could not get out of his head, by and by, anon, anon, Sir, here, here, what do you want Gentlemen? Do you call here? This relation confirm'd the Gentleman that the Jesuit was a Conjurer, and became much concern'd that he had not inquir'd his Lodging; for though his gratitude oblig'd him not to injure him, and that he held Friendship sacred, yet the good of his Country he prefer'd before all, which made him enquire after his Pippin-Monger; for though he consi∣der'd particular obligations were great, yet he must not favour a Traytor against the general; and weighing these Events, suspected the dan∣ger of the consequence. I thought not the Nation some Years ago, so sit to be presented with this, as now, when there is no sober person but must be convinced,
the Adage in Latine was not made without cause; Si cum Jesuitis, non cum Jesu itis. I have a natural aversion against these super-intendents; our Saviour return'd Good for Evil, all sorts of Jesuits return Evil for Good; therefore more than the name, they have no relation to Jesus. It's true comparatively they may be admitted as Daemonists; which pass as well for Good as Evil Spirits; this distinguishes, all sorts of Jesuits are good only in pretence, but Diabolical in Design. It's humbly submitted, what abominable, horrid, odious, and detestable actions, they have offered upon England; and what the three Nations have suffered by the procure∣ment of these Jesuits? What Treache∣rous Massacres, Direful Assassinations, by Remonstrances, Covenants, and infa∣mously prodigious Execrations, have been accumulated upon the King and Kingdom? God preserve the Kings Sacred Person, the old Royalists, and plant Loyalty in every in∣dividual Heart; and that all Jesuits, their
Spawn, Products; and Effects, be quite ex∣tirpated; then will Christs Church truly flou∣rish, and Neighbourly Love be at every Door, House, Board and Bed. FINIS.
