G196 31355838 110708
A VINDICATION OF A National-Fishery: Wherein is Asserted, That the GLORY, WEALTH, STRENGTH, SAFETY, and HAPPINESS of this KING∣DOM; with the Flourishing of TRADE, and Growth of NAVIGATION: As also the Employing the POOR of this Realm, doth depend (under GOD) upon A National-Fishery. And all the General, Vulgar, (tho' Erroneous) Objections against En∣couraging the Fishery of England, Answer'd, and Confuted. To which is added, The SOVEREIGNTY of the BRITISH-SEAS. England's a Perfect World; 'T has Indies two: Correct your Maps; The Fishery▪ is Peru. LONDON: Printed for F. Coggan, in the Inner Temple Lane. MDCXCIX.
To the most Noble AND Mighty PRINCE, THOMAS Duke of LEEDS, MARQƲESS of CARMARTHEN, EARL of DANBY, Viscount Latimore, Baron Osbourne of Kiveton, Lord President of His Majesty's Most Honourable Privy-Council; Lord Lieutenant of York-shire, Governour of Kingston upon Hull, AND KNIGHT OF THE Most Noble Order OF THE GARTER. May it please Your Grace, THE Great Ap∣plause you have so deservedly meritted, hath
encouraged me to Dedi∣cate this small Epito∣my to Your Honour; and not knowing any Man, that can with more lively Colours re∣present this Important Affair to the Wisdom of the Nation, I lay it at Your Lordship's Feet, as an UNDERTAKING, (which if Your Grace be pleased to Espouse, for the Good of the Kingdom) you will thereby add another Tro∣phy to your former At∣chievements;
and the Glory of the Action will be Recorded to all Po∣sterity: For upon a Na∣tional-Fishery, under God, doth depend the Safety, Honour, and Happiness of this King∣dom, the Flourishing of Trade, and the Supporting of Credit, as in the Sequel of my Discourse, I hope, I have made appear. My Lord, this Age gives us too many Ex∣amples, of Discouraging
Ingenuity; many Excel∣lent Qualities lying of∣ten hid under humble Looks, and mean Ha∣bits, which soon are discountenanc'd, and sup∣press'd by Insulting Greatness and Popular Opulancy: But You have shewed by the constant Example of Your Acti∣ons, that You have Agreed with Seneca, in his Renowned Maxim; that sola virtus vera Nobilitas, When so ma∣ny others, are blinded
with their absurd Va∣nity and airy Great∣ness. But you have ren∣dred your self a true Patriot to your Country; and therefore I most humbly implore this Book may be sheltred under the wings of Your Graces Protection: who am, Right Honourable and Renowned Sir, Your Graces most humble And most obedient Servant, Joseph Gander.
TO THE BARONS OF THE Cinque-Ports, And the Members of Parliament for the Coasting-Towns and Burroughs of the Kingdom of England. Honoured and Worthy Senators, THE Cinque-Ports of this Kingdom, having signalized their Loyalty and
Valour by Sea, in several Ex∣peditions, for the Glory of the King's, Honour of their Coun∣try, and Safety of the Realm, our preceding Kings confirmed several Dignities on them, and amongst the rest, made their Members of Parliament Barons, as an Encouragement to Na∣vigation, and their Prowess. And gave them the Honour of Supporting the Canopy over his Head at his Coronation; as is supposed by way of Simili∣tude: That whereas they had Defended, Supported, and Main∣tained his Honour by their Courage against his Enemies by Sea, he gave them the Ho∣nour to support the Canopy over his Head; as a Mark of Ho∣nour to them, and his Acknow∣ledgement
of the Greatness of their Service. And many Coasting-Towns and Burroughs, have from time to time, been endowed with great Priviledges, some of them re∣maining to this day; as a mark of Honour, by several Kings, to Encourage Navigation; from whence originally, we have be∣yond all Dispute, arrived to the Knowledge we are now at∣tained to in Marine Affairs▪ But now most of those Towns and Burroughs (that formerly flourished by their Fishing) are reduced to miserable Pover∣ty, and Thousands of Families ruined for want of the Fishery. And the Gentlemen who have Estates in those Places, or near
the Coast, are exceedingly im∣pair'd. Of which Calamity, King Henry the 8th had undoubted∣ly a fore-sight of, as appears by the Sratute of 33 of his Reign, 'tis there thus inserted; because the English Fishermen dwelling on the Sea Coasts, did leave off their Trade of Fishing in our Seas, and went the half Seas over; and thereupon they did buy Fish of Pickards, Flem∣mings, Normands and Zea∣landers, by reason whereof, many Incommodities did grow to the Realm, viz. The Decay of the Wealth and Prosperity, as well of the Cinque-Ports, and Members of the same, as of other Coast∣ing-Towns by the Sea-side, which were builded, and inhabi∣ted
by great Multitudes of People, by reason of Using, and Exercising the Feat, and Craft of Fishing. Secondly, The decay of a great Number of Boats and Ships. And thirdly, the decay of many good Mariners, both able in Body, by their Diligence, Labour, and continual Exer∣cise of Fishing; and Expert by reason thereof, in the Know∣ledge of our Sea-Coasts, as well within the Realm, as in other Parts beyond the Seas. It was therefore Enacted, That no manner of Persons, English Denizons, or Strangers, at that time, or any time after, should buy any Fish of any Foreigners in the said Ports of Flan∣ders, zealand, Pickardy, or
France, or upon the Sea between Shoar and Shoar. This shews what great Care our former Kings, and Parlia∣ments have taken to Preserve the Nursery for Sea-faring Men, for the Defence of the King∣dom, and for the Preservation of our Coasting Towns, &c. And, have therefore thought fit in all Humility to Dedicate this Book to you, as before∣mentioned. If my sincere In∣tentions to serve the Kingdom, have its desired Success, I have my wish, who am Your most humble And most obedient Servant, J. Gander.
A VINDICATION OF A National Fishery, &c. BY the Benign Goodness of God, and by the Wise Conduct of our King, and the Admirable Wis∣dom, and prudent Care of our Sage Senatours at Home: England, after a tedious and Chargeable War, hath obtained an Honourable Peace. And the Sword being now Sheathed; His Majesty in his most Gracious Speech to both Houses of Parliament, hath de∣clared
His Royal Inclination, for the Preservation of the Saftety, Honour, and Happiness of the Kingdom, &c. So that it is not to be doubt∣ed but that the Genius of our Government, will make it the Chiefest of their Care, to Settle the Affairs of Trade, upon the most firmest Foundation, for the publick Good of our Nation. For the most destructive Consumption that can happen to a Kingdom, and the only Nurse of Idleness and Beggary, is Want of Trade; whereas on the contrary, Increase of Trade, encourageth Labour, Art and Invention, and enrich∣eth the Common-Weal. And beyond all Dispute, the Fishery of England, is the Main Trade of this Kingdom, rightly Managed; The good Patriots of our Country are to weigh the Matter: And it is so comprehen∣sive a Blessing, that were those Advantages but Industriously im∣proved,
that Providence hath be∣stowed on this Island, we might consequently be the most Flou∣rishing People in the whole World, both by Sea and Land. And seeing by the Decay of the Fishing Trade, we have lain open to France, and Holland, by neglecting our own Preservation, and ill Management of the Fish∣ery amongst our selves, it may be supposed, it is high time to look to it. But whether this Great Loss to the Kingdom hath been occasioned by our Wilful, or inad∣vertised Neglect: I shall not de∣termine; and hope it will spee∣dily be taken into the Conside∣ration of the most Judicious Pa∣triots of our Countrey. And then we shall draw back the Trade from Foreign Nations, and Employ our own People. The Great and Weighty Question upon this Point of Trade to be considered, is: Whether it is not the General Interest of
England, to Revive and Encou∣rage a National Fishery, it being the Main Pillar of the Trade of this Nation; And humbly offer my weak Opinion of the Ne∣cessity of it; For England being Situated in the very Jaws of Neptune, by her commodious Harbours, Rivers and Bays, &c. must be Defended by Shipping; and she is the best accommo∣dated with Sea-Ports of any Place in Christendom, and stands fair∣est to be Lords of the Sea of a∣ny People in the World. This Kingdom being an Island comparatively, were it, not for that Isthmus or Neck of Land to the North, that joyns it to Scotland. It must be universally allow'd, that her Floating Castles must defend her from all Foreign In∣vasions or Incursions. And since she is obliged to defend her self by Naval-Force. It should be considered how that must be maintain'd and preserv∣ed:
For, without those Bul-Warks, the Kingdom, and con∣sequently the rest of the Domi∣nions must be in a few years, in a very deplorable Condition. And nothing is more certain than, that it is the Sea enrich∣eth the Land, which is confirmed by the great Advantages of get∣ting Treasure, by Navigation both at home and abroad; as is manifested by the Grandeur that Merchants generally live in, in England, Holland, France, &c. History gives a very Satisfactory Account of this Truth; How the Venetians have arrived to that Greatness they now live in by Navigation, and by their Naval Force, claim a Prerogative of the Adriatick Sea. And also, to what Greatness hath the French King attained to by Navigation in a few years, that he gives Laws in the Me∣diteranean Sea.
And the Hollanders by their Navigation are grown, as Opulent (almost) if not altogether, as any People in the World. But in Queen Elizabeths Reign of Blessed Memory, England gave so Fatal an Overthrow to the Spanish Armado in Anno 1588, that she was the Terror of the Whole Universe, by being so Potent by Sea; and after Her Majesties Success of that Famous Victory, she was as much Ag∣grandized by Foreign Princes, for Her Conquest, as she would undoubtedly have been despised, had she been overcome. But how England has decli∣ned since Her Reign, for want of the Fishery for Nursery for Sea-Faring Men, is obvious to the whole World. Woful Experience tells us, how much our Neighbours have grown upon us; by this Neglect of ours, by the Wealth they have got with∣in this forty or fifty years; and
also by their daily Increase of of Shipping. And for want of true Tele∣scope to see clearly how this National Fishery may be preserv'd and maintain'd, we are and have been many years, in the dark. It is not only the Fish that we loose, and the impoverishing the Coasting Towns, and Bur∣roughs, the only Loss that this Nation sustains; But for want of a prudent Method to Manage this Fishery. We have only the Colour for a Nursery for Sea∣men, which will not breed a tenth part of the Men we have occasion for in time War, as we are an Island. Further, the Hollanders and French, finds these Advantages (by Encouraging of the Fishery's, that they do not only get Wealth, but it inures their Men to the Hard∣ship of the Sea, and makes them Skilful in Handling their Tack∣ling in Pilotage and Navigation.)
So that they know our own Coasts, Shoals and Harbours, better than we do. But the Antient Britains per∣mitted none to Fish on our Coasts,Vid▪ Seld. Ma∣re Clau∣sum. 138. or in our Seas, nor any to Sail into the Island, without their Leave, and those only Merchants; nor would not permit any Fo∣reigner to View or Sound their Sea-Coasts, Which was undoubedly a great Security to them, and Encourage∣ment to their Pilots; but now, 'tis observable, that the Hollan∣ders seldom make use of English Pilots, to come into any of our Harbours; and if they have Oc∣casion to Man out a Fleet of Men of War, 'tis but making a Draught out of the Fishery, and they are put on Board their own Cli∣mate. Whereas, to the great Detri∣ment of this Nation, and Loss of our Men; when we have occa∣sion to Man the Royal Navy,
we are forc'd to press Tag, Rag, and Bob-Tail, a parcell of Low∣sy Vagrants and Vagabonds, that have not Prowess to make them Soldiers, nor Genius to make them Mariners; and while they are in Harbour, Eat up the Nations Provision: And when they come to be Roll'd and Toss'd by the Waves at Sea, they are as sick as so many Dogs, and infect great Numbers of Sea-Faring-Men, And many dies. by which great Incon∣veniecy, renders them more fit for an Hospital, than a Fighting Navy; as is seen in time of War, and our Sea Commanders the daily Witness of this Cala∣mity. And it cannot be deny'd, but that it was the Fishery of En∣gland, that supplied Queen Eliza∣beths Navy with Seamen, and made her so Potent, to give so Fatal an Overthrow to the Spa∣niards, That, that one Blow was so Great a Loss, that they will never Retrieve it, nor be able to
oppose us either by Sea or Land. And Her Clemency to the Hol∣landers, in giving them Permis∣sion to Fish on our Coasts, was the very first Foundation that they laid, to raise themselves to their present Grandeur, and by the Wealth they have got, and Shipping, by their Breeding of Sea-Faring Men, they are ren∣dred very Formidable at Sea. It is worth the while, saith the Reverend Mr. Cambden, to observe what an extraordinary Gain the Hollanders, and Zealanders, do make by Fishing on the English Seas,Rich. 2. Fitz Her∣bert. Tit. Protection. 46. having first obtained Leave from the Castle of Scarbourough; For the English have ever granted them Leave to Fish, reserving al∣ways the Honour and the Privi∣ledge to themselves; but through Negligence resigning the Profit un∣to Strangers, 'tis almost incredible, saith he, what a vast Sum of Mo∣ney the Hollanders do make by this Fishing upon our Coast.
And in Edward the Fourth's Reign,Rob. Belknap, An Emi¦nent Judg in his tim. affirmed,  That the Sea is sub∣ject to the King, as a part of this Kingdom, or of the Patrimony of the Crown. He ordered Commanders with a Naval Power, to pro∣tect and Guard the Fisher-men upon the Coasts of Norfolk, and Suffolk, and the Charges of the Guard were defrayed by the Fishermen; The English Nation were ever in past Ages Renown∣ed for Sea-Affairs, in all Coun∣tries near the Seas; and they had also a Numerous Navy, that the People of all Countries Esteem∣ed, and call'd the King of En∣gland, King and Sovereign of the Seas. And why England should not now insist upon the Sovereign∣ty of the British Seas,☞ as in former times,Object. seems very Wonderful! But some People may say, that in case this Fishery were Encou∣raged, it may be a Means to prevent Eating so much Flesh, as we do now in England: and so consequently, be very preju∣dicial to our Landed-Men, and
bring the Rents of the Farms lower. But this with Submission, is a very Erroneous Notion. For Example: The Fish that may or should be Caught in the British Seas, is not intended to be eat in England, and per∣haps not one Huudredth part of it, but to be sold at foreign Mar∣kets; as in due time shall be ob∣served. And to make it appear, that if a National Fishery be encourag∣ed, it will cause a greater Con∣sumption of Flesh than is now in England,☞ and consequently, ra∣ther encrease than diminish the Rents of our Landed Gentlemen, and in few Years might double the Rents, as the Fishery flourish∣ed, and our Trade encrease both at home, and abroad. I Humbly Offer these Reasons; First, Our Coasting Towns, Bouroughs and Villages Adjacent,
that formerly had their depen∣dance on the Fishery, are reduced to so great Poverty, for want of being Employ'd, that they are now constrain'd to feed upon Coarse-Bread, Butter, Cheese, Milk, Turnips, Carrots, or on such Roots and Herbs, as they can get: Whereas if they were Employ∣ed in this Fishery, they would then have Money to go to Market, and buy Flesh, as their Ancestors did before them, for themselves, and Families: And I suppose there is not any Man, but what is sensible that the English natural∣ly loving Flesh, the meanest Man or Woman in the Kingdom would have Roast and boyl'd Meat for themselves and Families, as well as their Landlords, if their Purses would bear it. So that then there would be a greater Consumption of Flesh than there is now, not only in our Coasting Towns, &c. but in all
probability, through the whole Kingdom, when once we flourish in this Fishery. This Great and Glorious Un∣dertaking will not only enrich us, but Employ thousands of Peo∣ple that are now so miserable Poor, that they gradually Starve for want of having this Encou∣ragement. And what is worthy your par∣ticular Notice,☞ it would prevent abundance of Sea-faring Men from going into Foreign Service in times of Peace, for want of Employment at home; many of them leaving their Wives and Children to be maintained by the Parish, which undoubt∣edly is a great Grievance to the respective Parishes, and a Burthen to the Inhabitants. And this Fish∣ery would not only preserve thou∣sands of Families from Starving, but then they would wear better Cloaths, and promote our Wool∣len Manufactury; For 'tis on∣ly
Poverty makes People wear Rags; and being disheartned, it oftentimes prevents their Devo∣tion. And it will also prevent a great many Inconveniencies, that now attend this Nation, for want of being Employed. For Example: There would not be so many Vagrants and Va∣gabonds, nor so many People that take illegal Courses; as Thieving, Robbing, &c. to the Ruine of themselves and others. Nor so many Export our Corn, nor carry our Wooll unwrought out of the Kingdom, if they were employed another way. This Fishery would also em∣ploy abundance at Land, so well as by Sea; as Clerks, Accom∣ptants, Ware-house and Store∣keepers, and the like, and great Numbers of Artists and Trades∣men: So that then there would be Provision for a great many Men, that go Crawling about the
Streets, like so many Snails, for want of Employ, that have been well Educated. Besides, 'tis an Universal Maxim, That Idleness is the Root of all Evil; and a great many People fear Starving more than Hang∣ing, as is seen almost every Session, or Assizes; For let the Judge enquire of the Criminals, what induced them to take the lewd Courses they are In∣dicted, or Arraigned for, the Ge∣neral Reply, is Want. Further, it is supposed by all that have travelled, in the Low-Countries, that where one Male-factor is Executed in Holland or in France, there is above One hun∣dred in England; and the only Reason that can be given, why there are so few in Holland and France, and so many executed in England, is, That they take care to employ their Subjects; and those that are uncapable by Age, or any other Infirmity for Labour,
are provided for, by allowing them a Competent Maintenance to live on; (but 'tis the Fishery of England, that employs and en∣richeth them.) And the Hollan∣ders themselves will boast, that God blesseth them in their Tra∣dring, and defends them from their Enemies, for being so good to the Poor. And it is a Con∣firmation of the Sacred Writ, That he that Considereth the Indi∣gent, the Lord will remember him in the day of his Tribulation. And what a great Glory will it be to the King and Kingdom, to preserve so many thousand Subjects, that are now involv'd in such miserable Necessity, that in all probability they must perish, if this Method be not speedily taken. And since His Majesty has been Instrumental in Delivering these Kingdoms from Slavery, and Po∣pery, &c. 'tis to be supposed that he will also make it his Chiefest
Care, to preserve his Subjects from Destruction (that have so Bravely Ventur'd their Lives, both by Sea and Land; and have paid their Money with so much Chearfulness to carry on the War. And have so long languished un∣der their Afflictions.) And HeThe King having Maugred all Opposition, both at Home and Abroad, it now remains, that he attacks Himself, that His Good∣ness and Greatness, may vye with each other, by enquiring,The Kingdom would pro∣mote Trade what is to be done to retrieve them from their withering Calamity. And 'tis believed by all well-wishers to the Welfare of these Kingdoms, that His Majesty will Sign all those Acts, that shall be for His Glory, the Senatours Ho∣nour, and the preserving so well as enriching of his Subjects. When he shall be Advised to it by his Parliament, in whom he has so great Confidence, as he hath often declared for the Good
of his People, in His most Gra∣cious Speech to both Houses of Parliament, which are too tedious here to insert. And having made the proud Lillies of France stoop to him, and Recovered the Principality of Orange,☜ he will now Assume his Trident. And to Emulate his Royal Predecessor, William the I. Conquerour of England, who, after being possessed of the Kingdom, took a View of it in a Royal Progress, and then did see there was an incumbent Necessity to defend this Realm by Ship∣ping (altho' he set fire of his own Fleet at his Landing, to let his Men know his Intentions: Aut Caesar aut Nullus.) Where∣upon he demolished several Vil∣lages in Hampshire, and there planted a large Forrest of Oaks, All in∣tended for Building Men of War, as a Guard to the King∣dom. which to this day is call'd New Forrest, it being above two and twenty Miles in length, and eleven Miles over.
This shews what Care our An∣cestors from time to time, have taken to secure this Island by Navigation, and for providing Ships of Force, as well as for Commerce; the one to Enrich, the other to defend, as well our Trading by Sea) as the Island from Invasion.And if we had the Mines of Mexico and Peru, in this Kingdom, unless they were se∣cured by Force of Arms, they would un∣doubtedly lie open to any that would in∣vade us. For there is no Dominion that can expect to flourish in Trade, or be enriched by Commerce, if they do not secure themselves by Force, either by Sea or Land, as Opportunity offers, or the Ne∣cessity requires. 'Tis undoubtedly the Interest of the Nation to stand as well upon their Guard in times of Peace, as in War; that they may give no Opportunity to an Ene∣my to Surprise us, by Sea, or Land. And since there is so great a Necessity for the Defence of the Nation, to support our Navgati∣on by this Fishery, certainly our
Senatours will take Care that the Grandeur of these Glorious King∣doms shall not be ecclipsed by the growing Greatness of our Neigh∣bours, who have, and still do en∣croach upon the Sovereignty of the British Seas, which is the only Diadem of the Imperial Crown of these Dominions; and the Port Cullizes and Guard of the Realm. But the Fishery, if encouraged, will be for the Good of the King∣dom in General, from the King to the Peasant (or meanest Sub∣ject) and in some measure take off the Burthen of the Taxes this Nation hath so long struggl'd un∣der; and not only make the Ex∣chequer the Greatest Bank in the World, but oblige the Treasure of the East and West-Indies, com∣paratively, to meet in our Streets; And also preserve a perpetual U∣nion amongst the Subjects of England, let them be never so Retrogade in their Opinion, as to their Profession of Religion.
And this happy Union will pre∣vent all Intestine Commotions; and bid Defiance to all Foreign Invasions, or Incursions. And it cannot be denied, but that England had formerly the richest Fishery in the World; when we maintain'd the Sove∣reignty of the British Seas; and by Computation, had above 800 Fishing Ships; and had it been Encourag'd, by a reasonable. In∣crease, we must have had now, between 2 and 3000 Fishing Ships; And nothing can be more true, than that the Fishery of England, is the Main Pillar of the Trade and Defence of this Nation. And it will not only raise the Naval Force of England, but by its Growth and Flourishing, be a Curb, to keep under the growing Power of the French and Hollan∣ders, and bring in Great Trea∣sure to the Kingdom, as afore∣said.
And further, if this Nursery for Seamen were Encouraged, the Merchants would never want Men to carry their Ships to Sea, nor be in danger of having their Men press'd in time of War (which is a great Detriment to our Trade, and Loss to the King and Kingdom) for then we should have Sea-faring Men, and Mari∣ners enough, to serve the King∣dom. And in regard that some peo∣ple may say that there will not be constant Employ for our Seamen in the Fishery in times of Peace; and so prevent their going into Foreign Service for want of Em∣ploy at Home: I have particu∣lariz'd the respective Seasons for Fishing, throughout the Year, in the British Seas.
Of the Miraculous Treasure of the British Seas. THE Coast of Great-Britain doth produce a continual Harvest of Profit and Benefit to all that do Fish there; and such Shoals and Multitude of Fishes are offer'd to the Takers, that it makes an Admiration to those that are employ'd among them. The Summer▪ Fishing for Her∣rings, beginneth about Midsum∣mer, lasteth some part of August. The Winter Fishing for Her∣ring, from September, to the mid∣dle of November; both which extend from Bonghoness in Scot∣land, to the River Thames Mouth, being a Run of above a hundred Leagues. The Fishing for Cod, at Allum| by, Whirlington, and White-Ha∣ven, near the Coast of Lanca∣shire, from Easter till Whitsun∣tide.
The Fishing for Hake, at A∣berdenie, Abveswitch, and other places between Wales and Ireland, from Whitsuntide, to St. James-Tide. The Fishing for Cod and Ling, about Padstow, within the Land; and of Severn, from Christmas to Midlent. The Fishing for Cod on the West part of Ireland, frequented by those of Biscay, and Portugal, from the beginning of April un∣til the end of June. The Fishing for Cod and Ling on the North and North-East of Ireland, from Michaelmas to Christ∣mas. The Fishing for Pilchers on the West-coast of England, from St. James tide until Michaelmas. The Fishing for Cod and Ling, upon the North East of England, from Easter to Midsummer. The Fishing of great Staple-Ling, and many other Sorts of Fish lying about the Island of
Scotland, and in the several parts of the British Seas all the Year long. In September, not many years since, upon the Coast of Devon∣shire near Minegal, five hundred Tun of Fish were taken in one day. And about the same time, three thousand pounds worth of Fish, in one day were taken at St. Ives in Cornwal, by small Boats. Our five Men Boats and Cobles,☞ adventuring in a Calm, to Launch out amongst the Hollands Busses, not far from Robinhood's Bay, re∣turned to Whitby, full freighted with Herrings, and reported that they had seen some of those Bus∣ses take ten, twenty, and twenty four Lasts at a Draught of Her∣ring, and returned into their own Country with forty, fifty, and a hundred Lastes of Herring in one Buss.
Our Fleet of Colliers,☜ not ma∣ny years since, returning from Newcastle, laden with Coals, a∣bout the Wells, near Flamborough Head, and Scarborough, met with such Multitudes of Cod, Ling, and Herring, that one among the rest, with certain Ship Hooks, and other like Instruments, drew up as much Cod, and Ling, in a little time, as sold for well nigh as much as her whole Lading of Coals. And many hundred of Ships might have been laden in two Days, and two Nights. Now what great Inconveni∣ency and Detriment is this to the English Nation;☞ That we do not Encourage a National Fishery, that we may retrieve those Great Advantages, that we have so long taken no Notice of, in regard we can Employ our Seamen through∣out the whole Annual?
And out of which wonderful Affluence and Abundance of Fish, swarming in our Seas; that we may the better perceive the Infi∣nite Gain, which Foreign Nations make: I will especially insist upon the Fishing of the Hollanders on our Coasts; and thereby shew, how by this Means principally they have risen, to the Greatness of their present Grandeur: 1. In Shipping. 2. In Mariners. 3. In Trade, at home and abroad. 4. In Towns and Fortifications. 5. In Power at home and abroad. 6. In Publick Revenue. 7. In Private Wealth. 8. In all manner of Provisions, and Stores of Things Necessary for the Preservation of Mankind, and Munitions of War. Encrease Shipping. Besides seven hundred Strand Boats,☞ four hundred Evars, and
four hundred Sullits, Drivers, and Tod-Boats, wherewith the Hol∣landers Fish upon our Coasts, e∣very one of these employing an∣other Ship, to fetch Salt, and car∣ry the Fish into other Countries, being in all three thousand Sail▪ maintaining and setting on Work, at least twelve thousand persons; Fishers, Tradesmen, Women and Children. They have above (as it is supposed) one hundred Doy∣er-Boats, of one hundred and fifty Tuns apiece, or thereabouts, seven hundred Pinks and Well-Boats, from sixty to one hundred Tuns Burthen, which alto∣gether Fish upon the Coast of England, and Scotland, for Cod and Ling only. And each of these Employ another Vessel,☞ for providing Salt, and Transporting of their Fish, making in all, one thousand six hundred Ships; which Maintain and Employ persons of all Sorts, four thousand at least▪ For the
Herring Season, they have one thousand six hundred Busses at the least, all of them Fishing only on our Coast, from Bonghoness in Scotland, to the mouth of the Thames. And every One maketh work for three other Ships, to attend her; the one to bring Salt from Foreign parts; another to carry the said Salt and Cask to the Bus∣ses, and to bring back their Her∣ring, and the Third to Transport the Herring into Foreign Markets; So that the Total Number of Ships and Busses, plying the Her∣ring-Fare, is six Thousand four hundred Ships; where every Buss, one with another, Employs forty Men, Mariners and Fishers with∣in her own Hold; and rest, ten Men apiece, which amounteth to One hundred twelve thousand Fishers and Mariners. All which maintain double, if not treble so many Tradesmen, Women, and Children by Land.
Besides, they have generally four hundred Vessels at least, that take Herring at Yarmouth, and there sell them for Ready-Money; so that the Hollanders (besides three hundred Ships, beforemen∣tioned, Fising upon their own Coasts or Shoars: have at least four thousand eight hundred Ships, onely maintain'd by the Seas of Great-Britain. And to this Number, they undoubtedly add every day; although their Countrey neither affords Victuals, nor Materials, nor Merchandize to set them forth. Yet by the Great Advantages that they have got by Fishing on our Coast, they abound in every Thing that is fit for the Use of Mankind. Encrease of Mariners. The Number of Ships, Fish∣ing on our Coasts, as being a∣foresaid, four thousand eight hundred, if we allow but twen∣ty
persons to every Ship, one with another, the Total of Ma∣riners and Fishers amounteth to One hundred sixty eight Thousand, out of which number they daily furnish their Ships, to the East and West-Indies, to the Meditere∣anean, and for their Grand Fleet of Men of War; for by this means they are not only enabled to brook the Seas and know the Use of their Tackles and Com∣pass, but are likewise instructed in the knowledge of Navigation and Pilotage, insomuch, that from hence their greatest Navigators have had their Educations and Knowledge of the Seas. Encrease of TRADE.Observ. By reason of those Multitude of Ships and Mariners, they have extended their Trade to all Parts of the World, Exporting for the most part, in all their Voyages, our Herrings, and other Fish,
which they Catch upon our Coasts, or in the British Seas, for the Maintenance of the same.Note, That we might make the same advan∣tages of our Fish abroad, did we en∣courage this National-Fishery. In Exchange whereof they re∣turn these several Commodities from other Countries: From the Southern Parts, as France, Spain, and Portugal; for our Herrings, and other Fish, they return Oyls, Wines, Pruens, Honey, Woolls, Leather, with Store of Coin in Specie. From the Streights; Velvets, Sattins, and all Sorts of Silks, Aloms, Currants, Oyls, and all Grocery-Ware, with much Mo∣ney. From the East-Countries for our Herrings, and other French, and Italian Commodities, before returned, they bring Home Corn, Wax, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tarr, Soap-Ashes, Iron, Copper, Steel, Clap-board, Wain-scot, Timber, Deal-board, Dollars, &c. From Germany, for Herrings and other Salt Fish, Iron, Mill∣stones,
Rhenish-Wines, Plate-But∣tons for Armour, with other Munition, too tedious to insert; Silks, Velvets and Rushes Fu∣stians, Baratees, and such like Frankford Commodities; with Store of Rix Dollars. From Brabant and Flanders: they return for the most part Ready-Money, with some Tape∣stries, and some other Commo∣dities; and some of our Herrings are carried so far as Brassil. And that which is more strange, and to our great dishonour, they have generally four hundred Ships, which Fish in sight of Yarmouth, and vend the Herrings in Eng∣land, and make us pay Ready-Money for our own Fish. Sir Josiah Child in his Discourse of Trade, in the end of his Pre∣face, is pleased to say, That he hath exposed his Conceptions to the Publick Censure, with an Assurance, that they will be re∣ceived and Honoured with a
Publick Sanction, and past into Laws; and thus begins his Book. The Prodigious Increase of the Netherlands in their Domestick and Forreign Trade, Riches, and Multitude of Shipping, is the envy of the Present, and may be the Wonder of future Gene∣rations. Here he sets out the Riches of Holland, and backs it on with an Addition, in several subse∣quent Expressions in his Book: They are Sampsons, and Goliah's, in Trade: Sons of Anach; Men of Renown, Masters of the field; like a Prevailing Army that Scorns to build Castles and For∣tresses, to secure themselves as we do by Act of our Navigation; And to Ad∣vance their Glory herein, he tells us, that we are but Dwarfs, and Pig∣mies, in Stocks and Experience, &c. But he takes no Notice that they have attained to their Great∣ness by Fishing on our Coasts; and that we were the Sampson's
and Goliah's in Queen Elizabeths Reign, and they the Pigmies, as shall be made appear more at large. And the Honoured Author goes further on in his Preface, and tells us, that were they freed from the French Fears, they would be Worse than Task-Ma∣sters over us in Trade, consider∣ing their Treasure. That the Trade of the English Nation is in a very bad Circum∣stances, is plainly seen by all thinking Men; And since it is Practical among Kings and Prin∣ces, and Sates, to Joyn one with a∣nother (or enter into a Confede∣racy) to oppose a King, or Prince, that is Growing too great, that if they do not endeavour to Suppress him, it may be a Means to lie open to them whenever he intends to make an Invasion or Incursion into their Dominions, or Invade their Territories. And whether it is not now
high time, considering those vast Improvements of the Hollanders and French, to depress the Grow∣ing Greatness of our Neighbours, must be left to the Great Wis∣dom of our Senatours; And also, whether a longer Continuance of their Fishing on our Coasts will not be a further Encouragement to their Encroachments, and our own Title, as to the antient So∣vereignty of the British Seas? By this their large Extent of Trade, they are become Citizens of the whole World, whereby they have so enlarged their Towns, that most of them with∣in this Hundred Years, are full as big again as they were before; as Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Dort, Middleburgh, &c. having been twice enlarged, their Streets and Buildings are orderly set forth, that for Beauty and Strength, they may Compare with any o∣ther Cities in the World; upon which they bestow infinite Sums
of Money; All this Originally flowing from the Bounty of the British Seas, from whence by their Labour and Industry, they derive the beginning of all that Wealth and Greatness; and par∣ticularly for the Havens of the aforesaid Towns, whereof some of them Cost Forty, Fifty, or an Hundred thousand pounds: their Fortifications, both for Number and Strength, (upon which they have bestowed innumerable Sums of Money) as well upon their Frontiers, as Ports, and may Vye with any People in the World. Encrease of Power abroad. Such being the Number of the Ships and Mariners,☞ and so great their Trade, Occasioned Principally by their Fishing, they have not only Strengthned, and Fortified themselves at Home, and to Repel all Foreign Invasions; But have likewise Stretched their
Power to the East and West In∣dies, and in many Places thereof, they are Lords of the Sea-Coasts; and have likewise Fortified upon the Main: And more than this, all the Neighbouring Princes, in their differences by reason of this their Greatness at Sea, are glad to have them of their Party, as was exemplified, when the Wars were between the Danes and the Swedes, the Hollanders were for the King of Denmark, and Lent him Vantrump to be his Admi∣ral, who had the Success of Sink∣ing the Swedish Admiral, and overthrew the Swedish Fleet. This is a Confirmation how much they are in Esteem for their Strength at Sea, and that one would think ought to be a Pre∣sident for England, to Preserve our Naval-Force.
Encrease of Publick Revenue. Moreover;Note, if this Natio∣nal Fishery were encou∣raged, there would un∣doubtedly acrue to the Crown, a∣bove 400000l▪ per An∣num. how mightily the Publick Revenue, and Custom of that State is increased by their Fishing on our Coasts, may ap∣pear in this; that above forty years since, over and above the Customs of other Merchandize, Excises, Licenses, Waftage and Lastage, there was paid to the States for Custom of Herring, and other Salt Fish, above five hundred thousand pounds in one year, besides the tenth Fish, and Cask paid, and for Waftage, which cometh to at least as much more, among the Hollanders on∣ly: Whereto the tenth of other Nations being added, it amount∣eth to a far greater Sum. We are likewise to understand that great part of their Fish that they take out of our Seas upon our Coasts, is sold in other Countries for Ready Money, and they ge∣nerally
Import from Foreign Coun∣tries, of the finest Gold and Sil∣ver; coming home, Recoin it of a baser Allay under their own Stamp, by which means they ex∣ceedingly Augment their Publick Treasure. Observation. So that if England would en∣courage this National Fishery, we should Heap the same Ad∣vantages; (the Allay of the Coin only excepted,) which we cannot permit in England. Encrease of Private Wealth. As touching their Private Wealth; if we Consider the a∣bounding Stores of Herrings, and other Fish by them taken on our Coasts, and the usual Prices that they are sold for; as also the Multitude of Tradesmen and Handicrafts Men, that by reason
of this their Fishing, are daily set on work, we must needs con∣clude, that the Gain and Profit thereof, made by Private Men, must of Necessity be exceeding Great; As by Observing the par∣ticulars following, will appear; By Dunkirk Spoyling and Burning the Busses of Holland, and setting Great Ransom upon their Fishermen, Enforced them to compound for great Sums of Money; that they might Fish quietly for one year; whereup∣on the next year after the Fish∣ermen agreed amongst themselves to pay to the States of Holland a Dollar, for every Last of Her∣ring, towards the Maintenance of Certain Ships of War, to se∣cure them in their Fishing on our Coasts, they having obtained Liberty from England for the same; By Reason whereof there was a Record kept of the seve∣ral Lasts of Herrings that year, and it appeared thereby, that in
one Half year they had taken thirty thousand Lasts of Herrings, which at twenty pound per Last, amounteth to three Millions Six hundred thousand pounds, at six∣teen, twenty, and thirty, pounds a Last, as they are Ordinarily sold (according as they Pick them) and then transported into other Countries, it cometh at least to five Millions, whereunto, if we add the Herrings taken by other Nations; As France, Lubeck, Hamborough, Bremen, Biscay, Por∣tugal, Spain, &c. which for the most part Fish in our Seas; together with Cod, Ling, Hake, and o∣ther Fish, and taken by the Hol∣landers upon the British Coasts, all the year long, the Total will Modestly and Evidently arise to above ten Millions. per Annum. But Admit it did amount to but five Millions; what a vast Loss is it for our Nation to su∣stain?
The great Trade of Fishing, Employing so many Ships at Sea, must likewise maintain an innu∣merable number of Tradesmen and Artists by Land; As Spinners, Hemp-Winders to Cables, Cor∣dage, Yarn, Twine for Nets and Lines; Weavers, to make Sail-Cloths, Cesive, Packers, Tollers, Dressers, and Cowchers, to sort and make the Herrings lawful Merchandize; Tanners, to Tan their Sails and Nets; Coopers, to make Cask, Block, and Boult∣makers for Ships, Keelmen, and Labourers for carrying and re∣moving their Fish: Sawyers for Planks, Carpenters, Shipwrights, Smiths, Carmen, Boatmen, Brew∣ers, Bakers, and a great Number of others, whereof many are maimed Persons, and unfit to be otherwise Employed, Children and Families;☞ And further, every Man and Maid-Servant having any poor Stock, may venture the same in their Fishing-Voyages,
which affords them Ordinarily, Great Increase, and is duly paid according to the Proportion of their Gain. Encrease of Provision.Observ. And further it is well known, that Holland it self, only doth af∣ford a few Hops, Madders, But∣ter and Cheese, and yet aboundeth in a very bountiful Manner, (by Reason of this Art of Fishing) in all kind of Provision, so well for Life as Commerce; As in Beef, Mutton, Veal, Corn, &c. In Cloths and Leather, and Wines, Silks, Spices; and for to Defend themselves by Sea, they have Pitch, Tarr, Cordage, and Timber, Iron, Steel, Cannon, and all Manner of Small Arms, for the Service of their Land Forces.
Of all which they have not only Enough to Supply them∣selves, but from their Magazines, are able to furnish their Neigh∣bouring Countries. And if this Fishery is not en∣couraged, it must certainly re∣dound to the Ignominy of the English Nation, to permit Strangers to Fish on our Seas, and Impoverish our Selves to make them Rich; Insomuch that for want of En∣couraging this Fishery, above two Hundred Towns, Burroughs and Villages are Ruin'd (that formerly were enriched by Fish∣ing) and the Inhabitants reduced to Miserable Want. Whereas on the Contrary, by our Sedulous endeavouring to make use of this Great Blessing, we might in a few years, Repair the decayed Towns, and the Losses of this Kingdom; and not only pre∣vent the Destruction of Thousands
of Families, and grow so Potent by Sea, that none durst oppose us. And beyond all Dispute, had our Ancestors (in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth) been told that either the French or Hollanders, should ever have been so Pow∣erful by Sea, as to appear with that Naval Force as they have done on our Seas, they would have thought they had been the greatest Lyars and Impostors in the World, which is now too manifestly known, not only to this Kingdom, but to the whole Universe. And how can it be supposed, that we shall be able to Defend our selves against any Invasion or Incursion, that a Foreign Enemy may make, unless we Preserve the Foundation of those Floating Castles that must secure the Island?
Which without Controversie is a National-Fishery. When 'tis daily visible that the French and Hollanders had never attained to that Force by Sea, they are now arrived to, if it had not been Encouraged by this Neglect of ours; which in all Probability may prove the giving the Sword out of our own Power, and to the last De∣gree prove Fatal to the English Na∣tion, if not speedily prevented. And since God and Nature hath Offered so great a Trea∣sure, and lays it at our own Doors; should we not be exceed∣ingly to Blame, if we do not accept of such a Wonderful Bles∣sing, which no People in the World but our selves can boast of, to enjoy in so Bountiful a manner as this is Bestowed on us?
The Right Method to be ta∣ken to Retrieve and Secure our Priviledges, ought to be the Great and Speedy Care of the best Patriot of our Country; I might give here many Reasons for defending the Right of the Fishery to our own Subjects, as upon the Reason of Justice, Prudence and Interest, and the Right of our Sovereignty of the British Seas, admits of no Dispute. Some Men may say, that it is not a proper time to insist upon, or Dispute the Sovereign∣ty of the British Seas. For these Reasons. First,☞ the King is a Hollan∣der Born. Secondly, that He hath an E∣state and Revenues in Holland. Thirdly, if the States of Hol∣land had not Assisted his Ma∣jesty with their Navy and Ar∣my,
in his Expedition against King James, he would not have Succeeded in his Design. Fourthly, That the States of Holland may insist, that if they had not Assisted England in the Distress they were involved in King James's Reign, they had not been Delivered from Tyran∣ny and Popery, &c. In Answer to these Objections, I Humbly Offer these Considerations. As to the First, It is true, the King was Born in Holland, and by the Mothers side English, but now His Majesty is Espoused to England by his Coronation Oath, and therefore, according to the Sacred Writ, will (no doubt) cleave unto his Wife. And let some Mens mistakes be what they will▪ He must un∣doubtedly have a Greater Esteem for the English and for England, that hath Crowned him with
the Imperial Diadem of these Kingdoms and Dominions, than for the Hollanders, if once they should oppose the Sovereignty of the British Seas, which is now his Right, as hath been acknow∣ledged by Hugo Grotius, upon the Innaugaration of King James the First of England, He rendr∣eth this Magnificent Character of him. Tria Sceptra Profundi in Mag∣ne Cojere Ducem;Hugo Gro∣tius Lib. 1. Lib. 2. which is, that the Rights of English, Scottish, and Irish Seas, are united under one Scepter, neither is he Satis∣fied with this bare Pro∣fession, but he goes on, Sume animos à Rege tuo, Quis det Jura Mari; which is, Take Cou∣rage from the King, who giveth Laws to the Sea: And in the same Book, in contemplation of so great a Power, he Conclude∣eth. Finis Hic est qui Fine ca∣ret, &c. that is, This is an End beyond an End, a Bound that
knoweth no Bound; a Bound which even the Wind and the Waves must submit unto; This is the Acknowledgment of Hugo Grotius himself, that before he had disowned the Sovereignty of the British Seas in his Mare Liberum. As to the Second Objection. The King is not unsensible, that his Revenues in England doth far exceed those of Holland, and the only way to Secure his Interest there, must be by dint of Sword, for without that, he had never Regained the Princi∣pality of Orange; And it cannot be supposed that his Majesty should value these Kingdoms and Dominons at so slender a Rate, as to lie open to a Foreign Enemy for want of Encou∣raging a National-Fishery, which will be for his Glory, the Ho∣nour of the Kingdom, and the
Publick Good in General; when he is convinced it is to be done, and thereby Secures the Interest and safety of his Dominions, both at Home and Abroad. As to the Third Objection. 'Tis allowed, the States of Hol∣land did Assist His Majesty with their Navy and Army; and in Answer to this, the King knows it may be proved from undenia∣ble Record; That if Queen Eli∣zabeth (of Blessed Memory) had not Assisted the States both by Sea and Land, when they First Revolted from the King of Spain, they would never been freed from the Spanish Yoke, nor a free State; And further, for Her Majestie's Assistance, Of∣fer'd Her the Sovereignty of the Netherlands, in Consiederation of Her Royal Bounty, and Good∣ness to them, after she had sent Threescore thousand pounds, up∣on
on the Account of Sir Thomas Gresham, in Anno, one Thousand five Hundred Seventy and two; so that it is supposed that not only the King but all Christen∣dom knows, that the Hollanders owe their Ab-Origine, and the Greatness they are now attained to, from England: So this is but one Service done for another. As to the Fourth Objection. Beyond all Dispute the King and Kingdom hath taken Care to Pay the Hollanders, all the Charges they were at for the Navy and Army. But it cannot be supposed that they would quit their Pretensi∣ons to the Sovereignty of the British Seas, which is the Main Pillar of the Nation. As in the Preamble, of an Act of Parliament made in the 14. year of the Reign of King Charles the Second, it is thus inserted.
That the Wealth, Honour and Safety of this Realm; as well for the Maintainance of Trade, and Encouragement of Naviga∣tion, as in many other Respects, doth in a High Degree depend on the Fishery. And should God Almighty, out of his Infinite Mercy and Goodness, Inspire the King and Senatours, to Revive and Pro∣mote this National-Fishery; It would be such a Comfort in Dan∣ger to this Nation, as the Ho∣ney Sampson found in the Lyons Jaws: And not onely the Coast∣ing Towns, Burroughs and ad∣jacent villages, be Enriched there∣by; but the King and Kingdom in General, would find the Sweetness of it. For did we but Secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas, it would not only make the whole World stand in awe of us, but Court us to buy our Fish.
For without, it is Impossible the East and Northern Coun∣tries should subsist, and in many o∣ther Places, Herrings are every days Meat, Winter and Summer, as well to draw on drink, as to satisfie Hunger and in many Places, the Greatest part of the year, they are Scarce to be had; for soon after Michaelmas, the Sound is Frozen, so that no Herrings can be Transported thither; And France, Spain, Italy, and the Rest of the Catholick Countries, could not keep Lent (without our Fish) which next to their own Salvation, they Tender most Dear, in Obedience to the Com∣mand of the Church of Rome. 'Tis Observable, that the Hol∣landers make it their Business to infect the People of England, that we cannot make the Advan∣tage of the Fishery as they do; and therefore it will be convenient to remove all the Vulgar Ob∣jections: Some will have it that
we want Men, and others, that our Men will never take to it. As to the First, I Answer, That we have Men Enough, but they are Idle and live upon the Pub∣lick, without making any Re∣turn of their Labour, but let these People be Employ'd in the Fishery, and they Protected by an Act of Parliament, we shall soon have enough, and to spare; and it is a Great Happiness to this Kingdom, that we can Employ our Sea-faring Men in times of Peace, and 'tis so great a Bles∣sing, that no Nation in the World has the like Opportuni∣ty of Employing and enriching themselves. The Second (Exception or) Objection is; That the Genius of this Nation will never endure the Hardships of this Employ∣ment. To which I Answer, That the English do run greater Hazards, and suffer greater Hardships in
their long, tedious, and unheal∣thy Voyages; as to the East and the West-Indies, and the Turkey Voyages, where many Men are lost, by reason of the Heat of the Climate, want of Provisions and Water, which in the Fish∣ery, there is none of these In∣conveniences to attend them, they being so often in and out of Port; and as to Labour, the working of a Mine is far beyond that of Fishing, where the Men sometimes Work up to the Middle in Water.—But to come nearer to the Point, the English is so far from having an Aversion against Fishing, that they apply themselves to it; for Example, after Harvest is in, and the Herring-Season comes on, the Country Fellows and Boys do go to the Coasting Towns, to be Hired into the Fishery; and do Generally take such a liking to it, that after 2 or 3 Voyages they very rarely return
to their Rural Employment, but take to the Sea altogether. And further, I cannot imagine what Hardships the Hollanders can undergo in the Fishing, more than the English are willing to do; this is another Objection. But this, beyond all dispute, is a very Erroneous Notion; for the Herring Fishing in the Eng∣lish Seas begins in June, and goes out in November; and that for the first four Months, it is the best time for Profit, Pleasure, and Fair-Weather; for we seldom look out after the Herring Fishing till September, and so continue to the end of November, which is the most Tempestuous Season in the Whole Annual; and then in January, we fit out for the North Seas, and spend the remaining part of Winter in all Extremi∣ties of Cold and Hardship; This is enough to Satisfie, that we are able to undergo as much Hardships as the Hollanders.
But however, I'le strain this point a little further; Suppose that the Winter Fishing would be too Hard for us, what Ex∣cuse can we have for not make∣ing our Improvements on the Summer Fishing, which is more advantageous abundantly; Another Objection is, That the Hollanders can fare Harder than the English, in their course feed∣ing, and Great Stress is laid up∣on this; and that an English Man will never be able to live on so sparing a Diet as they do. Now if it were so, and that an English Diet could not be had, and that a Dutch Diet would not serve us; but that is not our Condition: for he that cannot brook with the one may have the other; And I am indu∣ced to believe that Pork, Pease, and Beef, are much better and more Strengthening, than Roots and Cabbage, for the Hollanders
Victualling is the same with ours, for Beer, Biscuite, Butter, Cheese; all which we can provide our selves with, much Cheaper than they: And to make Good the Defect of their Ordinary Provi∣sions, they drink a great deal more Brandy than the English do; so then to take one thing with another, we Victual with Good Provisions, as Cheap or Cheaper than they do. But besides the very suggestion of leaving a Good Diet, to go to a bad, is a very Great Error; for the Countrey Men that en∣ter themselves on board the Fish∣ery, fare far better at Sea than they did at Land; for be∣sides their General Victualling, which they carry with them to Sea, they feed upon the Fish they Catch, which for Va∣riety, being Fresh taken, is a Treat, to what a Person of Qua∣lity has at his Table a Shoar; and of pitiful weak Men at
Land, in a Voyage or two, become Stout, Hearty, and Health∣ful Men. There are two more Wolves in the way; First, that our Herrings are in no esteem abroad, because we have not the right way to cure them. Secondly, we shall never make nothing on't, for the Hollanders will under-sell us, for Freight∣ing Cheaper, and consequently beat us out of the Trade. In answer to which; First, there are two ways of curing the Her∣rings, the one at Sea, where they are Gipp'd, immediately up∣on their taking, and Barrell'd; the other at Land, where they are Gipp'd, and Pack'd some days after they are taken; These we call Shoar-made-Herrings, and we know very well, that one Barrel of the other for Goodness, is worth one Hundred of these; and that they will never take their Pickle kindly, unless their
Throats be Cut, as soon as they are Caught; so that it is a great Error to take a Shoar-made-Herring, for a Tryal of Skill in curing; But for those that are made at Sea, they are made as Good, and as much in Esteem abroad as any of the Hollanders Herrings, and they have been fre∣quently Sold in the East-Coun∣try for four pounds a Barrel; and I could wish we were no more to blame, for not taking them than curing them; But ad∣mit we did not know how to Cure them; I hope 'tis not im∣possible for the English to learn. Secondly, the other Notion is, That the Hollanders will beat us off of our Trade; this is as Errone∣ous as the rest, and of no force at all against the Fishery, or it is much more Force against the Merchant, and the Newcastle Trade; for this lies under our Noses, and more in our conve∣niency than any Body's else.
And to Neglect our Fishing upon this Consideration, is to Quit all Navigation, and leave our selves to the Mercy of the Hollanders, or to be made a Prey to any that will attack us. And then to fear we shall want Vent, is to imagine that the People will leave off Eating, and a Great part of the Trade∣ing World is yet unserv'd with Fish, and it never could be made appear that our Herrings lay upon our Hands for want of a Market. And since all these Objections are sufficiently answer'd, there is nothing wanting, but assuming our Antient Right, and taking Possession of the Fishery. And notwithstanding it is so apparently made appear, that this National Fishery will redound so much to the Glory of the King, Honour of our Senatours Assem∣bled in Parliament, and Welfare of the Kingdom in General.
We will suppose for Argument sake 'tis all but Wast-Paper. But here is the Question to be put to the King and Kingdom in General, if the growing Great∣ness of the French and Hollanders, has so much Increased within this thirty or forty years last past, and still continue in the increasing of Sea-faring Men, Mariners, and their Naval Force; what will become of England in Ten or twenty years; when in all proba∣bility, they may be so Potent (unless a speedy Check is put to their Carrier) that we shall not be able to oppose them? And 'tis an Universal Maxim, that the Forces of Potentates at Sea: Sont des Marques de Grandeur d'Estat, saith a French Author; Who∣soever Commands the Sea, Com∣mands the Trade of the World: He that Commands the Trade, Com∣mands the Wealth of the World, and consequently the World it self.
Again; as he that is Master of a Field, is said to be Master of every Town, when it shall please him; so he that is Ma∣ster of the Sea, may in some sort, be said, to be Master of every Countrey, at least of such as are bordering on the Sea; For he is▪ at liberty to begin, and end War where, when, and upon what Terms he pleaseth, and extend his Con∣quests even to the Antipodes. And England being encompas∣sed with the Sea, as aforesaid, and abounding in Commodious and Excellent Havens Bayes and Ports, it excels for Safety and Se∣curity (which is no small Praise) all the Neighbouring Countries in Europe, if not all in the World, and needs not fear any Neighbouring Nation, but only that which grows Potent in Ship∣ping; for they onely can deprive us of our Main Security; And if an Island can make us as the Con∣tinent.
And if this Nation is once over power'd at Sea, we must expect to be the most miserable People in the Vniverse, having for so many Gene∣rations last past, Lorded it over the whole World by Sea; that the very Name of the English struck a Ter∣ror into all those that durst oppose them. When William the First, subdu∣ed the Realm, Conquerour of England that was an easy Fall; it proving only prejudicial to some particular Families; And he Re∣siding in the Kingdom, took all the care imaginable to pre∣serve this Nation, as already has been said, by his Planting of a New-Forrest with Oaks, to his perpetual Glory. But if once the Naval Power of England be overcome by the French or Hollanders; (Accor∣ding to all Human Probability) it must prove a Fatal overthrow, so far as they can reach with Fire and Sword, being Spurr'd on by Ambition, and Avarice, Re∣venge
and Interest; and then we should find the English saying to be too True; That the French and Hollanders are like Fire and Water; Good Servants but bad Masters. And it is most certain, that there is no other way to Main∣tain the Glory and Grandeur of this Kingdom but by Raising a National-Fishery; which rightly understood, is the Primum Mobi∣le of the Nation; 'tis the on∣ly Palladium of this Realm, with∣out which, 'tis impossible to preserve, or revive the former Glory of our Ancestors, and Secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas, and enrich the Kingdom by Navi∣gation.
THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE British-Seas, ASSERTED. ENgland hath claimed a Preroga∣tive of the British Seas time out of Mind; and amongst our for∣mer and Ancient Kings, King Ed∣gar was very Potent,Guil. Mal∣mesb. lib. 2. Cap. 8. who possessing an Absolute Dominion of the Seas, Sailed Round about it eve∣ry Year, and secured it with a constant Guard, as it is Recor∣ded; and what Dominion King Edgar had, as absolute Lord of the Sea, appears in these Words;
I Edgar King of England, and of all the Islands, and of the Ocean lying round a∣bout Britain, and of all the Na∣tions that are included within the Circuit thereof, Supream Lord and Governour; do render Thanks to Almighty God my King, who hath enlarged my Empire, and Exalted it above the Royal Estate of my Progenitors, who altho they arrived to the Monarchy of all England; ever since Athelstan, yet the Divine Goodness hath favoured me to subdue all the Kings of the I∣slands, in the Ocean, with their most Stout and Mighty Kings, e∣ven as far as Norway, and the Great∣est Part of Ireland; together with their most Famous City of Dublin. So far Edgar. And after him, King Conutus left a Testimony of his Soverei∣gnty over the Sea; In this Ex∣pression; Thou O Sea art mine, &c. And from the Testimony of the
Saxons, and the Danes, we shall descend to the Government of the Normans, whereby many Notable and Clear Proofs we shall find, as may be gathered out of that Breviary of England, called Dooms-Day: Rot. Par. 48 Hen. 3. 22. Edw. 1. 2. Rich. 2. The Tribute called Danegelt, was paid in the time of the English Sax∣ons, which amounted to four Shillings upon every Hide of Land,Am. 26 part. page 276. for the Defending the Do∣minion by Sea. Roger Hoverden asserteth it was paid until the Reign of King Stephen; and in the Parliament Records of King Richard the Second, it is Obser∣vable that a Custom was Im∣posed upon every thing that pas∣sed thro' the Northern Admiral∣ty; that is, from the, Thames a∣long the Eastern-Shoar of Eng∣land, towards the North-East, for the Maintaining a Guard for the Seas.
And this was not imposed on∣ly upon the English, but also up∣on all the Ships of Foreigners, paying at the Rate of Six pence a Tun that passed by; such Ships only excepted that brought Merchandize out of Flanders to London. Rot. Par. 2 Rich. 2. part 2. Act 38. Seld. Mare Clausum, page 334. Rot. Fran. 5. Hen. 4. Rot. Fran. 38. Hen. 6. Rot. Par. 23 Edw. And it ap∣peareth by Publick Records, con∣taining divers main points, touch∣ing which, the Judges of the Land were to be consulted for the Good of the Common Wealth; That the Kings Sea Dominion▪ which they called, the Antient Superiority of the Sea,Vide Edw. Coke, part 5. fol. 108. and in Con▪ Littleton▪ Sect. 439. fol. 260. was a Matter beyond all Contradiction amongst all Lawyers of that Age, and asserted by the Determina∣tions and Customs of the Law of the Land; and by Express Words of the Writs and Forms of the Actions themselves.
And this Truth was not only comfirmed by the Laws, but by our Medals: There hath been a Piece of Gold very often Coyn∣ed by our Kings, called a Rose Noble, which was Stamped on the one Side of it, a Ship Float∣ing in the Sea, and a King Ar∣med with a Sword and a Shield, Sitting in the Ship it self, as in a Throne; to set forth the Repre∣sentation of the English King by Sea. The first Author hereof, was Edward the Third; when he Guarded his own Seas with a Potent Navy, consisting of Ele∣ven Hundred Ships, at which time as at others, he Marched Victoriously thro' France.Note, p. 38. Remark. But of all that has been said, there can hardly be alledged a more convincing Argument to prove the Truth of all that hi∣therto hath been spoken, than the acknowledgment of the Sea Do∣minion of the Kings of England; When the Agreement was made by Edward the first of England,
and Phillip the Fair of France; Reyner Grimhald was then Admiral of the French Navy,Rot. Par. 31. Edw. 1. Membran. 16. Intercepted and spoyled on the English Seas, The Goods of many Merchants that were Sailing to Flanders, as well English as others, and was not contented with the de∣predation of their Goods, but he Imprisoned their Persons, and delivered them up to the Officers of the King of France. And in a very Insolent man∣ner, Justified his Actions in Wri∣ting, as done by Authority of the King his Master's Commission. This being alledged to be done to the great Damage and pre∣judice of the King of England; the Prelates, Peers, and the rest of the Nation, Exhibited a Bill against Reyner Grimbald, and managed by the Procurators on the behalf of the Prelates, Peers, and of the Cities and Towns through out England; and also of the whole Kingdom of England in
General; and by and with the Authority, as is supposed, of the Estates assembled in Parliament; with those were joyned Procura∣tors of most Nations Bordering up∣on the Sea, throughout Europe, viz. The Genoeses. The Catalonians. The Spainards. The Almayns. The Zealanders. The Hollanders. The Freezlanders. The Danes. The Norwegians. The Hamburghers And all these instituted a com∣plaint against Reyner Grimbald, who was Admiral of the French Navy, in the time of the War, between Philip King of France, and Guy Earl of Flanders; And all these Complainants in their Bill, do joyntly affirm, That the King of England and his Prede∣cessors, have time out of mind, and without controversie, enjoyed the Sovereignty and Dominion of the English Seas, and the Isles belonging to the
same, by Right of the Realm of England; that is to say, by pre∣scribing Laws, Statutes, and Pro∣hibition of Arms and of Ships, otherwise Furnished, than with such Necessaries and Commodi∣ties as belong to Merchants, &c. Also, That they have had, and have the Sovereign Guard here∣of, with all manner of Cogni∣zance and Jurisdiction, doing right and Justice, according to the said Laws, Ordinances, and Prohibitions; and in all other Matters which may concern the Exercise of Sovereign Dominion in the said Places. This is the Declarations of the Nations aforemention'd, and they did declare he was Lord of the Sea, &c. This is Cited out of the Par∣liament Records; and they did de∣clare an Acknowledgment of the Sea Dominion of our Kings, made by those Foreign and Neighbour Nations, who were
most concern'd in the Business, to the Glory of our Kings of Eng∣land. Mr. Hitchcock,☞ in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, presented a Book to the Parliament, con∣cerning the Commodity of Fishing; That the Hollanders, and Zealanders, every year towards the latter end of Summer, do send out four or five Hundred Vessels, called Busses, to Fish for Herrings in our Eastern Seas; but before they Fish, they ask leave of Starbourough; these were the Words: Care was also taken in King James the first of Eng∣lands Reign; That no Foreigner should Fish on the English or I∣rish Seas, without leave first ob∣tained; and every year at the least, this leave was renewed from Commissioners, for that pur∣pose, appointed at London. And the Kings of France have desired leave of the Kings of England, for a certain time to Fish
on our Seas, only for Fish for his Houshould, and obliged them∣selves in Articles, That none of the Fish, that was taken in the British Seas should be exposed to sale in any Market. In the Seventh year of the Reign of King James the first, the Sove∣reignty of the British Seas was Strenuously asserted by Proclama∣tion; and all Persons excluded from the use of the Seas upon our Coasts, without particular Licence; the Grounds whereof, you have here set down in the Procla∣mation it self. A PROCLAMATION. Touching Fishing. JAMES by the Grace of God, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all and Singular Persons to whom it may apper∣tain, Greeting. Although we do sufficiently know by our Expe∣rience,
in the Office of Regal Dig∣nity (in which by the Favour of Almighty God we have been Placed and Exercised these many years) as also by the Obser∣vation, which we have made of other Christian Princes exempla∣ry Actions how far the Absolute∣ness of Sovereign Power extend∣eth it self; and that in Regard thereof, we need not yield Account to any Person (under God,) for any Action of ours, which is Law∣fully Grounded upon that Just Prerogative; yet such hath ever been and shall be our Care and Desire, to give satisfaction to our Neighbour Princes and Freinds in any Action which may have the least Relation to their Subjects and Estates; as we have thought Good (by way of Premonition) to declare to them, and to whom∣soever it may appertain, as fol∣loweth. Whereas we have been con∣tented since our coming to the
Crown, to tolerate an Indiffe∣rent and Promiscuous kind of Liber∣ty to all our Friends whatsoe∣ver, to Fish within our Streams, and upon any of our Coasts of Great Britain, Ireland, and other adjacent Islands, so far forth, as the Permission or use thereof might not redound to the Impeach∣ment of our Prerogative Royal, nor to the Hurt and Damage of our loving Subjects; whose Preservation and Flourishing E∣state we hold our self Principal∣ly bound to Advance before all worldly Respects: so finding that our Continuance therein hath not only given occasion of over-great Encroachments upon our Regali∣ties, or rather questioning our Right; but hath been a means of daily wrongs to our own Peo∣ple that exercise the Trade of Fishing, as (either by the Mul∣titude of Strangers, which do pre-ocupy those Places, or by the Injuries that they receive
Commonly at their Hands.) Our Subjects are constrain'd to aban∣don their Fishing, or at least, are become so discouraged in the same, as they hold it better for them to betake themselves to some other course of Living; whereby, not only divers of our Coast Towns are much decayed, but the Number of Mariners daily diminish, which is a Mat∣ter of Great consequence to our Estates, considering how much the Strength thereof consisteth in the Power of Shipping, and use of Navigation; We have thought it now both Just and Necessary (in Respect that we are now by Gods Favour Li∣nealy and Lawfully Possess'd as well of the Islands of Great Bri∣tain and Ireland, and the rest of the Isles adjacent) to bethink our selves of good lawful Means to prevent those Inconveniences, and many others depending upon the same. In consideration where∣of,
as we are desirous that the World may take notice, that we have no intention to deny our Neighbours the Allies those Fruits and Benefits of Peace and Friend∣ship, which may justly be ex∣pected at our hands in Honour and Reason, or are afforded by other Princes in the point of Com∣merce, and Exchange of those things which may not prove pre∣judicial to them: So, because some such convenient Order may be taken in this Matter, as may suf∣ficiently provide for these Import∣ant Considerations, which do de∣pend thereupon; We have re∣solved first, to give Notice to all the World, that our Express plea∣sure is, That from the beginning of the Month of August next com∣ing, no Person of what Nation or Quality soever, being not our Natural Born Subjects▪ be permit∣ted to Fish on any of our Coasts and Seas, of Great Britain, Ire∣land▪ and the rest of the Isles ad∣jacent,
where most usually here∣tofore any Fishing hath been, un∣til they have orderly demanded and obtained Licenses from Us, or such of Our Commissioners as We have Authorised in that behalf, viz. At London, for Our Realms of England and Ireland; and at Edenburgh▪ for our Realm of Scot∣land; which Licenses Our Inten∣tion is, shall be yearly demanded, for so many Vessels and Ships, and the Tunnage thereof, as shall in∣tend to Fish for that whole Year, or any part thereof, upon any of our Coasts and Seas, as aforesaid, upon the pain of such Chastisement as shall be fit to be inflicted on such Offenders. Given at our Palace at West∣minster, the 6th of May, in the 7th Year of Our Reign of Great Britain, Anno Dom' 1609.
Notwithstanding this Procla∣mation, the Netherlanders still proceeded in the way of their En∣croachment upon the Seas, thro' the whole Reign of King James, and were at length so bold as to contest with him, and Quarrel His Majesty out of His Rights, pre∣tending (because of the long Con∣nivance of Queen Elizabeth) that they had of their own a Right, of Immemorial Possession. And in King Charles the I's Reign, a Proclamation was pub∣lished, for Restraint of Fishing upon His Seas and Coasts, without Li∣cense, dated the 10th day of May, in the 12th Year of his Reign. This Proclamation being set forth in the Year 1636, serv'd to speak the Intent of those Naval Preparations, made in the Year 1635; which were so numerous and well pro∣vided, that our Netherland Neigh∣bours, were apprehensive of some Great Design in hand, for the In∣terest of England by Sea.
As I might shew at large (if it were requisite) by certain Pa∣pers of a publick Character yet in Being. But there is one which may serve instead of all; and it is a ve∣ry Ingenious Letter of Secretary Cokes, that was written to Sir Wil∣liam Boswell, the King's Resident, then at the Hague; the Original whereof is still reserved among the Publick Papers: In which Letter he sets forth, the Grounds and Reason of Preparing that Royal and Gallant Navy; with the King's Resolution to Maintain the Right derived from his Royal Progenitors, in the Dominion of the British Seas; and therefore I here render a True Copy of it, so far as concerns this Business, as most pertinent to our Purpose. SIR, BY your Letters, and otherwise, I perceive many Jealousies and Discourses are raised upon the
Preparations of His Majesty's Fleet, which is now in such forwardness, that we doubt not but within this Month, it will appear at Sea. It is therefore expedient, both for your Satisfaction and Direction, to inform you particularly, what was the Occasion, and what is His Ma∣jesty's Intention in this Affair: First,☞ we hold it a Principle, not to be denied (as it may be prov'd from undeniable Record) That the King of Great Britain, is a Mo∣narch at Land and Sea, to the full extent of His Dominions; and that it concerneth Him, as much to maintain His Sovereignty in theBritish Seas, as within His Three Kingdoms; because without* That, these cannot be kept safe; nor He preserve His Honour and due Re∣spect with other Nations. But Commanding the Sea, he may cause his Neighbours, and all Countries, to stand upon their Guard, when∣soever he thinks fit.
And this cannot be doubted,☞ that whosoever will encroach up∣on him by Sea, will do it also by Land, when they see their time. To such Presumption, Mare Li∣berum, gave the first Warning-piece, which must be answer'd with a Defence of Mare Clausum; not so much by Discourse, as by the lowder Language of a Power∣ful Navy; To be better under∣stood, when over-strain'd Pati∣ence seeth no hope of preserving her Right by other Means. The degrees by which His Ma∣jesty's Dominion at Sea, hath of latter Years been impeached, and then question'd, are as Considera∣ble as Notorious. First, to cherish, and as it were, to nourish our unthankful Neigh∣bours, we gave them Leave to gather Wealth and Strength upon our Coasts, in our Ports, by our Trade, and by our People: Then they were glad to invite our Mer∣chants Residence, with what pri∣viledges
they would desire. Then they offer'd us the Sovereignty of their Estates; and then they su'd for License to Fish upon our Coasts, and obtained it under the Great Seal of Scotland, which now they suppress. And when thus by Leave, or by Connivance, they had possess'd themselves of our Fishings, not only in Scotland, but in Ireland and England; and by our Staple, had raised a great Stock of Trade, by these Means they so increased their Shipping and Power at Sea, that now they endure not to be kept at any distance: Nay, they are grown to that Confidence, to keep Guards upon our Seas, and then project an Office and Com∣pany of Assurance, for the Ad∣vancement of Trade; and withal prohibit us free Commerce within our Seas, and take our Ships and Goods, if we conform not to their Placarts. What Insolences and Cruelties they have committed a∣gainst
us heretofore in Ireland, in Greenland, and in the Indies, is too well known to all the World. In all which, tho' our Suffer∣ings, and their Wrongs, may seem forgotten; yet the great In∣terest of His Majesty's Honour, is still the same, and will refesh their Memories, as there shall be Cause. For tho' Charity must remit wrongs done to private Men; yet the Re∣flection upon the Publick may make it a greater Charity to do Justice on crying Crimes. All this notwithstanding, you are to conceive, that the Work of this Fleet, is Revenge, or Execution of Justice for these great Offences past, but Chiefly for the future, to stop the violent Current of that Presumption, whereby the Men of War, and Free-booters of all Na∣tions (abusing the Favour of His Majesty's peaceable and most graci∣ous Government) whereby he hath permitted all his Friends and Allies, to make use of his Sea-ports,
at a reasonable and free Manner, according to his Treaties) have taken upon them the Boldness, not only to come confidently at all times into all his Ports and Rivers, but to convey their Merchant Ships so high as his Chief City, and then to cast Anchor close up∣on his Magazines; and to contemn the Commands of his Officers, when they have required a further distance. But which is more intolarable, have assaulted and taken one another within His Majesties The Downs. Chamber, and within his Rivers; to the Scorn and Contempt of his Dominon and Power; and this being of late years an Ordin∣ary Practice, which we have en∣deavoured in vain to Reform by the way of Justice and Treaties, the World, I think, will be sa∣tisfied, that we have Reason to look about us.
And no Wise Man will doubt, but it is high time to put our selves in this Equipage upon the Seas; and not to suffer that Stage of Action to be taken from us, for want of our Appearance. So you see the General Ground upon which our Counsel Stands; In particular, you may take Notice, and Publish as cause requires; That His Majesty by his Fleet intendeth not a Rupture with any Prince or State, nor to Infringe any Point of his Treaties, but resolveth to con∣tinue, and Maintain that Happy Peace wherewith God hath Blessed his Kingdom, and to which all his Actions and Negotiations have hi∣therto tended, as by your own In∣structions, you may finally under∣stand. But withal considering, that Peace must be maintain'd by the Arm of Power, which only keeps down War by keeping up Dominion; His Majesty thus provoked, finds it Necessary for his own Defence and
safety, to re-assume and keep his Antient and undoubted Right, in the Dominion of these Seas, and to suffer no other Prince or State to encroach upon him, thereby as∣suming to themselves or their Ad∣mirals any Sovereign Command; but to force them to perform due Homage to his Admirals and Ships, and to pay them Acknowledgments, as in former times they did. He will also set open▪ and pro∣tect the free Trade, both of his Subjects, and Allies, and give them such safe Conducts and Convoy, as they shall reasonably require. He will suffer no other Fleets, nor Men of War, to keep any Guard upon these Seas, or there to offer Violence, to take Prizes, or Booties, or to give Interruption to any Law∣ful intercourse. In a Word; His Majesty is resol∣ved, as to do no Wrong, so to do Justice both to his Subjects and Friends, within the Limits of his Seas.
And this is the Real and Royal design of his Fleet, whereof you may give Notice, as you find Occasion, to our good Neighbours in those parts, that no Ʋmbrage may be taken of any Hostile Act, or purpose to their Pre∣judice in any Kind; So wishing you all Health and Happiness, I Rest Your assured Friend and Servant.White-Hall, 16 April. 1635. our Style. JOHN COKE. So what has been said is suf∣ficient to prove the undisputable Titles of the Kings of England's Sovereignty over the British Seas; and the Necessity of Maintaining and Defending it:
The CONCLƲSION. TO Conclude, that by which hath been undeniably Asserted, it doth evidently appear, That the Kings of England (by Immemora∣ble Prescription, continual Usage and Possession; and also by the Ac∣knowledgment of all the Kings, Princes, and States of Christ∣endom, and the Laws of this Kingdom,) have always held the Sovereign Propriety of the British Seas.—And His Majesty by Right of his Sovereignty hath Supream Commands, and Iuris∣diction over the Passage of his Seas, and Fishing therein beyond all Contradiction. And for these Rea∣sons, stand the fairest of any Peo∣ple in the World, to be Lords of the Seas, and give: Laws to the whole World by our Naval-Force▪ And considering the Nutural Sight of these our Seas, that in∣terpose themselves between the Great Northern Commerce, and that of the whole World; And also, that of the East, West and Southern Climates; and with all,
the vast Treasure that is got by Fishing in them daily. It cannot therefore be doubted but His Majesty, by reason of his Great Wisdom and Virtue, and his Admirable Valour; And the Diligent Care of his Faithful and Loyal Subjects, may without in∣justice to any Prince or State, be made the Greatest Monarch for Wealth and Command in the World; and his People the most Opulent Flourishing of any in the Universe. And the Sovereignty of the Seas being the most Precious Jewel of his Imperial Crown; (and next under God) the Principal Means of our Wealth, and Safe∣ty; all true English Men, are bound by all Possible Means of Honour and Industry, to pre∣serve it with the utmost Hazard of their Lives and Fortunes. Thus you see, what Wonder∣ful Advantages may redound to the Felicity and Glory of this
Nation, if God gives us Hearts and Resolutions to Vindi∣cate those Rights which are most Impiously and Injuriously Invaded by our Neighbours. FINIS.
