G738 10731419 45540
A TREATISE AGAINST SVPERSTITIOVS JESƲ-WORSHIP. VVherein the true Sense of Phil. 2. 9, 10. is opened, and from thence is plainly shewed, and by sundry Arguments proved, that corporall bowing at the Name Jesus, is neither comman∣ded, grounded, nor warranted thereupon. With answers to some of the maine reasons overthrowne. And afterwards the chiefest reasons and grounds of those that produce the said Text for that opinion, are examined, and the weaknesse and insuffi∣ciency of them laid open. Together with a discovery of sundry grosse absurdities, and very dangerous erroneous Consequences, that doe neces∣sarily arise from that opinion. Written especially for the benefit of weake seduced Persons, that have a zeale towards God, though not according to knowledge. By MASCALL GILES Minister of Gods Word at Dicheling in SUSSEX. I hate them that regard lying vanities, but thy Law doe I love, Psal. 31. 6. In vaine doe they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Com∣mandements of men, Mat. 15. 9. LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. for Andrew Kembe at St. Margarets hill in Southwark, 1642.
TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIPFVLL Mr ANTHONY STAPLEY Esquire, one of the Knights in PARLIAMENT elected for the County of SUSSEX. RIGHT WORSHIPFULL, WHen through sundry and con∣tinued abuses offered mee by those whose superstition I have impug∣ned, I was necessitated to commit this Treatise to the Presse: After some deliberation I tooke boldnesse to Dedicate the same to you, being encouraged hereunto, partly by reason of your favourable Affection to my poore Selfe, which I thankfully acknow∣ledge; partly also and especially because of your knowne sincere affection to the Truth, and hatred of all superstiti∣ous Vanities; and also because you are a right Worthy Member of that Honourable Body of the House of Com∣mons, whose endeavour is to clense the waters of the San∣ctuary, from that filth and bitternes, whereby they have
been defiled by too many, that they may run pure and cleere, to refresh the Soules of Gods People, I meane to root out those superstitions and innovations, which have so long pestred the Church, and grieved the well-affected: amongst which this Ceremony is one, which you have not long since forbidden by your religious Order, though contrary to the same, Pride and shame makes the Prea∣chers of to keepe it up, and such malignant Principles, by which these men have polluted the Peoples judgements, makes them still to practise it. This opinion indeed is very specious, making a shew to the ignorant, of great hu∣militie, religion, and holines, when indeed it is a Monster of many heads; there being not many Points of Popery, that produce more dangerous Conclusions than it doth, (especially in the sense that some hold it.) The Text which they pretend for this Ceremony being as contrary to it, as light is to darknesse. The Lord blesse you, and the truly vertuous Lady, the Lady Clerke, your religious Yoke-fellow, and all yours and hers, with his choicest mercies, and powre out his especiall blessings upon that Honourable House of Par∣liament, whereof you are a Member, that you may be still tendred of him as the Apple of his eye, and continu∣ally preserved from the Plots and fury of the malignant partie, to the glory of God, the safetie of Sion, and the perfect Reformation of this Church and Kingdome, which all true Israelites desire, and pray for, that future Generations may praise GOD for you, and call you blessed. Thus prayeth Your Worships in all Christian duties to be commanded, MASCALL GILES.
TO THE IMPARTIALL READER, That hath not the Faith of our Lord Iesus Christ in respect of Persons. CHRISTIAN READER; MY Antagonists in this Question are of two sorts; The first are they that ground their opinion upon the Text, and thereupon make bowing at the Name Jesus a necessary dutie. The Second sort do also ground their opinion upon the Text, and also upon the same reasons, and yet make it but an indifferent Ceremony, prin∣cipally grounding it upon the Canon of the Church, professing that as a Law hath established it, so if a Law shall forbid it, they will leaveIf the Text may be over∣throwne by a Law made by the Creature, Then, seeing that Devils & Reprobates must fulfill the Text by suffe∣ring their ut∣ter destruction, as I shall after∣wards make manifest, then if these be wise they will make a Law to save themselves from it. it, but till that time they will use it. There are farre more of this sort than of the former, and they are farre more absurd in their opinion than the former: for the one are true to their owne grounds, though they be mi∣staken, but the other are false to them, and indeed make but a mocke of the Text, yea of Christ himselfe. In my Treatise I contest with them both in one: here I will bend my selfe to the Second sort. 1. I would know of them, if they stand so much upon a Canon, why did they not obey the Order of the House of Commons? What was their Order inferiour to the Canon made by the Convocation onely without consent of Parliament, without which no Law can binde the The times altered too suddenly up∣on them. Subject? 2. If they did ever meane to leave it, why did they fasten it also upon the Scripture? Many of them never practised it, nor found any Text for it, till the Archbishop had charged the Canon for it, which in for∣mer times, asEccl. Pol. lib. 5. sect. 30. Master Hooker saith, none was constrained to use. What was not the Text authentique, till the Canon had made it so? or were they so ignorant, that they knew not how to worship God
till the Canon was charged? or if they were not, how will they answer it before God, some of them, that having lived long in the Ministery, yet never before this time made knowne this part of Gods Counsell to their People? 3. With what honesty can these men ever leave their practise of it, the Canon being overthrowne, except they renounce their opinion? If they had not medled with the Text, they might have come off more fairely, but if the Canon fall, all the power in the world can never overthrow the Text, but it must stand for ever inviolable. Therefore whereas it is the manner of these men to call all those Ministers facti∣ous, and schismaticall, that observe not the Canon as they expound it, what manner of Persons will these prove themselves to be, that will not obey Gods sacred Word? The evasion, which these men make for themselves is beyond all measure ridiculous. TheyMaster Page saith some∣thing to this purpose, Iusti∣fication of bowing, pag. 7. say, the Text doth but warrant this Ceremony, and the Church hath taken occasion from the Texts warranting it, to command it, a very learned distinction. We will view therefore the Text, as they exponnd it, and the Canon as it stands: Thus they open the Text; When Christ had humbled him∣selfe, God highly exalted him, and gave him the Name Jesus to be above every Name, that at the mention of it, all should bow their knees to the Glory of the Father. Is this but a warrant? take the Text any way, can there be a more serious Ordinance? The dutie of the Text is the maine end of Christs exaltation, and the honour of his All Exposi∣tors hold, that this Text doth denote Christs Kingdome. Kingdome. What shall God lay flat this Glorious Name of Christ, and lay downe his owne honour at the will of man? Surely not to obey this Text, is to deny Christs Resurrection, his Ascension, and his glorious Kingdome, to exclude themselves from being servants to him, and not to suffer him to reigne over them. Yea in their own sense, it is to deny him the Name Jesus, and so they overthrow our Salvation; A damnable opiniō to make the honour of Christ, as he is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, who by his death over∣threw all cere∣monies, to be but a Ceremo∣ny, & arbitrary also at mans will. For if this Name were given him, as they say, because they should bow to it, if they will not bow, they deny him that Name. Now let us view the Canon, the words whereof are these; When the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned in time of Divine Service, due and lowly reverence shall be done by all Persons present. See now, is the Canon so forcible and plaine as the Text,I know no he∣resie either old or new, of a more fearfull consequence than this o∣pinion. though understood in their owne sense. Yet these men say, that the Text doth but warrant, but the Canon commands this Ceremony. But the Canon saith not the Name Jesus, but the Lord Jesus, who is mentioned as well by any other of his Titles, as by the Name Jesus. 2. It specifieth onely due
and lowly reverence, which may be done without the corporall bow∣ing of theThe Canon makes not plainly for it, whatsoever the Canon-makers intended. knee. Grant that there were equalitie in the words and sense of either, shall so great a Scripture have no more authoritie than a Church Canon, yet these men give it not so much, they make the Text but a servant to the Canon, and to waite upon it; for so long as the Canon stands, the Text shall stand; but if the Canon fall, the Text shall fall with itThese men deale with the Text as little Children doe with Babies, who when they have done playing with them, throw them away: So they, when they have done playing with this Text, and may not be suf∣fered any lon∣ger to mocke Christ by it, then they will throw it away.. Was there ever heard of such advancing of mens traditions above Gods sacred Word, as there hath been lately? O errour, whether wilt thou runne, if thou once take footing? ô how righteously will these men be clothed with shame? How justly will they eate of the fruit of their owne way, and be filled with their owne devises? The occasion of my publication of this Treatise is this; Sundry men in the Countrey wherein I live, especially since this Archbishops time, have grounded this superstition upon the Text, and that upon the perill of damnation, if it be refusedI have heard of some that have wished that those knees might rot that would not bow at the Name Jesus. Much like the words of Bish. Andrewes on Phil. 2. 9. who saith, that that knee which will not bow at that Name, shall be smit∣ten with som∣what, that it shall not be able.: Ʋpon which, multitudes of ignorant men were drawne to it, upon the opinion of these mens worth: Yea of my owne Parish some staggered, and others were tainted with it; therefore I thought it my dutie to labour in the point, and I tooke paines to reade some Tracts of those of that opinion, and found no∣thing but emptie stuffe, without any ground from Scripture; and being furnished with the Arguments that follow against it, I delive∣red sundry of them to my People, proving that this bowing hath no foundation upon the said Text, and in no other sense I reproved it: This comming to these mens eares, I was presently called factious, schis∣maticall, and what not. I hearing of it, desired Conference with some of them, and I found that they had no Scripture for their opinion, but onely such muddy reasons as have been raked out of the kennels of Popish Authors. I much desired to talke with one of these men of the more corrupt opinion, who taking it in scorne that I should re∣prove what he held, railed against me above measure. This man ne∣ver practised or preached for this Ceremony, till this Archbishops time, and then he began to ground it upon the Text, and after a while he pressed it againe upon a very great danger, if not done; and the better to winne his People to it, he publiquely told them, that he had studied more houres in this Question, than others of a different opi∣nion had done minutes, and said that he was able to satisfie any one in the Question. After I had talked with this man, immediately it was noised about in the Countrey, that my Arguments were accounted
light andIf so why would not he suffer one of his Parish to partake of the Conference, who came to his house in the midst of it, and earnestly desired it. weake, and his such as I could not AnswerHis reasons were onely the three first, no∣ted in the Se∣cond part of my Booke, and there thou maist reade my Answers.. I having heard this from many credible Persons, and knowing my selfe to be wronged, wrote to the said party, to request another Conference before indiffe∣rent Witnesses, for the other was private, and shewed reasons why it could not be unequall on his behalfe, and also declared unto him that none of my Arguments were solved, and to avoid prolixitie, instanced but onely in one, shewing him how I stated it, and how he answered it, and how his answer made to it,Part. 1. Sect. 8. Argu. 1. sufficed not, meekly desiring him to answer it more fully by Letter, or else to conceive one against another time. I desired him also to cleere unto me this his opinion, how the Text doth but warrant this Ceremony, and not injoyne it, and how he can ever leave practising it (as he said he would, if an Act of Parliament should forbid it) with a safe Conscience, except he renounce his opinion. I received a Letter from him, in which my Arguments are againe sligh∣ted, and he justifieth his opinion, making it but an indifferent Ceremo∣ny, and yet grounds it upon the Text of Phil. 2. 9, 10.I testifie to the world, that I wrong him not, but can shew it from his own hand, which opinion neither him∣selfe nor the wit of any man can ever make good. and yet refu∣seth to give me his reasons, & utterly denies to satisfie my demands, and to answer my Arguments, and resolves to meddle no more in the A strange thing that a Divine so greatly stu∣died in the Point, beyond other Divines of the other opiniō, should refuse to stand up for his opi∣nion when it is opposed. Question, and will not admit of another Conference, because it would be a Conventicle, and yet he ceaseth not continually bitterly to censure those that differ from him in opinion, though he refuseth to bring his opinion to light. I have also received hard measure from ano∣ther, (though not of so grosse an opinion in this point as the former) who having obtained some Arguments from me, promised to answer them, or else to yeeld. I had from him not one word of reason, but all rai∣ling, & yet he boasteth, that he hath overthrowne all my Arguments. Thus lying downe under great contempts and reproaches, I am neces∣sitated to publish this Tract (which otherwise I had not thought to doe) to cleere my selfe, and to try the strength and valour of those kinde of men; that the world may judge where the truth is; and also if it be pos∣sible, to helpe those that stagger, and are misled. Now this is that I en∣tend to prove in the ensuing Treatise, that bowing at the Name Jesus, hath not onely no command, but also not the least warrant from Phil. 2. 9, 10. If any will make answer to it, I desire them to answer the whole, and not a part, and to ground their reasons upon the Scriptures, which hitherto they have not done. Thus Christian Reader, I commit thee to God, and rest Thine in the Lord Jesus, MASCALL GILES.
A TREATISE AGAINST SVPERSTITIOVS JESƲ-WORSHIP. THis Treatise I divide into two parts. In the first part the true sense of the Text is laid open, and from thence sundry Arguments are raised against bow∣ing at the Name Jesus. In the second part are answers to the pretended Reasons for that opinion. PART I. Foure things are necessary here to be sifted and cleered. First, What is meant by the high exalted Name of Christ, sig∣nified in these words; Name above. Secondly, What is meant by the Names subjected to this highest Name, signified in these words; Every Name. Thirdly, What is meant by these words; Every knee shall bow, and, Every tongue shall confesse. Fourthly, What is meant by these words; In the Name of Je∣sus. SECTION I. Wherein it is to be considered, what is meant by the exalted Name of Christ, signified in these words; Name above. BY Name above every Name,Name above every Name, what it is not. cannot be meant a bare proper Name, for these reasons.
First, It is no way necessary so to understand it, because (Name) is not generally, or for the most part so taken in Scripture, but in other senses. Secondly, Because this phrase (a great Name made or given) is never taken in Scripture for a bare proper Name. Thirdly, Because this phrase (Name above another made or gi∣ven) is never taken in Scripture for a bare proper Name, above another such Name. Fourthly, It is not agreeable to the analogie of the Text, so to understand it: My reason is this; because the subjected Name in the Text, must have of necessitie, a correspondent Relation to Christs advanced Name, otherwise the sense cannot be Logicall. If then the high advanced Name of Christ in the Text be a proper Name, it will follow necessarily, that all the subjected Names must be pro∣per Names also. Yea themselves referre the Name Jesus, to divine Names, preferring it before the Titles, Christ, Sonne of God, Jeho∣vah, &c. And if it be so understood, though the sense be Logicall, yet is it not sound, for this it will be: The Name Jesus is a greater Name than the Name Christ, Jehovah; and so consequently above the Name Father, or Holy Ghost; above the Names of men, as John, Thomas, Henry, and so above the Names of all creatures and things, which will make a most absurd sense, which yet cannot be avoy∣ded upon these mens grounds. Againe, seeing it is evident, that all the subjected Names in the Text, must bow to the Name above eve∣ry Name. If the said Name be understood of a proper Name, they not excepting divine Names, the sense will be this: The names of Angels & Devils, the names of all things and creatures, the names of men, as Richard, Thomas, William, yea, divine Titles, as Lord, Christ, Jehovah, must bow to the name Jesus; and how senslesse will this be? Seeing then, that the Names subjected to the Name above every Name, are not the names of creatures, and things subjected, (for they are referred in the Text to knees, of things in heaven, things in earth, and things under the earth, not to Names) but the powers of things and creatures subjected, as I shall hereafter de∣monstrate. Then cannot the Name above them all be a proper name; for then the sense will be this: The name Jesus hath domi∣nion over every thing and creature, and every thing and creature most bow knees to the name Jesus, which will be ridiculous. Lastly, seeing the names subjected to the Name above every Name, are meant the powers and vertues of things and creatures, they ex∣cepting
not divine Names, they must understand it also of the power of God, then the sense will be this: The name Jesus is a∣bove God, and that God himselfe must bow knees to the name Je∣sus, which sense will be horride and blasphemous. Secondly, If it were necessary to understand (Name above eve∣ry Name) for a Name or Title, yet may it not be understood of the Name or Title Jesus; for these Reasons. First, The word (Jesus) doth no where in the whole new Te∣stament signifie the bare name Jesus, but onely then when it was promised by the Angel at Christs Conception, Mat. 1. 21. and given unto him at his Circumcision, Luk. 2. 21. where necessarily it must so signifie. Secondly, This phrase , Name of Iesus is never taken in all the New Testament (where onely it is used) for the name Ie∣sus, or any other titles of Christ, but in other senses. If any shall thinke, that it is meant of the name Jesus in this place, making the word  to be the Dative case, and to agree in opposition with the word , because there is no Article before it; I answer, in sundry places of the New Testament the selfe same phrase is used without an Article, and is never put in the Dative case, but alwaies in the Genitive, and doth no where denote the bare name Iesus; as in these places amongst others. Act. 2. 38. Act. 16. 18. Act. 4. 10. Col. 3. 17. Thirdly, The Name above every Name, is incommunicable to any creature, being the onely prerogative of the Sonne of God: but the name Jesus was communicated to others, as to Joshuah, which is the same name with Iesus, Heb. 4. 8. &c. Therefore it is not sound what BishopSermon on Phil. 2. 9, 10. Andrewes, and MrIustification of vowing, Pag. 49. Page from him doe affirme, that the name Iesus is incommunicable, which though it were given by men, yet they say, it was not given of God, who ap∣pointed none this name save Jesus Christ, and therefore they say that it is greater than the name Christ, because many were called the Lords Christs by Gods owne allowance, as Kings and Pro∣phets. For to this I answer: The name Jesus was not given to some at least without a speciall providence of God, as to Joshuah, who was a great Saviour, and type of Christ. Thus saith learned Ʋrsi∣nusCatechis. Pag. 196. Atqui inquis Parentei Ioshuae, &c. But thou wilt say, saith he, that the Parents of Joshuah when they gave him this name, could not imagine, that God would deliver Israel by him: He answers, At Deus scruit & voluntatem eorum direxit: But God knew it and
directed their will. And some are no more called the Lords Christs, than others are called the Lords Saviours, as Nah. 9. 27. These Saviours there are called the Lords gifts, which is all one as if it had been said, the Lords Saviours. And whereas the name Jesus was a common name to be called by, generally allowed, and never reprehended in any: But for the name Christ, howsoever some were called the Lords Christs, as Types of Christ, yet no man might take the name Christ as an ordinary name to be called by without horrible blasphemy, Mat. 24. 23, 24. Fourthly, Because the Name above every Name was given to our Saviour at his exaltation, according to the plaine words of the Text. But the name Jesus was given to him in the beginning of his humiliation. To answer here, that give signifieth to advance, I re∣ply, it is not agreeable to the sense of this word in other Scrip∣tures, and it marres the phrase and sense of the Text here, as I shall hereafter demonstrate. Fifthly, Because Jesus was advanced after his Resurrection to be Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36. And it is considerable that the Evan∣gelists doe usually call him by the name Jesus, onely in the time of his humiliation. But in the Epistles of the Apostles, He is most commonly called Christ, not neere so often Jesus: And when he is called Jesus, it is very commonly with the addition of Lord, or Christ, as Lord Jesus, or Jesus Christ, or both together, the Lord Jesus Christ. An argument, that Lord, and Christ, be Titles of his honour, and so cannot be lesse eminent than the name Jesus. Sixthly, It is against the Scriptures to preferre the name Jesus above other divine Titles, because God in subjecting all things to Christ, did yet except himselfe, 1 Cor 15. 27. And when the Scrip∣tures doe enter into particulars, Christs name is specified to be ad∣vanced onely above created names, as above Angels, 1 Pet. 3. 21. above Kings, Psal. 87. 27. above Prophets, Heb. 3. 3. above Priests, Heb. Chapters 7, 8, 9, 10. above all other creatures and things, Heb. 2. 8. His name is never preferred above Gods Name. Seeing then, that the Name above every Name, cannot be the name Jesus,Name above every Name, what it is. I understand it of the supereminent Glory and Power of Christ, and that upon these Reasons: First, It is no way contrary to the analogie of faith so to un∣derstand it; for Name is used for Glory and eminency familiarly in Scripture, as Gen. 11. 4. and in common use of speech, as we
say, Such a one hath a Name for wisdome and learning, when we note him to be eminent and potent for the same. Secondly, Name of God, &c. in Scripture doth commonly denote the Power, Majestie, and Glory of God; and that two wayes; Either implicitely, or expressely. 1. Implicitely, when the Person of God, because he is glorious, and full of Majestie, is onely denominated properly and evidently, as Psal. 5. 11. Let them that love thy Name be joyfull in thee, that is, Let them that love thee. So Psal. 9. 2. so Act. 3. 16. even as we say to great men according to their degrees of honour, Your Ma∣jestie, your Grace, your Honour. So accordingly the Saints of God have usually spoken of God, and to God, and Christ, in, and by the Title of his Majestie, (thy Name) because Name, Glory, and King∣dome are properly his. 2. Expressely; when the Power and Glory of God is particu∣larly and evidently manifested by the word Name; as 1 Sam. 17. 45. I come unto thee in the Name, that is, in the Power of the Lord of Hostes. So Rom. 9. 17. That my Name, that is, my Glory may be declared: So Act. 4. 7. By what power, or in what name. Thirdly, It is more agreeable to the Analogie of the Scrip∣tures so to understand it, than otherwise; for, first, a great Name doth every where signifie the great glory and dignitie of the Per∣son. Secondly, Name above another, doth every where signifie the Glory and Dignitie of the Person having that Name, above others whose names are not so great. Fourthly, It must be so understood here, and not for the Title Jesus, because in this sense it fits the words of the Text answerable to other correspondent Scriptures; for thus I reason: Whatsoever Name is the gift, which God gave Christ when he exalted him, is the Name above every Name in the Text: for so the words of the Text are, God highly exalted him, and gave him a name above every name. But Power and Glory is the Gift, which God gave Christ when he exalted him, according to these correspondent Scriptures Mat. 28 18. All power is given me in heaven and in earth; and 1 Pet. 1. 21. God raised Christ from the dead, and gave him glory. Ergo, Power and Glory is the Name in the Text above every Name, Therefore not the Name Jesus. Fifthly, It is proved by the scope and coherence of the Text; for there is opposed the exaltation of Christs Person to the humi∣liation
of his Person; not of the name Jesus to the name Jesus, or any one Title to another. The conjunction (Wherefore) declares a correspondency of Christs exaltation, according to the distinct branches of his humiliation. For the sufferings of Christ in the Text are reducible to two heads: The paine of feeling, and the paine of losse: The paine of feeling, in these words; He humbled himselfe, and became obedient unto death, even unto the death of the Crosse: The correspondent honour followes in these words; Wherefore God highly exalted him. The paine of losse, that is his de∣parture from his Name and Glory; which is amplified in two re∣spects. 1. In regard of the excellency of the Person, that left his Glory: He that was in the forme of God, and thought it no robbery to be equall with God, he became of no reputation: An extraordinary matter, that God should become Man, that the Lord of Lords should become a servant, that the God of Glory should receive shame. 2. It is amplified by the measure of the Glory which he laid downe; for the words are, , He emptied himselfe of his Name and Dignitie, He left as it were no Glory remaining, according to Isa. 53. 3. He became not onely man, but a servant, not a servant onely, but the most despised of all servants, for he was reviled from the Prince to the abject. 1 Cor. 2. 8. He was num∣bred with Theeves and Malefactors, Mat. 27. 38. He had a name of repute beneath all names and reputes; for Barrabas the murde∣rer was preferred before him, John. 18. 40. See now, how the Con∣junction , Wherefore, answereth to this; for it follows, God gave him a name above all names, that is, Power and dignitie above all created powers and dignities whatsoever. It answers expressely to the name of Power and Glory, not at all to the name Jesus. Thus then I argue: In respect of what Name Christ by this Text suffered in the time of his humiliation, in laying it downe, and emptying himselfe of it: in respect of that Name God his Father▪ when he exalted him, gave him a Name above every Name. But Christ according to this Text, in the time of his humiliation, suffered in respect of his repu∣tation and glory, in laying it downe, and emptying himselfe of it. Not so in respect of the name Jesus. Ergo, God his Father when he exalted him, gave him a name above every Name, according to this Text, in respect of glory and dignitie, not in respect of the name Jesus. It will thus therefore follow from the premises, that seeing the
Name Jesus is not the Name above every Name in the Text, it can∣not be the Name in which every knee should bow: and seing Christs Name of Power and Glory is that Name, all knees must bow in his Name of Power and Glory. SECTION 2. Wherein it is to be considered what is meant by the subjected Name, signified by (every name) which are referred to things in heaven, things in earth, and things under the Earth. SUndry Expositors doe referre these Names to rationall crea∣tures onely, but upon my poore judgement, yet submitting my selfe to better information, they are to be referred to every crea∣ture, and thing, both rationall, and irrationall, without excepti∣on of any. For it seemes to me, that the Kingdome of Christ set forth in this Text, is not onely his Kingdome of Mediatorship, but also his naturall Kingdome, which from all Eternitie he enjoy∣ed with his Father, to which Kingdome he is advanced to by his Father, according to his humane nature: and this seemes to agree with many paraled Scriptures; as 1. with John 17. 4, 5. where Christ prayeth after this manner; I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the worke that thou gavest me to doe: And now O Fa∣ther, glorifie me with thine owne selfe, with that glory which I had with thee before the world was. 2. It is proved from Heb. 1. 2. God hath in these last dayes spoken unto us by his Sonne, whom he hath made heire of all things, by whom also he made the worlds, that is, God hath ad∣vanced his Sonne, according to his humane nature, to be partaker of the Glory of his Divine nature, who made the worlds, and all things therein, now to be inheritour of all things. Therefore saith Mr Calvin on that place; Hic honor jure debetur, &c.Calvin on Heb. 1. 2. This honour is rightly due to the Sonne of God, that he should have power o∣ver all things, because by him all things were made. 3. It is con∣firmed from that paralell place of Col. 1. 15, 16. 4. It is evident from 1 Cor. 15. 27. where God having excepted himselfe, that did put all things under Christs feete, it is plaine, hath excepted nothing but himselfe. 5. It is manifest from Heb. 2. 6, 7, 8. in
which place the Apostle applyes the eight Psalme to Christ, where is specified the subjection of irrationall creatures; yea the Apostle saith expressely there, that God having put all things under Christs feete, hath excepted nothing that is not put under him. 6. Seeing that it is manifest, that this Text of Phil. 2. 9, 10. shall not be per∣fectly fulfilled till the day of Judgement, we shall finde that other things besides rationall creatures shall be subject at that day to Christ; for the Apostle shewes 1 Cor. 15. 26. that he shall destroy the last enemy, which is death; and Rev. 20. 13. The Sea shall give up the dead which are in her, and death and hell shall yeeld up the dead which are in them. 7. It may appeare from Rev. 5. 13. a place cor∣respondent in phrase and sense to Phil. 2. 9, 10. where the Holy Ghost having spoken before of all rationall creatures, how they praised Christ, speaks there of irrationall, both sensitive, and in∣sensitive, and referres them to every creature, in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, and in the Sea, which creatures groaning now and travelling in paine for the sinne of man, doe long for the day of redemption, at which time they shall be delivered from the bon∣dage of corruption, into the glorious libertie of the Sons of God, and now in their kinde they praise and glorifie Christ in hope of it, but at that day shall their fullest praise and subjection be. So that it seemes to me, that no creature, or thing, is excepted, but that all must bow to Christ, yea, indeed the Text of Phil. 2. 9 seemes to me plainly to inferre it, for the Apostle speaking of all knees of things in every part of the whole universe; as Heaven, Earth, and under the Earth, seemes to except nothing from bowing to Christ. And this appeares to be the judgement of Mr Calvin,On Phil. 2. 9, 10. Omnia à coelis, &c. God hath subjected all things from heaven to hell, to the rule and dominion of Christ: And of this opinion are plainly Origen and Hierome,In his work. Pag. 245, 246. as Bishop Babington cites them: and thus judgeth Mr Ed∣ward Gurnais in his Vindication of the Second Commandement, Pag. 72.
SECTION 3. Wherein it is to be examined, what is meant by bowing every knee. BOwing the knee cannot be here taken plainly and literally for the bowing of that member of the body,Bowing every knee, what it is not. which is called the knee; for these Reasons: First, If it be not so taken, it is not contrary to the Analogie of Faith; for, 1. Bowing is applyed to the soules of men, which properly cannot bow: Psal. 44. 25. Our soule is bowed downe to the dust: 2. It is applyed to mountaines and hilles, Hab. 3. 6. Secondly, Knees are taken figuratively and metaphorically in Scripture, for strength, power, and abilitie, as Ezech. 7. 17. where God threatens, that when he shall arise to destroy Jerusalem, he will make all hands to be feeble, and all knees to be weake as wa∣ter, that is, he will turne all their strength into extreame weaknes. So when God promiseth to give strength and salvation to his peo∣ple, He bids them to strengthen the weake hands and confirme the feeble knees:Isa. 35. 3. because by the hands and knees the strength is manife∣sted; the knees being as it were the Basis of the whole body, which being feeble, the body sinks. Thirdly, Because the most of the Creatures, which here must bow knees, yet have no proper knees to bow: As Angels, Devils, many sensitive, and all insensitive creatures. And seeing that the Apostle begins with things in Heaven, where in the highest Heaven are the Angels, and the soules of just men made perfect. In the se∣cond Heaven, Starres and coelestiall Orbes. In the lowest Heaven, mists, dewes, and clouds; it were senslesse to imagine, that God in the first place should command these to bow proper corporall knees, when they have no such knees to Bow: hence I argue: Whatsoever bowing is expresly required in the Text, shall be per∣formed by every creature. But bowing of proper corporall knees, shall not be performed by every creature; yea, not by most of the Creatures. Ergo. Bowing of proper corporall knees, is not expressely re∣quired in the Text.
The corporall Bowers at the Name Jesus, doe give this answer, which indeed cannot satisfie: They say that those creatures which have not corporall knees, yet have something correspondent to knees, and therefore doe bow after their kind and manner. I reply. 1. I would faine know how it is, that they bow after their kinde and manner, except it be by their obedience and subjection, will they nill they to the dominion of the Lord Jesus. 2. However they bow, surely they doe not bow corporall knees, therefore, if such bowing be expresly commanded in the Text, how shall they fulfill the Text. Seeing then that the most of the creatures can fulfill the Text without bowing corporall knees; it is manifest that bowing corporall knees is not expressely required in the Text. Surely it would argue want of wisdome in God, or great injustice, if he should command his creatures that dutie, which they cannot per∣forme. (To illustrate it by this simile) If a great King should send out an Edict to taxe every one of his Subjects both great and small, with a taxe of twentie pound a man, when he is not ignorant, that there are thousands in his Dominions, that are not able to pay twenty shillings a man, would not this argue want of wisdome and justice. In like manner, this would argue the like imputation in God, if he should injoyne all creatures and things to bow corpo∣rall knees, when the most of them have no such knees to bow. If it should be said that those Subjects of such a King cannot pay, where it is not, it is sufficient that they pay what they are able; but let them that are able, pay the whole summe. I answer, this had been reasonable; if the Kings command had been so, but how shall this excuse the King, that against his knowledge shall command all his Subjects to pay alike, as well those that are not able, as those that are? So to say in respect of this Bowing, let those that have no knees, pay what they can, but let those that have knees pay knees; It were faire indeed, if God should leave it so at libertie. But how can this at quit God of want of wisdome and justice, if he should command all creatures and things to bow corporall knees, when he knoweth that the most of his creatures, and things, have no such knees to bow. Seeing then that bowing of the knee cannot be taken literally, I understand it of subjection, and so it is taken, Gen. 27. 29. Thus Isaac blesseth Jacob, Let people serve thee, and Nations bow downe to thee, that is, let them be subject to thee. So Pro. 14. 19. &c So in common use of speech, when one saith to another, that he will
make him bow, he meaneth that he will make him yeeld. The same subjection is signified, Psal. 2. 12. by the word, Kisse, where Rulers and Judges are commanded to kisse Christ, that is, to yeeld their subjection to him. If then the word Kisse in that place, can∣not be taken properly but figuratively, why should it be thought unreasonable by any, to have bowing the knee here to be under∣stood figuratively? Now that bowing here is meant of subjection, many correspon∣dent places doe evidently prove it, as 1 Cor. 15. 27. Hb. 2. 8. Ephes. 1. 22. testified by the most judicious Primitive Fathers that write upon the said Text, as also by our most eminent moderne Divines, as that worthy and famous Confessor of Christ Master William Prin, largely evidenceth in his learned Appendix against bowing at the Name Jesus, to which I referre thee. By bowing every knee of things in Heaven, things in Earth, and things under the Earth, is understood the subjection of all things and creatures, with all and every one of their powers, faculties, vertues, and abilities, will they nill they to the dominion and government of Christ.Vindicationi of the second Commande∣ment. Pag. 72. There is not the least abilitie in the nature of man, saith Master Gurnay, but must finde a knee to bow to Christ; our least muscles, and knuckles, inclinations and dispositions: The like may be said of every creature, they must bow the strength they have in every part of them, to the power and dominion of Christ. And in this generall sense, the knee of the body properly so called, is not excluded; but in a proper and literall sense it is not injoyned. Secondly, It is to be considered what is meant by the confession of every tongue. By the confession of every tongue, is not meant properly and li∣terally the vocall confession of that member which we call the tongue, because every Name under Christs Name, which must bow the knee, must also confesse with the tongue, which for the most part want tongues as well as knees. By the confession with the tongue, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, is meant the expression and yeelding forth of the severall parts, functions, gifts, powers, and abilities of every creature, both ratio∣nall and irrationall, to the glory and praise of Christ the highest Lord. 1. That it is understood of all kinds of creatures, it is evi∣dent from the forequoted place of Rev. 5. vers. 10. where the foure Beasts, and the foure and twenty Elders, by whom are understood rationall creatures, as Angels and men are said to extoll and glori∣fie
Christ. And it follows verse 13. that John heard all the crea∣tures in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, and in the Sea; and all that are in them, to say, Praise, glory, and honour be to the Lambe, &c. which creatures there, are all irrationall creatures, which have no proper tongues to speake, and yet are said to speak the praise of Christ. Even as the Heavens and the Earth are said Psal. 19. 1, 2, 3. to speake in all languages the praise of God their Creatour. So now they shall praise Christ the great Lord and Re∣deemer. And secondly, that every part and parcell of the creature shall praise the Lord, it appeares from Psal. 103. 1, 2, 3. where the Prophet David calles upon his Soule, and all that is within him, that is, all the vigours and powers that are in every part of him, to praise the Lord. As David in every part of him praised God, and the Messiah to come, so shall every part of every creature ei∣ther willingly or unwillingly praise and extoll the great Name of the Lord Jesus being come and advanced; and in this generall sense the proper tongue of man is not excluded. And thus at the last day the Friends of Christ with their wills, and his enemies against their wills, shall call Christ Lord. Mat. 7. 22. Mat. 25. 37. 44. SECTION IV. Wherein it is to be considered what is meant by this phrase, In the Name of Jesus. THe Bowers at the Name Jesus, to make their opinion and pra∣ctise good, doe thus understand in the Name of Jesus to be at the mention of the Name Jesus. But I inferre, that this interpretation is sensles and absurd, having for it no ground or warrant from Scripture For 1. as I said before, this phrase, Name of Jesus, is never taken for the Name Jesus, or for any other Titles of our Sa∣viour. 2. Therefore, In the Name of Jesus, can never be taken for at the mention of the Name Jesus any where. 3. This phrase, in the Name, prefixed before any of the Titles of the Deitie, as in the Name of Christ, Lord, God, &c. is never taken for at the Naming of any of these Names in any part of the Old and new Testament, but if any shall fasten such a sense upon it any where, it will marre and murder the sense, as indeed it doth the sense of this Text by
that exposition. To instance but in two places amongst many. Psal. 118. 10. All Nations compassed me about, but in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them; would not it be a wilde sense to say, At the Naming of the Lord I will destroy them. So Act. 9. 29. Saul spake boldly in the Name of the Lord Jesus, were it not infinitely absurd to say, that he spake boldly at the Naming of the Lord Je∣sus. Thus ridiculous will the sense be made every where, where this phrase is used according to this exposition, try it who will. This exposition which they make of the Text is one of the maine pillars of their cause, which did they not make, they should loose a maine and principall ground for this their opinion and practise, and therefore this failing them all failes them. I know they are not able to bring any one Scripture for to warrant this exposition. They have no vision for it, therefore they are naked; It is built upon the loose Sand of vaine opinion, and not upon the Scriptures, therefore it falles to the ground. All the warrant they have for this exposition is this, that (in) doth often signifie (at) or (to) I answer, this is nothing, except they can bring any Scrip∣ture for the whole phrase, viz. that in the Name doth signifie (at the mention of the Name) which they cannot doe: For my part, I refuse not to take the Preposition () as they would have it ta∣ken, and so it shall make for me, and not for them: Let (in) be as much, as (to) or (at) and so, for as much as I have shewed before, that Name of God or Christ, doth denote the Power and glory of Christ, either expressely or implicitely, I take it, this phrase In the Name of Jesus, may be indifferently referred either to the Power and glory of Christ expressely, so the sense will be this: Every knee or Power shall bow at, or to the Power and Glory of Christ, or rather to the Person of Christ, implicitly enfolding his Power and Dominion; and then the sense will be this; Every knee shall bow at, or to Christ. And thus it agrees to this phrase in Psal. 63. 4. Thee will I blesse while I live, I will lift up my hands in thy Name, that is, I will lift up mine hands to thee, or I will worship and a∣dore thee; and agrees fitly also with Isa. 45. 23. which is applyed to Christ, Rom. 14. 11. As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me. So that according to the meaning of the Preposition (in) in their owne sense, the whole phrase being expounded ac∣cording to the Analogie of Faith, makes against them, and not as all for them.
SECTION V. THus having opened the Text, I will briefely gather the sense to∣gether, according as it hath been opened, and shew the meaning of the Text, and compare it to the exposition, which they make of it, and then let judgement passe upon it. The sense then will be this: Our Lord Jesus Christ being in the forme of God, equall with God, made himselfe of no reputation, (that is) laid downe his Name, and Dignitie, and received a Name beneath all Names, and being made like unto Man, and taking up∣on him the forme of a Servant, humbled himselfe to death, even to the death of the Crosse: Wherefore God highly exalted him, and gave him a Name above every Name, that is, Glory, Renowne, Dominion, and Dignitie, above all things, and creatures, created Powers, Dignities, Dominions, that all things, creatures, powers in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, should subject them∣selves, and all their strength, vertues, and abilities, either willing∣ly or unwillingly to Jesus Christ, thus glorified, and advanced, and that they should expresse, and shew forth, that Jesus Christ is Lord in the glory of God the Father, for so I take it that must be understood,  being often used for () and thus this branch of Christs exaltation will fully answer to that branch of his humiliation, mentioned verse 7. where it is said, that he tooke upon him the forme of a servant, and was made in the likenesse of Man, but now being exalted, he shall be manifested to be Lord in the Glory of God the Father. Which shall be fully declared in the great Day of Judgement, when he shall appeare in his Glorious Name of Power and Glory: And of this opinion are Ambrose, and Hierome, and other Fathers, and Calvin, and Zanchius, and Pisca∣tor, besides sundry other moderne Expositors doe allow of it: Though the other expositions be sound, viz. To the Glory of God the Father, because the honour of the Sonne is the honour of the Father. Now this exposition is full and easie, making the sense cleere, but the other exposition, which they make, makes the sense rug∣ged, and is not agreeable to the scope of the Text, nor sense of o∣ther correspondent Scriptures. For thus they reason; Jesus Christ being in the forme of God, though it no robbery to be equall with God, but made himself of no reputation, &c. Wherefore God
highly advanced him, and gave him a proper Name, or Title a∣bove every Name, that when the Name Jesus shall be sounded out in the Church, in the time of prayer or preaching, for there and then, say they, is the place and time of this dutie, all things in Hea∣ven, and Earth, and under the Earth, should bow corporall knees: A most absurd and sensles exposition. I will note here a few absur∣dities, which they make in the sense by this their interpretation, in comparison of the cleernesse of the former exposition, leaving the most materiall absurdities to be considered of hereafter. First then, To understand Name above every Name, for Glory and Power above all, hereby is evidently set downe, what Name it is, that God gave to Christ, viz. the Name of Power, and Glory. But to understand Name for a proper Name to be called by, it is not manifested what Name it is: they say, it is the Name Jesus, but the Text doth not say so in that phrase as they understand it. And expounding it of the Name Jesus, what absurditie is this to say, that God gave his Sonne that Name at his exaltation, when he received it at his Circumcision? This is to make God to dally with his Sonne: To give, and take, and to give againe; For it is plaine, that if now he had it given him, it was not then in his possession. Secondly, When we understand Name, for the Power, and Glo∣ry of Christ, and bowing of subjection to the Power of Christ, or to Christ himself advanced, it is shewed to whom this bowing shall be performed, viz. to Christ. But by understanding Name for the Name Jesus, and the bowing to be done at the sound thereof, they onely set downe a time, when the bowing shall be done, but they declare not to whom it shall be done: This they say, At the sound of the Name Jesus, every knee shall bow, but they doe not manifest the Person to whom these knees shall bow. Thirdly, In taking (in the Name of Jesus) to be at the mention of the Name Jesus, as they doe not plainly apply any honour to the Person, so neither to the Name; but it must stand but for a cypher, or watch-word, to give notice when the bowing shall be perfor∣med; but according to this their exposition they cannot give it any honour; and it is absurd to have this Name to be so highly ad∣vanced above all Names, and yet not to give it honour. But they will have honour to be given it, therefore they will have (in the Name) to be understood to the Name at the mention of it. And so Bishop Andrewes the Oracle of that opinion understands it, yet hereby is not the Person of Christ properly denominated, because
so the exposition referres the whole bowing to the Name, none at all to the Person, and themselves confesse, that to bow to the Name, and not to the Person, is Idolatry. But they say, it is done to the Person, by bowing to the Name. I reply. (to passe by the censure of such a kinde of worship; for so saith BishopIn his Works Pag. 245. Babington, an Idolater may excuse his Idolatry by this distinction of concomitancy) What they say is one thing, and how they expound the Text is another, according to their ex∣position of the Text, they cannot make that sense of it, except they adde to the Text, so that according to their owne grounds, they must make the worship either vaine or Idolatrous. No marvaile therefore that that judicious and learned Dr Whita∣kers reckoning up sundry absurd interpretations,In his Answer to Sanders de∣monstration concerning Antichrist. which the Pa∣pists make of the Scriptures, concludes with this their interpretati∣on of this Text, from whom our superstitious-Jesu-worshippers had it, as the most absurd and grossest of all; and no marvaile that famous BishopIn his Works Pag. 245. Babington, censures such to be justly given up of God to delusions, to beleeve lyes, because they will not search for truth. Now I come to handle sundry Arguments against bowing at the Name Jesus. SECTION VI. EVery true interpretation of a Text, especially an obscure Text, must be warranted by Scripture, speaking of the same matter, or in the same phrases. But to affirme that the Name Jesus in the Text of Phil. 2. 9, 10. is the Name above every Name, not onely created but divine, and that therefore we must bow at the sound of that Name, is not war∣ranted by any correspondent Scriptures, speaking often of the same matter: Or to expound these phrases, Name above Names, made or given, to be the advancement of a naked proper Name a∣bove such Names, or  the Name of Jesus, to be the Name Jesus, or , in the Name, to be at the sound of the Name. None of these expositions are warranted by Scripture, speaking of∣ten in the same phrases. Ergo. Not one of these expositions which these superstitious Jesu-worshippers make the ground of their opinion and practise, is a trve exposition.
Let the Minor be disproved if it can. The Major is proved from Rom. 12. 6. If any Prophesie, let him prophesie according to the proportion of faith. So 2 Pet. 1. 20. No Scrip∣ture hath any private interpretation. It is an infallible rule set downe by Divines for the understanding of the Scriptures. Thus saith learned Zanchius;Zanchius de Scripturâ, Pag. 422. Altera interpretandi Scripturas regula est, &c. Another Rule, saith he, of interpreting the Scriptures, is a dili∣gent and accurate comparing of the Scriptures, which are of the same thing one with another, that is, that we expound the more obscure Scriptures by those that are more evident and cleere; for the Scripture is an interpreter of it selfe, than which a better cannot be found.Aug. de Do∣ctrinâ Chri∣stianâ. And this saith Austine, Non ita esse interpretan∣dum unum locum, ut cum multis alijs pugnet, sed ut cum multis alijs consentiat, We must not so understand one place that it disagree with many others, but that it agree with many others. This then their interpretation above mentioned, agrees with no place, but disagrees with all; it is therefore none of Gods Truths. SECTION VII. VVHatsoever Bowing is required by the Text, shall be neces∣sarily performed by every creature in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth. But Bowing at the Name Jesus, shall not be performed by every Creature in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth. Therefore Bowing at the Name Jesus, is not required by the Text. The Minor is plaine, for to omit now to speake of Angels, De∣vils, and dumbe creatures, Bowing at the Name Jesus shall not be performed by the most men, for many Nations know not Christ, therefore cannot so bow all their life; famous Churches do not so bow. If this then be the true bowing, I would faine know, how, and at what time they shall performe it, that in this life performe it not. To deny the Major is absurd; for the Text is plaine, that Christ is advanced to so high a Name, that every creature should bow to him in that name. 2. It is such a bowing, as there is also a demon∣stration that Christ is Lord, therefore if any creature shall be ex∣empted
from the bowing in the Text, Christ should not be their Lord, which would be derogatory to Christs honour, and contrary to evident Scriptures; as, Mat. 28. 19. where all Power is given Christ, in Heaven, and Earth. And Heb. 1. 2. where Christ is cal∣led Heire, that is, Lord of all things. Whereas then some answer that though every one shall not bow at the Name Jesus, yet every one is bound to doe it, they ought to performe it. I reply, if that bowing be the duty of the Text, every one of necessitie must and shall doe it. To affirme then, that the dutie of the Text should be done of all, though it shall not, is all one as to affirme that Christ should be Lord of every creature, and it behoveth him so to be, though he shall not. If then bowing at the Name Jesus shall not be performed of all, it is manifest, it is not required by the Text; for all Expositors hold generally, that the Text shall willingly or unwil∣lingly be fulfilled of all. SECTION VIII. VVHatsoever Bowing is required by the Text, shall be per∣formed by every creature at the day of Judgement. But bowing at the Name Jesus shall not be performed by every creature at the day of Judgement. Therefore bowing at the Name Jesus, is not required by the Text. The Major is confirmed by evident paralell Scriptures, as, Rom. 14. 10, 11. Why doest thou judge and condemne thy brother. We shall all appeare before the Judgement seate of Christ: As it is written, Eve∣ry knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confesse to me. So Heb. 2. 8. The Apostle affirming there, That all things are put in subjecti∣on to Christ, yet saith, We doe not yet see all things put under him, that is, perfectly, which perfection shall not be till the last day. The Jews shall then fully be subject to him, that now scorne him. Infidels shall then perfectly be subdued to him, that now know him not. Devils and Reprobates, shall then feele their fullest destruction.1 Cor. 15. 26. Death shall then fully bow, being overcome in regard of the Saints, and it be∣ing in its fullest vigour in regard of Christs enemies. The Saints shall then wholly bow, yeelding themselves perfectly to the honour of Christ, which now they cannot doe by reason of corruption
Rev. 20. 13. Hell and the Grave, shall then bow by yeelding up their dead. But what need I further illustrate this Truth, it is generally ac∣knowledged by the most and best Expositours, both ancient and moderne. Confessed also by the Champions for bowing at the Name Jesus, asSerm. on Phil. 2. 9, 10. Bishop Andrewes, andPage 48. Mr Page, who in his Treatise of Justification of Bowing, understands the Text of the generall subje∣ction of all Creatures to Christ at the great day of Judgement, and is forward to alledge many Authors for it, as Theophilact, Anselme, Aquinas, Illyricus, Hunnius, and Hyperius, Salmeron, Zanchius, and Estius, and tels us that he could cite twice as many more, if he pleased. The Major therefore is undeniable. For the Minor, I never read any yet in Print to affirme, that we shall all bow at the Name Jesus at the day of Judgement. Master Page indeed coasteth towards it, but speaks not out plainly. For thus he answereth the Argument taken from the day of Judgement: Iustification of Bowing, Pag. 95. & alibi. Though all shall be subject to Christ then, yet shall not we be subject before we needs must? and declare our subjection by our bowing at the Name of Jesus; for subjection doth not exclude but include bowing. It shall be true of all knees then, but it must be verified of some knees now. I agree with him in this, that there is a present equitie of the Text: I consent to Mr Calvin, who saith, that though the King∣dome of Christ be not prefect till the day of Judgement, yet it is begun already, and encreaseth dailyRegnii Chri∣sti crescit in dies, perfectio vero non con∣stabit ante ul∣timum diem. Calv. in Phil. 2. 9, 10.. Christ hath now all things under his feete, and all Creatures are at his Rule and becke, and must and shall fulfill, not their owne will, but the will of Christ, though they shall not be perfectly subdued till the last day. But yet Master Pages inference is not to the purpose, for to affirme that because we must be all subject to Christ at the day of Judgement, therefore we must declare our subjection by bowing at the Name Jesus; is all one as to affirme, because servants must be subject to their Masters, that they must shew their subjection by bowing at their Masters Name; or because wives must be subject to their husbands, therefore they must make a cursie at the Name of their Husbands. But if Master Page will speake to the purpose, he must say thus; Because all creatures shall declare their subjection by bowing at the Name Jesus at the last day, accordingly we must now witnes our subjection. This in∣ference is right, if he can prove his ground; but that lyes upon the proofe: Of necessitie our present bowing must be according to the future; the parts must be according to the whole; the prefect bowing
must regulate the imperfect; therefore if bowing at the Name Jesus shall not be performed at that day, it concernes none so to bow now. Some to whom I have put this Argument, and finding it too hot for them, stand to it to affirme that bowing at the Name Jesus shall be fulfilled at the day of Judgement, but they cannot prove it other∣wise than by seeking shelter at this Text.Affirmanti in∣cumbit proba∣tio. If any such assertion shall ever come in Print, I am confident that every judicious Reader will smile at it, if not grieve to see the wilfulnes of such men, that rather than they will yeeld to the truth, will justifie such dangerous Para∣doxes. I will therefore by Gods assistance encounter with it, and I thinke I shall upon better reasons disprove it, than they can ever prove it. First, There is no Scripture for it, and it is in no wise to be ima∣gined, that so many cleere Scriptures speaking so fully and plainly of the Judgement-day, and of the deportment of those that shall then appeare, should say nothing of this ceremony of bowing at the name Jesus, if it were then to be done. Secondly, To what end shall the Name Jesus be sounded out at that day, that all shall bow at the sound of it? When he shall then ap∣peare in his most glorious Name of Power, and Glory; when he shall not come as a Jesus to the most that shall then bow, but a Lord to all, and so shall all call him. Mat. 25. 37. 44. Thirdly, It is absurd to imagine that the Holy Ghost would de∣scribe the perfection of Christs Kingdome, onely by such a gesture as a childe can performe at the mention of his Father. Fourthly,On Phil. 2. 9, 10. Bishop Andrewes the late Father of the corporall bow∣ing at the Name Jesus, will confute it by a saying of his. He is ex∣alted, to whose Person knees doe bow; His Person is taken out of our sight, all that we can doe, will not reach to it, but his Name he hath left behinde him to us, that we may shew by our reve∣rence and respect to it, how much we esteeme him. If then we must now bow to the Name, because the Person of Christ is out of our sight; then it followes that when Christ shall manifest his Person, there will be no time, or place, for bowing at the Name. (But by the Bishops reason, seeing he acknowledgeth the fulfilling of the Text at the day of Judgement, it will follow that Christ shall send out his Name at that day, to have it sounded out, that all should bow at it, and not come himselfe in Person, or else if then he come in Person, he must leave his Name behinde him, and so the duty of the
Text shall not be fulfilled. Againe, It is very absurd to affirme that our worship will reach to the Name, but not to the Person of Christ; for shall veneration and honour reach to a bare Name as it is sounded out by the breath of man, who is lesse than nothing? Isa. 40. 17. And can no worship reach to the Person, who besides that he is in the glory of the Father in the heavens as man, also is every where present by his infinite Deitie, and especially present in and a∣mong his Saints by his Spirit?) Names be signes, and a kinde of images of things or Persons re∣presented by them. An Idolater bowes to an image, which he doth see, because he deemes that it represents unto him the Person, whom he adores, which he cannot see; whereas if the Person were present before him, he would never bow to the Image. The Name Jesus is as it were the signe or image of our Saviour, it would be therefore worse than Idolatry it selfe to bow to Christs image efore his owne face. If any shall yet inferre, that though all other Scriptures say no∣thing for the bowing at the Name Jesus at the Judgement day, yet it is enough that it be specified in one Text, as (viz.) in this pre∣sent Text of Phil. 2. 9, 10. I answer, It is utterly against reason to imagine, that if bowing at the Name Jesus were to be done at the Judgement day, that the Holy Ghost would omit to specifie it in so many cleere places, treating of the Judgement day, and would set it downe in an obscure Text (that treats not plainly of the Judge∣ment day, but as it must be enlightned by other cleere Scriptures) and that in such words, and phrases, that are different in sense to all those words and phrases in other Scriptures, though often therein used. Oh! It highly concerns us in season to provide Oyle in our Lamps, that we may meet Christ with comfort at that great day, and not to be like children,Bish Babing∣ton in his Works, Pag. 246. (as Bishop Babington well notes) playing with letters, and syllables, and adoring Titles with that honour, which is due to the Person. It is Sathans Policy to exercise men with trifles, that he may steale away their hearts from that which is necessary, as wofull experience proves too true in such as are addi∣cted to this will-worship. To this I will subjoyne two other Ar∣guments. Whatsoever bowing is required by the Text, shall not be fully perfected till the day of Judgement. But bowing at the Name Jesus may be fully perfected before,
for many can now make a perfect low curtesie at the sound of that Name, even almost to the ground. Ergo. Bowing at the Name Jesus, is not required by the Text.The bowing which the Saints shall performe at the day of Iudgement, is their perfe∣ction, for then the image of God shall be perfectly re∣stored to them. Hence it will follow, that if bowing at the Name Iesus be that bowing, seeing the Saints in this life must strive toward perfe∣ction, that all their striving must be, how to make the fairest Cursies at the Name Jesus. Whatsoever bowing is required in the Text, is already begun by every creature, as I have proved before. But corporall bowing at the Name Jesus, is not practised in the least degree by the most of the creatures. Ergo. This bowing is not required in the Text. SECTION IX. VVHatsoever exposition of a Text will inferre an inequa∣litie of worship between the three Persons of the Trini∣tie is false. But so to expound the Text, as before-mentioned, will inferre an inequalitie of worship between the three Persons of the Trinitie. Ergo. It is a false Exposition. The Major is plaine, because the three Persons being coequall, ought to have a coequall worship, agreeable to John 5. 23. Every one must honour the Sonne as they honour the Father. The Minor is plaine, for they by their exposition of the said Text of Phil. 2. 9, 10. doe inferre a bowing at one of the Titles of the Sonne, which they doe not practise at the Titles of any other Person. The answer given to this reason is twofold. First they affirme, that they worship all alike in Spirit and Truth, and that the word , translated (even as) in Iohn 5. 23. doth intend onely a true∣nes of worship, not every way an equall correspondency. I reply, that the Persons being equall, must have an equall worship; and the word , must be there taken for the selfe-same worship in likenes and kinde, because praise and glory and honour is due to God, Rom. 11. last. If to God, then to every Person in Trinitie, because every Per∣son is God. We are to serve God with our bodies, as well as with our soules; outward honour is true honour as well as that which is inward. If then all honour both outward and inward be to be done to God, not any honour must be performed to one Person, that must not be performed to another; therefore if we be bound to honour the Sonne by bowing at his Name, we are also bound to
honour the Father by bowing to his, but if we be not bound so to honour the Father, neither are we so bound to honour the Sonne. For the exposition of the word , (even as) in Iohn 5. inquam i. . pari eodem planè honore, quo & omnes patrem hono∣rant, & paulo ante. Zan∣chius saith thus; Even as they honour the Father, that is, (I say) saith he, with the like selfe-same honour plainly, wherewith all honour the Father: and a little before▪ To whom, saith he, an equall,Quibus aequa∣lis imo modis omnibus idem, debetur honor. Zanchius de tribus Elohim parte priore. l. 4. c. 2. p. 93. yea every way the selfe-same honour is due. Secondly, They answer, that they doe not put a difference be∣tween the Three Persons, for by bowing at the Name Jesus, they worship all the three Persons in one, because they cannot be divi∣ded. I reply: Though they cannot be divided, yet they may be distinguished, and that in their worship too; else that place of John were to no purpose. Saint Steven calls upon Christ personally, and distinctly, Act. 7. 59. So doth St Paul upon the Father, Ephes. 3. 14. And the distinct Names of each Person, doe not personally de∣note the other Persons; as when I say, I beleeve in God the Father, I doe not in that Article say, I beleeve in God the Sonne. If then these men say, that they honour every Person alike personally at the Name Jesus, which they must say, if they say any thing, they confound the Persons: For the Person of the Father is not in the Person of the Sonne, nor the Person of the Sonne in the Person of the Father, &c. but the Persons are distinguished: Every Person is in one Divine Essence, and the whole Essence in every Person: There∣fore the Name Jesus being a proper Name to the Second Person, and not the Name of the first, or Third Person, cannot denominate, but onely the Second Person. And it is plaine, that the Name above e∣very Name in the Text, is onely proper to the Second Person, be∣cause the Second Person onely was humbled, therefore the Second Person onely received this Name. From whence I agrue, looke as the Sonne is personally honoured, so must the Father be. But the Sonne is Personally honoured by bowing at his Name. Ergo. So must the Father be. Or the Father is not Personally ho∣noured by bowing at his Name. Therefore the Sonne must not be so honoured. I grant that the honour of the Sonne, is essentially the honour of all the three Persons, because every Person is the selfe-same God; according to Joh. 5. 24. But here the Question is of the Persons, not of the Essence: But let us reason from the Essence it makes against them. They that honour the Sonne, as they honour the Father, must
so honour the Sonne in the Father, as they honour the Father in the Sonne. But when they honour the Son in the Father, they doe not bow at the Name of the Father. Therefore when they honour the Fa∣ther in the Sonne, they must not bow at the Name of the Sonne; for if they doe, how doe they honour the Sonne, as they honour the Father. SECTION X. GOD will not require that dutie of any of his creatures, to whom he hath not created Power of performance: I say crea∣ted, to prevent an Objection. But if corporall bowing at the Name Jesus, be injoyned of God to all the creatures, he should require that of the most of his creatures, to whom he hath not created power of performance. Therefore it is none of Gods injunctions. The first part of the Argument cannot be denied without blas∣phemy, by imputing crueltie to Almightie God. The second part is also very plaine. For what power have meere sensitive and insensitive creatures, to bow at the Name Jesus, as sheepe, and oxen, stones, and minerals, trees, and plants; which neither have knees to bow, eares to heare, hearts to understand when Jesus is named. What, shall not these be subject to Christ, till Jesus be named? or shall it be greater then, than at another time? how sensles will this be? The true bowing, which is the bowing of sub∣jection, as I have shewed, is already performed in some degree, by all the creatures together at once. But bowing at the Name Jesus, cannot be done by all at once; suppose we understand it onely of rationall creatures; For how can the Angels, and glorified Saints, understand when Jesus is named on Earth? How can we on Earth heare, when Jesus is named in Heaven? How can those under the Earth know, when Jesus is named in Heaven or Earth? How can those in Heaven and Earth know, when Jesus is named in Hell; or could it be known, were it fit then to bow? Yea, how can we heare, when Jesus is named in another Congregation? But grant it be re∣ferred to one particular place, how can it be done? How shall things in Heaven bow at the Name Jesus, when they have the Person of
Christ with them, which by Bishop Andrewes assertion, before spe∣cified, would be unseasonable to be then performed. How shall deafe men bow at the Name Jesus, who cannot heare it pronounced? What, shall not they fulfill the Text as well as o∣thers? Seeing no creature is excepted. Is not Christ Lord of them as well as of others? How shall young Infants bow at the Name Je∣sus, to whom Gods Kingdome belongs as to others? How shall things in hell bow at the Name Jesus? To speake first of Devils, which come into our Congregations, how if they had knees, shall they bow at the Name Jesus? These Devils tremble, say some, because of Jesus, but trembling is not bowing. 2. Shall they tremble more at the Name Jesus, than Christ, or Jehovah? It were sensles to imagine it. How shall the damned Soules in Hell bow at the Name Jesus? After what manner shall Jesus be named in hell? There is no Church there, no divine service there, which is the place and season, these men say, of this bowing. There is nothing in hell, but blaspheming, what shall they blaspheme, and then bow, if they had bodies? most ridiculous; What shall they not fulfill the Text in hell, and be under Christs power, untill Jesus be named? then they might ease their torment by forbearing the mention of that Name; Seeing in hell they can doe nothing but blaspheme, how shall they Bow? The Bowers at the Name Jesus doe maintaine,Page Iustifica∣tion of bowing that when men sweare by Jesus, it is no time and place for bowing; yet the worst manner of naming Jesus on earth, is better than the best in hell; therefore there is no time and place for it in hell; yet must things in hell fulfill the Text; therefore it cannot be the meaning of the Text, to bow at the Name Jesus. SECTION XI. THe aforesaid exposition of the said Text, will make us serve God in bondage. Therefore it is an untrue and false Exposition. The Consequent is plaine, for Christ hath brought us to liber∣tie, and made us free, Gal. 5. 1. in which freedome we are comman∣ded to stand fast. That it will bring us againe into bondage it is plaine, for it will tye the service of God to every mans will, be they never so vile, for
whensoever Jesus is named by whomsoever, if this exposition be true, we must bow; yea therefore it will bring guilt of sin upon the soules of every one, that shall at any time heare this Name Jesus na∣med, and not bow. By this meanes Christ shall bring us into grea∣ter bondage, than the bondage of the Ceremoniall Law, from which he delivered his Church. To this I will subjoyne another Argu∣ment. It will bring the Spirt of God into bondage. Therefore it is a wicked opinion. I prove it from John 3. 8. The winde bloweth where it listeth, i. e. The Spirit of God worketh when and where he pleaseth, and not at our pleasure. All the holy actions of a Chri∣stian are wrought by the Holy Ghost, therefore by this exposition, the worke of the Holy Ghost will be enthralled to the will of every man, yea of vile men also. The answer which they give to this, hath no weight in it; they make use here of this Rule; Praecepta affirmativa, &c. Affirmative Precepts doe alwayes binde, but not to all times. Therefore say they, we are not bound to doe it but when the Church orders it, viz. In time of Divine Service and Sermons. I reply, this rule holds in those Precepts, the time of performance whereof is not determi∣ned in the Word, but it cannot hold in this place; For as these men expound the Text, the time is appointed when this bowing shall be performed, viz. At the mention of the Name Jesus. Therefore it is a sinne at any time to name it, or heare it named, and not to bow. Gods unlimited Commands cannot be limited, therefore the Church limiting it to a time, could not ground it on Gods Command. The Name Jesus is the same Name at one time, or place, as at another. It cannot be proved in the whole booke of God, but when God determined a time of doing any thing, but that it bound ordinarily at that time. When a Master shall say to his servant, At my calls you shall answer, and give attendance. When his Master shall call, and he give no attendance, is not he disobedient? Would it be a good excuse for him to tell his Master, That he is not bound to waite up∣on him, but onely at the Table? So if God shall say; At the sound of the Name Jesus you shall bow; when they heare it often mentio∣ned, and will not bow, doe they not breake Gods command? Will it be a tolerable excuse to plead, that they are not bound to doe it, but onely at Church. When Nebuchadnezzar made a Decree, Dan. 3 that at the sound of the Cornet, Sackbutt, &c. all should fall downe and worship, did not he intend, that this command should binde at all times, when these
Instruments should be sounded out? And did not the people of the Land judge Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, to be transgres∣sours of the Kings Commandement, when having heard the sound they did not bow: So if God should say, At the sound of the Name Jesus, you shall all bow. It is a manifest breach of the Comman∣dement, when at any time it is heard, and no bowing performed. Therefore when Gods commandement is plaine, and unlimited, and they say, the Church must limit it, they give the Church au∣thoritie over Gods Word. They cannot deny but they must be al∣wayes internally reverent at the Name Jesus, according to the third Commandement, which injoynes inward reverence at all times, when we mention any of Gods Titles, or else Gods Name shall be taken in vaine. If then expression of outward reverence at the Name Je∣sus, be also Gods command, it must be performed at all times when it is mentioned, or else the Name Jesus will be profaned, un∣lesse they will have the Precepts of the Gospell lesse obligatory and binding, than the Precepts of the Law. They may therefore with as good reason affirme, that we are not bound to be internally reve∣rent at all times, when we mention the Name Jesus, or any other divine Titles, but onely in the Church, as not to expresse outward reverence at all times when the same Name is mentioned, but onely there. Secondly, I reply. If we are not bound to performe the dutie of the Text, but by direction and command from the Church. By what authoritie shall the damned in hell doe it, who must yet fulfill the Text as well as we? there is no Church-government in hell, or will they have them doe it by direction from the Canon; into what unspeakeable snares doe these men run into by this opinion?Surely Devils and reprobates will be behol∣ding to these men, if they can make their opinion good, for unlesse they should fulfill the Text they should not be damned, and they have no canon to make them to doe it, and they are very fooles if they will make a Canon t damne thselves. Againe, they make the Church a perpetuall Person, and the du∣tie never to be ended by this their exposition; For these two clau∣ses, of bowing the knee, and confession with the tongue, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, are coupled together by a conjunction copulative, as du∣ties to be done together, both must be done in the Name of Jesus; Therefore as they understand (at the Name Jesus) and understand∣ing bowing the knee plainly, and properly, they must of necessitie un∣derstand confession with the tongue, that Jesus Christ is Lord plainly also, and literally. See then what worke they will make of it. The Naming of Jesus, will call for a bowing of the knee at the sound of it, & also at that time a vocall confession with the tongue, that Jesus is the Lord. In which confession, Jesus being againe na∣med,
will call for a new bowing & confession, and so it will come over and over againe, never to be ended: this snare they cannot possibly avoyd by their so expounding the Text. SECTION XII. VVHatsoever Exposition of a Text shall diminish, weaken, and Eclipse the Glory and Majesty of Christs Kingdome is false, blasphemous, and abominable. But the aforesaid Exposition doth so. I will prove that it doth in sundry respects. First, When we understand Name above every Name, for the Power and Dominion of Christ over all creatures, and things; by this Exposition the high Dignitie of Christ, specified in these words; God highly exalted him; is amplified, and enlarged; and thus it answers other Scriptures, as Ephes. 1. 20, 21. where in the twentie verse, the high honour of Christ is set downe in these words; He raised him from the dead, and set him at his right hand in heavenly places; which words answers to these words in Phil. 2. 9. God highly exalted him. Then it follows, vers. 21. Far above all principalities and powers, and every name that is named; which is a farther amplification of Christs Honour: and fitly answers this phrase in Eph. 1. 21. God gave him a Name above every Name. Againe, This answers patly to Daniels advancement, who was a type of Christ, Dan. 2. 48. Where it is said, that the King made Daniel a great Man, and gave him great gifts; which is as much as if he had said according to the words of Phil. 2. 9. He highly exal∣ted him. Then it follows, that he made him Ruler over the whole Pro∣vince of Babylon, and chiefe of the Governours of all the wise men in Babylon; which is an amplification of Daniels honour, and it is as much, as if it had been said, he gave him a Name above all the Names of the wise men in Babylon. On the other side: By understanding Name above every Name, for the title Jesus, the honour of Christ is rather diminished; for they give him in effect no Dominion and Power at all; for his pro∣per Name Iesus, which others had as well as he, doth not properly denote Power and Authoritie; but his Power consists in his com∣mand and dominion over all, as he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. 16.
Secondly, The Text according to the true meaning thereof, makes Christ Lord of every creature, from whose government and dominion, none can be exempted. The other Exposition robs Christ of the honour and dutie of the most of his creatures, which cannot possibly performe their dutie to Christ, as they understand it; as I have proved; so that it makes Christ Lord but of a few of the Creatures, who is Lord of all. Thirdly, The Text truly understood gives to Christ the honour of every knee. Christ will have all the abilities of every part and parcell of every creature to bow to him: every knee of every facul∣ty of the soule, and part of the body must bow: he will be honou∣red with all our strength. Now whereas Christ will have all knees, they give him onely by this exposition, the knee of the body pro∣perly so called, or a low curtesie, and no more.A mightie purchase in∣deed Christ shall have ob∣tained by this exposition, af∣ter his extream humiliation and suffering, to have no∣thing but a ceremony done him at the mention of his Name, as these men call it, & distinguish it from a substan∣tiall and neces∣sary duty. Page Iustifica∣tion of bow∣ing. pag. 6. 7. If it be a cere∣mony to us, it is also a cere∣mony to all the creatures: no marvaile then if these men affect ce∣remonies so much, seeing they by their doctrine doe make every creature, yea all Angels and glorified Saints, to be altogether in practising a Ceremony. Fourthly, The Text in the true meaning thereof injoynes the bowing therein at all times and places: every creature will they nill they are subject to Christ, and we are bound to bow continually all our strength, all our gifts and endowments, all our naturall and spirituall abilities, as faithfull servants to the will, dominion, and pleasure of Christ our highest Lord. The other exposition tyes this dutie not to every place, but to one place, viz. The Temple; and not at all times, but onely one day in a weeke ordinarily, The Lords day, and not at all times in the said day, but onely then when Iesus is named, which amounts in all but to a few minutes in a weeke; So that they will make Christ Lord but for a few minutes in one day of a weeke: It is a poore honour that they will allow to Christ from this Text, and indeed, it is all that the most of them can af∣ford him, or are willing to give him, allow him two or three cur∣tefies once in a weeke, and all their time else dishonour him by their scandalous lives. Fifthly, Whereas Christ is Lord and King, especially of his Church, which amongst men are onely his true and faithfull sub∣jects, for whose sake he will bring downe all adversary Power; this their exposition robs Christ of his true Subjects, and thrusteth upon him, for the most part, the members of Antichrist. For the most famous Divines of all times, and of all Churches, are against the said exposition. The best Churches and Christians, because they understand Gods Word, practise it not, and who doe practise it as a dutie of the Text, (a few simply mislead onely excepted) but a sort of ignorant, superstitious, lewd scandalous persons, or meere
men-pleasers, and servers of the times; which are enemies to Christ, yet this opinion forceth these on Christ, to be his true subjects, and thrusteth going his owne people, purchased with his blood; and what an unspeakeable indignitie is this to Christ?If a ceremony be the sole ho∣nour due to Christ by this Text, & done him onely ge∣nerally by such as these, surely then God hath highly advan∣ced his Sonne to a very great purpose. Sixthly and lastly, The opinion of these men deprives Christ of his honour and glory at the great day of Judgement. For. 1. It puts no difference between his kingdome now begun, and his king∣dome made perfect; for by their exposition of the Text, they can∣not avoyd it, but that they must make the bowing at the Name Ie∣sus, to be the true bowing at the great day of Judgement, as I shew∣ed before. And 2. What an abasement will this be of Christs honour at that great day: For whereas he shall then appeare in his great and glorious Name of Power and Glory, accompanied with his Mightie Angels in flaming fire,2 Thes. 1. 7. who shall then yeeld unto him their fullest service and subjection, which is the bowing, that they shall willingly performe unto him at that day; To the end that he may make all his enemies to tremble, that they shall licke the dust, and become his foot-stoole, give them a full and finall overthrow; thrust them into the bottomles pit, which is the bowing in the Text, which they shall performe to Christ against their wills; and that he may wholly free his Saints from the corruption of their natures, and renue them perfectly, according to his image, and reward them with everlasting blisse and happines, which is the bowing that they shall willingly yeeld unto him;Rom. 8. 22. and that he may renue the creature, which now groanes, and travaileth in paine by reason of mans sin. This their exposition makes it to be nothing else but aSeeing these men hold it not necessary to obey the Text, but by direction of a Canon. I wonder what they will doe for a Canon to command the Ceremony at the day of Iudgement. Ceremony, a corporall bowing at the title Jesus, which will be a poore honour to Christ, a poore affrightment to his enemies, a poore advancement to his Friends. It will make this glorious day of the Lord, to have no glory in it; yea, it will make Christs kingdome in the height and perfection of it, to be but a ridiculous mock-kingdome; such a kingdome in effect as his enemies ascribed to him, Mat. 27. 29. Who platted a crowne of thornes, and put it on his head, and bowed the knee before him, and mocked him. Yea these in some sort deale worse with him than they, for they dealt thus with him in his extreame humiliation; but these doe it in the greatest height and perfection of his Kingdome. This opinion therefore darkneth, diminisheth, yea overthroweth the kingdome of Christ, therefore it is a blasphe∣mous opinion, not to be endured.
SECTION XIII. THe bowing at the Name Iesus, is neither typified nor prophe∣sied of in the old Testament, therefore it is no way probable, that it is a due honour to Christ in the new Testament. The Consequent is proved by these places, Act. 10. 43. Act. 3. 24. What is there any thing materiall concerning Christ, but it was fore-shewed? Yea,Mat. 5. 18. the Law hath jots and Titles concerning Christ; small matters of him were foretold;Hos. 11. 1. as his flying into Egypt; his bringing up at Nazareth;Mat. 2. 23. his birth at the Towne of Bethlehem; the Souldiers casting Lots for his Garments;Mich. 5. 2. the not breaking of his bones. But this honour in the Text,Psal. 22. 18. is the honour of Christs kingdome, which in∣deed is foretold according to the true meaning of the Text,Num. 9. 12. as Psal. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Is. 45. 23. But whereas all other ho∣nours concerning Christ, both externall and internall, are fore∣told, corporall bowing at his Name is not foretold: and seeing jots and titles concerning Christ are foreshewed, and bowing at the Name Jesus (if it were the Evangelicall honour of Christ) not fore∣told, it would lay an high imputation on the Majestie of God, and impute that crime to Gods charge, that our Saviour justly laid to the charge of the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 23. Who tithed Mint and Cum∣min, and neglected the weightier matters of the Law. SECTION XIV. THere is no example for bowing at the Name Iesus in the whole New Testament, therefore it is not probable, that it is a com∣manded dutie. The consequent is plaine; for what necessary dutie is there, but there is sufficient light in Scripture, that it was practi∣sed. We reade of the often meeting of the Church together in the New Testament, of their Prophesyings & Prayers, with the severall gestures of them; but there is not the least intimation in the Scrip∣ture, that ever bowing at the Name Jesus was practised. As there must be offences for the hardening of the wicked, so God will have Examples for the benefiting of his people,Mat. 18. 7. and for the leaving the wicked without excuse. The Apostle saith 1 Cor. 6. 2. That the
Saints shall judge the world, that is one way of their judging of them by their vertuous examples. God was ever mindfull, that there should be examples, Iohn 13. 15. Phil. 2. 5. 1 Thes. 1. 7. 2 Thes. 3. 9. 1 Tim. 4. 12. The Apostle having spoken Heb. 11. of the faith of Gods Worthies, and of the singular fruits thereof, concludes Heb. 12. 1. Seeing there is such a cloud of witnesses, let us run with patience the race that is set before us. There are a cloud of witnesses for other duties, not one witnes for this bowing; What, will God have us run in other duties, and stand still in this, it is impossible, if it were of his appointment? Seeing then there is neither example, nor shew of example in the whole Booke of God, for bowing at the Name Iesus, it is a strong convincing Argument, that it is none of Gods appointment. SECTION XV. THis opinion and practise was not knowne in the purest of anci∣ent times, yea it was not knowne within seven hundred yeares after Christ. I might goe yet a great way further, as some doe. It is the usuall wont of these men, to boast, that generally all the Fathers are on their side, whereby they deceive poore simple soules. But they must not thinke to carry it away with big words of osten∣tation, but they must prove what they say, and not bring halting proofes,On Phil. 2. 9, 10. but full to the purpose. Generally, saith Zanchy, the Fa∣thers doe understand the Name above every Name, either of the Name of God, or the Name of the onely begotten Sonne of God, and some of Christs Glory; how then could they expound the Text, as these men do: If three or foure Fathers may be brought to make the Name Iesus the Principall Name; which are either not the most ancient, or most orthodox; they are nothing to the generall streame of the other, more ancient, or more orthodoxe, that doe not make the Name Iesus the principall Name: Yet these three or foure as Master Page confesseth, doe not say that adoration must be done at the sound of the Name Jesus; yea he affirmes, that there is no full authoritie for bowing at the Name Iesus from the Fathers. Some Divines doe conjecture, that this custome was brought up first to testifie Christs divinitie against Arrius, but they neither prove it, neither can they; and if it were so, it overthrowes these mens
grounding it upon the Text. The best instance, which these Bowers bring from the Fathers, is that of S. Hierome, whom yet they doe pittifully wrest. This Father commenting on Isa. 45. 23. sheweth that this Text is now fulfilled in Christ. For, saith he, Moris est Ecclesiastici Christo genu flectere, It is an Ecclesiasticall custome to kneele, or bow the knee to Christ. But Hierome speakes of Christ, not Jesus. He doth not say, that this kneeling or bowing should be done at the name Jesus. It is also the manner of Christians to bow to God, doe they therefore bow at the Name God. And indeed what Hierome saith is now verified by every true Christian, who humbly pray to God in the name of Christ, and is not this to bow to Christ? Now that Hierome consents not unto them it is plaine; for when he entreats on Phil. 2. 9, 10. the place in controversie, he saith there no more but this, according to the judgement of o∣ther Authors, that all Creatures should adore Christ: An evident Argument that Hierome was not of these mens opinion. The truth is, the Fathers are wrested, not one is for them. If any one in answer to this Argument will produce Fathers, I pray them to produce them to say, not onely that the Name Jesus, is the Name above every Name, but also to say, that by bowing in the Name of Jesus, is meant bowing at the mention of the Name Jesus; If they bring none to speake thus full, let them spare their labour, for o∣therwise their Testimonies will halt, and not be worth a rush. SECTION XVI. THe Visitors at their Visitations in the late crazy dayes, though then they grounded the bowing at the Name Jesus, not onely upon the Canon, but also upon the Text of Scripture; yet did at that time give leave to some Ministers, that scrupled the sole bow∣ing at the Name Jesus, (though it was very unwillingly granted) to bow at other Divine Names, so they would bow at that, and not onely so, but at that time they used veneration, and suffered it to be done at humane Names. For at the Metropoliticall Visitation at the Cliffe by Lewes in Sussex, in the beginning of July 1635. The Visitor entring into speech of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, as soone as ever he named William, he put off his hatt, and the grea∣ter part of the Ministers then present made low obeysance: This
is true, and thereof there be many witnesses. I contend now, that this toleration, and this practise, doth contradict this opinion of bowing at the Name Iesus. As for the second instance, if any now shall distinguish betweene divine and civill worship, and affirme that this was but civill worship. 1. I reply, I could question the distin∣ctionSee Master Gurnay Vin∣dication of the second Com∣mandement, from Pag. 54. to 107., but though I should grant that this distinction may be ad∣mitted else-where, yet cannot it be admitted here; for if the Name Iesus, be the Name above every Name in the Text, it must have pro∣per relation to Names and Titles; then if the honour of the knee be the advancement of the Name Jesus above other Names, no ho∣nour of the knee whatsoever, may be performed to any other name; for then how shall the advancement of the Name Iesus above other Names appeare. Againe, Though it should be granted that the civill worship of the knee may be given to the Names of men, which yet is not to be granted upon these mens grounds, yet no divine worship of the knee, upon the said grounds can be given to any name whatsoever. Therefore no Names of God, besides the Name Iesus, can be adored with the worship of the knee. For whatsoever is di∣vine, is onely capable of divine worship. Then, if any other Divine Names may be indifferently bowed unto, they giving the prehemi∣nence above them all to the Name Iesus, it is a plaine contradiction, for then they make them as high, and as honourable, as the Name Iesus. But if other Names of God besides the Name Iesus, shall not be bowed to; as these superstitious Jesu-worshippers never doe, by their bowing at or to the Names of men, it cannot be avoyded but they give the preheminence to the Names of men above the Names of God, which shall have some honour done them, all the honour that they are capable of, but the Names of God shall have none at at; for bowing the knee in the Text, doth denote preheminence. To conclude, if all Divine Names may have divine honour done to them, when they are named, and humane Names have civill honour done to them, call it what you will; Jam sumus ergo Pares, what prerogative or super-eminency of honour shall the Name Jesus have above other Names. Then the Text of Phil. 2. 9, 10. as these men understand it, shall stand but for a cypher; For if all Titles both divine and humane, be of themselves capable of the honour of the knee, then was the Name Jesus capable of this honour, if it had ne∣ver been advanced. To what purpose then did God so highly ad∣vance it to receive this honour. If any shall yet object, that though God have advanced the name
Iesus above every Name, that every knee should bow to it, yet o∣ther Names may be bowed unto, because the bowing of the knee, which is due to God, who is Lord of all, and so to every Person of the Trinitie, is also allowed to be done to men. I answer, 1. No Text puts difference between the Persons of the Trinity, but they say that the Text of Phil. 2. 9. puts difference between Names, in pre∣ferring the Name Jesus above other Divine Names. Therefore upon their grounds, Divine Names must not be honoured alike, (though the Persons of the Trinitie must) because, say they, the Name Iesus is above them all.Gen. 41. 43. 2. God hath commanded the bowing of the knee to be done to men,Gen. 33. 3. 2 Sam. 18. 28. 1 King. 1. 16. and there be examples for it in Scripture. But he hath no where commanded bowing of the knee to be done to Names, either divine or humane; neither be there any examples in Scripture, that either the one or the other was ever practised: Therefore if it be true, as these men say, that bowing at the Name Iesus is Gods command to be done to it upon so speciall a reason, that it is the Name above every Name, there being no command, or example of bowing at any other Name besides, nothing can be more certaine, but that the Name Iesus is selected and culled out a∣mong all other Names, to have the honour of the knee peculiarly to be done to it. Therefore to give this bowing to Divine Names is evill, but intolerable presumption to give it to the Names of men; for this cannot be done without horrible profanation of the Name Iesus. This will necessarily follow, if bowing at the Name Jesus be grounded upon the said Text. SECTION XVII. THis exposition of the said Text, will bring a scandall upon the Church of England; for though an injunction passed in the dayes of Queene Elizabeth, to authorize this Ceremony, and a Ca∣non was made for it in the beginning of King James his Reigne, (though the words of the Canon are not plaine for it) yet was the execution of it generally neglected. No man was urged, or compel∣led to it. The learned Worthies of our Church were suffered to con∣fute this exposition of the Text as a Popish errour, as Bishop Alley, Bishop Babington, Doctor Airy, Doctor Whitakers, Doctor Fulke, Doctor Willet, with sundry others. Yea, those Ministers that were
suspended for Ceremonies, were never called into question for this. Yea MasterEccl. Polit. li. 5. sect. 30. Hooker, pleading for our Ceremonies, calleth bowing at the Name Iesus, an innocent harmlesse Ceremony, which none, saith he, is constrained to use: It appeares that by his judgement none ought to be compelled to it. But the Governours of the Church have constrained Ministers all along for the most part to use the rest of the Ceremonies; but the other was generally neglected, and not urged, till the dayes of this late Archbishop. Therefore if this be a dutie of the Text, it will accuse the Church of England of grosse hy∣pocrisie, in urging meere Ceremonies, and neglecting to urge a ne∣cessary dutie: It would be a preferring of her own traditions above Gods Commandements: It would make then, that the Church fai∣led in sinceritie, till this late Archbishop came. SECTION XVIII. LAst of all, I may bring this as a reason against them; the most of them, and some also of the chiefest of them, that ground it on the Text, yet hold their opinion very uncertainly: they passe to and fro betwixt the Text and the Canon: When they thinke that the Authoritie of the Canon is not altogether sufficient to make the people to practise it, they flee to the Text, and when they are afraid that the Text will not beare it, they flee to the Canon. And if this be not halting between two opinions, for my part, I know not what is. I will instance but in one; Master Page in his Treatise of justification of bowing at the Name Jesus, doth confesse, that when he first went about that Treatise, he did not thinke that it could be so directly proved from the Text; a plaine evidence that he went about it doubt∣fully; for he was to encounter with an Antagonist, that held it no dutie of the Text; and would he goe about to contradict him, when himselfe was fearfull that the Text would not beare it; but he af∣firmes that when he had read Bishop Andrewes on Phil. 2. he could not but condescend to hisPage justifi∣cation of bow∣ing, P. 4. opinion; yea though he brings many Ar∣guments, such as they are, to prove it a dutie, yet thus he closeth with his Antagonist; Though I am not so peremptory, saith he, that it is a dutie of the Text, as you are it is not; Neverthelesse, if the Text faile me, I will ground it upon the Authoritie of the Church. Yea throughout the whole Treatise, he is content with any testi∣mony
or proofe from any Authour, that may give the least signifi∣cation that it is but a thing indifferent, yea which is to be noted, that those Authors, that are evidently against him, and vnderstand bowing the knee in the Text, of subjection; because they say that this subjection is signified by bowing the knee, he takes to be for him; he may as well affirme, that because Kings and Rulers are commanded to be subject to Christ, Psal. 2. 12. which subjection is signified by the word Kisse, therefore they are bidden in an expresse and lite∣rall way, directly and plainly to kisse Christ. A strange thing, that a man should write so largely as he doth, and yet not be sure of his owne grounds; what is this but to ensnare the Consciences of his Readers, to make them practise a duty, yet they shall not know up∣on what ground they practise it; they shall not know whether they obey Gods Commandement, or Mans onely. To state and preach this opinion so uncertainly, as many Ministers have done, what is this but to bring upon the consciences of their people a necessitie of sin∣ning, and so great perill of damnation; for whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Rom. 14. 23. I say to all these men, as Eliah said to the wor∣shippers of Baal, 1 Kings 18. 21. Why doe yee halt between two opini∣ons? If God be God, follow him, but if Baal be he follow him: So I say, If you will ground this bowing upon the Text, follow that, or if upon the Canon, followThough they have no fast footing upon either. that; you cannot ground it upon both, and yet make it a thing indifferent; for if you ground it on the Text, you must make it necessary, and alwayes, and at all times, and pla∣ces, continually to binde. PART II. Wherein are Answers to Reasons pretended for bowing at the Name Jesus, from Phil. 2. 9, 10. SECTION I. OF all the Reasons that I have hither to met with, I pro∣fesse, I have not found any one that is truly groun∣ded upon the Text, or any other correspondent Scrip∣tures, but meerely upon the fantasie of the braine. Onely there is a shew of a proofe by reason that In the Name, is translated at the Name, which they presse upon their
People in this wise; The Text, say they, is as cleere as the Sunne for this practise, doth it not say expressely, At the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow? Can there be any thing more plaine?There is a great diffe∣rence between these 2 phra∣ses, In the name of Iesus, which is the Power of Jesus, and at the Name, or appellation Ie∣sus, as there is between these two, In the Name of the King, that is, the Kings au∣thoritie, and at the Name King. I have al∣ready answered this, therefore I will be silent now; onely here I se∣riously admonish these men, to unteach such vaine doctrines. I an∣swer them, there is nothing more obscure and sensles, than such an Interpretation; making In the name of Jesus, to be meant at the men∣tion of the Name Jesus; for I have proved before, no Scripture can warrant this Exposition. But if they will needs have it so meant here, I will produce a Text that may make as much for adoration at Gods Name, as this Text for the Name Jesus, Psal. 63. 4. Thee will I blesse while I live, I will lift up my hands in thy Name: What Name this is the first Verse shews, it is Gods Name; If then In the name of Jesus be meant at the naming of Jesus, what reason can be given why In the name of God, may not as well be meant At the naming of God. If then by this exposition we be bound in the one place, to bow the knee at the naming of Iesus, we are as well bound by the other place, to lift up our hands at the naming of God, But if it be not meet so to understand the Psalmist in the one place, it is not meet so to un∣derstand the Apostle in the other place. For the translation, though I doe not question it, yet in my poore judgement, if it had been translated In the Name, as it is in the Ori∣ginall, the same phrase being never translated at the Name in any o∣ther place of Scripture, but in this place onely, (though in as hard places as this) it would have prevented that great offenc which ig∣norant men have taken by it for the practise of this will-worship, and much restrained superstitious Teachers from pressing it upon the consciences of their people, by reason of this translation. But cer∣tainly such Teachers have much to answer for, for teaching such doctrine, when they cannot but know, that no Scripture will beare them out in such an Exposition. SECTION II. Another Reason is this. THe Name Jesus,Zanchius on Phil. 2. 9. say they, was the most despised and contempti∣ble Name.Page Iustifi∣cation of bow∣ing, pag. 42. Therefore God will have it honoured, when it is mentioned, above other Names. I answer; Jesus Christ the great Rabbi and Doctor of his Church, hath no where taught them to
reason so: The Text cannot with any sense beare this Reason; for as I have shewed before, the Apostle argues from the humiliation of Christs Person to the advancement of his Person; not from a Name to a Name. The Apostle doth not say, that the Name Jesus was humbled, therefore he doth not meane that the said Name was ex∣alted. Therefore because it hath no light from Gods Word, this an∣swer might be sufficient: but because it is a reason much relyed up∣on, and ignorant men that know little else, have learned it exactly from their Teachers, I will encounter with it, and make it mani∣fest, that there is no strength or soundnesse in the said reason. First then I deny the Antecedent; The Name Jesus did not suf∣fer above other Names; It cannot be well proved, that this Name suffered at all; For no man denied Christ this Name, but both e∣nemies and friends gave it him; It was the Person, not the Name that suffered; neither did Christ suffer for this Names sake. When Joseph and Daniel, Types of Christ, were abused and persecuted, can any say, that their proper Names suffered, neither can it be truly said, that the Name Iesus properly suffered, when Christ himselfe suffered. Their maine proofe of this Reason they produce from John 19. 19. Where Pilate set up Christs title over his head upon the Crosse, Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jewes: This, they say, was done to him in scorne; so that his Name Jesus was made an execration say they. I answer, It cannot be proved that this Title was set up at all in scorne. Judicious Mr Calvin on that place, is of another minde. For thus he saith; Pilati consilium fuit, &c. It was Pilates policy saith he, that he might revenge himselfe of the Jewes, who by their obstinate importunitie had forced him to punish an inno∣cent Person, to condemn the whole Nation in the Person of Christ. So by his judgement this title was a reproach to the Jewish Nation, rather than to Christ. He addeth yet further, Atqui in Christo hoc extraordinarium fuit, quod sine ignominia titulus apponitur, This was extraordinary in Christ, that without any reproach his title is set up. 2. The offence that the Chiefe Priests of the Jewes tooke at this Title, proves it not to be scornefull to Christ, who were displeased with Pilate for it; which if it had been reproachfull, they burning in malice against our Saviour, would have liked it well enough. 3. Had it been set up in scorne, it was not in any quarrell to the Name, but to the Person. 4 Had it been to a Name, yet was it not to the Name Iesus, but the Title King of the Jewes.
But the truth is, the most Glorious Names of our Saviour; as God, Sonne of God, Christ, Jehovah, suffered rather in him than the Name Iesus.Page Iustifica∣tion of bowing Pag. 42. & alibi. The reason that Mr Page gives to preferre the Name Iesus a∣bove these Names, doth not satisfie; for, saith he, these Names are glorious and lofty Names in themselves, and therefore need no ad∣vancement; but the Name Iesus was an humble and lowly Name, therefore God advanced it. I say, this Reason is not satisfactory; for the Question is not, what these Names are simply considered in themselves, but what they were in Christ in the time of his humilia∣tion; As the Question is not, whether we are to bow at the Name Jesus simply considered, but at that Name in Jesus Christ. I contend then, that these aforesaid Glorious Names were more humbled Names in Christ than the Name Jesus; For Iesus was his proper Name given him at his Circumcision, but these Names are Titles of his honour: As Henry and King; so is Jesus and Christ, saith lear∣ned Bishop Babington.Workes, Pag. 245. Christ in respect of these Glorious Names suffered exceedingly; For , He emptied himselfe of the Glory of these Names. The Jewes generally would not give them, nor suffer them to be given unto him. Whosoever did but once o∣pen his mouth to ascribe any of these Titles of honour to our Savi∣our, presently he suffered for it; for whosoever did but confesse him to be the Christ, was put out of the Synagogue, Joh 9. 22. When at any time he did but take the due honour of any of these Names to him∣selfe, they immediately intended mischiefe against him. Ioh. 5. 18. The Iewes sought to kill him, because he said God was his Father, ma∣king himselfe equall with God: So Joh. 10. 33. For thy good workes, say they, we stone thee not, but that thou being a man makest thy selfe God. So Mat. 26. 65. As soone as he had confessed that he was the Christ, The high Priest cryed out against him, that he blasphemed. So that it is evident, that our Saviour suffered the paine of losse, in re∣spect of these glorious Names, not having the honour of them, and not onely so, but he suffered also the paine of feeling in himselfe and his members, when at any time, he or they did but ascribe the ho∣nour of these Names unto him. Now that these Names, and not the Name Iesus, are suffering Names, I will illustrate it by this Simile. Suppose the Subjects of some King, whose proper Name is John, or Henry, suppose, I say, his owne Subjects should hate him, rise up a∣gainst him, and at length kill him, not because he is called John, or Henry, but because he will be their King, as indeed he is. I would faine know in respect of what Name this King suffereth, his name
John, or Henry, or his Title King; no man can say it is for his pro∣per Name, but for his Kingly Title, which they will not give unto him: In like manner our Saviour, whose proper Name is Jesus, which Name others had as well as he, he is God, he is Christ, he is King. The Jewes never question him for his proper Name, but they will not give him his Titles of honour, they will not suffer him to reigne over them, Luk. 19. 27. but because he takes this due honour to himselfe, they reproach him, and kill him; in all reason there∣fore, these Glorious Names are suffering Names, and not the Name Jesus. Answ. 2. I deny the Consequent; We are not bound to bow the knee at the sound of that Name, which is the most suffering Name. Neither can this Text, or any other Scripture make good this rea∣son; there is nothing in the Text spoken of a bare Title, but onely of the Person of our Saviour. 2. The reason will be more evident (if it were lawfull to reason without booke,) for bowing at the Names, God, Christ, or King, &c. than the Name Jesus; for thus I reason: Looke what Names Christ in the time of his humiliation laid downe, and at the mention of which received disdaine & reproach, it is meete, that in the time of his exaltation he should receive ho∣nour at the mention of those Names, rather than at the mention of that Name, which he laid not downe, and at the mention of which, he received no disdaine and reproach. But Christ in the time of his humiliation laid not down his Name Jesus, but he laid downe his Glorious Names, as Lord, God, Christ, King, and at the mention of these he suffered disdaine & reproach, not at the mention of the Name Jesus. Therefore it is meete, that Christ now in the time of his exaltation should be honoured at the mention of his Glorious Names, Lord, God, Christ, King, &c. ra∣ther than at the mention of the Name Jesus. So we see plainly, that if there were a reason in the Consequent, it makes not so much for the Name Jesus, as for the Names above-spoken. If it be replyed, that Christ having been humbled in his Name Jesus, it is therefore necessary, that he should receive honour in that Name, being exal∣ted. I answer, If their meaning be this, that because Christ was called by the Name Jesus being humbled, therefore he ought to be bowed to at the sound of that Name being exalted, it is a sensles reason without any proofe, consequent, or ground, therefore let them prove it, or cease ever to mention it. If this were necessary,
why were not those Worthies Joseph and Daniel, Types of Christs humiliation as of his exaltation by a speciall appointment of God bowed to, when they were advanced at their distinct Names of Jo∣seph and Daniel, being so called when they were humbled. In ano∣ther sense it is true in Christ (though it be not an ever-binding rule) for he shall be alwayes honoured by the Church in that Name, which shall not be laid downe. SECTION III. THirdly, Thus they reason; We receive more benefit by the Name Jesus, than by any other Name; for it signifieth our Saviour: And in this sense they preferre it above other Names, yea above Jehovah it selfe. Some have openly taught this stuffe, Jesus is more excellent than Jehovah, because Jehovah delivered the people from the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, but Jesus delivers us from the wrath to come.Iustification of bowing, p. 47. Yea Mr Page himselfe speakes very meanly (in comparison) of the name Lord, which is the same with Jehovah, (for every where, where the Septuagints finde the name Jehovah, they translate it by the word , Lord.) Yea though he doe acknowledge, that the name Lord doth betoken the Deitie. For thus he saith; What tell you me of Lord, give me a Samaritan, that may binde up my wounds. And in other places he preferres the name Jesus, before Christ and Lord. Answ. 1. I desire to know, what they meane by this reasoning. If this be their meaning, that the title Jesus did more for us than the titles, Christ, Jehovah, or Lord, it is most ridiculous; yea it is Ido∣latry to attribute our Salvation to bare names, or titles, which our Saviour himselfe wrought for us. But if this be their meaning, that the Person Jesus, is greater, and did more for us, than the Person Christ, Jehovah, or Lord; this is as sensles as the other; for 1. this will divide Jesus from Christ, and make Jesus and Christ two Per∣sons. 2. It will seperate Jesus from Jehovah, so making Christ not God, or above God; and so in effect deny him to be a Saviour; for if he had not been Jehovah, he could not have saved us. 2. It is an absurd kinde of reasoning to attribute temporall de∣liverance to Jehovah, and Salvation to Jesus, onely for as much as Jehovah is the Authour of all good, temporall, spirituall, and eter∣nall;
yea our Salvation in Scripture is specially ascribed to Jeho∣vah, or Lord, as Isa. 43. 11. I even I am Jehovah, and besides me there is no Saviour. So Vers. 14. This saith Jehovah your Redeemer. So Isa. 12. 2. The Church shall say, Behold, God is my Salvation, I will trust, and not be afraid, for the Lord Jehovah is my strength, and my song, he is also become my salvation. So Deut. 33. 29. Psal. 84. 11 Isa. 26. 4. And in very many places besides. It is therefore beyond measure absurd, to preferre Jesus above Jehovah, and to ascribe Sal∣vation to Jesus onely; for if he name Jesus be above Jehovah, of necessitie it must be above the names God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost; and so either way the second Person will be made grea∣ter than the first, or third Person. For thus I reason: Whosoever hath a Name greater than others, is therefore more excellent than those whose Names are not so great. Therefore, If the name Jesus, which is a name peculiar to the se∣cond Person, be a greater Name than Jehovah, which he hath com∣mon to him with the other Persons, or greater than the name God the Father, or God the Holy Ghost, it will follow expressely, that the second Person is greater than the first or third Person. The first part of the Argument is proved from Heb. 1. 4. where the Apostle proves that Christ was better than the Angels, viz. be∣cause he had obtained a more excellent Name than they. This is also confirmed by the Analogie of the Scriptures; for I have shewed be∣fore, that Name above another, doth alwayes denote the excellency of the Person above another, that hath not so great a Name; as Deut. 26. 19. The Lord promiseth his people that will keepe his Commandements, that He will make them high above all Nations, in praise, in name, and in honour. So Isa. 56. 5. The Lord promiseth to the Eunuches that will keepe his Sabbaths, a Name better than of sonnes and daughters, that is, he will bestow upon them a greater ex∣cellency and honour, than those that have sonnes and daughters, viz. in that respect, or they shall be more excellent by that name that he would give them, than they should have been by having sonnes and daughters. Therefore to affirme that Jesus is abave Jehovah, doth expressely fight against this Text of 1 Cor. 15. 27. where God having subjected all things under Christs feete, hath yet excepted himselfe that did put all things under him. Seeing therefore he hath excepted himselfe, and hath not subjected himselfe to Christ: by the selfe-same reason he
hath not subjected his Name to Christs name, for if he had, by the reason above-specified, he had also preferred his Sonne above himselfe. The Answers which I have received to this Argument, are these three, yet none of them sufficient in my judgement. First, it is said, that the ground and rule above-specified, holds be∣tween Christ and the Angels, and so it will hold between Christ and all the rest of the creatures, where there is a manifest difference, but it will not hold between the Persons of the Trinitie, because they are equall, and cannot be made unequall. This answer is very frivo∣lous; For the Apostle gives this reason why Christ is better than the Angels, viz. because he had obtained a better Name than they, which argument had been weake and uncertaine, and he could ne∣ver have made good what he affirmed, if his ground and rule could ever have failed. A true rule is a perfect rule, or no rule at all. 2. True it is, that it is indeed impossible, that the three Persons should be made unequall, yet may one be preferred before, or under∣valued beneath another by some mens opinion, or practise. For as Arrius undervalued the Sonne beneath the Father, in that he attri∣buted unto him a Name below the Name of the Father: And as we prove against Arrius, that Christ is God equall with the Father, be∣cause of the identitie and samenes, and equalitie of his names and attributes with the Father, being called Jehovah, Sonne of God; cal∣led omniscient, eternall, &c. So it will be evidently proved by neces∣sary consequence, against these men that hold that opinion, how∣soever they positively deny it, that they are in some degree in an extreame with Arrius, preferring Christ above the Father, because they attribute unto him a Name greater than the name of the Fa∣ther. Secondly, They answer, that the second Person, though of himselfe he be equall with the Father, yet in respect of us he is grea∣ter, because of the worke of redemption which he hath wrought for us. I reply. This is a strange answer, and very unsound: for 1. the Scriptures doe every where as much extoll the love of God in giving his Son, as the love of Christ in giving himselfe. 2. This answer doth not agree with the Text, for the Text injoyneth the bowing there∣in, not onely to us men, but generally to all creatures, over whom Christs Name is advanced, for therfore is every knee of every thing to bow to Christ, because he having a Name above every Name, hath also a Name above their Names. Therefore if the Son have a Name above his Fathers Name, by the same reason the Father must bow to the Sonne.
3. By this answer they contradict themselves, for when they be challenged that in bowing at the name Jesus onely, they honour the Sonne above the Father, they deny it, and affirme, that they honour all alike at the name Jesus, which indeed they cannot affirme, if the second Person be greater to us than the other Persons, then we to whom he is greater, must honour him more than the other, that to us are not so great. Even as to the supreame Magistrate in a King∣dome, we give a greater honour than to those that to us are not so great as he. Thirdly, Thus it is answered, that the name Jesus is a common name to every Person in Trinitie, and therefore though it be above other Divine Names, yet it doth not make inequalitie between the Persons, and in bowing at that onely, they honour all alike. Now thus they goe about to prove their Assertion. God say they, was cal∣led Saviour before Christ was incarnate, and Jesus and Saviour is all one, therefore the name Jesus denominates every Person of the Trinitie. 1. I reply, If Saviour and Jesus be all one, why then doe they not bow as well at the sound of Saviour, as Iesus, for their rea∣son is the same for both. 2. I affirme, that they are not all one: the word Saviour indeed, before Christ was incarnate, shewed what God would doe in the fulnesse of time, viz. send his Son to be our Redeemer; but it is no proper Name; Jesus is a proper name, never appropriated to the second Person till Christ was incarnate: and some good Authors affirme, that it is the name of his humanitie onely, be∣cause given him upon his incarnation, and he being called generally by that name in the dayes of his flesh; and sundry men being so called as Types of Christ,Sermon on Phil. 2. though (if it be so) it doe denominate un∣to us his whole Person, God and Man, because of the inseperable u∣nion of the two natures. But Bishop Andrewes assertion here is very strange, who affirmes that the name Jesus, is the proper and chiefe Name of God; but how can it be so, when it is not the proper name of Gods eternitie? but was given unto the second Person in time by reason of mans fall. But the name Jehovah, denotes Gods eternall Being, and therefore is the proper and chiefe name of God indeed. And, how doth the Bishop agree with himselfe in that place? For thus he saith; The Person is taken out of our sight; all that we can do, cannot reach unto it, but his Name he hath left behinde to us, that we may shew by our reverence, and respect to it, how much we esteeme him. For if the name Iesus doe denominate the Person of Christ, as taken out of our sight, then it denominates onely his
humanitie, which onely was in our sight, for the Deitie was never in our sight: But if it be true, as he saith, that Jesus is the proper name of Christs Deitie, then in this sense he is not gone from us, but is with us alwayes unto the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20. and lives and dwelles in the hearts of his Saints, Eph. 3. 17. Secondly, It is absurd to affirme, that nothing we can doe can reach to Christs Person, because it is out of our sight: by the same reason, nothing that we doe can reach to God the Father, or the Holy Ghost, because they are invisible, then farewell all Religion. If nothing that we can doe can reach to Christs Person, then the whole bowing can reach but to the Name, none to the Person; and to wor∣ship the Name without the Person, is grosse Idolatry by their owne confession. And how can these men affirme, that they honour the Three Persons alike at the name Jesus, when nothing they doe can reach to the Person of Christ. Thirdly, By the Bishops reason, if we must bow at the Name of our Saviour, because he is not present, then we must not bow at the name Jesus, which name, saith he, signifieth the Deitie, which is al∣wayes present, but at the name Christ, which saith he, though with∣out ground, is the name of the humanitie onely, which is gone from us. Secondly, If Jesus be the proper and chiefe name of God, then should all those that were called ordinarily by that name (besides Christ) be called by the proper and chiefe name of God, which without horrible blasphemy could not be yeelded unto. It is Anti∣christs impietie to call himselfe God, 2 Thes. 2. 9. Yet worthy men were called Jesus, and never tooke any offence at it, and were never blamed for it. Seeing then the name Jesus was given to the Second Person onely upon his Incarnation, it cannot be the proper and chiefe name of God, or of every Person in Trinitie; and it no where denominates any other Person, but the Second Person onely, there∣fore it is a name peculiar to the Second Person onely. Lastly, This answer overthrowes their owne ground from the Text, for if the name Jesus, be the name of the Three Persons, then cannot it be the name above every name in the Text, for that Name is proper onely to the Sonne, For 1. God gave him this Name, and that after his humiliation, therefore was it not a name naturally in∣herent in him as a Person of the Trinitie, because he had it not be∣fore. Secondly, the Person onely in the Text that suffered, received this Name, but neither the Person of the Father, nor the Holy Ghost
suffered, but the Sonne onely. Therefore neither the Father, nor Holy Ghost received the Name above every Name, but the Sonne onely. SECTION IV. BUt the reason is naught, why they prefer the name Jesus above other Divine names, for signification sake, because it signifi∣eth our Salvation. For who taught them to reason thus, have they received it from the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles? If they have, they must shew where▪ It is abominable to teach for a doctrine the fantasie of the braine; but there is no shew nor shaddow for this reason punctually in this Text, or any other Scripture: This is an∣swer sufficient, but by Gods grace I will further encounter with it, & shall prove it a reason without reason indeed, and to be of a very fearefull and dangerous consequence. 1. If we must bow at the name Jesus, because it signifieth our sal∣vation, then we must rather bow at the name Christ, because this Name doth more fully and expressely signifie our Salvation, than the name Jesus, (now these Jesu-worshippers doe not bow at the name Christ.)Catechis. P. 202. Thus saith learned Ʋrsinus;  Jesus est proprium nomen Me∣diatoris, &c. Jesus saith he, is the proper name of our Mediator; Christ as it were the Sirname. For so is he Jesus, that so he is also Christ, i. e. a promised Saviour and Messias: By both names his Office is designed, but by the Name more summarily than ex∣pressely; by the Sirname more cleerely and expressely; for the Sir∣name Christ, doth denote the three certaine parts of his Office, as namely, Propheticall, Priestly, and Kingly. I will illustrate this further by this Similie. If we should heare of some Potent King, that he is become a great Conquerour, hath atchieved a noble Victory, and hath made a great conquest of his enemies, & hath wrought a great deliverance to his Subjects: this Newes indeed is something; but yet this generall re∣lation doth not so much satisfie, we desire further to heare of parti∣culars; therefore if it shall be declared unto us, how the Battell was ordered, how he disposed his Army, and how the Victory was wrought; when particular Circumstances of the Conquest shall be fully related, by this means the Victory is more cleerely manifested,
and we rest better satisfied, and contented a great deale more this way, than before, by the generall signification of it. Thus it is concerning the Names Jesus, and Christ; The name Jesus doth but in generall shew Christ to be a Saviour; But the name Christ doth in particular make knowne, how he wrought Salvation for us; For it denotes him to be a Priest to have offered up him∣selfe a Sacrifice for us, and to make intercession for us It denotes him a King to subdue and conquer the enemies of our Salvation, and to rule and reigne in our hearts by his Spirit. It denotes him a Pro∣phet, to teach and instruct us, and to make known Gods will unto us, whereby he doth apply his purchased Redemption unto us. In all reason therefore the Name Christ doth more fully and cleerely ex∣presse our Salvation than the Name Jesus; and by this their reason is rather to be bowed to than the Name Jesus. Secondly, if we must bow at the name Jesus, because it signifieth our Salvation, why then doe not they bow at the word Saviour, (which they make all one with Jesus,) which doth as plainely, yea more plainely denote our Salvation than the Name Jesus, being better understood of all. SECTION V. TO hold that we must bow by the Text at the Name Jesus, be∣cause it signifieth our Salvation, will admit this dangerous con∣sequence, for either it will overthrow the bowing in the Text to Angels, Devils, Reprobates, for they cannot bow at the name Ie∣sus in this sense as they say we must bow; for the name Jesus can∣not signifie to them, that he is their Saviour, seeing the Angels ne∣ver sinned: To the Devils Christ was never promised; and if they must bow, and fulfill the Text, as certainly they shall, they must bow also upon the selfe same reason as we must, for the reason in the Text is the same for all: then they must bow also in this sense, that Jesus signifieth their Salvation also, which is an unspeakeable ab∣surditie. Yea it will overthrow Christs conquest of sinne, death, and the grave, whose destruction is their bowing to Christ in the Text, and it will make Christ their Saviour in stead of their destroyer. It satisfieth not to answer that the very Devils could call Christ by the name Jesus;Page justifica∣tion of bow∣ing, pag. 48. for so they might call him, because it was his proper Name, by which he was commonly called, but if they bring
their reason right, they must prove that Angels and Devils bow to Christ as he is their Saviour, (which they can never doe) for so they say we must bow, and the reason of the Text is the same for all. It is plaine then the Name Jesus cannot be the Name in the Text in which every knee must bow, because it concernes elect men onely, but that Name must concerne all things and creatures alike, which is the Name of Power and Glory, as is above specified. SECTION VI. THe bowing at the Name Jesus, because it signifieth a Saviour, and not at Jehovah, is a preferring our Salvation above Gods Glory: Now to doe so is abominable, therefore it is a false opini∣on, and an unlawfull practise. The Consequent is very plaine; for the Glory of God is the end of all his workes, Pro. 16. 4. So it must be the maine end of our workes, 1 Cor. 10. 33. Moses and St Paul preferred Gods Glory above their owne Salvation, Exod. 32. 32. Rom. 9. 2, 3. He that loves not or serves not God for Gods owne selfe, but for his owne benefit, is but a false and mercenary worshipper of God, and shall surely misse what he seekes for. Now that this practise will make that we preferre our Salvation above Gods Glory, it is evident, for Jehovah is the expresse Name of Gods Glory, Isa. 42. 8. I am Je∣hovah (saith God) that is my Name, and my Glory I will not give to another. This Name is called Gods glorious and fearefull Name, which whosoever will not feare, God will make his plagues wonderfull, Deut. 28. 58.. But the name Iesus is the Name that signifieth our Salvation, therefore it will plainly follow, if it be necessary to bow at any Name, if we will bow onely at that Name, that signifieth our Salvation, and not at that Name that signifieth Gods Glory, we love our selves above God, and regard our owne benefit more than his Glory. It availes not to answer, (as some doe) that Jehovah is compre∣hended in the Name Iesus; and therefore in bowing to Iesus, they also bow to Jehovah, and so glorifie God. For it is absurd to say, that the Name Iesus doth generally include the name Jehovah; for Iehovah is of far larger extent than the Name Iesus. The name Je∣hovah is the name of Gods eternity, it signifieth God to have life with∣in
himselfe, to be an everlasting being, and was before the name Ie∣sus: The Name Iehovah, betokens Gods incomprehensiblenes, his omnipotencie, his omniscience, his wisdome, his goodnes, and all his ho∣ly Attributes, and that essentially in himselfe: It betokens all Gods works, his worke of Predestination, not onely of Election, but Repro∣bation, by which he will be also glorified, Pro. 16. 4. It betokens not onely his worke of Redemption, but also his works of Creation and Providence, for which works sake, the heavens and earth doe praise him, and speake his praise in all languages, Psal. 19. 1, 2, 3. And for which works sake, we must also praise him, Psal. 100. 2, 3. Psal. 147. It signifieth not onely his mercy, but also his justice; for which also we must rejoyce, and praise the Lord, Psal. 58. 11, 12. True it is, God shews his Glory abundantly in becomming a Sa∣viour to his people, yet the Name Jehovah goes beyond the Name Ie∣sus in the extent of his Glory: It denotes Gods Glory essentially in himselfe, and generally in respect of all his mightie works. The name Iesus denotes his Glory onely particularly in respect of the worke of Redemption, and onely by way of relation to us, whom he hath re∣deemed. Therefore the reason aforesaid remaines inviolable, that if we will bow onely at that Name, that denotes Gods Glory particu∣larly onely, and that doth onely respect our owne benefit in the worke of Redemption wrought for us; and not at that Name that betokens his Glory essentially in himselfe, and that which hath re∣lation to all his Attributes, and to all his mightie works, or if we will bow onely at Gods saving name, and not at all at any of his commanding Names; I say, the reason stands firme, we love our selves above God, and regard our owne benefit and salvation, more than his Glory or Soveraigntie over us. As if a Subject will not bow to the King, but onely in regard of some great extraordinary be∣nefit bestowed upon him, it is evident, that he regards himselfe more than his Majestie. 2. The Angels, which by the Text must bow as well as we, upon the same reason of the Text, cannot have respect to the benefit of Salvation. They serve Christ for his Glory sake, and as he is their Lord. 3. And lastly Seeing Devils and Reprobates must fulfill the Text as well as we, and that also upon the same reason, by these mens grounds, they shall be more sincere in their service than we for they must bow to him gratis, and as he is their Lord, but we must not bow, but upon a particular benefit, that Christ is become our Sa∣viour.
I doe ingenuously confesse, that this reason that Christ is our Sa∣viour, is a very strong reason to move us to glorifie God to the ut∣most, with our bodies and soules, being redeemed by so great a price, 2 Cor. 6. 20. And seeing now that Christ for suffering death is crowned with glory and honour, Heb. 2. 9. and is now glorified God and man with that glory which he had with his Father before the world began, Ioh. 17. 3. It highly concernes us to glorifie him now God and Man, with the glory and honour wherewith we now glorifie the Father; yet it is no reason to prove, that we should honour the Sonne more than the Father, or the Title Iesus above other Titles of the Deitie. SECTION VII. MAster Page gives this reason, why the name Iesus hath the pre∣ferment above other Names to be bowed to,Answer to a Reply, P. 157. viz. because a∣bove all other Names it signifieth Christs dying and suffering I can∣not say Iesus, saith he, but presently I am put in minde of dying. Answ. 1. I deny that the name Iesus is a Name, that above all other Names puts us in minde of Christs sufferings; For this Name in the plaine signification of it, doth not directly signifie dying. Many called God their Saviour in the old Testament, yet few did suppose that God should dye. Many were called by the Name Iesus, and many Sauiours God stirred up, and yet dyed not as Sa∣viours. Christs Disciples knew him all along by the Name Iesus, yet thought he had raved, when he once put them in minde of his death, Mat. 16. 21. But indeed the name Christ doth more fully put us in minde of Christs sufferings, than the Name Iesus; for Iesus sig∣nifieth a Saviour, but Christ signifieth Anointed; it denotes him not onely a Prophet and King, but also a Priest, whose office was to shed bloud, therefore it directly signifieth dying. God if he had pleased could have shewed his mercy without his justice, but he would not. He could have been a Iesus without becomming a Priest, but he could never have been a Priest, unlesse he had been a Iesus. 2. The Consequent is to be denied, for if the Name Iesus should above all other Names signifie Christs death, it will not follow, that therefore it is the principall name to be bowed to, 1. Because they have no ground of Scripture for it. 2. Because it contradicts
the Text; for the Name above every Name is the Name that leads us to Christs exaltation, and not to his suffering; For God exalted him, and then gave him that name, yea he is become a perfect Sa∣viour by his Glorification. What profit had it been to us, if he had not overcome death? therefore it is said, We seee Iesus crowned with glory and honour, &c. Heb. 2. 9. 3.Quicquid con∣venit tali, qua∣tenus tali, con∣venit omni ta∣li. If this reason be good, then we must bow at the Name Iesus written upon a wall, or in a Booke, or when it is thought of; for so it will put us in minde of dying as well as when it is heard. Then also we must bow at the name Christ, heard, seene, or thought of; because this Name doth better put us in minde of dying, than the name Iesus: yea we must bow also more especially when we reade in a Chapter, or heare the sufferings of Christ preached to us; yea at every breaking of the bread in the Sacrament, or powring out of the wine, we must bow, because Christs death and sufferings are better so notified to us than by the Name Iesus. So that there is no weight in this reason. SECTION VIII. SOme reason thus; The fulnesse of the Godhead dwels in Christ bo∣dily, Col. 2. 9. Ergo we must bow at the Name Jesus. Answ. I deny the Consequent, for if the fulnes of the Godhead should so dwell in Christ, as that the rest of the Persons were strip∣ped of the Godhead, which is blasphemy once to imagine, there might be some shew for this reason, but the whole fulnes of the Godhead dwels in every Person, in the First and Third as well as in the Second Person, Ioh. 14. 11. But onely here is the difference, that the fulnes of the Godhead dwels in Christ onely bodily, because he onely had a body ordained for him, that he might be a perfect Saviour, Heb. 10. 5. And because he is now glorified in that body. So that there is no reason for that opinion from this place, but if there were a reason in this place, it makes as much for bowing at other titles of Christ, as Iesus, yea rather at the name Christ, which is onely named in the Text; for the whole fulnesse of the Godhead dwels no more in Iesus than in Christ. But they presse it farther, thus; Christ man brings us to the Fa∣ther, and we could never have conceived rightly of the Deitie, but
by the humanitie of Christ. I answer. Christ man onely did not bring us to the Father; but Christ Mediator, God and Man; and though by Christ we are brought to the right conceiving and true knowledge of God, it is sensles to inferre hence, if the consequent were good, that therefore we must bow solely at the Name Jesus, except they can prove that Jesus brought us to the Father, and not Christ. Some say, that Jesus signifieth Christs Person, but Christ his Office, therefore we must bow rather at the Name Jesus than Christ. I answer, I have proved already, that Iesus signifies the Of∣fice of our Saviour as well as Christ, though more summarily, and I affirme againe, that the Name Christ doth every where denote Christs Person, as well as the Name Jesus, and if this distinction a∣bovesaid could be proved true, that Iesus signifieth our Saviours Person, Christ his Office, yet it will be an ill Consequent to affirme, (if it were necessary to bow at Names,) that we should bow onely at that Name that signifieth Christ Person, and not at that name that signifies his Office, seeing by his Office he brings us to God, and makes knowne unto us the Father. Therefore this reason is with∣out ground, and without any light from Scripture. The onely con∣sequent that the Scripture gives signification of upon this ground is this: Because Christ brings us to God, and reveales to us the knowledge of the Father, therefore we must pray to the Father in the Name of Christ, but it doth not say, that therefore we must bow at the Name Iesus; and upon this their ground, it may be as well inferred, that we must pray to the Father by mentioning of the Name Iesus onely, as bow to the Father at the mentioning of this Name onely. CONCLUSION. I will shut up all with this Argument drawn from the Premises. EVery Exposition of a Text, which doth advance the Glory of God, and of Christ, and doth cleere the Truth, without any am∣biguitie, and absurditie, is to be preferred before such an exposi∣tion, which derogateth from the Glory of God, and of Christ, and produceth many ambiguities, and dangerous absurdities. But this exposition of Phil. 2. 9, 10. To understand Name above every
Name given to Christ, of the Power, Glory, and Dominion of Christ above all creatures, and things, created Powers, Dignities, and Dominions, Gods Name and Power onely excepted, and to understand bowing of every knee in the Name of Jesus, of the subjecti∣on of every creature, thing, dominion, and power, to the Glory, Power, and Dominion of the Lord Jesus, advanceth the Glory of God, and of Christ, and cleeres the Truth, without any ambiguitie and absurditie. But on the other side, To expound Name above every Name in the Text, of the advancement of the Name or Title Jesus, either absolutely or relatively, above not onely all created Names, but also above all Divine Names, and Titles; and secondly, to under∣stand, bowing every knee, of things in heaven, things in earth, and things under the earth, in the Name of Jesus, of bowing of ex∣presse corporall knees, when the Name Iesus is sounded out. These expositions doe obscure the Text, doe deface the Glory of God, and of Christ, and produce many dangerous consequences and absurdities. Therefore the former interpretation of the said Text, is to be preferred before the other, yea is true, when the other is false. The dangerous Consequences, which the second opinion doth produce, are noted in the Premises to be these. 1. In respect of the whole Trinitie. 1.Part 1. Sect. 9. IT confoundeth the Persons of the Trinitie. 2.Part. 1. Sect. 1. It will make all Names and Titles of the Trinitie and Deitie, as Lord, God, Christ, Jehovah, Father, Holy Ghost, to bow knees to the Name Jesus. 2. In respect of God the Father. 1.Part 2. Sect. 3. It makes him inferiour to his Sonne, and to bow to his Son. 2.Part 1. Sect. 10. It accuseth him of crueltie and injustice, in appointing such a worship to most of his Creatures, in whom he hath not created Power of performance.
3.Part 1. Sect. 13. It maketh him to regard things of lesse importance, and to neglect the weightier. 3. In respect of God the Sonne. 1.Part 1. Sect. 12. It attributes unto him a Name, which they say; is above eve∣ry Name, yet without power and authoritie, making it onely the proper Name Jesus, which others had as well as he. 2.Part 2. Sect. 5. It overthroweth the dutie of the Text, to Angels, Devils, and Reprobates, or else it will make Christ a Saviour to them, yea it will make Christ a Saviour to Hell, sinne, death, and the Grave, which must bow as well as other things, as appeares by the Pre∣mises. 3.Part 1. Sect. 12 It deprives Christ of the honour of the most of his creatures, which cannot possibly performe the Text, as they understand it, so that it makes Christ Lord but of a few of the Creatures, who is Lord of all. 4.Part 1. Sect. 12 For those that can performe it, it gives to Christ the honour onely of one part of the body, when he will be honoured with the whole body and soule, so that it makes him Lord but of the knee onely. 5.Part 1. Sect. 12. It gives him this honour but one day in the weeke ordinari∣ly, and that but now and then in that day, and but in one place or∣dinarily, when he will be served at all times and places. So that it makes Christ Lord but for the space of a few minutes in one day of the weeke, and that but in one place. 6.Part 1 Sect. 12. It depriveth Christ of his true Subjects, and forceth upon him the members of Antichrist. 7.Part 1. Sect. 12 It depriveth Christ of his honour and glory at the great day of Judgement, and makes his Kingdome in the height of it to be extreamly ridiculous. 8.Part 2. Sect. 3. It advanceth the Sonne above the Father. 9.Part 1 Sect 9. It giveth greater honour to the Sonne, than to the Father, and so maketh inequalitie between the Persons of the Trinitie. 10.Part 2. Sect. 3. It attributeth our salvation either to the bare Name Jesus, and so it is flat Idolatry, or else it divideth Christ from himselfe, making Jesus and Christ two Persons, and from Jehovah making him not God, or above God, and so it is flat blasphemy. 4. In respect of God the Holy Ghost. 1.Part 2. Sect. 3. It makes him inferiour to the Second Person.
2.Part 1 Sect. 11 It brings his worke into bondage at the will of man, yea sometimes of vile men. 5. Concerning the Church. It gives her authoritie over Gods Word.Part 1. Sect. 11. 6. Concerning our selves. 1.Part 1. Sect. 11. It brings us into bondage, by making us to performe Gods worship at every mans pleasure, and so it enthralls Gods worship to every mans will. 2.Part 1. Sect. 11. It makes the Church a perpetuall prison, and the bowing of the knee never to be ended. 3.Part. 2. Sect. 6. It makes us to respect our owne benefit more than Gods Glory. 4.Part 1. Sect. 8, It makes us to serve Christ more corruptly than Devils and Reprobates. 5.Part 2. Sect, 6. It will make the Saints at the day of Judgement worse than Idolaters. These dangerous, and for the most part, blasphemous Conse∣quences, besides many other sensles absurdities doe necessarily a∣rise from this opinion, therefore it is insufferable and not to be endured. ERRATA. PAge 1. line 22. reade Names. pag. 2. li. 10. read Names. pag. 3. li. 17. read apposition. lin. 37. reade parentes. lin. 40. read scivit. pag. 7. lin. 7. reade Names. lin. 17. read to the Glory of which Kingdome. lin. 28. reade in the inheriting. pag. 16. lin. 32. read . Laus Deo. FINIS.
