H100A 99827613 32035
A SHORT TREATISE, SHEWING The Causes and Remedies of that General Disease spread abroad throughout this Nation, commonly termed by many the Plague of the Guts; But it is very probable to bee that sort of Flux, called by the name of Dysenteria, or Red-Flux. With some other remarkable Remedies for other Diseases worthy to bee noted. Published by N. H. of Dor∣chester, in the County of Dorset for the good of those that desire their Health. Try and Trust. Try man as the Instrument, but trust God as the Helper. LONDON, Printed for R. Ibbitson, 1658.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER: OR Any one to whom these Pre∣sence shall come; Health and Peace bee multiplied. Christian Reader, I Have as a Minister, or servant un∣to thee, prescribed away if thou wilt hearken to me, as from God, for thy good, to bee a Physitian un∣to thee both for soul and body; if thou wilt give thy heart to receive wholesome counsel and advice from God, and my self, by using and put∣ting into practice what is here set down in this following Treatise: The great and wise God knowing the inward frame and temper of all mens
hearts, knows how to suite an out∣ward judgement upon any particular person, much more upon a whole Nation, according to the inward distemper of the heart and soul of man. There is (as I am informed) a general Loosness amongst persons, and that not or a few, but many, with terrible gripings in the body; may not this fitly intimate, and put us in minde of that general Loosness not onely in Religion, for matter of Worship, but also a great Loosness, and Liberty in matter of Life and Conversation, by giving way to the satisfying of the flesh, and this is seen not only amongst prophane ones, from whom wee can expect but little better, but hath been, and still is found even amongst those which have made Profession of the Truth, and have been accounted as Pro∣fessors of the same, amongst them that are truly godly, whereby they
have fretted and grieved the Spirit of the Lord, and have caused the Name of God to bee evill spoken of. And this evill is not found onely in one corner of the Land, but gene∣rally throughout all the parts there∣of; and therefore as the sin is, so is the plague or punishment, not onely in the City of London, and the places adjoyning, but it is spread here and there over the whole Nation. Wherefore (I think) it is good for us to look about us, and to see the hand that smites, seeing it is not a mediate, but an immediate judge∣ment from God himself, and there∣fore especially to bee sought un∣to. And because it may bee, those that are in Authority, have too much winked at, and have not put in exe∣cution the Law of God, to wit, against Blasphemy, &c. There∣fore
God hath now taken the power into his own hand, and hath taken away many by death, even those a∣mongst others that were never guilty of any such horrible Crimes (it may bee) for the sins of others. The people of the Lord were punished for the sin of Acha, and yet (as far as wee know) some of them whose names were written in the Book of Life. Wherefore (Christian Reader) I would, if I could advise thee as from the Lord, that thou consider seri∣ously of these things, and desire true understanding from God: The Plague is general, and it requires general repentance, not onely by a publick humiliation, but every fa∣mily and person a part by themselves, with seeking and turning unto God. Those that finde themselves guilty, to bethink themselves especially, and labour to amend, for though the
hand of God is not upon them in par∣ticular, or whether it may, or may not bee, and so they may escape, yet it may bee for their sakes, that the hand of the Lord is gone out against others. And for those that have kept close to God (whom God have preserved) and have not yet fallen from their first Love, labor stil to keep sure foot∣ing for holiness of life, and sound∣ness of doctrine, That the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ may run on, and bee glorified amongst them which are truly sanctified, and to mourn in secret for Gods afflicting hand over his people. A word to the wise is sufficient, if so bee thou art wise for thy self, and I am thine, as thou art thy self, in the Lord, N. H.
A short TREATISE SHEWING The Causes and Remedies of that general Disease spread abroad throughout this Nation, com∣monly termed by many the Plague of the Guts, but it is very probable to be that sort of Flux, called by the name of Dysenteria; or Red-Flux. WHereas I am credibly inform∣ed that the Lord hath visited this Nation with a certain Disease, not onely in the City of London, but gene∣rally throughout the whole Nation; I thought it my duty in charity, through the instigation of certain friends, to pub∣lish to the view of those whom it may concern, as children, and others of riper years, certain remedies, which I have by
my own experience found out, for many years since, which was never before now made known unto the world, and being made use of (as it hath been upon many persons heretofore, and upon some per∣sons of late) I never failed (to my know∣ledge) the first or second day within the space of eight and forty hours, but it hath ceased and stopt without any prejudice to the person, which may seem to follow by reason of the suddenness of the cure, or any costiveness, which I know will bee ob∣jected and feared by many. And although the things prescribed for the cure of this Disease are mean and common, yet think not meanly of those weak means, which may through the blessing of God, pro∣duce strange and wonderful effects. And take this for a truth, that although the Disease have held for a month or two, or for a quarter of a year, or more, those two receits which are mentioned, or set down with the mark of a star above the rest, hath (and as far as I know) may through the blessing of God, remedy this Disease, according to the time before prescribed, or sooner, as I have found by experience, the same night.
And besides this, I have found for ma∣ny years since, that those persons which have accustomed themselves to Physick barely, and nothing else, have (for the most part of them) dyed, though some have lingered a long time in it, to wit, two or three months. And during that time they have been in extream torments by reason of those contrary humors, and in∣ward gripings of the Guts, which have brought them to a Consumption of the whole, and so have finished their end in such extream torments, as cannot well bee expressed. There are (as I am informed) many Physitians, which terme this Disease to bee the Plague of the Guts, the reason, as I suppose is; because most Physitians have not been acquainted with this Disease in this Nation, though it is common in Ire∣land, and as I have heard in Scotland, but in plain (in submission bee it spoken) it is nothing else, or nothing lesse than the Flux in the bowels, in that I finde it takes them in the same manner as it did those that had the Flux in Ireland, and are now cured with the same Remedies. And for the better understanding here∣of,
I shall here set down, 1 Briefly and in general, what a Flux it. 2 The several kinde of Fluxes, toge∣ther with their causes, that you may dis∣cern thereby the one from the other, and what little probability there is that it should bee the Plague of the Guts. 3 The Remedy for this, or any of the like Disease, so called, though inferior unto it. 4 The ordering of the body afterward in case of the worst, though I never found any danger to ensue. Of the Flux in general. If it come through much eating or drinking, or through Flegmatick matter, it cometh not often, nor continueth long, hee needeth no remedy, unless it bee cau∣sed of overmuch weakness. Of the Flux Lyenteria, to wit, Cholle, and Flegme. This is an infirmity of the retentive vertue of the stomack, with the slipperi∣ness
of the Guts, whereby the ment being taken very suddenly without digestion, like as it was received, passeth away by stool. Of the Flux or Laske Diarrhea. This is a waterish Lask, with griping, but without excoriation of the bowels, and without heat, whereby the body is con∣sumed; It is caused of all humors of the body. Of the Flux, or Laske called Dysenteria, viz. The Red-Flux. And this is the Flux which by likelihood is this Disease which is spread abroad in this Nation. This is an exulceration, or excoriation of the intrals. And is described in this manner. It is a pain of the intrals which infla∣meth, sretteth, and excoriateth the same, so as with the matter of the scouring, blood is avoyded, and it causeth much gnawing, which causeth the Pattern to go often to stool.
The causes are sharp humors which passeth through the bowels, and there ex∣ulcerateth the same, fr, and take away the fatness. Also when the body is over-charged with Choller, Melancholy, and Flegme, of which nature seeks to un∣burthen her self. Another kinde of Dysenteria, or Bloody-Flux. This cometh without scraping of the Guts, and of much more blood than the former, wherefore it is rather taken for the Flux of the Liver, than Dysenteria, though wrongfully so called. For an ordinary Laske, or Flux in Children, or griping. * Take half a handfull of Couch-grass cut, fit to boyl, of Carraway-seed, and Fennel-seed bruised (or Anniseed instead of the Fennel-seed if it cannot be had) of each half an ounce, nine or ten Plantaine leaves washed and cut, boyl these in a quart of water to a pinte, then strain it, after put in of your Pomgranet ryne poudred, of Cyn∣namon poudred, of each as much as will
lye on a groat, and a quarter of a pinte of milk, or less, and set it over the fire again, and let it boyl for the space of halfe a quarter of an hour, then take it off the fire, and let the childe drink of it warm morning and evening. A special Remedy for the cure of the Flux, cal∣led Dysenteria, or for any other Flux. * Take the inner ryne of an Oak, one great handfull, Anniseed and Carraway-seed bruised alike, one ounce, of Couch-grass cut, fit to boyl, one great handful, of Plantane washed and cut, one little hand∣ful, boyl these in a pottle of water to a quart, then strain it, and put it over the fire again, and put in a quarter of a pinte of milk, to sweeten it something, because of the rankness of the grass; as also Cyn∣namon poudred, and Sanguis Draconis (or Dragons blood) of each as much as will lye on six pence, let it boyl again half a quarter of an hour. Drink of this a good draught first and last, warm, fasting in the morning two hours after, and two or three houres after supper ere you go to bed. Note this, that you may not bee de∣ceived,
your Couch-grass, is not your Knot grass, for that will do more hurt than good, but it is your Long-grass which runs upon the ground, with sweet knots or knobs. For a Flax in extremity, with never so great gripings, and the party worn away. Take of Almonds one pound blancht, and stampt in a Mortar small, twelve yolks of new laid Eggs roasted hard, bray them together, take a pinte of strong Vinegar, put it into the stuffe, and mingle them altogether, and put all into a fair pot of earth (but remember to stamp it well) then take five or six spoonfulls at once warm in a cup, and drink four or five times a day if need be. Proba est. Although this Receit cannot chuse but bee good in it selfe, yet it hath not been tryed by mee as often as the former Re∣medy. In all these Fluxes you may make use of this white, Plaister, if you please, and partly because it is good for many special uses besides this disease of the Flux, and partly because children are not so subject to
take inward applications, as outward, therefore I shall er set down how it is made, with the Remedies thereof. Take of the best Sll oyl a quart and four ounces; Red-lead and White-lead a∣like, one pound, well beaten into fine dust; Cape-soap, (or Castle-soap) finely sliced twelve ounces, mingle these well together in an earthen pipkin well glazed (it must hold a gallon to hold this quantity) ir it with an Iron ball having a handle to it, when this is well mingled together, the Soap come upward, then set it upon a fire of ols an hour and hal, still stir∣ring it, till the redness hee turned into a gray colour, then drop a drop of it upon a trencher; and if it cleave unto the tren∣cher it is enough, then pour it out by little and little upon a table, and with a little fresh grease anoint your hands, and the table, make it up roules as fast as you can; keep it for your use two or three yeares, the elder the better. But you ac∣cording to your need you may take an e∣qual quantity of each, whether lesse or more (I  of this b by the way.) It being laid to the stomack; provokes appetite, it taketh a way any grief, or a∣bout
the stomack. It is a pr melody for the Colick, it being appiled to the belly. And being laid to the rene of the back, it easeth the bloody-flux, the run∣ning of the Rels, the h of the Kid∣neyes, the weakness of the back. It heal∣eth all swellings and bruises: It drieth a∣way running humors without breaking of the skin: It taketh away all aches: It breaketh fellons and other impostumes, and healeth them; being laid to the head, it is good for the Evill: It helpeth the headach, and good for eyes. This in a Manuscript. There was once a Gentlewoman, ex∣traordinarily perplexed night and day with such inward gripings and frettings for the pice of almost half a year, as I was truly informed by her husband, so as that the pain with the continuance of it was not, nor cannot now bee expressed: Shee had taken Physick from several Phy∣sitians, with all the advice that could bee given, or means administred unto her; yet all was in vain, but still grew worse and worse rather than better: At the last, I my self being brought by the providence of God into the Town where shee dwelt,
and hearing of it, I went unto her, and had some conference with her, desiring with∣all to accept of a Drink which I would make for her, I having had (as I told her) much experience of good it had done, and likewise to incourage her thereunto, I certified her that there could bee no dan∣ger in the taking of it, seeing they were all ordinary things, and that there was nothing Physical whereby to stir the bo∣dy, or to make it any way worse than it was, yet shee was loath to venture upon it because shee had tried so many Physitians already, and they had done her no good (which is a great fault found in many, be∣cause they have had a disease long, and have tried many, therefore if any come that should prescribe any other way, then what was prescribed before, they think it impossible, as if one person may not ex∣ceed another, and may not have know∣ledge in that disease which another hath not) so this Gentlewoman having had is so long, thought it impossible to receive any cure, and yeelded her selfe for dead, being worn away to an Anatomy, or Consumption, yet by much perswasion, I obtained her leave to make it for her, and
shee promised mee to take it, and that night shee drank the first draught, but it made such a striving and stirring in her body to get the mastery of the disease, that I could not perswade her to drink of it any more, yet that very draught made a perfect cure, and shee re∣covered. Now because the body is over-burthe∣ned with Choller, Melancholy, and Flegm, therefore I hold it very useful and neces∣sary, that before you take any of the for∣mer Remedies for the Flux, that you take this purge, which is very needful for the ex∣pelling of those humors formerly mentio∣ned, if so bee that the party bee not too much worn away; if so, then I could ad∣vise you to forbear any such means, and onely make use of that drink for them of riper years noted with a star, neither is it to bee given unto children, for the drinke it selfe will cure it without any such phy∣sick. A preparative for the purge which I could advise you to take before. Take as much Senae finely poudered, as will lye on half a crown, with the pap of two or three roasted apples well buttered, and
sweetned with sugar, and so mingled al∣together with the powder of Senae, eat that instead of your supper (and drink a little warm broth after if you please) a little before you go to bed, it will lye in your body all the night, and not in the least disturb you of your sleep, but to∣wards the morning it will begin to work, and it may give you some two or three stools, according to the temper of your body, it may bee more, yet it will not make you sick at all, but you may wear a Wastecoat that night, or when you finde it beginne to worke, let a Wastecoat bee warmed, or keep it in your bed all the night, that it may be fit for use; I would not have you to rise out of your bed about the house untill you have taken the purge, or finde that first to move or stir in your body. About an houre after the preparative have done working, take this purge fol∣lowing in your bed. Take of your Diaphenicon, give five drams to a woman, and fix to a man, in a quarter of a pinte of White-wine, stirring it about by the fire with your knife untill it bee wholly dissolved, and so take it
warm, lying there till it begin to work (I mean for the space of an houre) then let your cloaths bee well warmed, and rise, having before hand a good fire prepared in your Chamber, cloath your selfe very hot, the hotter the better, although you are in a sweating condition all the while the phy∣sick is working, and fit by the fire, or walls up and down in your Chamber till it hath done working, and keep out the ayre as much as may bee. After every stool you ought to drinke  draught of broth made of a small neck of Veal, which must bee put over the fire before you take the purge, that it may bee in readiness, putting into your liquor one∣ly a good crust of wheaten bread, and a little salt. About an hour or more after the purge hath done working, take your rest upon your bed, being covered hot for the space o an hour and half, for to refresh nature that hath been something wearied. In the mean time let this broth be made and provided. Take a Chicken and boyl it in fair water with oat-meal groats (or great Oat-meal) finely beaten in a mortar, strain them in a cloath with some of the liquor, then put
thereto Violet leaves, Strawberry leaves, the roots of Fennel and Parsly, the pith of them being taken out with a little whole Mace, Saffron, and Nutmeg, and one pen∣niworth of Currans, boyl half the quanti∣ty away, and so eat and drink thereof. This purge purgeth Flegme, Choller, and Melancholy very easily, and never offends the stomack, neither maketh the party sick, taking it in this manner after the preparative before mentioned. There are certaine cautions to bee ob∣served both for meats and drinks for the space of two or three dayes, while you are taking the Physick or the drink. 1 Remember that for that time you drink neither Beer or Ale, strong or small, neither any Wine, unless it bee red Wine with a toast in it, but let your drink bee water and sugar, ordered in this man∣er, boyl in three pintes of water an ounce of Cynamon broken in peeces, for the space of half an hour, and then make it a little sweet with loaf Sugar, and so drink it as you do your ordinary drink, warm. 2 Abstain during the same time, or
longer, from Cabbage or pottage made of it, and green fruit. 3 Abstain from salt meats, as also from fresh Eeles and Playse. 4 Put in your pottage leaves of Plan∣tane three or four, and eat dry meats for the most part, as Mutton, your Beef mode∣rately salted, Rabbets, &c. And remember that at night when you go to bed, the same day in which you have taken the purge, you may take a draught of that drink which is appointed for this disease: If you are to make use of Glisters it is good to put the juyce of Plantane in∣to them. Exitus acta probat.
