H136A 40642747 50394
Iter Boreale, the Second part, RELATING The Progress of the Lord General Monk, Calling in the Secluded Members, their Voting King CHARLS the Second home, his Joyfull reception at Dover. and his Glorious Conduct through London, to His Royal Palace at White Hall. By T. H. a Person of Quality. To the Tune of When first the Scottish Wars began. GOod people all hark to my Call, Ile tell you all, what did befall, And happend of late; Our Noble valiant General Monk Came to the Rump, who lately stunk, With their Councel of State, Admiring what this man would do, His secret mind there's none could know, They div'd into him as much as they could, George would not be won with their silver and gold. Another invention then they sought, Which long they wrought for to be brought, To clasp him with they, Quoth Vane and Scot, Ile tell you what, We'l have our Plot, and he shall not, We'l carry the sway; Let's Vote him a thousand pound a year, And Hampton Court for he and his Heir, Quoth George indeed you'r free Parliament men, To cut a thong out of another mans skin. They sent him then with all his hosts, To break our Posts, and raise our Ghosts, Which was their intent, To cut our Gates and Chains all down Unto the ground, this trick they found To make him be shent, This Plot the Rump did so accord, To cast an odium on my Lord, But in this task, he was hard put unto't 'Twas enough to infect both his horse and his foot. So when my Lord perceiv'd that night, What was their spight, he brought to light Their knaveries all. The Parliament of forty eight, Which long did wait came to him straight To give them a Fall, And some Phanatical people knew That George would give 'em their fatal due; For indeed he did requite them agen, He pull'd the Monster out of his den. To the House our worthy Parliament, With good intent they boldly went To Vote home the King, And many hundred people more Stood at the door which waited for Good tidings to bring But some in the House whose hands were in blood In great opposition like Traitors they stood, And yet I believe, 'tis very well known, That those that were for him were twenty to one. They call'd the League and Covenant in, To be read again to every man, But what comes next, All Sequestrations null and void, The people said, none should be paid, So this was the Text, For as I heard all the people say, They voted King Charls the second of May, Bonefires burning, Bells did ring, And our streets did eccho with God blesse the King▪ Our General then to Dover goes In spight of foes or deadly blows, Saying, Vive le Roy, And all the Glories of the Land, At his command there they did stand In Triumph and Joy. Good Lord what a Sumptuous sight 'twas to see Our good Lord General fall on his knee, To welcome home his Majesty, And own'd his Sacred Soveraignty. Then all this worthy Noble Train Came back again with Charlemain Our Soveraign great, Lord Mayor in his Scarlet Gown With's Chain so long went through the Town In Pomp and State, The Livery men each side the way, Upon this great Triumphant day. Five rich Maces carried before, And my Lord himself the Sword he bore, Then Vive le Roy the Gentry did sing, For General Monk rode next to the King, With acclamations shouts and cries, I thought they would have rend the Skies. The Conduits ravished with Joy, As I might say, did run all day Great plentie of wine, And everie Gentleman of note, In's Velvet coat that could be got, In glorie did shine, There were all the Peers and Barons bold, Richlie clad in silver and gold, Marched through the streets so brave, No greater pomp a King could have: And thus conducted all along Throughout the throng til he did come Unto White Hall, Attended by these Noble men, Bold Hectors kin, that brought him in With the General, Who was the man that brought him home, And plac'd him on his Royal Throne, 'Twas General Monk did do the thing, So God preserve our Gracious King. FINIS. LONDON Printed for Henry Brome at the Gun in Ivy-Lane 1660.
