I422B R35434 15305242 103386
A JOURNAL OF THE PROCEEDINGS Of the pretended PARLIAMENT IN DUBLIN, From the 7th, to the 20th of this Instant May. A BREVIATE OF The Late King's Speech; AND THE SPEAKER'S Repeal of the ACT of SETTLEMENT, and taking away the King's Supremacies, with the Names of the Protestant LORDS Spiritual and Temporal Sitting in Parliament. ON Tuesday, the 7th. of May, the Parliament Assembled according to the Return of the Writts, at the Inns in Dublin; the late King being present with his Crown and Robes, Attended by Twenty Two Peers, Four of which were Spiritual Lords Protestants, viz. Dr. Dobbin Bishop of Meth, Dr. Wittenhal Bishop of Cork, Dr. —, Bishop of Limerick, Dr. —, Bishop of Ossory. And of the Temperal Lords there were only Four Protestants, viz. Earl of Granard, Lord Longford, Lord Howth, and Earl of Kingsaile. The late King made a Speech, in which he assured them he would Consent to the Inact∣ing of such Laws as should Relieve them which were prejudiced by the late Act of Settlement,
which done, the Commons proceeded, to the Election of their Speaker, who after half an Hours Conference Chose Sir Richard Nagle, who in the behalf of the Commons craved the Four usual Petitions, which granted, the House Adjurned till the Morrow. Wednesday the 8th. The Lords passed the Bill of Recognition of the late King's Right. The 9th. was Assention day. Friday the 10th, the Commons passed the Recognition Bill; on the same day Sir Ʋlic Burke brought into the House of Commons a Bill for the Repealing the Acts of Settlement and Explanation; Which the House received with an Huzza, and then read a first and second time, and ordered it to be Committed. The same day some moved thereupon in the House, that nothing could be more Ad∣vantagious to the King and Country, then to destroy the Horrid and Barbarous Act of Set∣tlement, as they was pleased to call it: And whoever should alledge the Contrary, shall be Deemed an Enemy to both 'twas moved by another Member, that the Act of Settlement ought to be burnt by the Common Hang∣man. Saturday the 11th. The late King gave his Assent to the Bill of Recognition, and Ad∣journed till Munday. Munday the 13th. A Bill with some Limita∣tions, was Read in the House of Lords, a∣bridging the Bill sent from the Commons for Repealing the Act of Settlement, and only giving the old Proprietor a Moiety. Tuesday the 14th. A Bill passed the House of Commons, Impowering the King to Dispose of all Pattent Offices in Posession or Revertion, after the 20th. day of May instant; and ano∣ther Bill to Bar all Writts of Error and Ap∣pales to England, Asserting that no Law of England can bind that Kingdom; Both which Bills were sent up to the House of Lords. Wednesday the 15th. A Bill was Read in the House of Commons for Repealing Poyning's Law, and also another Bill for giving the King 15000 l. a Month for one Year, to be Levied on the Tenement, but to be Allowed them in their Rents by their Land-lords with∣out regard to Previous Courtails. Thursday the 16th. A Bill was brought in by the House of Commons, for taking away the Kings Supremacies in Ecclesiasticks, and A∣brogating all Penal Laws against Papists: In the House of Commons there are only five Protestant Members, viz. Sir John Made, Jo∣seph Coghlan, Sir Thomas Crosby, Arthur — Jeremy Douovan, Esq; The same day it was moved in the House of Lords, that all absenters Lands should go towards Reprisals. The King since the Session of Parliament, has Created (the Lord Chancellor Chief Justice Nugent, Lord General, Mr. Carty, Sir Valentine Braone, Collonel, Luttrell, Collonel Sarsefield, and about fourteen more) Lords, the Act for Seizing most of the Absenters Estates is since passed, and is so strictly put in Execu∣tion, that the Shops of poor Huckster-Women whose Husbands are in England, are daily plundered, which makes Dublin Ring with the Cries of the poor. Lincensed May, 31. 1689. James Frasier. London Printed by John Wallis in White-Fryars. 1689.
