I69A R17622 13386280 99354
AN Impartial Account OF THE DOCTRINES OF THE Church OF ROME. VIZ. The Pope's Supremacy. His Infallibility. His Power of Indulgence. The Lawfulness of Equivo∣cation. No Faith to be kept with Hereticks. That the Pope hath Power to declare Heresie, and who are Hereticks. That he may Excommunicate Emperours, Kings and Prin∣ces, &c. SHEWING, What ROME was in its Pristine Purity; And how it hath degenerated in the several Centuries, by Ushering in those HORRID INNOVATIONS. Proved from their own Authors. In a LETTER to a FRIEND in the Countrey. Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum? Licensed, WILLIAM JANE, March 3. 1678/. LONDON, Printed by H. L. and are to be sold by Richard Butler next door to the Lamb and Three Bowls in Barbican. 1679.
An Impartial Account of the Doctrines of the Church of Rome. SIR, TO deal ingenuously with you, I cannot be of their Opinion, (be they who they will) who think the present Plot either a Trick of State, or a Puritanical Design upon the Papists. This I am easily perswaded to believe, because of that ill Aspect it hath upon the former. And that it is neither a Design managed by a few dis∣contented Persons, nor a Contrivance of the Jesuits only, I am very well satis∣fied, because I know that the former had no reason for their Revenge, nor any pretence, either from ill usage or Persecution, to raise their Spleens. And for the latter, though I am assured that they are a sort of active, zealous and hot-brain'd Furioso's, and do not doubt but that they have a very great Hand in this Business, yet can J not consent that they are the only Persons concern'd in it. I am apt rather to look upon it as a De∣sign of the Papists in general, than of the Jesuits in particular; And this I am the rather induc'd un∣to, because of those few Persons who have been already discover'd among the Ecclesiasticks, all are not of that Order; And among the Laicks some there are who are no great Lovers nor Admirers of them. But the Argument which doth most fortifie my Belief hereof, is taken from the Conside∣ration of the avowed Doctrine and Principles of the Church of Rome, and its constant Practice (whenever it had power) correspondent thereunto. If therefore I shall make it Appear, that the declared Doctrine and avowed Principles of that Church, are such as do directly tend to the promoting and encouraging Acts of this Nature, and that in all Ages (unless interrupted by want of power or opportunity) their Practices have been constantly correspondent to those Principles; I shall not need to give you any further Character whereby to know what sort of Persons they are, who are engaged in this Conspiracy. I shall begin with their Doctrine and Principles, and to make good that part of their Character, I shall offer some Instance, and those such as are not the private opinions of some particular Men, or some particular Society of Men only, but the declared Doctrines of their Church, VIZ. ☞ The Pope's Supremacy; His Infallibility; His Power of Indulgence; The Lawful∣ness of Equivocation; And that no Faith is to be kept with Hereticks; That the Pope hath Power to declare Heresie, and who are Hereticks; To Excommunicate Emperours, Kings and all Magistrates; To absolve all their Subjects from their Obedience; To depose and de∣throne them, and confer their Kingdoms on others; And that so soon as any one is Excom∣municate, ipso facto his Subjects are absolved from his Government, and from the Oath of Al∣legiance whereby they were bound unto him. This is the now Declared and Avowed Do∣ctrine of the Church of Rome. But Ab initio non fuit sic; This, like many other things in their Religion, is but a meer Innovation. [The Time was when Pope Gregory the Great could say to the Emperour Mauritius, Vobis obedientiam praebere desidero, I desire to give you due obedience. And that Pope Leo with great submission made suit to the Emperour Theodosius to have a Synod called. The Time was when no man durst presume to ascend the Papal Chair, till by the Autho∣rity of the Emperour he was Licensed so to do. The time was when the Popes of Rome dated their Apostolic Letters with the Stile of the Reign of their Lords the Em∣perours, till Pope Paschalis Anno Domini 1070. changed the Stile, since whose time the date of their Epistles do only Note the year of their own Apostleship or Papacy. 'Tis true, that before they came to this height, they did make frequent Attempts, and in several Councils did very much struggle for Primacie: but then they were so modest as only to desire a Priority of Order; And yet it was not without great difficulty, and a great Expence both of Time and Treasure that they obtained this. The Greek Church then did, and to this day do oppose it. Insomuch that Michael Palaologus Emperour of the East, after his Death, was denied an honourable Burial, because in this Point he had submitted to the Church of Rome.
But in the Western Church they have been so successful in their Attempts, that they have improved their Primacie into Supremacie, and their Priority of Order into an Ar∣bitrary and boundless Tyranny. The Possession of this Jewel was a long time contended for by the Patriarchs of Con∣stantinople and Rome, both of them laying claim to it. In the days of the Emperour Mauritius; John Nesteutes, (so stiled because of his great Temperance,) was Patriarch of Constantinople, who though he was a very temperate man, yet he was very proud and haughty; And seeing that the Imperial Seat was then in Constantinople, and that Rome was then besieged by the Lombards, he thought he had a fair opportunity to advance his own above all other Chairs, and therefore caused himself to be stiled The Oecumenic or Uni∣versal Bishop, to whom Pelagius 2. and Gregory the first, surnamed The Great, mightily op∣posed themselves: Gregory, in opposition to that arrogant Title which John assumed to him∣self, caused himself to be stiled Servus servorum Domini, ie. The Servant of the Servants of the Lord; And in his Epistles to Mauritius touching this matter, he calleth this proud Title which John had assumed, A Name of Vanity, a Prophane Stile, Antichristian, and the Usurper of it, The Fore-runner of Antichrist; So far was the then Bishop or Rome from affecting the name or thing. But when Phocas had not only conspired against, but basely murdered his Master Man∣ritius, together with his Wife and Children, and taken upon him to Rule the Empire; The Patriarch of Constantinople, for opposing this cruel Parricide, fell into disfavour; which Bonifacius 3. (next Successor but one to Greg. Magn.) observing, stept in, and unwilling to lose so fair an opportunity, and by flattering that cruel Murderer, obtained of him to be stiled Ʋniversal Bishop, and that the Church of Rome should be called the Head of all other Churches. Thus you see how they came by this gaudy and glorious Title, This Name of Vanity and Badge of Antichrist. And how well they have kept it since, with what care and cau∣tion they have preserved it, how tender they have been over it, how impatient to have it question'd, with what zeal they have always maintained and defended it, and how much they have improved it to their own advantage, will appear by that Train of Instances I am now about to offer to you. Their Angelical Doctor Aquinas, so much own'd and reverenc'd by all of them, being an un-exceptionable Witness, shall be the first I produce to make good my Charge against them. As to the first Branch thereof he is very po∣sitive, Quicunque resistit Authoritati Romanae Ecclesi, Haeresin incurrit. Qu quidem Authoritas principaliter residet in summo Pontifice, Th. Aq. 22. qu. 11.2, 3. for he tells us, That whosoever resisteth the Authority of the Church of Rome, is guilty of Heresie: And he further explaineth himself when he adds, That this Authority doth principally reside in the Pope. And what shall be done with these Hereticks, he instructs us, For, saith he, they may be lawfully put to death by the secular Power, Haeretici possunt juste occidi in judicio se∣culari, & rebus suis privari, etiamsi alios non corrumpant; magis quàm rei crimine laesae Majestatis, vel quàm cudentes falsam monetam. Idem. 22. q. 10. &c. & qu. 11. 3 c. and deprived of their Goods, yea, though they do not infect others. And he further adds, That they may more justly be punished with death, than those who are guilty of High Treason, or Coining false money. By this Doctrine you see, all who are not of the Romish Persuasion, or to speak more properly, all who do not truckle under, and submit themselves to the Pope's Authority, are reputed Hereticks, and all such as are destin'd to Ruine and Destruction; so that we can promise our selves no security. That any of us do live; enjoy our Religion, our Li∣berty and our Estates, next to the divine Goodness and Protection, we owe it only to their want of power and opportunity; For, Non decrit virus, nisi desunt vires. It ought
therefore to be our great care ut desint vires, that they never gain so much power over us, as will enable them to execute this their barbarous and bloody Doctrine upon us. The mischievous consequences hereof are at first sight evident to every one, that hath but half an Eye open. But to make them, if possible, more plain, I shall shew you what strange Superstructures they have built upon this Foundation, and how by Vertue thereof they always have, and still do greatly trouble the whole Christian World. The first I shall mention is that Position of theirs, That Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks. Who are Hereticks Tho. Aquinas hath already told you, and that no Contracts, Leagues, Societies, Promises, Vows or Oaths are a sufficient security to such, when they have to do with those of the Church of Rome, this Position plainly demonstrates. And that this is the avowed and declared doctrine of that Church, we have the Suffrage of a whole Council of Bishops, viz. The Council of Constance, by whom this Doctrine was own'd, affirmed and practised. And John Huss, Hierom of Prague and Savanarola felt the mischief of the Violation of Publick Faith. The same thing was also fiercely disputed in the Diet at Worms, in the Case of Luther. And had not Caesar been a better Christian than the Ecclesiasticks, and more a Gentleman than his Holiness; Luther, notwithstanding his safe Conduct, had not return'd safely from thence. But lest any secular Princes hereafter, should, either through scruple of Conscience, or in Point of Honour, think themselves obliged to keep their word, and so hinder them of their Prey when it is in their hands; the Doctrine is now emproved, and we are told, There are two distinct Tribunals, and the Ecclesiastical is the Superior; and therefore, Becanus in Theol. Scholast. if a secular Prince gives his Subjects a safe Conduct, he cannot extend it to the Superiour Tribunal, nor by any Security given hinder the Bishop or the Pope to exercise their Jurisdiction. Now this Position is supported by two others, viz. The Pope's Power of Dispensation; And the Lawfulness of Equivocation. Where these Conspire together, it is impossible that any Oaths or Contracts, Vows or Promises should stand before them. And if these will not, what Tye can hold them fast? That the Pope is absolutely above the whole Church, Lib. 2 de Gencil. c. 17. and above a General Council, so as he acknowledges no Judges on Earth over himself, is confi∣dently Asserted by Bellarmine. And with him Martin Azpileveta, Papa nulli homini vel legi humanae quoad poenam sub∣jictu, Euchirld. p. 738. Papa habet in om∣nes Christi fideles Jurisdictionem im∣media sibi à Chri∣sto concessam. Idem p. 883. the Navar Doctor agrees, when he saith, The Pope is subject to no Man, nor is he Accountable to any Humane Law. And he seems to give a Rea∣son of this Assertion afterwards, when he tells us, That the Pope hath Jurisdiction over all Christian People, granted immediately to himself by Christ. And that by Vertue of this Superiority he hath Power to dis∣pense with the Canons and Decrees of Councils at his pleasure: This is so great a Jewel in his Tripple Crown, that as it was not with∣out great difficulty obtain'd, (being Condemn'd by two General Councils, that of Constance Anno Dom. 1415. and that of Basil 1431.) so will it not easily be parted with. And that he hath Power, not only to dispense with the Decrees of Councils, but with the Laws of God, the Law of Nature, and all Vows, Oaths, Contracts and Promises among Men, is so known an Article of the Papist's Faith, that he must be bad little acquainted with them, who is ignorant thereof. And of so great profit and ad∣vantage, both to the Pope himself and his Courtiers, that he that questions it, touches the Apple of their Eye.
If a Man have taken an Oath of a thing lawful and horest, To. Aq. 22. qu. 9. A. 9.3 and in this Power, yet if it hinders him from doing a greater good, the Pope can dispense with his Oath, and take off the Obligation, saith one of the most moderate of them, Canus Bishop of the Canaries. Reiect de poenitent. If any Man have Promised a Woman to Marry her, and is betrothed to her, and hath sworn it, yet if he will before the Consummation enter into a Monastery, his Oath shall not bind him, his Promise is Null; but his second Promise, that shall stand. This is esta∣blished, and whosoever denes it is Accursed by the Council of Trent. Sess. 8. Can. 6. If a Case happen wherein the Pope hath no right to interpose with a Dispensation, yet the plenitude of his Power can supply that defect. By Vertue of this did Pope Clement 5. Quonquam de jure non pussumus, tamen explenituine Pote∣stl dictum Or∣dinem reprobamus. condemn the Order of Knights Templers, saying Though by right we cannot do it, yet by the fulness of Power we condemn the said Order. The Pope can dispense always, and in all things where there is cause and in many things where there is no cause, sed sub majori pretio, under a greater Price, said the Clerk of the Datary. But Mosconius in his Books of the Majesty of the Militant Church, goes farther: for he tells us, That the Pope can dispense supra Jus, contra Jus, above Law, and against Law and Right; And he gives us this Reason; For, saith he, the Pope's Tribunal and Gods is but one, and therefore every reasonable Creature is subject to the Pope's Empire. Arch-Bishop Ʋsher citeth a certain Roman Doctor, whom though he doth not name, yet he gives us these Hints, B. P. . Epistol. I. R. Impres. An. 1609. The Gentle∣man's business was to wipe off the Imputation of Cruelty from the Powder Plot; And he gives this Reason for it, Because both Seeds and Root of an evil Herb must be destroyed; And taking Notice of the Oath of Allegiance imposed on them, he laughs aloud at the Simplicity of it; His words are worth remembring, Sed vide in tanta astutia, quanta Sim∣plicitas! &c. But see what Simplicity here is in so great craft! When he had Placed all his security in that Oath, he thought he had framed such a manner of Oath, with so many cir∣cumstances, which no man could any way dissolve with a safe Conscience. But he could not see, that if the Pope dissolve the Oath, all its Knots, whether of being faithful to the King, or of Admitting no Dispensation are accordingly dissolved. Yea, I will say a thing more ad∣mirable; You know, I believe, that an unjust Oath, if it be evidenty known to be such, or only declared such, it obligeth no man: That the Kings Oath is unjust, is sufficiently de∣clared by the Pastor of the Church himself. You see now that the Obligation of it is vanished into smoke, and that the Bond which so many wise men thought was made of Iron, was less than straw. It would be endless to produce all that may be drawn out of their own approved Au∣thors touching this Business. I shall therefore only add one or two Instances of the con∣curring Practice of their Holy Fathers, which done, will sufficiently demonstrate, that this is the declared and avowed Doctrine of their Church. In the Yeer 1525. was the Battel of Pavia, between Charles the fifth Emperour, and Francis the First of France: In the Battel the French King was taken Prisoner, and carried to Madrid in Spain, where he continued for many Months under Confinement; But at length, upon an Oath by him taken, whereby he obliged himself in several things to the Emperour, he was enlarged, and returned to his own Kingdom. Pope Clement the seventh sent to Congratulate with him, but that was not all, his business under-hand was, Hister Cyail. Trid. . 1. to Engage him in a Confederation against the Emperour; which being Ratified in Cugvas, May 22. 1526. be∣tween the Pope, the French King, and the Princes in Ital, under the Name of the most
Holy League, the Pope absolved the King from the Oath taken in Spain, for the Obser∣vation of the things agreed upon, and so gave him leave to be Perjur'd. Pope Clement the eighth did very much press the French King to joyn with Spain in the Invasion of England; But he was answered, Card. Ossatus Epist. 87. ad D. de Ville-roy. That the King was Tyed by an Oath to the Queen of England. To which the Pope Replied, That the Oath was made to an Heretick, but he was bound in an∣other Oath to God and the Pope, that Persons under the degree of Sovereign should indeed keep their Covenants, but Supreme Princes may without any danger to their Reputation, make Co∣venants and break them, lie, betray, &c. If the Authority of their own Approved Writers, and the Suffrages of their Holy Fathers, the Ppes, whose Judgment and Practice always have been, and still are consonant thereunto, may suf∣fice to Notifie the Avowed and declared Doctrines of their Church; We have, you see, both these setting their Hands and Seals hereunto. And how mightily that Position of their, (That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics) is supported hereby; and how mischievous an Influence this Doctrine hath upon all the Affairs of Mankind; doth plainly appear. For, so long as these Men believe, that they either are, or may be dispens'd with when they please, what Scruple will they make of falsifying their Vows, breaking their Oaths, violating their Promises, or making void their Covenants, when they have but the least hope of gaining any Advantage thereby? What duty can Parents expect from their Children, whilst such a Corban is allowed them? What Obedience can Sovereigns hope for from their Subjects? What Fidelity can one Friend look for from another? What security can any man have in having to do with Men of this Persuasion? What certainty is there, either in their Promises to God, or Faith to Men, seeing both the one and the other are in the Pope's power to dispense with; Nay, though they swear that they will not procure a Dispensation, nor believe it in the power of any one to dispense with them; yet can they as well be dispens'd with for that Perjury as the other, so that it is impossible to Tye them so fast, but the Pope can unloose them. But this Article of their Faith, (That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics) hath not only this to support it: It hath another Crutch also to lean upon, and that is The Doctrine of Equivocation; Which is a main Pillar in this Rotten Fabrick. By Vertue hereof they can make insignificant all Oaths and Promises, deceive the Questions of Magistrates, conceal their Names and tell false ones, elude all Examinations, and say any thing that may serve their own interest and Advantage. Though we must confess, that this Doctrine is not so publickly owned in their Church is the former, yet those whole Practices are correspondent thereunto, find Warranty for their so doing herein. Whosoever estioneth the lawfulness of it, is not only look'd upon with an ill Eye, but severely Censured by many of their great Doctors and Casuists; Father Barnes, who wrote a Book against Lying and Equivocating, was suspected for an Heretic, and smarted severely under their Hands for it. Emmanuel Sa, Sanchez, Emonerius, Navar, Diana, Cardinal Cajetan, Hot multi diunt, quo sen∣tentiam post qu tu con∣scientiâ lequi. Instruct. Sacord l. 5. c. 37. and Cardinal Tolet, having Enumerated several Instances thereof, at last concludes. Many say the same thing, whose Doctrine any man may follow with a safe Conscience. I might add many Instances out of their own Writers, but this is so known a practice of the Members of that Church, and so much Countenanced by their Church it self, that it is obvious to every one. And how great a Support this is to that Polition of theirs be∣fore-mentioned, is plain; for to dissolve all their Oaths and Promises, and make void their Faith given, they need be at no greater charge or trouble, than only the pretence of a mental Reser∣vation. Thus have I given you one Instance, in that Assertion of theirs, (That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics) which Assertion being more an Adjective than to stand by it self, they are forced to sup∣port it with two Crutches, known by the Names of DISPENSATION and EQUVOCATION, the mischievous Influence of which Triumvirate upon all Humane Societies, is but too palpable. My next Instance shall be in the Doctrine of The Pope's Supremacy. By which they Exalt him far above all Principalities and Powers, making him not only an Uni∣versal
Bishop and his Church the Head of all other Churches; but avouching, That he is absolutely above the whole Church, Be darw. l. 2, de Concil. c. 17. and above a General Council, so as he acknowledges no Judges on Earth above himself. And as if all this were too little, ascribing unto him an absolute Sovereignty and uncontroulable Dominion over Emperours, Kings and all Magistrates, by Vertue whereof he hath power to Excommunicate them, or any of them, to absolve all their Subjects from their Obedience, to depose and deone them, and confer their Kingdoms on others. Though the Pope's Claim to be Episcopus Episcoporum, the Ʋniversal Bishop, Head of the Church, and ve a General Council, be a meer Novelty and innovation, the up-start brood of noted Am∣bition, such a thing as simple and pious. Antiquity abhorr'd to think of; The former bearing Date only from the Usurpation of Pope Boniface 3. And the latter having been since condemned by two of their own General Councils, viz. That of Constance, and that of Basil, yet now they are look'd upon as certain and Fix'd Points of their Faith, and eagerly defended by their most Approved Writers, to be the undoubted and inherent Right of St. Peters Successors; And no wonder, for they do not stick to tell us, That the Bope is a God upon Earth; That the Sentence of God and the Pope is one and the same thing. As also the Tribunals and Courts of God ana the Pope; and to doubt of the Power of the Pope, is as much as to doubt of the Power of God. Now if these things be true, which in their Books are laid down as infallible Maxims, the Ʋniversality and Headship, Superiority to Councils, and what not, do by a necessity of consequence belong unto the Pope. But how mon∣strous Blasphemy this is against God, and how destructive of all Order and Government in the World, is but too notoriously manifest. And that this is the Avowed Doctrine of their Church, is so well known by them, so willingly owned, and upon all occasions so hotly contended for and maintained, that they will not put us to the proof of it. But this is not all, It is not enough for their Lord God the Pope to be Head of the Church, but he must be so of all the World too: He must have the Power of both Swords, Spiritual and Tem∣poral, in his own Hands. All Empeours, Kings and Princes must hold their Crowns and Scepters in Fee from him, and that not in Fee simple neither, but only as Tenants at Will, liable to his Cen∣sure upon all occasions, and upon no occasion sometimes; subject to be Excommunicated, Deposed, Dethroned and Dispossessed of their Temporalties, whenever he pleaseth, or is displeased rather. Though this be one of their dearling Doctrines, yet sometimes (especially when they want power and opportunity) they will either deny, excuse or palliate it as much as they can. And therefore for the proof of this, I shall endeavour to produce such Evidences as they themselves shall not be able to deny, and may suffice to convince any man, that this is not only the Doctrine of their Church, but the most beloved Doctrine thereof. The first Evidence I shall produce for this, is their great Champion, who tells us, De um. Pontif. l. 5. c. 6. & 7. That the Pope hath a supreme Power of disposing the tempor althings of all Christians in order to a spiritual good. And that the Ecclesiastical Republick can command and compel the Temporal, which is indeed its subject, to change the Administration, to depose Princes, and to appoint others, when it cannot otherwise defend the Publick Good. Suarez, a Portugez, and Professor in the University of Conimbra, maintain∣eth, Desens. Fid. Cath. l. 3. cap. 23. sect. 10. & sect. 8.20. That the Pope hath Superiority over Kings as Subjects, to depose them, not only for spiritual Crimes, as Heresie and Schism, but for temporal faults, be∣cause a Tyrannical Government tendeth always to the destruction of Souls: And that when a King is sentenced by the Pope to deprivation or death, the Exe∣cutioner who is first in Place, is he to whom the Pope shall commit the Authority. And if there be no Direction or Assignation in the Santence, special or general, then de Jure it appertains to the next Sac∣cessor, so as the Successor be apparent, and also that he be a Catholic. But if he be doubtful or no Ca∣tholit, then it devolves to the Commonalty of the Kingdoin. And he further adds, that this Power is morenecessary over Princes than over Subjects. Cardinal Tales says, and is commended by others for it, That when a Prince is Excommunicate, Concer. Eccl. in Angl, f. 336. before the Denunciation, the Subjects are not absolved from their Oath of Allegiance, yet when it is denounced, they are not only absolved from their obedience, but are bound not to obey, unless the fear of Death, or loss of Goods excuse them: which was the Case of the English Catholicks in the time of King Henry the Eighth.
ney percelor  to be  after all  eight him with terrble  itious in the Night, and sometimes have  appear, &c.] Th you see with what Solemnity hey epare their Instruments, how hlasph emously they pre∣ to call upon  patronye their Treasonand Muider, and  nsase all Princes are, if the  these holy Men. some Docters, not the Doctrine  the Church of Rome; And  when any Attempts of this Nature happen to prove une∣cech, then to excusthe prests, the blome is laid upon some  contents of the Jesuis Order: But by that hath  ready laid, you see 'tis plain, that not only the Jesuises, but several others of their most Approved Writers do earnestly contend for the same thing. And whosoever will but take the pain to  the Canss in the Church of Rome,they will find them realous  the thority of the Detrals, the Canon Law, and the De∣cr of Gouncils. Nowth  are not i their Creeds and publick Conselsions,  whence should we know the Doctrines of their Church, but from their chiefest and most leading Doctors? But to put the materr but of all doub If I shall make it appear unto your that their Holy Fa∣thers the Popes have all ong not  Hoctrine, but by their avowed Judge∣ments and correspo  the time; You will need no fur∣ther Evidence to of  faith. Ep. l. 2. op. 55. That the Pope may use the  Kiss his Pope, that it is lawful for him to depose Eperours; that  Church of Rome, That  &c. Pope  Phat they are  kill such as Epi  receiverth  and is it in our ope Inncerne the  saith, Insppes de    That the  the Pape's Adveraly, and  to  his Emplrs of how. But this plice is  and ho∣nourable for an , and therefore a lowes  serve his  Canonieus, &c. The  is (of counsel wader  and  the Church of Lateran, Yet sower, He shall  the Span of his  Talke and set on the first dish, Ibid. and hold the Rosn for but . He shall be the Tran∣ He spall be the  of his St, and  his his Sub∣jectas  and Scepters of all other Kings and  are Trampled under Foot by  Twenty. Pope Faul the fifth; inathe  which hapned betweth him and the S of Venies, is very full and peremptory in his determination of this Point, for he talls the Vorpations, That the Pipure Val∣rmat of Prousces is  to the Remer Reclesiastites, and subject to it. That he bath Pru to deprive Princes of their Estates for a their saules in their Govern, yea (though they have not commit∣ted any fault)  the Pope shall judge it he for the good of the Church. And that he way frts   the Duth of Allegiance which they owe  their Princes; In which Casethey are  cast  Subjectiou, and over to pursue their Prines, if the Popetenow and And the Doctors of his time, who either by his Order or Approbation, or both, wrote upon this subject did most all  speak very plainly, telling us, That the Pope hath all Apperity  Head in and  and  we all Prin in thy World  his Subjects and  them for any fault  has  Monarch  all th with; That Mon might Appeal to him from  Sovreoligh Prince a That be hight  to all Princes, and anound those that wore  by Mrus. That the Ec∣estiths are nor  reaphs Princes, nor not in Cass of Treasont And the they arither lawd to th sons Law to  is wire directiv, That they out not unto their Prints, either Contribution, Ca∣
or . That the Pope cannot  fall, and therefore It is ississsary  they  wounds, be they must or unjust; That things all the World diffw from the Pepes, with is  him, and he is not excused from Sin who sollows not his Advice, though all the World  to be false. Thus you see the Judgement of their Holy Fathers the Popes, the Successessors of St. Peter, their Universal Bishops and Sepreme Heads, exactly agreeing in every thing with that of their Appro∣ved Doctos before-mentioned. And if all this will not suffice to Aeguaint us what is the Do∣ of the Church, Iannot imagine by what way or means we shall evercome to the ∣ledg of it. Yet to make the Business (if possible) more plain and evident, I shall to their Priniples add the Notice of their Practices, i.a. I shall shew you, that ever since Bendsace the third obtained of the Particide Phetas for Himself and Successors, that Gaudy Title, that Name of Vanty, that Badge of Antichrist, (as Pope Gregory the Great, his Prede cessor, thought sit to call it,) they have in all Ags, and at all times, unless when hindred by want of power and opportunity, not only stiffy de∣fended, zealously maintained, and greatly emproved that Doctrine to their own advantage, but also practised the same, to the great prejudice of Emperours, Kings and Princes, and the Peace of the whole World. CENT. VII. It was in the beginning of this Centurie, that Beeisous the third obtained for Himself and Succes∣so to be stiled the Ʋniversal Bishop, and that the Church of Rome should be telled The Head of all other Churches. And in this Centuris,though they did Exercise this Power in Lording it over other Churches, yet we do not find that they did presume so far, as to extend it to a Superiority over Kings and Princes, and a right to dispose the Temporalties of Kingdoms. But it was not long that they kept within these Bounds; For CENT. VIII. In this Centuris Leo Isaius Emperour of Constantinople was Excommunicated by Pope Gregory the second, his Countrey given away to the Lbards, where  and his Successors lost all the Western Empire, which the Pope and the French King afterward  red between there. Childericus King of France, by the Advice and Authority of Pope Zacharias the First, had his Head shaven, was thrust into a Monastery, and Pipinus Son of Carolus Martellus (who was but a Subject and Servant to the King) was at the Command of Zachiaries, by Bonisacius Anointed King of Fre. Consus Coprons Emperour of the East, had caused Images to be demolished, for which ease Pope l the first seat Embassadors to him, willing him to restore the Images of the Saints, and threatned to Excommunicate him, if he ref;used to be obedient to his Counsel. CENT. IX. Pope Hadrian the second, imperiously Commanded Corolus Calvus King of France, to present one Hiarus Bishop of Laudannum,and Nephew to Homarus Bishop of Rhemes, to the end that his Cause might be Judged by the Apostolick Seat. This Command the King (as  good reason fo) took in very evil part, and sent picth is  to the Pope; That the Kings of France hads th  Soverign Lords in their own Countrey, And not Vige-gerents and Vessels to Bi∣shops; and that he would not Permit any man; who had been condemned in a Lawful Council  Countrey, viz. in the Council of Accipiacum, to make Appellation to Rome. Pope Stephanus the sixth disananulled the Imauguration of the Emperour Arnulphus, and Anoint∣ed All or Lawbert, Marquess of Tascia, to be Emperour. CENT. X. Pope John the twelfth being dispelased with Hugh Capet King of France, for not Appealing to him for Confirmation in his new Royalty, disannulled the Decrees of the Council of Romes, and Excommunicated the Bishops. CENT. XI. Henry the fourth, Emperour, was Excommunicated by Pope Gregory the seventh. is Subjects  from their edience; Rodulph Duke of Swedenand Burganay set up against him to whom  by the Pope, with this Inscription. The , and Peter given it to Rodulph. What horrible Vexations this Noble Emperour endured from this Pope, as ho from Victor the third and Ʋran the second, his Successors, Hictories are so full, that I shall for hear to give you any Relation of them.
the  Emperour Henry the fourth, as three of his  Grigory 2. Victor 2 and Ʋrban 2. He stirred up Henry the  Henry the fourth, and  the Body of the Noble Emperour  at  to he raised  of his Sepule  to be carried to the  was the Antichristian pride  of  Holy Father. first, , was exommunicated by Pope Adrian, the fourth, and Pope Alexander the third  sotred to come creeping to the latter. And  Marg's Church is  Feet and crave Absolution. When he Kneeled down at the Pope's Feet the  Pope  his Foo upon the Emperour's Neck, and abusing the words of Holy Scri∣pture, said, Super Aspidion & Basils scum and able, & come  this London & Drem; i. e. Then  on  Adder, the young, Lion and the Dragon shalt this tread under thy Epi. The periour answeers. Non ibised Petre, . Not to that, out to St. Peter; But the proud Pope renited, Bi & Petre, i.e. Both to e and St. Peter thou dost this Homage. It was the same Pope Alexander the third, in whose days Thomas Becker Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury was , who being displeased thereat, though with much ado, he admitted the Purgation of Henry the second King of England; yet he enjoyned him, that thence forward he should hinder no Man in his Kingdom from Appealing to the Chair of Rogr. And that for the future no Man, be declared King of England without the Pope's consent. Henty the sixth son to Fredecic the First, was Excommunicated by Pope Coesestimus the third, and forced o come to Ro for Pardon. CENT. XIII. Pope Innocent the third Excommunicated John King of England, for not receiving Stephen Lang∣town Arch Bishop of Canterbury, being Approved by the Pope. He brought the said King so low, that he was in the end constrained to Resign his Crown of England and Ireland to the Pope, and to receive the same back again frohe Pope, to him and his Heirs, for yearly payment of 1000 Maths. Philip the second Emperour, was Excommunicated by the same Pope, and the Empire given to Otho Duke of Saxony. One the fourth, formerly Duke of Saxony, after he came to the Empire fell into the Pope's dis∣pleasure, and was by him Excommunicated, and the Empire given to Frederie the second, son of Henry the sixth Emperour. Frederic the second Emperour, was barbarously used by several Popes; His own Sons and Sub∣jects were by them encouraged to Rebel against him, and whilst he was hazarding his Person for defence of the distressed Christians in Asiae, these Holy Fathers endeavoured by all ways and means to  him of in Crown and Digni and in his absence to disturb the Peace of Europe. He was  of Pope Honori the third  Reason save only this. Thomas and Ri∣ the third and Earls of Anaanios  rebelled against the Emperour, and were by him subdued; Richard was taken prisoner, Thomas escaped and  Re, and was  to the Pope against the Emperour. Franio expostulating  him the unseemingess thereof, so the proud Pope, that Immediately he Thundred out his Cursings and Excommuni∣cation against him. Pope Gregory the Ninth who succeeded Hoderius the third in the Papal Chair, revived the Quar∣rel against the Emperour, and for no cause several times Excommunicated and proscribed him. Pope Innocentthe fourth, who succeeded Gregory the ninth, di also continue the Quarr; Though a day was Appointed for their Meeting at Festennia, to conclude a peace, and settle a right  between them; yet shall deceived the Emperour, and stead of Meeting with him according in his prounse, secretly took Ship in the Night, and first came to Gonou, from thence to Lyon in France,  he gathered of Council, and Excommunicated the Emperour. Thus was this Nodle  with these proud and malicious Popes, and he them hred in all his dengns for the  Christenom. And are not these practices well, becoming the Succes∣sors of St. Peter, and the Victor of Christ. Pope Briniface the Eighth instituted the first lubilee that was kentage  In the solemnization whereof, the first day he she wed himself to the people in his Pontifical agments, with St. Peters Keyes carried about him; but the second day he Appeared in Royal Apparel, with a naked Sword carried before him, and a Herauld proclaiming, Ecce Potestas utriusque Gladii. i.e. Behold the Power
of both Swords, thereby challenging to himself a Sovereign Authority in all things, both Civil and Ecclesiastical. He Excommunicated  King of France, and  Fonterity  fourth Generation, because he made an Ordinance, that no Money not Re other his Countrey to Rome. CENT. XIV. Pope Clement, the fifth Excommunicated Androuicus Palaolegus, Emperpur of Conh  de∣claring him a Schismatie and Heretic, because he, would not suffer the Gr Ap∣peals from the Greek Church to the Pope, neither would acknowledge him for his Su He also Excommunicated the Vencians for preferring Aradd to the Estate of Fer cau∣sed Francis Dandalus, their Embassador, with a Chain of Iron Tied about his Neck, to lie down under his Table like, Dog, to catch the bones which fell from it, till his fiery, was ass. He likewise Orcained, that the King of the Romans should not enjoy the Title the ght of an Emperour, without Confirmation given by the Pope. Pope John the twenty third would not condescend to the Coronation of Lewis the th, Duke of Bavaria, to be Emperour, because he had used the Imperial Dignity in Italy, before he was Autho∣rized by the Pope. Pope Clemen the sixth Excommunicated Ludovicus Quintus the Emperour, and commanded the Princes Electors to chuse another, who in obedience thereunto, Assembling themsel at Bens in the Dioctels of Trevers, they chose Charles the fourth, son to John King of Behimla. CENT. XV. In this Centurie there was so great a Schism in the Church of Rome, having sometimes two, some∣times three Popes at once, and they were so busied in managing and promoting their own Interests and ambitious designs, in Cursing and Excommunicating one another, that they had no lesure to meddle with temporal Princes. CENT. XVI. Pope Paul, 3. Excommunicated Henry the Eighth King of England, for abrogating his Au∣thority there, and assuming the Supremacy to himself. Queen Elizabeth was never free from their malice till her death, Pope Pius Quintue, in the Year 1569. Excommunicated her, and as much as in him lay deprived her of her Crown and Kingdoms, her Honours and Dignities. Pope Sixtus Quintus Excommunicated the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde. In his time, and by his encouragement, a Jacobine Friar, called Clemens, killed Henry the third King of France with an empoisoned Knife, at the Siege of Paris. Which Murder the Pope, by a Solemn Oration in the Consistory Sept. 2. 1589. commended to the Skies as rarum, insigne, & memorabile facinich, i. e. as a rare, excellent and memorable Deed. Henry the fourth, Successor to Henry the third King of France, was also stabb'd by Ravillias, which horrible, Murder he himself confessed he was moved unto by reading a Book of Mariana's a Spanish Jesuit. And though it was well enough known, that the Jesuits in Paris did both promote and applaud the Deed, yet were they never discourtenanced nor disowned at Roul for it. Pope Clement the eighth, Anno, 1600, 42 Regni Elizabetha, sont two Breves privately into Eng∣land, one to the Clergy, the other to the People, charging that they should admit no Man, how near soever in blood, for King, after the Queens Death, unless he were such an one, as would not only tolerate the Roman Religion, but also promote the same with all his might, and undertake by Oath to perform the same. Now what Effect these Excommunications and Breves have had, will appear, when we call do mind and consider the design of the Spanish Armado Anno 1588. The Spanish Inrasion of Ire∣land Anno 1599. Gowria's Conspiracie against King James in Scotland Anno 1600. And the Gun-powder Treason in England, 3 Jacbi, Anno Domini 1605. Since which time we have never been quite free from their Attempts, witness their Rebellion and Massacres in Ireland, and that without any provocation, begun 2. Octob. Anno 1641. Their somenting of our Civil Wars in England, (of which, if it were, necessary, it were no hard matter to give you many unquestionable Instunces) And that harbarous and blood sign now on Foot, and which is in part discovered; God grant, that it may be both fully known and timely prevented; And that we all may at last learn to prize our own Religion, (which teacheth us no such things,) and live according to the Rules thereof.
well their Frindples and Practices do  of Kings  by reason of that Agree∣. it hath always  malicious. Aspect upon the Persons,  and when the Belliere of it have power and opportunity to put  Mischiebous in its Influence  before it was Malicious  its Aspect. hath an unbourded and limited Power; None are exempted , as well Friend as Enes; Not only the Heretical Pro∣ Roman Catholics, (as they call themselves) are liable to the  and are sur to feel the force of his Cursings and  they have the misfortune to displease their Sovefeign Lord, the Pope. deration whereof one would think, might suffice to awaken and alarm all Kings and  them, before it is too late, to shake off this Papal Tyramy, and Vindicate  which the Laws of God, of Nature and of Nations hath conserred on them  all this they will suffer themselves to be enslay'd and trampled on, they may,  repent themselves of their carelesness, and have none to blame but themselves for  of their neglect. I shall only and the Instance more to Compleat their Character, and that is Their Doctrine of Infallibility. By which they make the Pope more than Man, and not inferiour to God himself, putting him out  all posity of Erring. Some of them seem indeed to place him in a middle station, telling us, that he is Neither God nor Man, but something inferiour to the one, and much superiour to the other: Now if this be so, I would fain know what he is; for, being a rational Creature, and no good Angel, (as I suppose) I know not what they can make of him, unless it be a Devil Incarnate. This Doctrine is so monstrous and unreasonable in it self, and so dangerous in its consequences, that I wonder how ever it found Admitance among Men of Reason. Whosoever believes this,  his own Judgement, and deprives himself of all freedom of Will; He puts himself into the Hands and Power of another, to be led captive by him at his case and pleasure, into all Heresie, and even unto Hell it self; for all his Dictates are indisputable, and if he (whom we think infallible) will have it so, we must believe white to be black, and black to be white, though our Senses contradict it. We must believe Piety to be Sin, and Sin to be Piety, though the Holy Scripture reach us otherwise. But it will be said, that we suppose Impossibilities, for, that Infallible Spirit by which the Pope is guided and assisted, will not suffer him to dictate any thing but what is true and good. This will need no other Answer, than a Review of the Determinations and Actions of their Popes, (some of which I have laid before you,) and how true they have been in the one, and how good in the other, set any one Judge. But to this we may add, when they had sometimes two, and sometimes three Popes at once, every one Cursing and Excommunicating another, I would fain know which of them was infallible, for certainly they could not all be so. When Stephar the fixth disannulled all the Decrees of his Predecessor Formes, caused his ead Body to be taken out of his Grave, and cut off his three Fingers, wherewith he was wont to Consecrate Persons admitted to spiritual Offices, and threw them into Tyber; and caused all them who had received Ordination by Formosus, to receive new Ordination; Pray tell me, which of these Popes, (for they are both owned to be legally Seated in the Apostolick Chair) were insal∣lible? for, in my opinion, one of them must needs be in the wrong, and if either of them was so, then we have found our a fallible Pope. But I shall at once Answer this Objection by one of their own Councils, which tells us, Mot Poifices in  at reses  esse loganeur. Concil . Brd. Many Popes are Recorded to have fallen into Errours and He∣refies. Which as it shews the unreasonableness of this Doctrine, so doth it fairly  the danger thereof; For, if those who are believed to be infallible Gides may stumble and fall too, then those who have given up themselves to be guided by them, cannot be secure from the same misfortune. And what can be the Issue of this but juine and destruction, without a true and timely Repentance? And why should they re∣ whilst they believe that they have done nothing, but by the direction of one that is  fal∣lible?
But the danger of this Doctrine is not  It influencer the Peace and Bufety, the  fallible Gentleman happen at any time to take  and in an  Peoples , to be Heretical and Excommcate, then what  cold  The Sovereignty of the one, and Safety of both are exposed to  or . Doctrine (though in it self so monstrous and unreasonable, and in   to private Persons and public Societies) is notwithstanding the   their Church, is so well known, that I shall not ed to multiply   shall therefore only offer you these two. were banished the Republic of Venice, being   Copes of a certain Writing, containing eighteen Rules,   Orthodox Ecclesi, vere sentiamus; i.e.   that out Belf may be conformable to that of the Orthodox Church. In she  Rules it is prescried, That Men must believe the Hierarchical Church   which our Bye judgeth to be white. Mother, Witness shall be their great and approved, Billarmine, who   us, That if the Pope should err by commanding Sin, or for D  biding Verenes, yet the Church were bound to believe, that the Vices were  good, and the Virtues evil, unless she would sin against her Conscience. So that if any scrupulous Papist should yet think, that to disturb the Peace of  well goveed Societies, burn Towns and Cities, Assassinate Princes, Murder subject, or  petty things as are to be done, in order to the promoting of the Catholick Cause, are  They have this Salvo ready for them, that though they be sinful in themselves, yet it their So∣vereign Lord the Pope, whom they look upon as their infallible Guide, do command it, that very Command takes away the sinfulness of it. Thus have I given you a Character of a certain sort of Men, who by their avowed Principles and correspondent Practices, do render themselves (in my opinion)  eem'd in this barbarous and bloody design. Which when you have seriously considered. I am confident you will not desir any further satisfaction. And now I shall apply my self to confider of your third Enquiry, where∣in you desire my Opinion. Quest. 3. For what Reasons, or upon what Pretences, they might probably be Perswaded to engage in such an horrible, bloody and barbarous design? Answ. You do well to ask, For what Reason, or upon what Pretences? For, though Pretencer, I gran they might have many, yet just reason, cause or provocation, I do verily believe they had  You expected, it m  a dismal Tale of some dreadful persecution or oppression they  unders that they were in danger either to lose their Lives, their Estates, or their Liberties at least; that they were denied the frdom of English-men, and debarr'd the use of their Religion; and that by these meanes they were made, desperate, and so fir'd into these violent Undertakings. I am, I confess, of the wise Solomons opinion, Eccl. 7.7. That Oppression ofttimes  a wise Man ad. But I do affure you this was none of their Case. As for their Lives, they were safe under the Protection of the Law, and so long as they kept themselves within the bounds of their Duty and Allegiance, they had no more to fear that the be of Protestants. As for their Estates, they enjoyed them freely and fully, without any trouble or moestation  they were urder no Sequestration; nor Decimations; they sate quietly under their own Vin and had as treat, if not greater opportunities, to emprove their Patrimonies than any other then. As for their Liberties, they were no less safe than their Lives and Estates,  never in aded by any one; If the Keepers of Prisons had had no other Guests, they would have had but an ill time on't, their Places would not have been so profitable as they are. As for the Freedom of English-men, who enjoyed it more than they did? 'Tis true, that of late, and but of late neither, they have been taken off from some troublesom and chargeble Or∣ers in their Countreys, which I look upon rather an advantage than injury to them; for, by this means they were at liberty to live as retiredly as they pleased, free from that trouble and
for the  their Chuntrey. . so far,  the Exercise of  that you can∣ Complaints the batton for came time that to  too could have no just cause or provocation    will make a bold Challedge to the   of King Henry  Eighter,  Eng∣ (though many Protestants died upon giving you satisfaction, that it will rather   s;olly  these men, and stir up your   them as to engage them in such a herein, I shall consider the common Motives   how far each or are of them may probably   at liberty to judge of the people. Actions may he Reduced under four Heads, viz.  . It will be wondred at, I suppose, that I should Rank Religion  but of that I shall give you an Account when I come to speak of it as a  to such Actions, . The love of Money (saith St. Paul) is the Roo all evil,  while some cover  from the Faith, and pierce themselves thorough with, many sor∣. instab desity of what is not one's own, in a mighty incentive to ill and unjust Actions; and  occasions great, trouble and misery to the covetous themselves; Whilst, Men are hur∣ on and guided by this only they have no leisure to think of what is fit and just, to be done∣ I do not believe  hath so farmortified this Passion, but that he hath a great hanck∣ still after the old  Peter-peace, a great desire to revive that gainful Trade of Appeals from hence to Rome, and Indulgences from thence hither. And that his Fingers still itch after Col∣lactions, Investitures, &c. Nor do I think, that his Agents and Adherents, whether they be of the Laity or Glergy, are so modest and self denying Persons, but that the great and gainful Offices in our Church and rate, may happen to tempt the most abstemious among them; An English Bi∣shoprick, a good Deanery, a rich Arch-Deacenry, a well endow'd Prebendary, or a Fat Benefice, are no such contemptible things in the Eyes of the Popish Clergy. Nor are those many advantageous Places and Employments in our State, at all undervalued by the Popish Laity, whose gain is all the Godliness they design. is an immoderate Appetite, and desire of Honour and Graudeur, to compass which  at nothing, Queenque do rem, is their Motto. If they can but by any way or  Aggrandize themselves, they never coulder the Justice or injustice of their Claim, nor are  concern'd whether the means they use be lawful or no. This is themper of Ambitious Men,  to all men; The Poet well obser. At Pulch est digite monstrar; & dicier, Hic est. And I am afraid His Holiness and his Partie are not without some of this Leaven in them; though the Successor of St. Peter, out of his abundant Humility, do stile himself, Servus Servorum Domini, i.e. The Serant ofthe Serants of the Ld; yet I doubt he is not so lowly minded, but that it would mightily please him to see Crowns and Scepters lying at his Feet. It is no doubt a great Condescension in this Holy Father, to admit the Emperour to he his Ad∣ver are, to be a Canon or Brother of the Church of Lateran, to alloy  to be the Sewer of his  Train-Beater, the Quirie of his Stable, to hold his Stirr &c. With hat set his Footupon the Nerk of the Noble Empe our  prophaning Scripture into the Bargain, as I have already shewn you? With what a modest Countenance did Pope Innocent the third look upon John King ? And with what Meekness did the same Pope Alexander the third use Henry the second  of England in the Case of Thomas Becket? And do not you think that  Bishop of Rme that now is, would be glad to see the Crown of England, and our King too, in
the same Case that then both it and the King was? And that his Clergie would not willingly see themselves exempted from the Coercive Power of Kings, as formerly they were? And if so, then do you judge whether this might not probably have some Influence upon their Actions in this Affair. Revenge (saith the Italian Proverb) is a thing so sweet and pleasant, that God Almighty will not allow it to Man, but reserves it wholly to Himself. 'Tis true indeed, that God reserves it to Himself, but not for that Reason which the Proverb assigns. When St. Paul adviseth us, Not to avenge our selves, but rather to give place unto wrath. He gives this Reason of his Advice, Rom. 12.19. Deut. 32.35. Hebr. 10.30. For it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay it, saith the Lord. Not that God envieth Man any thing that is sweet and pleasant, provided it be not hurt∣ful; but as careful Parents will not put a Knife into the hands of their Chil∣dren, so this being a dangerous Weapon, which we, poor Mortals, know not how to use; God, for our good, denieth it to us. But ever since our first Parents did presume to take of the forbidden fruit, all their Posterity have been very eager after things forbidden, and very desirous of things that are denied them. Hence is it, that Men are so apt to invade the Prerogative and Priviledge of Almighty God, to throw down all Inclosures, and transgress the Bounds and Limits that are set them. Hence is it, that they presume to wield this dangerous Weapon of Revenge, and make such ill work with it in the World. Such is the nature of it, that when Men are once possessed with a desire thereof, that very desire becomes violent, imperious and irresistible: Nothing must stand before it, Humanity, Reason or Religion, Piety towards Parents, Loyalty towards Sovereigns, or Duty to God, are but weak. Rampires against the impetuous torrent of this violent Passion. It hurries Men on through Blood and Slaughter, Treason, Murder, Sacriledge, and all manner of Villany, and stops at nothing till it attain the end it aims at. And I am afraid their Holy Father the Pope hath not quite divested himself of this desire; He may possibly remember what King Henry the Eighth did to his Predecessars, Pope Clement the seventh and Paul the third, when he shook off the Papal Tyranny, denied obedience to the Pope, forbid the carrying of any money out of his Kingdom to Rome, and caused Himself to be Recognized Supreme Head of the Church of England: He cannot but besensible, how the Successors of that King always have done, and still do keep the Pope at a distance, and scorn his pretended Power and Authority here; and believing (as his Flatterers tell him) that God's Tribunal and his are all one. Though others may not, he thinks he lawfully may claim a share with God in the execution of Vengeance; and that there∣fore he doth no more than well, whilst he endeavors to revenge himsel and the Church of Rome, upon the Heretical King and Church of England, (as they are pleased to stile us,) for our defection and separation from him and it. I might add many more, even most of the Works of the Flesh, as Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Envy, &c. Gal. 5.20.21. But all these, either directly or by conse∣quence, are Comprised under some of these three Heads before-mentioned. Now that these three Passions, viz. Covetousness, Ambition, and Revenge, have all united their Forces, Conspired to∣gether, and mightily promoted this barbarous and bloody design, I think, is sufficiently plain and evident. But though these might be strong and prevalent Motives to the first Designers, whose Aim, no doubt, it was to make themselves rich and great, and to be avenged of those who had so long hin∣dred them from being so;  were they no good Pretensions, nor sufficient Pleas, to palliate their iutended Enterprize. These were too gross and course Materials to make up a publick Remon∣strance or Manifesto. They must have something more fine, more taking with, and persa∣sive among the people, to cover so black a design, and varnish over so hateful an Undertaking, Now there is nothing doth more effectually impose upon the minds of Men, or sooner engage them in great and dangerous undertakings, than that which I have propounded as the last Motive here∣unto, viz. Religion. But is it possible, that Religion, which is so good a thing, should either encourage or persuade Men to that which is so evil? Surely no. And therefore it will be fit that I here explain my self a little, lest any wicked and malicious Persons should hence take occasion to quarrel with Religion it self, to cast an Aspersion upon the most Innocent thing, and fully the greatest Beauty in the World. I very well know, and let all the World know, that true Religion never encourageth nor perswadeth to any thing, but what is holy and just, and good: That it not only discountenanceth, but abhorreth whatsoever is evil, much more such wicked, barbarous and inhumane Practices as we are now speaking of. See The Pourtraicture of true Religion drawn in Little, by a most excel∣lent Hand. Jam. 1.27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father, is this; To visit th
Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the World. This I take to be that (Jam. 3.17.) Wisdom which is from above, which is first Pure, then Peaceable, gentle and casie to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without bypocrisie. But where we meet with Envying, Strife, Confusion, and every evil work, the Wisdom that directeth thereunto descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual and devilish. When therefore I speak of Religion as an Incentive to any thing that is evil, I do not speak of Religion simply considered, nor of the true Religion, but of the Religion of these ill men who are engaged in such ill Practices: And in this Case I particulariy mean the Romish Superstition; And that the Doctrine and Principles thereof do directly tend to Faction and Rebellion, that it doth encourage Men in Treason, Murder, and every evil work, I have so plainly shewn you, that I shall not need to add any more to that Evidence. Now when as Men are animated by that, which they take to be Religion, they are easily engaged in the most desperate and bloody designs, and (being hurried on by a blind and mis-guided zeal) they are usually most fierce and violent in their Actings. They look upon every thing to be not only lawful but good, that serves to promote the cause of their fantied Religion. Herein is ve∣rifid that of our blessed Saviour, The time cometh, that whosoever killeth you, will think he doeth God service, John 16.2 And here in the Religion of old and new Rome, i.e. of Heathen and Christian Rome do very much agree; for, as the Pagan Persecutors thought they did great and acceptable service to their Heathen-gods, in killing Christians; so the present Church of Rome thinks she doth very good ser∣vice to God, the Church, and to Religion, in prosecuting Heretical Princes and People (as they call all those who are not of their Persuasion) with all manner of cruelty and inhumanity that is ima∣ginable. This therefore, viz. Their Religion, I look upon to be the greatest Motive to this barbarous and bloody design of theirs. And this, whatever else they deny, they will seldom disown; As for instance, their intended Secretary of State, Mr. Coleman, upon his late Trial, though he denied any thing of a design upon the Kings Person, and many other things which were plainly enough proved against him, yet briskly owned that he had endeavoured to introduce the Romish Religion, and to have it setled and established here in England. And if we recollect our thoughts, and con∣sider that inhumane Massacre of the Hugonots in Paris, the bloody Persecution of the Waldenses, and poor Protestants in the Valleys of Angrogne, Piedmont, &c. The Marian days here in Eng∣land; The Spanish Armado sent to ruine both our Religion and Government; O Neal's, Desmond's and Tyr-Oen's Rebellion in Ireland; The Spanish Invasion of that Kingdom under Don Juan d' Aquila; the Gun-powder Treason in the days of King James; the late Rebellion in Ireland in the days of King Charles the first. The continual Plottings and Contrivances ever since, and this Barbarous and Bloody Design now under Examination; We shall find Religion at tho bottom of all these: Read but the several Stories (to which I refer you,) and you will find, That the Foundation of all was still a Command and Directions, either mediately or immediately, from their Holy Father the Pope; the thing designed was always the Promoting of the Catholic Cause, i.e. the setting up of Rmish Superstition The Mean propounded wa, by extirpating Heresie and Heretics, i.e. by murdering all innocent and good men, that would not be of their Persuasion; And this they were obliged unto, not only by an Oath, but under the pain of eternal damnation. Now when Mens very Religion is Rebellion, and their Faith Faction, what Security can any Prince or People promise to themselves in conniving at such a sort of men? I pray God our Eyes may be opened in time, that we may repent of our sins, and amend our lives, that we may see God's Goodness in the Discovery, and make seasonable and effectual use of those Prudential Means which God hath fairly put into our hands, for the timely prevention of it. Thus, Sir, have I confidered the Contents of your Letter, and endeavored to give you the sa∣tisfaction you desired; wherein if I have come short of your expectation, you must thank your∣self, for making choice of one of so mean capacity, and meaner Intelligence. And now, Sir, having a little Paper to spare, give me leave to ask one Question of you. Quest. Whether you think a Papist [qu Papist] i.e. Acting according to the Principles of his Religion, can be either an honest Man, a good Neighbour, a good Friend, or a good Subject? Answ. I only propound this Problematically, and therefore you must not expect that I intend to deter∣mine it; However, to illustrate the Question a little, give me leave to offer you something by way of Expostulation.
1. He who believeth it not only lawful but necessary, to Dissemble, Lie, Violate his Vows, break his Oaths, make light of his Word and Promises, Swear and Forswear, say or do any thing, when either his Ghostly Father commands it, or the Interest of the Catholic Cause requires it: and is perswaded, that say or do what he will upon that Account, there is one in the World; who by his own Power, and many others, who by a Power from that one, can dispense with him for it, pardon all, and make that which in it self is sinful, to be no fin. Can you think such an one to be an honest Man? 2. He who believes it lawful to deceive and undermine his Neighbour, to injure him in his Body, Goods or good Name; if by reason of any of these he stand in his way, and hinder his design of promoting the Cause he hath undertaken. He whose avowed Principle it is, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, i.e. Men of a different Persuasion from himself: He who is perswaded that he owes nothing of Love, Kindness, Affection or Good-will to any one, unless they be serviceable to him in his ill designes upon others; who hath devoted himself wholly to one Interest, and one Partie, and looks upon all the World besides as Heathens and Publicans, and accordingly to be dealt with; Have you so much Charity to think that such an one can be a good Neighbour, when he hath an opportunity to be otherwise? 3. He, of whose Sincerity we cannot be assur'd, and of whose Fidelity we have all the reason in the World to doubt, because his Principles teach him to Dissemble, and his Religion allows him to deceive us. He, to whom we cannot with confidence commit any Secret, and from whom we cannot expect any Kindnes, unless we joyn Interests with him, and drive on the same design that he doth; who believes it not only lawful but sometime, necessary to deceive, betray, and expose his best Friends to all the dangers that are imaginable, meerly to advance an Interest which he hath espous'd; whom no Obligation, either of Relation, or Affection, or Kindness, or Vows, or Pro∣mises, or Oathes, or any other Engagement whatsoever, can keep within the Rules either of Justice or Friendship, when the over-ruling Interest of the Catholic Cause requires it should be other∣wise; Can you imagine that such an one can ever make a good Friend? 4. He who believes that there is a foreign Power superiour to that of his own Prince, even in his own Kingdom; and that he is bound in Conscience to obey the former and disobey the latter, if at any time their Commands happen to run Counter; that he may be Absolv'd from his Allegi∣ance, and dispens'd with for his duty and obedience to his own Prince; that notwithstanding Saint Pauls Doctrine to the contrary, Rom. 13.1, 2. yet sometimes it may be lawful for him to Resist and Rebel against his Sovereign; but if at any time it happen, that this Superiour Power should in an ill humour, declare this Prince to be Heretical and Excommunicate, then he not only may, but ought to do all that in him lies, to depose, dethrone, and deprive this Prince of his Kingdom, to destroy his Laws, ruine his Government, and subvert all established Rule and Order both in Church and State. Whilst any one is of this Persuasion, can you or any man believe, that such an one can ever be a good subject? Who they are that thus believe, you may, without consulting an Oracle, easily divine; And if this Probleme should happen to be determin'd against them, That being just to their own Prin∣ciples, they can neither be honest Men, good Neighbors, good Friends, nor good Subjects; how much then will it concern all Men, and all Degrees and Societies of Men, to beware of them? I shall not urge it further, but having started the thing, shall wholly leave it to your Consideration, that you may improve or damn the Argument, as to you shall seem most just, when you have lei∣sure to spend some thoughts upon it. In the mean time give me leave to tell you, that I really am; SIR, Yours, &c. FINIS. BOOKS Printed for, and sold by R. Butler, next door to the Lamb and three Bowls in Barbican. An Alphabetical Martyrology containing the Trials and dying Expressions of many Mar∣tyrs of Note since CHRIST. Extracted out of Fox's Acts and Monuments of the Church. With an Alphabetical List of Gods Judgments, remarkably shewn on many Noted and Cruel Persecutors. Together with an Appendix of things pertnent to the understanding this Martyrology. By Nath. Tailor M.A.T.C.C. A Skirmish made upon Quakerism, against Wil∣liam Penne, in two sheets. 2. The Shibboleth of Quakerism, or that which they call The Pure language, &c. in two sheets 3. One sheet against the Quakers, detecting their Error and mis-practice, &c. 4. Quakerism proved to be grofs Blasphemy and Antichristian Heresie, in 4 sheets, stitch'd together price 9 d. Two Sermons of Hypocrifie, and the vain Hopes of self-deceiving Sinners. A Vindication of Oaths, and swearing in weighty Cafes, &c. By John Chey
