J1110 R37955 17155337 105981
A JOURNAL Of what has past in the North of IRELAND, Since the Landing of the Duke of SCHOMBERG, to the Surrender of Carrick-Fergus; together with the Rates set upon all Provisions that are brought to the Market-Town, or to the Camp. In a Letter from one that was an Eye-witness to all those Matters. Licensed, J. F. 1689. SIR, THE General having caused a Post-Office for to be Erected at Donohodee for sending Letters to England, by way of Port-Patrick in Scotland, this comes that way, and is to disscharge my promise (the first Oppertunity certain that I had,) to you of what hath occur∣red since our Arrival. The Garrison of Carrickfergus, no sooner saw our Fleet, but they Burnt all their Subburbs: Seized all the Protestants in the place. Made fast their Gates, and put themselves in a posture of Defence. About Three in the Afternoon, Tuesday, August 13th. the General with that part of the Fleet that was with him put into Bangor, on the other side of the Lough, over against Carrickfergus; and that Afternoon Landed all the Soldiers, and forthwith sent Parties to Killaleigh, Hilsborough, Lissnegarvey and Bellfast, in which places they found not one Papist to resist them, but all bid∣ing them Welcome with such Presents of Food as the Ravenous Papists had left them. And this Night the General with the rest, Encamped near Bangor. Wednesday 14th. Early in the Morning, his Grace Decamped to Bellfast, and Encamped there until the remainder of the Fleet came to him, which was not until the 19th. And then they Landed their Men at Bellfast, where having Refreshed themselves, on the 21st. they March'd towards Carrickfergus, Eight Miles; the General at the same time ordering the Men of War, which were Seven or Eight to draw up before the Town, and as soon as they saw the Army by Land come before it, to Play on it with their Cannon. Accordingly about Six in the Afternoon they began, and continued Fireing until the Army had raised their Batteries, one upon the East, and another on the North side of the Town, where was a vast Number of Horses, and other Cattle, all which fell into the Soldiers hands as an En∣couragement to go further. Capt. George of the Lord Lissburns Regiment with greate Cou∣rage and Bravery, fetch'd off a very Great Booty of Horses and other Cattle, out of an Orchard under the very Walls. Indeed such was the  and Courage of all, that those were  were first Admitted to places . The Batteries being Finished, the Cannon and Morters began to Play that Night, and continu∣ed Playing until next Morning viz. Thursday 22. When the General for want of a Trumpet, sent Early in the Morning a Drum into the Town, to Demand a Surrender upon Disscreti∣on, which they Refused to do otherwise then with Bag and Baggage, Musquer and Sword, Drums Beating, Trumpets Sounding and Col∣ours Flying, and a Convoy to Conduct them safe to their own Party. To which the General returning no Answer; About Eight in the Morning, they sent out an Officer to desire his Graces Resolutions, to those their Peremptory Demands. To which his Grace Answered. THat he came hither in the Names, and by Order of their Majesties, King William and Queen Mary, to Restore the Subjects and Laws of this Their Kingdom of Ireland, (which had been long Abused and Corrupted,) to their due State and Cur∣rent. And that pursuant to Their said Majesties Natural Inclinations and Desire, to Avoid as much as possible Effusion of Christian Blood. He, as Their Majesties General should do all that in him lay for per∣formance thereof: And in Order thereunto Assured them, if they would Surrender without further Trouble, and Swear Feality to Their said Majesties, deliver up their Armes and Serviceable Horses, and what Else they had Taken from the Protestants; they should not only have their Lives and Liberties, but Equal Protection to Each of Their Majesties Pro∣testant Subjects; But if they then Refused to Accept those Gracious Offers, he had Aquitted himself of the Blood should be Spilt, could not afterwards Grant them the like Terms, but would Endeavour to Reduce them by Force of Arms. And accordingly they Refused these Terms; the General Ordered the Cannon, Bombs and small Shot forthwith to play again upon them, which they did without Intermission. The Parley aforementioned, was no sooner over, but there came into the Camp 500 Horse from Enniskilling, some without Boots and Pist∣ols, others with Pistols but without Carabines, some with one Pistol and a Carabine without a Sword, others without all, with only a Fowl∣ing Peice or Fire-lock, most of their Horses small and poor, yet such have been the Courage and Actions of these Men as is scarce Credible, especially (of which you have heard e're this) the Routing 3000 under Maccarty, Takeing him
Prisoner, and Killing double their ow Number: These brave Men the General made Welcome, and will soon be better Arm'd and Accoutred. In the Evening I March'd into the Camp; and through the Whole, and found the Lord Liss∣burns, and a French Regiment Marching with Faggots, Shovels, Pick-Ax's, and such other Implements, besides their Arms, to Releive Two other Regiments in the Trenches. The Ge∣neral himself until Twelve at Night, was Marching up and down in Person, giving Ne∣cessary Orders, and going even to the Batteries, and no more Concern'd at the Enemies Bullets Humming and Whizing about his Ears, then if it had been Musick of Peace. I saw my self several of the Enemies Bullets fall close by him, and went even into the Tren∣ches. I staid in the Camp all Night, to please my Eies and Ears with the Sight and Noise of our Bombs, Cannon, and small Shot, which conti∣nually plaid on the Town, like incessant Showers of Hail, with which they beat down the Gate on the North side of the Town, and great part of the Wall adjoyning, and much of the Half∣moon by the Castle, and as a Drummer, and others, who stole out, said killed their principal Gunner, by dismounting a peece of Cannon up∣on him, while he was levelling at our Battery on the Half-moon, and about a Hundred others; much damnifying the Houses. About 5 next Morning (Aug. 23.) I returned to Bellfast, and find that a Protestant may alrea∣dy safely, and without any Danger, march throughout the whole Province of Ʋlster, which is one fourth part of the Kingdom, with only a Stick in his hand, not a Papist being any where to be found in it, except about 2000, who are fled to the Red Glin, between the Mountains, a∣bout Twenty miles Northward of this place, for fear of being dispoild by the Protestants (who they have so served already:) They have few or nor Arms, except half Pikes and Skeanes, with which they hoped to secure themselves from the Violence of the Country people, until they can procure pardon and protection; which I am told the Gederal is about ordering for them. To our great Surprize, and no less Joy, we found the whole Country full of Corn, and all manner of Provision, whose plenty you may guess at by the following Table of Rates set up at the Market-Cross of this place, and the which is so satisfactory that while I was Transcribing it I hard the Sellor say, it was enough in all consci∣ence, and almost double what they got before our Landing. Vera Capie follows Rates fet upon Goods and Ʋictuals to be sold in the Camp, before Carrickfergus; and all other places hereabouts.   l. s. p. q. Wheat, the Barrel, cantaining 32. Winchester pecks, or two Winchest∣er Barrels. 0 13 00   Mault, the Barrel, containing 44 Winchest. pecks, or 2 Barrels and a half. 0 15 00   Old Oats by their Mault-measure, the Barrel at 0 10 00   New Oats the same Measure, the the Barrel 0 06 00   Oatmeal, the Peck, containing Sixteen Quarts, 0 01 00   Fresh Butter, 18 Ounces to the Pound, 0 00 02   Salt Butter, 16 Ounces to the pound, 0 00 02   New-milk-Cheese, a pound, 0 00 01 1 Scim'd-milk-Cheesd, a pound, 0 00 01   New-milk, 2 quarts for 0 00 01   Scim'd-milk, or Butter-milk, 4 quarts for 0 00 01   Brandy, a quartern, 0 00 03   Hay, a Hundred weight, 0 00 08   Fresh Beef, a pound, 0 00 00 3 Mutton, a pound, 0 00 01   Geese, a piece, 0 00 08   Hens a piece, 0 00 04   Eggs, 8 for a 0 00 01   White-Bread, 15 Ounces for 0 00 01   House-hold, or Oat-Bread; 20 Ounc. 0 00 01   Aquavita, a quartern, 0 00 02   To which all Persons are hereby required to Conform at their Perril; and if any conceal their said Goods, and keep them from the Mar∣ket, in expectation of greater Rates, the same shall be seized. We have no certain Account of the Enemies Army; but it is confidently reported, they are now at Lurgan Race, and have made from thence and the Neury some Scouts as  as within Six Miles of Dromoore, and are about 30000 strong; but so cowardly, that they dare not approach further this way: But it's believ'd upon our Ap∣proach will Retreat, and Retreat, till they have no more Room left for it. The Country, all hereabouts, offer their Service, as one man, to the General, to go against the Enemy; but as yet, but here and there a man has been accepted. The 23 d. in the Afternoon, the Garrison sent out an Officer, with Offers to Surrender, upon the Terms formerly offered them: But the Ge∣neral refused so to do, or otherwise than upon Discretion; and that unless they sent out all the Protestants safe and well he would put every Pa∣pist to the Sword he should take. This they also rejected; and the Cannon and Bombs have plaid all last Night, and this Morning; as I was wri∣ting hereof, I saw the Town on Fire: So that by the next you may her of its Surrender, unless it comes to you sooner by Sea. I am Yours. POSTSCRIPT. JUST now comes Advice the greatest part of the Town is burnt, and have beat a Parly Three times, but the General will not hear until they send safe all the Protestants out. Mr. Paterson, Chirurgeon to the Ld. Lissburnes Regiment, was last Night killed in the Trenches. Belfast, August, 25th. 1689. LONDON, Printed for E. Goldin in the Strand, 1689.
