J1280 12737433 93027
ROBERTVS STAPYLTONIVS. EQVES AVRATVS  TAMEN ENERVATVS SED INTEGER PARQ▪ SIBI, MODESTIAM SATYRARVM ET  DEBET: DEBET ETIAM ET DEVS ET NCREMENTV
Mores Hominum. THE MANNERS OF MEN, Described in sixteen Satyrs, BY JUVENAL: As he is published in his most AUTHENTICK COPY, lately printed by command of the KING of FRANCE. Whereunto is added the Invention of seventeen Designes in Picture: With Arguments to the Satyrs. As also Explanations to the Designes in English and Latine. Together with a large Comment, clearing the Author in every place, wherein he seemed obscure, out of the Laws and Customes of the Romans, And The LATINE and GREEK Histories. By Sir ROBERT STAPYLTON, Knight. Published by Authority. LONDON Printed by R. Hodgkinsonne, in the Year 1660.
The Frontispice. FAME, having fill'd her Trumpet with the praise Of JUVENAL, flies from a grove of Bayes, And holds a Wreathe to crowne his Statue, set Where all his Satyrs, to act Men, are met. A 1 Porter, to give rich men almes, attends. A Goat 2, most gravely, Wantons reprehends. The Country 3 whips the City. The Court-Fish 4, Is deere. The Poor are mockt with a proud 5 Dish. Th' old 6 Suiter. Learning's woefull period The 7 Pedant showes, makes for himselfe a Rod. Ancestors Armes he 8 boasts, that never fought. The lustfull 9 Ranter is to spoon-meat brought. How vainly prayes 10 Self-interest? Such 11 fruite Crown'd th' Author's Table. Please you to recruite A Ship-wrackt 12 Merchant? Strange Temptations lie In friends full Bags 13, then, ere you trust Sir, try. What Glutton left Male-issue, but he prov'd, A 14 Master-Cooke? When was a People mov'd To shoote 15 their poyson'd Arrowes with more gall Then for Religion? The Speare 16 governs all. These heads, digested by a matchlesse pen, Expresse the Manners both of Rome and Men.
Libri Hypotypôsis. PLenam FAMA tubam Juvenalis laudibus inflat, E Luco Phoebi volitans; & cingere gestit Subjectam statuam merito diademate lauri. Adsunt, turba procax, Satyri; praeludia MORVM. Divitibus paucos quadrantes sportula 1 praebet. Lascivos gravitas capri 2 arguit. Vrget honesti Nequam urbem agricolae flagrum 3. Sex millia squamae 4 Aulicus impendit. Patinâ 5 luduntur egeni. Turpe senex 6 procus est. Perituras cùm docet artes Grammaticus 7, propriis ferulâ virgísque feritur. Degener ex proavis insignia 8 ventilat haeres. Quod reficit lasso vires, sorbillat adulter. 9 In voto 10 quibus est sua res, quàm vana petuntur! Apponunt fruges 11 mensae Juvenalis inemtas. Naufrago 12 in auxilium quis adest? Quàm dulce fruenti Depositum 13 locuples! cui credas ergo, probetur Ante fidem. Haeredem nullum, nisi forte magirum, 14 Insignis generat gulo. Quando ferociùs arcum 15 Gens tendit, quàm cùm furiosam in praelia nomen Relligionis agit? lex terrae est cuspis 16 acuta. Haec magni librum praecedit summula Vatis, Qui Romanorum mores depingit, & Orbis.
The Life and Character of Juvenal. DECIUS JUNIUS JUVENAL was born at Aquinum in Campania; his father (some say his foster-father) a rich freed-man of that town, bred him a Scholar, and designed him for a Lawyer. In order whereunto, he heard the O∣rator Quintilian, declaming under him (according to Divaeus) till he was of middle age. Then, being Heir to a Fortune, therefore not necessitated to make Law his Profession, he wholly applied himself to the study of Moral Philosophy; and by that rule measuring the actions of his Countreymen the Romans, which then gave as well the Example, as the Law to all Nations, he found nothing so needfull for the corrupted World, as Reformation of Manners. This he resolved to make his businesse, not by inflicting a penalty like the Cen∣sor, but by showing the uglinesse of Vice as a Satyrist, in Imitation of Lucilius: yet so far out-doing his Pat∣tern,
that he read his Satyres publickly, not alone with the general applause of the people of Rome, but even Quintilian himself (as we may probably collect from the tenth book of his Institutions) became his hearer and admirer. Yet Paris, another of his Auditors, was not so taken with his seventh, though it sets forth his high and mighty Munificence to the Poets, in this manner, Many to honour in the warres He brings; Puts Summer-Annulets and Winter-Rings On Tragick Poets fingers; what, there lives No Lord that will bestow, this Player gives. Do'st thou attend the Camerini then, And Bareae? a fig for Noble men, Write Tragedies; 'tis Pelopea takes, She Praefects; Philomela Tribunes makes. It seems, the word Player was more then Paris could digest; who, to revenge himself upon the Satyrist, mo∣ved his great Master Domitian Caesar, to bestow upon Juvenal a Regiment of Foot in Aegypt. This was a pretty handsome return form'd by Paris out of the ve∣ry subject of his anger, bandying, as well as he could, Sa∣tyr for Satyr, by making Juvenal one of his Tribunes,
or Poet-Colonels. An old Manuscript relates it thus, The Emperour Domitian displeased with Juvenal, for touching upon his favours to the Player Paris; yet not thinking it fit to put any publick affront upon a man of that integrity of life, banished him, under the name of an honourable imployment in his service, making him Praefect of a Cohort in Ae∣gypt. A Commentator saies, this Imployment broke the heart of Juvenal, but sure he dream't it; for, Ju∣venal (no more troubled at his Colonel-ship then I ex∣press him in the 16th design) out-lived his back-friend Paris and likewise Domitian himself, as plainly ap∣pears in the close of his fourth Satyr, But He was lost; when once the Clown began To fear him, he reveng'd the Noble man. How many years he survived his banishment, may be easily calculated from these words Sat. 13. Is this newes to one born when Capito Was Consul, above threescore years ago? Now reckon threescore years from the Consulship of L. Fonteius Capito Collegue with C. Vipsanius in the year from the foundation of Rome, eight hundred and
twelve, you shall find, that not onely Domitian was dead, and the short reign of Nerva ended, but also the 21 years of Trajan; and in the second of Hadrian, a. u. D.CCC.LXX.II. he writ the 13th Satyr to Calvinus, dying afterwards in the bosome of his Countrey, crowned with white hairs and Lawrel, Emblems of mortality common to all men, and eter∣nitie of Fame, the consequent of his peculiar de∣serts. And here, I know it will be wished, that Juvenal, from whose hands we have the Characters of men of all conditions, had left us his own; and I believe he would have done it, if he might have commended himself: to which (in that case) truth would have obliged him. But, this not befitting him and well becom∣ming me; I shall shall deliver my Author, as his Life, his own Works, and others of unquestioned authority, represent him to me. He was born or made heir to a good Estate, but de∣serued a better, for using the gifts of fortune with such moderation, as that he neither lived poor, in hope to dye rich, nor exceeded the measure of his purse, either
at his Feasts or Sacrifices. He was bred up a Rhe∣torician, and arrived to that perfection in his Art, that where he writes of any thing handled by for∣mer Orators, he addes new matter and form, more delightfull and more usefull to the world: but where he ends, it will be hard to show another, since his time, that ever raised upon his grounds any conside∣rable superstructure. He is an Author of so clear and supreme a Judgement, that no other did ever make choice of nobler Arguments, nor writ so many Ma∣xims or Sentences, that, like the lawes of nature, are held sacred by all Nations. He was a Judge of manners, so incorrupted, that his Enemy, though favourite to Caesar and the Court-Informer, could not find matter against him for a charge of defamation. In short, he was a Politician for the benefit of Mankind, disguising Morality under the vizzard of a Satyr; for which he had his warrant from Plato in these words, , It is the highest point of Science, to be, yet not to seem a Philoso∣pher, and to do serious things in jest. Thus divine
Plato, the scourge of Hypocrites, that calls it the great∣est injustice, when a man seems just, and is not so, ap∣proves of this Philosophical dissimulation; whereby the vulgar, laughing at Vice and Folly, are cozened into Wisdome and Virtue; in this Mystery no Artist ever came near to Juvenal▪ that, with the bitter-sweet∣nesse of his Satyrs, not like Philip's 'Prentice, but like Galen himself, cures the most desperate Patients, by pleasure opening the way to recovery. To justifie this Character I could bring a Catalogue of witnesses, all great Authors of his time, or ours▪ but, that I may not detain you too long in the Portico of his work, these out of many shall suffice. In the first place, his Rhetorick-Master Quintilian, enumerating the Latine Satyrists, admires Lucilius, praises Horace, honours Persius, then adds, but after all these we have Juvenal; a greater elegancy I observe not in all the works of that learned Orator, marshalling his Scho∣lar, then living, in his true place among the Satirysts, last in time, and first in merit. The next is Martial, that sends him a present of nuts with this Epigram, the mo∣nument of his Eloquence,
De nostro facunde tibi Juvenalis agello, Saturnalicias mittimus ecce nuces! Caetera lascivis donavit poma puellis Mentula custodis luxuriosa dei. Eloquent Juvenal, I send to thee Saturnalitian Nuts: my store you see; The wanton God, my Ortyard-keeper, trades With fruit, and gave the Apples to the Maids. To come from the Romans to the best of our modern Censors, Julius Caesar Scaliger sets his mark upon PERSIUS for an affected and fantastick writer, boast∣ing an aguish kind of Learning, ambitious to be read, yet not desirous to be understood, though now decyphered to a tittle: whereas Juvenal is elo∣quent and clear, absolutely the Prince of Satyrists, so exact in all he writes, that nothing is censurable by the Criticks. Then comparing him with Horace, he calls him a jeerer, content to give his Satyres the ti∣tle Sermones, Discourses, inserting some loose sen∣tences as it were in common talk, yet studied: not regarding how his Verses ran; but so that he spake pure Latine, his work was done: In Juvenal, all things are quite contrary, when he is in fury, he as∣saults and kills; his style is extreme handsome, wherein together with the purest Latine, he hath
the happiness of incomparable Transitions: his Verse is far better then Horace, his sentences no∣bler, he speaks things more to life; and (comparing the Roman Satyrists) Scaliger concludes, that Juve∣nal is to be preferred before Horace, by as many degrees as Horace is to be preferred before Luci∣lius. To which Censure J. Lipsius makes these Addi∣tionalls, Who can be displeased, to see Juvenal preferred before Horace by Scaliger the Father? that, in my opinion, among the many excellent judgements he hath given, never pronounced a greater truth: certainly he passed a just sentence for Juvenal; in heat, sublimity, and freedome (which are essential to a Satyr) he goes far beyond Horace: He searches Vice to the quick, reproves, cryes out upon it, now and then he makes us laugh, but very often mixes bitter jests: and writing to M. Muretus, Lipsius tells him; that in the publick reading of Juvenal, he did well seasonably; for if any Times ever needed a Satyr, ours do: and in Satyr, none so fit as Juvenal to rectifie the Manners of Men.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE MY VERY GOOD LORD HENRY, Lord Marquesse of DORCHESTER, Earl of KING∣STON, Viscount NEWARK, Lord PIERREPONT and MAUNVERS. MY LORD, WHen your Lordship laid your commands upon me, to interpret JUVENAL, it was an honour I beheld with fear; for, though I knew him to be one of the greatest Classick Authors, yet I doubted, I should not find him the easiest: because I then 1638. heard of no man that had attempted to put him into any other language: But O∣bedience to your Lordship, carried me through all the difficulties of my first Translation, and from the good successe of that (answerable to the event of all things acted according to your Lordship's judgement) I was incouraged to copy him a-new, out of his exactest Edi∣tion,
printed 1644. afterwards at PARIS: to which I have added a large Comment, and the Designe of every Sa∣tyr in Picture. Thus restored to himself, and illustra∣ted, I presume to bring JUVENAL once more to kisse your Lordship's hand: from which I received him, like an old ROMAN Coin, hard to be read, but worthy to be studied by our ablest Antiquaries. Truly, my LORD, if my abilities could have reached the height of my ambition, I would have de∣dicated, out of the learning of the GREEKS and RO∣MANS (wherein your Lordship is so great a Master) not my interpretation of another; but some worke that should have owned me for the Author, and trea∣ted of such subjects as your Lordship daily reads: but since I cannot what I would, I acquiesce in what I can: it shall be happinesse enough for me, after the learned Authors of Sciences, and Commentators upon Lawes, have taken up your more reserved time, if my Author may entertain your houres of recreation: which I would not promise to my self, but that he DELIGHTS with PROFIT: For, your Lp^'s. divertisements are more serious then most mens studies, your very mirth being observations upon Men and Businesse, which your Lordship knowes was the end that JUVENAL
aimed at: and undoubtedly MORES HOMINUM should at first have been the Title to his SATYRS, if his modesty could have prefixed, what I have done, out of his own words, QUICQUID AGUNT HO∣MINES. But sooner may the Sun let fall his beames upon a solid body, without making a shadow, then Merit can exist without Detraction: No marvail, therefore, if Envy or Follie have stirred up Enemies against this in∣comparable Satyrist, in severall Ages. In his time, his Country was exasperated by too great a CLEARNESSE of his stile, made (for the most part) by their own self-reflexions: for, guilty men are shrewdly apprehensive. Afterwards, to remoter parts, and strangers to the ROMANE Customes, he appeared OBSCURE, and was looked upon, like the Moon in an Eclipse, as drown∣ed in the shadow of a forein clime. Lastly, though the greatest Scholars have made use of JUVENAL'S authority, as CUJACIUS in the civil Law; DE LA CERDA to explane TERTULLIAN; and GROTIUS to assert the Rights of Peace and War; yet, in our seed-plots of Learning, there sprung up a Sect of little formall Stoicks, that for a few wanton words (all they could make sense of) cast JUVENAL out of their
hands: just as if Pygmyes should throw away Dia∣monds, set in Tablets bigger then themselves, only because their foils were black. My Copie will not (I hope) be liable to these ex∣ceptions: The first falls to ground of it self, for, the bitterness of these Satyrs, being only PERSONAL to the ROMANS, cannot touch the ENGLISH: there∣fore, I have made it my businesse, to clear them from all OBSCURITY, which is the second charge. To perspicuity, I have added language so well-qualitied, that (I am confident) the third sort of accusers will never inform against this JUVENAL for Immodesty. And if when I took off his obscenity, I could have set on the full perfections of his Pen, my industry had been crowned to my wish. But though I am too much composed of earth, to ascend to my desires: I know your Lordship parti∣cipates so much of Heaven, as to descend to the ac∣ceptance of intentions. Yet when your name (now flying in the breath of every University) shall be the Protection of such learned Pieces as I cannot SHOW, but only can CONCEIVE: thus far my present De∣dication will be happiest, as being first authorised by your Lordship, which I look upon as the earnest of
a generall approbation; for, the noble follow your opinion; all your example. But if there should be some one that dislikes my way, because I goe not his; such an Adversary I shall not think considerable, since the Judge (from whom no Scholar will appeal) gives sentence for Your Lordship's Most humble Servant, ROBERT STAPYLTON.
THE PREFACE. AGathocles, that being Son to a Potter,Plutarch in A∣pophth. raised himself by mi∣litary virtue to be King of Sicily, commanded earthen pots to be set upon his Cupboard of gold-plate, and pointing to them, when he would incourage his young Souldiers, said, Look friends, from these, I am come to this. It may as much incourage the Youth of England, if they consider, how high this Nation is in prosperity and ho∣nour, purchased by the industry and valour of their Ancestors, from the low beginnings of the Britons, mentioned in these Satyrs. Juvenal takes no∣tice of one great Souldier here, Arviragus,Sat. 4. and names him as the terrour of Domitian Caesar: but this only shews the Gallantry of our Country-men; what was then their Art of War, their Fortifications? poor huts:Sat. 14. what their Manufacture? baskets: what their Erudition? Lawyers Rhetorick,Sat. 12. Sat. 15. taught them by the French: what their Breeding? to be ranked with the Scythian Picts, the Agathyrsians; But now, if Juvenal could live to review the World,ibid. he would find, that the spirit of Arviragus is diffused into thousands of our Souldiers, every one of them able to lead an Army against his Romans, That our Island is famous for the noblest Merchants, the greatest Scholars: and the civilest persons living; which I have a particular ingagement to acknow∣ledge, for the acceptance of my first Translation: wherein they not only par∣doned mine and the Printer's Errours, but likewise the corruptions of those Copies which I then steered by. Therefore, when the most perfect and authen∣tick Impression came to my hands from Paris, I thought my self obliged to render it in English; as well in Gratitude to, as for the Benefit of, the pub∣lique. Yet I could not rest altogether satisfied, without making some (as I con∣ceive
necessary) Additions of my own. In the first place, from the subject-mat∣ter of Juvenal, I have given a Title to his Satyrs, viz. Mores Hominum, The Manners of Men, not without the warrant of a president from Horace, that calls his own Satyrs, Sermones. Withall, I have invented a Frontispice conteining in one Picture my Authors generall Designe, together with sixteen other Pieces, expressing the particular of every Satyr, whereunto I have writ Explanations in English, and also in Latin; that foreiners, if they please, may understand the Cuts, and our Country-men make use of their interpretation, as my former Arguments inlarged. Lastly, that nothing within my power might be wanting, I have taken care, in a new Comment, to set down clearly, though briefly, every Grecian and Roman Custome, Law, and History; for all which I quote my Authors: yet I am not ignorant, that our new Mode of writing will no more allow of quotations in the body of a Work, then in the beginning of a Preface; but I shall desire to be excused in both; for I humbly conceive, that reason is never out of fashion: and in matter of weight or controversie, he can∣not justly hope for credit, that shews not authority, and he that doth it well, makes a Book a Library. By the way, I must give you this caution, that you will find the Historie of the Ante-Trojan Times more pleasant then true, be∣ing wrapt up by the Greeks in Allegories, in whose respective Mythologie, I have endeavoured to unfold the mysterious Wisdome of the Ancients. How this will be taken, I know not; but I am sure, 'tis not conclusive, from a former favour to infer the necessity of a second: Howsoever, I am no Alcibiades, for I dare trust my Country with my Life, much more with my Book. I shall conclude with a Request to my Reader, that he will not charge up∣on me the literall or other coincident errours of the Printer, which for the most part (if not totally) are corrected in the Table.
Figura Prima, OCcurrunt oculis 1 Capitolia, Regia Romae, Clara, uti Sol novus in terris, splendore triumphi Elicito ex captis Armis, 2 Regumque Coronis; Roma tamen, propiùs spectata, videbitur atra: Area lata patet 3 Circi, pugnaeque theatrum Multiplicis; coràm saevi dux femina ludi Tuscum figit aprum, in proprium magis effera sexum. Furtiva uxoris benè potus Leno 4 maritus Oscula dissimulans, vigili sibi munera somno Augurat. Insumpsit bona qui praesepibus, haeres, E Româ impellens currus ad Caesaris aedes, 5 Flaminiam laceransque viam, contemnit avorum Oppositas Statuas, majorum & transvolat Vrnas. Alea ubi 6 Dominos, exercent praelia servos. Obnubit pompam Latialem 7 sportula; sordes Ecce trahit Procerum! Libertinusque Tribuno Se dives praefert; lecticam, aulaeque ministros Summovet exclusos, qui magnum limen adorant. "Dicite jam, servi quid nomine dignius, Orbis "A Româ victus, vitiis an Roma subacta? "Dicite, cum cives agitet manifesta phrenesis, "Nonnè opus est Satyrâ mediā pertundere venā?
The first Designe. THE Court of Rome, the 1 Capitol looks bright, A new day breaking with triumphant light, Struck out of Arms 2 and Crowns of Kings subdu'd: But Rome it self looks foul, if strictly view'd. Behold, in the 3 Circensian Lists, a Boare Encounter'd by a Woman; that much more Defies her Sex, then her Antagonist. The tipling 4 Husband sees not his Wife kis't: He dreams of Deeds of Gift. An Heir's undone With keeping Chariots, from Rome to runne To Caesar's House in the 5 Flaminian Way: Where his Forefathers might their Son dismay, Their Urnes and Statues standing in his sight. Insatiate 6 Gamsters play, their Servants fight. Note lastly, what the Roman splendor clowds, The Money-basket 7, where a Freed-man crowds Before Sedans, braves Officers of State Serv'd like base Beggers at a lock'd-up Gate. Then tell me; Which should Most a Slave be call'd, The conquer'd World? or Rome, to Vice inthral'd? Tell me, if Towns, where Luxury thus reigns, Need not a SATYR'S Whip to breath their veins?
The Manners of Men. THE FIRST SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. The Author, by the Wits, engag'd To hear long Poems, is inrag'd: And to revenge himself, reads that Which they will be more angry at. For, no Romançes he presents: No Fables of the Gods invents. His Subject is Rome's horrid Crimes; His End, to disabuse the Times, SHall I but hear still? never pay that Score? Vex'd with hoarse CODR'S Theseis o're and o're? Shall he, unpunish'd, read me tedious Playes? He Elegies? huge TELEPHUS whole dayes
Unpunish'd spend me? or ORESTES, writ Margent and outside, but not finish'd yet? None knows his own house better than I do The grove of MARS, and VULCAN'S Grotto too Neer to th' AEOLIAN Rocks: windes how they roll: What Souls Judge AEACUS torments: who stole The Golden-Fleece: what Ash-trees Centaures fling: With these Theams JULIUS FRONTOS Plane-trees ring, And marble Pillars, by fierce Readers burst. These our best Poets write of, and our worst. We from the Grammar-ferula have took Our hand too, and the Rhet'rick-school forsook; Where we have counsel'd SYLLA to lay down The Sword, and sleep securely in the Gown. 'Tis foolish pity, now so many are Turn'd Poets, Paper which they spoil to spare. But why we run in that Satyrick Chase, Where great LUCILIUS rid his Chariot-race; If you have leisure, and are pleas'd to hear My Reasons stated, the account I'le cleer. When th' Eunuch marries; When, her Spear all goar, Bare-breasted MAEVIA foils the Tuscane Boar;
When all the Senate's not so rich as one That with his Sissers play'd a tune upon My youthfull Beard, when it was grown too grave; When, part of Nile's slime, the Canopian slave CRISPINUS flaunts it in his Tyrian cloake; Which, falling off, his shoulders still revoke: A Sommer-hoop his sweaty fingers swing, Nor brooks a greater Stone should load his Ring; 'Tis hard not to write Satyrs: For who hath Spirits so milde, that will not be in wrath At this base City? or so rib'd about With Iron, to be held from flying out? When, fil'd with's own bulk, in his new Sedan MATHO the Lawyer comes; and then the man That's great friend peach'd, and will soon fleece the few Poor Lords yet left; Prince of th' informing Crew, Whom MASSA feares, CARUS with gifts attends: To whom his wife trembling LATINUS sends. When they shall out thee of thy legall-right That labor for their Legacies by night: Whom th'old rich Lady lifts with ease to heaven, Leaves PROCULEIUS one Ounce, GILL eleven:
Each hath his weight according to his measure, And heirs her wealth, as he advanc'd her pleasure: The price of blood, so wasted, let him take, Turn pale, as stepping bare-foot on a Snake: Or as the Rhetor that in his sad strife, Speaks at the Bar in LIONS for his life. What rage inflames me, when the people's press'd With crowds attending him that dispossess'd The Orphane, now a Prostitute? When this Condemn'd to exile, but not punish'd is: For, what's the hurt rich infamy can do? Here MARIUS din'd at three, drinks there from two; The angry Gods He hath, by losing, won: But Thou, victorious Province, art undon. Are, not these worthy HORACE? not write these? What then? Romances? Tales of HERCULES, Or DIOMED, or what a bellowing Was in the Labyrinth, or shall I sing The flying Architect and Sea-drown'd Boy? When that which Law lets not the Wife enjoy, Her Husband takes, that's expert at the sleight Of measuring, with's eye, the Chambers height;
And, nodding o're his liquor, subtly showes The trick of sleeping with a waking nose. When to be Captain of the Guard he stands, Whose stables eat up his Fore-fathers Lands, Whilst he by their Flaminian Urnes drives on: For, when he was the Boy AUTOMEDON, He held the rains: and to his mantled Love Brag'd what a Charioteer he hop'd to prove. Who would not write vast Satyrs in the streets, When there the forger of a Will he meets, That in his Chair, transparent on both sides, On six mens shoulders carry'd, proudly rides Bolt-upright, like MAECENAS: a strange rise; Moist wax and parchment made him in a trice? Then comes the Lady, that, for rich wine, brought Her thirsty husband Poyson: she that taught Beyond LOCUSTA'S art, rude neighbours how, Through Fame and Men, to bear black corpses now. Doe what short GYARUS, or chains deserves, If thou wilt prosper: Virtue's prais'd, but sterves. 'Tis Vice to which their Palaces they owe Their Gardens, Tables; and that goodly show
Of Plate, which on their Side-boards they set up; And silver-Goat inboss'd without the Cup. For covetous Daughters which Step-fathers keep, Men-Brides, and loose young Gallants, who can sleep? If Nature will not write a verse, Scorn may: Like me, or CLUVIENUS, any way. Er'e since DEUCALION sail'd the showre-swoln Flood To th' Oracle that on PARNASSUS stood: Since through soft stones a warm Soul gently flow'd, And PYRRHA to their Males Maids naked show'd: What men doe, their hopes, fears, distasts, contents, Sports, plots: this rapsody our book presents, And when was known a higher flood of vice? When mindes more avaritious? When the Dice So madly flung? Our Gamesters will not let Their Purses now be brought, their Trunks they set. How their armes-bearing Stewards fight, you see. And less than mad can you think him to be, That casts at once eight hundred pounds away, Nor to his shivering man a coat will pay? Who built so many Villas? When was't known Our fathers with seav'n Courses supp'd alone?
The Sportula now hangs before the door, A little Basket for the scrambling Poor. But first the Porter viwes you, lest you own Anothers name: you shall be serv'd if known. Our TROJAN Lords this Cryer calls alowd; (For they as well as we the threshold crowd,) Give to the Praetor, give the Tribune; hold, The Freedman, I came first, and will be bold To keep my place; why should I ROMANS fear, Though by EUPHRATES born, which in my ear The loop-hole would confess, should I deny? Five Houses worth three thousand pounds have I, To make a ROMAN Knight, What more's requir'd? Is not Right Worshipfull CORVINUS hir'd To keep sheep neer LAURENTUM? at my rate The Freedman PALLAS liv'd not: my estate Exceeds the LICINI: then TRIBUNE stay; Let Riches carry it; nor he give way To sacred Honour, whose bare chalky feet At ROME first kis'd the stones that pave the street: For here to money's Majesty we yeeld Divine respect; though, fatall Gold, we build
To thee no Tempels yet: though Silver hath No Altars like to Victory, Peace, Faith, Virtue, and Concord, where the Storks nest creaks, When that young Brood the old one's welcom speaks. But in their year's Accounts, when our great men Summe up the Basket; What get Clients then, Whose old shoes hang here, there a kind of cloak, All a poor house affords, but bread and smoak? Sedans full for these hundred Farthings throng Big-belly'd or sick Wives are brought along: He begs for th' absent, a slye trick now common, Holds forth the close-chair empty, for the woman: My GALLA'S here, Dispatch, Why this delay? Let's see her; she sleeps; vex her not I pray. The day it self's in handsome order spent, First at the Sportula we complement: Our business in the Forum next we follow, Visit the learned in the Law, APOLLO; And our triumphall Marbles, one I mark Inscrib'd AEGYPTIAN and ARABARCH: Of which all I can say, is only this, You may against that Statue more than piss.
Old Clients weary leave their Patrons Gate And their own hope, though it had made them waite Long for a supper: 'twas a vain desire. Poor wretches, they must now buy roots and fire. Mean time their Prince hath, serv'd up to his board, All rarities the Seas and Woods afford: On's empty beds, his ease he only takes? And of so man'y old, fair, large Tables, makes His choice of one, to hold his various meats, And there alone his Patrimony eats. He'l not allow the Parasite a place: Who can endure a Luxury so base? Huge Ravin, to ingross whole boares, a beast That only seems created for a feast. But swift's thy plague, when swelling and undrest Thou bath'st crude Peacock, which will ne're digest. Thus Youth untimely, Age intestate dyes: The laugh'd-at news to every table flyes: And at these Funerals, their angry friends Applaud the justice of such fearfull ends. Posterity can no new Vices frame; Our Nephews will but wish and act the same:
All Crimes are at the height. My Muse, away; Hoist Sail; spread all thy canvas. Poet, stay, Here's Work; Where's Wit and Freedom? as we list To whip Vice, like th' AURUNCANE Satyrist? That simple Freedome I dare hardly name: All's one, if his poor MUTIUS like or blame; Touch TIGELLINUS, and thou shalt expire Wrapt up in pitch and flax, and set on fire, Like those with propt-up throats, that smoaking stand, And dragg'd to execution, plow'd the sand: Whil'st he, that poison'd his three Uncles, born In's pendent-Couch, thy death shall laugh to scorn: If he come, lay thy finger o're thy lips; Th' Informer catches the least word that slips. AENAEAS now, without indangering Thy self, to fight fierce TURNUS thou maist bring: None vexes that ACHILLES feels his wound, Or grieves for HYLAS with his pitcher drown'd. But when LUCILIUS like a sword drawes out Hot fury; he that feels cold guilt about The heart, his crimes lay'd open blushing heares: His entrailes sweat: from hence springs rage and tears.
These things, before the trumpet sounds, debate: The plumed Combatant repents too late. Well then, I'le try, what I of those may say, Urn'd in the LATINE and FLAMINIAN Way. The Comment UPON THE FIRST SATYR. VErse 2. Theseis.] A Heroick Poem (writ in imitation of Virgils Aeneis, but not by so good a Hand) magnifying The∣seus that built Athens, for encountring with Monsters, kil∣ling of Giants, and such Herculean Knight-errantry, as had been fathered upon the valour of his Youth, by fabulous Antiquity: For, the first Hi∣storians described valiant Persons, as the old Geographers did the unknown parts of the World, fancying impossibilities in Nature, , Shoars without waters, or guarded by wilde Beasts; as Plutarch observes in his preamble to the Life of Theseus. The Author of this Latine Poem was Codrus; you have an account of him Sat. 3. Shorter then's Dwarf-wife, Codrus had a Bed. Item, six little Juggs on's Cupboard's head. Item, beneath it stood a two-ear'd Pot By Chiron's Herball. Lastly he had got A Chest with some Greek Authors▪ where the fierce Barbarous Mice gnaw'd never-dying Verse.
To this Miserable Inventory of his Goods, might well have been an∣nexed the Schedule of this pittifull Poem, wherewith he had so often tormented the Eare of Juvenal. Verse 4. Huge Telephus.] The Tragicomedy of Telephus, base Son to Hercules, by Auge the Daughter of Alaeus▪ from whose eyes, when she could no longer conceal the shame within her, it put him into such a fu∣ry, that he resolved never to see her more. In pursuance of this resoluti∣on, he committed her to a Master of a Ship, commanding him to set her ashoar in some far distant Country, where her dishonour could not have arrived: but his private instructions were, that when he had her at Sea, he should drown her. Before she came aboard him, in a Forest of Mysia, she fell in labour, and was delivered of a Boy, that by the Midwife was conveyed away, and hid among the bushes. Fortune having thus rescu∣ed the Child, Beauty pleaded in behalf of the Mother; and so far the Master's cruel heart was melted, that he landed her in Caria, and there sold her to Theutrantes, who in a short time raised her from his Slave to be his Queen. Mean time some Mysian Shepheards, driving their flocks through the Forest, saw a Hind (singled from the Heard) that never of∣fered to stir till they came up to her, where they found her giving suck to a new-born Babe, which they took up and carried home to one of their Wives. The news of the Child's strange preservation flying through the Kingdome of Mysia, came to the King's ear, who sent for the Infant, and was so taken with his beauty, that he eased the Shepheards of their care, and bred him up as his own. In short, the King being Childless, upon his death-bed, adopted this Child of fortune, to whom he then gave his Crown, as he had formerly given him the name of Telephus in memory
of his Nurse the Hinde. Telephus succeeding to the Kingdome, was cour∣ted by the Greeks, in their march to Troy, for a passage through his Do∣minions; which he denying, and with an Army of his own endeavou∣ring to give a stop to theirs, he was by Achilles wounded in the left thigh with a Spear; and when all the art of Chiurgery failed to give him ease, the Oracle being consulted, answered, that no humane help would save his life, unless he could receive it from the hand that woun∣ded him: whereupon he reconciled himself to Achilles, who, it seems, made the first experiment of the weapon-salve upon Telephus, healing his wound (saith Pliny) with the rust of the Spear that made it. Ovid. Telephus aeterna consumptus tabe perisset, Si non quae nocuit dextra tulisset opem. Consum'd for ever Telephus had dy'd, Had not the wounding hand the Cure apply'd. Others say that Achilles did this cure by virtue of certain herbs taught him by his Singing-master the Centaur. Chiron. Claud. Sanus Achilleis remeavit Telephus herbis, Cujus pertulerat vires; & sensit in uno Lethalem placidam{que} manum: medicamen ab hoste Contigit, & pepulit quos fecerat ipse dolores. Achilles, that gave Telephus his wound, Cur'd him with herbes: from one hand death he found And life: his Enemy his Surgeon prov'd, And he that caus'd the pain, the pain remov'd. Here was plot enough to make a Play, like the Thanks in Terence that were to be sent to Thais, more than Great, Huge.
Verse 5. Orestes] The Tragedy of Orestes, Son to Agamemnon, and Clytemnestra, that having murdered the King her Husband, to make way for her second marriage with Aegistus; her next resolution was (in order to a settlement) to take the life of her young Son Orestes. But she was prevented in this designe by the vigilant care of her Daughter, Prin∣cesse Electra, by whom her Brother, with his Governour, was privately sent to his Uncle by the Father, Strophius, Prince of the Phocians; in whose Court Orestes was educated with the Prince's Son Pylades, inse∣parable Friend and Companion to him in all the sad changes of his for∣tune. When for some years he had remained with his Uncle, Orestes sickned & dyed, as the world was made believe: the colourable Ceremo∣nies of his Funeral being over, Embassadors from the Prince were sent to Aegistus and Clytemnestra, to condole (that was to congratulate) for the death of Orestes, who (attended by his Cousin Pylades) went him∣self in their train disguised, shrinking his shoulders to disguise his height; and being admitted to the presence of his Mother and Father in law, Orestes slew them both in revenge of his own Fathers murder. With the horror of this committed matricide, he fell distracted, imagining that his Mothers ghost, with a guard of Furies, haunted him. He likewise slew Pyrrhus, the Son of Achilles in the Temple of Apollo, for ravishing his Betrothed, the fair Herimone, the Daughter of Hellen by Menelaus: and wandered with Pylades into Taurica Chersonesus; where the barba∣rous Custome of the Europaean Sarmatians was, to offer up to Diana the blood of Strangers, especially Graecians, which of all the World they hated. The King of the Country Thoas, receiving intelligence that one of the Stranger-Princes was Orestes, commanded that he, as the better man, should be sacrifized: but no discovery could be made which of the two
was he; for Pylades took upon him the name of Orestes, and Orestes owned himself; their friendship being so strict, as they refused not to die for one another. Cicero de Amicitia. These bloody Rites were superintended by the Lady Iphiginia, one that before the Trojan War, (when the Grecian Fleet lay winde-bound, for Agamemnon's offence of killing a Stag in Aulis) was brought thither to appease the wrath of Di∣ana as a Sacrifice: but the goddesse pittying her innocence sent a Hinde to supply her place at the Altar, and conveyed away the Princess to be her Priestesse in Taurica; where she now coming to the knowledge of her Brother Orestes, saved his life by joyning with him to kill Thoas King of Taurica; from whence they fled into Italy, carrying along the Image of Diana hid in a Faggot; and therefore called Fascilides by the Romans, and adored by that Title in the Aricine Wood, where the figure was left by these Wanderers. Lastly, Orestes being told that he should finde rest, and be dispossessed of the Furies in Arcadia, directed his course thither; and there died, bit by a Viper. His body was afterwards digged up by command from the Oracle, and found to be be ten foot and a half high. Pliny lib. 7. Verse 8. The Grove of Mars,] Several Groves were consecrated to Mars, one in Pontus, another at Athens, a third in Alba, where the Wolf gave suck to the Twins of Mars, Romulus and Rhemus. This last, I conceive, my Author means, as a subject on which his Country∣men, the Romans, used to exercise their Muses. Verse 8. Vulcan's Grotto near to the Aeolian Rocks.] By Vulcan's Grotto is meant the concave of the burning Mountain Aetna, where Vul∣can the god of fire hammered out Thunderbolts, as the old World was made believe; when the truth of Histories was wrapt up in Fables by the
wisedome of the Ancients. Right against Aetna lie the 7. Liparen Islands, Liparis, Tremessa, Ericusa, Phenicusa, Evonyma, Hiera, and Strongyle, the greatest of the seven; where Aeolus reigned, that was believed to be god of the Windes, and blew from his Aeolian Rocks, as the Bellowes to Vulcan's great Forge in Aetna; who had likewise a little Forge in Hiera, the least of these 7. Islands, called the Vulcanian Isle, and his Liparen Work-house, Sat. 13. —But Vulcan powr'd Nectar himself, and his own fingers scowr'd, Foul'd in his Liparen Work-house.— The cause why this Isle was dedicated to Vulcan, was, from a little sto∣nie Hill therein, continually vomiting up fire. Verse 10. What Souls Judg Aeacus torments.] The three Infernal Judges were Rhadamantus, Minos, and Aeacus: The first commissioned to hear the Charge, and judge of matter of fact. Virg. Aeneid. lib. 5. Gnosius haec Rhadamantus habet durissima regna, Castigat{que}, audit{que} dolos, subigit{que} fateri. Here strictest Rhadamant the Gnosian reignes, Hears Crimes, makes Souls confess and suffer pains. The second pronounced Sentence. Horace. Cum semel occideris, & de te splendida Minos Fecerit arbitria No sooner shalt thou die, and Minos pass Clear sentence on thee. The third saw Judgment executed; as in the words here commented upon. What Souls Judg Aeacus torments. Verse. 11. Who stole the Golden Fleece.] The Theef was Jason: his
Fable Ovid gives you; the History of the Fleece, Justin lib. 24. Phry∣xus Prince of Thebes, after the death of his Mother Queen Ino, when he durst no longer trust his life to the madness of his Father Athamas, and the malice of his Step-mother Mephele, committed himself to the mercy of the Sea, and desperately attempted to pass the Pontick Straits upon the back of the Golden-Ram, his Sister Helle riding behinde him: but she, poor Lady, frighted with the roaring of the waves, let goe her hold, and was drowned in that narrow Sea, afterwards called Hellespont. Phryxus himself came safe to Aeta King of Cholcos, where he sacrificed the gol∣den-Ram to Jupiter; some say to Mars. The Ram swifter then he stemd the Straits, flew up to heaven, and was made a Star, retaining his former figure. The Golden-fleece hung up in the Temple, until Medea char∣med the Guards for Jason to steal both it and her. Verse 11. What Ash-trees Centaurs fling.] Ixion had issue the Centaurs by the cloud, which he imagined to be Juno: by his own Wife he had Pirithous Prince of the Lapiths, married to Hippodame, the Daughter of Oenomaus, King of Elis. At this Wedding the Centaures having drunk hard, nothing would content them but the Bride; attempting to carry her away by force, they were fought with, and defeated by the Lapiths, under the command of Piriibous, assisted by his Friend (that afterwards went with him down to Hell) Theseus. In the fight the Cen∣taur Rhetus pluckt up by the rootes, and flung at the Lapiths, such wilde Ash-trees as Boreas in a storm could hardly blow down. The expression is Lucans: The battel Ovid most rarely describes. Verse. 12. Julius Fronto.] A Tribune, by Galba discharged out of the City Cohorts, Tacit. lib. 16. After this exauctoration Fronto lived in Rome most nobly, his House and Gardens being free for all that would
read their works, as well for meanest Poetasters, Codrus and Cluvienus, as for the noblest Poets, Juvenal, Statius: and Martial, that in an Epigram to Fronto stiles him, Clarum militiae Fronto togae{que} decus. Fronto thou Ornament of warre and peace. Verse 13. We have counsel'd Sylla to lay down the Sword.] To advise Sylla that he should lay down his Commission for Dictator or supreme Ma∣gistrate, was a Theam or Exercise as common in the Rhetorick Schools, when the Scholars were to learn the point of perswasion, as it was for their Master to make them deliberate for Hannibal, Sat. 7. After the fatal day at Cannae won, If he directly should to Rome march on; Or, to get's weather-beaten forces out Of stormes and lightning, wisely wheel about. A hard task it would be for the best Rhetorician living, to perswade Sylla, if he were now alive (for that was the case) to resigne the sove∣reign power, unless he were such an Orator as could bring arguments to raise the love of Pleasure above that of Ambition and Revenge: to all which Sylla was passionately given, as you will finde in this Summary of his life. Sylla or Sulla was nobly born; but till the time of his Questorship, he much dishonored the Patrician Family, from which he was descen∣ded, with drinking, wenching, and acting in private among Stage-play∣ers, his wit making him an excellent Comedian; for it was quick and sharp, as you may note from his animadversion upon the letter writ him by Caphis the Phocian, advising him not to meddle with the sacred trea∣sure of Delphos, because he was told for certain that the God was heard to strike his Lute in the Sanctuary. To this Sylla answered, That he
wondered Caphis understood the god no better; for one that is really sad will have no minde to play Tunes: and therefore Caphis should not fear to receive that which Apollo parted with so merrily. But Sylla was not hap∣pier in his jests, then he was in serious concerns; wherein he had been without a Parallel, if his Cruelty had not blemish'd his Fortune. He fet∣tered King Jugurth, defeated Marius, destroyed the Government of Cinna, proscribed Sulpitius; and commanded that Sulpitius his Slave, for betray∣ing of his Master, should have his neck broken from the Tarpeian rock. He beat Mithrydates out of all Europe, and Euboea, confining him within the limits of his hereditary Kingdome of Pontus. At the walls of Rome, neer to the Collin Gate, he fought a battel, where the number of the slain was said to be 80000. Then he entred the City, where he gave quar∣ter to 4000 men; and when they had delivered up their weapons, orde∣red them to be put to the sword, he himself (as Seneca reports) then sit∣ing in Senate within the Temple of Bellona; where the Lords being frighted with the shrieks of the dying men, he cryed, To the business of the day, these (my Lords) are a few seditious Rogues slain by my com∣mand. He likewise put to death of his own party above 9000. In his first Roll of Proscription he writ down 80000 names: in his second List 5000. By his order M. Marius, Brother to C. Marius, had his eyes dig'd out, and was then cut to pieces limb by limb: He also slew Carinates Praetor to Marius. In short, he made not only Rome, but all Italy, a Slaughter-house. He did ill valiantly: and was cautious enough to se∣cure himself He knew no fear of Heaven; had no Faith; no Mercy. Four Marian Legions confiding in his false promise, and imploring the pitty that never dwelt in him, were slain to a man. Five thousand Praenestines, that had his word for their indemnity, he caused to be slain
and cast into the fields, denying burial to their bodies. He drew his sword against women. He commanded mens heads to be brought him only to make sport withall. The ashes of Marius were dis-urned by his barbarity. From the time that he resigned the Dictator-ship, until the very hour of his death, he recreated himself with Players, Fools and Fidlers. The day before his death, hearing that Granius the Praetor de∣ferred the payment of his vast debts in expectation of Sylla's death, he sent for the Praetor to his Chamber, and there, after he had Rogu'd and Rascal'd him, commanded him to be strangled: But the fury wherewith he ranted, put his body into so violent an agitation, that his Impost∣hume (the bed of his lowsie disease) broke; and all that night strugling for life in his own blood, next morning he gave up the Ghost. His E∣pitaph writ by his own hand was to this effect. Here lies Sylla, the greatest Friend, and the heaviest Enemy. Plutarch. Verse 22. Lucilius.] The first Latine Poet that writ Satyrs, born at Aurunca in Italy, a Town famous for Satyrists, Lenius, Silius and Turnus being all three Auruncanes; whereof the last was a Person of great qua∣lity, and gracious with the two Vespasian Caesars, Titus and Domitian. In the six and fourtieth year of his age Lucilius died at Naples, and was buried at the publick charge. Verse 26. Bare-brested Maevia foyls the Tuscan Boar.] This may with great reason have the second place among the motives that prevai∣led with Juvenal to write Satyrs, and is as much against nature as the first. What a prodigious sight it was for the Romans, in their great Show-place, the Circus, to see a Woman fight with a Boar, and of all Italian Boars the Tuscan Boar was the wildest: But, it seems, Maevia was a fier∣cer Creature: and no doubt but Rome would have been astonished, if
such a Prize had been played in King Numa's dayes; when a woman but coming into the Senate-house to plead in her own Cause, they sent to the Oracle to know, what it portended to the State. Plutarch in the life of Numa. Verse 28. That with his Sissers.] Cynnamus the Barber, whose For∣tunes were raised by his Mistresses, to the quality of a Roman Knight, with a vast Estate, as Juvenal tells us, Sat. 10. Sooner might my Arithmatick avow, How many Mannors he is Lord of now: That when my youthfull beard was grown too grave, Correction with his nimble Sissers gave. He was at last forced to flye from Rome into Sicily. Martial. Qui Tonsor fueras tota notissimus urbe: Et posthac Dominae munere factus eques. Sicanias Vrbes, Aetnaea{que} regna petisti Cynname, cum fugeres tristia Jura Fori. Qua nunc arte graves tolerabis inutilis annos? Quid facit infaelix & fugitiva quies? Non Rhetor, non Grammaticus Ludive Magister, Non Cynnicus, non tu Stoicus esse potes, Vendere nec vocem Siculis plausum{que} Theatris: Quod superest? iterum Cynname Tonsor eris. All Rome knew thee a Barber; and then made Knight-Cynnamus, for which thy Mistress paid. Thy next trick was the Forum to beguile, And flye from Justice into Aetna's Isle.
What Art shall now thy useless age maintain? What can, unhappy fugitive, Quiet gain? No Rhetorician can be made of thee, No Pedant, Cynnick, Stoick canst thou be; Nor Actor in Cicilian Playes; what then? Cynnamus, ev'n turn Barber once agen. Verse 31. —The Canopian Slave. Crispinus flaunts it in his Tyrian Cloak] Crispinus, Freed-man to Nero, was born in Aegypt, at Canopus the lewdest Town in all that Kingdome, and he as lewd a Knave as ever came from thence, but a man of a most insatiable pride and curiosity. See the beginning of Sat. 4. Of his Cloak thus Martial, Nescit cui dederit Tyriam Crispinus abollam, Dum mutat cultus induitur{que} togam: Quisquis habes humeris sua munera redde precamur: Non hoc Crispinus te sed abolla rogat. Non quicun{que} capit saturatas murice vestes, Nec nisi deliciis convenit iste color. Si te praeda juvat faedi{que} insania lucri, Quo possis melius fallere sume togam Who had's Cloak Crispine knew not, but 'twas gon When he chang'd habits and his Gown put on. Prythee, good Friend, restore his Tyrian riches: This not Crispinus, but his Cloak beseeches. Purple of Tyre is not for every wear, Great persons only in such Cloaks appear.
If thou beest theevish, take a Gown, that over Thy knavery thou may'st have a better Cover. Verse 40. —Fill'd with's own bulk, in his new Sedan Matho the Lawyer comes.—] From a poor Advocate Matho grew so rich an Informer, that he went in his Sedan, and filled it, he was so fat with taking his ease: of whom Martial Declamas in febre Mathon, hanc esse phrenesim Si nescis, non es sanus amice Mathon. Declamas aeger, declamas hemitriteus, Si sudare aliter non potes, est ratio. Magna tamen res est: erras, cum viscera febris Exurit, res est magna tacere Mathon. Matho in's Ague pleads; a Frenzie 'tis, Th'art mad, Friend Matho, if thou know'st not this. Plead in a double Tertian? put the case Thou could'st not sweat else thou might'st talk apace; 'Twill doe me good: No, better hold thy peace In hot fits, Matho, lest thou melt thy grease. Verse. 41. —And then the man That's great Friend peach'd.—] This arch Rogue some think to be Cassius, Tutor and Impeacher of Silanus. Tacitus lib. 13. But an old Commentator affirmes the man to be Heliodorus the Stoick, Nero's Informer-General. This grand Knave might well be cal∣led Prince of Informers, unto whom the petty Informers, the Players, Massa, Carus, and Latinus, were such obedient Subjects, that the two first presented him their wealth, & the last his wife: yet were these Players Va∣lets of the Chamber to Nero, and such as he much delighted in. Bebius
Massa is remembred by Tacitus at the death of Piso. Pliny saith, That by Carus a Libel was given to Domitian Caesar, that would (if the Em∣peror had lived) have cost Pliny his life. As for Latinus, he was put to death by Claudius, for being Pander to his Empresse Messalina. Verse 48. Leaves Proculeius one ounce, Gill eleven.] The Civil Law accounts the whole Estate as a Pound, or As. An absolute Heir is called Haeres ex asse. The first named in a VVill, Haeres primae Cerae; A Lega∣tee, Haeres in ima Cera. The twelfth part of a Pound or As, is an Ounce: so that he who is Heir to eleven Ounces, carrieth away eleven parts of the Estate; and he that is Heir to an Ounce, only one poor part. Verse 53. —As the Rhetor, that in his sad strife Speaks at the Barre in Lyons—] Sueton. At Lyons in France Caligula instituted Exercises for Rhetoricians: the Victors had an Imperial donative: the conditions of the vanquished were, That they should satisfie the Victors either by writing of their praises, or with a summe of money, or lick out the Orations they themselves had written, or be beaten with Ferula's, or drowned in the next river, at the discretion of the Judges. No marvel then if the poor Orators looked as pale as consumptive Wenchers. Verse 60. Marius.] Marius Priscus Proconsul of Africa, accused and prosecuted by the Africans for poling of their Country, was banish∣ed and condemned by Cornutus in the summe of 7000 nummi or sestertii: but this small summe (not ten pound more then Crispinus paid for his Mullet) was paid in to the Exchequer: the Province lost the charges of the Suit wherein they overthrew him; and the vast remainder of the money which he had extorted from them, enabled him in his ba∣nishment to live more riotously then he had done in Rome; for there
he eat at their ninth hour, which is our three of the clock in the after∣noon; but in his exile he drank from their eighth hour, which is our two of the clock in the afternoon, being the time when the Romans bathed to prepare their bodies for dinner; and so Marius by his banish∣ment clearly got an hour of earlier riot. And though his own Country Gods were offended, it seems the forrein Gods were better pleased. Verse 64. Hercules.] Son to Jupiter by Alcmena. The twelve La∣bors imposed upon him by Juno, was a subject much handled by the Romançe Poets. Panyasis writ the Heraculea, fourteen books of Her∣cules. Verse 65. Diomed.] The tale of Diomed is this: In a duel with Ae∣neas he wounded Venus, that assisted his Antagonist her Son; and to re∣venge her self of him, she sent her other Son Cupid to his wife Aegialia, that struck her in love with Sthenelus; who set on by his Mistress, lay in ambush for her Husband as he returned from the siege of Troy, routed him, his men flying to the Sea side; where, their legs not being able to carry them farther, they found wings, and were transformed into birds. See Lycophron and Solinus. Verse 66. Labyrinth.] Thus runs the Fable of the Labyrinth. Pasi∣phae, Wife to Minos King of the Cretans, was taken with a preternatu∣rall and nefarious love to a Bull; and by the art of Daedalus, she was in∣closed in a Cow of wood; so attaining her desire, she conceived and brought forth the Minotaur, half Man half Bull. The Instruments of her wickedness being discovered by Minos, he shut up Daedalus with his Son Icarus in that very Labyrinth made by his Master Builder Daedalus: But he got out with another invention of Wings, and flew to Cumae in Italy, where he laid them down. Sat. 3. But his Son Icarus flying too
high, the wax that fastned on his Wings, was melted by the Sun, and the Boy drowned in the Sea. Verse 68. When that which Law lets not the Wife injoy.] Domitian Cae∣sar made a Law, that Adulteresses should be uncapable of inheriting and of using close Chairs or Sedans. Sueton. Verse 72. Waking nose.] The Pimp to his own Wife counterfeited sleep so artificially, that with snoring he made such a noise, as if his nose had been awake. Verse 73. To be Captain of the Guard he stands.] Fuscus (afterwards Generall against the Dacians) had consumed all the Estate left him by his noble Progenitors, with keeping a Stable of Chariot-horses to fol∣low the Court from Rome to Caesars Country-house, whether he him∣self used to drive his Chariot along the Flaminian way, where the Sta∣tues and Urnes of his Ancestors stood in his sight, which might well have deterred him from spending prodigally the fortunes they had left him, acquired by their Noble Industry. But, it seems, that which flat∣tered him to this expence, was a hope that Caesar would make him Prae∣fect or Captain of his Praetorian Guards. Verse 76. Automedon] was Coachman to Achilles. It appears that Fuscus, besides his expectation to be Captain of the Guard, had a natu∣rall inclination to be a Chariotier; for, when he was the Boy Autome∣don, that is, before he was able to drive the horses like a man, he used to sit with the Chariot-driver, and to hold the rains, to show his affection to that Art, and withall to commend himself to his young Mistresses that were so much taken with Chariotiers. Verse 80. Forger of a Will.] The Author means Tigellinus, that poy∣soned three of his Uncles (as you may read towards the end of this
Satyr) and forged Wills, wherein he made himself Heir to them all. Verse 83. Maecenas.] That great Patron of the Poets Maecenas, was known to be likewise so great a Voluptuary, that Juvenal never useth his name but in this sense, as here, and Sat. 12. Purple for soft Maecenases to weare. Verse 87. Locusta.] One of Nero's Court-Instruments, that being chid for dallying with Britannicus, gave him a dose that wrought so nim∣bly, he dyed before the boll could be taken from his hand. Verse 89. Gyarus.] The least Island of the Cyclades, to which the Ro∣mans banished highest offendors. Verse 96. Loose young Gallants.] The Praetextati, or young Nobility of Rome, that wore the Praetexta or Gown bordered with Purple, of which they were divested before they could be arraigned by Law. Verse 98. Cluvienus.] Such another pittifull Poet as Codrus was. Verse 99. Since Deucalion] That is since the World began again after Deucalion's Flood; when he landing upon the top of the Moun∣tain Parnassus, consulted the Oracle of Themis about the restoration of Mankinde, and was answered, It might be done by him and his Wife Pyrrha, if they would cast stones over their shoulders, which should be mollified into flesh and blood, and inanimated with a rational Soul; and (if we believe the Greek Historians or Fabulists) they did so, and it succeeded accordingly; to which Juvenal adds, that Pyrrha put the Males and Females together. Verse 113. Villa's.] Country-houses. Verse 115. The Sportula.] When the Romans were grown so proud in their Luxury, that a great man scorned to admit his Friends to his Table; instead of a Supper they were entertained by a Porter at the Gate,
with the Sportula, a little Basket that held 100 farthings, as in this place: but sometimes the Sportula was enlarged, and the Porter treated the Guests with variety of meats. Vid. Sat. 3. See'st not what smoak the Sportula breaths out. Verse 119. Our Trojan Lords.] The Romans derived themselves from Trojan Aeneas. Verse 121. The Praetor.] The Praetor Urbanus was an Officer in the nature of our L. chief Justice, attended by the Lictor, or Officer of Death, that carried on his shoulder an Axe within a bundle of rods, signifying the different punishments of petty and capital offenders; those being on∣ly whipt, these beheaded. To the Urbanus or great Praetor were added at last 17. Praetors more, whereof two were Praetores Fidei Commissarii, in the nature of Lord Chancellors or Keepers. Fenest. de mag. Rom. c. 10. Verse. 121. The Tribune.] The Tribunes of the People, from the number of two in their first Institution, came afterward to be ten. These were Protectors of the Commonalty; they sate at the dore of the Senate; they were the Grand-jury to inform the Lords: No Act could pass un∣less they subscribed it with the letter T. but they themselves had not au∣thority to make an Act at first; yet in processe of time they usurped such a power. Pomp. Laet. Stadius in Flor. Pigh. Rosin. Verse. 122. The Freed-man.] Was an Infranchised Slave; and this might be Crispinus by his taking place of the Praetor and Tribune, or it might be any other Infranchised Slave, that was a Native of Capadocia, Mesapotamia, Assyria, or Arabia; for the river Euphrates runs through all these Countries. Verse 127. A Roman Knight.] The Census Equestris, or that E∣state which made the Eques Romanus, (a dignity answering that of
Knight with us) was 400 sestertia, about 3125 l. of our money. A Freed-man worth so much might claim the Priviledges of a Knight, and a Knight that had less could not sit upon the Benches and Cushions at a Play by Otho's Law. Sat. 3. Vers. 128. Corvinus.] One of the noble Family of the Corvini, but grown so wretchedly poor, that he was inforced to serve a Shepheard, and keep his Flocks near to the Town of Laurentum in his own native Country. Verse 130. Pallas.] He was the wealthy Freed-man of Claudius Cae∣sar, that suffered him, together with Narcissus his fellow Freed-man, to have, not only great Estates conferred by Decree of Senate upon them, but likewise the Dignities of Quaestor and Praetor; and let them extort and monopolize so much, that when he complained of the emptiness of his Exchequer, one answered, It would be full enough if his two Freed-men might refund. See Sueton and Tacitus. Verse 131. The Licini.] Licinus, Caesars Freedman, was by Augustus made Governor of Gaule, which he pillaged, and so got a masse of wealth. It seems there were more Freed-men of that name, because it is put in the plural number. Verse 134. Chalkie Feet.] A Slave that from forein parts was brought to Rome to be sold in the Market, had his feet marked with Chalk. So Pliny and Tibullus. Verse 139. Concord, where the Storks nest creaks.] The Stork built in the Temple of Concord, erected by the Senate in the Forum. App. lib. 1. and therefore when the old Stork returned to feed her young ones, they would be sure to salute her with a creaking noise. If it were not for the word creaking, I should have inclined to Politian's opinion, that in his Miscel∣lanies interprets this to be a nest of Quails, the Embleme of Concord.
Verse. 142. Clients.] A Client had relation to some Noble man as his Patron. The Patron was obliged in honour to protect his Client; the Client, besides his attendance in publick, was bound by Law to con∣tribute towards his Patrons assesments and Daughters marriages. If any Client could be proved unfaithfull to his Patron, to have informed, made oath, or given his vote against him, or for his Enemy, he was for such disloyalty devoted to the Infernall Gods, and not only accursed by the Priest, but out-lawed by the Criminal Judge; so that it was lawfull for any man to kill him. Lazius de Repub. Rom. lib. 12. c. 3. Verse 153. The Forum.] The great Roman Piazza, where the Courts of Justice sate, to which the Client, after he had complemented his Friends at the Sportula, waited upon his Patron. Martial Prima salutantes at{que} altera continet hora, Exercet raucos tertia causidicos. The first hour and the second we salute, And in the third hoarse Advocates dispute. Verse 154. The learned in the Law, Apollo.] The reason of this ex∣pression was occasioned by the Library of Civil-law-books, made by Augustus Caesar, in the Temple of Apollo-Pallatine▪ where the Judges also heard Causes, as appears by Horace's delivery from the prating Fel∣low that was arrested and carried before the Judge sitting in that Tem∣ple. Horace Sic me servavit Apollo. Thus Apollo saved me. Verse 156. Aegyptian and Arabarch.] Crispinus the Aegyptian, that by his Master was priviledged to have triumphal Titles, Ornaments and a Statue, in the pedestall or basis whereof was engraven the style of Ara∣barch, which Crispinus might conceive the Reader would take to be
Arabian Prince. Some take Arabarch for a Customer in Aegypt, that re∣ceived toll for Cattle brought thither out of Arabia; but Juvenal seems to use the Word for an Arch-rogue. Verse 161. A Supper.] The Supper which the Patron was ordered by Domitian Caesar to bestow upon his Clients, was called Caena recta, a plain Supper, to distinguish it from the Patrons Caena dubia, or Supper of varieties, such as puzled the Guests to know where they should be∣gin. But at this time the Sportula was not by Domitian reduced to the Caena recta, of which Martial Centum miselli jam valete quadrantes. Poor hundred Farthings now farewell. Verse 171. Whole Boars.] The first that brought in fashion the having of a Boar served up whole to his Table was Servilius Tullus. Pliny. Verse 174. Crude Peacock.] Peacocks flesh never putrifieth. St. Au∣gustine. Then well it might be raw upon a Gluttons stomach, when he bathed before his next meal. Hortentius the Augur, was the first that brought this meat in request at Rome. Verse 177. Angry Friends.] Neer relations must needs be vext at the death of a Friend, by gluttony so surprized, as not to have time to make a Will. Yet even they could not but laugh at such a Comicall disaster, though they lost their Legacies by it. Verse 186. Mutius.] A great Knave but a poor man; so that when the Auruncane Satyrist, Lucilius, published his knavery, he had not a purse to see Advocates in a cause of Defamation: but if Tigellinus, the Emperor's Favourite, had been the man so defamed, he would have fol∣lowed the Law, which was, Ne licet carmen fieri ad alterius injuriam. Cicer. lib. 4. Tusc. Be it unlawfull for any man to make verse to the injury
of another. And in favour of so eminent a Courtier, Juvenal thinks it probable that the Judg would have sentenced the Offender to die as cru∣el a death as was inflicted upon Christians; of which barbarous cruelty read Tacitus lib. 15. Yet that very Judge might in his conscience know that Tigellinus was a thousand times the greater Villain. M. Tigellinus Ophonius poysoned three of his Fathers Brothers, and forging their Wills came to a vast Estate most villanously. Probus. Verse 189. Like those.] Christians, of whose living bodies Nero made bonfires, using them as he had done Rome, with the firing where∣of, he charged them. Note that Juvenal, speaking here of the Christi∣ans Martyrdomes, writes nothing disparageable to the Religion it self, as he doth to that of the Jewes in Sat. 3. and 14. from whence it may with reason be inferred, that because he scofs not at Christianity, he re∣verenced it. Verse 195. Aeneas.] Anchises his Son, that when Troy was fired, took his Father upon his shoulders, carried him through the flames, and brought him safe to Drepaum, a Town in Sicily, where the old man dy∣ed, that in his youth begot this Pious Son upon the Goddesse Venus at the Trojan river Simois. Virgil Aeneid. 1. He was King of the Latins, and reigned eleven years after the death of Latinus, in the right of his Wife Lavinia, Daughter and Heir to King Latinus; and the Widow of Tur∣nus slain by his hand. Aeneid 12. Eutropius. In his voyage from Troy to Italy, he lost his Wife Creusa, buried his Father (as you heard before) in Sicily, but never touched upon the Coast of Africa; and therefore could not have seen Dido, if she had been then living. After a tedious passage at Sea, he landed safe with his Sonne Ascanius in Italy; there conquered and settled: and from him Julius Caesar derived himself.
Verse. 196. Turnus.] Generall of the Rutilians in their warre against Aeneas, with whom he fought single, and was very angry with Juno that she would not let him stay to end the Combat. See Virgil Aeneid. lib. 6. Verse 197. Achilles.] Son to Peleus and Thetis, that in his Infancy washed him in the Stygian water, whereby he was made invulne∣rable in any part of his body but only the foot, by which his Mother held him when he was dipt. His Tutor was Chiron the Centaur, of whom he learned Horsmanship, Musick, and Physick. His Mother un∣derstanding by the Oracle, that he should perish in the Trojan Expedi∣tion, concealed him in a womans habit in the Court of King Lycomedes, where he got the Kings Daughter Deidamia with child of Pyrrhus. At last discovered by the subtilty of Ulysses, he was drawn into the war, be∣cause Troy could not be taken by the Graecians until they had the assi∣stance of Achilles. To prevent the Fate which Thetis knew him to be in danger of, she prevailed with Vulcan to make him armes that were im∣penitrable. After he had shewn much valour in the war, he was in such a rage with Agamemnon for taking from him his beloved Prisoner, fair Briseis, that he resolved (notwithstanding all the Prayers and importu∣nities of his Countrymen) never more to draw his Sword against the Trojans: But hearing that Hector had slain Patroclus, his fury for the death of that Friend made him forget his rage against his ene∣my, King Agamemnon, and dispensing with his solemn resolution, he fought again more furiously then ever, slew Hector, and in his Friends revenge tyed the dead body to his Chariot, and drag'd it three times a∣bout the walls of Troy; at last sold it to King Priam. Finally, when he was to be married to Polixena in the Temple of Apollo, Paris, Hector's ef∣feminate Brother, to prevent his Sisters marriage, concealed himself be∣hinde
the Image of the God, and with an arrow hit Achilles in the heel, where he was only capable of a wound. See Pliny, Homer, and Gellius. Verse 198. Hylas.] A most delicate Boy, Favorite to Hercules, that having slain his Father Theodamant, fell in love with the Boy; and in his voyage with the Argonauts to Colchos, when his Oare was broken and he forced to land, that he might get another in the Mysian Woods; the day being extremely hot, he sent Hylas with a pitcher for water to the ri∣ver Ascanius▪ but the bank being so high above water that he could not stand and fill his Pitcher, the Boy lay down upon his breast and hung o∣ver the stream, running with such a violence, that from his hand it car∣ried away the Pitcher, which he suddenly striving to recover, the Pit∣cher and Hylas were both drowned together. This occasioned the Fable that the Nymphs had ravished Hylas. But Hercules, when he heard no more news of the Boy, was so madded, that leaving the Argonauts, he searched Mysia for him, calling aloud upon his name. Virg. Vt Littus Hyla Hyla omne sonaret. That all the Shoar with Hylas Hylas rung. Verse 206. Latin and Flaminian way.] High-wayes from Rome full of dead-mens Monuments. The Flaminian way, Arc and Forum were so called from the Consul Flaminius, that fighting Hannibal was slain at Thrasimene, where his body was by Hannibal searched for amongst the dead, but not found. Livi. lib. 22. The Latin way, formerly called the Ferentian way, the Ausonian by Martial, not farre from the Latin Port, fell into the via Appia, that reached as far as Capua.
The second Designe. REad this good Book, sweet Lady, study fame, Leave gadding, hide your naked breasts for shame, The 1 Stoick cries; whom by the sleeve she takes, And out of it Glasses of Essence shakes And Civet-boxes, that perfume the Knave: Which of the two conceive you the more grave? Or which shews lightest, the bare-shoulder'd Wench At Barre, or 2 Judge in sarcenet on the Bench? Yet these are modest, if you 3 men compare, That fillet up with holy rites their haire, And pearl their necks with oriental charms. Then what's an 4 Emperor, that in his arms, Paints his pale Cheek before a Looking-Glasse? Here's yet a 5 Lord whose face is tougher Brasse, That (when 6 the Consul like a King attir'dSat. 10. Comes to the Circus in a Crown) is hir'd, A Trident in's right hand, the Stage to tread; In's left a Float-net, rais'd to catch his Head That followes with a Faucheon to invade This Lord borne, but a Rogue by breeding made. So Grapes, that grow upon the richest Vines Vnprun'd, degenerate to poorest Wines.
Figura Secunda. Hunclege, pulcra, librum; pereunti consule famae; Nè vaga transcurras vicos; sit pectus opertum, 1 Stoicus exclamat: vulsâ quem mollitèr ausa Solicitare togâ, tristi sub veste latentes Prodit suffitus, secretáque aromata spargit. Quemnam ex his, morum censes praeferre pudorem? Aut uter est levior, quae coram 2 Judice mammas Denudat moecha, an bysso pellucidus Ipse? Illa modesta quidem, fictum dum respicis, aras Ante, 3 Sacerdotem redimicula longa trahentem, Feminea orantis jactante monilia collo. Quid video? galeâ spectabilis 4 Induperator (Proh Deus!) ad speculum pallentia purpuratora. 5 Monstrum succedit majus; septemplicis aeris Frons illi, longo qui stemmate cretus avorum Se locat ad Circum (hic Trabeae fert 6 Consul honores,Sat. 10. Regalémque, manu quem portet Publicus, orbem) Retibus in laevâ libratis, lustrat arenam; Dum dextra appensos effundit fuscina casses: Mirmillo insequitur, si non cavet, ense paratus Caedere degenerem. Vitis neglecta labascit Nobilis, atque abeunt in vilem Massica vappam.
The Manners of Men. THE SECOND SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. Men are not what their lookes aver. Vice taints the grave Philosopher; The Judge the Bench'es honor staines: The Mock-Priest holy Rites prophanes: The armed General paints his face; The Nobly-borne foul Acts debase. The Reason Babes that speak may tell▪ For, none but they believe a Hell. BEyond SARMATIA and the Frozen Sea, I could fly hence; when to teach Manners they Presume, that CURIAN Temperance professe: And live like Bacchanals, in lewd excesse.
Th' unlearned first, though you CRYSIPPUS see Carv'd in all Studies: for, a great man's he That can buy ARISTOTLE'S Counterfeit, Or PITTACUS'es Statue copy'd get; And bids CLEANTHES, done by' a Master's hand, There, as his grave Library-keeper, stand. No trust to faces: for, what streets but fill With reverend vices? thou say'st, we are ill, When thou thy self art known to be so right, So perfect a SOCRATICK Catamite. Indeed, rough hairy limbs, and arms that bear Stiffe bristles, promise mindes extreme severe: But, from their smooth posteriors when he files Unnaturall tumors off, the Surgeon smiles. They dote on silence, speech with them is rare, Shorter then eye-browes too they weare their hair. More ingenuity PERIBONIUS shows: In such a man whose face and mien disclose His foul deboshery, I hold it fate: Simplicity we should commiserate, Plain madness speaks in his excuse: but them As infinitely baser I contemn
That with HERCULEAN language vice assail, And magnifying virtue, wag the tail. Shall I, sayes infamous VARILLUS, feare Thee bouger SEXTUS? make the odds appear? The Strait may Cripples, White-men Negro's, jeer. But who'l indure to hear a Mutineer Complain'd of by the GRACCHI? Who'd not cry Till earth confus'd the sea, the sea the skie; If MILO should a Murderer reprove: VERRES a Thief, CLODIUS Adult'rous love: CATILINE treason in CETHEGUS blame: SYLLA'S three Scholars 'gainst his Roll declaim? One lately marry'd his own Neece, and then Reviv'd a Law, a bitter Law to Men, That might have frighted MARS and VENUS too: Whil'st JULIA with abortives did undoe Her fruitfull womb: lump after lump she teem'd That ev'n the pictures of her Uncle seem'd. Such SCAURAN counterfeits, who would not slight Though ne're so bad, and rated turn and bite? Where's now the JULIAN Law a sow'r-Sir cry'd, Sleeps it? LARONIA with a smile reply'd,
Blest times, that make thee Censor, chastly given ROME now'll be, a third CATO'S dropt from Heaven: But Sir, your hairy neck's perfum'd, let's know Whence th' Essence comes? blush not, your Drugster show. If you'l needs wake the Statutes, reinforce The Law Scantinian, note men, you doe worse. But your strong Phalanx multitude defends And close-joynd shields: loose livers are fast friends; Our sex hath none of your detested tricks, TEDIA, CLUVIA: FLORA never licks CATULLA: HISPO passive pleasure knows, And pale with doing and with suffering grows. Doe we plead? study we your Civil Laws? Shake we your Courts with bawling in a cause? Some few of us fence, diet-bread some use, You spin wooll, and in baskets bear your clews: Thread from the pregnant spindle you can twine More nimble then ARACHNE, and more fine Then chast PENELOPE; or she that spins, Shiv'ring 'ith' stocks, a penance for her sins. 'Tis known why HISTER made his Freed-man heir, And living gave his wife so large a share:
She's rich that in a great man's bed lies third. Secrets bring jewels: marry, not a word. Yet for a Law that's death to us, you move. Censure acquits the Crow, condemns the Dove. Sham'd by LARONIA our soft Stoicks fly; For what delivered she, they could deny? But what in others can deform'd appear, When thou, grave Judge, dost mingled sarcenet wear? Nay sit'st in those thin silks, amazing ROME, And dost our PROCULA'S and POLLINEA'S doom? FABULLA will the deed you wot of doe: Let her be punish'd for't; CARFINIA too: Against her be, what ere thou wilt, decreed, She will not, though condemn'd, wear such a weed: But JULY'S hot, I sweat: then naked go, For madness will not half disgrace thee so. This Robe had our victorious Fathers seen Thee passing Laws in, when their wounds were green; Or had our Mountaineers beheld it, how Would they have hear'd thee when they came from plough? Heav'n! that a Judge should put on such a Vest: Wer't handsome if a Witness were so drest?
Stern Legislative CRETAN, thou art now Transparent, this disease was caught; and thou Wilt spread it further: as the scab but got By one sheep, the whole flock will have the rot: Hogs catch the measles; and the grape, that sees A tainted grape, sucks poyson by degrees. This shameless habit will not be thy worst, In time: none ever was stark-naught at first. Thou wilt er'e long turn hedge-Priest: joyn with them That Fillets wear, whose necks are all one Gemme; That with great Bolls, and Sows fat Paunches pray To our Good Goddess the contrary way: For, Men perform these Rites, no Female by: You prophane Women, get you gone, they cry; None sounds a Call with her lowd Cornet here. At ATHENS such the BAPTISTS Orgies were, When they their private Torches did advance, And tir'd out their COTYTUS in a dance. He with an oblique steel his eye-brows dyes, Touch'd with moist soot: & paints his trembling eyes. A glass-Priapus one mans wine must hold, Anothers huge long locks a Cawl of gold;
Blew shield-work this, or ras'd white satten wears: His Man too by his Masters JUNO swears. He holds the Mirrour Pathick OTHO bore (AURUNCANE ACTOR'S spoils) that when he wore His armes he view'd himself in; when he gave The battails signal, and bid the Ensignes wave. A gallant subject! for new Annals fit, And should in our-times History be writ. A Looking-glasse did load the Gen'rals Carre, And was the Baggage of a Civil-warre. O 'twas done like a General to kill Old GALBA; like a ROMAN pleits to fill; To hope spoils from the BEDRIACK field would grace The Capitol; to grease and paint the Face: Which proud SEMIRAMIS, when she put on Her Quiver, would not doe at BABYLON: Nor did the pensive CLEOPATRA dip Her Pencil, when aboard her ACTIAN-Ship: Here's lewd discourse; at Table no respect, Foul PHRYGIAN talk, the lisping Dialect Taught by th' old white hair'd Man, the Man of note For his so spacious and authentick Throat,
The Chief-Priest, most fanatickly inspir'd, A Master for the gusto to be hir'd. Why doe not these with PHRYGIAN Razors take That flesh away, of which no use they make? A Piper, or a Trumpeter, had four Hundred sestertia: GRACCHUS, for thy Dower Deeds were drawn, joy given, a great Supper made, The Bride was in his Bridegroom's bosom lay'd. Doe we the Censor or the Aruspex need You Lords? Doe not these horrid sights exceed All Monsters, though a woman should be Dam Unto a Calf, or a Cow calve a Lamb? The Priest that in Procession sweating heav'd Th' ANCILIAN shields by leathers unperceiv'd, Now weares a Bride's gown, petticoat and vail. O God of War! whence did these crimes assail Thy Latian Shepheards? how, Rome's Father, sprung These nettles up, that have thy children stung? Behold, a man great both in wealth and birth, Marries a man! yet thou into the earth Run'st not thy spear, nor thy plum'd helmet shak'st, Nor a complaint to JOVE thy Father mak'st.
Goe MARS, and to some other God assigne Those sacred Fields not look'd upon as thine. To morrow morning early on my friend I, in the Quirine valley, must attend. Why thither? cannot your own Guesse decide That question? my He-friend's to be a Bride. They bid few now, but notice they will give To all men, and record it if they live. Mean time, the Female's troubled much, she can No issue have, so to oblige the man. The best is, Nature to such mindes denyes Pow'r to change sexes: the wife barren dyes: Swoln LYDE'S salve-box helps not: nor to stand Where th' active LUPERCI may clap her hand. More monstrous Fencer-GRACCHUS did appear In's Cassock, arm'd with his three-forked spear: And view'd the Lists round, as he fled the Chase; Borne Nobler then the whole Capitoline Race, MARCELLI, CATULI, the FABIAN name, Those who their Pedegree from PAULUS claim, And all that from the scaffolds saw the sport He made: not bating that paid him for't.
That there be ghosts and regions under ground And th' oare, and black toads in the Stygian Sound; And thousands row'd in one boat; findes not faith With boyes, but such as pay not for their bath. Believe thou. What CAMILLUS, what now knows FABRITIUS, CURIUS, both the SCIPIO'S: The Legion that fell upon the train At CREMERA: the youth at CANNAE slain, Souls of so many battels? ever when Our ghosts descend, the spirits of these men Would purifie themselves, if they could get Sulphur and torches, and a lawrel wet. To them poor we must goe: indeed we boast Our conquests, stretch'd beyond the Irish coast And th' ORCADES, which lately we have seiz'd, And BRITAIN with no night in sommer pleas'd: But what we doe, that make the world our own, The conquer'd doe not: ZALATES alone, One of th' Armenian Youths, more lewd (they say) Then all ours, to the Tribun's flame gave way. See how commerce with ROME breeds our Allyes! He came a Hostage: men we womanize:
For had these boyes staid, all had lovers took, Their Countrey-cloths, whips, bridles, knives forsook; Thus back to their Artaxata they bear The manners, of the loose young Gentry here. The Comment UPON THE SECOND SATYR. VErse 1. Beyond Sarmatia, and the Frozen Sea I could fly hence—]Juvenal was so moved at the impudence of pretenders to Philosophy, base Hypocrites, that took upon them to reform the manners of the Romans; That, rather then stay in Rome with such Knaves, he could be con∣tented (if wings were to be got) to fly beyond Sarmatia, that is, to trust himself with the most barbarous Russians, Laplanders, Finlanders, and inhumane Cannibals; and so passing the River Tanais (that divides the two Sarmatia's, parting the European Tartars from the Asiatick) to fly over the Frozen Sea, which was then believed to be innavigable; but the Hollanders have lately sailed so far in the North-east passage, that they have discovered Nova Zembla within the Artick Circle, but twelve degrees from the Pole. Verse 3. Curian Temperance.] The Curian Family was enobled by the Temperance and Valour of Marcus Curius, that triumphed over the Sa∣bines, Samnites, and Leucanians, and beat King Pyrrhus out of Italy;
but his greatest triumph was over himself and his affections, as appears by his answer to the Samnite Ambassadors, that finding his Table cove∣red by the fire-side, furnished only with earthen dishes, and Curius him∣self roasting of roots for his supper, beseeched him to better his poor con∣dition, by accepting a great sum of money from their hands; to which he answered, that he had rather still eat in earth, and command the Samnites that were served in gold. Being accused for plundering, he produced a wooden vessell, which upon proof appeared to be all he had of the spoil. Liv. Verse 4. Bacchanals.] The Celebraters of the Bacchanalia or Dionysia, the libidinous Feasts of Bacchus, where virtue was death; for they that refused to sacrifice to Lust, were sacrificed by the fury of the Bacchanals. Of the abominable Ceremonies used at these Feasts, see Liv. & St. Augustine. They were at last as a Seminary of wickedness interdicted by the Senate. Verse 5. Chrysippus.] The Philosopher Chrysippus, the most ingenious Scholar to Zeno the first Stoick, and to his Successor Cleanthes; from both which Masters he only desired to know Doctrines, and bid them leave the Proofs to him; indeed he was so incomparable a Logician, that it grew to a Proverb, If the Gods would study Logick, they would read Chrysippus. He was Son to Apollonides (by some called Apollonius) of Tarsis, but he was born at Soli a City of Cilicia. Having spent what his father left him in following a Kings Court, he was compelled to study Philosophy, as being capable of no other course that might buoy up his fortunes: but after he was an eminent Philosopher, he never de∣dicated any of his books, as others did theirs, to Kings; and therefore was thought to be a great despiser of Honours, Laertius. But it is more
probable, that he following his studies to inrich himself, would neglect no good Medium to a fortune; and I rather believe, that he having smarted so much by attendance at Court, would never apply himself to Princes any more. He died of a violent laughter, with seeing an Asse eat figs, as some say, but of a Vertigo, according to Hermippus, in the 143 Olympiad, having lived seventy three years. Verse. 7. Aristotle] Was born at Stagyra, a City of Thrace, seated upon the river Strymon; his Father was Nicomachus the Physician, the Son of Macaon, famed by Homer for his skill in Physick, which it seems came to him extraduce, for Micaon was the Son of Aesculapius. Phaestias, Mother to Aristotle, was descended likewise from Aesculapius, as some affirm; but others say, she was Daughter to one of the Planters sent from Chalcis to Stagyra. He was a slender man, crump-shouldered, and stuttered naturally very much: but, for his incomparable erudition, Philip of Macedon sought to him to be his Son Alexander's Tutor; and Alexander made him his Secretary. He was 18 years old when he came to Athens, and there for 20 years he heard Plato. The City of Stagyra, from its ruines, was for his sake reedified by his Pupill, Alexander the great. When Alexander marched into Asia, Aristotle returned to Athens, and read Philosophy in the Lyceum thirteen years, from whence his Scholars were properly called Peripateticks of the Lyceum, (to distin∣guish them from the Peripateticks of the Academy, the Platonists,) yet afterwards they were known by the name of Peripateticks only, where∣of he himself is deservedly styled the Prince. After all the benefits re∣ceived from him by Athens, the return made, was an impeachment drawn up against him, that he was no true worshiper of the Gods. But this (as you shall presently see) had formerly been the case of Socrates, by the
sad example of whose death, Aristotle learned to decline the envy and fury of that unthankfull City; from whence he went to Chalcis in Eubaea, and there died in the sixtie third year of his age, and the 114 Olympi∣ad, when Philocles was Archon: the very same year Demosthenes also died in Calauria, both being forced to fly their Countries. Aristotle was the first that made a Library, Strabo lib. 3. which together with his School, he left to Theophrastus, that taught the Kings of Aegypt how to order their Library, by disposing of their Books into severall Classes. Verse 8. Pittacus.] Pittacus, one of the seven Sages of Greece, assisted by the Bretheren of Alcaeus the Poet, slew Melancrus Tyrant of Lesbos, in the chief City whereof, viz. Mytelene, Pittacus was born. A war breaking out between the Athenians and Mytelenians about the Achil∣leian fields, he was chosen General for his Country, and finding his Army too weak to dispute that Title in the field, he challenged Phryno, Generall of the Athenians, to a single combat, and met him like a Fisher-man, his visible armes being a Trident, Dagger, and Shield; but under it was a Net, which, in the Duel, he cast over the head of Phryno, and so conquered him by stratagem that had been Victor by his Giantly strength in the Olympick Games. Strabo. Laert. This Duel Lyps. saith, was the original of those kind of prizes played by the Roman Gladiators, called the Retiarius, and Secutor, or Mirmillo, described in this Satyr, to the shame of so noble a person as one of the Gracchi was, that for a poor salary was hired by the Praetor to venture his life as a Retiarius or Net-bearer, against the Secutor's Fauchi∣on. You may see their figures (as they acted in the Circus) in the Designe before this Satyr. So long as his Country needed him to
manage the warres, so long Pittacus held the Sovereign power as an absolute Prince. But when the warre was ended, he like an ab∣solute Philosopher, put an end to his own authority; and after a vo∣luntary resignation of his power continued for ten years, he lived ten years more a private person, Laert. Val Max. being about fourscore, he dyed in the third year of the 52 Olympiad, Aristo∣menes being Archon. Verse 9. Cleanthes.] Cleanthes the Stoick was Scholar to Crates, and Successor to Zeno Founder of the Stoicks; his Father was Pha∣nius of Assus; by his first profession he was a VVrastler, but it brought him in no great revenue; for all he had was but four Drachma's when he came to hear Crates: and to get a lively-hood under him and Zeno, he was forced to work by night, to keep himself from hunger and scorn in the day time. The Court of Areopagus ci∣ting him to clear the suspicion of Fellony, and give an account how he lived, he produced a Woman, for whom he ground meal; and a Gardiner that payed him for drawing of water; and shewed Ze∣no's Dictates writ in shells and Oxes shoulder-blades, for want of money to buy Paper. He succeeded Zeno in his Schoole, lived above fourscore years, and died voluntarily; for his Physicians injoyning him to fast two dayes; for the cure of an ulcer under his tongue; when they would have had him eat again, he would not, but took it unkindly that they would offer to bring him back, being two dayes onward on his journey; so continuing his fast for other two dayes, he came to his last home. Verse. 14. Socratick Catomite.] Socrates was son to the Statuary So∣phroniscus, and the Midwife Phaenareta, and husband first to Myrto the
Daughter of Aristides the Just, afterwards to Zantippe, the arrantest Scold that ever thundered with a tongue. He first reduced Philo∣sophy from naturall to morall (that is) from contemplation to pra∣ctise, it being his constant Maxime, Quae supra nos nihil ad nos, We are not at all concerned in things above us. Anytus the Orator, indeed the leather-Dresser, for that Trade inriched him; though he was asha∣med to own it, and therefore having been upon that score (reproached by Socrates) to satisfie his spleen, he got Melitus the Poet and Lycon his fellow Orator, to joyn in drawing up an Impeachment against Socra∣tes, as no true worshiper of the Gods, and a corrupter of youth, ha∣ving first made him a scorn to the people, by hiring Aristophanes to bring him upon the Stage in a Comedy. From the abuse put up∣on him in this Comedy, others, many ages after, took occasion to abuse Socrates; especially Porphyrius observed by Nicephorus to be more malicious then were his Accusers, Anytus and Melitus. But I doe not believe that my Author intended to cast dirt upon him in this place; where Socratick Catamite cannot be otherwise interpreted, then one of those censorious persons, that would be thought as learned and virtuous as Socrates, when they really were as vitious as men could be, and as un∣learned as the very Statues of the Philosophers, the purchase whereof was all the proof they could make of their learning. Some there are that imitate their folly in our dayes, as appears by the instance Lubine makes in a Scholar, his Contemporary, whom he forbears to name, that gave 3000 drachma's for the earthen-lamp, that Epictetus used, hoping, that if it burned all night by his bed-side, it would infuse into him the wisdome of Epictetus in a dream. If he bought the lamp for this reason (as Lubine con∣ceives he did) then he was guilty of the vanity of Juvenal's Philosophasters
but if he bestowed so much money upon a piece of Antiquity, that might be usefull to the present and succeeding times; in that case I should honour him for his expence, as I doe the memory of Thomas Earl of Arundell and Surrey, (Grandchilde and Heir to the last Duke of Nor∣folke) for the vast summes those Statues cost him, from which Mr. Sel∣den hath pickt out so many learned notions; as you may find in his book entituled Marmora Arundeliana: among which Statues is the inscription that proves Laches to be Archon at the death of Socrates, which is to be made use of in this very place. As for Epictetus his lamp, it might have been of great advantage to Fortunius Licetas, when he writ De Lucernis absconditis. To return to our account of Socrates, He was convicted of impiety and improbity by the false oaths of his Accusers, and the testiness of his Judges, for being asked at the Bar, What in his own judgement he deserved, he answered, To be maintained by you the great Councell or Prytanaeum, at the publique charge; which so enraged the Senate, that the major part, by above 80. voted him to death, and accordingly execution was done, the Officer of death presenting him a draught of Hemlock, which he cheerfully took off; and so Laches, as aforesaid, be∣ing Archon, in the first year of the ninety fift Olympiad, he was poyso∣ned by that ingratefull City of Athens, which as Juvenal sayes Sat 7. —to Scholars now, Except cold Hemlock, nothing dare allow. Verse 21. Peribonius.] The Archi-gallus or chief Priest of Cybele, Principall of an Order of Rogues so infamous for drunkennesse and de∣bauchery, that it was not lawfull for a free-born Roman to be one of the number. The original of their institution was this, Cybele the daughter of King Minos, being in her infancy exposed upon the Hill Cybelus in
Phrygia, from which Hill she had her name, and there nourished by the wilde beasts, to whose mercy she was left, was found by a Shepherds wife, bred up as her own Child, and grew to be both a great Beauty, and a Lady of most excellent naturall parts; for the Greeks from her in∣vention had the Taber, Pipe, and Cimballs. She was married to Saturne, and therefore Mother of the Gods, her highest title. She was also called Rhea, from her flowing or aboundant goodnesse: styled likewise Pessi∣nuntia, from Pessinus a Mart-town in Phrygia; and Berecynthia, from Berecynthus a Mountain in the same Countrey, where her Ceremonies were begun; and Atis, a handsome young Phrygian, by her appointed su∣perintendent over them, upon condition that he would promise chastity during life: but not long after he defloured a Nymph: for which offence Cybele took away his understanding; and in one of his mad fits, by his own hand he was gelt, and after that, he attempted to kill himself; but it seems the Compassionate Gods prevented him, and turned the youth in∣to a Pine-tree, Ovid. Met. By his example, the Phrygian Priests ever after gelded themselves with the shell of a fish. Their Vest was particoloured, called Synthesis, or amictus variegatus; they carried the picture of their Goddesse through the streets of Rome in their hands, and striking their breasts, kept tune with their Tabers Pipes, and Cymbals, called Aera Corybantia: as they were named Corybantes, from Corybantus, one of Cybele's first Votaries, they wore Miters fastened under their chins, Sat. 6. —Cybels Priest, the tall Grave half-man (with no obscene part of all, A Fish-shell long since cut off that) comes in, A Phrygian Miter ty'd beneath his chin. In this manner dancing about the streets, they begged money of the
people, from whence the Romans termed them Circulatores Cybelei, Cybels Juglers, or Collectors; they were common Bawds, as appears by this place, and Master-Gluttons and Drunkards, as you may see in the follow∣ing part of this Satyr; and where the young Consul Damasippus layes the chief Priest of Cybele dead drunk, Sat. 8. With Cybels Priest on's back, his bells at rest: Verse 27. Herculean language.] This referres to Xenophons Dialogue between Hercules Virtue and Vice; where Hercules confutes the monster Vice with arguments, as he had done other monsters with his club. Ver. 29. Varillus.] A poor Rogue, that will acknowledg no difference or odds in point of goodness between himself & the wicked great man Sextus. Verse 33. To hear a Mutineer complain'd of by the Gracchi,] Signifies the same with our English Proverb, To hear Vice correct Sin. Caius and Ti∣berius Gracchus (Sons to that excellent patern of modesty, Cornelia Daugh∣ter to Scipio Africanus, that conquered Hannibal) were young men of in∣comparable wit and elocution, but too much addicted to popularity. This made them relinquish the Lords, and court the People, with whom to in∣gratiate themselves, they passed the Lex Agraria, for division of the pub∣lick lands between the Lords and Commons, which Law, though groun∣ded upon a fundamentall Right, was the firebrand to a sedition quenched in the blood of these two Brothers; Tiberius being slain, as he was making a Speech to the people, by the hand of Publius Nassica the Pontifex Ma∣ximus; and Caius, when he had fortified the Capitoline Mount, by the com∣mand of the Consul Opimius. Plutarch in Caio & Tiberio. Verse 35. Milo.] T. Annius Milo from the Papian Family adopted by T. Annius his maternal Grand-father, slew Clodius Tribune of the Peo∣ple, that had many seditions and dangerous designes against the Republick,
for which reason Cicero intended to make the people favourable to the Murtherer, and spake in his behalf, but not that Oration which is at this day to be seen among his works; and that afterwards coming to the hand of Milo, then banished to Masilia, where he lived in extreme want: Oh, sayes Milo, if Cicero had spoke this, I had not gathered worms in Masilia, Nonn. in Romanorum Historiam. Verse 36. Verres.] Caius Verres was first Questor to Cneius Carbo, then Legate and Proquestor to Cneius Dolabella, both which he betrayed. When Lucullus and Cotta were Consuls, he was made Praetor Urbanus, or Lord chief Justice of Rome; and after the discharge of that office, Praetor of Sicily, where he exercised his authority with so much lust, ava∣rice and cruelty, that the Sicilians sued him upon the Law De pecuniis repetundis, to make him refund: and in their favour, Cicero managed the accusation against him with so much vigor and art, that when Verres saw how his Patron Hortensius was over matched, he withdrew into volun∣tary exile, where, after he had rested free from any further molestation for twenty six years, he was by the Triumviri proscribed and slain. Plin. lib. 34. The cause of his proscription, was for denying to Mark Antony certain antique pieces of Corynthian plate, which that Triumvir much de∣sired. Seneca saies he died like a stout man; but it seeems he had lived like a thief, one that robbed not one man, not one City, but all Sicily. See Ci∣cero in Verrinis, Asconius Pedianus and Lactautius lib. 2. Verse 36. Clodius.] Clodius, Cicero's capitall enemy, made himself be adopted by a Plebeian, only that he might be one of the body of the peo∣ple, to vote Cicero out of Rome, Cicero ad Atticum lib. 1. He was an A∣dulterer most impudent and sacrilegious, for he came to the solemnity of the Good Goddess (where it was unlawfull for any man to be present) in
the habit of a singing-Woman, Sat. 6. to meet Julius Caesar's wife, Plu∣tarch. which occasioned the Julian Law, that made adultery death. He married his own Neece, enjoyed three Sisters, and corrupted Metella Daughter to the religious Pontifex Maximus, that lost his eyes with zealous care to preserve the Temple of Pallas when it was on fire, Sat. 3. Or he that sav'd our Pallas from the flame. Verse 37. Catiline.] A Roman, for his conspiracy against his Country, made famous by the pen of Cicero. Catiline's fellow Conspirators were Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius, Gabinius, Ceparius: you may read their whole Plot at large in Salust; and Cicero's Orat. against Catiline. Verse 38. Sylla's three Scholars,] Caesar, Anthony, and Lepidus; imita∣ting in the beginning of their Triumvirate, the bloody Roll of their Tu∣tor in the Art of Government, Sylla. See Sylla in the Comment upon the first Satyr. Verse 39. One lately married his own Neece.] This might be Claudius Caesar, that after he had put to death his Empress Messalina, married Agrip∣pina his own brothers Daughter, Mother to Nero, the Senate dispen∣sing with the incestuous Marriage: and she (lest she might bring a Co∣heir to her Son Nero) took potions, and receipts to make her part with her conceptions: which deformed Embrions or Abortives could not choose but be very like her Uncle their Father; for he was (as the Mother of An∣tonius used to call him) a monster of men, a thing begun by nature but not finished. And after the violation of the Law, in this marriage with his Neece, he revived the Julian Law, which made adultery death; not only a terrible Law to Men, but that would have reached Mars and Venus too, if Vulcans Counsell might have pleaded it. Others, to whose o∣pinion I subscribe, understand this (One) to be Domitian Caesar, that was
like wise very ugly, and married his own Neece Julia, here named, Daughter to the delight of mankinde, his noble Brother Titus: forcing her to take so many drugs to prevent the danger of child-bearing, that by seek∣ing to preserve, he destroyed her. Verse 45. Scauran Counterfeits.] Aemilius Scaurus born of noble (but poor) parents, raised himself by his elocution to the dignity of Consul: He having once been so poor, that he was forced to trade in Charcoal for a lively-hood. In his Consulship he triumphed for his victory over the Ligurians, and Cantisci: when he was Censor he made the Aemilian Way, and built the Aemilian Bridge: He commanded his Son Scaurus (for giving ground to an enemy) never to come into his sight again; the sense of which ignominy, made so deep an impression in the bashfull youth that he slew himself, Plin. But as the best interpretation (of Scauran Counterfeits) Salust in his Jugurthines gives this character of Aemilius Scaurus. He was a person noble, active, factious and bold, but he had the art of concealing his vices. After the expiration of his Consulship, when he was Consular, and Prince of the Senate: the House sent him Ambassador to King Ju∣gurth to diswade him from assaulting Cirra, and besieging Adherbal. Verse 48. Laronia.] A wanton, but a witty Lady, that tells the sowre Philosophy-monger, that Cato Major, (Censor by his office) and his Ne∣phew, whose constancy was admired by the Romans (being now in their ashes) it seems a third Cato was come from heaven, meaning this censori∣ous Stoick; but whilest she thus looks upon him as upon a kinde of God, she takes notice that he is in something lesse then a Man; for she findes that he weares a perfume, and desires to know his Drugster, that she might buy at the same Shop: such essences being as proper for her sex, as con∣trary to his severe profession.
Verse. 54. The Law Scantinian.] Caius Scantinius, being accused by Caius Marcellus, for offering to force his Son; a Law passed in Senate, that set a Fine of 10000 H.S. upon the like attempt; and the foul Offen∣der was either to pay the whole summe or his life. Verse 66. Arachne,] Idmon's Daughter, a Lydian Maid that had the vanity to challenge the Goddess Pallas to weave with her, and being dis∣graced by the Goddess, despaired: and had hanged her self but that Pallas as a monument of her own mercy and the Maids presumption, saved her life and turned her into a Spider, that is still weaving to no purpose. Ovid Met. lib. 6. Pliny sayes Arachne was the Inventress of Lines and Nets▪ and that her Son Closter found out the VVheels and Spindles for wool. Verse 67. Penelope,] Wife to Vlysses, that in the twenty years absence of her Husband, could never be wrought upon, either by her Parents perswasions or the Courtship of her Suitors, to violate her faith in giving way to a second marriage▪ but when the libidinous pretenders were so pressing that she feared violence, she won them to a grant of so much time, for her to think upon it, as till the work which she had in hand (and was then in the Loom) should be wrought off: and she carried her designe so politickly, that all which they saw her weave in the day time, she un∣wove in the night. Thus she staved off their fury, till her Husband return∣ed, who coming home in a Beggers habit, desired of his wife a nights lodg∣ing, and in that time made an end of all his Rivals. Homer in Odyss. Verse 80. Procula.] Procula, Pollinea, Carfinia, and Fabulla were fa∣mous Roman Curtesans in Juvenal's time. Verse 87. Victorious Fathers.] The ancient Romans; whose richest ap∣parell was their wounds, their strongest fortifications the mountains, and their healthfullest exercise, the plough that maintained their Families:
with what indignation would they have looked upon the effeminate im∣pudence of these Sarcenet Judges. Verse 93. Legislative Cretan.] The silken Judges that would be thought as strict and just as Minos the Cretan Legislator. Verse 101. Hedge-Priest.] The word is now so proper for a Mock-Priest, that I rather choose it then my Author's expression, Qui longa domi redimicula sumunt, a House-Priest, one of those that weare fillets and jewels about their necks, which he calls House-Priests, to distinguish them from Priests belonging to the Temples, appointed to sacrifice by publick Authority; to which he adds the wearing of fillets and jewels, to distinguish them from men, their effeminacy disowning of their sex. These Separatists he parallels with the Dippers or Baptists of Athens, that worshiped their Goddess Cotytus or Cotittus, with the like abhominable Ceremonies, being diametrically opposite to those used by the Romans at the Feast of the Good Goddess; for there the Vestal Nuns were Super∣intendents. Cic. de Arusp. respons. no man admitted to the Sacrifice, not so much as a male picture, Sat. 6. (though it seems Clodius brought in a masculine substance;) nay, the very Myrtle was excluded, because it was consecrated to Venus: but here they had nothing appertaining to the Good Goddess, but that which made her thought to be Ceres, the paunches of fat Sowes, and bolls or vessels of wine, which they called by the name of Amphora's of hony. Alex. Gen. Dier. lib. 6. c. 8. but they admitted no women, they themselves acting womens parts. Verse 116. Masters Juno.] It was the Roman mode for the man to pro∣test by his Genius, and the woman by her Juno. Verse 117. Otho.] Otho Sylvius descended from the Hetrurian or Tus∣can Kings, came to be Emperor by treason, murdering his poor old
Sovereign Galba. Tacitus lib. 1. cap. 7. sayes, that Otho's Souldiers as if they had marched against the Parthians, Vologeses, or Pacho, to unthrone them that had rooted out the Arsacean Line, and not to murder their own Emperor unarmed and aged, scattering the people, trampling upon the Senate, put spurs to their horses and charged into the place of Assembly; neither did the sight of the Capital, nor reverence of the Temples there, nor the memory of past Princes, or fear of those to come terrifie them from committing that inhumane act, which the immediate Successor is obliged to revenge. Galba was slain by Camurius a Souldier of the fifteenth Le∣gion. Tacit. Plut. But Otho that when he was conquered by Vitelius, painted his face before his great Looking-glass like an ordinary woman, (for it seems the two Queens Semiramis and Cleopatra did not so in their last battels) yet in his death, and only in his death, shewed himself a man. Plut. Tacit. Verse 118. Auruncane Actors spoil.] It relates to Virgils verse lib. 12. Actoris Aurunci spolium, Auruncane Actors spoil; being a massy spear won in fight from that great Souldier by Turnus: not greater for a spear then Otho's Trophy for a Looking-glass. Verse 127. Bedriack field.] The ground where Otho was defeated by Vitelius, in all other but the Louvre-copy written Bebriack. Verse 129. Semiramis.] Queen of Assyria, the Widow of King Ninus, that perceiving the Assyrians would not indure to be governed by a VVo∣man, concealed his death, and took upon her self his person, till such time as her Son Ninus should grow up and be able to manage the Affairs of State. She walled the City of Babylon, Sat. 10. Brick-wal'd Babylon. Subduing her neighbour Princes, she very much extended the limits of her Empire, Valer. lib. 9. cap. 3. Once, when she was dressing her self,
newes came that the Babylonians had revolted, and one side of her hair being uncomb'd out, she put on her Quiver, and in that posture led up her Army against the Town, nor would she suffer the other side of her hair to be put in order till the City was rendered. But the end of her life answered not so glorious a beginning; for she fell in love with her Son Ninus, that having no other way to be rid of her nefarious importunity, slew her with his own hand. Verse 131. Cleopatra,] Queen of Aegypt, Daughter of Ptolomy Auletus, Sister and Wife to Ptolomy the last: She was first Mistress to Julius Cae∣sar, and had by him her Son Caesario: Afterwards Mark Antony lived with her as her Husband, divorcing himself from his own Lady the Si∣ster of Augustus, which he so resented, that he declared a war against An∣tony, and defeated him at sea in the battel of Actium, where he fought and fled in obedience to Cleopatra; at last died upon his own sword, Plut. This example Cleopatra followed, that disdaining to be made a scorn to Rome, and to follow the triumphant Chariot of Augustus, procured a Country fellow to bring her in a basket of figs, a venomous Asp, which she angering, it sucked her arme, and so the poyson struck her to the heart. Plut. in the life of Marc. Antony. Verse 134. Foul Phrygian talk.] A lacivious Lecture read at meal∣times by the Archigallus, Peribonius, to his Scholars that exactly followed him in Trencher-doctrines, and point of gusto, but could not be brought to imitate him in the use of his Phrygian Razor (viz.) the Fish-shell wherewith he gelt himself. Verse 142. Gracchus for thy Dower.] This Gracchus a prodigie of that noble house of the Gracchi, that being descended from Gracchus Sempro∣nius the Proconsul of Spain, to whom the Celtiberians rendred them∣selves,
and from Scipio that defeated Hannibal, to the dishonour of his Family and Nation, basely married himself as a Bride to a Trumpeter; out of a meer wanton humor; for he was able to subsist of himself, as ap∣pears by the Dower which he brought to the Trumpeter, being 4000 Se∣stertia, about 3125 l. sterling, the Census Equestris or legal Estate of a Ro∣man Knight: yet was this very Gracchus one of the four and twenty Salian Priests, of which were twelve, being the first number, instituted by Numa Pompilius in the honor of Mars, and were to dance in Procession through the streets of Rome, carrying in their hands the Ancile or brazen Shield that dropt from heaven into King Numa's hand, Plut. in Numa. Verse 145. Censor.] The Censors were two Officers chosen by the Consuls with consent of Senate, to Register mens names, and to assesse or value their estates: in the second place they were capacitated to reform manners, by inquiring into mens lives and actings: and in this secondary sense, Juvenal asks whether it be not more necessary, that a Censor should set a Fine upon the head of Gracchus, or that an Aruspex should purifie Rome, after the production of such a Monster. Verse 145. Aruspex,] A Soothsayer, that divined of things to come by inspection of the entrails of sacrificed beasts, part of whose office it was to lustrate or purge the place contaminated with any monstrous birth. Verse 148. A Cow calve a Lamb.] Be pleased to take notice that calve in this place is the proper action of a Cow in bringing forth a Lamb; and that in the precedent verse Damme is the denomination received by the woman, after she hath teemed a Calfe. This I explane, lest my Rea∣der, referring both the words to one action, I might be thought to trans∣gress against the rules of proportion. Verse 150. Ancilian Shields.] The Ancile was a brazen Shield round
at both ends, and half-moon'd at the sides, which in King Numa's reign (as I said before) fell down from Heaven at the ceasing of a plague, a voice being heard (out of the cloud from whence it dropt, when Mira∣cles were frequent at Rome) that promised health to the City so long as that Ancile should be kept safe; whereupon Mamurius was commanded by Numa to make eleven more such Shields, which he did, and made them all so like the first, as they were indistinguishable. These twelve Ancilia were delivered into the custody of twelve Priests of Mars, which number was afterwards increased to four and twenty, (one of whose Colledge this Gracchus was, before he married the Trumpeter) called Salian or dancing Priests, because, as you have heard, their cu∣stome was to dance when they carried the Ancilia. This stupendious marriage of a Priest of Mars makes my Author cry out upon the God, that revenged not upon his Priest this prophanation of his Deity; and that being the Father of Romulus, and therefore of the Romans, his God∣headship looked no better to his children, but suffered them to act these abominations even in the Campus Martius, the Fields of Mars, and in the Quirine Valley, which was likewise consecrated to him, that was in his fury called by the Romans Gradivus, but when he was amicable Quirinus, Ovid. 2. Fast. Verse 171. Swoln Lyde's Salve-box.] A charm against barreness worn by the superstitious Roman women, and sold by those Quack-salving Gossips of Lydia. About the understanding of this word Lyde there have been great controversies among the Criticks: Junius will have Lyde to be the Lydian Maid Arachne, and so to signifie a Spider, which (the Naturalists say) if it be worn about a woman, will make her fruitful. Politianus will have Lyde to signifie one of those Lydian women that went
about Rome to sell receipts to Ladies. Now doe but suppose this Spi∣der of Junius to be put into Politian's Salve-box, and to feed upon the un∣guent that imbalmed the inside thereof (as those Spiders doe which at this day are worn in bags or walnut-shells against a Tertian Ague) and then either interpretation of Lyde may stand good; and so the Spider may be sold for a charm against barrenness by a Lydian woman, that should best know her nature, being her Country-woman: and consequently the two Criticks are reconciled, without the learned scruple, that if Ly∣de had signified a Spider, condita then must have been the nominative case, and so the verse would have wanted his true quantities. And thus much shall suffice for these kinde of Criticismes, being difficiles nugae. Verse 172. Active Luperci.] The Lupercalia were Feasts and Games solemnized by the Romans in honour of God Pan, whom they called In∣uus or Junus, Pomponius Laetus de Sacerd. cap. de Luper. The time of their celebration was upon the unfortunate dayes of February, a Februando, be∣ing the time of Purification; though the Feast it self was called Lupercale, the Feast of Wolves, in memory of the Wolf that nursed Romulus and Remus: and the Luperci, the Priests that ran the Course, set forth at the foot of Mount Palatine, where the Wolf gave suck to Romulus; likewise a Dog the VVolfs enemy was then sacrificed with two Goats. These were the Ceremonies, Plut. in Romul. after the Sacrifice, two young Lords wait∣ing at the Altar, had their foreheads bloodied with the Popa's knife where∣with he killed the Goats: the blood was presently dried up with wool dipt in milk; and as soon as ever their foreheads were drie, it was their Qu to laugh: then the Goats skins being cut into thongs, the youths took them in their hands, and only girting a napkin about their middles, ran stark naked through the streets, striking all they met with the thongs,
and the wives that never had children, would be sure to stand in their way, because they believed there was a virtue in those touches that hel∣ped conception. The reason why they ran naked, was, because the Shep∣herds God, Pan Licaeus, in whose honour the Arcadians first instituted such Games, was ever painted naked, Fenest. de Sacerd. cap. 1. Verse 173. Fencer Gracchus] Juvenal seems not to be so much offen∣ded with Gracchus the Salian Priest, as with Gracchus the Gladiator, be∣cause this dishonoured his illustrious Family in the sight of all Rome; fighting upon the Stage as a Retiarius, or Jack-Pudding to the Clown the Myrmillo. The manner of their fight was this; the Retiarius and Myrmillo or Secutor being so armed as you see in the Designe before this Satyr, and the whole City of Rome, as well the Senate as the People look∣ing on; the Retiarius tried all the wayes of his Art, to get the Myrmillo's head into his Cast-net, sometimes seeming not to minde himself, that the Secutor might think he lay open to his Sica or crooked sword, and whilest he cunningly gave him a blow at his leg or thigh, attempting with his Float-net to halter him: but if he missed, he was forced to fly round about the Lists till he could recover, and put himself into a posture of offence: in the mean time he kept off the Sica with his Fuscina or Trident: Some∣times they would come to a Parlee, and the Net-bearer would act the Complementaster, telling the Follower, though he knew his blood was sought by him, and alwayes carried a spunge in his pocket, Plin. lib. 31. to wipe away his fury, yet for his own part he meant no harm to the Follower himself, only he desired to catch his Fish. See Lipsius in Saturnal. & Ju∣venal, Sat. 8. where he describes this Gracchus in the Lists, not compelled by Nero to fight as a Gladiator: but voluntarily, after he had spent his fortunes, selling his honor, life and funerall to the Praetor, being a man of
mean birth, in whose Shew this Lord fought for money, in the presence of the greatest persons of Rome, but none of them, no not the Capitolini Marcelli, &c. so nobly born as himself. Verse 176. Capitoline Race.] Capitoline was the Cognomen or Sur∣name of the Manlian Family, whose Founder Marcus Manlius, for affecting the Sovereign power, was adjudged to be cast down from the Tarpeian or Capitoline Rock. Verse 177. Marcellus] was the proper name of the gallant Roman that in a single combat killed the Generall of the Gauls, took Syracusa in Sicily, was five times Consul, and at last, circumvented by Hannibal in an ambush, perished. Verse 177. Catuli,] The honour of that name Qu. Luctatius Catulus, in the first Punick war, with three hundred saile of Romans, cutting of pro∣visions from six hundred Carthaginian Ships under their Admiral Amil∣car, and defeating their whole Fleet, put an end to the war: yet granted them at their humble suit peace, upon these conditions, That they should leave to the Romans Sicily and Sardinia, with the rest of the Isles between Italy and Africa, and withdraw their forces out of Spain that lies beyond Iberus, Liv. Verse 177. Fabian name.] The Fabii were those noble and potent Romans that took upon themselves the war against the Vientes, only drawing with them into the field their Clients and Slaves; and having worsted the Enemy in many light skirmishes, at last by a stratagem at the River Cremera they were all slain to a man, Ovid lib. 2. Fast. yet this sad calamity one of the Fabian Family survived, being left at Rome a Child, from whom by a long series of descents came that Fabius Ma∣ximus, created Dictator against Hannibal, whose dilatory prudence
restored Rome to her former greatness, much impaired and almost quite lost by the temerity of other Generals. Ennius. Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem. One man by his demurres preserv'd our State. Verse 178. Paulus.] Paulus Aemilius the Consul, slain at the battel at Cannae in Apulia. Verse 180. Not bating him.] The Praetor that hired the Gladiator Gracchus. Verse 182. Stygian Sound.] The River Styx, over which Charon (with the Oare here mentioned) rowed thousands of souls at a Fare. Verse 184. Pay not for their bath.] No children at Rome were exemp∣ted from paying the Balneatick, or Bath-farthing, but only such Infants as were carried in their Nurses armes; and it should seem that only such believed their Nurses, that told them of Hell and Hobgoblins. Verse 185. Camillus] Was called a second Romulus, as a new Founder of Rome after the Gauls were Masters of it: ten years he held the Veians besieged, and then took the Town by a Mine: Soon after he was brought to his Trial by Apuleius Saturninus Tribune of the people, for riding in Triumph with white horses, and for an unequal distribution of the spoil: being condemned he withdrew into Ardea: but when the Gauls had possessed themselves of Rome, and straightly besieged the Capitol, he was in his absence chosen Dictator, and collecting the scattered Romans, surprized the Gauls that only busied their heads about weighing of Roman gold; and so restored his Country to their Liberty. After this, when the people of Rome would needs transplant themselves to Veii, he stayed them with a grave and eloquent Oration, which you may read in Livy, wherein you may see all the perfections and excellencies of the
City of Rome. The third time that he was made Dictator, he preserved the City Satricum, confederate with the people of Rome, from the fury of the Latins. The fourth time that he was chosen Dictator to pacifie a se∣dition of the people, he excused himself for want of health, and deputed another in his place. The fifth time that he was Dictator, the Gauls once again marching towards Rome, and quartering their Army neer the Ri∣ver Aviene, were utterly defeated by him. Lastly, at 80 years of age he died in Rome of the plague. Verse 186. Fabricius.] The Censor, titled for his strictness Maximus, assisted by his Collegue Q. Aemilius Papus, fined Pub. Cornelius Ruffinus, who had been twice Consul, and put him out of the Senate, for having in his house a silver vessel of ten pound weight, Agel. lib. 4. Val. Max. See Juvenal. Sat 9 and 11: where he notes the like Censure passed by him upon his Collegue P. Decius▪ Verse 186. Curius.] Of him in the beginning of the Comment upon this Satyr. Verse 186. Both the Scipio's] Scipio Africanus and Scipio Aemilianus, or Africanus minor: the first when he was a boy used at certain hours of the day, to retire himself into a private part of the Temple, and was thought by the people to converse with Jove. At seventeen years of age his Fa∣ther carried him into the field, in the beginning of the second Punick war; and even then he rescued his Father wounded and catched in one of Hannibals traps, Liv. Plut. After he had taken new Carthage in Spain, he passed his Army into Africa, where conquering Hannibal, he made Carthage tributary, Liv. Where he died is uncertain; some say at Rome, and shew a Monument at the Porta Capena with three Statues over it, two of P. and L. Scipio, the third of the Poet Ennius Scipio's friend, Cic.
Others say he died at Linternum, and was there buried by his own ap∣pointment, declining his ingratefull Country, that would have condem∣ned him for moneys received of King Antiochus, and not brought into the publique Treasury. By this Scipio the other Scipio was adopted (for he was the Son of L. Aemilius Paulus) he utterly destroyed Carthage and Numantia, two Cities most inveterate enemies to the State of Rome. At last, living privately at his own house, he was there slain, for which murder the Gracchi were suspected, Liv. Verse 187. The Legion.] The three hundred and six Fabii before mentioned. Verse 188. The Youth at Cannae.] The flower of all the Roman Militia, upon whom the Carthaginians at the battel of Cannae did execution so long, till Hannibal himself cryed out Souldiers no more blood. Verse 191. Purifie themselves.] The Aruspex when he purified a place defiled with Monsters, used a Torch and Sulphur with water, and a Laurell sprinkle, Ovid. Verse 195. Th' Orcades] Claudius Caesar added the Islands of the Or∣cades to the Roman Empire. Verse 198. Zalates.] One of the Armenian Children sent Hostage to Rome, and there debauched by the Tribune, who had the custody and breeding of him. Verse 205. Artaxata,] A City in Armenia, Strab. lih. 11. built up∣on the River Araxes by Hannibal King of Artaxia.
Figura Tertia. UMbricius 1 migrans 2 Juvenali narrat amico, Quorsùm tota domus rhedâ ponatur in unâ, Et cur matre senex cupiat decedere 3 Româ; Facta noverca pios quia pejùs tractat alumnos, Quàm si quis longis venit improbus hospes ab oris: Nam si tu fraudes ignoras artis, egenus Esto; ut 4 Judaeus Romae qui somnia vendit, Cui 5 Templū Egeriae, cui 6 fons{que} 7 nemus{que} locantur, Arboribus populo mercedem pendere jussis. Umbricii sine dote 8 puellam candida virtus Agricolae jungat; lanam trahet otia ruris Nacta, magìs felix, quàm serica Consulis uxor: Filia 9 dum civis, dotata an pauper, in urbe Cogitur infido miserè succumbere Graeco; Pharmaca qui miscet, cantûs choreaeque magister; Virginibusque legit, quae scripsit Achaia mendax. Ambulet Umbricii per noctem 10 filius, irâ Jam praetextati spretâ, contoque minantis; Dissimilis 11 Romano inopi, qui basia dextrae Caedentis figens, abit uno laetus ocello. Quum virtus humilis magnas non incolat urbes, Currū age, perge 12 Auriga, probis comes ibo colonis.
The third Designe. HEre from 1 Umbritius 2 Juvenal receives A full account why his old friend thus leaves His Mother 3 Rome, that treates the best of hers No better then the worst of Foreiners: For if no Cheats mean-fortun'd Romans use, They grow as poor as fortune-telling 4 Jewes, That farm Egeria's sacred 5 Tenement, Fountain 6, and 7 Grove, but fell it to make rent. His 8 Daughter, without dow'r, her virtue now May match to one that holds his father's plough, And she live happier then a Consul's wife, Crown'd with the quiet of a Country life: Whil'st, poor or rich, at Rome a handsome 9 Maid Will be to some sly Grecian's lust betray'd, That gives her Physick, teaches her to dance, To sing an Ode, or read a Greek Romançe; His 10 Son too may walk lighted by the Moon, And now fear no wild rambling youth's batoon; Like some poor 11 Roman, that in case he misse But one eye, will the hand that strook him kisse. No living for poor virtue in great Towns. On 12 Carter! Have among you honest Clowns.
The Manners of Men. THE THIRD SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. Umbritius, with his Waggon load Of household goods, upon the road Meets Juvenal, and layes him down The reasons why he leaves the Town; Compares the Countries safe delights With Rome's deer Rates, ill-Arts and Frights; And saying on, is put in minde Of parting, by the Sun declin'd. THough griev'd for my old friend's re∣move, I'm glad He will at empty Cumae fix, and add One Dweller to that Sybil's Town, the dore To Baiae, sweet retirement's pleasant shore.
I would plant Prochyta your petty Isle, Ere dwell in our Suburra's goodly Pile: For what so desolate, sad, horrid there, As frights of fire, still falling houses here, And thousand dangers which at Rome we dread, Besides the Poets that in August read? The Wagon, wherein all his house was lay'd, At th' ancient Arc by moist Capena stay'd, Where NUMA every night his Goddesse met, Whose Temple, Spring, and Grove the People let Now to the Jews, and all their stock to pay Their Land-lords, is a Basket and some Hay; Yet out of every tree the rent is made, 'Tis Beggars-bush, no more the Muses shade. Into EGERIA'S valley we descend, To those fair Wells, which Art presum'd to mend. How much diviner had the waters been, If with a border of eternall green, The grasse about the spring had still remain'd, Nor marble had the native stone prophan'd? Here thus UMBRICIUS sayes, since for our pains In honest Arts, the City yeilds no gains:
My stock's less this day then the day before, Yet will to morrow shrink that little more: I mean to goe and settle in the Town, Where DAEDALUS his weary'd wings lay'd down; Whil'st age strait-shoulder'd hath some youth in it, Whil'st my hair's gray; whil'st there's a remnant yet For LACHESIS to spin; whil'st I walk on My own legs, need no staffe to lean upon; I bid the place where I was born, farewell. There let ARTURIUS and CATULUS dwell, Men that turn black to white, that can with ease Farm holy earth, our rivers, and our seas, Be Scavengers, bodies to burning bear, And sell slaves under the commanding spear. These Village-known cheeks, that in Country lists Were Fencers men, these sometimes Flutenists, Now sword-play Masters, with revers'd thumbs kill, The people shouting, what-poor Rogue they will. Returning thence, hire the gold-finders place, Indeed what not? since they are of that race Which rises to high office, from mean birth, As oft as fortune is dispos'd to mirth.
What should I doe at Rome? I cannot ly, Nor when a book is vilely writ, comply And beg a copy. How your Planet runs I know not; promise fathers deaths to sons Nor can, nor will I; I did ne're dissect Toads entrails; what commands lewd friends direct To others wives, convey'd by others be: No Thief shall his Receiver make of me. I therefore goe lame, no companion left, An useless member, my right hand bereft. Who's now belov'd, but he that can reveal Foul trusts, which he for ever should conceal: He owes thee nothing, nothing will bestow, That lets thee but an honest secret know. Great VERRES with respect will that man use That when he pleases VERRES can accuse. Let not dark TAGUS buy thee from thy sleep, Nor all the gold that rolls unto the deep; Take not base bribes, which thy sad soul rejects: Whil'st thy great friend the faith, he hires, suspects. Now what they are our rich men love so well, I loath so much, I haste, nor blush, to tell,
I cannot, Romans, this Greek Town abide; Nor's all Greek filth; for long since with the tide To Tiber, Syrian Orontes flowd, Their oblique strings and Fidlers, language, mode, Their Country Cimbals too they brought a-land, And hackney-Sluts that in the Circus stand. Walk thither you that doe a fancy bear To Curtezans that painted Miters wear. Our nointed Clown, prize-playing ornaments, Or a poor basket-scambling gown contents: There's born at Andros, Samos, Amidon, Alaband, Trallos, or high Sicyon: Have th' honour in mount Esquiline to live, Or that, to which a name the wickers give. Now servants in great houses, some years hence Their Lords; thanks to their desp'rate impudence, Quick wit, and volubility of tongue; ISAEUS had not his so smoothly hung. Tell me, what's he in whom comes every man? A Rhetorician, a Grammarian, A Painter, Nointer, Augur, Geometrician, A Dancer o'the ropes too, a Physician,
Magician, he knows all things: bid him so, To heav'n the hungry little Greek will go. In short, wings were not by a Thracian worn, Tartar, or Moor: but one at Athens born. Should I not fly from these great Lords? shall he Seal first, and at a feast take place of me, That hath by that wind wafted hither bin Which brings us Syrian figs, and sea-coal in? Is it no priviledge that we were bred In Roman aire, with Sabine olives fed? The wise Greek Parasite will the speech commend Of his unlearn'd, the face of 's ugly friend: His long weak neck with HERCULES compare, Holding earth-born ANTAEUS in the aire: Admire his cleer voice, sounding harsher then The Cock that treading bites his love the Hen. We flatter thus, but they're believ'd, for they Act better: when upon the Stage they play A naked Sea-Nymph, or a modest Wife, Or Curtezan, they doe it to the life, The woman seen, 'tis not the Player speaks; All's plain beneath the waste, and gently breaks;
Nor should their Mimicks be in that esteem: ANTIOCHUS, STRATOCLES, DEMETRIUS seem Such wonders: soft-tongu'd HAEMUS such a man: Their very Nation's a Comedian; Smile you? a lowder laughter shakes him: weep, He his friend company in tears will keep, But griev's not: if you say the winter's cold And call for fire, he'll in a Rug be roll'd: Cry out 'tis hot, he sweats: can ours then match His wit, that still lies at the nimbler catch? That night and day put's on anothers look: Praises his friend's new Suite, as strangely took: Flourishing of his hands before his face If he belch well, or piss with a good grace: Or if, the gilt boll's bottom turning up, He take the froth off, with a gallant sup. Then nothing's safe from's lust, or unprophan'd: Not your chast Wife, your Son till then unstain'd, The yet smooth Bridegroome, or your virgin-childe. Hast none of these? thy Grandmother's defil'd. They will know Chamber-secrets, and be fear'd. And since some mention of the Greeks y' have heard,
See their Gymnasium, where our Youth now learns, And hear a crime the reverend Gown concerns; The Stoick murder'd BAREAS, a State-Rogue His Friend; his Pupill a grave Pedagogue: An old Informer, nurs'd upon the coast Where winged PEGASUS a feather lost. No place for any Roman here remains, Where ERIMANTUS or PROTOGENES reigns, Or DIPHILUS, that by's Nation's vice will own No Partner, but enjoyes his friend alone: For if his clime's or nature's venome fall Into an easie ear, good night to all My tedious service, out a-doors I'm hurld; A Client's the least losse in all the world. But, not to sooth our selves, though night by night We Clients run so hard, what gain we by't? When now the Praetor bids his Lictor fly To childless friends, that long since waking ly, For fear that his Collegue the Tribune may Wish MODIA, or ALBINA, first Good day? The rich man's Slave and the poor Freed-man's Son (That gives him th' upper hand) together run;
The first whereof bestowes what would have paid The Tribune for a Legion, to Trade With CATIENA, or pant once or twice Upon Calvina: frighted at her price, Thou tak'st poor whores; so much thou canst not spare As will hand CHIO from her lofty chair. At Rome produce a witness as sincere As CYBEL'S Host, though NUMA should appear, Or he that sav'd our PALLAS from the flame: First his estate's examin'd, last his fame: What servants keeps he? whats he worth in land? On's Board how great how many Chargers stand? As much coyn as in's Cofers each man hath, So much is th' estimation of his faith. Should'st thou make oath by all those sacred pow'rs The Samothratians worship, and by ours: That poor men thunder and the Gods contemne, 'Tis held; and that the Gods dispense with them. Then one's a common theam for mirth and scorn, If's Gown be sordid, his Cloak old and torn, His Shoe-sole gape, or in the stitcht-up wound The several scars by the new thread be found.
In wretched beggery nothing's harder, then To see what laughing-stocks it makes of men. Get y' out, whose meanes fall short of Law, one cryes, For shame from off the noble Cushion rise: Let some Whor's issue, or the Cryer's Heire Sit down, and give his gallant plaudit there With fine young Fencers, basket-scramblers; thus It pleas'd vain OTHO to distinguish us, Who (here) to Sons-in-law with mean estates Gives portions? who the poor his Heir creates? When's he of th' Aediles Counsell? ere this day We meaner Romans should have troopt away: Men seldome rise where want keeps virtue down; But 'tis a miracle in this base Town. Here Servant's bellies your expence inlarge: A poor Room's dear, a slender Meal great charge. We blush to eat in earth, they doe not so That hence removing to the Marsians go; That are contented with Sabellian food, And only wear a course Venetian hood: There's a great part of Italy where none But only dead men have a gown put on.
Ev'n in the majesty of some feast-day, When on the strew'd Stage th' old Jig ends the Play, While the poor Country-Child in's Mothers arme Fears the pale gaping thing will doe it harme: You see one habit worn, by all that sit As well in the Orchestra as the Pit. White garments serve the Aediles of the Town, And 'tis esteem'd a robe of high renown. Here's gallantry beyond our means: Here's more Then needs, oft taken from anothers store. Our common crime's proud beggery: not to hold Thee longer, all at Rome is bought and sold. What giv'st thou to have COSSUS daign a word, Or great VIENTO but a look afford? This mowes down beards, he must the Fav'rite trim: The Patron's house is fil'd with gifts for him; This for your self Sir: tribute we must pay To servants, and make them as rich as gay. Who fears, or ever fear'd in Country-Towns Their bane? at moist Praeneste: where wood crowns The Volsian cliffs: among the simple sort Of Gabians: or in bending Tibur's Fort?
We fill a Town shoard-up with slender poles Brought by the Boor, who th' old wide-gaping holes Dawbs over, and then bids us sleep secure, When we to sleep for ever, may be sure. Let me live where no night-shreiks terrify, Here one, fire fire; here others water cry; UCALEGON tugs out his lumber there: Below they've chimneys therefore fire may fear; But thou three stories high unwarn'd art took, That could'st for no mischance but drowning look, The rain from thy Loft being kept away Only by tiles, where egges soft pigeons lay. Shorter then's Dwarfe-wife CODRUS had a Bed, Item, six little Jugs on's Cupboards head; Item, beneath it stood a two-ear'd pot By CHIRON'S Herbal: Lastly he had got A Chest with some Greek-Authors, where the fierce Barbarous Mice, gnaw'd never-dying verse. Who knows not CODRUS nothing had? yet crost By fire, poor wretch, he all that nothing lost: And to accumulate the Begger's grief None gave him house-room, or a meal's relief.
But when ACTURIUS his great house was burn'd The City droopt, the Conscript-fathers mourn'd The Praetor straight adjourns the Court, the fate Of Rome we groan for, fire it self we hate; While's house burns, one sends marble and great sums, With milk-white naked Statues th' other comes: EUPHRANOR'S work, or POLYCLET'S rare piece This gives, old buskins of the Gods of Greece: Books, Shelfs, MINERVA to the waste, he brings, A bushell full of silver he: more things And better, then he his could ever call, This Persian now receives, more rich then all Rome's childless men, suspected to conspire (Good cause) the setting his own house on fire. Could you be from the Circus wean'd, you may Buy a neat house at Fabrateria, At Sora or Frusino; for what here You sit at, to hire darkness by the year. There your short Well no bucket needs, but wets With ease your little Garden's tender Sets: Live, love thy rake, and sallets neatly drest, Which may a hundred Pythagoreans feast:
'Tis somewhat, be where 'twil, to be decreed Lord of so much as may one Lizard feed. Most sick men here with over-watching die; Such crudities breed meats that baking lie Upon the burning stomack. What ease get Poor Ttadesmen next the street? sleep's for the great. Hence spring diseases, when the waggons meet At th' oblique turning of some narrow street: The Car-men there, that stand and scold, would keep Dull DRUSUS or the Sea-calf from his sleep. When business calls, the crow'd a rich man shun, Lest over them his huge Sedan should run, Which he Reads, writes, or sleeps in as he goes; For sleep will come if he the curtains close. Yet he's there first: for as we haste, we finde A stream before us and a tide behinde: He shoves with's elbows, he with harder blocks, Our heads this cowl-staffe and that barrell knocks, Dirt noints our thighs: and then the great foot kicks, And in our fingers th' horsemans rowell sticks. Seest thou what smoak the Sportula breaths out, A hundred Guests, their Kitchin's lug'd about?
Scarce CORBULO could such huge Chargers lift And Chafingdishes, as one Groom makes shift To bear on's steady head; and runs so fast He fans the coals, and tears his cloaths with haste. Now meets he Carts wherein tall Fir-trees quake, Now some that Pine-trees at the people shake: Then breaks the Axletree whose Carriage bears Ligurian stones, and pour'd about his ears. That mountain thy unlucky Slave intombes: Of his beshatter'd Carkas what becomes? Where limbs or bones lie, who can finde the holes? Poor men's whole bodies vanish like their souls. His Fellowes safe at home the dishes wash, Blow with their mouths the fire, the Nointers clash, And Boyes doe in their several places toyl, To fold up napkins full of sweat and oyle: Whil'st Novice-Ghost, he sits upon the shoar Afraid of CHARON, hopeless to get o're Foul Styx, from's mouth not able to defray (Poor soul) that token, should his waftage pay. Note more dangers that attend the night: To batter out our brains, from what a height
Pots are pour'd out which, crackt or slipping, print The pavement with their weight, and hurt the flint. Thou'lt be thought dull, senseless of casual ill, To sup abroad, and first not make thy Will: For with so many fates thou art to meet As waking windowes open to the street: Wish therefore, wretch, and pray they may but crown Thy head with that foul sullage they cast down. The wild and drunken youth, unless he fight And kill his man, can take no rest that night, But like ACHILLES, when for's friend he mourns, Now on his face, then on his back he turns: His own he looses if Rom's peace he keep; A Quarrell still is prologue to his sleep. Yet though rash years and hotter wine provoke, He's subtle, and avoids the purple cloak, And his long train of Friends and Grooms, that passe With burning torches and with lamps of brasse: But I, that have the Moon before me born, Or husband a short candle, am his scorn. Hear how we quarrel'd, if a Quarrell 'twere, where he layes on, the blows I only bear:
He stands before me, and commands me stand, And I must be obedient to's command: Alas! what would you have a man to doe, In hands of one that's mad, and stronger too? Whence com'st, he cries? whose beans have swell'd thy gut? Whose vinegar hast drunk? what Cobler put His purse to thine, some rare chopt leeks to buy, To eat with a fry'd Sheeps-head; thou'lt reply? Speak or I'll kick thee; say, where dwel'st thou? what Proseucha shall I finde thee begging at? Make answers, or say nothing, all's alike, He'll beat thee, and make oath that thou didst strike; A poor mans liberty is only this, He must the hand that bastinads him kiss: And give the beater thanks, withall his heart, He'll let him with some few of's teeth depart. Nor is this all thy danger; he's not farre Will rob thee, when their dores Shop-keepers barre, When every hinge is silent, Theevs then creep To cut thy throat: for when our Souldiers keep The Pontine Fenns, and guard the Galline Wood, Rogues thence run hither for their livelyhood.
What forge? what anvill, but where chains are wrought? Such store of iron to make fetters bought, That shortly to want plough-shares we may fear, That pruning-hooks and mattocks will be dear. Our Great-grand-fathers Grand-fathers were blest, They under Kings and Tribunes liv'd the best, When throughout Rome one Prison serv'd for all. I could say more: But see the Cattel call; The Sun too is declining, I must go, The Carter cracks his whip, and tells me so. Farewell, think on me, and when Rome signes thee A Pass to thy sweet AQUINE, call on me; From Cumae we'll to Elvine CERES ride, To thy DIANA thou shalt be my guide. If us this shame not, booted I'll assist In your moist grounds my fellow-Satyrist.
The Comment UPON THE THIRD SATYR· VErse 2. Cumae,] A City in Campania, upon the Sea-coast neer to Puteoli, built by the Cumaeans, a people of Asia, whose Generall Hippocles joyning with Megasthenes Generall for the Chalcidians, the Articles between them were so drawn, that Hippocles was to have the naming of the City, and Megasthenes the right of colony or plantation, Strabo lib. 5. Thus the Cumaeans of Aeolia gave the name to that Town, from which the Sibyll called Cumaea received hers. Verse 4. Baiae,] Another City of Campania, so named from Baius one of Vlysses his Mates there buried. Neer to this City were the Baths, or that confluence of warm Springs whereunto the noblest Romans resorted both for pleasure and health, which made it flourish with many fair and Princely Buildings, Martial to Valerius Flaccus. Vt mille laudem Flacce versibus Baias, Laudabo dignè non satis tamen Baias. Should I with thousand verses Baiae praise, Her praises to her worth I could not raise. As much in commendations of the place is said by Horace in his Epistles. Nullus in orbe locus Baiis praelucet amoenis. Sweet Baiae no place in the world excells. Verse 5. Prochyta,] A little desolate Island in the Tyrrhene Sea, one of those called the Aeolian Isles: some say it was a Mountain in the Isle
of Enarime, which by an Earthquake was from thence poured out, and therefore by the Graecians called Prochyta. But Dionys Halicar, lib. 1. af∣firms the name to be derived from Prochyta Nurse to Aeneas. Verse 6. Suburra,] One of the fairest and most frequented Streets in Rome. Festus from the authority of Verrius saith it had the name a fuccur∣rendo, for as much as the Courts of Guard were there which relieved the Watch, when the Gabines besieged that part of the Town; and to shew that the change of the letters came only by the vulgar errour of pronoun∣cing, he tells us that in his time the Tribe or Inhabitants of the Suburra was written Tribus Succurranea, not Suburrana; nor Suburana, as Varro would have it called, for being under the old Bulwark, sub muro terreo. Varro lib. 4. de ling. lat. Verse 10. Poets that in August read.] Among the sufferings of those that lived constantly in Rome, my Author reckons the torment they were put to by the Poets, whom they could not be rid of, even in the moneth of August, when the extremity of heat was enough to kill a man that, being pressed by their importunity, must stand in the open Street to hear their ridiculous Verses read; and Vmbricius seems the more sen∣sible of the misery in regard it only fell upon the meaner sort; for all the great persons of Rome were then at their Country-houses, to which they removed upon the Calends or first day of July. Verse. 12. At the ancient Arc by moist Capena] An Arc was a Mo∣nument of stone raised like to the Arch of a Bridge in memory of some triumph or victory: and this Arc was built in honour of the Horatii: af∣terwards it was called the distilling or dropping Arc, because over it the pipes were laid that carried the water into Rome from Egeria's Foun∣tain, Ovid Fast.
Egeria est quae praebet aquas Dea grata Camenoe: Illa Numae Conjux consilium{que} fuit. Egeria waters us, the Muses prize her: She was King Numa's Wife and his Adviser. Verse 13. Where Numa every night his Goddess met.] Numa Pompilius, second King of the Romans, was born at Cures a Town of the Sabines. He was famous for Justice and Piety: He pacified the fury of his Neigh∣bours, and brought the Roman Souldiers (that were grown cruell and savage in their long War under King Romulus) to a love of peace and reverence of Religion. He built the Temple of Janus, which being opened signified war; being shut, times of Peace: and all the whole Reign of Numa it was shut, but stood open after his death for fourty years toge∣ther. He created the Dial Martial and Quirinal Flamens or Priests. He instituted a Colledge of Twelve Salian Priests of Mars. He consecra∣ted the Vestall Virgins: declared the Pontifex Maximus or Chief Bishop: distinguished the dayes Fasti and Nefasti, the Court-dayes, and Va∣cation or Justicium: divided the year into twelve moneths: and to strike a Veneration into the hearts of the Romans, and make them observe what he enjoyned, out of an awfull religious duty; he made them believe that every night he met a Goddess or Nymph which he called Egeria, from whose mouth he received his whole form of government: their place of meeting was in a Grove without the Porta Capena, called afterwards the Muses Grove, wherein was a Temple consecrated to them and to the Goddess Egeria, whose Fountain waters the Grove. Ovid that calls her Numa's Wife saith likewise, that she grieving for his death, wept her self into a Fountain, Metamorph lib. 15. which Fountain, Grove and Temple at a yearly Rent were let out to the Jews, grown so poor after the
Sack of Jerusalem, that all their Stock was a Basket for their own meat▪ and hay to give their Horses. Lastly King Numa, after he had reigned fourty years beloved and honoured by his own People and all the neigh∣bour-States, died, not having any strugle with nature, meerly of old age. By his Will he commanded that his body should not be burned, but that two stone-Chests or Coffins should be made, in one of which they should put his Corps, and in the other the Books he had written, Plutarch in Numa, where he saith (and quotes his Author Valerius Ansius) that the Coffin of Numa's Books contained four and twenty, twelve of Ceremo∣nies, and twelve of Philosophy written in Greek. Four hundred years after, P. Cornelius and M. Baebius being Consuls, by a sudden inundation the earth was loosned, and the covers of the Coffins opened; but there was no part of his body found in the one, in the other all the Books intire, pre∣served by the earth and water: But Petilius (then Praetor) had the read∣ing of them, which occasioned their destruction by fire; for he acquanit∣ing the Senate with their Contents, it was not thought fit by the great Councell of Rome, that secrets of such a nature should be divulged to the People; so the books were brought into Court and burned. Verse 25. Vmbricius.,] A man rare at divination by the entrails of sa∣crificed beasts, Pliny. He foretold the death of Galba, Tacit. but those honest Arts not bringing in sufficient to maintain Vmbricius in Rome, he scorned to use cozning Arts, by playing the Mountebank for a lively∣hood, as you see by his words. —How your Planet runs I know not; promise Father's deaths to Sons, Nor can, nor will I: I did ne're dissect Toads entrails.—
Upon these Premisses he concludes. What should I doe at Rome? — From whence, contemning the vanities and baseness of the Town, with his whole household in a Waggon, this poor Aruspex went out in greater triumph at the Porta Capena or Triumphal Gate, then ever any Con∣queror entred by it into Rome. Verse 30. Daedalus,] An Athenian Handicraft-man, Sonne of Mition, the most ingenious Artist of his time. From his invention we have the Saw, the Hatchet, the Plummet and Line, the Auger, Glue and Cement. He was the Inventor of Sails and Sail-yards, which undoubt∣edly occasioned the Fable of his invention of Wings. He set eyes in Statues, and by secret springs, wheels, and wyers, gave motion to those men of marble so artificially as they appeared to be living: an Art revi∣ved, in the reign of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, by his Mathematician Janellus Turrianus. See. Strada in his Hist. Dec. 1. How Daedalus built the Labyrinth, was imprisoned in it, and escaped by the VVings he made himself; you have in the Comment upon Sat. 1. From thence flying to Sardinia, then as farre as Cumae; there he laid down those Wings, the Wings of Sails, as Virgil calls them, and rested upon the Terra firma. Lucian lib. de Astrolo. tells us, that Daedalus was a Mathematician: and his Son Icarus taught Astrology, but being a young man full of fiery imma∣ginations, he soared too high, pride bringing him into error, and so fell into a Sea of notions, whose depth was not to be sounded. Verse 33. Lachesis.] The three fatall Goddesses which the Heathens believed to dispose the thread of mans life, were Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, the Daughters of Erebus and Night. The first bore the Distaffe, the second spun the Thread, and the third (when it came to the determi∣ned
end) cut it off. Apuleius thinks the ternary number of the Destinies or Parcae, to be derived from the number of three points of time; that the Flax wound about the Distaffe signifies the time past, the Thread in spinning, the time present; and that which is not twisted, the time to come. The old Latins called these three Sisters Nona, Decima, and Morta. Verse 36. Arturius and Catulus.] These two from poor beginnings had raised themselves to great Estates and Offices, and made use of their wealth and authority to ingross all good Bargains, and to monopolize all beneficiall places and employments, even to those of the Scavenger and Gold-finder. Verse 40. Spear.] At Auctions or publick sales of mens goods (part whereof was their Slaves) the Romans ever stuck up a Spear, to give no∣tice to the Town, Cic. Phil. and when they came in, there was upon the place an Affix posted up, which contained a Particular of the parcels to be sold, with their several prices Sig. de Jud. Under the Spear sate the Cryer, asking who giveth most? and by him an Officer, some Arturius or Catulus, for Voucher. Verse 43. Revers'd Thumbs.] At any Sword-play, either in the Cir∣cus or upon Theaters, it was in the power of the People to make the Gladiators or Fencers fight it out, and die upon the place: or to dis∣charge them; and likewise to restore them to their liberty, lost by the baseness of their calling, for the present, and if they pleased for ever. The first was done by bowing down their Thumbs; the second (as by these words appears) with turning up their Thumbs; the third by gi∣ving them a Rod or Wand, called Rudis; the last by bestowing Caps upon them. Qui insigniori cuique homicidae Leonem poscit, idem Gladia∣tori
atroci petat Rudem, & Pileum praemium conferat, He that will have a notorious Murderer exposed to the Lyons, even he will give to the bloody Gladiator a Rudis, and reward him with a Cap, Tertul. de Spect. cap. 21. Verse 54. Toads Entrails.] The skilfullest Aruspex that ever divined by Toads Entrails was Locusta, much imployed in that service by Agrip∣pina, and by, the Son of her vitious Nature, Nero. Verse 65. Dark Tagus.] Tagus is a River of Lusitania rolling gol∣den sands, Plin. by which my Author conceives the stream to be dark∣ned. Neer to this Spanish River (if we credit Pliny) Mares are hors'd by the West-winde, and foale Ginnets infinite Fleet, but their time of life is swifter; for they never live to above three years old. Verse 71. Greek Town.] Rome, where Graecians (that were Johns of all Trades, and could do every thing to please the humour of a Roman) carried away the men like ships, with a breath: and where the very wo∣men affected and spake the Greek tongue, Sat. 6. —old Woman! fie, let Girls doe so: Wilt thou fourscore and six be Greekish? chast Greek is not when , thou say'st Life, soul: and fool'st thy husband in a crowd With words, for which thy Sheets were late a shrowd. Verse 73. Orontes,] A River of Caelesyria, that springs up not farre from Mount Lebanon and the City of Seleucia Pieria, where it sinks un∣der ground, and riseth again in the Apemene Territorie, running by An∣tioch, and falling into the Sea neer Seleucia. It was called Orontes by his name that first made a Bridge over it, for before they called it Tryphon, Strab.
Verse 76. Circus,] The great Shew-place at Rome, neer to that part of Mount Aventine where the Temple of Diana stood. Tarquinius Priscus built Galleries about it, where the Senators and People of Rome, to the number of a hundred and fifty thousand, might see the running of great Horses at Lists, Fireworks, Tumbling, and baiting or chasing of wilde Beasts. In after Ages there was likewise to be seen Prizes played by the Fencers or Gladiators: and in Vaults underneath it stood women that would prostitute their bodies for money, Rosin. Antiq. and as you may see in this Satyr. And hackney-Sluts, that in the Circus stand. Verse 79 Our nointed Clown] The meanest sort of Roman Fencers had their necks nointed with an artificiall Clay made of oyle and earth; and so that they were able to compass such a nointing, with a Trechedip∣na or a poor Poste-Gown, in which they might runne to the Sportula (either to get a share in the hundred farthings, or in the Clients plain Supper) their ambition was satisfied. But the Greek Peasants, though farre meaner (as subject to these) scorned such low thoughts, aiming to recover that by cozenage, which they had lost by fighting with the Romans. Verse 81. Andros,] An Island in the Aegaean Sea, being the principall of the Cyclades, where there is a Spring whose water every year upon the fifth day of January tastes like wine, Plin. lib. 2. Samos is an Island in the Icarian Sea right against Ionia, Ptolomy. Amydon a City of Paeonia or Macedonia, that gave assistance to the Trojans. Alaband a City in Caria, Plin. Ptol. infamous for effeminate men and impudent singing women; only famous for the birth of Appolonius the Rhetor. Trallis a Town of Caria in the Lesser Asia, Plin. lib. 5. Sicyon an Island
in the Aegean Sea, opposite to Epidaurum, very high and eminent, Plin. From this Isle Minerva was called Sicyonia, because Epopaeus there built a Temple to her for his victory against the Boeotians. Verse 83. Mount Esquiline.] The seven hills that Rome stood upon, were the Palatine, the Quirinal, the Aventine, the Caelian, the Esquiline, the Tarpeian or Capitoline, and the Viminall; the last being so called from the VVickers or Oziers growing upon it. Verse 88. Isaeus,] The fluent Orator, whose Scholar Demosthenes was. Verse 96. At Athens born.] Daedalus that put off his VVings at Cumae, as before. Verse 100. Syrian Figs] Syrian Figs, Sea-coal, and the Grecians came in with one wind and for one purpose, viz. to be sold in the Market at Rome. Verse 102. Sabine Olives.] Olives growing in the narrow, but long Country of the ancient Sabines, which reached from Tyber as farre as the Vestines, and was bulwarkt on both sides by the Apennine Mountains, Plin. Verse 106. Antaeus,] A Giant, begot by Neptune upon the Earth, sixty four cubits high. He spent his youth in Libya at the Town of Lixus, afterwards called the Palace of Antaeus. Ever when he found himself weary or over-toyled, he recovered his strength and spirits by touching of the Earth his Mother; and therefore Hercules, when they two wrast∣led together, held him up in the aire, that the earth should not refresh him. The great Roman Souldier Sertorius, at Tygaena a town of Libya, digged up the Sepulcher of Antaeus, and found his body, Plutarch. Verse 111. Doris,] A Sea Nymph, Daughter to Oceanus and Thetis,
and VVife to her Brother Nereus, by whom she had an infinite number of Children, Sea-Nymphs, that from their Fathers name were called Nereides. Her Picture was alwayes drawn naked, and so it seems the Greek Players acted her. Verse 112. Thais,] A famous Curtesan born in Alexandria, that set∣ting up for her self at Athens, drew the custome of all the noble Youth of that learned City. She was rarely charactered by Menander the Poet in a Comedy, which probably was acted in Rome by the rare Greek Comedians, Demetrius, Antiochus, Stratocles and Haemus. Verse 137. Gymnasium] is here taken for any Room wherein the Greek Philosophers read to their Roman Pupills. Verse 139. Bareas.] Bareas Soranus was impeached of high Treason by his Friend and Tutor P. Egnatius, that took upon him the gravity of the Stoicks in his habit and discourse, to express the Image of an honest Exer∣cise, Tacit. but the Informer was paid in his own coyn; for he that im∣piously and basely had murdered his Scholar in Nero's time, was him∣self in the reign of Vespasian condemned and executed upon the informa∣tion of Musonius Rufus, Dio, Tacit. Verse 142. A feather fell.] In Cilicia P. Egnatius was born, at a Town as lying as himself; for there, as their History sayes, Bellerophon's Horse Pegasus (having stumbled in the aire and sprained his Fetlock) dropt a feather from his heel, and ever since the Town was called Tarsus. Verse 144. Erimantus.] Erimantus, Protogenes, and Diphilus were Greeks, which the Great men of Rome trusted with the government of their Children. Verse 158. Lictor.] See Praetor Sat. 1. whose Officer the Lictor was. Verse 156. Modia] Modia and Albina were rich Ladies that had
not any Children of their own, and therefore the Roman Lords courted them in as servil a manner as the Lords were attended by their Clients, Sat. 5. Trebius oblig'd, has that for which he must Break's sleep, and run ungarter'd and untrust, For fear lest his saluting rivals may Have fill'd the Ring by dawning of the day; Or at the time when the Seven-stars doe roll Their cold and sluggish Wain about the Pole. Verse 160. The Tribune.] I conceive this Tribune to be the Militarie Tribune that commanded in chief with Consular power; not one of those six that had every of them a thousand men in a Legion, consisting of six thousand. Verse 161. Catiena.] Catiena, Calvina, and Chio were rich Curtezans, too dear for the Common sort of Romans; for mean people were hardly able to pay their Sedan-men or Chair-bearers. Verse 166. Cybel's Host.] Scipio Nasica, whom the Senate judged to be the best man; and therefore when Cybele Mother of the Gods was first brought to Rome, with advice from the Oracle, that she should be en∣tertained by the best man, they voted her to be lodged in his House. When he found himself inauspiciously named for Consull by Gracchus, he resigned his Authority. When he was Censor, he made the Con∣sulls Statues be pulled down, which had been set up in the Forum by every mans ambition. When he discharged the Office of Consull, he took the City of Deiminium in Dalmatia. His Army put upon him the name of Imperator, and the Senate decreed him a Triumph, but he refused both. He was very eloquent, very learned in the Law, and
with an excellent wit, a most wise man; and in the esteem of all Rome, worthy his noble Ancestors the two Africani. He left not money e∣nough to pay for his Funerall expenses; therefore they were defraied by the People; and in every street through which the body past they strew∣ed flowers, Plin. lib. 22. cap. 3. Verse 166. Numa.] See the beginning of the Comment upon this Satyr. Verse 167. He that sav'd our Pallas.] L. Metellus the Pontifex Maximus before mentioned, that when the Temple of Vesta was burned down, rescued from the flame the Palladium or wooden Image of Pal∣las, brought from Troy: But his piety had a very sad success, for ventu∣ring too desperately into the fire, he lost both his eyes, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 44. This Metellus in the first Punick VVarre, for his victories over the Carthaginians, had a most glorious triumph; for he led through Rome thirteen great Commanders of the Enemie, and sixscore Ele∣phants. Verse 174. Samothracians.] Samothracia or Samothrace is an Island in the Aegaean Sea, neer to that part of Thrace where the River Hebrus falls into the Sea, Stephan. It was anciently called Dardania, from Dardanus the Trojan, that is reported to have fled thither with the Palladium; but the first name of this Island was Leucosia, Aristot. in his Republick of Samothracia. The Gods worshiped by these Islanders, were Jupiter Juno Pallas, &c. from the Samothracians brought to the Romans, whose peculiar Deities were Mars and Romulus. Verse 188. Vain Otho.] L. Roscius Otho when he was Tribune passed a Theatrall Law, wherein he distinguished the Roman Knights from the Common people, assigning fourteen Benches in the Theater only
for the Knights, that is, for such as had an Estate worth four hundred Se∣stertia, being about three thousand one hundred twenty five pound of our money, by which Law they that were not worth so much incurred a penalty if they presumed to sit upon any of those Benches, Cic. Philip. 2. See likewise his Orat. for Muraen. Verse 191. Aediles.] The Romans had three sorts of Aediles. The first they called Aediles Curules, from the Chariot they rid in: these were chosen out of the Senate, Pilet. in lib. 2. Cic. epist. fam. 10. and had in charge the repairing both of Temples and private Houses. The second sort were Aediles Plebeii, chosen out of the People; and these came into Office when the Curules went out, they ruling several years by turns, Alex. Gen. Dier. lib. 4. c. 4. these were impowred (together with their charge of Temples and private Dwellings) to punish the falsifying of Weights and Measures, to look to the publick Conduits, and to make provision for Festivall Playes. The third sort were Clerks of the Mar∣ket, looking to the Corn and Victuals sold in publick, Alex. ibid. these were the Aediles Cerealis in ordinary: the extraordinaries were the An∣nonae praefecti, Rosin. Antiq. l. 7. c. 38. Verse 198. Marsians.] The Marsians were a poor but stout People of Italy, Neighbours to the Samnits, descended from Marsus Sonne to the Witch Circe: Men that with their spittle cured such as were bitten by Vipers, Plin. Verse 199. Sabellian Food.] Such pitifull poor meat as served the Sa∣bellians, which inhabited that part of Italy lying upon the Mountains betwixt the Marsians and the Sabines. They were conquered by M. Curius the Dictator. Their ancient name was Samnites, Stephan lib. 3. cap. 12.
Verse 206. The pale gaping thing.] The vizarded Fool in the Play. Verse 215. What giv'st thou] To the Lord Cossus his Chamber-keepers, to let thee in. Verse 216. Veiento] Fabricius Veiento, a Lord of the Senate: how proud he was of his honour and excessive wealth, may be gathered from hence, poor men not being able to get so much as the favour of a look from him, unless they bought it of his Servants: how politick a Courtier he was, you may see Sat. 4. and how unhappie in his Wife Hippia, in Sat. 6. Verse 222 Cold Praeneste] Thus, not moist Praeneste, it should have bin printed in the Satyr, if the Transcriber had not mistaken. It is a Town of Latium fortified by nature, as standing very high: it was a Greek Plan∣tation, as appears by the old name Polystaephanus. In this Town was the Temple of Fortune, which L. Sylla (the Fortunate) richly paved with square stones, Plin. l. 36. ca. 25. Verse 223. The Volscian Cliffs.] Those that dwell upon the rockie Mountains in Latium. Camilla was a Volscian, she that assisted Aeneas against Turnus, Aeneid. 7. Of all the Volscians the poorest were those of Gabium. Verse 224. Tibur,] A City of the Sabines, sixteen miles from Rome, watered with many pure Springs, and seated in an excellent aire, Ovid. 4. Fast. The three Sonnes of Amphiraus, Tiburnus, Catillus, and Chorax built the Town, to which the eldest Brother gave the name. Solin. Sex∣tus the Graecian. The Fort of Tibur stood so very high, as to those that looked upon it at a distance it seemed to be bending and falling like Grantham-Steeple. Verse 233. Three stories high.] Poor Romans, such as Vcalegon, dwelt in Garrets, Sat 10.
—but in that sad time, Seldome the Souldiers did poor Garrets climb. Verse 237. Codrus,] the Author of the lamentable Heroick Poem, in∣tituled Theseis, Sat. 1. one that could neither make Friends nor money to buy a Bed long enough for his Dwarf-wife Procula. Verse 253. Euphranor,] A noble Picture-drawer, and as rare a Statu∣ary, one that writ some Volumes of Symetry and Colours. He flou∣rished in the hundred and fourth Olympiad: many excellent pieces he likewise cut in brass, Plin. l. 34. ca. 8. Verse 253. Polyclet.] Polycletus for his accuratness and the sweetness of his touches excelled all Statuaries, Quintilian. He did things in brass honoured with the commendations of great Writers, particularly that of his Gamesters playing at Dice was thought to be incomparable. He was a Sidonian and Schollar to Gelades. Two Statues he made of one and the same designe; the first according to art, by his own judgement; the other following vulgar opinion, as any that came in desired him to alter it: when they were finished, he exposed them to the common view, and that which he did of himself was infinitely commended, the other thought to be nothing neer it: But friends (said he) you must know, this which you cry up, is my worke; that which you dislike, your own. Verse 261. Circus] See the former part of the Comment upon this Satyr, there you will finde the reason why the Romans were so loath to leave the Circus for any other place, where they were not like to have such rare sport for nothing. Verse 262. Fabrateria,] A poor Town of Campania. Sora, another of the same Country, taken (and I suppose sleighted) by the Ro∣mans, Plin. lib. 3 cap. 5. Frusino another neighbour Town in the Fa∣lern
Territory, anciently called Frusinum, Ptolom. Verse 268. Pythagoreans,] The Disciples of Pythagoras, that first gave name to Philosophy, and made himself be called Philosophus, not Sophus, a Lover, not a Master of Wisedom, that title being proper to God a∣lone, Laer. in prooem. l. 1. See Comment upon Sat. 15. Verse 278. Dull Drusus,] One that it seems was as drousie for a Man▪ as the Seal or Sea-Calf for a Fish. Verse 291. Corbulo,] A man of a vast body, and that spoak high and mighty words, Tacit. lib. 13. Verse 298. Ligurian Stones,] Marble digged out of the Quarries in Liguria, upon the Appennine Mountains between France and Hetruria, now Florence. Verse 308. Charon,] Brother to the Destinies; the Ferry-man of Hell, that carries no Souls in his Boat under farthings a piece. Verse 323. Achilles.] See the Comment upon Sat. 1. from whence you may fancie in what impatient postures the Players would act Achil∣les, when he was in fury for the death of his friend Patroclus. Verse 355. Pontine Fenns.] The Volsian Fenns neer to Forum Appii, not farre from Tarracina, twenty miles from Rome: they were drained by the Consul Cornelius Cethegus, to whom that Province fell, and tur∣ned into good Land, Liv. l. 47. After this it was overflowed again and a Trench for Theeves, untill the reign of Theodoric King of the Goths, by whose Command it was drained once more. The Gallin Wood stood neer to the Cumaean Bay, and was another shelter for Theevs. Verse 368. Aquine.] Aquinum a Town of the Latins, Plin. watered by the River Melpha, Strab. now called Aquino, famous for the birth of two men incomparable for their several kindes of Learning, my Author
Juvenal the Satyrist, and Thomas Aquinas the Schoolman, called by our Country-men St. Thomas of Watering, a word expressing the moistness of the place, which may likewise appear by the adjacent Temple of Ceres, the Goddess of Husbandry, by the Title of Elvin Ceres, that is, Ceres of the Washes or Marshes, from whence the Spring and River of Elvis took their names; yet there was drie ground neer to Aquine in Juve∣nal's own Land, called Diana's Hill, Martial to Juvenal, lib. 2. Epig. 18.
Figura Quarta. COnsedêre Patres, moderantes cuncta, Quirini: Ipse 1 Nero calvus, solióque animóque superbus, Eminet: hinc claudit latus aegrae villicus urbis 2 Pegasus, interpres legum sanctissimus Idem: 3 Crispus deinde senex octogenarius, annos Vix quadraginta numerans vultúque, jocísque: Proximus, haud adeò jucundus, 4 Acilius iram Caesaream in 5 natum metuit, quem saeva manebat Pro Christo, (ut fama est) mors designata Tyranno: Assidet huic 6 Rubrius tristis; 7 Montanus adestque Immenso luxu, parilíque abdomine tardus; Mollis 8 Crispinus; jugulos aperire susurro Doctus 9 Pompeius; meditans nova praelia villâ 10 Fuscus; 11 Veiento dives; captúsque 12 Catullus Luminibus, nupérque exors, mendicus, & erro, Concilio procerum regnat, de ponte satelles: Conversus, cum dextra jaceret bellua caeco, 13 Piscatorem ipsum pro pisce capítque tenétque, Astantem, & dubiè expectantem aequalia pisci Praemia praegrandi, qui summa est cura Senatûs. De patinâ post examen, sententia lata est, Hic Rhomborum grex hôc integer orbe coquatur.
The fourth Designe. THe Councell sits that rules all Climates known; First, proud Domitian 1 Caesar in the throne; Next 2 Pegasus, on whose impartiall doom Depends the Civill Government of Rome; Then sweet-tongu'd 3 Crispus, his years full fourscore, His mirth but fourty, and his face no more. He's not so cheerfull, but this Senator, Aged 4 Acilius looks as troubled, for The Princes frown upon his 5 Son: become, Some say, a Christian mark't for Martyrdome. There sits dejected 6 Rubrius: there the gust Of fat 7 Montanus: gluttony and lust; The Moor 8 Crispinus: whisp'ring 9 Pompey there; There bookish 10 Fuscus; rich 11 Veiento here; Catullus 12 last, blinde and a Begger late, But now a bloody Minister of State: He magnifies, as much as flatt'ry can, The Fish, for which he takes the 13 Fisherman, That waits in hope of the Imperial pay, For bringing-in the business of the day. Resolved upon the Question, that this shoale Of Turbots in one Monster, be boild whole.
The Manners of Men. THE FOURTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. The Mullet by Crispinus bought Sets off the Turbot that was brought To Court: a Rhombus, only for The pallat of an Emperor. The Senate's call'd, and character'd; The Fathers, to the Fish prefer'd, In Caesars Albane Palace sit, And pass a Vote for boiling it. BEhold CRISPINUS once again held forth; And oft I'll shew him, Monster, whom no worth Redeems from vice; weak, only strong in lust, Who meerly does the Widow's sweets disgust.
What matter then how many Porticos Tire his Coach, through what Groves in's Chair he goes? Of what land, of what houses he's possess'd Neer to the Forum? No bad man is bless'd; Much less a Villain that corrupts the good, One that with incest cools his sun-burn'd blood; For, not long since, a Vestall he deflowr'd, That was alive by th' earth to be devour'd. But these are his sleight faults: had they been thine, The Censor on thy head had set a Fine. But what would prove TITIUS and SEIUS base, Or brand another, must CRISPINUS grace: His person's fouler then his crimes: the Slave Who can describe? he for a Mullet gave, Of six ounce weight six thousand it is said, From those by whom great things, are greater made. I should commend him, had it been his drift To win th' old childless man, with such a gift, To write his name first, when he seals his Will: There might be further reason in it still, Should he this Present for's great Friend prepare, Borne in her closs and large glasse-window'd Chair:
But no such matter, for himself 'twas bought: We now see feasts that make APICIUS thought Frugall and poor: CRISPINE, was fish thus dear, When thou didst thine own Country Canvas wear? He might have bought for less (I dare well say) The Fisher then the fish: a Lordship may Be purchas'd in a Province at that rate; In Italy a competent Estate. What rarities may we think CAESAR eats, When this poor dish, scarce miss'd among his meats, Had so many Sestertia given for't? Belch't by the purple Buffon of the Court, Now Master of the Horse; that cri'd of old Stale broken ware, and fish of Nilus sold. Begin CALLIOPE, let's sit, but sing We may not, this is truth, no fained thing: Then speak Pierian Girls; your patronage Give me, that call you Girls in your old age. When our last FLAVIUS the cow'd world disturb'd, When great Rome, as his Slave, bald NERO curb'd: A strange vast Adriatick Turbot lands Where VENUS Fane in Greek Ancona stands:
It fill'd the Wharfe, and stuck a-shore like those The Sun pours from Maeotis, where they froze, Into the Pontick Sea's dull mouth; which grow With lying bound in Ice, huge, fat and slow. This Monster th' owner of the Boat and Lines For our chief Bishop craftily designes: For, such a Rhombus who dare sell or buy? Along the coast Spies thick as Grass-wrack lie, Informers, that would sue the naked man For taking up a Fugitive, that ran From CAESAR'S Vivaries, the Ponds that bred The Prodigy, where it had long been fed: And ought to be return'd to its old Lord. For if PALFURIUS credit we afford, Or ARMILLATUS, 'tis Imperiall food, If it be rare and excellently good, On whatsoever Billow it be tost: This fish was therefore to be giv'n, or lost. Now sickly Autumn froze, the Patient fear'd A Quartan; Winter foul and stiffe appear'd: What he had caught would keep, the Fisher knew; Yet he makes haste, as if the South-winde blew,
The Lake past, at robb'd Alba he arrives, Where still poor Vesta's Trojan fire survives. The wondring crowd first stopt him; but when they Their admiration satisfi'd, gave way: The Presence-hinges nimbly turn'd about; The fish goes in, the Senate wait without; 'Tis brought to CAESAR; thus the Fisher sayes, Great Sir, what is so huge it would amaze A private Kitchen, graciously accept: Be this day to thy Genius sacred kept; With speed thy stomach clear of common meat, And this untill-thy-time-kept-Turbot eat: 'Twould needs be caught. Could any Raskall gloze More plainly? yet his Peacocks feathers rose. Nothing so gross but will belief incline, When that powr's prais'd, equals the pow'rs Divine: But there's no Boyler big enough; his States He therefore calls to Councell, them he hates, Whil'st their looks shew the paleness of a great Sad friendship; th' Usher cries, make haste, he's set. First PEGASUS whips on his purple Gown, Who was the Bailiffe of th' amazed Town,
What then were Prefects more? whereof the best, He was, and of our Judges, th' honestest: And yet his uncorrupted tongue was charm'd, In those base times when Justice was disarm'd. There likewise did old pleasant CRISPUS meet, Whose nature, like his eloquence, was sweet. Could he, that Rules th' Earth Seas and People, chuse A friend he might with more advantage use: If when his thoughts to blood and vengeance move, He'd suffer him his cruelty reprove, And that he would his honest Councel hear? But what's more violent then a Tyrant's eare? With whom, of Spring-windes Rain or Heat, his friends Discoursing, on a word a Life depends. He therefore never swam a stroke to break The Torrent; nor durst any Roman speak The truth his soul thought; or in doing good Imploy his time: he many Winters stood; And saw his eighti'th Solstice: in this sort, At this Guard too lay safely in that Court As old ACILIUS, that did next attend With his young Son, unworthy of an end
So cruel, now design'd him by the Prince; But old Lords shew'd like Prodigies long since: Let me be, rather then a man of birth, The giants brother, th' off-spring of the Earth; Poor youth, he scap't not though he naked threw, His Javelin in the Alban lists, and slew NUMIDIAN Lions: that Patrician art Who knows not? who admires th' old subtill part That BRUTUS acted? 'twas an easie thing To put a trick upon a bearded King. Ignoble RUBRIUS lookes no better, sham'd With guilt of a disgrace not to be nam'd: Yet was our Pathick Satyrist lesse base; MONTANUS his Guts waddle a slow pace; CRISPINUS enters sweating Easterne-Gums, Enough to serve two Funeralls: POMPEY comes, A neater cut-throat from whose lips death creeps In whispers: FUSCUS, that his bowels keeps; For DACIAN vultures, making war his study In's Marble-villa: wise VEIENTO bloody CATULUS followes, that the Lover playd, And had a passion for the unseen Maid,
Our times great Monster, a blinde flatterer, Whom high-way begging did to Court prefer, Fit to run after ARICINE Horses heels, And seems to kisse the tumbling Waggon-wheeles; None more admir'd the Fish, much he did say To's left hand turn'd, when that on's right hand lay; So the Cilicians Sword-play he commended, And th' Engin when the Boyes in Clouds ascended: VEIENTO came not short of him; for he Divin'd, BELLONA, as inspir'd by thee; A mighty Omen, Sir, this Fish must bring, Of some great triumph, or some captive King; Or from the Pole of's British Chariot ARVIRAGUS shall fall; perceive you not, It is a forrein Monster, by the Scales Prickt-up on's back: VEIENTO only failes, In that he is not able to presage The Turbot's native climate and his age. Shall's cut him; speak? MONTANUS cryes, oh no, Twere a dishonour, Sir, to use him so; Let's have a thin-wall'd earthen vessell made, Wherein his whole circumf'rence may be lay'd,
Some rare PROMETHEUS now should mould the pot; With all speed let the wheel and clay be got; Henceforth the Potters, CAESAR'S Fish to fit, His Court may follow. This Vote carry'd it, Worthy the man, who th' old Court Riot knew, And NERO'S midnights, and a hunger new When Falern wine inflam'd the lungs: in all My time, his taste was most authenticall: If Lucrin Rocks or Circe's th' Oisters bred, Or were they with Richborough-water fed, He found at the first taste: and by the look Of Crab-fish, told upon what Coast 'twas took. The Councell rises; and the Lords receive Commands, the Room and th' Alban Tow'r to leave; To which in such haste and astonishment For them our mighty Generall had sent, As if he'd treat of something which the stern SICAMBRI, or the CATTI did concern; Or had receiv'd out of far distant Coasts Distracted Letters, brought by flying Posts. And would to heav'n he had spent all that time Thus innocently, when he robb'd our Clime
Of many a gallant and illustrious soul, Unpunish'd, or without the least controll: But he was lost when once the Clown began To fear him, he reveng'd the Noble-man. The Comment UPON THE FOURTH SATYR. VErse 1. Crispinus] In the beginning of Sat 1. he is only menti∣oned as Freed-man to Nero; but before this Satyr was written Nero had raised him to be Master or Generall of his Horse Guards; and at this time the Moor Crispinus was one of the Lords of the Councell to Domitian Caesar. Verse 5. Porticos.] When the Romans were at the height of wealth and pride, they expended vast summes of money in building ground-Galleries, standing upon Marble Pillars, of the form (as I suppose) of our Piazzas but longer and higher, as made to ride in, both for their Coaches, as here, and for their horses, Sat. 7. His House costs much, his Portico costs more Wherein he rides untill the showre be o're. Verse 8. Forum.] The City of Rome had six Forums or great Piazza's; The first was the Forum Romanum or Vetus, and in it the Comitium or their Westminster Hall, where their Courts of Justice sate; there was also the Rostra or Pulpits for Orations, and their old Exchange or Tabernae built
about it, with the Basilicae Pauli and other noble Buildings, Hen. Sal∣muth in Pancirol. lib. rerum deperdit. cap. de Basil. & Tabern. The se∣cond was the Forum Julium, built by Julius Caesar. The third was built by Aug. Caesar, and from him named Augusti Forum. The fourth Do∣mitian began, and Nerva finished: this they called Transitorium, being a Transitus or Thorough-fare into their Market-places: Martial calleth it Forum Palladium, because in the midst of it was the Temple of Pallas: Lips. de magnitud. Rom. l. 3. c. 7. The fifth was built by Trajan, where the Senate erected that Imperial Monument of Trajan's Columne, a Pil∣lar that was a hundred and fourty cubits high, wherein was carved all the battails and actions of the Emperor Trajan, which was finished two years after Juvenal writ the thirteenth Satyr; and therefore you see only a part of it in the Designe or brass-Cut before the second Satyr. The last was Forum Salustii, opening into the goodly fair Garden, called the Hor∣ti Salustini. Verse 11. A Vestal he deflowr'd.] The House that was dedicated to the Goddesse Vesta stood neer to the Temple of Castor. In this House at first four Virgins were cloistered, afterwards six: their Charge was to keep the sacred fire of Vesta, which if it went out would portend evill to the Romans, as they believed: their penalty for such neglect, was to be stript naked as farre as the waste, and then to be whipt by their Lady-superintendent: as for the fire, it was only to be kindled again from the beams of the Sun, which was done by a kinde of Burning-glass. They were admitted between six and eleven years of age, and were to remain in the Cloister thirty years; the first ten to learn mysterious Ceremonies, the next ten to practise them, and the last ten to instruct others. If in all these thirty years any Vestal was convicted of inchastity, she was led to
the Campus Sceleratus or Field of Execution, lying within the walls of Rome neer to the Colline Gate: Munster in sua Cosmog. there in her closs Chair let down into a Vault, wherein was a Couch, a Lamp burning, and a little meat: the hole they put her in was presently stopped up: Plutarch in Numa, and so this poor defloured Vestall like an Anchorite lived and died in her grave. The reason of this kinde of death and burial, was because they held it unlawfull to lay violent hands upon a Vestall, and unfit to burn her body, who had kept the sacred fire with no more sanctity. Verse 14. The Censor.] Domitian Caesar, that acting the Censor, had executed Cornelia a defloured Vestall according to the letter of the Law, and commanded Adulterers to be whipt to death in the Comitium, where the Judges sate. Verse 15. Titius.] Titius and Seius are the John a Nokes and John a Stiles of the Civil Law. Verse 19. Six thousand.] Six thousand Nummi or Sestertii made six Sestertia, being neer upon fifty pound sterling; and the Mullet weighed six pound, equall to the number of the Sestertia. Verse 28. Apicius,] The most noted Glutton that was ever recorded in History, he writ a volume yet extant of the art of Cookery. Seneca in his book of Consolation to Albina tells us, that Apicius lived in his time, and hanged himself, because when he took his accounts of an infinite summe of money which he had laid up only to maintain his Kitchen, he found the remainder to be but the tenth part. Verse 33. Province.] Provinces were all Countries out of Italy, to which the Romans sent a Praefect, Proconsul, or any other Gover∣nour.
Verse 40. Nilus,] The seven-channel'd River of Aegypt, inclosing the City of Canopus where Crispine was born. Verse 41. Calliope,] One of the Muses, Mother to the Poet Orpheus, ta∣ken to be the Inventress of Heroick Verse: Virg. in Epigram. Verse 43. Speak you Pierian Girls.] The nine Muses were called Pi∣erian, because Pierius begot them of Antiopa: Cic. 2. de natura deorum; but the Poets say they were so stiled from a rich Macedonian, that by his Wife Evippe had nine Daughters turned into Magpies by the nine victorious Muses, whom they had challenged to sing: Ovid. 5. Metam. Now when they sung, the subject-mattter was still fained, and therefore Juvenal sayes they must speak, because the storie is true. Verse 45. Our last Flavius] The Flavian Family, as it was Imperial, began in Vespasian and ended in Domitian, that by way of jeer was called bald Nero, for that he had all the ill qualities of his Predecessor Nero, and would have looked like him if he had not wanted his head of hair. Verse 47. Adriatick,] The Sea that parts Italy from Dalmatia, and is now called the Gulf of Venice. Verse 48. Greek Ancona,] The chief City of the Pisans, built by the Sicilians upon the Adriatick shoar, where the Emperor Trajan was at the charge of making a commodious Haven a work of great magnifi∣cence: Plin. lib. 3. cap. 13. The name of the City is Greek, shewing the figure of the place to be like a bended Elbow, which the Greeks call . Verse 50. Maeotis,] A Scythian Lake or Sea freezing in Winter, that in Summer dischargeth it self into the Euxine Sea by the Cimmerian Bosphorus. The fish there bred (as of a greater size then any other) is cal∣led Maeotick fish: Stephan. These straits of Bosphorus are to the South, at
the North is another Bosphorus (or Straits, where Cattel have adventured to swim over) called Thracius, which openeth into the Propontis, the South end whereof is called Hellespont, from whence to the Mediterranean, it bears the name of the Aegaean Sea. Verse 54. Chiefe Bishop.] There was in Rome a Colledge of Ponti∣fices or Bishops, consisting of four, the number appointed by Numa, chosen out of the Nobility, whereunto were added four more out of the Commons: Fenest. de Sacerd. These eight were the Major Bishops, to which Sylla added seven Minor Bishops: Rosin. Ant. lib. 3. cap. 22. This College of fifteen was exempted from all temporall Jurisdiction, and com∣missioned in their own Court of Judicature, to hear and determine the Causes of Priests and private Persons: the President of this Colledge was stiled Chief Bishop or Pontifex Maximus, a title that after the In∣auguration of the Roman Emperors, devolved to the Crown. Verse 60. Caesar's Vivaries.] The Emperor's Fish-ponds, where the great Turbot had been formerly inclosed, and from thence made an e∣scape into the Adriatick Sea, as the Informers Palfurius and Armillatus would pretend, to avoid the Law, knowing very well that by the Ci∣vill Law any man to his own use may take fishes which never belonged to any Pond, as ferae naturae, the wild creatures of nature. Verse 71. Lake.] Albane Lake. Verse 71. Robb'd Alba,] A City in Latium built by Ascanius Son to Aeneas, and by King Tullus Hostilius taken, sleighted, and robbed of all the Treasure and Reliques which the Trojans had there placed in the Temple of Vesta: only her fire was left, out of a superstitious fear that it boaded ill luck to have the Vestall fire extinguished in any place. Alba took its name from the white Sow with thirty Pigs sucking her, being
the first living thing the Trojans saw at their landing in Italy, Sat. 12. —Our white Land-mark then. The Albane Mountain came within their ken, That seat where young Julus pleas'd his minde, (Lavinium to his Step-mother assign'd) By th' o're-joy'd Trojans, from the white Sow nam'd, That from her thirty ne're-seen paps was fam'd. Verse 77. Caesar.] The word Caesar is put in upon my own account, for that used by my Author is Atrides, Agamemnon: So Juvenal here calls Domitian scoptically, as in the end of this Satyr he calls him our mighty General; and in the beginning of this Satyr, Chief Bishop, Pontifex Maximus; because in his Feasts he exceeded the Pontifices, from whom a great Supper was called Caena Pontifica by the Italians, that have now varied the phrase to buccone per Cardinale, a Morsel for a Cardinal. Verse 80. Genius.] The ancient Heathens called God Genius; after∣wards they took Genius for a subordinate Spirit, and thought every man at his nativity to have a good and a bad Genius assigned him: but some conceived a Genius to be the Spirit that stirs up men to pleasure▪ there∣fore amongst the Romans the time of feasting were called Genial dayes; and when they made great treatments, it was grown into a Proverb a∣mong them, that they met to indulge the Genius. Verse 92. Bayliffe.] Pegasus a great Civil Lawyer born in Alba, (where the great Turbot was brought to Domitian) now Praefectus Vrbis or Chancellor of Rome, all Causes of what nature soever within a hundred miles of Rome being heard in his Court, Fenestell. Alexand. Neopl. Sigon. But in the reign of the Tyrant Domitian this great Judge
stood only for a Cypher; and to be Praefect of Rome, was no more then to be Bayliffe of a Village. Verse 97. Crispus.] Vibius Crispus, a rich subtle and smooth-tongu'd Orator, but his abilities were more in private causes then in publick bu∣siness: Quintil. He was born at Placentia: Tacit. and lived to be foure∣score years old, in the several Courts of evill Emperors; yet he still kept in favour, by being (as the Marquess of Winchester in the like case said of himself) a Willow and not an Oak. In a Progress-time he followed Caesars Chariot on foot. When he was a Youth, Nero whispered him in the ear, and asked him, Crispus, hast thou ever enjoyed thy own Sister? he answered, not yet Sir: a cautious and a handsome return from one that would not own a crime he never committed, and yet durst not finde fault with any that should offend in the same kinde, it being Nero's Case. In Domitians time, being asked if any one were with the Emperor, Crispus answered, not a flie Sir: Sueton. This was a pleasant but a sharp reply; for Domitian in the beginning of his Empire, used every day to with∣draw for an hour only to kill flies. Crispus was twice Consull, twice mar∣ried, and left an Estate of 00 H. S. Verse 113. Acilius.] Acilius Glabrio, a Man of singular prudence and fidelity: Plin. He was Consul with Vlp. Trajan eight hundred fourty five years after Rome was built, at the very time when Domitian commanded himself to be called Lord and God: Eutrop. lib. 9. Sueton in Domit. That Acilius lived to be fourscore years old, and then sate in Councel about the Turbot, we have Juvenal's authority; but after this he was charged with designs of innovation; so was the Youth that came to the Councell with him, his Son Domitius, and both of them were con∣demned; yet was the old man's Sentence changed into Banishment, not
out of the Emperors mercy, but cruelty, that he might afflict himself with remembrance of the untimely death of his Son: who knowing his life was sought by Domitian at this time, soon after counterfeited mad∣ness, in hope that would take off the Tyrant, in whose sight he fought naked with Lions in the Albane Theater, where Domitian at his own charge brought wilde beasts to be slain, and killed a hundred with his own hands: Sueton. This Impeachment against the Father and Sonne pretended to be for innovation in the State, was really upon suspicion that the Son had been converted to the Christian Faith; as I was told in Oxford by a Gentleman of worth, assuring me that he had the authority of a great Author for it, which I thought to be Eusebius or Baronius, but having searched them both, I finde not Domitius recorded for a Martyr by either of them; and therefore in the Designe before this Satyr I only tell you, that some say he was a Christian. Verse 116. Old Lords shew'd like Prodigies long since.] Long before Domitian reigned, it was news in Rome to see an old Lord, for this bald Nero took his Pattern from Nero himself, qui nobilissimo cuique exitium destinabat, that singled out the noblest persons for destruction. Verse 124. A bearded King.] Tarquinius Superbus, whom Brutus be∣guiled, wore his beard long; for in his time the Barbers were not come over to Rome from Sicily. Verse 125. Rubrius,] That in his youth committed some such foul crime as pathick Nero did, and being come to mans Estate, was as bold a Writer of Satyrs against others, as Nero was against Quintinian a notorious Pathick: Lub. Verse 128. Montanus. Curtius Montanus (mentioned by Tacitus) a huge fat Glutton, and a great Master in the Art of Cookery, whose
belly Juvenal here only takes notice of, but leaves him not so; you will meet him again in this Satyr. Verse 130. Pompey.] Pompeius Ruffus, not so gallant and fine a Cour∣tier as the Arabarch Crispinus in his Oriental perfumes; yet was Pompey the subtler in whispering of accusations. Verse 132. Fuscus.] Cornelius Fuscus, that having only heard of bat∣tails, and studied stratagems of Warre within the marble walls of his Villa or Country-house, was sent General by Domitian against the Da∣cians, where his Army and Fuscus himself was lost. Verse 134. Veiento.] See the Comment upon the third Satyr. Verse 135. Catullus.] Catullus Messalinus a blinde man and a bloody Villain, whose informations cost many men their lives: Domitian used to cast him at great persons like a blinde dart that will spare no man: Plin. He was by this Emperor raised from begging at the foot of the Aricine Hill in the Via Appia, to be one of his Councellors of State, Domitian taking it for granted, that the tongue which begged so well would urge an accusation better. Verse 143. Cilicians.] Sword-players of Silicia whose art in fencing this blnde Parasite had commended upon the Theaters; as he had likewise praised the Engine (such as we have in Masks and Playes) that hoisted up the Boyes to the Clouds, or the blue Canvas which they called the Velaria, covering the top of the Theater: Xiphilin. Verse 146. Bellona.] Minerva Goddess of War, (Sister to Mars) stiled likewise Enyo and Pallas, whose Priests sacrificed their own blood to her, and immediately she so inspired them as to explane things present and foretell the future: before her Temple stood a Pillar called the Col∣lumna Bellica, whereon lay the Spear which the Faecealis or Herald took
in his hand when he denounced war: Alexander ab Alexandro, lib 2. cap. 12. Verse 150. Arviragus.] King of the South Britains youngest Son to Kymbeline, a great Enemy to the Romans in this Island, both in Domi∣tian's reign (when it seems he flourished) and in Claudius Caesar's, whose Daughter Genissa (if we may believe our British Historians that he had such a one) Arviragus married. Verse 159. Prometheus,] Son to Japet by his Wife Asia; an excel∣lent Potter he must needs be, for he was the first (according to the Poets) that made a man of clay: thus runs the Fable. Minerva, extremely ta∣ken with his ingenious workmanship, promised to give him any thing the Gods had that would conduce to the perfection of his Art; and when Prometheus answered, that he could not conjecture how Celestial things would advantage him unless he took a view of them, Minerva carried him up to heaven, where finding all the heavenly bodies to be animated by fire, he thought that would be most instrumentall, and therefore with a Rule which he had in his hand he touched a wheel of the Sun's Chariot, and so with his Rule burning, he brought down to the Earth fire where∣with he made his man of clay. Jupiter, inraged at this presumptious theft, gave a Box to Pandora to be delivered to her Husband Epimetheus (Brother to Prometheus) which being opened by him, filled the world with innumerable diseases and calamities; as for Prometheus, Mercury was commanded to binde him to the Mountain Caucasus, where an Eagle continually fed upon his heart: but afterwards, when Jupiter fell in love with Thetis, and declared that he would marry her, Prometheus, skilfull in future events, deterred him from the Match, because he said it was decreed by the Fate, that the Sonne born of Thetis should be a greater
Person then his Father; and Jupiter remembring how he had deposed his own Father Saturn, feared the same measure from his Son; and there∣fore chose to loose Thetis rather then his possession of the Heavens. In recompence of the service done him in this discovery, Jupiter sent Hercules to Caucasus, where he killed the Eagle and unchained Prometheus. If I have trespassed upon your patience with this tedious Fable, I doubt not but to please you again with the Mythologie of it. Prometheus was the first that taught the Assyrians Astrology, which he had studied upon the top of the high Mountain Caucasus, not farre from Assyria and neer to the Heavens, from whence he could the easier discover the magnitude rising and setting of the Starres. An Eagle was said to tire upon his heart, because it was consumed with care, and watch∣ing the motions of the celestial bodies: and being these were the acts of Prudence and Reason, Mercury, the God of both, was said to have chain∣ed him to the Mountain: moreover for that he shewed to men how thunder and lightning was generated, it was reported that he brought fire down from Heaven: N. Comes Mythol. lib. 4. c. 6. Verse 165. Falerne Wine.] That the Grapes growing upon the Fa∣lerne Mountains in Campania made a rare Wine in Juvenal's time, you may know by his frequent use of the word Falern, and at this day it is the absolute best Wine in Italy, as they say that have met with it where it is pure, which is only in the Cardinals or some great Princes Cel∣lars. Verse 167. Lucrin Rocks or Circe's.] The Lucrin Rocks were in the Bay of Lucrinum in Campania; the Rocks of Circe were about Cajeta, where was a Temple dedicated to Circe, and a Mountain that bore her name.
Verse 168. Richborough] in Kent. Verse 176. Sicambri,] The People of Gelderland, between the Rivers of the Mose and the Rhene. Verse 176. Catti,] Germans, now Subjects to the Landgrave of Hessen called Hassi, against whom Domitian made one voluntary expedition, as he did another of necessity against the Dacians, now the Hungarians, where his whole Legion was overthrown, and the General Fuscus slain, ut supr. Verse 178. Flying Posts] Some conceive that Juvenal meant Carrier-Pigeons; but he calls them not flying Posts either for the speed of bird or man; but because in Packets of Overthrows or Insurrections, the Ro∣mans used to stick a Feather: in expresses of victory, a Lawrel: M. V. C. quoted by Lubin.
Figura Quinta. Montanus, dubiae solvens aenigmata coenae, Hunc figi narraret 1 Aprum Calydonis in agris; Ionio 2 Mullum, tot abhinc per saecula, nasci Aequore; 3 Muraenam grandem Scyllae que caninos Rictus & stomachum Siculo irritâsse profundo: Alite multiplici 4 septum Jecur éque tonitru Natis tuberibus, Judaeus & altor, & anser, Dictetur: 5 Squillâ 6 Virronem noverit emptum: Has, unde hoc oleum, Venafri produxit olivas Campus; & Albanae 7 succus praenobilis uvae Spumanti flagrat paterâ, 8 Ganymede ministro. Depascit panes Libycos 9 Conviva superbus, Cui datur ad primos locupleti accumbere lectos. Narratu facile est, quid mordeat ultimus hospes; 10 Frusta, & relliquias anguillae rodit, & unguem 11 Cammare parve tuum, putres qui spirat amurcas: Aut potat faeces, medio quas territus haustu Dejicit, attonitus 12 Maurum spectare ferentem. Virro & 13 Virrones solùm poma aurea gustant: Cùm Trebio & 14 Trebiis, quae projiciuntur, acescant. Sic verè coenat dives, ridetur egenus; Neglectúsque Cliens macer est, epulante Patrono.
The fifth Designe. MOntanus that, but tasting any dish, Knew th' age and climate of the flesh or fish; Would tell you, Calidonia fed this 1 Boar; That 2 Mullet was upon th' Ionian shoar Spawn'd ten years since; and that this huge 3 Lamprey Made Scylla bark in the Sicilian Sea. This great 4 Goose-liver, with fowls circumscrib'd, The Jews cramm'd; and that 5 Squil rich Virro brib'd. He would pronounce, 'twas the Venafrian soil Where th' Olives grew which made this precious 6 oile; That here old juice press'd out of Albane 7 Grapes Is fill'd by Asian 8 Boyes with lovely shapes. No 9 Loaf but of the purest Libian bread, Standing before the first 10 and second Bed: But no man needs interpret what he gnaws On the third Bed, Crusts, Eel-bones, 11 Cra-fish claws Dipt in Lamp-oile; or that he spilt his draught Of 12 dregs, scar'd at the Moor by whom 'twas brought. Great Virro's stomach golden 13 Pipins close, Green Crabs the Butler to mean Trebius 14 throws. The Rich in earnest dine, the Poor in jest, The Client's Fast sets off the Patron's Feast.
The Manners of Men. THE FIFTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. The Client Trebius is reprov'd, That will with no affront be mov'd His Patron's Table to forbear: Where he but seldome must appear; And then, poor Creature, only sees The precious Wine, but drinks the Lees; At Virro's Feast eats scraps, or sterves: Nor better, who brooks this, deserves. ARt thou not yet asham'd? dost thou intend Thy Life, thy SUMMUM BONUM, should depend Upon another's Trencher? art thou able To take more scoffs then were at CAESAR'S Table,
By servill GALBA, or SARMENTUS borne? I'd scarce believ't, wer't thou a witness sworn, I know the belly's cheaply fed; put case Thou had'st not to fill up that empty space: Is there no Hole, no Bridge, no Cottage-nook? Art thou with a meal's injury so took, So pleas'd with hunger? more gentile it were To shrug thy shoulders and gnaw dog-crusts there. First, when to supper thou art bid, thou hast The full reward of all thy service past; A great friends bounty, meat; he thinks so, though He bids thee seldome, yet he thinks it so: After some Months neglect, if he admit A Client, lest there should want one to sit On's third bed, he sayes, Wee'l together eat: What would'st thou more? thy wishes are compleat. TREBIUS oblig'd, has that for which he must Break sleep, and run ungarter'd and untrust, For fear lest his saluting rivals may Have fill'd the ring by dawning of the day; Or at the time when the Sev'n-starres doe roll Their cold and sluggish Wain about the Pole.
But then, what kinde of supper is't? thy cup Is fill'd with wine moist wool would scarce drink up; The Guests transform'd to CYBEL'S Priests you see: Made with foul words their first encounters be; Anon the cups, they drink in, flie about, And thou thy wound wip'st with a crimson clout: How often doe the Libertines and You Pots of Saguntum furiously imbrue? What th' untrim'd Consuls saw, his servant skinks: The grape prest in the Civill Warres he drinks; Nor with one little Taster-full would part, To's friend, that has the trembling of the heart. From th' Albane or the Setine hills, next day, He something drinks, whose age hath took away The dusty Hogs-head's date, and climate; such As THRASEAS and HELVIDIUS would touch, When they drank Crown'd, on the Nativities Of CASSIUS and both the BRUTUSES. VIRRO'S own wine's into large Amber put, Or sea-green Berill into fascets cut: They trust not thee with Gold, or if they do't Sometimes, a Keeper is annext unto't,
That counts the Gems, marks where thy sharp nail aims; Excuse him, there the pretious Jasper flames; For VIRRO, to be a la mode, now brings These stones into his Bolls out of his Rings: Which in his Hilts the youth, prefer'd before The jealous-spirited HIARBAS, wore: Thou drainst a foul four-snouted glasse, that's call'd The Beneventine Cobler, old and gall'd; And going to the Glass-house every day For scraps of brimstone to be truckt away. With wine or meat if thy Lord's stomach glow, Boild water's brought him, cool'd in Scythian snow: Did I complain none of the same wine came To your share, 'las your water's not the same? Thy Cup is fill'd by the Getulian Boor; Or raw-bon'd fingers of the Blackamoor, Whom i'th rough Latin way, at dead of night, To meet by th' Urns, would put thee in a fright. The flow'r of Asia on thy Patron waits, Bought at a price would purchase the Estates Of TULLUS, warlike ANCUS: To such Boyes, In few words, all our Kings had were but toyes;
Thou therefore when (th' art drie) must call to thee Thy black Getulian Ganimed; can he, He that cost thousands, wine for poor men fill? High looks become his form and youth; when will This serve thee? or that Lord of cold and hot, The Yeoman of the mouth, brew thee a pot? He scorns th' old Client should his pains command, And is not pleas'd thou sitt'st, when he must stand; Great houses with proud Servants swarm. How those Grumble to reach thee bread, a knife would pose: Hard mouldy Crusts, which doe the Grinders spoil, And yet are hardly enter'd with long toil? Thy Lord's loavs are of soft and snow-white flower, Keep-in thy hand, rev'rence the Butler's power: Should'st thou be bold with it in jeast, a Clown Stands o're thee, that will make thee lay it down; Remember, sawcie Sir, where you were bred, And know the colour of your houshold bread: Was 't this for which I left (so man'y a time) My Wife, the cold Mount Esquiline to climb, When Winter-JOVE pour'd down his cruel rain, And my fur'd Coat did rain it o're again?
See how thy Lord's long Squill bears down the dish Garnish'd with sparagus; and how the fish, With his proud tail, the Table seems to scorn, When in the hands of the tall Servant born. Thy Crab, with half an egge about it shred, Comes in a Plate: a Supper for the dead. Upon his Fish Venafrian oyle he poures, Lamp-oyle dawbs over thy pale Coliflowers: For, stuff brought in MICIPSA'S picked cane Thy Sawcer fills; for which all Rome refrain The Bath, stunk up by BOCHAR, to come nigh; From which the very Lybian Serpents flie. Thy Patron's Mullet CORSICA sends in; Or Tauromenian Rocks, when our's begin To fail: when we, our luxury to please, Have for the Shambles robb'd the neighb'ring Seas, Plunder'd the Tyrrhene Fishes, spoild our fry; The Provinces our riot must supply; Thence LENAS sends AURELIA Donatives Wherewith she serves the Market; but he gives To VIRRO a huge Lamprey from the Straits Of Sicily: for when the South-winde waits
For's Goal-delivery, and his moist wings dries: Carybdis our bold Fisher-men despise. Thy Eel is Cosin to the slender Snake, Which th' Ice of Tiber did so spotted make: That fed with mud, and in the Kennel kept, Through the Suburra's Common-shoar oft crept. I'd speak a word in VIRRO'S eare; none crave What SENECA, brave PISO, COTTA gave To their poor friends (for great as Fasces then Or Titles, bounty shin'd in Noble-men;) Only a civill usage we intreat, Let's eat, at the same Table, the same meat: Do this and be (what most to be contend) Rich to thy self, poor only to thy friend. To VIRRO a great Goose's liver's set, Girt with cramm'd Fowle, or rarities as great: A wilde Boar foaming lies upon his board, Worthy the fair-hair'd Meleager's sword: Then, if't be Spring time, the par'd Mushrom's drest, If wish'd-for thunder make a greater feast: ALLEDIUS cries, your Corn you Lybians spend; Unyoak your Oxen, so you Mushroms send.
Mean time, lest any thing omitted be, To put thee out of patience; thou shalt see The Carver, flourishing his knife, begin, As if he were to dance a Matakin: Nor ends till all his Masters tricks are done, Till over all the dishes he hath run, And shew'd you what the diff'rent postures are Of cutting up a Pullet and a Hare. But thou, as HERCULES dragg'd CACUS, must Drawn by the heels out of the dores be thrust, Souldst thou, as if thou hadst three names, repine; To thee when offers VIRRO his own wine, Or pledges in thy dregs? which of you are So rash, so lost, that to your Monarch dare Say, drink Sir: many words may not be spoke By a poor Fellow in a tatter'd Cloak. But should some God, or God-like man then fate More kind, give thee a Gentleman's estate; Poor Rogue, how high from nothing would'st thou rise? How gracious would'st thou be in VIRRO'S eyes? Give TREBIUS this, set TREBIUS that meat: Wilt please you (Brother) of these entrails eat?
Oh money! he this honour does to thee: 'Tis VIRRO and thy self that Brothers be. But would'st thou be one of the better sort, A Lord, and thy Lord's Prince, about thy Court There must no young AENEAS playing run; Nor daughter, more a darling then a son? A barren wife makes a friend sweet and dear. Yet if thy MYGALE should children bear Now thou art rich, set on thy knee three boyes: Ev'n in thy pretty Parrat-Babes he joyes. For the green Stomacher his Servant goes; The small nuts, and the penny he bestowes, That's ask'd him, when this Begger of small sums, This little Parasite to his table comes. To poor friends poys'nous Toad-stools they afford; The Mushrooms are serv'd only to the Lord: Pure Fungo's, such as CLAUDIUS eat: before His wife's came: after which he ne're eat more. VIRRO, and all the VIRRO'S apples taste, Whose smell alone to feed upon thou hast: You'd think perpetuall Autumn sent-in these From the robb'd Orchard of th' Hesperides.
Thou eat'st Crabs, such as he gnaws in the Works, That under's shield and in his helmet lurks: And fears the whip still when he learns the art, Out of the hairy Kid to cast his dart. That VIRRO spares his purse thou maist believe; But he does this only to make thee grieve. What Comedy, what Mimick can excite More laughter then the coz'ned appetite? Know, 'tis his aim in tears to see thee wash Thy rage, to hear thy longing grinders gnash. Your Lord's Guests, Freemen you your selves doe think: He thinks you Slaves, took with his Kitchin's stink; And he thinks right; for, what poor man that had Hetrurian golden bubbles, when a Lad, Or wore their figure, with a poor devise In Leather made, that can endure it twice? Oh, but a hopefull supper fails us now; You'll see another time he will allow Some part of the reversions of a Hare; We shall a Chick, or the Boar's haunches share. This makes you watch his eye with untouch'd bread. Hee's wise that lets thee be no better fed;
For if thou canst with all these scornes sit down, In time thou'lt let him shave and crack thy Crown; And take a good sound whipping in the end: Worthy of such a Feast, and such a Friend. The Comment UPON THE FIFTH SATYR. VErse 5. Galba.] Apicius Galba, an excellent Droll in Tiberius Caesar's time: Martial in his Epigrams names him very of∣ten. Sarmentus was such another piece of impudence, in the reign of Augustus Caesar, and often came to his Table, where he (be∣ing a Roman Knight) to the dishonour of his quality endured all manner of affronts and scorns, yet at length by good drolling insinuated himself into the Emperor's favour. The Scuffle between Sarmentus and Messius Cicerra is described by Horace in his Journall, lib. 1. Sat. 5. Verse 7. The belly's cheaply fed.] A little contents nature: Senec. in his Epistles. Nature requires bread and water, no man as to these is poor. Wherein a man can limit his desires he may boast himself to be as hap∣py as Jove. Again he saith, Nature appoints but a little, and is conten∣ted with it: the belly hears no Precepts; it asks and calls, but is no trou∣blesome Creditor, if you pay what you owe, not what it covets. Again, it is a high pleasure if you can be content with such food as you can never be deprived of by the iniquity of Fortune.
Verse 19. On's third Bed.] In the Triclinium or Roman Dining-room, was a Table in fashion of a half-Moon or Hemicycle, against the round part whereof they set three Beds, every one containing three persons when they had their full number; the Hemicycle being left for the Waiters. Verse 22. Saluting Rivals.] His fellow Clients, that put on their cur∣sory Gowns to bid good morrow, sometimes by break of day, to their Patrons; or Patronesses, I mean rich Ladies that were Childless, such as Modia and Albina: Sat. 3. For fear lest his Collegue the Tribune may Wish Modia or Albina first good day. Sometimes at midnight, as here. —When the Sev'n-starres doe roll Their cold and sluggish Wain about the Pole. Both times are taken notice of by Martial: Mane vel 'a media nocte togatus ero. By day-break or at midnight I'll be gown'd. Verse 29. Cybel's Priests.] See the Comment upon the second Satyr, where you will finde the Priests of Cybele to be an Order of Rogues, Drunkards and Gluttons, therefore very likely to quarrel and fight a∣bout their victuals. Verse 33. Libertines.] A Libertine was properly the Issue of a Freed-man and a Freed-woman, and the Son whose Father and Mother were both Libertines; nay, if the Mother only were free-born, was called In∣genuus: but after the Censorship of Appius Caecus, Liberti and Libertini signified the same degree of freedome, and Ingenuus was taken for one born free, whether their Parents were Freed-men or the Sons of Freed-men:
Justin Inst. l. 1. tit. de Ingenuis: See Franc. Sylv. in Catilinar. 4. Verse 34. Pots of Saguntum.] Course earthen Pots made in Spain at Saguntum, a City famous for holding out against Hannibal: See Sat. 15. Verse 35. Vntrim'd Consuls,] That wore beards like their Kings. Verse 39. Albane.] The Albane Hills bore a very pleasant Grape: Plin. and the Vines there growing have not yet degenerated; for, the Vino Albano is now the best meat-wine in Rome. Verse 39. Setine Hills.] Setia the City that denominates these Hills, lies not far from Tarracina in Campania: Martial lib. 13. Pendula Pampineos quae spectat Setia campos. Setia that hangs o're the Pampinian Medes. The Wine that came from these Mountains was in great esteem with Augustus Caesar, and Regis ad Exemplum with Juvenal: Sat. 10. —When thou rich Setine Wine dost hold Sparkling midst Diamonds in a Boll of Gold. Verse 41. Date, and Climate.] The Romans writ upon the Vessels in their Cellars (as the Officres of our English Kings set down in their ac∣counts) where the wine grew, and what day of the Moneth it came in. Verse 42. Thraseas and Helvidius.] Thraseas Paetus was Son in Law to Helvidius Priscus; both would as gladly have laid down their lives to preserve Rome from the tyranny of Nero, as D. Junius Brutus ventured his to free the Romans from Tarquin; or M. Brutus and Cassius theirs to deliver their Country from the encroachment of I. Caesar. Tharseas was a Stoick, and accordingly he behaved himself at his death; for when the Of∣ficer told him from Nero, that he must die, with great constancy he repres∣sed the tears of his Family, and chearfully holding forth his arme, when the floor was full of his blood, turning to Demetrius the Cynick, with
the courage of Socrates, he said, This blood we offer as a Libation to Jove the deliverer: Tacit. lib. 16. Helvidius Priscus, suspected upon the same account, was banished Italy by Nero; and after his death repealed by Galba: See Tacit. Verse 43. Drank Crown'd.] When the Romans indulged or sacrifi∣ced to the Genius (which was, as aforesaid, either at the Nativities or Marriages of themselves, or those they honoured) it was their custome to crown their heads with cooling flowers to allay the heat of the wine, and by binding of their fore-heads to suppress the fumes then ascending. Verse 46. Beril.] A Precious-stone often mentioned in sacred Scrip∣ture. Verse 53. —The Youth prefer'd before The jealous spirited Hiarbas.—] Aeneas, (See Sat. 1.) in whose time, when fighting was in fashion, the Hilts of Swords were set with pretious-stones: Virg. Aeneid lib. 4. —Stellatus Jaspide fulva Ensis erat.— —Bright Jasper sparkled in his Hilts. but in Juvenal's dayes, when fighting in the field was out of date in Rome, and eating and drinking only in request, it was the mode to take out the Gems from their Hilts, and set them in their Bolls. Verse 56. Beneventine Cobler,] An ugly Glass that bore the name of Vatinius the Drunken Cobler of Beneventum; and the four noses of it were studed and bossed like his nose: Martial. Verse 63. Getulian Boor.] A Negro of Getulia in Africa. Verse 67. Flower of Asia.] My Author means not the whole, but that part of Asia (properly so called) within the Trojan Dominions,
which took this name from Asius the Philosopher: Suid. After the Ro∣mans were made Lords of those Territories, by the gift of King Attalus, when they had brought them into the form of a Province, they called it Asia: Strab. lib. 13. so that the Flower of Asia signifies the loveliest Boyes or Ganymeds of the Country about Troy, where Ganymed himself was born, as you will see in the third Note following. Verse 69. Tullus.] Tullus Hostilius, the third King of Rome, that took, sackt, and demolished the City of Alba, as in the Comment upon the fourth Satyr; a Prince no less active then Romulus. He revived the Roman courage buried in sloath, and the arts of peace: and lest they should want imployment, took occasion to quarrel with his Neigh∣bours: Liv. He first reduced Coyn to certain rates: He brought in the Consuls Chariot-chair, or Sella Curulis or Eburnea, so called, because it was made of Ivory, and carried about in a Chariot. The Lictors were his Officers. He invented the Toga Picta and Praetexta; the first being a Gown imbroidered in figures, was worn in Triumph, the other (guarded with purple Silk) by noble mens Sons: and from Hetruria (now the Dutchie of Florence) he brought the golden Bullas or Bubbles, which in their infancy they wore about their Necks: See Macrob. lib. 1. Saturn. Verse 69. Warlike Ancus] Ancus Martius fourth King of the Romans, Numa's Daughters Sonne; he subdued the Latins, inlarged the City of Rome, took-in the Aventine and Martial Mounts, and with a wooden Bridge joyned the Janiculum to Rome. He extended the Roman Limits to the Sea-coast, where he built the City of Ostium. He made the first Prison that ever was in Rome, and the number of that one Prison was not multiplied in the Reigns of the three Kings his Suc∣cessors, nor a long while after; as you may see in the end of Sat. 3.
Verse 72. Getulian Ganymed.] Ganymed was Son to Tros King of Troy, so sweet a Boy that Jupiter fell in love with him; and, as he was hunting upon the Mountain Ida, made his Eagle seize and carry him to Heaven: where for his sake Jupiter put off Hebe, Juno's Daughter, that till then filled his Nectar; and gave his Cup-bearer's place to Ganymed. The Mythological sense of this Fable is, that the divine Wisdome loves a wise man, and that he only comes neerest to the nature of God: Cicer. lib. 2. Tusculan: But this Negro, this Getulian Ganymed, came neerest the nature of Pluto, and might have been the Devil's Cup-bearer. Verse 87. Remember.] These are the words of a proud controlling Waiter at the Table, answered (in the next verse but one) by the poor upbraided Client. Verse 90. Mount Esquiline,] Where many Patricians had houses; so had some Greek Mountebanks: See the Comment upon the third Satyr. Verse 98. A Supper for the Dead.] The Romans used to bring to a dead man's Monument a little Milk, Honey, Wine, Water, and an Olive: Apulei. thus they appeased the Manes or Ghosts: See Lips. l. 7. Tacit. Verse 99. Venafrian Oyle.] The Oyle made at Venafrum (a City of Campania) the purest in all Italy, mentioned likewise by Horace and Martial. Verse 101. Micipsa.] Micipsa and Bochar were the names of two Kings, this of Aegypt, that of Numidia. It seems the Oyle that came from their Countries was so fulsom, as the very African Serpents would not endure the smell of that which their own Country-men used in the Baths at Rome.
Verse 105. Corsica,] An Island in the Ligustick Sea, lying North and South between Italy and Sardinia, from which it is 60 furlongs distant: Plin. lib. 3. cap. 4. it is environed VVest and North by the Ligustick Sea, on the East it hath the Tyrrhene Sea, on the South the Pelagus or main Sea: Ptol. c. 5. l. 2. Verse 106. Tauromenian Rocks.] The Sea coast neer Tauromenium in Sicily. Verse 111. Lenas,] One of the Haeredipitae or Fishers for Legacies, that bought up the Cream of the Market to present to Childless persons: This was a rooking complement in fashion with the Romans: Sat. 6. But Ursid likes the Julian Law, intends To get an heir, and lose the gifts he sends, That courts him with the Shamble's rarest things, The Mullet, and great Turtle without Wings. Verse 111. Aurelia,] A rich childless woman presented by Lenas with so many Shambles-rarities, more then she could spend in her house, that with the overplus she served the Market. Verse 120. Suburra.] See the beginning of the third Satyr. Verse 122. Seneca,] A Spaniard, born at Corduba, he was a Stoick and Tutor to the Emperor Nero, that having raised him to so vast an Estate, that the calling in of his bank of money in Britain, caused a Rebellion; at last, suspected to be one of the Plotters in Piso's conspiracy, Nero commanded that he should bleed to death: His works are extant which shew his excellence of Learning in Morall and Naturall Philosophy: and though some have aspersed him, as a covetous wretch, I think him to be fully vindicated in the noble mention here made of him by my Au∣thor.
Verse 122. Piso.] C. Piso Calfurnius lived in the reign of Claudius Caesar: Prob. he was adopted by Galba; magnificent in his bounty both to friends and strangers: Tacit. At his Country-house Nero often recre∣ated himself: idem. Verse 122. Cotta.] Aurelius Cotta a munificent person contemporary with Seneca and Piso. Verse 132. Meleager,] Son to Oeneus, King of Calidonia, by his Wife Althaea; that as soon as she was delivered of him, imagined she saw the three fatall Sisters holding in their hands a Brand, and that she heard them say, when that fire-stick should be burned out the Childe should die: The Destinies then vanishing, the Brand was left, which Althaea extinguished, and kept it with great care. Meleager being now grown a man, it fortuned that his Father, sacrificing to the Gods, offered of his fruits to all the Deities, Diana only omitted; this neglect so incensed her, that she sent a wilde Boar which destroyed the whole Country of Aeto∣lia. Meleager with his Mistress Atalanta (followed by all the gallant Youth of Greece) hunted this Boar, and slew him, presenting his head to Atalanta (the Daughter of Jasius King of Argos) that first hit the Monster with an arrow. This Present was resented with such a strange animosity by his Mother's Brothers Plexippus and Toxeus (they as well as she having ventured their lives in the Chase) that they attemp∣ted to take her head; which so inraged her Servant Meleager, that he slew them both, and immediately married Atalanta. The news flying to Althaea, that both her Brothers were slain by her Sons hand; in her fu∣ry she threw the Brand into the fire, and as it burned so did the bowels of Meleager, the Brand and he in the same instant dying: Ovid Me∣tam. lib. 8. Althaea to revenge her self upon her Sonne with fearfull
execrations prayed for his death to Pluto and Proserpine: Hom. there∣fore the story of the Brand only signifies her curses and the Magick which she practised: Sabin. Verse 133. Spring-time.] The best Mushromes grow in Africa, in the Spring of the year, immediately after thunder; which though it blast the Corn, is notwithstanding wished-for by such Voluptuaries as Alledius, that had rather have the Lybians to send their Mushroms to Rome then their Corn. Verse 145. Cacus,] The Aventine Shepherd (the great Gandfather of the Bandetti or Italian Outlawes) from whose robberies the Latines could secure neither their own nor strangers goods; so that when Her∣cules passed through Latium with droves of Cattel which he had got from Geryon in Spain; at Mid-night Cacus took them out of the Pa∣sture; and lest he should be trackt by the Beasts feet, he dragged them by the tails into his Den. Hercules rising by day-break, and finding by his eye that he wanted some of his number, took a view of the Rocks and Caves about the place, to discover by the footing, if any of his Cattel had straggled thither; but when he saw by the print of their hoofs that they all went from the Caves, not towards them, he knew not what to think of it; and being about to remove, his Oxen (that wanted their fellowes) began to bellow, and were answered by those in Cacus his Den: thither went Hercules, and was resisted by Cacus; that endeavou∣ring to obstruct his entry, was knockt down dead with his Club (and it seems dragged out by the heels) Liv. lib. 1. Virg. Aeneid. lib. 8. Verse 163. Aeneas] Juvenal tells the Client Trebius, that if he should grow rich, and have a Court like Queen Dido's, yet (if he mean that his Patron Virro shall be one of his Courtiers) he must not wish as she
did to have a young Aeneas; for A barren Wife makes a Friend sweet and dear. Notwithstanding if Mygale, the Wife of Trebius, should bring him three young Aeneases, Virro would make much of them all, as he did of their rich Father, and for the same consideration, Viz. Oh money! he this honour does to thee: 'Tis Virro and thy self that Brothers be. Verse 171. Claudius.] Claudius Caesar, whose Armie brought into his o∣bedience the Isles of the Orcades: He was a dull sottish Prince, which his Empress Messalina presumed upon, or else she had not dared in his life time to marry her self publickly to C. Silius: Tacit. Annal. lib. 11. Juvenal Sat. 10. This was told him by his Freed-man Narcissus, that governed him in chief, and commanded him to take off her head, Sat. 14. After her death, his Freed-men Narcissus, Calistus and Pallas held a Councell about another VVife in her place, and the last carried it for his dear Mistress Agrippina. She was Neece to Claudius, and confidently, be∣fore she was his Empress, took upon her the Authority of a VVife: Tacit. Annal. lib. 12. c. 1. VVhen he had married her, she made him betroath his Daughter Octavia to her Son Domitius; and soon after, by the help of her Favourite Pallas, got him to adopt her Son Domitius by the name of Nero; and then she had no further service to command him in this world; therefore (making Locusta poison one of his beloved Mushromes, Sat. 5.) she sent him into the next world, and so he descended into Hea∣ven, Sat 6. See Seneca in his Drollery upon the death of Claudius Caesar, where he sayes he went up to Heaven, but by a Decree of the Gods was thrust down to Hell. Verse 180. Hesperides.] The three Daughters of Hesperus Brother to
King Atlas their names were Aegle, Arethusa and Hesperethusa. The Poets tell us these Sisters had an Orchard where the trees bore golden fruit, which was guarded by a Dragon, till Hercules slew him and carried the golden Apples for a Present to his Stepfather Eurysttheus. Some say this Dragon was only the doubling of a point at Sea (the shore winding and foaming like a Dragon) which landed Hercules in a Country full of Olive trees with fruit upon them as yellow as Gold: Plin. Solin. See Vir. and N. Comes lib. 7. Mythol. cap. 7. Verse 194. Hetrurian Bubbles.] Golden Bullaes or Bubbles, worn a∣bout the necks of Noble-mens Children, by the appointment of Tullus Hostilius: imitating the great Persons in this fashion, poor people hung about their Childrens necks a leathern Bubble.
Figura Sexta. POsthume, 1 dic, quid agis? seris an ineptus in annis Ambis tu teneram juvenili in flore puellam, Quae lasciva fugit, ducens hâc fraude sequacem? At tu, si sapias, 2 Juvenali attende monenti: En Capitolinus stat 3 mons ibi, cautibus horrens; Inde fluit 4 Tiber, hinc abituram cernis 5 Amicam: Elige de tribus hisce tibi, vel saxa, vel undas, Et te praecipitans canorum consule famae: Credêris demens, nisi vincla jugalia vites, 6 Urbicus emulget cum vaccam pauperis Aeliae, Et cantat Mimus; 7 Paris irritátque Tragoedus Troiadas, Proceres ubi magno agit histrio plausu. Adde quod ad Phariam, (lippū comitata 8 Lanistam Nupta Senatoris) properaverit 9 Hippia cymbam. "Ursidium exemplis absterret talibus Autor, "Conjugii vetulus nè porrigat ora capistro: "Non quod femineum Satyrâ perstringat honorē "Paucarum ob maculas, quas ipso in sole notâris, "Nec tamen eclipsin faciunt hae; sed ne{que} splendet, "Vt radiat coelo muliebris fama Latino; "Astruit Vxorum Lucretia morte pudorem; "Portiá que abserptis Viduarum est gloria flammis.
The sixth Designe. HOW 1 Posthumus? thou wilt not sure engage To this young Beauty in thy drooping age? She's coy, and shuns thee only to entice: But follow thy friend 2 Juvenal's advice. Here hangs the steep 3 Tarpeian Rock: here flowes Swift 4 Tiber: there thy 5 Iberina goes: Chuse two of three, a precipice, or wave; Casting thy self away, thy credit save: We shall conclude thee mad, to marry now When 6 Urbicus the Clown milks Aelia's Cow; And 7 Paris the young Player gains the hearts Of Ladies, How? with acting great mens parts: Whil'st th' ill-look'd Fencer 8 Sergius steals aboard Fair 9 Hippia, marri'd to an ancient Lord. By th' Author such examples are pickt out To cross her marriage, whom th' old man's about: Not to defame her sex, for these few blots; Ev'n in the Sun we have discover'd spots, Yet still he shines in heav'n, and not more fair Then Ladies fames flie in the Roman aire; Where Lucrece seal'd the faith of Wives in blood, Portia the constancy of Widowhood.
The Manners of Men. THE SIXTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. The Roman Women full of Taints And Blemishes, the Poet paints; And sends them represented thus To old Ursidius Posthumus: Of whom he does compassion take, And counsels him his choice to make Of any death, ere such a Life As he must look for with a Wife. I Grant that Chastity when SATURN reign'd Was seen on earth, when one cold Cave contain'd A little Houshold fire, and Lar; and made For Shepherds and their Flocks a common Shade;
When first the Mountain-wife leaves sedges spread, And skins of neighb'ring beasts, to make her bed: Not like thee CYNTHIA; nor her, that cry'd And swel'd her fair eyes when her Sparrow dy'd: But whil'st man Acorns belcht, his wife (more wilde) Had her full breasts drunk up by her great childe. For in th' earth's nonage, under heavn's new Frame No vice they knew that from th' Oak's rupture came, Or clay-born had no Parents; and yet much Old virtue might remain, at least some touch Ev'n under JOVE: but ere JOVE had a beard, Ere Greeks by others heads swore; when none fear'd A thief would rob him of his hearbs or trees, But liv'd without inclosure; by degrees To Heav'n then Chastity ASTRAEA led; And so together the two Sisters fled. POSTHUME, 'tis old to steal anothers sweets, To slight the Genius of the sacred sheets: The Iron Age brought forth all other crimes, Adultery was in the Silver times: Yet Meetings, Contracts, Joyntures motion'st thou In our Age? Nay, the Master-barber now
Trims thee; perhaps thy Pledge her finger fits. Wilt thou wive POSTHUME? sure thou hadst thy wits? What snake-hair'd Fury haunts thee? canst obey A Wife, so many halters in thy way? So many windows open, those so high; The opportune Aemilian Bridge so nigh? If in this choice of deaths none pleasing be, Think, is't not better thy Boy sleep with thee, Thy Boy that reads no curtain-Lecture, fains No coyness, till presented; nor complains Because thou spar'st thy back, or that so oft As he commands thou dost not come aloft? But URSID likes the Julian Law, intends To get an Heir; and lose the gifts he sends, That courts him with the Shambles rarest things, The Mullet, and great Turtle without wings; What is not possible if URSID wed? If this old Stallion thrust his foolish head Into the Marriage halter, that lay prest So oft, half smother'd, in LATINU'S Chest? Besides his Wife must be of th' old chaste strain: He's mad, good Surgeon, strike his median vein.
Adore JOVE prostrate on's Tarpeian hill Nice man; to JUNO a guilt Heifer kill, If thou hast luck to Nun's flesh: so few are Fit to touch CERE'S Veil, their Fathers dare Not kiss them. Thy dore-posts with Garlands crown, Thick Ivy to thy threshold hanging down: One man thy IBERINA satisfie? She'll sooner be contented with one eye. But she's cry'd up, lives at her Father's Grange; Let her live next a Village-maid, then change To be a Town-maid; and the Grange may pass. But who swears nothing done in Mountains was, Or Caves? are JOVE and MARS so wondrous old? In all our Gardens do'st one Maid behold Worthy thy choice? our Play-house Boxes prove, Can'st pick out one thou maist securely love? BATHYLLUS acting LAEDA, THUSCIA leaks At's Gambolls; APULA as tickled squeaks. THYMELE the long thing-before discerns, Then Country-THYMELE the Town-trick learns: The rest will pout when, th' Arras taken down, Noise leaves the Stage the Courts of Law to drown.
And when in CYBEL'S Games men act not, they ACTIUS with's Visard, Thyrs, and Codpiece, play AUTONOE'S loose Jigge, that laughter moves, Sings URBICUS, him the poor AELIA loves: These spoil the singing Boy; at high rates those Doe buy th' unbutt'ning the Comedian's hose. HISPULLA the Tragedian doth affect: That these should love QUINTILIAN can y' expect? The Lutenist ECHION, if not he, The Fidler GLAPHYRUS shall Cocold thee: Or she that for a Wife thou mean'st to take Will AMBROSE Piper thy Child's Father make. To straiten the large Streets long Scaffolds raise, Adorn thy Gates and Posts with solemn bayes, LENTULUS, that thy canopi'd noble Heir, May look like Rogue-EURIALUS the Sword-play'r. The Lord VEIENTO'S Lady, HIPPIA, With a base Gladiator ran away, Following SERGIUS to the Pharian Isle, Lewd Alexandria, and the banks of Nile: Ev'n dissolute CANOPUS crying down The impudence of this prodigious Town.
Regardless of her Husband's reputation, The honour of her Sister, House, and Nation; She left her crying Babes; what may amaze Thee yet more, she left PARIS and the Playes. And she that richly by her Father kept, Had in his down and deep-fring'd Cradles slept, Scorn'd rocking waves; fame she long since did slight, Whose loss upon a Bed of down weighs light: She therefore Tyrrhene waves, th' Ionian roar, And various Seas with constant courage bore; For danger let but some just cause appear; Their frozen hearts doe honest actions fear, Their trembling feet, too weak to bear them are; They bring strong souls to things they fouly dare. She that her Husband takes aboard will swound, Then how the Pump stinks! how the aire turns round! She with her Knave's not sea-sick, that bespues Her Husband; this eats such as Sailers use, Runs on the Decks, to pull hard ropes delights: But HIPPIA what Youth what Form invites? What did she see to doat upon the stile Of Gladiatress? her Gallant a while
Had shav'd; his cut arme crav'd a Writ of Ease: And so deform'd a face could hardly please, Worn bald with's Helmet, on his nose a Wen, His eyes sharp Rheume still dropt: but he was then A Sword-man, this makes HYACINTHS; this to her Lord, Sister, Country, Babes, she did preferre: 'Tis Steel they love; had SERGIUS for his Sword Took up the Wand, sh' had horn'd him like her Lord. But what's a private house? what HIPPIA'S name? See the Gods rivals, CLAUDIUS CAESAR'S shame, Whose daring wife, when sleep had drows'd his head, Prefer'd a Mat before his royall Bed. Th' Imperiall Strumpet with one Maid, stole out In her Night-hoods, and having put about Her black hair a red Perriwig, she got Into the Stews, where th' old rugge still was hot: In a spare room, kept for her, there gold-chain'd, Bare-breasted stood, her name LYCISCA fain'd: High-born BRITANNICUS thy womb display'd; Smil'd upon all that came, her bargain made; And when the Wenches were dismis'd, she last ('Twas all she could) sadly the dore made fast;
And many thirsted-for encounters try'd, Departed tir'd with men, not satisfied: And foul'd with candle-smoak, her cheeks smear'd o're, The Brothel-steam to CAESAR'S pillow Their love-draughts, charms, & drugs Brew'd for the Son in law, that drinks his fate. Their sex kept under swels their vices so, That lust appears a Peccadillio. But why's CESENNIA by her husband grac'd? She brought ten thousand, at that rate she's chast: Love's bow or torch, nor wounds, nor burns his heart; Hence comes the flame, the Portion casts the dart. Her freedome's bought; he by, she'll write, or kiss: A cov'tous man's rich Wife a Widow is. How is't SERTORIUS BIBULA approves? The truth discuss'd, the face, not Wife he loves. Let but three wrinkles grow, her dry skin shrink, Her teeth look rusty, her eyes deeper sink; Pack up his Freed-man bids her, and be gon; Th' art now a burden, thy nose drops, jog on, Quick; let another that's dry nos'd succeed. Whilst fair she reigns, her Lord's Canusian breed
Of sheep and Shepherds, Falern Vine-yards craves: That's nothing: all fine Boyes, all Jayles for Slaves: What neighbours have, she wants, his purse must buy; In Winter, when a-shore the Merchants lye; When th' icy Tow'r the Pilot's art controlls, Great Chrystalls he brings home, huge Myrrhine Bolls; And the rich Diamond, that fairer show'd On BERENICES finger: this bestow'd The barbarous AGRIPPA, he to his Incestuous Sister once presented this, Where bare-foot Kings the Sabbath sacred hold, And ancient pitty lets the Hogs grow old. Is one of all these worthy thy imbrace? Be she fair, rich, neat, fruitfull; though she place The Statues of her Ancestours to guard Her walks: and be her self then those loose-hair'd Peace-making Sabines more unknown to man: A bird as rare on earth as a black Swan. Who'll brook her if she be all this? give me A Country-Maid, CORNELIA, before thee The GRACCHI'S Mother: if as proud as great Thou, as thy dowre, thy triumphs dost repeat:
Thy HANNIBAL, thy conquer'd SYPHAX, pry'thee Take and be gone, and take all Carthage with thee? Hold PHOEBE; PHAEBUS, in my Children lyes No fault, their Mother kill, AMPHYON cryes: But PHAEBUS shoots; thus NIOBE, whil'st her place She boasts to be above LATONA'S race, And fruitfuller then the white Sow her womb: Did all her Children, and her Lord intomb. What's modesty, what's beauty, that she shu'd Upbraid thee with them? there's in that rare good No pleasure: when corrupted by proud hearts, More Aloes then Honey it imparts. Yet who so fond a Lover, but he may Abhorre his Paragon sev'n hours a day? Some triviall things, no Husband's patience brooks, For what's more base? none thinks she handsom looks, Till she her Thuscan can in Greek express, And turns pure Atticke from a Sulmoness. When they want native Latine (more their shame) They speak all Greek, vex, tremble, laugh, proclaim Their soul's deep secrets: what more? to't they go In Greek: Old-woman, fie, let Girles doe so;
Wilt thou fourscore and six be Greekish? chast Greek is not when  thou say'st, My life, my soul: and usest in a crowd Those words, for which thy sheets were late a shrowd. What will not this Provocative command? There's in a smooth and petulant tongue a hand; Speak thou more soft then HAEMUS, charm our ears CARPOPH'RUS like: thy face summes up thy years. If thou'lt not love thy Wife, 'tis to no end To seal the Contract, and in vain to spend A Supper, and those Jellies made to give High spirits; or that first-night's donative, When, shining in rich Plate, she must behold Dacian and German CAESAR cut in Gold: If thou'lt uxoriously to one adhere, Submit thy willing neck the yoke to bear: There's none will spare her Lover, though she burn His spoils and torments to her sport she'll turn; To marry therefore him 'twill less behove That would a kinde and noble Husband prove. Thou shalt give nothing when she's not content, Buy or sell nothing but with her consent:
She'll rule thy soul: that friend must be expell'd Now old, whose growing beard thy gates beheld. The priviledge of Law when Fencers take, And Bawds are free their Testaments to make, Thou must to Rivals thy estate bequeath. Hang up thy Slave: how merits my Slave death? Who's witness? who informs? hear what he'l say? On man's life never was too long delay. Fool, is a Slave a man? he's clear: be't so, We will, and our Will shall for reason go. Thus she her husband awes; streight quits her reign, Shifts house, tears her bright Veil, returns again To some scorn'd Bed: leavs the new wreathed door, The rooms fresh hang'd, green boughs upon the floor; Thus numbers she eight husbands in five years: How rare th' Inscription on her Tomb appears. Despair of peace whilst thy wife's mother lives; She how to rob a husband precepts gives; She to a servant no rude lines rescribes, No simple stuff: the guard she cheats or bribes: Then, her Child well, for the Physitian sends; Casts off the rugg; whil'st the hid Knave attends,
And mastuprates mad to be so delay'd: Why, think you, can a Mother of the Trade Chast thoughts, or other then her own, imprint? Besides, a Bawd's loose Daughter is her Mint. Most Law-suits women cause: MANILIA will, If not Defendant, be the Plaintiffe still: Themselves draw Bills, they doe Exordiums frame, Give hints, teach learned CELSUS to declame. Their Tyrian Cassocks nointings for the field, Who knows not? sees not how with spear and shield The wounded post is charg'd by Maids at armes, And rarely well-train'd Matrons: whose alarmes May Florall Trumpets claim; unless some Prize They mean to play, and therefore exercise? Where's her chast blush that puts her helmet on And her sex off? that, though she doat upon Man's strength, would not be man; for, but compare Our pleasures, 'las how little is our share? 'Twere fine if one should thy wife's Wardrobe cry, Her Gauntlets, Belt, Plumes, Tases her left thigh Half-cov'ring: or if for all fights she be Thou blest may'st sell her armour cap-a-pe.
These are the Dames that in thin holland sweat, Whose silks too much their tender bodies heat. Behold how fiercely the taught thrust she takes; See what a blow her helmet bowes, and makes Her Hips spread, and thick folds in her short Gown: But smile when she disarm'd to th' pot squats down. Tell me, you Neeces to great LEPIDUS, To blind METELLUS, spend-thrift FABIUS, What Fencer's Trull thus arm'd was ever known, When did ASYLU'S wife thus fighting groan. Debates, alternate brawlings ever were In Marriage-beds, no thought of sleeping there. Fierce as a Tigress robb'd she then begins To chide, or sigh, when guilty of close sins: Or her own Children hates; or swears he keeps A Wench, and as she did believe it, weeps. Her tears in troops still ambusht, wait to know What's her designe, how she'll command them flow. That 'tis pure love thou pleas'd hedge-sparrow think'st, And from her lips the briny moisture drink'st: What Letters might'st thou read, if thou could'st get Into the jealous Strumpet's Cabinet?
But she's caught with this Slave, that Gallant. Come Plead her excuse QUINTILIAN? We are dumb. Speak woman? 'Twas agreed, she doth reply: Thou should'st doe what thou list, and so should I. Out-storm a tempest, th' aire with clamour fill, A woman will be found a woman still; If once surpriz'd, th' earth hath not bolder things: Ev'n from their crimes their spleen & courage springs. But from what Lerna have these Monsters crept? Their once-low fortunes chast the Latines kept; And vice out of poor houses labour barr'd, Short sleep, and hands with Thuscan wool made hard: HANNIBAL at our Gates with all his powers, Their Husbands standing on the Colline Towers. Long peace undoes us. Lust, then War more fierce, Revenges now the conquer'd Universe. When poverty left Rome, no horrid sin But entred; then to our sev'n hills flow'd in Rhodes, Malta, Sibaris; Tarentum crown'd With flowers, and still in wine and women drown'd. That Bawd Coin first strange fashions hither brought: Wealth to the weaken'd world foul riot taught.
For what cares VENUS drunk? she does not know Her upper Region from her Coast below: She now at midnight her great Oisters eats, When Falerne wine with foamy Essence sweats; When off the Flagons, round the Chamber goes, The Table rises, each Light double shows. Go now, why TULLIA snorts a doubt propose; When she so snuffs the aire up with her nose? Or what COLLATIA to her MAURA talks, When she by Chastity's old Altar walks? There their Sedans wait; they doe there distill, And the carv'd Goddess with long spoutings fill: They mount by courses in the Moon's chast sight, And so ride home; the morning scarcely bright, Thou spatter'st thy wife's water, as thou go'st To bid those friends good day thou honour'st most. Now the Good Goddess hath her secrets blaz'd, When to the Pipe they frisk, and running maz'd With Wine and Cornets, their hair wildly rowle; Like Priapaean MAENADES they howle: Then how they long for't! when it comes, what cries, What torrents of old wine flow down their thighs!
LAUFELLA Wenches at the nimble heave Dares challenge, and the Garland does receive: Then she, whil'st MEDULLINA lifts, kneels down: And they call her their Queen that gets this Crown. No Girles-play here; all's done that may allure Cold PRIAM'S heart, or NESTORS Hernia cure. Then lust grows rampant, she's pure woman then, And the whole Vault cries, now let in the men; Sleeps th' old Adult'rer? bid the younger blood Run nimbly hither, drest up in my hood. Comes none? she'll meet her slaves; those out oth'way, The Tankard-bearer for his pains she'll pay: He absent; no Man found; e're she'll abide Delay, she'll let an Asse get up and ride. Would publick rites might this abuse eschew. But Moores and Indians a she-Singer knew, That could a more sufficient Roll have shewn Then CAESAR'S Anti-CATO'S both in one: And brought it in, whence not a Mouse, that fears His stones, but flies, where veils man's picture wears. What sawcy Athiest durst of old despise NUMA'S black Boll, the Urn for sacrifice,
Or Vatican frail Plate that earthen was? Now where's an Altar that no CLODIUS has? Hang on a lock I hear old friends advise, Appoint a guard: but who shall watch the spies? Her art first draws them in. To one degree Of lust all now are come; no chaster she By whose rough hob-nails the black flints are worn, Then she that's on tall Syrians shoulders born. To see a prize OGULNIA hires a Man, Gown, Clients, Nurse, a Cushion, a Sedan, A red-haird Maid, on her commands to wait; And all her Father's goods, with her last plate, To active Wrestlers prodigally gives: At home in great strait's many, but none lives In moderation that befits the poor. Yet Man sometimes weighs profit, looks before, Provides for cold and hunger, fears to want, Taught by th' example of the frugall Ant: Vain Woman sees not how the Stock consumes, That Gold will grow in empty bags presumes, And still to take from full heaps: never measures At what excessive rates she buys her pleasures.
Some our soft Evnuch's still smooth kisses love, And meer despair of beard; no fear to prove, A need abortion: yet the pleasure's great, Because the Surgeon in ripe youth and heat Their dowcets cuts, the black Down newly grown: These, when they come to weigh a pound a stone, He takes off, leaves the remnant at full size, And only the poor Barber damnifies. Into the Bath this goodly Evnuch goes, And there, no doubt, so huge a bawble shows, As may with BACCHUS or PRIAPUS vie: His Lady's Evnuch, with her let him lie; But POSTHUMUS I would not wish you trust Your Minion BROMIUS to this Evnuch's lust. If she love Musick, let no voice that's sold To Praetors, hope to make his button hold: Her hands are still on th' Organs, her Lute stuck With gems, the strings with a rich quill are struck: The young HYDEMELE'S Lute takes her, this She hugs, and gives the lov'd wood man'y a kiss. One of the Lamian house and Appian name With Cakes and Wine to VESTA 'and JANUS came,
To know if POLLIO'S Lyre would musick breath, To win him the Capitoline oaken Wreath. Should her Lord sicken, what could she doe more? Or had the Doctors her young Son giv'n ore? She stood at th' Altar, as the manner is, And spake the prompted words of sacrifice, Nor for a Fidler sham'd her face to veil: And when the Lamb was open'd she turn'd pale. Thou old God, Father JANUS, can Heav'n hear These pray'rs? I see y' have little business there; She must for Buskins, she for Socks procure Thy aid: th' Aruspex will grow crooked sure. But let her sing, e're ramble to invite The Wits; and parley, in her Husbands sight, With men of paludated Gen'rals, face to beard, And naked breasted: this is she that heard All news, knows whats in Thrace and Scythia done, The secret of the Step-mother and Son; Can tell, who loves, what Wencher was beguil'd, And who 'twas got the Dowager with child, What day oth' Month; knows ev'ry Ladies phrase She sports in, and how many sev'ral wayes:
She first the Comet saw, th' Armenian State And Parthian threatning: at the City-gate She way-layes fame; NIPHATES she gives out Hath drown'd the Men and Countries round about; That th' Earth shakes, Cities nod: in all our streets She prattles this, to every one she meets. Yet this is by a baser vice out-stript; Poor Neighbours must intreat they may be whipt: For if a barking Dog disturb her sleep, She calls out to the Varlets she doth keep, Take your battoons along without demur, Brain the Dogs Master first, and then the Cur. She frowning goes into her Bath by night, Pots, Pans; the Camp's remov'd by candle-light: She loves to sweat in Crowds, till each arme falls, Tir'd with the weight of her two leaden balls: Then her Bath-keeper a Knaves trick hath found, To make his Lady's nointed thigh resound. Mean time her Clients, sterv'd and hungry, droop: At length she comes red-cheekt, and longs to swoop A Rundlet off, lay'd at her feet, and pour'd From a full Ewre; whence th' other Pint devour'd,
To force an appetite; she in her way To supper, does oth' ground her stomach lay: The Marble floor swift Rivers interline, Or her broad Bason smells of Falerne wine: Like a long Snake into a Wine-fat cast, She sucks it in, and spues it out as fast; A sight that makes her Husband's stomach rise, Who to avoid the object shuts his eyes. She's worse, that VIRGIL at her board commends, And DIDO'S killing of her self defends; And then compares the Poets, VIRGIL layes In one scale, in the other HOMER weighs: Gramarians, Rhetoricians, the whole crowd She drowns; Lawyer nor Cryer speaks so lowd, Nor other Woman; words burst from her tongue, Youl'd swear so many Bells and Basons rung: Let none sound Trumpets, or brasse Kettles grieve, She can alone the lab'ring Moon relieve. Her wisedome th' End to honest acts sets down. If she'll shew learned, let her girt her gown Above her knee, to God SILVANUS slay A hog, and for her bath a farthing pay.
Let not thy wife to speak high things affect, Nor nimbly the short Enthymem project; Nor know all Histories: she may have got A little, so she understand it not. I hate her that PALAEMON'S art revives, That to discourse, by rule, or method strives: That as an Antiquary Verses quotes Unknown to me; and in her Gossip notes A fault in Grammar, which Men scarce regard: Pray let her Husband's solaesism be spar'd. A woman thinks all's lawfull, when she wears Those mighty Pear-pearls that weigh-down her ears, And th' Emerald Neck-lace: nothing makes man's life Unhappier, then a fortune with a wife. Boil'd flowre like mortar's in her wrinkles laid, Or that Pomatum which POPPAEA made. Her poor fool's lips she bird-limes, but comes in To her Adult'rer with a clean-washt skin. When goes she neat at home? she meets her friend In all perfumes that meager Indians send. At last she's seen undaw'bd; then first she's known, And nurst with Asses milk, whose breed's her own,
And still took with her, lest she be sent forth An Exile, like POPPAEA, to the North. But what's thus poultic'd, and thus plaster'd o're, Is it a face, or may't be call'd a sore? 'Tis worth your knowledge what they doe by day: If in the night her Husband turn'd away, Her chief Maid's dead: her Dresser ready stript; Too late comes her Chair-bearer, and is whipt, Because another fell asleep: his head Breaks her tough cane; him rods, him cords dye red. There are that pay the Beadles by the year: She beats, then paints; then does her Gossips hear, Or her fair gold-embroider'd Garment views; Beats on, and does the dayes accounts peruse; Which took; and beating till the Beadles groan: Be gone, she thunders in a horrid tone; In the Sicilian Court a milder doom Offenders had, then in her House at Rome. For, if some neater dress she meditates, Or hastes to the Religious Bawd, that waits In ISIS Fane; or some ith' walks expect: Poor PSECAS still bare-breasted, naked-neckt,
Her hair torn, combs her Lady's; Why's this lock So high? straight her Bull-pizle gives a knock. What hath your Woman done deserves these blows? Is 't her fault Madam you dislike your nose? Another oth' left hand unties the strings, Opens her hair, and curles it into Rings. The Matron of the Wheel in Councel sits, Whose needle now her Lady manumits; She gives her vote ith' first place, as most sage, Then her inferiours in art and age. As if that fame and life were both at stake: So great a care they of their beauty take. Her hair she doth in that rare method tie, And builds her head so many stories high, You see ANDROMACHE before: behind She's less; you there another woman find; 'Tis she; for, you by her short waste may see A Virgin-Pigmey needs must taller be; If her Chiopines her Lady-ship should miss, She sure must stand a tip-toe for a kiss. Mean time, she to her Husband's profit gives Just no regard, but as his Neighbour lives;
In this more neer, that she his friends will hate And servants, and consume his fair estate. Behold BELLONA'S CYBEL'S Priest, the tall Grave half-man (with no obscene part at all; A Fish-shell, long since, cut off that) comes in, A Phrygian Myter ty'd beneath his chin. Plebeian bells the hoarse Quire still'd; his mouth Sounds loud, beware September and the South, Unless she purge her with a hundred egges: With these her Fieulamort old Gowns he begs, Which Cloths must all great sudden crosses bear, And be an expiation for that year. She wades in Winter through the broken ice, And bathes in Tiber ev'ry morning thrice; In that fierce stream her tim'rous head she steeps: O're TARQUIN'S fields then nak'd and trembling creeps On bloody knees: If't be white IO'S will, She'll goe to Aegypt, and at Meroe fill Warme drops to sprinkle ISIS-Temple, neer Th' old Sheep-coat built: the Goddess she dare swear Speaks to her. See the spirit of a Saint, Whom with their minds by night the Gods acquaint.
This then's her darling Priest, that's follow'd by The linnen-cloath'd bald crew, that howle and cry After his God ANUBIS, whom he jeers: He prayes for her that not the sport forbears On solemn dayes: great punishment remains Due to the Wife that her clean smock prophanes; The silver Snake to move it's head appears, Won with his study'd murmurs and his tears Her sin to pardon: a great Goose, no doubt, Or a thin Wafer bribes OSYRIS to't. He gone; her hay and basket left, with fear The poor she-Jew begs in my Lady's ear: This Grove's High-priestess, heav'n's true Messenger, Hierusalems old Lawes expounds to her That fills her hand but thinly, yet 'twill hire Your Jew to sell what Dreams you can desire. A Childless rich man's Legac'y, a young Love, Found in the lights of a warme trembling Dove, The Commagenian Aruspex views A Chicken's breast: a trick th' Armenians use, Dog's entrails they dissect, and sometimes reach To cut a Child up; do it, and then peach.
But the Caldaean's more believ'd; the things Th' Astrologer speaks, flow from JOVE'S secret springs: Since Delphian Oracles no more exist, And man hath lost the future in a mist. But th' oftest exile's chief, whose Scheme foretold OTHO'S great Rival's death, for love and gold. His Art finds faith, that hath had both hands chain'd, And in the Camp a Pris'ner long remaind: No Math'matician a rare man is thought, But that's condemn'd, and ev'n to ruine brought; That scarce got to the Cyclads to be sent, And not to be in closse Seriphus pent. These she consults, when the slow jaundice will Dispatch her Mother; but thy TANAQUIL Asks if thou shalt not die before her Mother? And when her Sister? and her Fathers Brother? And if her Servant shall her self out live? For can the Gods a greater blessing give? Yet knows not she what SATURN'S frowns portend, Nor in what Aspect VENUS smiles befriend; Nor is so much an Artist, as to say When 'tis a lucky, when a dismal day.
But shun her, in whose hands thou seest so soil'd An Ephemerides as if 'twere oil'd; That asks not hers, but can thy fortune show; That if into the field her Husband go, Or, the warres ended, for his Country come, THRASYLLUS figures keep her still at home; Or if she move eight furlongs, th' hour is took For riding of that mile out of her book: That will, if her rubb'd eye but itch, indure, Till her nativity be cast, no cure; And though she lie sick, yet will take no meat Till th' hour that PETOSIRIS bids her eat; If poor, she to the Fortune-teller showes Her hand and forehead, and a kiss bestowes: Casts lots, first hall'wing both ends of the lists. The Phrygian Augurs and Gymnosophists, In both the Globes verst, the Patricians hire: Or those old Priests that watch heav'n's winged fire. Plebeian fate the Mount and Circus bounds; Bare-neckt at th' oval-Tow'r, before the rounds Oth' Dolphine pillars, in her Gold-chain stands A Prostitute, that answers the demands
Of Goody-Ale-wife, if she may forsake Mine Host her Husband, and a Broker take. Yet these the Child-bed pangs and dangers know, And all a Nurse's labours undergoe: But in a rich wrought-Bed scarce one lies in; So prevalent have arts and med'cines bin, Which unborn Babes destroy. Rejoyce thou wretch, And for thy Wife thy self the potion fetch: For should a Boy spring in her pregnant womb, Thou Father to an Aethiop would'st become; Straight this black thing pretends to all thou hast: Ne're to be seen before thou break'st thy fast. Suppositious children, Bishops pull'd From the foul Lake, I mention not: Joy gull'd, Religion, Honour mockt, whil'st false Heirs claim The Salian Priesthood, and great Scauran name: Sly fortune or'e sweet Babes does nightly stand, Which in her bosome warm'd, by slight of hand She into great men's houses doth convey, Then laughs in secret at the parts they play: She is the Mother of their second birth, And brings them forth to be her scene of mirth.
This Charms, Thessalian Philters sells that Witch; So pow'rfull, she may clap her husband's breech With his own slippers: thus thy soul grows blind, And things, but now done, slide out of thy mind. Yet, were this well, would she not scru thee up To NERO'S Uncle's rage, into whose cup CAESONIA did a Colt's whole front infuse: And what the Prince his Wife does, who'll not use? All went to wrack in that disjoynted State, As JUNO should her JOVE intoxicate. 'Las! AGRIPPINA'S gentler Mushrome sped One old man, and but made his shaking head And driv'ling mouth descend to heav'n: this drench Not vulgar, mixt with noble blood can quench: Fire, steel, and whips this calls for. Could one foal Thus much? then what could she that brew'd the boll? They doe, they may, hate Bastards, none denies, But now their Sons-in-law they sacrifice: You richer Orphans stand upon your guard, No dainties touch, pale poysons are prepar'd By your own Mothers; get you Tasters; pray Let your wise Guardians, ere you drink, take Say.
This sure we fain, no president appears. Our newer Satyr lofty buskins weares; We rant in Sophoclean lines, too high For our Italian hills, and Latine skie? Would we fain'd, but hear PONTIA confess, My Sons I would have poyson'd: Viperess! What two? at one meal two? had I to sev'n Been Mother, I'd have sent them all to heav'n. MEDEA'S PROGNE'S tragick scenes we may Believe and pardon; women durst essay Things monstrous in those dayes, but not for gain: 'Tis far less strange when in an angry vein Their sex proves mischievous: when rage, once crost, Inflames their livers, they are headlong tost Like stones from Precipices, when th' earth slides And leaves to the rock-head no mountain-sides: But I hate her that studies and commits A foul crime, being in her perfect wits. They look upon ALCESTIS on the Stage, And see her for her Lord her life engage: Were such a change now offer'd to a Wife, She would prefer her little Bitche's life:
BELIDES ERIPHYLES you may meet, And CLITEMNESTRA, daily, in each street, But diff'renc'd thus, th' old CLITEMNESTRA held A foolish gouty Axe she scarce could weld: Now with a red Toad's Lungs the feat they doe; Yet have their fine Steeletto's ready too, Lest wary AGAMEMNON should have got, The thrice-foil'd Monarch's Pontick Antidot. The Comment UPON THE SIXTH SATYR. VErse 1. Saturn,] Son to Coelum and Vesta. He married his Sister Ops, and cut off his Father's generative parts, casting them into the Sea, where they begot Venus, therefore called Aphrodite. His elder brother was Titan, that perceiving his Mother and Sisters stood affected to Saturn, resigned his birth-right, conditioned that Saturn's male-issue should be destroyed, that so the Crown might return to Titan's Children. In pursuance of these Articles Saturn devoured his Sons. Now Ops, being delivered of Jupiter and Juno at one birth, made the Midwife carry Juno to Saturn, but Jupiter she concealed, and had him privately nursed in the house, sending for the Corybantes to play to her upon their Cymbals, that the noise of their bells might drown the
crying of the Childe. Then she brought forth Neptune and put him to Nurse: to her Husband shewing (wrapt up in swadling clouts) a stone, which he devoured. In her third Child-bed she had Twins a∣gain, Pluto and Glauca, and, as before, concealing the Boy, shewed only the Girle to Saturn. All this being at last discovered to Titan; when he saw that his Brother's Sons would come between him and the Crown, he mustered his own Sonnes the Titans, defied his Brother Saturn, fought him, had the victory; and pursuing his Brother and Sister, Saturn and Ops, took them both, and imprisoned them till such time as Jupiter, be∣ing grown a man, defeated the Titans, setting at liberty his Father and Mother. Afterwards Saturn (hearing from the Oracle that his Son should dispossess him of his Kingdome) sought the life of Jupiter: whereof he had intelligence, and by way of prevention, seized the government of Creet into his own hands. Saturn fled into Italy, where in the Do∣minions of King Janus for some time he lurked; and from his Latitat that part of Italy was called Latium. Under the Reign of Saturn the Fabulists place the Golden Age, when the earth not forced by the Plough and Harrow, afforded of it self all kinds of grain and fruit, the whole ter∣restrial Globe being then a Common, not so much as one Acre inclo∣sed. The naturall Philosophers reduce this Fable of Saturn and Coelum to the motion of Time and the Heavens: the Astrologers apply it to the course of the Planets: See Lucian. de Astrol. Ovid. Metam. The My∣thology of it you may have from the Chymists, and Nat. Comes lib. 2. & 10. Verse 3. Lar.] A Spirit or God to which the Romans ascribed the guarding of their houses; painting him like a Dog, because they wished to have him like a Dog that keeps the house, gentle to the houshold,
fierce only towards strangers. The Lar and the Dog are compared by Ovid. Fast. 5. Servat uter{que} domum, domino quo{que} fidus uter{que} est: Compita grata deo, compita grata cani. Exagitant & Lar & turba Diania fures; Pervigilant{que} Lares, pervigilant{que} Canes. Both guard the house, to th' owner both are right: The High-way is the Lar's and Dog's delight. The Lar and Dog from Thieves the house will keep: The God and Dog wake when the houshold sleep. The Temple of this God was the House, the smoak his incense, and his Altar the Hearth, which was therefore accounted sacred, as appears by C. M. Coriolanus, taking sanctuary in the Chimney of his Enemy Tullus Attius: Plutarch in Coriol. Verse 5. Mountain-Wife.] before such time as men durst venture, for fear of wilde beasts, to carry their Wives down with them from the tops of the Mountains. Verse 7. Cynthia,] Mistress to the Poet Propertius, that confesseth his captivity in these words. Cynthia sola suis miserum me coepit ocellis, Et captum nullis ante cupidinibus. Cynthia's eyes set my poor heart on fire, Which till that instant never knew desire. Verse 7. Nor her.] Lesbia, Mistress to Catullus, that writ upon the death of her Sparrow: the Elegie begins thus: Passer, deliciae meae puellae, The Sparrow, play-Mate to my Love,
Verse 10. Great Child.] Before the debaucheries of Parents had les∣sened the Statures of their Children, cum robora Parentum Liberi magni referebant, when goodly strong Children shewed the strength of their Parents. Verse 12. Th' Oak's rupture.] Men as they grew more civilized, lodg∣ed a-nights in hollow trees, which made the wilder People believe that trees brought forth men. Verse 13. Had no Parents,] Whose evill manners they might inhe∣rit by example. Verse 15. Ere Jove had a beard.] Jupiter or Jove was, as aforesaid, Son to Saturn and Ops, delivered of him and Juno at one birth in the Isle of Creet, where he was bred up by the Curetes or Corybantes, the Priests of Cybele, that concealed him from his devouring Father. But after he had released Saturn from imprisonment, and found that his Father had a plot upon his life, he outed him of his Kingdomes which he divided with his Bretheren by lot: Sat. 3. Heaven and earth fell to himself, the Sea to Neptune, to Pluto Hell. Then he married his Sister Juno, by whom he had Vulcan. There were four Jupiters, two Arcadians; one Son to Aether and Father to Proserpine and Bacchus; the other Son to Coelum and Father to Minerva, the Inventress of Warre: the third was Son to Saturn, born in Creet, where his Tomb was to be seen: Cic. 3. de Natura Deor. The Naturallists interpret Jove to be the Element of fire, and will have Jupiter to signifie adjutor, because nothing helps and che∣rishes nature so much as fire: sometimes Jove is taken for the two superi∣or Elements, when they act upon the two inferior Elements for genera∣tion and corruption. The Ethnick Poets by the several adulteries and thefts of Jove, under the shadow of a Fable, give us the character of a
Tyrant. The time of his reign they call the Silver Age, in reference to the Golden Age under his Father Saturn; for as much as Silver participates more of Earth, and consequently of rust and corruption, then Gold doth: Hierocl. The purest of the Silver Age was ere Jove had a beard; for when Down once grew upon his chin, you see what reaks he played with La∣dies in Ovid's Metamorphosis, iron barres and locks could not hold out against his golden key: Horace, Inclusiam Danaen turris ahenia, Robustae{que} fores, & vigilum canum Tristes excubiae munierant satis Nocturnis ab adulteris: Si non Acrysium, virginis abditae Custodem pavidum, Jupiter & Venus Risissent; fore enim tutum iter & patens Converso in pretium Deo. Aurum per medios ire satellites, Et perrumpere amat saxa, potentius Ictu fulmineo. The brazen Tow'r, gates strongly barr'd, The Mastiffe Doggs fierce Court of guard, From midnight-Ravishers immur'd, Fair Danae had well secur'd: Yet pale Acrysius, that lockt Her up, by amorous Jove was mockt: Needs must the way be uncontroll'd And safe, the God being turn'd to Gold. Gold passes Centries, batters Walls, And with more force then thunder falls.
Verse 16. Ere Greeks by others heads swore.] The Grecians swore by the heads of the Heroes, as the Aegyptians did by the lives of their Kings, and the Irish by their Governours hands. Verse 19. Astraea,] Daughter to Astraeus, one of the Titans, who is said to have begot her upon Aurora, by whom he had likewise all the Windes, which he armed to fight for his Brothers in their war against heaven. She abhorring the iniquity and falsehood of men, flew up to heaven, and was made one of the twelve Signes, Libra: and there, as Justice ought to doe, she weighes the intents and actings of men in the celestial Scales. That her Sister Chastity fled to heaven with her, is Ju∣venal's opinion. Verse 26. In our Age.] Sat. 13. —Worse then the Iron times: Nature no mettle breeds to name our crimes. Verse 27. Thy Pledge.] It was the Roman mode for the Bridegroome upon his Wedding day before he carried his Bride to the Temple, to present her with a Ring as a Pledge of his endless affection: Macrob. lib. 7. A. Gell. This Ring she wore upon her middle finger, because from it there passeth an Artery to the heart, and therefore the Antients judged the middle finger only fit to be crowned in Matrimony. Verse 32. Aemilian Bridge,] A mile from Rome, built over the Ri∣ver Tiber by Aemilius Scaurus, as in the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 39. Julian Law.] Now that Vrsidius Posthumus means to marry and live honest, he would have Adultery punishable by death; and there∣fore magnifies the Julian Law for making it a capitall crime: See the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 40. Loose the Gifts.] How childless persons were courted with
gifts out of the Shambles: read Sat. 5. Verse 46. Latinus Chest.] The Comedian Latinus mentioned Sat. 1. played upon the Stage the Gallant to an Adultress, that upon the unex∣pected return of her Husband, locked him up in her Chest: a part that had, as it seems, been really acted by Vrsidius in his younger dayes. Verse 49. Tarpeian Jove.] From Jupiter's Temple in the Tarpeian or Capitoline Mount he was called Tarpeian Jove; the Mount had the name of Capitoline from the head of one Tolus, found as they digged for the foundation of the Tower built upon that hill formerly called Tarpei∣an, from Tarpeia the Vestal Virgin (Virg. l. 9.) that betrayed the place (where her Father commanded in chief) to the Sabines, upon their pro∣mise to gratifie her with all they wore on their left armes, she meant their Gold-Bracelets; but they gave her all indeed, Bracelets and Shields; so the Traytress perished: Varr. Verse 50. Juno,] Daughter of Saturn and Ops, Sister and Wife to Jupiter, Goddess of Kingdomes and Riches, Patroness of Marriage, from whence she was called Pronuba; the Helper of women in their la∣bour, which gave her the title of Lucina. Hebe was her Daughter, conceived, as Poets tell us, by eating of wilde letuce, of which she surfei∣ted at a Treatment made her by Apollo. She had Vulcan and Mars by Jove, though Ovid would have her to conceive Mars only by the touch of a flower. The Naturalists make Juno to be the Aire, and there∣fore Sister and Wife to Jove: for that between the Aire and the Skie there is the neerest relation. The name of Juno is derived like to that of Jupiter, a juvando, from helping: Cic. 2. de Natura deor. Vrsidius at his marriage might very well afford to gild the horns of the Heifer which
he sacrificed to Juno, if she would help him to an honest VVife, and in that nick of time purge the Town of VVenches for his sake. Verse 52. Ceres,] Daughter to Saturn and Ops, inventress of Husban∣dry: Virg. Georg. Prima Ceres ferro mortales vertere terram Instituit.— To break the Earth with Plough-shares Ceres first Taught men.— Rosin. Ant. lib. 2. cap. 11. She is pictured sometimes in a Matrons habit, wearing a Garland of Corn with a handfull of Poppy or a Sheaf in one hand, and a Sickle in the other, as you may see upon the top of her Temple in the Designe before the twelfth Satyr: sometimes she is drawn with a sad look, as if she were seeking her Daughter Proserpine, stoln a∣way by Pluto as she gathered flowers in the Vale of Aetna, where Ceres lighting a Lamp to search for her, fired the Mountain, which is like to burn for ever. In her travel to finde Proserpine, Ceres came to the Court of King Eleusius in Attica, where she was made Governesse to his Sonne Triptolemus, and tryed to make the Childe immortall, suckling him in the day time, but all night long she put him in the fire. Eleusius, wondring at the strange growth of his Sonne, set Spies upon the Nurse, which bringing him no discovery of any extraordinary means used by her in the day time, the King hid himself in her Chamber to watch her in the night, where seeing her thrust his sonne into the fire, the sudden fright made him call out to her to hold her hand. Ceres offended with the Kings curiosity, punished it with death. To the Childe she taught the art of sowing seed, and put him into a Chariot drawn with flying
Dragons, that he might ride through the whole world and teach Hus∣bandry to all Nations. The Nymph Arethusa giving intelligence to Ceres that Proserpine was in Hell, Ceres went to Heaven and expostu∣lated with Jupiter of the injury done her by their Brother Pluto, demand∣ing restitution of her Daughter, which was granted in case that Proser∣pine had eat nothing while she was in Hell. But Ascalaphus testi∣fying that he had seen her eat some of a Pomgranate which she plucked from the tree, as shee walked in Pluto's Gardens, her return was obstru∣cted for ever. For this testimony Ceres turned the Witnesse into an Owle. At last, to qualifie the griefe of his Sister, Jupiter consented that her Daughter Proserpine should be in Hell the one half of the year, and the other half-year upon the Earth. The Romane Sacrifices to the Goddesse Ceres were called sacra Graeca, Grecian Sacrifices, and the chief Priestesse Sacerdos Graeca, because those Ceremonies were brought to Rome out of Greece by Evander. The time of her Solemnities was at day-break, the Rites only performed by Women, that ran up and down with Lamps in their hands, helping Ceres to seek her Daughter. They that officiated in her Mysteries were injoyned silence; and therefore Wine was forbidden at that time, which was upon the 27. of March, being the fifth of the Calends of Aprill. For this reason the Romans cal∣led a Feast without Wine Cereris sacrificium, a Sacrifice to Ceres: Plaut. in Aulular. Into the Temple of Ceres no person durst presume to come that knew him or her self guilty of the least crime, much less they that had to answer for so great a sinne as lasciviousness, which is the sense of Juvenal in this place. Verse 53. Crown thy dores.] On wedding dayes the common sort of people crowned their dores and dore-posts with Ivie; the leaves, bran∣ches
and berries covering their very thresholds; but persons of honour instead of Ivie had Laurel, and builded Scaffolds in the streets for the people to behold the Nuptiall Solemnity, as you will see in the follow∣ing Verses, when Lentulus is named. Verse 55. Iberina,] Vrsidius Posthumus his Bride that was to be. Verse 65. Bathyllus,] A Pantomime, that acted with his hands the wanton Mien of the Dancing-Mistress Laena, with whose postures, imitated by a man, the Country Ladies, Thuscia, Appula, and Thymele were much taken. Verse 70. The Courts of Law,] That sate in the Forum Romanum. Verse 71. In Cybel's Games.] The Megalesian Games were Showes made in honour of the Goddess Cybele, the magna Mater; they began upon the fourth day of Aprill, and were continued for six dayes after, du∣ring which time the common Play-houses were shut up. M. Junius Bru∣tus dedicated those sports to the Mother of the Gods. Verse 72. Thyrse.] The Thyrsus was a Spear wreathed about with Vine-leaves and grapes, proper to Bacchus, which his Priests the Bac∣chanals carryed in their hands when they were possessed with their God; therefore in the seventh Satyr Juvenal sayes —soft aires to chant, Or reach a Thyrsus, suits not with sad want. that is, a poor man can never come to be possessed with a Poeticall furie, as high as a Bacchanalian rage, because he wants money to buy wine. Verse 73. Autonoe's loose Jig.] Autonoe, Daughter to Cadmus King of Thebes by his Wife Hermione: she was married to Aristaeus, and by him had Actaeon, called the Autonoeian Heros: Ovid Metam. l. 3. He∣siod. in Theog. It seems that some Attelan or ridiculous jeering rimes
were made upon Autonoe, that used to be sung on the Stage after the acting of a Tragedy, to make the Spectators merry again. For rehear∣sing of this Jigge the poor beggerly Aelia fals in love with Vrbicus, the Fool in the Play. Verse 78. Quintilian,] The grave Rhetorician born at Calaguris in Spain; he therefore called the Spaniards his Country-men. He came to Rome with Galba, and was Governor to Domitian's Nephews. He first taught Rhetorick in Rome, was Tutor to Juvenal, had a Pension out of the Exchequer, and writ Rhetoricall Institutions and Declamations. Verse 87. Hippia,] The unworthy Wife to the great Lord of the Senate, Frabricius Veiento. Verse 89. Pharian Isle.] Pharos was a little oblong Isle of Aegypt; a dayes sail from the Continent, if we believe the authority of Homer; but now it is joyned by a Bridge to Alexandria: the change is ascribed to the River Nilus, whose seven channels cast up an infinite quantity of mud upon the Foards adjoyning: Ovid Metam. lib. 15. Fluctibus ambitae fuerant Antissa Pharósque, Et Phoenissa Tyros: quarum nunc insula nulla est. Antissa, Tyre and Pharos lay erewhile Within the Sea: now none of them's an Isle. See Plin. lib. 2. cap. 85. This Isle had a Tower of white Marble built upon a Rock, which cost Ptolomey Philadelphus eight hundred talents, Sostratus Gnidius being his Architect. The Tower bore the name of Pharos: and in the night hung forth a Lantern, by which the Ships at Sea sailed into the Haven. In this Isle Alexander the great resolved to build a City, but finding the place too narrow for his Modell, right a∣gainst it he built the City of Alexandria, not far from the Canopian mouth
of Nilus: the ground was laid out by the rare Architect Dinocrates fif∣teen miles in compass, cast into the fashion of a Macedonian Cloak. Here Lagus lived that was Father of Ptolomey, successor to Alexander in the Kingdome of Aegypt; therefore Juvenal calls Alexandria the lewd walls of Lagus. Verse 90. Nile,] A great Aegyptian River: some say the name of it was derived from King Nilus, others from the new slime or mud which it works up continually. It springs from a Mountain in the lower Mau∣ritania, not far from the Ocean, in a Lake, which is called Nilis; then for some dayes journeys it runs underground; and again bursts forth within a greater Lake in Caesarian Mauritania, and again, swallowed up in the sands, for twenty dayes journeys it passeth through the Deserts to the Ae∣thiopians; at last spouts out of a Fountain called Nigris: then dividing Africa from Aethiopia, it makes diverse Islands, the noblest whereof is Meroe. After it hath received all recruits from confederate Rivers, it takes the name of Nilus, and dischargeth it self into the Sea by seaven mouths, viz. the Canopian, Bolbitic, Sebennitic, Pharmitic, Mendesic, Tanic and Pelusiac. Nile embraceth the lower parts of Aegypt, divided by her right and left armes: by the Canopian from Africa; from Asia by the Pe∣lusiac: Plin. lib. 5. cap. 9. so that some have set down Aegypt in the list of Islands, the River Nilus cutting it into a Triangle; and from that figure many have called Aegypt by the name of the Greek letter Δ Delta. Verse 91 Dissolute Canopus,] Another City of Aegypt, distant from Alexandria 120 furlongs, so named from Canobus Amyclaeus, Master of Menelaus his Ship, that carried Hellen from Sparta, and by a storm was driven upon that coast, where the Master dyed, bit by the Serpent Haemor∣rhoida. In memory of him Menelaus built the City, wherein he left all
his men that were unfit for any further Sea-service. Who can enume∣rate the superstitious wickednesses of the City of Canopus: Ruff. lib. 11. cap. 26. this of all Aegyptian Towns was the lewdest, as you may see here and Sat. 15. Verse 96. Paris,] A handsome young Player, Favourite both to the Emperor Domitian and to his Empress; but his Imperial Mistress lost him his Master and his life: for upon that account Domitian put him to death. So long as he was in favour he did many gallant things: Sat. 7. Many to honour in the warres he brings; With Summer-annulets and Winter-rings He bindes the Poets fingers: what there lives No Lord that will bestow, a Player gives. Why dost thou court the Camerini then And Bareae? a fig for Noble-men: Write Tragedies; 'tis Pelopea takes, She Praefects, Philomela Tribunes makes. Though Paris was highly commended in these verses, yet the Satyr of them (that touched his quality of a Player) so stung him, that he procu∣red a command of foot for the Author, and sent him with his Regiment as far as Aegypt: See the life of Juvenal, and the Designe before Sat. 16. Verse 101. Tyrrhene waves.] The Tyrrhene Sea is part of the Medi∣terranean, lying beneath Italy (called therefore Mare inferum) between Corsica and Sicily: the Ionian is part of the Mediterranean, above the Adriatick Straits, between Sicily and Creet; through both which Seas they must needs pass that sail from Rome to Aegypt. Verse 119. This makes Hyacinths.] Hyacinthus was Son to Amyclas,
and beloved at the same time by Apollo and Zephyrus; but Hyacinth in∣clining more to Apollo, his Rival Zephyrus was so inraged, that his love turned to hatred, and watching his time when Apollo played at Pall∣mall with his Mignion, Zephyrus blew the Iron Ball (which Apollo struck) full upon the head of Hyacinth; so the fine Boy was slain: and though sad Apollo had not power to quicken him again into a man, yet he revived him into a purple flower, that still beares the name of Hyacinth: Palaeph. in tract. de fabul. See the same story told, with some alterations by Ovid. Metam. lib. 10. Verse 125. Whose daring Wife.] Messalina, that taking her opportuni∣ty when her Husband Claudius was asleep, went to the common Stews in a red Periwig, then in fashion with common Prostitutes; which also wore Gold-chains about their necks. Verse 131. Lycisca,] The most famous Courtesan of those times, whose name was chalked over the Chamber-dore where Messalina en∣tertained her Customers. Verse 133. High-born Britannicus.] Britannicus was Son to the Em∣peror Claudius by Messalina, at least so reputed. He was first tituled Germanicus. When he was an Infant his Father carried him into the Camp, and commended him to the Army: yet notwithstanding all that care, by the contrivance of Nero he was poysoned: Tacit. lib. 13. Verse 162. Canusian Breed.] Canusium was a Town of the Apulian Daunia, upon the River Aufidus: Ptol. Plin. Pompon. Canusium afford∣ed the best Sheep of Italy, and the finest wool, which nature had died with an Eye of red: they that wore it in a Garment were called Canusi∣nati: Martial. lib. 9. Verse 159. Falerne Vine-yards.] Falernus was a part of Campania
(yeilding incomparable wine) anciently called Amineum. Aminean Vines: Virg. Verse 166. Berenice,] That after the death of King Herod was the Concubine of her first Husband's Brother, incestuous Agrippa: Joseph. Verse 175. Peace-making Sabines.] The Sabine Women; they came to Rome to see the solemnity of the Consualia, Shews made in honour of Neptune, God of secret Counsels: Tertul. de spect. cap. 5. as he was also the Inventer of horsemanship. These Shews were the original of the Cir∣censian Games, begun by Evander, Dion. Hal. lib. and revived by Romulus purposely to intrap the Sabine Maids, whose curiosity he knew would bring them to the Shew; and then, he resolved, that his new Plan∣tation of Romans should not want Wives, which they could have a∣mongst their Neighbours by fair means; therefore he got these by strata∣gem, and deteined them by force. A war growing about it between Tatius and Romulus, these late chast Maids, now virtuous Wives, with their hair scattered about their shoulders (as at a Funeral) came betwixt the two Armies, bearing their young Children in their armes, and made a Peace between their Fathers and their Husbands: Plutarc. in Romul. Liv. Ovid Fast. 3. Verse 178. Cornelia,] Mother to those two (formerly named) valiant but mutinous Tribunes, Caius and Tiberius Gracchus; Daughter to Scipio Africanus that conquered Hannibal, and Syphax King of Numidia, and subjected Carthage to the power of Rome. She was not only noble by ex∣traction, but exceeding handsom, chast, rich, and prolifick, glorying much in her Children; for, being intreated by a Campanian Lady to honor her with the sight of her richest Ornaments, she brought her out neither Gold, Jewels, nor glorious apparrel, only shewed her Sons: Val. Max.
Verse 184. Amphion,] Son to Jupiter, by Antiope the Daughter of Nycteus, and Wife to Lycus King of Thebes, that finding her to have lost her Maidenhead, circumvented by K. Epaphus, or as others say, Epopeus, divorced himself from her, and married Dirce. In the widowhood of Antiope Jupiter got her with Child; but Dirce suspecting her Husband to have done it, clapt her up in prison. Jupiter, pittying her sufferings for his sake, delivered her from imprisonment when she was almost at down-lying. She fled to the Mountain Cithaeron, and there at the crossing of two high-waies was brought to bed of Male-twins, which the Shepherds took up, and called the one Zethus, the other Amphion. These two, com∣ing to be men, were called in by the Thebans; and when they knew how Dirce had used their Mother, they tyed her to the tail of a wild Bull that dragged her through briers and bushes, miserably tearing her, till Bac∣chus put an end to her torture, by turning her into a Fountain of her name. Amphion was so great a Master of Musick, that it was said Mercury gave him the Lute, which he playing upon made the stones dance at the building of Thebes till they had walled it about. Amphion married Ni∣obe Sister to Pelops, and Daughter to Tantalus King of Phrygia, Son to Jupiter by the Nymph Plore: She had by him fourteen Sons and seven Daughters: but being proud of her great birth, her marriage, and fruitfulness, Niobe scorned the Thebane Matrons for sacrificing to La∣tona that had but two Children. But those two, Apollo and Diana, sensi∣ble of this affront offered to their Mother, in one day shot to death all the Children which Niobe had bragged of: not sparing Amphion, only be∣cause he was her Husband. As for Niobe, she was taken up in a whirle-wind that carried her from Greece into Asia, and neer to the Town of Sipylus, where she was born, transformed into a Marble Statue: Ovid.
Metamorph. 6. That Amphion with his Lute made the stones dance after him, only signifies the musick of his Elocution, winning the hearts of rude ignorant people, that dwelt at distance, to meet and live in a body, that they all might defend one City. This power of perswasion was the Lute, which he received from Mercury the God of Eloquence: See Alberic. Rocat. N. Com. Mythol. lib. 9. cap. 15. By the Marble Statue into which Niobe wept her self, is understood the effects of immode∣rate griefe, which at last converts to stupidity, and makes us insensi∣ble of grief. Thus was Niobe petrefied into Marble, the only Mo∣nument she could raise to her self, after her Children were destroyed: Paleph. Verse 197. Till she her Tuscan.] Till she changes her Tuscan or Ita∣lian Mother-tongue into Greek, nay even the barbarous Latin of Sulmo into pure Attick Greek. Verse 209. Haemus,] A smooth-tongued Greek Comedian, mentioned Sat 3. Carpophorus was another of the Company. Verse 216. Dacian and German Caesar.] Domitian's Picture cut in Gold, or rather the Sculpture of Trajan, a Prince that deserved the In∣scription of Dacian and German Caesar. Such Coins were usually by the Bridegroom presented in a massy piece of Plate, as a gratification for his first nights lodging. Verse 236. Her bright Veil.] The Bride's yellow Veil, or the Flam∣meum, in which they brought her (with her face covered) to the Bride∣groom: Plin. lib. 21. cap. 8. This Ceremony the Romans used, to put the Woman in remembrance that she ought to preserve, what she then covered, the blushes of a Bride. Verse 251. Manilia,] A subtle Curtesan, that being accused to the
Senate by Hostilius Mancinus, then the Aediles Curulis, for having by night wounded him with a stone, appealed to the Tribunes, and pleaded that Mancinus would violently have entred her house at an unseasonable hour, but was beat back with stones: no marvail my Author uses her name for a she-wrangler in the Law: A. Gel. lib. 4. cap. 4. Verse 254. Celsus.] Junius Celsus, a great Orator that writ seven Books of Rhetoricall institutions. Verse 255. Tyrian Cassocks.] The Roman Fencers alwayes played their Prizes in their Endromides or short Coats: this was the reason why the Retiarii were called Tunicati: and no doubt but the Retiarius (de∣scribed Sat. 2. and 8.) fought in a purple Cassock of the right Tyrian die, he being a Noble-man, descended from the Gracchi and Africani. This fashion was followed by the wanton Roman Dames, that likewise imita∣ted the poorer sort of Fencers, nointing themselves with their Ceromatick composition of oile and clay, being exercised and trained as Tyrones or young Souldiers in the Campus Martius. Verse 259. Florall Trumpets.] The Florall Games were celebrated in honour of Flora, Goddess of Gardens and Medows, upon the four last dayes of Aprill, and the first of May: Ovid. Fast. 5. Incipis Aprili, transis in tempora Maii, Alter te fugiens, cum venit alter, abit. In Aprill thou begin'st and end'st in May: As one comes tow'rds thee, th' other runs away. The Institution of this Feast was, to pray that the earth might seaso∣nably bring forth flowers and fruits: but the Shew was of impudent Strumpets, dancing naked through the streets to the sound of the Trum∣pet. The Beasts hunted in these Games, were Goats, Hares, and such
milde creatures: Hosp. de Orig. Fest. There also were shewed tame Ele∣phants taught to walk upon the ropes: Suet. in Gal. Verse 275. Great Lepidus.] M. Aemilius Lepidus the Censor, that upon his death-bed enjoyned his Sons to cast a linnen Cloth over his bo∣dy, and so to carry it, upon the Bed he died in, to the Pile to be burned, without imbalming, Purples, Trumpets, waxen Images, common Mour∣ners, or any other Funeral pomp at all. Verse 276. Blind Metellus,] The Censor and Pontifex Maximus, that lost his eyes with saving the Image of Minerva when her Temple was on fire: See the Comment upon Sat. 13. Verse 276. Spend-thrift Fabius,] Sonne to Fabius Maximus; in his youth he had consumed his Estate, which surnamed him the Gulf or Spend-thrift: but afterwards he grew to be a staid man, and a great ex∣ample of virtue, in particular of Frugality and Abstinence Verse 279. Assylus,] A Gladiator or common Fencer. Verse 292. We are dumb] Juvenal would have his Tutor, that in∣comparable Rhetorician Quintilian, out of all the colours, flowers, or fal∣lacies of his art, to say something in excuse of a woman taken in the man∣ner; but all he can answer is for himself, That he is dumb, and his Ora∣tory nonplust: he cannot for shame be of Counsell or open his mouth in so plain a Case. Then the Judge of manners, the Censor Juvenal, turns to the Woman, and bids her speak in her own Cause: She no sooner looks upon her Apron-strings, but she justifies the act, as grounded upon a Contract parole, or Articles of Agreement before marriage, wherein it was mutually covenanted, consented and agreed by and between her and her Servant (now her Husband) that after the subsequent solemnization of their marriage, it should be lawfull for them, or either of them (as if
no such marriage had been solemnized) severally and respectively to doe or act whatsoever should best please them, or either of them; and this whereof she is accused, is her several and respective pleasure: Can a Judge then have power to call her to an account for doing what she had liberty and right to doe? Verse 299. Lerna.] Lerna, or Lernes, is a Lake neer Argos, where Hercules ended one of his twelve labours, by killing the Serpent Hydra, whose heads, still as he cut them off, were multiplied. This many-headed Monster had laid waste the whole Country of the Argives, insomuch as it grew to a Proverb with the Greeks, when one mischief came upon the neck of another, to call their present condition , a Lerna of evils. Verse 309. Rhodes,] An Island in the Carpathian Sea, where Homer was born; so named from Rhodia, one of Apollo's Mistresses: Diodor. lib. 5. In this Isle was a Gymnasium or School of Asiatick eloquence, and the Mathematicks; so that when Aristippus, the great Socratick Philosopher, was shipwrackt upon the coast of Rhodes, and found there some Geome∣tricall Schemes, he cried, Cheerly my Mates, I see the foot-steps of men. Vitru. lib. 7. Here stood one of the Wonders of the World, that huge Collossus 70 cubits high (built by the famous Statuary Cares) from which some think the Inhabitants to have been called Colossians. This Island held by the Knights of Rhodes, was taken by Solyman the Magnificent in the year 1522. Verse 309. Malta.] Malta, or Melita, is an Isle lying neer to that part of Sicily which looks towards Africa: Plin. lib. 3. cap 8. From hence came the breed of fine little Dogs that so please the great Ladies: Strab. lib 6. This Island afforded very precious Roses and delicate soft Vests: Cicer. and is now inhabited by the Knights of Rhodes, called Knights of Malta.
Verse 309. Sybaris,] A Town of Magna Graecia, seated between the Rivers Crathis and Sybaris: Steph. It was built by the Trojans, that after the sack of their City, were driven upon the place by extremity of wea∣ther. This Town was once so potent that it governed four great Coun∣tries, subdued 25. Cities, and armed 300000. men in their war against the Crotonians: Strab. lib 6. But prosperity made them wanton; no such Gluttons in the world, witness the Proverb, A Sybaritick Sow. Verse 309. Tarentum] A great City of Magna Graecia; the founder of it was Tarentes Son to Neptune, after whose time it was enlarged by the Lacedemonians, that, led by their General Phalantus, took the place (almost impregnable, as lying between two Seas in the form of an oblong Isle) and outed the Inhabitants: Justin▪ lib. 3. From this Spartan Colony descended those Tarentines that for a long time maintained a War with the Romans; at last, finding themselves over-matcht, called in Pyrrhus K. of Epire to assist them. Some say that Tarentum had the name from the Sabine word Tarentum, signifying soft; and the Tarentines were a very soft and effeminate People, madly debauched, and jeering all other Nati∣ons; but a sad just Judgement fell upon them; for when, without any ground of quarrel, they had surprized a City from their Neighbours the Japygians (now Calabrians) and for a whole day exposed the young men and Maids, their Prisoners, to the libidinous fury of the Souldier, it was revenged from heaven, their whole Armie being instantly consumed with lightning: Leonic. Thom. lib. 3. cap. 38. Neer to this Town breeds the Snake called Tarentula, that if he bites any one, makes the party bit∣ten die laughing: the cure for it is a present sweat, which they take in a dance, physick proper for the constitutions of such Voluptuaries. Verse 322. Chastitie's old Altar.] The Wantons of Rome in spight and
contempt of the Goddesse of Chastity, prophaned the ruins of her Image, at her antiquated and neglected Altar. Verse 329. Now the Good Goddess.] That which the Romans in Ju∣venal's time called the Good Goddess, was by the Antients named Fauna, Fatua, and Senta; she was one of the 5. Daughters to Faunus, a Lady of that strict modesty, that after she was married, no man but her Husband ever set eye upon her; therefore, by her example, no man was admitted to her Sacrifices: See the Comment upon Sat. 2. and Alexand. ab Alexandro, lib. 6. cap. 8. Verse 332. Priapaean Maenades.] The Maenades, otherwise called Bac∣chae, Bassarides and Thyades, sacrificed to Bacchus, every second year, up∣on the Mountain Parnassus in the night time, with torches in their hands, and their hair about their ears, crying Eu, Hoe, sounds that implyed the wishes of good fortune, for which they prayed in their Drink. These two sounds being joyned in one word, gave to Bacchus the name of Evoeus or Evan. This company of mad women had likewise a tumultuous meet∣ing, once in three years, upon the Mountain Cithaeron, whether they came every one bearing in her hand a Thyrsus (being a Spear wrapt about with Ivy) and there, with strange howling, celebrated the Orgies of Bacchus. The Ceremonies of the Good Goddess had a great resem∣blance to these Bacchanalian Rites, in dancing to Pipes, singing (which brought in the Priapaean Singing-woman Clodius) and forbidding of men to be present at the Sacrifice: See Plutarch in Caesare. Verse 340. Priam,] King of Troy, who lived to be so old that nothing could put outward heat into him, but such an accident as firing of his City by the Greeks; nor could any thing inflame his spirit, unless it were such a sight as this: See the Comment upon Sat. 10.
Verse 340. Hernia,] A rupture that spoiled the Courtship of Ne∣stor: See likewise the Comment upon Sat. 10. Verse 352. Caesar's Anti-Cato's.] Caesar hearing that Cato Major was dead (whose virtues Cicero had commended in his Dialogue titled Cato) to disparage his life and manners, writ two Books which he called Anti-Cato's; and when they were rolled up in the form of a Cylinder, as all Books then were (you may see it in the figure of the Tragedy pawned by the Poet Lappa, in the Designe before Sat. 7.) no doubt but they made a pretty bulk; yet my Author conceives that something of a larger size was brought in to Caesar's Wife, when she danced in the private Feast of the Good Goddesse, by Clodius, that came into the assembly of Ladies like a Singing-woman, and was discovered by Caesar's Mother, Aurelia. Verse 357. Earthen.] The earthen vessels used in the first Roman Sacrifices by King Numa (the Inventer of their Ceremonies) were ne∣ver so prophaned as their Vessels of Gold have been. Verse 364. Tall Syrians shoulders.] These Syrians were Slaves of a gigantick stature, which in Juvenal's time the Roman Ladies kept, as they now keep Switzers, one to carry their Segetta's or Sedans. Verse 365. Ogulnia,] A Wanton of a miserable poor fortune, but one that made a shew as if she were some great Lady. Verse 389. With Bacchus or Priapus.] The naked Statues of Bacchus and Priapus, Gods of the Vines and Orchards, which very much re∣sembled the goodly Evnuch when he came to his Lady in the Bath. Verse 394. To Praetors.] Part of the Praetors office was to hire Mu∣sick and Voices at the setting forth of publick Playes or Games. Verse 399. The Lamian house and Appian name.] She must needs be a great person by extraction and marriage, that was descended from
Lamus, Father to Antiphates King of the Laestrygons, by Horace called the ancient Lamu's, Ode 17. and married to one of the noble Appian Family, which took that surname from the Crown won by L. Ap∣pius in Achaia. Who would imagine this Lady could have a passion for the poor mercenary Lutenist, Pollio? much less, that as a Sacrificer she would stand veiled, repeat the Priests words: turn pale for fear of some unlucky signe, when the Aruspex looked into the entrails of the sacrificed beast; and bring to the Altar an Offering of barley-cakes and wine: all this to make the Gods propitious to her Servant, that when the Musick-prize was played in the Capitol, he might bear away that oaken Wreath given to the best Musician Poet and Player by the Judges, which Do∣mitian Caesar had appointed in the Capitoline Games. Verse 400. Vesta and Janus.] There were two Vesta's, Ops or Vesta VVife to Coelum, and her Daughter the Virgin Vesta, in whose honour the vestall Virgins were consecrated by Numa at Rome, her Rites anci∣ently having been performed, and her sacred fire kept in Alba, Sat. 4. Liv. These two Vesta's are taken for one another in the Poets, but when they are distinguished: by Vesta the Mother is understood the Earth, by the Daughter the Fire. Janus was the most ancient King of Italy, that, as I have formerly told you, protected Saturn (when he fled out of Creet from his Son Ju∣piter:) and these two Kings entred into so strict a league of friendship, that Saturn imparted to Janus the secret of Agriculture, and in requitall Janus admitted Saturn into a partnership of government. They built two Towns which bore their names, one called Saturnium, the other Ja∣niculum. They first coined brass money: Macrob. lib. 1. stamped on the one side with the beak of a Galley, on the other side with the picture
of Janus graved with two faces, because Janus was held to be so prudent a Prince, that looking backward he remembred all things past, and looking forward, foresaw and provided for the future. After his death Janus was reputed a God; and King Numa built a Temple to him (as aforesaid) which stood open when the Romans were in warres, and was shut in times of peace. This Temple gave him the attributes of Pa∣tuleius and Clusius: Serv. Three times he was Clusius; for his Temple was shut thrice; first, during the reign of Numa, then at the end of the second Punick Warre, and lastly after the Battail of Actium. Janus and Ogyges are the same. It is agreed, by the common consent of an∣cient VVriters, that Janus, who is likewise Ogyges, came into Italy in the Golden times, when men were just. He taught his Subjects to plant Vineyards, to sow their grounds, and of their fruits first to make Offerings to the Divine power; then to use the remainder with moderation: Munster, lib. 2. Cos. Janus was a Priest, a religious man, a learned Philosopher, and a Theologue: He was, I say, the Father of Gods and men, the first Head and Governour of mankinde; of whom depended the management of this vast VVorld: Fab. Pict. Juvenal calls him thou old God Father Janus▪ and so old a God his Children the Romans thought him to be, that some of them conceived he was the Chaos: Ovid. in Fast. Me Chaos antiqui, nam sum res prisca, vocabant. The Ancients call'd me Chaos, I'm so old. Verse 412. Th' Aruspex will grow crooked sure] VVith stooping to look into the entrails of sacrifices made by great Ladies, for Fidlers and Players. Verse 425. Niphates,] A great River of Armenia the less, tumbling
down from the Mountain Niphates, that divides the lesser Armenia from Assyria, and gives the name to the River: Strab. lib. 11. which name of Niphates comes a nivibus, from snow: Stephan. and therefore upon a violent sudden Thaw, the gossiping great Lady (that holds conference with Generals, palludated in their imbroidered riding-Coats, as being ready to march into the field) might very well report that Niphates had drowned all the Countries about it. Verse 438. Two Leaden Balls.] They that sweat before they bathed▪ swung two Leaden Balls, in each hand one, (and then were nointed:) Senec. Epist. 57. Verse 462. The labouring Moon.] When the Moon was in eclipse, the simple superstition of the Romans made them believe that she was be∣witched with charmes and incantations, for which there was no Counter-spell but only a sound of brass, from Trumpets, Basons, Kettles, and the like: Tibull. Eleg. 8. Cantus & è cursu Lunam deducere tentat, Et faceret, si non aera repulsa sonent. Songs would, and sure might make the Moon retreat: Were not, for Counter-charms, Brass-kettles beat. Verse 465. Sylvanus.] God of the Woods, Son to his Grandfather and Sister, in this manner: Venus being offended with Valeria Tuscula∣naria, made her fall in love with her own Father. She opened the wicked secret to her Nurse, and the old Bawd trepand her Master into his Daugh∣ters Bed, telling him there was a Neighbour's Daughter, a very pretty young Maid, that had a months mind to him, but durst not speak for her self, no nor look upon so reverend a person. After enjoyment, when the old man was tippled, he took a light in his hand, which the Nurse seeing,
prevented his fury, and casting her self out of the Window broke her neck: a President shortly after followed by the old man; but Valeria, trusting to her nimble feet, over-ran her Father Valerius, got into the VVoods, and was delivered of Sylvanus, called by the Grecians Aegypa∣nes, from his figure, being a man with Goats feet. This Phantasm was by the Greeks and Romans believed to be God of the VVoods and Cattel; also that he had the power to transform Cyparissus, the Boy whom he doted upon, into a Cypress tree. To this God men offered up a Hog; but women never sacrificed to Sylvanus, nor did any of their sex pay a farthing to the Bath-keeper; as the Stoick did, that imagined himself a King, for which Horace laughs at him: neither was it the fashion for wo∣men to wear short Coats: all which my Author thinks fit they should take upon them as well as the understanding of great Authors, which is proper only to men. Verse 468. Enthymem,] An imperfect Sylogisme, wanting one pro∣position. Verse 471. Palaemon.] Remmius Palaemon, born at Vincentia, by Plin. and Ptol. called Vicentia. He lived at Rome, in the reigns of Tiberius and Claudius Caesar; he was an excellent Grammarian, and Tutor to M. Fabius Quintilian: but such a pride his Art put into him, that he said, Learning was born and would die with him; and used to call M. Varro a litterate Hog, whom Quintilian (not learning to make a Judgement from his Tutor) called the most learned of the Romans: and sayes, he writ ma∣ny learned books, was a Master of the Latin tongue, and skilfull in all Antiquity both of the Romans and Greeks. One of Palaemon's brags was, That Virgil in his Bucolicks prophecied of him, as the only competent Judge of all Oratours and Poets. He repoted, that when Thieves had ta∣ken
him, after he had named himself, they let him go: but Poverty pro∣ved not so kinde; for she never let goe her hold when she had catched him; after his expensive vanity of bathing many times a day, to which his fortunes were not answerable: Suet. Verse 482. Poppaea,] Nero's Empress: she invented a rare Poma∣tum: and was so elegant, so carefull to preserve her beauty, that when she was banished Rome, she carried fifty she-Asses along with her, for their milk to wash her self in. She died by a sudden rage of her Husband, kicking her when she was with child: Tacit. Verse 205. The Sicilian Court.] In the reigns of, the cruellest Tyrants of Sicily, Phalaris and the Dionisii. Verse 509. Isis.] Her first name was Io: she was Daughter to the Ri∣ver Inachus, and one of Jove's Mistresses. For fear of Juno, Jupiter meta∣morphosed her into a white Cow; but Juno's jealousie found her out in that shape, and begged the Cow of her Husband, which he had not the courage to deny her. Then she made Argos with his 100 eyes her Cow∣keeper, whereat Jupiter was so enraged, that he slew him by the hand of Mercury: Juno, to revenge her self upon his Love, made her mad, and so grievously tormented her, that Jove was forced to reconcile himself to his Wife; and then won her to consent that Io might be restored to her for∣mer shape. Afterwards she married Osiris, and changed her name to Isis; and after her death the Aegyptians, in memory of benefits received from her, by whom they were taught the use of Letters, deified her, and called her Priests Isaici: See Plutarc. in his Morals. Neer to the Palace of Romu∣lus, by Juvenal here called the old Sheep-coat, stood her Roman Temple, which was the meeting place for Wenches, Pimps and Bawds, as appears in this and the ninth Satyr, where it is pictured in the Designe: Ovid.
Multas Io facit quod fuit illa Jovi. Io makes many what she was to Jove? Verse 510. Psecas,] The Woman or Dresser to a tyrannicall Lady. Verse 517. The Matron of the Wheel,] That being very old, was in favour of her eye-sight, spared from needle-work, set to spinning, and made one of her Lady's Councel. Verse 525. Andromache,] VVife to Hector, Daughter to Eetion King of Thebes in Cilicia: Hom. lib. 12. Iliad. and Mother to Astyanax. In her widowhood Pyrrhus carried her into Greece, and had by her a Son called Molossus; afterwards (falling in love with Hermione, that was betroathed to Orestes) he gave her in Dower part of his Kingdome, and married her to the Prophet Helenus, Son to Priam, Volater. Her name imports a Virago or a masculine woman, and a tall one she was; you may take Ju∣venal's word. Verse 535. Bellona,] The Goddesse Pallas, or Minerva formerly de∣scribed, whose fanatick Priests sacrificed to her their own blood, and were therefore highly reverenced by the superstitious Roman Dames. Verse 535. Cybele.] Vid. Sat. 2. where the Goddesse Cybele and her Priests are set out at large. Verse 548. Tarquins Fields.] The Fields consecrated to Mars, cal∣led Campus Martius and Tiberinus (in regard they lay neer the River Ti∣ber) were bestowed upon the people of Rome by the Vestal Caja Tarra∣tia. These Juvenal calls Tarquin's Fields, because Tarquin the Proud converted all that ground to his own use, sowing it with corn: but when Brutus had freed Rome from his Yoak, the Fields were restored to their Martiall use, and the sacrilegious crop of Corn flung into the River; the Romans judging it to be impious for any man to make a benefit of holy
ground. The infinite number of Sheavs, clotted with the River-mud, in time became firm ground, and was called the Isle of Aesculapius, or the holy Island: Rosin. antiq. lib. 6. cap. 11. In the Campus Martius were to be seen the Statues of many Roman Generals, and the rarities which the Capitol had not room for. There the Tyrones or young Souldiers ex∣ercised their arms, and the Romans ran Horse-races and Foot-races, Wrestled, Fenced, cast the Bowl, Sledge and Dart, learned how to use the Sling and Bow, and to vault from the back of one horse to another: Coel. Rhod. l. 21. cap. 29.30. Here was also a Mount paved with Marble, tarressed about with Galleries, and in the midst of it a Tribunal or Seat of Justice, about which the Assemblies of the people many times gave their votes at the election of Magistrates: Serv. in Buc. Eclog. 1. Verse 549. White Io.] See the preceding Comment upon Isis: yet I cannot but take notice that Juvenal makes her only a white Cow, where Suidas tells us she was sometimes white, sometimes black, and sometimes of a Violet colour. Verse 550. Meroe.] Of all the Islands made by the River Nilus, Meroe (as aforesaid) is the greatest: it is in length 3000 furlongs and 1000 in breadth. The Chief City bears the name of the Island, and was built by Cambyses, that gave it the name of his deceased Sister Meroe. The Isle is inhabited by Shepherds, good Huntsmen and Husbandmen; as also industrious Miners, digging for Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, divers sorts of Stones, and the precious Ebone-tree: Herod. Verse 555. Her darling Priest.] The Priest of Isis at Rome. Verse 556. Bald Crew.] They that celebrated the mysteries of Isis, shaved all the hair off their heads: Apulei. Plin. Verse 557. Anubis,] Son to Osyris and Io or Isis: he was worshipped in
the form of a Dog, as his Brother Macedo was in the figure of a Wolfe, because in their Shields the one bore a Dog, the other a Wolf: Diodor. Coel. Rhod. lib. 3 ca. 12. After this Dog the Romans, in imitation of the Ae∣gyptians, went crying and howling, as if they followed him in quest of his Father Osiris King of Aegypt, that was murdered privately by his Bro∣ther Typhon: and the body having been long sought for by Queen Isis, was at last found cut in pieces neer to Syene: after his deification they still mourned for him with this Ceremony, and adored him in the form of a Bull, by the name of Apis, which in the Aegyptian tongue signifies a Bull; accordingly his offering was Hay: and if he took it, it betokened prosperous success; if he took it not, it was ominous: Strab. lib. ult. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 16. Verse 461. Silver Snake.] That Silver Snake, which in the Temple of Isis and Osyris twined it self about the Images of the Dog and Wolf. Verse 566. The poor she-Jew,] That durst not beg in publick, because she was an alien, but more especially, because she begged in the name of one God, not of the many Gods of Rome. Verse 573. Commagenian.] The Commagenian or Syrian Aruspex, and the Armenian Sooth-sayer told fortunes to Ladies, by inspecting the en∣trails of Pigeons, Chickens and Dogs; now and then they would steal a Child and dissect it; afterwards they would inform the Magistrate, and leave their good Dames to the mercy of the Law. Verse 576. Chaldaean] The Chaldaeans lived about Babylon, and had among them an Oracle like that of Delphos in Greece. They were the most ancient Babylonians, their office in the Common-wealth was to manage the government of Religion, their study Philosophy and Astro∣logy, wherein they were great Masters: the reason was, they studied
not all Arts and Sciences like the Grecians; but laying aside the care of worldly business, only applied themselves to Philosophy, whereby they came to be most learned: Diodor. Sicul. lib. 3.Cicer. Verse 578. Jove's secret Springs,] Spoken by my Author in scorn of Astrologers; as if Jupiter should now whisper them in the ear, with knowledge of future events, ever since Apollo had lost his voice at Delphos, where the Oracle was silenced at the birth of our Saviour Christ. Verse 581. Th' oftest Exile's chief.] The Ladies of Rome had the high∣est opinion of such an Astrologer as either by exile or imprisonment suf∣fered most, for predicting against great persons, and had been upon the accomplishment of his prediction repealed or set at liberty; as he was, who foretold that Otho should be Successor to his great Rivall the Empe∣ror Galba. Verse 589. Seriphus,] A very little Island in the Aegean Sea; it is one of the Cyclades, to which the Romans confined Informers, Astrologers, and great offenders, whose sentence ran, In Insulam deportari, to be carried into an Isle: See Plin. Panegyr. Verse 590. Tanaquil.] Wife to Tarquinius Priscus King of Rome: Liv. This Queen was much given to the study of Astrology and Ma∣thematicks. Verse 595. Saturn's frowns] Are here ballanced, in antithesi, with the smiles of Venus: he being the most sullen, cold, and malignant Planet; she the most benigne and fortunate, especially in conjunction. Verse 604. Thrasyllus,] A Platonist, and a very great Mathematician, once in high esteem with Tiberius Caesar, afterwards by his command cast into the Sea at Rhodes. Verse 610. Petosyris,] A famous Aegyptian Astrologer or Mathemati∣cian
(for so was an Astrologer called by the Romans) Plin. l. 7. c. 28. Suid. Verse 614. Phrygian Augurs.] The Phrygians, Cilicians and Arabians were marvelous skilfull Augurs or Diviners by the flight of Birds. Verse 614. Gymnosophists.] Indian Philosophers, so called because they were wise and naked. From the rising to setting of the Sun they would look upon him with fixed eyes; and stand in the hot boiling sands, first upon one leg, then upon the other: Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2. some say they could indure heat and cold without any sense of pain. When Alexander the great came among them, he bid them ask of him whatsoever they had a mind to, and he would grant it: they prayed him to bestow upon them what they infinitely thirsted for, immortality: He replied, How can you expect immortality from me that am mortal? Doe you know your self to be mortal, said they; why are you not then contented with your pa∣trimonial Kingdome, but trouble mandkinde thus to bring the world into subjection? Cic. Tusc. quaest. lib. 5. Augustinus lib. 5. de Civ. Dei. Verse 615. Patricians,] The Roman Nobility. Verse 116. Heav'ns winged-fire.] The lightning, watched by certain old Priests appointed for that purpose; and where they imagined a thun∣derbolt to fall, a hedge was made about the place, lest the people should come upon defiled ground, which they purified by sacrificing their Bi∣dentes, a pair of young Heifers; and from them the place it self was called Bidental. Vers. 617. Plebeian.] The Plebeians were the common people of Rome. Verse 617. Circus,] the great Shew-place, described in the Comment upon Sat. 3. Verse 618. Th' Ovall Tower.] A wooden Tower, of the form of an Egge, built by Agrippa for the Judges of the Circensian Games, to view
the course. This Tower was supported with pillars carved like Dol∣phines; before them upon a Mount stood a Courtesan, drest up as Ju∣venal describes her, that told poor women their fortunes. Verse 632. Before thou break'st thy fast.] The Romans held it omi∣nous, and looked for a black day, if they saw a Negro next their hearts in a morning. Verse 634. The foul Lake.] The Velabrian Lake, where fruitfull poor women exposed those children they were not able to maintain; and Midwives took them up for rich barren Ladies, that counterfeited lying-in, and trepand their Husbands with these Sons of the earth, that by this means inherited the greatest honours and fortunes in Rome, viz. The Salian Priesthood and great Scauran name. Of both which I have spoken in the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 643. Thessalian Philters.] Thessaly is a Country of Greece, ha∣ving Boeotia upon the one hand, on the other Macedonia: it lies to the Sea between the River Peneus and the Mountains of Thermopylae: and was first called Aemonia of King Aemon: Plin. lib. 4. cap. 7. There are in Thessaly 24 Mountains, whereof the noblest is Olympus, Palace of the Gods; then Pierus, the Seat of the Muses; Peleus and Ossa, memorable for the Giants war; Pindus and Othrys, inhabited by the Lapiths: but neither the Mountains nor the many fair Rivers of this Region rendred it so famous, as it was made by the rare Simples that grew there, rare both for the use and destruction of men, for medicine and poison; so that not only Physitians, but also Witches came thither to furnish themselves of ingredients for Philters or Love-potions. It was in Thessaly where Medea gathered all those herbs which restored old Aeson to his youth: Apul. lib. 1. Flor.
Verse 649. Nero's Vncle.] Caesar Caligula, who had this surname à caligis, from his military Boots, which he wore set full of Pretious-stones. His Wife Caesonia wrought upon his affections with such powerfull love-potions, that in his dotage he would often (like to the Lydian King Can∣daules) shew her naked to his friends: yet still when he kissed her neck, he would say, This fair neck, if I please, may be cut off. Once in a hu∣mour he professed that he would send to be resolved, by what means he was brought to that excessive dotage: then Caesonia, fearing to be disco∣vered, put into her Philter more of her powder of sympathy, which made Caligula stark mad, and turned him from a Prince to a Tyrant. Verse 650. A Colt's whole front.] The Hippomenes, a caruncula or bunch of flesh growing upon the forehead of a Colt; some say the Mare eats it in her very foaling time, as grudging so great a benefit to man, in regard it makes him, that wears it, be beloved of all his acquaintance. This Hippomenes, snatched from the teeth of the foaling Mare and in∣fused in wine, makes the drinker enamoured of the Cup-bearer; Caligu∣la found it so. Verse 653. Mushrome] Claudius Caesar, above all other Table-rarities, loved to eat Mushromes: Sat. 5. —before His Wife's came, after which he ne're eat more. Verse 669. Pontia.] Juvenal supposes that his Readers may questi∣on the truth of some crimes charged upon Ladies, and take them to be stories fained for heightning of his Satyrs, in imitation of Sophocles when he writ his Greek Tragedies. Now my Author, to clear himself, quotes the Case of Pontia Daughter to P. Petronius, and VVife to Ve∣ctius Bolanus, that after her Husbands death, poisoned the two Sonnes
which she had by him, that she might come with a full fortune to him, that was her Servant before Nero put her Husband to bleed his last. Pontia, being arraigned, was convicted from her own mouth, con∣fessing the fact, and her inclination, not only to poison her two Sons, but many more, if her first Husband had begot them; so the words import. —hear Pontia confess, My Sons I poyson'd. Cruel Viperess, What both? at one meal two? had I to sev'n Been Mother, I had sent them all to heav'n. When sentence was passed upon her, after a great Supper and a Banquet, she called for Musick, danced a while, then made her veins be cut; and yet at the same time took a draught of poison for expedition: See Jan. Parrasius Papin. Stat. 5. Sylv. Mart. O mater, qua nec Pontia deterior. O mother, Pontia was not worse. Verse 673. Medea,] Daughter to Aeta King of Colchos by Queen Ipsea, or, as some call her, Ida. When Jason, with the rest of the Argo∣nauts, arrived at Colchos, Medea won her Father to give them a reception in his Court: Then for fear of losing her beloved Jason (that attempted to carry her from many rival Princes, which daily lost their lives upon the same account) she taught him how to overcome all intervenient dangers, by taming and yoaking the brazen-footed Bulls, by charming into a dead sleep the ever-waking Dragon; then killing him and stealing the Gol∣den Fleece, which he guarded. This done, Medea fled away with Jason, carrying along her little Brother Absyrtus. King Aeta pursued them; and when he drew so neer, that Medea and Jason gave themselves for lost: to retard his march, she cut in pieces the young Child her Brother;
and whilst her father gathered up his scattered limbs, she and her Servant saved themselves by flight. At last, after a tedious voyage, they came to Thessaly, where Jason (that could not move her in vain) made it his suit, now they were in the Worlds great Physick-garden, that she would try her art upon his old decrepit Father; whom she restored to his strength and youth. Diogenes said that Medea was no Witch, but a wise wo∣man, that by Gymnastick exercises, and sweating in Stoves, brought effe∣minate persons, which had prejudiced their health by idleness, to as good a habit of body as at first. This made the Poets invent their Fable of her boiling of men till their old age was consumed. Trusting to this exam∣ple of Aeson, the Daughters of his Brother Peleas were cozened into the murder of their Father, Medea making them believe she would restore their Father to his youth, as she had restored her Husbands Father: Ov. Met. lib. 7. Lastly Jason put her away, and married Creusa, Daughter to Creon King of Corinth. Medea (mad to be thus used) by the hand of her Servant presented to Creusa a rich Cabinet full of wild-fire, which she opening, burned her self and fired the whole Palace. Jason, resolving to kill Medea for this fact, broke open her Chamber-dore: just as if she had bewitched him thither, only to be an eye witness to the death of those Children which he had by her; for, as soon as ever he came in, she catcht them up and strangled them all, but saved her self by the power of Ma∣gick. Her next appearance she made at Athens, where she married Ae∣gaeus: and though he was then very aged, she had a Son by him, called after her own name, Medus, that gave name to the Country of the Medes: Justin. lib. 42. After all this (no body knows how) Jason and she were reconciled; probably it was for her own ends, because she forth∣with carried him to Colchos, where he reestablished her old banished Fa∣ther
in his Kingdome: See Diodor. Sicul. and N. Comes that learnedly interprets the Fable of Medea. Verse 673. Progne,] Daughter to Pandion King of Athens, Wife to Tereus King of Thrace, of all Thracians the most barbarous: for, under pretence of waiting upon Pandion's other Daughter, that made a visit to her Sister Progne at his Court by the way he ravished Philomela, cutting out her tongue, that she might not tel. But Philomela, being an excellent Work-woman, drew her sad story with her needle in such lively colours, that her Sister Progne knew the whole circumstance of the Rape: and to revenge her self of her cruel Husband, by the advice of the Maenades, she feasted him with the limbs of his and her Son Itys, which being known by the Childs head that was served-in for the second course; Tereus in his fu∣ry would have killed his Wife; but whilst he was drawing out his Sword he saw her turned into a Swallow: Philomela was transformed into a Nightingale, Itys into a Pheasant: Tereus himself, admiring at their me∣tamorphosis, was turned into a Lapwing, that still bears upon his head the creast of a fierce Thracian Souldier: See Ovid. Met. 6. Verse 683. Alcestis,] Wife to Admetus King of Thessaly, whose Cattle-keeper Jove himself had been; and therefore, as it seems, when his old Master was sick to death, Jove was contented with an exchange; so that if any one would die for Admetus, he might live. But this being an office distastefull to his whole Court and Kingdome, all excused them∣selves, only Queen Alcestis cheerfully embraced the offer, and served her Husband with her life. Her Tragedy you may read in the works of Euripides. Verse 687. Belides.] The Belides or Danaides were fifty Daughters of Danaus Son to Belus. To these Ladies Aegyptus (Danaus his Brother)
desired to marry his fifty Sons; but Danaus would not give way to the Treaty of a marriage with all or any of them, because the Oracle had fore-told him that he should die by the hand of a Son in Law: but Ae∣gyptus moving it once again in the head of a strong Army (brought to force the consent of Danaus and his Daughters) the match was conclu∣ded. Upon the wedding night the Brides were instructed by their Fa∣ther to kill their Husbands when they saw their opportunity: In obedi∣ence to him all these Ladies slew their Husbands, but only Hyperm∣nestra, that preserved the life of her Husband Lyceus: He afterwards ve∣rified the Oracle, and to secure himself slew his Father in Law Danaus, and succeeded him in the Kingdome of Argos. The sentence pro∣nounced against these Sisters by Minos, the just Judge of Hell, was, to pour water into a Tub that was split, until they filled it, which could never be, and therefore their punishment must be endless. Some think this Fable signifies the Spring and Autumne, that every year pour out new varieties of flowers and fruits, yet never satisfie our expectations: See Lucret. lib. 5. Others take it to bear proportion to the whole life of man, and of all things in the world: which as they come in, go out, not leaving any long continued monument of what they were. There are that apply it to benefits conferred upon ingratefull persons, which va∣nish in the doing. Plato compares the split Tubs of the Beleides to the minde of an intemperate man, which is insatiable. Terence hath one that saith he is very like them, plenus rimarum sum, I am full of Leaks: But whosoever he was that writ the following Epigram, he fixes Plato's sense, from an universal to a particular, exceeding well. Belidas fingunt pertusa in dolia Vates Mox effundendas fundere semper aquas.
Nomine mutato, narratur fabula de te Ebrie, qui meias quae sine fine bibis. Quinetiam hoc in te quadrat turba ebria; quod sint Corpora quae fuerant, dolia facta tibi. Tubs split, say Poets, the Belides fill With water: which, still pour'd in, runs out still. Change names, to thee the Fable comes about Drunkard, that all thou pour'st in pissest out: In this too it concerns your bousing Crue, Those, that were Bodies, are made Tubs by you. Verse 687. Eriphyle,] Daughter to Thelaon, Sister to Adrastus, and Wife to Amphiaraus. She was bribed with a Ring by Polynices to make discovery of her Husband, that lay hid for fear of being forced to march to the seige of Troy, where he and she knew that it was his fate to die. For this trechery of his Wife, Alcmaeon had in charge from his Father Amphiaraus, that as soon as ever the breath was out of his body, she that betrayed him to death should not live a minute: accordingly, when the news was brought, Alcmaeon slew his Mother. Verse 689. Clytemnestra.] See the Comment upon Sat. 1. Hom. lib. 11. Odyss. Senec. in Agam. Eurip. in Orest. Sophocles in Elect. Verse 695. The thrice foil'd Monarch.] Mithridates King of Pontus, that by the strength of his arme could rule six pair of horses in a Chariot: and by the strength of his brain two and twenty Nations, every one of them speaking a several tongue, and he all their languages. When the Romans were taken up with their civil wars, he beat Nicomedes out of Bithinia, and Ariobarzanes out of Cappadocia: possessing himself of Greece, and all the Greek Islands, only Rhodes excepted. The Merchants of
Rome that traffick't in Asia, by his contrivance were slain in one night: the Proconsul Q. Oppius and his Legate Apuleius were his Prisoners. But Mithridates was thrice defeated by the Romans: First (as you have heard by Sylla at Dardanum: then by Lucullus at Cyzicum: from whence he fled for refuge to Tigranes King of Armenia, that suffered him to make new levies within his Dominions; but that vast Army was totally routed by Pompey. Finally, Pharnaces besieged him in his Palace, and Mithri∣dates despairing, attempted to poison himself; but had brought his body to such a habit by long and constant use of Antidots to prevent impoiso∣ning, that when poyson should have done him service, it would not work: Nor had he then lost the Majesty of his looks; for the man, sent to kill him, found Mithridates unwillingly alive, yet still so undaunted and like himself, that the Murderer shakt and trembled at his presence; nor was able to doe his office, till Mithridates guided the Executioners hand to his own heart. But first this King slew all his Royall Family: Laodice his Wife, his Sister, Mother, Brother, three young Sonnes, and as many Daughters.
Figura Septima. PRimò praecipitem in vitium descripserat Autor Romam; dein rigidos aliena in crimina sontes; Rus praelatum Vrbi; vitandam rectiùs Aulam; Ad coenam & sannas simul, accubuisse Clientes; Ducenti Vetulo qualisque futura sit Vxor. Subjicit hîc, doctos qualis fortuna sequatur. Lappa 1 Poëta togam, mox libros pignorat Atreo. Historicus 2 scriptor ruris nemorisque recessum Eligit; attonitus mentem de pane parando, Et, cùm turgescat millesima pagina, chartis. Causidico 3 macro & docto petasunculus & vas Pelamidum dantur: ditiaureus affluit amnis Indocto, 4 crassúmque premit lectica Mathonem. Rhetore 5, quis color & quae quaestio summa, magistro Scire volunt omnes; mercedem solvere nemo: Sed nostrum instituens, gallinae filius albae Quintilianus 6, habet miro tot praedia fato. Ars nihil Enceladi, claríque Palaemonis affert; Grammaticus 7, cui tetra haeret fuligo lucernae, In pueros oleum perdit: qui vimine Flaccum 8, Et qui Virgilium 9 docuit trepidare minores, Vapulat à magnis; unúsque est pluribus impar.
The seventh Designe. VIce at the height in Rome: And that cry'd down By Knaves: The Country better then the Town: The Court far worse: The feasted Client jeer'd: The City-Wanton whipt: these you have heard. Now see the Virtuosi how they fare, In what a sad condition Scholars are. Lean Poverty is in the Poet's looks: Lappa to 1 Atreus pawns his Cloak and Books: The great 2 Historian, shelter'd in the wood, There meditates how he may compass food, And Reams of Paper, to write Tomes upon. The well-read 3 Lawyer gets, for fees, Poor John. Th' 4 unlearned feeds so high, he hardly can Crowd his fat sides into his large Sedan. The 5 Rhetorician poures on flowry Theams, Almost for nothing, all his golden streams: Yet th' Author's Rhet'rick-Master wealthy grows, Quintilian's 6 one of Fortunes rare white Crows. The 7 Schoolmaster (so often like to choak, When Boyes that con by Lamp-light smell of smoak; He that made young besmutted 8 Horace sweat And 9 Virgil shake) is by great School-boyes beat.
The Manners of Men. THE SEVENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. The Arts are fed by empty praise. The wanting Poet sells his Playes; Less the Historian's profit is; The Lawyer's gettings less then his; The Rhetoritian's yet more small; And the Grammarian's least of all. Yet Learning, scorn'd and almost sterv'd, By Caesars bounty is preserv'd. CAESAR is both our studies Cause and End, For he alone is the sad Muses friend. Now, when our famous Poets strive to hire Poor Gabian baths, at Rome to make the fire:
Nor to turn Cryers some have held it base, But left in AGANIPPE'S Vale, their place, Whil'st to large Courts the hungry CLIO goes; For, if thy learned purse no money showes, Get thee MACHAERA'S name and living, cry At publick sales, What will you please to buy? Fine pots? three-footed stools? come chuse your selves Shelves for your Studies, Play-books for your shelves: HALCIONE, PACCUS his tragick wit: TEREUS and OEDIPUS by FAUSTUS writ: 'Tis better far, the Judge then swearing thee, To say I saw, what thou did'st never see: Let them doe so that come from th' Asian coast; Though Cappadocian Knights, Knights of the Post, And our Bithinian Knights too, doe the same, Which thorough Gallo-Graecia barefoot came. None shall hereafter stoop to sordid pains That brouse on Laurel, and write lofty strains: Youths study; CAESAR'S bounty spurs you on, That seeks but matter it may work upon. But if for help from others thou do'st look, And therefore fill'st thy yellow Table-book,
Borrow a Faggot (THELESIN) blow blow, And upon VULCAN what thou writ'st bestow; Or let the moths thy lockt up works devour; Or break thy Pens, and thy Ink-bottle pour Upon those warres that did thy sleep expel, Those mighty lines writ in a little Cell; Only because thou didst for Ivy hope, And a lean Image: that's thy utmost scope. For rich Churls have learn'd only, in our dayes, To commend Poets as Boys Peacocks praise: Mean time Youth spends, that might with toil have made A fortune from War, Traffick, or the Spade: And eloquent poor Age begins too late It self and it's Terpsicore to hate. Now mark, to save his purse, what trick's devis'd, Thy Prince (the Muses and their God despis'd) Himself makes Verses, and admits no Peers But HOMER, meerly for a thousand years, Caught with Fame's sweetness if thou'lt read, to lend His House will MACULONUS condescend; He will command his churlish iron grates To open faster then the City gates:
His Freedmen he will marshall in the Pit, His Clients and his Friends great voices fit: But not a Prince thy Bench-hire will defray; Nor for the Beam, that bears the Scaffolds, pay: Nor so much as the Chairs return insure, Set for great men, th' Orchestra's furniture. Yet still we ply the brittle sands, and through The shore draw furrows with a barren plough: Nor, would we take our hands off, can we do't; Custome and vain Ambition ties us to 't. The Writing Evil poisons many so, That Years and their Disease together grow. But he that merits Bayes to crown his head, That spins out nothing of a common thread; That, as his great Art's Master, scorns to print Poor triviall coines stampt at the publick Mint: One that I cannot shew, but only can Conceive, a minde untroubled makes that man, That feels no care, loves silent Groves, and brings A spirit fit to taste th' Aonian Springs. In the Pierian Caves soft aires to chant, Or reach a Thyrsus, suits not with sad Want,
That pinches day and night: when HORACE writ His Ohe, he was full of Wine and Wit. What place for wit, but where a man with Verse Is only troubled, and holds free commerce With BACCHUS and APOLLO? 'tis in vain To think one bosome can two cares contain. 'Tis for great souls, not one that need besots And mends his Mat, to modell Chariots For Gods, their Steeds and Looks: or how her Snakes ALECTO, in confounding TURNUS, shakes. Had VIRGIL had nor house-room, nor a Boy Whom he about his bus'ness might imploy: The elfe-lockt Fury all her Snakes had shed, His Pipe play'd nothing rare, but flat and dead. We tragick Poets now would think it fair, If that, which kept th' old Buskins in repair, Might not from RUBREN LAPPA be with-drawn, Whose Cloak and Papers ATREUS hath in pawn. Poor NUMITOR has nothing for his Friend, But can rich presents to his Mistress send: Nor wants to buy a Lyon, tamely bred, And with much flesh accustom'd to be fed;
Poets, belike, cost more then Lions doe, And are conceiv'd to eat more garbage too. In's Garden LUCAN pleas'd with fame may lie, With Marble Nymphs and Fountains in his eye: But BASSUS, poor SARRANUS, what to thee Is any glory, if't bare glory be? To their dear Thebais the People throng, And to the sound of his inchanting tongue, When STATIUS with the promise of a day O're joyes the Town; for in so sweet a way He reads his Poem, that to hear it spoke A lust affects the soul: yet when he broke The benches with strong lines, he must for bread To PARIS sell AGAVE'S Maiden-head. Many to honour in the warres He brings; Puts Summer Annulets and Winter Rings On Tragick Poets fingers; what there lives No Lord that will bestow, this Player gives. Do'st thou attend the Camerini then, And BAREA? a fig for Noblemen, Write Tragedies; 'tis PELOPEA takes, She praefects, PHILOMELA Tribunes makes.
Nor envy Stage-rais'd Poets; where hast thou A PROCULEIUS, or MAECENAS now? A FABIUS, LENTULUS, or COTTA? Wit Had then Munificence to ballance it. 'Twas good for Poets then, pale fac'd to grow, And, all December long, no wine to know. But you Historians to more purpose toile, Your Works requiring both more time and oile; None short of the two thousandth page can fall, And meer expence in Paper breaks you all. The boundless matter upon which you goe, And Lawes of History will have it so. But what fruit reaps your labours? where is he Will give th' Historian an Attorney's fee? No, you are lazy people, either laid Upon your beds, or walking in the shade. Then tell me what doe active Lawyers gain By Civil bus'ness, their great Books and Train? They bawl loud ever, but then deaf our ears, When the rich Creditor; that fees them, hears: Or by the sleeve he pulls them, that layes claim To some great fortune, by a dubious name;
Then th' hollow Bellows breaths forth mighty lies, And on their breasts their eager spettle flies. To state their profits truly, set me here A hundred Lawyers, and LACERTA there; And that one Coach-mans land shall buy th' estates Of all those hundred learned Advocates. They sit, that are the Grandees of the Warre, And thou poor AJAX standest at the Barre: And for litigious titles quot'st the Lawes To a dull Herdsman, that must judge the Cause. Crack thy stretcht lungs poor wretch, that when th' art tir'd, The Lawyer's Bayes, green Palmes, may be acquir'd. What is the price at which thou set'st thy tongue? A little Bacon-flitch, i'th' Chimney hung: Or Tunny, barreld when 'tis mud not fish; Or stinking Onions, Aegypt's monthly dish; Or Wine our Tiber-Watermen transport, Five bottles, if thou hast pleaded four times for't? And if one piece of Gold come, which is rare, As your agreement was, the Judge must share. AEMYLIUS shall have what he demands: (Yet we plead better) for at's Gate there stands
A Chariot, and four goodly Steeds of brass: And he, in's one-ey'd Statue, makes a pass, On's fiery War-horse, with his bending spear, Putting the Foe, at distance, in a fear. Thus into debt hath PEDO vainly run, Thus MATHO breaks; TONGILLUS is undone, That from his great Rhinoceros took oile, And with his dirty train the Bath did soil; And his young Medians shoulders prest so sore, When his Sedan they through the Forum bore, As he was going to buy silver plate, Fair Myrrhin bolls, fine boyes, with an estate And Country-house; for all which, at the day, His Tyrian Purple promises to pay. And yet this gallantry with some does well: Purple and Violet Robes a Lawyer sell, A noise and face of wealth doe him befriend; But lavish Rome puts to expence no end. Should our old Orators return and live, No one would now two hundred drachma's give To CICERO himself, unless there shone Upon his finger a great pretious-stone:
He that begins a Suit, ith' first place, marks If thou hast ten Companions, and eight Clarks; Whether a Closse-chair doth behinde thee wait, And men in Gowns before thee walk in state. A Gemme, to plead with, PAULUS therefore hires, And therefore PAULUS greater fees requires Then are by GALLUS or by BASIL took: For Eloquence in rags men seldome look. When's BASIL honour'd, after his Report, To bring the weeping Mother into Court; Or who hears BASIL, plead he ne're so well▪ Away to France, or rather chuse to dwell In Africa, the Nursery of Law: If from thy pleading thou would'st profit draw. Thou teachest Rhet'rick; O the iron breast Of VETTUS, that can those hard Theams digest Which murder Tyrants! who the self same things He sitting reads, to others standing sings, And in the same tone the same verse instills: Poor School-masters this twice boil'd Cole-woort kils; The trope, the kind o'th' plea, the questions summe, What arrows from the adverse part may come
All men would know, none for their knowledge pay; Pay would'st thou have? what doe I know I pray? The Master's tax'd, that under the left breast There's nothing beats in's young Arcadian beast. That, every sixt day, makes my poor head ake With his dire HANNIBAL; what course hee'll take After the fatall day at Cannae won; If he directly should to Rome march on, Or to get's weather-beaten forces out Of storms and lightning, wisely wheel about. Ask what thou wilt, I'll give it thee, 'tis there, That his own Father him so oft would hear. But, with one mouth, at least six Lawyers plead For Men, and not as you doe for the Dead: They from their pleadings HELLEN'S Rape exclude, MEDEA'S Charms, the base Ingratitude Of JASON, and what kinde of medicine might Bring old blind AESON to his youth and sight. The Rhetorician shall (if rul'd by me) Take up his Rudis, and himself make free, Declaim in Law-Courts, and descending from The fained shadow, to the substance come.
Lest that small stock, which his one Loaf should buy, Be spent, which teaching School will ne're supply. Doe but CHRISOGONUS and POLLIO weigh, And for what miserable stipends they To great men's Sons their Rhetorick impart, Dissecting THEODORUS and his Art. His Bath costs much, his Portico costs more, Wherein he rides untill the showre be o're: Is't fit his Lordship for fair weather stay, And soil his handsome Beast with new-made clay? No, here his Mule's neat hoof unsully'd shines. On that side he his Dining-room designes, Which on Numidian Pillars round must run, Where West and North cool th' East and Southern Sun. What ere his house cost, Artists he must take▪ To marshall dishes, and rare sawces make; And when all these Sestertia thus are spent, Poor two, at most, QUINTILIAN must content. Nothing costs Fathers less then Sons. How got QUINTILIAN so much land then? Tell me not Of presidents that are with fortune rare; The Fortunate is valiant, and fair,
The Fortunate's wise, generous, well born, On his black shoe a Silver-Cressent's worn; The Fortunate speaks handsom'st, argues best; Though hoarse, sings well: for here the ods will rest, What Stars receive thee, when but newly come Crying to light, and blushing from the womb. If fortune will, poor Rhetorician, she Can raise thee, and thou shalt a Consul be: And from a Consul, if she will, she can, Make thee again a Rhetorician. What was VENTIDIUS? What TULLY too, But proofs of what the Stars and Fates could doe? That Crowns for Servants, Bayes for Slaves prepare: But Fortunate, white Crows are not so rare. Many repented that they play'd the fool In setting up a barren Rhet'rick-School; As in THRASIMACUS may be observ'd, And SECUNDUS CHARINAS almost sterv'd I'th' midst of Athens, that to Scholars, now, Except cold Hemlock, nothing dare allow. Grant Heav'n, that gentle weightlesse Earth may lie On our fore-fathers bones, and sprout on high
In flow'rs, which to the Aire perfumes may bring, Cloathing their Urns in a perpetuall Spring: Because a Tutor they did still repute To be the sacred Parent's Substitute. When's Rod the Centaur singing-Master shak't, ACHILLES, though he was a great boy, quak't In's Fathers Mountain: yet who, then, could fail To laugh, that saw a Master with a tail. By his own Scholars now is RUFFUS mall'd, RUFFUS, that TULLY ALLOBROGIAN call'd. Who to ENCELADUS, or to the learn'd PALAEMON, tenders justly what is earn'd By a Grammarian's pains? be what it may, 'Tis less still then a Rhetorician's pay: Yet thence, he that a Schoole-boy over-sees, Defalks (as all Paymasters will) his fees. PALAEMON yield, fall from thy highest rate, Like Trades-men in their Shops, a little bait: So long as all's not lost, intic'd wherewith, Thou satest up till midnight; which no Smith, None that cards wool with sloap-tooth'd wyre would do, So long as all's not lost, that put thee to
Th' induring what a Grammar-school annoyes, As many sev'ral smoaks as thou taught'st boyes: When HORACE with his Lamp was all besmear'd, And VIRGIL like a Blackamoor appear'd. Yet seldome that which is their due is paid, Unless complaint be to the Tribune made. But stricter lawes on Tutors you impose, For you must have one that all Grammars knows, Rules, Authors, Histories: and these, as well As he can his own nails or fingers tell; That if perhaps you ask him, as you goe TO TYTAN'S or the Town-Bath, you may know ANCHYSE'S Nurse, thy Mother in law's name ARCHEMORUS, the Country whence she came: How long ACESTE'S liv'd, how many a pot Of his Sicilian wine the Trojans got. You doe expect he should a School-boy take, And mould his manners, just as one would make A face of wax: you doe conceive that he To all your Children must a Father be, And look they should no filthy pastimes use: Nor is't a little toil to him, that views
The hands of such a world of Boyes, and pryes Into the trembling corners of their eyes. Doe this they say; and for our whole years debt, Thou shalt have what a suit in Law can get. The Comment UPON THE SEVENTH SATYR. VErse 1. Caesar.] The Emperor Domitian; such a favourer of learned men, that he sent many of the Virtuosi out of this world to perfect their knowledge in the next: and to the rest he gave an opportunity of following their studies in this life, by impri∣soning or banishing of them: Yet some few Poets, and very noble ones, tasted of his bounty, as Martial and Statius; both which he favoured, the first for his own sake, the other upon the score of his Minion the Player Paris, for whom Statius writ the Tragedy of Agave, and was well paid for his wit by Paris, that taught his great Master the art of incou∣raging some Scholars. Therefore Juvenal in this Satyr commends both Domitian and Paris, but you may see it is for fault of a better; the Satyr appears through the Complement. Verse 4. Gabian Baths.] Gabium was a beggerly Volscian Town (See the Comment upon Sat. 3.) To be Master of a Bath there, was no bet∣ter then a Fire-maker's place in a Bath at Rome. Verse 6. Aganippe's Vale.] Aganippe's Valley and Spring were in a so∣litary
part of Boeotia, consecrated to the Muses. But instead of withdrawing to such privacie, as the old Poets used, want of Patrons and hunger forces the new ones, as Cryers of goods to be sold, to come upon a Stage built for that purpose, in large Courts where Chapmen might have room to flock about them. Verse 7. Clio,] One of the Nine Muses; her name signifies Glory: Hesiod. Theog. because glory is the aim of Poets. She was the Inventress of History, transmitting to posterity the actions of gallant men: Virg. de 9. Mus. VVas it not pitty that so noble a Muse for plain hunger should turn Cryer? Verse 9. Machaera,] A Cryer of Goods set to sale, one that was in Juvenal's time, as well known at Rome, as He is now about London that cryes Stockins for the whole Family. Verse 13. Halcyone.] Halcyone was Daughter to Neptune and Wife to Ceyx. She sailing to the Oracle was shipwrackt, and being impatient cast her self into the Sea: but the Gods in pitty would not suffer her to be drowned; and therefore turned her into a Kings-fisher: Ovid. lib. 11. Verse 14. Tereus] King of Thrace, Son to Mars by the Nymph Bi∣stonis. He married Progne, that (finding, by her Sister Philomel's needle∣work, who had cut out her tongue, and why he did it) called a Councell of her Gossips the Maenades, that were met to celebrate the Orgies of Bacchus; where by a general vote it was resolved, that she should treat her Husband, all the dishes at the Table being made out of his young Son Itys, severally cooked; and that, for a second course, one of the Gos∣sips should bring in the head of his Son Itys, and another the ravished Philomela. How all these four Princes were transformed, if you remember not Ovid, you may turn to the end of the Comment upon Sat. 6.
Verse 14. Oedipus,] Son to Laius and Jocasta King and Queen of Thebes. VVhen Jocasta was with childe of him, the King sent to the Oracle to know the fortune of his Ofspring, it was answered, The Queen would be delivered of a Son that should kill his Father. Laius, to pre∣serve himself, when the Child was born, gave him to a Shepherd, charging the man, upon pain of his own life, to destroy the Infant. The Shep∣herd durst not obey the King, for accounting to the Gods; neither durst he disobey him, for fear of his threatnings; therefore he chose a middle way, and thrusting a Sword through the feet of the poor Babe, into the holes he put twigs of VVicker, by which he hung him upon a tree, thinking that want of sustenance would soon make an end of him. The Shepherd at his return to Court shewed the bloody sword to the King, confidently assuring his Majesty that his pleasure was fulfilled. But Phorbas, Shepherd to Polybius King of Corynth, going through the VVood (perhaps to make a visit to his Brother Shepherd) heard the Child, ran in, and took it down. Returning with all speed to Corynth, he presented the Babe, as a great rarity both of Fortune and Nature, to the Queen his Mistress, that was Childless. The Infant so pleased the Queen, that, as if the Gods had sent her a Child from Heaven, she bred him up as her own; and from the tumour of his feet, which his wounds had swelled, she called him Oedipus. VVhen he grew to be a good big Youth, and understood he was not Son to Polybius, he resolved to finde out his own Father. To this end he consulted the Oracle, that bid him goe directly to Phocis, where he should meet his Father: when he came thither, the Phocians were in an Uproar; which Laius coming to sup∣press, in the tumult Oedipus, not knowing him to be his Father, slew him. Then conceiving himself to be deluded by the Oracle, Oedipus, being
out of hope to finde his Father, fell upon a new designe, undertaking the Sphinx, a Monster with a womans face, birds wings, and a dog's body. This Chimaera, from her fortification upon a Mountain in The∣bes, plundered and destroyed that Kingdome: nor would Apollo pro∣mise any end to their miseries, till one came that could resolve the Mon∣ster's riddle. To such a knowing person Creon King of Thebes (that suc∣ceeded his Son in Law Laius) offered in marriage the new Widow, his Daughter Jocasta. Many gallant men had died in the attempt, yet that was no discouragement to Oedipus, when a Kings Daughter was the prize for which his life was to be ventured. To the fatall place came Oedipus, and by the Sphinx was presently asked, What is't, That in the morning is a four-footed creature, two-footed at noon, at night three-footed? he answered, a Man; that in his infancy creeps upon hands and feet; in his full strength goes upright on his leggs; and in his decrepit age borrows one leg of the Carpenter, walking with a staffe. For grief to have her Aenigma thus unriddled, the Sphinx brake her neck; a for∣tune that Oedipus might well envy: for his was far sadder, to be rewarded with the marriage of his own mother Jocasta. But time at last unfolded to Oedipus the Riddle of his own fortunes. And when he knew that he had killed his Father, and married his Mother, in a rage he pluckt out his own eyes: and would have killed himself, but his hand was held by his Daughter Antigone, that led her blinde Father out of Thebes, when he was banished by Creon: Senec. in Oedip. and after Seneca I doubt a Theban Tragedy writ by Faustus would hardly sell, unless a rare Cryer preferred it: See Stat. in Thebaid. Verse 17 Asian.] Asian Slaves in the first edition: in the second, Ro∣man Knights.
Verse 19. Bithynian.] Bithynia is a Region of the lesser Asia, lying right against Thrace along the Pontick Sea; for which reason Bithynia had once the name of Pontus: Euseb. Afterwards a People of Thrace that were called Thynians, passing over and possessing themselves of Pontus, it took from them the name of Bithynia: Plin. lib. 1. ca. 31. Divers other appellations this Country had, but was famous by no name at all, but this which my Author seems to give it, viz. a Nursery of Knights of the Post: it is only memorable for Hannibal, that was buried at Libyssa. Verse 20. Gallograecia.] Juvenal calls it new France; the ancient name was Galatia. When the Galls grew to be so populous that France could not contain them, first with sword and fire they over-ran Italy, took Rome, and straightly besieged the Capitol; but Camillus routed them and freed his own Country: See the Comment upon Sat. 2. Then the Galls, that like a Sea-breach had overflowed all Italy, after the storm was over, continued rolling: and loosing on the Roman side, got ground again in Greece and Macedon; from thence, led by their General Le∣onorus the Grecians joyning, they passed into Asia, where, by consent of the King of Bithynia, they planted themselves in a part of his Dominions, which was afterward called Gallograecia. Verse 27. Thelesine,] A Poet, to whom (as some think) Juvenal writ this Satyr. Verse 28. Vulcan,] God of fire: See the Comment upon Sat. 1. Verse 33. Ivy.] Poets were crowned with Bayes, Oak, Parsley and Ivy. Verse 36. Boyes Peacocks praise.] Children are much taken with the colours and beauty of the Peacock's Plumes, them they commend, but they give him nothing: if they can get a Peacock, they will pull his fea∣thers,
and take from him that which they commended. In point of Vain-glory the Poet much resembles the Peacock, as he is described by Ovid. de Art. lib. 1. Laudatas ostendit avis Junonia pennas: Si tacitus spectes, illa recondit opes. Praise but the Peacock, and he spreads his Train: Say nothing, and he shuts it up again. Verse 40. Terpsicore,] One of the Nine Muses, the Inventress of Musick and Dancing. In her the greatest part of man's life rejoyces: Plutarch. Verse 42. God.] Apollo. Vers. 46. Maculonus,] One of the Peacock-praisers, that accomo∣dated the reading Poets with his house, and furnished them with voices to cry them up, but bestowed nothing upon them. Verse 49. Pit.] By the Pit and Scaffolds for the People, and the Or∣chestra for the Nobility, you may cleerly see, that Roman Poets read their Works upon a Stage, as solemnly as our Playes are acted, and their audience was as great. An Instance whereof my Author here gives you in the Poet Statius. To their dear Thebais the People throng, And to the sound of his inchanting tongue, When Statius with the promise of a day O're-joyes the Town; for in so sweet a way He reads his Poem, that to hear it spoke A lust affects the soul: yet when he broke The Benches with strong lines— Verse 68. Aonian.] In Aonia (which is the mountanous part of Boe∣otia)
there is a Spring consecrated to the Muses, from which Aonian Fountain they are called Aonides. Verse 69. Pierian Caves,] At the foot of the Mountain Parnassus were certain Caves full of the Pierian Muses Deity, according to Poe∣ticall tradition. Verse 70. Thyrsus,] The Spear or Javelin wrapt with Ivy, which e∣very Priestess of Bacchus carried in her hand, when she sacrificed to her God, crying Eu, hoe, as you see in the Comment upon Sat. 6. In imi∣tation of these Javelin-bearers, Horace sacrifices one of his Odes to Bac∣chus, and begins the second Staffe with a cry like to theirs. Ohe, recenti mens trepidat metu Plenoque Bacchi pectore turbidùm Laetatur; Ohe, parce Liber, Parce, gravi metuende thyrso. Ohe, with fear my mind's possest: Fill'd with the God of Wine, my breast Feels troubled joy; Ohe Iäccus Drop thy fear'd Thyrsus, spare me Bacchus. Verse 80. Alecto,] That with her Snakes hissed Turnus into distraction: Virg. Aeneid. lib. 7. She is one of the Infernall Spirits that distract the mindes of guilty persons, therefore called Erinnes by the Greeks. The Furies are wicked thoughts, frauds, and hainous crimes of vitious men, which day and night torment their consciences: Cic. in Orat. pro Rosc. Verse 87. Rubren Lappa,] A poor, but an excellent, Tragick Poet; therefore my Author thinks it just, that he should have as considerable a Pension from the State of Rome, as the Common-wealths of Greece al∣lowed to the Ancients for their Tragedies: Then should not Rubren be
necessitated to pawn his Books and Cloak to Atreus the Broker. Verse 89. Numitor,] Another Maculonus, such a one as would not stick to call a Poet friend; but yet not part with a penny to keep his friend from sterving, though he could spare money enough to maintain a Wench and a Lion. That Juvenal meant this by some great person is apparent in the very name. For, Numitor was King of Alba, deposed by his younger Brother Amulius, who slew Lausus Son to Numitor, and made his Daughter Rhea Sylvia a Vestall Nun; that under pretence of a sacred Honour he might oblige her to Virginity. But she was got with Child (as the Romans believed) by God Mars; a miracle that was no point of faith at Alba. For Rhea suffered the rigor of the Law, being for breach of her vow buried quick in the bank of Tiber: sentence passing upon her Twins, that they should be drowned in the River; but they were cast a-shore, and found (sucking at the breasts of a VVolfe) by the Shepheard Faustulus. VVhen they came to be men, they slew their Uncle Amulius, restoring the Kingdome to their Father Numitor. Verse 95. Lucan,] The rich and noble Poet that writ in Heroick verse the Civill VVars between Caesar and Pompey,for which Poem Nero put him to death. He was born at Corduba in Spain, and Nephew to Se∣neca that writ the Tragedies. Verse 97. Bassus.] Saleius Bassus and Sarranus lived in Domitians time, and were good Poets though poor men. Verse 101. Statius.] Papinius Statius, a Neopolitan, born of noble Pa∣rents: his Ancestors were Epirots: his Father Papinius for his eru∣dition and integrity was made a Citizen of Naples, where he begot this Poet, that writ the Tragedy of Agave, the Poem called the Woods, began another of Achilles, and hath left us in twelve Books his Thebais
here mentioned by my Author, that calls it the Mistress of the people of Rome: they so courted it when Statius gave notice that he would read. Verse 111. Paris,] The handsome young Player; you read of him in the Comment upon Sat. 6. in the Designe before it, you see him acting to the Ladies; and one of them, viz. Hippia, leaving him with more re∣gret then all her other relations. Regardless of her Husband's reputation, The honour of her Sister, House and Nation, She left her crying Babes: what may amaze Thee yet more, she left Paris and the Playes. He was, when Juvenal writ this Satyr, Favourite to Domitian Caesar: and neither the Camerini nor the Bareae, nor any other Lord in Rome so liberall to the Poets, his old Masters. To Statius he gave money; to o∣thers the Emperor's Commissions to be Praefects, Governours of Pro∣vinces; or to be Tribunes, Colonels of foot. Little thought Juvenal when he said this, that Paris would make him one of the number of his Poet-Colonels: but you may see him in the head of his Regiment, in the Designe before Sat. 16. Verse 106. Agave.] The Tragedy of Agave, Daughter to Cadmus and Hermione, & Wife to Echion of Thebes, by whom she had Pentheus, that being no lover of wine, and therefore a despiser of the Orgies of Bacchus: when he was King of Thebes was cut in pieces by the Maenades, his own Mother Agave being one of the Bacchanalian Murdresses: Hor. S. l. 1. Sat. 3. Quid? caput abscissum demens cùm portat Agave, Gnati infoelicis, sibi tum furiosa videtur? What? in her hand when wild Agave had Her Sons head, did she think that she was mad?
Verse 113. Pelopea.] The Tragedy of Pelopea, the incestuous Daugh∣ter to Thyestes. She had by her Father a very lovely Boy. Lest her abomination should come to light, she left him to be devoured by wilde beasts: but a Shepherd prevented her, took home the Infant, and made it the nurse-Child to a Goat, from which his name of Aegisthus was de∣rived: the same Aegisthus, that like the Son of such a Father, lived in A∣dultery with Clytemnestra, and assisted her in the murder of his Cosen, her Husband Agamemnon, as you may see in the Comment upon Sat. 1. Verse 114. Philomela.] The Tragedy of Philomela and Progne: read the Comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 116. Proculeius,] A Roman Knight, very bountifull to his friends and neerest kindred: Horace, Vivet extento Proculeius aevo, Notus in fratres animi paterni. May old Age Proculeius own, That's for his brothers father known. Verse 116. Maecenas,] The Patron to Virgil and Horace. On the last he bestowed whole Sabine Lordships, and would have given him more, if Horace had asked it: which he records to all posterity in his Ode that begins Inclusam Danaën. The first part of the Ode you have in the Comment upon Sat. 6. almost all the remainder concerns the bounty of Maecenas, therefore I shall here joyn it to the rest. —concidit auguris Argivi domus, ob lucrum Demersa excidio. Diffidit urbium Portas vir Macedo, & subruit aemulos
Reges muneribus; munera navium Saevos illaqueant duces. Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam, Majorum{que} fames. Jure perhorrui Latè conspicuum tollere verticem, Maecenas, equitum decus. Quanto quisque sibi plura negaverit, A Diis plura feret. Nil cupientium Nudus castra peto, & transfuga divitum Partes linquere gestio: Contemptae Dominus splendidior rei, Quàm si, quicquid arat non piger Appulus Occultare meis dicerer horreis, Magnas inter opes inops. Purae rivus aquae, sylváque jugerum Paucorum, & segetis certa fides meae: Fulgentem imperio fertilis Africae Fallit sorte beatior. Quanquam nec Calabrae mella ferunt apes, Nec Laestrigonia Bacchus in amphora Languescit mihi, nec pinguia Gallicis Crescunt vellera pascuis: Importuna tamen pauperies abest; Nec si plura velim, tu dare deneges. Contracto meliùs parva cupidine Vectigalia porrigam: Quàm si Mygdoniis regnum Alyattici
Campis continuem. Multa petentibus Desunt multa. Benè est cui deus obtulit Parca, quod satis est, manu. The Argive Augur's house ne're shrunk Till bribes had shook it, then it sunk. King Philip beat down City-gates, And foil'd with gifts his rivall-States. Gifts Pirats tame; yet with our store Our cares increase, and thirst of more. Noblest Maecenas, to appear Too great was justly still my fear. The more we to our selves deny The more the Gods give: naked I With those that nothing covet joyn, A Fugitive from men of coin; Yet greater Lord of what I scorn, Then if my Barnes held all the corn, Reap't by the stiffe Appulian Boor; And I were mid'st those riches poor. My seed's firm faith, a chrystall Flood, A little quantity of Wood, Is happiness He never knows That in rich Tyrian purple goes. Calabrian Honey my poor Bees Yield not, nor Wine on aged Lees In Laestrigonian Casks I keep: No fat French Pasture feeds my Sheep;
And yet I feel no begging Want, Though should I beg, thou more would'st grant. Desire restrain'd, my trouble's less Then if what Midas did possess, And Craesus too were mine: For such As covet much, want ever much. He's blest, to whom the Gods dispense Enough, though but a competence. The two things which Horace here labours to express, are, his own Mode∣sty and the Bounty of his Patron Maecenas: as for Juvenal you may please to take notice, that although he never uses the name of Maecenas (I mean in a metaphorical sense) but only for a voluptuary; yet when he mentions Maecenas as himself, he ranks him with the noblest Patrons of the Learned. Verse 117. Fabius, Lentulus, or Cotta.] For the munificence of Fabius Maximus, I shall referre you to Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. 3. and to Plinius Secundus de Viris illustr. You see Cotta in the List with gallant Piso and Seneca Sat. 5. The state of Lentulus at the birth of a Son you read in Sat. 6. and in this place his liberality to the Poets. Verse 140. Lacerta,] The Emperor Domitian's Coachman. Verse 144. Ajax,] (Viz.) a Lawyer that pleads as fiercely as Ajax in Ovid. lib. 13. Metam. Verse 152. Monethly.] Every moneth from Aegypt to Rome came Ships that brought good store of Onions, as a Commodity vendible to the Romans, and not to be eaten by the tender consciences of the Aegyp∣tians, that held Onions to be things sacred, Sat. 15. To strike a Leek or Onion with the edge Of the presumptious teeth, is Sacriledge.
Verse 153. Tyber-Watermen,] That would not fail, when they carried wine sent by a Client, to drink and fill up the bottles with water; so that a poor Lawyer had his fees, viz. his Present of wine qualified with an allay from the River. Verse 157. Aemylius,] A wealthy Lawyer; but his Statue on horse∣back in Brass (with a Spear in his hand, as if he were charging the ene∣my) was as good a Souldier as he was an Advocate. Verse 163. Pedo.] Pedo and Tongillus were Advocates, that being poor men, had an ambition to be thought rich, and spent so much, only to make a shew, that it broke them: the last-named being so curious, that he would not be nointed after bathing with oile dropped out of common Distillatories, but from the pretious Horn of the Rhinoceros, a beast that hath a deadly feud with the Elephant: what a great eater he was Martial tells us. Omnes Tongillum medici jussêre lavari O stulti! febrim creditis esse, gula est. All Doctors bid Tongillus use the Bath: Not th' Ague (fools!) the gluttony he hath. Now Matho was a Purchasor as Martial also tells us: yet it should seem he was undone by his expences in feeding his fat paunch, and maintaining the Ushers and Train that attended his new Sedan: Sat. 1. Verse 167. Medians,] Lusty Median Slaves, Chair-bearers to Tongillus. Verse 170. Myrrhin.] What a high value the Romans put upon Bolls made of Myrrh-tree, you see by the commands which the imperious Wife layes on her Husband, to make a voyage in Winter (when Mer∣chants
durst not venture their Ships) only to furnish her with rarities, Chrystalls, Myrrhin Bolls and Diamonds: Sat. 6. What neighbours have and she wants, he must buy; In Winter, when a-shore the Merchants lye: When the Icy Tow'r the Pilot's art controlls, Great Chrystalls he brings home, huge Myrrhin bolls; And the rich Diamond.— Verse 192. Away to France.] The French taught the art of Pleading to our Country-men: Sat. 15. We see the Greek and Roman Athens spread Ore th' Earth: by th' eloquent French Nation bred, Britains grow Lawyers.— and well might the best French Orators practice at the Bar, when their Neighbours delighted so much in going to Law one with another, that Juvenal takes it for granted, a Lawyer poor at Rome would soon grow rich in France: no part of the World being more litigious, but only A∣frica, where Beggers would find money to commence a Suit. Verse 196. Vettus,] Any Rhetorick-Master. Verse 197. Tyrants.] The whole Context is —O the Iron breast Of Vettus! that can those hard Theams digest, Which murder Tyrants.— At first sight, this only seems to relate to common Rhetoricall Theams, wherein young Scholars incourage men to kill Tyrants: but if you look more narrowly into the Author's meaning, you will finde that he intends only to describe the sad condition of a Rhetorick-Master, that must endure to hear, over and over again, such declamations as have
been inflicted for a divine Judgement upon a Tyrant. Witness the Sy∣racusian Tyrant Dionysius, that beaten out of his Kingdome by Dion, taught School at Corinth, which is set forth by Diogenes the Cynick in one of his Epistles thus, , I came from Megara to Corinth, and passing through the Market-place, I light into a Schoole, where the boyes sate and did nothing. I asked them, Who is your Master? they answered, Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant. I now, thinking they mocked me and spake this in jeast, went on to a Bench, and sate me down in expectation of their Schoole-master: for they said, he was called out in haste to the Market-place. And Dionysius presently returning, I rose up and saluted him, saying, This is not well Dionysius, that you should teach Schoole. He, conceiving that I condoled the loss of his Kingdome and bemoaned his present Misery, made this Answer, I am glad that yet Diogenes pitties me. But I, that had said this is not well, repeated my words again adding, Really this is not well, and it very much afflicts me, not that you have lost your Kingdome and the power of a Tyrant, but that we suffer thee Dionysius to live safe and free in Greece, after so much mischiefe as thou hast done by Sea and Land in Sicily. Verse 208. Hannibal.] To the young Romans, that were Students in Rhetorick, no Theam so familiar as that of Hannibal: Sat. 10. Goe climbe the horrid Alpes, vain-glorious fool, To please the boyes, and be their Theam at School. nor could you much blame the Rhetoricians for revenging themselves upon Hannibal, that had like to have prevented Juvenal in his directi∣ons to the poor Lawyer for a voyage into Africa: it being once a hundred to one that Hannibal might have sent the Roman Rhetoricians (out of
which the Lawyers were made) to people Africa; as you will see in this Breviate of his life. Hannibal, General of the Carthaginian Army, was Son to Amilcar, that carried him, when he was a Child, to the Altar, and there made him swear, that he would as soon as he came to be a man, take up armes against the Romans. He landed with his Fleet in Spain, passing the Pyrenaean Mountains, he beat the French at the River of Rosne: Eutr. lib. 3. He opened a passage into Italy over the Alps: He took the City of Saguntum Liv. lib. 1. Dec. 3. He overthrew the Con∣sul T. Sempronius at Trebia: He defeated the Consul Flaminius, and slew fifteen thousand of his men at the Lake of Thrasimene. His Army was very much consumed by the protracting policy of Fabius Maximus, that would not come to a battel: Liv. lib. 4. Eutr. lib. 3. after this, he recrui∣ted, and fought the Consuls Paulus Aemilius and Terentius Varro at Can∣nae, where the Romans lost fourty thousand foot and two thousand seven hundred horse, in which number were so many men of quality, that Hannibal sent to Carthage three bushels and a half of gold-Rings, worn upon their fingers by noble Romans, to distinguish them from the Common People. All these Rings were revenged by a poor Annulet (worn upon the finger of Hannibal) which, in the Collet, had a private box, a very small one, but yet large enough to hold preventive poyson: Sat. 10. But the revenge of Cannae, for that spring Of Roman blood, was a poor little Ring. From Cannae Hannibal marched within three miles of the City: but the weather proved tempestuous, lightning and thundering, as if the Ar∣tillery of Heaven had been planted in defence of Rome. This suspended the resolution of Hannibal. Many great Officers of his Army congra∣tulated
his victory, and wished him for a day or two to rest himself and his forces. Maharbal, General of his horse, gave his vote for a present march to Rome. You will (said he) see the consequence of this bat∣tel five dayes hence, when you feast your victorious Commanders in the Capitol: let the horse follow them: let them behold Hannibal himself before they hear of his comming. No, sayes Hannibal, let the Enemy goe before us: the designe is glorious, but the way more difficult then can be suddenly imagined. He therefore commended the good intentions of Maharbal, but to act what he advised time must be taken. Then said Maharbal, The Gods have not made one man capable of all things; Hannibal, you know how to conquer, but you know not how to use your Conquest: Liv. lib. 22. After his Army had rested in Campania, and feasted at Capua, Marcellus at Nola routed him: Liv. Eutr. 3. Flo. 3. At Cannae he lost the honour which he had formerly won upon the place, where he was overthrown by Sempronius Gracchus. Now Hannibal, in the declination of his fortune, having no better luck at Sea then at Land, was called home again to Carthage, besieged by Scipio Africanus. Scipio hearing that Hannibal was landed, met him at Zama, there fought him; slew twenty thousand Carthaginians, and took very neer as many Prisoners. Hannibal fled, first to King Antiochus, then to Prusias King of Bithynia: But the Romans demanded him of both these Kings, as Author of the breach of peace between Cartharge and Rome: so that Hannibal seeing no hope of safety for himself, put an end to all his own and the Romans fears and jealousies, by taking the poyson which he alwayes carried about him in his Ring. Verse 217. Hellen's Rape.] Hellen's Rape, Medea's Charms, and the Ingratitude of Jason (that married Creusa, putting away Medea the
preserver of his life,) and his Father Aeson's Cure, these and the like were Cases argued in the Schools by Rhetoricians, to prepare them for Moot-Cases of the Law, and disputes at the Barre. Verse 230. Theodorus.] Chrysogonus and Pollio were Theodorians, for so they called those Rhetorick-Masters that read to their Pupils the works of Theodorus Gadareus. He was an excellent Orator, born at Gadara a Sy∣rian City not farre from Ascalon; yet he chose to write himself of Rhodes: Strab. Hermagorus, that writ the Art of Rhetorick, was his Scholar, and Tiberius (afterward Caesar) when he retired himself to Rhodes, was one of his studious Auditors. Verse 235. Numidian.] In Rome the richest pillars were of Numi∣dian Marble: and it seems that some wealthy Voluptuaries had Dining-rooms which turned round upon those Pillars, that they might command the Sun, have as much or as little of his light and heat as they would, or if they pleased none at all. Verse 241. Poor two.] Two Sestertia came but to five pound at most by Lubins account: but sure the place is false printed; it should be fif∣teen pound at least; which Juvenal thinks to be a mean annuall Stipend for a Rhetorick-Master to receive from his Pupil's Father; but he tells you Nothing costs Fathers less then Sons.— A Sentence that holds as true in our times, as it did when my Author was living, or when Crates cryed out of a Window to his fellow Citizens the Thebans, O Country-men, what madness hath possessed you? you have a great care of the goods you will leave to your Children, and no care at all of the Children to whom you will leave those goods. Verse 242. Quintilian.] See the Comment upon Sat. 6. He is often
named, never without honour, by his Scholar Juvenal: that in this Sa∣tyr prayes Grant Heav'n, that gentle weightless Earth may lie On our Forefathers bones, and sprout on high In flowr's, which to the aire perfumes may bring, Clothing their Urns in a perpetual Spring; Because a Tutor they did still repute To be the sacred Parents Substitute. This Prayer was made by Juvenal out of the Principles of his Tutor Quintilian, that writes thus; In the mean time, of one thing I admonish Scho∣lars, That they love their Tutors no less then their Studies, and believe them to be the Parents not of their boates, but of their mindes: lib. de Discip. Officio. Verse 257. Ventidius.] Ventidius Bassus, Son to an Ascalon Bond-wo∣man. He was taken and led through Rome by Cn. Pompeius Strabo (Father to Pompey the great) when he triumphed for his victory over the Picenians. He was first a Car-man, then a Muliteer: afterwards he was in one year created Praetor and Consul. He was made General against the Parthians, and returned to Rome triumphant. So that he, who at first was Prisoner to a Roman General, and lay in a Dungeon, at last, as General of the Roman forces, filled the Capitol with Parthian spoils. See Val. Max. lib. 6. c. 10. A. Gell. lib. 15. c. 4. Verse 257. Tully] M. Tullius Cicero was born among the Volscians at Arpinum, now Abruzzo. He was Son to Helvia a poor, but a mar∣velous good, woman. Who his Father was we know not; some think him a parallel to our good-man Plantagenet; for they say he derived himself from Tullius Attius, one of the old Volscian Kings; but others re∣port
him to be a Fuller of Cloth: Plutarch in Cic. It seems Cicero was of very mean Parentage: Sat 8. — This new man Tully, this poor Arpinate, Late made at Rome a Country-Gentleman. Nor was he ashamed of the meanness of his birth; for when some friends moved him to change his Plebeian name of Cicero, that smelt of pease: he told them, he would keep it, and make it as noble as the Scauran or Catulan name. Plutarch. And he was as good as his word; for, besides his first place in the Catalogue of all the Roman Orators and Philoso∣phers, he obliged his Country by making many wholsome Lawes, and by abrogating the Lex Agraria, the Law for division of Lands, which had cost so much blood since it was passed by C. and Tib. Gracchus, heads of the Levelling Party: but his highest honour, the title of Pater Patriae, Father of his Country, was given him for delivering Rome from the fire and sword of Catiline and his fellow Conspirators. In his old age he was proscribed and slain by the tyranny of C. Octavius Caesar and Marc. Antony, because he too much favoured a Common-wealth. Verse 259. Slaves,] Such as Servius Tullius and Ventidius, the Sons of Bond-women, but raised by fortune; the first to wear a Crown: and the other, victorious Laurel. Verse 263. Thrasimachus,] A Carthaginian, Scholar to Plato and Iso∣crates, publick professor of Rhetorick; but his gettings so inconsiderable; that he left teaching Schoole, and (some say) hanged himself. Verse 264. Secundus Charinus,] A Rhetorick-Reader in Athens, lear∣ned in Arts not good: Tacit. Constrained by want he came and set up School at Rome, where he made an Oration against Tyrants, for which
he was banished by Caligula; some say that he poysoned him. Verse 266. Hemlock.] The cruel bounty by ingratefull Athens, be∣stowed upon the great Philosopher Socrates: See the Comment upon the second Satyr. Verse 273. Centaur.] Chiron the Centaur, Tutor to Aesculapius, Hercu∣les, and Achilles. The Centaurs (as their enemies the Lapiths described them) were only men to the girdle, beneath it horses. In what awe this old Centaur had his young Scholar Achilles, is described by Ovid lib. 1. de Art. Qui toties socios, toties perterruit hostes: Dicitur annosum pertinuiisse senem. Quas Hector sensurus erat, poscente magistro, Verberibus jussas praebuit ille manus. He that so oft scar'd friends and foes, is said To have been of a poor old man afraid: The hands, which Hector was to feel, he did Hold to be struck, when's angry Master bid. Verse 275. Mountain.] Pelion, a Mountain in Thessaly (hanging o∣ver the Pelasgick Bay) crowned with Pine-trees, and downward to the foot covered with Oakes. There Pelius lived that was Father to Achilles. Verse 278. Ruffus,] Satrius Ruffus That looking upon the Rhetorick of Tully with contempt, and as if that great Orator had not writ Latin but French, used to call him Allobrogian, Savoyen or Dauphinois. Verse 279. Enceladus,] A Grammar-Master: so was Palaemon: Vid. the comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 296. Tribune,] That upon the humble Petition of a School-ma¦ster would force Parents to pay his Salary for teaching of their Children.
Verse 303. Nurse.] She that nursed Anchises (Father to Aeneas) is named by no Author. The Stepmother to Archemolus was called Cas∣peria: what Country-woman she was no body knows, nor no body cares; but she loved Archemolus so much, that she let him make a Cuc∣kold of her Husband, that had made her Queen of the Marrubians in Italy: Virg. Aeneid. lib. 10. That Acestes the Trojan furnished Aeneas and his Mates with wine we know, for which Virgil calls that King of Sicily the good Acestes: but how many pots of wine were drunk off by his Country-men, I believe would puzzle all the Grammarian Criticks, that take great pains in studies, which are neither pleasing nor profita∣ble: Senec.
The eighth Designe. NObility is Merit. Tell not me Of this great Office, or that Pedegree; Is 1 Marius noble for his Birth, or Sway In his Proconsulship of Africa, Which ev'n in peace he plunder'd? I prefer Before Him Marius the 2 Carpenter, That from vast-body'd Cimbrians Rome releast, And made his Country's 3 Vultures a huge feast. With young Lord 4 Damasippus drinks, th' old Knave Cybel's 5 Chief-priest, a 6 Pirate, 7 Murd'rer, 8 Slave, Thief 9, 10 Hangman, 11 Coffin-maker: and his Host Cook-Syrophaenix 12, add, to his more cost, His soft-lipt Hostess 13 Ciane. Who can Compare this Lord to that No-Gentleman The Consul 14 Tully? that lean Vigils kept, Wak'd when the Senators securely slept, And never dream'd that Rome was to be fir'd At midnight, when fierce Catiline conspir'd? Corvinus 15, 16 Galba, that in Marble stand, Reviv'd by some rare Statuaries hand; Are monuments to gallant Sons: the base Shew them as Trophies of their own disgrace.
Figura Octaua. NObilitas virtus est; quò mihi stemmata, longo Sanguine censendus? Meritò num Nobilis audit, Legatus victis Marius 1 quòd praesidet Afris, Quos pace exspoliat? Marium 2 huic ego praefero fa∣brū, Subjecit Romae qui grandia corpora, Cimbros; Indigenas ad lauta vocans convivia 3 corvos. Dic mihi, quis clari Damasippum 4 crederet ortûs, His cum collegis qui siccat pocula Consul? Gallus 5 adest Cybeles, Pirata 6, Homicida 7, metallis Damnatus 8, Latro 9, torvus mortisque 10 minister, Sandapilaeque 11 faber; Syrophoenix 12 ultimus, hospes Et coquus: intereà Cyane 13 sua basia vendit Hospita, nec parvo. Tam magni nominis umbrae Quis non praetulerit longè incunabula 14 Tullî, Obscurique novique hominis? quo consule Roma Evigilante stetit secura; Patresque supinos Nè monuêre quidem occultae vel somnia flammae, Quam conjuranti vovit Catilina Cethego. Familiae princeps Coruinus 15 Galba que 16 Caesar, Quorum, post cineres, in marmore vivit imago; Stant aeterna piis monimenta nepotibus: at qui Degenerant, sua cum statuis opprobria figunt.
The Manners of Men. THE EIGHTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. Maim'd Statues, cripled by times rage, And Pictures now grown dimme with age: Our Ancestors deserts proclaim, And if we live not well, our shame. Honour consists in worth, not blood; The Great weigh nothing, if not Good: The Mean, whose virtue is their birth, Have been the greatest men on Earth. WHat's Linage? PONTICUS, what good can flow From great blood? What is't Ancestors to show In Paint and Statue? the Aemilii plac't Intire in Chariots, Curii to the waste:
CORVINUS, that by th' shoulder less appears; And GALBA wanting both his nose and ears? What's a Dictator drawn to life? or what Dimme Masters of the Horse, still pointed at? If pictur'd Worthies see thy time spent ill? Thy house why doe so many Gen'ralls fill Breathing in Marble? if thou, in the sight Of arm'd Numantians, play'st at dice all night: And go'st to bed about the break of day, The time when they drew off and march't away? Why glories FABIUS in his French Descent And Altar, his HERCULEAN Monument? If covetous, if vain his Greatness be; If no Euganean Lamb more soft then he; If with Sicilian pumice smooth he shave, Slandring his Fathers, that were rough and grave: Blasting whose Urns this poisoner's Image stands, Fit to be broken by the Hang-man's hands. Fill all thy Courts with old wax-Imagerie, Virtue's the true and sole Nobilitie; A PAULUS, COSSUS, or a DRUSUS live, And let thy Predecessors Statues give
Place to thy Virtues: when the Fasces lead Thee Consul, let thy Fame those Rods precede. Pay me with thy minds treasure my first debt, By deed and word the stile of Virtuous get: That thou art Noble shall need no Record; Patrician or Plebeian, hail my Lord, So I shall call thee, of what ever blood, If thou art born to doe thy Country good. Rome, when thou com'st, shall make as loud a shout, As Aegypt when OSYRIS is found out. But who will honour him that's Honours shame, Noble in nothing, but a noble name? We call a Lord's Dwarfe, Giant; a Moor, Swan; A crooked Maid whose height at thrice we span, EUROPA; to Dogs, that lick dishes dry, Mangy and lazy Dogs; we Lion cry, Panther, or Tiger; if there be a brute More fierce, we give those Curs his Attribute. Take heed thou go'st not for a CRETICUS, And bear'st the Camerini's title thus. Whom do I counsell? 'tis to thee I speak, RUBELLIUS PLAUTUS; swolne, as they would break,
With Drusian blood thy veins doe proudly run: As if thou had'st some thing of honour done, For which the mighty Princess, born to shine In all the splendor of the JULIAN line, Must needs have teem'd thee; and not she, that sits On our bleak Mount, and for her living knits. You are (sayes he) poor Rogues, Plebeian scumme, Your Fathers no man knows from whence they come; But I am a CECROPIAN; bless your Grace, And give you joy of your illustrious race: Yet in that scumme, your Lordship may finde out A poor Plebeian, that's imploy'd about Defending with his learned tongue or pen, The Causes of unlearned Noble-men. Out of the gowned People doth he rise, That reads Law-Riddles, and their knots unties. In armes this poor Youth at Euphrates stands, That with our Standard guards the Netherlands. Thou meerly a CECROPIAN art: and we, Like MERCURY'S old Statue, worship thee; For other difference no Optick gives, But his head's marble; and thy Image lives.
Tell me, thou Trojan Progeny, who thinks The Beast is generous, whose courage shrinks? We praise the Horse that easy'st wins the course, And makes the shouting Circus oftest hoarse. He's noble, let his breed be what it will, Runs best, and casts the durt up formost still; But they are sold, though HIRPIN were their Sire, Or CORITHA their Damme, that basely tire, And lose the match: what their fore-fathers won Dyes there; no honour is to shadowes done. Then bought at low rates, slow-feet, having got New Masters, no more draw a Chariot, But with gall'd necks at Waggons tug and gird, Or are to NEPOS his Horse-Mill prefer'd. That we may therefore you, not yours admire, First Sir, some honour of your own acquire: Which we may on their Monuments engrave, To whom we pay, and you owe all you have. Let it suffice, that we have said thus much To that proud puff't up Youth, (Fame speaks him such) Full of his Kinsman NERO; For 'tis rare If mighty fortunes common sense can share.
But PONTICUS, I would not have thee go Upon thy Ancestors past praises so, As that to future praise thou should'st not rise: Hee's wretched that on others fame relies. When once foundations shrink, the Pillars fall; The Widdow'd Vine droops at th' Elm's funerall. Be a good Souldier, a good Guardian be, A Judge from favour and corruption free; And, if in Court thou shalt a Witness stand, Though PHALLERIS an untruth should command, And dictating a perjury, bring in His brazen Bull: think it the foulest sin, Should'st thou to save thy breath thy honour spend: And forfeit, for thy life, life's chiefest end. Death such a man deserves, nor lives indeed, Though him a hundred Gauran Oisters feed At one meal: though the unguents COSMUS us'd In's brazen Bath, be all on him diffus'd. When Governor thy su'd-for Province hath At length receiv'd thee, bridle in thy wrath Bound Avarice, pitty our Associate's groans, Behold (the marrow squeez'd) Kings empty bones.
Th' Imperial Laws, the Senate's Justice note, How worth's advanc'd, and how their thunder smote TUTOR and CAPITO, for making prize Ev'n of Cilician Pyrates; heavy lyes The doom on them, but poor man where's thy ease, When PANSA all that NATTA left will seize. Thy rags CHAERIPPUS let the Cryer sell; Go not to law, since thou art us'd so well: 'Tis madness, after all, to cast away The Ferry-money that should CHARON pay: Not such th' old losses, nor so deep the wound, When our Allyes in Riches did abound; Each House had heaps of Coin, Store-houses full Of Coan Silks, and Sparta's purple Wool; PARRHASIUS his Pictures, Ivory brought To life by PHIDIAS; Statues MIRON wrought, Or POLYCLET did in each corner wait, And scarce a Table but had MENTOR'S plate. Thus th' unjust Governour ANTONIUS here Feathers his Nest, and DOLABELLA there. Thus VERRES did by sacriledge increase, And stole aboard his ships the spoils of Peace.
Now, friends to Rome a Yoke of Oxen feed, Or some few Mares, which they reserve for breed: Out of whose Pasture, ev'n the Bull or Horse, The Father of their Stock, Tax-masters force; Their Lares, and whatsoe're doth handsome look, If 't be their only Cottage God, 'tis took: And such a toy, the Provinces doe call Their greatest wealth, and may, for 'tis their All. Perhaps thou slightst, and mayst securely slight Oild Corinth, Rhodes that was not fram'd to fight. For, soft thigh'd men, if pressures should provoke, How can smooth rosind Youth shake off the yoke? 'Ware Spanish foot, French horse, oppress not thus Illyrian Sea-men; Reapers feeding us That at Circensian Races spend our time, And Stage-playes. But what gains so base a crime, When MARIUS late left Africa so bare? However, let it be thy Master-care, That poor and stout men no great wrong receive: Though thou tak'st Gold and Silver, thou wilt leave Helmets and Javelins to revenge their harms, And Swords and Shields; the plunder'd will find armes.
Not my own sense I speak, for truth I plead: Believe it, Lords, a Sibyl's Leafe you read, If virtuous Friends and Servants with thee dwell, If no fair Minion thy tribunall sell; If no insatiate Wife run up and down, Through ev'ry Country, and to ev'ry Town, Bending her crooked tallons, to lay hold, Like a fierce Harpy, on a prey of Gold: Then bring thy birth from PICUS, or do'st love Great names? take all the Giants that fought JOVE. PROMETHEUS himself thy Father make, Progenitors from any Story take. But if rash pride and lust thy soul provoke, If in the Subjects blood thy Rods be broke; If thou delight'st to see the Beadle tyr'd, Th' axe blunted; the Nobility acquir'd By thy great Parents, stands against thy claim, And holds a glorious Torch before thy shame. Each crime is so conspiciously base, As he that sins is great in birth or place. To me thy Ancestors how can'st thou boast? When to the Temples, which they built, thou go'st
To forge a Will, their spirits to affront, While their triumphall Statues look upon't. Or how? when nightly, thy adult'rous blood Conceals it's blushes in a French fools-hood. Where his fore-fathers bones and ashes ly, In's Coach fat DAMASIPPUS hurries by: And though now Consull, with huge iron Stayes, Strikes a Choach-wheel himselfe in down-hill wayes: By night indeed; but yet the Moon discryes, And Stars bear witness, with ntentive eyes. But when he comes out of his Consulship, At noon-day DAMASIPPUS cracks his whip: Nor blushes, though his aged friends he meets, But with his whip first his acquaintance greets: And when his horses are unharnest, feasts With barley, he pours out, the wearied beasts. Nay, when in NUMA'S ceremoniall wayes, He Sheep or Oxen at JOVE'S Altar slayes, By EPONA he swears, and all that Crue, Whose pictures we o're nasty Mangers view. But when his Tavern-Revels are begun, Up staires and down must SYROPHAENIX run;
Moist SYROPHAENIX, that sweats th' Oyles he sells At th' Idumaean Port, for there he dwells; And with the courtship of an Host, the word That he salutes with, is my Prince, my Lord. The like doth CYANE, bringing Flagons still In a clean Apron, which inflames the Bill. But thou sayst, pleading for him when he's chid, That young we did the like; 'tis true, we did. But art' reclaim'd? thy errour do'st retract? Short let it be, which thou dar'st fouly act. Some crimes with our first beards are cut away: Of course sue out their pardons Children may. But DAMASIPPUS takes his bathing Cups, And on the painted Tavern-linnen sups, Ripe for the Armenian warre; fit to make good The Syrian streams, the Rhene or Istrian flood, Of years that NERO'S person may defend; Send to thy Fleet at Ostium, CAESAR; send: But thy great Adm'rall in some Tavern seek, There they will finde him lying cheek by cheek With Murd'rers, mixt with Pyrates, and Purse-takers, Run-away Slaves, Hangmen and Coffin-makers:
With CYBEL'S Priest on's back, his bells at rest. Where equall freedome welcomes every Guest; Where ev'ry man for the same cup may call: One table, that too alike neer to all. Hadst thou a Slave like this Lord, what would'st thou Do with him PONTICUS? send him to plough Thy Land neer Luca, or his pains imploy In Tuscan Quarries; but my Lords of Troy You with your selves dispense: and things, held base In Clowns, the VOLESI and BRUTI grace. Who would have thought we could this lewdness find In men of honour? but there's worse behind. Thy fortunes spent, thou DAMASIPPUS let'st Thy voice out, on the Stage a share thou get'st: CATULLUS his shrill, Phantasm spends thy breath. Swift LENTULUS playes LAUREOL, put to death; Acts hanging well: and wert to be decreed By my vote, merits to be hang'd indeed. Nor can the People be excus'd in this, The Peoples foreheads are more braz'd then his, Which impudently sit and pleasure take, To see the sport that our Patricians make:
That can our FABIAN Comedians hear, And laugh at MAMERCAN'S box oth'ear. No matter for how much their breath they sell; Which now there is no NERO to compell. Yet fail they not in the great Praetor's Shows, To sell their blood: but here a Stage suppose, And there a Scaffold, which would'st thou refuse? Who so fears death, that he would rather chuse To watch fair THYMILE o'th Stage, where he And CORINTH, the dull fool, must fellows be. Nor is't a wonder, when the Prince shall love A Fidler's name, if Lords do Players prove: What could the Town be then, but Playes? And there GRACCHUS, Rome's infamy, doth arm'd appear; A Retiarius: no Secutor's Shield, No crooked Faucheon brings into the field; Nor wears a Beaver down (no, he reproves, Reproves and hates that habit) see he moves His Trident, and (the Net pois'd in his hand Lest he might throw it out of his command) He holds up his bare face, and in the eyes Of all Rome, round about the Lists he flies;
His Cassock speaks him, gold-strings hanging at His chin, and glitt'ring in his high-crown'd hat: Who therefore was Secutor to this Lord, Shame cut him deeper then he struck his sword. What Rascal would not, were his vote now free, Give it to SENECA, NERO e're to thee, For whom we should not as one Patricide, One Ape, one Serpent, and one Sack provide: ORESTES had thy crime, but not thy guilt; The Gods were Authors of the blood he spilt, His Father to revenge, made drunk and slain: Yet him his Sisters murder did not stain, Nor, in a rage, his Spartan Wife he kill'd; Nor Bolls of Poyson for his Kindred fill'd. ORESTES sung no Odes; no Troicks writ, Books which of all crimes NERO did commit. VINDEX, VIRGINIUS, GALBA should have first Reveng'd, of all his cruelties the worst. Works for a Prince are these? doe these Arts sute With Majesty, it self to prostitute, On Stages, to put forein Actors down, And carry from the Greeks their Parsley Crown?
Thy voice's trophies let thy Fathers bear, THYESTE'S long train let DOMITIUS wear, ANTIGONE'S or MENALIPPE'S tyre: And on AUGUSTUS CAESAR hang thy lyre. Who any thing finds higher then thy line CETHEGUS reaches? CATILIN or thine? Yet you took Armes, and did by night conspire To set our Houses and our Gods on fire; Like Sons of Galls, or Rogues at Lions born, For which you ought pitcht Cassocks to have worn. But on your motion did the Consul wait; This new-man, TULLY, this poor Arpinate, Late made at ROME a Country-gentleman: Set guards, where e're the line of danger ran, Unmaz'd us, and took pains for all the Town: And therefore, ev'n within the walls, the Gown A greater title upon him bestow'd, Then any name CAESAR to Actium ow'd, To Thessaly, or to those weapons, kept Moist with the blood which they so often wept. For Rome, freed Rome, did call her self his Child, And CICERO his Country's Father stil'd.
Another born at Arpin, MARIUS, tills First as a Hireling, the rough Volscian hils: The Vine then paid him, when the lazy Cramp Took his hand Palizadoing the Camp. Yet he at Cimbrian horrours never check't, But did alone the trembling State protect. And when slain Cimbrians did the Crows invite, Which never could on goodlier bodies light, A second Laurel was by MARIUS worn, Collegue at that time to the nobly-born. Plebeian souls and names the Decii were; Yet, for our Youth, our Friends, and Armies, here And every where, th' infernal Gods, and th' Earth, The Mother to whom Mankind owes his birth, Accepted them, and more the Decii priz'd Then all, for whom their lives were sacrific'd. He had, that from a Bond-woman did spring, Rome's Purple, Crown and Rods, our last good King. A Gate of Rome, in banish't TARQUIN'S aid, The Consul's noble Sons would have betraid; Which for our doubtfull liberty were ty'd To act, what COCLES would have magnifi'd,
Or MUTIUS, or the Maid that courage found To swim o're Tyber, then our Empire's bound. Discover'd by a Slave, whom Mothers taxe, They felt their Fathers Rods and our just Axe, THERSITES I could wish thy Father were, So thou, like to ACHILLES, might'st appear In VULCAN'S Arms; ere my consent would let ACHILLES like THERSITES thee beget. Yet fetch how farre thou canst thy Pedegree, The base Asylum thy first House must be: The first, whose blood thy Ancestors can claim, A Shepheard, or what I am loth to name. The Comment UPON THE EIGHTH SATYR. VErse 1. Ponticus,] The Noble Person to whom Juvenal di∣rects this Satyr, writ against such as degenerate from their illustrious Ancestors. Verse 3. Aemilii,] Generalls of the Aemilian Family, to whom the Lords of the Senate had decreed the honour of triumph; such as P. Ae∣milius Macedonicus, that was commanded to put on his triumphall Robe
in the Senate-house: and Scipio Aemilianus, that destroyed Carthage and Numantia, as aforesaid. The Marble Statues of these Aemilii (it should seem) were not broken or weather-beaten, but whole and fresh, when this Satyr was writ. Verse 4. Curii,] Statues of the Curii; which Time, beginning at the feet, had eaten away with his iron teeth to the very waste. Verse 5. Corvinus.] Valerius Corvinus, Military Tribune under the Generall Camillus, when he pursued the routed Galls. In their flight they made a stand, and one of the Galls challenged any of the Roman Army. Corvinus accepted the Challenge. At day-break, when they met, a Crow flew to Valerius, sate upon his helmet, and in the Combat peck't at the face and eyes of the Gall. When Valerius had killed his Enemy, besides the usual reward for such a service, he was honoured with the sur∣name of Corvinus or Crow. He was six times Consul, and in perfect strength of body and mind lived to be a hundred years of age: Liv. lib. 7. Dec. 1. but his Statue was not so long lived for marble as he was for a man, o∣therwise it would not have wanted one shoulder in Juvenal's time. Verse 6. Galba.] In his Court Galba had set forth his Pedegree, wherein he derived himself, by his paternal Line, from Jove; by his ma∣ternal, from Pasiphae. Was not Jove obliged in point of honour to keep on his Nephew Galba's nose and ears? yes sure, and would have done it, if he had not wanted power: But how could he preserve the Statue of a great-great-Grand-childe, when the Gods were so much out of authori∣ty, that his Son, the God of Warre, was not able to guard his Armes; for, my Author tells Sat. 13. that —Mars fell asleep, His helmet lost, nor could his own goods keep.
Verse 7. Dictator.] Among the Romans, their Dictators differed from their Kings only in title and duration of their Offices: for, the King had his by inheritance, the Dictator only for six moneths, unless the Senate continued it for six moneths longer, upon the same sad necessity that made him be chosen, viz. the misery of a War. He was called Dicta∣tor, or Speaker, because his Word was Law, Quoniam dictis ejus parebat populus. There lay no appeal from his Sentence to the People; there∣fore he was titled Populi Magister, Master of the People: Pigh. His first Act after election, was to choose his Equitum Magister, which Ma∣ster (as I take it) we call General of the horse, that was Vice-Dictator; for in the Dictators absence he had the same unlimited authority: Stad. in Flor. lib. 1. cap. 11. To be descended from a Dictator, or from a Gene∣rall of the horse, must needs be great honour to a Roman that had perso∣nall worth: VVhat followes? But who will honour him that's honour's shame, Noble in nothing but a noble name. Hear a divine Phylosopher to this purpose. If there be any good in Phi∣losophy it is this, it looks not upon Pedegrees. Philosophy found not Plato Noble, but left him so: Senec. Add to this the authority of a Philosophicall Orator, though in his own Case. It is enough for me to flourish in my own Actions, rather then to rest in the fame and opinion of my Ancestors: let me live so, that I may be to my Descendents the beginning of their Nobility: Cic. in Sallust. Verse 9. Pictur'd Worthies,] The Author names the Lepidi, which must needs be a very great Family, coming from that Worthy the Ponti∣fex Max. Aemilius Lepidus, that in his Childhood slew an enemy in a bat∣tail, for which, by decree of Senate, in the Capitol his Statue was set up
in his Praetexta (or Gown guarded with purple silk) to shew that he was a Noble-man's Son; and in his Bulla's (or golden Bubbles) to signifie that he was a Child when he merited that honour. Verse 12. Numantians.] The Roman Commanders that served un∣der Scipio at the siege of Numantia in Spain, a Town that for twenty years maintained war against the Romans: and after it was belegur'd for 14. years, did not only hold out against 46000. Romans, but still worsted the Besiegers: at last, after a long and hard Siege laid to the place by Scipio Minor; when hunger had conquered the sterved Numantians, and that they wanted Souldiers to man the works, they fired themselves and all they had, leaving nothing to the Besiegers but more field-room. Verse 15. Fabius.] Fabius Maximus (the noble Ancestor of this un∣worthy Fabius Persicus,) from his conquest over the Allobrogians or Dauphinois, surnamed Allobrogick. Fabius Maximus Gallica Victoria cog∣nomen Allobrogici sibi & posteris peperit: Fabius Maximus, for his French Victory, got the surname of Allobrogick [or French] to himself and his poste∣rity: Val. Max. This Family derived themselves from Hercules, to whom the Romans consecrated two Temples, one at the Porta Trigemina, the other in the Roman Smithfield or Forum Boarium; which Altar was here∣ditary to the Fabians: Liv. This Fabius Persicus is called the most filthy and the most obscene of all men living: Sen. lib. 4. c. 30. de Benef. Verse 18. Euganeans.] The Sheep that were bred upon the Euganean Downes and Vallies had the finest and softest wool in Italy. Some say that Padua belonged to the Euganeans; others affirme them to be the Ta∣rentines, Calabrians and Venetians: but Pliny is for the first opinion, he tells us Verona was a City of the Euganeans, which is but a mile from Padua: Plin. lib. 3. cap. 20.
Verse 19. Sicilian.] The best Pumice-stones are gathered in Sicily, a∣bout the Mountain Aetna. With these Pumices the Italians did smooth their skins, but now they use for the same purpose a Specifick earth. Verse 23. Waxen Imagerie,] Heads of Wax were set up in all Ward∣robes or Galleries: Plin. lib. 35. A Court full of dusty Images makes not the owner noble: no man lived for our honour: what was before us, is not ours. It is the minde that nobilitates. VVho is generous? He that is virtuously given: Senec. Verse 25. Paulus.] Paulus Aemilius or Aemylius (that in his Con∣sulship led Perseus King of Macedon in triumph) drew his Pedegree, as aforesaid from Mamercus, Pythagoras the Philosopher's Son, by the Grecians surnamed Aemylos for his civility. Verse 25. Cossus,] That in a battail slew the General of the Enemy, and so brought into the Capitol the Spolia opima. Verse 25. Drusus,] One that won more then the Spolia opima from a General of the Enemy, slain by his hand in the field: for, the General's name was Drusus; which name he carried away, and left to his Posterity. Verse 27. Fasces,] The bundle of Rods with an Axe in it, carried be∣fore the Consuls and Praetors by their Lictors, as aforesaid. Verse 36. Osyris.] VVhy the Aegyptians kept the Anniversary of Osy∣ris, and every year upon the day of his death sought for him with a gene∣ral mourning and howling, I have told you in the Comment upon Sat. 6. I shall in this place add the opinion (not without probability) that Joseph was Osyris, and then you will assigne another cause for seeking him. Moses having carried away his bones, and only left to the Aegyptians a desire of Joseph and the memory of his virtues, which they celebrated with this ido∣latrous Ceremony, howling till they found him, and then shouting.
Verse 45. Creticus.] One of the House of Metellus surnamed Creticus, from his Conquest of Creet. That the Camerini were very great Romans needs no other evidence, but only the naming of them and the Bareae for all the cliented and courted Lords of Rome in Sat. 7. Verse 48. Rubellius Plautus.] All the Juvenals I have seen do write, as it is printed in the Louvre-copy, Rubellius Blandus: but no Author takes notice of any such kinsman to Julius Caesar and Drusus: therefore I follow Justus Lipsius, that reads it Rubellius Plautus, he being in as neer a degree of relation to Augustus Caesar, by the Mothers side, as Nero was. All men cry up Rubellius Plautus that by his Mother had the Nobility of the Julian Family: Tacit. lib. 13.14. Verse 49. Drusian.] Tiberius Caesar and his Brother Drusus were de∣scended from Tiberius Nero that conquered Asdrubal: Suet. Verse 54. Bleak Mount.] Tarquin's Mount, where very poor women got a sad lively-hood, by weaving and knitting in the wind. Verse 65. Euphrates,] A River of Mesopotamia. This River rises upon the Mountain Niphates; and the fall from such a Precipice makes the stream large, deep and swift: it runs into the red Sea, but first joyn∣ing with the River Tygris it makes Mesopotamia: Strab. Verse 57. Cecropian.] Cecrops was the first King of Athens. Sure the Romans were excellent Heralds, that could bring a Descent from this King who reigned before Deucalion's Flood, Ante Deucalionis tempora regem ha∣buêre Cecropem, Before Deucalion's time they had Cecrops for their King: Justin. lib. 2. He founded Athens. They drew him in his Picture male and female; for that he first joyned man and woman in Matrimony: Ju∣stin. ibid. Euseb. in praef. Chron. In his Tower sprung up the Olive-tree, from which the City of Athens took its name: the Athaenians from thence∣forth
honouring Minerva as their Patroness, and refusing the Patronage of Neptune, that by bringing forth a horse for service, promised them success in war. He first coined the name of Jupiter, built Altars in Greece, and some say invented the Greek Alphabet. He was called Diphyes or double-natured, some think either from the height of his body, or that, being an Aegyptian, he spake both his own and the Greek tongue: but I rather believe he had the attribute Diphyes as he had his Picture in two shapes, for joyning the nature of the male and female. Verse 68. Mercury's old Statue.] The Hermae or Athenian Statues of Mercury had Marble heads, but the other parts were of course stuffe. It was the custome of Athens, when the State would reward a deserving man, to send him two or three of these Statues, which he placed over his Gates: Thucid. Verse 71. Thou Progeny of Troy.] He means Rubellius Plautus, that being of the Julian Family, derived himself from Aeneas of Troy. Verse 77. Hirpin.] Hirpin and Coritha were the best-bred Horse and Mare of all that ran Chariot-matches in the Circus. Verse 90. Youth.] Rubellius Plautus, the proud young Lord to whom this admonition is given. Verse 102. Phalaris,] King of Agrigentum, the cruellest of all the Si∣cilian Tyrants. To torment his Subjects he imployed the whole strength of his wit, which was very quick, as you may see in his Epistles, yet ex∣tant. To this Prince Perillus the Athenian presented a brazen Bull, made with such Art, that a man inclosed therein, and rosted, bellowed like a Bull. For this ingenious invention, when the Artist expected his re∣ward, he was more ingeniously paid, being the first that was executed in his own instrument of cruelty: may all Projectors of others miseries
meet the like just recompence. The last that felt the brazen Bull was Phalaris himself, that growing insufferable to the Agrigentines, the whole City rose against him, and rosted him alive. Verse 108. Gauran,] Lucrine Oisters, taken about the Baian Port, neer the Gauran Mountain. Verse 109. Cosmus,] So great a Voluptuary, that the preparation of those Unguents which he used in his Bath, was ever after called Vnguen∣tum Cosmianum: Petron. Verse 117. Tutor.] Julius Tutor, that robbed his fellow Theevs the Ci∣licians, those Dunkirks to the Romans; for which notwithstanding he was condemned by the Senate. Verse 117. Capito.] Capito Cossutianus, accused by the Cilicians upon the Law de repetundis, that he might refund and make restitution for pol∣ling of their Province when he was Legate: Tacit. lib. 5. Verse 120. When Pansa.] When the new Governor Pansa, like the lean hungry Flie, feared by the Leper in Josephus, will be sure to suck hard and glean from the Country all the money and goods left by his Predecessor the old Governor Natta, that reaped the full Harvest of the Province: which he ought to have governed like a Roman, not pillaged like a Thiefe. Detrahere aliquid alteri, & hominem hominis incommodo suum augere commodum, magis est contra naturam, quam mors, quam paupertas, quam dolor: To take away any thing from another, and for a man to raise himself upon the ruines of a man, is more against nature then death, poverty, or pain: Cic. 3. Offic. Yet a Commander in chief will hardly obey this Law of Nature, but compel Chaerippus, viz. the poor Plough-man to pay Taxes, though commonly such Impositions end together with their Im∣poser in a Mutiny. Nec vero ulla vis impii tanta est quae premente metu
possit esse diuturna. Testis Phalaris, cujus praeter caeteros nobilitata crudeli∣tas, qui non ex insidiis interiit, non à paucis, sed in quem universa Agrigen∣tinorum multitudo impetum fecit. Really, no force of a wicked man can be so great, as to continue by the pressure of fear. I may instance in Phalaris, whose cruelty is conspicuous above others, that perished, not by treachery, not by a few mens hands, but assaulted by the whole multitude of the Agrigen∣tines: Cic. 2. Offic. Verse 128. Coan.] Cos is an Island in the Aegaean Sea, one of the Cyclades. It was plundered by Hercules that slew Euripilus and Clytica, King and Queen of the Island, because they impeded his landing there when he re∣turned from the sack of Troy, after he had slain King Laomedon, Father to Priam. To this Island the world owes the Invention of Silk-weaving. Verse 128. Sparta's purple wooll.] Lacedaemonian purple was in great request with Souldiers, as Julius Pollux affirms. Verse 129. Parrhasius,] A great Master in the Art of Painting, born at Ephesus. He was the first that drew with perfect lines the aire of the face, sweetning it with the hair, and by the confession of Artists, no Picture-drawer ever came neer him, for giving of the last hand to a Piece. Yet Timentes put him down in the drawing of Ajax: but he had the better of Zeuxes: For, when Zeuxes had drawn a bunch of grapes so to the life that Birds flew to peck them: Parrhasius painted a linnen Cloth so arti∣ficially, that Zeuxes, presuming no man could match his grapes, proudly bid him, take away the Cloth and shew him his Picture; but when he found his errour, he ingeniously gave Parrhasius the honour of the day; for that he himself had only cozened the Birds, but Parrasius had decei∣ved an Artist: Plin. lib. 35. cap. 10. Fab. lib. 12. Verse 130. Phidias,] A Statuary, never equalled for carving in
Ivory: yet he was far better at making of Gods then Men: Quintil. His Master-piece was the Ivory Statue of Minerva at Athens, 39 cubits high; in her Shield was the Battail of the Amazons and the Giants War: in her Sandals the Fight between the Centaurs and the Lapiths. The next to this was his Jupiter Olympius, carved in one intire piece of Ivory; then his Venus, that stood at Rome in the Portico of Octavia: Plin. l. 35. cap. 8. He made a Statue ten cubits high of Nemesis, the Goddess of reward and punishment, at Rhamnus a Town in Attica. This Minerva (as Antigo∣nus describes her) occasioned the Proverb Rhamnusia Nemesis: she held in her hand the bough of an Applle-tree, and in one of the folds Phi∣dias ingraved the name of his beloved Schollar Agoracritus Parius. Phi∣dias was first a Painter, and drew the Shield of Minerva at Athens. Verse 130. Myron,] A famous Statuary, especially for his Heifer, a piece so carved to life, that Poets have made it immortall: See the Greek Epigrams, and Ausonius and Propert. Verse 131. Polyclet.] A most incomparable Statuary: See the Com∣ment upon Sat. 3. Verse 132. Mentor,] An excellent Graver of Plate: Plin. l. 12. c. 11. Mart. Vasa{que} Mentorea nobilitata manu. And Vessels grav'd by Mentor's noble hand. Crassus the Orator had two Goblets of Mentor's workmanship, which cost him about 2500 French Crowns: Plin. lib. 33. cap. 13. Verse 133. Antonius] My Author, having described the riches of the East, before those parts were made Roman Provinces, now names the Governors that inriched themselves with the spoil of those Countries wherewith they were intrusted by the State of Rome. C. Antonius was banished for six years by the Censors; the reason upon record was,
for that he had polled the Associates of Rome: See Pedian and Strab. Verse 134. Dolabella,] Proconsul of Asia, accused by M. Scaurus, and condemned upon the Law de Repetundis: Tacit. Verse 135. Verres,] Governour of Sicily accused by Cicero: part of his charge was Dico te maximum pondus auri, argenti, &c. I say thou hast ex∣ported an infinite of Gold, Silver, Ivory and Purple, great store of Malta-Vests, great store of Bedding, much Furniture of Delos, many Corinthian Vessels, a great quantity of Corn, Wine and Hony. Cicero presses this against him as theft; but Juvenal calls it sacrilege: because Verres in robbing the Associates of Rome, robbed the Gods, to whom the Romans ingaged for protection of their Friends and Allies: See the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 141. Lares,] Houshold Gods. Vid. the Comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 146. Oild Corinth,] A City of Achaia (in the middle of the Peloponnesian Istthmus) first called Ephire. It was the noblest Town of Greece, and standing commodiously between the Ionian and Aegaean Seas, grew so potent, as to hold competition with the City of Rome, and so proud as to affront the Roman Embassadours, and cast dirt upon them: Strab. Hereupon the Senate decreed a war against the Corinthians as Violaters of the Law of Nations, and sent an Army thither under the command of L. Mummius that besieged Corinth, which could not prove a work of much difficulty, the Inhabitants being strangely effeminate. Venus was their Patroness, in whose Temple two hundred Ladies of plea∣sure daily stood at Livery: What men was this Town likely to train up? but such as Juvenal describes, that perfumed themselves with rich Oiles and Essences, fitter to wear garlands then armes: and to meet a Mistress in a bed, then an Enemy in the field. When Corinth was burnt by Mum∣mius, there was a confusion of rich mettals in the fire, to the high advance
of the Brass, which ever after by way of excellence was called Corinthian Brasse. Verse 146. Rhodes.] See the Comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 150. Illyrian Sea-men.] All the coast of the Adriatick Sea, from Tergestum to the Ceraunian Mountains in the Confines of Epire, are in∣habited by the Illyrians: Pomp. Mel. Dion. Alex. These had a fair op∣portunity to make themselves good Sea-men. Verse 150. Reapers.] The Aegyptians, a description of whose fruitfull soil and vain People I have given you at large in Pliny's Panegyrick. Verse 153. Marius.] Marius Priscus Proconsul of Africa; how he rifled the wealth of that Province, and his Accusation and mock-Sen∣tence, you read in the Comment upon Sat. 1. Verse 160. Sibyl's Leaf.] I know not whether Juvenal means the ordi∣nary leaves of the Sibyl's Books, or the extraordinary Palme-tree leaves wherein Sibylla Cumaea writ down her predictions: but this I am sure of, he prophecies (as truly as any of the Sibyls) of the revolt of the Africans from the Roman Empire, for the Pressures and Taxes laid upon them by their covetous Governours. Verse 166. Harpy.] The Harpyes were Daughters to the Earth and Sea: Serv. That they may enjoy their Father and Mother, they dwell in Islands. These winged creatures have the eares of a Bear, the body of a Vulture, the face of a Woman, and hands with crooked tallons instead of fingers. Virgil names but three of them, Aello, Ocypete and Caeleno, which last Ho∣mer calls Podarge, and sayes, that of her Zephyrus begat Achilles his horses, Balius and Zanthus. Hesiod takes notice only of two, Aello and Ocypete: Appollonius numbers them like Hesiod: Erythraeus observes that no more but two Harpyes are carved in an ancient Basis at Venice, and there at this
day to be seen in Saint Martins Church. Yet others reckon three, and Homer a fourth, viz. Thyella. In hell they were called Dogs, in heaven Furies and Birds, in earth Harpyes. When Phineus King of Arcadia, perswaded by his Wife Harpalice, had put out the eyes of his Sons, he himself by a judgement from heaven was struck blind, and haunted by the Harpyes, that with their dung spoiled all the rich dishes at his Table. In the passage of the Argonauts to Colchos, Phineus treated Jason, that, mo∣ved with indignation at the horrid sight, bestowed upon the King Ze∣thus and Calais Sons to Boreas, which having wings like the Harpyes, should beat them out of his Dominions. They did so, and chased them into the Isles of Plotae not far from Zacynthus, where they were admo∣nished by Iris (in Hesiod called Sister to the Harpyes) to leave their pur∣suite of Joves Dogs: this very word frighted the Borean Brothers; and from their retreat the Isles of Plotae were afterwards called Strophades: Virg. The Harpyes were bloody Plunderers and Extorters of money: Sidon. lib. 5. Epist. 7. They were evil women. Apulei. See their mytho∣logy in Coel. lib. 27. Verse 199. Bring thy birth from Picus] He would be of a very anci∣ent House that could bring down his Pedegree from Picus King of La∣tium, Son to Saturn, Father to Faunus, and Grand-father to King Latinus. He was a mighty skilfull Augur. Circe fell in love with him; but he re∣fused her marriage, and took to wife the Nymph Carmentis, which so ve∣xed the Goddess-witch, that she struck him with her magicall Rod, and turned him into a bird of his own name, a Magpie. Some think this Fi∣ction invented from his Augury, because he was the first that, divining by the flight of birds, made use of the Magpie: Ovid. Metam. 14. Verse 168. Giants,] The Sons of Titan that fought and beat Saturn,
and were defeated by Jove. See the beginning of the Comment upon Sat. 6 Verse 161. Prometheus.] See the Comment upon Sat. 4. Verse 184. French Fools-hood.] The Santons of Aquitane, neer Tholouse in France, wore hoods, that are by Martial called Bardocuculli, Fools-hoods. It seems that which in the day time was the French Fashion, pro∣ved the Roman Mode at night, when the young Lords, ashamed to be known, went to their first Debauches. Verse 186. Damasippus,] A profuse young Nobleman, that as my Author tells us, was first Consul of Rome; then a Chariot-Jocky; after∣wards a common Drunkard; and at last a Stage-player. Verse 199. Epona,] Goddess of Stables: Damasippus swore by her, as long as he was able to keep Race-horses; and so did the Grooms of his Stable; it being the Roman Custome for Servants to swear by their Ma∣sters darling-Deity: Sat. 2. And by his Master's Juno his man swears. Verse 201. Tavern-Revels.] Or Cook-shop Revels: for, in Juvenal's time, Cooks Shops were the Roman Taverns. Verse 202. Syrophoenix,] A Vintner or Cook, a Mungrel, born be∣twixt Syria and Phoenicia, from whence he transports the Oyles and Es∣sences that serve his Guests, when they noint after bathing and perfume their Wines: Sat. 6. When Falern Wine with foamy Essence sweats. Verse 207. Cyane,] Wife to Syrophoenix. Verse 216. Painted Tavern-linnen.] Stained Table-clothes brought out of Syrophoenix his Country. Verse 217. Armenian War] Nero made war in Armenia (that rebel∣led against him) by his Lievtenant Domitius Corbulo: Tacit.
Verse 218. Rhene.] Damasippus had youth and strength (but that he wanted honour) to have fought for defence of the Roman Empire, which extended to the River Rhene and the Istrian Flood, now called the Rhiine and the Danow. Verse 220. Ostium] Now Hostia; the next Sea-port to Rome, where the Roman Fleet lay at Anchor. Verse 220. Cybel's Priest.] You cannot wonder that he should lie dead drunk, when you read the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 231. Thy Land neer Luca.] Luca is a City of Tuscia, so named from Lucumo King of Hetruria: Strab. lib. 5. This City flourished an∣ciently with men of great worth and valour, from whom the Romans had their military Orders. Verse 240. Swift Lentulus.] Celer or Swift was a surname of the noble house of Lentulus. Verse 240. Laureol,] A Slave, condemned to be hanged for running away from his Master. This Slave was personated or acted upon the Theater by a Lord, one of the Lentuli, fellow-Actor to the Lord Dama∣sippus, that played a part in Catullus his Comedy called the Phantasm▪ another of the Company was a Mamercus, one of the Aemylian Family, descended, as aforesaid, from Mamercus Son to Pythagoras. My Author observes, that it was the more base in these Noblemen to be Stage-players, because they were Volunteers, not prest men, as in Nero's time; for then Lords durst not refuse to act upon a Stage, when the example was shewed them by their Emperor: but these young Noblemen (by their Prodiga∣lity brought to Want) for a poor Salary offered themselves to act upon Theaters: both as Players, to spend their lungs, and as Fencers, to put their lives in the power of the People.
Verse 255. Thymele,] Latinus his pretty Wife: but though her Hus∣band presented her to Heliodorus the grand Informer, that old block of which Latinus himself was a chip: yet when she was courted upon the Stage by the young Mamercan Lord, that acted a Love-passion some thing too naturally, Latinus was so bold as to give him a sound box of the ear, which would make the common people laugh more then any jeast made by Corynth the Clown, that is here called, Corynth the dull Fool. Verse 260. Gracchus,] The Gladiator mentioned Sat. 2. In the De∣signe before which Satyr you see him in the Circus as a Retiarius or Net-bearer, flying from the Secutor or Pursuer, just as Juvenal describes them here Verse 274. Seneca.] See the Comment upon Sat. 5. Verse 274. Nero.] The Emperor Nero, Schollar to Seneca; but no follower of his precepts: For, by his wicked actions, Nero changed his gallant Proper name into a base Appellative, so that we call every cruel Tyrant Nero: but it seems he fell back from his first course, as in his time the Rivers did from theirs: Plin. lib. 2. cap. 203. He grew to such a height of villany, that he spared not his own family, but was to his Mother, brother, Wife, and all his neerest relations, a bloody Parracide: Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 24. Hist. Eccl. For which my Author intimates that Nero deserves a thousand deaths, and therefore it would be too milde a Sentence that should condemn him as a single Parracide, to be sowed up in a Sack with a Dog, Cock, Viper and Ape, and cast into the Sea; perhaps lest his naked body should defile the Element of water, that wa∣shes out the filth from other things: read Senec. lib. 5. Controv. Digest. lib. 48. ad Leg. Pomp. de Parracid. Coel. Rhod. lib. 21▪ cap. 21. Cic. pro Sext. Rosc. In the next place my Author aggravates Nero's murder of
his Mother, comparing it with the very same Crime committed by Ore∣stes, but not with the same intention, nor seconded with the like cruelties. For, first Orestes took himself to have a Commission from the Gods to kill his Mother, in revenge of his Father, murdered by her, when he had drunk hard at the Feast she made to welcome him home, after his ten years absence at the siege of Troy. Homer agrees with Juvenal, that of the Matricide committed by Orestes Jove was Author, and sent Mercu∣ry to bid Aegysthus take heed of imbruing his hands in Agamemnon's blood; for if he did, Orestes should revenge it upon his Mother and Ae∣gysthus: Hom. Odyss. Then, Nero slew his Sister in Law Antonia; but Orestes did not kill his Sister Electra, nor his Wife Hermione, as Nero killed his VVife Poppaea; nor poysoned he his neerest relations as Nero poysoned his Brother Britannicus. Nor did Orestes in his frenzie commit a Crime equal to Nero, when he writ his Troicks, which Juvenal urges as the greatest of his cruelties; for they put him into a humour of setting Rome on fire, only that he might sing his verses of Troy burning, by Rome in the like condition. Lastly, for the Imperial Crown of his impiety, he charged the fact upon the Christians, condemning those poor Innocents, for that which he himself had done, to be tortured in pitch't Cassocks fit for Catiline and Cethegus (as Juvenal here sayes) that would have fired Rome; and therefore fittest of all for Nero, that did it. This torture is fully described in Sat. 1. Verse 285. Vindex.] C. Julius Vindex Governor in France, the first mo∣ver in the rebellion against Nero; not upon his own score, but upon the account of S. Sulpitius Galba Lievtenant in Spain, for whom both Vindex & Virginius Rufus Governor in Germany declared themselves: and Juve∣nal thinks all three had done well, if they had declared against Nero for
the burning of Rome, and revenged in the first place his malice to his Country. Verse 390. Parsley-Crown.] Nero in the Isthmian prizes had carried away the Parsley-Crown from the Greek Musick-Masters. Verse 292. Thyestes long train.] Thyestes was Son to Pelops and Hip∣podamia. He, to spight his Brother Atreus, made him Cuckold; Atreus, to revenge himself, first banished Thyestes, then repealed his banishment and feasted him with the flesh of those Sons which he himself had begot upon the body of his Wife Aetope. Thyestes, to out doe his Brother, de∣floured his own Daughter Pelopea, by whom he had Aegysthus that as∣sisted in the murder of Agamemnon Son to Atreus. In this Tragedy of Atreus (so horrid that Historians say the Sun could not have patience to behold it, but went back into the East) Nero played the part of Thy∣estes: and Juvenal thinks, that when the Play was done, Nero might have hung the long Vest, which he acted in, upon the Statue of his Ance∣stor Cn. Domitius, as well as he hanged upon the Statue of Augustus Caesar the Lute decreed him by the Judges of the Musick-exercises, he having first kissed and adored it: Suet. Verse 293. Antigone's and Menalippe's Tyre.] That we may know Nero acted upon the Stage both Mens and Womens parts, my Author bids him put upon the head of L. Domitius Nero the Tyre in which he played Antigone, that led her blind Father Oedipus, as aforesaid: and on the head of Domitius Aenobarbus to put the dress in which he played the part of Menalippe, got with child by Neptune, imprisoned by her Fa∣ther, and in a Stable delivered of a boy, that was almost stifled with the stink of the place, and therefore called Baeothus. Verse 296. Cethegus,] One of the Conspirators with Catiline that co∣venanted
to fire Rome: the barbarous Galls did no more. Was this a designe fit for Romans and persons of honour, as they were? Verse 300. Pitcht Cassocks,] Made for poor Christians: See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 1. Verse 302. New man.] Cicero's Enemies, in scorn of his mean birth, called him novus homo, new man; and the poor Arpinate, because he was born among the Volscians at Arpinum, now Abruzzo; then a poor Town, yet enobled by two famous Natives, M. Tullius Cicero and C. Marius. Verse 306. The Gown.] Hail thou that wer't first stiled Father of thy Country, thou that in the Gown did'st first deserve a triumph and the laurell of the tongue. Thus the spirit of Cicero is complemented by Pliny, lib. 7. cap. 2. Father of his Country, was a title by Cato conferred upon Tully for preserving Rome from Catiline, Cethegus, and the rest of their faction. Verse 308. Caesar.] Augustus Caesar, second Emperor of the Romans, Consul with Cicero in the year, from the foundation of Rome, 722. He overthrew Brutus and Cassius at Philippi, and defeated Marc. Antony at the battail of Actium, where he built a City, and named it from his victory Nicopolis: Plutarch. He reigned fifty six years. In his time learning flourished: then in Rome lived Virgil, Horace, Sallust. Hortensius, Athe∣nodorus, Tarseus and Sitio Alexandrinus: Eutr. lib. 7. But in Juvenal's opinion, neither his conquest at Land nor his Sea-victory merited so much honour from his Country, as those services done in the Gown by Cicero. Verse 313. Marius,] Another poor Arpinate born in the same Town with Cicero. His Father C. Marius and his Mother Fulcinia wrought for their living: Plut. and so did he himself when he first came to the Army: Juv.
The Vine that paid him, when the lazy Cramp Took his hand, pallizadoing the Camp. After he was a Souldier, by degrees he rose from one office to another, till at last the Consul Metellus made him his Lievtenant-Generall in Numidia, where he took King Jugurth, and drive him into Rome be∣fore the wheels of his triumphant Chariot: for which service the Romans looked upon him as the only great Souldier, able to defend them when they trembled at the invasion of the Cimbrians and Teutons. He was then chosen Consul five times together. In his fifth Consulship, when he had Catulus for his Collegue, he overthrew the Cimbrians and Teutons. He was defeated by Sylla, and hid himself in the Minturnian Fens in Campa∣nia, where he was found, cast into a Dungeon by the Minturnians, and a Cimbrian sent to murder him: But the Executioner fled from the Priso∣ner, whose eyes (as he said) shot forth a flame of fire. Then the Town, possessed with the like fear, suffered Marius to make an escape; and in a small Pinnace he passed over into Africa, where Juvenal sayes Sat. 10. that he begged his bread in conquered Carthage. When Cinna had sei∣zed into his hands the government of Rome, he called-in Marius, that, destroying his enemies, was the seventh time chosen Consul; and then dyed in Rome of a Pleurisie: Plut. Ver. 317. Cimbrians.] The Cimbrians are the Danes and Holsatians, that, with the rest of the Germans, are called Teutons, from their God Tuesco: Versteg. These, bodying in a vast Army, were upon their march for Rome, in the year 640. but Marius cut them off, as aforesaid: they were men of huge giantly bodies, and horrid looks. The Cimbrians used to rejoyce at a battail, where, if they fell, they should die gloriously upon the bed of ho∣nor: but they lamented in their sicknesses, as if they were to perish basely: Val. Max.
Verse 321. Second Laurel.] He wore the first when he led King Ju∣gurth in triumph. Verse 322. Collegue.] Marius in his fifth Consulship was Collegue to Q. Catulus, a person nobly born. Both, as equalls in the service of pre∣serving their Country from the Cimbrians, were equalized in the ho∣nour of triumph. Verse 323. Decii,] The Decii were Plebeians, but men of more then Patrician courage; for they devoted their lives as voluntary Sacrifices for the benefit of their Country; the Father in the war with the Latines: the Son in the Hetrurian war: the Grandchild in the war that King Pyrrhus made for the Tarentines. The first Decius, when he was Generall in the Latian war, dreamed the victory would fall to them whose Generall should be slain. Taking this for a Revelation from the Gods, he charged the enemy so far, till he got, that which he came for, his death. Whilst the Roman Army fought to fetch off his body, his dream proved true; for the Victory fell to them. The second Decius, in the Hetrurian warre, devoted his life in these words, Vpon my head be all the miseries that threa∣ten my Country: presently he was slain, and the Romans had the day. From the premisses Juvenal concludes, that in the Estimate of the Gods the Decii were equall to the State of Rome; because these two private persons were, by commutation, accepted for the whole Republik. Verse 329. He.] Servius Tullius, Son to Oericulana a bond-woman. After the murder of Tarquinius Priscus by the Sons of Ancus Martius, S. Tullius was crowned King of Rome: Val. He reigned 44 years. Verse 331. Tarquin.] Tarquin the proud, the seventh and last King of Rome. He succeeded Servius Tullius: but yet, as my Author sayes, Ser∣vius was the last good King of Rome. If he had been as fortunate as good,
he had never married this Tarquin to his Daughter Tullia, that with his Pride joyned her Cruelty, and exercised it by his hand upon her Father, only that she might be Queen a little before her time. But Tarquin was a great Souldier: He conquered the Latines and the Sabines: He took Suessa from the Hetrusci: Gabii was delivered to him by his Son Sextus, that fled into the Town, pretending himself an Enimy to his Father. He first instituted the Latine Feriae. When he built the Capitol, in diging for the foundation, the workmen found a man's head: the Soothsay∣ers being asked what it signified, answered, a Tower built upon that foundation should be the head of the world. At last, when his Son Sextus had ravished Lucrece, I. Brutus (that fearing his Tyranny had long counterfeited madness) appeared like himself, headed the Ro∣mans against Tarquin. He fled to Porsenna King of Hetruria. To re∣establish him, Porsenna made war against the Romans, but in vain, Liv. Plut. Yet Tarquin once had almost recovered his Crown: for Titus and Tiberius, the Sons of Junius Brutus, undertook to deliver up a Gate of Rome to Sextus Tarquin: but they were discovered by Vindicius a Slave; for which discovery he was made a Freeman: afterwards the Rod laid upon the head of a Slave, when they manumitted or made him free, was called Vindicta. But Titus and Tiberius were for this offence put to death by their Father like Slaves, being first whipt, and then beheaded. In the war made by King Porsenna in favour of the Tarquins, Horatius Cocles stood him and his whole Army, till the Bridge over Tiber was broken; then, although he had an Arrow in his thigh, he took the Ri∣ver and swam safely to the Roman Host: Liv. lib 2. Afterwards, at the election of Magistrates, one jeering him with his lame leg, he answered, Every one remembers me of my honour. It was likewise in this war that
Mutius Scaevola having sworn to kill Porsenna (then lying with his forces before the City of Rome) by mistake slew his Secretary; and being brought before the King, when he saw his error, for anger that his Country was not delivered of Porsenna by his hand, he cut it off: Liv. ibid. Lastly, in this very war, Claelia with divers other Ladies, the grea∣test beauties of Rome, were given to Porsenna for Hostages: but she freed her self and all her Company. For Claelia, pretending some Religious Ce∣remonies were to be performed by washing in the River Tiber, made the Keepers in modesty stand at distance, till the Ladies, following her, swam to the Romans: whose Dominions, at that time, reached no further then the River. That Claelia went not on foot to the water side, may be collected from the Statue on horse-back, which the Romans set up in ho∣nour of her courage in the Via sacra. Verse 239. Thersites.] Homer, with great reason, calls him of all the besiegers of Troy the ugliest: he was so, both in body and mind: read his description Iliad. lib. 2. For his foul mouth Achilles gave him a box on the ear, which silenced the Rogue for ever. Verse 340. Achilles.] See the Comment upon Sat. 1. Verse 344. Asylum.] Rome was first an Asylum, or Sanctuary for all kinds of Rogues; and the Founder of it, Romulus, was a Shepherd, or — Juvenal is very loath to goe further, if he should, in reference to the murder of Remus, he must call Romulus Parracide.
The ninth Designe. MAy 1 Juvenal believe his eyes? is this A real or mock-Metomorphosis? Spruce 2 Naevolus, her Ladiship's Gallant, His Lordship's Droll, the Wit, come now to Want? Where's all thy jeasts? thy self thou might'st propose: If thou could'st speak, which would be through the nose. Where's thy new Gown? where is the Jesemin Which all that head of hair was butter'd in? I little thought to meet thee alter'd thus; Thou look'st pale, like the Ghost of Naevolus: And witther'd as a Witch, with such a beard Vpon thy chin; where not a hair appear'd, But with a plaster it was straight pluckt off. Thou hast got likewise a consumptive cough. Is all the strength, old women so cry'd up, Shrunk into this smal Vrn, thy Cawdle-cup? There's 3 Isis worship't, at her Temple-Gate, On their old Mistresses those 4 Beggers wait, That once as high in Female favour stood, As ever thou hast done, their limbs as good: And end in thy decrepitness they must; A Cripple still speaks th' Epilogue to Lust.
Figura Nona. NUm credes oculis, Juvenalis 1? vera figura est, An metamorphosi quâdam se lumina fallunt? Deliciae ne mihi Dominarum Naevolus 2 olim Obvius it, Procerúmque sales, & Morio Romae? Quàm tristis veste, & vultu? si venajocandi Aruerit, possis vel te proponere ludum, Per nasi vitium nisi vox malè mulceat aurem. Quò toga, amice, nitens? tibi quò defluxit amomum, Quod solet horrentem sylvam illinire comarum? Non sic mutato sperabam occurrere? palles Vmbra velut; spectrum, non Naevolus Ipse, vidêris; Canidiam rugâ mentiris, & indice barbâ, Quam nupèr suetus fuerat convellere dropax. Vnde aegri veteris tibi facta domestica tussis? An tot matronis jactata probatáque virtus Langueat, in juris miserè conclusa patellam? Isidis aspicias 3 Fanum, quo turpia pangunt Foedera; truncatum 4 cernas ibi Cypridis agmen Emeritúmque; suis quondam hi placuêre Puellis; Quaeque tuo, par horum inerat quo{que} gratia nervo, Nec diversa manent te certò, Naevole, fata: Clauditur in Veneris Ludis scena ultima manco.
The Manners of Men. THE NINTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. A Dialogue the Poet frames; Where poor lewd Naevolus declames, That nothing now th' Vnchaste bestow, But poyson, when they jealous grow. For fear whereof, he silence prayes; But stones will tell, the Poet sayes: Gives him good counsell, but in vain; So jeers, and leavs him to complain. POet. Why NAEVOLUS, thou still com'st lowring so, Like vanquish't MARSIAS, I would gladly know? What dost thou doe with RAVOLA'S strange look, When, with his beard all froath, the Slave was took
Licking of RHODOPE, and stood in fear, Of sawce for sweet-meats, a sound box o'th' eare? CREPERIUS POLLIO made not such a face, When, to seek fools, he went from place to place Promising trebble use: and found not one, In all the Town, that would be wrought upon. How on a sudden did these wrinkles grow? Late with a little thou mad'st such a show Thou seemd'st a kinde of Slavish Knight; our feasts Rung with thy sharp and those no Country-jests. All's altered; melancholy clouds thy brow, Thy hair's a dry Wood; Thy skin shines not now As when warme birdlime sleek't it; now thy thighes Are rough, thy Coppice-haire neglected lies. How cam'st thou by th' old sickman's jaundice, whom A quartan feaver hath long kept at home? Thy frail flesh joy and griefe of spirit knowes: Both which thy face, in divers habits, showes. May be, thy former course thou do'st forsake, And quite another way thy voyage make; For, late (I take it) when our prayers were se'd To ISIS, Peace and her fair GANYMED:
And at the Chappell built to entertaine The Mother of the Gods: and in the Fane Of CERES (for what Temple may not we Have Wenches at) none was cry'd up like thee: The Wives did not AUFIDIUS so much woo; And would'st thou tell, so did their husbands too. Naevolus. Sir, 'tis a thriving Trade to many men; But I got nothing by it: now and then A greasie Cloake, or Gown the Dyers spoil'd: Course cloath, in dressing which French Fullers toil'd; Or some base silver of the second veine. Fates govern men; Fates in parts secret reign; For, if good Stars their influx countermand, Thy unknown length shall for a Cipher stand: Though VIRRO bathing tickle at thy sight, Or though a thick-writ Letter thee invite, Whereto he in a post-script may annex Some Greeke Caresses, to allure his sex. No monster like a cov'tous Pathick whore; I gave thee this, then thus much, and then more: He counts and kisses; let's cast up the sums, Boy bring the notes, you see in all it comes
To six Sestertia. Reckon now my pains: Is't easie when a handsome — one strains Into a stinking —, and there shall greet The Bowels, and the last night's supper meet? I hold him to be more a Slave, that's bound To digge his Master, then his Masters ground. Yet you Sir, think your self compos'd for love, Design'd for heav'n, fit to give wine to JOVE. Poor Parasites must look for nothing sure, When you'll not pay us, that your itchings cure. Lo here, to whom the green UMBRELLA went, To whom the goodly Amber boll was sent On his birth-day, or when the humid Spring Did with it self the female Calends bring: When, Carpets laid beneath his feet, he sate And view'd his Presents in a Chair of state. Say Sparrow, who shall heir those mountain-heights, All those Appulian Valleys: all those Kites Weary'd with flying o're thy land? Rare Wines Thy Cellars fill, from fruitfull Trifoline Vines, The Misene Precipice, bleak Gauran hills; No man with long-liv'd Must more Hogs-heads fills.
What wer't, if thou to thy spent Client gave Some acres? wer't not better he should have The Country-Child, his Mother, and their Shed, And Dog, that still their Play-fellow was bred? Then that all these a Legacie should raise For thy Comrade, that on the Cymbals playes? Thou art not honest when thou ask'st, saies he, But aske, my Boy and House-rent cry to me: My one Boy, like to POLYPHEM'S one eye, For whose large Orbe ULYSSES was too sly; Another must be bought, one will not doe My businesse, and then I must diet two. When Winter comes, what shall I doe I pray? What to my Boyes bare Legs and Shoulders say, When them cold-breath'd December shall benumb, Have patience and the Grashopper will come? But to dissemble, and let pass the rest; How rat'st thou it, and I was still thy prest Devoted Client, that but for my ayd, Thy Wife untill this hour had been a Maid: By what waies I was wrought upon, thou know'st, And what upon thy Promises thou ow'st.
Oft in my armes the flying Maid I caught, When she to tear the new-seal'd Writings sought. Whil'st at the dore thou whind'st, I wrought thy ends, And scarce my whole night's labour made you friends. Witness the pretty little bed, whose creak Thou heard'st, and with it heard'st thy Lady squeak. The marriage knot, crack't, ready to divide, Th' Adult'rer hath in many houses ty'd; Now, first or last, what can'st thou count upon? False and ingratefull, is't no merit? none, That I for thee a Boy or Girle beget? Which thou maist breed, and in our Records set Proofs that thou art a man: thy gates adorn With Garlands, now to thee is issue born. What I have given thee, stops the mouth of fame; Besides the priviledges Fathers claim, That thou art made an Heir, thou ow'st to me: The sweet Caducum too I purchase thee; Nay, 'tis to thee much more advantage yet, If three, the legall number, I beget. Poet. Thou hast, poor NAEVOLUS, just cause to griev. Naev. And then, Sir, when he should my wants reliev,
As a neglected thing he lets me pass, And seeks himself a new two-footed Asse. Be sure you never doe this trust reveal, But in your bosom my complaints conceal. For, your smooth CYNAED is the deadliest foe: So jealous of his secret; what we know, As if it were betray'd, inflames his ire: Hee'll stab, or brain us, or our houses fire; Nor doubt, where so much riches doe abound, That any want of poyson will be found. My Counsel therefore keep as closely hid, As theirs the Court of MARS at Athens did. Poet. O fool! fool! do'st imagine rich men can Have any secret? though the Serving-man, Prove silent, Truth from Beasts will speech compell: The dogs, the posts, the marble stones will tell. Thy window shut, o're crannies hangings lay, Lock double dores, and take the lights away; Let all give charge that none lye neer thee; yet, What thou shalt in thy Bed-chamber commit, Ev'n when the Cock the second time shall crow, E're it be day, shall the next Tavern know:
And hear crimes that were not committed; lyes That Spinners, Carders, Master-Cooks devise; Who care not what they 'gainst their Lord compose, When with their rumors they revenge his blowes. Some will way-lay thee, nay enforce thee hear, And being drunk themselves, make drunk thy ear. Intreat their secresie, as thou do'st mine, They'd rather tell it, than steal Falern Wine: Or then out-quaffe those Cups LAUFELLA takes, When for the People she her Off'ring makes. We must for many causes live upright, But chiefly that we Servants tongues may slight: For of th'ill People that to us belong, The part that is most evill is the Tongue. And yet that Lord's condition is far worse That fears the men which eat upon his Purse. Naev. Good Counsel, to scorn Servants tongues, I've learn'd: But Gen'ralls, wherein all men are concern'd; What to my self, in my peculiar Trade, Now time and hope are lost, wilt thou perswade? For, this fair Flow'r goes swiftly to decay, Poor wretched Life's short portion hasts away.
Whil'st we drink, noynt, wench, and put Garlands on: Old-age steals on us, never thought upon. Poet. Fear not, thou'lt ner'e want Pathick friends, so long As these Hills stand and flourish; all will throng To Rome, by Boat and Coach, to make this Match, That their Heads neatly with one finger scratch, Another hope may rise, and that more great, Only doe thou provoking Rocket eat. Naev. You speak to happy men; my fates would joy, If all my trading might my teeth imploy: O my poor Lars, I offer to your powers A little incense, bran, and wreaths of Flowers. When shall the fortune I attain be such, Will keep me from the Hovell and the Crutch? For Int'rest-money, when shall I receive Thousands, for which the Rogues good pawns shall leave? Have Silver-Vessels, pure illegall Plate, Such as FABRICIUS censur'd for the weight? And two young Hackney-Maesians at command, Safe in the clam'rous Circus me to land. A croked Graver, and another Knave Paints Faces in a trice? these would be brave.
But I poor wretch must of such hopes despair; For, when to fortune I doe make my prayer, Her ears against me with that wax she arms, Which sav'd ULYSSES from the Syrens charms. The Comment UPON THE NINTH SATYR. VErse 2. Marsyas.] A rare Piper, born at Celaenae, once the chief City of Phrygia: Lucan. Lugent damnatae Phoebo victore Celaenae. Condemn'd Celaenae for Sol's Conquest mourns, as if the very Town put on the looks of their fellow Citizen Marsyas, that (having sawcily presumed to challenge Phoebus at the Pipe invented by Minerva) was vanquished and condemed to be flead alive: Ovid. lib. 6. Fast. No marvel if he looked scurvily, after such a Sentence passed upon him by victorious Apollo. Verse 5. Rhodope.] Rhodope was a famous Curtezan of Thrace, fel∣low-Bondslave to Aesop the Fable-maker. She was redeemed for a great summe of money by Charaxus (Brother to Sapho the Poetess) that fell in love with Rhodope; and after he had spent all the rest of his fortunes upon her, turned Pyrate: but she, raising her self upon the ruins of him and other such fools, came to be so infinite rich, that she built a Pyramid: Plin. lib. 30 cap. 12. Juvenal uses her name for a Roman Curtezan.
Verse 7. Crepereius Pollio.] A broken Citizen of Rome, and one that all the Town knew to be a Bankrupt. Verse 16. Thy hair's a dry wood.] Debauched Naevolus wanted mo∣ney to buy unguents for his hair, so to put his head into the mode; for, the Romans poudered not as we doe, but annointed their heads; yet take notice, that he lived before the siege of Naples, for his hair stuck on. Verse 26. Isis,] That her Temple in Rome stood neer to the old Pa∣lace of Romulus, by my Author called the old Sheepcoat, you see in Sat. 6. a vertuous place it was, the Mart for Bawds and Whores to drive their bargains: See the figure of the Temple of Isis in the Designe before this Satyr, and the history of that Goddess in the Comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 26. Peace.] The Temple of Peace, wherein Vespasian Caesar had set up the Statue of Ganymed. Verse 28. The Mother of the Gods.] Cybele, that after she was brought out of Phrygia to Rome, and there for some time had been a private Guest to Scipio Nasica, the Republick built a Chappel to entertain her, which was now converted to such pious uses as the Temple of Isis, and of Ceres, formerly a Goddess dreadfull to sinners: See the Comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 31. Aufidius,] A notorious lusty Grecian, gracious with most of the rich and wanton Romans: Mart. Acrior hoc Chius non erat Aufidius. Chian Aufidius was no sharper Knave. Verse 41. Virro] One of the Sect that worshiped the Good Goddess the contrary way: See the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 62. Female Calends.] Upon the Calends or first day of March (being according to the Roman account the birth-day of Venus) they ce∣lebrated the Matronalia, or female feasts: during which time the Beau∣ties
of Rome, dressed up in all their splendour, sate in Chaires that stood upon Carpets, and received rich presents from their Husbands or Ser∣vants. This Ceremony was imitated by Pathick Virro: and his poor Ido∣lator Naevolus must be at the charge of modish Offerings, Umbrella's, Fannes, Amber-bolls and the like. Verse 68. Trifoline.] The Trifoline Vineyards, and those upon the Gauran Hills and the Misene Promontory, were all in Campania, and all their Vintages, excellent Wine: Mart. Non sum de primo, fallor Trifolina, Lyaeo, Inter Vina tamen septima vitis ego. I Trifoline am cozen'd, the best wine I have not, but I bring forth the sev'nth Vine. Certant Massica aeque ex monte Gaurano Puteolos Baias{que} prospectantia: The Massick Vine is full as good that comes from the Gauran Hills, over∣looking Puteoli and Baiae: Plin. lib. 14. cap. 9. Verse 79. Thy Comrade] Cybel's Priest, that playes upon the Cim∣bals till Sack silence him and them: as in the Designe before Sat. 8. but then he played to the unthrift Damasippus, of whom there was nothing to be got but Sack. Now he playes to wealthy Virro, in hope to cozen him out of his estate, as his Predecessors the Corybantes cozened Saturn, that he should not hear the cry of his own Child: much less shall Virro hear the bawling of his man Naevolus, but bequeath all to his boon Companion the Archigallus or Priest of Cybel: See the Comment upon Sat. 2. & 8. Verse 79. Polypheme.] Polyphemus the Cyclops, Son to Neptune by Thoosa, Daughter to Phorcys. He was a huge man-monster, and had but one eye, in the midst of his forehead: but his Mother had not so much; for, she and her two Sisters had but one eye amongst them all.
He fell in love with the Nymph Galatea: and from a steep rock broke the neck of his Favourite Acis, because he was jealous that his Mistress loved the Youth better then himself. When Vlysses by a storm was cast upon the coast of Sicily, he eat up six of his Mates, and would have de∣voured the rest, if their Captain had not been too subtill for him: but Vlysses foxed him with black wine, and when he was in a dead sleep, got a fire-stick and burned out his one eye: Homer 10. Odyss. Virg. Aeneid. 3. Many say Polyphemus had but one eye, some that he had two, others three; but 'tis all fabulous. For he was a prudent man, and therefore said to have an eye in his head neer his brains. But Vlysses was wiser then he, by whom he was said to be blinded, that is, over-reached: Serv. Verse 104. Our Records] The names of Fathers that had Children were recorded in the Aerarium or Chequer-Office. The original of this Inrollment was from Servius Tullius, that to ascertain the number of Births and Burials, ordered that when a child was born, the kindred of the child should bring a piece of money into the Aerarium of Juno Lucina; and so likewise into the Exchequer of Venus Libitina when any died or came to age. This Custome, quite abolished, was revived by Augustus Caesar at the birth of children: Lips. in Tacit. Verse 109. Heir] A Roman could not be Heir to his Wife unless he had a Child by her. And whereas Bachellors were fined for their con∣tempt of Marriage: Fathers had right to stand for civil Magistracy, to cast lots for Provinces, and to be Heirs by VVill. Tacit. Verse 110. Caducum.] Caducum, by Cujacius out of Vlpian, is defined to be that which is left to a person by Law capable to receive, but yet for some respects devolves from him to the Exchequer after the Testators death. Of this there were two sorts: The one, when the gift to an Heir
or Legatee (that died before the Testator, or opening of the Will) came to the Prince. This was enacted by the Law Papia Popaea (made to sup∣ply Augustus Caesar with money, the publick Coffers being exhausted by the Civil Wars) and abrogated by Justinian: Lib. 6. Cod. Justin. Tit. 1. The other sort was when the Prince had by the Law Julia and Popaea that which was left by VVill to such as were unmarried, if they did not marry within ten dayes after the Testators death: And half that was so conferred to such as was married, but had no Children, in case the man was 25 years of age, or the woman 20, except it was given by their Kin∣dred, which Cujacius thinks extended to the sixt degree. This Law was repealed by Constantinus, Constantius and Constans: lib. 8. Cod. Justin. Tit. 58. And to this the Poet here hath reference. The Servant telling his Master, amongst other good turns he had done him, that by him he was put in a condition to receive. —Nec non & dulce Caducum. The sweet Caducum too. Verse 112. Three] Jus trium liberorum, The Law of three Children freed a man from being Ward, gave him precedency in election to Of∣fices in the Common-wealth, trebbled his measure of Corn in the pub∣lick allowance: this Pliny the Consul obtained of the Emperor Trajan for his friend Tacitus: Plin. Epist. Verse 126. The Court of Mars.] The Areopagus; where those severest and most just Judges the Areopagites gave sentence, and delivered their votes in Characters and alphabeticall Letters, θ theta signifying the Sentence of death: and death it was to divulge the Votes by which that Sentence passed. Some say it was called the Court of Mars, because Neptune in that Court accused Mars for the murder of his Son: where∣of
he was acquited by seven Votes of the twelve Gods that were his Judg∣es: Alexand. ab Alexand. lib. 3 cap. 5. The first Judgement of life and death was pronounced in the Areopagus: Plin. lib. 7. See Jul. Pollux. lib. 8. de magist. Athen. Verse 127. O fool! fool!] Juvenal's expression is, O Corydon! Corydon! so the Romans called any dull Country-Lob. Verse 145. Laufella.] The good Goddess was well served when the Offering was made by Laufella, one of whose abhominable drunken Pranks you hear of in Sat. 6. This Oblation was made for the People: Credat aliquis, &c. Some may believe that bribes were given to the Judg∣es before whom Clodius was arraigned, for the Adultery which cleerely he had committed with Caesars wife, wherein he violated the religion of that Sacrifice which they say is made for the People: At the celebration where∣of Men are so far from being admitted, that the very Pictures of male creatures are covered. Senec. Epist. 98. Verse 169. Lars.] See the beginning of the Comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 176. Fabricius,] The Censor: Sat. 11. That to his own Collegue was so severe: For he fined him because he found in his house illegall Plate, viz. a silver-Vessel of ten pound weight: See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 177 Hackney-Maesians,] Chair bearers of Maesia, which the vanity of poor Naevolus wishes for, that he might be carried in state to see the Chariot-races, Stage-playes, and other recreations of the Circus. Verse 184. Vlysses,] King of the Isles of Ithaca and Dulichium, Son to Laertes and Anticlea; but some said his true Father was the Outlaw Sisy∣phus, that met with his Mother as she went to be married with Laertes; or
as others tell the story, forced her after marriage, in her journey to the Oracle. Ajax in his Plea objects this against Vlysses: Ovid. lib. 13. Met. jeering him with his Sisyphian blood. Homer makes him a person of great prudence and experience. He married Penelope Daughter to Icarus the Lacedaemonian. By her he had Telemachus, and so doated on her, that when the Greek Princes engaged in the war against Troy, he counterfeited madness, hoping they would leave him with her, as useless for them. Therefore yoaking Beasts of different species, he plowed the Sea-shoar, and sowed the sands with Salt. But Palamedes, to make tryall whether V∣lysses were really mad or no, laid Telemachus in the furrow before him, which he seeing, took off the Plough and balked his Child. Thus he was drawn into the Association, where he served his Country with great judgement and success. When Achilles passed for a Maid of honour in the Court of King Lycomedes, Vlysses found him out; parted him and Princess Deidemia, and brought him to a nobler Mistress, the VVarre: many services he did of the like nature, for without them the Oracle had pronounced, that Troy could not be taken. He flattered Philoctetes to a disovery of the poysoned arrowes of Hercules, and brought him to the Leaguer before Troy. He stole away the ashes of King Laomedon that were kept in the Town on the top of the Scaean-Port. He with the help of Diomedes slew the Guard, and carried away the Palladium, the Image of Pallas, being the Telesmaticall Safeguard of Troy. He was sent again with Diomedes as a Spie into Thrace, where he killed the King, and brought away his horses, before the Grooms watered them in the River Xanthus. About victualling the Camp he had strange fallings out with Palamedes, and at last, upon the credit of a false report raised by himself, he got his old discoverer stoned to death. VVhen Achilles was slain, in the Judge∣ment
for hearing and determining the right to his Armes, both he and Ajax pleading their own Causes, Sentence passed for Vlysses. When Troy was taken, he slew Orsilochus Son to the King of Creet, that would have abridged him of his just share in the plunder of the Town. He put to death Polyxena at the Tomb of Achilles; and when he took shipping for Ithaca, made the Keepers of Astyanax (Son to Hector) breake the Child's neck from the top of a Tower. But a Voyage so bloodily begun must needs be improsperous. After some crosses at Sea, he was cast by a storm upon the coast of Sicily, where with twelve of his men he entred the Den of Polyphemus; and when that Cyclops had devoured six of them, Vlysses burning out his eye as aforesaid, he and the rest, wrapped in Ram-skins, escaped. Then landing in Aeolia, Aeolus gave him a Wind in a bag: but when it had carried him within ken of Ithaca; his Mates, taking it to be a bag of Gold, opened it, and the VVind that came out drive him back again into Aeolia. From thence he passed to the Laestry∣gons or Canibals that eat men, and so to Circe that transformed his men into beasts: but Mercury gave him a counter-spell, and confiding in the virtue of it, he boldly came up to Circe, drew his sword, and forced her to restore his Mates to their own shapes. Then, captivated with Circe's beauty, he staid with her a whole year, and had by her a Son named Te∣legonus. Hesiod affirmes that she brought him other two, Arius and La∣tinus. At last, with much unwillingness, she dismissed him. After per∣formance of certain ceremonies he went down into Elysium, and there from the mouth of his Mother Anticlea, and from Elpenor, and the blind Prophet Teresias, was instructed in future events. Returning again into this world, and to his Mistress Circe, he gave the rites of buriall to the body of Elpenor, that in his drink had fallen from a Ladder and broke his
neck. Afterwards he sailed by the Isle of the Syrens, and for fear their sweet singing might inchant his men, he appointed them to stop their ears with wax, and commanded that he himself should be tyed to the main Mast: So with much difficulty passing the Straights of Scylla and Charyb∣dis, that set their Barking Dogs upon him, he arrived in Sicily, where Pha∣ethusa and Lampetia, Daughters to Phoebus, kept their Fathers Flocks, which he charged his men not to meddle with. But whilst he slept; his Mates, compelled by hunger and perswaded by Eurylochus, killed a great sort of the sheep; for which they paid their lives in a wrack at Sea, not a man in the Ship escaping but only Vlysses; that, bestrid a Mast, and was by the winde and waves for nine dayes together tossed to and fro: at length, being cast upon the Isle of Ogygia, the Nymph Calypso gave him kinde reception: seven years he staid with her, in which time she had two Sons by him, Nausithous and Nausinous: Hesiod. Into Ogygia Ju∣piter sent Mercury to tell the Goddess Calypso, that she must no longer detain Vlysses. Once again he put to Sea, but when he was in sight of Corcyra, inhabited by the Phaeacks, Neptune raised a storm that split his Ship; and he had perished, if Leucothoe in pitty had not helped him to a Plank, which he held by, till he came safe to shoar in one of the Phaeack Havens. There he hid his nakedness amongst the bushes, but was found out and cloathed by Nausica, Daughter to Alcinous King of that Island; where, by the artifice of Pallas, he was brought to Queen Arete that gave him a Ship manned for service. The Master landed him in Ithaca, and not being able to wake him according, to his Commission, laid a great deal of treasure by him, and left him in a dead sleep: but Pallas quickly roused him, and put him into a beggers habit. In that pickle he came to his Neat-herds, and found his Son Telemachus amongst
them. In this disguise he was brought to his house by his Hogherd Eu∣maeus, where, after many affronts put upon him by his Wife's impudent Suiters, his Nurse Euriclea knew him. Lastly, his Son Telemachus and two of his Neat-heards assisting, he fell upon the pretenders to Penelope, slew them all, and then discovered himself to her. But forewarned by the Oracle that his Son should kill him, he resolved to leave his Court and lurk in the Woods: mean time Telegonus, his Son by Circe, desirous to see his Father, made a voyage to Ithaca: but being a stranger to the Servants of Vlysses, most uncivilly they would have shut the gates a∣gainst him and his followers, that disputed their entrance; in the tumult by meer chance Telegonus shot his Father with a poisoned arrow, dipt in the blood of the Fish Trygon.
The tenth Designe. HEar pray'rs return'd, in the Pantheon made. Wealth 1 Plutus 2 send me; for what hast thou pray'd? Fool for thy death; with Gemmes thy 3 Golden-cup Shall sparkle, but with poison be fill'd up. O 4 Jove! I would be great: 5 Sejanus, thou To awe the World shalt bend the second brow: Till Rome, that fear'd thy 6 Statues, laugh to see Them drag'd as Traytors through the Streets with thee. I would be eloquent, sweet 7 Pallas; so Thou shalt, to admiration, 8 Cicero: But dear this pray'd-for eloquence shall cost, When, for thy tongue, thy hand 9 and head is lost. For Conquest, Spoil and Triumph, 01 Mars, I kneel: The arme of 11 Caesar the whole World shall feel; And he, what every noble soul abhorres, The bloody hands of base 12 Conspirators. Of 13 Time I beg long life: Had Pompey dy'd A young man, how had he been glorify'd: Now in perfidious Aegypt he lyes dead, His aged 14 body sever'd from his head. Make 15 this a Beauty, 16 Venus; Fair and Chast Shall 17 Lucrece be, but yet by Rape disgrac't.
Figura Decima. AUdi, vota Deos quàm perniciosa fatigant! Ô mihi fundat 1 opes Plutus 2; delire, quid optas? Splendidius fatum: flammas imitante Pyropo Aureus extrà ardet Crater 3; intúsque veneno. Jupiter 4, esse velim magnus; Sejane 5, secundum Ferre supercilium Te fassus contremit orbis: Mox, cultae genibus, Statuae 6 calcantur, & uncis Cum Domino lacerae, debent ludibria vulgo. Fac me facundum Pallas 7; prece diva movetur; Eloquio pleni moderatur frena theatri Tullius 8: at magno venît Facundia; solam Ob linguam, rostris affixa capútque 9 manúsque. Da spolia, & pompam rogo te, Gradive 10, triumphi; Ad sua devictos deducit flagra Quirites Caesar 11: at in medio (quod mens generosior horret) In conjurantûm medio cadit Ipse 12 senatu. Da multos, Saturne 13, dies; juvenilibus annis Pompeius salvos inter cecidisset honores: Nunc jacet Aegypti pudor, & sine marmore Magnus; Truncatus 14 collum Titulis Senióque verendum. Nata 15 sit haec formosa, 16 Venus; Lucretia 17 pulcra es, Castáque, at invitam Te laedit crimine Raptor.
The Manners of Men. THE TENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. For Wealth, Power, Eloquence, success In Warre, Long-life and Handsomness We pray; which if the Gods bestow, Our ruine to our prayers we owe. What then befits us to receive, We to the Powers divine must leave; And, shunning riot, wisely live: This blessing we our selves may give. IN all th'earth; from Cales Westward, to the streams Of Ganges, gilded with the morning beams, To few men Good and Ill unmaskt appear. For, what with reason doe we hope or fear?
What hast thou by thy happy'st project gain'd, But thou repent'st thy pains, and wish obtain'd? Whole houses th' easie Gods have overthrown, Granting their pray'rs that did those houses own. In Peace and War that's sought, we should avoyd: How many have pure Eloquence destroy'd? He vainly shortned his life's hopefull length, By trusting to his more then humane strength. What multitudes have toyl'd to meet their fate, Gath'ring vast sums: which now the best estate Falls as far short of, as our Dolphins fail To match the hugeness of the British Whale. LONGINUS was girt therefore, by command From NERO, with the whole Praetorian Band. SENECA'S Gardens, like his riches, great: And the fair Lat'ran buildings were beset By all the Guards too; but in that sad time, Seldome the Souldiers did poor Garrets clime. If thou, in the night season, travell'st late, And carry'st but a little silver plate, Thou fear'st the sword and club; thy faint heart quakes At ev'ry reed, whose shade by Moon-night shakes.
The poore way-faring man, that doth not bring A charge along, before the thiefe will sing. The first pray'r, made to almost all the pow'rs; Is wealth, that our stock may encrease, that our's In all th' Exchange may be the best fill'd Trunk: But out of earthen pots no poyson's drunk; Fear that when thou rich Setin Wine do'st hold Sparkling mid'st Diamonds in a boll of Gold. How lik'st it now; that one o'th' Sages stept Ore's threshold laughing still; and th' other wept. But laughter's easie, any may deride: 'Tis strange whence moisture th' other's eyes suppli'd. DEMOCRITUS, that laugh't his lungs sore, there Where no Pretexta Trabeae; Fasces were, Closs chaire, high Throne, had burst sure, had he gaz'd Upon our Praetor, in his Chariot rais'd, Amid'st' the dusty Circus, in JOVE'S gown: In his Robe Royall, wearing a great Crown, An Orbe which scarce one ATLAS can support: Therefore a Crown-bearer sweats soundly for't; And lest the Consul his high thoughts might wrong, That Slave in the same Chariot rides along.
Then th' Eagle must, from's Ivory Scepter, soare: Here Cornets sound, there long troops ride before, With him white Romans, in whose pockets lurks Th' Almes-basket, which on their good natures works. He then found matter to deride all those He met withall; whose mighty judgement showes, Brave men, Examples which the world adorn, May in dull climes and grosser aire be born. The bus'nesses of men, their joyes and fears He laught at, and sometimes their very tears: A halter on proud Fortune he bestow'd, And when she frown'd, his middle finger show'd. Whil'st to the Gods wax't knees vain Man repairs, With his superfluous or destructive Pray'rs. Pow'r, subject to great envie, ruins some; Long rolls of glorious names, from whence they come: Or those atchiev'd, which did their triumphs crown. Brass Statues follow Ropes that pull'd them down; Their Chariot-wheels groan under th' Axes stroak, And ev'n their inn'cent horses legs are broke: The fire to crackling flames the bellows turns; The head, adored by the people, burns:
The great SEJANUS melts; and of that face, Which in the whole world had the second place, Basons and Ewres, Pots, Frying-pans are made. Thy house, this day, let solemn Laurel shade, Drag to the Capitol a milk-white Bull; Behold SEJANUS through the streets they pull, The people shout, to see him drag'd with hooks: What lips he has? how like a rogue he looks? Trust me, I never could that man abide; But what crime? who inform'd? who testifi'd? No such thing; a long-worded Letter came From Capreae: good; I no more Queries frame. What doe the rabble all this while? they run Along with fortune, as th' ave ever done, And hate condemned men. That very hour Had NURTIA smil'd upon her Tuscan's power, And he surpriz'd the old Prince, by trust beguil'd, Those Rascals had SEJANUS CAESAR stil'd. E're since we left the selling of our voice, We take no care; the rout, that once made choice Of Consuls, Praetors, Tribunes, what it pleas'd, Is long agoe of all that trouble eas'd:
And only, with perplext devotion, prayes For two things, Bread and the Circensian Playes. Hark how they whisper, shall he die alone? No sure, that great fire's made for more then one. At MARS his altar (may the omen fail) I met BRUTIDIUS, and my friend look't pale. Pray heav'n our mighty AJAX doe not kill Those that were for him, should his cause go ill: Then, whil'st he lyes upon the brink, lets goe Full speed, and trample upon CAESAR'S foe: But let our Men see't, lest on us they fall, And to the Bar their pinion'd Masters call. News of SEJANUS thus went up and down; These were the secret murmers of the Town. Would'st be SEJANUS? courted at his rate? A Consull this, a Tribune him create? Be th' Emp'ror's Tutor, that in Capreae sits Thron'd on a Rock 'mongst his Chaldaean Wits? Would'st have the horse and foot serve under thee, And Captain o'th' Praetorian Life-guard be? Why should'st thou not desire it? those that would Act no foul mischief, doe yet wish they could.
Is there in Greatness so much Good as will But only serve to counterpoise the Ill? Would'st be with that drag'd Traytor's Purple grac't? Or be at Gabii or Fidenae plac't? Break small pots, judgement of false measures give? At poor Ulubrae a patcht Aedile live? SEJANUS therefore never understood, You must confess, true and essential Good, But much too wealthy, much too potent grown, Pil'd Tow'r on Tow'r, whence he was headlong thrown: Whom fortune did to that strange height entice, To make his fall more horrid by his rise. What o'rethrew CRASSUS, conquer'd POMPEY caught? And him, that to his whips slav'd Romans brought? Ev'n Supreme Power: got by arts strangely odd, And Prayers heard by some malignant God. To CERES Son in law but few goe down In peace that wear, none that usurp, a Crown. At TULLY'S and DEMOSTHENES his fame: Boyes in MINERVA'S five dayes feast doe aim. And of their penny-PALLAS Rhet'rick crave, Waited upon by the small Satchel's Slave.
Yet both these Orators their Tongues struck dead; His wit cost CICERO his Hand and Head: Such barb'rous cruelty who ever saw Done on a duller practicer at Law. O happy Rome! when I was Consull born. ANTONY'S sword he might have laught to scorn, If he had still thus Poetiz'd. I pray The Lady-Muses, that I rather may The Author of ridic'lous Poems be, Second divine Philippick then of thee. Th' Athenian wonder too was put to death, That rul'd the people with his powerfull breath, Got when the Fates were froward, Gods unkind: Whom's Father, with the smoaky forge half blind, From blowes on sooty VULCAN'S Anvill spent In ham'ring swords, to study Rhet'rick sent. The man of Wood that spoils in triumph bears, A Helmet broke, Breast batter'd, dangling Ears; Horses that draw a Pole-lesse Chariot, Streamers from Gallies in a Sea-fight got: And a sad Captive set a-top of all; These more than humane blessings Souldiers call.
These the Greek, Roman, Barb'rous Gen'rals sought, And with so many wounds and dangers bought; Virtue is so much less belov'd then Fame: For, bate reward, who will at Virtue aime? Hence, have some few sunk Nations with their pride, That glorious titles might there ashes hide, Which the wild fig-tree springing breaks away: For tombes themselves the pow'r of Fate obey. Weigh HANNIBAL, how many pounds canst find In that great Gen'rall's body now? whose mind, Not Africa wash't with th' Atlantick Main, Nor where warm Nilus bounds it, could contain. He to his Elephants and Aethiops Joyn'd Spain: pass'd o're the Pyrene Mountain tops; Though Nature th' Alps and Snow, as barrs, had laid: Through Rocks with Vinegar his way he made. Now Italy is his; he'll yet march on: There is, saith his proud Souldier, nothing done, Unless my Carthaginians storm the Town, And ith' Suburra set my Standard down. O! how would th' one-ey'd Gen'ral's picture, took, Riding on his Getulian Monster, look.
What's th' end? O glory! he that so far spread His conquests, vanquisht, into exile fled, Must (great strange Waiter) part o'th' Presence make, Till the Bythinian Tyrant please to wake. That life, which threatn'd th' earth with change of States, Nor sword, nor dart, nor rocky mountain dates, But the revenge of Cannae, for that Spring Of Roman blood, was a poor little Ring. Go climb the horrid Alpes vain-glorious fool, To please the boyes, and be their Theam at School. The Youth, that honour'd PELLA with his birth, Vext at one world, coop't up i'th narrow earth, As if the rocks of GYARUS wall'd him in, Or as he had in closs Seriphus bin, When he a Conqu'rours entrance had compell'd To brick-wall'd Babilon, one Coffin held. Death doth alone deal plainly, and declare What things of nothing humane bodies are. We may believe, what was believ'd of old, That ships put in at Athos: and what bold And lying Greece on history impos'd, XERXES that Mountain with his Fleet inclos'd:
That or'e the sollid Sea by Coach he past; Drank up whole Rivers, when he broke his fast: And all that hov'ring with her drunken wings, The Muse of SOSTRATUS the Poet sings. But how from Salamin return'd he shipt, Whose barb'rous pride the East and Northwest whipt, Never in AEOLUS his jayle so paid? That fetters on th' Earth-shaker NEPTUNE laid, And 'twas done gently that he spar'd his brand: What God would not serve under his command? But how return'd he? in a bark he fled, Sayling in blood: retarded by the dead, Whose bodies to arrest his flight did swim; Thus so much courted Glory punisht him. Grant health, O JUPITER, grant length of dayes; Thus the fresh youth, thus th' old and sickly prayes. But how great constant ills doe old men brook, How ugly, how unlike themselves they look? Instead of skin, they have a nasty hide; Sagg'd cheeks, wherein such wrinkles are descry'd, As when through Tabraca's thick woods we shape Our course, we see scratcht in an old she-Ape.
There's somthing still that diff'rences the young; This then that fairer, He then he more strong: The old have one face; the same Palsie makes Their voices tremble, which their body shakes: Their Heads an aged fall o'th Leafe disclose, And th' infancy of a still-dropping Nose. Disarm'd of Teeth, this chawes with only Gums; And to Wife, Children, and himself becomes So loathsome; as the sight turns COSSUS blood, That brings him presents of the rarest food. Nor in his meat, or Wine, does th' ancient gust, Rejoyce his duller Pallat: and for lust, A long Oblivion cancells those Essayes, A Nerve lyes couchant which no art can raise. Indeed; what faith, a comfortable effect, From weak gray-hair'd PRIAPUS, can expect? Besides; though he may lust, he cannot love, Shall VENUS, without strength to please her, move. The suff'ring of another part now see, In rarely well-set Ayres what joy takes he: Although SELEUCUS sing them to his Lute, Or the fine Player in his golden Sute?
What matter where o'th' Stage he sits; whose eare Can scarce the Cornets, or the trumpets hear; Whose loud-tongu'd Boy the very house must rock, To make him know who's come, or what's a Clock: A Fever only warming the no blood In his cold body: which hath such a flood, Of all kinde of diseases, that to tell Their very names, I might sum up as well How many Youths got OPPIA'S good will, What Patients THEMISON did one Autumn kill; What friends to Rome by BASIL cheated were Abroad, by HIRRUS what poor Orphans here: What men long MAURA in one day enjoyes, Or the base School-master HAMILLUS, boyes. Sooner might my Arithmetick avow, How many Manors he is Lord of now, That, when my youthfull beard did trimming crave, Correction with his nimble Sizzers gave. This loses th' use of shoulders, that of thighes, He of his hips; and he of both his eyes, Envy'ng the pur-blind: the fresh colour's fled From's lips, and those with other's hands are fed.
He, at the sight of supper, wont to fall A yawning, gapes and gapes, and that is all. So gape young Swallows, to bring whose supplies, With her mouth full, their fasting Mother flyes. But losse of all his members equalls not His losse of senses, that hath quite forgot His servants names, nor his friend's count'nance knows, Nor who 'twas supt with him last night, nor those He got and bred, though now his Will declare Them strangers, making PHIALE his heir; For her warm breath, a trick that she did use, For many years together, in the Stewes. But, if he have his senses, yet he must Be forc't to lay his Children in the dust, With his fair Sister's ashes fill an Urn; Give order for the fire too, that must burn His Brother's body, and his dearest Wife: This penance all must doe that have long life; They must new fun'rals of their house behold, And in perpetuall grief and blacks grow old. King NESTOR did (if faith to thee we give, Great HOMER) neerest to the Raven live;
Blest sure, to be so many ages old That he his years upon his right hand told; And drank so oft wine in the Must? but stay A while before you judge, and mark, I pray, How he complain's of Fates too kinde decrees, Of too much thread they spun him, when he sees His son ANTILOCHUS his beard on fire; He then, of all about him, did inquire, What 'twas should him to so long life ingage? What he had ever done deserv'd that age? So PELEUS raves for his ACHILLES slain: He for ULYSSES wandring on the main. PRIAM (Troy safe) had his last progresse made In state unto ASSARACUS his shade. HECTOR, his subjects weeping and forlorn, With all his brothers had the body born. CASSANDRA first her fun'ral tears had spent, And then POLIXENA her garments rent: If he had dy'd before his son's foule guilt, Ere wanton Paris his bold ships had built. What did long life conferre? a sight oth' fall Of Asia, fire and sword destroying all.
Then, for his Crown, th' old trembling Souldier took A helmet, and at great JOVE'S Altar strook, Fell like an Oxe, in his old age despis'd, And by th' ingratefull Plough-man sacrific'd. Yet PRIAM dy'd a Man; but his old Wife Surviv'd a Bitch, and bark't away her life. I come to our own stories: passing by The Pontick King, and SOLON'S wise reply; That would not CRAESUS should his fortune praise, Untill the close and evening of his dayes. This caus'd the exile, and imprisonment Of MARIUS: made him, in old age, content In the Minturnian Fens to hide his head, And ev'n in conquer'd Carthage to beg bread. What parallel in nature had there been? What happier Roman had Rome ever seen? If when, in all the pomp of war, he past Our streets with crouds of Captives, and at last Came from's Teutonick Chariot to alight: Then his triumphant soul had took her flight. To POMPEY provident Campania gave A timely fever; but, his life to save,
In many Cities publique Pray'rs were made, The Conquerour preserv'd, to be betray'd When conquer'd, by ROMES fortune and his own; His Head cut off, a punishment unknown To our most dangerous Delinquents: thus CETHEGUS suff'red not, nor LENTULUS; Ev'n CATILIN, that to her fun'rall fire Had destin'd Rome, came to his own intire. To VENUS, in her Temple, for fine Boyes The zealous Mother prayes, with lesser noyse: But prayes aloud for Girls exactly fair, Each nicetie remember'd in her pray'r. Why laugh'st thou at her zeal; the Deifi'd And fair DIANA was LATONA'S pride? But the fair LUCRECE, and her fatall rape, Incourages no one to wish her shape. VIRGINIA RUTILA'S buncht back would show: And her sweet Eyes on RUTILA bestow. Fair Creatures are by trembling Parents watch't; So seldome beauty is with virtue matcht. But if mean houses virtuous breeding give, Where, like th' old Sabines, poore and chast they live:
If o're rebelling blood a grave command Be given to youth by nature's lib'rall hand: And nature can do more then breeding can, Or Tutors; the boy ne're shall be a man: For ev'n to tempt the Parents some are bold, Such is their courage that come arm'd with gold. The Tyrant NERO, to an Evnuch's place Advanc'd no club-foot, nor ill favour'd face: Nor worthy of that sad preferment held Those, that had necks, or backs, or bellyes sweld. Now in thy handsome sons and daughters joy; Which, because handsome, greater woes annoy: He shall be the Town-prostitute, and fear What wives expect from husbands most severe: Nor can his Starres for so good fortune look, That he should ne're in MARS his nets be took: Where VULCAN'S rage will reason more controll Then any passion that invades the soul. Some GANYMEDS are stab'd, some whipt to death, And the live-Mullet enters some beneath: But thy ENDYMION shall have her he loves; Straight, when with pow'rfull gold SERVILIA moves,
He shall have her he hates: her gowns shall fly To sale, shee'll nothing to her lust deny. Rich OPPIA and poor CATULLA too, When they do long for't, will like women doe. But how can beauty hurt the Chast? What good Came to BELLEROPHON by's govern'd blood? HIPPOLITUS, by's Mistresse was perplext, PHAEDRA no lesse then STENOBAEA vext: The edge of womans wrath is then most keen, When a repulse adds blushes to her spleen. Would'st thou have him, whom CAESAR'S wife will chuse Co-husband, to accept, or to refuse? This great Patrician, young and handsome; dies For being such in MESSALINA'S eyes. She long hath sate in her bright veile; her bed With nuptiall purple (in a garden) spread: Ten thousands told, the customary summe; The publique Notaries and th' Auspex come. She thinks this secret witness'd by too few, Shee'l marry publickly; Sir, what say you? Deny to do't, and HYMEN'S tapers burn, That from her bed shall light thee to thy urne:
Consent, and thou shalt gain a little time, Till the news fill the City, till the crime Arrive the People; and the Princ's ear, Who, last, the blemish of his house shall hear. If then a few dayes life thou so approv'st, Obey; but whether thy own youth thou lov'st, Or on her beauty doat'st, not only thou, But she her fair neck to the Axe must bow. Shall man then pray for nothing? If I may Advise thee, let the Gods thy wishes weigh; Unto their Providence thy Will submit, And for what's sweet, they'l give thee what is fit: And that which thy condition most behoves. The Gods love Man more then himself he loves. Transported with a blind self-love, we crave That all of us may Wives and Children have: But to th' Omniscient Deity, alone, What Wives, what Children we shall have, is known. Yet, that for Sacrifice thou maist prepare Thy white hog, and for somthing make thy prayer. Pray, that the Gods be graciously inclin'd, To grant thee health of body, and of mind.
Ask a strong soul that may death's terror scorn, And think, to die, as good as to be born: As great a gift of nature. That no cross Can daunt, that knows no passion, fears no loss: That HERCULES his labours can digest Far better then SARDANAPALUS feast, His Wenches, or his Feather-beds. I show What thou thy self maist on thy self bestow. Virtue's the path to Peace. If Prudence be, There can be no Divinity in thee Fortune: 'tis we, we to thy Pow'r have giv'n The name of Goddess, and plac'd thee in heav'n. The Comment UPON THE TENTH SATYR. VErse 1. Cales,] Anciently Erythia, afterwards Gades, two Islands beyond the Confines of the Boetick Province, the farthest West of any part of the World discovered to the Romans. These lay without the Sraits of Gibraltar, that divide Europe from Africa: Plin. lib. 4. cap. 22. They were called Erythia from the Tyrians, bordering upon the Erythraean Sea, that built a City in these
Isles. The Romans named them Gades: both are now one Island, cal∣led Caliz by the Spaniards; and Cales by the English, that had power within the memory of man to have given it what name they pleased: for in the year 1596 this Isle was taken, and the City sackt by the Earles of Essex and Nottingham, and Sir Walter Rawleigh Knight, sent thither with a Fleet to revenge the Spaniards invasion of England in 88. In this Isle the grass is so rank, that Cows milk will make no Cheese, nor come to curds, unless it be diluted with a great deal of water. It is likewise cre∣dibly reported, that Cattle which Graziers feed there, if they bleed them not within 30 dayes, will be sure to die of fat. This was the reason why the Poets invented their Fables of Geryon's Droves taken by Hercules, that once had a Temple in this Isle; wherein are now two old Castles, called Torres de Hercules. See Strab. lib. 3. Verse 2. Ganges,] The greatest River in the East: it cuts through the Indies. The Greeks by another name call it Phison. The holy Scripture numbers it amongst the Rivers that issue out of Paradise. The Springs that contribute to Ganges are not known, but 30 Rivers flow into it. It is 8000 paces over where it is narrowest, where it is broadest 20000, and where it is shallowest 100 foot deep. It had the name from Ganges King of Aethiopia. Suid. Verse 11. He.] Milo, a Champion born in Italy at Crton, where so many Champions were bred, that in one of the Olympick Games all the Conquerors were Crotonians: so that 'twas a Proverb, The worst Crotonian is better then the best Grecian. He was a man of more then humane strength; for in the Olympick Exercises he carried a Bull a furlong and never stopt to breathe: When he set the Bull down, with his hand he struck him stark dead, and the same day eat him up. No man living could wrest an apple
out of his hand; nor was able, when he stood still, to remove his foot. Yet presuming too much upon his strength, he would needs try if he could rend in sunder a tree, which age or accident had cleft as it grew in the Forest: at first it yielded to his violence, but presently closed again, and catching his hands in a trap, held him till the Wolves devoured him. Cic. Val. Max. Verse 17. Longinus.] C. Cassius Longinus, the great Civil Lawyer, to whom Caligula married Drusilla. Nero commanded his eyes to be put out, and then gave him but an hour to prepare for death. His pretended Crime was, for having in his Bed-chamber the Image of Cassius, one of Julius Caesar's Assassinates: but that which really made him a Delin∣quent was his wealth. Verse 19. Seneca.] See the Comment upon Sat. 5. This most learned and good man, after the death of Burrhus, was criminated by Foenius Ruffus and Tigillinus, for improving his fortunes beyond the limits of a private person: and they likewise informed, that in the sweetness of his Gardens and magnificence of his Villaes he exceeded the Prince himself. For this he was put to death by his ingratefull Pupill Nero. vid. Tacit. lib. 14. Verse 20. Lateran Buildings.] The house of Plautius Lateranus, de∣signed Consul, that by Nero's command was apprehended by the Prae∣torian Cohort for one of Piso's Conspiracie, and his Children not so much as permitted to take their leaves of him before his death. Tacit. lib 15. Verse 22. Poor Garrets,] Where Beggers had their habitation: Sat. 3: But thou, three stories high, unwarn'd art took. Verse 33. Rich Setin Wine.] How precious a VVine it was, appears
by the long keeping of it in Virro's Cellar at Rome: Sat. 5. From th' Albane or the Setine hills, next day, He something drinks, whose age hath took away The dusty Hogshead's Date and Climate.— Verse 35. One o'th' Sages.] Democritus of Abdera, the laughing Phi∣losopher, that being asked why he did nothing but laugh, answered, he could not help it, having for his Object Man, full of Ignorance; that does and does, and nothing does he doe: all his designes clearly proving, that he never comes to the years of discretion; but growing a Childe again, kills himself with superfluous care and toil. But sorrow never came neer his cheerfull heart, otherwise he would not have lived to be a hundred and nine years old. His opinion was, That all things are composed of Atomes, and that there are many VVorlds and all corruptible. From the Magi, Chaldaeans and Gymnosophists he learned Astrology and Theology. He was so great a Philosopher, that he was called Pentathlos, viz. a Champion at five Exercises; Naturals, Morals, Mathematicks, the li∣berall Sciences, and all the Arts. To attain his knowledge he travelled, and so spent all the wealth left him by his Father, a man so rich that he feasted Xerxes and his whole Army. After his return to Abdera, he lived in very great poverty in a Garden house, neer the walls of the Town; where, resolving to spend the rest of his life in Contemplation, he burned out his sight with the reflection of the Sun from a brass Bason. Laert. Verse 36. Th' other wept.] Heraclitus of Ephesus, the weeping Philo∣sopher, that is said never to have gone over his threshold into the street with dry eyes. For, as Democritus alwayes laughed, because he believed all our actions to be folly: so Heraclitus ever wept, because he thought them to be misery. In his old age he fell into a dropsie, and slighting
the Physitians Art, which he said could never make a moist part dry, he cased himself in Cows dung, but whilst he lay drying in the Sun, he fell asleep, and Dogs tore out his throat. Some say he was never taught, but came to all his learning by nature and industry: others say he heard Ze∣nocrates, and Hippasus the Pythagorian. He flourished in the time of the last Darius. He left many Poems; and is often quoted by Aristotle: his Philosophical Works were very obscure, which gave him the title of the Dark Philosopher. Verse 40. Praetexta.] Read the original and description of this Gown in the Comment upon Sat. 5. I shall only adde, that in the first institu∣tion the Priests likewise wore it, with the same priviledge wherewith some Christian Orders weare their habits at this day: for, till it was pul∣led off, Sentence of condemnation could not pass against the Priests. Verse 40. Trabeae.] The Trabeae were of three sorts, the first a Gown woven all of Purple, and consecrated to the Gods: such was the Robe before mentioned, viz. Jove's Gown. The second was the Robe Royall here named, worn by Kings and Consuls, made of Purple interwoven with White. The third was the Augure's habit, Scarlet woven with Purple: Serv. Aen. lib. 7. Alexand. ab. Alex. Gen Dier. lib. 5 cap. 18. Verse 41. High Throne.] My Author here describes the Consul, and likewise calls him Praetor, because in his absence the Praetor, that set forth the Circensian Playes, sate mounted up as Lord of the Circus: Sat. 11. —Great Cybel's Towell is hung out; And to her solemn Playes the Town's devout: Where that great Horse-stealer, the Praetor, sits As if he triumpht.— But now the Consul takes his place, and comes into the Circus in the
State and Habiliments of a King, as appears by his Ushers with the Fas∣ces or Ensignes of death, and by his Trabea, Crown, and Scepter headed with the Roman Eagle carved in Ivory. For the perfecting of this de∣scription, I place him in a Throne not a Tribunal, because he could not use his Chariot-Chair in the Circus as a Judgement Seat, but as a Chair of State, whereon he might sit to behold the Gladiators, as you see him fi∣gured in the Designe before Sat. 2. Verse 45. Atlas.] When the Consul, in this Mock-triumph, was no longer able to bear that Celestial Orbe of his massy Crown, he had an Atlas to support it, a Slave, that having taken the Crown, seemed to be as great a man as his Master. Triumphanti, &c. when a Hetruscan Crown of Gold was held behinde the back of him that triumphed, and yet wore an Iron Ring upon his finger: the Conqueror and the Slave that bore the Crown, were equals in their fortunes. Plin. lib. 33. In these sports it was the Slaves office to cry aloud to the Consul, Look behind you Sir, Remember you are a man. Verse 52. Almes-Basket.] The Consul's two Sportulaes, the meat and Money-basket which obliged the attendance of his Clients in white Robes not as Candidati (for 'twas long before this time that suiters to the People stood in white) but as men of eminence and imployment in the Empire, as if they were principal Secretaries to a King. Fenest. de Mag. Rom. cap. 3. Verse 56. Dull climes.] Abdera, where Democritus was born, stood in the Barbarous Country of Thrace. Verse 60. Middle-finger] The infamous finger, which pointing at a Roman, gave him the affront now red by  enemy that cryes Cazzo. Verse 61. Wax'd knees.] The Heathens,  their Gods should
not forget their Prayers, they writ them down, and fastned them to the worshipped Images, which had their Knees (the Seat of Mercy) waxed over, purposely to make the paper stick. Verse 66. Statues.] If a man were condemned for Tyranny, Treason, or any Crime of the like nature, his name was crost out of the Roman Calendar or Records, and his Statues broken. This was done either by Decree of Senate, or by the fury of the People. See Tacit. Annal. 6. and Plin. in his Panegyrick. Verse 71. Great Sejanus.] Aelius Sejanus, Son to Seius Strabo. In his youth he followed C. Caesar, Nephew to Augustus. By many artifices he wrought upon Tiberius, so as that subtile Prince, closs to all others, lay open to him. He had a strong body and a confident spirit; secret in his own actings; an Informer against others; equally proud and flatter∣ing; seemingly modest; really ambitious; to which end he sometimes made use of bounty, but most commonly of industry and circumspection, mediums alike dangerous, when a Crown is the Designe. At his first coming to be Captain of the Emperor's Life-guard, the Praetorian Cohort, his forces were not considerable; but he made them so, by bring∣ing his Praetorians (that were before quartered severally, and as he said grew debosht) into a body, and fixing them in a standing Camp, that they might be ready to act when they received his Orders; and that a view of their number and strength, might beget confidence in them, fear in others. He had no sooner intrenched, but he crept into the hearts of the Souldiers, with going to them, calling them by their names, and gi∣ving them hopes of preferment, he being commissioned to name his own Officers. He likewise omitted not, either to court the Senate, or to advance his friends to honours and offices; which Tiberius was so far from dis∣liking,
that in the Senate-house he commended Sejanus as his laborious Partner, gave him the second place in the Empire by making him his own perpetual Collegue, and suffered his Images to be set up in the The∣aters and publick Meeting-places, and to be carried in the Ensignes of the Legions. But the Master-piece of his policy was, to ingratiate himself with Livia, wife to Drusus heir apparent to the Empire. This Lady, Sister to Germanicus, was very ill favoured when she was a Girle, afterwards pro∣ved a beauty: nothing was unhandsome in her but her heart, of which she robbed her husband, to bestow it upon her servant; and left a noble certainty for a base hope, that is, to be Empress to Sejanus; when the skie should fall, and he trample upon all Caesar's numerous Relations. Yet Livia in some particulars like to Hippia. Sat. 6. Regardless of her Husband's reputation. The honour of her Brother, House and Nation, Forsook her crying Babes.— and prostituted, together with her self, the other Chamber-secrets of her Lord, that in private often said, It seems Caesar hath a Co-adjutor whilst his Son is living: this was a dash upon the mouth with his tongue, where∣of Sejanus was more sensible, then of the other given him by Drusus with his hand, which he returned with a speeding revenge. For he put away his wife Apicata, to make way for Livia: and she to requite him, poysoned her husband Tacit. l. 4. Tiberius being then at Capreae, had intelligence of all his practices, and by his death prevented his own murder. Treason is like the Cockatrice's eyes: For, seeing first it kills, first seen it dies. From Capreae the Emperor writ to the Senate  the Letter was read, and it was a long one. But the Lords made short work: for imme∣niately
the Tribunes and their Souldiers encompassed and bound him; then Sentence passing in the House, they dragg'd him to the Gemoniae, where he was flung down. Dion. Cass. The ignominious manner of his execution, how his Statues were pulled down, and dragged through the Streets of Rome, I need not add; you have an exact description of it in this Satyr. Verse 74. Laurell.] Upon great feast dayes, the Romans drest up their houses with boughs and wreaths of Laurell: and what day should they keep more holy, then Caesar's day of deliverance from Sejanus? therefore they incourage one another to sacrifice unto Jupiter Capitoline a Bull, as white as he himself was, when he carried Europa upon his back. And this Bull was to be haled with ropes through the streets of Rome to the Capi∣tol: as the body of Sejanus was dragged, with hooks, thrust into his throat to the Scalae Gemoniae, the Gemonian Stairs, where malefactors had their thigh-bones broken, and were then burned to ashes. Coel. Rod. l. 10. c. 5. Verse 82. Capreae,] An Isle about 8 miles beyond the City of Surren∣tum in Campania. Nothing in this Isle could invite Tiberius Caesar but on∣ly Solitude, or that he might the freelier enjoy Thrasillus and the rest of his Chaldaean Astrologers; unless his Majesty had loved Quales, wherewith the place abounds. Verse 86. Nurtia.] The Goddess of Thuscany, where Sejanus was born, at Volscinium, now Bolsena. Verse 89. Selling of our voice.] Before the Sovereign power was in∣vested in the Caesars, when the Common-wealth of Rome was governed by the Senate and the People: the poorer sort lived upon the sale of their Votes to such as were Candidates, or Suiters to them for publick Offices and imployment.
Verse 98. Brutidius.] A Senator, that looked pale for fear some Spies, which were in the Senate-house at the condemnation of Sejanus, might criminate all such as spake not thundring words against that Tray∣tor. For, my Author conceives that upon such information Tiberius Caesar would not spare his own Party, but misplace the execution of his fury, as Ajax did, that beat a heard of Oxen, supposing them to be the Grecians that gave sentence against him, when he pleaded his title to the armes of Achilles. Sophocl. Verse 118. Gabii] Was once a City, built by the Kings of Alba. Virg. Aeneid. 7. It became subject to Rome, being delivered to King Tarquin by the fraud of his Son Sextus, as aforesaid. At this time it was a Village, or some very poor Town, as appears by the ranking of it with Fidenae and Vlubrae: that being a Village of the Sabines. Plin. and this of the Volscians, only memorable, because Augustus Caesar was there at Nurse. Phorphyr. in lib. 1. Epist. Horace. Verse 127. Crassus.] M. Crassus, Son to P. Crassus. the wealthiest of all the Romans. It was he that said, No man should be accounted rich, that could not maintain an Army with his annuall rents. He was sent General in the Slavish or Servile war against Spartacus the Gladiator, that having raised a vast Army of fugitive Slaves, had beaten Vatinius, Gellius and Lentulus, which commanded in chief for the Romans. At Regium, neer the Fens of Leucas, he fought and slew twelve thousand of the Enemy, together with their Captain General. In his Ovation for this victory, he made a new President, entring Rome with a Crown of Bayes upon his head: whereas, before him, no General for a conquest o∣ver Slaves wore any thing but Myrtle. When Caesar, Pompey and Cras∣sus made their Association; Pompey was left to govern Rome, Caesar sent
to the Gallick war: and Crassus for his Province had Syria, where, in hope of infinite wealth, he made warre against the Parthians; in prosecution whereof he lost his Son P. Crassus, that seeing no hope of safety, and want∣ing the use of his right hand, that was shot with a Dart, commanded his Slave to kill him. His whole Army was routed by Surena (Lievtenant General to King Orodes) that slew twenty thousand of his men, took ten thousand prisoners, and gave no quarter to Crassus, but having dispatcht him, cut off his head and hand, which he carried into Armenia to his Master. Plut. in Crass. Verse 127. Pompey.] Cn. Pompey; from the greatness of his actions surnamed the Great. He was one of Sylla's Party, and by him sent into Africa against his Enemies. First he overthrew Domitius, then he took King Hiarbas prisoner, and triumphed before he was at full age, viz. 25. Whereupon Sylla's Army gave him the title of Great. He marched in∣to Spain, and there joyned his forces with old Metellus against Sertorius, that said, If the young boy had not come, he should have peppered the old woman. The Senate made him Generall in the Pyratick warre, which he dispatched in three moneths. He succeeded Lucullus, beat King Mithridates and triumphed for that victory. He brought Tigranes King of Armenia upon his knees, and from that humble posture, set him in his Throne again. In Asia he conquered the Iberians, Albanians and Jewes, taking prisoner their King Aristobulus. After the death of his Lady, Julia Daughter to I. Caesar. he married Cornelia, Daughter to Sci∣pio, the Widdow of P. Crassus. At Naples he fell sick of a high accute fever, and was in all mens opinions past recovery: but death proved not so kinde as he made a shew for, which is excellently observed in this Satyr,
To Pompey provident Campania gave A timely fever: but, his life to save, In many Cities publick pray'rs were made: The Conqueror preserv'd, to be betraid When Conquer'd by Rome's fortune and his own: His head cut off, a punishment unknown To our most dangerous Delinquents.— For how seasonably would this fever have ended Pompey's life, in the me∣ridian of his glory, when he dedicated his spoiles of the Ocean and the East in the Temple of Minerva, with this inscription, Cn. Pompeius Magn. Imp. Bello, &c. Cneius Pompey Generall, in the Warre brought to an end in thirty yeers: for twelve millions a hundred fourscore and three thou∣sand men defeated, put to flight, and taken prisoners; for ships surprised or taken in fight, eight hundred fourty and six: Towns and Castles rendred, fifteen hundred thirty eight: Countries conquered from the Lake of Maeotis to the red-Sea: A vow deservedly paid to Minerva. His other triumph, M. Messalla and M. Piso being Consuls, bore this title, This Triumph is. For clearing the Maritim parts of Pyrates, and restoring to the Ro∣mans the Dominion of the Sea, and for the conquest of Asia, Pontus, Ar∣menia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, Syria, the Scythians, Jews, Albani∣ans, Iberia, the Isle of Creet, the Basternae; and likewise of the Kings, Mi∣thridates and Tigranes; more then all here written he said to the People, That he found Asia the farthest Roman Province, and left it the middle of his Country. Plin. l. 7. c. 28. Now see the folly of venturing all in one bottom. The loss of one battail, fought at Pharsalia, lost Pompey the name of Great, obscuring the splendour of his former victories: and Caesar, that came into the field much inferiour, both in the number and quality of his
men, came off Lord of the whole World. So that when Pompey fled as far as Aegypt, the fame of his overthrow (that came before him) had made way for his destruction; which was ordered by the perfidious King Pto∣lomey, and executed by Septimius and Salvius, two Romans that had been Souldiers under Pompey, but were then commanded and assisted in this bloody business by Achillas the Aegyptian. He left two Sons, Cneius and Sextus Pompey; the first defeated in a Land-battail, at Munda in Spain; The other in a Sea-fight, upon the coast of Sicily. Verse 128. Him that to his whips.] He means Julius Caesar, that subje∣cted the free-born people of Rome, and brought that Common-wealth to a Monarchy. C. Julius Caesar Consul, Collegue to M. Calphurnius Bi∣bulus in the year of Rome 695. he had France for his Province, decreed by the Senate for five years: Eutr. lib. 6. cap. 7. Suet. 11. In the year 706. he was Consul with P. Servilius Isauricus. In the year 708▪ he and M. Aemilius Lepidus were Consuls. In the year 709. he was Consul alone. In the year 710. he was Consul and Collegue to Marc. Antony. He was the first Roman Emperor, and reigned from the year 708. for three years. He conquered all France, bounded with the Pyrenaean mountains the Alps, and Gebenne, now called Montaignes d' Avergne, or Montagnes de Cevenne, and the Rivers of Rhosne and the Rhiine: which in 9 years space he reduced to the form of a Province. He was the first Roman that ever invaded the Germans beyond the River of Rhiine, passing over his Army by a Bridge of his own contrivance. He discovered the Isle of Great Britan, before unknown to the Romans, and had money and ho∣stages given him by our Country-men. When, being absent from Rome, he could not carry his business in Senate as he pleased, he turned his arms against his Country, and without resistance took Savoy, Pisa, Vmbria, He∣truria,
and forced Pompey to fly Italy. Then marching into Spain he routed three strong Armies, commanded by three of Pompey's Lievtenant-Generalls M. Petreius, L. Afranius and M. Varro. At Pharsalia he de∣feated Pompey, and subdued Ptolomey in Aegypt: in Africa he gave an overthrow to Scipio and King Juba. In Spain he beat the Sons of Pompey. Five times he triumphed: for France, for Alexandria, for Pontus, for A∣frica, and for Spain. Of all Generals he was the most munificent, espe∣cially after these triumphs. He was murdered in the Senate-house with four and twenty wounds given him by Brutus Cassius, and the rest of the Conspirators: innumerable Prodigies in the aire and earth portending his untimely end. Plut. in Caes. & Brut. Flor. Appian. lib. 20. Oros. lib. 6. cap. 17. Eutr. lib. 6. His spirits were so vigorous, that he used to write, read, dictate and hear, all at one time. Of his so great concerns he would dictate to four Secretaries at once: if he had no other business, to seven. He fought 50 battails, and was the only man that went beyond M. Mar∣cellus, that fought 39. Besides those slain in his civill victories, a hun∣dred fourscore and twelve thousand men fell by his sword. His mercy was such, as that he conquered all men, even to repentance of their enmity. His magnanimity is unparalleld: when he took Pompey's Cabinet of Letters at Pharsalia, and Scipio's at Thapsus, he opened not any one Let∣ter, but most nobly, with the faith due to secrets, burned them all. Plin. lib. cap. 25. Verse 131. Ceres Son in Law.] Pluto, Son to Saturn and Ops, Brother to Jupiter and Neptune. In their division of Saturn's Kingdome; Pluto, that was the youngest, and called Agesilaus, had the Western part, lying along the coast of the Mare inferum, the low Sea: Jupiter had the Eastern Dominions: Neptune the Islands. This to the Poets hinted their fabu∣lous
invention, that Jupiter was Lord of the Heavens, Neptune of the Seas, and Pluto of the infernall Regions. The name of Pluto is derived , from riches, because all our riches comes from below, being dig∣ged out of the bowels of the earth. For the same reason the Latines cal∣led him Dis. Cic. 2. de. Nat. Deor. He stole away Proserpine Daughter to Ceres. Claud. de Rap. Proserp. Verse 133. Tully.] M. Tullius Cicero. Read the Comment upon Sat. 7. His murder, as aforesaid, was comprehended in the agreement between the Triumviri, C. Caesar, Antony and Lepidus: accordingly an Officer to Marc. Antony (against whom Cicero writ his Philippicks) executed him, cutting off his head, and nayling his hands to the Pulpit for Orations. O Antoni! rapuisti vitam, &c. O Marc. Anthony! thou hast ravished a Life, that would have been more unworthy of Cicero, under thy reign; then Death could be, under thy Triumvirate. But the glory of his Actions and O∣rations thou hast been so far from taking away, as thou hast added to it: That lives, and shall live in the memory of all ages. And whilst, or by Chance or Providence, or any way, this joynted frame of Nature (which almost he alone, of all the Romans, penetrated with his spirit, fathomed with his wit, and illu∣minated with his elocution) shall hold together: it shall draw along his fame, as Time's inseparable companion. And all posterity shall admire his writings against thee, and execrate thy cruelty to him: and sooner shall Mankind pe∣rish from the earth, then his praise should fall to the ground. Vell. Paterc. Verse 135. Penny-Pallas.] At the celebration of the Quinquatrua, or five dayes feast of Minerva, Goddess of Eloquence: the School-boyes, whose learning had but cost a Penny, prayed, that Pallas would make them as eloquent as Tully or Demosthenes, the two greatest Orators of the Greeks and Latines.
Verse 140 A Duller.] If Tyranny was never exercised upon a Dull Laweyr, a heavy headed Poet will not be in danger of his life: there∣fore sayes Juvenal —I Pray The Lady Muses, that I rather may The Author of ridic'lous Poems be, Second divine Philippick then of thee. Verse 147. Athenian wonder.] Demosthenes, Son to a Cutler of Athens. His Father left him young and rich, but his Guardian cozened him almost of all; the poor remainder would hardly pay for his schooling. The designe of his Studies was, to make himself an Orator; but by a naturall infirmity he was not able to pronounce the letter r, which he helped, as he walked upon the Sea coast, with gathering Pebbles, held in his mouth whilst he repeated his Orations. Thus his own and his Tutors Art made him the best Speaker that ever declamed in Athens. But he spake so much in defence of the liberty of Greece against King Philip of Macedon, plotting their subjection: that for his Philippicks (in imitation whereof the Orations writ against Marc. Antony, that in∣vaded the Liberties of Rome, were called Philippicks by Cicero) he was banished by the Athenians. But after Philip's death, the Sentence was re∣pealed. Alexander now dead, and Greece being governed by Antipater, Demosthenes, that saw his Country could not protect him, took sanctu∣arie in the Isle of Calauria, sacred to Neptune. Thither Archias, the Mimick, was sent by Antipater, to court him out of Sanctuary, and to en∣gage for Antipater, that he would not any way trouble him. Demosthe∣nes answered, That he never liked Archias when he was a Player, but much worse since he played the Embassadour: then Archias in plain
terms threatned to pull him out by the ears. So, said Demosthenes, now thou hast unmasked the Macedonian Oracle; before thou wert a Player in a Vizzard: stay but a while, till I write a word or two to my friends, and I am for thee. Then, as if he meant to dispatch his Letters, he laid his paper before him, and putting a quill to his mouth, sucked up the poyson, which, for that purpose, he still carried about him. See Suid. Verse 165. Wild-figtree.] Which growing under the strongest walls breaks them asunder. Mart. Marmora Messallae scindit caprificus. Messalla's Marbles the wild-figtree cuts. Verse 167. Hannibal.] See the Comment upon Sat. 7. Here Juvenal touches his ambitious nature, not contented to have enlarged the Cartha∣ginian Empire, as far as the Atlantick Sea, that bounds Africa to the North: and likewise as far as the River Nilus, where it terminates to the East; but that, to his Lybian Elephants and Aethiopians, he added Spain; and designed the conquest of Italy, which he had almost brought about, in despight of nature, that barricaded him by land with the Pyrenaean Mountains, which divide Spain from France; and with the Alps, that di∣vide France from Italy. But over the Alps he marched, though he lost one of his eyes in the Snow, and though he was forced to make his way through the rocks with fire and vineger: so Livie and Sil. Italicus affirme: and for the Roman History I hold their authorities much bet∣ter, then the Judgement of Polybius, that sayes the fire and vineger was a Fable. Verse 178. Suburra.] See the beginning of the Comment upon Sat. 3. Verse 179. One ey'd.] To have seen Hannibal with his one eye in a
march how he looked, when he was upon the back of his Getulian Ele∣phant (I believe) would have startled the courage of a Roman. Verse 191. The Youth.] Alexander the Great, Son to Philip King of Macedon by his Queen Olympias; though she would not own so mean a Father for her Child, but gave out that a God begot him, and that she conceived in thunder by a flash of lightning, the night before King Phi∣lip married her. After marriage, Philip dreamed, that he sealed up his Wife's womb with a Signet, wherein was ingraved a Lion: which dream Aristander Telmisseus thus interpreted; No body sets a Seal upon an empty Cabinet: the Queen is with Child of a Boy, that shall have the courage of a Lion. This young Lion, Alexander, conquered Asia, Armenia, Iberia, Albania, Cappadocia, Syria, Aegypt, Taurus, and entred upon Cau∣casus. He subdued the Bactrians, Medes and Persians; possessed himself of the East Indies, as far as Bacchus or Hercules had ever marched; and (as they say) wept, because there was no more worlds to conquer. He was infinitely handsome, something in his face shewing him to be more then a man. He had a long neck, a little inclining to the left shoulder, spritely eyes, a lovely colour in his cheeks; and in every other part of his body a certain Majesty appeared. This Conqueror of the World, overcome with wine and choler, died of a fever at Babylon, in the 30th year of his age, and the 12th of his reign. See Solin. At his death no body suspected him to be poysoned. Six years after, Queen Olympias dis∣covered the whole plot, executed many for it, and made the Executioner dig up and scatter the reliques of Iolaus, that gave him the poyson: which, one Agnothemius reported that he heard King Antiochus say, was done by the directions of Aristotle. But others hold the story of Alexander's impoi∣soning for a Fable. Plut. in Alex. Polyb. Q. Curtius Arrian & Plut.
Verse 193. Gyarus.] See the Comment upon Sat. 1. Seriphus is an o∣ther little Isle of the Cyclades. Verse 202. Xerxes,] King of Persia, Son to Darius, and Granchild to Cyrus by his Daughter Acosa. To make preparations for a warre upon Greece, in five years he raised 700000 Persians, and joyned with them 300000 Auxiliaries, his Fleet consisting of 200000 sayle. Behold a glori∣ous Army, that wanted nothing but a Generall. Justin. lib. 2. When he took a view of all his forces, the tears fell from his eyes; and being asked why he wept, he answered, because a hundred years hence not one of all these millions of men will be left alive. He joyned Asia to Europe, co∣vering the Hellespont with Ships; and disjoyned the Mountain Athos from the firme Land, cutting it into an Island. Plin. lib 4. cap. 20. His Army was beaten at Thermopyle, by 4000 Lacedaemonians; and his Fleet, by The∣mistocles at Salamis; from whence advice was sent him (seriously by his Lievtenant Generall Mardonius▪ and subtily from the Athenian Admiral Themistocles) to fly out of Greece immediately: for there was a designe to stop his passage. Whereupon he rid post to the Hellespont, and finding his Bridge of Ships scattered by a Tempest, took a Fisher-boat and e∣scaped. 'Twas a spectacle to be looked upon with wonder, in considera∣tion of mans condition and change of fortune, to see him sculk in a little Boat; whose Fleet, not long before, the spacious Sea was scarce able to contain; not so much as a man to wait upon him, that lately commanded an Army cumbersome to the earth. After his return to Persia, he would ne∣ver think of wars again, but wholly applyed himself to ease and idleness: proposing great rewards to any, that could invent new wayes of luxury. Val. Max. This brought him into contempt with his Subjects; and within a short time he was slain, in his Palace, by the Captain of his
Guard, Artabanus, that was formerly a faithfull Councellor to him, and gave his vote against the warre with Greece. He shot arrowes against the Sun, and cast fetters into the Sea. Laert. In his Army a Mare, that creature of undaunted courage, brought forth the most timorous of all animals, a Hare: which undoubtedly portended the cowardly flight of his vast Army, and the fall of his high pride: that moved him, when his Bridge of Boats was first broken, to command 300 lashes should be gi∣ven to the Sea, and Irons cast in to fetter Neptune, and these words to be spoken to the God by the Executioner. Thy Lord inflicts this punish∣ment upon thee, because thou hast injured him, that never deserved ill of thee; and yet King Xerxes shall pass in spight of thee; and to thee shall no man at all sacrifice; thou art so deceitfull and cruel a Flood. And ha∣ving thus punished the Sea, he repaired the Bridge. Herod. lib. 7. Verse 206. Sostratus,] A Greek Poet, that writ the Persian expedition into Greece. He foretold to the Athenians the coming of Xerxes into Greece. Herod. But he foretold truer then he told, in this place quoted by Juvenal, where he makes Xerxes drink up whole Rivers for his mornings draught: me thinks it should have followed, that he meant to eat up all Greece for his supper. Verse 209. Aeolus.] Son to Jupiter and Sergesta (or Acesta) Daughter to Hippotes the Trojan. He reigned (as in the Comment upon Sat. 1.) in Strongyle, the greatest of the 7. Lipparene Islands. Some speak of three Aeoli; one Sonne to Hippotes and Granchild to Phylantes; the other Son to Helenus and Grandchild to Jupiter; the third Son to Neptune and Arne. See Virg. Plin. Diod. Sic. & Eustath Odyss. 10. They called him King of the Windes, because, by the clouds and smoak of Aetna, he foretold the quarters where the Winde would hang. According to Isa∣cius,
he was a man that studied Astronomy, especially that part which ap∣pertains to the nature of the Windes, for the benefit of Navigation. He therefore divined, when the Sun was coming into Taurus, if there would be a Storm at Sea or a Calme, and what day or hour of the day, or how long, the West wind should breathe, or what other winde should rise at the rising of the Dogge or any Celestiall Signe, and blow again upon Criticall dayes, viz. the fifth, the seventh day, and the like. For this reason he was thought to be King of the Winds. To which is added by Strab. lib. 1. that he guessed at the Windes by the ebbing and flowing of the Sea; and Marriners finding it to be true, believed the VVinds to be his Subjects, and that he could at his pleasure imprison or release them: an opinion more probable then that of some Lapland-Philosophers, that tell us, if we have the skin of a Dolphin, ordered with certain ceremo∣nies, we shall have a wind to any place we are bound for, and no other wind shall blow upon the water. Sure Homer's Age was poisoned with this natural Philosophy, otherwise he would not have made Aeolus be∣stow a wind in a bag upon Vlysses, as aforesaid. Aeolus, as to Morality, is a wise man, that moderates his passions seasonably: and, according to the opportunity of time and business, speaks angrily when he is pleased, and gently when he is offended: such a one, at his pleasure, bridles and lets loose the wind. N. Comes Mythol. lib. 10. cap. 10. Verse 223. Tabraca,] A part of Lybia. Possidonius tells us in his voy∣age from Cales to Rome, he was driven upon the Lybian Coast, where he saw a VVood full of Apes, some sitting in trees, others upon the ground: some that had breasts hanging down, and young ones sucking them; some again that were old, bald and impotent. Verse 233. Cossus,] One that laid out his money in the Shambles upon
the best Fish and Foul, which he presented to rich childless persons, in hope the venture would bring him in a fortune when their Wills were proved: therefore the older they were, the better for his purpose. Verse 245. Seleucus,] The best Lutenist in Juvenal's time. Verse 255. Oppia,] A notorious common Slut in my Authors dayes, but afterwards so unknown, that his Transcribers instead of Oppia put Hippia, an Adultress often mentioned in his Satyrs, but never charged with multiplicity of Servants, as Oppia is. Verse 256. Themison,] A Greek Physitian, whose authority is quoted by Galen. He was Schollar to Empedocles. Plin. lib. 29. cap. 1. but that he was a bad practicer, you may take my Author's word. Verse 257. Basil,] A Governour of a Province; to be put upon the same thievish File with M. Priscus, Verres, Tutor, Capito, Pansa, Natta, Antonius and Dolabella. Verse 258. Hirrus,] A Guardian, that by cheating of poor Orphans, came to a great fortune, and lived in no little state, as you have him de∣scribed without a name Sat. 1. What rage inflames me, when the People's prest With Crouds, attending him that dispossest The Orphane; now a Prostitute?— Verse 259. Maura.] One of the beastly Prophaners of Chastities old Altar. Sat. 6. Verse 260. Hamillus,] Really such a Tutor, as Socrates was falsely reported to be by the Leather-dresser Anytus, Melitus the Orator, and Lycon the Poet. Verse 272. Fasting.] A high expression of a Mother's love, that feeds her young ones even when she her self is hungry.
Verse 278. Phiale,] A Curtezan, that was Mistress of her Art. Verse 289. King Nestor,] Son to Neleus and Chloris. Hom. Odyss. lib. 2. born at Pilos, a City standing upon the Laconick Sea. Strab. lib. 7. In his Fathers life time he commanded in chief against the Epeans of Pe∣loponnesus, afterwards called Elians. Plin. lib. 4. cap. 1. At the Wedding of Pirithous he fought on his part against the Centaurs, that would have stole away the Bride. At the Siege of Troy he was grown very old, yet with fifty sayle of Ships he joyned himself to the rest of the Greek Princes, when he had lived to the third Age of Man, as he himself tells us in Ovid Metamorph. lib. 12. How many years make three Ages, is not agreed on by Interpreters. Xenophon sayes, the Aegyptians (and from them the East) reckoned an Age to be thirty years: then was Nestor but ninty years of age, and had only counted thirty years upon a finger when he began to tell upon his right hand. But if Juvenal had thought him but ninty, which thousands were then, and are now, he would not have referred us to the faith and authority of Homer; neither would he have added, that Nestor lived neerest to the Crow or Raven, that lives nine ages of man at least, if we believe Hesiod, quoted by Plin. lib. 7. cap. 48. Therefore I take it for granted, that in my Authors ac∣count Nestor was 300 years old; and having told 280 upon his left hand by twenty years a joynt, had begun the other twenty upon his right hand. Nor had he lost any part of his long time, as appears by his experience and wisdome, being so great, that Agamemnon said, he should quickly take Troy, if he had but ten Nestors: to his prudence he had such a rare elocution, that his words were said to flow sweeter then honey. He had seven Sons and one Daughter by Eurydice Daugh∣ter to Clyminus.
Verse 297. Antilochus,] Eldest Son to Nestor and Eurydice. He at∣tended his Father to the Siege of Troy, and was there slain by Memnon, Son to Tython and Aurora. Hom. When the body of this gallant Youth was burned, his Father could not but complain that he had lived too long to see it. Verse 302. He,] The Father of Vlysses; but who that was, whether Laertes or Sysiphus, Juvenal had no mind to determine. See the Com∣ment upon Sat. 9. Verse 303. Priam,] Son to Laomedon. When Troy was taken, and slighted by Hercules, he and his Sister Hesione were carried Prisoners in∣to Greece: from whence he was ransomed, and returning, built up Troy, made it a much fairer City, and extended the limits of his Kingdome so farre, that he was in a manner Emperor of all Asia. He married Hecuba Daughter to Cisseus King of Thrace, and had by her seventeen Sonnes, one of which number was Paris, that, to finde out his Sister Hesione, made a voyage into Greece; and there stole away Helen Wife to Me∣nelaus, which was cause of the League entred into by the Grecian Prin∣ces, and of their ten years Siege of Troy; in which time he saw almost all these Sons and 33 more slain by the Enemy: for he had in all 50 Sons. Cic. Tuscul. 1. Lastly, after Troy was taken, he himself was slain by Pyr∣rhus, Sonne to Achilles, at the Altar of Hircaean Jupiter, where Juvenal sayes that he Fell like an Oxe in his old age despis'd, And by th' ingratefull Plough-man sacrific'd. Verse 304. Assaracus,] Son to Tros King of Troy, Brother to Gany∣med, Father to Capys the Father of Anchises. Ovid. and great Uncle to Priam, as appears in this Pedegree.
Jupiter the second. Dardanus. Erichthonius. Tros. Ganymed. Assaracus. Ilus. Laomedon. Priam. Verse 306. With all his Brothers,] That were 49. Hom. Virg. Cic. All these Sons and base Sons to Priam, with their Brother and sovereign Lord Hector (in case that Priam had died before the Trojan war) would have carried his Corps to the funerall Pile; according to the custome of the An∣tients, and reckoned in the number of human felicities: an instance where∣of we have in Q. Metellus: For, besides his high honours and surname of Macedonian: when his body was carried to be burned, the Bearers were his four Sons, one being Praetor, and the other three Consular persons: two of the three having triumphed, and the third being then Censor. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 44. Verse 307. Cassandra first.] Cassandra was one of Priam's 12. Daugh∣ters, a Prophetess; and therefore Juvenal sayes her tears would have been shed first for the funerall of her Father, which she might have foreseen,
though no body would have believed her, a fortune that attended her predictions. For, when she foretold the danger of the Trojan Horse, and cryed out against the receiving of it within the walls, no credit at all was given to her words by her own Country-men; and therefore it was no marvel Agamemnon believed her not, when she was his Prisoner, and bid him take heed of a plot upon him by his Wife: but he then looked up∣on her as a mad-woman. Afterwards both he and Cassandra perished in the plot laid and executed by Clytemnestra and Aegisthus. See the Comment upon Sat. 1. This slighting of Cassandra's Prophecies, made the old Poets tell the story of Apollo, that had so high a passion for her, he bid her ask whatsoever she would, and she should have it, for a nights lodging: she asked the spirit of Prophecy, and had it, but he had no Cassandra. The God, in a rage to be so mockt, though he had not power to recall his gift, yet made it ineffectuall, taking away the credit of her words from all that heard them. In his Aeneis Virgil sayes, that a little while before the Sack of Troy, she was betroathed to young Choroebus, that seeing her (the very night the Town was taken) carried away by a Grecian, indeavoured to rescue her; but in the attempt was slain by one Penelaus; and the Maid her self defloured in the Temple of Minerva, by Ajax King of the Greek Locrians, that, for his sacrilegious Rape, was struck with a thunderbolt by the incensed Goddess Pallas. Verse 308. Polyxena,] the greatest beauty of all Priam's Daughters. At the Siege of Troy; Achilles, seeing her upon the walls, fell in love with her, and desired to be King Priam's Son in Law. The King consented to the match, and the Temple of Apollo was the Place where the Marri∣age was to be solemnized, and the peace ratified. Paris, knowing this, hid himself, as aforesaid, behind the Image of Apollo, and with an arrow
hit and slew Achilles. When Troy was taken, and Polyxena made a cap∣tive, the Grecians dreamed Achilles appeared, and charged them that Polyxena (under pretense of whose marriage he was slain) should be sa∣crificed to his Ghost. This cruelty was acted by his Son Pyrrhus. Ov. 23. Metam. When they brought her to the Tomb of Achilles, wanting a Garter, she cut away the skirt of her Gown, and with it tyed her Vest beneath her knee, that she might fall modestly. Verse 317. His old Wife.] Hecuba, Wife to King Priam, that after her Husband was slain, lived till she was transformed into a Bitch. Ovid. Metam. lib. 13. This fable was grounded upon her behaviour when she was Prisoner to the Greeks: for, seeing the floating body of her Son Polydorus, which they had cast into the Sea, and having no other means of revenge, she scolded at them like a Bitch, that barks against the Moon. Serv. Verse 320. Pontick King.] Mithridates. See the end of the Com∣ment upon Sat. 6. Verse 320. Solon,] One of the seven Sages of Greece. He was born in the Isle of Salamis, and flourished at Athens in the time of Tarquinius Priscus, King of Rome. Gell. lib. 17. cap 21. He gave to the Athenians Laws of such a temperament, that both the Senate and the People (Contraries in point of Interest, and Opinion) equally approved of them; nay after the Republick of Athens came into the hands of a single person, Solon's Lawes were confirmed by Pisistratus, though he had altered the nature and quality of the Government. Thus he writes to Solon. I have provi∣ded, that the State be still governed by your Lawes. He abrogated all the Lawes of Draco, but only those against Homicide. When he fled from the Tyranny of Pisistratus, first he went to Aegypt, then to the Isle of
Cyprus; and lastly, invited by Croesus, King of Lydia, he came to his Court at Sardys, where the King shewed him his infinite riches, and as∣ked, if he had ever known a happier person: Solon answered, yes, one Tellus, a very poor but a just man; that lived under a good Government, had virtuous Children, lived to see their Children; and then died in the service of his Country. Croesus, desirous to be thought happy in the se∣cond place, asked him, who doe you think the second happy? he replied Cleobis and Biton, Sons to the Argive Priestess; that wanting a pair of Oxen (as the custome was) to draw her Chariot to the Temple of Juno; when these young men could find no Oxen in the field, they yoaked them∣selves, and drew their Mother fourty five furlongs to the Temple, where she prayed, that the Goddess would reward this piety of her Sons, with the best thing that could be given them, which it appears was death: for, Cleobis and Biton, after they had sacrificed and feasted, slept in the Temple, and never waked again. Yet (said Solon) may Croesus be in the number of the happiest hereafter. But no man can be justly called so before his death: therefore Juvenal terms it —Solon's just reply, That would not Croesus should his fortune praise, Vntill the Close and Ev'ning of his dayes. This Answer Croesus found to be true by a sad experiment: for he be∣ing defeated and taken prisoner by Cyrus King of Persia, that condem∣ned him to be burned to death, for presuming to make a War in his Do∣minions: when he lay upon the pile of wood ready to be fired, he cry∣ed out, O Solon Solon Solon! Cyrus, that was present at the execution, sent to know what Solon was (perhaps thinking him to be a God) that Croesus so called upon: who told the Messenger, I should never have come to
this ignominious death, if in the time of my prosperity I had thus remem∣bred Solon, that when I shewed him all my wealth, would not pronounce me happy, but said, No Judgement could be made of any mans felicity till the hour of his death. This Answere struck a terror into the great Persian King; having then before his eyes the truth of Solon's words in the fortune of a mighty Prince, and not knowing how soon it might come to be his own case; Cyrus therefore pardoned Croesus, and after∣wards used his advise in the quality of a privy-Counsellor. Herod. lib. 1. He died in the eightith year of his age in the Isle of Cyprus, leav∣ing order that his body should be transported to Salamis, there burned, and his ashes scattered about the Island: lest the People of Athens should get any relique of him, and so think themselves to be absolved from the Oath which they made, faithfully to observe his Lawes till his return to Athens. His buriall in this place and manner, though Plutarch thinks it fabulous, is confirmed by the inscription upon his Monument. Mors mea ne careat fletu, linquamus amicis Maerorem, ut celebrent funera cum lacrymis. Lest with dry eyes friends should my Fun'ralls keep, Grief I bequeath; they shall have cause to weep. Cic. Tusc. Quaest. lib. 1. See Val. Max. Suid. Diog. Laert. Verse 324. Marius.] See the Comment upon Sat. 8. Verse 333. Provident Campania.] Campania, a Country in Italy, so called, because it was the Field, or Campania, where the constant battail was fought between Ceres and Bacchus, that is, where Corn and the Vine strove which should most inrich the soile. Plin. It is now, in relation to the Peasants that plough the earth and dress the Vines, called Terra di Lavoro, the Land of Labour. Here Pompey, in Capua, some say at Naples,
fell sick of a burning Fever, by a great Providence saith my Author: For, if he had died, then he had not lost his own honour and the freedom of his Country at Pharsalia; nor his life, at the sixtith year of his age, in Aegypt, ut supra. Verse 348. Latona,] Daughter to Coeus the Titan, Mother to Diana and Apollo. And to have two Deities by Jupiter, might well make her a proud Woman, and a joyfull Mother, as she is said to be, both in Ho∣mer and Virgil. Verse 349. Lucrece,] Daughter to Tricipicinus Praefect of Rome, Wife to Tarquinius Collatinus, the great Example of Roman Chastity. When Sextus Tarquin could not prevail with her by Courtship, he re∣solved to force her; and entring her Bedchamber with his sword drawn, threatned more then to kill her, if she yielded not: for he said that, when he had murdered her, he would lay the dead body of a Slave in her armes, to the end they might think her slain for an Adultress. Terrified with these menaces, to avoid infamy, she suffered a Rape. In the mor∣ning she sent for her Father, her Husband, and the rest of her Friends▪ and breaking forth into tears, acquainted them with the Tyrant's Act, and immediately, pulling out a knife, which privately she carried for that purpose, she stabbed her self. Her Father, Husband and Friends moved with this sad spectacle, opened the business to the People, which took armes against the Tyrants, drive them out of Rome, and bani∣shed both their King and Kingship. T. Collatine upon his VVife's Mo∣nument is said to have placed this Inscription, yet extant at Rome in the Bishop of Viterbo's Palace. Collatinus Tarquinius dulcissimae Conjugi, & incompa∣rabili pudicitiae decori, mulierum gloriae: Vixit annis
XXII. mensibus II. diebus VI. proh dolor! quae fuit cha∣rissima. Collatinus Tarquinius to his sweetest Wife, the most incom∣parable pattern of Chastity, the glory of her Sex: she lived 22 years, 2 moneths, and 6 dayes. Woe is me, she, that was my dearest. This Epitaph is likewise to be seen amongst the Fabrician Antiquities. Quum foderet ferro castum Lucretia pectus, Sanguinis & torrens egrederetur; ait, Procedant testes, me non placuisse Tyranno, Ante virum Sanguis, Spiritus ante deos. The wound in her chaste breast when Lucrece made, The crimson torrent bursting out; she said, Come forth you Witnesses, that Tarquin stole No love, Blood to my lord, to heav'n my Soul. See Liv. in the end of lib. 1. Verse 351 Virginia,] A great Beauty, Daughter to L. Virginius a Ple∣beian. The Decemvir, Appius Claudius, laid a plot to ravish her, and that he might doe it without danger of the Law, he suborned one of his Cli∣ents to take her for a Slave, as being a supposititious Child to Virginius his Wife, and the reall Issue of a Slave to the said Client, for whom his Pa∣tron Appius gave Judgement, that so he might have free access to her. Her Father not knowing any other way to preserve his Daughter un∣stained, slew her with his own hands; and bid her, Goe Daughter, I send thee to the shades of our fore-fathers free and honest, two titles which tyranny would not let thee enjoy living. Then, with his hands reeking in his Daughter's blood, he fled to his fellow souldiers, and told them what
inforced him to murder her. For this, Claudius first suffered imprison∣ment, and then death. Liv. Verse 351. Rutila] Lura Rutila, an ugly bunch-backt woman, that lived to be above threescore and seventeen years old. Plin. lib. 7. Verse 356. Sabines.] If they had not been chaste and loving VVives, they would hardly have come to make a Peace between their Husbands and their Fathers, ready to joyn battail; as you may see in the Comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 378. Servilia,] A Lady very deformed both in body and mind, that still made her Gallants her Pentioners. Verse 384. Bellerophon,] A Person infinitely handsome, Son to Glau∣cus King of Ephyre. He being in the Argive Court, was looked upon with an eye of pleasure by Sthenoboea, Wife to Praetus King of Argos; and she stuck not to invite him to her imbraces: but, beyond her expectation, suffering a flat denyall. She was so much inraged at this affront to her beauty, that she accused the innocent stranger for attemp∣ting to ravish her. The King credited her testimony, but when she pres∣sed him to doe her justice, he would not violate the Lawes of hospitality so as to kill him in his own Palace, but desired the favour that Bellerophon, in his journey through Lycia, would deliver his and the Queen's Letters (which you may be sure moved for his present execution) to her Father Jobates: that being though not less cruel then his Daughter, yet more carefull of his honor, would not put him to death publickly, but imployed him in a desperate service against his enemies the Solymi, a barbarous and warlike people, to which he with a small force gave a totall rout. After this and many other dangers, conquered by his valour, he was sent to kill that hidious Monster the Chimaera, which he did by the favour of Nep∣tune,
that accommodated him with the winged horse Pegasus. Jobates ad∣miring the courage and fortune of the Youth, gave him part of his King∣dome, with one of his Daughters, by whom he had Isander, Hippolochus and Laodamia. Hom. Iliad. VVhen Sthenoboea heard of his marriage with her Sister, she killed her self. Bellerophon, proud of his successes, attemp∣ted to flie up to heaven; but Jove sent a gad-flie, that made his horse cast him and break his neck; the place where he fell being afterwards called the Alleian Field. But Pegasus performed his journey, and was made a Star by Jupiter. Some say, that as Castor invented a Coach, and Erich∣ton a Chariot, so Bellerophon found out the use of Gallies, wherewith, in a Sea-fight, he conquered that valiant people, the Solymi: and sailing he was said to flye upon the back of a winged horse. Vid. Pindar. Interpr. Verse 385. Hippolytus,] Son to Theseus by Hippolyta the Amazon (o∣thers say by Antiope.) His whole delight was to be on horse-back in the field a hunting. When he returned to Court, he regarded not the La∣dies, that were much taken with his person, and in the first place, the Queen his Step-mother, Phoedra. She found an opportunity, in her Hus∣band's absence, to intice him to her Bed; but he gave her a flat denyall with much indignation; which so incensed her, that she told his Father he intended to ravish her, and murder him. Hippolytus, understanding his Step-mother's designe upon his life, took Coach and fled. But the Sea-calves, lying then upon the shore, frighted with the rattling of his wheels and the neighing of his horses, tumbled into the Sea with such a hideous noise, that the horses started, and ran away with Hippolytus, drawing the poor Youth (tangled in the rains) through the craggy rocks, till they pulled him to pieces. He was buried in the Aricine Grove con∣secrated to Diana. Ovid Fast. lib. 3. Diana pittying her fellow-Hunts∣man,
desired the great Physitian Aesculapius to use all his skill for reco∣very of the dead Prince; whose torn limbs he set together, and by his Hermetick art brought him to life again. Hippolytus, revived, left Attica, and came into Italy, where he called himself Virbius, twice a man: there he married a Lady whose name was Aricia, and built a City, to which he gave her name. Verse 390. Co-husband.] C. Silius, the loveliest young Lord of Rome, married to the noble Lady Junia Syllana: but Messalina (the insatiable Empress, of whom in Sat. 6.) chose him for her Servant, and made him put away his Wife. Silius very well knew the danger of having such a Mistress; but, if he refused, his destruction would be immediate; therefore he thought it best to expect the future, and enjoy the present. With a great train she frequented his house, could not endure to have him out of her sight: but the infamy thereof was so great, that she sought to cover it with the name of Matrimony. Her Husband, Claudius Caesar, being gone to sacrifice at Ostia: with all the Rites and Solemnities of Marriage, she took Silius for her Co-husband. This news made all the Emperor's Court tremble, especially those of his Bed-chamber, Calistus, Pallas, and the great Favorite Narcissus, that, when the other two would have gone to diswade her, stopt their journey: For, Narcissus feared no∣thing, but that she should know he knew it, before he had made sure of the Emperor: one of whose Mistresses he got to begin the story, which he so well seconded, that Claudius gave him a Commission to execute Messalina, and for that day to be Captain of his Praetorian Life-guard. Silius had his triall, but refused to plead, only desired that he might be speedily dispatched. Messalina (not suffered to come to Claudius his presence, and prevented in her designe of sending her Children, Bri∣tannicus
and Octavia, to beg for her) was perswaded by her Mother Le∣pida to kill her self; which she offered at, yet had not a heart to perform; but the Tribune (sent by Narcissus) did it for her, in the Lucilian Gar∣den. Tacit. lib. 11. cap. 9.10.11. Tacitus makes this Preface to the History of their strange marriage. I am not ignorant, it will sound like a fable, that any man should be such a Sot, especially a Consul elect, in a City where no∣thing can be secret: The day appointed: an Assembly of Witnesses at sea∣ling of the Deeds of Contract with, and provision for Issue by, the Prince's Wife: that he should hear the words of the Auspex; and she, in the Ac∣coutrements of a Bride, sit down among the Guests, kiss, and imbrace, and lie all night with her other Husband. But this is no fictitious relation, all the circumstances being delivered by ancient Writers. Vide Suet. in Claud. Verse 393. Bright Veil.] See the punctuality of Messalina, that omits no Hymenaeal ceremony. She wears the Flammeum, or the Bride's flame-coloured Veil. The purple Counterpoint is cast upon her Bed; a sum of money tendred for her Portion: a publick Notary draws the Deeds of Joynture for the VVife, and Settlement for the Children: the Town is called in for witnesses. And lest they should come together inauspicatò, without some happy promise from the Auspex, he by the flight of Birds divines of the future felicity of the marriage: but the best Sooth-sayer at the VVedding was Vectius Valens; that, to shew tricks, got to the top of a tree, and being asked what he saw from thence, answered, A Storme coming from Ostia. Tacit. lib. 11. cap. 10. Verse 427. Hercules,] Son to Jupiter and Alcmena; for his valour and the glory of his actions deified. Cic. de Nat. Deor. lib. 3. But he menti∣ons many of that name. First, he that contended with Apollo for the
Tripos. The second, an Aegyptian, who they say invented Phrygian Letters. The third, one of the Corybantes or Priests of Cybele. The fourth, Son to Jove by Asteria the Sister of Latona: he is worshipped at Tyre, and had a Daughter called Carthage. The fift, in the Indies, being likewise known by the name of Belus. The sixt, a Theban, Son to Ju∣piter (as aforesaid) by  wife Alcmena: to him they ascribe the Achievments of all the est. That Hercules was one of the twelve Gods of Aegypt, and that the Greeks borrowed this Deity of the Aegyp∣tians, and conferred it upon the supposed Son of Amphitryo, we have the authority of Herodot. Fourty three which bore the name of Hercules, are enumerated by Varro; that sayes, all that excelled in strength had this name, as a title of honour, from Hercules, begot by Jupiter upon Alc∣mena. He had the fame of conquering almost invincible Labours, put upon him by Juno, that sought to destroy all Jove's Bastards: but he still came off victorious, which immortalised his name. In regard that Juvenal here mentions his Labours, I shall give you an account of them. The 1. in his Cradle, where he crusht the heads of two Ser∣pents, sent by Juno to strangle him. The 2. when he was a Youth, in getting with child the fifty Daughters of Thespius in one night, which brought him fifty Boyes. The 3. when he came to his full growth, was the destruction of the many-headed Monster Hydra, in the Lernean Fens, as aforesaid. The 4. his foot-race, upon the Mountain Maenalus in Ar∣cadia, with a Hind, that had brasen Feet and golden antlers, which he caught and killed. The 5. in the Nemaean Forrest, between Cleonae and Phlius in Greece, he slew a huge Lion that was shot-free, neither to be hurt by Iron, Wood, or Stone. The 6. he vanquished Diomedes King of Thrace, that fed his Horses with mans flesh, and made them eat their
Master. The 7. A dreadfull wild Boar (that was lodged in Erymanthus, an Arcadian Mountain, and destroyed the Country) he took, and carri∣ed him alive to Juno's Officer, his Task-master Euristheus. The 8. He killed the Stymphalick Birds with his arrows, or, as some say, made them flye cleer away, with the sound of a brass rattle. The 9. A wild Bull, that had almost laid waste all the Isle of Creet, he tamed and brought him in a halter to Euristheus, that let him loose again in Attica, where he did a world of hurt: but was slain by Theseus at Marathon. Ovid. Met. lib. 7. The 10. He vanquished his rivall Achelous in a combat for their Mistress Deianira, though he turned himself first into a Serpent, then into a Bull: but Hercules cut off one of his horns, and got the Cornucopia, the horn of plenty, which he exchanged with him for the Amalthaean, or wishing horn. The 11. He slew Busiris King of Aegypt, that used to kill all the strangers in his Court. The 12. In Lybia he strangled the Giant Antaeus, that wre∣stled with him, as in the Comment upon Sat 3. The 13. Calpe and Abyla, when they were one Mountain, he pulled asunder. The 14. He slew the never sleeping Dragon, Orchard-Keeper to the Hesperides; and car∣ryed away the golden Apples. The 15. When Atlas was wearied with his burden, he eased him, and in his stead supported Heaven. The 16. He conquered Geryon King of Spain, that had three bodies, and carried off his herds of fat Cattel, as in the Comment upon Sat. 5. The 17. He beat out the brains of that half-man Cacus, the grand Thiefe, Son to Vulcan, and vomiting flames of fire like his Father, ibid. The 18. He slew another Out-law, one Lacinius, that plundered the borders of Italy, and upon the place built a Temple to Juno, called Juno Lacinia. Virg. Aeneid. 5. The 19. Albion and Bergion, Giants that stopt his passage not farre from the mouth of the River Rhosne, he overcame by the help of
his Father Jove, that assisted him with a showre of stones. The 20. He con∣quered and took prisoner Tyrrhenus King of Eubaea, that made war upon the Baeotians, and tyed him to four wild Colts, that tore him into quar∣ters. The 21. He tamed the Centaurs. The 22. He clensed the Ox-house of Augeas King of Elis, which held 3000 Oxen, and was never toucht be∣fore. The 23 He delivered Hesione from the Sea-monster; her Father, King Laomedon, engaging to remunerate him with his best horses: which promise being broken, Hercules in a fury stormed Troy, slew the King, took Hesione prisoner, and bestowed her upon Telamon, that first scaled the walls. The 24. He plundered the Isle of Cos, and put the King and Queen to the sword, as in the Comment upon Sat. 10. The 25. He con∣quered the Amazons, and gave their Queen Hippolyte to his friend and fellow Souldier Theseus. The 26. He went down to Hell, and brought up their Porter, three-headed Cerberus in a tripple chain. The 27. He brought back with him into the world Queen Alcestis, that died for her Husband, as in the end of the Comment upon Sat. 6. The 28. After his return from hell, he slew Lycus King of Thebes, that in his absence would have ravished his wife Megara. The 29. with his arrows he shot the Eagle, which upon the top of the Mountain Caucasus fed upon the still growing liver of Prometheus. The 30. He killed Cygnus, Son to Mars, in a duell on horseback. The 31. For denying to give him food he slew Theodamas, Father to his Favorite Hylas, as in the end of the Com∣ment upon Sat. 1. The 32. He conquered the Cercopes, when he served Omphale Queen of Lydia. The 33. He sackt Pilos, and put to the sword King Neleus with all his Family but Nestor, wounding Juno her self (that came to assist Neleus) with a three-forked Dart. The 34. In the Isle of Tenos he slew Zetes and Calais, the winged Sons of Boreas; and
upon their Tombe erected two Pillars. The 35. He passed the torrid Zone, and the burning Sands of Libya, not troubled with their scorching heat: and having lost his Ship, waded through the quick-sands of the Syrtes. The 36. He set up the Pillars in the West, called Hercules Pil∣lars. The 37. He slew Eurytus King of Oechalia, and plundered the City, carrying into Eubaea the fair Princess Iole promised to him, and afterwards denyed by her Father. When Deianira heard of his love to Iole, she remembred the message delivered to her from the Centaur Nes∣sus, together with the Vest dipped in his blood, viz. That if ever she found her Husband loved another, she should give him that Vest; and when he had it on, he should be only hers. She therefore sent it to him by her servant Lychas, which he puting on as he went to sacri∣fice, it set him in such a frenzy, that he made himself the burnt-Offe∣ring. After his death he was held a God, and believed to be the same with the Sun. Macrob. lib. 1. Saturn. cap. 2. In his return from Spain, some think he brought the use of Letters into Italy, and was therefore worshipped both in a Temple apart, and also with the Muses. Verse 428. Sardanapalus.] The last King of Syria, from Ninus the thirtith. His Lievtenant General Arbactus, being ambitious, after some great service, to see his Master (a favour never before granted to any but meniall Servants) after long suit was admitted, and in the first Modell of a Seraglio he found the King, not distinguishable from the Concubines, either in his habit or imployment; for he was spinning purple-silk: only his body seemed to be the tenderest, his eyes and his garb the most las∣civious. At sight hereof Arbactus, with horrid indignation, stomacked that so many men should be governed by a VVoman; that so many men, which knew the use of armes, should be subject to a Distaffe. At his
return to the Armie, Arbactus reported the strange spectacle, professing, he would never serve a Prince that had rather be a Woman then a Man. All are of his mind. They march against Sardanapalus, that in his last scene was still the same; for he stood not upon his defence like a man, but hid himself like a woman; not having in his thoughts the hope of keep∣ing his Kingdome, but the fear of loosing his life. At last, with some few disorderly Servants he takes the field, is beaten, retreats to his Pa∣lace, layes himself and all his treasure upon a pile of wood, and made it be fired; doing only this act like a man. Justin lib. 1.
Figura Undecima. AD coenam vocat indigenam 1 Juvenalis 2 Amicū Aemulus Evandri, qui frugi erat Herculis hospes: Non mare, non pelagus lustrat; patrimonia mergi In ventrem nolit: tener hîc tibi ponitur hoedus 3, Persice, nec minùs est gratus, quia traxerit auram Vulgarem Ausoniae; salicísque ignarus & herbae, Solo lacte satur placet, arridétque palato. Quam cernis 4 gallinam, ante horrea pinguis avenâ, Haec ova 5 exclusit foeno modò sumpta calenti. Hos tulit 6 asparagos, quae carpit villica lanam, Fuso quos posito legit de vertice montis. Nativum retinet, quo fulgeat, 7 uva colorem, Autumnum ut dicas gemmis mutâsse racemos. Arte pari 8 pyra cum 9 pomis servata furorem Effugêre hyemis, tutâque recondita cellâ, Cruda emendato posuêre pericula succo; Et jam cardiacis prosunt, quibus antè venenum. Nunc epulas, coenae caput, aspice, nempe legentes Autorem Iliados pueros 10, nostrúmque Maronem: Vindicat haec famâ violatos mensa poetas: Prodiga enim licèt his sit mens, his curta supellex, Non omnes Iros, non omnes crede Nepotes.
The eleventh Designe. LIke an old Roman 1 Juvenal here treats His 2 friend, invites him to no forrein meates, No costly sawces; empties not his purse To fill his Board: nor eats his 3 Kid the worse, Nor is esteem'd by Persicus lesse rare, Because it only breath'd Italian ayre: Bred in rich grounds, it eat nor grasse nor wood: But suckt, which makes it such delicious food. These Barn-doore 4 hens, an houre ere they were drest, Lay'd those great 5 Eggs, took warme out of the Nest. This dish of 6 Sparagus the maid, that spun The Napkins, left her housewifes work undone To gather from the hills, where they grew wilde. The 7 grapes, that look as Autumne were with child Of cluster'd Pearls and rubies, are preserv'd. The 8 Pears and 9 Apples, when old winter sterv'd Il-order'd fruit, so carefully were laid, They from crude poisons, are rich cordialls made; And for a Banquet, Scholars wait to read Virgil 10 and Homer: here's a feast to plead The Poets cause; though some are beggers, all Must not be censur'd poor, or prodigall.
The Manners of Men. THE ELEVENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. To supper Persicus is bid, To fare as th' ancient Romans did; Not new-found Rarities to eat, Nor to see Wenches after meat: But to hear Homer read, and then Compar'd with Virgil's mighty Pen. To this, all serious cares displac't, His friend, the Poet, bids him haste. IF ATTICUS sup nobly, he's esteem'd A Prince: if RUTILUS doe so, he's deem'd A mad-man. For, what makes us laugh so loud, As poor APICIUS? every table, crowd,
Bath, Stage, jeer RUTILUS: that when he might Bear armes, and for his Country's honour fight: Is brought by feasting of his youthfull blood (Not forc't to 't by the Tribune, nor withstood) To write what Fencers dictate to his hand, Their Lawes, and words of service and command. Such you see store of, whom the Creditor, Oft fail'd with, at the Shambles watches for; Whose Palat is their God: whose meanest sort Fare like great Lords, or Officers at Court; And through their broken stock, when ruine shines, Their gust all th' Elements for spoil designes. No price for Rarities too great is thought; Nay, minde it, they love most what's dearest bought: These make it nothing, for a summe that straight They mean to spend, to pawn their ancient Plate; Or their dead Mothers Images to break; And then for three pound sterling to bespeak An Olio Podrido: whence they fall To that which the poor Fencers hodge-podge call. The diff'rence therefore lies, who bids the Guest? In RUTILUS 'tis luxury to feast;
But gaines VENTIDIUS a noble name, And his expense is waited on by fame. Him I may justly scorn, that knows how farre All Lybian hills o're-topt by Atlas are, Yet knows not where the disproportion rests, 'Twixt little purses, and great Iron Chests. From heav'n came KNOW THY SELF; and should be fix't In every breast, with every counsell mixt: Whether to take a Wife thou do'st intend, Or to the sacred Senate would'st ascend, (Nor at ACHILLE'S armes THERSITES aimes, Which with apologie ULYSSES claimes) O do'st thou, as an Orator, affect Some cause of great concernment to protect? Consult thy self; ask thy self, who am I? A TULLY, CURTIUS, or MATHO? try Thy tongue's just measure, weigh things high and low: Ev'n if thou'lt money on a fish bestow; Nor covet for a mullet to disburse, When there is but a gudgion in thy purse. For, what end canst thou look for, when thy rents Diminish, and thy gluttony augments:
Thy Fathers goods, thy own and others, drownd In thy vast womb, which Cattle holds, and ground? Such riotous Gallants sell their rings at last; Then must bare-finger'd POLLIO beg, or fast. Untimely fun'ralls Gluttons cannot have: Old age is more their terrour then the grave. These are their usuall steps; they've money lent At Rome, and that their Creditors see spent. Then something left, but what I doe not know, When th' Usurer, to whom great sums they owe, Looks pale upon't; their native soil they shun, And to the Bath or Port of Ostia run: Nor more to leave the Forum disapprove, Then from the hot Suburra to remove, And in the cool Mount Esquiline to live. Only this galls, this grieves the Fugitive, To want for one year the Circensian Playes. But not one guilty blush his cheeks betrayes; Few with scorn'd Modesty have now to doe; She from the City is departing too. Thou shalt make triall, PERSICUS, this day, If to the things, which I thus fairly say,
In life and manners real proof I give: Or praise course food, and a closs glutton Live: Or when I send my boy, that all may heare, For brown Loaves, whisper junkets in his eare. Since to come sup with me, th' hast promis'd now Thy host EVANDER I will be; and thou HERCULES; or AENEAS, lesse then he, But JOVE'S Relation in the next Degree: And for this Son and Granchild when he sent. The first in fire, the last by water went. Now heare your bill of fare, which never did Adorn the shambles: A fat little kid, The softest of the Herd; near Tibur 'twas Bred in rich Grounds, yet neither eat the grasse, Nor brouz'd upon the willow's humble wood: But more participates of milk then blood. Then mountain-Sparagus; which, her distaffe laid Aside, was gather'd by the Village-maid. Great eggs, took warm from their contorted hay, Serv'd with the mothers which those eggs did lay. Grapes long preserv'd, such as the Vinyard bears. Signine, and Syrian, that match Pisan Pears,
Serv'd up, as they came or'e, in baskets full; Apples that taste like those we newly pull, Not to be fear'd, th' ill humor being lost: Autumne's crude juyce concocted by the frost. Th' old Senate this poor supper would have thought A wanton feast; his sallets CURIUS brought, Which he himself in's little garden got, And or'e a poore fire put them in the pot: Now rogues, that dig in chains, disdaine such meat: Remembring how the Cookes fat paunches eat. Broil'd rashers, that on wide grid-irons lay, Were then reserv'd for some great holy-day. They on their kindreds birth-day adding lard, And what more flesh the Sacrifice had spar'd. Some kinsman, whom thrice Consull they had seen, That had our Gen'rall and Dictator been, Came to these dainties early; with his spade, Which tam'd the mountain, or'e his shoulder laid: Doubting the FABII, or stern CATO saw, By SCAURI, or FABRICII, kept in awe; The rigid Censor's manners they did feare, That to his own Collegue was so severe.
None made it then their serious care, to note Where in the Sea, Mother of Pearl did float, That makes the rich backs to our Trojan Beds: Plain their bed-sides were, with small brazen heads, Which like a crowned Asse's-head were made, Wherewith the wanton Country-children play'd. The house and meat were then alike, all rude: No Roman had Greek arts with wonder view'd; But, when Towns rich in plunder, he did force; He broke great work-mens bolls, to trap his horse; And in his richest helmet only put, Under a rock ingrav'd, the figure cut Of that wild beast, tam'd by the Empire's fate, Suckt by those Twins, the Founders of our State: And shew'd the naked God's bright spear and shield, Hung o're a Foe that was to die or yield. No men then shin'd in silver, but when arm'd; And the course meats they fed upon, were warm'd In a poor Tuscan earthen-pot; which thou, Hadst thou a noble spleen, wouldst envy now. Then in our Temples Deities appear'd, And in our streets a voice, at midnight heard,
Cry'd to the City, from the Western shore, THE GAULES COME; then our Gods the office bore Of their own Prophets; thus they bid us look Unto our selves; and thus the care was took For us and Rome by JOVE, out of his mould Of stone, in those dayes not prophan'd with Gold. Tables made here at home those times beheld, Of our own wood: old Walnut, that was fell'd By some kind tempest when the wind lay East. Now our rich Gluttons value not a feast, The Turbut, and the Wild-goat taste not well, The Unguents and the Roses vilely smell, Unless the Table, their large Plate stands on, Be Iv'ry: and that Iv'ry stand upon A tall wide gaping Pard, of those teeth made Which at Syene are a ship-board laid: Such as swift Moors, or the tann'd Indian sends; Or, where the Nabathaean shade extends, Th' Arabian Elephant is forc'd to shed, Now grown too great, too heavy for his head. 'Tis this creates the raven in the guts, 'Tis this the stomach in such choler puts.
For, a poor silver foot is such a thing, As when a finger weares an iron ring. Proud Guests I therefore shun; that will compare Me to themselves, and scorn my meaner fare. 'Las! I have not an ounce of Iv'ry, I, No Table-men of that stuff, not a Die: Ev'n my knife-hafts are bone; nor cut nor eat My Hens worse; I've no Carver for your meat, To whom the Pergula in duty ought To bow, as one by Doctor TRYPHER taught: That hath a Hare and Boar of wood at home, A fat-rumpt Pygarg, and a Sow's great womb: Phesants and Turkies which Getes send to us, And that huge red-wing'd Phaenicopterus; And with his unedg'd mock-knife when he wounds This sumptuous feast, the whole Suburra sounds. To carve a Goat, a Capon's wing to cut, My novice-Boy to school was never put, But alwaies rudely bred; his carving work Was but to give his fellowes bits of pork. Plebeian glasses, for small prices sold, Brings my rude boy, whose clothes defie the cold.
On me no Phrygian youth, no Lycian waites, Bought of the Mango, at excessive rates: All Romans mine; when any thing you would, Pray call, but call for't as a Roman should. All go alike, with short and upright haire, Onely this feast-day comb'd with greater care. This a blunt Shepherd, that a Herdsman's sonne, Longing to see, what late he hath not done, His Mother and her Cottage; and would faine Meet his old friends the Goates yet once againe. My boy's well-fac't, well-manner'd; such as he That wears the glowing purple, ought to be. No DRAUCUS, whose hair's are pull'd off with gummes, That when into the Bath he trembling comes, With the distillatory covers o're, His fist-like dowcets, and huge wen before. Wine he shall bring thee, in those mountains made, Under whose brows he hath so often plaid; The Country being one and the self-same, Both whence the Wine and the Cup-bearer came. Perhaps thou dost expect, that I should bring The Spanish Courtezans to dance and sing,
Their quiv'ring thighs descending to the ground, For which they are with loud applauses crown'd; To rich men nettles, to dull VENUS spurres: But more the female sex this pleasure stirres; With them it works more strongly, moves the tears, And growing water in their eyes and ears. A poor house is not for these wanton toyes, Their obscene songs, and Castinetta's noise, At which i'th' Stews the naked Slave would start. To him leave bawdy songs, and all lust's art, Whose slipping Guests are ready still to fall, He doth his Spartan marble so be-spall. For, there with fortune we dispense. The Dice Are foul i'th' poor, adultery a vice: Let rich men doe it, o're, and o're agen, They're free-mein'd Gallants, and fine Gentlemen. For this day's feast, shall other game be sprung; Great HOMER with high-sounding VIRGIL sung, Shall both dispute the doubtfull Palm: such verse No matter with what tone the boyes rehearse. But now out of thy breast all bus'ness turn, Take thy sweet ease, this day all cares adjourn.
No mention what use-money thou do'st pay: Suppose thy wife goe forth by break of day, And about midnight uses to return, Let not thy bosom with closs choler burn; Though her moist silks suspected wrinkles show, Her hair be tows'd, her face and ears doe glow. Nor bring to my house what hath thee annoy'd, But whatsoe're thy servants have destroy'd, Or lost, what ever vexes thee exclude; Especially thy friend's Ingratitude. This while, great CYBEL'S Towell is hung out, And to her solemn Playes the Town's devout, Where that grand horse-stealer the Tribune sits, As if he triumph'd: and if it befits This vast, this too great People; I may say The Circus comprehends all Rome to day. Heark what a noise they make? it may be guest, By that loud shout, the Green-coats have the best. Were these Sports silenc'd, you should see the Town As fatally astonish't and cast down, As when the Consuls Cannae's battail lost. Let Youths goe thither, that will be at cost
Of spending lungs, and wagers boldly laid; Or would sit neerest to the handsom'st Maid. Let Husbands and their Wives those sights behold, Which is a shame to be before them told. But let us old men, with skins wrinkled, shun The busie Gown, and drink the Spring's warm sun. To bathe here at elev'n th' art free to goe; Five dayes together 'twould not please thee so. For, th' easiest life would likewise tedious seem: Less frequent Use gives Pleasures their esteem. The Comment UPON THE ELEVENTH SATYR. VErse 1. Atticus,] One of the Family of that infinite rich and noble person T. Pomponius Atticus, eminent for his lear∣ning, and for the friendship between him and Cicero. Mart. lib. 7. Attice qui renovas foecundae nomina gentis. Atticus, that thy fruitfull Name reviv'st. Verse 2. Rutilus,] A Descendent from the Rutili. A Gentleman of a small fortune, that consumed it with feasting: and in the prime of his youth, when he might have served in the warres, and have got honour
and a fortune, as his Ancestors did by the sword, shames himself with it, and disgraces their noble memory, coming upon the Theater as a Gla∣diator or common Fencer. Verse 4. Apicius.] The rich Glutton, that being sensible how ridi∣culous poverty would make him, hanged himself. See the Comment upon Sat. 4. Verse 4. Not forc'd to't] Like young Proculus, compelled by the Emperor Calligula to fight with a Thracian Fencer: or like Domitius Glabrio, inforced by the necessity of the times to make himself a Gla∣diator; but Rutilus was of the same ging with Gracchus, that fought up∣on the Stage for money, when there was no Nero to compell him. Sat. 8. Verse 21. His dead mothers Images.] Medalls of Gold and Silver, wherein her Figure was ingraved. Verse 27. Ventidius.] A Gentleman of the house of Ventidius, that is quoted for one of the rare presidents of good fortune. Sat. 7. Verse 30. Atlas.] A Mountain in Africa, so high that by the inha∣bitants it was called Columna Coeli, the Pillar of Heaven. Upon this Mountain, in comparison whereof all other Lybian hills are mole-hills, the Astrologer Atlas used to contemplate the Starres, which occasioned the Fable of his being turned into that Mountain, to support Heaven, as he is rarely described by Virg. Aeneid. lib. 4. Verse 37. Thersites] The basest, ugliest, and boldest Knave amongst the Greeks; yet he had not the impudence to stand in competition for the armes of Achilles; so farre he knew himself and his want of merit. Verse 42. Tully.] Juvenal admonishes an Orator to consider his own abilities; whether he be with the first-file of Speakers, a Cicero; or in the
second rank, a Curtius Montanus, that had a harsh kind of elocution, but proud and swelling. Tacit. or of the third and lowest forme, a Matho, whose wit was unweldy like himself. See the Comment upon Sat. 1. & 7. Verse 52. Pollio,] A Roman Knight, as appears by his Ring, the mark of his honour; but it seems the Census Equestris his four hundred thousand Sesterces were spent, in feasting, to the last Deneir; otherwise he would not in his life time have suffered Poverty, like Hannibal, to plunder him of his Ring. Verse 60. Ostia,] A haven Town, to which the Roman Prodigalls removed, that in case their Creditors followed, they might slip aboard a Galley; which was the designe of Damasippus. Sat. 8. Verse 61. Forum.] The Forum Romanum, the place of complement and business; where the Romans had their Exchange, Courts of Justice, Pul∣pits for Orations: and Saturn's Temple, or the Chamber of Rome. See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 1. Verse 62. Suburra,] A great street of Rome, described in the Com∣ment upon Sat. 3. Verse 63. Cool Mount Esquiline] Coole to the great persons that dwelt upon it; but cold to their Clients, almost sterved with dancing at∣tendance in the night. Sat. 5. Was't this for which I left, so many a time, My Wife, the cold Mount Esquiline to climb. Verse 69. Persicus,] The Friend invited to supper by Juvenal, as I have said in my Argument to this Satyr. Verse 76. Evander,] King of Arcadia, Son to the Prophetess Carmen∣tis: for his eloquence said to be the Son of Mercury by Nicostrata.
He, having accidentally slain his Father, left his Kingdome, and by the advice of his Mother sailed into Italy, beat the Aborigines, and possessed himself of the place where afterwards Rome was built; built himself a little Town upon Mount Palatine, and there entertained Hercules, but very frugally. He lived to give such another treatment to Aeneas. Virg. Aeneid. lib. 8. Verse 80. The first in fire.] Hercules, that was Evander's first Guest, went his voyage to the Gods in fire; for he burned himself alive, as in the end of the Comment upon Sat. 10. Verse 80. The last by water.] Aeneas, treated by Evander along time after Hercules was burned, went to heaven by water; for he got his death by a fall into the Numician Well; some say he was drowned in it, and the Fountain it self consecrated to his Deity. Tibull. Verse 83. Tybur.] See the Comment upon Sat. 3. Verse 92. Signine,] Pears that grew in Italy amongst the Signines, and were the latest ripe. Plin. lib. 15. cap. 15. Verse 92. Syrian.] Pliny and Martial commend the taste of the Sy∣rian Pear; but Horace cries up the Pisan Pear for the most delicious. Verse 98. Curius.] See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 111. Fabii.] Q. Fabius Maximus and his Sonne, both temperate and frugall persons. Verse 112. Scauri.] Marcus Scaurus, Prince of the Senate. See the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 113. Censor.] Fabricius the Censor, that set a Fine upon the head of his Collegue P. Dcius. See the Comment upon Sat. 2. & 9. Verse 127. Wild-beast.] The Wolfe that gave suck to Romulus and Rhemus, under the rock at the foot of the Quirine Mount.
Verse 129. Naked God.] Mars, that naked begot Romulus and Rhemus, as aforesaid; but afterwards put on his armes to maintain the Empire, founded by those royall Twins. Verse 138. The Gauls come.] M. Caeditius heard these words in the aire. Liv. lib. 5. Marcellus, when he had relieved the Capitol, and beat the Gauls, built the Temple of Jupiter upon the place where Caeditius heard the voice. Plut. in Marcel. Verse 152. Syene.] A Maritim City upon the borders between Ae∣gypt and Aethiopia, not far from the Isle of Elephantis; so named from the numerous breed of Elephants. This City is directly under the Tro∣pick of Cancer: so that in the Summer-Solstice, at noon day, the bodies of the Inhabitants cast off no shaddow at all. Plin. lib. 1. cap. 73. Verse 154. Nabathaea.] An Orientall Region, beginning at Arabia, and containing all that tract on the right hand to the red Sea. On the left hand is the Persian Sea, and at the furthest part the Indian: it had the name from Nabaioth, the eldest Son to Ishmael. The people of this Country are called Dacharenes. Eustat. & Steph. Verse 168. Doctor Trypher,] Master of the carving Academy, whose Pergula or Ground-tarras, opening to the Suburra, was furnished with wooden figures of birds, beasts and fishes, for his Scholars to practice upon. Verse 170. Pygarg.] Authors differ strangely about the Pygarg; some say it is a Wild-goat or Hind, others a kind of Eagle. Suid. all I can do is to put to it the Epithet fat-rumpt, which expresses my Authors mean∣ing, and the sense of the word Pygarg. Verse 172. Phaenicopterus,] An African bird, a water-fowle, with red wings, and a beak so long and crooked that it cannot drink, till the whole head be under water.
Verse 182. Mango,] He that sold Slaves and fine Boyes in the Market. Verse 210. Castanettaes] Knackers, of the form of a Chestnut, used to this very day by the Spanish women in their Dances. Verse 221. Such verse] As Homer's and Virgil's, so excellently good that boyes cannot spoil it with reading, if Scholars sit to hear it. Verse 235. Cybel's Towell.] At the Circensian or Megalesian Playes, instituted in honour of Cybele Mother of the Gods, they hung out a Tow∣ell to give notice to the Town, as our Players used to put forth a Flag. The originall of their custome was from Nero, that hearing as he sate at dinner, with how much impatience the people waited at the Court gates, to know his pleasure about the Circensian Playes: he threw them out of the window the Towell he wiped his hands with, to give them notice that he had dined, and would be presently at the Circus; where ever after a Towell was hung out. Suet. in Ner. Verse 237. Horse-stealer,] The Consul or Praetor; one of them being still present at the Megalesian or Circensian Playes, in his Robe royall, which the Romans proverbially called the Megalesian purple. At these Shows the Praetor, when they ran their Chariot-races, would take the horses he liked best without paying for them, under pretence of service to the Publick, but keep them for his private use; therefore Juvenal calls him the grand Horse-stealer. Verse 242. Green-coats.] The four parties that ran Coach-races in the Circus, were divided into severall Liveries, viz. the Green-coats, the Russet-coats, the Blue-coats and the White-coats. Henr. Salm. in Pen∣cirol. cap. de Circ. Max. To these four Domitian Caesar added two Com∣panies more, the Gold-coats and the Purple-coats. Suet. in Domit. ca. 7.
Verse 245. The Consuls.] P. Aemilius and. T. Varro, overthrown by Hannibal at the Battail of Cannae; where Aemilius slew himself; but his Collegue Varro fled to Rome, and had the thanks of the House for not despairing of the Common-wealth. Liv. Verse 253. To bathe here at elev'n.] An hour before meat the Ro∣mans bathed, at the eighth hour, which is our two a clock in the after∣noon: but Juvenal invites his friend Persicus at their fifth hour, which is our eleven a clock in the morning; by which it appears he went to dinner at twelve, according to the present custome of England.
The twelfth Designe. COrvinus 1 come, see 2 Juvenal perform His vow, made for Catullus in a storm. This 3 Lamb to 3 Juno, 4 that to 4 Pallas I Will sacrifice, to 5 Jove this 5 Calf shall die Vpon green Turfe, which I will kiss with tears For joy that earth once more Catullus beares. That 6 draught of his sad wrack to me he sent To be hung up a votive Monument, With more such woefull Pictures, in the Fane Of 7 Ceres, Goddess of our watry Plaine: How low the Tempest makes his tall Ship dive! Whil'st fire and water, waves and lightning, strive Which shall devour her; the Lavinian Key Stretching its stony arms into the Sea, Would rescue her: and to the Lee they steer her, To meet th' embracing Port, but Death is neerer. Down goes the Mast, the Bark is lay'd at hull, Still still she bulges, she is stow'd too full: Now her rich lading over-board they cast; Plate, purple Wool, rare Baskets: all hope past, The Sun breaks out, the Wind turns gentle aire; The day was dismal, but the evening faire.
Figura Duodecima. HUC 1 Corvine, tuum 2 Juvenalem solvere testis, Debita quae Divis, si parceret unda sodali. Candida 3 Junoni mactabitur agna 3; Minervae 4 Par 4 vellus dabitur; vitulus 5 Iovis 5 imbuet aras Cespite de vivo; cui figo basia cultor Laetitiâ illacrymans, pelago reddente Catullum. Tradidit incolumis votivas ecce tabellas 6, Quas Heluina 7 Ceres missae monimenta salutis In Fanum accipiet; quo multa ostendit imago Huic similes casus: Navim ut detrudit in imum Tempestas victrix! ut mox ferit aethera velis! Aemulus intereà certat cum fulgure fluctus, Vtri praeda ratis cedat: sed saxea profert Brachia in auxilium portus porrecta Lavinus: Tenditur ad positas inclusa per aequora moles; Jamque propè est Statio, at propior Mors instat Amico: Trunca suo pinus malo, scatet alveus undis; Coepit cum ventis jactu decidere Vector, Projicit argentum, tinctas & ab aere lanas, Bascaudásque, volens etiam pulcherrima mitti. Spes vitae cum sole redit; componitur Auster; Atra Dies, toto sed fulget Vesper olympo.
The Manners of Men. THE TWELFTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. The Poet sacrifices now Those Beasts, which he did lately vow, For his Corvinus: safe come back From Sea, where he escap'd a Wrack: Nor does He this in hope of gain, Like men that such Devotion fain For sordid avaritious ends: And neither are, nor merit, friends. CORVINUS, I above my birth∣day prize This sweeter day, this day of Sacrifice, Which green turf waits for, which to heav'n I owe: To JUNO an Ewe-lamb, as white as snow:
The like to her, that brings into the field The Mauritanian Gorgon in her Shield: But that, kept for Tarpeian JOVE, takes scope, And brandishing his forehead, shakes his rope; For, 'tis a fierce Calfe, ripe for the designe Of th' Altar, Temple, and besprinkling wine: So great, that now to suck his Damme he scorns, And vexes young Oaks with his budding horns. Had I a fortune like my Love, a Bull, Fatter then plump HISPULLA, I would pull, Whose weight should sink him; not bred hereabout, But one, that when his blood did issue out, Should the rich pastures of Clitumnus show, And some Arch-flamen's hand should give the blow: For my friend's landing, from despair late rais'd, Yet trembling, and ev'n at himself amaz'd. For horrors of the Sea and lightning past; When Heav'n thick darkness in one cloud o're-cast, And, in an instant, fire the Sail-yards caught; Whil'st each, astonisht, himself stricken thought; And no one could the fate of drowning fear, That saw the Shrowds and Sails in flames appear.
All things fall out in such a hideous form, When there arises a Poetick storm. Another kind of misery behold, Heare with new pitty: though the case be old, And known to all that have in Temples been, And there like fate in Votive Pictures seen; ISIS you know feeds Painters, to express In tables modells of my friend's distress. When half his Ship took water; larboard here The reeling tree, there starboard, forc't to steer; And wave on wave did of his skill defeat The hoary Pilot: with the winds to treat CATULLUS falls, and for his pattern takes The Castor, that himself an Evnuch makes, And to redeem his life his stones bestowes; So med'cinable he his dowcets knows. Cast o're-board all that's mine, CATULLUS cryes, Willing his richest goods to sacrifice: Purple for soft MECAENASES to wear; Robes of those climes, which grass so noble bear, As dies the fleece by nature; helpt with rare And unknown fountains, and the Baetick aire.
To NEPTUNE silver Chargers he gave up, Made by PARTHENIUS, and a goodly Cup Of neer two gallons, worthy to be brought To thirsty PHOLUS, FUSCUS his wife's draught. Besides his Baskets from the British Mart; He drown'd a thousand bolls of Grecian art, Such as that royall Merchant tippled in, Whose money did rich plated Olynth win. Where's such another in the world? that dare, To save himself, thus cast away his ware? Some doe not get a fortune for life's sake: But, blind, live that they may a fortune make. Most of his wealth is sunk, nor helps the loss: They lastly are inforc't, all goes so cross, To hew the Mast down: in their sad distress, This cure's apply'd, and the tall Ship made less. Goe now, and to the wind commit thy breath; Trust planks, four fingers breadth, remov'd from death, Or seav'n, in case it be the thickest Pine; Yet, with thy netted Knapsack, Bisket, Wine, And bursten-bellied Flagons, be so wise To carry Hatchets, lest a storm arise.
But when the Sea was smooth, the heav'ns grown kind, My friend's fate conquering the Sea and Wind; When the three Sisters, pleas'd, fair work begun, And by their bounteous hands white thread was spun: The wind for these poor wretches blowing fair, And little stronger then a gentle aire, With miserable shifts their course they sped; For, Gowns and Cloaks, in stead of Sails, were spread; Only the fore-sprit Sail intire remain'd. The South-wind laid, now hope of life they gain'd, With the Sun's presence: Our white Land-mark then, The Alban Mountain, came within their ken, The seat where young IULUS pleas'd his mind, Lavinium to his Step-mother assign'd: By th' o're-joy'd Trojans, from the white Sow nam'd, That for her thirty ne're-seen paps was fam'd. At last, they come within our Sea inclos'd, Our Tyrrhene Pharos; a work so compos'd, That, Italy forsook, the forked Key Runs to imbrace the middle of the Sea. Nature ne're made a Port of equall mark: Through it the Master steers his broken Bark,
And brings her to an anchor, in the Lee, Where Baian Lighters lye, from tempests free; Their voyage the shav'd Saylors there relate, And with much pleasure of past dangers prate. Goe then boyes, speak, and think all good successe: With flow'rs the soft hearths, and grass-altars dress; Cast bran upon your knives. Ile come anon: And these our greater Ceremonies done, Wee'l home again; where lesser wreaths of flow'rs Shall crown some lesser Images of ours, Of frail, but shining wax; there I will turn My JOVE'S fierce wrath away: there incense burn To my paternall Lars; and flourish there As many colours as the Violets weare. All's neat and fine, green boughs our gates adorn, And hallow'd Tapers, lighted with the morn. Nor think, CORVINUS, this zeal counterfet; CATULLUS, for whose safe return I set So many Altars up, hath three heirs male. Who, on a friend so hopeless, would entaile A sick Hen? 'tis too costly; none I know That on a Father will a Quail bestow.
All court the Childless: if they PACCIUS find, Or rich GALLITA, fev'rishly inclin'd, They post up pray'rs, and to the Gods vow feasts; There are that promise Hecatombes of Beasts, Elephants, that for State, not sale we feed; Not Italy, but Sun-burnt climates breed Those Monsters, kept in our Rutilian Grove, Or TURNUS his Mead-royall, CAESAR'S drove: They scorn to be a private-man's; as they That serv'd our Gen'ralls, and did once obey The Tyrian HANNIBAL: and Epire's King; Whose Ancestors into the field did bring Part of his force, and met the Roman pow'r, Each bearing on his back a moving Tow'r. Which could PACCUVIUS or NOVIUS, buy, These Ivory-Portents, should Victims die, GALLITA'S Lars and Deity to please: Worthy this Goddess, and such Knaves as these. Whereof the last nam'd, did the Law allow, Would some of his great train of Servants vow, The goodliest bodies his command imployes; Veil-ore the foreheads of young Girles and Boyes:
Or if he had a Daughter of his own, An IPHIGINIA, marriageable grown, She should to th' Altar; though he hop'd to find No Tragick slight, to change her for a hind. My Roman puts down the Greek plot; who dare A thousand Ships to a last Will compare? For if Death's neer-aym'd dart the sick-man miss, Hee'l alter's Will, caught in a net with this, This pretious merit, and sole heir create PACUVIUS; who, his Rivals foil'd, takes state. See how this Rascall growes a man of note, By cutting of his IPHIGINIA'S throat! But let PACUVIUS live to NESTOR'S age, Get more by craft, then NERO by his rage: Pile gold up mountain high; and when 'tis done, Nor love, nor be belov'd of any one.
The Comment UPON THE TWELFTH SATYR. VErse 1. Corvinus,] The Friend to whom Juvenal writes this Satyr. Verse 4. Juno.] In the Capitol was the Temple of Jupi∣ter, to which joyned the Temples of Juno and Minerva under one roof, cast into the figure of an Eagle, that with his body covered Jupiter's Temple, and spread his wings over Juno's and Minerva's. To these, be∣ing the principal of the selected Gods, milk-white beasts were sacrificed; Bulls to Jupiter, Cowes to Juno and Minerva. Juvenal, bounding his devotions within the limits of his fortunes, goes not to the Capitol to pay his vow (for his friend's safe arrival) to these three Tarpeian Deities; but building Altars of green Turfe, offers milk-white Sacrifices to them all; to Juno an Ewe-lamb, another to Minerva, to Jupiter a young Bullock, wishing him a Bull; as fat as Madam Hispulla, that fell in love with the Tragedian. Sat. 6. Verse 6. The Mauritanian Gorgon▪] The Gorgons; Medusa, Sthe∣nio, and Euryale, were Daughters to Phorcus and Cete. They had the Isles of the Dorcades in the Aethiopick Ocean, right against the Orchard of the Hesperides. They were Martiall Ladies (neer the Mountain Atlas upon the borders of Mauritania) conquered by Minerva, or Perseus, that slew their Queen Medusa. Xenoph. Herod. Minerva is fabled to bear in her Shield Medusa's head, that turns men into stones, because
wisdome petrefies the hearts of men, making them constant and immove∣able as Rocks. Verse 10. Besprinkling Wine.] The grand Sacrifices are imitated by Juvenal both in colour and ceremony, for he sprinkles wine between the Bullocks horns: Queen Dido did no more, when she offered a white Cow to Juno, as you may see Aeneid. lib. 4. Verse 17. Clitumnus,] A River that divides Vmbria and Tuscany. Phi∣largyr. whose water gives such virtue to the rich pastures adjoyning, that all the Cows grazing there have white Calves. Therefore the Capito∣line Sacrifices came from thence. Plin. lib. 2. Propert. Verse 18. Arch-flamen.] The ordinary Minister that struck down the beast sacrificed, was called Popa: but Juvenal, upon his Thanksgiving day, would have had an Officer of better quality, some Flamen or Arch-flamen, in case his fortunes had been no less then his friend-ship to Ca∣tullus, the Merchant. Verse 33. Isis.] The Temple of Isis notorious, first for superstition, as ap∣pears by the pennance which the great Lady is ready to perform, if it be white Io's pleasure. Sat. 6. secondly for lust. Sat. 9. is famous in the third place, for pictures of wracks at Sea, vowed and dedicated to the Goddess Isis. One would have thought the Romans had choise of Gods enow of their own: yet, it seems, they thought not so; when in their dangers at Sea, they made so many vowes to the Aegyptian Goddess Isis, as imploy∣ed a whole company of Picture-drawers only to draw votive Tables, that were to be hung up in her Temple. Verse 48. Baetick aire.] In Baetick Spain (now Granada) is a pasture where the aire and water give a naturall tincture to the sheeps Fleeces, dying the wool upon their backs of a colour between black and red.
Verse 50. Parthenius,] A Grecian, a great Master in the art of graving. Verse 52. Pholus,] A notorius drunken Centaur. Theocr. When he treated Hercules, he brought out a tunne of wine, which he had buri∣ed in the sand; and being pierced, it cast a perfume upon the aire, which his neighbour-Centaurs presently sented; and would have stormed the place, if it had not been defended by Hercules, that killed many of the Assailants, and made the rest take their heels. Diod. lib. 5. Verse 52. Fuscus his Wife.] She might have been Pholus his Wife, if she could drink between 2 and 3 gallons at once. Verse 53. Baskets.] All the merchandize Great Britain afforded in my Author's time; and so great a rarity the Romans thought them, that they made our British word Latin, calling them Bascaudae; nay, they were angry that any but themselves should be said to have found out the Art of making Baskets. Mart. lib. 14. Barbara de Pictis veni Bascauda Britannis, Sed me jam mavult dicere Roma suam. From British Picts the barb'rous Baskets came, But now Rome would gladly th' invention claim. Verse 55. Royall Merchant.] Philip, King of Macedon, that in the above mentioned words of Horace, —beat down City gates, And foil'd with gifts his rival-States. The particular, here instanced by my Author, is the bargain which King Philip made with Lasthenes and Eurycrates for the rendition of Olynth; a City of Thrace neer to Athos, then under the Command of the Atheni∣ans; not to be taken either by a storm or siege, but only by that which K. Philip said would enter the strongest Fortification, an Asse loaded with
Gold. At this time his Gold was laid out upon Merchandize, for it brought him in thrice as much in Plate. Verse 73. Three Sisters.] Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos; of which in Sat. 3. Juvenal here calls them Spinsters, that, according to the belief of the Romans, in times of safty and prosperity spun white thread; and black, in times of adversity and mortall danger. Verse 82. Alban Mountain,] Where Ascanius built the City of Al∣ba Longa, leaving the Town of Lavinium to his Step-mother Lavinia. That Alba was so named from the white Sow with thirty Pigs sucking her, vid. Sat. 4. and the Prophecy in Virgil. Aeneid. Verse 88. Tyrrhene Pharos,] The Port of Hostia (anciently Ostia) where Tiber disburdens it self into the Tyrrhene Sea. Claudius Caesar, in imitation of Pharos in Aegypt, built the stony Armes of this Port: and for eleven years together kept 30000 men at work upon it. Sueton. It was de∣signed by Augustus, and repaired by Trajan. See Pliny's Panegyrick. Verse 94. Baian Lighters,] Boats that came from Baiae, described in the beginning of Sat. 3. Verse 95. Shav'd Saylors.] It was the custome for Roman Slaves, when they received their freedom, to shave their heads before they put on their Hats: those which, at the triall for their lives, were acquitted did the like, shewing themselves to Jupiter with their crowns shav'd: and it is pro∣bable, that Saylors, after they had escaped a shipwrack, used the same ceremony. Verse 97. Speak and think.] The Romans thought that any man's good Omen consisted in other mens words and wishes: Omen being only the conjunction of Os and Mens, tongue and heart. Of the solemn form of Sacrifices used for good Omens sake. See Brisson.
Verse 104. My Jove.] Juvenal's domestick Jove, moulded in wax, as his Lars were: to both which he sacrificed, abroad and at home: for though the Lar was the houshold God, yet King Servius Tullius appoin∣ted him publick; as well as private, worship; and good reason he had, if the Lar begot him; as his Subjects believed, by the apparition which his Mother, sitting by the fire side, saw upon the hearth. Plut. Verse 108. Hallowed tapers.] As well in domestick as publick Thanks∣givings, the Sacrificers dores were stuck full of waxen tapers, bayes, and flowers. Verse 115. Paccius.] A rich childless man, presented by all the Ro∣man Heredipetae or Legacy-mongers. He is named by Tacitus, that calls him African. lib. 20. Verse 116. Gallita] Cruspilina; made great by wealth and barrennesse, which; both in good and bad times, are alike powerfull. Tacit. lib. 17. Verse 118. Promise Hecatombes.] For the recovery of sick men (pro∣vided they were rich and childless) flattering knaves, that hoped for great Legacies, would not stick to vow to the Gods Hecatombes of Elephants, if they were to be had; which was impossible: for they were beasts ne∣ver seen by the Romans, till invaded by those dreadfull enemies, Pyr∣rhus King of the Molossian Epirots (whose Souldiers rid upon their backs in wooden Towers) and Hannibal, Generall of the Carthagi∣nians; here called Tyrian, because Queen Dido, the Foundress of Car∣thage came from Tyre. Nor in my Author's time were any Elephants fed or kept in Italy, but only in the Meadows about Lavinium, conque∣red from Turnus by Aeneas: both the Meads and Elephants now belong∣ing to his successors, the Caesars. Verse 129. Novius and Pacuvius,] Visiters of the sick Gallita, or
Paccius; both which they plyed with warm gifts, in hope of large returns when their Wills were proved. Verse 138. Iphiginia.] In the beginning of Sat. 1. tit. Orestes you have the story of Iphiginia brought to be sacrificed, for releasing the Trojan Fleet that lay wind-bound at Aulis; and how Diana left a Hinde in her place, & carried the Princess into Taurica. Now, the bitter Satyrist sayes, that if his fellow-Citizen Pacuvius should sacrifice an only Daughter for the re∣covery of Gallita, he should not think the act of Agamemnon to be so commendable: for alas! what is the freedom of 1000 Ships, to the glori∣ous expectation of a Legacie? Verse 143. Death.] Libitina (so Juvenal) was the Goddess, in whose Temple all things appertaining to funerall pomp and ceremony were bought and sold. Some think, the Romans by Libitina meant Proserpine, Queen of the Infernal Regions. Others think her to be Venus, and give this reason why all things belonging to Funeralls should be kept in her Temple; thereby to admonish us of humane frailty; how neer our End is to our Beginning, since the same Goddess is Patroness both of life and death. Plut. Verse 150. Nero by his rage,] That spared neither private persons, nor publick, nor the very Temples: and gave no office without this charge: Thou knowest what I want, let us make it our business, that no body may have any thing. Sueton.
The thirteenth Designe. FJe 1 Calvin; wilt thou shame thy self? a man Of years, and sense, take on for a Trepan? Because a seeming Friend * forswears a Trust? The Gods, whose Altars he prophanes, are just; And at this instant pour upon him all The plagues, that on his head he wisht might fall. Were but his breast transparent, thou wouldst see His face is counterfeit, as false as he: He smiles when thousand Furies tear his heart, And ev'n divinest objects make him start. The God that shewes like 2 Jupiter to us, To 3 him looks like three-headed 3 Cerberus. He hears his sentence from the 4 Flamen's breath, Takes him to be a 5 Judge of life and death: He thinks thy hand is heav'd at whips and racks, And that 6 rods circle-in the Popa's 7 axe. If thou should'st study Ages for a curse, Thou couldst not render his condition worse. Yet lest Knaves should presume, upon his score, To slight the Gods, which honest men adore: He shall run on in mischief, till he meet Deserved death, and thou shalt live to see't.
Figura Decima Tertia. NOnnè pudet Te ridiculi, Calvine 1, doloris? Nullus hebescenti seris venit usus ab annis? Vs{que}adeò mirum est, quod non Tibi reddat * Amicus Depositum? justi, quorum violaverit aras Perjurus, Dii sunt; ad dignas numina poenas Deposcunt; sentit toties quas vovit Erinnys: Ficta fenestrato simulatam pectore culpam Frons malè celaret; facies non consona menti: Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum, Tu ridere putas; trepidat simulacra Deorum Conscius inspiciens; nostérque est Jupiter 2 illi Cerberus 3, & triplici rictu oblatrare videtur; Terribilis dicat quod jus in Flamine 4 Praetor 5 Credit, & esse aram vitaeque necísque Tribunal; Numina laesa putat flagro fidibúsque litari, Lictorem virgisque 6 Popae circundare ferrum: Poena illum vehemens & multò saevior urget, Quàm si Te diris juvet auxiliaribus Orcus: Sed nè successu crescat fiducia fraudis; Justitiam ut discant moniti, & non temnere Divos; Perfidus antiquis addit perjuria culpis, Extinctum ut videas totâ cum prole, superstes.
The Manners of Men. THE THIRTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. Old Calvin, of a Trust beguil'd, Is chid for vexing like a Child; When by experience he hath known How base the cheating World is grown. But this firme hope his heart may cheere; Though such Rogues pass unsentenc'd here, Yet conscience will their Hangman prove: Nor can they scape the Judge above. THe Crime committed presently torments The Author; 'tis the first of punishments, That no offender can himself acquit, Though the brib'd Praetor his just doom remit.
What sense, CALVINUS, thinkst thou each man hath Of this Trepan? thy Trustee's broken faith? Nor is thy stock so poor, that such a losse Should sink thee: nor is't an unheard-of crosse; The cheat is common, daily brought about, A Lot from fortune's middle heap drawn out. We must not let our grief be too profound: Man's Pain should be no greater then his Wound. Thou bear'st not a slight hurt; a scratch, a turn Off fortune's wheel: thy bowels rage and burn, That a pretended friend is so unjust, Not to restore to thee a sacred Trust: Is this news to one born, when CAPITO Was Consull, above threescore years ago? Gain'st thou by long experience nothing then? 'Tis true; that Science makes the happy men, Which conquers Fortune with celestiall Books: But yet, we call him happy too, that brooks Life's discommodities: and never shakes The yoke, but life for his directress takes. What day so holy, but some Thief we find; Perfidiousness, deceit of every kind?
Vice being grown a beneficiall Trade, By poyson, and the sword, great fortunes made. For, good men are grown scarce, the number small; If't be summ'd up, you will not finde in all So many true deservers of that stile, As there are gates to Thebes, or mouths to Nile. 'Tis the ninth Age, worse then the iron Times; Nature no Mettle hath, to name our crimes. Yet, O the faith of Men and Gods, we cry, In furious passion; with a voice as high As theirs the Vocall Sportula do raise, When they FAESIDIUS in his pleading praise. Tell me Old-man, that should'st Child's bubbles wear: Know'st not how many VENUSES appear In others gold? nor how they laugh at thee, That, simply, look'st no man should perjur'd be: But would'st the world to a belief compell, That Gods in Temples and red Altars dwell? Thus liv'd th' earth's honest Natives, e're his Crown Old SATURN, flying for his life, laid down, And took his Country-Sithe up: JUNO then A little Girle, JOVE hid in IDA'S den:
No heavenly feasts above the clouds, no Boy To wait Cup-bearer, was fetcht up from Troy: Nor wine fair HEBE fill'd; but VULCAN pour'd Nectar himself, and his own fingers scour'd, Fould in his Lip'rene Work-house: Then alone Din'd Gods, their crowd was not so num'rous grown. The Stars had not took in so great a freight, But press'd poor ATLAS with a gentler weight. Th' infernall regions no one's Lot had been, No grim-fac'd DIS, and his Sicilian Queen: No Wheel, Stone, Furies, no black Vultur's pain; But Hell was free, and every Ghost did raign. Fraud rare, and capitall the crime was then, If youths would not rise up to aged men; A boy to any beard: although the Lad More strawberries, more heaps of acrons had. Four years precedence was so much esteem'd: Part of old age the chin's first down then seem'd. Now, if a man his friend's Depositum Deny not, but returns the bag and summe, With all the rust; the faith prodigious looks: Worthy to be in Tuscan Soothsay'rs books
Recorded; ev'n the place where it was found Ought to be purg'd too, with a Lamb that's crown'd. To me an honest man more Monster seems Then nature shakes at, when a woman teems A Child with two heads; then Mules foaling found: Or wond'rous Fishes plow'd out of the ground. It mazes me as much, as if a showre Of stones the clouds upon my head should poure; Or as a swarm of Bees, o'th' Temple-top, Hung like a bunch of grapes, as if'twould drop; Or as a River, with a violent stream, Flow'd headlong to the Sea, that ran pure cream. Thou cry'st out, that of ten Sestertia hee, By sacrilegious fraud, hath cheated thee. What if another hath two hundred lost By such a trust? if it a third hath cost As many as a spatious Chest could hold? So easily men with the Gods make bold, When they alone behold the sin we act: No mortall being witness to the fact. Mark's loud denyall; how unmov'd he bears His juggling count'nance: by SOL'S beams he swears:
JOVE'S Thunder; MARS his Spear; APOLLO'S Darts; Her Shafts and Quiver that shoots Hindes and Harts, His Virgin-Sister: by, the Father to AEGAEUS, NEPTUNE'S Trident: adds the bow Of HERCULES, MINERVA'S Pike puts in: With all the Armes stor'd in Heav'ns Magazin: Wishes his Son's head boil'd may be his meat, Which he with Pharian Vineger would eat. There are that hold, all things by chance were made, And that the world's by no first mover sway'd, Nature returning us the day and year; And so touch any altars, void of fear. To suffer for his crimes, another fears; Thinks there are Gods, and yet himself forswears. Forecasting thus, let ISIS punish me; Upon my body, what she please, decree, Beat with her timbrells my eyes out; so I, Though blind, may keep the money I deny. What is the ptisick, or the rotten cough O'th' lungs, or half a thigh, to gold enough? So that ARCHIGENES be kept away And Hellebor, brought from Anticyra,
Wherewith he gives his gouty Patients ease: Poor nimble LADAS the rich gout would please. For, what's the glory crowns a Foot-man's browes, Those hunger-sterv'd Pisaean Olive-boughs? But say the wrath of Heav'n be great, 'tis slow; And if the Gods destroy each guilty foe, When will they come to me? Besides, I may, As some doe, get a pardon if I pray: Men's fates are divers, though their crimes be one; A Cross exalts that Villain, this a Throne. Thus their souls, trembling at foul sin, they cheer: Then, if thou bid'st them at the altar swear, They run before thee; nay pull thee along, And vex thy spirits with a rayling tongue: For, in all causes, th' impudent defence Most men believe to be just confidence. He, as 'twere in CATULLUS his fine Play, Acts in thy ear the Mimick Run-away: Louder then STENTOR thou cry'st out, poor wretch, As loud as HOMER'S MARS his voice could stretch: Hear'st JOVE? nor speak'st thou? now when words should passe Whether thou wert of Marble, or of Brass?
Else why our papers open we so fast, And on thy coals religious incense cast? The liver of a Calf why doe we cut, And Swine's white cauls upon thy altar put? For ought I see in Statues; as divine That of BATHYLLUS is, as this of thine. 'Gainst this disease, take what he can prescribe That ne're read Cynicks, nor the Stoick Tribe, Diff'ring from them but in a Cloak: nor cares How on poor roots pleas'd EPICURUS fares. Great Doctors must do desp'rate Patients good, But thee ev'n PHILIP'S Prentice may let blood. If thou on earth no crime so foul can'st find, I'm silent; beat thy breast, if th' hast a mind: Or with thy open palme afflict thy face; Thy doors may well be shut in such a case: With much more tumult and a deeper groan, Our moneys then our fun'ralls we bemoan. Here no man counterfeits, and is content His upper garment should in jeast be rent, And his eyes troubled with a humour strain'd: Lost money is bewail'd, with tears unfain'd.
But if thou see'st each Court of Justice spread With such complaints; if in Deeds, ten times read, The hand's forsworn, whose characters reveal The writer, known by his Sardonix Seal; That stone, which for a Paragon was set, And still lockt up in's Iv'ry Cabinet. Do'st thou conceive thy self so fortune-free, That common accidents should pass by thee, As Son of a white Hen, poor we the Dregs And baser Chickens of unlucky Egges? Thy little loss can move but little spleen, If by thy eyes th' earth's greater crimes be seen. Compare hir'd Thieves; fires treacherously rais'd By sulphur, which have at our gates first blaz'd; Compare those that from Temples steal old bouls, Whose very rust strikes rev'rence in our souls. Gifts, dedicated by some forrein State, Or Crowns, our ancient Kings did consecrate. Have you not these? you have a lesser Knave, Who sacrilegiously the gold will shave From HERCULES his thigh, or NEPTUNE'S chin, Or that thin Plate, which CASTOR'S clothed in:
And that no scruple in his conscience felt, When he the Thunderer himself did melt. Compare them that buy poysons, or compound; And them, that in the Sea are to be drown'd In an Oxe-hide: sow'd up with a poor Ape, Whose fortune is, though guiltless, not to scape. Yet these are peccadillo's, if confer'd With those enormous wickednesses, heard By GALLICUS, the Praetor of the Town. From the Sun's rising to his going down: If thou would'st know the nature of Mankind, In that one house thou maist their Manners finde: Spend there some time, and, when thou home repair'st, Call thy self miserable if thou dar'st. In th' Alpes, who think swoln throats strange? or a teat In Meroe, then the Nurse-child more great? Who wonders at the Germans watchet eyes, And yellow locks, that like Rams horns do rise, Which unguents make not from the Curle to fall? The reasons's plain, 'tis nature in them all. When from their cloud the Cranes do give alarms, The valiant Pygmey stands unto his arms:
But, too weak for the Thracian bird, he's snapt: And through the aire in crooked tallons rapt. Thould'st die with laughing, should'st thou see this here; But though such battails are fought daily there, It is ridiculous in no ones eye: Where the whole Regiment's but one foot high. But, shall thy perjur'd Cheat unpunish't scape? No sure, his soul's in chains; we could not shape A torment greater; what would fury more? But still thou loosest; he will ne're restore The summe in's hands, deposited by thee. O 'twould be envi'd comfort, might'st thou see Him dying for't, and dropping his last blood: Revenge then life it self's a greater good. Thus fools at no cause, or at toyes, take fire; The least occasion serves to blow up ire. CHRISIPPUS his opinion was not such, Mild natur'd THALES would not say thus much. The good old man, that did a neighbour live To sweet HYMETTUS; would not, fetter'd, give Part of that hemlock in his cup infus'd, Ev'n to the Rogue by whom he was accus'd.
Happy Philosophy! that by degrees Kills vices first, then souls from error frees. For, to rejoyce when those we hate doe smart, Argues a feeble and a narrow heart; Which instantly you may from hence collect, That women most of all revenge affect. But think'st thou he escapes, whose conscience makes Whips that, unheard, his guilty soul still shakes? The Judge CAEDITIUS cannot here invent, Nor RHADAMANTH in Hell, a punishment To equall his, that's day and night opprest, Bearing about his Witness in his breast. A Spartan, by the Pythia, answered was, That he should, not one day, unpunisht pass; Because to break a trust he did but doubt, And if his legall oath might bear him out: What the God thought on't, he inquiry made, And if APOLLO would the fact perswade. Fear then, not conscience, made him render it. Yet, all the Prophesie did well befit Th' approachless Oracle: he found it true, Extinguish'd with his issue; with the crue
Of his whole family, and num'rous kin: So was he plagu'd but for a will to sin. Th' Intent of fraud is taken for the Act; What is it then if one commit the fact? Perpetuall anguish; at his meat no pause, Which sticks, and swells betwixt his sickly jawes. The wretch spits out the cordiall of the Vine, Dislikes the pretious age of Alban wine. Bring better: in thick pleits his browes are shrunk, As if he Falern vineger had drunk. If night his cares with some short slumber ease, And rest, in's tumbled bed, his body seize; The Temple, th' Altar, th' injur'd God, (and what His soul in's agony most trembles at) He sees thy sacred Shape: then man more tall, That frights his sleep, and makes him utter all. This is the man that, when it lightens, quakes; And when it thunders, heav'ns first murmur shakes His soul out: not the wind's, not fortune's ire, Falls down, but angry and revenging fire. That storm past, greater is the next believ'd: As if he were by the cleer sky repriev'd.
Then, with a sleep-less Fever, if he get A Plurisie; he thinks the Gods have set (By whom he cannot hope to be forgiv'n) These plagues upon him: stones and darts of heav'n. To promise to his Lars the bleating flock, He dares not, nor the comb of a poor Cock. For, to sick guilty men, what hope survives? No victim but more worthy then their lives. Nature, in evill men, is wav'ring still, And tim'rous; only bold in doing ill: But when 'tis once committed, to their sight Then come the lively forms of wrong and right. Yet, to those crimes their consci'nces cashiere Nature relapses, fix'd and constant there. Who bounds his vices? when did banisht grace Return, if once but wip'd out of the face? Who e're saw man contented to have done One villany? the perjur'd Knave will run Upon this quest, till he at last be took, And sent to the black Dungeon and the Hook; Or to th' Aegaean Rocks, that entertain Great Exiles; thou shalt glory in his pain,
And odious name: and once, with comfort, find No God is deaf, nor, like TIRESIAS, blind. The Comment UPON THE THIRTEENTH SATYR. VErse 2. The first of punishments] Is the Malefactors Consci∣ence. Magna est vis, &c. Great is the power of Conscience on both parts; that neither the innocent can fear, and yet guil∣ty men ever have their punishments before their eyes. Cic. Verse 4. Praetor.] The Praetors, in their institution, were Deputies to the Consuls, when the Wars impeded their administration of Justice to the people. At first there was but one sworn Praetor: afterwards, Cau∣ses multiplying, the Praetor Peregrinus, or Country Praetor, was added, and the number at last encreased to 18. The two first Praetors (Presidents of the Centumvirall Ballot. Plin.) were they that ought to have done justice to Calvinus: for to their Jurisdiction it belonged, to give judgement in Cases of equity, and to decree restitution for money or goods unlaw∣fully detain'd. Rosin. Ant. Rom. lib. 7. cap. 11. Verse 6. Thy Trustee's broken faith.] Perditissimi hominis est, &c. It is the part of a Villain, at once both to break friendship, and to deceive him that had not been damnified, if he had not trusted. idem. Verse 11. We must not let our grief.] Neve tam graviter, &c. We must not take those misfortunes so grievously which by no councell we can a∣void:
and by calling to mind the like fortunes of others, we may know that ours is no new accident. Cic. Verse 16. A sacred Trust.] Aristotle in his Problems queries, Why there is more injustice in denying a Trust, then a Debt? He answeres, Either be∣cause it is base to wrong a Friend: or because a greater injury is committed; For, besides the Loss, Faith is violated. Verse 17. Capito.] L. Fonteius Capito, when Nero Caesar reigned, was Collegue in the Consulship with C. Vipsanius. From hence may be computed the time when Juvenal lived and writ this Satyr, viz. in the se∣cond year of the Emperor Hadrian. in the year of Rome 872. See Lips. lib. 4. Epist. Quaest. Epistola 20. Verse 20. That Science.] Philosophy; especially in the Stoicks books, that bid every man look for all manner of evils and adversities. If they happen, things foreseen will be suffered with more ease: if they happen not, that which is beyond Hope should be accounted Benefit. Read Se∣neca and Epictetus. Magnitudinis animi proprium est, &c. It is proper to great spirits, to fear nothing, to despise all humane things, and to think no∣thing that can happen to man insufferable. Cic. Verse 32. Thebes,] That had as many Gates as Nile had Mouths, viz. 7. But then you must understand Thebes in Boeotia; for Thebes in Aegypt had a hundred. Sat. 15. And Thebes lyes with her hundred Gates inter'd. The seaven Mouthes of Nile are named in the Comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 33. Ninth Age.] Juvenal reckons one Age more then the Tuscan Soothsayers: yet they were thought great men, as appears in this Satyr.
—the Faith prodigious looks, Worthy to be in Tuscan Soothsay'rs books Recorded— The Question was, What the shrill and mournfull sound of the trumpet signified, which in a clear skie and hot day the Romans heard in the aire? Resolved by the Tuscan Soothsayers, That it portended the End of that Age of the World, and the Beginning of another Age. For, the World was to have eight Ages, different in lives and manners: to every one of these God had limited a certain time, within the compass of the great year. Now, at the going out of one Age, and the coming in of an∣other, the Earth or Heaven produces some Prodigie whereby the Ma∣sters in this knowledge presently discern, that men will alter in their lives and manners; and accordingly be more or less favoured by the Gods, then those of the former Age. Plut. in Syll. But their eight Ages might be named by severall Metalls: Gold, Silver, Electrum, Brass, Copper, Tin, Lead, and Iron: therefore Juvenal adds a ninth, —worse then the Iron times; Nature no mettle hath to name our crimes. Verse 37. Vocall Sportula.] The Men (or rather Voices) that feed up∣on the meat-Sportula of Faesidius the Lawyer, which obliges them to cry him up when he pleads his Clients Causes. Verse 39. Childs bubbles.] The bullaes or bubbles, worn by the Chil∣dren of the Romans, vid Sat. 5. Verse 46. Old Saturn,] Called , Time, and still painted with a Sythe. In his reign the Poets (supposing it to be the beginning of Time) fancied the Golden Age, or the purest World, men being then ignorant of vices; which ignorance of vice (as Justin saith of the Thracians) brought
the Barbarians to more perfection, then ever the Philosophers attained by the Knowledge of Virtue. See the beginning of the Com. upon Sat. 6. Verse 48. Ida,] A Mountain, neer Troy, famous for the conceal∣ment of Jupiter from, his devouring Father, Saturn: as also for Paris; there he was bred amongst the Shepheards, and gave the golden Ball from Juno and Pallas to Venus: lastly for Ganymede, Son to the King of Troy, taken up from thence by the Eagle (as in the Comment upon Sat. 5.) and carried to Heaven, to be Cupbearer to Jupiter in place of Hebe, the Goddess of Youth; afterwards married to Hercules. This remove of Hebe incensed her Mother Juno against the Trojans, almost as much as the judgement of Paris in contempt of her beauty. Verse 53. Liparene Workhouse,] One of the 7. Liparene Islands; cal∣led Ephesian by the Greeks, Vulcanian by the Latins. See the beginning of the Comment upon Sat. 1. Verse 56. Atlas.] Juvenal thinks it great injustice to poor Atlas, that so many new Gods should come into Heaven to oppress him with their weight: one of the number being Hercules, that once eased him of his load. Verse 65. Four years precedence.] Apud antiquissimos Romanorum, &c. Among the most ancient Romans, neither to the greatness of birth or wealth was more honour done; then by the younger to the elder persons, which they reverenced, and worshipped, almost as much as their Parents, and the Gell. lib. 2. cap. 15. Verse 67. Depositum,] Any thing intrusted by a man to the faith of another man. Verse 70. Tuscan Soothsayers.] The Romans had the art of Divina∣tion from the Tuscan Soothsayers, that presaged of future events by Pro∣digies:
which they still put upon record. See the former part of the Com∣ment upon this Satyr. Tit. Ninth Age. Verse 73. A Lamb that's crown'd) With flowers, as all beasts sacri∣ficed were. Verse 96. Aegaeus,] Father to Theseus the Founder of Athens. Verse 99. Wishes his Son's head boil'd.] The Rogue, when he denies a sum of money deposited in his hands; after he hath sworn by all the Artillery of Heaven, will not stick to make Imprecations against himself; and wish, that he may fare like Thyestes, that eat the head of his own Son. See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 8. Only this perjur'd Villain would have worse sawce then Thyestes had: for, his story mentions no vinegar made in the Isle of Pharos, which is the sharpest in the world. Verse 101. All things by chance were made] An opinion detested by Seneca, that sayes, Nature, Fate, Fortune, Chance, are all names of one and the same God. Verse 102. No first Mover.] A Villain would gladly make himself believe there is no God, if he could: but, as my Lord of St. Albons obser∣ved, though the fool in his heart hath said there is no God, yet he hath not thought so. A vicen affirms; He that sees not God in nature, wants not only reason, but even sense. Verse 104. Touch any Altars.] When a man would put a Trustee to his oath, he brought him into the Temple, and there made him swear, laying his hand upon the Altar. A great example of this custome, with the punishment of the perjured Rogue, we have in the history of Herodotus One Archetimus, in his journey, deposited a great summe of gold in the hands of his Host Cydias. When he returned, he asked for his gold: Cydias absolutely denyed it. After a long contest, the Plaintiff referred
himself to the Oath of the Defendant. Cydias scrupling at Perjury, resol∣ved to swear by Equivocation; and for that purpose put all the Gold into a great Cane. Upon his day, he appears in a sickly posture, leaning up∣on this Cane, walks with it to the Temple, and when he kneeled down at the Altar, gave it Archetimus, to hold till the ceremony should be ended. Then, lifting up his hands, he confessed upon Oath, that he had received the Gold wherewith he was charged, but withall he swore, that he had a∣gain delivered the same individuall Gold to the Defendant. Archetimus hearing this, in a fury threw upon the Marble floor the Cane, which with the outward violence, and weight within it broke to pieces, and out came all the Gold. Thus providence righted him: and Cydias, by report, dyed miserably. Verse 109. Timbrels.] Gold, Silver, or Brass Timbrells, used in their ceremonies by the Priests of Isis, in whose Temple was the Image of Har∣pocrates with his finger cross his lips, and that Goddess, together with this God of Silence, were believed to send diseases into humane bodies. Verse 113. Archigenes,] The greatest Physitian of Rome, the Roman Mayhern. Verse 114. Anticira.] An Island, neer to the Maliack Gulfe and the Mountain Oeta, mentioned as part of Thessaly by Strab. lib. 9. In this Isle grows the black Hellebore, which cures an old Gout. Plin. Verse 116. Nimble Ladas,] Foot-man to Alexander the great. He ran so nimbly, that the print of his foot was not seen upon the gravell. His Statue was set up at Argos, in the Temple of Venus, after he had won the foot-race in the Olympick Games. These sacred Games were instituted by Hercules in honour of his Father Jove, neer to the City of Olympia in Elis. These consisted of five Exercises; casting the Javelin, flinging the
Iron-ball, leaping, wrestling, and running foot-matches and Chariot-races: they began every five years, and ended in five dayes. The Con∣queror was crowned with an Olive-wreath, got in a Grove of Olives neer the City of Pisa in Elis; and therefore by Juvenal called Pisaean Olive boughs: and such honour was done him, that his Chariot came not in by the City gates, but the walls were pulled down, for him to enter at the breach. From these Games the Grecians had their Aera, or account of years, beginning with the first Olympiad, in the year of the Julian Period 3938. Verse 119. Say the wrath of Heaven be great, 'tis slow.] Yet as slow as it is, sure it will be. Divine wrath by slow degrees proceeds to vengeance; but the long sufferance is payed for by the greatness of the punishment. Val. Max. Caesar sayes gravely, The Gods are accustomed, that men may be more afflicted with the change of their condition, sometimes to give wicked men prosperous success, and longer impunity. Verse 131. Catullus,] The Author of the Comedy called Phasma, or the Phantasm, mentioned Sat. 8. wherein, it should seem, there was a spi∣rit or eccho, that answered and mockt some poor man, till it made him call as loud as Calvin cryed out upon his perjured Trustee, that is, saies my Author, as loud as Homer's Stentor, that was able to drown the cryes of fifty shouting together: or indeed as loud as Homer's Mars, that when he was wounded by Pallas, or Diomedes, roared louder then the cryes of an Army, when ten thousand men joyn battail. Hom. Iliad. lib. 5. Verse 142. Bathyllus,] A rare Lutenist, and an excellent Mimick, to whom a Statue was set up at Samos in Juno's Temple, by the Tyrant Polycrates. Verse 143. He,] That is Juvenal himself.
Verse 145. A Cloak.] The Cynicks wore two upper garments: the Stoicks only a thin Cloak. This is all the difference Juvenal puts be∣tween them; for their Doctrine was the same. They both contemned riches, and agreed in this Maxim, That Virtue needs no addition, but of it self is sufficient to make life happy. Verse 146. Epicurus,] Father of the Epicurean Sect. He placed the Summum bonum, or felicity of Man, in Pleasure: not as Aristippus did, in the pleasure of the Body, but of the Mind; and in the absence of Pain. He condemned the Dialecticks, because he affirmed, that Philosophy might be taught in plain and easie words. He denyed the providence of the Gods in humane affaires. So much is ascribed to him by Lucretius, that he confidently avouches, Epicurus obscured the light of all the other Phi∣losophers, no less then all other heavenly bodies are darkned by the Sun. And though (from his opinion, that felicity consists in pleasure) all Voluptuaries, by a common mistake, are called Epicureans: yet we have, besides this place of Juvenal, good authority, that Epicurus was a most temperate man: contenting himself with a little Garden, and feeding upon Herbs; not to provoke hunger, but to satisfie it. Senec. Verse 148. Philip,] A Country Chirurgion, yet his Apprentice had skill enough to bleed Calvin: therefore Juvenal, as somewhat a better Artist, undertakes his cure. Verse 152. Thy dores may well be shut] It was the Roman custome, and is ours at Funerals and in the time of mouring, to shut up the dores, and darken the Rooms. Which the Satyrist wishes men would doe, that have lost their money; because they look upon it as a sadder calamity then the loss of friends or neerest relations: therefore, the grief being greater, why should the signes of grief be less?
Verse 162. Sardonix Seal.] A coat of Armes cut in a Sardonix; which pretious stone being laid up in a Lord's Cabinet, whereof he himself kept the key; there could be little probability that the impression should be counterfeited. Verse 167. A white Hen.] Albae Gallinae filius, Son of a white Hen, was a Proverb with the Romans: amounting to as much, in point of good luck, as our English Proverb, Wrapt in's Mothers Smock. Verse 180. Castor.] Castor and Pollux, Sons to Jupiter by Laeda, Tyn∣darus the King of Sparta's Wife, deceiv'd by Jupiter in the shape of a Swan, by whom she had two egges, and Twins in both: in the first, Helen and Pollux: in the other, Castor and Clytemnestra. These Brothers cleered the Laconick Sea of Pyrates, and for that action were accounted Gods of the Sea, and prayed unto by Marriners in a Tempest. They went with the Argonauts to Colchos: in which voyage, Pollux killed Amycus King of the Bebrycians, that would have intercepted him. At their re∣turn to their Country, they recovered their Sister Helen, stoln by Theseus: and in his absence took a City from him. VVhen Castor died, the Greci∣ans (as true historians as Lucian) say that Pollux (who, as aforesaid, was hatcht out of the same immortall Egge with Helen) prayed to his Father Jupiter, that he might divide his immortality with his Brother: which suit being granted, they both died, and both revived. This Fable was invented from those Stars, the celestiall Twins, called Castor and Pollux by the Greeks, both rising and setting together. Castor had a Temple in Rome, where the great money-Masters kept their iron-barred Trunks, when they durst no longer trust Mars with them. Sat. 14. And what Chests, lin'd with gold, with iron bound Castor now watches,—
some of this gold Castor had for guarding it, though not very much, as may be gathered by his coat of Plate, beaten very thin. Verse 185. In an Oxe-hide.] For many hundreds of years, from the foundation of Rome, there was no Law made against a Child for killing of his Father or Mother: nor on the other part, against Fathers and Mo∣thers for murdering their Children. Both Romulus and Solon forbore to make any such Law, because they thought it impossible that such im∣piety should be committed; and likewise because the prohibition might prove a provocation to the crime. Cic. pro Sext. Rosc. The wickedness of after Ages inforced the legislative power to punish those unnatural Offen∣ders in this manner; The Murderer was sowed up in a leathern Sack with a Viper, and so cast into the Sea. Senec. lib. 5. Controv. 4. in fine. But in Juvenal's time the Viper had the company of an Ape. Sat. 8. For whom we should, not as one Parracide, One Ape, One Serpent, and One Sack provide. Afterwards the circumstances of the punishment are thus described, The Parricide, having been whipt till he was cased in blood, was sowed up in the Sack called Culeus, together with a Dog, a Cock, a Serpent and an Ape. Hern. Modest. Digest. lib. 48. ad leg. Pomp. de parric. See Coel. Rhod. lib. 11. cap. 21. Verse 189. Gallicus.] Rutilius Gallicus the Praetor Vrbanus, so favoured by Domitian Caesar, that no Judge but he had any power at Court, and all the business of the Forum and the Town was brought before him in his private house. Verse 196. Meroe.] You may add to the description of Meroe in the Comment upon Sat. 6. That the Island-Nurses had breasts bigger
then the Children that suckt them; for which you have Juvenal's autho∣rity, that lived in Aegypt. Verse 102. The valiant Pygmey.] The Pygmeys are a People in the farthest parts of India. Plin. l. 7. living in a healthfull aire, and a Coun∣try where the whole Year is Spring time. The tallest Pygmey is but three spans in height, the ordinary sort only a cubit high; from whence they derive their name of Pygmey,  signifying a cubit. Their Wives child every fifth year; and at eight are old women. Some say, they ride upon Goats with darts in their hands. In the Spring of the year, the whole Nation marches to the Sea shore, where, in three moneths time, they de∣stroy the Egges and Chickens of their enemies the Cranes, which other∣wise would oppress them with multitude. They build their houses of clay, birds dung and feathers. In Thrace they held the City of Getania, till the Cranes took it, and forced them to seek out a new Plantation. Plin. lib. 4. cap. 11. So Stephan; that sayes, the Pygmeys had their name from Pygmaeus the Son of Dorus, Nephew to Epaphus. Olaus Magnus tells us, they are found in the Northern parts of the world, and by the Germans called Serelinger, that is, a pace long. They are properly cal∣led Pumiliones or Dwarfs by Stat. lib. 1. Sylv. I should hardly have be∣lieved there could be such a People, but that my Author sets not his mark upon them, as part of an old Nurses tale; which neither he would, nor any learned or rationall man will doe, when he finds them cleered from that scruple by Aristotle lib. 8. Animal. where he calls them Troglo∣dytes, because they live in Caverns under ground, placing them in Ae∣thiopia. Upon the River Ganges in the East Indies, they have the City Catuzza. Philost. See Homer. Pompon. Gell. Their ridiculous shape you may find in Ctes.
Verse 219. Chrysippus,] The Stoick: whose Sect would not allow a man to have any passion, as not agreeable to his rationality. See the be∣ginning of the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 220. Thales,] One of the seven Sages of Greece. He was the first that taught his Country-men Geometrie. Apulei. By his constant study of nature, he is said to have found out the distinctions of time: the quarters of the wind: the diameter of the Sun to be the 720th part of his Circle: the motions of the Stars: the cause of Eclipses, and of the dread∣full sound of Thunder: the obliquity of the Zodiack: the five Circles or Zones of the Celestial Sphear, and the Suns annuall return. His pro∣fession was Merchandize. Plut. He departed this life in the first year of the 58 Olympiad, Pausanias Erxyclides being Archon, dying as he sate at the Olympick Games, quite spent with heat and thirst, which at 87 or 90 years of age, might easily overcome his weak spirits. Verse 221. The good old man.] Socrates, Neighbour to sweet Hymet∣tus, a Mountain in Attica, abounding with Bees, and excellent sweet ho∣ney. Stephan. Suid. He being falsely condemned (as in the beginning of the Comment upon Sat. 2.) was so far from desiring to be revenged of his Accusers, or Judges, that he would not suffer Lysias the Orator to plead in his defence. Cic. in Cat. Major. Socrates professed, no man could hurt him, because no man can be hurt by any but himself: and in Plato, he proves the doer of an injury to be more miserable then the sufferer. No change of fortune could make him change his contenance, which was the same, even when he drank his poyson. Verse 225. Happy Philosophy,] Which armed Chrysippus, Thales and Socrates against the injury of man, and power of fortune. Verse 233. Caeditius,] A Judge, under the Emperor Vitellius, so cruel
that he is compared to Rhadamanth, one of the Judges of Hell. Verse 237. A Spartan.] Glaucus, Son to Epicidides of Lacedaemon; He had so great a name for a just dealer, that a Milesian told him, he was desi∣rous to enjoy the benefit of his justice; and therefore having sold half his Estate, he came to deposite the money in his hands. After the Milesian's death, his Sons demanded the money deposited: Glaucus denyed the re∣ceipt, and turned them out of Town. They went to Milesium; he to Delphos, where he put this Case to the Oracle; What if a man forswear himself? The Pythia (or Apollo's Prophetick Priestess) answered, He that swears false may gain by it, but shall dye: so shall he that swears the truth; but the perjured man shall leave no issue: by degrees his perjury shall eat out his House, Name, and Family. Glaucus, terrified with this answer, hum∣bly begged pardon of Apollo, whereunto the Pythia replied, To tempt the God, and to commit the fact, is one and the same crime. Glaucus sent for the Milesians, and restored to them the money deposited by their Father: Yet, a while after he died an untimely death; and his Family was extirpated root and branch. Herodot. lib. 7. Verse 274. The comb of a poor Cock] For the recovery of a sick person at Rome, Sheep and Lambs were sacrificed to his Lars or houshold Gods, and a Cock to Aesculapius; which had been the ancient custome of the Greeks, as you see in the last words of Socrates; O Crito, I owe Aescu∣lapius a Cock, be sure to pay my debt. Verse 289. Aegaean rocks.] This answereth to the place in Plinius Se∣cundus (as I have observed in my Notes upon his Panegyrick, pag. 22.) his words are these: How much diversity of times could doe, is now specially known; when to the same Rocks, where formerly every innocent person, now only the guilty are confined: and all those desert-Islands which late were fil∣led
with Senators, are now planted with Informers. Verse 292. Tiresias,] A Theban Prophet, Son to Everus. His Coun∣try-men the Grecians, that instead of writing Histories tell tales, do say, That in Cythaeron he saw two Dragons in the act of generation, and taking notice which was the female, killed her: immediately he himself was turned into a woman. After seven years, he met with the like sight again, slew the male Dragon, and was restored to his first shape and sex. Then, a dispute hapning between Juno and Jove, Whether male or female had more sense of pleasure, Tiresias was made Umpire, and gave judge∣ment for Jove, that the pleasure is greater in the female. For this, Juno took away his sight: others say he was struck blind when he saw Pallas naked. Jove, to recompence the loss of his sight, gave him the spirit of foresight, making him a Prophet. Vlysses questioned his soul in Ely∣zium, as in the Comment upon Sat. 9. The Monument of Tiresias was erected at the foot of the Mountain Tilphossus in Boeotia, neer to the Fountain Tilphossa, where, in the time of his banishment, he ended his life by a draught of cold water, which in extreme old age oppressed his spirits in a moment. After his death, the Thebans gave him divine ho∣nours. Of his transformation read Ovid. Metam. lib. 3.
Figura Decima Quarta. VIrtutis ratio est vitioso magna parenti, In sobolem si restet amor, si viscera tantúm. Talos profusus 1 pater odit, parvulus haeres Cum ludit, mimúsque eadem movet arma fritillo. Fastidit lautae senior Gulo fercula coenae, Insignem bullâ puerum 2 erudiente Magiro Fictile condire, &, plumas ubi detrahat, ollae Indere ficedulas, in eodem jure natantes, Quo spes merguntur, quas concepêre Propinqui. Musica nulla sonat vernaeque Laris que Tyranno 3 Tortorum in strepitu, cum filius esse Procrustes Coepit, sopitósque breves extendere servos. Lena 4 parens (vafram quae docta Cupidinis Artem, Filiolae dictat, quà sit lactandus Adulter) Dispumat quoties vinum, se sobria damnat, Pupam maternae quod traxerit orbita culpae. Gibbosus 5, majúsque animo quàm corpore monstrum Instituit similem & qualem generaverat offam, Per quodvis augere jubens patrimonia crimen: Ast ubi, quem docuit, geniti cadet ense Magister Victima Avaritiae, superis si redditus auris, In melius prolem teneris effingeret annis▪
The fourteenth Designe. IF vitious Parents did but love their blood, Ev'n for their Childrens sake, they would be good. What 1 Gamester hates not play, that sees his Son, New-coated, trying how the Dice will run? Who loaths not feasts, that hath in's Kitchin took His 2 Heir, instructed by his Master-Cook, Pulling of wild foul, in the Bisk to swim: Thus sinking all his Kindred's hopes of him? A 3 Tyrant in his house: will not be milde To his whipt Slaves: when he beholds his Childe, His young Procrustes, stretch a sleeping boy To help his growth? The 4 Bawd, that (to imploy Her long experience) her Daughter schools, When she writes letters to her am'rous fools: If Sack would suffer her, must curse the time That e're she us'd the Girle in her like Crime. The 5 Wretch, that makes his Son a truer Ape Of his ill nature, then his ugly shape: Advising him his fortunes to improve; By all means, all obstructions to remove; When his apt Scholar kills him, might he live, Would to his next Child better Precepts give.
The Manners of Men. THE FOURTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. By Parents ill examples led, Their Children are to Gaming bred, To gluttony, to rage, to lust, To getting wealth by wayes unjust; When Creatures meerly sensitive To their seed gen'rous breeding give. And Man for shame should teach to His, What Nature, and Right Reason is. TThere are, FUSCINUS, certain stains that spoil A handsome Breeding, and fame's beauty soil In many things, which in a blood doe run: Deriv'd from the lew'd Father to the Son.
If th' Old-man dice, th' Heire in long-coats will doe The like, and flings out of small boxes too. What better hope can any kinsman have Of Boyes, that Mushromes for the Olio shave, And drown the Beccafico's swimming in't: Taught by the knave their father; taking hint From gray-hair'd gluttony? In their sev'nth yeare, E're all their black teeth cast, the white appear: A thousand Tutors with grave beards provide On this, as many on the other side, He will love costly suppers still, and hate From a great Kitchin to degenerate Milde temper, that will pardon small mistakes: That servants souls and ours one matter makes: Like Elements our bodies: is this taught: Or Cruelty by RUTILUS? That's caught With a delight to heare whips crack their strings, And thinks no Syren half so sweetly sings: Th' ANTIPHATES, and POLIPHEME, to fright His House; pleas'd when's Tormentor, in his sight, Into's slave's forehead a hot Iron runs, For two course napkins lost; what learn his Sons
Of him; that loves chains clinking, and to stand Spelling the letters Country Hang-men brand? Could'st thou think LARGA'S daughter would not prove A wench? whose lips so fast can never move, Reckoning the partners in her mothers crimes, But that she must, at least, breath thirty times? She, a young child, knew when th' Adulterer Came to her mother, that's now Bawd to her: By th' old-one, are her little letters pen'd, And she has the same messenger to send. Thus nature works us; swiftly, in a trice, We are corrupted with domestick vice, When Presidents of sin great Authors give; Perhaps one Youth or two, untainted live, Born to despise it, whose hearts TYTAN may Have fram'd with more art, and of better clay. But others in their Parents foot-steps run, And track that beaten path they ought to shun. Let us abstain from any thing amiss; For which one reason, and a main one, is, Lest us our Children follow: for, to fall Into foul vices we are docill all.
There is a CATILINE on every ground; A BRUTUS or a CATO no where found. Ev'ry uncivill word, or action, barre From houses where there's Children: farre, oh farre. From thence be Wenches; and that bawdy song The Parasite will sing you, all night long. There's due unto a Child, a great respect: If thou do'st any wickedness affect, Slight not thy tender Infant coming in, But let them stand betwixt thee and thy sin. For, should thy Child doe any thing that moves The Censor's wrath, since he not only proves In face and body like thee, but the Son Ev'n of thy Manners: since all he hath done Is walking in thy steps; canst thou chastise And persecute him for it with thy cryes, Then disinherit him? thee what can give A Father's forehead, or Prerogative? That old, art worse; thy giddy head design'd For cupping-glasses, to let out the wind. When there's a Guest to come within thy dores, Thy Slaves are set to work; rub thou the floors,
Wash spots out which the Pillars beauty drown: Dry Spiders, with their Cobwebs, sweep thou down; This scoures smooth plate, that rough imbost work dryes And all with's rod the threatning Master plyes. Wretch, do'st thou fear foul Gall'ries should offend, Or Rooms, that dogs have spoild, distaste thy friend: Though e're he come, thou might'st help ev'ry Room With pin-dust half a bushell, and one Groom? And would'st thou not thy Child thy house should see Holy and spotless, from all vices free? 'Tis by thy Friends and Country kindly took, That thou hast got a Roman: if thoul't look, That he be fit for's Country, for th' encrease Of the Republick, both in Warre and Peace. The Common-wealth minds to what arts he's brought By thy instruction, and what Manners taught. The Stork with desert-Snakes and Lizards breeds Her young one, on like poison (fledg'd) it feeds. From horse-flesh, Dogs, and Gibbets, Vultures spring, And to their young a piece of carrion bring: Which is their food, when they, great Vultures grown, Chuse preys and trees to build in of their own.
But th' Eagle, and the Hawk of nobler name, Flyes in the open champain at his game: The Hare or Goat he in his Airy layes; Thence, when his progeny strong feathers raise, They hast to tire, when hunger shall provoke, On what they fed, when first the shell was broke. CENTRONIUS was a builder; now, upon Cajeta's winding shore: on Rocks, anon, At Tibur: in Praeneste's Mountain now, He Greek and far-fetcht Marble did allow, His Villa's lofty Battlements to crown: Which HERCULES his Temple quite put down, And Fortune's (as POSIDES SPADO late Put down the Capitol) whil'st in this state CENTRONIUS dwelt, he gave his wealth a strain, And broke; yet did a fair estate remain: All which his mad Son spent, whil'st he essayes New Villa's, of far richer stone, to raise. Some one, whose Father kept the Sabbath, giv'n To worship nothing but one Pow'r of Heav'n: One that thinks mans flesh differs not a jot From Hogs flesh, which his Father tasted not;
That cuts his Prepuce, scorns the Roman Law, And learns the Jewish, therewith kept in awe, And with precisest care observing it, By MOSES in's mysterious Volume writ: That will not, ev'n the way that he should goe, Unless to one of his Religion, show; And of the thirsty Travellors, will bring Only the Circumcised to the Spring: His Father caus'd all this, whose seav'nth day still Was vacant, nor did his life's number fill. Yet willingly Youths follow other Ills, To Avarice injoyn'd against their wills. For, under Virtue's shaddow and praetext This Vice deceiv's; a habit much perplext, Sad looks, sad clothes it hath; and then, who can But think the Covetous a Frugall man? Praise him as sparing; of his wealth as sure, As if the Hesperian Dragon did secure His golden fruit? add to's description this, That such a one a man of Credit is; For so the people term him; minds his Trade: By carefull Workmen are great fortunes made;
Although, indeed, great fortunes, by base wayes, The constant Anvill and hot Furnace raise. The Fathers then, esteem those children best, That worship wealth, and think no poor man blest; Incouraging their issue to affect Their humor, and be Zelots of their Sect. Some Elements of vice they teach them; first Poor little Sparings: then, th' insatiate thirst Of Getting; with false measure he defeats His stomach, and his servants bellies cheats, Nor ever will permit them to be fed With all the mouldy crusts of his blue bread. Yesterday's Minc'd-meat, whereon he did sup, He keeps in mid-September: and layes up Parcht Beans for his next meal, seal'd in a dish: Wherein are scraps of tainted Summer-fish, And counted blades of Leeks; to which feast some, Invited from the Bridge, would scorn to come. But, with these torments why do'st goe about To scrape up wealth? 'tis madness without doubt: Plain phrenzie doth thy senseless soul bewitch, To live poor, only hoping to die rich.
Mean time, down full mouth'd bags whilst money flowes: Like money's self, the love of money growes; Nay, he least covets it that hath it not; So that another Manor must be got, When thou art straightned in one Lordship's grounds, And 'tis thy pleasure to enlarge thy bounds. Thy Neighbour's harvest thou do'st more esteem, For that does greater, yea, and better seem: That must be purchas'd first; and by degrees These woods; those mountains, hoar with Olive-trees. If th' owner, loath to sell, thy patience vex, By night lean Oxen, with their wearied necks, And thy sterv'd Droves, thou send'st into his Corn: Nor come they home, till his first crop be shorn, And all his Harvest in their bellies heapt, That one would think, it were with Sickles reapt. What numbers suffer thus? 'tis not to tell, How many such wrongs force their land to sell. But what is said? what Trumpet sounds foul fame? What hurt, sayes he, is in an evill name? Give me a bean-hull, e're the praise of all The neighb'ring Village, and my Harvest small.
As if thou should'st want sickness, grief, and strife, And better fates would lengthen out thy life; Were as much land to thee, alone, alow'd, As under TATIUS all Rome's People plow'd. In old times, when a Souldier, broke with age, Had stood the Carthaginian War; the rage Of firy PYRRHUS, and Molossian swords: At length the State, with much adoe, affords For many wounds too acres, pay for blood And sweat: no man upon his merit stood As greater, nor his Country's faith accus'd, As if he had ingratefully been us'd. This glebe, the good man, the good wife that lies In Child-bed, all the Cottage did suffice: Four Infants, one Slave, and young Masters three; The ablest of which Brothers us'd to be Most feasted; pulse was for their supper got, Which on the fire smoak't in the greatest Pot, When they came home from digging, or the plow: So much land scarce serves for a Garden now. Hence almost springs all evill; no one sin, That to the mind of mankind enters in,
Poysons or kills more then wealth's cruell thirst? For, all men would be rich, and rich at first. But what regard of Law, what fear, what shame In greedy rich men, flying to their aime? Live pleas'd, that you these Sheds, those Hillocks have; The Marsian, Hernick, Vestine Old-men gave This counsell to their Youth: to serve your board, The follow'd Plough will bread enough afford. This pleases best the Country-Gods, that found, And taught us, th' Art of plowing up the ground; The sweets whereof when once we understood, We scorn'd the Oak, that bore our ancient food. They are not given to any kind of vice, That shame not to wade through the broken Ice In Fishermens great Boots; and wear Coats lin'd With our own furres, to keep away the wind. All th' evill, all the wickedness we do, The forrein unknown Purple bring us to. These Precepts th' Ancients gave. Now, Autumn past, The balling Father, to's Son snoaring fast At midnight, cryes, Wake boy, take paper, draw, (And look you sleep not ore't) a Case in Law;
Read th' old Law Rubricks; keep the Vine in chase, Petitioning for a Centurion's place: Broad shoulders, hairy nostrills, uncomb'd hair, In LAELIUS the Gen'rall's Eye, shew fair: The Moorish Huts, or British Tow'rs destroy, At threescore a rich Eagle to enjoy. If the long labour of the Camp displease, If Fifes and Cornets bring the loose disease, Buy what for as much more will sell again; Nor doe thou any Merchandize disdain, Though not on this side Tiber to be brought; Without distinction let all ware be bought: Whether perfumes or hides thy Chapmen sell; From whence soe're it rises, Gain smells well. Repeat this Sentence, by th' old Poet writ, Worthy the strain of a Celestiall wit: Which JOVE himself might utter, 'tis so just: No matter whence it comes, but come it must. When Boyes beg pence, old Wives this Lesson set: Girles learn it e're they learn their Alphabet. To any, who shall thus his Children school, This I reply. Tell me, thou vainest fool,
Why spurr'st thou him? go, make a sure account: Thy Boy his Tutor shall as far surmount, As TELEMON by AJAX his brave Son, Or PELEUS by ACHILLES was out-done. Spare thy Child, native Evill hath not fear'd His conscience yet; but when he combs his beard, And shaves, he then will a false witness come, Sell perjury for any little summe, Touch CERE'S Altar, nay her foot: For dead Give thy poor Daught'r in Law, ev'n when she's led, Into thy fatall house, a wealthy Bride; Death, in her sleep, by thy Son's touch apply'd. Thou bid'st him gather wealth by land and seas: He finds short wayes, Great crimes are done with ease. But thou wilt say, when 'tis too late, I lay'd No such commands, did no such thing perswade; Yet, of his wicked mind art thou the cause, From thee his damned Principles he draws: For, they that getting of great summs enjoyn, And make their ill-taught Children doat on coyn, Bidding them, where advantage serves, deceive, Doe the whole rains unto the Chariot leave,
Which would'st thou stop, it knows not how to stay, But all bounds broke, despight thee, runs away. None sins just so far as he hath in charge, But at his pleasure will his vice inlarge. When to thy Son thou say'st, Fools only grant A Friends suit, or relieve a Kinsman's want; Thou teachest him to spoil, to circumvent, And by all mischiefs Riches to augment: Which with as great a zeal thou dost adore, As e're the DECII to their Country bore; To Thebes MENAECEUS; if Greece say true: In whose land, sown with Dragons teeth, there grew Legions with swords & shields, that forthwith fought, As they along their Trumpeter had brought. That fire, by thy spark kindled, thou shalt see Flaming, devouring all: not sparing thee. The fierce young Lion, in his furious rage, Will tear's old trembling Keeper in his cage. Although Astrologers doe thy Scheme erect, 'Tis tedious the slow distaffe to expect: He breaks thy thread, that hinders his intents, The Youth thy long and Hart-like age torments.
Send quickly, let ARCHIGENES be found, And buy what MITHRIDATES did compound: If thou wilt smell another Rose, or eat Another Fig; e're thou sitt'st down to meat, An Antidote let some, that loves, thee bring; A Father as much needs it as a King. 'Tis Sport, the like upon no Stage hath been, Nor in the Praetor's Shew was ever seen, To note what lives are lost, a house to found: And what Chests, lin'd with gold, with iron bound, CASTOR now watches; since MARS fell asleep, His Helmet stoln, nor could his own Goods keep. Scorn CERE'S, FLORA'S CYBEL'S Pastimes then; No Playes, no Shows, like Bus'nesses of Men. Can it so take, to see one backward stoop, And cast his flexive body through a hoop, Or from the stretcht-out Rope appear to slip? As to see thee, in thy Corycian Ship Dwelling for South, and South-east winds to wrack, Selling thy life to buy a stinking sack? That from old Creet to fetch fat wine do'st love, And their great Flaggons, neighbours-born to JOVE.
Yet he that so his slipp'ry footing sets, Eats by it; and the Rope his pardon gets From cold, and hunger: thou dost undertake Thy dangers, for a thousand tallents sake, A hundred Villa's; View the Ports, survey Seas fill'd with wracks: man's major-part at Sea: And Seamen sail where there's most hope of gain, Through the Carpathian and Getulian Main; Nay, beyond Calpe, hear the setting Sun Into th' Herculean Ocean hissing run. For what? to bring home bags, with money swell'd; To brag of wealth, and that thou hast beheld Mermaids and Monsters; it must be confess'd, These more then with one Fury are possess'd: As mad as he, that in his Sisters hands, The Furies haunted, with their Snakes, and brands: Or he, that when a Bull or Oxe he goard, Thought AGAMEMNON, or ULYSSES roar'd. Though such their cloaks & coats from tearing spare; Yet they are mad-men, that so heap their ware, As to the upper Deck they cast a bank, Distinguish't from the billowes by one plank:
Vent'ring for Bullion thus, whereon they print Small faces and inscriptions at the Mint. Lightning and Clouds oppose, weigh Anchors, cryes The Corn and Pepper-Merchant; let no skies, With their black wens, your manly hearts affright, 'Tis Summur-thunder: The poor wretch, that night, Perhaps is cast away; and in's left hand, Or teeth, his purse and girdle bears to land. He, late, unsatisfi'd with all the Gold Down Tagus, or the bright Pactolus, rol'd; Now, glad to feed on any meat, about His nakedness puts a cold crupper-clout: Whil'st for a shipwrackt man he begs an almes; And hunger with his pictur'd storm becalmes. Goods got thus hardly, with more fear and care Are kept; so wretched Money-hoarders are. Rich LICINUS in's house still sets the watch, Trembling for fear Thieves should his Amber catch, Statues, and Pillars, which the Phrygians smooth; Broad Tortois; Elephants pure snow-white tooth: The Cynicks Tub burns not; or if it break, Yet he, against to morrow, may bespeak
Another; or the same may serve again Plated with lead: 'twas this, which made it plain To ALEXANDER (when in that poor seat He visited DIOGENES the Great) That he, who nothing covets, happier is Then he, that seeks to make the whole World his, His Acts and Dangers great. If Prudence be, There can be no Divinity in thee Fortune; 'tis we, we to thy Pow'r have giv'n The name of Goddess. Yet how I would ev'n Th' accounts of wealth, if any ask, I tell. Get what cold, thirst, and hunger, may repell; What th' earth to EPICURUS did afford, Or long since serv'd at SOCRATES his board. Nature ne're asks this thing, and Wisdome that. But these sharp rules I see thee startle at: Mix therefore something of our manners; get The sum, that's for the fourteen Benches set, By OTHO'S Law; and if this make thee frown, And pouch thy lips out; to thy self set down Two Knight's fees: thrice four hundred, the just rates, Proportion'd for three Roman Knights Estates.
Is't not a lap-full? is a space yet void? Then, all the treasure CROESUS e're enjoy'd, Nay ev'n the Persian Kingdome will not do: Nor all the wealth NARCISSUS rose unto, That govern'd CLAUDIUS CAESAR all his life, By him obey'd, when bid to kill his Wife. The Comment UPON THE FOURTEENTH SATYR. Verse 1. Fuscinus▪] This Satyr was writ to him, but who he was we know not. Verse 9. Beccafico,] The Fig-pecker, or Ficedula, which the Italians call Beccafico: and is at this day esteemed the principall in∣gredient in the composition of a Bisk or Olio. Verse 10. Taught by the Knave their Father.] Men doe more hurt by example, then by transgression. Cic. especially Parents. Utinam liberorum, &c. would we our selves did not corrupt the manners of our children. Wanton education, which we call indulgence, in a moment spoils Infancy, and breaks all the nerves of the mind and body. What can satisfie the appetite of a Youth, that first learned to goe alone in purple? now he knows what the purple Dye, what the Conchylium is. We are hugely pleased, if he talke rudely. Words, not allowable among Alexandrian Voluptuaries, we laugh at: and kiss the Child
for speaking of them. No marvail. We taught them; they had them of us: they see our Mistresses, or Wenches. Every Feast rings with obscene songs, and sights, which it is a shame to mention. This first makes it custome, then nature. The poor Children learn Vice, before they know it to be so. F. Quintil. Verse 17. Small mistakes.] No man is without faults. Our Vertue is no∣thing, but a lesser proportion of Vice. Herm. Trismeg. Verse 20 Rutilus,] A Tyrant, not a Master of a Family: such an∣other for a man, as the Mistress of Psecas was for a woman: just as she beats her Maids, he torments his men: and as Juvenal compares that Lady to the Dyonisii, the Tyrants of Sicily: so he parallels this Gentle∣man with Polyphemus the Cyclops; and the Laestrigonian King, Antiphates, both eaters of mans flesh; Rutilus being the Raw-head and Bloody-bones of his house. Verse 28. Country Hangmen.] The Over-seers of the Slaves at work in the Country; that bastinaded, tortured, or branded them with letters burned into their foreheads, when they transgressed, or when their cruell Masters were offended. Vincti pedes, &c. fettered feet, manicled hands, branded forheads, are all usuall in the Country. Plin. Verse 29. Larga,] A most infamous Adultress grown to be an abo∣minable Bawd. Verse 37. Thus nature works us.] It is naturall for Children to imitate their Parents. One example of luxury or avarice does a world of harm. Se∣nec. Epist. 7. Verse 48. Catiline,] A wicked debaucht man, that would have ruined his Country. See the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 50. Brutus,] Nephew to Cato Vtican; A just sober man, like his Uncle: both ruining themselves to preserve their Country.
Verse 60. Censor,] The Judge of manners. See the Com. upon Sat. 2. Verse 68. Cupping-glasses.] The ancient Cupping-glasses were of brass, and horn. They were applyed to mad-men. It is not amiss in a phrenzie (in case the party be not let blood before, nor come to himself, nor be able to sleep) to trepan such a Patient, or open the fore-part of his skull, and set on Cupping-glasses: which, because they lessen his fever, may bring him to sleep. Cel lib. 3. cap. 18. Verse 87. The Stork with desert-Snakes.] The Stork does so good ser∣vice for the Thessalians, in killing up their Snakes, that by their Lawes he that kills one of those Birds, suffers the same punishment with him that murders a man. Plin. lib. 10. Verse 89. Vulture.] The most harmless of all creatures; that eats no∣thing which men sow or plant, only feeds upon carcases. Destroyes no living thing; but, for affinity, forbears the very carcases of birds. Plin. It is of that strange sagacity, that, three dayes before any cattel dies, it will flye about the place where the carrion is to be. idem. Verse 93. The Eagle,] The Prince of birds; he is said to be Thunder-bearer to Jove, because of all creatures he is never struck with Thunder, though in his flight he soares a pitch neerest to the clouds. Plin. Verse 100. Cajeta,] A Port-town in Campania, not farre from Baiae, built in memory of Cajeta Nurse to Aeneas. Virg. Aeneid. lib. 7. But Strab. lib. 5 sayes, it was named Cajeta from the crookedness of the shoar; all crooked things being called in the Laconick Dialect . Verse 101. Tibur.] See the Comment upon Sat. 3. Verse 101. Praeneste.] See the same Comment. Verse 105. Posides Spado] Freed-man to Claudius Caesar; so gratious with his Master, that, in his triumph for Britain, he bestowed upon him
the Hasta pura, a Spear without a Pike; one of the greatest honours which a Souldier could receive for service; adding the government of Judeae, where his Master made him his Lievtenant-generall; and likewise gave him the priviledge to be carried in a Closse-chair, and to set forth publick Shows. He built at Baiae that princely Fabrick, called the Pos∣sidonian Bath. I suppose he built another at Rome, that shewed like an Imperiall Palace; because my Author sayes, that as Centronius put down the Temple of Hercules at Tibur, with the House which he there built, and likewise the Temple of Fortune at Praeneste, with another Building in that Town: so Posides Spado outvied the Capitol, with the House which he built not far from it. Verse 118. Moses.] Qui docebat, &c. That taught, how the Aegyptians were not in the right, that worshipped God in the Images of beasts: nor the Graecians, that gave to their Gods the figures of men; and that Power only to be God, which comprehends us, the Earth, and Sea: which Power we call the Heaven, the World, and universall Nature. To make whose Image like to one of us, really none but a mad-man would presume. Strab. lib. 16. Verse 120. Vnless to one of his Religion.] To this very day, the Jewes will doe no reall civility unto any but of their own Nation and Religion: which they love so much as to lend them money gratis; all others must pay interest. Verse 123. His Father caus'd all this,] Whose Jewish Tenets are he∣reditary to the Son. Aegyptii, &c. The Aegyptians worship many Animals and Images made by hands. The Jewes worship only in spirit, and conceive one God, holding them to be profane that make Images of perishing matter, in the form of Men for God, the supreme and eternall Power, neither mutable
nor mortall: Therefore they have no Images in their Cities, nor in their Tem∣ples. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5. Verse 132. Hesperian Dragon.] See the Comment upon Sat. 5. Verse 154. The Bridge.] Where Beggars waited for the charity of Passengers. Sat. 5. Is there no Hole? no Bridge?— Verse 184. Tatius,] Generall of the Sabines, that, by the treachery of the Vestall Virgin Tarpeia (as in the Comment upon Sat 6.) took the Capitol. After he had got that advantage of the Romans, and often fought them with various successes, upon the intercession of the Sabine wo∣men, as aforesaid, he made a Peace, and put it in his Conditions, That the Sabines should be free of the City, and he himself Partner with Ro∣mulus in the government of Rome; whose Territory extended not then to any great quantity of Acres, as appears Sat. 8. by the adven∣ture of Claelia. —the Maid, that courage found To swim o're Tiber, then our Empire's bound. But, the Kinsmen of Tatius having affronted the Laurentine Embassadors, and Tatius not righting them, according to the Law of Nations, the pu∣nishment due to his Kinsmen fell upon himself. For, he Sacrificing at Lavinium, the whole City were insurrectors, and killed him. Liv. Verse 187. Pyrrhus,] King of Epire: descended, by the Mother, from Achilles: by the Father, from Hercules. He was strangely preserved in his infancy, and bred in Macedon by Glaucias of Megara, by him restored to his Fathers Kingdome at seventeen years of age. Whilst he returned from Epire into Macedon, to marry his beloved Mistress, Daughter to Glaucias; his Subjects, the Molossians, again rebelled, and set up another
Family in his Throne. Having lost his Crown, and with it his Friends, he fled to his Sister Deidamia's Husband, Demetrius, Son to Antigonus: and commanded under him, at the great battail where all the Kings, that divided Alexander's conquests, were ingaged. There he, though a young man, had the honor, where he fought, to worst the Enemy. In Aegypt he grew so great a Courtier, that Queen Berenice's Daughter, Antigona, loved and married him, and won her Mother to move the King her Step-father, for money and forces, to reestablish her Husband in his Kingdome. Entring Epire with an Army, he found his People weary of their present Governor, Neoptolemus, all came in to their King. But Pyrrhus, fearing that Neoptolemus would follow his example, and get some forrein Prince to espouse his quarrell, divided the Crown with him. Soon after, discovering that his Brother-King had a plot upon his life, Pyrrhus invited him to Supper, and there killed him. In memory of his Patron and Patroness, the King and Queen of Aegypt, he called his Son by Antigona, Ptolemey: and the City he built in Epire, Berenice. Lysi∣machus, hearing of this signall Gratitude, made use of Ptolemey's name to cajoll, or put a trick upon Pyrrhus, having then undertaken the quar∣rell of Alexander, Brother to Antipater, both Sons to Cassander. The con∣tents of the Letter were, That Antipater desired Pyrrhus to receive there∣with three hundred talents, to forbear all acts of hostility against him. But the direction was, King Ptolemey to King Pyrrhus: whereas he ever used to write, The Father to his Son, greeting. By this means, the cheat of the counterfeit Letter and Token was found out. He was ready not only to intress himself in this difference between the Sons of Cassander, but im∣braced any opportunity of warre, being ambitious to make himself the universall Monarch. The Successors of Alexander used him, to ballance
the power of Demetrius, whom he beat out of Macedon. The Tarentines called him into Italy; where he turned the effeminate Tarentines into good Souldiers, and almost brought the warlike Romans upon their knees: for, twice he fought the Consul Dentatus, and at those two bat∣tails slew threescore thousand Romans. After his restless ambition had carried him from the East to the West, and back again by Sicily to Ma∣cedon, from thence to Sparta, and at last to Argos: A poor Argive woman, seeing her Son's life at the mercy of his sword, with both her hands flung a tyle at him, which hitting between the helmet and the head, broke his skull, and killed him. He was, in the opinion of great Souldiers, the grea∣test, next to Alexander, that ever the world had. Antigonus being asked whom he held to be the best Generall? answered, Pyrrhus; if he had li∣ved to be old. But, for conduct and policy, Hannibal gave the first place to Pyrrhus, the second to Scipio, the third to himself. The Officers of his Army, when he fought a battail, observing his looks, celerity and motion, said, Other Kings were like Alexander in their State and Courts, but Pyr∣rhus in his armes and in the field. And when they gave him the surname of the Eagle, he said , that I am so; I owe you for it: how can I be less then an Eagle, that have your Swords for Wings He was bountifull to his friends, moderate in his anger towards his enemies; and when obligations were laid upon him, extremely gratefull. Calumny he sleighted: for, when some moved him to banish from Ambracia one that had railed against him: no said he, It is better that he should tarry here, and slander me in one Town, then all the world over. Upon the same account another being un∣der examination, he asked him, Were these your words? the Examinant said, Yes Sir, and I should have spoke more bitterly, if we had drank more wine. Pyrrhus was satisfied with this answer, and discharged the man. Indeed
he held himself concerned in nothing but warre and victory: for, even when he had taken a cup or two extraordinary, a friend asking, whether he thought Pytho or Caphisias the best Musitian? he answered, Polysper∣chon is a good General. Plut in Pyrrh. Verse 189. For many wounds two Acres.] The Consull Dentatus him∣self, after Pyrrhus was beaten out of Italy, accepted seaven Acres, given him by the State. Columel. Verse 203. Wealth's cruel thirst,] That, like Death, spares no body. Intelligi, &c. It may be easily conceived, that no obligation can be so holy, or solemn, which avarice will not dispense with. Cic. Verse 208. The Marsian, &c.] To be contented with their poor Cot∣tages and Hillocks: not to build Palaces, and purchase Appulian Moun∣tains: was counsell, given to their Children, by the ancient Country peo∣ple of Italy; the Marsians neer to Alba: their neighbours, the poor Her∣nicks, between Alba and Lavinium: and the Vestines, between the Sabines and the Marsians. Verse 211. Country-Gods.] Tellus and Ceres, that taught Husbandry, and how to force out of the Earth a better food, then was known in the gol∣den age. Sat. 6. Whil'st man acrons belcht— Verse 225. Law Rubricks,] Titles of old Lawes writ in red letters. Verse 225. Vine.] The Vine-battoon, wherewith the Centurions bela∣boured the sides of their lazy Souldiers; as my Author instances in C. Marius, beaten with the Vine, when he was the Camp-Carpenter. Sat. 8. Verse 230. At threescore a rich Eagle] The covetous Father tells his Son, that if he will endure the hardship of the warre, till he be threescore
years of age, he may then get to be Standart-bearer, a place of little dan∣ger and great profit. Verse 235. On this side Tiber.] Beyond Tiber, or at the Roman bank∣side (would it were so in all great Cities) dwelt the men of sordid or noi∣some Trades, as Tanners, Fish-mongers, Diers, Bruers, &c. Mart. lib. 6. Non detracta cani Transtiberina cutis. Not a Transtib'rine skin flead from a Dog. Verse 238. Gain smells well.] He alludes to the answer of Vespasian Cae∣sar, made to his Son Titus, that moved against the raising of money by Taxes or Excise laid upon Urine. Vespasian, pulling out of his pocket a new minted piece of gold, asked, How smells it Titus? he replied, very well Sir: yet, said Vespasian, this came out the Pis-pot. Suet. Verse 242. No matter whence it comes.] The whole verse is quoted out of the old Poet Ennius. Verse 249. As Telamon by Ajax.] My Author sayes, A Child that receives base precepts of thrift from his Father, will, when he comes to be a man, goe as farre beyond his Instructor in villany, as Ajax or Achilles transcended their Fathers in gallantry and honour. Thus they were derived. Jupiter. Aeacus. Telamon. Ajax. Peleus. Achilles.
Verse 255. Touch Ceres Altar.] Whereunto no Wanton durst (once) approach, much less a perjured person. See the Comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 258. By thy Son's touch.] A crime charged by M. Caecilius upon Calphurnius Bestia. Plin. Verse 279. Menaeceus,] Son to Creon King of Thebes. When the City was besieged by the Argives, the Oracle promised, that Thebes should not be taken, if the last of the Family of Cadmus would voluntarily die. Menaeceus, thinking himself concerned, fell upon his own sword. Cic. 2. Tuscul. Others say, the Prophet Tiresius told Menaeceus that Thebes should be impregnable, never to be conquered, if he would goe to the Dragon's Den, and there sacrifice his own life: whereupon, unknown to his Father, he stole thither and slew himself. Juvenal puts a dubious mark upon this History, because the Grecians write, That Cadmus, the killer of the Dragon, sowed his teeth in ploughed lands, where they pre∣sently sprung up in squadrons of armed men, that fought, and killed one another. Ovid. Metam. lib. 3. Verse 290. Hart-like.] The Hart lives nine hundred years, as some say: but all know, he is very long liv'd. Vita cervi &c. the longavity of Harts is evident, some having been taken, after a hundred years, with Gold Collars about their necks, put on by Alexander the great, and covered over with meer fat. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 32. where you may read an excellent de∣scription of the Hart. Verse 291. Archigines,] A greek Phisitian, as aforesaid, in high esteem with the Romans, that like us (and almost all nations whatsoever) value Strangers more then Natives: but Gallen often inveighs against him: per∣haps he might have a Peek to Archigenes, and hate him, upon the same
reason that made his Country-men admire him, viz. because he was a stranger, only with this addition, that the stranger intrenched upon his practice: Verse 292. Mithridates.] See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 301. Castor.] See the Comment upon Sat. 13. To his Temple in Rome, great monyed men removed their iron-barred Chests; from the Temple in the Forum Augusti, dedicated to Mars the Revenger: where Thieves had broke in, that robbed the Merchants, and spared not Mars himself: for they stole away his Helmet. Verse 303. Ceres.] See the Comment upon Sat. 6. The Pastimes, or Pageants, carried about the Circus in honour of Ceres, were showed in this manner. The stealing away of Proserpine, and the lamentation of Ceres was acted by Roman Ladies, habited all in white. The Pomp of this solemn Show is thus set down in all particulars by Tertul. de Spect. cap. 7. Simulachrorum series, &c. 1. The Gods Images. 2. The Effigies of great persons. 3. Chariots of State, empty. 4. Chariots filled with the Gods Images. 5. VVaggon-Chariots, wherein were placed the figures of riding Gods. Alex ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 30. 6. Chairs of State. 7. Crowns. The last, Spoils taken from the Enemy. Ovum in Cerealis Pompae, &c. The principall ingredient that made up the Cereall Pomp was an Egge. Hesp. de orig. fest. Rosin. lib. 5. cap. 14. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 6. cap. 19. The reason of providing an Egge, as I conceive, was that which made them set up the Ovall Tower in the Circus. Sat. 6. —at th' Ovall Tow'r, before the rounds O'th' Dolphin-pillars— viz. in memory of Castor and Pollux, hatched out of Eggs: The Dolphin-Pillars were erected in honour of Neptune.
Verse 303. Flora's.] Of the Florall Shows we have spoke in the Com∣ment upon Sat. 6. and likewise of Cybel's or the Ludi Megalenses. Verse 308. Corycian Ship,] Bound for Corycium, a Promontory in Creet, where Jupiter was born: there to be laded with Jupiter's neigh∣bours, great Flaggons, and wine to fill to them, called by the Romans Pas∣sum; made of withered grapes, dried in the Sun: which insolation brought the liquor to be sweet and fatning. Verse 320. Carpathian.] The Carpathian Sea goes beyond Rhodes, Creet, and Cyprus; and is so named from the Island Carpathus, lying be∣tween Rhodes and Creet. Verse 320. Getulian.] The Straits of Gibraltar, where the two Hercu∣lean Pillars stand, Calpe on the Spanish side, and Abila on the Libyan Coast. These Pillars in my Authors time (as in the beginning of Sat. 10.) were believed to be the farthest west, by the vulgar; which sailing be∣yond the Straits, would conceive themselves to hear the Sun's burning Chariot set hissing in the Herculean Ocean. Verse 327. He.] Orestes, that imagined himself haunted with his Mother's Ghost, and her guard of Furies, shaking their snaky locks, and flourishing their Torches: as in the beginning Comment upon Sat. 1. Verse 329. Or he.] Ajax, that (being evicted by the Sentence of A∣gamemnon, in the Suit between him and Vlysses, for the Armes of A∣chilles) ran mad, routing the Cattel, doing execution upon Oxen, which he called Agamemnon and Vlysses: recovering his wits, it was his fate, ratione insanire, to fall into a sober madness, and for shame to kill himself. See the Coment upon Sat. 7. Verse 342. Purse and Girdle.] The Merchants best Purse was his Girdle; wherein he sowed up his gold; and if he were shipwrackt, he held
his Girdle in his teeth or with his left hand, and with his right swam to land. Verse 344. Tagus and the bright Pactolus] For Tagus, see the Com∣ment upon Sat. 3. Pactolus in Lydia is such another golden River, spring∣ing upon the Mountain Tmolus, and falling into the River Hermus. Strab. & Dionys. it runs by Sardes. Dion. Prus. It was formerly called Chry∣soras, because it runs with golden sands. Solin. Verse 348. Pictur'd storm.] The rich Merchant had the landtscap of his shipwrack limn'd to be hung up in some Temple, as you may see in the Designe before Sat. 12. The poor man had his drawn by some poor Painter; and holding it before his breast (as Beggers here hold their Certificates) he moved the charitable people, so Juvenal here tells us: a mock figure of it you have in the Frontispice, before the breast of the twelvth Satyr. Verse 351. Rich Licinus.] See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 1. Verse 355. The Cynick.] Diogenes, Scholar to Antisthenes, and institutor of the Cynicall Sect. He was born in Pontus, at the City of Sinopis, about the third year of the ninty first Olympiad. His own name was Cleon. Suid. His Fathers name was Icesius or Icetes, an Exchanger of money. In his youth, by his Father's example, he was so ambitious of getting mo∣ney, that he put the question to the Oracle, How he might come to be a great monyed man? it was answered, by coining; at least he understood it so. He obeyed the direction, was taken in the manner, and banished: or else suspected, and forced to flye his Country. Only one Slave attended him, called Manes, that soon after ran away from him. And when some advised, that he should lay the County for his Slave, No, said he, If Manes want not Diogenes, it is a shame for Diogenes to want Manes.
When he came to Athens no Begger could be poorer, all his Wardrobe was a double Cloak, which he wore in the day time, and used for a Bed at night; lying upon it, either in Jove's Portico, or in the Pompaeum; both which he said the Athenians built for his Dormitories. All day he stood at the gates of some of the Poets, or at the dore of his Master An∣tisthenes, that, having commanded none of his Scholars should trouble him at present, bid Diogenes be gone, or he would beat him away: In stead of going back, Diogenes put his head in a dores, and said, You have no cudgell hard enough, to beat Diogenes from your house. This answer made him welcome to Antisthenes ever after. Being bound for Aegina in his old age (when he had a Staffe to his Wallet) he was taken by the Pirate Scirpalus, that carried him to sell in Creet: and when the Cryer made his Oyez, If any man want a Slave—you rogue, said Diogenes, cry, If any man want a Master. As soon as Xeniades the Corinthian had bought him, he said, Now Sir, look you doe as I command you: What? said Xeniades, Would rivers run upward? why (answered Diogenes) If you had bought a Physitian, would you not follow his advice? For these and such like words he had his freedome given him, together with the tuition of his Master's Children. His dwelling was a Tub, that could not be in danger of fire, because it was made of clay baked by the Potter, like the pleasure-boat of an Aegyptian. Sat. 15. —that floats, Row'd with short Oares, in painted earthen boats. In Winter he turned the mouth of his Tub to the South, in Summer to the North; as the Roman Volupuarie turned his Dining-roome. Sat. 7.
Which on Numidian Pillars round must run, Where North and West cool th' East and Southern Sun. Alexander the Great found Diogenes in this posture at Cranium in Co∣rinth, sunning of himself. Alexander, being then upon his expedition a∣gainst the Persian, was so taken with his manner of life and way of beg∣ing, that he bid him, Ask something of Alexander; Diogenes said, I have but one suit to make, that you would not stand between me and the Sun. Alas poor man, said Alexander. Poor, replied Diogenes; Which of us two is poor∣rer, I, that am content with my Tub, Staffe, and Wallet; or you, that covet the possession of the whole Earth? This answer makes Juvenal give him Alexander's title, calling him Diogenes the Great: for which he had A∣lexander's own authority, that departing from the Cynick, said to his Followers, If I were not Alexander, I would be Diogenes. Plut. When his Friends saw he could not live, they asked him, Where will you be bu∣ried? he said, I care not for being buried at all. Will you then, said they, be devoured by the Doggs and Crows? By no means, he replied: Set my staffe by me, I will beat away the Doggs and the Crows. They told him, he could not doe that, when no sense was in his body. No sense, said he, then what need I care where it be laid? He died in the nintith year of his Age, the very same day that Alexander died at Babylon. His opinion was, That good habits both of body and mind were acquirable by Corporall and Philosophicall exercises. Verse 363. If Prudence be.] These verses conclude the tenth Satyr; and had not been repeated here, but to make a better impression of them in the erronious mindes of men, that prefer Fortune before Wisdome. Verse 369. Epicurus,] That lived upon roots and herbs. See the Com∣ment upon Sat. 11.
Verse 370 Socrates.] In a great plague at Athens, only Socrates esca∣ped the infection, by his temperance and frugality. Laert. See the begin∣ning of the Comment upon Sat. 2. Verse 375. Otho's Law.] See the Comment upon Sat. 3. Verse 380. Croesus,] That expected, Solon should have fallen down and worshipped him for his wealth. See the Comment upon Sat. 10. tit. Solon. Verse 381. Persian Kingdome.] How rich it was before the Macedo∣nians plundered it, you may read in Justin. Verse 382. Narcissus.] See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 10.
The fifteenth Designe. THe zeal of Aegypt sets at mortall odds Two Towns, that quarrell which are truest Gods, The 1 Crocodile, a Serpent Nilus breeds: Or flying 2 Ibis, that on Serpents feeds? Snake-worshippers 3 of Ombus dare not think Of touching water, 'tis their Gods own drink; Wine, in his Temple's Portico, they quaffe: Are merry, but, they have not long to laugh. Their dancing dayes were seav'n, but done they are: To pay the 4 Piper, th' Enemy takes care. The meager 5 Tentyrites, that fast and watch, Shoot arrows the fat Ombites to dispatch, That on their painted beds carousing lie; Not being now in case to fight, or flie: Yet they doe both, for, stones at first they cast, And (quickn'd by their danger) run at last, Saving themselves from the Massacre; all But 6 one that, reeling, gets a fatall fall. For, like his Serpent, when their Birds want meat, He's by his zealous Neighbours kild and eat. Why thus Men, worse then Beasts, destroy their kind: Hear the No-Cause, He is not of my mind.
Figura Decima Quinta. RElligiosa Phari committit rixa colonos; Certatum est binis, de vero Numine, pagis, Niliacae serpens de te, Crocodile 1, paludis Incola; & oppressis saturâ serpentibus Ibi. 2 Ombiacus 3 cultor, genius cui praesidet Anguis, Nullam gustat aquam (Deus, ut bibat, eligit undas) Sancta popina, adhibet genialia vina, sacelli Porticus; at non longa hilari sunt gaudia Festo, Saltantes vidit sol tantùm septimus Ombos; Currit, ut hostis adest, pactâ sine stipe Choraules. 4 Tentyra 5 lethiferis feriunt jejuna sagittis Ombicolas, madidis recipit quos culcita lectis: Nulla fugae, aut pugnae, superest vis; utraque fractis Tentatur tamen, & per humum quaesita lacertis Saxa fatigatis primùm mittuntur in hostem: Tandem Ombi fugiunt; celeres timor adjicit alas, Vt vitent pernice sequacia fata volatu: Labitur hîc quidam 6, temeti viribus actus In praeceps, captúsque minutìm roditur; Ibis Vt solet hostilem morsu lacerare Colubrum. Cur homo sic hominem mactet, crudelior ursis, Quàm nulla est, aut causa levis! sententia dispar.
The Manners of Men. THE FIFTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. The Tentyrites and Ombites fight, These drunk with wine, and those with spight. Whose Gods are true, that is to say Whose Bird or Serpent, makes the Fray; Where they, that fast from lawfull food, Eat up a Man, and drink his Blood. Thus violating Nature's Lawes, For that they call the Holy-Cause. BITHYNICUS, who knows not what Portents Mad Aegypt deifies? this part presents Devotion to the Crocodile, in that Ibis, with Serpents gorg'd, is trembled at.
Where from half-MEMNON Magick Lutes are heard, And Thebes lyes, with her hundred Gates inter'd: The Long-tail'd Monkey's golden form shines there: There Sea-fish; River-fish is worship't here, Whole Cities to the Hound their prayers address, None to DIANA, the Hound's Patroness. To strike a Leek, or Onion, with the edge Of the presumptuous teeth, is sacriledge. O blessed People, in whose Gardens spring Your Gods! that hold it an unlawfull thing, The fleecy Sheep, or little Kid, to eat; But lawfull to make humane flesh your meat. When grave ULYSSES, telling the like crime, Amaz'd ALCINOUS, at supper time; No doubt, in some it laughter mov'd, or spleen, As he a lying Traveller had been: Will none this Fellow cast into the Main, Worthy a true Charybdis, thus to feign Cyclops and Laestrigons, that mans flesh eat? That Cyan rocks meet, the lye's not so great: That Scylla barks, that bladders, to his hand, Were fil'd with wind; that struck with CIRCE'S wand,
ELPENOR grunted; with his Mates, turn'd Swine: To fool us sure is this old man's designe. Thus some stay'd Phaeack, who at meal would drink Less Corcyraean wine, might justly think; Because ULYSSES had no Witness there. I sing, indeed, things monstrous, but that were In the late Consulship of JUNIUS done: Neer Coptus, scorcht by th' almost vertick Sun; A crime no Tragedy can parallel. For, search all stories Buskin'd Poets tell, From PYRRHA'S time; no fact, like what the rage Of this wild People acted, in our Age. An old grudge, to immortall hatred turn'd, Betwixt the Tentyrites and Ombites burn'd; A wound, in these two neighbour-Towns, past cure: Because that neither People will endure Their neighbours Deities; nor will have more Held to be Gods, then they themselves adore. When at their Feast, the Ombites set their beds And boards in Temples and High-wayes: the Heads. And Leaders of the Enemy (that meant To make a sad Feast) labour'd to prevent
The rising from their cups, which, day and night, Those men had set at, till the Sun's seav'nth light. Aegypt is all debauch'd; this truth know I, Each poor Town may with lewd Canopus vie. Add, that a victory comes easie, when The foes are tippled, lisping, reeling men. With flow'rs crown'd, nointed with poor unguents, they Of Ombus dance: here Negro-Pipers play, And there comes malice fasting; first they fall To words, zeal sounds the Trumpet to the Brawl. With equall clamours then begins the fight, Bare hands, in stead of darts, on faces light: Scarce any cheek escap'd without a wound, In all the scuffle no one nose was sound. Halfe faces, or chang'd looks, have all the rout, And gaping bones through broken cheeks stick out. Fists full of blood, drawn from the eye, they caught; Yet they themselves all this but boyes-play thought: Because as yet no carcass trampled lies, But many, thousands fighting, no one dies. Their fury therefore sharper grows; and now, With stretcht out arms, down to the ground they bow
To seek for stones, which suddain tumults arme: Nor are these, stones that can doe equall harme With those which AJAX or strong TURNUS threw; Or weights, such as from DIOMEDES flew, And, hitting of his thigh, AENEAS feld: But such as less and weaker hands can weld, Hands of our time: In HOMER'S dayes that birth Decreas'd in stature; but, upon the Earth The little fighting fools, that now are born, No God can look on, but must laugh to scorn. But to my story; Now supplies come in, To draw their swords the Tentyrites begin, Keen arrows shoot, the Ombites run apace; As fast the shady Palm-tree's neighbours chase. An Ombite falls, pusht headlong by his fear: Him, seiz'd, the Tentyrites to pieces tear, That many may on one dead body sup; Nor call for pots, or spits; to eat him up Or boyl'd or roasted: the victorious throng, To stay for fire, doe think the time too long. They gobbet down his flesh, his bones they gnaw, And are most highly pleas'd to eat him raw.
It glads me, that the fire scap'd unprophan'd; That Element, which slye PROMETHEUS gain'd, And, stole from Heav'n, did on the earth bestow; I joy it, and I think it self does so. But he that of the carcase got a bit, Ne're tasted any flesh so sweet as it. For, 'tis not to be question'd, if the prime Of pleasure were the gust, in such a crime: Nay who, to eat his share, too farre off stood, Scrap'd with his fingers from the earth some blood. The Biscainers, it's said, to mans flesh ow'd Their life; but how? when war and fortune show'd Their utmost spleen: theirs was the worst of fate, 'Twas famine in a siege, of longest date; Their miserable food should pitti'd be; The very people nam'd, draws tears from me. After all herbs, all animalls, the sting Of hunger, makes them snatch at any thing; The foe ev'n pittying their morphew'd skin, Pale looks, and joynts for want of meat grown thin. They famisht fed on others, when they were, For hunger, ready their own flesh to teare.
What Man, what God, but such might hold excus'd, As this sad weight of wretched fortune bruis'd? To whom their very Ghosts might pardon give, On whose dead bodies they were forc'd to live. We better precepts have from ZENO won, He does not hold all must for life be done. This doctrine whence should Biscain Stoicks raise, Besieg'd by old METELLUS: in our dayes, We see the Greek and Roman Athens spread Through th' Earth; by th' eloquent French Nation bred Britains grow Lawyers: so will Thule doe, They talk of hiring Rhetoricians too. But this brave people; and the Saguntine, They that alike in faith and honour shine, But greater in the number of their dead; Their just excuse necessity may plead. Maeotis with lesse rage the world affrights, Then Aegypt: for, the bloody Taurick rites. She that ordain'd (now trust a Poets Pen) Only requir'd a sacrifice of Men; But the poor wretch, that was to loose his life, Fear'd nothing there more barb'rous then the knife.
What accident, what siege or famine held, That Aegypt to such monstrous things compel'd? For which, me thinks their Memphian Nile should grow Into a rage, and cease to overflow. The horrid Cimbrian, Briton, Agathyrse, Nor wild Sarmatian knows a rage so fierce, As this effeminate useless rout; that floats, Row'd with short oars, in painted earthen boats. To suit their crime you can no pennance frame, In whose minds wrath and hunger are the same. The softest hearts kind Nature, it appears, Gave to us men; because she gave us tears. Our senses noblest part our grief commands, For our sad friend; or when a Pris'ner stands In mournings at the Barre: for cosening sleights When to the Court his Guardians th' Orphane cites, Whose tresse-like hair, and eyes still dropping pearl, Makes us doubt whether he's a Boy or Girle. Nature commands our tears, when in the street, A marriageable Virgin's corpse we meet; Or when a Child, his death annex'd to 's birth, Too little for the fire, is clos'd in earth.
What good man, that mysterious lights may use Such as you would the Priest of CERES chuse, But thinks another's miseries are his? From the dumb Herd we diff'renc'd are by this. Profounder knowledge therefore only springs In us, made capable of heav'nly things. To learn and practice Arts, 'tis we have pow'r, Deriving sense from the Celestiall Tow'r: Which creatures that to earth look downward want; To them the world's great Architect did grant Life only; life and soul to us he gave: That mutuall love might succour give, and crave; Collect into a People men dispers'd, Leave hollow trees, where mankind first convers'd; Build houses, joyn to ours anothers Lares, Sleep safe, confiding in our neighbours cares: Protect our brother, stagg'ring with his wound, Or faln; charge at the trumpet's common sound, Defend our selves with the same Works and Forts, And be with one key lockt within the Ports. But now, at farre more concord Serpents are; The Panther yet his spotted kind will spare:
A Lion's blood what stronger Lion spills? A Boar what Boar, whose tusks are sharper, kills? The Indian Tigresses firme peace enjoy, No curst Bears one another will destroy; But Man, when on the wicked Anvill laid, He fatall Iron malleable made; Rakes, Hooks and Plowshares, would not him con∣tent, Till the more skilfull Smith did Swords invent. We see men that unsatisfied remain With killing men, unless they eat the slain. To these foul Monsters what would he not say, Or to what place would he not flye away, If now PYTHAGORAS their diet view'd? That of all creatures heav'n with life endu'd; Ev'n as a man, did th'eating disavow: Nor to his belly would all puls allow.
The Comment UPON THE FIFTEENTH SATYR. VErse 1. Bithynicus.] Volusius Bithynicus, to whom Juvenal addresses this Divine Satyr. Verse 3. Crocodile,] A Serpent of the River Nilus, that, from an egge no bigger then a Goose-egge, grows to be above two and twenty cubits long; which no other creature does, that is at first so little. The Aegyptians know, how high the River Nilus will rise that year, by the place where this egge is hatcht. He is armed with impenetrable scales. In the day time he lives upon the land; in the night, upon the water. When his belly is full of fish, he lies down upon the shore, with his mouth open: a little bird (there called Trochilos, in Italy the King of birds) first picks his teeth, then tickles his gummes, in which pleasure he falls a sleep: And the Ichneumon, a kind of Rat, running down his throat like an arrow shot into his Bowels, gnawes asunder his womb, which is the only tender part about him. Upon the Ri∣ver of Nilus there is a People called Tentyrites, which mortally hate this Serpent, that is terrible to those that flye from him, but flyes from those that pursue him: which only these men dare doe. He is said to be purblind in the water, and quick-sighted on the land. Some affirme
that of all creatures he only grows as long as he lives; and lives to be ve∣ry old. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 25. Verse 4. Ibis,] The Aegyptians pray to the Ibes against the coming of Serpents. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 28. The Ibis is a filthy bird. See Ovid. in Ib. It is somewhat like a Stork, but those of Pelusium are all black, in other places they are all white. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 30. Ipsi qui irridentur Aegyp∣tii, &c. Even the ridiculous Aegyptians worship no Monster, but for some good it doth them: as the Ibes, that kills a vast number of Serpents, being a strong great bird with stiffe thighs, and a horney beak. They preserve Ae∣gypt from the plague, by watching and killing the flying Serpents, which the Southwest wind brings out of the Libyan Desarts: whereby they neither doe hurt, when alive, by biting: nor by their stink, when they are dead. Cic. de Nat. Deor. Verse 5. Half-Memnon.] In the Temple of Serapis, at Thebes in Ae∣gypt, some think the Colossus or Statue of Memnon to have been dedi∣cated; which at the rising of the Sun, touched with his beams, is said to sound like musick. Plin lib. 36. cap. 7. Germanicus saw the Statue of Mem∣non, which being struck with the raies of the Sun, sounded like the voice of a man. Tac. Ann. lib. 2. cap. 15. This vocall Statue was erected about the year of the Julian Period, 3106.1080 years after, when Cambyses ruin∣ed the hundred gated City of Thebes, he caused the Statue to be broken about the middle of the breast, imagining the sound to be a product of the Mechanicks, effected by springs and wheels within: but none were found. From this time the Musick was thought to be magicall; for nei∣ther cause nor Author appeared, yet still the Colossus yielded the same sound. The remaining part of this wonder of the world was seen by Strabo, that sayes, both he and others heard the vocall marble about
one in the afternoon. See Strab. lib. 7. Pausan Attic. Philostrat. in vit. Apol. Verse 6. Thebes.] The most ancient City of Aegypt; built as some say by Bacchus; as others affirm by Busyris, and once so called. Diodor. & Cic. and Herodot. that sayes, it was in compass a hundred and fourty furlongs, and therefore named Hecatompylos. Verse 7. Long-tail'd Monkey.] A kind of Monkey which the Aegyp∣tians worshipped for a God. This Monkey, the Cercopithecus, had a black head, and hair upon all the rest of the body like Asses hair. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 21. Verse 9. The Hound.] Anubis, Son to Isis and Osiris. He gave the Hound for his Armes, or the impress of his Shield: and therefore was adored in the shape of a Hound. This made Aegypt so superstitious, that if a Dog dyed in any house, the whole family shaved themselves; which was their greatest expression of mourning. But Juvenal derides them, that worship the Hound, and not the Goddess of hunting, Diana. Of terrestriall creatures the Aegyptians in generall only worshipped three, the Bull or Cow, the Dog, and Cat. Of water-animals two, the Lepidot. and Oxyrinth. Strab. Some particular places, as the Saitae and The∣bans, adored Sheep, the Latopolitanes the broad Fish, the Lycopolitanes the Wolf, Kid, and Goat; the Mendesians the Mouse, and the Athribites the Spider. Strab. lib. 17. Verse 11. A Leek or Onion,] Wherein, they conceived, there must needs be a Divinity; because they crost the influences of the Moon, de∣creasing when she increased, and growing when she wained. Plin. Verse 15. Sheep.] The Aegyptian Priests eat only Veal and Goose; but altogether abstained from Lamb and Mutton. Diodor. lib. 2.
Verse 18. Alcinous,] King of the Phaeacks, whose Daughter Nausicae found Vlysses amongst the bushes (as in the end of the Comment upon Sat. 9.) and brought him to her father: where at Supper he discoursed his voyage, and told how Polyphemus and Antiphates eat up his Mates: which inhumane crueltie, in my Author's opinion, must needs be thought so incredible and ridiculous a lie, to the soberer sort of Phaeacks, that he wonders some of them killed him not, for abusing them with impossibili∣ties, viz. that men should eat men: all the rest of his Mandevilian ad∣ventures, as that Scylla and Carybdis set their Dogs at him, That the Cy∣an rocks, on either side of the Thracian Bosphorus, met and joyned together, That Neptune gave him bladders filled with wind, that Circe turned his men into Hogs, he thinks might be easier believed, or past by, as pardo∣nable fictions: But that one man should kill and eat another, what sober man can credit? Verse 30. Corcyraean wine,] The excellent strong wine of Corcyra, anci∣ently Phaeacia. Plin. now Corfu, and so called by Cicero. Famil. Epist. 9. Verse 33. Junius.] To prove the matter of fact in this sad relation, as if he were to prove a Law, he names the Consul, Junius Sabinus, Col∣legue with Domitian Caesar, at the time when his Minion, Paris the Play∣er, got a Commission for Juvenal to have a Regiment of Foot at Pen∣tapolis in Aegypt, where that barbarous crueltie was acted. Verse 34. Coptus.] A Metropolitan City of Aegypt. Ptol. Plut. Strab. a Haven common to the Aegyptians and Arabians, inclining towards the red Sea, neer to the Emerald-Mines. Over this Town the Sun at noon day is almost in his verticall point. Verse 37. Pyrrha,] Wife to Deucalion. See the Comment upon Sat. 1. From her time, Juvenal bids us summe up all Tragick Examples, as that
of Atreus, feasting his brother Thyestes with his own Sons; Medea kil∣ling her Children; Orestes his Mother, as aforesaid: and we shall finde no parallel to this bloody banquet. For, those horrid crimes were on∣ly committed by single persons, this by the joynt consent of a mul∣titude. Verse 39. Immortal hatred.] Religion is, a religando, from binding the minds of men in the strictest of all bonds: and undoubtedly diversity of Religion makes the saddest difference between man and man. Upon this maxim, the wisest of the Kings of Aegypt grounded his policy, for assigning severall Gods to the severall People of his Kingdome; that so they might never agree amongst themselves to rebell against their Prince. Diodor. Verse 40. Tentyrites,] The Inhabitants of the City of Tentyris or Tentyra in Aegypt. Plin. Ptol. Strab. Steph. They hate the Crocodile, and are terrible to him, as in his precedent description. The Deity they wor∣ship is the Ibis, a bird that kills the Crocodile, as aforesaid. Verse 40. Ombites.] Ombus or Ombri, a Town in Aegypt. Ptol. that adored the Crocodile. By the description of John Leo. it seems to be that which is now Chana. Undoubtedly, the Transcriber of Juvenal when he should have writ adhuc Ombos, writ the c twice over, and made it adhuc Combos. Abra. Ortel. which mistake, together with an infinite number of grosser errours, is rectified in the Louvre-copie, followed by me in this Edition. Verse 51. Know I.] This knowledge of the Author, makes very much for the Argument of his next and last Satyr, writ when he was banished into Aegypt, under the name of an honourable Commander, a Colonel of Foot.
Verse 52. Lew'd Canopus.] Of the infinite Lewdness, of this Town, See the Comment upon Sat. 6. Verse 55. Poor unguents.] So their wine were generous, the Ombites cared not what poor unguents they made use of, which in other parts of Aegypt were most pretious. Plin. Verse 56. Negro-Pipers.] The Towns of Ombus and Tentyris were upon the borders of Arabia, and common to the Arabian Aethiops: some of which were the Pipers at this lamentable feast of the Ombites. Verse 73. Ajax or Turnus,] Men of more strength then any were in Juvenal's time, as appears by the weight of the stones which they lifted and threw at their enemies. Ajax in his combat with Hector. Iliad. 6. & 7. Diomedes in his combat with Aeneas. Iliad. lib. 6. that had the luck on't; for, Turnus likewise struck him down with a stone. Aeneid. lib. 12. Nec plura effatus, saxum circumspicit ingens, Without more words, he spies a mighty stone, Hom. ibid. sayes that Diomedes took up such a weight, as in his time fourteen young men could hardly wag. Verse 77. Homer,] The most incomparable Greek Poet. He flouri∣shed eightscore years before Rome was built. Cor. Nep. He was blind, and therefore surnamed Homer (for so the Ionians call a blind man that wants a guide) being formerly known by the name of Melesigenes, as born neer to the River Meles, which runs by the walls of Smyrna. Phi∣lost. and Strab. The place of his nativity is made doubtfull, by many Ci∣ties, every one of them claiming him for a Native, after his death; where∣as, in his life time, none of all these Towns would relieve his wants, or own him. The Colophonians say he was a Citizen of theirs; the Chians challenge him: the Salaminians will have him: the Smyrnians so far avow
him, that in their City they have dedicated a Temple to him: many other Cities clash and contend about him. Cic. in his Orat. pro Poet. Archia. He writ two Works; one of the Trojan war, which he calls his Ilias; the other of the voyage of Vlysses, which he calls his Odysses; as likewise many other little Pieces. From him came the illustrious Family of the Homerides, in Chios. Hellan. Ingeniorum gloriae, &c. Amongst so many kindes of learning, and such variety of matter and form, who can fix the glory of wit upon any one particular person? unless it be agreed by generall consent, that no man went beyond the Greek Poet Homer, whether the for∣tune of his work, or the subject be considered. Therefore Alexander the great (and in the best judgements such a censure raises him, above envy, to the highest pitch) amongst the spoils of Darius King of Persia, having taken his Cabinet of unguents or essences, whose outside was all pretious stones: His friends shewing him to what use he might put it (rich unguents and perfumes being improper for a rough Souldier) No, I profess to Hercules, said Alex∣ander, Homers works shall be kept in it: the most pretious Book for the mind of man, shall have the richest Cover. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 29. The Greek let∣ters, invented at severall times by others, he reduced to that form where∣in we now have them. vid. Herodot. & Plutar. & Plin. lib. 3. cap. 2. where he tells of the conjuring up the Ghost of Homer, from the mouth of Appian the Grammarian, an eye witness of the fact. Verse 80. Must laugh.] The Gods (that once assisted Hector and Ae∣neas in their Combats, because they had great courages, and were goodly persons) now cannot chuse but laugh, saith the Satyrist, to see the Pygmeys of his time, Dwarfs both in mind and body, fight and kill one another. Very Pygmeys they would have been, if their stature and strength had lessened proportionable to their decrease between the time of the Trojan
warr and the age of Homer, as appears by the weight lifted by Diomedes, if we credit Homer's testimony, in the last note but one. Verse 84. Palme-trees.] The Palme-tree Grove, neer to the City of Tentyris. Verse 94. Prometheus.] See the manner of his stealing fire from Hea∣ven in the Comment upon Sat. 8. Verse 103. The Biscainers.] The Vascones, a People of Spain. Ptol. Plin. & Tacit. They were besieged by Metellus and Pompey, and reduced to such extreme necessity, that the living were inforced to eat the dead. Flor. lib. 30. cap. 22. Val▪ Max. lib. 7. cap. 6. Oros. lib. 5. cap. 23. The Vascones sent a Plantation into France, which are now cal∣led Gascons. Verse 119. Zeno,] Father of the Stoicks, Son to Mnaseas of Cittium in the Isle of Cyprus. The Oracle told him, if he would be a good man, he must converse with the dead; whereupon he presently fell to the reading of old Authors. Laert. He first came to Athens as a Merchant, yet with some inclination to the study of Philosophy: for, hearing his Ship was cast away, he said Fortune commands me to study Philosophy more intentively. Senec. Or as Plutarch hath it, I thank thee Fortune, thou wilt thrust me into a Gown. He was Scholar to Crates, Stilpo and Xenocrates: and so well satis∣fied with his two last Masters, that he said, his best Voyage was his Ship∣wrack. His Hearers were at first called Zenonians, from their Reader: afterwards, from the place where he taught, they had the name of Stoicks. He was so honoured by the Athenians, that they intrusted him with the keys of the City. After he had been a Reader eight and fifty years, and had lived ninty and eight, he broke his finger (and as it seems, to prevent the sense of further pain) strangled himself. King Antigonus (that eigh∣teen
years before had writ for Zeno to come to him into Macedon, and still had a hope to get him thither) when he heard of his death, said, What a sight have I lost: one asking him why he was so great an admirer of Zeno, he answered, because in all my intercourse with and favours to him, I never knew Zeno either exalted or dejected. The King's respects to Zeno died not with him: For, he sent his Embassador to Athens, that moved in his Master's name for the erecting of a Monument to Zeno in the Cera∣mick. It was done by Decree of the People, attested by Arrhenides, then Archon, and writ upon two Pillars; one erected in the Academy, the other in the Lyceum. The Statue they set up for him was of brass, crowned with a crown of gold. The reason of the Decree was, That the world might know how much the people of Athens honoured good men alive and dead. The Sect of the Stoicks sprung out of the Cynicks; and their principles, as in the Comment upon Sat. 13. were the same, viz. That virtue wants nothing, but comprehends within it what is sufficient for the happiness of life; which they held to be governed by fatall ne∣cessity. Verse 121. Biscain Stoicks.] My Author sayes, It would have been no great wonder, if the Biscainers had eat mans flesh, without necessity, when they were besieged by Metellus; because, in his dayes, Spain never heard of Zeno's Precept, that enjoyned his Sect, Vpon no termes whatsoever to violate the Law of Nature. But in Juvenal's time, so long after Metellus, when the Greek and Roman Philosophy was dispersed through the world (e∣ven the Britains being taught by the French to argue the Law: and Thule or Tilemarck in Norwey talking of a Salary for Rhetors, to initiate their Nation in moot Cases) that now the Aegyptians (from whom all learning was derived) should be so barbarously inhumane, as to eat
one another, is an amazement to my Author; and may be so to all that know not Quantum Relligio poterit suadere malorum. Verse 127. Saguntine.] The people of Saguntum (now Morvedre) in Spain, besieged by Hannibal, against the Articles of peace between Rome and Carthage. Their fidelity to the Romans incouraged them to hold out, till hunger forced them to eat the bodies of the Dead. When they had no more Dead men to preserve the Living, they raised a pile of wood in the Market-place, where they burned themselves, and all they had. This siege, against the conditions of peace, brought in the second Punick warre, and consequently the ruine of perfidious Carthage. Verse 131 Moeotis,] Where every tenth stranger was sacrificed to Diana, the bloody Ceremony continuing till the coming of Orestes and Pylades. See the Comment upon Sat. 1. tit. Orestes. Verse 139. Nile.] This River (of which in the Comment upon Sat. 6.) was the Aegyptians heaven. Read my Translation of Pliny's Panegyrick p. 19. Aegypt so gloried in cherishing and multiplying seed, as if it were not at all indebted to the Rain and heaven, being alwayes watered with her own River; nor fatned with any other kind of water, but what was poured forth by the Earth it self; yet was it cloathed with so much corn, that it might (as it were eternally) vie harvests with the fruitfullest parts of the whole world. Verse 141. The horrid Cimbrian] The Danes and Holsatians, horrid indeed and terrible to the Romans overthrown in three battails by these German Outlawes (for so the word Cimbrian imported in High Dutch according to Plutar. but Fest. sayes, in French) which had been Masters of the Romans, but that Marius rose, as in Sat. 8. from a Ploughman,
and a camp-Carpenter, to be a victorious Generall: and though the man was meanly born, Yet he at Cimbrian horrors never check't, But did, alone, the trembling State protect. Verse 141. Agathyrse.] The Agathyrsi (now Alanorsi) were a People of Scythia. Ptolom. so named from Agathyrsus, Sonne to Hercules by Echidne. Verse 144. Earthen boats.] In the Isle of Della, imbraced by the Sea and two armes of Nilus, there is such an easie passage by water, that some have earthen boats. Strab. lib. 17. Verse 147. Softest hearts.] Dum hominem, &c. when Nature com∣manded Man to weep, she gave him pity, humanity, and mercy. Senec. Verse 159. Mysterious lights.] In the Ceremonies of Ceres, such a per∣son was thought fittest to officiate at the Altar, as could keep a torch light∣ed when he ran at full speed. Verse 179. At farre more concord Serpents are.] Caetera animantia, &c. other creatures hold fair quarter with their own kind. We see them as∣semble and joyn, against those of another species. The fury of Lions makes them not fight amongst themselves: no Serpent bites another Serpent: No Sea-monsters, or fishes, to their Kinde are cruell: But really many mischiefs are done by man to man. Plin. lib. 7. in Praem. Ab homine, &c. Man by man is daily indangered. The world hath not more frequent villany, more ob∣stinate, more flattering. A storm threatens before it rises; houses crack be∣fore they fall; smoak ushers fire: but destruction from the hand of man to man is suddain: and the neerer it approaches, it is the more industriously disguised. You are deceived, if you trust their faces that complement you: they have the shapes of men, the souls of wilde beasts. Senec. Epist. 104. Nulla
est tam, &c. there is no plague so detestable, as that which one man brings up∣on another. Cicer. Verse 193. Pythagoras.] Son to Mnesarchus of Samos a Diamond-cut∣ter. He was Scholar to Phericydes the Syrian, and the first that taught Philosophy to the Italians. When Phericydes dyed, he heard Hermoda∣mantus, then a very old man, Nephew to Creophilos. Then he made a voyage to Aegypt, to sound the mysteries of their Theology, sacred ce∣remonies, and Morality. Afterwards, desirous to learn Astrology and the discipline of the Chaldaeans, he went to Babylon; where he was taught the course of the Starres, and their influence in relation to the nativities of men. It is said that he had no less then six hundred Scholars that came to him by night; whereof the most famous were these four, Architas the Tarentine, Hippasus the Metapontine, Alcmaeon and Philolaus Crotonians. He was the first Assertor  of the transmigration of Souls into o∣ther bodies: whereof Ovid writes the History, and meant not (as I con∣ceive) to trouble Grammarians, with making out his sense with a figure, but understood form as Pythagoras did, for soul : beginning thus In nova, fert animus, mutatas dicere formas Corpora: dii ceptis (nam Vos mutastis, & Illas) Aspirate meis— Souls, chang'd into new bodies, I record: You Gods (that chang'd Your selves, and Them) afford Your help— Pythagoras, the easier to perswade his Auditors, affirmed that he himself was first Son to Mercury, his name Aethalides: and that his Father bid him chuse his suit, and it should be granted, excepting immortality: He asked, that no change of his soul might deprive him of the memory of
things past. After he dyed as Aethalides, he lived again as Euphorbus, then as Hermotimus; then he was a Delian Fisherman, called Pyr∣rhus. Pyrrhus dying, he revived as Pythagoras. This opinion of the Souls migration, he learned from the Aegyptians; and from their Priests (undoubtedly) he had his abstinence from flesh and herbs, not allow∣ing himself all kinds of puls: for, he abstained from beans. What a ridiculous appearance we see in the story of his Aegyptian Philo∣sophy? Can any body then blame Lucian for jeering at him, and bringing the soul of Pythagoras into a Coblers Cock, that was interro∣gated, Why he would eat no beans when he was Pythagoras? whereunto he answered, If I had not in some things been extraordinary, I should not have been so followed. Lucian in Mycill. Truly I am thus far of Lucian's opi∣nion, That Pythagoras, and his Pattern, King Numa, would never have brought the Common-people to submit to their Authority and Lawes, If they had not first won them to a beliefe, that their Law-givers were more then men. This made the Crotonians and Metapontines reverence his Lawes; and suffer him to reduce them, by his doctrine, from their luxurious vanity: insomuch as the women, wrought upon by his integrity and strictness of life, hung up their wanton Ornaments and Vests of cloth of gold, in the Temple of Juno. After he had lived long amongst the Crotonians, he went to Metapontus, and there dy∣ed. About the manner of his death tradition differs very much. But in how great esteem he lived with the Metapontines, they manifested af∣ter his decease, by consecrating his house into a Temple, and giving him divine honours. He was the first that named Philosophy, and himself Philosopher, a lover of wisdome: the reason for it I have given you in the Comment upon Sat. 3. tit. Pythagoras. He thought, that in heavenly
and earthly things there is a harmony: for how can the universe consist but in certain proportions and definite numbers. Polyd. Virgil. lib. 1. cap. 9. de rerum invent. He held the world to be increated and incorruptible, and hat Mankind was from eternity. Censorin. He defined God to be a spi∣it, intent and moving about the nature of all things; of whom all things have their being, all animals their life. Polyd. Virg. lib. 1. cap. 1. vid. B. Jamblic. & Politian in Lam. He writ two Commentaries, one treating of a Common-wealth, the other of a Kingdome; which Plato by his Letter to Archytas the Tarentine (Scholar to Pythagoras) earnestly desi∣red a sight of; and when he had received a Copy, expressed much thankfulness and satisfaction.
Figura Decima Sexta. ROmulidae 1, noti Juvenalis 2 ad ora stupetis? Nil in fronte novi est, radiet nisi Cassidis aurum; Si dicar Soli praefulgens, mira videtur Res expendenti? Sol non est Ipse Tribunus. Sexcenti similes 3 his, me duce, signa sequuntur: Quin positum vestras graphium spes fallit, Amici; Nec tamen obtusum est nostrū, sed cuspide pungit, Si meministis, at hic stimulus multò acriùs urit; Hâc 4 virgâ, vitis de stipite, corrigo lentos Castrorum comites, & frango in vertice nodos; Quâ si vos feriam, prosint patientèr ocello Lacrymulae expressae, tremulâque quiescere calvâ: Aut si Praetorem pergant vexare querelae, Fidendum est Causae; sunt justi Centuriones. Sed vitate meos pedites, vos calcibus actos Memphi proscribent: Libertas est rata Campo; Immotusque metu Miles, succumbit amori. Nunc, palpans Genitor, scribetur languidus haeres; At si non captet, Ceras Paris impleat unus, Qui mihi militiae sub Caesare donat honorem; Vndè Clientis opes, queîs (nam venalia Romae Omnia) ab officio moveatur fortè Patronus.
The sixteenth Designe. NOt know me friends 1? look better, 'tis th' old face Of 2 Juvenal, but in a rich new case: More glorious then the Sun I may be well; The Sun, I take it, is no Colonel. Six hundred of these 3 Fellows I command: You look a Pen should still be in my hand? Mine was no soft Pen, you have heard so much: But where this falls, it gives a harder touch: This, Neighbours, is the 4 Vine; with this I do Battoon my Raskalls; should I beat you too, Your best were to put finger in the eye, Or shake your empty heads; yet, if you cry For Justice to the Tribune, you may trust To your good Cause, our Officers are just: But 'ware my Regiment of foot, you'le be Kickt out of Aegypt. Souldiers, and not Free, Our Charter barrs: For love, not fear, we bow. My bed-rid Father, if he please me now, Shall be my heir; but if he please me not, The Favourite, that my Commission got: Which brings me in, you may at Rome report, Money enough to buy his Place at Court.
The Manners of Men. THE SIXTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL. The ARGUMENT. The great Court-Minion, Paris, sells The Major's place, and Colonel's, Whose parts upon the Stage He play'd: For touching this, the Author's made A Colonel in spight; and sent To Aegypt with his Regiment: Where he the difference records Of People wearing Gowns and Swords. A Souldier's priviledges who can tell? For, GALLUS, in the Camp if all goe well, Young valour's enterd by a happy Star. There is an hour in fate, more pow'rfull far,
Then if to MARS her letter VENUS write: Or's Mother, pleas'd to see her SAMIANS fight. The common-benefits let's first repeat; 'Tis something, that no Gown-man dare thee beat; Nay, if thou beat'st him, he puts up the blow, Nor struck out Teeth dare to the Praetor show, Nor that black lump in his swoln face reveal, Or's one eye: which no Surgeon hopes to heale. The armed Judge, that must thy wrongs repaire, With shoes and great boots hanging at his chaire; Observes CAMILLUS his old martiall Lawes: And lets no Souldier, to defend his Cause, Passe or'e the trenches, or his colours leave. A Souldiers wrong the Captaines soon perceive; And give me satisfaction too he must, In case the ground of my Complaint be just: But the whole Regiment will malice me, My foes each private company will be. The right they do me, they are sure to make More grievous, then the wrong I would not take. It were to be as desperate an asse, As th' Orator VAGELLUS ever was,
Against two thighs, thousands to move to wrath With Boots and spurrs; who so ill breeding hath? Then who so much a PYLADES to lend Assistance, in an army, to his friend? Let's wipe our eyes, nor go about to use Men, that we know will but themselves excuse. The Judge interrogating, who was by When thou wer't hurt? the Witnesse that sayes, I: Be what he will; his haire, in my esteem, And beard, might our great Ancestors beseem. A Souldier'gainst no souldier, if he please, May a false witnesse bring, with much more ease, Then a poore Country-man, if he pursue A guilty Souldier, can produce a true. The grand Prerogatives observe we now, Appendent to the Military vow. If shamlesly my neighbour-Souldier claime A piece of ground, that bears my Fathers name: Or shall the sacred Bounder-stone dig out, To which all my Forefathers were devout; I likewise yearly off'ring, to the Soile, My first fruits of Puls, Hony, Meale, and Oyle.
If, being my debtor, he not only stand Dallying to pay me, but forswear his hand: We wait, till all the people be call'd in; 'Tis a whole year before our Suit begin; And then a thousand stops, a thousand stayes; Sometimes the Usher but the cushion layes: His cloak off smooth CAEDITIUS having got: And old Judge FUSCUS us'd the Chamber-pot, The Court's up, when we should to pleading goe; Within the Lawyers lists the fight is slow. But he that wears a sword and belt, may use His pleasure, and his day of hearing chuse: Nor is his Suit in danger to be stopt, Or with demurrers as with triggers propt. Then, Law the freedom to a Souldier gives, To make his Will, whilst yet his Father lives; For, what his service in the Wars hath got, Unto the Stock of wealth belongeth not, Of which his Father wholly may dispose. CORANUS therefore, that so wealthy grows By husbanding his pay, his dying Father Sends presents to; just industry did gather
His wealth, and that's his own which he hath earn'd. A Generall in honour is concern'd, That he that wants not worth, no gold should want, That all may march out trapt, and all clinquant. The Comment UPON THE SIXTEENTH SATYR. VErse 1, Gallus,] The person honored with this Satyr. Verse 6. Or's Mother,] Juno, whose principall Temple stood in the Ionian-Isle of Samos. Verse 10. Praetor,] That would heare no complaint against a Souldier; whose proper Judges were the great-Officers of the Army. See the Com∣ment upon Sat. 1. tit. Praetor. Verse 15. Camillus,] The Dictator formerly mentioned: He made a Law at the Siege of Veiae, That a Souldier should not be compelled to leave his Colours for any suit in Law; the reason of the Law was, That no Souldi∣er might be absent from the publique service, upon a private man's Complaint. Verse 26. Vagellus,] An Orator that, without any consideration of o∣ther mens interest or his own danger, would undertake any Cause, though he were bastinadoed for it, by some concerned great person: Therefore I call him an Asse, according to our dialect; but my Author stiles him, A Man with the heart of a Mule, Mulino corde, which his old transcri∣bers mistaking, changed mulino into Mutinensi, and so made him a foo∣lish
Orator of Mutina (now Modena) in Italy, but that City is vindi∣cated, by the noble French-copy, from being Mother to such a Dunce. Verse 21. Cohort,] The Roman Cohort, or Regiment of Foote, was the tenth part of their ordinary Legion, or the Legio justa. A Cohort contained three Maniples; every Maniple two Centuries; every Cen∣tury a hundred Souldiers, Alex. Gen. Dier. lib. 1. So you see, that Juvenal, in his Cohort, commanded six hundred Men. Verse 29. Pylades,] See the Comment upon Sat. 1. tit. Orestes. Verse 36. Great Ancestors,] The old Romans; that feared not death, in their Countrie's, their own, or their friend's just-Cause. Verse 42. Vow,] The military sacrament or Oath, the form whereof was this: Obtemperaturus sum, &c. I am to obey and doe whatsoever is commanded me by my Generals, to my power. Polyb. See Lyps. de milit. Rom. lib. 1. dial. 6 & 4. Verse 45. Bounderstone,] Set up for a Marke betweene Neighbours Lands: Upon this stone (not to be defiled with blood, by Numa's con∣stitution) the Romans yeerly sacrificed Puls, Honey, Meale and Oyle, as their first-Fruits to the God Terminus or Limit: of which they used to say; The God Terminus was not to give place to Jove himself. And they held a crime committed against this Deitie, by removing a Bounderstone, to be the greatest of all Sacriledges. Verse 55. Caeditius,] Mentioned here as a Pleader: as a Judge Sat. 13. The Judge Caeditius cannot here invent, Nor Rhadamanth in hell, a punishment Verse 56. Fuscus,] Aurelius Fuscus; Martial sets his mark upon him for a drunkard, and Juvenal does as much for his wife, Sat. 12. and little
lesse for her husband, by making him turne to the wall before he sits down in the Court. Verse 71. That's his own which he hath earned,] All that a Roman ear∣ned, by his labour and patience in the Warres, was cleerly his own; not of the essence of his Patrimony, which appertained to his Father by sur∣vivorship, in case that during his Son's life he had not emancipated, or made him free; for, a Sonne, being in potestate Patris, could give a∣way nothing by Will, unless he were a Souldier, whose military Oath gave him his freedome; and enabled him to dispose of whatsoever he had got in the service of his Country. Knowing this priviledg, Coranus (though he was old, and had one foot in the Grave) courted his young Son, that was a Souldier, and might therefore die before him, without leaving a Legacie, out of the Profits and Proceeds of his Pay, to his Father, unless the old man (like a common Captator) pleased him with Presents. FINIS. ERRATA. FOlio 76. verse 81. for theres, read theirs. fol. 86. ver. 311. for note, read, note yet. fol. 171. v. 415. for, with men of paludated, read, with paludated. fol. 227. v. 20. for the Judge then, read, then the Judge. fol. 310. for in thy decrepitness they must, read, in their decrepitness thou must. fol. 403. v. 237. for the Tribune sits, read, the Praetor sits. fol. 479. v. 340. for Sommnr, read, Sommer.
READERS. IF I should have printed all the places wherein the Louvre-copie (which I follow) differs from other Juvenals, it would have been a little book of it self: I have therefore put down only the most materiall alterations, that, if you please, you may here correct the words of your Latin Juvenal, by the French Edition: and the commaes, by my English. Yet, let me advertise you of one most excellent reading that is not in the K. of France's copie, for which (I take it) we are obliged to Dr. Hammond's observation, out of an old Ma∣nuscript, viz. Sat. 13. vers. 1. Extemplo, quodcun{que} malum committitur, Variae Lectiones JUVENALIS, PARISIIS editi, 1644. Sat. 3. VErse 36. —& verso pollice vulgus Quum libet occidunt V. 112. —aviam resupinat amici Sat. 6. V. 142▪ —vidua est, locuples quae nupsit avaro Sat. 8. V. 4. —humero{que} minorem Corvinum V. 157. Eponam Sat. 9. V. 26. Quodque taces, ipsos Sat. 10. V. 24. —notissima templis
Divitiae; crescant ut opes, V. 74. —si Nurtia Tusco V. 93. —augusta Caprearum V. 150. —aliosque elephantos, Additur imperiis Hispania V. 220. —Oppia maechos V. 222. —circumscripserit Hirrus V. 224. —inclinet Hamillus V. 322. —sive est haec Oppia V. 365. Nullum numen habes, si sit prudentia; nos te Nos facimus Fortuna Deam, Sat. 13. V. 32. Faesidium. Sat. 14. V. 2 Et nitidis maculam haesuram, V. 62. Hic leve argentum; vasa aspera tergeat alter, Sat. 15. V. 35. Ardet adhuc Ombos, Sat. 16. V. 13. At{que} oculum, medico nil promittente, relictum, V. 21. Consensu magno efficiunt, curabilis ut sit Vindicta, & gravior quam injuria V. 23. Declamatoris mulino corde
THE TABLE: OR An ALPHABETICALL ACCOVNT of the principall and most memorable Words, Matter, Historie, Descriptions, Characters, and Sentences contained in this Volume. A. AEACVS, one of the three infernall Judges, folio 17. his office, ibid. Aediles, of three sorts, 102 Aegeus, 445 Aegistthus, begot in Incest, 350 lives in Adul∣tery, ibid. marries Clytemnestra, 15. designs the murder of Orestes, ibid. is slain by him, ibid. Aelius Sejanus, his beginning, 357. his policies, ibid. & 358. discovered, ibid. his execution, 359 Aemilius Lepidus, Pont. Max. 289. why his Sta∣tue was set up with a Childs Bulla about his neck, 290 Aemilius Paulus, leads Perseus K. of Macedon in triumph, 291 Aemilius Scaurus, 58. his birth, poverty and advancement, ibid. he breaks his Sonn's heart, ibid. his Character, ibid. his Em∣bassage to K. Jugurth. ibid. Aemilius, a rich Lawyer, 254 Aeneas, Son to Anchises, 33. his piety, ibid. his fortune, ib. drowned, 407. Julius Caesar de∣scended from him, ibid. Aeolus, K. of Strongyle, 370. why called K. of the Winds, ibid. what his dominion sig∣nifies, in a morall sense, 371 Aeta, King of Colchis, 18 Acestes, why called the good, 263 Achilles, Son to Peleus, 34. his life summed up, ibid. Acilius Glabrio, a Prudent Man, 123. Consul with Vlp. Trajan, ibid. accused for De∣signes of Innovation, ibid. banished with more cruelty then his Son was executed, ibid. Actor's spoiles, 61 Adriatick, now Golfo di Venetia, 120 Africa, and France, litigious Countries, the Lawyers best Patrimony, 25 Aganippe's Valey, 241 Agathyrse, 511 Agave, kills her Son, 249 Age Ninth, 44.443. Eight Ages, ibid. Agrippina, chosn for her Uncle Claudius Cae∣sar's second Wife, by her dear Servant Nar∣cissus, 149. hr confidence before marri∣age, ibid. she gets her Son Domitius adop∣ted by her husband, ibid. then poysons the old Man with a Mushrome, ibid. Alaband, a City n Caria, 97 Alba, built by Asnius, 121. robbed by K. Tul∣lus, ibid. from whence it had the name, ibid. Albane Wine, now called Vino Albano, 142 Albina, 99 Alcestis, dyes to sa her Husband's life, 221 Alcinous, K. of the haeacks, 504. feasts Vlysses, ibid. Alcmaeon, why he  his Mother, 223 Alecto, one of the tree Furies, 247. what the Furies are, ibid. Alexander the Great 68. his Mother's pride, ibid. his Father dream interpreted, ibid. his conquests, d. his description, ibid. dyes at thirty yrs of age, ibid. the truth of his impoisong doubtfull, ibid. Alexandria, 195.  called the Walls of La∣gus, ibid.
Alledius, a Glutton, 14 Althaea, Queen of Calidonia, 147 Amphiaraus, 03. foreknew that he must die at thy Siege of Thebes, 223. a secret his Wife made use of, ibid. his last Charge to his Son, ibid. Amphion, 199. his Fable, ib▪ mythologised, 200 Amydon, a Paeonian City, 97 Ancient Romans described, 59 Ancile, a brazen Shield, 63. of what fashion, ibid. how it dropt from the Clouds, ibid. eleven more made, ibid. Ancona, a City built by the Grecians, 120 Ancus Martius, fourth K. of Rome, 144. con∣quers the Latines, ibid. inlarges the City and Territories, ibid. builds the City of Ostia, ih. makes the first Roman Prison, ibid. Andromache, 212. brings a Son to Pyrrhus, ibid. is married to Helenus, ibid. Andros, an Aegaean Isle, 97 Antaeus, 98. why Hercules held him from touching the earth, ibid. his Sepulcre and body found, ibid. Anti-Catoes, writ by Caesar, 206 Anticyra, an Isle, 446 Antigonus, 508. his love to Zeno, and the rea∣son of it, 509 Antilochus, eldest Son to Nesor, 374. slain by Memnon, ibid. Antonius. vid. C. Antonius Anubis, 213. worshipped in the Form of a Dog, 214. the reason, 503 Apicius, the most memorle Glutton, 119. writes the Art of Cokery, ibid. upon what account he hang himself, ibid. Apicius Galba, a Droll, 140 Apollo's Temple-Statue, 31 why he is called the learned in the Law ibid. Appion, affirmes that he sa Homer's spirit rai∣sed, 507 Appius, vid. L. Appius. Appius Claudius, 381. his ot upon Virginia, ib. he dyes for it, 382 Aquinum, now Aquino, 5. famous for the birth of Juvenal and omas Aquinas, 106 Arabarch, inscribed in e Pedestall of Crispi∣nus his Statue, 31. wt it signifies, ibid. Arachne, Idmon's Daugh, 59. her Fable, ibid. Inventress of Lines and Nets, ibid. Arc, a triumphall Monument, 91 Archetimus, intrusts his Gold, 445. is trepand, ibid. how he came by his own, 446 Archigallus, the Title of Cybel's Chief Priest, 53. why no Roman could be of that Order, ib. how they came to be castrated, 54. the manner of their procession, ibid. Archigenes, a great Physitian, 446. censured by Galen, 483 Areopagus, 324. how the Judges, there sitting, gave sentence, ibid. to divulge the secrets of the Court was death, ib. why called the Court of Mars, ib. Arete, Queen of Corcyra, 328 Aristotle, a Stagyrite, 49. his parentage and description, ibid. Tutor and Secretary to Alexander the Great, ibid. his Scholars na∣med Peripateticks, ibid. he made the first Library, ibid. Armenia, rebells against Nero, 300 Arpinum, 305. there Tully and Marius were born, ibid. Artaxata, a City built by K. Hannibal, 70 Arturius, an Ingrosser of beneficiall Places, 95 Arviragus, K. of South-Wales, 126. said to marry Claudius Caesar's Daughter, ibid. Aruspex, 63. how he made his presage, ibid. his purifying Ceremony, 70 Asius, 144 Astraea, Justice, 189 Assaracus, 374 Asylum, 309 Asylus, the Fencer, 202 Atalanta, Princess of Argos, 147 Atellan Jigge, 193 Athamas, K. of Thebes, 18 Atlas, the Mountain 405. why called the pil∣lar of Heaven, ibid. why K. Atlas was said to be transformed into that Mountain, ib. Atreus, 248 Atropos▪ the Destiny that cuts off the Thread of life, 95 Atticus, 404 Auction, publick sale of Goods, 95. the man∣ner of it, ibid. Aufidius, 321 Auge, Daughter of Alaeus, 13
Augurs, 216 Augustus Caesar, 305. his Victories over Bru∣tus and Cassius at Philippi, over M. Antony at Actium, ibid. Aurelia, 146▪ Aurelius Cotta, 147 Automedon, Coachman to Achilles, 27 Autonoe, 193 Sentences in A. Fol. 153. verse 23. The Iron Age brought forth all other Crimes: Adultery was in the Silver times. Fol. 73. verse 25. —for our pains; In honest Arts, the City yeelds no gains. B. BAcchanals, Celebraters of the libidinous Feasts of Bacchus, 48 Bacchae, vid. Maenades. Baetick Spain, now Granada, 421. famous for rare-coloured wool, ibid. Baiae, why so named, 9. what a sweet and Princely Town it was, ibid. Baius, Mate to Vlysses, 90 Balneatick, the Bath-farthing, 68 Baptists, Dippers of Athens, 60 Barbers, came first to Rome from Sicily 124 Bardocuculli, 300 Bareas Soanus, impeached, 99 Basil. 32 Baskets, first made in Great Britain, 422. their invention falsly boasted by the Romans, ib. Bathyllus, a Lutenist, 447, his Statue conse∣crated, ibid. Beccafico, 474 Bedriack-field, where Otho lost the Empire, 61 Belides, 221. their Story, 222. the Sentence pronounced against them in Hell, ibid. what it is thought to signifie, ibid. & 224. Bellerophon, 382. courted by Q. Sthenoboea, ibid. denyes her, ibid. is accused for an attempt upon her Honour, ibid. carries Letters writ against himself, ibid. his fortunate Valour, ibid. he marries Sthenoboea's Sister, 383. his flying up to Heaven interpeted to be his invention of Gallies, ibid. Bellona, Goddess of Warre, 125. her Priests sacrifice their own blood, and then pro∣phesie, ibid. Beneventine Cobler, an ill favoured drinking-Glasse, 143 Berenice, 198 Beryll, 143 Biscainers (the Cantabri in Spain) anciently Vascones, 508. besieged by Metellus, ibid. Planters of Gascony, ibid. Bithynia, 245 Bithynicus, vid. Volusius Bithynicus. Boars served up whole to the Table, 32. who first did it, ibid. Boccar, K. of Numidia, 145 Bounder-stone, the Altar of God Terminus, 522. not to be blodied, ibid. Bridge Aemilian, 189 Britannicus, 197. poysoned, ibid. Brutidius, 360 Sencences in B. Fol. 80. verse 181. In wretched Beggery nothing's harder, then To see what laughing Stocks it makes of Men. Fol. 82. verse 213. Our Common Crimes proud Beggery. Fol. 109. verse 9. No bad Man is bless'd. Fol. 114. verse 117. Let me be rather then a Man of Birth. The Gyants Brother, th' Offspring of th' earth.
Fol. 331. verse 7. The Belly's cheaply fed. Fol. 347. verse 354. Seldome Beauty is with Virtue matcht. Fol. 470. verse 304. No Playes no Shows like Businesses of Men. Fol. 317. verse 134. What thou shalt in thy Bed-chamber commit, Ev'n when the Cock the second time shall crow, E're it be day, shall the next Tavern know. C. CAcus, the Outlaw. 148. robbes Hercules, ib. how he was caught and killed, ibid. Caducum, a term of the Civil Law, explaned, 323, 324 Caeditius, a Judge, 452. a Pleader, ibid. Caesonia, 218 Cajeta, 476 C. Antonius, banished by the Censors, 296. the reason, 297 C. Caesar Caligula, 218. how he had his sur∣name, ibid. his dotage on his Wife, ibid. what he said when he kissed her neck, ib. why she philtered him into madness, ibid. C. Cassius Longinus, 353. his eyes put out, ib. the colour for his death, ib. the true cause, ibid. C. Julius Caesar, 363. France decreed him for his Province, ib. his five Consulships, ib. his three years absolute Reign, ib. his vi∣ctories, ib. & 364. his munificence, ib. his murder foreshewed, ib. his strange dexte∣rity in dispatch of business, ib. the number of his Battails, ib. his mercy and bravery, ibid. C. Julius Vindex, the first that declared against Nero, 303 C. Marcellus his Charge against C. Scantinius, 59 C. Marius, 305. his poor beginning, ibid. his high Atchievements against K. Jugurth, and the Cymbrians and Teutons, 306. overthrown by Sylla, ib. his imprisonment and strange escape, ib. begs his bread at Carthage, ib. is the seventh time Consul, ib. dyes of a Pleurisie, ib. C. Piso Calphurnius, adopted by Galba, 147. how munificent, ib. C. Scantinius, cause of the Scantinian Law, 59. C. Silius, 384. Gallant to the Empress Messa∣lina, ib. forced to sue a divorce from his Wife, ib. and to marry his Mistress in her Husbands life time, ib. refuseth to plead at his triall, ib. Cales, anciently Gades, its situation, 351. sackt by the English, 359. how rich the soil a∣bout it, ib. Calliope, the Muse, 120 Calphurnius Bestia, accused by M. Caecilius, 483. Calvina, 100 Camillus, called a second Romulus, 68. why condemned, ib. chosen Dictator, ib. re∣lieves the Capitol, ib. peswades the Ro∣mans not to desert the City, ib. his second Victory against the Gauls, ib. his Law at the Siege of Veiae, 521. his death, 68 Campania, 379. why called Terradi Lavoro, ib. there Pompey the Great falls sick, 380 Campus Martius, 212. why called Tarquin's fields, ib. described, ib. how the men were there exercised, ib. how the women, 201 Camurius, murderer of Galba, 61 Canopus, 195 Canusium, 197 Capito Cossutianus, accused by his Province, 294 Capito, vid. L. Fonteius Capito. Capitol, named from a man's head, digged out of its foundation, 308. an Augury from thence taken, that Rome should be the head of the World, ib. Capitoline, surname to the Family of Manlius, 67 Capreae, 359 Cares, builds the Colossus at Rhodes, 203 Carfinia, a Strumpet, 59 Carus, Intelligencer to Domitian, 25. informes gainst Pliny. ib. Cassandra, Daughter to K. Priam, 375. a Pro∣phetess,
never believed, 376. the ground of the Fable, that Apollo made love to her, ib. her Ravisher thunder-struck ibid. Castanetta's, 409 Castor and Pollux, 449. their fabulous hatch∣ing, ib. why esteemed Gods by Marri∣ners, ib. their actions, ib. the Fable of their death and revivall derived from the Stars that bear their names, ib. Castor's Temple in Rome, ibid. Castor, Inventer of Coaches, 383 Catiena, 100 Catiline, a Conspirator, made famous by the Pen of Cicero, 57 Catillus, 103 Catti, 128 Catulus, a Monopolizer, 95 Catullus, Author of the Comedie called the Phantasm, 447 Catullus Messalinus, a blind Begger, 125. raised to be one of the Lords of the Councel, ib. Catuzza, 451 Cecrops, K. of Athens, before Deucalion's Flood, 292. why pictured Male and Female, ib. his Olive-tree names the City, ib. what he taught the Grecians, ibid. Celsus, vid. Junius Celsus. Censor, 63. the manner of his election, ibid. his Office, ibid. Ceparius, fellow-Traitor with Catiline, 57 Cercopithecus, described 503 Ceres, Goddess of Husbandry, 191. how re¦presented, ib. her Fable, ib. her sacrifices, 192. why so little frequented, ib. her Pa∣geants described, 484. why an Egge was presented in her Pomp, ibid. Cethegus, ingaged with Catiline, 57 Chaldaeans, 214. their imployment in the Babi∣lonian State, ib. their study, ib. why grea∣ter Philosophers then the Grecians, 215 Chalky-feet, the mark of a Slave sold in o∣pen Market, 30. Character of a Greek Mountebanck, 76.77.78.79. Charon, 105 Chief Bishop, vid. Pontifex Maximus Chio, 100 Chiron, 262 Chorax, 10 Christians inhumanely martyred by Nero, 33. Their torture described, 11. vers. 188 Chrysippus, the Stoick, 48. an incomparable Logician, ibid. Cilicians 125 Cimbians, 306. why they rejoyced at a bat∣tail, and lamented in a sickness, ib. Cinna, calls-in Marius 306 Circe's Rocks, 127 Circus, the great Shew-place, described 97. why a Towell was there hung out for a Flag, 409 Claelia, 309 Claudius Caesar, marries his own Brother's Daughter, 57. a sottish Prince, 149. puts his Empress to death, in obedience to his Freed-man Narcissus, and marries again by appointment, ib. adopts Nero, Son to his his second Wife, ib. is poysoned by her, ib. Cleanthes, the Stoick, 51. his poverty when he studied Philosophy, ib. the manner of his death, ib. Cleopatra, Daughter to Ptolemey Auletes, 62. she puts Marc. Antony upon a battail at Sea, ib. why and how she poysoned her self, ib. Clients, what they were in their first insti∣tution, ib. Clio, 242 Clitumnus, 421 Clodius, Cicero's Enemy, 56. why he degraded himself of his nobility, ib. his prophana∣tion of the Good Goddesse's Ceremonies occasions the Julian Law, ib. his incest and debauchery, ib. his discovery by Cae∣sar's Mother, 206 Closter, Son to Arachne, 59. he invents wheels and spindles for wool, ib. Clotho, the Destiny that holds the Distaffe, 94 Cluvienus, a pittifull Poet, 28 Clytemnestra, 15. why she murdered her Hus∣band, ib. she marries Aegisthus, ib. is slain by her Son, ib. her ghost haunts him, ib. Cneius Pompey, his rise, 361. why surnamed the Great, ib. the success of his armes, ib. his Wives, ib. the Inscriptions upon his spoils and triumphs, 362. his folly of loo∣sing all at one battail, ib. his sad end, 363.
his Sons defeated, ib. Cocks, offered to Aesculapius for recovery of sick Persons, 453 Codus, 2. Author of the Poem titled Theseis, 12. the Inventory of his Goods, ib. his miserable poverty, ib Coena Pontificia, 122 Cohort, 522 Collatinus Tarquinius, Husband to Lucretia, 380 his Inscription upon her Monument, ib. Columna Bellica, 125 Concord's Temple, where the Stork built her nest 30 Consul, by Juvenal called Praetor, as he was first named by the People, 355 his mock-state described, 356 Coptus, 504 Corbulo, 105 Corcyra, 504 Corinth, first called Ephyre, 297. how situated, ib. the Citizens affront the Roman Embas∣sadors, ib. a War decreed against them, ib the Town easily stormed, ib. how Corin∣thian brass came to be the best, ib. Cornelia, 198. her Jewels, ib. Cornelius Fuscus, Student in Armes, 125. Ge∣nerall against the Dacians, ib. he and his Army lost, ib. his Wifes draught, ib. he himself noted for a Tipler, 522 Corsica, described, 146 Corvinus, Juvenal's friend, 420. Corvinus, a Roman Knight, 30. glad to be a Shepherd's man, ib. Corvinus, vid. Val. Corvinus. Cos, an Island, 295 Cosmus, Inventer of the Vnguentum Cosmianum, 294 Cossus, a Lord, 103 Cossus, a Legacy-monger, 371 Cossus, his Spolia Opima, 291 Cotta, vid. Aurelius Cotta. Cotyto, Goddess of the Baptists or Dippers, 60 Crassus, vid. M. & P. Crassus Crates, cryes out upon his Countrymen, 259 Crepereius Pollio, 321 Creticus, surname to the house of Metellus, 292 Crispinus, Freedman to Nero, 23. born at Canopus, in Aegypt, ib. Martial's Epigram upon his Cloak, ib. his pride, 4. his character, 108.109. what he paid for a Mullet, ib. the summe reduced to our money, 119. Ma∣ster of the Horse, and Councellor to the Emperor, 117 Crispus, vid. Vibius Crispus. Crocodile, described, 501 Craesus, King of Lydia, 378. his questions an∣swered by Solon, ib. condemned to be bur∣ned, ib. his life pardoned 379. made a Pri∣vy-Councellor to K. Cyrus, ib. Crowns, given to Poets 245 Cumae, a City built by a People of Asia, 90. it gave the denomination to a Sibyl, ib. Cupping-glasses, 476 Curian Temperance, 47 Curtius Montanus, a huge fat Glutton, 124 Cyane, 300 Cybele, why so called, 53. her invention of the Taber, Pipe and Cymball, ib. stiled Mo∣ther of the Gods, Rhea Pessinuntia ib. Magna Mater, 193. Berecynthia, ib. her love to Atis, ib. Cydias, a Trustee, 445. put to his oath, ib. e∣quivocates, but gains nothing by it, ib. dyes miserably, ib. Cynnamus, the Barber, 22. Martial's Epigram upon him, ib. Barber to Juvenal, 4.343 Cynthia, Mistresse to Propertius, 186 Cyrus, K. of Persia, takes Croesus prisoner, 378. comes to see his execution, ib. why he sa∣ved him, 379. how he preferred him, ib. Sentences in C. Fol. 12. vers. 204. The plumed Combatant repents too late. Fol. 41. verse 74. Censure acquits the Crow, condemns the Dove. Fol. 79. verse 150, A Client's the least Losse in all the World. Fol. 230. verse 75. —'tis in vain To think one bosome can to Cares contain.
Fol. 279. verse 177. Each Crime is so conspicuously base, As he that sins is great in birth, or place. Fol. 337. verse 131. —but few goe down In peace that wear, none that usurp, a Crown. Fol. 438. verse 231. —think'st thou he escapes, whose Conscience makes Whips that, unheard, his guilty soul still shakes? Fol. 459. verse 47. There is a Catiline on every ground: A Brutus or a Cato no where found. Fol. 459. verse 55. There's due unto a Child a great respect. If thou dost any wickedness affect: Slight not thy tender Infant coming in, But let him stand betwixt thee and thy sin. Fol. 468. ver. 259. Thou bid'st him gather wealth by land and Seas: He finds short wayes, great Crimes are done with ease. Fol. 473. ver. 361. —he, who nothing covets, happier is, Then he that seeks to make the whole World his. Fol. 498. ver. 145. To suit their Crime you can no penance frame, In whose minds wrath and hunger are the same. Fol. 166. ver. 297. If once surpriz'd, th' earth hath not bolder things, Ev'n from their Crimes their spleen and courage springs. Fol. 183. verse 681. —I hate her, that studies, and commits A foul Crime being in her perfect wits. D. DAedalus, an Athenian Artist, 94. a Mathe∣matician, ib. imprisoned in his own Labyrinth, 26. how he escaped, ib. what we owe to his Invention, 94. where he laid down his wings, 74 Damasippus, 300 Danow, 301 Decii, sacrifice their lives for their Country, 307 Demetrius, the Cynick, 142 Democritus, the Abderite, 354 the reason of his continuall laughing, ib. his opinions, ib. how and why he burned out his sight, ib. Demosthenes, Son to a Cutler, 366. his Orati∣ons against K. Philip the cause of his ba∣nishment from Athens, ib. he takes sanctu∣ary, ib. Antipater's plot to draw him out, ib. prevented (by his voluntary death, 367 Dentatus, the Consul, 481. accepts seaven a∣cres of land for his service to the State, ib. Depositum, 444 Destines, vid Parcae. Deucalion, after the Flood, lands at Parnassus, 28. consults the Oracle of Themis, ib. Dictator, his Office Kingly, differing only in name, 289. limited in point of time, ib. absolute in power, ib. why so called, ibid. Diogenes, the first Cynick, 486. his own name, ib. his Father's profession, ib. cozen∣ed by the Oracle, ib. forced to flye his Country, ibid. how poorly he lived at A∣thens, 487. taken by a Pyrate, that sold him for a Slave, ib. his answer to him that cri∣ed him, ib. his words to him that bought him, ib. why infranchised, ib. what stuffe his Tub was made of, and how he used it, ib. his Letter concerning Dionysius the second, 256. Alexander the Great gives him
a visit, 488. their conference, ibid. why Juvenal calls him Diogenes the Great, ib. his answers touching his buriall, ib. his age and the remarkable day of his death, ibid. his opinion, ibid. Diomedes, wounds Venus, 26 Dionysius, deposed, keeps a School, 256. his Parley with Diogenes, ibid. Diphilus, 99 Dolabella, Proconsul, 297. accused and con∣demned, ibid. Domitian Caesar, marries Julia, Daughter to his Brother Titus, 57.58 Domitius, counterfeits madness, 124 Doris, 98 Drusus, 105 Drusus, kills the Generall of an Army, and bears his name, 291 Drusus, Brother to Tiberius Caesar, 292. derived from Tib. Nero, that conquered Asdrubal, ib. Sencences in D. Fol. 340. ver. 197. Death does alone deal plainly, and declare What things of nothing humane bodies are. Fol. 433. ver. 129. —in all Causes, th' impudent Defence Most men believe to be just confidence. Fol. 434. vers. 147. Great Doctors must doe desp'rate Patients good. E. EAgle, 476 Egeria, a Goddess, or Nymph, 92. Wife and Counceller to K. Numa, ib. her Foun∣tain, Grove, and Temple let to the Jews by the People of Rome, ibid. Elephants, first brought into Italy by K. Pyr∣rhus, 424. then by Hannibal, ibid. Enceladus, 262 Endromides, Fencers Cassocks, 201 Enthymem, 210 Ephemerides, an Astrologicall Diary, 180 Epicurus, 448. places felicity in the pleasure of the mind, and absence of pain, ib. why he condemned the Dialecticks, ib. he de∣nyes providence, ib. how Lucretius mag∣nifies him, ib. Voluptuaries erroneously called Epicureans, ib. his abstinence, ibid. Epona, Goddesse of Stables, 300 Erichthon, Inventer of Chariots, 383 Erimantus, 99 Eriphyle, 223. betrayes her Husband Amphia∣raus, ib. her death left in Legacy to his Son by her, ibid. Esquiline Mount, one of Rome's seven Hills, 98. the names of the rest, ibid. Evander, K. of Arcadia, 406. why he came in∣to Italy, 407. he defeats the Aborigines, ibid. takes the place that was afterwards Rome, ib. builds upon Mount Palatine, ib. treats Hercules, and Aeneas, ib. Euganeans, 290 Euphranor, Picture-drawer, and Statuary, 104. writes of Symetry and Colours, ib. when he flourished, ibid. Euphrates, a River springing from the steep Mountain Niphates, 292. joyns with the River Tigris, and makes Mesopotamia, ib. Euristheus, task-Master to Hercules, 388 Sentences in E. Fol. 235. verse 183. For Eloquence in rags men seldome look. Fol. 334. verse 55. Brave Men Examples, which the world adorn, May in dull climes, and grosser aire, be born. Fol. 394. verse 47. —what end canst thou look for, when thy rents Diminish, and thy gluttony augments?
F. FAbii, 67. the Family of the Fabii under∣takes a War, ib. three hundred and six of them slain, by a stratagem, at Cremera, ibid. Fabius Maximus, descended from the Fabii lost at Cremera, 67. why his Son was called the Gulfe, 202. why he was titled Maxi∣mus, 290. his descent from Hercules, ib. Fabius Persicus, 290 Fabrateria, 104 Fabricius Max. the Censor, 69. fines and de∣grades Pub. Corn. Ruffinus, and likewise his own Collegue, ib. Fabricius Veiento, a Senator, 103. his flattery to Claudius Caesar, 115. ver. 147. his unhap∣piness in his Wife, ib. Fabulla, a common Prostitute, 59 Falern Wine, 127 Falernus, 197 Faesidius, 443 Fasces, 291 Fascilides, the Image of Diana, 16. the reason of the name, ib. Fathers priviledged, 323 Fauna, the Good Goddess, 205. the strict modesty of her life, imitated in her Sacri∣fices, ibid. Flaminian Way, a High-way from Rome, full of Monuments of the Dead, 35 Flammeum, the Bride's Veil, 200. why worn, ibid. Flora, 201. her Games described, ib. Flower of Asia, 143 Flying Posts, 128 Faecialis, the Herauld at armes, 125. his Cere∣mony in denouncing Warre, ib. Fortunius Licetas, writes de Lucernis absconditis, 53 Forum, the great Roman Piazza, 31. described with four other Forums, 117.118 Forum Boarium, 290 Freedman, an infranchised Slave, 29 Fronto, a Friend to Poets, 19. honoured by Martial, ibid. Frusino, 104 Fuscina, the Retiarius his Trident, 66 Fuscinus, 474 Fuscus, vid. Cornelius Fuscus. Sentences in F. Fol. 38. verse 11. No trust to Faces, Fol. 75. verse 68. Thy great Friend the Faith he hires suspects. Fol. 80. verse 171. As much Coine as in's Cofers each man hath, So much is th' estimation of his Faith. Fol. 138. verse 165. A barren Wife makes a Friend sweet and dear. Fol. 157. ver. 100. Fame's losse upon a Bed of Down weighs light. Fol. 157. ver. 106. They bring strong souls to things they fouly dare. Fol. 269. ver. 91. —'tis rare, If mighty Fortunes common sense can share. Fol. 270. ver. 96. He's wretched that on others Fame relies. Fol. 313. verse 38. Fates govern Men. Fol. 415. verse 59. Some doe not get a Fortune for life's sake; But, blind, live that they may a Fortune make. Fol. 439. v. 249. Th' intent of fraud is taken for the Act; What is it then if one commit the fact? Fol. 5. verse 4. There is an hour in Fate more powerfull far, Then if to Mars her Letter Venus write.
Fol. 238. verse 231. If Fortune will, poor Rhetorician, she Can raise thee, and thou shalt a Consul be: And from a Consul, if she will, she can Make thee again a Rhetorician. Fol. 433. verse 123. Men's Fates are divers, though their crimes be one: A Crosse exalts that Villain, this a Throne. G. GAbii, 241. betrayed by Sext. Tarquin. 360 Gabinius, an Insurrector with Catiline, 57 Galba, vid. Apicius Galba. Galba, vid. Servius Sulpitius Galba. Gallicus, the Praetor Vrb. 450 Galline Wood, 105 Gallita Cruspilina, 424 Gallograecia, 245 Gauls conquer Italy, 245. beat by Camillus, ib. run away into Greece, ib. planted in Gallo∣graecia, ibid. Gallus, 521 Games Olympick, instituted, 446. consi∣sting of five exercises, ib. ending in five dayes, ib. the Victor crowned with an O∣live-wreath, ib. why called Pisaean Olive, ib. Ganges, described, 352 Ganymed, Son to the K. of Troy, 145. his Fable, ib. the mythologicall sense of it, ibid. Genius, taken for God, 122. for a Tutelar Spi∣rit, ib. for a Spirit within us, ibid. Getania, 451 Getulian Boore, 143 Gillo, a weak Gallant, 4 Glaucus, 453. money deposited in his hand, ib. he denyes the receipt of it, ib. puts his case to the Oracle, ib. the severall answers made him, ib. the money restored, ib. he and his whole Family extirpated, ibid. Glaucus, Father to Bellerophon, 382 Golden Fleece, 18. hung up in the Temple, ib. stolne from thence, ibid. Golden Ram, 18. carryes Phryxus and Helle, ib. is made a Star, ibid. Good Goddess, why thought to be Ceres, 60. vid. Fauna Gorgons, conquered, 420 Gracchi, Caius and Tiberius Gracchus, Sons to Cornelia, 55. too popular, ib▪ why they pas∣sed the Lex Agraria, and with what success, ib. how they were slain, ibid. Gracchus, a Fencer, 66 Gracchus, a Salian Priest, 63. married to a Trumpeter with a Portion of 3125 l. ster∣ling, ib. Green-coats, 409 Grief ends in stupidity, 200 Grotto of Vulcan, 16 Grove of Mars, 16 Gyarus, the least Isle of the Cyclades, 28. Male∣factors banished thither, ibid. Gymnasium, 99 Gymnosophists, why so called, 216. insensible of heat or cold, ib. their reply to Alexander the Great, ibid. Sentences in G. Fol. 331. verse 3. To few men good and ill unmask't appear, For, what with reason doe we hope or fear? Fol. 337. verse 115. Is there in Greatness so much Good, as will But only serve to counterpoise the ill. Fol. 348. verse 361. —ev'n to tempt the Parents some are bold, Such is their courage that come arm'd with Gold. Fol. 350. verse 421. Pray, that the Gods be graciously inclin'd to grant thee health of body, and of mind.
Fol. 400. ver. 161. Proud Guests I —shun that will compare Me to themselves, and scorn my meaner fare. Fol. 429. verse 29. —good men are grown scarce the number small; If't be summ'd up, you will not find in all So many true deservers of that stile, As there are gates to Thebes, or mouths to Nile. Fol. 431. verse 88. —easily men with the Gods make bold, When they alone behold the sinne we act, No mortal being Witness to the fact. Fol. 440. verse 283. Who bounds his vices? when did banish't Grace Return, if once but wip'd out of the face? Fol. 467. ver. 238. From whence soe're it rises, Gain smels well. Fol. 350. ver. 410. —let the Gods thy wishes weigh: Vnto their providence thy will submit, And for what's sweet, they'l give thee what is fit, And that which thy condition most behoves: The Gods love Man, more then himselfe he loves. Fol. 429. verse 40. Know'st not how many Venus'es appear In others Gold?— Fol. 52. verse 72. That he that wants not worth, no Gold should want: A General in honour is concernd. Fol. 395. verse 53. Vntimely fun'rals Gluttons cannot have, Old age is more their terrour then the grave. H. HAemus, 200 Halcyone, 242 Hamillus, 372 Hannibal, lands in Spain, 257. passes the Py∣renaean Mountains, ib. marches over the Alps, ib. gives overthrows to four Consuls, ib. Maharbal's judgement of him▪ 258. he is beaten by Scipio, ib. poysons himself, ibid. Harpocrates, God of silence, 446. the posture of his Image, ib. believed to be a concur∣rent cause of mens diseases, ibid. Harpyes, 298. why said to dwell in Islands, ib. what they were in Fable, ib. and 299. what in reality, ibid. Harts, live nine hundred years, 483. Alexan∣ders Gold-Collar, ibid. Hebe, 444. why removed from her Cup-bearers place, ibid. Hecuba, 377. why the Greeks said she was turned into a Bitch, ibid. Hedge-Priest, or House-Priest, contradistinct from Temple-Priest▪ 6 Heliodorus, Nero's Informer-General 24. how courted by the petty Intelligencers, 4 Hellebore cures the Gout, 446 Helvidius Priscus, banished, 143. repealed, ib. Heraclêa, writen by Panyasis, 26 Heraclitus, the Ephesian, 354. why he still wept, ib. his scorn of Physitians, 355. his sad end, occasioned by his own experiment, ibid. Herculean language, to what it referres, 55 Hercules, Son to Jupiter and Almena, 26 his seven and thirty labours, 385.386.387.388.389. he burns himself, ib. deified, ibid. Hermes, Mercury's Statue, 293 Hernia, 206
Hernick, 481 Hesione, carried prisoner into Greece, 374 Hesperides, 149. the Fable of their Golden-Apples and their Dragon, 150. the mytho∣logy of both, ibid. Hetrurian Bubbles, 150 Hippia, 194 Hippocles, Generall of the Asiatick Cumaeans, 90 Hippodame, Wife to Pirithous, 18 Hippolytus, a great Huntsman, 383. beloved by his wanton Step-mother, ib. gives her a re∣pulse, ib. his life endangered by his virtue, ib. lost by misfortune, ib. his torn limbs peeced again, 384. he comes into Italy, where he calls himself Virbius, ib. marries Aricia, ib. is buried in the Aricine Grove, 383 Hippomanes, 219 Hirpin and Corytha, 293 Hirrus, 372 Homer, 506. when he flourished, ibid. his own name, ib. why surnamed Homer, ib. owned and deified after his death by Ci∣ties, that slighted him in his life time, ib. & 507. his works, ib. his noble posterity, ib. esteemed the Prince of Poets by Pliny, from the judgment of Alexander the Great, ibid. composer of the present Greek Alpha∣bet, ib. Horatius Cocles, his Heroicall valour, 308. his handsome Answer, ibid. Hortensius, the Augur, or Diviner by Birds, 23. what Birds he loved best, ib. Hyacinthus, 196. his Fable, 197 Hylas, a delicate Boy, Favourite to Hercules, 35. drowned in his service, ibid. Hymettus, 452 Sentences in H. Fol. 267. verse 57. —who will honour him that's Honour's shame, Noble in nothing, but a noble name? Fol. 270. ver. 104. —think it the foulest sin, Shouldst thou, to save thy breath, thy honour spend, And forfeit for thy life, life's chiefest end. Fol. 498. v. 147. The softest hearts kind Nature, it appears, Gave to us Men, because she gave us tears. I. JAnus, 207. why he shared the Govern∣ment with Saturn, ib. he builds Janiculum, ib. coins money, ib. why his Figure had two faces 208. a Temple dedicated to him, ib. why called Patuleius and Clusius, ib. Janus Ogyges and Chaos are the same, ib. Jasius, K. of Argos, 147 Jason, steals the Golden-Fleece, 18 Jasper, 143 Iberina, 193 Ibis described, 502 Icarus, Son to Daedalus, 26. his imprisonment, ib. drowned in the Sea, 27. which was a Sea of Astrologicall Notions, 94 Ida, a Mountain, 444. memorable for Jove's concealment, ib. for the Golden Ball, ib. for the taking up of Ganymede to Heaven, ibid. Illyrians, good Seamen, 298 Inclusam Danaen, an Ode of Horace, 188.250.251 Ingenuus, 141 Ino, Wife to Athamas, 18 Io, vid. Isis. Iobates, Father to Sthenoboea, 382 Iphigenia, Sister to Orestes, 16. why she was brought to be sacrificed, ib. how she esca∣ped, ib. Priestess of Diana's bloody Rites in Taurica, ib. knows her Brother at the Altar, and saves his life, ibid. Isaeus, a smooth-tongued Orator, 98 Tutor to Demosthenes, ibid. Isis, conceived to be a cause of diseases, 446. her Fable, 211. her marriage to Osiris, and the change of her name from Io, ib. her deification and the reason of it, ib. where
her Temple stood in Rome, ib. what use it was put to, ib. why it maintained a Company of Picture-drawers, 421 Istrian-Flood, vid. Danow. Julian Law, vid. Law. Julius Caesar's Wife met by Clodius, habited like a Singing-woman, 57 Julius Caesar, vid. C. Julius Caesar. Julius Tutor robs the Cilicians, 294 Junius Celsus, 20 Junius Sabinus, 504 Juno, 190. what her intermarriage with her brother signifies ib. why her Sacrifices were milk-white, 420 Jupiter, 187. his fable ib. moralized ib. the power of his Gold, 188. why Jove was cal∣led Tarpeian, 190 Ivy, used at common weddings, 192 Ixion, Father to Pirithous, by his Wife, 18. Father to the Centaurs, by the Cloud, ibid. Sentences in I. Fol. 5. verse 60. What's the hurt rich Infamy can doe? Fol. 11. verse 194. Th' Informer catches the least word that slips. K. KNight, a Romane dignitie, 30. how made, ibid. Sentences in K. Fol. 394. verse 33. From Heaven came Know thy self, Fol. 236. ver. 203. All men would know, none for their Knowledge pay. L LAbyrinth, contrived by Daedalus, 26 Lacerta, Domitian Caesar's Coachman, 253 Lachesis, the Destiny that spinns the thread of life, 94 Ladas, foot-man to Alexander the Great, 440 how nimble, ibid. his Statue erected, for his victorie in the Olympick games, ib. Lake Velabrian, 217 Lamus, 207 Lar, the houshold God, 185 his Temple, In∣cense, and Altar, ib. paralleld with the Dog, by Ovid, ib. Larga, 475 Laronia, a witty wanton, 58 Lateranus, vid. Plautius Lateranus Latine way, full of dead men's monuments, 35. why so called, and how formerly, ib. Latinus, an informing Player, 24. presents his wife to the grand-Informer, 4. put to death for a Pander, 25. his Chest, 190 Latona, 380 Laurell, used at marriages of great persons, 193 Laureol, 301 Law against Adulteresses, 27 Law Julian, 57 Law against Parricide, how executed, 450 Law Scantinian, 59 Law Theatrall, 101 Law of three Children, 324 Leeks, and Onions, worshipped by the Ae∣gyptians, 503. the reason, ibid. Lenas, a Legacy-monger, 146 Lentulus, one of Catiline's conspiracy. 57. his Family surnamed the Swift, 301 Lepida, perswades her Daughter Messalina to kill herself, 385 Lepidus, vid. M. Aemilius Lepidus, Lerna, 203. why the Greek Proverb, A Lerna of evils, ibid. Lesbia, Mistress to Catullus, 186 Libertine, 181
Libitina, the funerall Goddess, 425. why some think her to be Venus, ib. Licinus, a Freedman, 30. Governour of Gaule, ib. where he gets a mass of treasure, ib. Lictor, the Officer of death attending the Consul & Praetor, 29. his rods and axe, ib. Ligurian Stones, 105 Liparen Islands seaven, 17. their names, ib. called Ephesian and Vulcanian Isles, 444 Locusta, poisons Britanicus, 28 Longinus, vid. C. Cassius Longinus, Luca, 301 Lucan, 248 Lucilius, the first Latin Satyrist, 21. his Coun∣try, ib. where he dyed, and who was at the charge of his funerall, ib. L. Appius, 207 L. Fonteius Capito, Consul with C. Vipsanius, 442. the time when the thirteenth Satyr was writ, ib. L. Metellus, Pontifex Max. 101. how he lost his eyes, ib. his triumph, ib. L. Roscius Otho, 101 L. Virginus, Father to Virginia, 381. his expres∣sion when he slew his Daughter, ib. Lucrece, 380. the manner of her Rape, ib. she kills her self, ib. her revenge, ib. her Hus∣bands Inscription upon her Monument, ib. & 381. her Epitaph, ib. Lucrine Rocks, 127 Lupercalia, Games in honour of God Pan, 65. why so called, ib. the time and manner of the solemnity, ib. Luperci, 65 Lura Rutila, an ugly old woman, 382 Lycisca, 197 Lyde's salve-box, 64 Lysias, the Orator, 452 Sentences in L. Fol. 40. verse 56. —Loose livers are fast friends. Fol. 163. ver. 232. On man's life never was too long delay. Fol. 234. ver. 174. Purple and Violet Robes a Lawyer sell. Fol. 318. ver. 157. —this fair flow'r goes swiftly to decay, Poor wretched short Life's short portion hasts away, Whil'st we drink, noint, wench, and put Garlands on, Old age steals on us never thought upon. Fol. 333. verse 37. —laughter's easie, any may deride. Fol. 519. verse 58. Within the Lawyers lists the fight is slow. Fol. 166. ver. 305. Long peace undoes us, lust, then warre more fierce, Revenges now the conquer'd Vniverse. M. MAcedo, adored in the figure of a Wolfe, 214 Machaera, 242 Moecenas, a great Patron to Poets, 28. a Vo∣luptuary, ib. his bounty to Horace, 250.251.252.253. Maenades, the Priestesses of Bacchus, 205. the time, place, and manner of their Sacrifice, ib. Bacchus named Evoeus, from their cries, ibid. Maenades Priapêan, the Ladies that sacrificed to the Good-Goddess, when Clodius met Caesar's Wife, 205 Maeotis, 120. sacrificeth every tenth stranger, 510 Maevia (a Gladiatress) fights with a wilde Boar, 21 Maculonus, 246 Malta, 203. what commodities it affords, ib. held by the expulsed Knights of Rhodes, now called Knights of Malta, ibid. Mamurius, the Workman, that made the ele∣ven
Shields, 64 Mango, 409 Manilia, 200. her Plea to her Accusation, 201 Marcellus, kills the Generall of the Gauls, 67. takes the City of Syracusa, ib. his honours, ib. why he built the Temple of Jupiter Ca∣pitoline, 408. his death, 67 M. Crassus, proud of his wealth, 360. his vi∣ctory over the servile Army, ib. For which he weares Laurell, instead of Myrtle, ib. his third part in the triumvirate, 361. why he made warre upon the Parthians, ib. his miserable death, with the losse of his whole Army, ibid. M. Aemilius Lepidus, forbids his funerall pomp, 202 M. Fabius Quintilian, a Spaniard, 194. Gover∣nour to Domitian's Nephews, ib. Tutor to Juvenal, ib. his judgment of M. Varro, 210 M. Tullius Cicero, meanly born, 261. his high merits, ib. his unworthy end, ib. stiled Father of his Country, 305. his fame, and his murderer's infamy recorded, 365 Marius Priscus, Proconsul of Africa, 25. fined, and banished, ibid. Mars, how he roared, 447. his Court in A∣thens, vid. Areopagus, Marsians, from whence derived, 102. where their Country lay, 481 Marsus, Son to Circe, 102 Marsyas, flead alive, 320 Massa, a Court-spie 24.25 Matho, 254 Matronalia, the female feasts, 321 Maura, 372 Medêa, 219. her Romançe, ib. & 220. Dioge∣nes his judgement of her, ibid. Medusa, 420. why it was said that her head turned men into stones, 421 Megasthenes, General of the Chalcidians, 90 Meleager, P. of Calydonia, 147. his story, ibid. what his brand signified, 148 Melita, vid. Malta. Memnon's Colossus, or vocall Statue, 502. tou∣ched with the Sun's beams, sounded like Musick, ib. like the voice of a man, ibid. when built, ib. when, why, and by whom broken, ibid. Menelaus, builds the City of Canopus, 195 Menaecus, 483. why he slew himself, ibid. Mentor, an excellent Graver, 296. what two Bolls of his work cost, ib. Meroe, the Isle, described, 213. the City Meroe, built, ib. how the Islanders spend their time, ib. their Nurses breasts bigger then the Children that suck them, 450 Messalina, 197. her Night-walk, ib. her se∣cond marriage in her Husband's life time, 384. her designe, to make her peace, pre∣vented, ib. she wants courage to kill her self, 385. a Tribune executes her, ibid. Metella, debauched by Clodius, 57 Metellus, vid. L. & Q. Metellus. Micipsa, 145 Milo, adopted by T. Annius, 55. kills Clodius, ib. why Cicero meant to speak for him, 56. what he said, when Tully's Oration came to his hand, ibid. Milo, the Crotonian, his incredible strength, 352. ruined by trusting to it, ibid. Minerva, Enyo, and Pallas, vid. Bellona. Minturnians, 306 Mirmillo, vid. Secutor. Mithridates, K. of Pontus, 223. his strength of body and brain, how many severall lan∣guages he spake, ib. his success against the Romans, ib. & 224. his three Overthrows, why he would have poysoned himself, but could not, ib. he assists his murderer, ibid. his nearest relations slain by him, ibid. Modia, 99 Montanus, vid. Curtius Montanus. Moses, 477 Mucius, a great Knave, but a poor man, 32. baited by Lucilius in his Satyrs, ibid. Mushromes, best in Libya, 148. when gathe∣red for use. ibid. Mutius Scaevola, vows to kill K. Porsenna, 309. mistakes, ibid. burns off his own hand, ib. Myron, a Statuary, 296. his Heifer, ib. Myrtle, why forbidden at the feast of the Good Goddess, 60
Sentences in M. Fol. 277. verse 123. 'Tis madnesse, after all, to cast away The ferry-Money, that should Charon pay. Fol. 336. verse 113. — those that would Act no foule Mischiefe, doe yet wish they could. Fol. 434. verse 153. With much more tumult, and a deeper groan, Our Moneys then our fun'rals we bemoan. Fol. 424. ver. 158. Lost Money is bewail'd with tears unfain'd. Fol. 464. verse 155. —down full mouth'd bags whil'st money flowes, Like money's self, the love of Money growes; Nay, he lesse covets it, that hath it not. Fol. 472. verse 349. Goods got hardly, with more feare and care Are kept, so wretched Money-hoorders are. Fol. 164. verse 248. — can a Mother of the Trade Chaste thoughts, or other then her own imprint? N. NAbathaea, why so called, 408 Narcissus, Freedman and Favourite to Claudius Caesar, 149. how Messalina frigh∣ted him with her two Husbands, 384. he makes the Emperor be told of it, ib. is cre∣ated Captain of the Life-guard for a day, ib. sends a Tribune to take off Messalina's head, 385. he and his brother Freedmen hold a Councell about a second Wife for Claudius, 149. he carries it for Agrippina, ib. Nausicae, finds Vlysses naked, 328 Negro-Pipers, 506 Mephele, Stepmother to Phryxus, & Helle, 18 Nero, Scholar to Seneca, 302. his cruelty to his nearest Relations, ib. & 303. his burning of Rome, ib. his malice to the Publick, 425 Nero's Uncle, vid. C. Caesar Caligula. Nestor, his parentage and birth, 373. his act∣ings in his youth, ib. joyns with the Greeks against the Trojans, when he had lived to the third age of man, ib. what three ages were in Juvenal's account, ib. Agamemnon's opinion of Nestor's wisdome, ib. his elo∣cution, ib. his Wife and Children, ibid. Nile, described, 195 Niphates, 208. why so named, 209 Nobility, what it is in the judgements of Se∣neca and Cicero, 289 Novius, 424 Numa Pompilius, second King of Rome, 92. a short view of his reign and Acts, ib. how he disposed of his body by his last Will, ib. ordered that his books should be bur∣ned, ib. Numantia, holds out a Siege bravely, 290. perishes nobly, ibid. Numantians, Roman Commanders at the Siege of Numantia. ibid. Numitor, a complementall Friend to Poets, 248 Numitor, King of Alba, 248. deposed by his Brother, ib. restored by his Grand Chil∣dren, Romulus and Remus, ibid. Nurtia▪ Goddess of Tuscany, 359 Sentences in N. Fol. 42. verse 100. None ever was stark naught at first.
Fol. 348. verse 359. —Nature can doe more then breeding can, Or Tutors,— Fol. 473. ver. 371. Nature ne're asks this thing, and Wisedome that. O. OEdipus, 243. his History, ib. & 244 Oeneus, K. of Calidonia, 147 Oenomaus, K. of Elis, Father to Hippodame, 18 Oericulana, Mother to K. Serv. Tullius, 307 Old-age, described, 341.342.343.344 Olympiads, the Greek Aera, or account of years, 447. in what year of the Julian Pe∣riod they began, ibid. Olympick Games, vid. Games. Ombites, adore the Crocodile, 505. Ombus, why written Combus in other copies of Ju∣venal, ibid. Omen, from whence derived, 423 Oppia, 372 Oracles, silenced, 215 Orcades, taken by Claudius Caesar, 70 Orestes, a Tragedy, 15. his Parents, ibid. his Life and death, 15.16 Orodes, 361 Orontes, a Caelesyrian River, 96 Osiris, marries Io by the name of Isis, 211. is murdered by his Brother, 214. his body found, ib. they worship him in the shape of a Bull, which they call Apis, ibid. his Offering, ib. he is supposed to be Joseph, 291 Ostia, now Hostia, 301 Otho, his princely descent, 60. how he came to be Emperor, ib. Otho, vid. L. Roscius Otho, P. PAccius, 424 Pacuvius, 424 Palaemon, vid. Remmius Palaemon Pallas, a rich Freed-man 30. how he got his e∣state and honours, ib. Pansa, 294 Papinius Statius, nobly born 248. his workes ibid. reads his Poem with great applause 331. yet was miserable poor, ib. Parcae, the Destinies 95. their ternary num∣ber explaned, ib. Paris, son to Priam 374. his business in Greece ibid. his stealing of Helen, cause of the in∣gagement against Troy, ibid. Paris, the Player 196. why put to death ibid. his Satyrick commendations by Juvenal ib. how he returned the Satyr. ib. his bounty to his old Masters, the Poets 249. his Mistresses. ibid. Parrhasius, incomparable for giving the last hand to a Picture, 295. why Zeuxes yeil∣ded to him, ibid. Parthenius, a rare Graver, 422 Patricians, 216 Paulus Aemilius, Consul, 68. slain at Cannae, ib. derived from Mamercus, Son to Pythagoras, 291 Pausanias Erxyclides, 452 Peacocks flesh never putrefies, 32. who brought it in request at feasts, ib. Peacocks compared to Poets, 245.246 Pedo, 254 Pegasus, Praefect of Rome, 122 Peleus, Father to Achilles, 482 Pelion, 262 Pelopea, Mother to Aegisthus, 250 Penelope, constant to her Lord, 59. her arti∣fice to stave off Suitors, ib. Pentheus, why killed by his Mother 249 Peribonius, a professed Rogue, Chief Priest of Cybele, 53 Persicus, 406 Petosiris, 215 Phalaris, the Tyrant, 293. his brazen Bull, ib. he tortures the Artist, that made it to tor∣ment others, ib. he himself is roasted a∣live in it, 294 Pharos, 194 Phericydes, Tutor to Pythagoras, 512 Phiale, 373 Phidias, the greatest Master for carving in Ivory, 295. his stupendious Statue of Mi∣nerva,
296. his Jupiter Olympius, ib. his Ve∣nus, ib. his Nemesis, ib. Philip, a Chirurgion, 448 Philip, King of Macedon, 422. why called the royall Merchant, ibid. Philters, 217 Phoenicopterus, 408 Pholus, 422. how he treated Hercules, ib. Phrygian Razor, 62 Phrygian talk, 62 Phryxus, a Prince of Thebes, 18 Picus, King of Latium, 299. Diviner by the flight of Birds, ib. turned into a Magpie, ibid. why that Fable was put upon him, ibid. Pierian Girles, the Nine Muses, 120 Pirithous, Prince of the Lapiths, 18 Piso, vid. C. Piso Calphurnius. Pittacus, one of the seaven Sages, 50. kills the Tyrant Melancrus, ib. chosen Generall for his Country, ib. challenges and kills the Generall of the Enemy, ib. this Duell the originall of the Retiarius and Secutor, ib. he resignes his Principality, ib. the time of his death, ib. Plautius Lateranus, 353. why and how put to death, ibid. Plebeians, 216 Plexippus, 147 Pluto, first Agesilaus, 364. why called Lord of the infernall Region, 365. why Pluto, and Dis, ib. he steals away Proserpine, ibid. Pollinea, a Wench, 59 Pollio, 406 Pollux, vid. Castor. Polycletus, a Statuary, 104 Polyphemus, the Cyclop, described, 322. his love and jealousie, 323. his meat, man's flesh, his one eye put out by Vlysses, ib. his Fa∣ble interpreted, ibid. Polyxena, Daughter to K. Priam, a great beau∣ty, 376. Achilles taken with her ibid. the match concluded, ib. her Bridegroome slain, 377. why she was murdered at his Tombe, ib. her modesty in dying, ibid. Pompeius Ruffus, a Whisperer of Accusations, 125 Pompey, vid. Cneius Pompey. Pontia, 218. why she poysons her two Sons, 219. her impudent confession, ibid. she dyes like a Ranter, ibid. Ponticus, 287 Pontifex Maximus, an Imperiall Title, 121. the Colledge of Pontifices, or Bishops, id. Pontine Fenns, drained, 105 Popa, 421 Poppaea, 211. invents Pomatum, ib. washes with Asses milk, ib. the manner of her death, ibid. Port of Ostia, 423. why called the Tyrrhene Pharos, ibid. Porta Trigemina, 290 Porticoes, 117 Posides Spado, 476.477 Praeneste, a City built by the Grecians, 103. the Praenestine Temple of Fortune, ib. Praetexta, a Gown worn by Noblemens Sons, 28. originally it was the Priests ha∣bit, ib. Praetextati, the young Noblemen of Rome. 28 Praetor Vrbanus, the Lord Chief Justice of Rome, 29. why called the grand horse-stealer, 409 Praetors, eighteen, 29. at first the Consuls Deputies, 441 Praetus, Husband to Sthenoboe, 382 Priam, taken prisoner, when Troy was sackt by Hercules, 374. carried into Greece, ibid. ransomed, ib. rebuilds the City of Troy, ib. makes himself Lord of almost all Asia, ib. marries Hecuba, by whom he had se∣venteen Sons, which made up the num∣ber of his male issue fifty: for he had thirty three Sons by the by, ib. slain at Jove's Altar, ibid. Prochyta, a little Island, 90. why so called, 91 Procue, 221. her Fable, ibid. Procula, a Roman Courtezan, 59 Proculeius, an old Ladies Favourite, 4 Proculeius, a man of Honour, 250 Proculus, compelled by the Emperor to fight upon a Theater, 405 Prometheus, 126. his Fable, ib. the mytholo∣gie of it, 127 Proseuca, the Jewes Place of Prayer, 88 Protogenes, 99
Provinces, 119 Psecas, 212 P. Aemilius Macedonicus, puts on his triumphal Robe in the Senate-house, 287 P. Crassus, commands his Slave to kill him, 361 P. Egnatius, informes against his Pupill, 49. condemned and executed, ibid. Pygarg, 408 Pygmeys, in India, 451. their healthfull Coun∣try, ib. their height, ib. the derivation of their name, ibid. the intervalls of their Wives childing, ib. they destroy the breed of Cranes, ib. how they build, ib. called Troglodytes by Aristotle, ib. Pylades, Son to Strophius, Prince of the Pho∣cians, 15. his friendship to Orestes, 16 Pyrrha, Wife to Deucalion, 28 Pyrrhus, King of Epire, 478. his parentage, ib. his life, 479.480. his Character, ibid. Pythagoras, 512. travells to Aegypt, ib. to Baby∣lon, ib. his Scholars ib. his opinion of trans∣migration of souls, ib. Ovid's Metamor∣phosis probably conceived to be a Pytha∣gorean History, ib. Pythag. avouches his own metamorphosis, ib. & 513. Lucian, in his Satyr upon Pythag. gives true reason of that strange, but well-meant, imposture, ib. he dyes at Metapontus, where his house was made his Temple, ib. why he called himself Philosopher, 105. the rest of his opinions, 14. his Treatices of a Common∣wealth and a Kingdome, ibid. Pythia, 453 Sentences in P. Fol. 112. verse 85. Nothing so grosse but will belief incline, When that Pow'rs prais'd, equalls the pow'rs divine. Fol. 278. ver. 158. —the plunder'd will find armes. Fol. 337. ver. 127. What o'rethrew Crassus? conquer'd Pompey caught▪ And bim that to his whips slav'd Romans brought? Ev'n supreme Power,— Fol. 351. ver. 431. —If Prudence be, There can be no Divinity in thee Fortune? 'tis we, we to thy pow'r have giv'n The name of Goddesse, and plac'd thee in Heaven. Fol. 404. ver. 256. Lesse frequent use gives Pleasures their esteem. Fol. 427. verse 1. The crime committed presently torments The Author; 'tis the first of Punishments, That no Offender can himself acquit. Fol. 428. verse 12. Man's Pain should be no greater then his Wound. Fol. 438. ver. 225. Happy Philosophy, that, by degrees, Kills vices first, then souls from errour frees. Fol. 466. ver. 219. All th' evill, all the wickedness we doe, The forrein unknown Purple brings us to. Fol. 137. ver. 156. —many words may not be spoke By a poor fellow in a tatter'd Cloak▪ Fol. 159. verse 148. —the Portion casts the Dart, Her freedom's bought—
Fol. 231. verse 97. Poor man what to thee— Is any glory, if't bare glory be? Fol. 332. verse 5. What hast thou by thy happy'st Project gain'd, But thou repent'st thy pains and wish obtain'd? Fol. 166. ver. 307. When Poverty left Rome, no horrid sin But enter'd— Fol. 333. verse 32. —out of earthen pots no poison's drunk, Fear that when thou rich Setine Wine dost hold Sparkling 'midst Diamonds, in a Boll of Gold. Q. QVinquatrua, 365 Quintilian, vid. M. Fabius Quintilian. Q. Luctatius Catulus, puts an end to the first Punick warre, 67. his articles of peace with the Carthaginians, ibid. Q. Metellus Macedonicus, 375. the noble bearers of his Corps, ibid. Quirinus, Mars, 64. why so called, ibid. R. REgisters of births and burialls, how ancient, 323 Religion, from whence derived, as to the word, 505. why severall Religions were invented in Aegypt, ibid. Remmius Palaemon, 210. Tutor to Quintilian, ib. how he called Varro, ib. his brag, ib. his poverty, and the cause of it, 211 Retiarius, the Net-bearer, a Gladiator, 66. his manner of fight, ib. Rhadamanthus, a Judge of Souls, 17. his com∣mission, ibid. Rhea Sylvia, forced to be a Vestall Virgin, 248. got with child, ib. buried alive, ib. Rhene, 301 Rhetors, speak for their lives, 25 Rhodes, why so called, 203. Aristippus his judgement of this Isle, ib. the Rhodian Co∣lossus, ibid. Rhodes taken by Solyman the Magnificent, ib. Rhodope, the rich Courtezan, 320. builds a Pyramid, ibid. Richborough, in Kent, 128 Ring, in Matrimony, how ancient, 189. why put upon the middle finger, ib. Rubellius Plautus, 292. descended from Augu∣stus Caesar, ib. why he is writ Plautus, not Blandus, as in the Louvre-copy, ib. Rubren Lappa, 247 Rubricks, 481 Rubrius, 124 Rudis, a Rod, or Wand given to a Gladiator at his discharge, 95 Rufus, vid. Satrius. Rutila, vid. Lura Rutila. Rutilus, 475 Sentences in R. Fol. 393. ver. 17. No price for Rarities too great is thought: Nay, mind it, they love most what's dearest bought. Fol. 463. ver. 155. —with these torments why dost goe about To scrape up wealth? 'tis madness without doubt; Plain frenzie doth thy senselesse soul bewitch, To live poor, only hoping to die rich. Fol. 335. verse 83. What doe the Rabble all this while? they run Along with fortune, as they've ever done, And hate condemned men—
S. SAbellians, conquered by M. Curius, 102 Sabines, 198. their stoln Maids prove ex∣cellent Wives, ib. where their Coun∣try lay, 98 Saguntum, 142. now Morvedre, 510. besieged by Hannibal against the Articles of peace, ibid. the Inhabitants eat the dead, ibid. they fire the Town and themselves, ibid. the ruine of Carthage revengeth Saguntum, ibid. Samos, an Isle opposite to Ionia, 97 Samothracia, 101 Samothracian Gods, ibid. Sardanapalus, King of Syria, 389. his effemi∣nacy, ib. his womanish defence of him∣self, 390. his manly death, ibid. Sardonyx, 449 Sarmatia, described, 147 Sarmentus, a Buffoon 140 Satrius Rufus, 262 Saturne, 443. why he is said to have reigned in the Golden Age, ib. his Fable, 184.185. mythologised, ib. he builds Saturnium, 207. the Stamp of his Coin, ibid. Scauran Counterfeits, 58 Scipio Africanus, rescues his Father, 69. de∣feats Hannibal, ibid. Scipio Aemilianus, Son to L. Aemilius Paulus, and adopted by Scipio Africanus, 70. ruines Carthage, ib. is murdered, ibid. Scipio Nasica, voted the best man, 100. pulls down the Consulls Statues, ib. refuses the title of Imperator, and the honour of tri∣umph, ib. his funerall expenses defraied by the People, ibid. Secundus Charinas, 261 Secutor, the Follower, a Gladiator, 66. the nature of his sword-play, ibid. Sejanus, vid. Aelius Sejanus. Seleucus, a Lutenist, 372 Semiramis, 61. why she took upon her the person of a man, ib. she walled Babylon, ib. her success and courage, ib. she is kil∣led by her Son, ibid. Seneca, the Stoick, 146. Tutor to Nero, ib. his vast wealth, ib. the cause of his ruine, 353. why, and how, he was put to death, 146. the subject of his works, ib. his vindica∣tion from the aspersion of Avarice, ibid. Seriphus, 215 Servilia, 382 Servius Sulpitius Galba Caesar, barbarously mur∣dered, 61. by a Common Souldier, ibid. his descent, 288 Servius Tullius, his Father thought to be the God Lar, 424. Son to a bond woman, ib. Crowned King of Rome, 307. how long he reigned, ib. why called the last good King, ibid. Setine Wine, 142 Sextus, a wicked great man, 55 Shaving the head, upon what account it was used by the Romans, 423. Why the Aegyp∣tians shaved, 503 Sheep, never eaten by the Priests of Aegypt, 503 Sica, the Secutor's Fauchion, 66 Sicambri, 128 Sicyon, an Isle in the Aegean Sea, 98 Socrates, 51. his Parents and Wives, ib. the first reducer of Philosophy from Specula∣tion to Practice, 52. preserved in the plague-time by his abstinence, 489. his Impeachers, 52. his answer at the Barre, ib. he would not have Counsell to plead, 452. his Sentence and Death, 52 Socratick Catamite, how to be understood, 52 Solon, 377. the place of his birth, ib. the time when he flourished, ib. the equall temper of his Lawes, ib. he repeals Draco's bloo∣dy Decrees, ibid. flyes from Athens, ibid. his conference with Croesus, 378. the suc∣cess of his words, 379. his death in Cyprus, ibid. his ashes, by his own appointment, scattered about the Isle, ib. his Epitaph, ibid. Sooth-sayers Tuscan, 442.443.444 Sora, 104 Sostratus, 370 Sportula, a basket of money, or of meat, 29 Sportula Vocall, 443 Statius, vid. Papinius Statius. Stentor, how lowd he cried, 447
Sthenoboea, 382. charges Bellerophon, with her own crime, ib. hears the news of his Mar∣riage, and kills her self, 383 Stork, 476 Stygian Sound, 68 Suburra, one of the fairest Streets in Rome, 91. why so named, ibid. Supper, to be made for Clients, 32. in lieu of the money-Sportula, ibid. how distin∣guished from the Patrons Supper, ib. Supper for the Dead, 145 Surena, 361 Sybaris, built by the Trojans, 204. how po∣tent a Town it grew to be, ib. how glut∣tonous, even to a Proverb, ibid. Sylla, or Sulla, the Dictator, 19. layes down his Commission, ib. is a theam in the Rhetorick Schools, ib. the summary of his life, ibid. Sylla's three Scholars, 57 Sylvanus, 209. how begot, ibid. his strange shape, 210. why God of the Woods, ib. his Sacrifice, ibid. Syrophoenix, 300 Sentences in S. Fol. 4. verse 35. 'Tis hard, not to write Satyrs. Fol. 39. verse 31. The Straight may Cripples, White-Men Negroes jeer. Fol. 41. verse 72. Secrets bring jewels, Fol. 42. verse 95. —The Scab but got By one Sheep, the whol Flock will have the Ro. Fol. 75. verse 61. He owes thee nothing, Nothing will bestow, That lets thee but an honest Secret know, Fol. 78. verse 135. They will know Chamber-Secrets and be fear'd. Fol. 134. verse 79. Great Houses with proud Servants swarm. Fol. 237. ver. 243. Nothing costs Fathers lesse then Sons, Fol. 281. verse 212. Short let it be, which thou dar'st fouly act. Fol. 318. verse 139. Slaves care not what they 'gainst their Lord compose, When with their rumors they revenge his blowes. Fol. 318. verse 147. We must, for many causes, live upright, Fol. 333. verse 21. But, chiefly, That we Servants tongues may slight. Seldome the Souldiers did poor Garrets clime. Fol. 347. ver. 349. Fair Lucrece, and her fatall Rape, Incourages no one to wish her Shape. Fol. 428. vers. 20. That Science makes the happy men, Which conquers Fortune with celestiall Books. T. TAbraca, 371 Tagus, now Taio, a River in Spain, whose sands have a mixture of Gold, 96 Tanaquill, 215 Tarentines, descended from the Spartans, 204 they call in King Pyrrhus against the Ro∣mans, ib. the cause of their destruction by lightning, ib. Tarentula, a Spider, 204. the effect of its poy∣son, ib. the cure, ibid. Tarentum built, 204. taken by the Lacedaemo∣nians,
ib. from whence it derives the name, ibid. Tarquin, the Proud, 307. his conquests, 308. appoints the Feriae, or Holydayes, ibid. builds the Capitol, ib. flyes to K. Porsenna, ib. Tarsus, 99 Tatius, Generall of the Sabines, 478. takes the Capitol by compact, ib. is Partner in the Government with Romulus, ib. why he was slain, ib. Tauromenian Rocks, 146 Tauromenium, ib. Telamon, Father to Ajax, 482 Telephus, a Tragecomedy, 13. his parentage, ibid. his fortunes, wound, and cure, 13.14 Telesine, 245 Temples, of Isis, Cybele, and Ceres, impudent∣ly prophaned, 321 Tentyrites, 505. hate the Crocodile, ib. adore the Ibis, ib. Tereus, 242 Terminus, his offering, 522. his violation, the greatest sacriledge, ibid. Terpsichore, Inventress of Musick, and Dan∣cing 246 Teutons, Germans, so named from their God Tuisco, 306 Thais, 99 Thales, one of the seaven Sages, 452. taught Geometry to the Grecians, ib. found out the intervals of time, ib. quarters of the Wind, ib. diameter of the Sun, ibid. the cause of eclipses, and thunder, ibid. obli∣quity of the Zodiack, ibid. the celestiall Zones, and the Sun's annuall course, ibid. when and how he dyed, ib. Thebes, in Boeotia, 442 Thebes, in Aegypt, ib. & 503. Themison, Scholar to Empedocles, 372. quoted by Galen, ib. a bad Practicer in Physick, ibid. Theodorus Gadareus, 259 Thersites, 309 Theseis, a Heroick Poem, 12. of the Knight-Errantry of Theseus, ibid. Thessaly, described, 217. there Medea gathered the simples that made Aeson young again, ibid. Theutrantes, K. of Caria, 13 Thomas, Earl of Arundel and Surrey, 53. his Princely Collection of ancient Greek and Roman Statues, writ upon by Mr. Selden, ibid. Thraseas Paetus, a Stoick, 142. his last words, 143 Thrasyllus, 215. his death, ibid. Thrasymachus, 261 Thumbs, bent downward, signified favour to the sword-Players, 95. reversed, or tur∣ned upward, that they must fight it out and dye (though misprinted in the Com∣ment) ibid. Thyrsus described, 193 Tibur, a City, and Castle, 103. by whom built, ibid. Tiburnus, 103 Tigellinus, poisoned three of his Father's Bro∣thers, 33. forged their Wills, ibid. Tilphossa, 454 Tilpbossus, ib. Timbrells, of gold, silver, or brasse, 446 Tiresias, a Prophet, 454. his Fable, ibid. his Monument, ib. his deification, ib. Titius, and Seius, 119 Titus, and Tiberius, Sons to the Consull Juni∣us Brutus, promise to deliver a Gate of Rome to K. Tarquin, 308. the plot discove∣red by a Slave, ib. their Fathers cruell sen∣tence of death upon them, ib. Tongillus, 254 Tower Ovall, 216 Toxeus, 147 Trabeae, 355 Trallis, a Carian Town, 97 Trebius, a base-minded Client, 130 Trechedipna, a Gown to run in, 97 Tribune, Protector of the Commonalty, 29. his legall and usurped power, ib. Tribune Military, 100 Tricipitinus, Father to Lucraece, 380 Triclinium, the Dining-Roome, described, 141 Trochilos, how he deceives the Crocodile, 501
Trojan Lords, great persons of Rome, 29 Trypher, a Carving-Master, 408 Tullia, Daughter to King Serv. Tullius, and Wife to Tarquin the Proud, 308. puts her Husband upon the murder of her Father, ibid. Tullus Hostilius, third King of Rome, sacks and slights the City of Alba, 144. puts the Ro∣mans into action, ib. ascertains the rates of Coin, ibid. brings in the Chariot-Chaire, the Office of Lictor, the Toga Picta, and Praetexta, ibid. and the golden Bullaes, ibid. Turnus, Generall of the Rutilians, 34. fights a single combat with Aeneas, ibid. Tutor, vid. Julius Tutor. Tutors, how to be valued, 260 Tyrrhene Sea, 196 Sentences in T. Fol. 75. verse 59. Who's now belov'd, but he that can reveal Foul Trusts?— Fol. 103. ver. 104. What's more violent then a Tyrant's eare? Fol. 333. verse 27. The poor way-faring man, that doth not bring A charge along, before the Thief will sing. V. VAgellus, 521 Valerius Corvinus, Tribune to Camillus, 288. accepts the challenge of a Gaul, ib. assi∣sted in that Combate by a Crow, from which he had his surname, ib. six times Consul, ibid. Varillus, a poor Knave, 55 Vatinius, the drunken Cobler of Beneventum, 143 Vcalegon, a poor Roman, 103 Vectius Valens, his ominous words at the adult'rous Wedding of Messalina and Silius, 385 Veiento, vid. Fabricius Veiento. Veil, vid. Flammeum, Velabrian, vid. Lake. Venafrian Oyle, 145 Venafrum, ib. Ventidius, a Slave, 260. made General against the Parthians, ib. triumphs, ib. Verres, his Offices in the Republick, 56. his trechery, lust, &c. ibid. a Suit commen∣ced against him by the Sicilians, ibid. his Charge managed by Cicero, 297. Juvenal's Aggravation of his crime, ib. he flyes his Country, 56. is proscribed, and slain, ib. the cause of his Proscription, ibid. Verses defamatory, prohibited by Law, 32 Vespasian's answer to his Son Titus, 482 Vesta, the Mother, 207. the Daughter, ibid. what they both signifie, ibid. Vestall Nunns, superintend the Ceremonies of the Good-Goddess, 60. their Cloister, 118. their number, ib. their Charge, ibid. their punishment for negligence, ib. the time of their admission, and stay, ib. the manner and reason of their execution for breach of vow, ib. their Founder, 207 Vestines, 481 Vettus, 255 Vibius Crispus, a smooth-tongu'd Orator, 123. how he kept himself in favour at Court, ibid. the pleasantness of his replies, ib. his honours, ib. Vindex, vid. Caius Julius Vindex. Vindicius, the Slave that discovered the Sons of the Consull Brutus, 308. made free, ib. the Rod used in manumissions, ever after, called Vindicta, ib. Vine-battoon, 481 Virginia, 381. the plot laid to ravish her, ibid. her Father, to save her honour, kills her, ib. the revenge of her death, 382 Virginius Rufus, 303 Virro, a Proud Patron, 130
Vivaries, Imperiall Fish-ponds, 121 Vlysses, his disputable Parents, 325. his poli∣cy to avoid the warre and enjoy his Wife, 326. how discovered, ib. his services for his Country, ibid. Achilles his Armes ad∣judged to him, 327. his cruelty before he went aboard, ib. his unfortunate voyage, ib. his death foretold by the Oracle, but inavoidable, 329 Vmbricius, an Aruspex, 93. why he removes, with his Family from Rome, ib. Volscians, 103 Volusius Bithynicus, 501 Vow, or Sacrament, Military, 522 Vulture, 476 Sentences in V. Fol. 6. verse 90. Virtue's prais'd, but sterves. Fol. 10. verse 179. Posterity can no new Vices frame. Fol. 266. ver. 24. Virtue's the true and sole Nobility. Fol. 339. verse 161. Virtue is so much less belov'd then Fame, For, bate reward, who will at Virtue aime? Fol. 351. ver. 431. Virtu's the path to Peace, Fol. 469. ver. 271. None sins just so farre as he hath in charge, But at his pleasure will his Vice inlarge. Fol. 404. ver. 53. —a Victory comes, easie when The foes are tippled, lisping, reeling men. W. WIlls, made by Military priviledge, 523 Sentences in W. Fol. 166. ver. 312. Wealth to the weakned World foul riot taught. Fol. 174. ver. 479. —Nothing makes man's life Vnhappier, then a fortune with a Wife. Fol. 465. ver. 201. —no one sin, That to the mind of mankind enters in, Poysons or kills more then Wealth's cruell thirst; For all men would be rich, and rich at first. Fol. 174. ver. 477. A Woman thinks all's lawfull, when she wears Those mighty Pear-pearls, that weigh down her ears. Fol. 81. ver. 193. Men seldome rise where Want keeps Virtue down. Fol. 349. ver. 387. The edge of VVomans wrath is then most ke, When a repulse adds blushes to her spleen.
X. XErxes, K. of Persia, 369. his two vast Ar∣myes, by Sea and Land, ibid. both o∣verthrown, ibid. why he fled out of Greece, ibid. his humour of fighting changed into feasting, ibid. his Subjects despise him, ibid. slain by the Captain of his Guard, 370. the madness of his pride, ibid. Z. ZAlates, an Armenian Hostage, 70 Zeno, the first Stoick, 508. understands the Oracle, ibid. comes to traffick at A∣thens, ibid. looses his Ship, and takes a Gown, ibid. why his Scholars were called Stoicks, ibid. how the Athenians honoured him in his life time, ibid. how after his Death, 509 A Sentence in Z. Fol. 494. verse 58. Zeal sounds the Trumpet to the Brawl. FINIS.
