L149 13672508 101167
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Monsieur Claude The famous Minister of CHARENTON in FRANCE. Done out of French by G. P. Imprimatur. Sept. 13th. 1687. Guil. Needham. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the corner of Chancery-Lane in Fleetstreet. 1688.
THE PREFACE: A DISCOURSE OF DEATH. IT is no little advantage we receive from our Religion, that it is so mightily effectual to free us from all troublesome and disquieting thoughts, and to produce in us a settledness and firmness of mind, not apt to be easily shaken or moved; nay it inspirits men with courage and an ingenuous confidence, raising us above those fears and cares that follow false Opinions, and like Ghosts are wont to torment otserable This is a great kindness that the Faith of Christ doth to those we live according to it, that it puts them into such a state, that they need fear nothing but displeasing, or offending God; especially our Christianity is the most proper remedy against the unreasonable fear of death, for that must necessarily distract the mind, and interrupt its peace by continual vexation and perplexity, in all those who are under the power of it, and therefore most fitly call'd by the Apostle here a state of Bondage. And deliver them who through fear of death, were all their life time subject to Bondage. I shall not dispute here, whether by death is meant onely that which is temporal, or that which is eternal, since it is the appre∣hension or fear of eternal death chiefly that makes the other so tir∣rible and affrighting. It would be an easie thing to conquer the fear of death, one might soon be able to think of it with the greatest indifference and unconcernedness, if we could but once thoroughly
persuade our selves that it would put an utter end to us. It is the Judgement to come, the never dying worm, the everlasting flames and immortality that are to follow, that make men so loth to think of dying, so unwilling to hear of it, so surprised at any sign or symp∣tome of it. Were there no other state after this, the generality of men would be so far from fearing death, that they would fly to it as the onely certain cure for the evils of this life, any little disease, pain and burthen that they could not easily get rid of, they would seek a remedy for in death. Were there not, I say, in all men a natural dread of the ill Consequences of death, I cannot but ima∣gine that mens own hands would send more daily to the cold Grave than all the diseases and casualties that our bodies are liable to, and it would be so far from an instance of courage and bravery to despise death, that the greatest Cowards would most desire it and soonest fly to it. But let them doe what they can, they can∣not wholly free their minds, at least, from all suspicion of another world, and that makes them most commonly so fearfull of dying. So that it comes to the same, whether by death be meant here of the body onely, or a future state, for that which makes us fear death is because it leads us into another life. Therefore I shall now explain to you, I. How men by the fear of death are subjected to Bondage. II. Inquire what this fear of Death is that Christ delivers us from. III. How Religion doth free us from it. I. How men by the fear of death are subjected to Bondage. For this is the natural effect of any fear whatsoever, that it makes men slaves, it cowardizes them, and renders them mean and abject; particularly the fear of death so enslaves those that are possessed of it, that they can neither think freely nor act freely, and so conse∣quently can neither be truely good nor really happy in this life. This fear doth hinder men from thinking freely. And therefore we read of those that have commanded that none should name this word death in their hearing. Such persons who are afraid to die, dare not give themselves free liberty to exercise their minds, and are fain to take all occasions of diverting themselves, and find any entertainment rather than be put in mind of their continual danger.
They use all arts to stifle and smother such thoughts as soon as they rise. Their hearts are ready to sink within them when they hear of any dismal calamity that hath happen'd unto a Neighbour or Friend, lest the same should betide them, and their own turn shortly come. And this is generally true, that he can neither fully enjoy himself nor take pleasure in himself, who hath not mastered this fear of death. It hinders men from acting freely. He is a slave to every man, that hath power enough to doe him a mischief, who is afraid of death. Whatever Religion or Profession he is now of, you may soon threaten or scare him out of it, and make him whatever you please. Such a one cannot promise to-himself that he shall continue one day longer in that mind, that faith that he now holds. There is no sin so vile or heinous, but what he may be brought to commit. Put but his life in danger, fright him thoroughly, and he will renounce all the Articles of his Creed, and break all the Commandments his Religion lays upon him, for every one that doth but wear a sword. And is not this a truely slavish condition, when we can neither com∣mand our own thoughts, nor be master of our own actions? And this is certainly the case of all those, that do not love God better than their lives, or that fear death more than sin. Such a one can neither be good nor happy; not good longer than while he finds it safe and free from all danger, and how can he be happy who stands in such a continual dread that a thousand accidents may this hour happen to him, and that death must certainly befall him, and that it is onely God's infinite patience that it doth not presently. And without any more words I know you will all grant this a miserable state. But now I do not say this is the effect of all kind of fear of death, I must therefore more particularly shew what kind of fear it is that makes men so unhappy. Most men have great reason to be afraid of dying, as much as a guilty Prisoner hath to be afraid of coming to his Tryal and brought to his Sentence. The more some men fear death, the more troublesome thoughts and apprehensions it occasions in them, the more capable are they to be wrought upon by it. Nay indeed it is im∣possible for a guilty person not to fear death, although perhaps sometimes out of a brave indifferency in the heat of bloud and pas∣sion, he may despise it, valiantly rush into the midst of danger, and with a bold and daring spirit voluntarily expose himself to it, out of a sense of pretended honour and gallantry; yet let him think coolly and soberly of such a thing, let him consider of it with him∣self
and the consequences thereof, and I am sure he will be very misgiving and suspicious, and struggle mightily with himself at the thoughts of it. I speak not to lessen the fears of those who live in any known sin; if God be true they have great reason to be afraid. Now here it may be asked, supposing a man brought into extreme danger of his life for the sake of his Religion, in a time of Perse∣cution, one that hath long professed the true Religion, but hath lived very unanswerably to it, and is guilty of many grievous crimes un∣repented of, which he is accused by his own conscience for; of a sud∣den he is commanded to renounce his Faith which in his mind he is verily persuaded is true, and to turn to Idolatry, and to deny and blaspheme his Saviour, or else immediately to suffer death; what must such a one doe now in this cases If he complies with the command, he sins grievously against the light of his mind and his own conscience, and yet by such a complyance he gains time of repentance, to make his peace with God, and to beg his pardon for his crime, and also for all his other sins which he hath so long lived in. If he chuses death, it is that which he is wholly unprepar'd for, he is utterly unfit to appear before God, and he can expect no∣thing but to suffer God's vengeance for the sins of an ill-spent life. Now what is to be done in such sad circumstances as these? It is a case that may happen, and therefore to resolve the doubt I shall propound briefly these things to you, viz. 1. In point of duty what this man is bound to doe. This is most certain, that no sin ought to be committed upon any consideration whatever. Their damnation is just, saith the Apostle, that doe evil that good may come, Rom. 3. 8. It is in no case, either justi∣fiable or prudent, to save our lives by any sin. It is every one's duty, nay it is best even for the greatest of sinners, to loose his life a thousand times rather than to deny God or his Truth. And as for gaining time for repentance; it is to be considered that when we are in such a strait, as that we cannot live any longer without sinning directly and grievously against our consciences, it is God's will that we should then die, the time of our repentance is now over, and God by this Providence doth call us out of the world. Now when we will not submit to this call, but will not stick to doe the greatest villany, how can we expect that God should bestow any far∣ther grace upon us, or that his Spirit after such an Apostasie should strive any longer with us. Commonly the effect of such things is a judicial hardness, to be given up to a perverse mind and a re∣probate
state. After any one hath in so gross a manner violated his Conscience, there is very little hope that ever he should be again renewed in the spirit of his mind. For persons to have obeyed the truth, and yet in time of persecution fall away, and for fear of death renounce it, the ancient Church, that is to say, a great part would never again receive them into their Communion till their death, and a great division there was among them concerning the restoring those that had once lapsed into Idolatry. What then shall we say to those, who after a wicked life, add to their other sins that of Hypocrisie? They may for a while lengthen out their wretched lives, but it is to be fear'd that they have shut themselves out from all hopes of the means of Grace. It is a very improper and unlikely way in order to attain the pardon of past sins, to commit the grea∣test we can be guilty of, to renounce our Saviour. 2. In such a case therefore the Sinner is bound to adore the justice of God's Judgment, that by his own gross neglect and carelesness he is brought into such misery, for that he ought to have been always prepared for such a time. Yet however, though he hath highly provoked God, and displeased him to the utmost, yet he will not deny or blaspheme his name, he will not renounce his Saviour, nor disown his profession; he will leave himself to God's infinite mercy, and will die rather than offend him: and such a resolute resignation of himself, such a generous and noble profession of his Faith, how far it may be acceptable with God, and prevail with him is un∣known. In such extraordinary instances, God may use extraordi∣nary means in reference to us, and may dispence even with the Rules he hath laid down in the Scripture. Indeed I cannot prove or produce any promise for it, but the example of the Thief on the Cross, who for an extraordinary instance of Faith and Charity, obtain'd more than common grace, I think, and favour. And con∣sidering the infinite goodness of God's nature, I should have far more hopes of such a person, that after a wicked life ends his daies bravely and couragiously rather than against his Judgement and Conscience, than of a profane, covetous, worldly, unclean Professor, who bewails his sins on a sick-bed while he is wrestling with a wasting disease, and hopes by his prayers and good wishes and pious resolutions to obtain his pardon. And this was the sense of the Primitive Church, that an Heathen being converted to Christianity and suffering for it, among other Christians, before he could make a publick Profession of it, or be baptized into it, that he should inherit the reward of Christians, this baptism in his own bloud supplying all other defects,
and expiating all former sins. I say it was the common Opinion of the ancient Fathers, they thought his death carried with it the re∣mission of all past sins. I shall not take upon me to determine this, but thus much I think may be said in the case proposed, that to die for his Religion is the best means such a person can use to obtain his pardon, and does express his repentance to be sure far better than adding the sin of Apostasie to all his others. But to make sure, the best way is to hasten our repentance, and to reform presently, before the floods come, and the winds blow, and the storms rise; by a new life to arm our selves against all the powers and rage of men, and then though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet we need fear no evil. This therefore is as I told you a great reason to fear death. For death being in truth the greatest of all natural evils that can befall us, there is in all men a natural fear of it, which cannot be wholly rooted out by Religion, nor is it necessary that it should be. If death had not been a natural evil, it had never been threatned nor inflicted on mankind as a punishment for sin. There is in all men a natural dread of it, and we hardly count them worthy the name of men, that are not affected with a due sense of it. And this fear is more or less according to mens tempers. Some are much more timorous than others. To some the circumstances that attend death are much more terrible than death it self. Some fear diseases and pain more than death. Some are loth to die for fear of their Posterity, Friends, Relations, to whom they are usefull, and for whom they are mightily concerned. Some are unwilling to go out of the world because they are in a capacity of doing more good in it, which was the case of St. Paul. On the other hand some are willing to die onely through weariness of life, out of peevishness, discontent and impatience, because they are dissatisfied with their present condition, or cannot bear those afflictions which God's Pro∣vidence hath exercised them withall; which cannot be reckoned any vertue, unless in them who in their sober minds and thoughts can willingly submit to death, whenever it pleases God to call them to it. And yet such upon a sudden fright or surprise, when their lives are unawares brought into danger, may not be able to conquer their fear, but may shew a great disquiet. They may earnestly desire to▪ tarry a little longer, that they may be yet fitter for death, that they may search and try themselves yet more exactly and curiously; that they may be farther satisfied with the sincerity and honesty of their hearts and intentions. Many more instances I might give.
But now that which our Saviour frees us from is, a troublesome, tormenting fear of death, which thing alone disturbs us, and fills us with confusion and perplexity of spirit, when ever we chance to think of it. As when we are unreasonably jealous and suspicious of what Trials God's ordinary Providence may put us upon; when we are unmeasurably solicitous about the preserving our health, or se∣curing our selves from danger; when we are concern'd as if we had no hope, and are as unwilling to submit to the stroke of death as a sullen Malefactour is to go to execution. Now such a fear of death is worse than death it self. I now proceed to shew how Religion does free men from this trouble∣some and anxious fear of death. And the, 1. Means our Religion affords us to deliver us from this fear is, the consideration of God's wise and gratious Providence over us. Not an hair of our heads shall fall to the ground without his leave. Our lives are in his hands who hitherto hath taken care of us, and whatever he calls us to is with the highest reason, and the most excellent ends, and can we wish any thing better to our selves than this would be, to be under the protection of the Almighty? Would we live longer than infinite Wisedom sees fit for us? Can we doubt of his care who is goodness it self? Would we have the disposal of our own selves? Alas! how soon should we repent us of our choice, and run into all the several casualties and dismal dangers that can fall upon us? If we had nothing to depend on, or trust unto, but our own counsels, prudence or carefulness, we might then have just reason to distrust every man, and to expect death in every place; we could not be too scrupulous or solicitous. Could I in the least doubt of God's Providence over us, then indeed I should neither eat nor sleep safely, nor live one day in quiet; I should not be able to doe any thing without anxiety and disturbance, if I once could persuade my self that all the effects that happen were wholly casual, and not governed by an infinite understanding, that superintends all affairs, and dis∣poses of them as he sees good. Nor is there any thing that can well settle mens minds in the midst of so many secret and open dan∣gers as we are every minute liable unto, in any tolerable patience, rest, quiet and assurance, but this one consideration, that nothing can befall us without the leave and ordering of the best and wisest of Beings. Indeed the Turkish opinion of Fate, which hath strangely prevail'd among Christians, ought in reason to satisfie them against the greatest dangers, that the number of the days of every man living is so determin'd by an unalterable decree, that it is impossible he
should die before, or out live the time appointed him by God before all the world. This made the Followers of Mahomet, who so studiously taught this Doctrine, to despise death and danger, not to fear it when they were in the extremest hazard of it; freely to visit their Neigh∣bours when sick of the Plague, which we dare not do to one another in any ordinary disease; or to run upon their Enemies swords or Cannons. For what can be strange with those, that are neither concern'd to prolong their lives, nor to avoid death? But this is no part of the Christian Faith. We are told indeed the days of our years are Threescore years and Ten, and if by reason of strength, they be Fourscore years, yet is their strength labour and sorrow: for it is soon cut off, and we fly away. Behold, saith David, Thou hast made my days as an hands breadth. And Job tells us, a man's days are determined, the number of his months are with God, he hath appointed his bounds that he cannot pass, and in another place, that all men have their appointed time. All which signifies no more than this, that God in the general hath set bounds to a man's life beyond which he will not ordinarily extend it; he hath set the term of our lives beyond which we shall not ordinarily extend them, which is about Threescore and Ten years, notwithstanding which some die much sooner, and some few live longer. But the Scripture no where teacheth us, that the length of a man's life is so fixed by God that he shall not die before such a time, nor live at all beyond it. Nay, the contrary is plainly intimated to us. In all those places of Scripture where long life is promised for the reward of obedience in any particular duty, which must imply (if it signifie any thing) that we shall live longer than otherwise we should have done. Thus, Honour thy Father and thy Mother: that thy days may be long upon the Land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. Now this promise can never reasonably oblige any man to the performance of duty to his Parents, if it be absolutely determined how long he shall live. Thus in the 23. Exod. And ye shall serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread and thy water, and take away sickness from thee; the number of thy days will he fulfill. Not that he promiseth that if they were obedient to his Laws, they should live out the full age of men, and that he would preserve them from sickness and distempers. No, for this were to no purpose, and they could expect no otherwise if they harkened not unto, or disobeyed God's words. So farther, in the 4. Deut. God promises not any should live out their days, but that they should live longer than otherwise they
should. Thou shalt keep therefore his Statutes and his Commandments, which I command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy Children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon the earth which the Lord thy God giveth thee for ever. To wicked men God often threatens sudden and untimely death, that they should die sooner than otherwise they should have done. The fear of the Lord prolongeth (or, as we have it in the Mar∣gin, addeth) days; but the years of the wicked shall be shortned. That is they shall not live so long as otherwise they might have done. Thus many men shall not live out half their days; not half the or∣dinary time of a man's life. Most observable is the instance of King Hezekiah, in the 38. Isa. to whom the Prophet positively declares; Thus saith the Lord, set thine house in order, for thou shalt die and not live: and yet upon his humble Prayer Fifteen years more were added unto his days, which otherwise he should not have had. From which it plainly appears that by sin and disobedience men may shorten their days and cut off from their lives, and by Piety and Vertue men may procure to themselves a longer life and encrease of days. Now the length or shortness of our lives depends often upon our own voluntary actions, upon our pleasing or displeasing God, which cannot agree with that Doctrine of Fate I before mentioned. Nor do we need any such opinion against the fear of death, because we allow that our life depends upon God's good will and pleasure; that no instru∣ments of death, no ill practices, can prevail against us without his appointment. And this is a sufficient foundation of assurance and con∣fidence, notwithstanding the frailty and uncertainty of our condition here, that the Watchman of Israel neither slumbereth nor sleepeth; that his eye is always upon us for Good; that we shall live as long and as well as is really best for us, and then who would not be willing to die? But, Another means our Religion affords us to free us from the fear of death is a deadness to this present world and all the trifling pleasures of it. For it is an over fond love and doating upon the things of this world and sensual enjoyments that makes persons so unwilling to die. The more our appetites and desires are mortified and subdued, the readier we shall be to bid an eternal farewell to all these things below. It is no wonder that those who know no other happiness but what is to be found in these lower Regions, are loth to be torn from their dear possessions, and to venture into a strange Countrey which they have so little knowledge of. But by this contempt of the world
which our Religion teaches us, we forsake it in the love of it, even whilst we are living, and so our business is better than half done before hand, and we are freed from those worldly cloggs and encum∣brances that too often hang on our vertue and most raised affections. Farther, the Consideration of Christ's conquering death for us gives a mighty encouragement against the inordinate fear of death. For our blessed Saviour hath tasted death for every man and hath taken away its sting, hath quell'd its force and overcome its power, insomuch that he is said to have abolished it. He hath made a way through death and the grave to his Father's Glory, and shall we be afraid like Saint Peter, to profess and fellow him wheresoever he goes? Our Prince and Redeemer hath voluntarily passed through it, and shall it grieve us to follow his steps, and to come to him through that passage by which he himself entred into his Kingdom? Lastly, The hope of salvation is another great means that our Chri∣stianity administers to us against this base fear of dying. I have read it is an ordinary saying among the Turks, that if Christians had a right opinion concerning Heaven, they could not be so afraid of death, which is the onely way to life. And it was reasonably asked by the Philoso∣pher of him that promised that all that were of his Sect should be im∣mediately happy as soon as they were dead, why then he did not presently die? Do we really believe a future Glory, and are we afraid to enter into our Master's joy? What, are we Christians, and yet would we live al∣ways here? Have we already attain'd all the happiness which we aspire af∣ter? Can we be contented to know no more of God, to enjoy no more of his Glory, and to love him no more, than we can doe in this imperfect State? Are we unwilling to receive that reward which we daily pray for? Thou knowest not what thou art capable of, what perfection, what happiness thy soul shall enjoy, freed from this troublesome Tabernacle, this luggage of flesh, and art thou afraid of being translated into the celestial Kingdom? One glimpse of that Glory which our Saviour hath promised to us, would make as all long to be with Christ. No wonder Saint Paul was so ready to die, when he had before hand been rapt up into the third Heaven, and had seen and heard things not utterable. Did we live in the hopes of the future happiness we shall enjoy, we should not value any of the plea∣sures here below, nor fear to undergo any thing that stood in his way between us and those blessed Mansions of happy Souls, where dwelleth God, and perpetual peace and satisfaction, free from all care and distur∣bance, from all fear and anxiety, from all pain and danger; where onely is to be found perfect contentment, eternal joy and immortal hap∣piness.
If Christians perfectly knew the felicity of the other life, they would be impatient of the present; they would be hardly able to brook or endure living, or any thing that detain'd them from such unspeakable enjoyments. Wo unto us therefore, that yet dwell in Meshech, and are forced to abide in the Tents of Kedar. Blessed, yea, thrice blessed, are are all those that have passed this miserable world, and are received into the heavenly Mansions; for one day there is better than a thousand elsewhere. One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that will I still seek after, that I may live for ever with him, and behold his Glory. When shall we arrive at that eternal and celestial happiness, where we shall have no more of these storms and dangers? When shall we pass all fears, and cares, and grief, and troublesome passions? Even so saith the Church, all true Christians and sincere Believers, come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and deliver us from these crazy bodies, and put on us that house that is eternal and in the heavens. Is it so pleasant to us to wan∣der to and fro in this wilderness, and be tossed up and down upon these troublesome waves? And can it be grievous to us to think of arriving at our journey's end? How soon would all the grief and pain and uneasiness that accompanies sickness, and the very pangs of death pass away; when once we have received our Crown? We shall be so taken up with those surpassing joys, that we shall have no leisure to think of what we have undergone; all the troublesome passage will soon vanish. I confess that for men who have no well grounded hopes of eternal life, it is reason∣able for them to fear death, as the day of their execution, when they shall receive the just reward of their evil doings. But to you I now speak who profess to have an hope of this blessed immortality; for you it is a shame to be afraid of death. It is for them onely to fear death, as one of the Ancients said, who would go to Christ. This is the onely thing that makes men take death so heavily, they do not really believe those great things our Saviour hath promised; if they did they would look upon death as the greatest happiness that can befall them. Why art thou then thus cast down, O my soul, Why art thou disquie∣ted within me? We contradict, at least we disparage our faith, by our fear of death; since it is the Gate that leads into the heavenly City, into the new Jerusalem. We ought rather to entertain the thoughts of it with a smile, and bid it heartily welcome, as the end of all my labour and torment, all my sorrows and cares: as that that would give me a sight of him that dyed for me, and convey me into his armes and embraces who shed his bloud for my soul▪ and carry me into a Kingdom of peace and Righteousness and eternal joy, and would bring me into the company of all
the famous Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessours and all holy men and women; which will again restore to me the Society of those Friends, Relations, dear Children and Parents, whose loss I have so sadly bemoan'd and restore them again refined from all dross, infinitely more lovely and amiable than ever they were before. Oh! how shall we please our selves when once our souls are disentangled from this lower world? Thou art afraid to go to a strange place, where thou never wert before, and from whence no Friend that is gone thither before hath ever returned to tell thee what it is; but is it not sufficient to know it is our Father's house, our Saviour's King∣dom, a place of uninterrupted joy and happiness? All the afflictions of this life are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be reveal'd. Let us fix in our selves these considerations, and we shall see nothing ter∣rible in death, or think strange of being born into the invisible world; which though it may be attended with some pain and hardship, yet the joy that we are delivered from this miserable life will soon make us infinite amends. Nay indeed were there no other advantage, but onely the putting an end to those disquieting fears of death, death it self should be less dreadfull to us. In the other life there is no more fear of dying, no dis∣eases can overtake us, we shall be above all the solicitudes and trouble∣some concerns of nature. Inure therefore your minds to this, till it hath reconciled to you the thoughts of death, this is the most happy and perfect state that we can arrive to here, to have as the usual expression is, Vi∣tam in patientia, mortem in desiderio, to be content to live, and yet desirous to die, and to enter into the possession of those great things which God hath laid up for those that fear him. Such may find it as hard to be willing to live, as to be desirous of death. Persons affected with a due sense of immortal happiness, may doubt which is hardest, to bear life or to suffer death. Thus hath our Saviour delivered us from this sla∣vish fear of death, by bringing life and immortality to light through the Gospel. And it is all the peace and comfort of our lives to be raised above the fear of death.
THE LIFE OF Monsieur Claude. PART I. FRANCIS CLAƲDE was a Pastour of great Piety, performing his Office with much Honour in the Churches of Montbaziliac and Cours near Bergerac in lower Guienne, where he died in his seventy fourth year. He had a Son called John Claude, a famous Minister of the Gospel, whose Life I now undertake to write, for the be∣stowing upon his memory an instance of the Esteem and Af∣fection I had for him, and the gratifying the desire of such as onely knowing him by his Writings, will, as is very natural, be curious to be informed of the principal Circumstances of the Life and Death of his great Man.
Monsieur Claude was born at Salvetat, in the year 1618. His Father, being a Lover of Polite Learning, took care of his education during his youth, after which he went to finish his Studies in the Academy of Montauban: There did Monsieur Claude study Philosophy; his Wit beginning then to find matter to exercise upon, made him quickly dis∣tinguish'd from all the other Students in Philosophy; and though he was no harder Student than his Companions, yet the flame of his imagination carried him so far that he made greater progress in that Science in six months than his fel∣low Students in a year. After he had accomplish'd his course in Philosophy, he began to study Divinity under Messieurs Garrisoles and Charles, Professours in that Academy: he more particularly applied himself to Monsieur Charles, whose memory he ho∣nour'd all his life long. I know not whether the Confor∣mity of these two great Genius's might not from that time contract this Union of Hearts; for as Monsieur Claude had an Admiration for his Master, we may also affirm, that the Master relish'd the Character of his Disciple; that he lov'd him tenderly, and spake of him as of a young-man of most hopefull expectation. His Father, being desirous to see him in the Sanctuary, did a little hasten the time of his reception into the Ministe∣ry, for he was not full twenty five years old when he was admitted as Minister; he lost thereby the opportunity of travelling, of seeing other Universities, that of Saumur es∣pecially where were Professours of such vast Learning, and where was to be found that Politeness of Language and Man∣ners as very rarely passes beyond the Loire, and which ne∣vertheless was so much his Province. He was admitted Minister in the Synod of upper Guienne and upper Languedoc, in the year 1645. he was assigned Mi∣nister to the Church at La Treyne, his Father was nominated by the Synod to ordain him, and he had this Comfort,
which is the greatest a man of his Character can receive, Monsieur Claude served this Church but one year. The Synod of upper Languedoc benefic'd him with the Church of Saint Afrique in Rovergue, and this to supply the Place of Monsieur Martel; this Church was not con∣siderable for a numerous Congregation, but had had the good fortune of being serv'd by Ministers of Extraordinary merit; Monsieur Gaches, who died Pastour at Paris, and Monsieur Martel Professour of Divinity had there exercised their Mi∣nistery, and this little Flock, glorying in those two great Names, imagin'd that, for the keeping up its Fame, it could not doe better than to pitch upon Monsieur Claude. In Sciences, as in War, great Men are not accomplish'd in a day, herein Art as well as Nature requires Time and Industry. Monsieur Claude studies hard at Saint Afrique, though his Sermons took him up less time than his other Studies, he preaching with great facility; he had a Wit that easily conceived things, a Judgment that did not fail of dis∣posing each Piece in its due place, an Expression so fluent, so easie, so just and so masculine, that People had much adoe to distinguish what he said with meditation, from what he had written. The Church of Castres, famous for the honour it had of possessing in its bosome the Officers of the Chamber of the Edict of Nantes, and a vast number of other persons of Quality and Learning, intreated Monsieur Claude in his passing that way, to give them a Sermon. He preach'd there one Sunday, and fill'd his whole Auditory with Admiration, so far as to give occasion to a very singular Declamation which a very able Man made in favour of him, and which the publick will possibly be glad to be informed of since it re∣dounds to his Honour: A numerous Company were discour∣sing of Monsieur Claude's Sermon, Ladies there were that spake their opinions, those of the best sense were extremely well satisfied with it, others of the order of those that a little too much mind the Preacher's voice, face and actions,
durst not so openly pass their Verdicts, and staid first to know a worthy person's Judgment then present; I am persuaded they did not expect so smart an answer, when they heard him say, that he could wish with all his heart he had but one Eye, like that Minister, provided he was capable of preaching as well as he. There needed no more to persuade them that he had preached very well, since this Gentleman, who was a person extremely handsome, valued that Sermon at so high a rate. This Sermon made a strong impression upon Peoples minds, so far that the Officers of the Chamber of the Edict, wanting a Minister, several of them cast their Eyes upon Monsieur Claude, but there were motives also, that brought another into the election, the Lot was cast upon these two Pastours; and Providence, that had destin'd Monsieur Claude for something greater, depriv'd the Church of Castres of the Comfort it would have received from his Ministery. But if the Church of Castres had not the honour of ha∣ving Monsieur Claude for its Minister, it had the pleasure of seeing that he came to chuse a Wife in its bosom, and that it thereby acquired a kind of right over this great man. He there married Mademoiselle Elizabeth de Malecare, on the eighth of November 1648. the bare choice of a man of that merit speaks in favour of her that was to be his Wife, she came of a very good Family, her Father was Advocate in Par∣liament; she made good her Birth and the Declaration which Monsieur Claude made in her behalf, which will be seen in this History, justifies the esteem and affection he had for her till death. Monsieur Claude serv'd the Church of Saint Afrique for the space of eight years, being belov'd by his Flock, known and desir'd by several Churches, esteem'd and honour'd in the Sy∣nod of upper Languedoc; whereat he was annually present; but amidst all these Blessings he consider'd, as the most preti∣ous, the Birth of a Son which God gave him according to
his Heart, on Wednesday the fifth of March, 1653. and who was nam'd Isaac Claude, it so fell out at this time that the Church of Nismes which was one of the best Churches in France, sought within and without the Provinces for a man that could bear the weight of that burthen; a Minister, in short, that was proper for Preaching, for Disputation and the Conduct of a great Flock. Monsieur Claude's reputation being spread far and near made them quickly determine upon the choice they were to make; they sent as Deputies to him Gentlemen of the greatest Eminence, that they might not miss their aim; these Gentlemen discourst him, made him most obliging Offers, and accomplish'd their Design; for he was appointed Minister for their Church by the Synod of up∣per Languedoc. The Service of this Church was very painfull, the Preach∣ing there every day, the Sick taking up a great deal of the Minister's time; Ecclesiastical matters requiring no less application, Monsieur Claude was not startled at this new task; he found time sufficient to accomplish all his duties, the beauty of his Genius and his Industry provided for all the occasions of his Flock. How much soever busied in the common Functions of his Office, he found leisure to begin a Work which he would have finish'd, but for a Disappointment that broke his mea∣sures. He was refuting the method of Cardinal de Rich∣elieu, when he heard that the Synod of lower Guienne had given that emploiment to Monsieur Martel, Professour of Divinity, he would not stand Candidate with his Brother in the Gospel, and the deference he had for the Company, whence he held his Commission, caused him to lay his Pen aside. As Monsieur Claude was born for a Chair of Divinity, and that his Wit naturally turn'd that way, there was always in Nismes a considerable number of Students in Divinity so far advanced as to be admitted to make Probationary Sermons, to
whom he read Lectures of Divinity; his way of Teaching was so neat, the matters he explain'd seem'd so well medi∣tated and so happily fitted to the use of the Pulpit and to the understanding of Holy Writ, insomuch that he caused them to make no less progress in the knowleged of Divinity, than in the best Academies; hence came that great concourse of Divinity Students; nay, and there has been seen to come from this kind of Private School Disciples of merit, that made good the Pains of the Master that instructed them. Monsieur Claude's Ministery did too much fructifie in Nismes in the opinions of the Roman Catholicks; the rumour of his Reputation daily augmenting, was an importunate sound, that wounded their ears, a certain presage that he would not be long at quiet. And indeed he was snatch'd from that Church by one of those extraordinary ways which People of his Character and singular worth do daily experience; his knowledge, his steadiness, his zeal, created a jealousie in a man whose sentiments were not so upright as his. Monsieur Claude knew that he espous'd the project of our ruine, under the specious veil of an accommodation of Religion; he openly opposed this design; he was the Mo∣deratour of a Synod of lower Languedoc; there did he break his measures; and in that Province dismounted the machine of re-union, which the Court has abandon'd in these latter days, as being of too slow a movement, and that it can more easily effect those ends by other means, there needed no more to fetch Monsieur Claude from Nismes; a Decree of Council was intimated to him, by which he was interdicted the exercise of his Ministery throughout the whole extent of the Province of Languedoc. He forbore Preaching, and went to Court, being onely supported by his innocency, he there prosecuted his concern for near six months, but all in vain, for the Resolution was already taken, not to revoke the least of any thing that had been done against us; and more especially to weary out the Ministers who were not pleasing to the Governours of the Provinces.
In this Journey did he compose that little Tract which answers that of the perpetuity of the faith of the Catholick Church touching the Eucharist; this was his first Piece that was made publick; this Tract of his made a noise in the World; the Roman Catholicks were at a loss to know the Au∣thour's Name; the Jansenists who felt the weight of the blow, would needs know the hand from whence it departed; but all the pains they took in order to this discovery were for a long while all in vain, and we may say that as they have laugh'd at the uneasiness the Jesuits had been under to find out the Authour of the Provincial Letters, they in their turns made this occasion their diversion, as did many other People who were not sorry to see an Authour stand forth, who allarum'd that party by a Work of thirty Pages. This little Tract did Monsieur Claude so much honour, that it well deserves we enlarge a little upon it, and the par∣ticular Circumstances that it affords, will reward the Reader for the time he may bestow upon what we are going to say of it. The Tract of the Perpetuity of the Faith of the Catholick Church touching the Eucharist, compos'd by an able Jan∣senist believed to be Monsieur Arnaud, had Monsieur de Turenne in view, the Court had the same aim in persuading him to change his Religion, and the Jansenists espousing this design hop'd to acquire honour by this Conquest; but as he was a Prince, who without playing the Divine had a right sense to judge whether the Argument was good or bad, it was necessary to chuse a matter that was beyond the com∣mon reach of his Lights in Religion, and to pass his under∣standing, by drawing him into the vast fields of antiquity; as being a region proper to impose upon Strangers and new Commers, who do not well know the Map of that Countrey. No fitter Subject for a trepan could have been chosen than that pitcht upon by this Authour; he pretended to prove that the Doctrine of the Real Presence, had been the con∣stant
Faith of the Church, till the time of the Reformation, (a great prepossession in France, for a heart that wish'd for a Religion that accommodated it self with his fortune) the turn which this Writer took was very ingenious; how said he a thousand years of a peaceable possession, and a profound silence do they not sufficiently justifie the Faith of the Church upon this Article, it peaceably enjoy'd its right till Beranger; and as soon as this man offer'd to open his mouth to combat this truth, all rose up against him, and he was condemn'd by the first Council held at Rome by Pope Leo the Ninth, in the year 1053. Before him none had combated the Real Presence, therefore it was the universal Sentiment of the Church. This Authour does still something more, for to the proof of the matter he adds that of right, that is to say, that he means to prove, that if the Church had been of the Pro∣testants opinion it would have made so sensible an alteration in Christendom, when it chang'd its belief upon this Article, and that it fell into the Faith of the Real Presence, that there is not an individual, but would have sensible of this Innova∣tion, seeing the thing could not fail of being so of it self; Nevertheless he is persuaded, that none ever complain'd of upon this account; whence he infers that no change has been made in the Doctrine; nay, and that this change is not even possible after the manner we conceive it; this ingeni∣ous method affected Monsieur de Turenne, he found in this reasoning an air of truth of too large extent for his know∣ledge, his doubts were known, and persons of the first Qua∣lity and of an exemplary Piety endeavoured to disperse these elusions, they cast their eyes upon Monsieur Claude who was then at Paris, he would not oppose what they desir'd of him, because he found himself thereunto engag'd by the sense of his Conscience, and by the respect he had for the persons who required his assistence, thus he writ, and this was the true occasion of that Dispute.
Monsieur Claude understood very well that this was but an ill way to make his Court for his restoration to the Church of Nismes, but he did not stand wavering, what course to take, he saw that he was going to enter the lists with a Writer of mighty name, he hop'd that God wou'd give him the grace to maintain his Cause. Messieurs Blondel and Aubertine, whose Writings were to be defended, were Au∣thours consummated in the study of the Fathers; they seem'd to have exhausted the matter which Monsieur Claude un∣dertook to treat of; if we find that he sometimes walks in their steps, we shall also see that he makes new discoveries, and his manner of handling this subject is so fine, sensible and strong that we may affirm it to be a method wholly new, whereof Monsieur Claude is the first Authour: in short, as he had tryed the strength of his Genius, he was sensible of an air of confidence, which arose from the strength of the truth he was going to defend; this was his disposition when he began to write upon this matter. His Answer is short, but it is the fullest and closest Work that had till then been seen upon this Subject; the Authour speaks little, but says a great deal in few words; and the Hypotheses which he states are so well meditated, so just, back'd with such good reason, that there is no staggering them, whatever onset has been made upon them; nay, and we shall find that all the trains of this great Dispute are so many lines that depart from that center, and which after divers illustrations and long evasions return thither as to their true Principle. Monsieur Claude undertakes to prove in his Answer, that this change termed a chimoera, and look'd on as a thing impossible, did effectually happen; he shews the time, man∣ner and principal Authours that favour'd it; he makes ap∣pear how easie it is to alter a Point of Doctrine when those three things concur together, as has been seen in that of the Eucharist; first, when it is under-hand attacqu'd, and by way of explication, still retaining the same terms, conse∣crated
by a long use to that tenet; secondly, when this in∣novation does not alter any thing in the worship; and thirdly, when the errour finds a happy age wherein to spread its darkness: He proves so well that these three things have concurr'd in the change of belief, upon the sub∣ject of the Eucharist, that all his reasons are as so many de∣monstrations, against which there is no offering any thing, that can weaken the proof of them. The Authour of the little Tract of the perpetuity of the Faith of the Catholick Church, touching the Eucharist, hath acted in this Debate as shrewd men do, who have nice concerns to defend in the Courts of Justice, for though you produce a∣gainst them a vast number of Witnesses, considerable both for their Worth and their Dignity, they plainly perceive that the onely way to Ward off the Blow that wou'd otherwise destroy them, is to endeavour to invalidate the proof by re∣proaches good or bad, which robs these witnesses of all Cre∣dit; and thus you have a vast field open to contempt, to foul language, and imposture: Nay, and we have seen such as by a cunning slight suggested to them by their danger, endeavour to derive advantage from the testimony that has been urg'd against them, however opposite it may be to their Justification, and this is much the Character of that Authour. Monsieur Claude understood his design very well, he trac'd him exactly through all his windings, and as it highly behov'd him to maintain the Dignity, Integrity, and Authority, of the testimonies which Messieurs Blondel and Aubertine had produc'd, we may affirm, that he did it with all the evidence, and all the strength that can be desir'd in a disputation of that nature, which turn'd much more upon matters of fact, than upon questions of right. Monsieur Claude, having not been able to get the Prohibiti∣ons taken off that had been exhibited against his officiating his Pastourship in Nismes, or in any other Town of Lan∣guedoc, departed from Paris after six months abode in that
Town, and repair'd to Montauban; certain it is that he had not then any settlement in his mind, as seeing no appearance for it, yet did he live much at his ease, though he was not altogether unconcern'd at the Troubles he was made to suffer, he overcame them by submitting himself with an absolute resignation to the Providence of God, and this course of sub∣mission to the Decrees of Heaven, which is ever the best, did not fail to prosper with him; he had not the trouble of wishing or of being tyr'd with expectation of seeing his desires accomplish'd, the Church of Montauban prevented him, and gave him not leasure to solace himself after the hardship of a long Journey, he arrived there on the Satur∣day, preach'd on the Sunday following, being Communion day. The Church assembled for his Vocation, a Place was offer'd him, he accepted it, and the Synod authoris'd the choice of the Church. He had serv'd eight years the Church of Nismes, when he setled in that of Montauban, where he staid but four years, but with so much delight, that I have heard him often say that that time compos'd the sweetest and happiest period of his Life. He there liv'd in a perfect Union with his Collegues, being cherisht and esteem'd by his Church, and being charm'd with the Beauties of that Climate, which he look't upon as his second place of Nati∣vity having there perform'd his Studies. There did he compose his answer to the second Tract of the perpetuity of the Faith of the Eucharist, but did not imagine that the Manuscript he had left at Paris, wou'd one day be∣come a subject of Disputation, because it was onely made for the instruction of Monsieur de Turenne, who declar'd him∣self to be satisfied with it; nevertheless this Work was three years after taken to task, and the Authour of the perpetui∣ty of the Faith of the Catholick Church, touching the Eucha∣rist made an answer thereunto. For a long time not any Book about Religion had been seen in France, that made so much noise as this, the Au∣thour
not onely attackt the ashes of a dead person that are sel∣dom fear'd, as he had done in his former Tract, which slight∣ly ran over the Book of Monsieur Aubertine, he knew he had to doe with another Authour, who was not to be sligh∣ted, which inspir'd him with a design of writing after a more sinewey and more elaborate manner. Whether the event prov'd answerable to his good intentions is a point which I leave the Readers to judge of; it onely appears as to me that Monsieur Claude was not of that opinion, and that if he found more art in the second Tract than in the former, more wit and more care to conceal the weakness of the matter, which the Authour therein defends, yet did he not therein observe the more solidity. He saw in it some∣what less sincerity, and eruptions of mind against persons of merit and probity, to whom the publick has not done the same Justice as this Authour. To remain mute when the whole Kingdom speaks, such silence seem'd affected to Monsieur Claude, the Roman Ca∣tholicks said openly, that this last Book made their cause triumph, and that it would not be answer'd; the Protestants did not speak with so much arrogance though they had much greater confidence, being necessitated to curb their sentiments, when they were treated with ill Language; and to make semblance of fearing Books, that did not perplex them much at the bottom, and this piece was of that rank. Monsieur Claude ventur'd the repose of his Life by an∣swering it, the event did but too well justifie him, he never∣theless determin'd to maintain his first Tract, by refuting the Book which made so much noise at that time, and this is the piece bearing the Title of, an answer to the second Tract of the perpetuity of the Faith of the Eucharist, this work is of a much larger bulk than the former, though it turns much upon the same principles; it was necessary to be more particular in Citations, in the choice of proofs, in the order and light wherein they were to be set, and the con∣sequences
that are to be thence derived, and this course is perhaps what is most difficult in a disputation of the nature of this under our consideration. Monsieur Claude knew it very well, and on that account, did he contrive a method painfull for himself, but easie and usefull for his Readers, he onely took what was most essential in the passages of the Fa∣thers, and which was serviceable to his Subject; he says not too much for fear of wearying out attention; he says suffici∣ent to illustrate his matter; the Arguments he brings upon these testimonies are short, but persuasive, whether that he backs his own cause, or attacks that of the Church of Rome, and because it is a subject containing ungratefull matter by rea∣son of the same expressions of the Ancients, which are often reiterated in this kind of conflict. Monsieur Claude thought fitting to enliven his matter with a gayety of discourse, yet without deviating from the Character of a wise and Ma∣jestick Writer. The Authour of the Treatise of the Eucharist, made it matter for his Diversion, one while to insult our cause whose weakness he deplores, another while our Reformers whom he speaks of with extreme contempt, and sometimes Monsieur Claude himself, looking on his demonstrations as petty elusions, which vanish at the approach of his lights: I know not whether he imagin'd when he mediated his com∣mon place of Metaphors, that Monsieur Claude wou'd sleep upon that passage; he was certainly mistaken if he had that opinion: Monsieur Claude found out the weakness of it, makes merry with it in more than one place, as well as at that method of the Authours, of putting proofs into ob∣jections, and objections into proofs. He commends his ju∣dicious silence, which makes him pass quick over the grea∣test Difficulties, and his Prudence that makes him dwell, upon things that seem the most easie. This is what Mon∣sieur Claude calls in the conduct of the Authour, an affecta∣tion of speaking in a Slumber, so to lull us asleep by his own
Example. There are places indeed, where he does not seem to be in his wonted good humour, and this is when he can∣not bear what Writers of that Communion call Pious frauds I mean the manifest alterations, which the Authour makes of some passages, as to the sense, the terms and expressions, one is in the Homily of the Euchrist for consecration attri∣buted to St. Chrysostom, though it be none of his, the other is taken from Luke Anacorete. Fame, which delights in magnifying Objects, quickly gave the alarm among the Jansenists, a secret rumour was spread about Paris▪ that the unknown Authour, was answer∣ing this second Tract of the Eucharist. The main body detach't some of its Emissaries, to find out whence this News came, and in what part of the Earth this hardy Minister liv'd, who came to disturb the Glory of such as had the Vogue of being the most Learned and most Polite Wri∣ters of France; some of them brought back word, that the Authour they were in quest of was Monsieur Claude: This was a sufficient intimation to those Gentlemen, for them to take their measures; they wrote to the Bishop of Montauban, an Prelate eminent at that time for his Sermons, which the Court had relish't, and for the engagements he had had with the Jansenists; they entreated him to know whether Mon∣sieur Claude was writing, to see his Papers if possible, and to acquaint them with the intent of them. This Prelate sped according to their desires, Monsieur Claude had been ob∣lig'd to see him, he was known by him, if I dare say it, esteem'd, a thing rare in France, considering that immense distance, which is presum'd to be between the height of an Epis∣copal Crosier, and the bare crook of one of our Pastours. My Lord Bishop entreated Monsieur Claude to tell him, whe∣ther it was true, that he was answering Monsieur Arnaud, for so was the style at that time, that he wou'd doe him a ve∣ry sensible kindness in letting him see his answer. Monsieur Claude thinking it did not become him to deny a thing,
which he did not at first think to be of consequence, he pro∣mis'd to let him see some of his Copy, and accrdingly per∣form'd what he promis'd. The Bishop of Montauban did not fail to inform his friends, of what he had seen, and to let them know that this answer was Printing at Paris, under the direction of a person of Merit, who did that good Office to Monsieur Claude his particular Friend: I know not how far the reflexions of that Prelate did proceed; in a short time we saw orders come from Court, that snatcht him away from the Church of Montauban, his Friends did not doubt but that his merit had made him incur this new Disgrace; he obey'd these the King's Orders, as he had obey'd those that had taken him from Nismes, and not finding any safe Sanctuary in the Provin∣ces, he resolv'd to go lay open his conduct to the Eyes of the Court, that judges much better by its own lights, than when it was oblig'd through the great distance of places to trust to the lights of others. On the same day that he arriv'd at Paris, he had the dis∣satisfaction to hear, that a stop was put to the impression of his Book; but though this trouble attended him to Bed, when he wak't again, he was complemented with better tidings, for the very next Morning after his arrival, he had notice that the Prohibitions relating to his answer, had been read, and that it was allow'd the liberty of the Press, that Spirit of intrigue, that intrudes into all humane concerns, wou'd needs force the experience of its good and ill humour upon his Book. The Jansenists are said to have endeavour'd to have put a stop to its Sale by their Credit, which as then was so considerable, but the Jesuits through other prin∣ciples, very contrary to the former, did bring again the course of this concern into its natural Chanel; a remarkable ex∣ample of the vanity of the thoughts of men, and of the depth of the designs of the Providence of God, who knows how to derive his Glory from the good and ill dispositions of
their minds. This second answer of Monsieur Claude's, had all the success he cou'd desire; the Protestants made it the Buckler of their Cause, the Roman Catholicks found it ve∣ry dangerous, and if the Port Royal found therein matter of Vexation, other people more complying than they, were not much concerned at the consequences. The progress of Monsieur Claude's sentiments in this Book extended very far, he render'd the change of belief as to the Eucharist, too sensible, every Individual that reads his reasons, had a sense of this alteration, and to stop the course of it, they be∣thought themselves of giving out that the citations of the passages of the Fathers were not faithfull; and as these Gen∣tlemen among their people are in possession of being believ'd upon their bare word, it was absolutely necessary, for the dispersing this false accusation, that Monsieur Claude should Print, all at length, the passages he had cited, and this is what will be sound in the seventh Edition, that was made of that answer in the year 1668. The work was large, but the Volume might still have been enlarg'd, by a considerable number of other passages, which I have seen Written by the late Monsieur Claude's own hand, which is in the Margent of that second answer which is in his Closet. Monsieur Claude staid near Nine Months in Paris, being uncertain of his Fate, without being able to break through the barrieres, that hinder'd his return to Montauban. This was an Episcopal case, and these causes were so priviledg'd, that a Body was ever sure of loosing the process that one had with those Personages; Monsieur Claude understood it so too, and with submission and patience arm'd himself a∣gainst all these hardships. During this interval, he was courted by the Church of Bourdeaux, but Charenton had people of too much sense, to suffer their being rob'd of a man of such great merit, who was already among them, they let him have some intima∣tion of the design which that Church entertain'd. A re∣gard
was to be had to the inclinations of the Court, the matter was insensibly prepar'd, and as soon as they saw a propitious moment, for Monsieur Claude's calling into the Church of Paris, they took him, and he was effectually call'd to serve that Flock in the year 1666. PART II. IF Monsieur Claude's Books made so much Noise in Paris, when he was an hundred Leagues distant, 'tis easie to judge that he was much more talk't of when it came to be known, that he was to make his constant abode in that Town, in order to serve the Church that met at Charenton. I know not after what manner the Port Royal did receive the News, and whether those Gentlemen, seeing that this Learned Mi∣nister fixt his residence in that great City, did not think of him what skilfull Politicians say of a Prince that settles him∣self in Italy, that it was an ill prospect, and an Eye-sore; be it as it will, it does not appear, that they stir'd in the least to traverse this calling, it was not unknown at Court, and this was sufficient for Monsieur Claude. A discourse there was of an answer, of the Authour of the perpetuity of the Faith, to Monsieur Claude's second Book, he very quietly expected its coming out; however it did not appear for some time, which is a mystery I have no design to shrift into, it no ways availing my Subject, and 'tis sufficient, that I say how that another Writer stood forth to supply Monsieur Claude's Adversaries room, but I am as yet a Stranger, whether 'twas out of kindness to Monsieur Arnaud; great men are not over fond of such kind
of Assistance, as being willing to distance from them all that can inculcate the least suspicion of humane weakness. But to what purpose all this, when people have diligent Friends, they prevent us whether we will or no, and it is a kind of Civility, which we should not dare to complain of. This Dispute made too much Noise, to leave a Society at rest, that presumes it has a right to decide upon all matters, its Emulation was rous'd, and for fear any other shou'd gain the Victory, it immediately caus'd one of its Champions to enter the Lists, to rob Monsieur Arnaud of the Crown he al∣ready laid hold of, and which he is said onely to have lost, by being too much a Formalist. Father Noüet a Jesuite wrote against Monsieur Claude, and they did not stay for the Prin∣ters being at work upon the first Leaf, for the giving it ap∣probation; all concur'd towards the speedy stopping the Pro∣gresses this second answer made, and Father Noüet's Book was put forth with all expedition as a happy dike in opposi∣tion to this torrent. This Father Noüet's work has its Beauties and its goodness, like those actions of great consequence, which at the Bar defend an ill cause with a great deal of art; a vast know∣ledge of Antiquity, though little back't by truth, a design of writing Gentleman like, but most commonly unseason∣ably us'd, being sometimes travers'd by the bare heat of Dispu∣tation, and for the sake of the cause he defended. Monsieur Claude might handsomely have forborn answer∣ing this Book, as being to face Monsieur Arnaud, who only seem'd to require time for writing, that he might collect all his Forces, and overwhelm him with his last stroke; never∣theless he past over these difficulties, and making it a point of Honour still to maintain this Dispute, against an able Doctour chosen by the most Learned Society of the Church of Rome, he answer'd Father Noüet's Book, and this is the third work of his composing upon this important mat∣ter.
This answer was Monsieur Claude's favourite Book, he spoke of it modestly in the main, which indeed was his Character, but there was nevertheless to be observed in his Discourses, a fondness for this composure, and I have known deserving persons, that were of the same opinion with him upon this point. The Preface to this Book is admirable, and affords a most noble Idea of the Authour's design. Monsieur Claude had occasion in this Dispute to follow a Tract, which Monsieur Arnaud had diverted him from. Father Noüet thought fitting to upbraid him in some man∣ner, for having abandon'd the holy Writ in this controversie, this Accusation is curious falling from a Jesuit's Pen. Mon∣sieur Claude did not fail to turn it to his advantage, it gave him occasion to explain to us, the sixth Chapter of the Gos∣pel according to St. John; it was requisite, that satisfaction shou'd be given to a person that complain'd of a Ministers neglecting the word of God; the Tract of the use of the senses is an accomplish'd piece, nothing has been seen so well meditated upon that matter, as what he says of it, no∣thing so pat or so happy as the application he makes of it. As for the passages of the Fathers, which this Authour produces against them, he rids himself of them like an able and gallant man; for when Father Noüet produces very im∣properly against him, Authours posterior of Pascatius, he chuses them out in the Centuries 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15. Monsieur Claude does not fail to tell him, that these are im∣proper pieces, and witnesses that bear their recusation in their Forehead; but he does nevertheless often examine his passages, wherein he finds a sense quite opposite to Father Noüet's design. The opinions of the Greeks touching the Eucharist is likewise brought in play. Monsieur Claude an∣swers it, and upon that point, acquaints him with more than one History which he knew not, or which he was min∣ded to dissemble, because it did not favour his cause. This Authour is not ever happy in his citations, as not being
willing to take the pains of going to the Fountain head; ours complains of his neglects; Father Noüet is hardy, and makes no scruple of often altering passages. Monsieur Claude has much adoe to be moderate upon this point; he exclaims sufficiently, so as that the Reader may be advertis'd of the Snare that is laid for him. Never did Authour know how to avail himself better of the advantages that are offer'd him, if Father Noüet speaks of reading of the Fathers, as of a vast Forest, our Authour draws thence an argument, that Chri∣stian Faith is less involv'd in holy Writ, than in Tradition, which is a Woody Countrey by a Jesuits own confession; when this Writer is angry at the Primitive Ages of the Church, to which Monsieur Claude wou'd bring him back, that he says they have given us more Martyrsp. 432. than Writers and Doctours; our Authour de∣rives an advantage from his ill humour, and shews the reason why the Church of Rome refuses this Testimony, if Monsieur Claude sets Monsieur Arnaud against Father Noüet, it is without any design of setting them at odds, 'tis through the silence of the Pagans in respect of Transub∣stantiation, and the adoration of the Eucharist; Monsieur Arnaud denies that any proof can be drawn from their si∣lence, and adds, that they have perhaps written Books up∣on this Subject, that have not been transmitted to us. Fa∣ther Noüet on the contrary maintains, that Monsieur Claude's consequence wou'd be just, if the Pagans had not upbraided the Christians with the difficulties of that mystery, but he fancies that he proves it clearer than the day, and this is a∣nother point which our Authour does not agree with him in, refuting very plainly the passages urg'd by Father Noüet, and maintaining his first Thesis; in short, though Father Noüet had not perhaps a set design, here to combat Mon∣sieur Claude's opinion as to the time of the change, that was made in point of the Eucharist, he cou'd not with honour forbear saying something of it towards the end of his Book.
Forc'd he was to bear this little torture, in favour of the de∣voutest Zealots of his Communion, who wou'd have thought all had been lost if he had fail'd of maintaining a circum∣stance which so far influences the goodness of that cause; but as he gives this matter onely a transitory touch, Monsieur Claude does not enlarge upon this Subject, but nevertheless says sufficient to refute Father Noüet's illusions, and to back the good reasons he alledg'd in the two former Writings. This Monsieur Claude's answerp. 1668. was kindly receiv'd; the Protestants found therein the con∣firmation of their Faith, the Jansenists were not sorry, that Father Noüet had made this diversion in favour of them, being so much time gain'd to take breath, and the Jesuits on whom all people had their eyes fixt, came off sparkishly from this affair; they talkt of Father Noüet as of one of their adventures, that had pusht hard at his Enemy, and came off from the conflict honour'd with some wounds. This disputation had no ill consequence, I mean that the Advocate of the Protestant party was set a∣side, and treated more handsomely by the Society of the Jesuits, which commonly are not of a humour to suffer much, than he had been by the caball of Port Royal. After this attaque a kind of suspension of Arms lasted for some time; Monsieur Claude wanted not Employment, the bare business of his Pulpit at Charenton, requir'd the whole application of an ordinary Minister. This Church was so celebrated of it self, and honour'd with the presence of so many Foreigners, that it had been imprudence in a Minister, to have Preach'd unprepared. Thus the bare Office of Preaching was a Province of Pains sufficient for Mr. Claude, who was desirous to edifie his Flock, answer the hopes that people did conceive of him, and follow the steps of his Emi∣nent Collegues. He Printed but few Sermons, as being more taken up with other matters, which more concern'd the publick. We may nevertheless judge by those he has
Publisht, that his Talent lay no less for Preaching than for the Closet, and I hope his Son will Print a small Tract, which his Father did compose of the manner of explaining the holy Writ in the Pulpit, so just and so fine, that upon reading it, people will be throughly persuaded, that Mon∣sieur Claude was a great Master in that matter. Monsieur Claude did not onely signalize himself by his Writ∣ings, he was in a Station, that had great influences, to shed over the other reform'd Churches of France. Paris was the Fountain whence proceeded all the mischiefs, that over∣whelmed the Protestants in the Provinces, and Charenton the place whither they repair'd for Council, an excellent re∣medy in it self, so sharp, violent and obstinate were the ill humours. Monsieur Claude consider'd of this, he acted, he rouz'd up others by his own example, though he cou'd not wholly remedy the mischiefs of so many that were afflicted, and who from far and near required his assistance, we may say that he mitigated their trouble, by partaking therein himself and by his consolations. Monsieur Arnaud's Book came out at length, being entitled the perpetuity of the Faith of the Catholick Church, touching the Eucharist, defended. Monsieur Claude thought himself bound to answer it; this work of Monsieur Arnaud's made a noise in the World, it ha∣ving certain Characters fit to excite the admiration of peo∣ple, who onely floridly touch upon matters, to acquire quickly, and easily the quality of Learned. Monsieur Ar∣naud handles a Subject that might pass in some manner for new at Paris, because no French Writer had yet been seen, that had collected so many testimonies, and that like him had so profoundly argued about the Religion of the Greeks; this air of Novelty did much set off his Book; he cited passages which seem'd to bear all the marks of the real pre∣sence, according to the Roman Mode. A prodigious reading was observed in his answer. This great work, inspir'd hap∣py prepossessions in favour of the Authour; In short, though
Monsieur Arnaud had in his other works spoke with a Ma∣jestical tone, yet he now raised his Voice much higher, he lookt so big when he spoke of Monsieur Claude, and handles his Books with so much arrogance, that it was a kind of torrent, which without examination hurried away the suf∣frages of those easie Judges, that are determined by the bare accent of the Voice. Monsieur Claude had not the same assistance as Monsieur Arnaud, the latter being said to have had Friends, and such as furnisht him with proofs. Monsieur Claude cou'd have wisht, that the same thing had been done for him, but that this requir'd a happy leasure, a privilege out of date at Charenton, and granted onely to the Ecclesiasticks of France. In default of his Friends, he was forc'd to make it out in his own person. I shou'd not dare to insert the number of tra∣vels he read, what is seen of them in his answer, is but the least part of them. People often read several Books in hopes of finding something, that may be serviceable to the Subject we have in our mind, and we find nothing less than what we are in quest of. Those kind of relations being very sub∣ject to this imperfection; nevertheless a Writer cannot dis∣pence himself from this fruitless labour, when he is engag'd in a disputation of the nature of this, which turns upon mat∣ters that are to be defended or opposed. Monsieur Claude states principles that are a mighty help to disperse all the elusions of Monsieur Arnaud, he shews that the business in this dispute, is not to know exactly, what the Greeks believ'd in the matter of the Eucharist, but what they do not believe; and 'tis in this rank that he places the Transubstantiation of the Church of Rome, and the sove∣raign adoration which the Latines pay the Eucharist. He draws up a platform of the Greek Church, which is as it were the key of that matter, for he shews that there are several Greek Churches, that entertain Communion with the Church of Rome, and that it is not among them, that we are to go seek
for truths; he also justifies, that there a great number of Seminaries in Greece and in the East where Youth is brought up in the Faith of the Church of Rome, and that thence are taken Priests, Bishops, and sometimes Patriarchs who are Latines in Faith, and Greeks onely in Ceremonies; Money, fear and other motives do often bring those Roman Doctors, drest up after the Greek Mode, to the Principal Pulpits of those wretched Provinces, where heavy ignorance does ob∣tain; after which it is no difficult matter to derive such testimonies as one pleases from those missionaries who owe the Pope all they have, and who require nothing more for acknowledgment of his favours, than Paper and ink. These are the points which Monsieur Claude does make most evidently plain, from the testimony of several Writers most worthy of credit. In short, Monsieur Claude makes out the opinion of the true Greek Church, that is engag'd neither by love nor fear with the Church of Rome, that then it speaks clearly of the Faith concerning the Eucharist, wherein you neither find the Roman Transubstantiation or adoration; with these max∣ims Monsieur Claude refutes all Monsieur Arnaud's arguments, he unravels the intrigue of the testimonies he produces, he puts his Readers in a way of doing the like with himself, and there is no using any evasion but what this excellent matter provides against. For it serves to answer all that Monsieur. Arnaud has said upon this Subject, and shews you what course to take for the illustrating all the objections that might be made hence forward upon this matter. This was Monsieur Claude's fourth answer,p. 1671. upon this dis∣pute, the publick did him Justice in this, as it had done him in the other, it visibly appear'd that his Adversary granted him the principal question, which was the belief of the Latine Church, in the matter of the Eu∣charist till the time of Pascatius; Monsieur Claude had strong∣ly prov'd, that till then the real presence, Transubstantiation, and the adoration of the Host were unknown Doctrines to
the Latine Church; Monsieur Arnaud thought fitting to dis∣pute no longer upon this point, and to give the change, he contriv'd to lead Monsieur Claude and the Reader into the East. Monsieur Claude could willingly have been without this walk, but having undertaken to cure a person of his er∣rours, he was to be follow'd every where, that so he might dissipate his illusions; after which Monsieur Claude having all to no purpose exhausted all the secrets of his art, thought it became him to abandon this cure, and to leave it wholly to the sole immediate grace of God, who cures when he pleases, the most inveterate ills, and that seem the most in∣curable. I have been longer than I thought upon this dispute of Monsieur Claude's and Monsieur Arnaud's, but as it is what made most noise, I thought it requisite to give a pretty ex∣act Idea of it, that it might make an impression upon the Readers mind. I shall be shorter in his other works, and shall thereby endeavour a little to recreate such peoples minds, as were tir'd out by the uniformity of this matter, and who love novelty and conclusion. The desire of being an Authour, is an uneasie passion, since Monsieur Arnaud did not come again into play, ano∣ther Writer did not tarry long, before he suppli'd his room; he wrote against our Reformation in a very bitter style, he attackt Monsieur Claude, he pointed him out by his name, this Book is intitled Legitimate prepossessions against the Cal∣vinists; 'tis no longer a matter of Doctrine that is under∣taken to be handled, the success of the dispute of the Eu∣charist, had not been happy for the Port Royal, another course was to be taken, and we to be attackt in a place pro∣per for declamations, for calumny and the contempt of our Religion. The Authour of these prepossessions could not have chosen better, he there found wherewithall to satisfie his spleen against our Reformers, whom he loads with op∣probrious Language. This was a large Field for to excite the
peoples hatted against us, by renewing without any necessity, those sad Ideas of our ancient quarrels, which charity ought to have buried in an eternal forgetfulness. This fine and crafty policy, which those Gentlemen make profession of uniting with morals plain and free from all worldly in∣terests, found here a fair occasion of displaying their max∣ims at Court, where people were not over well satisfied with some of their works; the point of favour was to be weather'd again, by speaking of us and our Religion, after so odious a manner, as that it might make impression upon the most moderate minds, and through this prospect did Monsieur Nicole write that work, and that's its true Character. Monsieur Claude answer'd it, but he was far from follow∣ing that Authour's violent method, he found it so contrary to the spirit of Christianity, contented himself with shew∣ing its poisonous passages, but he does not make them re∣bound upon his adversaries head, thinking it sufficient that he renders them of no use, and destroys them before his eyes, and for ought I know, this is a greater mortification for that Authour, than if he had engag'd him after a less civil manner. Monsieur Claude gives us the Portrait of the Latine Church before the Reformation, there is not one sole stroke in it of his own hand, for he makes onely use of the testi∣monies of Roman Catholick Authours. This caution was necessary on the account of the niceness of the piece, and to avoid the suspicion of falsehood. The idea he gives us of the Church at that time is so sad, that there is no need of opening ones eyes, to judge that it wanted reformation. Monsieur Claude proves that it was desir'd, that it was eagerly demanded before our Reformers set about it, but he likewise shews the evasions which the Court of Rome used to elude this proposition, and the little likelyhood there was of the Clergy's entring upon so holy a project. After
having shew'd the necessity of the Reformation, Monsieur Claude proves that our Reformers, might goe to work upon weeding the Field of the Lord, and that they were forc'd thereunto by their own interest, and by the engagement they were under, of furthering the Salvation of their Bre∣thren. He answers those petty objections of the missiona∣ries, which the Authour of the prepossessions does pom∣pously display, he shews that there is no arguing directly against a doctrine, or in its behalf, by the bare examination of the lives of those who teach it, that the consequence is much more natural, and more sure to pronounce for or a∣gainst a Religion; after having examin'd its belief, he ex∣plains some of Luther's expressions that seem too rude, he speaks of that Authour as a Hero, because he really exert∣ed an Heroick constancy, but he will not warrant all his frailties; he is satisfi'd with shewing that the greatest men are subject unto failings, and by this means does he shelter some of our Reformers, over whose lives the Authour of the Prepossessions was minded to vent his spleen. The distincti∣on of this Authour is curious, he says that there may be in the Church a negative separation, that onely consists in ab∣staining from the practice of Doctrines that we do not be∣lieve; he is of a pretty temporizing humour, by insinuating that it would not have been ill contriv'd in our Fathers, had they onely proceeded so far, but he cannot pardon them the positive separation, which is properly what is called set apart; it appears plainly that this Authour's maxims do not pass for Standard truth at this day, when there wou'd be so fair an occasion to put them in practice. Many un∣happy persons are there, who wou'd thank this Authour if he cou'd procure them the enjoyment of that negative se∣paration whereof he speaks, till such time as we find the re∣sults which nature, reason and faith do presuppose. But perhaps the things wou'd go too far, if so great a complai∣sance was had for this negative, for there is found much
less danger in seeing the mysteries profan'd, than in giving the least suspicion, that the number of the true Converts was not very great. This Authour makes a mock of us with his distinction, for besides that, a good Conscience with this worldly management in matter of Religion, the little support there is at this day from the Roman Church, for those that do not relish its tenets, and the racks which on this account it puts on their minds and their hearts, in∣duce us to believe, that the same maxims wou'd have been practis'd upon our Fathers at the time of the Reformation, and that they would not have spar'd the negative separa∣tion. Our Authours would have written upon this matter, for the Church of Rome has never ceast exclaiming, that the calling of our Pastours was not Legitimate, and all that has followed that ill principle, could not have any character of Justice and goodness. The Libraries are full of Books, that have been written by Doctours of both Parties, but this Monsieur Claude's work is the best that has been seen upon this Subject. Possibly time having given occasion to new objections, has likewise furnisht Monsieur Claude with the occasion of making new discoveries in this matter, but what is particular, and which is a result of the beauty of his Genius, is that he writes with so much clearness, states his principles so well, and with so much exactness makes the application of them to the Ministry of the Protestants, that we are immediately sensible of the necessity of their consequences. Thus for example, when they debate with him the calling of the first Reformers; he contents himself with proving, that Ministry is to the Church even in oppo∣sition to the Pastours, that it is a right that cannot be alienat∣ed, either by the consent of the parties, or by the strongest Law, that is to say, by Usurpation; he adds, that three wills must concur to the forming of a lawfull calling, that of God, that of the Church, and the consent of him to
whom the Ministry is directed; he declares that the Mi∣nistry that is exercised among Protestants, is not an upstart Ministry, because it does not Preach up a new Gospel, but the same which the Apostles settled in the Church, but purg'd from the Errours which ignorance had shed therein. With these maxims does Monsieur Claude assert our calling, against all the unjust reproaches of the Church of Rome; he clearly shews its Justice and necessity. This Book having these great Characters, it is no wonder, that the publick did with joy receive it, and that it did so much honour to its Authour. Monsieur Claude did in 1676, cause five Sermons to be Printed, which he had Preach'd at Charenton the year be∣fore, upon the 22th. Chapter of St. Matthew, Ʋerse 1, 2, and 3. and the title of these Sermons is the parable of the Wedding Feast. I should be affraid of doing him an injury, if I enter'd upon the particulars of these Sermons, they are too fine and too short for an extract of them to be given in this place, as containing the matter of a vast Volume, and if well scann'd, will afford the profit of a bulky piece, which few Readers run over otherwise than in haste; whereas these Sermons do entertain people of sound Judgment, a mighty stock of Divinity, morals worthy of the Subject he ex∣plains, a neatness of expression, so just a way of arguing, with that heat and vivacity, that they must own the Au∣thour, no less fit for the Pulpit than the Study. Monsieur Claude had but one Son, whom he tenderly lov'd, he was very glad to see that his inclinations led him towards the Ministry, and that this choice he made, and which ought to be so free, had answer'd the inclinations of his heart. He had this satisfaction to find in him, a Sub∣ject proper to avail himself of his parts and example. He studied in the Academies of France, under the best Masters, who took great care of him; he returned to his Father,
who accomplish'd him in all things, that might make him a perfect Preacher. After which he was examin'd at Sedan, in the month of September 1678, and judg'd very worthy of being receiv'd into the office of the holy Ministry; he was demanded by the Church of Clermont in Beauvoisis, fourteen Leagues from Paris, in a Synod of the Isle of France, and his Father had the comfort of Ordaining of him, on the 9th. of October 1678. Monsieur Claude did more especially excell at the head of a Company; such did he appear for several years together, in the consistory of Charenton, such has he been seen in more than one Synod, of the Isle of France, wherein he was Moderator; one more especially there was, wherein he gave an instance of the strength of his Genius, which sur∣prised the whole Assembly. For after that eight propo∣nants had explain'd the Text he had given them; the Com∣pany being taken up with more important concerns, refer'd the examination of those propositions till the next day. This was a troublesome disappointment to the Moderator, who was to make report of those actions to the Synod, but Monsieur Claude was not perplext at this accident; the day following he call'd to mind all his Ideas, put each in its due place, forgot not so much as one single circumstance, and after he had perform'd the function of a Reporter, he perform'd that of a Judge; he examin'd those eight propo∣sitions, and spoke his opinion of them like a Master, though the assembly knew his several Provinces, yet was it charm'd with his memory, knowledge and Judgment. In case, in the Synod, any matters were proposed that were intricate of themselves, and still more perplexing through the cloud which the ignorance, or devises of the party did occasion; Monsieur Claude's wit had such an excellency, that in a moment it made way through all this Chaos, form'd a proposition clear and precise, in or∣der to his speaking his opinion pat, as if opinions were to
turn upon a yea or a no, a Character that is never mistaken, in the judging of a man that presides in a Company, since the choice of matters and the making them plain, is a certain sign of the presence, neatness, and strength of a great Genius. But as Monsieur Claude was exact in retaining the purity of the Faith, in the te∣nets of the reformed Religion, which he has so well defen∣ded, we may likewise say, that he acted like a wise, and charitable man in regard of the various sentiments which the Protestants entertain upon the Subject of Ecclesiastical Government and Discipline, and upon the use of some Ceremonies. His conduct more especially appear'd, in an answer he made to a Letter of the Bishop of London's; this Prelate illustrious by his Birth, and who with so much honour main∣tains the dignity of that great Office, labour'd under ap∣prehensions, for the divisions with which the Church of England was threatned, upon occasion of the Episcopal Government. For the preventing of this mischief, he wrote to some of the most eminent French Ministers, that he might have their advice. Monsieur Claude made too much noise in France, not to be consulted in an affair of this moment; he received a Letter from that Prelate, this was a slippery step, he had the eyes of all the Protestants upon him, to see how he wou'd behave himself in so nice a concern; he came off from it with honour, he used a temperament, that was approv'd of by all rational persons, he own'd what is good in the Episcopacy, but he does not dissemble the feebleness of some Prelates, who seem to him too rigid over our calling; we do not see in his Letter, that so decisive majesterial air, which other Writers take upon them, 'tis full of that humble spirit of Christianity, which onely breaths Charity and Peace. This Character pleased the Bishop of London, who honour'd him with his esteem. Monsieur Claude in return was full of acknowledg∣ments,
speaking of that famous Prelate, as of one of the greatest ornaments of the Church of England, and pointing him out under the name of the charitable Father, of all those unhappy persons that have taken refuge, who are all comforted in that they can pour forth their sighs, into a bosom, ever open to the complaints and necessities of the miserable; this Letter was written in the year 1680. In 1683, came forth Monsieur Claude's answer to Mon∣sieur de Meaux's Book, entitled A Conference with Monsieur Claude Minister of Charenton, and the occasion which ob∣lig'd him to put it forth was as followeth. Monsieur Claude had a Conference with the Bishop of Condom, up∣on the account of Mademoiselle de Duras, at the Countess de Roye's House, on the first of March 1678. Some small time after, that Prelate suffer'd a relation of their Confe∣rence to go abroad from out his Cabinet, with a discourse he had made for Mademoiselle de Duras upon the matter of the Church; Monsieur Claude in his turn, gave one of his Friends another relation of that Conference, with animad∣versions upon Monsieur de Condom's discourse; his Manu∣script fell into that Prelate's hands, who entreated a wor∣thy person to know of Monsieur Claude, whether he ap∣prov'd of that Writing which went abroad under his name. Monsieur Claude perused it, to see whether it was conform∣able to the Original, and having found it exact, he wrote at the bottom that he own'd it for his. This Declaration was given to Monsieur de Condom, who made reflexions upon Monsieur Claude's animadversions, for the maintaining his discourse of the Church; he likewise made some upon their Conference, and this was the Subject of the Book he caused to be Printed, having for its Title, A Conference with Monsieur Claude Minister of Charenton. Monsieur Claude fansied he might in this occasion, follow that Prelate's example, wherefore he caused his Book to be Printed, wherein he shews three things, he gives us his an∣swer
to Monsieur de Condom's discourse, and therein does he handle the question of the Church; he answers the reflexions that Prelate had made upon his Tract; he gives therein a relation of what passed in that Confe∣rence, and examines the reflexions of that Prelate, and owns that he gave his cause all the liveliest colours, which the most able Divines of the Church of Rome use, when they wou'd cover an errour with the lustre of truth. They parted with marks of a mutual esteem, and with a design not to publish their Conversation, but o∣ther considerations prevail'd over Monsieur de Condom's mind, and we are oblig'd to him for having first lept the bounds they had prescrib'd to themselves. For it gave Monsieur Claude occasion to handle the matter of the Church, and to give us a most clear and exact Idea of it. This composure was his Darling, and I may affirm, that he was as much satisfied with it, as with any of those that were the offspring of his Pen; he spoke of it to us, just before his last sickness, he told us he had meditated this question of the Church, with all the application he was capable of, for the giving of it a good light; he found few Authours that had applied themselves as be∣came them in illustrating that matter; he added, that Messieurs Cameron and Mestrezat were those that had best explain'd it, and that by keeping to the maxims he had stated, one might easily answer all the objections of the Doctours of the Church of Rome, without fearing they shou'd stagger his hypotheses. At first this Conference onely turn'd upon points of Discipline, and upon some small difficulties, touching the submission which individuals ought to have, for the de∣crees of Ecclesiastical Companies. If this discourse had not been the result of a common Conversation, wherein chance has a greater part than the choice of matters, in
all likelyhood a body might have said, these questions were not worthy of taking up those two great Genius's; but the consequences have so exalted this Subject, that it is the same thing with this dispute, trivial in its begin∣ning, as it is with those small springs, which make no noise at their issuing out of the Earth, and which are to be past dry footed, but which encrease extremely in a long course, often divide the place they water, redound to the utility of commerce, and thereby occasion puzling work to the Learned, who eagerly dispute about the sundry names that have been given to these Waters, of their invisibility, when the Rivers they form hide them∣selves in the Earth, of their privileges and of the rights the people have thereto. The condition of the Protestants was such, that the re∣pose of their Lives might with impunity have been inter∣rupted by the peevishness of a bare Vicar, as soon as he might have entertain'd the desire of wearying out a per∣son of our Religion; but it was more especially a Capital Crime in a Minister, to attaque the sentiments of a Pre∣late. Monsieur Claude had more than once experienc'd even in better times, how far the power of these Gentlemen extended in this case, yet did he not fail, as much as in him lay, of crossing the design of the Clergy of France, in writing against the Circular Letters that came from that Assembly, which were spread abroad under the authori∣ty of its name. He imagin'd that he ow'd the Sacrifice he made them of his rest to his own Conscience, and to the Salvation of his Brethren; for things were then in such a posture, that the bare thought of maintaining our cause, was in the opinion of those Gentlemen, deem'd a kind of Felony as Monsieur Claude has publickly shewn, when he explains the result of
that expression, whatever you may say or write 'tis all in vain,p. 109. these are the terms of their Letter. Monsieur Claude does not put his Name to that little Book intitled, Considerations upon the circu∣lar Letters of the Assembly of the Clergy of France, of the year 1682, because this piece had other Characters enough of its Authour, and that Christian prudence does not oblige us to expose our selves, when there is no motive of Conscience that calls us thereunto. The perusal of those reflexions is not long, and to it must I refer the Curious. Possibly Monsieur Claude never composed a∣ny work that has done him more honour than this, as small as it is; he does not deviate from the terms of a profound respect, when he reflects upon the temporal grandeur of those he speaks of, and to whom he thinks this submission owing. But after this, he takes upon him a true air of greatness, proceeding from the Ma∣jesty of the matter he handles; insomuch, that we see him march as an equal with those against whom he dis∣putes, upbraiding them with their affected mildness, un∣dermining the Foundations of an absolute Authority, which they exercise over Souls, and declaring to them roundly, that he onely took Pen in hand to give a reason of his Faith, not that he does herein own them for his Masters, but to render the sentiments of the Protestants publick; and the reason he alledges for it is, that Reli∣gion and Conscience onely depend immediately on God.p. 163. Some time after these circular Letters of the Clergy of France, were notified after somewhat an extra∣ordinary manner, through all the Protestant Churches in the Kingdom. The Intendents of the Provinces had order to convene the Consistories for the reading of
them; they had commonly among others, the Prelates great Vicar, in whose Diocese the Commission was per∣form'd. As this was a case wholly new, and whose in∣fluences created apprehensions, our Churches waited to see what the conduct of Charenton wou'd be in this mat∣ter, that so they might direct their own course, by its Compass; this course sped according to their de∣sire; those of the Consistory of Charenton were the first that were spoke to; Monsieur Claude was chosen to an∣swer, he did it with great Prudence and steadiness, and his answer serv'd for a model to most of the other Churches, who were very glad to walk in the steps of so able a guide. This answer was Printed; 'tis con∣ceiv'd in few words, but full of sense; Monsieur Claude owns the august Character, with which Monsieur the In∣tendent was invested, and for which he declares, that he and his Church have a profound respect; he therein protests that it was from this onely Fountain of submissi∣on, that proceeded the application they had used, in the reading of a piece, that had otherwise nothing but what was afflicting for our Churches; he farther owns, the mighty Station which my Lords the Prelates stand possest of in the Kingdom, by the dignity of their Offi∣ces, and that they thereby challenge our respects, but that if they pretended to speak to us in those Letters, as from off an Ecclesiastical tribunal, he was bound in Conscience to declare to them, that on that side we do not at all acknowledge their Authority. Matters in Religion had their mode in France like o∣ther things; that of Grace had for a long while possest peoples minds; Monsieur Claude's dispute against Mon∣sieur Arnaud, occasion'd the sentiments of grace to be little talk't of. The two parties wrote as if they had onely differ'd upon the single article of the real presence
of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Lord's supper. This battery had no sooner ceased, but that they erected that of the Authority of the Church, and this seems to be what made the most noise, and on which they most insisted, as seeming to those Gentle∣men, of a more efficacious use for conversion, than all the rest together. During these mighty Disputes, there was another kind of calmer Writers, who made Christian morals their business, and who ever and anon gave the publick little pieces which it greedily receiv'd, as finding therein wherewithall to recreate it self, from that great application which was necessary to be had for other, the more lofty questions of Divinity. Monsieur Claude knowing that a man of his profession ought to doe all things for all, in order to the Salvation of Souls, took the resolution of writing upon a Subject of Morality, and composed a little Book, whose Title is the examination of ones self, for the being duly pre∣par'd for the Communion, the first of the Corinthians, Chapter the 11th. Verse 28. This is a Tract, wherein man sees himself such as he is, in a faithfull mirrour. Monsieur Claude does herein make appear, that he throughly knew the heart of man, no feeble is there but he has penetrated; he follows him in all the win∣dings he uses, to conceal himself from God, the World and himself; he takes off that Mask, shews his Naked∣ness, his Misery, conducts him to our Lord Jesus Christ, as to his sovereign good. In the Gospel does he take the Lessons which ought to serve to illustrate and inflame him; he turns all these instructions to the use of the holy Supper. Monsieur Claude does farther shew, that he perfectly knew the World, as an able Physician knows Poisons, that is to say, with no other design but to op∣pose their qualities. These are no outragious Morals,
like many others; they are Just, yet have their severi∣ties, but withall, they are ever conformable to the state of man upon Earth, and to his Duty; and this is what renders them sensible to all the World: Whereas there are those, that often vend us precepts of morality, so a∣bove our reach, that they make no impressions upon our hearts, because our hearts do not find in those pourtraits, one single Character that suits with them. This little Book met with a very gratious reception from all sorts of persons, and indeed, it must needs have a most extra∣ordinary privilege of goodness, since it carries in its front a licence of a famous Magistrate of Paris, of the 7th. of November 1681. Monsieur Claude's Writings made so much noise in fo∣reign Countries, and especially amongst Protestants, that Groninguen caused a Professours place in Divinity to be offer'd him in its illustrious University; and this Town which had so highly signaliz'd it self in those late Wars being still cover'd, if I might dare to say it, with the sweat and bloud of its Enemies, imagin'd that for the fulness of its glory, it ought to get this Buckler of the Reformation into its bosom, there to cause Sciences and Religion to flourish. This calling was directed to Mon∣sieur Claude in all the forms, and with all the inducements he could desire, but it was a difficult matter in this case, to surprise the vigilance and affection of his Church, which too well knew the need it had of its Pastor. It earnestly intreated him not to abandon it, at a time es∣pecially, when his presence was so necessary to all the Protestants of the Kingdom; he was willing to make it the Sacrifice of his temporal interest and repose, after which he most humbly thank't the Magistrates of Groninguen for the honour they had done him, and prepared himself to undergo the utmost fury of that
Tempest, which had so long been lowring over our heads. In the mean while, the Calamities of the Protestants did daily hasten on apace, the Church that met at Charen∣ton, saw the Storm coming, and the privilege of being enlightned by the eyes of the Court, which it had made its support for above an age, was no longer a means to justifie its Conduct; it was wholly taken up in warding off the blows made at it by its Enemies, it was watchfull for the other Flocks, and the greatest weight of this heavy burthen lay upon Monsieur Claude's head. He shewed himself indefatigable, he answered the Writers of the Roman Communion, who ever seem to single out him in their works; he preach't as often as any one of his Collegues, was watchfull for the inward safety, so to disappoint it, rooted it out of others, and was carefull of the present, nay, and out of a providential Spirit, extended his thoughts and cares over the sadest futurity. This is the true scite of Monsieur Claude's heart and mind, till that fatal day, when he perceiv'd that all the solicitudes of humane prudence were absolutely in∣available, and that he must of necessity see the dis∣persion of all the reformed Churches in France, by the bare revocation of the Edict of Nants, under whose Faith we and our Fathers had liv'd. This Edict was published under the Seal, on Thurs∣day the 18th. of December 1685; the Gentlemen of the Consistory had notice of it, they thereby apprehended, that they had no longer the liberty of Preaching, be∣cause the Exercise at Charenton was no longer per∣form'd, but by virtue of a decree of the Council, which was revokt by the bare publication that had been newly made; nevertheless it was not perceiv'd, that
the Ecclesiasticks made any step to rob them of that small consolation, which they seem'd to have left of having the liberty of meeting once again in their Temple. This favour which would not have been considerable in the bottom, seem'd too great to the Ministers, and to some of the Ancients, that they open'd their Eyes to know the motives of it, and after a prety exact appli∣cation, they perceiv'd it to be one of those presents, which were to be distrusted, as coming from a suspected hand; they nevertheless liv'd in a kind of uncertainty, till Saturday at ten a Clock in the Morning; the Mi∣nisters appointed to Preach were ready, when that they were fully inform'd of the design that was laid, of coming into the assembly to speak to the people, du∣ring or after the action. The most prudent understood the consequences of that day; Monsieur Claude especial∣ly knowing by long experience, how far the zeal of Re∣ligion does hurry those, that are strongly possess'd with it, was the first that deem'd it fitting not to Preach. He backt his opinion with several reasons, which brought the rest to be of his mind. It was expedient to hinder the people from repairing to Charenton▪ the next day Monsieur Claude took care of this important matter, he saw plainer than the rest the peril he exposed him∣self to; but he imagin'd that he was likewise thereunto called by the duty of his Office. That a good Soul ought not to be much concern'd, for the dangerous con∣sequences of a good Counsell. He gave all the necessa∣ry orders, the thing succeeded according to his project, there was no Preaching at Charenton, and the event justi∣fied that his foresight was well grounded, that his fears were Just, and that this turn he gave to the Rudder of a great Ship, that was going to be wrack't, departed from the head of a most able Pilot, who contriv'd to save
the people whom God had committed to his charge, when he cou'd no longer hinder the wreck of his Vessel. This Cessation of exercise, which had seem'd too ha∣sty to some, past for a Masterly stroke in the opinion of others. The Ecclesiasticks knew it immediately, to be Monsieur Claude that had broke their measures, and to prevent the over officious cares he might have rende∣red to his dispersed Flock, they wou'd, said they, spare him the pains of that sad spectacle. He had fifteen days time given him, as well as the other Ministers to depart the Kingdom, they found means to abridge that time; for on Monday the 22 of December 1685, which was the day on which the revocative Edict of that of Nants, was Registred in the Parliament of Paris; Monsieur Claude received order at ten a Clock in the Morning, to be gone within four and twenty hours. He obey'd with a profound respect, and went away attended by one of the King's-Footmen, who was to conduct him to the Fronteers of France, and who faithfully perform'd his Commission, and yet did nevertheless carry himself very handsomly towards Monsieur Claude; so true it is, that great merit has an ascendant over those very hearts, that do not love our Religion.
PART III. MOnsieur Claude was not at a loss, what foreign Countrey to chuse for his retreat, his Son being Minister of the Walloon Church at the Hague, byast him above all other prospects that offer'd themselves to his mind. At Paris he took Coach for Brussels, his fame leading the way, occasion'd several persons to visit him in his Journey; he past through Cambray where he lay, was there presented with what was in season by the Je∣suits; the Father Rector did him the honour to come and see him, he made due returns to his Civility, and the diversity of Religion did not interrupt that commerce of Compliments, and instances of a mutual esteem. At last he arriv'd at the Hague, and the satisfaction he had to be in the bosom of his Family, whom the affairs of the time had separated, made him for some moments, forget the peril he had been in, and the remains of a great fit of sickness. In a few days after, he had the honour to pay his re∣spects to his Highness the Prince of Orange, he found that his merit had spoken in his behalf, he met with a gracious reception, and however great the Idea was, which Monsieur Claude had conceiv'd of his Highness, he own'd that fame, which commonly encreases objects, and which had spoken with so much luster of his Life,
had not as yet, had Voice sufficient to Trumpet all the Heroick Vertues of that August Prince. Monsieur Claude knew her Royal Highness the Prin∣cess of Orange, to be a great and illustrious support of Religion, that she understands it in its source, and that a lively impression is seen of it in her actions. He was desirous likewise to kiss her hand, he had that honour, and confest that he had never seen so enlightned an un∣derstanding, with so much Piety and Majesty united to∣gether. Monsieur Claude did likewise pay his respects to per∣sons of a very considerable figure in that State, and he could not sufficiently admire the sweetness and goodness of those illustrious heads, who at the coming out of their assemblies, where they have appear'd invested with the Majesty of a Soveraign State, speak and act a moment after with other men like private persons, and as if they were their fellow Citizens. Monsieur Claude was no sooner arriv'd at the Hague, but that the Elector of Brandenburg did him the honour to think of him, in order to get him into his Territo∣ries. This great Prince, whose bare name will be a per∣fect Encomium throughout all ages, caused an ho∣nourable and usefull employment in his profession to be offered him; but particular reasons hindred him from complying, so as he could have wish't, to this calling. The rest of his days were destin'd by the Providence of God, to these happy Provinces, and this potent State was willing he should share in that rich effusion of its Chari∣ty, which began to pour upon the Ministers that had here taken refuge, nay, he was distinguish't from all the rest by a most advantagious portion, and all concur'd to doe him good. The Prince of Orange took delight in ex∣ercising
his generous liberality towards him by a consi∣derable Pension. After so many troubles, the time now seem'd to be come, for Monsieur Claude to enjoy all imaginable quiet at the Hague. Nevertheless it is certain, that he was never less to himself, than when one would have thought he was the Master of his repose. His House was the re∣fuge of all the Unfortunate, oblig'd he was to hear their Lamentations, and ease their grief as much as in him lay. His dispersed Flock daily presented fresh objects to his eyes, but sad; and like so many Planks that had es∣capt Shipwrack. He received those that were exposed to temptation, was oblig'd to answer them, was inform'd that others were fall'n under it, and this was for him a matter of affliction and labour, to raise up these infirm persons again from their fall. The last work of Monsieur Claude is of a different Character from the rest, his little Book is so known by its self and its adventures, that I should be affraid of a∣busing the Readers leasure, if I went about to insert the particulars in this place. The Elector of Brandenburg being at Cleve, Monsieur Claude had the honour to pay him his respects, his E∣lectoral Highness exprest to him the particular esteem he had for his merit, he was desirous to hear him Preach, and accordingly he Preacht in his Palace, at two a Clock in the afternoon, upon these words, the 2 to the Corinthi∣ans, Chap. 5. ver. 17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: old things are past away, behold all things are become new. His Electoral Highness seem'd extreamly well satisfied with his Sermon, and utter'd his mind accordingly in terms most obliging to its Authour. Monsieur Claude return'd to the Hague, possessed with the glory of that great Prince, who may serve for a
Model to the most perfect Heroe's, if it be possible that there is any one that imitates him, in the exercise of that immense Charity, which he at this day bestows upon so many unhappy persons, and which bears all the marks of the holy fervency of the Primitive and happy days of Christianity. After Monsieur Claude was return'd, we wou'd needs know of him the means that were to be used for the re∣uniting the Protestants, call'd of the Confession of Augs∣bourg with those of our Communion. He said that in all probability this reunion wou'd not be a work of dis∣putation, which commonly onely serves to exasperate peoples minds, that we had reason to praise God, that there were no tenets essential to Salvation, that divided this holy house of the Lord, and that the shortest and safest way must be a wise temperament, which it wou'd be easie to find out if all parties wou'd concur to this good work, and lay in a stock of reciprocal Charity, as might reconcile peoples minds, and unite their hearts in order to the framing one and the same Communion, without declaiming against each other. He was more especially of opinion, that the piety of Sovereign Poten∣tates ought to be excited in this occasion, and that their zeal for this peace, wou'd be a mighty help for the accom∣plishment of this important design. This overture, which we made to Monsieur Claude was again a new Subject of admiration for him, in expressing to us the sentiments of the Elector of Brandenburg upon this mat∣ter, for he told us that this great Prince had discoursed him about this reunion with so much zeal, that he was persuaded, that if this piece was to be a present from Heaven in our days, Divine Providence would principally make use of his Electoral Highness, to whom this glory seem'd to be reserv'd as to the Prince, who can best se∣cond
this project with his own enlightned understanding, and with his sincere and ardent piety, known and re∣spected by both parties. Now for some time, Monsieur Claude had not enjoyed a perfect health, he was fixt to study so as he would have wisht, but his body could not therein follow the motions of his heart, yet did he not love to have his Study inter∣rupted in the Morning; he bestowed the rest of the day upon all those that were minded to see him. The time after Supper was reserv'd for his particular Friends, who took a most profitable delight in seeing and hearing him at those hours of freedom, and in those easie conversa∣tions, we saw perfect Monsieur Claude discoursing with great openness of heart upon all matters, and especially of that great revolution which is seen at this day in our concerns. His Character upon this Subject was humble and submissive to the Providence of God, he ador'd its steps, but also said that they were abysses, which were not to be too much sounded; that the safest course was to avail our selves of this Judgment of God, and in silence to expect the assistance of his grace, these conversations ever ended, with the usual exercises of piety in his Fami∣ly. After this manner did Monsieur Claude see the days of his sad exile run out till his last sickness, whose dole∣full remembrance we must renew in this place. There was no regular exercise for preaching in the Walloon Church at the Hague, he nevertheless Preach't there now and then with so much edification, that in ending his Sermon, he excited in the minds of his Auditours a pas∣sionate longing to hear him again, and it was to gratifie that desire, that he resolv'd to Preach on Christmas day the 25th. of December 1686. His Son was gone abroad that day, he supplied his place, the circumstance of the
season determin'd him upon the choice of the matter, 'twas requisite to speak of the Saviour of the Worlds Nativity; for that purpose did he chuse these words of the Gospel according to St. Luke, Chapter the 1. verse the 30, 31, &c. And the Angel said unto her fear not Mary, for thou hast found favour with God, and behold thou shalt conceive in thy Womb, and bring forth a Son and shalt call his name Jesus, he shall be great, he shall be call'd the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. This Sermon was very Learned, passages it had of extraordinary perfection, his fancy ever fruitfull and happy, appear'd as much in this occasion, as in any other of his Life. It afforded that turn so fine and so na∣tural, which he knew how to give to the matters he ex∣plain'd, flashes there were, that did in no wise betray the driness and heaviness of old Age, and we may say in short, that there was throughout observ'd that grandeur of Spirit which influences all his works, that so lively penetration, that so wise, so judicious a choice, which made the ruling Character of that incomparable Genius. He utter'd this Sermon with great eagerness, was heated and inflamed, and in all probability, this was the first point of that fatal sickness which bereft the World of him. His whole Auditory was charm'd with his action, Her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange, who is no less Illustrious, for the vast extent of her understanding, and a solid piety and without pomp, than through the bloud of so many Kings, whence she derives her extracti∣on, lissen'd to this Preacher, with a most steady applicati∣on of mind, and was extreamly well satisfied with this his performance.
It were to be wisht that this Sermon was Publish'd; Monsieur Claude told us, he had writ the greatest part of it; I am persuaded his Son wou'd oblige many people, if he caused it to be Printed as it is, being a fragment that wou'd doe much honour to his Father's memory. Monsieur Claude was no sooner at home, but that he found himself extraordinary weary; he was seiz'd that Evening with a most violent Rhume, spent the Night with some uneasiness, and on the Morrow would have gone and heard the Sermon, whatever endeavours were used by his Family, to hinder him from stirring abroad in that condition. That Night he had a Fever with pains throughout his whole Body, his Distemper was thought to be a Rhumatism, upon this principle did they pre∣scribe for his Recovery, but the humours were in so very great a ferment, that there was no moderating the course of them by any Remedy. On the 6th. of January, he was prest by most sensible pains, he was sensible of the decay of his Senses, and as if he had had a full know∣ledge, that he shou'd not ever have the liberty of expres∣sing his thoughts; he told his Son that he desir'd to speak with me, I repair'd immediately to his House, and in the presence of his Family, he told me his mind in these terms. I was desirous said he to me, to see you, and make my Declaration before you; I am, added he, a miserable sin∣ner before God; I most heartily beseech him to shew me mercy, for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, and I hope he will hear my Prayer, being the promise he made to repenting Sinners. I have reason to praise him for the blessing he has laid upon my Ministry, which has not been fruitless in his Church, which is an effect of his grace, for which I adore his Providence.
He took a little breath, and it was to tell us, that he had with great application examin'd all Religions, but had found none worthy of the Wisedom of God, and capable to lead a man to true happiness, save the Christian Reli∣gion. He then added, that among the divers sentiments, which divide Christians upon the Subject of Religion, which he had carefully Studied, he had found that the Reformed Religion was the onely good Religion which was to be followed, that it was entirely found in the word of God, that this was the Fountain from whence it was to be deriv'd, and that this Religion was as it were the Trunk and Body of the Tree, to which it became us to keep steady without ever forsaking it. This is my opi∣nion said he to me, and I was willing to declare it to you. I wou'd have told him, that I was not surpriz'd to hear him discourse in these terms, towards the end of his days, after what he had taught the publick by his Books, which had been of so great an Edification to the Church. Let us break off there said he to me, and let us not speak of praises at a time when moments are so precious, and when they ought to be employed to a better use. Here we let fall the Conversation, for that I perceiv'd his pains prest him, and that he askt to be put to Bed. A very worthy person, and one of his intimate and ancient Friends, wou'd needs pass that Night, being Mon∣day the 6th. of January, in his Chamber, that he might do him some small Services. His pains were most advan∣tageously rewarded, he had the opportunity of hearing him discourse of the happiness of those that had left France for Religion. He made the application of it to him, he besought him, he exhorted him as a Pastour and as a Friend, to enjoy that Privilege, as a blessing which cannot be sufficiently valued.
The following days nature seem'd to make an utmost effort to bring him off. He complain'd of a great pain in the Arm that was free, 'twas thought to be a spice of the Gout; he was a pretty while in this pain, and we in hopes through this new Distemper, which in all likely∣hood wou'd save his Life. But his Strength decaying through the raging of the Fever, and the length of the Di∣sease, did not help nature in that indication it shew'd us; I often saw him, and began to despair of his recovery on Friday, because I perceiv'd he was threatned with a Delirium, which was a thing we most dreaded. His Wife askt him if he was not sorry to leave her; no, answered he, because I am going to my God, and I leave you in his hands in a free Countrey, what can I desire more either for you or for my self? On Saturday in the Evening, Monsieur Claude wou'd needs Write to the Prince of Orange, he made use of the hand of one of his Friends, for that his own was too weak; this Letter was short and comformable to his Con∣dition, it exprest the State of his mind and heart, in those last moments of his Life. He sign'd it with some trouble, his Highness receiv'd it, and that great Prince, who ever places the concern of Religion in the first rank of so many other important matters, which depend upon his Conduct, understood the loss the Church was going to have; and all Hero as he is, he was sensible upon per∣using it of his being a man as well as we, it thereby al∣so appear'd, that he valued and lamented the dying per∣son, and shar'd deep in an affliction common to so many good Souls. On Monday Morning, Monsieur Claude askt to speak with his Son, as soon as he was come to him, he em∣brac'd him tenderly, and said, I am leaving you my Son, the time of my departure is at hand. His Son wou'd
have told him, that his Distemper was not yet desperate; but he replied, I have no hopes save in the mercy of God, that is my principal Sanctuary, take it also for your self my Son, and never take any other. Presently after, seeing that Monsieur Claude grew wea∣ker, I askt him whether he wou'd give his blessing to his Family, who requir'd it of him through my Mouth; most willingly answered he, immediately his Wife fell upon her knees by his Bed-side, and he spoke to her in these terms; My Wife, I have always tenderly loved you, be not afflicted at my Death, the Death of the Just is sweet and precious before God, in you have I seen the senti∣ments of a sincere Piety, I praise God for it, be constant in serving him with your whole heart, he will bless you, I recommend my Son and his Family to you, and beseech the Lord to bless you. His Son kneeling by his Mother, did likewise ask his blessing, Monsieur Claude who lov'd him as a Father, though he liv'd with him as a Brother, exprest great Joy at this Request, and made him answer; My Son, I have observ'd in you two Characters, which have mightily pleased me, that of an honest man, and that of a man of Honour, maintain these Characters to the last. You have chosen the right side, perform your Office as a good Pastour, and God will bless you; I recommend your Mo∣ther to you, love her, respect her, I am persuaded you will not fail in this, and that she will make you sutable returns. Be mindfull, added he, of this Domestick, take care that she want nothing as long as she lives; I give you my blessing. Hereupon these two afflicted persons had not the power to make him an answer, their tears and silence spoke for them. I crav'd his blessing for my self, he was affected and wearied, yet did he give it me according to my desire.
After that I said Prayers, he bid me be short, and al∣ledg'd this reason for it, I am under that oppression said he, that I am not capable of applying my mind at this moment, to more than these two great truths, to the Meditation of the mercy of God, and to the Graces of the holy Spirit. That is a great deal, Sir, said I to him, they are two most abundant Fountains of Comfort for you, I pray'd God for him, and then it was thought fit∣ting we should leave him to his rest. After the Sermon in the Morning, they pray'd for him in the Church, but without naming him. At Noon Monsieur Menard and Monsieur Jaquelot came to see Monsieur Claude; Monsieur Menard had been his Col∣legue at Paris. After some short discourse upon Mon∣sieur Claude's Sickness, said Monsieur Claude to Monsieur Menard, pray, Sir, let's talk of things more important, and more available for me, I am in a State of Death, but I hope that God will grant me mercy, for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ his Son, who is my onely Justice; Monsieur Menard seconded this thought, which Monsieur Claude had started, and Monsieur Claude's pangs com∣ing thick upon him, this conversation ended with a Prayer. Monsieur Jaquelot exprest to Monsieur Claude his con∣cern at his illness, to which Monsieur Claude made an∣swer after a very handsome and Christian Manner, in praying God to bless him. Monsieur Carre came into his Room at one a Clock, as soon as Monsieur Claude saw him, he told him that his last hour was drawing on, and that in a little time, his Son would be without a Father, but that he besought him that he wou'd be a Father to his Son. Monsieur Carre told him that he had an esteem for his Son, that he lov'd him and should serve him in all he
could, that they were Collegues, and that onely Death should part them. Monsieur Claude the Father thank't him, declar'd he died satisfied, and was very intent upon the Prayer which Monsieur Carre made for him. Though Monsieur Claude had not been nam'd after the Morning Sermon, the report of the danger he was in, was immediately spread about the Church, and the affection people had for him, with their pity and fear, drew a world of people to his House; more especially I found there several Ladies of his acquaintance, and Gen∣tlemen, who exprest how desirous they were, to hear Monsieur Claude speak and receive his blessing: I ap∣prov'd of their desires, but added, that it would be a hard matter to procure them that consolation, because his Head was not at liberty to talk long together; they nevertheless urg'd me to make the proposal of it, I ac∣cordingly did so, and that too immediately, telling him what was desir'd of him; I added, that the last words of a man of his Character and Merit, would edifie as much as several Sermons, and that he owed this Succour to the Zeal and Calamities of those good Souls that requir'd this comfort of him; a God's name replied he, this desire is Just, appoint a fitting time for it which you know best, and which accordingly was immediately ap∣pointed, but he was no longer in a condition to speak, he had had a Delirium, which did not allow him the liberty of prosecuting a discourse, in such a manner as might have been expected of him. He was again pray'd for in the Church, in the After∣noon Service, and it was thought convenient he should be named. Monsieur Arbusse Preaching at that time, said before he enter'd upon his Prayer, that there was one of our Brethren that deserv'd to be lamented by all good people, that it was Monsieur Claude, that they were to
pray God for him, the whole Congregation seem'd much concern'd at this name; Monsieur Arbasse pray'd to God with great zeal, was herein accompanied by the whole Church, which could not forbear weeping before hand, for the loss they were going to have. After five a Clock at the Evening Sermon, Monsieur Du Vivie pray'd God for Monsieur Claude, he insisted a pretty while upon this point, his grief and zeal excited likewise the grief and zeal of the Congregation which dissolv'd into tears. At nine a Clock Monsieur Du Vivie came to see him, as soon as he drew near his Bed, Monsieur Claude gave him his blessing; you have prevented my wishes said Mon∣sieur Du Vivie to him, I had a design to ask you your blessing; God confirm it to you, Monsieur Claude made him answer. Some time after Monsieur Du Vivie told him, that it became him to think of a perfect Justice, that may serve before the Tribunal of God, where he was going to appear, and that he knew very well that this Justice was onely to be found in our Lord Jesus Christ, who was made to us by God, Wisedom, Justice, Sanctification, and Redemption; that's all my hopes answered Monsieur Claude, he added this passage at length, I know in whom I have believed, &c. After which Monsieur Du Vivie said Prayers, which the sick-man lissen'd to with great atten∣tion. Half an hour after, Monsieur Du Vivie askt him whe∣ther he did not find, that his Condition had some affinity with the 73 Psalm. My flesh faileth and mine heart also, but God is the strength of mine heart and my Portion for ever. Monsieur Claude rais'd up his Voice and said twice Amen, Amen; he gave his blessing to some persons of his acquaintance that askt it of him; there was especially a deserving young Lady, who askt him whether he would
impart his blessing to her as well as to the rest, why should I not give it you he answered her, I have seen evi∣dent instances of your discretion and piety, I pray God to bless you. Monsieur Claude falling into a Slumber, his Son wakt him from time to time, to give him Consolation; 'twas done in few words, he being too weak to prosecute a long discourse, he askt him if he did not place all his confi∣dence in the death of his Saviour, yes Son replied he, our Lord Jesus Christ is my onely Justice, I need no other, he is all-sufficient. I askt him whether he was not much pleas'd in being thus comforted by his Son, I am very well satisfied he replied, let him continue, I said Prayers and staid with him till eleven a Clock. On Monday the 13th. of January, a sad day for us, I was call'd up at five a Clock in the Morning, to go see Monsieur Claude, who was become extraordinary weak; I spoke to him but little, he being in great Agonies occa∣sion'd by pains in his Stomach. At ten a Clock I drew near his Bed, and seeing him in a quieter condition, I askt him whether he knew me, yes said he to me, with a voice pretty strong, you are my Pastour, my whole re∣course is to the mercy of God, I expect a better life than this, help me to fortifie me in the exercise of medi∣tation and Prayer. Notwithstanding his pains, finding him constant in his pious inclinations, I took upon me the right of his Pastour, that he had conferr'd upon me; I spoke to him of the sinfulness of mankind, and of the riches of the grace of God, that have appear'd in the Death of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and I exhorted him to place his whole confidence in the Death of that good Saviour. These few words excited his piety, he gave us most sensible testimonies of his Repentance, and of the stedfast Faith he had in our Saviour Jesus Christ, and in
this happy moment did I also apply that so precious Balm, which our Saviour Jesus Christ has put into our hands, for the consolation of repenting Sinners. Be as∣sur'd said I to him, Brother, that your Sins are forgiven you, through the mercy of God, I declare it to you in the name of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who has given us a Commission for so doing; and I beseech him that he wou'd ratifie it to you, by the sentiment of your own Conscience, this Declaration which he lissen'd to atten∣tively afforded him mighty Joy; I am persuaded said he to me, that God will hear the sighs of my Soul, and your discourses, let us beseech him so to doe, by the Prayers I beg you would make in my behalf, according∣ly we fell upon our knees and I pray'd God for him. At two a Clock in the Afternoon, there was no longer any connexion in Monsieur Claude's discourse, nay, and we avoided engaging him to speak, for fear of augmen∣ting his Delirium; We pray'd often for him in that inter∣val. At five a Clock, he had somewhat a violent Potion given him for to rouse his Spirits, but all ineffectually. At seven a Clock, he became still much weaker, yet did he still hear, but was become speechless. I bid him give me a sign whether he understood me, and that he should give me his hand; accordingly he reach't it to me, I took his hand, and said these words of the 31. Psalm to him. Into thine hand I commend my spirit, for thou hast re∣deemed me O Lord God of Truth; at these words he prest my hand, and strugl'd to raise his head, I continued to exhort him and said Prayers. Monsieur Arbusse came to see him, and pray'd by him, for he was so weak, and his senses so spent, that Prayer was the onely assistance he could receive from us. This exercise lasted till half an hour past Eleven at Night. On the 13th. of January 1687, Monsieur Menard and I did
not stir from his Bed-side till his last gasp, when we saw him calmly expire at that time, and restored his Soul in∣to the hands of God. Thus Lived, and thus Died John Claude in his 68 year, after having so worthily perform'd his Office, for the space of forty two years or there abouts; he was by na∣ture quick and lively, but submissive to reason and faith; he was Civil, Modest, Illuminated, wise in his Councells, a true Friend, officious without being troublesome, cha∣ritable but with choice, and much concern'd for the evils the Church labour'd under. He understood the World, shrifted into intreagues, and improv'd all these lights to the repose of the Flocks of the Lord. He had a sagacious Wit, a vast Imagination, a nice Judgment, a just Choice; his expression was clear, sprightly and strong, his know∣ledge had past the test of Meditation, he had fram'd an easie platform of all matters of his Profession; each ob∣ject came in its due place, as soon as he spoke or writ, and all this was maintain'd with an exact method and mighty beauty of Language. He was a learned Divine, a great Preacher, an able and zealous defender of the Re∣formation, a rigid observer of our confession of Faith, an enemy of all such sentiments as might have disturb'd the peace of the Church, and the purity of Religion, and to the regulations of our Discipline. He was of easie ac∣cess, of frank and fluent Conversation, and all these great qualities were season'd with such profound humility, that when he spoke, he seem'd to forget what he was, to fit his discourse to the meanest understandings. In France he liv'd belov'd by his Friends, esteem'd by his Adversaries, and his name which has past with so much lustre into fo∣reign Countries, has there gain'd the admiration of those very people, who did not love his Religion, and ever will be had in veneration in the Church.
These Characters are to be seen in the works he has given us, and if his Son will farther enrich the publick as is hop'd with other Writings, that have not yet seen the light, they will furnish us with new strokes, to render the portraict of this great man the more accomplisht. For to have an Heroick Idea of him, we must study him and his works. Remember them which have the oversight of you, which have declared unto you the word of God, whose faith fol∣low, considering what hath been the end of their Conversa∣tion. Hebrews Chapter the 13th. Verse the 7th. FINIS.
Books Printed for Thomas Dring at the corner of Chancery-lane in Fleetstreet. AN impartial Collection of the great affairs of State, from the beginning of the Scotch Rebellion, in the year 1639. to the Murther of King Charles I. wherein the first occasion and the whole Series of the late Troubles in En∣gland, Scotland and Ireland, are faithfully represented. Taken from authentick Records and Methodically digest∣ed by John Nalson L. L. D. in 2 Vol. Fol. Systema Agriculturae, or the Mystery of Husbandry disco∣vered, treating of the several new and most advantageous ways of Tilling, Planting, Sowing, Manuring, Ordering, Improving of all sorts of Gardens, Orchards, Meadows, Pastures, Corn-lands, Woods and Copices, as also of Fruits, Corn, Grain, Pulse, New-heys, Cattle, Fowl, Beasts, Bees, Silkworms, Fish, &c. with an account of the several In∣struments and Engines used in this Profession, to which is added Kalendarium rusticum: or the Husbandman's monthly Directions, also the Prognosticks of Dearth, Scarcity, Plenty, Sickness, Heat, Cold, Frost, Snow, Winds, Rain, Hail, Thunder, &c. and Dictionarium Rusticum, or the Interpretation of Rustick Terms; the whole work being of great use and advantage to all that delight in that most noble Practise. The Fourth Edition carefully corrected and amended, by J. W. Gent. Folio. Almahide, or the Captive Queen an excellent new Ro∣mance, never before in English. The whole work written in French by the accurate Pen of Monsieur de Scudeus, Gover∣nour of Nostre Dame. Done into English by J. Philips Gent. The History of the Holy War, being an exact account of the Expeditions of the Kings of England and France, and several other of the Christian Princes, for the Conquest of Jerusalem, and the rest of the Holy Land; wherein are
largely represented the great Actions, Battles, Seiges, difficult Marches, honourable Retreats, admirable Strategems, re∣gular Conducts, and brave Performances of the Christian Armies, in all the said Expeditions. Done into English by Dr. Nalson. Folio. The Doctrine of the Jesuites, delivered in a plain sincere discourse to the French King, concerning the re-establish∣ment of the Jesuites in his Dominions. Written in French by a Learned Roman-Catholick, and now translated into English, quarto. A Collection of the Church Histories of Palestine, from the Birth of Christ to the beginning of the Empire of Dio∣cletian. By J. M. B. D. quarto. Mr. Claude's Answer to Monsieur de Meaux's Book, in∣titled, A Conference with Mr. Claude, with his Letter to a Friend, wherein he answers a Discourse of M. de Condom, now Bishop of Meaux, concerning the Church, in quarto. The second Part of M. Claude's Answer to Monsieur de Meaux's Book, intitled, a Conference with Mr. Claude, being an Answer to Monsieur Meaux's References; in quarto. The whole duty of a Christian, containing all things ne∣cessary both as to what he is to know and doe for obtaining a happy Eternity, to which is added more particularly di∣rections how to prepare for a comfortable Death, in Twelves. An infallible way to Contentment in the midst of pub∣lick or personal Calamities, together with the Christian's courage and incouragement against evil tidings and the fear of Death. The devout Communicant exemplified in his behaviour before, at, and after the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, Practically suited to all the Parts of that solemn Ordinance.
