L794 11946857 51336
THE Counterfeits, A COMEDY, As it is Acted at the Duke's Theatre. Vbi voluptas quaeritur, ibi non minus laudis promeretur qui pessimè dixit, quàm qui optimè, eò quòd non mi∣nùs delectet— Licensed, Aug. 29. 1678. R. L'estrange. LONDON, Printed for Iacob Tonson, at the Iudges-head in Chancery-lane. 1679.
PROLOGUE. IT is the Fate of Strangers to the Town, To have the Play and Prologue too their own: Whilst Writers here for one another sweat, Clubbing like Carr-men when a Brother's set. Nay, dull insipid Farce you will commend For sake of Prologue-writing gifted Friend; Some gentle follower of the Wits, who thinks He sucks in Poetry when-e're he drinks. Since these have left no Formal So or Thus, I'll bluntly tell you what you'll have from us. Know then our Poet ventures more by far Then all the blustering Hero's of the War. For he without a Second does engage Throngs of a fulsome bawdy scribing Age; And dares in th' midst of cry'd-up Satyr vent What you'll acknowledge nicely innocent. 'Tis bold and new, and 'mongst the rffling Toys, Whose Wit is beastly Impudence and Noise, He knows he's damn'd; but wou'd be so on choice. Ladies, for you he writ, much griev'd to see Your best of Pleasures, harmless Comedy, Made Bawd to such mean durty Ribaldry As scarce is known to th' Offall of the Gallery. Shou'd he miscarry, 'tis in such a Cause Will challenge Pardon, if not gain Applause. Be kind, he's young, and on your hands may mend. 'Tis something so to write as not t'offend.
The Actors Names. D. Gomez. Mr. Anthony Lee. Don Luis. Mr. Gilloe. Vitelli. Mr. Betterton. Antonio. Mr. Harris. Carlos. Mr. Medburne. Peralta. Mr. Smith. Dormilon. Mr. Persivall. Fabio. Mr. Vnderhill. Crispin. Mr. Williams. Tonto. Mr. Richards. Boy. Young Mumford. Officers. Women Elvira. Mrs. Lee. Violante. Mrs. Price. Clara. Mrs. Barrer. Flora. Mrs. Gibbs.
THE Counterfeits, A COMEDY. ACT I. SCENE 1. The High Street in Madrid. Antonio, Carlos. Car. SHe is your Sister, Antonio. Ant. That's it that makes my Hell: were she as far from my Bloud, as now my Love, she might, if possible, out-sin her Sex, and never injure me. But to call me Brother, and be pointed at for Whore, Carlos; were the Lives of all our Family twisted up in hers, nay, should all Posterity pe∣rish with her, she dies. Car. This Passion puts thee beyond all Counsel: prithee be thy self, and let me hear the Circumstances of your Story. I am too much a Spaniard, not to prompt you to Revenge; but would first know why, and how. Ant. Believe me, thou art blest, Carlos, who hast none of this frail Tribe so near thy Bloud, to rack thy Thoughts. The very Being of the Sex is in∣fectious, and from the momnt of their Birth corrupts their Bloud, and leaves them all a Stain. Car. This is Raving past hopes of Cure. Ant. Would you have me tame, when all my Care and future Hopes are at once blasted? Had I not Fondness for her beyond that of Mothers? Fol that I was, to trust my Happiness on the treacherous prop of a Wo∣man's Faith!
Car. This may still be Jealousie, and founded on the hate of some ly Informer. Ant. Would my Life could buy the least show for Doubt. No, see, see Carlos, her own Hand witnesses against her self; the onely thing wherein a Woman ought to be believ'd. Carlos reads the Letter. —Vitelli, a Gentleman of Cordova, as he pretended, with promise of Marriage had possession of my Bed and, as I am inform'd, is fled to∣wards Castile. My Retreat is to a Monastery, where, you shall know when my Injuries are reveng'd— Ant. Dost thou not find her more impudent then practis'd Bauds? Had he still staid to feed her Lusful flame, I had been ignorant. Yes, you shall be reveng'd on your Vitelli; and with the same Dag∣ger, though thou wert professing at the Altar, I'd send thee to keep com∣pany with the Devils like thy self. Carlos, thou must not trust thy very Thoughts with this Secret. Is there not something in my Looks may tell the world my Sister's Whore? Hah— Car. This is Madness beyond Bedlam; be calm, and I'll further your Design.—But— Ant. Each Minute's now an Age; but once reveng'd, thou shalt see me calm as sleeping Children. I was not wont to be thus. Car. Nor must you be, Antonio; this Passion is a certain Hinderance to your purpose. How can I assist you, when you will not give your self time to tell your Story? Ant. True, Carlos, and thou hast nam'd the onely thing could teach me Patience to relate my Shame. Know then, that very night I had concluded the advantageous Match for this false Woman, with Don A∣lonso Fonseca, the great Heir, returning late home, brisk with wine, and over-joy'd at the Success, I entred at the Garden-door, which I found open, and all the House silent as Death. Fear of my greatest Treasure wing'd me to her Chamber: where, to my perpetual Torment, I found that Letter. Oh Carlos! canst thou guess the Sighs of Merchants in a Storm, or utmost Pangs of Parents o're their dying Hopes? such was my Treasure, such my Loss and Grief. Car. The Surprize must needs be great, and the unlucky Circumstances adde much to the Affliction. But what Account could your Servants give? Ant. All I could learn was, that she (who you know always govern'd) commanded them to bed, and that her Maid should wait my coming home; by which means, unknown to any, thy escap'd. Car. Know you the place of her Retirment she speaks of? Ant. No, I let her Shame to b her Punishent, till I could wreak
my Vengeance on Vitelli, who I judge would chuse Madrid, (for of Cor∣dova he is not,) both for the Solemnity, and likeliest place to lie conceal'd. Car. Do you know him? Ant. No, Carlos, but such an Action must leave some mark upon the base Offender; and something tells me, my heightned Rage will point me to the curst Ruiner of my Honour.—Methinks I must look him dead. Car. Our Friendship needs not be confirm'd by Talking; Antonio knows how much Carlos would doe to serve him. Nor will I spend a Minute otherwise then in his Search. Unload thy self, and let me bear half the weight. Thou hast too much Love, and too much sense of Honour. Ant. Carlos, thou knew'st my Father well: methinks I see him just now breathing out his last, and with his cold trembling hand delivering up Elvira to my Care. Take her, said he, Antonio, the Treasure of my life, the Darling of thy lost Mother: and as thou hopest to meet us both in Heaven, swear never to marry till thou hast settled her. I swore; and when I would have added more, he onely answered with a Smile, and seem'd to die o'rejoy'd. Blest man! how unsuccessful was thy Care! And 'twas to perjure me thou mad'st me swear. We Interest and Honour urge in vain, Where Lust and Passion absolute do reign. Exeunt. SCENE 2. A Chamber in the Inn. Elvira, Clara, in mens Apparel: Elvira like a Knight of Malta. Elv. ARe we alone, Clara? each step I take I feel a Dagger at my heart. Wretched Woman, how am I fall'n! Oh the blest time, when innocently we spent our days in pitying the rest of our frail Sex! Am I not a Monster branded for my Infamy? Slave that I was to per∣jur'd false Vitelli! Clar. For Heaven's sake, Madam, don't weary me with Complaints. I swear the long-ear'd Devil I rid has laid me up this month. I fan∣sied my self lying, when I whipt and spur'd. They may laugh at Scho∣lars, Tailours and Seamen; but if a Chamber-maid in Breeches don't rid with the wor of 'em, I'll sell my Maidenhead for four Grapes, and they are cheap in this Country. lv. Thou art still all Mirth: but sooner shall the Sun rest, then I live and not seek the false Vitelli. Base, cruel man, to leave his poor Elvira
so! Oh! I could curse him, would my Heart give leave; but that be∣lies my Tongue. Clar. Well, Madam, you know Clara is no Flincher; but I'd sooner undertake to know a Bee amongst a Swarm, then find out a Man in this Crowd whose Name you're as uncertain of, as you are certain of his Dishonesty. This Will-of-the-wisp of Love wants Wit as well as Eyes. Aside. Elv. I've often heard him say, (and sure all he said could not be false,) that his Attendance upon the Councl of State would be necessary towards the recovery of an Inheritance; so that I conclude him here: and were he amongst millions, I have too much reason not to know him. Clar. The truth is, you have been pretty intimately acquainted. Aside. Not to fright you, Madam, but prepare you for the worst; (though the truth is, we Women seldom fail at a pinch) what if your Brother should come to the Celebration of the Royal Marriage, and find us here? how would you avoid a certain Ruine? Elv. It will be impossible for him to make me more wretched. But 'midst this Concourse, thus disguis'd, it will not be easie for to meet, much less to know us. Let what will come, I am too miserable to fear a Danger, and onely wander to find variety of Torments. Clar. Nay, good Madam, no more Whining. 'Slid, did I knight you for this? or will a few driveling Tears find your Lover, and escape your Brother's Fury? Think how ill Siveling becomes a pair of Breeches. Could I ever mistrust that You, that had the courage to leave your House and Country to turn Knight-rrant, nay more, plainly tell your Brother by your Letter, you had yielded up your Fort to a strange Cavalier, should come to talk of Danger and Wretched; things fit for Boys thoughts and Womens fears, not for Knights of Malta? Elv. Thy Innocence maintains thy Mirth: but what can wrong'd Elvira doe, weigh'd down by a vast load of Shame, that sinks my very Soul? Clar. There's your little imptinent Nicety, to call that Shame, Wo∣men spend their lives to purchase. Why, there's not one in hundreds that you meet, that seem devout and melancholick, but are contriving to throw away that Toy you wot of: and 'tis the first Lesson their Mo∣thers teach them, to lose it handsomely. Elv. But that I know this design'd to divert my Cares, thou wert past hope of Pardon. Clar. Heaven knows how dear I pay for all this Mirth. Aside. Pardon, Madam, (Sir, I should have said) I expect none, whilst I am in the right. 'Faith, methinks this Cross becomes you. Was't gain'd by some strange Atchievement against the Musselmen? or is it for fear the Women should run mad of such Sweetness, that you put this Cross over your Plague-door? Truth is, thee may be danger of Swelling for those come near it.
Elv. I shall lose all Patience, and wish you miserable as my self, if you persist in this Idleness. Clar. That's pleasant you'd perswade me you're Woman too ome, Sir, 'tis not that Cross shall bear you harmless. I know a Vow may be broke to save a Maid's longing. Oh my heart! whither do I ram∣ble? Aside. Elv. All thy Counterfeit cannot aise me to a Smile. Alas it is al∣ready broke. But that fond Fool dares trust a man, though heightn'd with such Vows as would make the most perjur'd tremble, is deservedly lost. Credulous, rash, doating, sottish Woman! didst thou not know him Man? how couldst thou think him then to be believ'd? Clar. Base that he was, to affront a person of your Honour, one that wears a Sword, and knows what's what. Did he refuse me, to meet me in the said Field provided at all points, I'd post him Coward, and hire Slaves to kick him. Elv. Ah Clara! hadst thou but seen his pale and ghastly Looks, but heard his Sighs and Vows. Then would he kneel, and weep, and press my Hand; then ise, and swear again with such dreadfull Imprecations, nothing that was Woman could resist. I'm sure I did not; false to my self and too-too-loving Brother. Would I had ne'r bn Woman: nor would I yet be Man, for I should be still far worse, and still more false. Yet would I were any thing but what I am. Clar. I'm like to have a blest time on't; and all this for the loss of a Madenhead. 'Faith it scares me so, if there be ever a Receipt in Spain to keep one, 't shall be the first thing I'll purchase: but I'm afraid 'tis very dear, and hard to come by. Enter Dormilon. Oh here's my Landlord: never man came in better time. Dor. You re welcome, Gentlemen; I hope your Lodgings please you. Elv. Very well, Landlord, we are quickly pleas'd, so they be private. But I fear you'll be crowded against this great Solemnity. Dor. Nothing can disturb you, the House is large, and this the most retr'd part. Elv. What other Strangers have you? Dor. Yet onely one Gentleman and your selves. Elv. Do you know from whence he came? Dor. No, I assure you. Clar. Prithee, Landlord, see our Dinner be made ready, and our Wine good and wll cool'd: as hot as the weather is, I must have one Halh to the Royal Pair. Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, a Gentleman just now alighted calls for you.
Dor. I'm coming. Your Dinner shall be ready with all expedition. Exeunt Dormilon and Boy. Elv. In the mean time we'll take a turn in the Yard, and see this New∣comer. Clar. I'm glad you have so much Woman in your Passion, as to be able to dissemble before Strangers. Come, Sir, be brisk and gay, strut like a young Knight new dubb'd. So, that becomes you, and is tempting. Though the Men false and cruel you may find, You yet may conquer all the Woman-kind. Exeunt. SCENE 3. The Inn-Yard. Vitelli, Dormilon. Dor. WIll you please to see your Chamber? Vit. Not yet; I'll stay here a while for my Servants that are coming. Dor. Are they much behind? Vit. I guess, not; for coming early this morning from Iyescas, my man left my Portmantue behind him, and brought in stead of it a Stranger's that supt with me. But before we had got a league from thence, we found the Errour, and I sent them both back to change it. I hope they may speed, for the Gentleman was not stirring when we set out. Dor. Is he coming this way, Sir? Vit. No, he came from hence. [Within Tonto.] Hostler, take in our Mules, and get 'em some fresh Straw. Dor. 'Tis like these are those you expect. Enter Tonto and Crispin with a Portmantue. Crisp. Never tell me, he must ride upon some Devil bridled and saddled. Ton. Would he would take him into his possession then; he has brought us into a fine condition. Crisp. 'St, there's my Master. Well, Tonto, that hanging Look of hine always foretold ill. Vit. Have you brought back the right? Ton. No, Sir, one much lighter in it stead. Vit. Curse on you both, Slaves! I am utterly ruin'd, without hopes lost Why did you not pursue him? Dogs!
Crisp. Whither, Sir? Vit. To Valentia, Rascals. Ton. Why, Sir, he was no more going to Valentia then you back to the Indies; but, as a Shepherd told us, took the upper way hither. Some Robber, Sir, on a Gennet got by the Wind: had he strid any thing else, we must have reach'd the Town before him. Vit. Careless Slaves! your Lives shall be some little Recompence. Enter Elvira, Clara. Elv. Hold, Sir, this were a Punishment too great, and most unworthy of your Sword. Crisp. 'Twas not our fault: your coming out so early occasion'd the Mistake. Vit. Dog! but mutter towards an Excuse, and I'll silence thee for ever. Elv. Pray, Sir, give me leave to advise: 'tis not your Passion will re∣cover what is lost; rather think which way you may retrieve it. Dor. If he be once hous'd in Town, 'twill be as difficult to find him, as an Honest woman in an Embassadour's Liberties. Your onely way will be, to send to watch his coming: 'tis likely he's yet upon the Road. Vit. Thanks, Gentlemen—Tonto and you go several ways; and if you hope for Pardon, bring some tidings of him. Crisp. Here, Landlord, take care of this. Exeunt Ton. Crisp. Dor. Your Loss must certainly be great, that makes you thus con∣cern'd. Vit. There was in it to the value of twelve thousand Ducats in Gold and Jewels. Clar. A Loss sufficient to undoe a Banquer. Dor. This is a course Welcome to Madrid. Elv. We cannot blame your Passion, caus'd by such a Misfortune. Vit. The Wealth is much below my care, could I but recover some Papers, which I would redeem with twice the sum. Elv. They needs must be of great import, to merit such a Ransome, and of too near concern to admit a Stranger's inquiry. Vit. No, Sir, that Cross you wear declares your obligation of succou∣ring the Distrest: and if you will so much relieve my Sorrow, as to hear my Story, I would beg your Company in my Chamber. Elv. I willingly shall wait you, Sir, and beg you will not scruple to admit my Friend. Vit. No, Sir; two such Counsellours may in some measure ease my Grief, and prove necessary to one so much a Stranger in this Court and Kingdom.—Landlord, shew a Room.
Enter Boy. Boy. [To Dor.] Don Luis desires to speak with you. Dor. Take this, and shew the best Chamber. Gives him the Portmantue. I'll wait you immediately, Gentlemen. Exeunt all but Dormilon. To him enter Don Luis. Luis. How fares my honest Friend Senior Dormilon? Dor. Ever ready to serve the noble Don Luis. Luis. Have you any news yet of my Nephew Peralta? Dor. None, Sir: for though I cannot pretend to know him by his Face; I should soon guess him by his Discourse, were he amongst my Strangers. Luis. He has orders to trust himslf to your care. I my self should carce be able to challenge him by his Looks, it being thirteen years since he let Madrid for Flanders. Dor. His killing the Ensign was unlucky; especially in this nick of time, whilst it deprives him of so fair an Estate as his Brother has left him. Luis. I'll venture mine to procure his Pardon, and make a Composi∣tion with the Widow; which I do not much doubt of, if he escapes those that watch his coming into the Town. Dor. Her knowing of his coming is strange. Luis. 'Tis certain, and that she has so far prevail'd with the Corrigi∣dor, that he has commanded all his Alguazills to apprehend him, if pos∣sible, at his arrival. Which is the reason I wrote him word to Valentia, where he has lain conceal'd, to come to your House first; mine being con∣tinually beset ever since he left Flanders. Dor. As soon as he comes, you shall have notice; and here he shall be safe as in S. Isidor's Church. Luis. Senior, I thank you. I am now going to meet the Widow at the Palace about the Reconcilement, judging much easier to buy her off before he is in Custody. Dor. Fortune attend you, Sir. Money is a prevailing Advocate. Luis. When that once fails, we must submit to Fate.
SCENE 4. Vitelli's Chamber. Vitelli, Elvira, Clara; Boy with the Portmantue. Vit. BOy, leave us. Exit Boy. Sir, I am dscended of the ancient Family of the Vitelli from whence I took my name. My Father, of no mean Fortune, has long since contracted a strict Friendship with one Don Gomez Aranda; and here in Madrid liv'd with greatest expressions of mutual Love. At last forc'd to part, Don Gomez set up his Residence in this Court; and my Father past the Seas to Mexico, where he has ever since been: and I in that great City of the New World first saw Light. Elv. Was you never, Sir, in Spain till now? Vit. Never: And the Occasion of my coming is to consummate a Match (formerly agreed on by our Fathers, that this way they might seal and propagate their Friendship) between the onely Daughter of Don Gomez and my self. The Painter makes me believe her fair and charming, and I arrived with all the Expectation of a longing Bridegroom; but after a long Voiage find my self wreck'd on Shore. Elv. Your Loss can be no hindrance to this Affair. Vit. Yes, much; my Letters are all gone I brought her Father from my own; and I have no reason he should believe me on my bae Word, with∣out farther Evidence to confirm him. Clar. Does he expect you, Sir? Vit. That he hath done these six months. Elv. He cannot doubt the truth of your Relation; or at least will so long suspend, till you can send to Cadiz, where I suppose you landed, and give him farther Testimony of being what you say you are. Vit. Your Counsel cannot be disputed; I'll immediately go seek him out. Clar. I should think it well advised to open this Portmantue; 'tis pos∣sible it may discover who has put the Change upon you. Vit. If any thing can be thought true a Villain says, he's called Vitelli. 'Twas ur being of the same Name that began this unortunate Ac∣quaintance. But this I hope will evidence the contrary. 'Twould adde to my Affliction, to have a Rascal justly claim the Name of my Family.
Elv. Would to Heaven I'd been a Stranger to that fatal Name, that like a Plague infects the air 'tis mention'd in. Vitelli breaks open the Portmantue, and Clara helping him empty it, among other things finds some Letters, and Elvira's Picture. Clar. Heavens! what's here? a Broker's Shop? Vit. There can be nothing worth the search amongst such Rags. Clar. See, Sir, here are Papers, and a Lady's Picture. Vit. A Moor to my Goddess; throw the Trife by. While he looks on the Papers, Clara knows the Picture to b her Lady's, and shews it her. Clar. Do you know this, Madam? Elv. Oh my Heart! the very same I gave the false Vitelli. Clar. Never whine, but remember you ae a Woman, and to dissem∣ble, or all is ruin'd. We must be nigh a Discovery. Aside from Vitelli. Elv. The Trial is too great. Vit. You seem concern'd; does that Picture cause it? Clar. I was saying, Sir, there is something in this Look that seems strangely unfortunate. Elv. And I, that the Eyes had such a yielding Easiness, as might be be∣tray'd by false Vows: and that here me thought the Painter had exprest such a languishing Cast as spoke the height of Love. Vit. 'Faith, Sir, I am not curious; but may pronounce the Lady misera∣ble enough has fallen into the hands of this Ruiner of my Fortunes. Elv. Did the Beauty you adore much exceed this? Vit. As this an Indian; her very Figure was enough to make all men love, and its Loss to make all men die. Elv. This is not so despicable a Face, that a Lover ought to be asham'd of Constancy. Sure I am, as bad a one has oft been sigh'd for. Vit. By some fond Fools that never knew a Beauty; but this is all Cloud to my Brightness. Clar. This will come to a Quarrel if not prevented. The dispa∣raging a Woman's Beauty turns the tamest of the Sex to a Scold. Aside. Pray, Sir, what Papers are those? this seems much from your Design. Vit. True, but entred on the discourse of one I love, I lose my self and Business. They are Letters. This to the most excellent Duke of Ossuna; this to the Regent of the Council of Aragon; this to the Mar∣quis of Velada. Clar. By these he should be a man of Fortune and Repute, and not a Robber.
Elv. The best way is to open one, 'tis probable you will find his Name and Quality. Vitelli reads. To the Marquis of Velada. My Lord, The Bearer of this is Don Manuel Peralta, Captain-Lieutenant of my Regi∣ment, who for killing an Ensign on the Guard (though highly provok'd) is compell'd to leave this Place, to prevent the Governour's Severity; and flies to your Lordship's Protection, by whose favour I doubt not he will obtain a Pardon, which I earnesly desire; as that of your Lordship for this Trouble given you by, My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant and Kinsman,the Earl of Pontilliana. Elv. This has made all plain: the onely means is, to have present re∣course to the Marquis, declare your Loss, and beg his Assistance in the Recovery. Clar. 'Twould require Haste, lest he prevent you with some new Cheat. Vit. I fly, and something like Hope gives me a good Omen. Elv. We shall wait your Return with impatience. Sure I am, my Happiness depends upon your Success. Exit Vitelli. Clar. What do you think of Vitelli now, Madam? Peralta I should say. You see he steals other things besides Maidenheads. Elv. But nothing of such Value, or so much past recovery. Clar. 'Faith, Madam, were that all, 'twer nothing. For my part, I think the Principal well sunk, so one can secure the Use: troth is, to lose that too, is something no Woman can well bear. Elv. Nothing but thy known Fidelity could secure thee from my Anger. Clar. What? I warrant you'd be grave, and thinking again; Oh the fine Gentleman upon his Gennet! how gracefully he bow'd! the tempting Serenades, passionate Letters, Complements beyond re∣sistance; and when possest, all over Pleasure! and then he kist, and
vow'd, and left me full of Hopes, that equall'd all but present Joys. Elv. But disappointed, makes all Plgues and Death a Blessing. And 'tis from these Thoughts the wretched Elvira falls to be a Lump of black Despair. Clar. By my faith, this is pleasant: neither well fll nor fasting. All the way we came; Oh Clara, were it possible, nay did I bt think it so, e're to see him, thou shouldst find me chearfull as in my Innocence: Now 'tis more then probable we shall see him; The Trial is too great, and I'm a Lump of black Despair. Believe me, Madam, 'tis unnatural for a Woman to fear in extremiy. Though Men with Counsel and with grave Debate, May better War, and judge Intrigues of State; In Exigences We the Rule have got. No Woman e're could want Excuse or Plot. Exeunt. The End of the First ACT. ACT II. SCENE 1. The Inn-Yard. Fabio solus with a Portmantue. Fab. THis Master of mine is as unaccountable as a breaking Mer∣chant. To steal from Valentia through ways scarce known to a Foot-pad; alight at the Town's end just a noon, when the Heat makes the Streets emptest, to avoid being snapt by the Officers; and yet at the sight of the first Vail, forget all Dangers, and think himself as secure as a Confessour in a Church. Enter Elvira, Clara. Clar. Now I am confirm'd 'tis he. For Heaven's sake, Madam, to your Chamber; 'tis downright Madnes to make a double Venture. Exit Elvira. Fab. Certainly when the Devil woud show his Master-piece, he puts on a Petticoat; and when he is not at lsue, a Woman may save him
the labour, and supply his place. [Sees Clara.] Here's a fit Vermin to be trapt, a smug Youth, that the Trail of a Wench may lead as far as a Fox a pack of Hounds. Clara sings. [To her.] 'Tis a merry world with you, Senior. Clar. Troth, Sir, he that can be sad with good Cloaths on his back, Money in his purse, and his Mistress Smiles, may he be condemn'd to the Gallies till he laugh. Fab. To curse him home, may he meet with such a Master as I have; and if he never laugh till he give him cause, I'm sure he must die a Slave. Clar. Is your's such a Turk? Fab. Oh! the Great Turk, Sir; and has by much a larger Seraglio: for all the use he makes of the whole World is to keep his Wenches n't. Clar. Pray how do you call your Hercules? Fab. Since you will have it so, Hercules Vitelli. Clar. With what confidence the Rogue lies! Aside. By his Name he should be of a great Family. Fab. I am not Herald enough to know the greatness of his Ancestours, but to my knowledge his Issue is large; about as numerous as the Iws, and o' my conscience as much disperst. Clar. I have an Acquaintance here, a Knight of Malta, that would make a rare Companion for him. Fab. A Knight of Malta? if he loves his Life, let him avoid him, for he has vow'd Destruction to all Pretenders to Chastity. You'll scarce believe it, but the sight of a Nun through a Grate, though he thinks her chast upon force, puts him into an Agony. Clar. You are much deceiv'd, Sir, a Knight's Vow is but what for∣bids the chast use of Marriage, and leaves him at liberty to all the world besides. Fab. Nay, if he has a new way of interpreting his Oath, it may be hey may fadge. Clar. Methinks— Fab. No more, I beseech you, Sir, I expect him each minute; and f I have not provided a Room before his coming, shall pay for this Prating. Clar. I lodge in this House, and when you are at leisure shall be glad of more of your company. Fab. Adieu, Senior. Clar. Poor Elvira, a Town-bull would have prov'd as constant a Lover. Aside. Exit Clara.
Fabio knocks, enter Boy. Fab. A Chamber, Boy. Boy. Will you please to walk this way? I'll carry your Portmantue, Sir. Fab. No, Sirrah, I had a wise Father, that taught me to trust my self: by the Weight there may be the Indies in't. SCENE 2. The High Street. Peralta, Violante, Flora veiled. Per. I Do confess, Madam, I have been Cock of the brisk Fools, that set up for Wits with railing against Love. But I now recant; and my Pain has been so exquisite, since I had the honour to see you, that it may equal years of Sighs and Verses. Viol. I should not sooner know a practis'd Beggar by his Cant, then I do you for a formal repeating Woer; one that takes notes from Plays, practises with his Glass, and concludes the next Woman he meets will be fond of studied Nonsense. Per. 'Tis barbarous to murther him with Wit, who has already yielded to your Beauty; the Power of which you know too great to suffer a Dissembler. Viol. Sure you think me Daughter to the Knight of the Sun; or my Beauty could never warm through this Cloud. Per. It does not extinguish the Fire, Madam, to hide the Flame that kindled it, that still burns and consumes. Viol. That's in the road again: could we but perswade you Gallants to forswear Fire, Sun, Flame and Fate, you would court with as much Silence as the Turk's Attendants wait. Per. You shall bind me to any thing, so you will reward my Dili∣gence, and understand by Signs.— He courts her with affected Gestures and Signs. Let these then speak for me.— Viol. A pretty Puppet-show, which when I am best at leisure, it may be I may throw away some few Rials to see again. Now I'm in haste. Violante runs out. Peralta holds Flora. Per. Nay, 'saith, though your light Figat hath gain'd the Port,
I'll make bold to seize the Tender, till I know of what Country you are. Flo. You'll find a smart Resistance. She struggles again. Per. Now you're mine; but some kind Answers to half a dozen Questions frees you. [Struggles still.] Come, 'tis but what thou¦rt bound to by thy Place.—Your Mistresse's Name, and where she lives: Quickly, quickly; thou'lt be turn'd away for letting her lose a Gallant. Flo. Sure you think your self in the Suburbs, or Embassadours Li∣berties, to take this freedom. I'd have you to know my Place is what's honest and honourable. Per. And shall be so still for me, dear little Fury! But canst thou doe any thing more honourable then to promote an honest Love? Is it not pity a Gentleman should be ruin'd for want of two Words? a Charity your Sex is seldom sparing in. Flo. I so perfectly hate you, I would lose that pleasure of Talking, did I not know, (if you are truly in Love, which Heaven grant!) what I have to say will rid the world of you. Learn and despair then. This Lady is just now to be married. Who she is, you shall ne'r be told, that you may die for an unknown Mistress, and make the better subject for a Ballad. Per. Truth is, this Anger does become thee; but for variety, and to shew the rest of your good Qualities, put on a relenting Look, and dis∣cover.—Thou art out of thy Calling to pretend to Secrecy.—By this thou shalt be kind.— [Gives her gold.] Though you de∣sign to make me Miserable, I know you will not make me a For∣sworn wretch. Flo. You shew so noble a Constancy, that if I were to die, I can't forbear now. Oh, my Lady were a happy woman, could she hope for such a Lover. I vow, Sir, I did but try you; and I'll assure you, in my eye you are the properest, most accomplish'd Gentleman. Per. Now thou flatterest; I can ne'r reward such Kindness—Prithee on. Flo. In short, Sir, for I shall be mist, Her Name is Donna Violante, sole Daughter to Don Gomez Aranda, who lives in this House. What will make your Pretences fruitless is, her Quality, and that she is already contracted to a Gentleman she never saw, and whom she every moment expects from India. Per. 'Tis ill, but not desperate, if you promise your Assistance. Flo. As far as I can serve you without endangering her Honour, and my own Honesty, which I'll assure you, Sir, I stand upon, you have made me yours. Exit Flora. Per. This is one of the true Breed: some few that prove otherwise are of another Species. You may as well call a Wolf a Lamb, as her Woman that waits, and can keep a Secret, or resist a Bribe.—Well, the Devil does owe me a Spite, and has taken an opportunity of paying it. Certain it is, this Woman must be had; but how, I fear's a Qustion will ne' be answered. Exit.
SCENE 3. Peralta's Chamber in the Inn. Fabio solus. Fab. I Have a true Mule's life, Burthen and Provender. He was cer∣tainly bewitcht that first debas'd himself to Serve: but the down∣right Devil was in him that chose a Wencher for his Master. The wandring Iew is a staid House-keeper to him: 'tis odds but the next Pet∣ticoat he meets carries him for Turky and there he may take a fresh one for the Indies. I have often wondred at two things; one, what this Master of mine is made of: to my knowledge he has given away and lost more Hearts then our Kings have sent to people the New World; and yet o' my conscience he has such a stock left, that were they well marshall'd, they might fight the French King this next Campaign. T'other is, what could possess me to be Shadow to this termagant Turk, whose onely Religion is to conquer Women. Why should not Don Fbi sound as well as Don Peralta? I'm sure Historians impose upon us, or else the Family of the Fabii have been famous. And shall be agen, good Don Fabio.—Don Fabio. I have the advantage in the sound of my Roman Fore-fathers. Beso 'osté las manos.—muy criado de su merced. Excellent! now will I walk in as much state as a Grandeé, and with the Wisedom of a Privy-councellour: and when Af∣fairs of State prove too heavy for me, my Boy and Musician shall di∣vert me with a Song. But in the mean time, till my Retinue is settled, I will vouchsafe to be Boy and Musician to my self. SINGS. Hang slavish Fear: The names of Man and Master is a Chea 'Tis Dog-like to be rated here and there. I will resolve, and shall be Great. I set my self at Liberty: W'are all by nature Free. 'Tis onely Law that makes us Slaves; Law first obey'd by Fools, and made by Knaves.
He that will be a Don, Follow me, he is one. He that will not his Freedom restore, Was got by a Jew, and nurst by a Moor. Humh! what a nick of time does this Master of mine chuse! Now do I see the Don running from before my Name, and leave poor Fabio to shift for himself; and feel all my Privy-councellourship trill down to my very Heels. But Fate still takes pleasure to bale vast Designs. Thus when the Wheel of Fortune turns, Oh Spain, thy great Escurial burns. Enter Peralta. Per. What Company's in the House? Fab. None of note that I hear of, but a Knight of Malta. Per. Where's my Landlord, Senior Dormilon? Fab. Abroad, otherwise I had acquainted him with your being here. Per. 'Tis lucky that you mist him, for I must yet be conceal'd; there∣fore on your life dissemble my true Name. Fab. So, the Devil and my Master have been juggling on some new Design. Aside. Per. The great Hazard that I run is, lest my Portmantue should betray me. Where is that was left in its stead? That may discover who made the Exchange, and contribute to its recovery. Fab. Here, Sir, may the Worth answer its Weight, and I can't be less then Don for the lucky Mistake. Fabio opens the Portmantue. Per. Open and search it. What's there? Fab. Why, Gold and Jewells, Sir, without count. The Gentleman has paid dear for an old Suit and dern'd Linnen, and some few Bills that should have been discharg'd. Here are Letters too— Per. How's this? To Don Gomez de Aranda? the Father of my ador'd Violante; and this no doubt the Indian they expect. Fab. A Lady's Picture, Sir. Per. The same: By Heaven her Picture too! Hah! Why am not I then the true Vitelli? for that's the Name. I well remember began our Acquaintance; and that he told me the hopes of a fair Wife brought him to Spain. He that loves can't want Impudence, and these Evi∣dences must stand the nicest Search. 'Tis resolv'd.—Put all up again, and make it fast. Fab. I think you resolve well this Country's hot and Company troublesome. Besides, you're used to Flanders. The Mules shall be ready, Sir; Gold's no Burthen. Per. What's that you mutter, Rascal? Fab. A Journey, Sir, would be necessary, and healthfull this Crowd
may breed the Plague. To be plain, let me beg of you to fly with this Treasure. In a short time you ay purchase your Pardon in spight of this dissembling Widow, and never trouble your Frinds to petition for't; and in the mean while, by the strength of this live as Great as the Governour. Per. No, Villain, I have Business of grater consequence in hand; and when that's done, will return it to the Owner. Mean-spirited Rascal, to guess I would enrich my self by such base means! Fab. Will you but wink till I run, Sir? I have ventur'd Hanging in your Service e're this for six ivers a day, with the Appurtenances of Poor-Jack and Bisket. Per. No more, Slave; make it up, I say. Fab. And the Picture too?— Per. That I shall have occasion for. Fab. Here's one Doblon, Sir, I am strangly smitten with. May not I have that for Contemplation? Per. Not a Rial, Dog; take it up and follow me. And know from this time forward I am Vitelli, lately arrived from Mexico, and that you are now come with me from Cadiz. And upon these hints improve thy faculty of Lying. Exit. Fab. Yes, I am an Indian, and am forc'd to value Gold at as little rate as those Fools. A pox of Honour and Honsty, 'tis as impertinent to a man and troublesome as a Maidenhead at fifteen, and as necessary to be parted with at the first good occasion. Exit with the Potmantue. SCENE 4. A Parlour in Gomez house. Violante, Flora. Flo. HOw could I doe less, when I had taken the retaining Fee? Besides, Madam, he spoke with such a prevailing Earnestness, that I, that never had an aversion to a proper Gentleman, could not help it. Viol. A proper Gentleman! one of the forward pretending Fops, that have half a dozen fine things to say, and when they are done, prove as dull as an outworn Poet. Flo. This Railing with us Women is as certain a sign of Love, as Huffing with the Men, of Cowardise.—But it shall go hard or I'll find it. [Aside.] —In earnest, Madam, the Gallant dresses well. Did you mind his Fredom and courty Mean? Viol. Dresses well? so does a Tailour's Prentice: and what you call
Freedom is onely Impudence pickt up by keeping Ill company; such sort of Wit as a man of sense takes more care to avoid, then such Triflers do to con it. Flo. This confirms me.— Aside. You'll allow his Person manly and agreeable? Viol. I confess I have seen some few in a Crowd less desirable: but put him altogether, he's one of the last men I hould chuse. Flo. You may be perswaded to see him again for all this Aver∣sion. Viol. Yes, if you can assure me I may doe him a Mischief by ir.—I wish I had never seen him— Aside. Flo. Since you are so nice, I hope your Mexian will prove one made of Wax, without a Fault or Blemish. Viol. You're always disturbing me with things I hate. I tell you, I will have nothing to doe with Mankind either of the Old or New world. But of all things never name this Stranger more. Flo. I hope I may rally a little on him, for that I design'd at first, onely I fear'd it might offend you. I'll try you this way.— Aside. By my troth, Madam, I wisht you with me, for certainly never any thing was so worth laughing at. Besides what he said to you, he has not Language enough to ask what's a clock, or commend a Sit of Linnen. 'Tis as raw a Fool as ever came out of a Nursery. Viol. Thou art always in extreams; I could not perceive so much Simpleness: I should have guess'd he had been a little at least conversant with the World. Flo. Right.—No, believe me, Madam, he snakt like a Boy be∣fore  Mother-in-law; and I am apt o think we are the first Women he ever adventurd to speak to, and he threw me this Purse meerly for fear I should have jeard him. I was about teaching him to hold up his Head, and make a Leg but the he ran fort. Viol. This is impossible; all he said to me was consistent and court∣ly, his Address gentile, and Shape becoming. But you ae still finding fault with what you have not wit to understand. Flo. Am I so, Madam? and I am now your Aversion, for abusing this Stranger. Could you in agie your Cunning laid so deep, that one of your own Sex could not see through it? All the harm I wish is your Indan may prove half so taking. But I have done, and here come one will plague you enough on that ubjct. Exit Flora. Enter old Gomez. Gom. I warrant you Girls have been taling of a Husband, and I can't blame you. I made my Wife confess she thought of nothing ee.—That Look won't doe, Vil.—I know it longs, and so forth. Come, come, your Mother tells me you're a Woman, and so forth.—That's enough, Vil,—
Viol. We had Discourse that was much more seious, Sir. Gom. Nay, by my troth, Vil. thou art fit to be married now thou canst dissemble so well.—But do'st thou know, Girl, he's com∣ing?—hah—does it not move, affect, and so forth?—A word to the wise, Vil.— Viol. Sir, I know nothing but my Duty. Gom. That's right, take the India's then. Oh, if he be like his Fa∣ther—Vil.—I'll say no more. But for a sparkling Eye and Wit, we were the same, and carried it; knew all the Poets and Players, and writ Prologues; nay, I had once the credit to be nam'd for a Lam∣poon. Time is, time was, Vil. Here 'tis, Vil.— [Shews a Letter.] Each minute I expect him, and shall take it ill not to see a young Vitelli in a twelvemonth. Viol. I hope, Sir, it will be no breach of Duty to ask some time to consider. Gom. Consider?—why, thy Mother and I were smitten, bargain'd, and so forth, before you could pluck up a Veil. Viol. I must not be accounted disobedient; but yet— Gom. Nay, that Toy of Modesty becomes thee, &c. but I'm your Father, Vil. and though merry, know what's what, Vil.—I give you leave to make up your mouth, &c.—But when he comes, ex∣pect a Curtesie, and, I thank you, Sir. One knocks. Enter Flora. Flo. What a curst thing is this not to have my Q— Aside. Sir, here's a Gentleman would speak with you. Gom. Has he no name, and so forth? Flo. I never saw him, Sir. Gom. Retire, Daughter.—If it be the man you wot of, go in and twitter, you shall be call'd. Flo. Whatever this Stranger means, I wish he had all my Bribe to be fairly rid of him. Exeunt Viol. Flo. Enter Peralta, Fabio with the Portmantue. Fab. Your right leg foremost, Sir. Per. Sir, when I tell you I am Don Pedro Vitelli, and come from In∣dia, I hope I may beg a Welcome; this I know, my Father ge me some assurance of it. Gom. Don Pedro Vitelli must challenge Welcome as long as I am Don Gomez, &c. And how does the good Gonzalo, my old Friend, your Fa∣ther? Thou mak'st me weep for joy. Just such was he, when we be∣gan our first Acquaintance.—I should have known thee in the Street, thou art so like, the very shape and face, &c. Per. I was always thought like him, Sir.
Fab. Yes, as a Bear's an Elephant. The Old man's as fond of the Cheat as my Master of the Wench. Aside. Per. This Letter I was commanded to deliver from my Father, with Thanks for the great Honour you design'd his Son. Gom. Honest man!—Yes, yes, this is the old Hand and Style to a very tittle. He reads. You are doubly welcome—. Let me embrace you: my Joys are so compleat, I scarcely can contain my self. Embraces him. Fab. Not so hard; he's weak in the back since the last Cure. Gom. He tells me he had once thought to come with these Gallions; but then I had been too happy. Per. Yes, Sir, he did, but some unexpected Business has deferr'd his purpose till their next return. In the mean time, Sir, he has sent me as a Pledge and Token of his ancient Friendship. Gom. And trust me, a welcome one. Nay, my Daughter shall tell you so too—Flora.—By Saint Isidor I was so overjoy'd to see you, I had forgot to give her notice of your Arrival. Enter Flora. Tell Vil. the happy Minute's coming, bid her put on her best Looks, and so forth. Per. Sir, I beg you would let this be disposed of in your Closet, about twelve thousand Ducats in Gold and Jewels, what I could bring con∣veniently from Cadiz; the rest will be sent. Gom. I'll be your faithfull Steward. Flora, shew the way where it may be laid, and hasten your Mistress. Flo. [To Fabio.] Come, Sir, if you dare follow. Fab. I never refus'd a Challenge from a Woman. Exeunt Servants. Gom. Fie, fie, this Girl makes me out of patience.— Enter Violante. Oh here she comes.—Come hith, Vil. this is he; Look and like, Vil. 'tis thy Father's Choice, and a wise one, though I say it.—I know you young people have some fine things to say to one another, &c. therefore I'll leave you, and talk a while with your Man about the Affairs of the New World and the like. Fabio returns. Per. He will be able to say something, though you can expect no per∣fect account from one of his Breeding:—at leisue I shall satisfie you, Sir. Gomez and Fabio at a distance. Now, Madam, I hope you will allow me more Freedom then when
you cruelly shunn'd my Addresses; and one that leaves the world he was born in, meerly to serve you, may justly expect some kind of Wel∣come. Viol. This Encounter is more strange then the former: and I can scarce imagine, the man that took so long a Journey for a particular Mi∣stress, would make so zealous a Court to the first he meets. The Lady in the Veil has the promise of that Heart to my knowledge. Per. And to mine too, Madam, or else this deceives me— Shews the Picture. Could you imagine one that had spent a year in Contemplation should not know you at the first glaunce? Viol. And yet you brib'd my Maid to learn my Name. Per. True, onely to take an opportunity of giving something to one I knew I must be beholden to. Viol. Your Trial of me was not too kind, Sir. Per. I confess, Madam, there's something extravagant in what's past: but I hope Curiosity and your Goodness will excuse it—Nor was it fit I own'd my self, till I could produce such Letters and Treasure as might secure me from being thought an Impostour for the future.— Fab. Yes, Sir, my old Master studies night and day: he is just now writing a Book, and intends to dedicate it to you. Gom. Then he has outstript me; I could never arrive farther then a Madrigal, &c.—And how is Mexico to Madrid? Fab. Catch me at Descriptions, and I'll hang for't. Aside. What's more wonderful then any thing in the Old or New World, he is a great Poet, and yet vastly rich. Gom. What kind of Court does the Vice-roy keep? is the Palace mag∣nificent? Fab. 'Faith, Sir, I think I may venture to tell you, 'tis whisper'd my old Master knows no end of his Wealth. Gom. Are the Streets large and fair? what garb do the Indians keep? &c. Fab. My young Master, Sir, may be worth—let me see—a million of Ducats; and when his Father dies— Gom. This Fellow's mind is all on Money: a shallow Rascal.—But these Answers are to my purpose: for if he be Rich, &c. let the Woman run the rest of the Hazard, and the New World be as 'twill. Aside. Fab. I am sure I have kept to windward of the Law, let my Master look to the upshot. Gom. This I like, this looks as Man and Wife; and may ye be as happy, &c. as Gonzlo and I can wish you. To Peralta. Per. Sir, there can be nothing less then Happiness accompany the Pos∣sssour of so much Goodness. And if she think me worthy of her, I must go into a Third World, to learn something new to wish to make me more blessed.
Gom. See you there, Vil. that's a Flight: many one of them, and such like, have I had in my Youth. Old Gonzlo still!—Well, Son, your Father and I were Wags, &c. in our young days. Per. Each thing you say reminds me so much of him, that were not I thus doubly blest, I should think of Mexico. Gom. Well, Vil. for a Man and Wealth thou art fitted; and she that looks for more must die, &c. This World I'm sure affords nothing—Come, Son, we'll go in, you're weary, and I long to discourse you: for this Man of your's is none of the great Intelligencers. Exeunt. Fabio, Flora, stay. Fab. 'Tis ten to one but we shall play the old Romantick trick, and while the Knight and Lady are at work, the Squire and Damsel imitate. Flo. I shall like you well enough, if you have another Romantick trick too, of drowning or hanging your self, if you see me displeas'd. For the truth is, you have a Face I would fain be rid of. Exit. Fab. Not so willingly as I would free my self of this House.—What a-Devil can come of a thing built upon a Quicksand? This they may call Love and Adventures: but he that can foresee a good End of them need never despair at the Gallows. But so it is— When for a Wench our Voiage is design'd, We boldly sail against both Tide and Wind. Exit. The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III. SCENE continues. Peralta, Fabio in disorder. Fab. ON my life, Sir, 'tis he; the very Vitelli whose Portmantue we hav—I see him with Don Gomez. Per. Curst Fortune! in the very minute? two Hours had possest me of her. Fab. What do you think of a fair and honourable Retreat?—This is the way out.— Per. Dog! I'll think of nothing but Victory; and will be, and am Vitelli, Son to Gonzalo. Think me any thing else, and I ll cut thy throat. Fab. You may be what you please: but I hope you'll allow me still to be Fabio, and to think my self in great Danger. I know it nothing concerns you. Per. Coward! no Flinching; but follow my Example, and lie like thy self, we will still carry it. In the mean while let's retire, and contrive to meet the worst. Fab. There needs no great Contrivance, it will meet us.—For my part, I'll lurk hereabouts for Intelligence. Exeunt. Enter Gomez, Vitelli. Gom. But, prithee Friend, have I so silly a Face, and so forth, that you could pick no body else out so fit to put a Cheat on? Good faith you're deceiv'd in old Gomez, he understands Trap, &c. Vit. I cannot yet understand why you mistrust me; I'm sure I expected uch another Welcome from one I lookt upon as Father. Gom. I'll say that for thee, thou'rt a pleasant Fellow, and hast as lucky a Countnance to conceal a Cheat as one would wish to purchase. But this is a little too gross—and how came we to be so nigh of kin? V. The Respect I bear you keeps me from taking any thing ill; nor can you by the worst of words force me into a Passion with the Father of Vilante, whom Gonalo made m believe I should at my arrival from the Indies call Wie. Gom. And so you shall, if you can lay any just Claim. But you ay with the same Considence pretnd to the Kingdom o Spain, &c.
and with much the same Success, believe me—Violante?—ha, ha, ha.— Vit. That you are Don Gomez you your self assure me, nor am I less Don Vitelli. That Violante is your Daughter you own, and Gonzlo your Friend, for whose Son you have design'd her. Why then does all I say seem Riddle? Is it the custom of Spain to mock those they style Friends? if so, the Indians are much less barbarou. Gom. The Devil take me, and so forth, if this Fellow have not a pret∣ty wheadling confident way with him. I'll confound him a little.— Aside. Well, Sir, since you will be Vitelli, I know you have often heard your Father speak of me, and how we spent our time when young. Vit. No day, Sir, but your Friendship is his subject; and this he bids me imitate. Tells how you vied in Arms and Arts; often wishes (though blest with Wealth) he had never left Spain, but still enjoy'd your Company. Gom. Vry fine.—I'm much beholden to him, &c. Did he never en∣ter into particulars of our Afairs? Vit. Yes, I've heard him say, when Fellow-students, you had one Purse; that the same Books, the same Company pleas'd you: and that your Fancies kept so even pace, that you often joyn'd upon the same Subject without the difference of the Style perceiv'd. Gom. I wish this Fellow's Shoes were off, that I might see whether he has cloven Feet or no. How could he possibly know this else? Of what Age, what Stature and Complexion is he? Vit. In all agreeable to you, and what he says so like your way of Speech, that sure I must call you Father. One think remarkable and private too is a Sar on his right Side, by a Wound receiv'd in a Duel wherein he was your Second: and you, Sir, as he told me, was then run through the Thigh, being on the same day you should have married. Gom. This Truth startles me. Aside. Do you know to whom? Vit. Yes, Sir, Donna Beatriz Cruzd, whom you first saw at Saint Isidor's Church, and that a month after your Marriage was consum∣mate. Gom. 'Tis a clear case, I am not Gome, nor this my House, nor he within Vitelli; no, no, all's a downright Mistake.—Friend, dost thou know whether there be two Gonzlo's, and two Vitelli's, that love and know by Sympathy? or art not thou somthing of a Spirit, and so forth? ha? Vit. The Gentleman's distracted. Aside: Sir, this I know, that I am the man I pretend to b, and grieve to ind you thus. Gom. Where you pick up these Truths, is byond my power to guess but. I can demonstrate you flse and counit. Fo if true, where
the Jewels, and so forth, you wrote you would bring with you? shew my Daughter's Picture I sent, your Father's Letters, and all that. Vit. That's my Misfortune; this very morning I was robb'd of all: but if you will have patience to wait— Gom. This I knew would tickle you. Let old Gomez alone to find out a Cheat, and so forth. Stole from you? yes by the right Owner, who brought them to me. Vit. To convince you, I know to a Rial what's in the Portmantue, each particular Jewel and Paper. Gom. This is some Confidence of another World, and almost distracts me.—Within, call Don Vitelli. Vit. Use not my Name to such a Villain; for so I dare pronounce and justifie him. Enter Peralta, Fabio. Fab. Ne'r fear, I have over-heard all, and can help you in a stress.— To Peralta entring. Don Fernando, Sir. Aloud. Per. This is argument of great Kindness, to make such haste from Ca∣diz to be at the Wedding of your Friend. Welcome, dear Fernando; for so I dare bid you to the House of him has given me leave to call him Father. Gom. New Riddles still! Vit. Steel'd Impudence!—how canst thou with confidence pronounce so damn'd a Forgery? Fab. We got well hither with our Treasure, to which I believe your good Wishes contributed. Vit. Slave, the Place secures thee.— Gom. You're acquainted then, and so forth.— Per. The onely Friend I had in Mexico; we were Neighbours, School-fellows, and in the same Ship arriv'd at Spain: nor can any one give you a more perfect account of my Father or his Affairs; for I know nothing I have conceal'd from him. Gom. He has hardly used you like a Friend, without Cheat, Villain, &c. are signs of Love amongst you.—Nay, with Confidence he endea∣vour'd to face me out he was the true Vitelli. Vit. And with the same honest Assurance stand here to make it good. Per. This is like thee, always driving on some piece of Extrava∣gance.—But trust me, Fernando, this is so unseasonable, as to break our Friendship, if persisted in. Vit. I scorn thee, am, and always was a Stranger to thy Friendship; and here pronounce the Cheat, Thief, Murtherer. Beware, Old man, you warm a Snake will leave a fatal Sting.
Per. Could I believe you were in earnest, I should be angy, Sir; but for this once forgive. Vit. I demand nothing but Justice, and by Heaven will have it. Gom. What can he design by all this? Fab. Why, Sir, you have had experience enough to know the World's wicked, and Love powerful. Gom. Yes it is, always was, and always will be, &c. Fab. I have had long a Jealousie that he was not right. For when my Master produc'd his Jewels, and shew'd his Treasure, he would so eye and sigh; and at the Picture cast such wanton amorous Glances, that I fear that's the true ground of his haste from Cadiz, thinking to prevent us. Then I minded he catcht at each Story that might seem very par∣ticular; as one my Master was the other day telling of a Del, and a Wound you received in the Thigh. Nay, he was so inquisitive, that he would count the Money and Jewells. Gom. I have no Doubt left; there 'tis I warrant. This Devil of Love invents more Tricks then a Iew ready to starve. Fab. Then, Sir, he has a plaguy wheadling Tongue, and such a set Look, that he was made to deceive. Gom. So he has, and by my troth had deceiv'd me, if he had come first. But bless my Stars, &c. that shall suddenly be prevented. Per. If nothing will do, from henceforth you are my Enemy, and as such I shall next meet you. Vit. Dare but quit this House, and no other Sanctuary shall protect thee. Gom. Desperate Villain, be gone, &c. or else an Alguazil shall provide you a Lodging. Vit. Was ever Age thus blinded? Stay but my returns from Cadiz be∣fore you conclude. Gom. No, this very night shall consummate the Match with the Noble Vitelli. Vit. No, Don Gomez, you throw her away upon a base Deluder; who is indeed a Souldier of Flanders, fled hither to gain a Pardon for Murther. Gom. This sounds like Forgery. You have no choice, but quit the House, or to Prison. Per. See how wild his Story is, and how quick Passion makes his Invention. Be gone, or this shall force it. Vit. I'll go, because my being confin'd will render me absolutely un∣capable of Remedy.—But I shall expect you have so much Honour left as to meet me in the Prado. Per. I will, and with my Sword chastise this Inslnce. An hour hence let it be. Vit. Agreed. But I shall scarce fight such a Rgue, till I have secur'd my Mistress. Exit. Gom. Well, Son, this Adventure is so extraordinary, that wre
your Father and I as when time was, the Players should not have wanted a Comedy, nor an Audience, &c. though I say it.—What, me∣lancholick?— Per. You must give me leave to reflect a little on the Loss of one I thought my Friend, nay doted on, and would have yielded all things up to satisfie his very Curiosity, but Violante.— Gom. Come, an ll thing's better lost then found: the World grows worse and worse, &c. You have reason to b satisfied, you have so timely found his Falshood. Fab. Let me beg you would urge that; for no man loves with such Truth, nor no man grieves with such Sincerity. Gom. For shame, Son, I shall think you repent your Voiage. Let's in, and my Daughter will make amends with true Affection. Per. The name of such a Remedy makes me forget my Disease; and she is now my onely Friend, as well as Mistress. Exeunt. Manet Fabio. Fab. Bating some odd hundreds, and so forth. Enter Flora going over as in haste. [To her.] You can never be in such haste as to refuse the profers of a sincere Lover. Flo. The very name of Love from one I hate adds wings to me. She strives to go. Fab. Not so fierce, good Damsell; though I have no Portmantue of Jewells, I have some Treasure about me I brought from the Indies, you'll like much better. Flo. I warrant some petty Shells and Baubles, things I scorn as much as I do you. My Mistress were miserably provided, were the Master and Valet alike. Fab. Come, ine Sentences are not for people of our quality. To have and to hold's the word; and the licking of the Posset-bason when they have done will save charges, and yet look Princely. Flo. No, Valet, next to you I hate nothing more then what has been pall'd. Fab. Except a Petticoat, and that of sixteen removes; yet must be thought to look new, like the Chambermaid after being paum'd by the whole Family. Flo. Still fresher then a Suit that after three generations in the Indies must be new turn'd for the Wedding. Fab. Come, 'faith never deny't, if thou hast pawn'd thy Utensils for Lees of wine and Chippings, or art contracted for Gizzards, and the fifth quarter of a Hen call'd the Guts, I desist: otherwise, which is the top of your Hopes, I offer you Flesh unblown, Fabio the sound and trusy. Flo. To convince you of my Aversion, I had rather live a wrinkled
Maid of sixty, and then be burnt for a Witch, then have any thing to doe with thee. Fab. This looks so like the Courtship of our Form, that it is no less then an evident token of Love—which thus I seal.— Offers to kiss her. Flo. And thus I deliver.— Gives him a box on the ear, and runs out. SCENE 2. The Inn. Elvira, Clara, Vitelli. Elv. to Clara. I Am now resolv'd; therefore without disputing a∣bout what I commanded you.— Exit Clara. Vit. I have told you all in short; and he that is more miserable must meet something yet unknown. To be outfac'd, rejected for a Villain, tied up by Nicety and Respect from Revenge, without a prospect of re∣trieving my Right, is what the most patient must want temper to bear. Elv. Wherein I can serve you, you may with assurance command, and I am apt at present not to think my self altogether incapable. Vit. I dae promise my self any thing from so noble a Succour.—Bless me therefore with something like Hope. Elv. The means how, I beg you will not inquire into; but I have some reason to be confident of a Design will defer the Marriage till you can hear from Cadiz: whither I advise you would immediately send post. Vit. This would secure my Happiness, and a little time gain'd cer∣tainly discover the Cheat. Elv. To prevent all Danger, if he comes out according to appointment to fight you, prepare Alguazills to seize him for the Robbery. It cannot be dishonourable thus to treat so base a man, and vindicate your self. Before he can procure his Liberty, your Post will be returnd, and all be clear'd. This requires dispatch, therefore haste; within half an hour I'll meet you. Vit. I have just reason to suspect him too false to keep his word; my greate confidnce is your Conduct. Exit. Elv. What this will come to, is as impossible to guess, as that it could ever come to this. But I'll in, and hasten Clara.— Once on the Ground, I can no lower fall: And venture nothing, though I venture all. Exit.
SCENE 3. The High Street. Carlos, Antonio. Car. SInce you have reason to despair of finding one in a Crowd, whose person you have no knowledge of, make this Tumult a Diversion; at least defer these melancholick Thoughts. Thou art now something more extravagant then Love could make thee. Nay, would I curse a man, I'd wish him as nice a sense of Honour as Antonio. Ant. I know my self to blame: but all I see of this great Preparation has so much unaccountable, taudry Gallantry in it, is so far from what I think, that to me Sickness would prove greater Pleasure then that the rest of men seem fond of. Carlos, I am not what I was; all my Am∣bition, Dotage of youth and Beauty, make but one intire thought of Hatred and Revenge: and could I satisfie this Passion, I should die with more delight then assured Maryrs suffer. Car. In earnest, Antonio— Enter Clara half veiled, in Womens cloaths, who seeing them pulls it over her Fac. Ant. Ha! that Face I have seen.— Cla. Now cannot I move a step; my masculine Spirit with my Ha∣bit leaves me. I have nothing but my Woman's Cunning to trust to. Aside. Ant. 'Tis she, Carlos; the very Clara, Pimp and Confident to El∣vira.—Baud!— Antonio goes to Clara. Clar. You cannot think your self in Spain, or that you talk to one of Quality, to treat me thus. Nor could any thing but your Mstake of the person perswade me to forgive this Insolence. Ant. Impudent Strumpet! would I had ne'r had cause to know thee. Unveil, or I'll tear it and thee to pieces. Clar. Stranger, you'll repent this horrid Rudeness. Know, people of my Rank cannot want Revengers of their Honour. Car. What do you mean, Antonio? 'tis dangerous to force a Veil in Court: you may mistake.
Ant. I tell thee she's my Sister's foul Associate, and Seller of her Ho∣nour.—Discover, or by my Father's soul— Antonio lays hold of his Dagger. Clar. Hold, Sir; 'tis I.— Ant. Base Devil! thou shouldst not live, were it not to tell me where Elvira is. Car. Be moderate, Antonio, your Threats will fright her from the Truth. Clar. That, Sir, Heaven be my witness, I am as ignorant of as those that ne'r saw light. Ant. Confess, or each minute shall invent new Punishment to rack it from thee. Thus with little Tortures I'll begin—and let out some of thy loose Bloud. Car. This is a Transport unworthy of thee. Ant. Should I trust a Rock I have already split on? Confess, or by— Clar. Be not so cruel, and I'll tell you all. Car. Give her time to think, Antonio; this Encounter may prove most lucky. Clar. But this time, dear Invention! and let me die a Fool.— Aside. Ant. About it then, and I will be patient. Clar. That fatal night we left your House, I waited on her to the Convent of Molbietro, where your Aunt is Abbess; who entertain'd her with no small Grief, when inform'd of the Accident that drove her to that Sanctuary; whence she dispatcht me to this place in search of he fse Vitelli. Ant. Of Hell, then which this Lie is falser. Car. To me this Story seems probable. Clar. So Heaven and you afford me Mercy as 'tis true. Ant. When came you hither? Clar. Not three hours since I alighted in this Inn, where I found— Ant. Whom? Clar. Vitelli. Ant. Vitelli here? Oh let me fly to my Revenge! On, good Clara. I can almost forgive thee. Clar. As I came out, he left his Chamber in search of a Servant he is sending out of Town, and cannot be far off. Ant. If this prove true— Clar. Why should you suspect me false, when 'tis my Lady's in∣torest you should find him? But to leave no Scruple, I'll conduct you to his Chamber, and produce unquestionable Testimonies. This you must remember, it is no longer Vitelli you pursue. Ant. More tricks yet? who then?
Clar. What I shall discover will convince you. 'Tis Peralta, a Captain fled from Flanders for a Murther, and took Valenti in his way. All this I learnt from Papers of his left in his Chamber, which I thought I was bound to search, when I knew they belong'd to him; that I might give a good account to her that sent me. Car. This news is beyond our expectation or hope. Ant. 'Tis what I'll improve to his certain Ruine. Car. First by fair means (which you have often promised me, if he was a Gentleman) you must retrieve her Credit, by offering him to mar∣ry her. They whisper. Clar. Indian, you must pardon me, since to secure my Mistress, her Lover and my self, I expose you to the first shock of Antonio's Rage: and good faith, Charity begins at home. Ant. Come along, and direct us to this Chamber of Discovery. Clar. This way, Sir.—Can I but get clear of you, and give my Lady timely notice,—discover what you can. Aside. Car. I must preserve Peralta, if possible, for the fair Elvira's Safety: For that depends on his, and if He dies, She too must fall nice Honour's Sacrifice. Exeunt. The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV. SCENE 1. The Inn-Yard. Vitelli, Crispin booted. Crisp. THe Horses are ready, Sir. Vit. Take this then, [Gives him a Letter,] and shew your Kindness to your Master by your quick Return.—One thing more. While Vitelli whispers to Crispin, Enter Antonio, Carlos, Clara. Exit Crispin Ant. This looks like truth. Clar. For more certainty see where he stands. Points to Vitelli. Ant. Is that my Enemy? Clar. That's Vitelli, or Peralta, which you please, or both.—I hope this Shift may free me, and I'll still about the dispatch of my Message. Aside. Antonio goes to Vitelli. Ant. Your Name's Peralta, Sir? Vit. I neither own the Name nor Temper of that curst Villain. What I really am I dare speak, which is, Don Vitelli. Ant. Thou'rt a Villain under both Names, and as such I'll use you. Vit. I can scarce think my self born of a Spaniard, to meet such Rude∣ness as my nature perfectly abhors. Ant. Damn your Sentences—and know your Forgeries and you are discover'd. Vit. To none that dare name my Actions so, and know me. Ant. Yes, Villain, Elvira's Wrongs and mine shall proclaim them And if thou hast so much Valour to defend thy self against the Brother, as Cunning to betray a wretched Woman, draw, and know 'tis Antonio heightned with a just Revenge that bids thee. Vit. This world is all Madness and Mistake.—Could I but think you were not deceiv'd in the Person, and had not too good reason to know the true Peralta deserves all this, I should not thus tamely dispute the Wrong. Ant. What, Coward too? and think to conquer me as my lost Si∣ster
by Words?—Draw, or by Heaven I'll doe the act of Justice, and rid the world of a perjur'd Slave.— Vit. Provok'd thus, I must be more, or much less then Man to suffer. They draw. Carlos with his Sword interposes to part them. Clar. What will this come to?—Those Officers at the gate shall determine the Quarrel. Clara runs out. Ant. Friendship's a Name, Carlos, when it stands in competition with Honour and Revenge.—What, must Antonio live and see (good Hea∣vens!) the Ravisher of his Sister safe?—By all— Car. What I urge is your Promise, and her Honour. And if he will make up this Breach by Marriage, you create a new Enemy to re∣fuse so just Terms. Vit. Little Hecks! do you think with a seeming Quarrel to force me to the keeping of a Whore, and take off your stale Goods? No, shew your selves for Cheats, and both assault me; whilst the innocent Vitelli dares thus undauntedly oppose you. Enter Clara with Officers. She points to Vitelli. Clar. That's he,—seize him. And at your own peril be his escape.—I have too much kindness for Vitelli, to let him perish for Peralta: a lit∣tle Confinement will break no squares. The Officers seize Vitelli. 1. Offic. Seiz'd by us the Devil can't escape. Vit. More Complices? Thieves! Murthrers! lose me, or— 2. Offic. No, Sir, Murtherer falls upon your own head, and 'tis the Ensign's bloud you shed in Flanders that calls for Vengeance. Ant. Let him at liberty, and I'll revenge it bravely, and save the dull Ceremonies of Law. 1. Offic. You owe us Thanks that you are not confin'd; this Quarrel deserves it. 2. Offic. If you consult your own Safeties, away. Car. Come, Antonio, you must know the Town too well, not to un∣derstand a Retreat necessary in this case. Antonio, Carlos retire. Vit. What can you mean, Gentlemen? I ne'r saw Flanders nor Spain till this last Flota from the Indies 1. Offic. This won't do, Sir, we are told of Writings in your Cham∣ber will convince you, whither we intend to carry you, and thence to Prison. Vit. Curst Peralta! now thou hast secur'd thy Designs. Gentlemen, I hope I may beg leave to speak with a Knight of Malta in the house be∣fore my Confinement. 1. Offic. No, Sir, we must and will prevent a Rescue: onely take your Papers with us, and then secure you.
Dormilon enters. Dor. What means this Disturbance in my House? 2. Offic. Onely the Seizure of one Peralta for a Murther. Dor. Peralta? this will be sad news to Don Luis.— Aside. I'll be his Bail. 1. Offi. The Crime admits of none; along, Sir. Exeunt Officers with Vitelli. Dor. The Widow has been too cunning for us; and that Don Luis must speedily understand. Exit. SCENE 2. Long Street. Antonio, Carlos. Ant. CLara escap'd, and Peralta secur'd from my Sword? something must and shall be done. Nor is it fit the Law punish a single Murther, whilst mine and my Sister's Honours remain unrevenged. I'll arm him my self, and in his own Chamber fairly kill him. Car. Yes, and suffer in his stead, while milder means may dompass your Designs. And if Antonio dare trust me— Ant. Trust thee, Carlos? yes, with Life, with Honour, All, I freely do. I find I am not fit to guide my self. Henceforth thy settled Judgement gives me Laws; but still remember my Sister's Wrongs, and where Per∣alta is.—Oh that Name! Car. Pray, no more, your hasty Rage has already prov'd Clara's loss, whose recovery will be necessary to our Affairs. She cannot yet be far; therefore let us round this Street: half an hour hence I'll visit the Priso∣ner, and doubt not to get more by Fair words and Promises, then your Sword could extort. Ant. Should he accept your Offer, the cause of his Imprisonment brings his certain Ruine with my Infamy. Clar. There's no danger on that side: a sum of Money prevents the Prosecution, and gains his Liberty. For 'tis as great a Miracle for a Rich man to be hang'd, as a Poor man to scape. Exeunt.
SCENE 3. Chamber in the Inn. Elvira in Womens cloaths, Clara very rich. Elv. I Am much too miserable e're to hope to make thee amends. Clar. You make your self so with fine Speeches. Let me learn you what Dangers Resolution and Cunning may avoid. Think now of nothing but a it Story to wheadle old Gomez, who will instantly be here. Elv. Had I but thy Courage, I could not fail but as I am, something thrills through my Bloud, and makes me tremble. How can I think to impose upon him with a false Story, who so steadily repuls'd Vitelli's true one? Clar. And so easily believ'd Peralta's, that was as false as yours. I tell you, Madam, he has a believing Countenace and looks like one of our politick News-mongers, who are sure to entertain a Story for being strange, and of themselves find out Reasons to make it probable, then conclude it true. Elv. How did he receive my Message? Clar. Like a Gentlema; and when he read a Lady's Honour was concern'd, told me, he would defer the greatest Business of his Life, which was the Marriage of his Daughter, till he had waited on you. Elv. This was courtly. Clar. There's no doubt of him; had I that Face and Cloaths, I'd un∣dertake to cully half the Dons in Madrid with a Li ten times more un∣likely.—There tis: That Cast, and a little Assurance, is infallible. Elv. This Mirth would conquer any body's Misery but mine. Clar. One thing I foresee, that the Seizing of Vitelli must something alter your Design.—St. One knocks. This must be the Don. Clara goes o the door. Enter Don Gomez. Gom. Is this your Lady? Clar. Yes, Sir.—Don Gomez Madam. Elv. Your Looks, and the Character the world gives you, speak you so much a Gentleman, that I shall need the less Excuse for this Rudeness. Gom. Ha! what a Prize was this for one of twenty, ad so forth?— Aside.
Madam, the world at the worst must say, Don Gomez always lov'd his Friend, and took pleasure in serving Strangers. And he that deservs this Character must be proud of the Commands of so fair a Lady.—By my faith she is, she makes my old teeth chatter, and so forth.— Aside. Elv. Sir, what I have to say is strange and startling, yet so fit for me to speak, and you to hear, that this Trouble is but necessary. Gom. The very stile I love too—Pray, on, Madam. Clar. The Old man listens as earnestly as a Bird in a Cage to a whistling Cobler. Elv. I can scarce believe one of your Experience and Wisdom would throw away an onely Daughter, fair and vertuous, on a Perjur'd man. Gom. Heaven forbid! I'd rather bury her in a Nunnery, and so forth: and let the Family of the Gomezs perish. Elv. Yet such is the false Vitelli, whom you design your Son-in-law. Gom. You startle me indeed; Vitelli my Son-in-law, false and per∣jur'd? Elv. Yes, Sir, if breach of strictest Oaths and solemnst Contract de∣serve such terms. Too sure I found him so. Gom. Then I am lost. Pray, good Madam, methinks I should, yet Heaven knows how unwillingly I believe you. Elv. In short, for 'tis grievous to tell a Truth to the Disadvantage of one I can never hate; you see here the miserable Mariana, whom trea∣cherous Tears, and such Oaths as the most jalous could not but trust, betray'd to Love. 'Tis too plain, all men must be false, when after such Vows Vitelli can prove so to me—wretched Woman! Gom. Trust me, Madam, I can weep, and so forth, at your Misfor∣tunes—But hope you mistake the Person that is their cause. For this Vitelli I have entertain'd, has not been long enough in Spain to make a Contract, scarce see a Lady. Elv. No, Sir, 'twas Mexico first gave me life (nor can my Fortune or Relation shame Vitelli,) and there my Heart was stole with fair bewitch∣ing words, and such tempting shows of real Love as might dispell a settled Hatred.—Yet can you think it, Sir, this kind protesting man, this Vitelli could prove false? false, oh my Heart! to Mariana that so lov'd him? Clar. Brave Woman, she almost makes me believe her. Gom. You will not think it rude, if I take leave in a Business of such weight, to clear some Doubts. &c. before I give full credit. lv. So far from that, you will oblige me by your Questions, the ni∣cest of which I know I can satisfie you greatest Curiosity in. For, alas! Sir, that and its Circumstances take up all my Care and Thoughts.
Gom. I ask then, did his Father know any thing of his Love? and by what means did you arrive? Clar. No, that he still kept conceal'd, for Reasons I could never guest. Till finding my self forlorn and left, that very morning we had appointed for our Marriage, by diligent search I understood he was gone for Spain, to Marry your Daughter.—Arm'd then with Love, which emboldens the most fearfull, disguiz'd, I pursued him in another Ship, and a day after him landed at Cadiz; whence I am now come to beg Relief in such a Cause as must concern every man's Honour that pretends to be generous, much more Don Gomez, and the Father of Violante. Gom. Base Vitelli, thou canst not be Son of good Gonzalo, nor e're shalt call me Father.—What a Scape was here, and so forth!— Aside. Elv. That he is the Vitelli that I challenge, this will witness; given with such moving Passion and such Charms as has ruin'd the poor Mariana. Shews Gomez Peralta's Picture. Gom. This I know all true, and this the very same I once thought to call mine.—But if— Elv. What I beg is, you would endeavour to restore an unkind Hus∣band to the most unfortunate of Women. For, false as he is, I can for∣give, whom I find I must ever love Gom. If there be Laws, Justice, &c. in Madrid, I here engage to see you righted: nor is it more then the great Obligation this Discovery lays upon me may justly challenge. Elv. I would, if possible, avoid Severity, for I must suffer when he is punisht. Let him but he perswaded to come hither, and I have some hopes he will not refuse to own me. Gom. That, Madam, shall speedily be done, and my Daughter brought to wait upon you to my house. For this publick pace is not fit for your Quality. Elv. Heaven must reward such Goodness, Sir. Exit Gomez. Clar. This is right, and the Old Trout rarely tickled. Nor was there any other means of getting Peralta from his house, before the design'd Marriage was consummate—I'd give half my Maiden∣head, to her how the Don will teaze him, and so forth. Elv. Something w still want to make our Plot successful, the Re∣lease of the true Vitelli from Prison; which must infallibly uine Pe∣ralta's Pretences; and to give my Brother timely notice, that thus aw'd I may secure him. Clar. I'll undertake both, and in my old Disguise to the Pri∣son, where 'tis odds but we find some Expedient. As for your Brother, his Lodgings are so near, he may be soon sent for. But how convenient that will be, knowing his hot Temper, must be consi∣derd of.
Elv. This I resolve, I'll be Peralta's Wife, Or to my Brother's Rage expose his Life. Exeunt. SCENE 4. A Room in Gomez house. Peralta, Fabio. Fab. NEver had Mischief such Success: for certain you were wrap in your Mother's Smock, and that a fine one too. The Old man is so confirm'd, he wreaths himself into the Toil, as if he resolv'd never to get out. Per. What may come of it hereafter I can't guess, but I am sure to enjoy the Woman, and that will recompense twenty such Hazards. All that seems unlucky is Don Gomez hasty Business, which defers a while our Marriage. But I resolve not to stir to answer Vitelli, till Violante's mine past recovery: for though I have no aversion to Fighting, I love a fair Lady much better. Fab. By my troth, the uglist would carry my Affections from that; and certainly man was made to increase the world, not to destroy it. But under favour, Sir, I hope you wont be so unfashionable to duel for your own Wife. Per. No, Sot, I duel to kill Vitelli, whose mouth once stopt, who lives in this world to contradict me? And within a year, which is the soonest I can be discover'd, I question not but with a Trick I have so to please the Lady, that all will be reconciled. Fab. This was a Master piece beyond my dull reach; and now I dare pronounce you happy, for 'tis a sweet one. Per. 'Twas pleasant to see, when the Old man would be offering at Questions, how the present of a Jewel diverted him; and the story of a large Stone (which for all I know may be an Indian Pebble,) that I told him was one of the fam'd Jewels of the great Montezuma, seal'd up his inquisitive Humour, and deliver'd him mine. Fab. Yes, Sir, I observ'd then he hugg'd, and call'd you dear Vitelli, Picture of Gonzalo, and onely one he would call Son. I'll swear I have seen a whole Comedy his had less Sport in't. Per. Is the Priest ready? Fab. Yes, yes, and has nothing to doe this half hour, but contrive a tolerable Leg not to be laught at.
Per. It must doe, without some Devil-Intelligencer owes me a spite: if so, this is his time to nick it. Fab. Doe the Devill has not Cunning enough, were you his E∣nemy, to prevent it. I went into the Kitchin, and the Cooks are as busie as a new Politician imploy'd on guess: follow'd Flora up stairs, and found an experienced Matron making the Bed to the best advantage. Enter Gomez, Violante. Per. Here comes my Father and my Life. Now I venture to call you so, since my Joys are certain. Gom. Never in worse time. Know, Sir, he that is once per∣jur'd, and so forth, must be trusted by Fools, not old Gomez; mark that. Fab. Here's a Showr in the midst of Sunshine. Aside. Gom. Come, you study for some paltry Excuse but be assured I have found you base and treacherous. Fab. Would I had a Musket on my shoulders in Flanders. Aside. Per. You'll give one so perfectly innocent leave to be amaz'd at so great a Turn. Gom. Must Gomez be pickt out of all men to be abused? or is this Maid an object it for so base a Design? No, Sir, I shall provide you a Wife more suitable, and take care to secure you from the Danger you were running headlong into, and so forth. Per. I can dread no Danger but your Displeasure, and the Loss of her I so inirely love. Gom. You give a great proof of it, whilst you thus contrive hr Ruine. Per. I have done nothing but what a violent Passion forc'd me to, nor is my Quality so mean. Gom. I know your Quality, and so forth, and grieve a Gentleman so nobly born shoul with such Baseness shame his Family. Fab. Heaven grant he don't shame that, and the Family of the Fabii at the Gallows. Viol. I shall forgive the Injury, if you return that Passion you speak of, to her you have quitted to impose on me.—Assure yourslf henceforth you are more then a Stranger to Violante. Per. Elvira's Wrongs discover'd too? curst Portmantue! this is past hopes. Aside. om. Your Gilt may well silence you. er. The unthought-of Charge well may, with the greatest wnder.
Gom. That will soon cease, when you shall see the fair and vertu∣ous Mariana, whom you call'd Wife in Mexico; and has thence pur∣sued you hither. Per. 'Sdeath, I had laid Snares for my own catching. Aside. Fab. Bear up, Sir, the wind veers fair again: this must be a gross Mi∣stake, and at worst give us leave to run for't. Gom. The mention of her Name may well disorder you, and so forth. If it be Remorse for deserting her, it may make some small Amends. Poor Heart! she must forgive, though she has but little cause to love. And were she my Daughter, and so forth.— Per. I can scarce think I want a Pardon, when I am a Stran∣ger to my Crime. And all Womenkind may as justly lay the same Claim as Mariana, whose very Name I ne'r was yet acquainted with. Gom. That you are Vitelli, Son to Gonzalo, and so forth, I am fully satisfied, nor am I less, that she speaks truth, from whose own mouth I heard it. Per. Is not her Discourse wild, and she justly to be suspected to be beside her self? Pray, Sir, consider how unlike this is the Son of that Gonzlo you call Friend. Fab. I have waited on my Master ever since he could think to∣wards Man; and let me beg your Pardon, Sir, have ticed him to Women, for fear he had no sense that way: but when he saw this Lady's Picture, he was convinc'd, for the very first week he would gaze and kiss; so that I left off Perswasions.—But ner as yet heard of any Mariana—or any other, was she ne'r so beauteous, in Mexico, that could divert his Thoughts.—This, Sir, I offer my self to swear. Per. Though this Witness may be of proof, yet so much do I trust y Innocence, that all I beg is, you would let me see this Lady. If she can so much as name me with Assurance hers, which is the greatest Cuse, here I relinquish all my Pretences to what I doat on. Gom. This I like, though I have little reason to believe you wil∣lingly undertake. Come, Daughter, put on your Veil; we'll go to Dormilon's, the Inn you say you lighted at, and there expect you.—Yet his Trease secures him from running. Aside. Viol. I wait you Sir,—and thank my Fortune, this suspicion has lss'ned my growing Love. Aside. Per. Adieu, dear Misriss, till the next Meeting shall approve me constant. xunt Gomez, Violante. [To Fabio.] Where am I, Fabio? within these few minutes, I would have quitted my Pretences for the very hopes of Liberty.
Fab. By my troth, Sir, for once take a Fool's advice; and now you may have it, never pretend more. For though this is some for∣saken Virgin follows the true Vitelli; yet true Stories laid together will grow too strong for Lies ne'r so well wrought. Per. Thou art always Coward in the very nick of Victory. Is it not much easier to perswade him she is some common Jilt, hired by Vitelli to disappoint our Marriage, then to outface the true Vitelli? Fab. All I say is, Sir, with your Assurance I should have made an excellent Servant. Now I know my self modest, and so not capable.— Well, 'tis hard when a Master takes ones calling from him, and incroaches on the very Secret of Lying that maintains him. Aside. Per. He's doubly curst is foundred near the Shore: Fortune the Rudder guide, I'll pull the Oar. Exeunt. The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V. SCENE 1. A Prison. Carlos, Vitelli. Car. BElieve me, Sir, so much a Friend to Honour and Justice, especially in a Lady's Quarrel, that nothing but Confine∣ment could secure you from Revenge. Vit. Believe me, Sir, to understand so much of Honour and Justice, that nothing but my Restraint should bear these Injuries: and be assured I am as far from knowing the Lady you speak of, as what you are; I will not say Trapans, for that may look like Railing and Cowardise thus disarm'd.—But— Car. 'Tis a Phrase belongs so properly to none as such deny their Names. And were I Peralta, no Hazard should so unman me to dis∣own it. Vit. I have scarce Patience under such Suferance to deny that once again.—Hell take the true Owner; and were I again amongst the barbarous Indians, I would spend my Life in railing at what you think Civil. Car. All this and more might pass, did I not know it counterfeit and what I urge, to the Advantage of one of more Fortune then you can pretend to. You too well know Elvira. Vit. Is a Strumpet to be impos'd on Fools; nor am I so dull, tha the fear of a false Imprisonment should marry me to a Whore. Car. One more such word, and by Heaven the Laws of Honour cannot secure thee. Strumpet and Whore, to one I name otherwise, though so, were Death. Vit. I as little fear your Threats, as understand your Niceties of Ho∣nour: but this I dare boldly urge, she that will court an Acquaintance can be little better.—But should I allow her Vertuous, what is she to me? or why must I needs be sixt upon by the Name of one I hav such just cause to hate? Or why should you mistrust a Story that must seem probable at least to the most prejudiced? Car. This seems an honest Confidence, and the Maid might be a Dissembler. Aside. Vit. Once more I tell you I am Vitelli, a Stranger to Spain that I
was robb'd by this Peralta, both of my Treasure and Mistress, and have nothing in exchange but those Papers and old Cloaths, on which you ground this Mistake. And were I at liberty, my Sword should make the Villain confess this Truth. Car. These strong Denials make me begin to doubt; and should you prove what you say you are, I have reason to beg your Pardon, though my just Concern for the Lady and her Brother will very much excuse this Earnestness. Enter Luis. Luis. Which is the Prisoner? Vit. My being disarm'd may soon resolve you. Luis. This frees you. [Shews him a Pardon.] And now thou art so, I can joy to see thee—Why so strange? must not the Pardon tell thee, 'tis thy Uncle that has obtain'd it? And though thou art a Stranger to his Face, yet methinks the Kindness should make thee con∣clude me Don Luis, whom you have so long converst with by Letters. Vit. Gentlemen, if you have design'd to ruine me, do't some more manly way. 'Tis too cruel thus to prolong my Torment. Old Gentle∣man, your Age secures you from Abuse. Luis. Hah! what's this? Ruine, Torment, Abuse? what can Peralta mean thus to return so great a kindness as his Liberty? especially to one he knows loves him, and on that account with greatest difficulty and charge has purchas'd it? Vit. I know no Pardon I want, nor does that Dog that owns the name of Peralta deserve it. Luis. Be not so severe against your self: other Young men have been guilty of as great Faults; besides, you kill'd him fairly. Vit. Leave, or I'll study some greater Curse then Madness ever could invent, and make it my only Prayer it may fall upon you. Luis. You are much altered since you writ last from Valencia.—Pray, Sir, can you guess the cause of this Distraction? it makes me weep. To Carlos. Car. Faith, Sir, I am much a Stranger; unless it be his fear of Re∣venge for the Wrongs he has done a Lady perswades him to conceal himself, I am wholly ignorant. I found him much in the same Humour, and began to give credit to him till your coming. Luis. Dearest Peralta, be thy self; if my Life or Fortune, which is no small one, can serve you, thou art safe. By thy Father's Soul I beg, who left thee to my Care. Car. This must be he.—Come, Sir, you know I proposed most honourable means of Reconcilement to Antonio; and if you marry Elvira, whose Beauty and Fortune are too considerable for the proudest to despise—
Vit. Hell take you both: or may you live to meet Miseries like mine Do you not think Confinement plague enough, but must I be thus rackt with Lies and Nonsense? Luis. Oh, Sir! had you known him when young, for since I have not sen him, this would afflict you. To Carlos. Clara comes in with man's cloaths Vitelli seeing her speak. Vit. Oh, I have still one Friend left: welcome, Sir, for ne'r was Wretch so timely succour'd. 'Las, I have suffered past the Cruelty of Turks betwixt these two Tormentours. Clar. That's Antonio's Companion, or I mistake; but this Disguise protects me.—I wish it were in my power to ease you, or in my Friend's, the Knight of Malta, at whose desire I now wait on you. Vit. They swear me down that I'm Peralta. The man, you well know, deserves my utmost Hatred, and by Heaven shall feel it.—Tell me Stories of one Elvira I have wrong'd, of Murther I have com∣mitted: nay, the old Gentleman fawns and cries, and calls me dear Pe∣ralta, and offers me my Pardon and my Liberty meely to abuse me. Is not this Sufferance beyond Patience, when I know all false and counterfeit? Clar. This is an Opportunity not to be lost.— Aside. Truth is, you act it bravly; but the Danger's past, and you may safely own your self. Aloud. [To Vitelli apart.] Be Peralta, nothing else can gain your Liberty, and this to my knowledge secures your Mistress. Gentlemen, you may think what you have heard strange, but the ne∣cessity of his Affairs I dare assure you made it requisite. Car. Prodigious! what may not a man doe with this Impudence? But his Liberty will be good news for Antonio, whom he must prepare to answer. Clar. Pray, Sir, let me undertake the Business, who throughly under∣stand the Affair; and will engage, if you bring Antonio to Dormilon's, either fully to make up the Breach, or that Peralta with his Sword shall give him Satisfaction. Car. That's all I wish; I'll imediately go find him.—We shall expect you, Sir. Vit. Where? Clar. At the Inn whither you are going. Vit. I will not fail. [To Luis.] Whither if you please to accompany me, which I am apt to hope, since you have so much Goodness to for∣give me, I will unfold my whole Story. Luis. I can forgive him any thing I so truly love, and am confi∣dent
some weighty Reasons urge you to this Denial of your Name. Clar. That you'll be assur'd of when you know each Circumstance, but now 'twill be too tedious; besides, his Business yonder requires dispatch. Luis. Along then, I have already discharg'd your Fees. Vit. I wholly commit my self to your Management. Clar. Which with this unexpected Success cannot possibly mis∣cary. Exeunt. SCENE 2. Elvira's Chamber in the Inn. Gomez, Elvira, Violante, Flora. Gom. 'TIs no more then what I promis'd, Madam, and was bound to perform. Elv. This is too much Honour, Madam, and I am so perfectly a Stranger, that I must despair of a Requital. Viol. Your Acquaintance would doubly recompense, could this be thought an Obligation. Elvira and Violante talk, Elvira's back toward the door, where enters Peralta and Fabio. Gom. Come, Sir, now I hope you will prove your self a Gentleman, honest, and so forth. Per. I never was charg'd for otherwise by any one that understood me, and question not but to unravel this Mistake. Gom. Here's your Vitelli, Madam, and I am thus far discharg'd of my Engagement. Elvira turns towards Peralta. Per. Elvira? this is a Rock must split me. Fab. 'Tis not in the power of Impudence to save us. Aside. Elv. Have I once more met thee, cruel, false man? it shall be hard to fly me. Elvira lays hold of Peralta. Viol. How strangely fond she is! Flo. It may be the Custom in Mexico. Per. Madam, if my being like the man you are so well acquainted with disturbs you, I had best remove the Object; 'tis unseemly to use a Stranger thus.
Elv. No, Vitelli, for by that Name thou won'st me; thou too well know'st the wrong'd Elvira, and those many Oaths that seald thy treacherous Love, e're to disown me. Canst thou forget Valentia? those Tears that made me thine? Is this the Recompence of too great Tokens of the ondest Dotage? He flings from her. Gom. What can all this mean? Per. Heaven knows, I am perfectly ignorant, nor to this time e'r beheld her face. Had I, Sir, could you think me so cruel to despis such Beauty? Elv. Canst thou forget, when languishing at my feet you lay, and dying vow'd, thence ne'r to stir till I had granted your Request? wone then, I easie Fool believ'd, and prished. Gom. There must be truth in this, no Woman e're could counterfeit to such height. Per. Truth? all's an evident Chat. You see she talks no more of Mexico and Mariana, but of Valentia and Elvira, names I'm a perfect Stranger to. Gom. Lady, this sudden change of your Story is enough to give me ground of Suspicion, and so forth. Flo. What can you believe, Madam? Viol. Nothing, but I naturally pity the poor Woman. Elv. Consider, Sir, I had no other means but this Pretence to get him from your House, and save your Daughter from Ruine. I freely confess I am not Mariana, nor a Mexican: nor is he Vitelli, or an Indian; but Peralta, a Captain of Flanders, who in his Journey hither stopt at Valentia, meerly to destroy the wretch'd Elvira. Gom. This is something of the Story the pretended Vitelli told, and so forth, is it not? Per. Now you have hit it, the same; and she without question one of Fernando's Dependants, hired by this Counterfeit to defraud me of my Mistrss. Does not this sound probable? Gom. Most likely; nay, I knew I should smell it, were it to be found above ground. Let old Gomez alone for Discoveries, &c. Per. I hope, Sir, no unlucky Accident can now disturb my Joys, but you will once more tell me I shall be blest. Gom. Yes, yes, we'll about it presently. Come, Vil. a little Op∣position makes the Victory more welcome. It will be no Rude∣ness to leave you alone, Madam; I suppose you'll quickly ind your Com∣panion. Per. No question, Sir, she has plenty. Elvira. Base man! relect upon my Honour too? Stay, Sir, for Ha∣ven's sake stay. Here's one can witness all I say is truth, that has been the constant Messenger of our Loves. Speak, dear Fabio; thou wert once all Honesty: I'll treble all thy past Rewards. Fab. You need not bribe me to speak Truth.
Gom. This is Trifling, and so forth; but let's hear him. Fab. I know you expect nothing but Truth from me. Per. Dog! will he betray me yet? Aside. Elv. Nothing else, dear Fabio; this may at last be some Remedy.—Tedious Clara.— Fab. Why then, Sir, upon the word of an Honest man, I never be∣fore so much as heard of Valentia or Elvira; and to my certain assu∣rance, my Master knows nothing either of them or Flanders. This is what I can declare in short. Elv. Slave! were I but a minute Man, thou shouldst not outlive this Lie. Per. You find, Sir, how she studies Delays, though it be to create Witnesses against her self. The Rogue lies with more con∣idence then the boldest of others can speak truth. Aside. Elv. Since I am thus basely used, tremble at Antonio's Rage, who shall bravely revenge my Wrongs, and teach you what it is to scorn a Woman's Love. Per. This must be some Player that has been used to act a Passion, she does it with such Art. Gom. By my troth, her way of Speech and Action pleases me much. And were not our Business earnest, and so forth, I would stay to hear her. As they are going, she stops Violante. Elv. As for you, Madam, whose Ruine I foresee equal with my own, let this Sea-mark warn you, and learn of her that teaches by Experi∣ence, not to trust those Angel-like bewitching Lips which with such power move, they might intice a Nun professing at the Altar; yet are full as false and treacherous as you think me. Viol. 'Tis Custom rules me, and a Father's Will, not my own Choice. Were it in my power, he should be still your's, if he was ever so. Elv. No, no, I know you must love, and fondly doat; I'm sure the wretch'd Elvira did. Alas! his Words are Charms, and each Action carries such Perswasive Eloquence, that were he not fale— Flo. Wll, Madam, I am confident the Lady's wrong'd. Viol. So far it works on me, as could I, to defer the Match a while,— Elv. Blessed Tongue! but are you so much more then Woman, to withstand his well-weigh'd, insinuating Vows? cannot Protestations made by subtlest art and dying Postures move? for he used such to me, and such must conquer. But I am troublesome, and you will cure me for speaking ill of one I should still hate her that rail'd on.
Viol. So much your Passion moves me, that, propose a way, and, if possible, I will serve you. Elv. 'Tis Impudence to beg so great a Treasure. It may be he'll prove true to you, and 'twas Elvira onely that was born to be thus miserable. Enter to them Clara, Luis Vitelli. Elv. to Clara. Oh Clara, still more wretched! with a ixt Confi∣dence he denies me, and obstinately says he is the Indian Vitelli. Is there the least show of Help? speak, dear, dearest Clara. Clar. You make me mad to be thus passionate, when there is al∣most certainty of Relief. Per. to Gomez. You see how fond she is of Men, and how well they are acquainted. While Gomez and Don Luis talk to one another Elvira addressing her self to Vitelli speaks. Elv. Yes, Sir, you see here the unfortunate Elvira, who in the Disguie of a Knight of Malta follow'd yon false, barbarous man.— Pointing to Peralta. My Misery makes me past all shame. Aside. Vit. This doubles my Hatred. Clar. No Whining, but have confidence of a Remedy. A little Pa∣tience and your Brother's coming must clear this Deceit. I'll go try to wheadle that Rascal Fabio. Gom. None is more then my self a Servant to the good Don Luis Pacheco. Luis. I must always be happy to see Don Gomez. Per. That should be my Uncle by his Name; if he knows me, I'm compell'd to yield. Aside. Clar. to Fabio. Is your Master, which you so commended, turn'd In∣dian since I last saw you? Fab. Friend, I have some serious Affairs, which are not to be disturb'd by impertinent Questions. Clar. Good, grave Sir, give me leave.—There was a Rascal Fabio I have seen, that strangely resembled you, who pretnded a smat∣tering after a Damsel hight Clara; have you met with such a one in your Travels? Fab. Pert Sir, I am at present melacholick, and will know no body.
Clar. Since you are so surly, it shall go hard but I bring you ac∣quainted wth the Gallows. Gom. Your Nephew that— Pointing to Vitelli. my Son-in-Law here tells me is one Fernando, was bred up with him at Mexico. Was't not so? Per. Right, Sir, and till this just Breach between us— Pox on't, I have spun my thread too fine. Aside. Luis. Assure your self, my Nephew is an absolute Stranger to the Indies. Till thirteen I bred him here in Madrid, and since he has spent his time in Flanders; where unfortunately killing an Ensign, he was forc'd to sue out his Pardon, and not an hour since was re∣least. Vit. Believe, Sir, though I was glad to accept my Liberty on any terms, I ne'r yet saw Flanders, nor was e're in Spain till my landing at Cadiz. There stands your Nephew, if you think fit to own one so base; who is the Robber of my Treasure, the actual Ruiner of this Lady's Honour, and great Designer on her I have a just Pretence to, might my Story gain credit. Elv. to Luis, and pointing to Peralta. And if you call him Ne∣phew, as certainly he is, you must own me for Necce, for ten thou∣sand times he has call'd me Wife. Nor could his Ambition rise higher then my Fortune, which should have been intirely his, had he spoke truth. Gom. Good faith, had not I a stay'd Judgement, and so forth, this would half distract me. Lui. 'Tis all Riddle to me, but I guess at a way shall unfold it. Enter Antonio, Carlos. Car. Remember your Promise, and keep your Temper: this I justly challenge from you, and expct. Ant. I am nothing but what you will have me. Elvira and Clara kneeling to Antonio. Elv. Thus low I do implore a Brother's Pardon, but my Fault has found already too severe Punishment. Clar. I hope, Sir, you will forgive the exact Duty I ow'd a Mistress I so dearly lov'd.—'Tis Clara begs it, Sir. Ant. You have made me too much a Stranger to your Affairs to think me concern'd. But the Love I always paid Elvira scarce deserv'd so great Neglect. To Carlos. I think I keep my word.
To Vitelli. As to you, Sir, (for I hate long Stories,) either be ho∣nourable, and repair this Lady's Wrongs by Marriage, (I will not call her Sister,) or prepare to die; so base a Cause can hope no other Success. Vit. Still the same Errour? would you have me marry one I am a Stranger to, and as Woman never till this minute saw? But know, I am so far from thinking wrong, that this shall ne'r be drawn sooner then to serve her. Points to his Sword. Ant. By Heaven, these petty Shifts— Car. Antonio.— [To Vitelli,] That you are Peralta, you at our last Meeting own'd; when this which now proves Clara engag'd you should make a Reconcilement. What means then this new Pre∣tence? Vit. By that I purchas'd Liberty, and now persist in my first Truth. Elv. Believe me, Sir, there stands the false cruel man, the treacherous Peralta. Points to Peralta. Clar. That's the base Wretch, for so I dare call him; and with This will revenge my Lady's Wrongs. Lays hold on her Sword. Per. to Gomez. You see, Sir, how they drive on their Conspi∣racy. A little more Impudence will perswade me out of my Name too. Gom. So much they perswade me, that I'll 'n home.—Come, Vil. this Design's at an end, for I'll never marry thee at Uncertainties, and so forth.—Here's two Vitelli's, two Peralta's, Fernando's, Elvira's, Mariana's, the Devil and all; and yet neither Vitelli, nor Pe∣ralta, &c. Vit. This Delay is all I intreat to gain my Mistress, and a few days hence my Messenger's return from Cadiz will assure you I am Vitelli. Ant. I'll kill them both, and that makes sure of my Ene∣my.— Luis. Then I'll try my last means; and 'tis what I solemnly swear, from this minute never to call him Nephew, nor possess him of a Rial of my Estate, that does not immediately own me. Fab. to Peralta sotly. 'Slie, Sir, will you lose a hundred thousand Ducats for the hopes of a Wench?—nay, no hopes? Luis. Nay more, this Lady's Story touches me so near, that if she be a Gentlewoman, he forfeits my Love in refusing to right her. Ant. He that questions that must be ignorant she is my Sister. Per. I have no reason to expect Forgiveness, who have been the ge∣neral Abuser of the whole Company. But if Love can cover Faults, I have great Pretences. First then, [To Luis.] I humbly beg your Par∣don; and if you will receive that Nephew you have taken such care
to preserve, here Peralta entreats. Luis. Truth is, Nephew, this was a little too high driven; but if you can reconcile your self with the rest, I must forgive one I love. And now I more earnestly view you, I dare conclude you the Son of my Brother. Gom. Well, I will never trust Age and Experience more, &c. Per. to Elvia. Your Pardon, Madam, which I have greatest cause to beg, I scarce dare ask: but if you forgive this Sally of Youth, and my Uncle consent, I am for ever yours.— To Antonio. Sir, this I hope you'll yield to, and honour me with a permission to call you Brother. Car. to Antonio. Refuse, Antonio, and you break your vow'd Engage∣ment. Ant. I yield to any thing is just, and if you behave your self wor∣thily, shall make no small increase to your Fortune. Per. to Elvira. Can you once more think me true? Elv. I must think any thing you'll have me. Per. To take off all cruple, I openly confess the Portmantue I brought you was mine by mistake, and upon that I grounded all my Pre∣tence. But I shall sufficiently make Amends, by yielding up that, and this a much greater Treasure. Bowing to Violante. Vit. Had I design'd a Quarrel, the Interest you have in this Lady would make us Friends.—And thus emboldned I dare call you Father, and my self this Fair one's Servant. Gom. 'Tis strange that I should not know thee, for by my troth thou hast Gonzalo's Cast, and so forth: and I will think of no Unkind∣ness, since I am thus assured. Ant. My Journey to Madrid was well design'd, and I can once more call my self Antonio. Gom. You shall all to my House, &c. for I love Weddings, and resolve to laugh at this Adventure. They talk together. Fab. Nay, Mistress Clara, I was not altogether so false as you think; for Fabio the Indian courted her, but Fabio the Spaniard was al∣ways constant. Clar. No more, my Don of the Netherlands, Clara will not pretend to hold so slippery an Eel, and she that will may take you for better for worse in best Capacities. Fab. You have your liberty, they that quarrel for you must strangely love Fighting. Luis. Why then all's agreed, and this little Noise may make a lasting Friendship.
Enter Dormilon. Dor. I have overheard so much as to know you merry.—What do you think of calling the Getano's in, who are just going by to Saint Hieronimo's? Gom. By all means call them in, &c. I will have one merry day after all, let the rest look to themselves. Dormilon returns with the Spanish Gipsies. A DANCE. Gom. Very well, very well. But this loses time: let's to the Church and so forth. For fear new Scruples should arise, I'd rather be Resolv'd then Wise. FINIS
EPILOGUE spoken by Mrs. Barry. IF any of you have a mind to ight, Let him affront our pretty Female-knight. For though her rambling Errantry is done; Since she's in danger of your damning Frown, Here as her Squire a Challenge I proclaim: Declare your Weapon, Time, and Place, and Name. When you shall own with shame, upon your knees, You fail much oftner then our Sex, to please. Perhaps her Servant by the Ladies may Be censur'd, that he basely ran away: But few, when they'd attain'd so much, would stay. Yet now the Power's by Marriage in her hand, Who may at leisure due Revenge command. For if he goes this year to the Campaign, A Friend may in his stead at home remain. Gallants, I needs must pray for some of you, Who with such heat to the Low-Countries go, That when you come again, if e're you do, You may be welcom'd with the loss of some rich Friend, Who's made you Heir to all he left behind. And be assur'd we'll prove exceeding kind To those who come with Scars of Honour home, If to inherit good Estates they come. 'Faith then, to us be favourable now, That we hereafter may be so to you. For those who mean to stay within the Nation, Let all new Plays now have their Approbation, Considering shortly comes a long Vacation: 'Gainst when, we shall no more reserve new Play, Then Vintner stock of French-wine till May-day.
Books Printed for, or sold by, Iacob Tonson, at the Iudge's Head in Chancery-Lane, near Fleet-street. THE Heroin Musquetier, or the Female Warriour; in Two Parts: Containing many true and delightfull Adventures of a French Lady, in the late Campagnes of 1676. and 1677. The Third and Fourth Parts, concluding the Work, are in the Press. Sir Patient Fancy, a Comedy, Acted at the Duke's Theatre, and written by the Authour of the Rover. Friendship in Fashion, a Comedy; written by Tho. Otway: Acted at the Duke's Theatre. Mr. Rimer's Examination of the Plays of Rollo, Duke of Normandy, the King and no King, and the Maids Tragedy; in a Letter to Fleetwood Sheppard, Esq. The Art of Making Love, or a Guide for Ladies and Gentle∣men in the affairs of Love. Price 1 s. Pleas of the Crown. Written by Sir Matthew Hales, late Chief Iustice of the Court of King's-Bench. An Historical Discourse of Parliaments in their Original before the Conquest, and continuance since: together with the Original, growth, and continuance of these Courts following, (viz.) The High Court of Chancery, King's-Bench, Common Pleas, Exche∣quer, Dutchy, and other inferiour Courts. Price 1 s. Brutus of Alba, or, the Enchanted Lovers, a Tragedy, writ∣ten by N. Tate: Acted at the Duke's Theatre.
