m1506 99829537 33977
THE Mystery of Curing Comprehensively. Explained and Confirm'd, by Exemplar of The Catholic Medicine. Powerfully Impregnated, and accuratly Formed; to Assist the Regent Principle, Disabled, or Impeded in Vital Government. Enabled hereby; more Vigorously, and constantly to Execute; the Functions and daily Operations; necessary to Health, and Life. For Support of Human Bodyes, variously Declining; and Recovery out of a Diseased State. The most useful, efficacious, and comprehensive Expedient; (Preventive and Curative) against the painful Diseases, and Decays of Human Nature. By E. Maynwaringe. M. D. Spes adhuc Spirantibus. Jan. 11. 1692/3. Imprimatur. Edm. Bohun. LONDON, Printed for the Booksellers. MDCXCIII.
THE MYSTERY of CURING Comprehensively, &c. FIRST, give me leave to Premise this necessary Information, That the Primitive Professors, and Fathers of Medical Science; were all diligent Preparers of their own Medicines: And their Successors likewise for many Hundred Years after, continued Industrious in that Work; many urgent Reasons requiring that most necessary Duty; which I forbear to recite: waving also the great Imprudence, in exposing Patients to Hazards; by revolting from that secure, knowing, and most hopeful Practice. Physitians then of the greatest Repute; were ambitious of acquiring, some Medicine extraordinary; most useful and advantagious to the Publick; and it was their Glory accountd; to have their Names Celebrated thereby; as Pro∣moters of a general good. But of latter times, the Learned making an un∣happy Defection; and changing that laudable Custom, for the vanity of Pen Practice: Illiterate bold Quacks have stept in, and personating the Physician; have imposed their Cheats, and Trifles upon unwary People; which hath brought a Scandal upon publishing any thing of this kind; and thereby barr'd the Pub∣lick from the benefit of Successful Labours, of some Learned and most Ingeni∣ous Artists. Thus much to obviate the Censure of undiscerning weak Heads; and stop the mouths of malevolent men, of opposite Interests. I proceed now to the matter proposed, and satisfaction promised. That a single Medicine may be endowed with a Power of Ʋniversality; pro∣perly and efficaciously to oppose many and various Diseases, in divers Persons, is what I have undertaken to prove: The Possibility, and rational Probability where∣of, will fairly appear; if you rightly understand as followeth. I am now going out of the common beaten Road of Physick; and the vul∣gar Methods of Physicians; into unknown Paths, but leading a nearer and safer way: you must not therefore expect my Discourse to comport with the common Notions, and Opinions of Writers; yet consentaneous with Reason, and justifiable thereby; confirmed also by matters of Fact. For your clearer Apprehension, I have digested the Discourse methodically into three Parts: wherein three things presents principally to be considered.
The Agent; the Works; and the Instrument! The First Part sets forth the Capacity of the Agent. The Second, contains the Difficulty, and Facility of the Work. The Third, shews the Hability, or Fitness of the Instrument. The First Part. THE Capacity, Power, and Dexterity of this Agent, (the vital Principle) eminently appears: First, in the wonderful Draught, and Portraiture of Formation. Secondly, in the daily course of Conservation. Thirdly, in the Exigencies, and Attempts of Curation. In the first Performance of this Plastic and Architectonic Principle, take notice; that simple Spermatic Humour, was the single matter out of which, and of which only, the Stamina or rudiments of the Stately Fabrick of Human Body, was for∣med and framed, with different Spermatick Parts: Bones, Cartilages, Ligaments, Tendons, Membranes, Fibres, &c. From thence proceeding to Organize, and compleat this wonderful Machine. The Second, and continual Operation of this governing vital Spirit; is main∣taining and supplying, the many different Parts of Human Body, with various suitable Liquors, derived from a simple alimentary Juice, wrought in the Stomach, called Chyle. The third Performance of this diligent, and dextrous Operator; is repairing, mending, and reducing into order, this Workmanship; when decaying, or dis∣composed: By the Instrumental means of Medicine. The first, and second Operations of this Agent are wonderful; in producing such various strange effects, out of single and simple matter, as Sperm and Chyle; by a transmuting and transubstantiating Power. Now to make some Remarks from hence; and reduce these considerables to our Purpose. Here is the wonder of Fabrication. And the daily wonder of Nutrition, and Conservation; by single matter. Then why not the wonder of Curation and Reparation by single Medicine? which last Operation is not so wonderful, as the two former; when I come to shew you the rational Possibility. and fair Probability thereof; by comparing the Efficient, and the Instrument; with the Work to be done. The first, and second Performance of this great Architect, and Conservator; no
Reason can demonstrate or explain: yet Fact proves them both, and undeniably are confest by all. Why then is the third Performance so incredible, and difficult to be admit∣ted; that may be comprehended by our Reason? as the sequel of the Discourse will make manifest. This curious Architect that built the Fabrick of Human Body; and formed all the various materials thereof by Transmutation of single matter, with no Instru∣ment: can probably, and with facility; repair and mend this Workmanship, when out of Order; with one exquisite Instrument, egregiously contrived for Catholic use. This vital Principle (called Nature sometimes) is a Catholic free Agent; dai∣ly performing various offices, and contrary motions in Human Body; yet all con∣spiring harmoniously, for the use, and welfare of vital Government. This Governour and Supporter of the Microcosme; operates universally, vari∣ously, and contrarily: yet consentaneously, usefully, and necessarily. Binds and loosens; opens, and shuts; moves upward, and downward; liquifies, and coagulates, rarifies and condenseth; transmits, and retains; transmutes, and transubstantiates, alimentary Matter into various forms, and Substances. And all these different, and contrary Actions; are performed (efficienter) by the vital, ruling Principle: (materialiter,) with a single alimentary Juice, digested in the Stomach, to supply, and enable every Part of the Body; differing in Organi∣zation, Temperature, Texture, and Office, to execute their various Functions. If this supreme Agent, can perform various and contrary Actions with single Ali∣ment: Then probably that same power may cure various, and contrary Diseases, with single Medicament. Can the Vital transmuting Spirit, of Bread and Water; make Chyle, Blood, Ner∣vous Juyce, Sperme, and Milk; various Liquors for divers uses, of the same ali∣mental matter? Can this transubstantiating Principle, make Blood here, Flesh there, and Bones in another place, of the same Food? If this vital Spirit can maintain and feed, all the different Parts of the Body with one alimentary Juice, Chyle: Then probably, and very reasonably, it may mend and Cure, all those Parts with one Medicine. If Nature can do wonders with single Aliment; very likely she can do wonders with single Medicament. 'Tis undeniable that Wonders are wrought in Man's Body every Day, tho in Health: But you are hard to believe that Wonders may be wrought by a Medicine in Sickness, or a diseased State. And yet these Wonders will not seem so great; when I come to set forth the Nature, and Qualifications of a Catholic Medicine; and the Reasons of its Comprehension, and Adaptness for Curing many and various Diseases. As Nature (the Life) doth distribute Aliment from the Stomach to all Parts of the Body; She can as easily convey (Materialiter vel Virtualiter) a Ca∣tholic Instrument, into all Parts, to set them right.
And this you must believe; that no Medicine directs or moves it self here or there in the Body; but Nature disposeth of it, to this Part, or that, as she stands in need; conveying both Nutriment, and Medicament at her Pleasure; at least to her Power; and there is no Power else. This vital Principle, is a dextrous and industrious Agent; that can doe wonder∣fully for relief; if the Physitian (Ministers Naturae) can provide such a Medical Instrument, as is comodious for management; and generally useful. Mechanic or manual Artists, that work externally upon their subject (Circa quod) have need of many Materials and Implements, to effect what they design, and are about: But the vital Principle is Seated more advantagiously; hath its Resi∣dence in every part of the Body, operating internally all the Functions; and there∣fore stands not in need of such variety of Instruments to work with. You may understand from hence; the possibility to be very fair and reasonable on Nature's Side; that she can manage a Catholic Medicine very well, to serve all the operations and intentions of Curing; is willing to recieve, and ready to operate with such an Expedient: But the possibility of contriving and forming this Catholic Instrument, lyes not so easy and probable on the Physitian's part: It is not to be done by guess, with Pen and Ink, upon a peice of Paper, in the prescribing Mode. Thus much shall suffice, to shew the Promptness, Energy, and Industry of the Efficient or vital Agent; in complying and operating with a Catholic Medicine. I pass on to the next Stage; to set forth the difficulty of the Work to be done; and probability of performing it. The Second Part. HERE presents to me a prodigious Company of Diseases; of different kinds; and seated in various Parts of the Body, preying upon the Life of Man; if not subdued, or prevented by powerful means: So many, and so variously assaulting; that in your Reason may well require a vast number of Medicines to oppose them: And without such combined force, and ready Assistance, you do believe, it is folly to attempt, and expect Success in the undertaking of so great a work. To remove this Difficulty, and seeming Impossibility that lyes in our way; and to render a Catholic Medicine sufficient and a fit Instrument to perform Comprehensively, against this great Company: I shall make two Strict Inquiries. First, into the Number of Diseases: Then Secondly, into the Nature of them. As to their Number, I find them Fictitiously multiplyed; seemingly but such, not really so many; which in another Tract, I have denoted and corrected that Errour. (Inquire into the General Catalogue of Diseases) where for sufficient Rea∣sons,
I Struck out the first general Division, out of that List; as not being properly called Diseases, but are Symptoms only: whereby a great Abatement is made and the Superfluous Number reduced to fewer by a third Part. I shall not repeat here the warrantable and sufficient motives for so Doing; but refer you thither for Satisfaction. Secondly; examining the Nature, and essential difference of Diseases; I find most of them, at least many; not to differ so much in Nature, as in Name; from Cir∣cumstances attending them, and makeing the Variegation: Therefore Diseases; though very numerous as commonly denominated; yet will reasonably, and advan∣tagiously admit of a Reducement: By Contracting and associating them into Com∣pany's of Affinity; from their Humoral causes, issuing from one and the same Foun∣tain: And then, Diseases will not require such variety of peculiar appropriated Medicines; nor such distinct Methods of Cure, as commonly is now Practised, and appointed by Authors. Diseases are unnecessarily, and extravagantly multiplyed by Denomination: But they are not a quarter so many in their Radication: For, although Diseases are made thus numerous and different by their Names; yet they have great Alliance, and are near of Kin, by their Origin, in their Causes of Production, and Conti∣nuation. Circumstances attending Diseases, do often give, or are the occasion of different Names: From different Parts affected, as Pleurisy; From the manner of Invasion, as Epilepsy. Apoplexy; From their Continuation, and Intermissions: As Feavers. From the manner of afflicting; as Convulsions. From Functions abolish'd, or depra∣ved, as Palsy, and Tremor, &c. Many such differences. The same Morbific Humour, roving up and down; infesting and afflicting divers Parts of the Body, hath begot various nominal Diseases: Rheumatism, Gout, Colic, Iliac Passion, Stitches, Cramps, Convulsions, Fluxes, Inflamations, Apostems, &c. The same Humoral matter that now makes the Gout; at another time produceth the Celic; some times a Flux; another time the Head Ach, or Tooth Ach, or something else. And thus it happens in one single Person. So likewise in divers Persons; the same Morbific Humor (in specie) in kind, does make various Diseases, and different Symptomatical appearances, according to the difference of Parts, in scituation and office; that this peccant matter shall molest and deprave. Thus producing Several Diseases, from the same Humoral Cause; but seemingly to vulgar understandings so distinct, as having no relation to each other: yet all these being bred, and fed from one degenerate matter, will admit of one and the same Cure, by a true radical Catholic Medicine, which applying to the Spring and Rise of all these; does fitly perform the Cure of those many Diseases; having their Causation and dependance from one Original. So that Multiplicity of Diseases in Appearance, does not necessarily require, Mul∣tiplicity of Medicines, and methods; as some undiscerning Heads may think; being deceived by various Names given to Diseases, from Parts affected, and Functions depraved, or other Circumstances attending.
From hence you may Judge; that various Names, do not alwaies make such various Diseases; not so different, and distinct in their Causes, as Commonly repre∣sented, and Supposed to be. They are many, if you Judge of them by their Spread∣ing Ramifications; but they are few (comparativè) in their Radication. And now you may plainly understand, this new Method of Curing Comprehensively by a Catholic Medicine; to be rational, and probable to effect what many Diseased People may desire; and their various Complaints answered, by an Extraordinary single Medicine. Morbi multi unico Remedio curantur; Cujuslibet enim Membri plaga, non habet peculiarem semper Causam; sed ab uno eodemque, exiguo licet semine, plures surgunt affectus. Says a good Author. But most People must have a different Medicine, for every complaint that they have a Name for; else they think it not possible to cure them, and ridiculous to attempt it. Medicine is not to be appropriated to Names; and to vary, as Names are varyed; but to the Nature and Condition of Diseases, in their Causes: many of them being of the same kind, may be link'd together under one Denomination; and will admit of the s me Medicine, and Method of Curing. Hereby the Practice of Physick, will not be so extravagantly large; but reduced into a much lesser compass, and easily comprehensible: The Intentions of curing but few; and the Number of Medicines not many: Success therein more hopeful; with the Charge, and trouble more easy to Patients, in their courses of Physick. Nominal multiplicity of Diseases, have amused the People; puzled young Practisers to adapt Medicines differently to each: And the elder sort, I doubt, are sometimes misled thereby. Diversity of Diseases by Names only, or chiefly have begot Diversity of Methods; and Diversity of Medicines: The which have created much Business; employed more Hands; and consumed more Drugs than was necessary. To illustrate and prove what hath been said; I shall give you some Examples. Take a Hundred Sick or Diseased Persons; examine them where their several Com∣plaints do lye; what Parts are affected or grieved: Some complain of their Head; others their Breast, or Lungs: Some of the Stomach; others about the Region of the Liver; many of the Spleen; some the Guts; others the Limbs, &c. And for all these several Parts complaining; your Physician will give you vari∣ous Names to distinguish them by; and peculiar Medicines, and different Methods of Curing: as in practical Authors, you may find such like forms of Medicines, and Methods Then Inquire of the same Authors, and see what Judgment they pass, as touch∣ing the Causes of all those Diseases, differently seated, and variously named: And you will find, that depraved Humours, and Obstructions; are the general, and principal Causes assigned, for all those Diseases; though commonly reputed, as different in their Nature, as they are in their Names: From which mistake, or Delusion intended, the Recipe's have superabounded. If so, as true it is; then what shall hinder the Catholic Medicine, from being a proper and fit Instrument, to unbar and unbolt all these Obstructions; and cleanse
away all such degenerate and depraved Humors, in this or that Part whereever they be? Then this Catholic Expedient stands as fair, and probable to cure a Hundred, or a Thousand thus variously complaining; as the Hundreds, and Thousands of Medicines, designed by appropriation, to every particular Person. And farther I must add: That this often tryed, and long proved Medicine; in many such difficult and different cases, with laudable Operation, and Success: must needs be more hopeful, than appropriated Medicines to every ones particular cases, that never was tryed before; but every Sick or Diseased Person, must make the Experiment, of their new invented Medicines. People being thus greatly mistaken; yet think themselves very wise and wary, and well provided for; when they have purchased some conjectural appropriated Recipes, devised for their particular case; which particularity lies chiefly in Name; and not much different from the Diseases of other Persons. But for your further satisfaction in this point; as to the certainty and worth of Catholic and Appropriated Medicines; I refer you to another Tract (The Practice of Physick Reformed) which Informs you fully. To Answer the Nominal and unnecessary multiplicity of Diseases; there are Thousands of Medicines invented, and daily more are inventing. And for this purpose, we fetch in all the Venemous Weeds, Shrubs, and Minerals out of Foreign Countrys, to make variety of uncouth and unlucky Medicines; which you must think to be proper, for the many several Diseases variously denominated; and peculiar for divers Persons differently affected. So that after tis Rate, of appropriating Medicines to Diseases; and to Individual Persons; Millions of Medicines, (for Millions of People) will be but sufficient to supply the Practice of Physick, after this unreasonable Mode. And here I might upbraid and laugh at the World for their Folly; having lost their understanding in this matter; and being imposed upon beyond all Reason. But I'le wave the Subject at this time; hoping to see (tandem al quando) some Champton come forth; in Defence of this beloved Practice, so much do ed upon. By what hath been said, you may plainly perceive; that the great work of curing, many and divers Diseases (such as are Curable; and Persons rightly endeavouring to be cured) lyes fair and probable to be effected, by the Catholic Medicine: The superfluous Number of Diseases being reduced; and the Nature of them being explained. The Vital Catholic Agent (called Nature) having a true Catholic Instrument to act with; operates universally and powerfully against a Multitude of Diseases: Performs the work of Curing, more readily and safely, with an amicable, well tryed, extraordinary Medicament; by a Physician's Industry, and long labour, compleated under his eye; than with a Number of Compositions conjecturally devised: Prescripts transmitted to the Shops, to be made at a venture; who then can tell, what they may prove?
The Third Part. IN the First Part; having set forth the Power, and wonderful Operations of the Agent, or Efficient. In the Second Part; the Difficulty, and seeming Impossibility of the work; made probable and likely to be effected. I come now in the last Place; to lay before you the Qualifications, and fitness of the Instrument, to apply exquisitely in this undertaking. The Catholic Medicine eminently declares its Ʋniversality; and properly bears that Title, in these two Respects. First, as having a general Amity with Mankind; being most agreeable with Human Nature: Operating friendly, pleasantly, and hopefully with All; disgusting, or disagreeing with none: But promoting all the necessary Operations; and aiding all the Functions, daily to be performed in Vital Government. Secondly, as having Enmity with all the Diseases, of seminal and humoral Production in Man's Body: Allways, and in all cases, shewing opposition thereo; and prosecutes such inbred secret Enemies to Human Life; constantly, and efficatiously. The Reasons why; and manner how; appears evidently; First, by these two insignal Properties; Aperitive, and Abstersive, wherewith it is primely endowed: which two grand Virtues, operating so clearly and fully; gives two such killing Stroaks, at the very Root of all the Seminal and Humoral Diseases; that the Buds, Blossoms, and Branches fed from thence, appearing variously, and in divers Parts of the Body; do soon wither, decay and Dye. Apertion, and Abstersion; are the two principal Operations, both preventive and curative; against a multitude of Diseases; if performed by such due means, as is required to do that work, as it ought to be done. The common reputed Purgatives (venenous Stimulators) they do open the back Door; they rake and empty the Body; and sometimes alleviation does follow: But what then? they carry a Sting in the Tail; they leave some ill impressions behind them, that stain and vitiate the Body, which lyes breeding for another production; and in a little time you must Purge again for that; and this is labouring in a Circle, and find no end. If you Purge, and not Purify; much of your labour is lost. The Catholic Medicine is no such Deceiver; but a faithful Servant, that keeps sweet and clean all the Apartments, Canals, and Offices in the Body: Opens all the August Obstructed Dictures, and private Recesses; lets no Filth abide in any place
to annoy, or impede the Vital Spirit in diradiating its Influence, to all the Regions and Parts thereof; which will save the daily labour of dressing stinking Issues, that many are constrained to, for a discharge of putrid Humors. And farther; we may rationally expect from thence; a more Sound, and Healthful Progeny in the World, than these latter Days do produce, from Parents of degenerate, and corrupt habit of Body. There can no better Expedient in Physick be contrived, to Preserve Bodies from Diseases; and to Help them out of Diseases; than this secure wholsom Medicine; that so truly and effectually, performs the two grand offices of Apertion, and Ab∣stertion. For these two eminent Virtues, purely united in one wholsom Composition; they always are attended, and adorned with other Consorts of great worth; which fol∣low one another inseparably; the one, making way for the other. Apertion leads foremost; Abstersion follows, and introduceth Purity; this ushers in Healing, and soundness to come after; then Roboration and vital Vigour, follows at the heels of these Praecursors; And after this manner Infirm Diseased Bodys, and Parts thereof; are restored to their Natural State; and made able to execute their Functions; by the strength of this Chain of Virtues, link'd together in de∣pendency, to produce great effects. Thus the Catholic Medicine assists the Life, to perform many and various Opera∣tions; and rationally it may be expected, that many and various Diseases should be corrected, and conquered thereby. And therefore it is not so improbable as some do imagine; that a single Medicine, should have so large a capacity and comprehensive Power, to command and subdue, many different Diseases, in divers Persons; since it is endowed with such a complication of the choicest Physical Virtues. The Vital Principle being thus disintangled, and freed from obstructing matter, and humoral Impurity; recovers Strength and Vigour thereby, and conquers the ma∣ny various Diseases, arising from Debility, laxation of Parts; and Stimulating mat∣ter: which includes a great number of Diseases; if by Name particularly they were reckoned. Wherefore it is not so strange; that a Medicine should be designed Catholic, for curing divers and contrary Diseases; since the same Causes (in specie) do produce dif∣ferent and Contrary effects in several Persons, or Subjects they operate upon: that which begets Obstruction, and Astriction in some; produceth Debility of Retention, and Laxation in others. Quicquid recipitur, recipitur per modum recipientis: The Sun hardens the Clay, but softens the Wax. This Radical Instrument applying to Causes, for their removal in all Bodyes; which being subtracted; their various effects do vanish also; whether they be contrary, or consimilar: Which unfolds the Mystery of curing comprehensively; Diseases being the product effects, are multifa∣rious; when causes producing, are not half so various. Consider also; that the variety, or multiplicity and difformity of Diseases; do not proceed so much different and dissimilar, from the diversity of fluxile humoral, and degenerate Matter; as from Structure and Fabrication; from the Diversity of Organs, and the Difference of their Offices. Therefore one and the same depraved
matter, as it perambulates, or lodgeth; infesting several Parts of the Body; does thereby beget Diseases of various Names, differently appearing, and differently molesting: what then shall hinder the Catholic Medicine, from performing its univer∣sal Office in Curing? Now observe who it is that manageth this comprehensive Instrument: The Vital Principle; A Cathosic Agent; of ubiquitary Presence, in the Machine of Human Body: That operates variously, and contrarily, at one and the same time, in seve∣ral places; yet consentaneously for the whole: Opens and Shuts; expels and retains; Liquifies and Coagulates, &c. in the daily Course, and Administration of Govern∣ment. Consider also the multifarious Qualifications of this Physical Expedient: Not for∣cing and compelling; but flexible and gentle, complacent and complying with the Regent Principle; to be conveyed here or there (materialiter vel virtualiter) and is made useful, as the Case requires: yielding up such Virtue, as Nature (Morborum Medicatrix) stands in need of: In like manner as the same Aliment is converted to various uses; so one Catholic Medicament, is applyed to various purposes. Nature directs, and hands the Medicine here and there; to work what and how she plea∣seth. And now I have proved sufficiently, and explained this Mystery: that Catholic Adaptation, rightly instituted for Diversity of Persons; and Diversity of Diseases; is the safety of the Catholic above the Appropriate; that it is a Tryed, and well proved Medicine with many: But the Appropriated to a single Person and Case; is an uncertain Chance Medicine; because not experimented by any; but conjectural∣ly presumed at a Venture; being designed and formed for the occasion presenting. And yet this is esteemed a safe and learned Invention; for the great and the rich, to trust their Lives with. Let the World dote on; and the Sham be their Help when they need: Let Ig∣norance and Errour manage their Cures; sic Populus vult decipi, & decipiatur. I need not tell you now all the Diseases by Name; that this Medicine is proper for, and effectual: Sufficient it is, and more satisfactory that I have shewed you how it opposeth the most of them, in their Nature and Causes: whereby you may trust your own Reason, and not my bare assertion. But some sort of People, that know nothing of Diseases, but their Names, will say, you have not told us what Diseases, this Catholic Medicine will Cure. To gratify the Desire of those weaker understandings, I shall give in a parti∣cular Account of many, by their Names commonly so called. For the Vertigo, Epilepsy, Apoplexy, and Convulsions; a proper effectual Remedy applying to their Causes. Allays Pains of the Head, or Limbs; Rheumatism and Gout: And is the most secure Anodyne, because it draws off morbific matter; and frees the Body from, acrid, sharp, and corroding Humors. Corrects and amends ill Digestion of the Stomach; sharpens a blunt Appetite; re∣moves Nauseousness, and fullness.
For Asthma's, Coughs, Wheesing and short Breathing: very prevalent. Against unweldy Corpulency, Dropsys, Scurvy, Jaundice, inflation of the Spleen, Hypochondriac Melancholy, hard and big Bellyes: approved and applauded herein: Takes away fullness, and foulness of Body; dischargeth gradually, safely, and cleanseth effectually. A certain Preventive against the Production of Worms in Human Bodyes: By pu∣rifying and evacuating Verminous, putrid matter of which they are bred. Also the best curative Remedy, to kill Worms already generated; and to bring them forth. They often being the cause of dangerous Sickness. Gives speedy ease in the Colic, and Gripes of the Guts. Restrains all violent and contumacious Fluxes: The most certain Help above all Methods, and Medicines in this Case: For if any Physical means, may deserve the Title of Infallible against Gripes and Fluxes; this Remedy may bear that Character. And had this Medicine gone over with the Army in the late expedition for Ireland (as was endeavoured) it had preserved many Hundred Lives, that perished miserably, for want thereof: This single Medicine, would have done more service; than all the Medicines (for internal use) that were sent over to supply the Army: But private interests, and particular favour▪ too oft stifles a publick Good. Epidemical depopulating Fluxes, have infested Armyes in all Countreys; both in their Camps, and Marches: (the Reasons why; are many; and Causes unavoidable) which have so weakned the strength of the surviving; and shrunk their Number by Mortallity; that their present Designs and Enterprizes have been checkt and frustra∣ted. The only expedient to be fought for; is a certain Preservative, to stop the beginning, and prevent the Mortality: which to perform; I do believe, nothing in Nature and Art (grounded upon Experience) is equivalent to this Catholick Ar∣canum: And doubtless would readily be accepted, and much esteemed by Foreign Princes, (if only for this case) though perhaps may not so much be regarded here at Home, as it justly merits: But many Lives are lost, by the want of such a Remedy. 'Tis the best Help for weak Backs, Loyns, or Genitals: for Strains, and over-Reaches; for Spermatic wasting, and Seminal issuing: To stay the Whites safely, by cleansing, purifying, and roborating. To purge oul Reins, Ʋreters, and Bladder; that send forth strong scented, thick or muddy Ʋrine. This purifyer, restores the Parts to cleanness, and soundness, and corrects the former ill effects. For Claps and Venereal Taints, producing hot and sharp Ʋrine, or running of the Reins: nothing Cures more certainly and safely; and may be managed with great Privacy. This tells no Tales; but smothers such misfortunes, by speedy ease and Help. Very useful to promote external Chirurgical Cures; by drawing off, and evacua∣ting all humoral offending matter; thereby disposing Nature to Heal; else external applications avail little: But for curing Wounds, Contusions, Apostems, Ʋlcers, &c. internal; this Medicine alone does all the Work; and acts a dexterous Surgeons part, in such secret places, where neither his Eye can Discern, nor his Hand come to Dress you: then this Sovereign Remedy is more helpful, and more to be de∣pended
on, than all the Practisers in Physick and Surgery: And is therefore the most necessary and important Medicament, to serve in Navies, Armies and Hospitals; most commodious and ready; easily managed by the meanest Capacities; perform∣ing singly and securely; above all the uncertain Methods, and multiplicity of Medi∣cines, appointed by Authors, or used by Practicers: Experto Crede. For all sorts of Fevers; of various and obscure dependencyes; this is the most confiding means to rely on; as radically applying to their several Causes, and Parts primarily affected. Fevers known to the World, but by Name only; therefore blindly and perniciously prosecuted, by Juleping, Blistering, &c. of fatal conse∣quence to many Thousands of Sick People. The Fleet Fevers, and Camp Fevers; that slays more Men sometimes than the Enemy, by such erroneous Methods, and in∣jurious means, or insufficient means, which is their best Help. But of this in another Tract. Ignota Febris, Fevers mistaken, &c. Sir William Hussy, his Majesties Embassadour to the Port; unfortunatly (to the Confederats great loss) Dyed at the point of his Negotiating a Peace: And the report came, that he dyed of a Feaver: which is no better Satisfaction to me; than he Dyed of they knew not what: for none dyes of a Fever; though few dyes without a Fever: Febris est Symtoma morbi, Solummodo. Febrile Heat, is no Disease; but a Symptom dependant thereon. I remark from thence; that his Help, and his Helpers; were but mean: And if they mistook the State of his Case; that it was a Fever; and prosecuted upon that Notion, (as reported) then there was a great Minister lost; and a great Affair miscarryed thereby. And how many brave Men, have dyed here at Honie; by the great mistake of Physitians, not knowing what a Fever is? The Account to great for me to Summ up. This Catholic, is a proper good Medicine for a Disease that hath no Name; and for a Disease that hath a wrong Name: This seeks out, and finds out; (ductu Natu∣re) when the Physitian knows not, what the Matter is; nor where it is. When he groaps in the Dark, and knows not where to aim: This knows the way (by Na∣tur's guidance) goes readily, and rightly about the business. This will not be de∣luded with Fevers, (as Practisers have been) But finds out their Dependancies; and dischargeth its virtue there. If you send this Medicine upon a wrong Errand; it will act, not as you intended; but as it ought to be done. Nature medicatrix amicably receiving this good Assistance; directs it here or there, (as the Case requires) and the Giver, hath no more Power of the Medicine afterwards. For various suddain Hamorrhages, Bleedings; issuing from divers parts of the Bo∣dy: This mitigats, retracts, and evacuats their Stimulating Causes. This is both Physick and Physitian; and Surgeon too, in some Cases; ready and safe Assistance for Travellers by Land or Sea: a great Security to them upon emergent occasions and accidents For Country Inhabitants, that live remote from Physick, and Physitians; This is necessary Provision: The Physitian may be long in comeing; and after that, Medi∣cines may be long in Preparing, and Coming: In the mean time the Patient may be wrackt with Fain; half spent, or past Recovery; and then the long look'd for Physick, Comes at last.
The Old way of Practice, was the good way; when Physick and Physitian liv'd to∣gether; and went abroad together: but now he is disarm'd; and become a naked, talking Man; able to do nothing, without the Help of a Pothecary. For Practisers, that are not Prescribers; this Medicine will do them great Service; and Credit, by effecting what the Common known Medicines cannot do, in dubious and difficult Cases; which some ingenious men have experienced to their Advan∣tage; and do make use hereof. This is a great Help to antient People; for making their lives more easy and Comfortable: Age commonly being attended with Infirmities, that does afflict them: Their Bodyes being grown Stale and Sour, producing Rheums, Coughs, short Breath, sharp Urine, Aches, and other decayes of Nature; against which this Medicine will give them much assistance, and mitagate their Complaints; being the best expedient immaginable to Repair, and Mend old Bodyes; that they may be serviceable a longer time. Hability and Soundness of Body; promotes the Durability, and Prolongation of the Life: For if the vital Spirit labours under corporal impediments, and unfitness for use in Goverment; by so much is the Life abbreviated in Duration. For Admirals, Generals, and great Officers: For Embassadors, Envoys, and Residents; whose lives are of great importance to Princes, and publick Safety; upon their En∣terprizes, and Negotiations: This is Cabinet Help, above all they can procure in forreign Country's; or what they can purchase at Home, to carry with them, as Ex∣traordinary means when they stand in need. There may be a good Physitian ready at Hand; but so good and secure a Medicine, may be too farr off: And then some suddain devised Compositions; hasty, new made, untryed Medicins; must be trusted with the Patient's Life at a venture, and it is all but venture: In the Patient's good Fate, is the greatest Hope of Recovery. And this is the general common Case, in the new Mode of Prescribing; The uncertainties whereof, I have fully proved else∣where. The Practice of Physick Reformed, &c. I am not a stranger to Methods, or courses of Physick, and do use them, when the Patient will, and can conform thereto: But some are averse to variety of Medicines in a Method; others cannot spare time to be confined; and some cannot bear the Charge: To such this Expedient is most commodious Help; and gives the greatest liberty in the use thereof; except great weakness, or extremity of weather, forbids that freedom. I Hope no Person hath such mean thoughts of me, as to think, I would put a Sham upon the world; with the loss of Reputation irrecoverably. This Medicine begs no Favour; and fears no Frowns: stabit examini Cuicunqe. But I will rather think (what I may deserve) that I shall have many thanks, and well wishes for this Labour, from divers Diseased, and Sick Persons; that will find the Benefit and great Advan∣tage, by this Health preserving; and Health recovering Medicine; as others have happily received before them: Some eminent Cures whereof; are related in an Appendix to Monarchia Microcosmi; which I shall not repeat here, but referr you thither for Satisfaction. I have veiwed thousands of Medicines in Pharmacopoeia's, practical Authors, and Ma∣nuscripts,
Chymical and Galenic; and took observations upon their failings. But I never met with any Designment of that latitude and Comprehension; so Congruously and regularly Composed: so wholesom, innocent, and agreeable to Human Nature; so efficatious and powerful, against the various Radications, and Surprising assaults of Diseases: of such certainty and safety in Operation; so Commodious for use, ready, and durable; as this Catholic Extract: Not easily and fortunatly found by Reading; but by Designing and working. The perfection whereof, was not the work of a Day, nor a Year; to prove, and improve this Medical Instrument: But Studious thoughts, and constant labour in various tryals, for many Years Proscecution; hath endowed it with such Sovereign virtues, and excelling Properties; as justly Claims Supremacy in Physick: And until Nature produceth a new Materia Medica; I believe we shall not be Blest with a better Medicine; and perhaps not so good, as this; in all respects. This hopeful, and helpful Medicine; puts a stop to the latent, dangerous Progress of Pain, to Inflamations, Tumors, Apostems, &c. Internal: The most frequent ain of mortal Diseases; which hath brought more to the Grave than any Complication, or Commutation of Diseases what ever; because rarely discovered or Sought after, but when too late; by Dissection of the Dead. Of which more at large, I have Treat∣ed, peculiarly upon this important Subject: Shewing the Causes of Inadvertency; and fatal Consequents, of not discerning that lurking Series. This Catholic Expedient being so necessary, and useful for Publick Help; ought not to be confined within a Private Practice; which occasions this Publication: And may be received from the Author, upon Application: or from the Hands of some other Persons, with whom it is intrusted for conveniency; with Instns for th use thereof. The Quantity Containing about half a Score Doses; to give a suffici∣ent, and Satisfactory Tryal of its Virtue in any contumatious Disease: And may be Continued, or intermitted, as every one's Case shall require; for a longer, or shorter time; as common Reason will dictate and inform; from the Benefit daily received; and what shall remain to be perfected. Great is the Mystery of Curing Comprehensively: And great is the Expedient to answer that Projection. And greatly to be esteemed, for the extraordinary Benefits, accruing to People, of all Conditions, and Quality; that shall have the good Fortune to Experience the various Properties thereof; adapt for their several Complaints, and Exigencies. So easy to be managed; so safe, gentle and pleasant in Operation; that nothing hitherto, hath performed like it. If any Learned Man; Physitian or Other, will offer Objections to any Truth herein asserted: The Author promiseth an Argumentative fair Reply of Conviction; by traversing and clearing such Doubts, and Difficulties that may be Started, out of the Common known Learning; to which this Discourse is Forreign, and Independent; being founded upon Sounder Principles: That the World may be Satisfied of the Verity, and Ʋsefulness, of this Work; for an establishment to Perpetuity: Not as a Remedy from Dying; but as the best of Physical Means; for well, and long Living. Experience and Tryals whereof; will silence all Reasoning that shall be brought against it. London, Grays Inn Lane, by Kings-Gate. E.M. FINIS.
Advertisement. Monarchia Microcosmi. The Origin, Vicissitudes, and Period, of Vital Government in Man. The frequent and dangerous Transition of Pains, to Inflammation, Tumors, Apostems, Ʋlcers, Cancers, Gangrens, and Mortifications, Internal, &c. with a Tract of Fontanels or Issues. A Treatise of the Scurvey: Shewing the various Nature, and Cure thereof. The History and Mystery of the Venereal Lues, Gonorrhaea's, &c. Resolving the Doubts and Fears of such as are perplexed with that Surprising Malady. A Treatise of Consumptions; Scorbutic Atrophies, Hectick Fevers, Phthisick, Spermatic wasting, &c. The Compleat Physician; Setting forth the Rise and Progress of Physick, &c. The Method and Means, of enjoying Health, Vigor and long Life. Inquiries into the general Catalogue of Diseases: Shewing the Errors and Contradictions of that Establishment. The Ancient and Modern Practice of Physick, examined and compared. Ignota Febris. Fevers mistaken in Doctrin and Practice, &c. The Practice of Physick Reformed; By Elaborate, Catholick, and Specifick Medicines: Excelling Ap∣propriated Conjectural Prescripts, in Certainty and Safety. All writ by the Author hereof. Errata. P. 5. read Inquirys. P. 6. read this.
