M1809 12280248 58681
The Praise of York-shire Ale Wherein is enumerated several Sorts of Drinks, with a Discription of the Humors of most sorts of Drunckards. To VVhich is added, a York-shire Dialogue, in its pure natural Dialect, as it is now commonly spo∣kenin the North parts of York-shire. BEING A Miscellanious Discourse or Hotch-potch of Several Country Affairs, begun by a Daughter and her Mother, and continued by the Father, Son, Ʋncle, Neece, and Land-Lord: after which follows a Scold between Nell and Bess, two York-shire women. Corrected and Amended, with large Additions in ma∣ny places throughout the whole Book, by the Au∣thor, And after all, a Clavis explaining the meaning of all the York-shire words in the Dia∣logue. By G. M. Gent. ORK, Printed by J. White, for Francis Hil∣ard, at the Signe of the Bible in Stonegate, 1685.
To the READER. Reader, heres sportive mirth, and harmless Droll, Come buy and read, & laugh thy Belly full. When thou hast done, if thou condemn me for't, Then I have made my self, and not thee sport; That man is too morose, and much to blame, That doth condemn all mirth to be profane:
All Ages have of lawful mirth allow'd. If too much time in it were not bestow'd; Here thou hast mirth, with small expence of time, I've taken pains, the pleasure will be thine. Vale, G. M.
Ad Momum, Carpere vel noli, nostra vel Ede tua. Or Carpe not at these Lines of mine, Or cause for to be publish'd thine.
The praise of Yorkshire-Ale, wherein is Enumerated several Sorts of Drinks, with a Description of the Humours of most Sorts of Drunkards. BAcchus having call'd a Parliament of late, For to consult about some Things of State, Nearly concerning the honour of his Court, To'th Sun, behind'th Exchange, they did resort: Where being met, and many things that time Concerning the Adulterating Wine, And other Liquors; Selling of Ale in Muggs, Silver Tankerds, Black-Pots, and little Juggs: Stronge Beer in Rabits, and cheating penny Cans, Three Pipes for two pence; and such like Trepans: Vintners small Bottles, Silver mouth'd black Jacks, Papers of Sugar, with such like cheating knacks:
Biskets, Luke Olives, Anchoves, Caveare, Neats Tongues, West-Phalia-Hambs, & such like Ch Crabs, Lobsters, Collar Beefe, Cold Pullets, Oyste And such like Stuffe, which make young men tur Royste▪ And many other things were then debated, And Bills past, upon the Cases stated; And all things ready for Adjournment, then Stood up one of the Northern Country men, A Boon good fellow, and Lover of Strong Ale, Whose Tongue well steep'd in Sack begun this Ta My Bully Rocks, Ive been experienced long In most of Liquors, which are counted Strong: Of Claret, White-wine and Canary Sack, Rhenish and Malago, I've had no lack; Sider, perry, Metheglin, and Sherbet. Coffee and Mead, with Punch and Chocolet: Rum and Tea, Azora wine, Mederry, Vin-de-Paree, Brag, wine with Rosemdry:
Stepony, Ʋsquebath, besides all these, qua Caelestis Cinnamon, Hearts-ease: rave Rosa Solis, and other Liquors fine, asberry Wine, Pur-royal, and Shampine Malmsey, and Viper-wine, all these I pass: rontineack; with excellent Ipocras: Lac'd Coffee, Twist, Old Pharoh, and Old Hoc Juniper, Brandy and Wine de Langue-Dock. Mum, Cherry-wine Langoon, and emonad, Sherry, and Port a Port, both white and red. Pomgranate, Mirtle, and Isope-wine I know, Ipres and Orleance, Coos, and eke Anjow, Burgundian-wine, Coecubum, Sage and Must, Fennel and Wormwood-wine have past my Gust, Hydromel, Mulsom, wine boil'd with Southernwood Opimium, Smirna, and Bion good: Temetum, Lora and brave Muskadel, Rumney and Nectar too that doth excell:
Sicilian, Naples and Lorain Wine, Moravia, Malta and Corsica fine: Tent, Muskatine, Brandy, and Alicant, Of all these Liquors I've had no scant, And several others; but none do I find, Like Humming Northern ALE to please my mind▪ It's pleasant to the Taste, strong and mellow, He that affects it not is no boon Fellow. He that in this drink doth let his Senses swim, There's neither wind nor storms will pierce on him▪ It warms in Winter, in Summer opes the Pores, 'Twil make a Sovereign Salve 'gainst cuts & fores▪ It ripens Wit, exhillerates the Mind, Makes friends of foes, & foes of friends full kind▪ It's Physical for old Men, warms their Blood, Its Spirits makes the Coward's courage good: The Tatter'd Beggar being warm'd with Ale, Nor Rain, Hail, Frost, nor Snow can him Assai▪
He's a good man with him can then compare, t makes a Prentise great as the Lord Mayor: The Labouring Man, that toiles all day full sore, A pot of Ale at Night, doth him Restore, And makes him all his Toil and paines forget, And for another day-work, hee's then fit: There's more in drinking Ale, sure then we wot, For most Ingenious Artists, love a Pot: Nay amorous Ladyes it will pleasure too, Make frozen Maids, and Nuns, and Virgins do The thing you know; Soldiers and Gown-men, Rich and poor, old and young, lame & sound men May such advantage reap by drinking Ale, As should I tell, you'd think 'twere but a Tale; Mistake me not, Custom, I mean not tho, Of excessive Drinking, as great Ranters do, For that would turn a great Wit to a Sot, mean the merry Quibling o're a Pot,
Which makes dull Melancholy spirits be, For Criticks and great Witts, good Company. Oh the rare Virtues of this Barly Broth; To rich and poor it's Meat and Drink and Clot The Court here stopt him, and the Prince did sa Where may we find this Nectar, I thee pray, The boon good Fellow answer'd, I can tell, North-Allerton, in York-shire doth excell All England, nay all Europe for strong Ale, If thither we adjourn, we shall not fail To taste such humming Stuff, as, I dare say, Your Highness never tasted to this day. They hearing this, the House Agreed upon All for Adjournmenr to North-Allerton: Madam Bradley's, was the chief house then nam' There they must taste this noble Ale so fam'd, And nois'd abroad in each place far and near. Nay, take it Bradley for strong Ale and Beer,
Thou hast it loose, there's none can do so well brewing Ale thou dost all else excel. Adjournment day being come there did appear A brave fullhouse, Bachus himselfe was there. This Nectar was brought in, each had his Cup, But at the first they did but sipple up This rare Ambrosia, but finding that 'Twas grateful to the Taste, and made them chat And laugh and talk, O then when all was out, They call'd for more, and drank full Cans about; But in short space, such strange Effects it wrought Amongst the Courtiers, as Bachus never thought Or dream'd upon: his wise men it made Fools, And made his Councellors to look like Owls. The simple sort of Fellows it made prate, And talk of Court Affairs, and things of State: And those that were dull Fellows when they came Were now turn'd nimble Orators of Fame.
And such of them were thought to be no Wits, Were Metamorphis'd into excellent Poets: Those that were lame, and came there with a staff, Threw't quite away, wch made the Prince to laugh, The Cripples which did Crutches thither bring, Without them now did hop about and sing: Some o're the Stools and Forms did skip and leap, Som knac't their fingers, no plain word could speak Som shak'd their legs and arms with great delight, Some curst and swore, and others they did fight; Some antick tricks did play like a Baboon, Som knit their brows did shake their heads & frown▪ Some Maudlin drunken were, and wept full sore, Others fell fast asleep, begun to snore: Thousands of Lies and Stories some did tell, Their tongues went like the Clapper of a Bell, Others were tongue-ti'd, could not speak one word And some did cast their reckoning up at Board.
Some sung aloud, and did deaf their fellowes Making a Noise, worse than Ʋulcan's Bellows: Some were for baudy Talk, and some did shout; Some mist the Cup, and pour'd the Liquor out? At every word, some did their Neighbour jump, And some did often give the Board a thump. Some were all Kindness did their Fellows kiss, Som all bedaub'd their clothes, & mouths did miss: For Arguments some were and learn'd discourses, Som talk'd of grey-hounds, som of running horses, Som talk'd of hounds, and some of Cocks o'th game Som naught but hawks, and setting dogs did name: Some talk'd of Battels, Sieges and great Warrs, And what great Wounds & Cutts they had, & Scarrs Some very Zealous were, full of Devotion, But being Sober then had no such Notion, Some there Were all for drinking healths about Others did rub the Table with their Snout:
Some piss'd i'th fire, others threw out their snuffs, And some were mad to be at handy Cuffs. Some swore that they would have a Serenade, Others did call their Hostess Whore and Jade: And round about did throw the Cups and glasses. The drink did fly into their Neighbours Faces: Some were for Bargains, some for Wagers aying: Others for Cards and Tables cry'd for playing: Some broke the Pipes, & round about them threw, Some smoak'd Tobacco till their nose was blew. Some in the fire fell and sing'd their Cloaths, And some fell from their Seat and broke their nose Some could not stir a Foot, did sit and glore, Some sought the house all over for a whore, Some call'd for Mussck, others were for a dance, And some lay staring, as if in a Trance. Some calld'd for Victuals others for a Crust, Some op'd their Buttons and were like to Burst.
Some challeng'd all the people that were there, And some with strange invented Oaths did Swear Some told how many Women they had us'd, Others at such discourse were sore Amus'd: Some shirk'd their drink, did put away the Cup, And some took all that came left not one Sup: Some whilest they Sober were would nothing pay, But being drunk, would all the Shot defray; Others whilest sober, were as free as any, But when once drunk, refuse to pay one penny? Some were for News, and how the State of things Did stand amongst great Potentates and Kings: Some all their Friends & Neighbours did backbite, And some in Jearing others, took delight; Some of their Birth and Riches made great boast. And none but they were fit to Rule the Roast: Some fill'd the Room with noise yet could not speak One word of English, Latine, French or Greek:
Or any other Language which one might Put into sense, and understand aright: Some Laught, until their Eyes did run on water, And neither they, nor others knew the matter: Some so mischievous were they without Fear, Would give their chiefest Friend a Box on'th Ear: Some were so holy, that they would not hear, Words either that Prophane or Smutty were: Some in a Melancholly posture laid, Others did cry what is the Reckoning paid: Some burnt their Hatts, others the Windowes broke Some cry'd more Liquor we are like to Choake Some piss'd their Breetches, Sirreverence your Nose, Some not only piss'd but all bee—their Hose: Lame Gouty Men, did daunce about so sprightly, A Boy of fifteen scarce could skip so lightly: Old crampy Capts that scarce a Sword could draw, Swore now they'd keep the King of France in, Awe.
And new Commissions get to Raise more Men, For now they swore they were grown young again: Off went their Perriwigs, Coats and Rapers, Out went the Candles, Noses for Tapers Serv'd to give light, whilst they did daunce around Drinking full Healthes with Caps upon the ground: And still as they did daunce their round-delayes, They all did cry this drink deserves the Bayes, Above all Liquors we have ever tasted: It's pity that a drop of it were wasted: A Stranger coming by, did hear the Noise, He step'd into the house to see the Boyes: Such sights he saw, as he nee'r see before, Which made him Laugh untill his sides were sore, His Horse did follow, and saw their Quaffing, He Neigh''d aloud, & broke his Girts with laughing These Antick Sights made Bacchus to admire, And then he did begin for to Enquire:
What Priviledges were bestow'd upon This famous Ale Town of North-Allerton, The Answer was, that it was only known, To have four Fairs i'th year, a Bourrough-Town, One Market every week and that was all, This moved Bacchus presently to call For a great Jug which held about five Quartss And filling't to the Brim; come here my Hearts Said he, wee'l drink about this merry Health, To the Honour of the Town, their State & Wealth For by the Essence of this Drink I swear, This Town is Famous fot strong Ale and Beer; And for the sake of this good Nappy Ale, Of my great favour it shall never fail, For to promote the quick Return and Trade, For all strong Ale and Beer, that here is made So to't they▪ went, and drunk full Healths about, Till they drunk Money, Wit, and Senses out:
For whilest one drop of Ale was to be had, They Quaft, and drunk it round about like mad. When all was off, then out they pull'd the Tapps, And stuck the Spiddocks finely in their Hats, And so Triumphantly away they went, But they did all Agree with one Consent To Easingwold they then away would pass, With Nanny Driffield there to drink a Glass: For Bacchus having heard of her strong Ale, He swore by Jupiter, he would not fail To have a merry bout if he did find Her Nappy Ale to please his Princely Mind: When they came there a Flaggon was brought in, Hold Gentlemen, before we do begin, Cryes one Boon Blade, let me declare to you, Some things which I of this same Ale doe know: Soe bowing to the Prince, he thus began, May't please your Highness, and you Gentlemen:
I've Travell'd thorow the most parts of France, As Picardy, Bress, Bretaigne and Provence: Normandy, Bevois▪ Poictu and Champaigne With Aquitain Bu gundy, and Lorrain: Geneva, Savoy. Languedock; also Within the Kingdome of Spain Oniedo: Lean, Navarr, Corduba, and soe on Through Biscay, Toledo, and Catelone: Castile, Ʋalentia, Venice, Florence, Mantua, Millain, Ʋrbin, St. Lawrence: Portugall, Naples, Italy, Holland, Germany, Denmarke, Sweedland, Poland. Hungary, Muscovia, Cephalonia, Turky, Transilvania, and Sclavonia: Media, Persia, and Mesopotamia, Palestine, Armenia, and Arabia; Parthia, Syria, Caldea, and Tartary, East and West Indies, China, and Barbary:
Numidia, Lybia, and Mexicana; thiopia, Egypt, and Messena; eru, the Grecian Isles, Sicillia, anary Isles, Corsica, and Sardinia. hese Country Wines, and other Liquors rare, With Englands humming Ale can not compare: or in my thoughts it doth most drinks excell, nd this same Nappy Ale doth bear the Bell: bove most Ale: for herein is such Art, ome when you will it's neithe Sweet nor Tart, Summer, Winter Weather, Raine, or Fair, Thunder, Sunshine▪ Misty or serene Air: Frost or Snow, Morning, Noon, or Night, whem you please this Ale is alwayes Right: either thicker, nor thinner, nor paler, or higher Colour'd, Newer, nor staler: onger, nor smaller, it hath no Fellow, eeter nor sowrer, but alwayes Mellow:
And fit to drink what time so'er you come, This is the pure strong Brittish Islands Rum; Hold, cry'd the Prince, for thou now more hast said, Of this same Ale, then's Truth, I am affraid: Yee Gods, the Prince then Cry'd, if this be true, I'le leave my Government of Wine to you; And list my selfe, mongst Ale Boys that are famous, For now, Paulo majora Canamus: So let us▪ now fall on, fill up my Can, Let each one take his Cup, observe his man, And let us drink, until we all be Tipsie, Ego tuquoque, ille & ipse, Vive Le Roy, great Bacchus then begins, God bless him cry'd the Courtiers and his Friends; This Health and several others went about, Then growing warm, they all set up a shout; Most famous Ale, if we thy worth had known, Then we had hasted soone to the Town,
Oh Ladds said Bachus I never thought t'have found ch pleasant Nectar, here on English ground wonder any will himselfe Confine om bousing Ale to swill himselfe in Wine: he Juice of Grapes shall be no more o'th Quorum, t Nappy Ale, Hordia Far a Forum. Wine's but an Ass, when Ale doth come in play, it be like the Ale we drink this day: all in my Land-Lady let her Appear, amous she is for brewing Ale, I swear; nd I a badge of Honour will bestow pon her without fail, before I go; d so a Clerke was call'd to Exemplifie, he Letters Pattents following, daintily: chus Prince of good Fellowes; To all to whom hese our brave Letters Pattents shall now come, hereas wee've bin Informed now of late, et Nanny Driffield our great Court and State,
For many years last past hath much advanc'd, By her strong humming Ale and as it chan We having ample Proofe thereof, so now We of our Princely grace, would have you kno This Land-Lady unto the Noble State And Honour of a Countess, we Create: And by our merry Fudling Subjects, She Countess of Stingo henceforth call'd shall be. To'th Pattent then was fixed a Black Pot, In a fine Silk Lace, twisted on a knot: Upon the Countess it was then bestow'd, The Noble Courtiers all stood up and Bow Long may your Honour Live to Brew such A And of your Art we wish you never fail; Bachus then took a great full Flagon up, And drunk the Countess health left not one S To an old Blade, the Prince said, thou shalt follo Then, Tu-eris mihi magnus Apollo.
Each of the Courtiers did then pledge the same, And now in earnest did begin the game: The new made Countess to gratifie them all, For an Hogshead of her choisest Ale, did call: Upon the Hogshead Bachus got astride, Now Ladds said he, this Ale is Deified. A Countess, a Countess, they then proclaim'd, You all the Country o're, will now be Fam'd: Drink Prince she said, and all ye Noble Crew; Drink till such time, ye wade your Noses blue: Here's Ale said they, so pure, so clear, so fine, It is more grateful to the taste then Wine: Nay this same Ale will make the World admire us Efficit Ingenios nobilis Ala Ʋiros: This famous Liquor, we know doth far outgoe The Poets Nectar and Ambrosia too: The Gods Nepenthe with it cannot compare, This is the Soveraign Antidote 'gainst Care.
Some Townsmen hearing this, Listened a while, Then into'th House they went, begun to smile; You'r welcome Gentlemen, sit down said the Prince And do as we do: if it be no Offence The townsmen said, wee'l joyn our selves with you, And try this day, to whom Honour is due Whether to Wine or Ale; it shall be Try'd, Agreed Agreed, they with one voice all Cry'd The Townsmen did perceive the Courtiers warm, Six in a hand sayes one will do no harm: You Grape Boyes now shall know before we part, Wines not the only Nourisher of Art: When Recubans sub Teguine Fagi We drink strong Ale: it makes us of the Magi. Well said, cry'd Bacchus, about then let it goe, As long as any here can shake a Toe: For as Scribendo disces Scribere, Just so Bibendo disces Bibere:
O brave Colonus see it go about, And let us now all Joyne set foot to foot, And drink all off, I'le not contend for praise, From henceforth this same Ale shall have the Bayes Wine shall not once be nam'd, where this comes in, He that names Wine that day commits a Sin, Wee'l all be merry, I'le hear no Clamour, Let's drink and sing, Oinia vincit Amor. Health upon Health did post about with speed, Till all the Courtiers were sore flusht indeed: Qui Color albus erat, with a Faldo, I plainly see Nunc est contrarius Albo, One Townsman said: let us our hold now keep: And we shall quickly lay them all to sleep, Bumpers and double Tankerds did go round, Bachus from's hogshead Throne, fell to the ground, Some forwards fell, backwards, and sidewayes some, Till on to'th Floor, they all did tumble down:
Let's throw them on an heap, a Townsman said, And Sing a Catch about them; I have made, Agreed they cry'd the Wine Boyes this shall know, That they to good Ale Topers, now must bow: Lett's throw the God above, Hee'l spoil his Cloath; Marry sayes one, I think hee's broke his Nose, He hath all bedaub'd his Suit of Tabby, But Sorte tua contentus Abi, Said they; The Catch begun then by the Blades, The Tune is, Hail unto the Myrtle Shades.
The Song. 1. COlonus and Bacchus did meet, Each one to commend his own Liquor; The Juice of the Grape was sweet, But Barley Oyle ran down the quicker: Colonus did challenge the Gods, To sight in defence of his Barley, But Bacchus perceiving the odds, Desir'd a Friendly Parly. 2. They drunk full Bumpers about, And Bacchus an health did begin, The Bacchanalians gave a great shout, The Colonians then thronged fast in:
They drunk double Tankards around, Till the Grape Boyes begun for to Glore The Rusticks neer flinched their ground, Till Bacchus fell down on the Floor: 3. Colonus did heartily Laugh, And about the God they did daunce, Full Pots about they did quaff: Whilest Bacchus lay still in a Trance. The Grape Boyes were beat out of play, And at length poor Bacchus did Rise: To Colonus he yeilded the day, So the Rusticks obtained the Prize.
Just as the Catch did end, they rubb'd their Eyes, They Yawn'd and gap'd, and did begin to rise: Oh Gentlemen, the Townsmen said you now, We hope the force and power of Ale doe know: Faith Bacchus said wee'r forc'd to yeild the day, For you have beat us quite, Pinch out of Play: O Wine I formerly did thee adore, But thou said he shall have my heart no more: Boy lead our Horses out when we get up, Wee'l have with you, a merry Stirrup Cupp: Then we to Famous Yorke will hast away, For thither wee'l adjourn the Court this day: The Horses were lead out, they mounted all, And each of them did for a Flagon call: Well Sirs said they, we yeild the day's your own, Wee'l try again next time we come to Town, Agreed the Townsmen said, come when you will, You'l find us true blue Fudling Bulies still:
They drunk about, the Townsmen pledg'd the same So took their leaves till they should meet again At parting they did kiss, and Bachus swore, He never met with such boon Blades before: Well noble Boyes said He, before't be long I hope our Lot will be to sing a Song; Great Bacchus when you come the Townsmen said Come well prepar'd, for we are not afraid: Farewell good Lads said he, and so away, They took their journey unto Yorke that day: When they to Yorke were come, they rov'd about From House to House to find such Nectar out As they had tasted last at length they heard At Parkers Coffee-house i'th Minster Yard: They several sorts of strong Ale there would find Some of which Ale would surely please their mind Unto this place they went, and Crowded in, Come Wench said they, with strong Ale wee'l begin
Sirs said the Girle, wee've Ale that's strong & old, Both from North-Allerton, and Easingwold. From Sutton, Thirke, likewise from Rascal Town, Wee've Ale also thats call'd Knocker-down: Well bring a Tankerd of each in, you Maid, Wee'l taste them every one the Courtiers said; The Ale came in each man a Tankard had, They tasted all; And swore they were full glad Such Stingoe, Nappy, pure Ale they had found: Lett's loose no time said they but drink a round: And chear our Spirits up with this good Creature, For Miser est, qui Nummos Admiratur. About and about it went full merrily, Till some could neither go, stand, sit, nor see, Vir sapit qui paca loquitur; if true The wisest in the Company is you, Said one, to's Opposite beyond the Table, Who was so drunk, to speake he was not able:
They call'd & drank till they were all high-flown, And could not find their way into the Town, They staggar'd too and fro, had such lite heads, That they were guided all unto their Beds: And in the Morning when they did awake, They curst and swore that all their heads did ake; O Yorke-shire Yorke-shire: thy Ale it is so strong; That it will kill us all, if we stay long: Soe they agreed a Journey for to make Into the South, some Respite there to take, But in short space again they said they'd come, And Tast some more of this same Yorkeshire Hum: Nay Bacchus swore to come he would not fail, And glut himselfe with Yorkeshire Nappy Ale: It is so pleasant, mellow too, and fine, That Bachus swore hee'd never more drink Wine.
The Conclusion. Now I have done, and will hold a piece on't: That, Nil hic Nisi Carmina desunt. Some men will say perhaps, here is no wit, Let such then know, Ex Nihilo Nihil fit. FINIS.
A York-shire DIALOGUE In its pure Natural DIALECT As it is now commonly spoken in the North parts of Yorkeshire. Being a Miscellaneous Discourse or Hotch-Potch of several Country Affairs, begun by a Daughter, and her Mother, and continued by the Father, Son, Uncle, Neese, and Land-Lord, after which followes a Scould between Bess and Nell two Yorkeshire Women. Note that D. stands for Daughter, M. for Mother, F. for Father, S. for Son, Ʋ. for Uncle, N. for Neese, and L. for Land-Lord. Reader here's Folly come and Laugh thy fill, He neer did good, that never did no ill. YORK Printed by J. White, for Francis Hildyard at the Bible in Stonegate. 1684.
A Yorkeshire Dialogue in its pure na∣tural Dialect, &c. D. MOther our Crockey's Cawven sine't grew dark, And Ise flaid to come nar, she macks sike warke, M. Seaun, seaun, Barne, bring my Skeel and late my Tee: Mack hast and hye thee ore to'th Laer to me: Weese git a Battin and a Burden Rape, Though it be mirke, weese late it out by grape: Then wee'l to'th Field & give the Cow some Hay And see her Cleen before she come away: For flaid she git some watter before she Cleen. And mar her Milk, Ise greet out bath my Neen: D. Whaugh Mother how she rowts, Ise varra Arfe, Shee'l put and rive my good Prunella Scarfe:
Ise ding thy Harnes out, thou base mucky Sew, Thou macks sike Anters, thou'l mistetch my Cow: What need thou be seay flaid, she will nut mell, Nor hipe, if there war nean here but thy sell: D. Wally, wally, heres a deft Tinye, Cawfe, It's better than a Keausteril behawfe, M. But pratty macks nea Porridge Tibb, ift wa A Keausteril, it wad yeild mare money far: It's newly gitten Feaut, tack haud on't Tibb, Wee'l Suck'lt weel, and put it into'th Cribb, And Bed it strangly with good clean Streay, And see it lye'th sell down, before we geay; It liggs bravely, for't hardly can be seen, It'l git neay Cawd, it's bedded up to'th Een: Good Beddin Tibb, will mack if Battin wee'l, Now I will milk some Beestlings into'th Skeel; Our Why is better Tidded than this Cow, Her Ewr's but swampe, She's nut for Milk I trow
You wait nut yet of Croky what to say, Preaufe of a Puddin's it'h eating alway: Shee's daft yet on her Cawf, in a day or tweay You'l see, wheather she be for Milk or neay; Now let us hame and late for Bowls and Sile, Thy Fatther'l meause whore weare all this while. F. Ise nut farr, ist Cow Cawv'd that's a Goodin, Now Tibb weese git some Beestling Pudding: Letts spang our geates for it is varra Snithe, And Ise flaid Wife it will be Frost Belive; Leauk yonder ist Lad coming to late for you, Hee'd be in Bed to Morn we gang to Plewe: M. Wya, wya, did'th Pot play when you com, wheay keauks the Supper now when Ise fra Hame What Hobb ist Beefe aneugh, ist Groats put in, Till all war deaun, I knaw thou wad nut lin: S. Ey Mother, Groats are in Iv'e tane of'th Pot, And 'th Cael I seaure are caud anough to sup:
M. Come tack up'th Beefe Tibb, ist Dubler ready, Thy Father and Hobb, mun gang to'th Smiddy, And fetch the Specks, Sock and Cowlter hither Seed time's now come they mun saw Haver: F. Come Tibb for sham bring out the bread & sawt Thou's lang a coming, thou braids of Haver Maut Thur Cael tast strang of Reeke, they're nut for me, God sends meat and'th Deevil sends Ceauks I see: M. Marry geaupe stink, you're varra dench'd I trow Your Belly sarraes an ill Master now: They'ro're good for them that finnds faut I seaure, But as the Sew doth fill the Draffe doth soure: F. Thou wad faine perswade us they are gooddins, Hungry Doggs are fain of durty Puddins: Come thou and taste them, and sit down i'th chair Meay the merryer, but fewer better Fair. M. But you will nut let me be merry lang I seaur, for there is allwayes something wrang
They that have sike as you, can have neay will To deau ought, A good Jack macks a good Gill, F. I pray thee Pegg let us be Friends again, Thou knaws fair words duz mack Feauls fain, It is weel spoken, that's weel tane I've heard, Thou is seay Crabb'd, to speak Ise alwayes feard: M. You set yan on unscape, and than you rewe, Great matters of an angry word I trowe; Stride Tibb, & clawt some Cassons out o'th Hurne, Than geay thy wayes and fetch a Skeel of Burn, And hing the Pan ore'th fire ith Rekin-Creauk, And Ise wesh Sile, and Dishes up 'ith Neauke: And then wee'l all to Bed; here's a cawd Neet: But Husband Ise cling close, and weese blend feet F. Pray thee deau Pegg, than Ise git up 'ith Morne And Late some Pokes, and put up our seed Corn: Than thou may sarra Gawts and Gilts with Draffe, And Ise give'th Yawds some Hinderends and Caffe,
Than for our Breakfasts thou may haet some Cael Till I lie by my Shackfork, and my Flail; And Hobbs mack ready my Harrows, & my Plewgh And he and I Pegg fall deau weel aneugh; I've heard it tawk'd and now the Trueth I've fund A mell tweay Steauls, the Tail may fall to'th grund I lited on Hobb, and he lited on me, And the Dee'l a thing is ready that I see; Neither Traces, Hames, nor Baurghwans to finnd, Swingle-Trees nor Helters, all's made an ill end: But tweay dayes sine, Ise seaure they war all here Flung on an heap ith midst of our Laer Fleaure. S. Fatther they're liggin all on our Faugh Lands. I trail'd them there my sell with my awn hands, F. Thous a good Lad my Hobb that teauk sike care Ist Yoakes and Bowes and Gad & Yoaksticks there: S. Ey, ey, & 'th Pleugh Staffe teau, Hopper & Teems We lack nought but a Bay Stagg of my Neems,
That wee're to Yoak 'ith Plewgh before our Yawds And than Ise seaur weese rive up all Adawds, F. Near rack, near rack, weese tack neay thought for that Ise seaur that it will bide us billing at. Our Land is twgh, and full of strang whickens. Cat whins, and Seavy Furs, and monny Breckins: It's nought but Gorr, it ploshes under Feaut, Weese find Trouble aneugh when we come teaut: S. Lythe ye, lythe ye, how fondly you tawke, You think weese mack monny ilfavart Bawke; When we do Plew, we mun tack teaume I Reed. I've heard Fowks often say mare heast warse speed: The Feck on'ts Gripp'd, and 'th watter runs away, I was at field my sell, and saw't to day: It will bring as good Blendings I dare say, As ever grew a Reaut in onny Clay; F. Our Eard is nut for blending Hobb I dout, We mun saw it with Bigg I trow, or nought:
Gray Geause hes laid, geay carry in her Egg, Tibb dar nut come to fetcht, for flaid o'th Stegg, Than goame steek'th Hemble deaur, & bar up Grise For they've byn in a mischief twice or thrice; Let's nut loase an Hogg for a hawpworth of Tarr, But mind to Noint'h Gawt Ear it will all marr, Our Perry garr'd him run, and lugg'd him sayer, I thowght that he had riven off his Ear: The Libber coms to Moarn, weese libb'th awd Piggs For they've made filthy warke ot'h Corn Land Rigs S. Fatther our Bull Segg's puslom'd, hee's deg bownd And our awd Meer is slidden into'th Pownd, F. Wellaneerin, wellaneerin, run fast run, Run fast Hobb, and bid my Maugh Herry come: And bring his Horne, and give our Segg a drink, Mack hast or else Ise whang thee till thou stink: Ʋ. How now Hob thou reeks fair, what macks ta run What uncuths hes ta brought come tell me seaun,
Our Yawd's layd backwards, Bull Seg is like to dee And seay Ise come for you to gang with me: Ʋ. Marry Ise vara weay, for that's ill warke, Ise flaid weese nut git there, before't be darke, F. That's weel your come, the Segg is at Stand Heck What ails this deaur, I cannut finnd out'th Sneck: That comes in an hour, sometimes they say, That comes nut in Twenty, He was weel to day, And preaz'd to git ore'th Hedge into our Fogg, And I did Slate him back than with our Dog; Ʋ. Is this him that liggs here, Hee's Teng'd hee'l dee Lets stick him, ther's neay whopes of him I see Hee's pratty meeterly Flesh, here's a good Skin, Hee'l mack good Cael, and put fat Backon in, Lets gang and see your Sheep, what ails yon Teaup, I think something hes stampt upon his Feaut: Thur Yowes are Clowelagg'd, they skitter saire, They'l be full of Mawks if you tack nut Care;
I think they've gitten some fresh whewts of Girs That macks them seay beclarted about'th Arse Ise like to clem let's Hame Maugh to our Pegg, Sheel kedge our kites with good Kirne-milk, & whig Ʋ. Sister heve you ought that will slocken weel▪ You've Whigg 'ith Stand, & good Kirn-milk 'ith Skee Fill me 'th bend Kit Ise set it to my pact, Ile venture a strang pull though I be haet, Here's fine Backon Sister its glore Fat, But it's a little knarl'd with your Carl Cat, F. It's small warse Pegg whores our Haver Riddle, Last time I saw't it was laid ive our Stable: Ise like to tawme this day's seay varry warme Your Bees macks a great noise, you'l have a Swarm Wheay has remmond 'th side Lanyels some ill Foal I laid um here, under the Awmry soal, Can neathing ligg that's leeter than a Stane We sall heve nought left seaun, all will be gane
All things run wrang Wife, neathing Cottens weel The Spindle is a Ravel'd, neay Garn o'th Reel, Thy Rock is burnt, thy Sneauskin is quite gean, I've lated sayer, and can nut finnd it Dame; Our great whean Cat hes eaten'th Pudding poke, You goam neathing, I never saw sike Fowke: Our Kitling meyw'd, I meaus'd what she did aile, I trail'd her out 'oth Ream Kit, by the Taile; Our Sew hes been 'ith Spence, thrawn down Whigg Stand I set it up again, with my awn hand: Perry hes been ith Beef Tubb teau just now, And maed as bad, or warse warke, than our Sew: The Ewn for lack of Dittin, hes slake'd all'th heet. Puddings and Pyes are daugh nut fit to Eat, Thy Sammaron web thou sent to'th Bleacher well, s stown, gray Geause Geslings all daz'd 'ith shell: Our Bakin I put up 'ith Harden Seek, The Milners let it fall into the Beck.
Waies is me Husband, our awd Bread's all gane We mun mack bannocks till'th Bakin come hame F. It comes ith Earnder Wife or else by Neaun, Come bring my Slippers Tibb, and deet my Sheaun To Morn 'ith Ownder we mun dod our Sheep▪ The Weathers haet and Mawkes begin to Creepe M. Some's feal'd our Backston Tibb, or else it's gan Ise varra flaid some's gitten't for'th lang lane: If I cud tell wheay's cutt our Band fra'th Sneck, Next time they come, Ise mack them Jet the Heck, Thou geayes Tibb like a Feaul, come leauke about, And see if thou can late our Backstane out: D. There is seay monny Holes and Hurles to seek That Ise neer finnd it, if I late this Week: Some Tantril hes byn here and Stown't away, For it was liggin here, but tother day: Whilk wayes our Hobb gane Mother, heres base wark Yonders Gawt ith Garth, hes riven all his Sarke
What's warse than ill Luck, late me our Fruggin Ise stopp'th Yat, till thou mack Perry lugg him: F. Here'st Dubler broken, & nowther sowl nor breau And Ise seay howl, I knaw nut what to deau: The Fatt's all storken'd here, a sham to see, I wad this grisely Cat war hang'd for me, Hame's hamely, if it be neer seay poor they say, And wee're but like to have poor Faire to day: Here's mad warke Hobb, speer'th deaur & flay back 'th Cat There'st Backon in her Mouth, hit her a bat: Weel deaun Hobb, hesta gitten't leauke it's there, It's lytle warse, it's traild' ith mucky Fleaur, Here'st Gully liggin, call thy Mother seaun, Ise scrape it cleen, Ise seaure it's now past Neaun, Fye, Fye, If wee'd nut come just when we did, Wee'd been misliken'd of our Dinners Pegg: M. How seay I whemmeld Dubler owr'th Meat, To keep it seaf and warm for you to Eat,
F. But'th Cat had eaten't all if wee'd nut been, Dubler's broken, thou may trust thy nawn Een; This Backon macks me Sweat it's varra sawt, And its all reasty teau, thats a warse fawt: M. They that eat til they sweat, and work till they't Cawd, Sike Fowkes are fitter to hang than hawd: Yan knaws nut how to please you you'r seay fickle Sike Feauls as you, are in Dockin out Nettle: All things are reet abroad, but nought at Hame, You'l finnd a faut I seaur whore there is nane: F. I wad fain see a Fine Sun shiny day, Here's wancle Weather for gitting of our Hay, What ails our Tibb, that she urles seay ith Neauke Shees nut reet she leauks an awd farrand Leauke: D. Fatther Ive gitten Cawd, I can scarse Tawk And my Snurles are seay sayer stopt, I can nut Snawke Nor snite my Nose, my Teeth Datther in my head Ise grown seay Healdy, I mun gang to Bed:
I may thank my sell for sitting barehead, ut wilfull Fowkes, Duz never want weay its said. How duz my Cosen Tibb Naunt I mun nut stay, hard she gat a Cawd the other day, M. Ey wellaneerin will ta gang and see, he's aboonith Chawmber, thou may clim upth Stee hees on a Dovening now gang Deftly Nan, And mack as little din as ee'r thou can: . Your mains flaid, ther's an awd saying you knaw That there's neay Carrion can kill a Craw: she be nut as dead as a deaur Naile, e mack her flyer, and semper like flesh Cael; Thou Covers Tibb, I see thou's nut yet dead, Leauk at me Woman, and hawd up thy Head; . Ah Nan steek'th winderboard, & mack it dark, My Neen are varra fair, they stoun and wark, Tey are seay Gunny and Furr'd up some time, can nut leauke at Leet nor see a Stime,
N. Come, come, I can mack thee Leetsome & Blithe, Here will be thy awd Sweet-heart here Belive. He teld me seay I saw him but last Neet, O Tibb he is as fine as onny Kneet: D. Nay Nan thou duz but Jybe, there's neay sike thing, He wooes another Lass, and gave her a Ring: For Change of Pastures macks fat Cawves it's said, But Change of Women macks lean Knaves Ise flaid I thought he lov'd me weel, he made sike shew, But all's nut Gowd that glisters, I see now, O're micle of yea thing, I've oft heard say, Is good for neathing: and seay I finnd this day, He was or'e keen to hawd as he began, He was seay fond in Love as neer was Man, But I may lye me down now, Seigh and Sob, He cares neay mare for me now than a Dog: N. Away, away great Feaul tack thou neay Care He swears that hee'l love thee for evermare;
And sayes as ever he whopes his Saul to save, Hee'l either wed to thee, or tull his Grave; Wayes me he never meawted thou was ill, But all is weel that ends weel I can tell: He had come titter Tibb, if he had knawn, Thou war seay Ill, what woman hee's thy nawn; He sayes hee'd leather tack thee in thy Smock, Then some with Fifty Pund, means is but Muck: D. Thou macks me laugh Nan, if all be true thou saies I whope that than Ise see some Joyful dayes, Hee's made me heve monny a sad Heart, I thowght he'd left me and wad nut tack my part: But then sometimes I thought it's a black Crake, That never to her sell can get a Make: N. The reason why he duz nut cume and gang, He sayes Love me leetly, and Love me lang There's luck in leizure, he'd heve your loves tack hawd He sayes he's heard that haet love is seaun cawd:
He can love the House weel that hes Tibb in, And nut be alwayes Rideing o'th Riggin Next time he comes he'l tell thee all his Mind: Seay be nut Stanfra but loving and kind: And let him kiss and grape teau if he will, Thou's neer warse woman, for there's nean can tell. D. He's had neay want of that, wch macks me think The Proverbs true that proffer'd things duz stink: The things that we heve deaun Ise arfe to tell, But I suppose thou's deaun the same with Will: N. Pray thee tell me Tibb, tell me woman seaun And Ile tell thee what Will and I heve deaun, D. If I sud tell the Reeks that we heve had▪ Thou'l kittle seay, it'l mack thee just stark mad: N. Thou sets me now Agog untill I hear, Thou need nut blush come whisper me 'ith Ear: D. What need I whisper, thou knaws young wo∣men will, To git a Lively Lad, use all their skill,
He kist me first, did grape my Breests and than, Went lawer down, thou knaws what teau dear Nan N. Tell me I pray thee what did he Tibby, Did he beat a Larum on thy Stiddy: I knaw that thou wad let him deau it gratis, If yance he gat but to thy Nunquam satis: Then thou wad cleave like Ivy to a Tree, Come thou may tell here's neayn but thee & me, D, I dare nut tell for flaid now of my Motther, Pray thee be quiet Nan thou's sike another, I will nut tell unless thou will declare What Will and thou did when you went to'th Faire N. When Will did git to mine within an Inch, O Tibb, how I did kittle than and winch: I blush to tell what follow'd after that, Young Men will heve a bit Tibb for their Cat: D. Wheesht, wheesht, my Mother's coming up I hear And shees heard all our Tawke Nanny I fear:
I dare nut speak a word now less or mare, For if she hear she'l whang me varra sayer, N. Wad she war hang'd, that cud nut stay belawe, I had as leeve be fel'd, as nut all knaw: Ise hear all out, when I have time ro stay, My Naunts just here now, farewel Ile away I mun be ganging now, Ise seaure its time, I've nowther been at Kye, nor sarra'd 'th Swine. M. What ista ganging Nan will thou nut stay, How comes thy Clathes seay flurr'd Barne this Lownd day. Thou's never Tite there's always something wrang, Wad ta saw thy sell thou great Gammerstang: For sham Woman Reet um down as ta geayes Ise seaur thou hes neay mence neer in thy Clayes Beseaur hereafter, Thou tack better Care, For Meat is Mickle but Mence is mare: Yonders our Owse is loppen o're the Yate, Nan Slate him back, as thou gangs up'th Town gate;
N. Naunt Ile nut mell, Outless he war our awn, What ist weaud Owse, that hiped at our Brawn, M. Nea nea great Stags what a durdam thou macks, It's him that brack down'th railes, to'th haver stacks When thou gangs up the Town, thou'l knaw him seaun He's a fine Flan Head, and a pure brown Greaun, N. Here's your Hob comming let him gang his sell I tell you plain, Ile nowther mack nor mell: I heve neay time now up the Town to Rame There is odd Charrs for me to deau at hame: M. Husband is Hob gane to fetch back'th weaud Owse A wee bit sine out o'th Fawd garth brack lowse F. If he can but dree, I saw him yeaud up'th Town, And seay I think he's gane to slate him down; Our Hay was seay ill gitten this wet year, It hes nea Feausan in't at all, I swear, My Maugh did say, this Hay'l be nought you'l see, I finnd an awd Ape now, hes an awd Ee:
Wife what's become of my Spatterdashers, Pray thee yeaud up'th Greese & fetch'th Gamashaes For I mun gang to'th Field, and fetch some Hay And give Ilkin o'th Drapes some while I stay, There is a Rencky Cow that beats all'th rest, And till I Fothet'd them I never wist, Tother hes Booke and Bane, and are as tall And yet she macks um run on Snocksnarles all▪ Bring me our Hay Spade Hob, hushta good Lad Tack teaum, and gome thy feet what ista mad▪ Some Roguehes Stown our Cawfhouse deaur away Mind Hobb if thou can Speer it out to day, Outapont how that Hen gobbles up all'th Groate Thur Birds are all Cumber Ise cut their Throat M. You've setten'th Hen a Flowter, & she did fettle To git her Birds all under the Lang Settle: She gat a Gliffe o'th Dog, hit him a Nawpe, Or els Ise tack up'th Tengs and break his Scau
F. What a durdams here, thou macks great warke Theyl heve their gutts stampt out when it grows darke M. Stand by Caingell, let me crum um some Bread Ise arfe to put them out, because o'th Glead, F. What a whanck's there, if thou sike wast do mack I mun late'th Needle whore it never stack; M. They'l yeild some money, though it be little, And monny▪ a little duz mack a Mickle: F. I care nut an they war all drown'd i'th Dike, They're nut worth an Atchison, nor twenty sike, M. Your a cheap man trouble nut your Jobber Nowl Ile give um some Trouts, reach me hither'th Bowl: F. Thou's nought but babbles thou duz things tot'h hawves, Thou'd mare need gang and mack some Cael for'th Cawves They're starv'd for want of meat hark how they Bleare, When steed's stown thou maysteek'th Stable deaur M. You're full of Care, and neer had onny yet, A pund of care'l nut pay an ounce of debt:
Braggsa good Dog. I've heard my Granny tell, But he was hang'd for Biting that was Ill: If I'd nut tane mare care then you, Ise seaur, Before this day wee'd all been turn'd to'th deaur, F. Ile yeild thy humour thou mun heve I see, Or els I seaur, Thou'l neither Height nor Ree: It's a good Horse that duz never stumble, And a good Wife that duz never grumble: M. Come come for all this Clutter you do keepe, You'd better have a Shrew, than heve a Sheep; F. Come bring my Jerkin Tibb: Ile to'th Arvil, You mans dead seay seaun, it macks me marvil: I thought he leauk'd weel Yesterday at Neaun, I little dream'd he wad be dead seay seaun: Come Wife mack ready will nut thou gang teau, Let Tibb deau'th warke, if there be ought to deau: M. Nay nay you know I cannut gang full weel, For'th Cooper is to bring Hame'th Kirn and Skeel.
Wya fare ye weel than, for Ile away, They're boon to'th Kirke, and seay I mun nut stay. I've gitten sike a Whelke, as I com Hame ust now it made my Gutts all kelke agane; Mack hast good Peg sweepth house & don thee seaun Our Land-Lord Woman will be here by Neaun, had an Incklin out at'th Arvil Feast, Methinks he macks deevlish stickle but hast. M. Its time for me about the house to Trip, le's be as welcome as watter into a Ship: F. Sweep'th Arrans down, till all be clean neer lin, s he'l leauk all Agye when he comes in: wad nut heve him here for onny thing, lthough a Cat may leauke Pegg at a King: hou leauks a Dozand leauke, rub or'e thy Face With dishclout, and put on thy Coife with Lace: M. Ile into'th Loft, and don my Clathes, now Will ind you to git some Eldin seaun your sell,
And mack Tibb mend up'th Fire, its ommost ot And let her rub down'th Table with a Clout: Ise ready now let him come when he will, But nowther'th Why nor Filly we will sell, Let's nut cast down our Hearts though he be ma As lang lives a merry Heart as a sad: Its nut aboon Three weeks gane sine'th Rent da Husband what heve you gitten up to pay: F. Ive Five Nobles Pegg, and some odd mone Thou seld some Cheeses hes thou onny: M. Seven groats and a penny is all my Stock, Thou knaws whore't ligs, Ive nowther Key nor lo F. Pray thee tell truly, hes thou neay mare, Did Thou nut sell some Garn at our last Fair; M. What if I did, heve I nut mare to pay, Than I can mack of Trouts, Kirn-Milk & W Wadta have me keaun, or deau that is warse, Turne Whore and Addle money with my Na
e have mare under my hands to gang about, Thou's nut think that Ile be thy Underlout: . Thou snoutbands me sayr, may I nut Jest, seaur I meant neay harm to thee 'ith least; Come hither Hobb, what little Stock hes thou, knaw thou's Addled some with driveing Plew . The small Stock, I've gitten up together, Twelve Bodles, a Groat and Six pence Fatther, . I mun borrow't Hobb, what ista willing, When I gitt mony thou's have a Shilling: . Ise gang and fetch't, it's hard fest in a Clout, You may seaun lowse't your sell, and tack it out: . Here's three and three pence in odd money Peg, That macks Forty Shillings, reet as my Leg. Pashions a Life, here'st Land-Lord just at deaur, tand you by, Ise speak to him do nut fear: L. Ise cum to see you, how dusta Billy What macks Thee hustle, thou's mare fawse then silly
Thou Glincks & glimes seay, I'd misken'd thy Face If thou had wont at onny other place: Ist God Morn, or God Deen, what sesta Will, I think you heve nut din'd, heres a good smell. F. Leet pray you Land-lord, & you seaun will knaw I think my wife hes Pyes it'h Ewn to draw: Thou casts a Leet a Lantom Pegg, thou's mains fine, Have you some Guests to come to day to Dine, M. Wellaneering, wee'd need have every Neaun, Something thats good to keep our Hearts aboon: L. But courser Faire, I think might you content You tack neay thought how to pay me my Rent▪ M. Good Land-Lord spare us we're but pour & bare Whore'th Hedge is law, it's eath gitting 'ore there: When yans down down with um, it duz appear We heve had monny Losles this same year: Our Sheep are dead ith Rot, and you do knaw The price of Butter now is varra law,
Weese pay you as we mack't and as't coms in, And you can have neay mare ot'h Cat but'th skin: . Here's Forty shillings, we heve neay mare, Weese have a Cow to sell at our neest Fair: L. What can I deau with this it will nut clear, And pay seay mickle, as streights your awd Arrear, . Here's bad times, prey ya Land-Lord be content, Forbear us but and you's heve all your Rent. . But it will be a lang time first Ise feard, And whiles'th Girse grows Horse starves as Ive heard Next time I come, you mun clear off I leauk, Thur driblets mack me scrat, whor't duz nut yeauk . But you mun let us rive up some fresh grund, Or els wee'l turn your Farme into your hand: . Wad ye'd gane titter, I had been neay warse, or your nut worth the warst Fart of my A— ou may gang when you will Ise never care, git another Tennant I neer fear:
Wee'r Sattle'd here, and seay to stir weer laith But weel I wait, weese gether here nea Grath, L. You ill my Farme for you have said to some, Your quite undeaun and beggar'd sine you cm F. Some Pikethanks for ill will hes teld you that, An unquoth Dog hes monny barkers at, Ise Sackless on't Sir, by this fire that Reeks, Ile swear't upon all Beauks that opens and steeks; If we sud swelt our hearts it will nut deau, T'afford Sour Milk, and Bread and Rent up teau; Yet of your Farm, I neer said an ill word, To onny Body I will besworn Land-Lord: I was teld, Ist git Gowd Grapes here by some Fowke, But now I see I've bought a Pig in a Poke, L. Away away if I sud let you sit, Rent free I see you cud nut live on it, Your Corn's as Rank as ever it can stand, There's sike a wreck, it ligs all down o'th Land,
And yet you say your Farm is starke 'oth Rent, And you for Tenants give me neay content, You cannut pay nor I cannut forbear, Provide seay for you selves another year; F. Wee'r nut sea Browden on't as you suppose, I think langer we stay the mare weese lose: Wadwe'd nee'r kend your Farm, nor had cum here But bought wit's best if it cost nut 'ore dear, There's neay Feaul like to'th awd Feaul, I may say They that are bund I see they mun obey, The time that we com here, we've cause to Curse, A tumbling Stane I see neer gathers Moss: We war o're weel before and did nut wait, And now we may the time rue, when'ts ore late. L. Com, com, for all your goodly Cracks & Brags, ll Husbands and Sluggards, mun gang in Rags: f you aw'd Money when you com to'th Farme, Your Creditors not it heve deaun you harm:
If all your Stock be gane lean to your Kin, Near is my Sarke, but nearer is my Skin; Charity begins at Hame Ise nut bund To let you live Rent free upon my grund: There's neay sell like to'th awne sell; yeu've Farmes ane Offer'd you say, God speed you, Ise nee'r Ru A weaud Horse I've heard it oft Reported And a Rotten Harrow are seaun parted: Fare weel, Ise weay to finnd'th awd saying tru It's an ill made Bargain, whore beath Parties Ru F. I've set our Land-Lord forward, wife hee's gan Our Hob's nut weel, he's a base stincking yane He's troubl'd with worms, he can nut Sleep nor Li Give him Wormseed and Treacle pray thee Pe Weay worth this trash, Ise flaid my Lad's undeau He's varra Seek, it works at his Heart Speaun: To Morne I'le gang to'th Market, and hire Tibb And Peggy Thou thy Sell, sall Spin out'th Web
Why a Husband, you may deau what you will, If I be weel. Ise git it deaun my sell; N. How deaye all, what Naunt as I hear say, Tibby hes tane a Godspenny to day: Ise come to knaw before I gang to Bed, I thought this Martinmas she wad be wed M. Wayes is me she's ore Young for a good Man, There's mare Fowks wed than keeps good Houses Nan She's Booke and Bane aneugh I knaw that's true But ill weed waxes fast and seay duz Thou: N. Ore young say you, I seaure she's gane eighteen And few but at that age, they are Man keen: Pray you what Age war you when you did wed, At sixteen Naunt you lost your Maidenhead: M. But they that wed before they'r wise, it's said Will dee before they thrive, and seay Ise flaid Will Thou and She, and all sike Flirtigiggs, That's fit for nought but serving Brewster Piggs
I marvel thy Mother gits nut thee a Dame, It's fitter for thee then to stay at Hame, To slaver and Spin, and run an odd Char A good Service war better for thee farr: N, What sike an a Service as Tibbs to have, I had as leeve be carrid to my Grave; M. How sea what ails her Service can thou tell Thou'l nowther let her thrive, nor thrive thy sell: N. I hear Tibb is to gang to Mistress Nice, She'l Rue, I'le warrant more than yance or twice, She'l deal her Neaves about her, I hear tell, She's timerous to please, and varra Fell, First thing that comes to hand she'l let it flee, Neans yable to abide her Crueltie; She'l Nawpe and Nevel them without a Cause, She'l make them late their teeth Naunt in their Hawse She's kittle of her hands, & of her tongue seay rife, That Tibb Ise seaure will have but an ill Life;
Ile lay a Wager that Tibb never stayes A New Meaun, and an awd, nay nut ten dayes: M. Thou's had a good Layer Fatther Nan I guess, Or els I seaur, thou never cud tell this; Birlady but my Barne shall never be A Battingstock for her, Thou's plainly see: Her Godspenny, sall be sent back to Moarn, Tibbs stay at Hame with me Nan Ile besworne; I knaw here'l be a Sain'd for her to come, But Ise nee'r care, although her Mistress Gloom, My Lass sall nowther Dame nor Mistress have, Leather then gang to be a perfect Slave; N. My Neem's now coming farewel Ile to Bed, I've sitten till my Feet's as caw'd as Lead; M. Nay prethee stay Nan but a wirly Bit, I heve some Garne to send with thee to Lit, I stale a Keslup Nan, fra thy Fatther, Which made me a deel of dainty preaser:
But Ill gitten, Ill gane, is true I finnd, For it's all scatter'd, and's made an ill end: Sea pray thee lend me a little Earning For we mun mack some Cheese in the Morning: N. Let Tibb come 'ore as seaun as she gits up, And I sall send you back by her a soape: M. What hast's thou in stay and tack a drink Nan There's Beer o'th Table, 'ith little Can, N. This Drink's all dowl'd, how lang ist sine't was drawn It is nut hawfe sea fresh Naunt as our awn: F. Yon Town's a dree way off Pegg, Ise sare tire'd Tibb is all Jarbil'd, and Ise basely Mire'd: As we went 'ore a Steel out starts a Hare, Our Tibb, gave sike a Glent, it flaid her sare: We went into an House, I lost my Staff, I finnd its true, Still Sew eats all the Draffe, All Fowk's deny'd, but yan beyond the Board, And he had stown't, and never said a word,
How dusta Wife, thou is nut weel I think, Thou graines varra sare, wilta have a drink, A grunting Horse, and graining Wise, nee'r will Their Rider fail, as I have heard Fowks tell, M. Wya wya, I can bide your Scoffs and scornes But God be thank'd a Curst Cow gits short Horns You'd leather see me hanging weel I wait, Than see me ganging up and down'th Town gate, F. You meause wife as ye use, Ise neay sike man, I can nut please I see deau what I can, M. You are unsawncy, I think by my life, With tawkin to you I heve broken my Knife: F. It's eath to mack'th Barne greet whore'th lip doth hing You Gloom seay Wife, I thought you'd have a Fling At me, or some els in the House, ee'r Neet, Something is alwayes wrang, all's never reet, M. Gloom Co yea, it macks me as seeke as a Horse, Never to have a penny in my Purse:
F. Better's a comming pray thee do not wreak, What Woman but for hope the Heart wad break: God nee'r sent Mouths, but he sent Meat alway, After fowl Weather followes a fair day: That Man falls law that nee'r again duz Rise, Hope weell and have weell, is said by the wise I nee'r fear, but Fortune again will smile, If we can have but patience for a while: We sall heve Luck Golore tack thou neay Care, Though we at present be but varra Bare: Some Rise and some do fall strangely we see, Give a man Luck and thraw him into'th Sea. Here's good Tobacco Wife it cost a prindle, How mun I leet my Pipe, Whaugh here's nea Ingle: M. What need you Rame seay, you see'th fire's gane Poul out your Touchwood, box, Steel, & flint stane, Then strike a Fire, and leet a Seave I Reed, And smeauke your Pipe before we gang to Bed:
F. Unfest my Collar poynt Wife, Than let us Kiss, And pray for Love, mell them whore ther nean is. What din is yon, lets gang to'th deaur good wife, And Lithe, yonders some Flight, I lay my Life: M. Marry Husband you have a special guess, Hark you what warke, yonders 'tween Nell & Bess A Cruel Flight begins, Amel tweay former Friends. N. Thou Ugly Whore what wark made thou last Neet, Thou deserves douking ift hou had thy Reet; That wad ceaul thy sawt A—thou fulsome Bitch, O Rotten Jade thou gave young Nobbs the Itch: Last time he clapperclaw'd thy Reeking A— He may be glad and fain it was neay warse: B. Thou lucken-brow'd Trull, there's nean warse than thy sell Thou went to ceaul thy Tail thou knaws at'th well
When every grisely Scab it was seay big, And sare that thou cud neither sit nor lig: I neer Besh—my sell, as thou did Bitch, When 'th Fellow wrought seay sare he gat a stitch Thou cud not git him off thy Belly Jade, Till thou was forced to cry our for Aide, And than'th whors bird thy Daughter Jan com in And pould him of, and drust & made thee clean: N. I scorn thy words thou filthy Refie Jade, Thou's gitten an 'ore heat Bitch with thy Trade, Geay shack thy Scabs off Whore, & wesh thy skin: Thou stands mare need than I of macking clean: B. Hang thee whore, hang thee, I never was laid yet Between two Feather Beds, to get a Sweat: My hair did nee'r come off thon dirty Drab, As thine did when thy Nose was in a Scab; I ne'r was laid down druncken on a Bed, With all my Clathes poul'd up whore to my head,
And sea left fast asleep with a great Candle urning between thy Houghs, that all meet handle, And then deau what they wad thou druncken Sew, Thy Tallow face is like to mack me Spew: . How lang ist fine the Lads did shout and hollow And after thee with Rotten Eggs did follow: Thou mawky whore, thou hes forgitten seaur, ine'th Cramer gat the up again a deaur, th midst of all'th Towngate, and'th Lads com by; And saw you at it, than they set up a Cry: And than beath thou & he away did sneake, f thou can say ought for thy sell, Whore speake, N. Thou lees, thou lees, thou grisely Braslen Face, nee'r was Pybald yet, ith Saddle place: Nor had a Surgeon to Syring me, As thou had Whore, when thou cud hardly see Thy Head and Face, they war seay swell & sare, That thou had scarcely left thee onny Haire:
B. As weel hair'd as thy sell, Thou nasty Quea Hang thee, thou fulsome Trull, thou's never clea Base Tantrill I never use to tack Neet Ramble And heve my Clathes ram'd up 'ith Butchers Shamble Ther's filthy stinking Flesh when thine liggs there, O'th day time seaur there's nean can like sike war N. As good Ware as thy sell Whore every whit I never was laid down on a Midden yet, With a Drunken Tinkler fund at warke Between my Legs Whore; it was nut seay dark, But they cud plainly see that did gang by, How sweetly thou and thy Tinckler did lye, B, Away, away Whore, thou tells up and down, How monny Men hes laid with thee i'th Town, Thou's a bold Whore, thy like was seldome seen, I marvel neay good Wife Clawts out thy Neen; N. Clawt out my neen Whore, but Ile dill thy din, I'le coul thy Haggas Bitch, if I begin,
Nay run nut Whore, Thou's nut seay leet of feaut, e git thee an the Devil git the nut; Nay Whore I've gitten haud, Ile coul thee down, nd shew thy Neighbours thy bald Scabby Crown Murder, Murder, good Neighbours help me seaun▪ he Bites and Scrats, Ise flaid Ise be undeaun: Weay worth this Whore, she's riven all my pinner My Coife, and Hankercher' as Ise a Sinner: e mack thee pay for this Whore Ile besworn, e have a Warrant for the Jade to Moarn: . What prates ta still, wad ta have mare yet Trull efore I gang thou's have thy Belly full: . What runs ta Whore, hesta gitten'th deaur Sporne e have another Bout with thee to Morne: hou peeps yet whore, cum out again thou Bitch, nd I sall Scrub off all thy Scabs, and Itch, hink I've wheested thee Whore, for this Neet, hou sal be seaur of mare next time we meet:
B. Wad, ta kiss'd my A-thou Jarble tail'd Trull th Thou's just like a Cow thats keen 'oth Bull no Thou pins and decks thy, sell to get a Ride And nean that knaws thee will sike Ket bestrid N. Oh Whore had I but thee here out again, I'de mack thy Ribs to Reeke, and Guts to grai If ever I git thee in my Clutches, Ile mack the fit Jade to gang on Crutches. The Authors Conclusion. My Papers at an end Ile take my Ease, Here's too much paines bestow'd unless it plea FINIS.
An Alphabetical CLAVIS, Uunfolding the Meaning of all the York-shire Words made use of in the aforegoing DIALOGƲE. A. ISe Arfe; that is I am afraid. Auters; signifies strange work, or strange things. Amell; is Between. Awne; Signifies own. To Rive all dawds; is to tear all in pieces. Ackwards; is when a beast lies back∣wards and cannot rise.
What ailes this deaur; is what's the matter with this door. An Aumry; is a Cupboard to put bread or meat in. Awd; is Old. Awdfarrand; is grave and sober. Aboon; is above, To set one Agog; is to make one long or desire, Asta; Signifies as thou, An Atchison; is a Scot'ch Coyne worth fower Bodles, An Arvill; is a Funeral. To look Agye is to look aside. B. A Barne; is a Child, A Battin; is the Straw of two Sheaves foulded together. Behawfe; is behalf.
To Batt'n; signifies to feed or like well. Beestlings; is the first milk after Calv∣ing. Belive; is in the Evening, Burne, is water. To blend, is to mix or put together. Baurghwans, are horse Collars, To bide billinge at, is to abide work∣ing at. Breckins, signifies Fearn. A Bauke, is a Balke. Blendings, are Beans and Pease mixed together. Bigg, is of the nature of Barly, and makes good Malt. A Bull segg, is a gelded Bull, Backon, is Bacon. Beclarted, is Besmeared or Bedaub∣ed. A bend Kitt, is a kind of a great Can with a Cover.
A Bleacher, is a whitester of Cloath. A Bakin, is Corn put up to send to th Mill for bread. A Beck, is a River. Bannocks, are Cakes baked before th fire. A Back-stone, is a stone or iron to bak Cakes on. Blithe, is glad. Breests, are breasts. A Brawne, is a Boar. Booke and bane, signifies lusty an strong. To bleare, is to roar and cry. Twolve Bodles, signifies two pence, To be browden on a thing, is to be fon on a thing. Birlady, is by our Lady. A batting stock, is a beating stock, Beath, is both. Breau, is supping Meat, or Gravy and fat for brewis, &c.
C. CRockie, is a little Scotch Cowe. Cawven, is Calved. A Cowe cleening, is the bag that hangs at the Cows Box after she hath new Calved. A Cawfe, is a Calfe. Cawd, is cold. Caell, are Potage. To Ceauke, is to Cook. To Clawt; is to tear or pull. Cassons, are dryed Cow turds, Caffe, is Chaffe. Like to clem, is very dry ready to choak. A Carle Cat, is a dog-Cat, or Hee Cat. Nought Cottens weell, is Nothing goes right. Cud, is could.
Chaumber, is a Chamber. A Crawe, or a Crake, is a Crow. To Cover, is to recover. Clathes, are Clothes. Cumber, is trouble. A Caingel, is a toothy crabbed fel∣low. To keep a clutter, is to make a grea¦stir. Coyea, is quoth you. To Ceaul, is to cool. To Clapperclawe, is to work earnestly or beat or Fight earnestly. A Crammer, is a Bowle sewer. To Cool ones Haggas, is to beat on soundly. D. ISe dinge, that is I shall beat. Deft, is pritty.
Daft, is fond or foolish. Deaun, is done. A Dubler, is a Dish to lay Meat on. Dench'd, is finely Mouthed or Curi∣ous. Draffe, is Graines. Deau, is do. A Deaur, is a door. Degg-bound, is mightily swelled in the Belly. Dittin, is Morter to stop up the Oven withal. Dayugh, is Dough. To Deet, is to wipe and make clean. To Dodd Sheep, is to cut the wool away about their Tailes. To Datther, is to Tremble with cold. Duz, signifies does. Deftly, is softly or leasurely. A Dovening, is a slumber.
Din, is noyse. A Durdam, is a great noyse or stir. To dree, is to hold out, or be able to go. A dree way of, is a long way off, A drape, is a Cow to be fatted that gives no milk. A Dike, is a little Pond or watery place. To Don, is to put ones Clothes on, A dozand leauke, is an old withered look. Dusta, is does thou. Driblets, are small inconsiderable things. Dowl'd, is dead or flatt, and not brisk. Drust, signifies drest. To deck one self, is to make them trim and fine.
E. EEn, are Eyes. Ewes, is an Ʋdder, Ey, ey; is Yes, Yes. Eard, is Earth. Ewn, is an Oven, Earnder, is the forenoon, Eldin, is Wood and sticks for the fire, Eath, is easie. Earning, is Rennet to make Cheese with∣all. F. FLaid, is afraid. Feaut, is a foot. Fra, is from Finnd, is find. Fawt, is fault. Faine, is glad.
Feawls, is Fooles. Fund, is found. Flung, is thrown. Fleaure, is floor. Faugh, is Fallow. Fondly, is foolishly. Fowkes, is Folk. Feck, is the most or greatest part. Fogg, is fresh Grass that comes after Mowing. Feald, is hid. Fruggin, is a Pole to stir in the Oven when it is heated to stir the ashes up. Flyer, is to laugh. Feard, is afraid. To be feld, is to be knocked down. Flur'd, is all Ruffled. A Flan head, is a broad large head. Feausan, is Taste or moisture. Flowter, is when one is angry or af∣fraid.
To Fettle, is to make ready, or pre∣pare. A Filly, is a Mare Foale, or young Mare, To Fest, is to tye. A Flirtigiggs, is a wanton fond Lass. Fell, is fierce and keen. A Flight, is a Scoulding-match. G. BY Grape, is by grope. To Greet, is to weep. Geay, is go. Town-gate, is the Town Street. Gang, is go. Groats, are Oatmeal. Gawts and Gilts, are Hog-pigs, and Sow-pigs. Gor, is miery or dirty. Grip'd, is delv'd to drain away wa∣ter.
Geause, is a Goose. To Goame, is to mind. Grise, is Swine. Girse, is Grass. Glorr fatt, is very fat. God Morn, is a good Morning to you. Goddeen, is a good Evening. Garne, is yarne. To Gawve, is to stare. Grisely, is ugly. A Gully, is a house Knife, to cut bread, &c. Gunny and furr'd, is sore running eyes. Gammerstang, is a great foolish wanton Girle. Greaun, is a Month. Greese, signifies Staires into a Cham∣ber. Gammashaes, are course Cloath Stoc∣kings that butten upon other Stoc∣kins to keep one warm.
To Gobble, is to eat greedily. A Glisse, is a sudden sight of a thing by chance. A Glead, is a Kite. Granny, is a Grand-mother. Glincks and Glimes, signifies to look cunningly. Grath, is Riches. Godspenny, is an Earnest-penny, To Gloom, is to frown and be sullen. Grane, is to groan To Glent, is to start aside. Golore, is great plenty, or abundance, H. TO Hye, is to make hast. Harnes, signifies Braines, To Hipe, is to push with the Head, Haud, is hold. Hame, is Home, Hobb, is Robert.
Haver, is Oates An Hurn, is a hoal behind the Chim∣ney. Hinderends, are the Off all of Corn when it is winnowed. Haet, is hot. Hames, are the crooked pieces of wood that are put upon Horse Collars. An Hopper, is a Seed-lip, or Basket the Husband-men put their Seed-Corn in, when they sowe their Land. An Hemble, is an Hovel or house to put Cattel under, or Wayns or Carts into. An Haver Riddle, is a Sive they use in Winnowing of Oates. Harden, is Hempen. Hing, signifies hang. Helters, is Halters.
Holes and hurles, are odd dark blind holes in a house. Hes, is hath. Howle, is hungry. Hesta, is has thou. Heauldy, is one that is tender and cannot endure much cold. Hushta, signifies to hold fast or mind ones feet. Hawves, is halves. Height nor Ree, signifies a wilful per∣son that will not be perswaded to any thing, but what they list. Hustle, is to shrug ones Shoulders. Heart-speaun, is the hole betwixt the Breast and Belly. Hause, is the Throat. Houghs, are the Leggs and Thighs.
I. ILfavart, is unhansome. To Jet the Heck, is to put one to the door. Jybe, is to mock or Jeer, Ista, signifies art thou, Ilkin, is each one. Jobber Nowle, signifies a Logger-head. Jerkin, is a kind of a jacket or upper Dublet with four Skirts or laps. An Inckline, signifies to have know∣ledge or hear of a thing. Ise, signifies sometimes I shall, and som∣times I am. Ist, signifies is it. Jarbl'd, is dagled or dirty. Ingle, signifies fire.
K. A Keaustril, is a great bon'd course Creature. A Keauke, is a Cook. Knawe, is Know. To Kedge, is to fill one very full. A Kite, signifies the belly. Kirne Milk, is butter Milk, Knarl'd, is eaten and torn with the Teeth. A Kneet, is a Knight. Keen, signifies Fierce or earnest. Knawn, is known, To Kittle, is to Tickle. Kye, are Cowes. A Kirne, is a Chirne. A Kirk, is a Church. Kelk signifies to Groan.
L. TO Late, is to seek. A Laer, is a Barn. Lig, is to lye. Leauke, is to look or behold. Never Lin, signifies not to tire or give over. Lang, is long. To Lite, is to Rely on, or trust to. Liggin, is lying or resting. Lyth ye, Lyth ye, is as much as to say hark ye, hark ye. To Lug, is to tug, pull or bite. A Libber, is a Gelder. Leeter, is Lighter. For'th lang Lane, is when a thing is borrowed with an intention never to be pay'd again. Leetsome, signifies to be pritty Chear∣ful.
Leather, is rather. Lawer, is lower. Lownd, is calm and mild. Loppon, is Leaped. A Langsettle, is a long Wainscot Bench to sit on. A Loft, is a Chamber. To Leet, is to alight. A Lantom, is a pritty distance, or way off. Laith, is loath. A Layer-father, is an Instructer, Teach∣er, or prompter. To Lit, is to dye. Lucken Brow'd, is hanging knit Brows. Thou lees, is thou lyes.
M. TO mack, is to make. Mirk, is dark. To mar, is to spoil. Mistetch, signifies to get an ill use o Custom. Mell, is Between. Mare, is more. To Meause, is wonder or admire. Mun, is must. Maut, is Malt. Meay, is moe. A Meer, is a Mare. Maugh, is a brother-in-Law. Meeterly, is indifferent. Mawks, are Maddocks. Mislicken'd, is disappointed. Mains flaid, is much afraid. Mickle is much.
Meauted, is thought, dreamed, or fear∣ed. A Make, is a fellow, or companion. Mence, is handsomness, or Credit. To marvil, is to admire or wonder. Misken, is not to know. Mains fain, is very glad. Mains fine, is very fine. Meaun, is the Moon. Meause as you use, that is when one judgeth another according to their own doings. Mawkie, is full of Maddocks. To Morne, is to morrow.
N. NAr, is near. Neen, signifies Eyes. Nut, is not. Nean or Neayn, is none. Neay, is no. A Newke or Neawke, is a Corner. Neet, is night. Neem, is Ʋncle. Neer Rack, is never matter; or take no care. Neawn, is Noon. Nawn, is own. Nowther, is neither. Neest, is next. Naupe and Nevill, is to beat and strike.
O. OƲght, is any thing. Onny, is any. Ownder, is the afternoon. Owse, is an Ox. Odd Charrs, signifies triffling business, or small Errands. Ommost, is almost. P. TO putt, is to push with the head. Pratty; is handsome, or pritty. Preauf, is proof. To plew, is to plow. To mack the Pot play, is to make the Pot boyl. Pokes, are Sacks. Pudding-pock, is the Pudding bag. A Pleugh, is a Plough.
It ploshes, signifies to be all wet under foot. Perry, is a little Cur Dog. Pusom'd, is poyson'd. A Pownd, is a Pond of water. To preaze, is to presse towards a plac or endeavour to go that way. The Paete, is the head. Preasure, is Rennet to make Chees withal. A Pringle, is a little silver Scotc Coine about the bignesse of a penny with two xx. on it. Pybald, is to be of two Colours. To prate, is to talk saucily. R. A Rape, is a Rope. To Rout, is to roare. Rive, is to tear.
Reek, is smoak. A Reckincrewke, is the pot hanger. I Reed, is I advise. Reant, is root. Remmon'd, is removed. A Reel, is an instrument Women wind their linnen or hempen yarne on. A Rock, is a Distaffe. Ream Kit, is the Cream pot. Reasty, is when Bacon is yellow and taste rank. Reet, is right: To Reet a thing down, ir to make it smooth. Riggin, is the Ridge of an house. Reeks, is it smokes. Rame, is to Rove, Rake, scrape, or pull. Rencky, is great and large. Ranck, is thick or throng. To rue, is to repent.
Rife of Tongue, is quick and nimble of Tongue. Reefie, is Scabby or Itchy, S. SIne, is since. Sike, is such. Seaun, is quickly. A Skeell, is a Milk Pale, or Water Pale. Sell, signifies self. To Suckle, is to let a Calf suck the Dam or Mother. Streay, is Straw. Strangly, is strongly. Swamp, is empty or smal. A Sile, is a strainer for Milk. To Spang ones gates, is to make hast. Snithe, is very cold and piercing. Seaure, is sure. Smiddy, is a Black-Smiths Shop.
Specks, are long thin pieces of Iron which Husband-men nail upon their Ploughs, to save them from wear∣ing. A Sock, is the Plough share to put on the Nose of the Plough. Sawt, is salt. A Stag, is a young Colt. Sarraes, signifies serves. A Shack-fork, is a stick with two grains which Thrashers use to shake up the Straw with all, that all the Corn may fall out from amongst it. Steauls, are Stools to sit on. Swingle-trees, are crooked piecs of wood to which the Horse Traces are made fast behind the Horses. Strang, is strong. Seavy, is full of Rushes.
A Seave, is a Rush that is drawn through in grease, which in ordina∣ry poor houses, they light up and burn instead of a Candle. To Saw Corn, is to sow Corn. A Steg, is a Gander. To steek or steck, is to shut. A stand Heck, is a Cratch that stands on feet in a Fold-Yard, for Cattel to eat their Fodder out on. A Sneck, is a latch of a door or Gate, To slate a Beast, is to hound a Dog at him. To stick, is to Butcher and kill a thing. To stramp, is to tread upon. Skitter, is when Cattel Scoure, or shite thin. Slocken, is to quench the thirst.
Side Lanyells, are hopples for Hor∣ses. A Stane, is a stone. A Sneauskin, is a leather which Wo∣men have fast at their Distaff, and lay upon their thigh to twirle their Spindle upon. A Spence, is a little place made with Wainscot, or a Lattice to set Milk or drink in. To Slake heat, is to scale or loose heat. Sammaron, is a Cloath betvveen Lin∣nen and Hempen, not altogether so course as the one, nor fine as the other. A Seck, is a Sack. Sheaun, are Shooes. Slovvn, is stoln. A Sark, is a shirt.
Sowle, is all kind of moyst or supping Victuals. To Storken, is to cool, or wax stiff or hard. Seay, is so. To speer out a thing, is to enquire after a thing. To speer the Deaur, is to shut the door. To whemmele a Bowlover a thing, is to cover it with a Bowle. Snawke, is to smell. Snurles, are the Nostrils. To Snite, is to blow the Nose. A Stee, is a Stye or Ladder. To semper, is to smile. To stown, is when a thing smarts. Not to see a stime, is to be blind, and see nothing at all. A Saul, is a soul. Sad, is sorrowful or Melancholly.
Stanfra, is backward, or unwilling. Sud, is should. A Stiddy, is an Anvill. Spatterdashers, are things to put above ones Stockings to keep them clean from mire and dirt. To run on snack-snarles, is to run on heaps headlong together. Where it never stack, is where it ne∣ver stuck. Sporn, is shut or closed. Sesta, is sayest thou. Stickle but hast, is very great hast, or speed. To snoutband one, is to be very an∣gry and hasty with one. Stark at the Rent, is very dear at the Rent. To scrat, is to scratch. Sattl'd, is settled. Sackless, is guiltless, or innocent.
To Swelt, is to dye. A Saind, is a Messenger or message. A Soape, is a little quantity or sup. T. A Tee, is the string the Cow Legs are made fast withal whilest she is milked. Tinye, is little. Well tidded, is when a Cow hath a good Ʋdder, and promiseth fair for store of milk. Tweay, is two. Thur, is these. Tane, is taken. Tawke, is talk. Tewh, is tough.
Teaut, is to it. Teaume, is time. Teng'd, is stung or sting'd. A Teaup, is a Ram. Like to tawme, is like to swound. Traild, is pull'd and dragged up and down. Teau, is to. A Tantril, is an idle tatling Wo∣man. Titter, is quicker or sooner. A Drull, is a mucky fowl Quean. Tack, is to take. Tengs, are Tonges. Twonty, is twenty. Trouts, are Curds. Trash, is green fruit, as Apples, &c. Timerous to please, is ill to please. Touch-wood, is rotten Wood laid by
to dry, that it may take fire at any spark given by a flint and steel. V. VArra, is very. Ʋnscape, is to put one in mind of a thing that is not Convenient. Ʋncuths, signifies News. To Ʋrle, is to draw ones self up on a heap. An Ʋnderlout, is a kind of a slave, or Drudge. An Ʋneuth Dog, is a strange Dog. Ʋnsawncy, is unluckie, or not fortu∣nate. To unfest, is to untye or unloose.
W. WArk, is work. Weese, is we shall. Whaugh, is a word of Admiration, as God bless us, &c. Wally, Wally, is Good lack, good lack or Oh me, Oh me. War, is were. Wad, is would. A Whye, is an Heifer. To waite, is to know. Whore, is Where. Wya, is well. Wheay, is Who. Whickens, are roots of Weeds. Whins, are Furz. Wellaneerin. is Lackady, or Alas, alas. To Whaug one, is to beat one. Wrang, is wrong.
A whanck, is a great piece. A Whelk, is a great fall. Wont, is dwelt or lived. A wreck, is aboundance. Whewts of Girfe, are young fresh Piles or blades of Grass. Whig, is Clarified Whey, put up with Herbs to drink. A Whean Cat, is a shee Cat. Warse, is worse. Wayes is mee, is woes me. Whilk, is which. Weell, is well. Wancle, is uncertain or changeable Weather. Weay, is sorrowful. Wilta, is will thou. To winch, is to Kick. Whesht, Whesht, is peace, peace. Wadta, is would thou. Weand, is Mad.
A Wee bitt, or Wirly bitt. To Wreak, is to fret and be angry. Y. YAn, is one. Yauds, are Horses. Yowes, are Yewes. A Yat, is a Gate. Yance, is once. To Yeaud, is to go. To Yeauke, is to Itch. The Yane, is the breath. FINIS.
A Catalague of some Books, Sold by Francis Hildyard, Bookseller at the Signe of the Bible, in Stonegate; in York. GRotij Opera 4 vol. fol. Eusebij &c. Historia Eccles cum notis valesij Gr. & Lar. 3. vol. fol. Sylvij Opera Medica fol. Heisechij Lexicon 4to. Monasticon Anglicanum 3 vol. fol. Matthaej Pai Historia newly printed with a large Glose &c. Hortus Indicus Malabaricus, continens Regni Malabarici apud Indos celeberrimi omnis generis Plantas rariore, Latinis, Mala∣baricis, Arabicis, & Bramanum Character ibus nominibusque expre¦ss as, Unà cum Floribus, Fructibus & Seminibus, naturali magni∣tudine à peritissimis pictoribus delineatas, & ad vivuit exhibitas, 2 vol. fol. Originis contra Cessum 4to. —contra Marcion. 4to. Dr. Hammond's Works now compleated in 4 vol. fol. Dr. Jsaac Barrow's Works 2 vol. fol. Dr. Willis Works Compleat, fol. English. Dr. Brady's Introduction to the old English History. Iosephus Works, newly reprinted, fol. Mr. Pole's Annotations on the Bible, fol. 1. vol. Bakers Chronicle fol. newly reprinted. Dr. Combers Companion to the Temple in one vol. fol. The Works of the Author of The whole duty of Man, fol. Dr. Grews Anatomy of Plants, upon Royal Paper, fol. Dr. Salmons Iatrica se Praxis Medendi, 4to. —Dispensatory 8vo. —Doron Medicum. 8vo. —Synoptis Medicinae. 2 vol. 8vo. —Horae Mathmaticae 8vo. Sr. Ionas Moores System of the Mathmaticks, 4to. 2 vol. Itineareum totius sacrae Scripturae, or the Travels of the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Judges, Kings, our Saviour Christ and
his Apostles, as they are related in the Old and New Testa∣ments, &c. 4to. History of the Bucaniers in America, 4to. L'Estranges Observators, 1. vol. fol. —Tracts, in two vol. 4to. The Works of the famous Mathematician, Mr. Edmund Gun∣ter. 4to. A short Dictionary English and French, with another French and English according to the present use, and Modern Ortho∣graphy, by Guy Mege Gentleman Contemplations Moral and Divine, by Sr. Matthew Hale Knight, late Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, 8vo. Dr. Gibsons Anatomy of Humane Bodies Epitomized. Dr. Patricks Paraphrase on the Psalms. 2 vol. 8vo. —Paraphrase on Iob. 8vo. —Paraphrase on Proverbs. 8vo. —Devout Christian 12mo. —Christian Sacrifice, 12mo. A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Non-conformist Short Discourses upon the whole Commonprayer, designed to inform the Judgement, and excite the Devotion of such as day∣ly use the same, by Th. Comber, D. D. Plutarchs Lives done into English by several hands, the three first vol. being all that are yet extant. Plutarchs Morals, done in English by several hands, they two first vol. being all that are yet extant. Mr. Creech's Translation of Lucretius, 8vo. —Horace, 8vo. —Theocritus, 8vo. LAW BOOKS. The Statutes at large by Ios. Keeble Esq. fol. An Assistance to Justices of Peace by the same Authors. fol. Plowdens' Commentaries, fol. newly reprinted. Roles Grand Abridgement in two vol. fol. —Reports, 2 vol. fol. Cookes 1. Reports in English, fol. —12. and 13. Reports Eng. fol. —Institutes in 4 vol. fol. Croke's Reports in English, fol. 3 vol. reprinted with the ad∣dition
of many thousand of References never before printed. Leonard's Reports Comt. in one vol. fol. Sheppard's Common Assurances. fol. —Grand Abridgment▪ 2 vol. 4to. A New Book of Entries by Sr. Tho. Robinson. fol. Dalton's Justice of Peace fol. —Office of a Sheriff, fol. Brown's Entries fol. Compleat. Anderson's Reports, fol. Compleat. Moors Report, fol. Hobarts Reports, fol. Modern Reports, fol. Sidderfin's Reports, 1 and 2 parts, fol. Styles Reports, fol. Yelvertons Reports, fol. Vaughan's Reports, fol. Huttons Reports, fol. Owen's Reports fol. Littletons Reports, fol. Saviles Reports, fol. Dyers Reports, fol. Pultons De pace Regis & Regni fol. Cawleys Laws against Recusant, fol. Manlys Interpreter fol. Officina Brevium, fol. Sr. Orlando Bridgmans Presidents, fol. Vidians Entries, fol. Blounts Law Dictionary, fol. Compleat Clerk, 4to. Wests Presidents 4to. Godolphins Abridgement of Ecclesiastical Laws, 4to. Brownlows and Goldsbroughs Reports 4to. Swinbourn of Wills, 4to. Swinbourn of Wills, 4to. Winggtes Abridgement of all the Statutes in force, and use untill this present year 1684. 8vo. Terms of the Law. 8vo. Clarks Guide all four parts. 8vo. The Parsons Councellor, by Sir Simon Degg, 8vo. The Parsons Law. The Laws of Jamaica, 8vo. Abridgement of Crokes Reports by W. Hughs. 8vo.
Kitchin of Courts. 8vo. Hales Pleas of the Crown, 8vo. And all sorts of School Books, as also Pictures ingraved, Etch'd, and in Missintinto, Maps of several sorts, both plain and Colloured. FINIS.
