M1854 R26842 9566602 43632
A MERRY-CONCEITED FORTUNE-TELLER: Pognosticating to all Trades and Pro∣fessions their good and bad Fortune. Calculated according to Art, for the Meridian of England, but may serve for all four parts East, West, North and South, from the beginning of the world to the end thereof. woodcut of man with hat London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White-Lion near Py-corner. 1662.
woodcut of man looking at sun
woodcut of gentleman wearing ruff collar and hat
To the Readers of this Fortune Book, Containing much good and bad luck Both to the Cobler and the Cook, To the Fool, Knave and Rook, And in this Book remember this, That Fortuna favet fatuis. For only this prediction is left out, Fools shal have mony when wit walks with∣out REader, because thou desirest no jeers to swallow, unless it be a cup of Ale or Wine, and then yov have the fortune to encounter with better wits, who make you pay the reckon∣ing: Therefore I will tell you that here is a Book of Fortune, which is subject to di∣vers fortunes; some good, some bad; the good are these; if mens brains are not stuft with Woodcocks brains, this book shall have good luck; also if men desire to laugh rather
then be melancholly, or to wake rather then to burn their shins by the fire fide, then this book shall have good fortune, but it shal have ill luck when men become as melancholly as Mantle stocks, as wise as Senators, as deaf as the Sa∣razens head without Newgate, and so forget∣ful, that they forget good turns, and their be friends. But I doubt not but this book shall have fools fortune, and that is, to get more money then those that have more wit. So wishing you may have the fortune to like this book. Farewel and be fat. Yours, The Fortune-Teller.
A merry Fortune Book. IT is held by all Astrologers, and by the whole Synod of Figure flingers and Star-gazers, that di∣vers sorts of people shall have good and bad fortune; namely, some shall have a great deal of money and no wit, and some shall have a great deal of wit and no money. Also divers maids shall have husbands at fiftéen, and some shall stay till five and thirty, and otheps shall lead Apes in hell, while others shall get such a cruel fall that they shall have a tynpany in their belly with two héels; and some shal sit up so late a starch∣ing a nights, that they shall forget to say their prayers when they go to bed. Also some widows shall have the fortune to bury thrée or four hus∣bands, and the lost shall commonly use them worst, and some that wéeps by the vertue of Onions in their handkerchiefs, shall be ac∣counted very loving wives. Also some women shall have the fortune to lye abed and be count∣ed good Huswives, while their servants do their work. And some lewd women shall have the fortune to give their husbands the common fortune of the horns, and yet be estéemed very honest women at a Christening.
Some shall have good fortune to have their words pass currant, though they speak non∣sence, & some shall have the fortune to have all their words taken for ustion and such stuff. Some Taylors shall have the fortune to trust young Gallants, & have their Bills paid with ill words, and some shall have the fortune to get into a new sui before they have paid for the old. Some shall have the fortune to come into company and come off unwounded by the shot: and some shall have the fortune to spend more then they get. Besides, Porters shall be very heavily opprest, and fortune shall load them with Murron and Béef, but feldom with more money then they can carry. Tinkers shall have the fortune to stop one hole and make thrée, and yet they shall be ac∣counted Lads of mettal, and if they escape Banbury they may have a better fortune. Oltlers shall make themslves fortune, by cosening your horse, and may feed themselves by starving your horse. Milk-maids shal have fortune sometimes to spill their milk, and let them take héed of evil meditations while they are milking their Kine. Tapsters shall have the fortune to get by cold weather & drunkards, but they shal have but bad fortune when they sell their drink for chalk. Vintners shall have good fortune if they kéep their custom: and they shall have ill fortune
when widows tears become White wine, and▪ Bacchus turn Water-bearer. Chandlers shall have good fortune in Lent time, when mustard is fetched by horse-loads, and they shall have ill fortune when the Crow pisses vinegar. Erocers shall have the fortune to go behind-hand, & yet have mony good reasons for their so doing, & shal pass in the dark for honest men. Apothecaries shall have a very swéet fortune, and gives other their bitter pills, and instead thereof receive swéet money, which is a com∣fortable Cordial. Inkéepers shall have good fortune, if their guests pay surely, and spend fréely, but they shall have ill fortune, when their guests bring their suppers in their cloak-bag. Shoomakers shall be heirs of Gentlemen by their crast, by their curtesie to their own profession, they shall often have the ill fortune to drink on Mundays, and be never sober all the wéek after. Coblers stall have the fortune to be some∣times all to pieces, and somtimes their wives shall come after them to the Alehouse, & most commonly they shall have most work in foul weather, and it shall be their fortune to set o∣ther men upright, & to tread awry themselves. Oyster-wives shall have the fortune to gape after wealth, and to scold at Billingsgate, un∣till
their thorats be sore, and to cry often. Cooks shall be very fortunate, and money shall come unto them by the belly, and it shall be their fortune to get most in Term time, by Countrymen; their worst fault shall be that they shall be glad of greazie fortunes, and a greazy satten Doubler. Sergeants shall be very fortunate by other mens folly. Butchers shall have the fortune to sell their meat sometimes at a right rate, but at Lent it shall be their ill fortune to sit and make Pricks against Easter. Pudding-pie-wenches shall have very good fortune to inrich themselves by Prentices and Countrymen, but if a candles end be found in their pudding, then they shall have ill fortune, for no body will come unto their house. Bricklayers shall have very good fortune if they come down no faster then they go up, that is, if they fall not down from their scaffolds, but to say truth, if they have no craft in dawb∣ing, they are like to have very ill fortune. Carpentures shall have good fortune if they live within rule and compass, and they shall have ill fortune when their children are chips of another mans block. Labourers shal have very good fortune if they can have work all the year, and they shall have had fortune, when they spend their wages on
Saturday nights, and Sundays, and to have never a penny on Munday. Cutlers shall have good fortune if they can sharpen their wits, as well as their kinves, and they shall have bad fortune when they cannot take off the edge of their wives tongues. Barbers shall have good fortune if young∣mens beards would grow faster, and they shall have ill fortune when women take their trades out of their hanes, and give men a Turnbal-stréet trimming. Habberdashers shall have good fortune when each gallant wears Beavers, and when Coun∣trymen buy course felts, they shall have ill for∣tune when their knavery is felt out. Coblers shall have good fortune if they could mend their own slves, as well as others shoos, and they shall have ill fortune when they go a∣wry into the Alehouse, and are underlaid, or rather overlaid with drink, so that they come réeling home at night. And Hostesses shall have very good fortune if they do not take chalk for chéese, and they shall have bad fortune by these thrée letters, I. O V. and the less they practice to write the white hand, the more shall be their profit. Coopers shall have good fortune when the Barrels break their hoops, and they shall have ill fortune when they sit at an Alehouse, & tell a tale of a tub over a cup of Ale, so that the next
morning they are fain to hoop their head about with a night-cap. Brewers shall have good fortune if they could make smal béer fox men as well as strong, and they shall have ill fortune when their wives drink too much of their new wort, and so be∣come loose bodied. Fishmongers shal have good fortuen if Lent would last, or if men were given more to fish then to flesh: but they shall have ill fortune when they are fain to kéep their Codsheads, because they cannot sell them. Shoomakers shall have good fortune if they do not drink on Mundays, & so play all the wéek, & they shall have ill fortune when the stitch of love takes them, so that they go beyond their Last, and run awoing to get a young Lass. Chambermaids shall have very good fortune if they can find their maiden heads after they are once lost, and they shall have a very heavy fortune when their Swéethearts run away, and leaves them with child. Kitchinmaids shall have a very fat fortune if they can put off their Kitchin-stuff, and all their Coney-skins at a good rate, and they shall have ill fortune when they burn off all their beauties, so that they are fain to die Maids, because they are dry meat. Fishwives shall have good fortune by Mer∣chants wives, when they make them pay déer
for Kickshaws, and they shall have ill fortune when they cry new fish so long till it stink up∣on their hands. Watermen shall have very good fortune if they be not drunk when the tide of good for∣tune comes, and they shall have bad fortune, when they cast anchor too often at the Alehouse, or in a great frost. Semsters shall have very good fortune by Genglemens shirts, bands and handerchers, when they bring them to their chambers, where they are kindly used for their white work: and they shall have bad fortune when they have got a could and cannot use their tongues to cry What lack ye, see fine Bands and holland Shirts, &c. Scriveners shall have good fortune by other mens ill fortune, and by leting all men know when other men go in debt; and they shall have ill fortune when they dare not come a∣gainst men for their ears, or when their kna∣very and forgery is discovered, for then they are quite canceld, and their Broker may lend him a cloak for his knavery. Malsters shall have very good fortune if there were never a sober man in a Parish; and they shall have ill fortune when their Kills are set on fire, because theee are so covetous, so miser∣ly Maltworms. Mercers shall have good fortune to talk of
good stuff at all times, especially in their own shops; And they shall have ill fortune when Ci∣ty gallants shufle & cut with them, & having got the game in their hands turn them up noddies. Tobacco men shall have very good fortune if every mans nose were as wide as a chimney, for then they would spend a great deal of To∣bacco; and they shall have ill fortune, when their is a frost in their fire-pan. Brokers shall have very good fortune by the Hangmans Wardrobe. Tankardbearers shall have very réeling for∣tune, if all the Conduits in London would run wine or ale: and they shall have ill fortune when they pawn their Tankards for good liquor. Curriers shall have good fortune, for though they marry scolding wives, yet they can curry their hides. Landresses shall have good fortune if all things be cleanly about them, & they shall have ill fortune, when their swéethearts run away from them and leave them in the suds, Nurses shall have good fortune if women could▪ lie In every month, and they shall have ill fortune when they consent to the stealing of some Gentlemans daughter, and so are banisht from Christenings, & stealing of Swéetmeats. Carmen shall have very good fortune, but they may say, Gramercy horse for it, and they shall have ill fortune, when they quarel with
Coach-men, and get a broken Coxcomb. Saylors shall have very good fortune if they can escape all dangers both by Sea and Land: and they shall have very bad fortune when they cannot go on the score, and be drunk before they go a voyage. Fidlers shall have good fortune if they be in tune in Term time: and they shall have ill fortune when they play underneath a Cham∣ber window, and are rewarded with an ex∣crementious Chamberpot flung upon them. Braziers shall have good fortune if the bra∣zen age would come again, bowsover they shall have the fortune to be accounted Lads of mettal. Almanack-makers shall have good fortune if they can tell when it shall happen. Glovers shall have very good fortune, by Weddings and Fairs: and they shall have worse fortune by sewing prickseam ware. Pedlars shall have good fortune if they carry two packs with them, one full of ware the other full of honesty: and they shall have in fortune at markets when Fair-days prove foul. Weavers shall have the fortune to be belo∣ved by pretty wenches, and they shall have the fortune sometimes to sing Catches in winter∣nights till they are mellow. Carriers shall have very good fortune for hey are always in the road way to riches,
and they shall have ill fortune by false beards and pistols, or Highway-men. Prentices shall have very good fortune if they can learn to be Fréemen with discretion: but they shall have ill fortune when after they are out of one Prentiship they will enter into ano∣ther, & marry a wife that will be their Master. Button makers shall have very good fortune if they can kéep them that are in a fear from making buttons backward. Polterers shall have very good fortune if hey can make Géese of their customers: and they shall have ill fortune when their old Coneys will not go off for young Rabits. Market-women shall have good fortune, when they can dispatch quickly, and turn their commodities into money: but they shall have ill fortune when they sit till their féet be cold before they can sell their ware, and they shall shall have worse fortune when they méet Robin Good fellow upon the way as they are riding home. Booksellers shall have very good fortune by other mens wits: and they shall have ill for∣tune when they have no customers for their Books, but Sir Ajax. Applewomen shall have good fortune by Boys & wenches that have the gréensickness: and they shall have ill fortune when they are cosened in the dark with naughty Tokens.
Hornmakers shall have very good fortune, but that some Gentlemen take their trade out of their hands. Midwives shall have swéet fortune at Chri∣stenings, and they shall have bad fortune when all maids resolve to turn Nuns. Draymen shall have good fortune to carry a great deal of Ale and Béer, and be sober men: but they shall have ill fortune when they drink more then their brains can carry. Chemney sweepers shall hove very good fortune, to climb high, and sldome fall lower. Crooked-Lane men shall have very good fortune, if they could turne their Latin com∣modity into English coyne: But they shall have bad fortune when they are turnd them∣selves into Latin men or Cornuti. Plaisterers shall have good fortune, when they take a good bargaine by the great, and are well paid: but they shall have ill fortune in frosty weather, or when Surgeons become Plasterers. Broom-men shall have good fortune by foul houses and old shooes. Potsellers shall have very bad fortune when Chimney sweepers and Oyster wives scorn to drink in any thing but plate. Tripe wives, shall have very good fortune if their tripes and themselves vie which shall
exceed in cleanness: but they shall have bad fortune when Summer weather sowers their Commodities. Horse Smiths shall have very good fortune by sundry Iades, and by shooting horses, pro∣vided that they do not prick them, and they shall have bad fortune when they drench them∣selves at the Ale-house, and kill themselves with drinking. Wheel-Wrights shall have good fortune when the world runs on wheels, and they set to make a paire of those wheels: bad fortune when Carts, Coaches, &c. go down into the Country, and come not up againe. Mountebanks and ignorant professors of Physick, shall have good fortune if they can scoure More Ditch with a Purgation, and drive out the corruption of the times by the posteriours of Terra incognita: and they shall have ill fortune, when men grow temperate in their dyet, and live honest, for then they shall live as long as nature will permit, and afford them no impoloyment for their Drugs. Vpholsters shall have very good fortune, when new married couples begin houskéeping but they shall have ill fortune when men will lye as Adam and Eve did, and that was with∣out bed or shéets. Sextons shall have very good fortune, when the Bells towles oftnest, and be shall sing
while other men wéep: But he shall have bad fortune when every man shall live as long as old Nestor, or Mathusalem. Botchers shall have good fortune, by good husbands that will mend their cloaths: and they shall have bad fortune, when every man wears a suit of right perpetuand, a Buff doublet, and hose of durance. Hosters shall have very good fortune, by legs, for one pair of legs shall be better worth to them then two pair of hands: and they shall have ill fortune when their comes a fashion up to go bare-foot, and bear-legd. Ditchers and country Labourers shall have very good fortune, when the Theames makes a breach into the Marshes and they shall have very ill fortune when they make a hedge to kéep in the Cuckow, that is, when they work and are not payd. Millers in the Country shall have very good fortune, if they be not troubled with the stone, so that they can let go their water when they list, and the Country Hostisses shall have bad fortune, by hey-makers in Summer time, and ill paymasters in the winter, that will call like Lords, and pay like Lobs. Stocking-menders shall have very good fortune when other men are out at heels. Bellows-menders shall have very good for∣tune
by Sea-coal fires, especially if they ould make a payre of bellowes that would blow a wind-mil sayle round: and they shall have ill fortune when Ritching-maids blow their fires with their back sides. Sadlers shall have good fortune when beg∣gers ride on horsebarck, and no man shall fetch a penny worth of mustard, but a cock∣horse: but they shall have ill fortune when rich men ride on poor mens backs, the women on their husbands shoulders. Scabingers shall be fortunate, for they carry away the corruption of the times, and therefore they shall get muck enough: but they shall be unfortunate, when Lodon streets are paved with frée-stone, and so kept cleane with swéeping. Smell-feasts shall have very good fortune, when they can fill their bellis at anothers ra∣ble, and they shall have ill fortune in Ember wéeks, and on fasting days. Also some that have little honesty, shall have good fortune to be counted good men: and and many honest poor men shall have the bad fortune to be counted knaves. Some also shall have the good fortune to marry a rich Widdow, that shall advance them to a good fortune: and some againe shall have the bad fortune to be undone by a Peti∣coat.
Some Travelers shall have the good for∣tune to tell lyes, and yet he believed, and some shall have such bad fortune, that they shall walk in Pauls, and dine amongst the Tombson a stone, and then you will say they they have sharps stomacks. Also Souldiers shall have very good fortune if they can come home again, in a whole skin, and they shall have bad fortune when they can∣not shift to kéep off their white enemies, have a valiant stomack for want of meat. Porters shall havve good fortune, if they can bear drink well, and ill fortune when their wives make them carry coals. Old Mads shall have good fortune if they can marry some rich gul; but they shall have ill fortune when they are got with child, and the father is run away, and they are eforced to sing Quéen Dido over their Cradle. Carmen shall have good hap when the Hack∣ney Coaches are gone down, and they shall have bad luck when they are drunk within, and let their Carts wait without. Chandlers shall have good hap when they find most sawce used, and they shall have ill luck when the Crow pisses vinegar. Country youngmen shall have good fortune when they find a purse of money in a hollow trée, and they shall have ill fortune when their purses are pict at London.
Great drinkers shall have good fortune when they go home sober; and ill fortune when they are so drunk that they cannot go home all night. Costermongers shall have ill luck when fruit is very déer, and they shall have good luck when there are no maids that have the gréen sickness. Those that are poor men, shall have good luck when rich men pay them wages duly, and they shall have ill luck when money lyes bed ridden, Youngmen shall have good luck when they obtaine their swéet hearts, and they shall have ill luck when they cast away their kind∣ness upon coy wenches. Millers shall have good fortune when they grind corn for all commers and have a great Tole dh, and they shall have ill fortune when their Mill is over-set with water. To conclude, some shall have more money then honesty, some shall have honesty, but little money, and some shall have neither mo∣ney nor honesty. Knaves and fools have very good fortune, as long as they continue their occupation of knavery and foolery, but they shall be very unfortunate when they turn wisemen. All sorts of Tradsmen shall have the good fortune to thrive and grow rich, when they
can get good trading again, but I cannot tell when this will be, but they shall have very ill luck when they can sing no other song then the Counter-Tenor. Citizens wives shall have very good fortune by going to Epsom-wels in the Summer-time, for there they may purge themselves of all their good quallities, but their Husbands shall have hornluck, for in the mean time they may chance to be made Cuckolds, and their wives cannot help it. Rope-makers shall have good fortune when Right and Iustice take place, for then they shall have imployment enough, but they shall have ill fortune when they dine with Packthread. The Hangman shall have very good fortune when great Thieves have the fortune to be hanged as well as little ones, and he shl have the fortune not to want work so long as he lives, but he shall have very ill luck, when Thieves instead of being transported from New gate to Tyburn in a Cart, are shiped a∣way for Iamaica. Astrologers and stargazers shall have very good fortune, when they can tell when it shall be, or when they can foretell, when they shall have more gold chains sent them, but they shall have the fortune always to be coun∣ted cheaters and deceivers when their genus leads them to nothing but lies, and they shall
also have the ill fortune to be accounted Owis when country men shite at their doors, and they cannot tell who did it. Dray men and Brewers shall have very good fortune when by the flings they come to be made Lords, and they shall have good for∣tune when they dy before they come to Tyburn Coblers shall have very good fortune, when by mending old shoes, they can make them∣selves Lords and they shall be accounted Lads of the Gentle-Craft, when they can stitch themselves and their Lordships fast together but they shall have very ill luck when they come to be hanged for killing their brother Coblers, Whip cobler, good people pitty the blind. The Kingdome shall have good fortune when right and Iustice take place, for when they shall be eased of all taxes and ried from all cruelty, tiranny and oppression, and then every one shall enjoy what is there own, in peace and quietness; but they shall never have the good fortune to thrive so long as cruelty and oppression raigns over them, Probatum est. FINIS.
