m440 13118803 97792
BEATAM AETERNAM CLARIOR E TENEBRIS CELI SPECTO ASPERAM AT LEVEM CHRISTI TRACTO In verbo tuo Spes mea MUNDI CALCO SPLENDIDAM AT GRAVEM Alij diutius Imperium tenuerunt, nemo tam fortiter reliquit. Tacit. Histor. Li. 2. c. 47. p. 417
THE HISTORY OF THE Rebellions IN England, Scotland and Ireland: WHEREIN, The most Material Passages, Sieges, Battles, Policies and Stratagems of WAR, are im∣partially Related on both Sides; FROM The YEAR 1640. To the Beheading of the Duke of Monmouth in 1685. In Three Parts. By Sir ROGER MANLEY, Kt. late Governour of Land-Guard-Fort. — Quae{que} ipse Miserima vidi. LONDON, Printed for L. Meredith at the Angel in Amen-Corner, and T. Newborough at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's Church Yard. MDCXCI.
THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER. IN regard the Reputation of Hi∣stories, is generally raised on the Worth of their Authors, I thought it convenient to acquaint the World, That the Compiler of This, was a Gentleman of known Integrity, bred in the Church of England; for whose Cause, joined with that of the Royal Family, he was a valiant and zealous Champion: having been Personally engaged in the most consi∣derable Battles, which his Royal Ma∣ster, King Charles I. fought against his Rebellious Subjects.
You are not therefore here to expect, the Reversion of other Mens Labors; no borrow'd Fragments, or Scraps of Records; no patch'd, or imperfect Col∣lections; but, an entire uniform Hi∣story, with great Impartiality, and, for the most Part, of his own certain Knowledge. Yet, to free him from Suspicion of any Mistake in these Memoirs, it is sufficient to observe, That he collected▪ them in those Troublesome Times, whose Iniquity would not admit the Publication of them; which he re∣serv'd, till there was a clear Stage for Truth to appear on. And, having surviv'd this Great Rebellion for many Years, he has added to the Hi∣story of that, an Account of all the Remarkable Transactions, with the
Conspiracies, Insurrections and Tumults, that happ'ned in the Reign of King Charles II. And concludes, with the Invasion and Overthrow of the Duke of Monmouth in the West. I shall say no more, but that this Gentleman dying soon after he had finished these Commentaries, the Publication of them was entrusted with me. Which I did very readily under∣take, since I had the Honour to know the Author so well, that his very Name was a sufficient Recommenda∣tion of the Work. And, all honest Men that knew Sir Roger Manley, were very desirous of a History from his Hand, whose Pen was a oyal and Just as his Sword. Reader, honour the Memory of this brave Man, and think not ill of the
Publisher, who, like a faithful Exe∣cutor, presents thee with this his last Legacy. And, if thou take my Pains in good part, 'tis all the Acknowledg∣ment I expect from thee. Adieu.
THE CONTENTS. PART I. BOOK I. THE Ʋnion of the Kingdoms of Great Britain. The State of Affairs in England. The Scots Tumults, and their Causes. They Rebel, and Arm. The King Marches against them, but concludes a Peace. They break it, and enter England with an Army. The Little Parliament call'd, and dissolved. The Treaty at Rippon, referred to the Parliament which met in November 1640. The Preludes to their ensuing Re∣bellion. Strafford Impeach'd and Beheaded. The Fa∣tal Act of Continuance. The Scots dismissed. The King follows them into Scotland. The Irish Rebellion breaks out. The King upon his Return, is pompously re∣ceived by the Londoners. The King enters the House of Commons. The Bishops accused of High Treason. The King forced by Tumults, retreats Northward. Contests about the Militia. His Majesty is repulsed at Hull. p. 1.
BOOK II. The King attempts Hull in vain. Propositions sent to his Majesty to York. Most of the Lords, and many of the Commons repair to his Majesty. He erects his Stan∣dard at Nottingham, and raises an Army. Essex, the Rebels General at Worcester, at Keynton. The famous Battle of Edge-hill. Fight at Branford. The King fortifies Oxford. Some Actions in other Provinces. The Queen lands at Burlington. Goes to Oxford. The Battle of Lansdowne; Of Rownday Downe. The Siege and Relief of Glocester. The great Battle of Newbury. The Parliament invite the Scots to their Succour. They enter England. The Siege of York. The fatal Battle of Marston Moor. The Fights at Brandon Heath and Copedry-bridge. Essex defeated in the West. The second Battle of Newbury. A∣lexander Carew, and the Two Hothams beheaded. Mac-Mahon and Macquier executed. The Arch∣bishop of Canterbury martyr'd. The Treaty at Ux∣bridge. Essex discarded, and Sir Thomas Fairfax made General in his Place. 38. BOOK III. The Continuation of the Irish Rebellion. The Lords of the Pale, side with the Rebels. Their Model of Government. The Cruelty of the English in Ireland. Ormond makes first a Cessation, then a Peace with the Irish. Delivers Dublin to the English. The King vindicated from any Correspondence with the Irish Rebels. Fairfax marches Westward; recal∣led, besieges Oxford. The King relieves Chester. Takes Leicester. The Fatal Battel of Naesby de∣scribed. The King's Cabinet taken, and published
Fairfax relieves Taunton. The Fight at Lang∣port. He takes Bridgwater, Sherburne and Bri∣stol. The King's Travels and Labours. The Scots besiege Hereford. They quit it. The Fight at Rowton-Heath. Digby and Langdale defeated in the North. Barclay-Castle, the Devizes, and Ti∣verton taken. Cromwell takes Winchester and Ba∣sing-House by Assault. The Fight at Torrington. The Prince passes into France. The Lord Hopton disbands his Army. Distructions at Newark. The King returns to Oxford. The Lord Ashley de∣feated. 84. BOOK IV. The King leaves Oxford, and goes to the Scots Army. Hereford is surprized, and Chester surrender'd. Ox∣ford besieged, and taken. The other Royal Garrisons follow. Massey's Forces disbanded. Contests with the Scots. Their barbarous Ʋsage of the King. They sell him. He is imprisoned in Holmbey-House, The Hi∣story of the Scots Rebellion, and valorous Actions of Montross. Independency triumphant. The Army mu∣tinies, and seize upon the King at Holmbey. They court him, but deal treacherously with him. He flies to the Isle of Wight. 122.
BOOK V. The King in the Isle of Wight. His Message for Peace. The Four Dethroning Bills. The Votes of Non-address. Cap. Burleigh attempts the King's De∣livery; Rolfe his Life. The King appeals to the Peo∣ple. They rise in several Parts of the Kingdom. Are suppressed. Pembroke taken. The Scots defeated, and Hamilton a Prisoner. Colchester surrendered. The Treaty in the Isle of Wight broken by the Army. They seize upon the King. Garble the Parliament. The perjur'd Remains of the Commons, assume the Supream Power. Constitute a pretended Court of High Justice. Arraign, Condemn and Murther their King. His End and Elogy. 169. PART II. BOOK I. The Regicides prohibit the proclaiming of the Prince of Wales. They abolish the House of Lords, and the Go∣vernment by Kings. Choose a Councel of State. Dis∣place and Fine the Lord Mayor for refusing to publish the Act for abolishing of Monarchy. Declare they will maintain the Fundamental Laws. Erect a High Court of Justice. Hamilton, Holland and Capell, condemned by it and murthered. Several Acts of State. The Scots proclaim Charles II. Some Actions of the Levellers. The King leaves Holland, and goes by Brussels into France. The Duke of Gloucester ba∣nished. Continuance of the History of Ireland. The King at Jersey. Prince Rupert Sails from Kinsale to Portugal. Loseth his Brother Prince Maurice, by a
Hurrycane. The King at Breda; Treats and Con∣cludes with the Scots. Montrosse's unfortunate End. Fairfax routed, and Cromwell General. His Actions in Scotland. The Scots barbarous Ʋsage of the King. They are defeated at Dunbar. The King crowned at Schone. He enters England. The Battle of Wor∣cester. The King's miraculous Escape. 109, 110. BOOK II. Cromwell enters London Triumphantly. Continuation of the Irish Affairs. Ormond leaves Ireland, and Clan∣rickard, his Deputy there. Ireton dyes of the Plague. Monk takes Sterling, Dundee; and Subjugates Scot∣land. The Isles of Scilly, Barbadoes, Garnsey, Jersey, and that of Man, surrendered to the Regicides. Their Greatness. They are courted by the Neighbouring Kings and States. They send a solemn Embassy into Holland. Cromwell Cabals. Turns out the Mock-Parliament. Chooses another. Is chosen Protector. The Wars with the United Provinces. The various Sea-Fights betwixt the Two States. Cromwell makes a Peace with them, and a League with France. The Expedition of San Domingo and Jamaica. Blake's success at Tunis and Santa Cruz. Dunkirk taken. The Death of Oliver Cromwell. His Cha∣racter. 249.
BOOK III. Richard succeeds his Father in the Protectorate. He is deposed by the Army. The Rump restored! Lam∣bert defeats Sir George Booth. Montague returns with the Fleet out of Denmark. Lambert turns out the Rump. Monk dissents, and declares for the Rump. Lambert marches against him. Being deluded by Treaties, he is deserted by his Army. The Committee of Safety routed, and the Rump yet again restored. Monk marches to London. Readmits the Secluded Members. The Parliament dissolv'd by its own Act. An Abstract of the King's Actions and Motions abroad. He is proclaimed by the Parliament. Returns into England. His glorious Reception. The End of our Troubles. 278. PART III. BOOK I. The REBELLION breaks into new Flames. Some Millenaries secur'd. Venner's Insurrection, and End. The Presbyterians stickle for new Elections. Several Seditious Tumults detected and punished. The Plague consumes the People. The Conflagration of the City. Tumults in Scotland. Oate's Plot. The Parliament insist upon removing the Duke from the King's Presence and Councils. It is dissolved. Another Parliament call'd. The Duke retires from Court. A new Coun∣cil chosen. The Parliament refuse the King Money, and insist upon the Bill of Exclusion. It is also dissolved, another being Summon'd. A new Rebellion in Scotland. The Arch-bishop of St. Andrew's inhumanly butchered.
The Rebels are defeated at Bothwel-Bridge. The King sick. He recovers. The Duke returns to Court. Mon∣mouth Cabals, and is outed of his Employments. The Lord Stafford beheaded. The Parliament dissolv'd, and succeeded by another at Oxford, which is likewise dismiss'd. College is hang'd, and Shaftsbury try'd. The strange Encrease of the Fanaticks. Their In∣solence and Power in the City. They form a Con∣spiracy. The Council of Six. The Plot to Murther the King and Duke. The Providential Fire at New-Market. Keeling discovers the Conspiracy. Russel and Sidney are executed. Monmouth absconds, but upon his Submission is pardoned. He again transgresses, and is banished. The King dyes of an Apoplexy. The Duke succeeds. 312. BOOK II. The Rebellion breaks out in Scotland under Argile, in England under Monmouth. Both are vanquished, taken and executed. The Final Ruin and End of the Rebellion. 336.
COMMENTARIES ON THE REBELLION OF England, Scotland and Ireland. PART I. BOOK I. The Ʋnion of the Kingdoms of Great Britain. The State of Affairs in England. The Scots Tumults, and their Causes. They Rebel, and Arm. The King Marches against them, but concludes a Peace. They break it, and enter England with an Army. The Little Parliament call'd, and dissolved. The Treaty at Rippon, referred to the Parliament which met in November 1640. The Preludes to their en∣suing Rebellion. Strafford Impeach'd and Be∣headed. The Fatal Act of Continuance. The Scots dismissed. The King follows them into Scotland. The Irish Rebellion breaks out. The King upon his Return is pompously received by the Londoners. The King enters the House of Commons. The Bishops
accused of High Treason. The King forced by Tumults, retreats Northward. Contests about the Militia. His Majesty is repulsed at Hull. THE Kingdoms of Great Britain being United under the Dominion of one Prince, and the Animosities and Emula∣tions, which usually disorder Neighbour-Nations, thereby removed; gave a sudden Rise to a very great and formidable Power, which could not be destroyed but by it self. The Moderator of this vast Empire, was JAMES VI. King of Scotland, and First Monarch of Great Britain, un∣doubted Heir to both, as well by Right of Suc∣cession, from Margaret the only Daughter of Edgar Atheling, the last of the Saxon Princes, as by that of Force, derived to him from the Norman Con∣queror. This Wise and Learned Prince,Charles I. succeeds to the Crown. being gathered to his Fathers, the loss which his Domi∣nions suffered by it, however great, was abundant∣ly repaired by the Succession of his Son CHARLES; who being truly Heir to his Father's Greatness and Vertues, as well as Scepters, did excel all his Predecessors, in the more severe Disquisition of what was Fit and Just; so that our Tragedies will scarce find Credit with Posterity, whilst the Ages to come, mistrusting the Reports of such enormous Villainies, will look upon our unheard-of Vicis∣situdes, but as the Fancies of Poetry, and the De∣coration of Theatres. For, how is it possible to believe, that the Best of Princes should meet with the Worst of Subjects, on whom he had con∣ferred more Graces, than the whole Series of his Ancestors? and that he, who valued his King∣doms and Life, at a lower Rate than the Hap∣piness of his People, should by a Judicial Par∣ricide, be sacrificed to the ambitious Violence of a prevailing Faction in their Representative: and
that, under the pretence of Usurpation and Ty∣ranny? But these things happened, an everlasting Reproach to the Nation, and not to be atoned for by any Resentment, or Hecatombs of Vi∣ctims. King James left a flourishing Kingdom behind him, but an empty Treasury, and his Successor engaged in a War with Spain; and, what was worse, the Parliament that oblig'd the Father to Arm, abandoned the Son, when they had exposed him. Nor were the succeeding Parliaments more Obsequious, or forward in supplying his Neces∣sities, how great soever; either in recovering the Palatinate, or rescuing the French Protestants, though undertaken in Defence of the Reformed Religion. 'Tis true, his Third Parliament voted him Five Subsidies; but we must own also,The Petiti∣on of Right that the Petition of Right, being a Condescension even to Su∣pererogation, deserv'd their best Acknowledge∣ments; for, raised with that Grant, they, that very Session, questioned the Tribute of Tonnage and Poundage, though perpetually enjoyed by his Pre∣decessors, Kings of England; affirming; That he had resigned what Right he could pretend to it, by that very Concession; which they urged with so much Violence, that forgeting the Rules of Mo∣desty, the King was forced to Dissolve them, and to punish some of the most Factious of that Sedi∣tious Convention. But the Causes of these Heats must be further sought. In the Reign of Queen Mary, a great Number of People withdrew themselves out of England, whereof many,Some pre∣tended Cau∣ses of Se∣dition. infected with the Disci∣pline of Geneva, upon Queen Elizabeth's Assumption to the Crown, returning, brought that uneasie Preciseness with them, which suddenly grew to that height, by the Carlessness, or Pusillanimity of the Magistrates, under King James; that it did
not only insinuate it self, under the veil of Piety, amongst the People, but even into the Court, and Parliaments; where joining it self to those of Anti-Monarchic Principles, it endeavoured to diminish the Prerogative, and subject the King to those Necessities which might force him to unusual Ways of supplying them: Which also happened; for, being pressed by the indispensible Exigence of his Affairs, and perceiving no hopes of Subsidies from Parliaments, he began to have an Aversion for them so Constituted, and search for Refuge in his Pre∣rogative. And yet he had so much Reverence for the Laws, that he would act nothing contrary to them, as appears in Ship-Money; which Tax how∣ever it were imposed to vindicate the Honour of the Sea against Pyrates, and our Potent Neighbours, he would not exact it, till it was adjudged to him by all the Judges of Westminster, and that under their Hands. But the Common People despising the Moderation of their Prince, and instigated by those who desired a Change, crying out, That their Laws and Liberties were endangered, muti∣nied; attributing all the Errors and Misfortunes in the Government (for the Undertakings Abroad had not been very successful) to his Counsellors, that they might transversly smite him, and blast his Reputation. To this the exuberant Power of the Clergy, that pretended Exemption from the Jurisdiction of the Laicks, did not please. The unusual Introduction of Ceremonies, as they cried out, and the placing of the Communion-Table at the East-End of the Church, with the more severe Imposition of Rites, however indifferent (except in the Command) did trouble them, and were the occasion of very great Tumults in many Pa∣rishes. But nothing did equally move their Choler, and Pity, as the Punishment of some Seditious Scri∣blers against Ceremonies, and the Bishops their
Authors, by Incarceration, and cutting off their Ears; who, however Guilty, and deserving what the Rigour of Justice could inflict, were yet thought to be hardly dealt with, considering the serene Tran∣quillity of those Halcion Days. And truly, Peace, and its Concomitant, Plenty, flourish'd amongst us, to the Envy of our Neighbours, continuing to the Fourth Lustre of the King's Reign;The Flou∣rishing Con∣dition of the Nation. which might have been perpetual, being inexpugnable from A∣broad, if it had not been destroyed, by the more than Civil Rage of our Mischievous Dissenters. Nothing seemed wanting to our Felicity, before it was disturbed by these nefarious Tumults; and, our People, if they could have seen their own Happiness, were, considering the inexhaustible af∣fluence of all Things, the Liberty of Commerce, and the free Enjoyment of what they had acquired, the happiest of any Subjects, under any known Government in the World. But our Luxury en∣creasing with our Abundance, we grew wanton, and fell into such a Surfeit, that nothing but a vio∣lent Bleeding could effect a Cure. The true Cause of these Evils, had its Rise from the noxious Indulgence of our Physicians, who neglecting to stifle the Factious Humours of the Puritans in their Infancy, gave such force and boldness to this Contagion, that it unhappily Infected the whole Body Politick, to the Ruine of Hierarchy, the best of Spiritual, and Monarchy, the best of Temporal Go∣vernments. 'Tis scarce conceivable, that there were found any in so happy a State, that should seem to de∣sire a Change. And yet such there were; amongst which,Who they were who desired a Change. the chief Ring-leaders were the Presbyte∣rians, who had their Missionaries and Lecturers in all the Quarters of the Kingdom; and those swarms of Sectaries, their Brood, who contended for an equal Liberty in Civil, as well as Sacred Things.
The Catholicks wished for the Dominion of Rome in Spirituals. But the Gentry, and Lesser Nobi∣lity, which composed the House of Commons, out of Contemplation of their own Greatness whilst they sate there, preferred Democracy before all other. In the mean time, this disguised Im∣piety grew up, under the plausible pretence of San∣ctity, seducing the Vulgar with a Shew of Reli∣gion, into a Reverence of it. It is not imaginable how far this Sacred Novelty prevailed, by the sedi∣tious Fury of its Preachers, and their uncontroul∣ed railing against the received Rites of the Church, and the lawful Power of the King. It had be∣witch'd the Town, the Country, and Private Families into an Opinion of it; nor were the great Representatives of the Kingdom, exempted from its Contagion, which the King had abundantly Experimented in all the Parliaments he had sum∣moned: For in them the Novellists, and Demo∣craticks, pretending the Liberty and Defence of Religion, against the Designs of the Court, and Popery, oppressed the Prerogative to advance their own; endeavouring to raise the Authority of the People, whose Vicegerents they were, upon the Ruines of the King. To this, they branded with the Odious Title of Papists, all that opposed them, by which means they deceived the People, who are still the more addicted to their Superiors, by how much they observe them the more Zealous for the Advancement of Religion. And truly, the depravedness of the Age was so great, that what∣ever was said in behalf of the King and his Mi∣nisters against Popery, had no Credit; but on the contrary, whatever was affirmed, to perswade the People, that the Court did Favour Superstition, was greedily swallowed down without any regard to Reasons of State, which sometimes obliged to a Compliance with the Desires of Foreign Princes and
Embassadors. But the true Source of our Miseries came from Scotland; this Embryo of Rebellion, gather∣ing Strength from Foreigners, upon this Occasion. The Nobility in the Infancy of King JAMES, had, by the Connivance of Murrey the Governour,The Scots Tumults. usurped the Lands and Possessions belonging to the Cathedrals and Monasteries of that Kingdom; which they also enjoyed, untill King Charles, pressed with foreign Wars, and but ill supplied from Scot∣land, resolved, by the Advice of his Council there, to reunite the said Possessions to the Crown again; which he did by an Act of Revocation, with a Com∣mission of Surrend'ries of Superiorities and Tithes. But those Nobles resolved to turn all upside down, rather than part with their Usurpations, and be deprived of the Vassalage of the Ministers, and Land-owners. And so conspiring against the King himself, designed to oppose his Authority, both Sacred and Civil, in the next Parliament he should call. Moreover, there were some other Malecontents, who by reason of their Disaffection, had been denied such Titles and Honours, as they pretended to at his Majesties Coronation, who all joyned together; and because there are no Pretences more specious than those of Religion, nor more charming Bates to ensnare the Vulgar, it was thought most proper to be insisted on. Nor was it long be∣fore the Depravedness of the times, furnished them with Opportunities to manifest their Resent∣ments. The pious King was pleased to send the Liturgy and Book of Common-Prayers, signed with the Blood of the first Reformers of our Church,The King sends the Liturgy into Scot∣land. to the Kirk of Scotland; for he desired, to unite in the same Opinion in Spirituals, those People who were subject to the same Empire in Temporals. King JAMES had formerly proposed the same thing to his Countrymen at Aberdeen, who willingly assent∣ed
to it; and having framed it there, and adapted it to the Church of Scotland, it was sent into Eng∣land, where it lay; till by the Advice of the Privy Council at Edenburgh, and perswasion of some o∣thers nearer him, though very unseasonably, his Majesty returned it to them, with Command to have it used in all the Churches and Chapels of Scot∣land. This Advice, however laudable, was ill timed, for the growing Factions took thence an Occa∣sion to rebel; and 'tis scarce credible, with what contumacious Fury the Presbyterians (who would sooner sin against Religion its self than its Rites) did oppose it; crying out, that the King intro∣duced Superstition, and prophane Forms of Worship into the Church. Rumours were also spread abroad by the dissatisfied Nobles before-mentioned, who abhor∣red nothing equal with the Restitution of what they had usurped; as also by others of the Cabal, who longed for a Change, of reducing Scotland into a Province: So that the People thinking their Civil as well as Sacred Liberty were in danger, became obnoxious to the Artifices of every Faction. And this occasioned the Sedition of Edenburgh, and the zealous Madness of the Rabble against the Li∣turgy. The Sedi∣tion of E∣denburgh. Jul. 23. 1637.The Dean that officiated, as also the Bishop who should have preached, had much to do to escape with their Lives; their wild Auditors throwing their Books, Stools, and whatever else their Fury could seize on, at their Heads. Nor did they stick here; for, the prime Conspirators who had thus infatuated the lowest of the People, and in∣censed them against the Liturgy, engaged them al∣so, the better sort now consorting with them, in a Covenant, under pretext of vindicating their Re∣ligion, to abolish it; and gaping after the Church-Revenues, to extirpate the Hierarchy of-Bishops. Moreover, they took up Arms, being instigated
thereto by the Puritans of England, whom they had cajoled with a Declaration, as they call'd it, to vindicate their Actions, and Intentions; and re∣nouncing their Duty and Allegiance, they seized upon the King's Castles and Revenues, for their Use, and Support in the War. Having raised an Army, but distrusting their own Strength, they courted Assistance from the French, and writing an humble Letter to Lewis XIII. of that Name, implo∣red the Assistance of a foreign Prince,The Scots implore As∣sistance from the French King Car. Rich∣lieu. against their own, whom they had so cruelly offended. And thus a great Mystery was discovered, teaching the World how to extirpate the Religion of Rome, by con∣sulting with a Roman Cardinal, and by joining Forces with a Catholick Monarch. The King had sent Duke Hamilton to allay these Troubles; but he acted so remissly, that he seemed rather to encourage than suppress their fury; which is no wonder, if what is reported of him be true, that their first Motions had been secretly directed by his Counsels. The King therefore incited by the Inso∣lence of his Subjects, resolved,Mar. 27-1639. The King marches to∣wards Scot∣land. seeing his clemency was neglected, to chastise them by force, and rai∣sing a great Army marches towards Scotland. But there was nothing performed in this Expedition worthy such extraordinary Preparations. For, ma∣ny both of the Nobility and Gentry, would hard∣ly be perswaded to invade Scotland, which likewise cooled the Soldiers. Nor is it to be wondered at, since their chief Officers, as Essex, who was Lieu∣tenant-General, and Holland General of the Horse, with others, proved afterwards to be the prime Heads of the Rebellion in England. They had for∣got the Animosities of old, betwixt these Neigh∣bour-Nations, fearing as had been suggested to them, That Scotland being conquered, the Forces that served to subdue it, might in process of Time be made use of to enslave England. But the remoteness of
this Project, renders it very Chimerical. However, the King warned by the Perfidy of his own Men,Makes Peace. was necessitated to consent to a Peace with the Rebels, upon no equal Terms. Which he the rather did, as being sensible, That nothing can happen more pernicious to a Prince, than Civil Discord. But the Scots quickly violated the Peace they had procured; for they did not disband ac∣cording to the Articles of the Treaty, but kept all their Officers in pay. Neither did they demolish the Fortifications of Leith, as they should have done; but adding Infidelity to their Rebellion, did also publish a Libel, entituled, Conditions of his Maje∣sty's Treaty with his Subjects of Scotland, which for its Falseness by inserting Articles never assented to, was burnt by the hands of the Common Hang∣man.The Scots break it, and invade England. High with their late Success, and looking up∣on the King's Indulgence, as an Argument of his Easiness, not his Goodness; being also instigated to it by the English Puritans, they arm a Second Time, and sleighting the Sanctions of the Treaty, rush into England, and unexpectedly possess the Towns of New-Castle and Durham. They had sent their Declaration before them, intimating, That what they undertook, was for the Glory of God, and that their Arms were onely Defensive, and not intended against England, but against the Canterbury-Faction, and to endeavour to unite both Nations in one, as to Re∣ligion. The King seeing his Clemency abused, and his Authority prostituted by the Rebels in Scotland, and to repress the Insolency of his Subjects, who had by Leagues, Oaths and the Seisure of his Castles and Forts, and the like, conspired against him; and also that the Decrees of Parliament might not be rescinded by those of the Assembly, nor the Three States be mutilated by the abolishing of E∣piscopacy; seriously resolved to vindicate his offended
Majesty, and reduce his so often Rebelling Subjects to their Duty again.The Little Parlia∣ment He therefore summon'd a Par∣liament to meet at London, which he had deferred for some Years past, to give those boisterous Spirits leasure to cool. And now he acquaints them, with the Invasion of the Scots and their Indignities towards him, and very earnestly demands Moneys of them to carry on the War; assuring them, that if they would liberally comply with his Necessities, he would not only consent to remedy all their just Grievances, but remit his Right to Ship-money for ever, though adjudged to him by all the Justices of the Kingdom. Nor did he thus obtain his desires, the Parliament opposing them; not on∣ly declaring that Tribute to be illegal, but were also,dissolved. if they had not been prevented by their Disso∣lution, upon the point of voting against the War they so much abominated. There were many good Men, who were much troubled at this unex∣pected Dismission of the Parliament, fancying that the Heats and Differences betwixt the King and his People, might have been dispelled by the Con∣tinuance of the Assembly, which seemed now on the other side highly exaggerated. The enraged Commonalty, exclaimed mightily against the Au∣thors of this Counsel. Some attributed it to Mar∣quiss Hamilton, the ambitious Son of a Mother wholly devoted to the Covenanters. Others to the Earl of Strafford. But the greatest Crowd, would have it to be the Archbishop of Canterbury; and to be revenged on him, about five Hundred of the Apprentices and Rabble, furiously assault his Pa∣lace at Lambeth, though without Success. But the true Authors, were the subtle Contrivers of the fol∣lowing Rebellion. For, Sir Henry Vane, one of the principal of them, then his Majesty's Principal Secre∣tary, being ordered by his Master to move for a Supply of Twelve Subsidies, with Power to descend to Eight; he, when the House by an Offer of Five,
nay Six were mentioned, to advance towards a Complyance, peremptorily told them, that less than Twelve would not do; whereby he not only irritated the Seditious, but the more modest part of the Assembly, which seemed to be his Design by the Effect. The factious were not displeased with the King's Necessities,The King's Necessities. which they themselves did from time to time contribute to, since there were no Subsidies to be obtained, but upon Conditions ruinous to Monarchy it self; or by exposing his best Friends and Ministers, to their Rage and Slaughter. And thus they constrained the King, though unwilling, to unusual ways of supplying his wants, that they might thereby expose him to the Contempt and Odium of an irritated People. But the King rai∣sed Moneys by other means; his Council, the faithful Nobility and Gentry,His Friends contribute to his Sup∣ply. the Judges, but more eminently the Clergy, who contributed a fifth of their Revenues (whence it was called the Bishops War) largely supplying him. The Earl of Strafford sub∣scribed 20000 pounds, which the Duke of Lenox also did, as likewise others proportionably; except Ha∣milton, who pretended Poverty, though the Author of his Memorials, against the current of the English Writers, delivers that he also subscribed 20000 pounds. Being thus furnished, the King raises another Army, and marches against the Scots, but slowly, not supposing them so forward, who had already passed the River Tweed, near Berwick. The Earl of Northumberland was General, and Strafford Lieu∣tenant-General of the King's Army; but they being both absent, the Lord Conway, General of the Horse, commanded, lying with 3000 Foot and 1200 Horse to keep the Passage of the Tine at Newburne. Lesley the Rebels General, desired permission to pass with his Army, with a Petition to the King, but being
denied, he attempted the Passage with Three Hundred Horse, which were repulsed. Here∣upon he plies his great Guns with such Suc∣cess, that the English,Lesley forces his Passage at New∣burne. being for the most part Raw and Unexperienced, throwing down their Arms, ran away. Commissary-General Wilmot made stout Resistance with the Horse, till over∣power'd by Numbers, he was forced likewise to retreat. The Scots possessed themselves of New-Castle the same Day, being abandoned by Sir Jacob Ashly, who sunk his Great Ordnance in the River for haste, whilst the whole Army retreated in much disorder towards York. Two Days after, they took Durham with the same Facility; and putting the Northern Counties under Contribution, forced them to supply their Needy Troops, with Pro∣visions and Moneys in abundance. The King Summons the Peers to York. Makes a Truce with the Scots.The King streightned with these Pressures, sum∣moned the Peers to meet him at York; by whose Counsel, or rather Faction, a Treaty was com∣menced, and a Cessation of Arms concluded upon very dishonourable Conditions. The Four Nor∣thern Counties being allowed the Rebels for their Winter Quarters, and 850 Pounds per diem during the Truce, for their Maintenance. Nor could it be otherwise hoped for, since Eleven of those Six∣teen Lords which the King had appointed to treat with the Scots, were either Principal Leaders, or Assertors of the Rebellion in the following War. It will not be from the purpose to mention, what further happened in this Convention. The Scots seemed to wonder, that they appearing in Arms upon the Invitation of the English Lords, none of them, unmindful of the Favour, had made any mention of it; affirming, they had not come without the invitation of their Letters. The English Lords surprized with this Reproach, as∣sured them, That they had made them no Invita∣tion
at all. The Scots being highly moved with this denial, produced an Instrument subscribed with most of their Hands, which strangely surprised them; until, upon a strict scrutiny, they found it to be an Invention of the Lord Savil's, who had really sent them the said Invitation, counterfeiting the subsigned Hands; which being now discovered by his own Confession, it was thought fit, seeing the Cheat had succeeded so well, not to publish it. Strafford alone did dare to advise against this sordid Compliance with the Enemy, urging, That the Scots were to be forced back with Steel, not Gold. He further advised the King, to grant them no Conditions unworthy himself, or the English Nation. Let him but give him leave, and he would upon peril of his Head, oblige them to return to their Country, and Duty to their Prince again. This vigorous Advice did so far irritate the Scots, that they prosecuted the Author of it to Death. On the other side, Ha∣milton, suspected to favour his Countrymen, per∣swaded a Peace, to which the rest of the Peers did also assent; upon a supposition, that a Parliament, and an Agreement, were the securest Remedies a∣gainst the impending Evil. The Cessation being thus concluded, the main of it was referred to the Arbitration of a Parliament,Nov. 3. 1640. The Rebel-Parliament meets. which the King had already summoned to meet at Westminster. And this is that fatal Convention, which, by the Pre∣dominancy of the Puritans in it, consummated their Impiety and Disobedience, by ruining the most Apostolick Church under Heaven, and Murthering the best Prince that ever swayed the En∣glish Scepter. The King might have expected better treating from this Meeting, seeing he did not call it (to use his own Words) more by others Advice, and the Necessity of His Affairs, than by his own Choice
and Inclination; who always thought the right way of Parliaments most safe for his Crown, as best pleasing to His Subjects and People. In the mean time, the King tells them in the House of Lords, the Commons present, What had intervened in the War, and what else He judged necessary to be done; and presses them to supply Means whereby the Rebels might speedily be driven Home again; whereunto He also would contribute His Endeavours; assuring them further, That that being done, they should find him most ready to remove all their Grievances. But they did not in any kind comply with the King's Desires, but seeming displeased with his calling the Scots Rebels, resolved not to send them Home, with whom they had long since con∣spired, before they had acquired every thing that they judged necessary for the Support of their de∣signed Usurpation. With this assurance, the Com∣mons purge their House of such as they thought might oppose their Designs; and to shew them∣selves good Patriots, entertained such Petitions,Preludes to the ensuing Rebellion. as they themselves had for the most part framed, in∣veighing against Grievances from several Parts of the Kingdom; and omitting entirely what they were assembled for, imputed all the Misfortunes and Errors of the Government, obliquely to the King, through the Sides of his Counsellors and Ser∣vants. And yet they will seemingly flatter him, under pretence of inspecting his Revenue, which they pretended much to desire, promising, not only to augment and settle it, but to make his Majesty one of the Richest Princes in Christendom. In the mean time, to try his Patience, and their own Power with the People, they ordered Pryn, Burton, and Bastwick to be released out of Prison. Who in de∣fiance of Justice, and the King's Authority, made a pompous Entry into London, attended with many Thousands of pretended Zealots. And now they encourage, and receive Petitions against the Hie∣rarchy
of the Church, resolving indeed to change both the Government thereof, and also of the State, by drawing the Supreme Power by little and little into their own Hands: Daring, in order to it, not only to slight, but to question the Lawfulness of the Royal Authority it self. But the King's Friends, and such who were addicted to Monarchy, were to be removed out of both Houses; which they en∣deavour by Threats, by Tumults, and by affixing their Names upon Posts; and, in time effected. For, several of the Nobles, and many of the Lower House, since they could not Vote with Liberty, absented thence altogether; whilst they who stay'd, being either enslaved to the Faction, or unequal to them in Numbers, durst say nothing. The Lord Keeper, and Secretary Windebank, with divers o∣thers, withdrew themselves into Holland and France. The Bishops were Imprisoned and Ejected, against Magna Charta, and the immemorial Custom of past Ages, which allowed them a Legislative Power before Parliaments were Instituted. The Judges also, who had Voted Ship-Money to be Legal, were themselves voted Guilty of Treason, whilst the weight of their Indignation fell upon the Earl of Strafford, who, by the Instigation of the Scots, was to be taken away. The Earl was then in the North, having been ad∣vertised by his Friends in the House, as also by his own Reason, of the Danger; and therefore advised not to appear in Parliament, as knowing the Hatred and Envy, both That, and the Scots bare against him: Who if he kept himself out of their Sight and Reach, might perhaps be forgot, or at least being less prosecuted, make a secure re∣treat into Ireland, which was at his Devotion; or beyond Sea, till better Times. But he re∣lying upon his own Innocence, and unwilling to seem Guilty by a Retreat; and the King being un∣willing
to Part with a Person, whose Counsel he should want, in his most abstruse Affairs, came up to London. Yet so armed, that he had himself designed to Impeach some of his Chief Enemies, being sufficiently provided with Matter for an Accu∣sation. But they were too nimble for him;The Tryal of the E. of Strafford. for he had scarce taken his Seat in the House of Lords, but he was accused by the Commons of High-Treason. And yet; there were some Motions made in order to his Preservation, in Case the King would consent to advance some of the Grandees of the Faction, to the great Offices of the Crown. But That being de∣layed, or denied, did so incense the Disappointed, that, joining with the Scots, they became more im∣placable against him. The Articles against this Great Man, were Twen∣ty-eight in Number; whereof the chief were, That he had Subverted the Fundamental Laws of the Land, Introduced a Despotick Power into the Kingdom, and endeavoured to destroy the Ancient Privileges of Parliament. To these, Sir Henry Vane's Memorials were produced, wherein the Opinions of Strafford, and some others, given in Private to the King, were set down; which, as they added Weight to the Accusation, so they added Infamy and Infide∣lity to the Secretary, which he could not clear himself of, by pretending, his Son had stollen his Notes out of his Closet. But nothing of these were lawfully proved; although they had invited Witnesses and Accusers out of Ireland, too prone of their own accord to destroy this Great Man; that he being removed, they might attempt that Rebellion which they had long designed. For, refu∣ting the Arguments produced against him, the Fa∣ction began to conceive, that if they did not destroy him, they should hazard their own Reputation, especially seeing the King had declared, in an Ex∣cellent Speech to the Two Houses, That he could
not apprehend him Guilty; and that it was very pro∣bable, that the Lords would also acquit him. Be∣ing therefore incensed against him, they resolved to destroy him, Voting him, by a Special Bill of At∣tainder, Guilty of High-Treason; for that he had endeavoured to infringe the Laws, and had by ac∣cumulative Crimes, rend'red himself more than sufficiently obnoxious; thereby, making themselves his Accusers and Judges. And, thus he was Con∣demned, by a New Law, made since his Trans∣gressions: For Crimes not yet perpetrated: Not for the Ill he had already committed, but that he had enabled himself to do what he pleased. But they wisely cau∣tioned, that this should not be made a President, whereby they might secure themselves against that Retribution of Injustice, which they had used to∣wards him. By this they plainly acknowledged, the Injuriousness of their Sentence; for had it been otherwise,He is Con∣demned. what harm could there have been in the Example? Whilst they were thus em∣ployed, the Tumults without, fomented by the Chief of the Conspiracy, raged horribly, especi∣ally against their Dissenting Colleagues, whereof Fifty-nine had their Names posted up for Straf∣fordians; that is, Publick Enemies; that thereby they might be exposed to the Madness of the Rabble: Though, in truth, they deserved to have their Names inserted in Gold, for daring so gene∣rously to assert oppressed Innocence. Of these, the Lord Digby was one, who had been as severe as any in the Prosecution of the Earl, till convinced of his Error, by the Lustre of the others Vertue, he generously recanted; whereby he lost himself in the Opinion of the Faction, particularly by that admirable Speech which he made in the House up∣on passing that Fatal Bill. The incensed Multitude flew to that height of Violence, that, amongst other Insolences, they
did dare to assault the Spanish Ambassador's House, upon Pretence of his shelt'ring of Papists; and, certainly he had run great hazard of being forced, if he had not been timely rescued from their Fury, by the then Lord Mayor; insomuch, that he did not doubt to question, whether they were a Civilized People or not, seeing they so barbarously violated the Law of Nations. The Lord's House enforced by the Tumults, did also, after much Reluctancy, assent to the Bill of Attainder, not considering, that their Authority would sink with the King's, seeing it was not probable, that these Men would spoil the Crown, to adorn the Nobles. But the King himself satisfied of the Innocence of the Pri∣soner, resisted longer, slighting the Uproars of the Populace, who, by Instigation of the Factions, per∣petually cryed out for Justice. Neither did he much value the Opinion of the Judges, their Com∣pliance being occasioned by their Fears; against whom he also complained, That instead of easing him of his Doubts, they amused him by their am∣biguous Answers. The Bishops also, who were to satisfie his Scruples in point of Conscience, seemed to refer him to the Judges, save only, that Doctor Juxton, the then Bishop of London, had told him, That he should do nothing against the Dictates of his Conscience, upon any Consideration in the World: Which he afterwards remembred, to the great Honour of that Excellent Prelate. Nor did he comply with the Fears of his Friends and Family, until over∣come, not perswaded, by the Earl's own Impor∣tunity, and Letters; who desired it, out of Hopes his Death might satisfie these Blood-thirsty Men, and atone betwixt the King and his People.murthered, and He then, however unwillingly, subscribed; though by a Candour not to be imitated, he did all his Life after, as also at his Death, blame this too easie Assent, even in himself. In the mean time, he
would make one Attempt more; in order to which, he wrote a Letter to the Lords, all with his own Hand; which he also sent by his own Son, the Prince; wherein he desired, That, seeing he had as∣sented to the Justice of the Parliament, his Clemency might also take Place; which some affirm, was promised before he Signed the Bill, but that was but to extort it by any means; for now they tell him, by a Deputation of Twelve of their House, That it could not be done, without the extream Peril of the Royal Family.lamented by the King. He will however solemnize his Obsequies with Tears; for, when the Archbishop of Armagh gave him an Account of the Exit of this Illustrious Innocent; adding, That he had never seen so white a Soul restored to its Creator, he could not forbear weeping. And, thus fell this Great Person, being then also Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Second to none for Wisdom, Loyalty, and Great∣ness of Mind; and who, as the King affirmed in his Divine Soliloquies, was a Gentleman, whose great Abilities might make a Prince rather afraid, than ashamed, to employ him in the greatest Affairs of State. He fell, as is said, by a Decree, à post facto, but shall rise again, by a Posthume Law, upon the Re∣stauration of King Charles the Second; he being then by a more Righteous Parliament, restored also to the Glories of his Honour and Innocence. Nor was it by this Act only that the King con∣tributed to his own Ruine, by removing so Excel∣lent a Servant, and so firm a Pillar of the State, but he also gave his Consent to that of Continu∣ance of this Parliament,The Act of Continu∣ance. during the Pleasure of both Houses; depriving himself, by this Fatal In∣dulgence, of one of the Principal Flowers of his Crown, which was, the Disposal of the Meeting, Proroguing, and Dissolving of these Conventions at his Pleasure. For, this signal and unusual. Con∣cession of his, was abused to that height by these
most Ungrateful of Men, that they took occasion hence, not only to ruine their Benefactor, but wholly to subvert the Government; which they also effected. The Archbishop of Canterbury, had been already Impeached, and was now close Prisoner in the Tower. And seeing he was the Chief Pillar of the Church of England, as appears in his Admirable Book against Fisher, the Jesuit; and he having con∣verted Two and Twenty from the Romish to the Protestant Religion, as he asserted in the House of Lords, when he was accused there of Popery; he was also to be removed: For, since the Eccle∣siastical and Civil Governments were to be extir∣pated, it was thought proper, that the Principal Asserters of both, should be sacrificed to the Ambi∣tion of the English and Scottish Novelists. Neither did the Fates of these Great Men, suffice to dispel the pretended Fears and Jealousies of the Commons; for, being elated, not satisfied, with these unexpected Concessions, they only encreased their Appetites; and, seeing now they were feared, and that, by the Madness of the People, whom they had be∣witch'd with an Opinion of their Sanctity, there was a way laid open to greater Matters; they did not blush to attempt the King's Royal Person and Family: Who, though he had granted more to the Petitions of the Parliament, than ever any Sub∣jects had demanded, he would yet have yielded to more, for the Good of his People, provided it did not intrench upon his Honour and Conscience. But these Concessions did not suffice them, who would have all, though they did not yet declare so far. In the mean time, they looked upon what the King had so generously bestowed upon them, but as Dues, interpreting them to have proceeded from his Necessities, not Inclinations; so that nothing he could either say, or do, could gain
the Favour of this Ungrateful Faction. The King's Concessions.After the Death of Strafford, his Majesty had denied them nothing that they had not been asha∣med to ask. The Star-Chamber, the Archbishop's Court, as also that of the Northern Borders, were taken away. Other Courts, as those of the Stan∣nary, and of Ludlow, &c. were circumscribed in narrower Bounds. Monopolies were entirely con∣demned. Ship-Money, and those other Maritime Revenues, that never Prince had as yet parted with, were suppressed. To all this a Triennial Parliament (lest any should dare to offend for the future) and the Continuance of this, during the Pleasure of the Two Houses, as is already said, was unhappily assented unto. And further, to wit∣ness the Candour of his Intentions, he admitted several of the most popular of the Faction, of his Privy-Council; the Lord Say, being made Master of the Wards; Essex, Lord Chamberlain; Holland, Groom of the Stole; Leicester, Lieutenant of Ireland; and St. John, Sollicitor General. But what Retri∣bution did they make the King, for all these Graces and Indulgences of Favour? They gave him no Money, nor any Thing else, save the empty Promises and Dreams of a Glorious Prin∣cipality. The Scots having been kept thus long by the Parliament, to awe the King, and now sufficiently Burthensom to the Kingdom, the Parliament ha∣ving served their Turn of them, were to be sent Home;The Scots dismissed. and are now dismissed, having exacted by Contibutions, Rapines, Spoils, Gratuities and Sti∣pend, above a Million of Money from the English, and their Representatives. Posterity will certain∣ly blush, when they shall consider the inglorious Actions of their Predecessors, in receiving and treating the rebellious and invading Scots, as Friends; which makes it manifest, that their Coming was an
Invitation, not Invasion. Nor would our grave Senators, have honoured them with the Title of Dear Brethren, or procured an Order to declare them faithful and loyal Subjects, (having been pro∣claimed Rebels by the King) and that in all the Churches and Chapels, upon a Thanksgiving day; nor have contributed so largely to their Subsistance, but that they had conspired with them, and pro∣pogated their Councils, by the same manner of rebelling: For it would have cost less in Money, and Honour, to have forced them, as Enemies, out of our Borders, than to retain them in England by a sordid Compliance, as Friends? By allowing them Quarters, they impose a Burthen upon the Coun∣try, which they ease by a Taxation upon the Sub∣ject. But their Design had always been, to keep the. Treasury low, and involve the King in Debts, which should necessitate him to agree with the Parliament, for the ruining of Strafford, the Ex∣tirpation of Episcopacy, and the perpetuating of their own Session. About this Time, the Armies in England and Ire∣land were Disbanded, the Noise of War ceasing with their Dismission. But, lest the Irish, who had been raised against the Scots, to the Number of Eight Thousand, should attempt any Commotions, the King had given leave to the Spanish and French Ambassadors, to transport them for their Masters Service. But that was opposed by the Parliament, upon the earnest pressing of the Irish Commissioners, who having now removed Strafford, resolved to add to that Rebellion they had Designed, by the Ac∣cession of those Common Souldiers. The King goes into Scotland.The King followed his Countrymen into Scot∣land, where he not only confirmed the Concessions they had extorted in England, but graciously con∣ferred upon them whatsoever they demanded of him; not considering, that degenerate and un∣grateful
Persons, are not to be obliged with any Fa∣vours whatsoever. Nor was it in England only,Oct. 23. 1641. The Irish Rebellion. that Discord had displayed her Arts of Faction and Tumult. The Irish following the detestable Example of the Scots, who had attained by Arms what their Ambition had designed, outwent them only in this, That they Rebelled more bloodily. 'Tis strange with what industry, so universal and so nefarious a Con∣spiracy was concealed, which was scarce discovered, but with the inhumane Slaughter of an Hundred Thousand Persons. And it is scarce conceivable, that those who were at the Helm of Government, should be so negligent or supine, as to suffer a Plot of this horrid Nature, to gather to a Head, and break out, to the Infection of the whole Body Po∣litick, without any the least Discovery, or pene∣trating into it. Especially seeing his Majesty, whose Eye was still awake for the Preservation of his People,Mar. 16. had Cautioned the Lords Chief-Justices, Parsons and Burlace, of some dangerous Designs in agitation in Ireland; and that, Six Months before this fatal Eruption, which His Majesty also signi∣fied to them he had been acquainted with, from his Ambassadors and Agents in Foreign Courts. Nor was the Information of Sir William Cole, who certified them Twelve Days before it broke out, of unusual Resorts and Concourses of suspicious Persons amongst themselves, so despicable, but that it ought to have been inquired into; and such Means and Preparations should in common Prudence have been used, as might have checkt any sudden Attempts or Insurrections whatsoever. And truly, the great Supineness, and Security of the English in general, did not a little contribute to their Ruine. For they could apprehend no Danger, considering the perfect Intelligence betwixt them and the Irish, cemented by inter-Marriages, and
all other imaginable Ties of Friendship; which seemed the more secure, seeing the Catholicks were permitted the private Enjoyment of their Religion, and had obtained, not onely a considerable Abate∣ment in their Subsidies, but many advantageous Redresses from the King's Favour, in all their Con∣cerns; so that they were, at this present, in a more flourishing Condition, than they had yet enjoyed since their first Subjection. In this Security, the I∣rish Army had been disbanded, but the Soldiery not disposed of, according to the King's Intention, and Promises to foreign Embassadors, who for want of other Employment, proved very assisting to the de∣signed Rebellion, by engaging in it. But the Irish, who had so often and for so many Ages endeavoured to vindicate their Liberty, and shake off the heavy Yoke of the English, thinking now the Occasion (by the Death of Strafford,Their Reae∣sons. and the disbanding of the Army he had raised) very inviting, they eagerly laid hold on it, hoping to emancipate themselves from the Slavery they groan∣ed under; or at least, in Imitation of the Scots, ac∣quire by Arms, as they had done, new Immunities and Privileges. But the main thing insisted upon, was their Religion, which had been derived to them by an immemorial Series of Ancestors, and which they always adhered to, with inexpressible Bigottry: so that observing it to be extreamly per∣secuted in England, and fearing the like Measure at Home, it served for the main Pretence of their Rebellion. Nor is it absurd to believe, but that the Conspirators in England, contributed equally to these Tumults, as they had done before to the Scottish Commotions, sinceClot∣worthy, Pryn, Par∣sons, Lof∣tus. some of their Party affirmed, That the Conversion of the Irish, was to be effected with the Sword in one hand, and the Bible in the other. Ire∣land could not do well without a Rebellion, to the end the Remnant of the Natives might be destroyed. They
would not leave a Priest in Ireland, but extirpate their Superstition and Nation. So that it was thought by many, that the Irish were forced by the English, by these Provocations, to take up Arms, that they might, upon so plausible a pretext, be intirely rui∣ned, and rooted out, as Rebels and Traytors. What other Reasons they gave, as Oppression, Grievances, Privileges, &c. common to all Rebelli∣ons, may pass as such; but that they should pretend to vindicate the King's Prerogative by destroying it, is only proper to them, and those nefarious Regi∣cides who did so naturally copy them. But what∣ever were the Pretences of the Revolters, it is but rational to believe they had never broke out, but for the Prospect they had of a Breach (which they could not but know from their Committee at Lon∣don, most whereof were Catholicks, and many, as the Lord Germanston, &c. prime Actors in the Rebellion) betwixt the King and Parliament. For, they could have had no Aid from abroad, France and Spain be∣ing engaged in a War, and the Pope, though he might wish well, remote and not over liberal; so that they must necessarily have been ruined by the Forces of England and Scotland. The Conspiracy being brought to Maturity, ma∣ny of the Gentlemen first,The Con∣spiracy is discovered. and afterwards most of the Nobility, as also the entire Multitude of the Romish Religion, joined in it; and with unheard-of Secrecy, assaulted, suppressed, and took most of the Towns and Fortresses of the Kingdom; and sparing none, these barbarous Traytors massacred, without Respect of Sex, or Age, them of the Eng∣lish Nation and Religion, filling all Places where they came, with Ruine, Rapines, Burnings, and in∣finite Slaughters. Dublin, the chief Seat of the Government and Kingdom, was not surprized, being saved by the seasonable Infidelity of one O Conall, an Irish-man;
who, being convinced by the horridness of the Fact, or greatness of the Reward he hoped for from its Discovery; lays open the whole Con∣spiracy, acquainting the Chief-Justices with the Design, the Night before it was to have been put in Execution. London-derry, Colrane, Tredagh, with some other Towns and: Fortresses standing upon their Defence, escaped the Danger, which with the Arrival of some few Forces from England, occasioned a very long and very bloody War. The Lords Justices having secured the Castle of Dublin, where the King's Magazines were,Dublin se∣cured. and the City as well as they could, with armed Men; they the next Morning apprehended Hugh Mac-Mahon, Grand-child to the late rebellious Earl of Tyrone; who by his unwary Confidence, or rather divine Providence, had occasioned the Discovery, by en∣trusting O Conalli with the Secret. Being brought before the Council, he boldly avowed the Conspi∣racy, affirming, That as it was universal, and to be put in execution that instant Morning; so it was not humanely possible to be prevented.Some of the Conspira∣tors taken. He acknow∣ledged himself their Prisoner, and being in their Power, they might use him as they pleased; he was sure to be suddenly revenged. The Lord Macquier, a∣nother of the principal Conspirators, was also taken, but few more of Quality; the rest of the Underta∣kers, as Roger More, Plunket, Birne, and others ha∣ving escaped. The Citizens, with such as could be confided in, were immediately armed, and Pro∣clamation made, and sent into all Quarters, of the Discovery of this flagitious Rebellion, and their Disappointment of their Attempt upon Dublin; as also to exhort all good Subjects to betake them∣selves to their Defence. Upon this Proclamation, the Lords of the English Pale being of British Ex∣traction, and who in all former Rebellions, had been true to the Crown, pretending Ignorance of
any Plot before this publick Notice, repaired to the Council, with Assurances of their Fidelity, and offer of their Service. And they were not on∣ly entrusted, it being dangerous to suspect them in this Juncture; but had also Arms delivered to them upon their Desires, and Commissions to levy Men for their own Defence, and that of their Pro∣vinces. The standing Forces in Ireland consisting of scarce 1000 Horse and 2000 Foot, were dispersed in the several Fortresses of the Kingdom; but so remote, that it was not possible, the ways being intercepted by the Rebels, to draw them to a Body: besides, ma∣ny of them being Catholicks, revolted, and others were surprised or intercepted, so that few of them could be brought to Dublin. The City was in the mean time fortified, with all imaginable Industry; being also daily filled with Numbers of such, who fled from the cruel and inhumane Barbarities of the Rebels. Of these, and the neighbouring English, two Regiments were formed, whereof Sir Henry Tichburne had one, together with the Government of Tredagh, and Sir Charles Coot, the other, with the Command of Dublin. These two Places being the principal Fortresses of the Party. The Justices and Council dispatched an Ex∣press to the King, who was then in Scotland, and to the Parliament at Westminster, of the Discovery and Progress of the Conspiracy. His Majesty highly per∣plexed, as most concerned, with this monstrous Re∣bellion; offers all his Assistance for the suppressing of it; acquaints the Parliament of Scotland with it, and demands their Aid in it; conjures the two Houses at Westminster, and empowers them to use the utmost of Force and Counsel to prevent the Progress of the Rebellion, and deliver his Protestant Subjects, from the Calamities that threatned them. Nay, sometime after he offered to go in Person, and raise
10000 Voluntiers for that Service, if the Parliament would but pay them; all which they refuse, under pretence of not exposing his Sacred Person to so eminent Danger; but in truth, preferring their own Fears to the Solace of so many desolate Suffe∣rers: and lest, when he had conquered those Rebels, he might be sensible of the Injuries done him, and being armed become formidable to the Parliament it self. The Houses indeed voted a powerful Relief of Men, Money, and Provisions, but they were but slow in Performance, retarding the Supplies they had so eagerly ordered, with their undutiful Disputes, and Quarrels with the Court, till the whole was well nigh lost. Bleeding Ireland was the Subject of their Discourse, not their Care, being too much taken up with the Management of their own De∣signs at Home, so that they went no farther, be∣sides exclaiming at the Obstacles, they themselves created; and that by a Calumny black as the Re∣bellion it self, they cast the Odium of those Delays, upon the unsulliedst Innocence in the World, the King: than whom, no Prince could be more sensibly affected with the greatness of the Calamity, nor desired the Wellfare of his Subjects with more Af∣fection. The King returns out of Scot∣land.The King having appeased Scotland, returned to London, where he was received with the general Ac∣clamations of the People, and all the Pomp imagi∣nable, being met by the Lord Mayor and Alder∣men, and royally feasted together with the Queen and Prince at Whitehall. But the Parliament being much disturbed with this solemn Entertainment, had prepared another reception for his Majesty. They had used all their Arts to hinder his going in∣to Scotland, lest peradventure he should tamper with his Army by the way, of which they had al∣ready created to themselves several Jealousies, it being as yet but in disbanding: or that he should
gain too much upon the Scots-Parliament by his Concessions and Favours. But, what they more o∣penly acted was, to press the King to substitute a Lieutenant in his absence, who might personate him, not obscurely designing the Earl of Essex for this ho∣nour; by which grant, they might have divested him of every thing but his Title before his return, which he perceiving, wisely refused them so ruinous a Con∣cession. And yet he commissioned him General on the South-side of Trent, with Power to raise For∣ces in case of Necessity. But the Faction impatient of every Repulse, in revenge, framed a Remonstrance in his absence; wherein, whatever was defective in the Government, was, as usually, attributed to his Counsellours, with the usual Reflections upon him∣self. But, the Misfortunes, and what Errors were committed, ought truly to be laid at their Doors, which they were not ignorant of, seeing the Parli∣ament absolutely denied to supply the Necessities of the Crown, both at Home and Abroad, whereby things often miscarried,The Parli∣ament pub∣lish their Remon∣strance. and Money was some∣times raised by extraordinary Ways. But the King, informed of their Design, and not ignorant of the Force of ingenious Calumny, had desired them not to emit the said Remonstrance; not that he feared the Truth, but that he apprehended the Poison of plausible Malice. But these modest Men refused to comply in so small a matter with their King, which produced an Answer from his Majesty, no less just, and reasonable to all Men of Sense, than that monstrous Libel was fertile of falsity and im∣posture. The Commons, to gain Credit to the Terrors wherewith they had exagitated the People, and lest they should have the least Suspicion of hazard to the Service of God,1641. Frame the Protesta∣tion. had in May framed a Pro∣testation and Oath, without acquainting the King or House of Lords with it, which rendered it ipso facto
illegal, which was swallowed by most Men; none of the Lower House, nor scarce any of the Upper refusing it, and afterwards imposed upon the whole Kingdom, which generally took it, without obser∣ving the Poison hid under it. This Protestation appeared very plausible at first sight, promising to defend Religion according to Law, and the King according to Religion; if it had not admi∣nistred occasion to those fictitious Bug-bears of Fears and Jealousies; or planed, and ushered the way, to that rebellious Confederation called the Covenant, betwixt these perfidious Wretches, and their no less perfidious Brethren, the Scots. The Faction also in process of time, explaining this Pro∣testation, affirmed their meaning to be, That by the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Po∣pery and Popish Innovations, contrary to the same Doctrine, is meant only the publick Doctrine pro∣fessed in the Church, so far, as it is opposite to Po∣pery, and Popish Innovation: and that the said words, are not to extend to the maintaining of any Form of Worship, Discipline or Government; nor of any Rites, or Ceremonies of the said Church of England: so that upon the Matter, it seems manifest, that the Hierarchy of Bishops, and the Liturgy, were plainly designed for Extirpation. The other Arts, whereby the Bell-weathers of the Faction daily incensed the People, were the feign∣ing, and then themselves detecting of Plots and Conspiracies, and imaginary Designs, wherewith they strangely troubled and afrighted the giddy Rabble; who, by an implicit Credulity, be∣lieved all that was told them, to the prejudice of the King or his Friends, whom they stigmatized with the odious Characters of Papists, and Malig∣nants. Nor was it an Artifice of less Cunning in them, to procure Subscriptions from the unthink∣ing
Crowd, to occasional Petitions of their own framing; pretending Grievances and Dangers, and demanding Remedies against them, as in publick Calamities. On the other side, the King hitherto patient, seeing his Clemency more and more abused, by the Contumacy of his Adversaries, resolved to punish these Disturbers of the Publick Peace: And, be∣ing informed, that some Members of Parliament had private Meeting and Caballing with the Scots, who also had countenanced the late Tumults; he gave Warrants to seize their Papers, and secure their Persons; but they being withdrawn, he caused One of the Ʋpper House and Five of the Lower, to be accused of High-Treason. His Ma∣jesty had had Advertisement of their Caballing when he was in Scotland, but had forbore them hitherto, upon hope, that his Indulgence might have laid the Storms these Men had raised; but finding the contrary, he caused them to be Impeach'd by his Attorney General, Sir Ed. Herbert, and sent a Ser∣geant at Arms to demand them of the House, which they were so far from complying with, that they immediately voted, That no Person whatso∣ever, should offer to Arrest, or Detain, any Member of that House, without Order from the House. But they had forgot their own Resolves in Sir George Ratcliff's Case, who being a Member of the Parliament in Ireland, had it determined a∣gainst him, That no Privilege of Parliament there nor here, should reach to Protect him in Case of High-Treason. The King therefore entring their House in Person,The King enters the House of Commons. required they should be delivered to the Law. The Crimes objected against them were; That, amongst other Things, they had endeavoured to subvert the Laws; had invited Foreigners (the Scots) to Invade the Kingdom; that they had raised Tumults, and Seditions, and had alienated the Subjects
Affections from their King. But these Traytors, ha∣ving private Notice of the Design against them, by one of theCountess of Carlisle. Court Ladies, withdrew themselves into Westminster-Hall; where, hiding themselves that Night, they in the Morning fled into the City, from whence they in a few Days returned, with no less Pomp than Impudence. 'Tis scarce credible, with what Bitterness the seditious calumniating Spirits in the Commons House, traduced this Act of the King's. They cryed out, Their Privileges were destroyed, and that never such Violence had been offered to so great a Court, by any of his Predecessors: Not considering, That there is no Sanctuary for Rebellion, which was the present Case, and they themselves will hereafter turn out the whole Body of the House. During these Tra∣verses, the tumultuous Uproars being encouraged by the Puritans, grew daily more licentious; inso∣much, that a Preaching Iron-monger, dared to throw a Libel, intituled, To your Tents O Israel, into his Majesty's Coach, the Multitude bellowing with∣out ceasing, Privileges of Parliament, Privileges of Parliament. The Parliament hereupon transfer their Session into the City, their Adjournment be∣ing to keep up the Belief, that they did not Sit in Safety, and to countenance the Attempt upon the Militia, which they now were designing; where, infusing into the People, gave them also a false Alarm by their Emissaries, who running through the Streets of the City at dead time of the Night, cryed terribly,A terrible Alarm in the City. That the King was coming with an Army of Papists to destroy them; which wrought so effectually, that the Inhabitants, raised with the Horrour of the imaginary Danger, took Arms, and in an instant got into a Body of no less than Fourty Thousand Men; whilst the Women also fill∣ed the Streets with Benches, Stools, Tubs, &c. to hinder the Passage of the Horse, and provided
scalding Water to throw upon them. The Non∣appearance of these Souldiers in the Air, could not undeceive the People, being kept warm with successive hourly Discoveries of Plots and Dangers; so that the Parliament which was returned, guard∣ed by great Numbers from London to Westminster, as it were in Triumph, importuned the King a∣gain for Guards, and that under the Command of Essex; pretending Danger, from I know not what Ambushes and Conspiracies. But the King, though he shewed the Vanity of these imaginary Terrors, and offered his own Person Bayl for their Security, was not heard. Nay, he offered them Two Hun∣dred of the City Militia, under the Command of the Lord Chamberlain, whose Province it was to take care of the Parliament; which they rejected, ordering Two Companies under Skippon, a Slave to the Faction, to attend them; whilst an infinite Number of the enraged Rabble, as it were assault∣ing Whitehall and Westminster, crying, No Bishop, Down with Antichrist, &c. forced the King's Friends, who would have entered the House, to retire. And, these Fellows, being for the most part such whose Domestick Affairs were, either inconsiderable, or desperate, and consequently, as usual, most busie, and most concerned for the Publick; exclude and force away the Bishops, knowing them to be im∣moveable in their Loyalty and Obedience to the King and Government.Twelve Bi∣shops com∣mitted to the Tower. And when this Sacred Order had protested against this Violence, the Houses enraged at it, sent Twelve of them, whom they had voted Guilty of High-Treason, to the Tower; whereby they secured themselves from their Votes, destroying afterwards, as much as in them lay, their very Function. Nor did these Miscreants forbear, to vomit their Gall against the Sacred Person of the King himself, by villainous and licentious Speeches; some of them crying out, That he was
the Traytor; others, That the Young Prince would govern better; and a prime Leader yell'd out, That the King was not fit to live. Insomuch, that his Ma∣jesty perceiving their unbridled Rage, which was cherished by those Sons of Violence in the Houses, and having, though in vain, attempted all ways to appease their Fury, he removed with his Queen and Children to Hampton-Court. After some Stay there, his Majesty and the Queen went to Dover, with the Princess Mary, married some Time since to the Prince of Orange, from whence the Queen passed into Holland,The Queen goes to Holland. under Pre∣text of conveying her Daughter to her Husband, but truly, to secure her Person; which was not meanly threatned, upon Account of her Religion, and Conjugal Affection. At Canterbury, being every where importuned by Messages from the Parliament, he was perswaded, though much against his Will, to Sign a Bill for taking away the Bishops Votes in Parlia∣ment. But no Concession could satisfie Unreason∣able Men; insomuch, that his Majesty being re∣turned to Greenwich, he went thence with the Prince and Duke of York to Theobalds, and so Northwards. This Conduct, as it happened, proved Fatal to the King. And some prudent Men did then won∣der, that his Majesty would leave the City, the Seat of his Kingdom, which had been also that of his Predecessors; filled with Multitudes of his Friends, abounding in Riches, and all Military Provisions, and the only proper place both for Peace and War;The King leaves Whitehall, and withdraw himself into the Country, where all these Advantages were want∣ing. But the Terrors wherewith his Followers, and particularly the Royal Family, were agitated, and the Apprehensions his Majesty had entertain∣ed upon their Account, as also the Hopes that these Animosities and Heats in the Lower House might cool in Time, seem to excuse his Retreat.
Nor was the King so abandoned by his People, but that many honest and brave Men, as well of their own Accord, as very many more by Gurney, the Lord Mayor's Procurement, mingled themselves with the Rabble, with design to defend the King's Sacred Person, from the Insults and Violence of the Crowd, if they should presume to attempt any thing against him. Nay, the whole Society of Grays-Inn (which shewed, That the Law as well as Reason was for him) coming to Whitehall in or∣der, offered themselves to guard his Majesty; which seasonable profession of Duty, drew from the King, both his Acknowledgements and Thanks; though he otherwise waved the offer supposing those popular Heats and Insurrections, might be best allayed by removing, and yielding; and lest also, he might be thought to meditate a War. But the Parliament to add Credit, at least Co∣lour, to the Terrors they had imbued the People with, gave Power to the Sheriffs and Justices of Peace in the Counties, to suppress all seditious and suspected Assemblies, and seize upon all Arms and Instruments of War, and secure the same. A∣mongst other terrible Triflings, it was affirmed, That the Lord Digby and Colonel Lunsford, had appeared in Arms at Kingstone with great Numbers, though their Cavalry amounted but to a hired Coach with Six Horses, which they ordered to be suppressed, and the Colonel was taken and sent to the Tower. After this, they follow the King to Royston with an insolent Petition,and goes North∣ward. wherein they demanded the Tower, the Fortresses, and Militia of the Kingdom to be delivered to them. But these, being inse∣parable Flowers of the Crown, were not to be parted with to any; and his Majesty being again pressed to it, continued immoveable, telling them in short, That their Fears, and Doubts, and Jea∣lousies,
which he looked upon as wild and irregular, were such, as he would take time to satisfie the World of; but that his own were not trivial, occasioned by the many scandalous Pamphlets, seditious Sermons, sundry publick Tumults hitherto uninquired into, and unpunished. But the Faction seeing the Constancy of the King, formed a Declaration, wherein, after a nauseous Enume∣ration of Grievances, Fears and Jealousies, they again peremptorily demand the disposal of the Militia; and being again refused, resolved to ex∣tort it from their King, with all their Force. Nor was it absurd in them; for, being conscious of their Crimes and Deserts, they could not imagine how to secure themselves from the Punishment due to their Guilt, but by asserting the Power of the Sword in their own Hands. They therefore passed their Ordinance for the Militia, though with so∣lemn protesting, That they had not the least In∣tention or Purpose of any War with the King (but how falsly!) which made it swallowed the easier. They then seized upon the Fleet,The Parlia∣ment arm, and the King is ex∣cluded at Hull. appointing the Earl of Warwick their Admiral, and possessed themselves of Hull, lest the King should secure the Magazine there: by whose Governour, his Majesty, when he would have entered the Town, was shut out by an unheard-of Insolence, and manifest Dis∣obedience. And this is that Hotham, the unhappy Monument of improsperous Infidelity, who falling from one Inconstancy to another, suffered at length Punishment (together with his Eldest Son, who, to aggravate his Misery, was executed before him) due to so flagitious a Crime, being beheaded by those for whose Sake he had so desperately rebelled. The Dye of War being thus cast at Hull, the Parties flew out into open Action; but, lest they should not pretend Justice, the Cause was defend∣ed on both Sides with Declarations, Apologies, and other publick Writings; which, because they
are extant, I will only add, That as the King had the better Cause, so it was also asserted with a bet∣ter Pen, however otherwise unfortunate. BOOK II. The King attempts Hull in vain. Propositions sent to his Majesty to York. Most of the Lords, and many of the Commons repair to his Majesty. He erects his Standard at Nottingham, and raises an Ar∣my. Essex, the Rebels General at Worcester, at Keynton. The famous Battel of Edge-hill. Fight at Branford. The King fortifies Oxford. Some A∣ctions in other Provinces. The Queen lands at Bur∣lington. Goes to Oxford. The Battel of Lans∣downe; Of Rownday Downe. The Siege and Relief of Glocester. The great Battel of Newbury. The Parliament invite the Scots to their Succour. They enter England. The Siege of York. The fa∣tal Battel of Marston-Moor. The Fights at Bran∣don Heath and Copredy-bridge. Essex defeated in the West. The second Battel of Newbury. Alexander Carew, and the Two Hothams beheaded. Mac-Mahon and Macquier executed. The Arch∣bishop of Canterbury martyr'd. The Treaty at Uxbridge. Essex discarded, and Sir Thomas Fairfax made General in his Place. Hotham proclaimed Traytor.HIS Majesty, upon Hotham's insolent Refusal, caused him instantly to be proclaimed Tray∣tor. On the other side, the Parliament declare they will defend him; and complain highly, of the Breach of their Privileges therein; as if the King had violated his Subjects Immunities, by pre∣tending to the Possession of his own Town, and the
Magazine he had purchased with his own Money. They further, sent some of their Members, to di∣sturb the King's Preparations at York; which they did so effectually, that he lost the Opportunity of raising an Army in that County. Perceiving then the Danger his Person was in, by the Enemies for∣wardness, he demanded a Guard of the Gentry and Free-holders of York-shire, which was easily assen∣ted to. Whereupon, the Parliament declared, That the King, seduced by evil Counsellours, did design to make War upon his Parliament; forgetting, that they had done the same, being exagitated with their fictitious Terrors Eight Months before. The King, with his said Guard, and the fee∣ble Assistance of the Trained Bands, attem∣pted Hull; but,The King attempts Hull in vain. finding it an Enterprise of much Difficulty, would not spend that Time which was so precious, in so hazardous an Under∣taking. But the Parliament, confident now in their Numbers and Power, (for the City of London and the neighbouring Counties were at their Devo∣tion) sent a Remonstrance, with Nineteen Proposi∣tions, to the King; by which, they demand in Ef∣fect,Nineteen Propositi∣ons sent to his Majesty. that he should surrender all his Regal Power in∣to their Hands: tho they disguised as much as they could their Intentions, with a Mixture of some Things really to be approved of by every honest man; others specious and popular; and some al∣ready granted by his Majesty. All which, as the King well observed in his Answer, were cunningly twisted, and mixed with other Things of their main De∣sign of Ambition and private Interest. But, the Propositions the Parliament made to the People, were of another Nature; for, they invi∣ted them by an Order, to bring in Plate and Mo∣ney to Guild-hall, for the Restitution whereof they should have the publick Faith, and all under pre∣tence of rescuing the King out of the hands of Papists
and Malignants; for the preservation of the Prote∣stant Religion, and the Privileges of Parliament. And never any Contributions were granted with more earnest and mistaken Zeal, than those that were thrown into their Corban by the London and Neigh∣bouring Puritans, under the pretext of Godliness; but to their own Ruine, as it happened. The Richer Citizens, gave their Money and Plate with Joy, and the Women offered their Jewels and Ear-Rings, to this Calf of Presbytery. Nay, the Poorer, both married and Maidens, gave their Wedding Rings, their Bodkins, and their Thimbles to pro∣mote this Holy War. They were all hurried into this mad Humour, by the fantastick Ardour of their Levites. These being the Boutefeus of Re∣bellion and Tumult, who bellowing in their As∣semblies, that Religion would be overwhelmed with Po∣pery, and their Liberties supplanted by the Approaches of Tyranny, declared, that there was no Deliverance to be expected, but from the Parliament. With these Arts, and Moneys from the City, that Nursery of Rebellion,The Par∣liament raise an Army, un∣der the Command of Essex. a great Army was raised under the Command of the Earl of Essex, and sent forth to destroy the Malignants, (for so they called such, who by the Principles of Honour and Duty, adher'd to their Prince) and to rescue the King, as they gloried, out of the Hands of his wick∣ed Counsellours. The Title of King, was as yet held in great Veneration by the People. It pleased them therefore, to entitle their War to the King and Par∣liament, though nothing more contrary to both. They had not as yet separated Kingship from the Person, which shortly after happened; for, distinguish∣ing betwixt the Politick and Private Capacity of the Chief Magistrate, they dared impudently to affirm, That the King was Virtually in the Parliament, though Personally absent at York. Nay, they went further, as there is still a plus ultra in villainous Rebellion, contest∣ing,
That the supreme Power is primarily in the Peo∣ple, and in Kings but by a delegate and fiduciary Commis∣sion; and therefore as being inferiour to the Whole, though superiour to every particular, to be reclaimed by Force if they should transgress against Religion and Liberty. But, to omit these seditious Impertinences, suffici∣ently refuted in the repeating of them; the King, understanding the Progress and Preparations of the Adversaries, and how they had seized his Navy, Fortresses and Magazines, being himself destitute of all Help, except such as those Generous and Loyal Lords and Gentlemen, who followed his Fortune,Essex and his Adhe∣rents pro∣claimed Traytors. The King sets up his Standard at Not∣tingham. did contribute; he declared Essex and his Adhe∣rents, to be Traytors and Rebels; and appointing the Marquiss of Hartford, General of his Forces, erected his Royal Standard at Nottingham, inviting thereby all his loving Subjects to his Assistance. It was observed, that a Gust of Wind did at the same Time blow down the Colours, which though look∣ed upon as Inauspicious by some, did not yet hinder, but that several Thousands repaired to them. And, his Majesty having received Money and Arms from the Queen, grew by these Supplies, and the Ac∣cession of his Friends, (most of the Lords and very many of the Lower House repairing to him) formi∣dable. Insomuch, that this great Defection of the Members, amongst whom was the Lord Keeper with the Great Seal, as they added Life and Reputation to the King's Affairs, being for the most part Per∣sons of whole Estates and great Abilities, so they did a little raise Apprehensions in them that re∣mained, which appeared by their Vote and Im∣peachment of the Fifteenth of June. The Queen proclaimed Traytor.The Queen, in the beginning of the Troubles, retired with her own and the Crown-Jewels, some whereof she had pawned for these Supplies, into Holland, under pretence of conducting (as is al∣ready observed) her Daughter, the Lady Mary, to
the Prince of Orange her Husband; for which pious, and just Fact, (tho they formerly looked upon it as a Scandal, when it was rumoured that they had a Design to accuse her) she was proclaimed Traytor, by these barbarous, and worst of Rebels. Some were of Opinion, that the Faction was not igno∣rant of the Conveyance of this Treasure, but conni∣ved at it, upon a Supposition, that the King, upon the Confidence of it, might be more refractary to their Demands, and consequently engage in a War against them, which they mainly desired, as the plausiblest way to ruine him. His Majesty, notwithstanding the Accession of his Friends and Power, desired the Ways of Peace, not War.Earl of Southam∣pton. Earl of Dorset. But all his Messages and gracious Offers, though sent to them by the Principal Nobles about him, were rejected with Scorn and Insolence: For, the impetuous Faction in the House, having a great Army on Foot, and abundance of Treasure, would hearken to no Accommodation. This obliged his Majesty to intend his Safety the more, so that levy∣ing Soldiers in the Counties he passed, he daily in∣creased, even beyond Expectation. For, having made a solemn Protestation at the head of his Men at Wellington.The King's solemn Pro∣testation, viz. That he would defend the Protestant Religion as by Law established, The Laws of the Land, and the Liberty and Property of the Subject, his Num∣bers visibly augmented. Passing through Chester into Wales, having made a Pathetick Speech to the Inhabitants thereof, and gained entirely upon their Affections, naturally inclined to serve their Prince; he went thence to Shrewsbury, where the Country being assembled by his Order, he at the Head of them made this following Oration; which for its Excellency, and that it contains the Ground and the Truth of the Quarrel, I thought fit to insert here.
Gentlemen, and Speech to the Gen∣try and In∣habitants near Shrews-bury.IT is some Benefit to me from the Insolence and Mis∣fortunes which have driven me about, that they have brought me to so good a part of my Kingdom, and to so faithful a part of my People. I hope neither you nor I shall repent in coming hither. I will do my part that you may not; and, of you, I was confident before I came. The Residence of an Army, is not usually plea∣sant to any Place; and mine may carry more Fear with it, since it may be thought, robb'd and spoiled of all my own, and such Terror used to fright and keep all men from supplying of me, I must only live upon the Aid and Relief of my People. But, be not afraid. I would to God my poor Subjects suffered no more by the Insolence, and Violence of that Army raised against me, though they have made themselves wanton even with Plenty, than you shall do by mine; and yet, I fear I cannot pre∣vent all Disorders; I will do my best: and this I pro∣mise you, no man shall be a loser by me, if I can help it. I have sent hither for a Mint. I will melt down all my own Plate, and expose all my Lands to Sale, or Mortgage; that, if it be possible, I may not bring the least pressure upon you. In the mean time, I have sum∣moned you hither, to do that for me and your selves, for the Maintenance of your Religion and the Laws of the Land, by which you enjoy all that you have, which o∣ther men do against us. Do not suffer so good a Cause to be lost, for want of supplying me with that which will be taken from you, by those, who pursue me with this violence. And whilst these ill men sacrifice their Money, Plate, and utmost Industry to destroy the Com∣monwealth, be you no less liberal to preserve it. Assure your selves, if it please God to bless me with Success, I shall remember the Assistance that every particular man here gives me, to his Advantage. However, it will hereafter (how furiously soever the minds of men are
now possest) be Honour and Comfort to you, that with some Charge and Trouble to your selves, you did your part to support the King, and preserve the Kingdom. With this Speech, and the Majesty and Reve∣rence of his Person, the People, as it were inspired, listed themselves by Troops in this Sacred Warfare; so that the King being, in a little time, become Ma∣ster of considerable, and formidable Forces, da∣red to provoke that Enemy whom he had hitherto avoided. Essex goes to his Ar∣my.Essex was waited upon in great State by the Par∣liament-Members out of Town, and with quick Marches hastens to Northampton the Rendezvous of his Army, consisting of Fourteen Thousand Men, high and confident, seeing they were to combat fresh and for the most part undisciplined Soldiers. Amongst other Instructions, Essex had received a Petition from his Masters to be presented to the King, wherein they desire, That his Majesty would desert his Followers, who were REBELS and TRAY∣TORS; and suffer them to be suppressed by the Earl of Essex. But his Majesty abominating so sinful a Thought,The King marches to∣wards London. leaving Shrewsbury, marched with Six Thousand Foot, Three Thousand brave Horse, and Two Thousand Dragoons, towards London. This unexpected Motion of the King, perplexed the City, and Senate, not a little before disorde∣red with the Success of Prince Rupert, who had broke and destroyed a Wing of their Horse near Worcester, and kill'd Sands the Colonel. Both Hou∣ses therefore, to obviate the Danger from the King's Army, and lest he should attempt the City, where it was supposed the Parliament might easi∣est be suppress'd; exhort the City-Militia to stand upon their Guard, to watch, to raise such Fortifica∣tions as could suddenly be made, to make Batteries for their Cannon, dig Trenches, and set up Courts
of Guard for the Souldiers, omitting nothing for their Defence against the King's feared Ap∣proach. They also sent Ten Companies to se∣cure Windsor, whilst they Imprison such of their Citizens, as were suspected to Favour the King's Party. Essex, in the mean Time, came to Wor∣cester, quitted by the Royallists, where he continued whilst the King passed by, without giving his Ma∣jesty any Interruption. But the Rebels followed close in his Rear, which he perceiving, turned short upon them, lest he should be enclosed betwixt the Rebels and the Rebellious City of London. This occasioned that memorable Battel, the first of these Unhappy Wars, which was fought in the Vale of Red-Horse; not absurdly called so, consi∣dering the streams of Blood which were spill'd there that Day. The Parties fought with equal Courage and Fortune, though both pretended to the Victory, which had been infallibly the King's, and the Rebellion stifled in its Infancy, if the Right Wing of our Horse had not pursued the Enemy farther than they ought to have done. But God, who was not pleased that our Sins should be ex∣piated at a Common Rate, determined other∣wise. The Battel of Edge-Hill. Oct. 23. 1642.The Royallists descending Edge-hill in Battalia, and very Chearful, had a Sight of the Enemy, who were busie in ordering their Army in the Valley below. The King viewing of them, being asked, what he intended to do? answered briskly, I ne∣ver saw the Rebels before in a Body. I am resolved to fight them; God and all good Men assist my Righteous Cause. Prince Rupert commanded the Right Wing; Lieutenant General Willmot, to whom the Earl of Forth was added, the Left; and the Earl of Lind∣sey, General of the Field, led the Main Battel on Foot, with a Pike in his Hand; and each Division had their Reserves. Essex, who had Quarter'd at
Keynton, drew his Army into Battalia in the Vale, saluting, or provoking the Adversaries with Three great Shot, and as many Shouts of his whole Army. This Summons was answered by Two great Guns, and being advanced nearer, the King observed the Rebels Army to be drawn up as fol∣loweth: Two Regiments of Horse composed the Right Wing, commanded by the Two Colonels, Balfore and Stapelton, and the Lord Fielding had his Regiment in their Rear for a Reserve. Essex com∣manded the Battel, at first also on Foot as the ad∣verse General; and the Left Wing, consisting of Twenty Troops of Horse, was led by Colonel Ramsey, a Scot. And now the Cannon began to play on both Sides, but without any considerable Execution. Prince Rupert charged Ramsey with so much Courage, that he not only forced him from his Station, but off the Field also; and the Brigade of Foot next to them, frighted with the Flight of their Horse, and surprized with the Defection of Sir Faithful Fortescue (who mindful of his Duty, went over with his Troops to his Majesty) threw down their Arms, Colonel Essex, who commanded them, retiring to the Main Body. But our Horse following the Chace too far, and their Reserves commanded by the Earl of Carnarven, and hurried with the same Violence, suffered the Victory to slip out of their Hands, by their too much eagerness to overcome. For, if they had charged their Flank, bared of their Horse, they had probably much in∣commoded them. Essex was more cautious, who sending Fielding's Reserve, with others under the Command of Hurrey, did much disturb the King's Foot, destitute by the Absence of their Horse. The Left Wing had not the same Success, for Bal∣fore had forced Willmot to a disorderly Retreat, and breaking Two Battalions of Foot, left naked by the Flight of their Horse on that Side, opened
a passage to the King's Standard. The Foot by this were all engaged, and the Fight growing very hot, the Standard it self was seized on, Sir Ed∣mund Varney that carried it being Slain; but it was recovered again by Sir Jo. Smith, for which gene∣rous Act he was by the King, the best judge of Merit, Knighted upon the Place, and honoured with the bearing of that Standard he had so brave∣ly recovered. The Earl of Lindsey was slain there, having performed all the Parts of a great Captain; and, his Eldest Son hastning to his Assistance, was taken Prisoner. The Battel being restored by the Accession of fresh Supplies on the King's Side, and the Evening approaching, they left combating as if by consent, both Sides being weary, and the Re∣bels also in want of Ammunition. Both Sides therefore rallying their shatter'd Forces, drew up in∣to Battalia, as at the Beginning. By this the Prince was returned, who, if he had not amused himself in that vain pursuit, and Plundering of the Ene∣mies Carriages at Keynton, the War had been ended at this first Blow. Essex was strengthened in the Field with Colonel Hamden's Regiment; and presently afterwards by Colonel Hollis his Foot, and the Lord Willoughby's Regiment of Horse; who meeting Prince Rupert's Wing in the Lanes pursuing of Ramsey, forced him back into the Field. Although Essex was more nu∣merous by the Addition of these Three fresh Regi∣ments, he did attempt no farther upon the King, considering also, that the Prince's Horse, of whose Bravery he had had Experience, were fresh and entire. Night being come, the King withdrew to the Hill, from which he had descended, where he lay all Night in his Coach with the Prince of Wales, (the Hopes, and future Glory of our Nation) the Camp shining with Fires. The next Morning, the King sent off his Foot to∣wards
Ayno, and having stood sometime in Battel-array with his Horse, did also follow. Essex lay in the Field where he had fought, and however re∣cruited with the Accession of Three entire fresh Re∣giments, attempted no farther upon the Royallists, but retreating to the Banks of Avon under the pro∣tection of Warwick-Castle,Essex re∣tires to Warwick. suffered the King to march whither he pleased. The slain on both Sides, were at first believed to amount to near Five Thousand, though the Country, by a stricter En∣quiry, affirmed, they had not buried above a Thou∣sand; which is the more probable, seeing Slaugh∣ters of this Kind are ordinarily magnified. On the King's Side, the General bravely performing the Duty of his Place, as also that of a private Soul∣dier, was slain, together with the Lord Aubigny, and Sir Edward Varney, who died in this Field of Honour. The Rebels lost Colonel Essex, (who signali∣zed himself by his Bravery) Lieutenant Colonel Ram∣sey, and the Lord St. Johns, who being taken died of his Wounds. Both Parties attributed to themselves the Honour of the Victory. The Essexians said, That the Field and Dead were left to their Dis∣posal. The Royallists likewise gloried, that they had done what they designed, by removing the Obsta∣cles that hindred their March towards London;The King continues his March. adding farther, That the Rebels however strength∣ned with Three Regiments, durst not oppose themselves to the King's Passage, the next Day. And truly, though the King's Forces were much shattered, they grew accidentally more formi∣dable than before, to whom it proved no small Victory, considering his Discouragements not to have been vanquished: For, many Eminent Persons, who stood at gaze before, seeing the Party equal, ranged themselves now without diffi∣culty on the better Side, where their Duty and In∣clination invited them.
How fair this Enemy behaved themselves in o∣ther things, may be guessed by Letters taken a∣mongst their Baggage in the Battel, discovering the Treasons of one Blake in the King's Army,Blake's Treason & Punishment. who daily gave Intelligence of what passed, to the Rebels, and particularly in what part of the Army the King fought, that they might direct their Bullets with more Certitude at so Illustrious a Mark. Per∣haps thus designing, as they had Religiously affirm∣ed, to defend the King's Person. But the unhappy Contriver of this nefarious Treason, expiated his Crime with his Life, being hanged on the next Tree. O. Crom∣well's first Adventure.I cannot omit what is affirmed of Cromwell, then a Captain of Horse in Essex his Regiment, who absented himself from the Fight. He had observed from the Top of a Steeple in the Neighbourhood, the Disorder of the Right Wing of their Army, wherewith being greatly terrified, he slipp'd down for haste by the Bell-Rope, and taking Horse, ran away with his Troop; for which Crime he had been cashier'd, had it not been for the powerful Mediation of his Friends. I mention this of this so famous Chieftain in the following Wars, to shew, how the Temperature of Body and Mind may, by Use and Ambition, be entirely altered. The King takes Ban∣bury-Ca∣stle, &c.The King continued his March, having the Town and Castle of Banbury surrendred to him in his Way; the Two Regiments of Foot, and Troop of Horse which Garrisoned there, putting them∣selves under his Majesty's Protection and Pay. Broughton, the Lord Say's House, was also delivered; and now, the King, with many Prisoners and Ca∣ptive-Colonels, entred triumphantly into Oxford.Enters tri∣umphantly into Ox∣ford. But he did not stay long there; for, Prince Rupert, with a great Body of Horse, swiftly moving up and down the Country, infested all the Ways and Avenues to London on that Side; and the King
following with the rest of the Army, assaulted and forced Brentford,Hollis and Hamden's Regiments, with part of the Lord Brookes's, routed at Brentford. breaking Two of the Enemies best Regiments there, taking Eleven Colours and Thirteen Pieces of Ordnance; which were sunk, by reason of their Encumbrance, in the adjoining River. Many were slain and drowned, and Five Hundred were made Prisoners; but the King gave these their Liberty, upon their Engagement, ne∣ver to bear Arms again against his Majesty. But, the Parliament, loth to lose so many brave Men, ordered Stephen Marshall, a fierce Presbyterian Mi∣nister, to absolve them from the Religion of their Oaths, which he did, with a more than Pontifical Authority. The Consternation this blow occasion∣ed, filled the City with Terror. They shut their Shops immediately upon the News, and muster∣ing their Trained-Bands and Auxiliaries, joining with such Forces of their Army, as were nearest; Essex drew them all up in Battalia upon Turnham-Green.Essex at Turnham-Green. Three Thousand who lay at Kingston, were also sent for; for which their General was after blamed, for abandoning so considerable a Post, which might have distressed the King, if made good: For, his Majesty having Intelligence of the numerous Strength of the Rebels, and indeed want∣ing Bullets for a Skirmish; lest he might be sur∣rounded by them, retreating over Kingston-Bridge, abandoned, as is said, broke it down after him; and having garrisoned Redding in his Way, return∣ed triumphantly to Oxford. Whilst these Things were a-doing, the City and the Two Houses apprehending the King's Advance, had sent for Essex, to whom they had given Five Thousand Pound as an Acknowledgment for his great Services at Edge-hill, to hasten to their Suc∣cour. But, the King being gone, the Citizens re∣turned to their Labours, and the Essexians to re∣cruit their shatter'd Regiments with new Levies.
The King being come to Oxford,The King returns to Oxford, and Forti∣fies it. and finding it a Place very commodious to make his head Quarters of, it being in the Heart of the Kingdom, and not far from London; commanded it to be Forti∣fied (which the Rebels had seasonably omitted to do) and surrounded with a deep Moat and Bul∣works, according to the Modern Practice, which was done with all imaginable Diligence and Haste. In the mean Time, the War was carried on in other Provinces of the Kingdom, with no less Courage and Vigour. Not only the Towns and Counties, but most of the best Families divided in their Opinions; many engaging according to their Interest, but most according as they affected the Parties. But, the various Battels, Fights, Veli∣tations, Sieges, and the like, as they deserve no Triumphs, happening in a Civil War, so they merit a better Description, than is yet ex∣tant; for, they were for the most part eminent for Courage, famous for Conduct, and by so much the more severe in their Actings, by how much the Parties were the more excited with the O∣pinion of doing well. I do not therefore de∣sign to relate the whole War, as being above my Force. I will leave that Province to the Writers of Histories, and content my self to describe the Chief Actions of it, and those Things I my self for the most part saw, but with designed Brevity. Whilst the Armies were in their Winter-Quar∣ters, they were not so idle, but that many Horse-Skirmishes, Excursions, Velitations, Beating-up of Quarters, and the like Feats of War, were daily practised, and that with various Success. The King's Affairs had hitherto succeeded well, con∣sidering his Circumstances, although he never re∣ceived any Advantage without Sorrow, seeing
it was gained from his Subjects. And hence it was, that as often as his Arms were Successful, his Thoughts were intent upon Peace, pressing and in∣viting the obdurate Faction to it, by reiterated Let∣ters and Messages, though to no purpose; for, those Puritans relying upon the Assistance of their Brethren, the Scots, were wholly averse from it. They had indeed formerly sent Propositions to the King at York, but more severe than any Denun∣ciation of War:Several fruitless Attempts for Peace. The Chief were, That the Chief Officers of State, should be of their naming; and the Militia by Sea and Land, at their disposing. That the King should disband his Forces, abandon his Friends, and not dispose of his Children, but by their Consent. His Majesty did not refuse an Answer to these Demands (although they seemed rather Imposi∣tions of Slavery, than Peace) which he sent by the Marquis of Hartford, and the Earl of Southam∣pton, Two Eminent Noble-men, with Command to deliver it in the House of Lords. But, being refused Admission, they returned without having effected any thing. Neither were the Mediation of the French and Dutch, though offered by both, (how sincerely I know not) accepted by the Houses; who answered, That they could not suffer, that any Foreign Prince, or State, especially the French, should interpose in their Affairs. And, to shew how little they valued the Monsieur, his Coach was stopped and searched for Letters, as he was passing to Oxford; his Complaint of that Insolence, being slurred over with a faint Excuse. The Parliament would admit of the Scots, their Brethren in Ini∣quity; whom the King did justly reject, as equally Rebels. They had indeed formerly, after the Battel of Edge-hill, upon the King's Advance with his victo∣rious Army towards London, apprehending his Ap∣proach, sent Two Lords and Three Commoners to
stay him, under Pretence of treating; which, when they could not, they seemed, in Revenge upon his Majesty's Retreat, to resolve to treat no more; though afterwards, upon the Instance of some of the more moderate amongst them, they again sent Twelve Delegates to Oxford, with Demands rather than Propositions; the Chief whereof were,Jan. 30. 1642. That his Majesty should Disband his Army; Return to the Par∣liament; Abolish Episcopacy; Abandon the Militia to their Disposal, &c. The King on the other Side, demanded, His Revenues, his Magazines, his Cities, Navies, Fortresses, &c. and, that whatever they had done contrary to Law, should be Abrogated. But no∣thing was concluded, save that the Commissioners were forced to confess, That the King (for,The King's rare Wis∣dom. they were commanded by their Masters to treat with no Body but his Majesty alone) did excel in Sharpness of Wit, in most accurate Ʋnderstanding of Things, and in Quickness of Judgment. That he also heard the contrary Objections and Arguments, with unimitable Patience: Unhappy only in this, That he attributed more to the Advice of others, than his own Opinion. The Parliament had long since seized upon all the King's Castles, Forts, Arms, Governments, Ships, Revenues, Treasure and Ornament. But, to shew their Intentions for Peace, they Denounce War with an Oath, declaring, They will not lay down Arms as long as the King had an Army, under whose Protection, Papists [that is, Royallists] and such who were obnoxious to the Law, might find San∣ctuary. Nay, they came to that pitch of Bold∣ness, that they presumed by their own Autho∣rity, to summon a National-Synod. Where, re∣jecting the ancient Forms of Councils, they impower this, composed of Presbyterian and Independant Clero-Layicks, to establish Religion, and the Forms for Government in the Church. They also falsified
the Great Seal, by making another instead of that which was with the King, and use it publickly. Thus, this Pacifick Tribe seeks for Peace, and im∣molates to injured Majesty, by rendering, as much as in them lay, the Differences irreconcileable. But, this Counterfeiting of the Great Seal, was voted Treason by the Parliament at Oxford some time after. The Earl of New∣castle in the North,During these Traverses, the Earl of New-Castle raised an Army in the North, to whom the Earl of Cumberland joined himself. On the other Side, the Two Fairfaxes, Father and Son, were for the Parliament. The first material Encounter they had, was at Tadcaster, where the Rebels were beaten, the Royallists having forced them out of Town; after which they also took Bradford. But the Fairfaxes being afterwards recruited, they took Leeds; and Colonel Cholmley and Boynton, rout∣ted and took Colonel Slingsby at Gisburg. The Younger Fairfax gained also a notable Victory at Wakefield, against part of Newcastle's Army; but he did not enjoy the Sweets of it long; for, his Forces were afterwards quite broken by the Mar∣quiss's, who over-spreading the Country with his Power,Victorious; and having received great Stores of Arms, Cannon, and other Military Utensils, with the Colonels Goring and King from Holland, drove the Rebels quite out of the Field, and shut up the Lord Fairfax,Besiegeth Hull. and his Remnants in Hull; where he be∣sieged him. This was a fatal Oversight; for, if he had carried the War into the associated Eastern Counties, humanely spoke, he had not only ad∣ded those Rich Provinces to his Victories, but by intercepting the Contributions of Money and Men, which those Rich Countries perpetually furnished the Rebels with, put an End to the War it self, and that without Blood.
The Queen Lands at Burling∣ton.Early in the Spring, the Queen landed at Bur∣lington, with many Officers and Commanders of Note, as also great Stores of Arms and Provisions for War. In this Place, and in her Quarters, her Majesty underwent no less hazard than at Sea: for, an English Man of War coming then into the Bay, fired into the Town with so much Fury, that she was forced to abandon her Lodging, and seek for shelter behind the Hedges. But, being received magnificently by Newcastle, and with Honours due to so great a Princess, she was attend∣ed by him to York;Goes to York. into which City she entered in Triumph, her self being the most pompous part of the Show. The Earl of Montross, eminent for his Youth and Nobility, and of high Esteem in his Country; having deserted the Covenanters, because he found them designing to Ruine the Church and Monar∣chy, came, accompanied with the Lord Ogelby and One hundred and Twenty Horse, to wait upon the Queen at York; where he informed her Ma∣jesty, of the Covenanters Preparations in Scotland, and, that they would in a very little Time, Invade England with a great Army. Hamilton came thi∣ther also to salute the Queen, and with his known Arts refuting Montross's Assertions, prayed her to give no Credit to One so Young and Vain: which she unhappily inclined to. Sir Hugh Cholmley, Go∣vernour of Scarborough, with Three hundred Men, came also in at the same Time, returning to his Obedience to his Sovereign. Which the Two Ho∣thams seemed also to attempt, though unfortu∣nately; so dangerous Rebellion is, that it often Ruines those who would return to their Duty a∣gain. The Marquiss of Hartford having Command of the Western Counties, and assisted by the Lord Pawlet, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Bevil Greenville, Sir
John Stowell, and others, all eminent for Courage and Loyalty, performed many great Actions. On the other Side, Major General Chudley, and the Earl of Stamford were very Active. But Hopton, not to be named without an Epithet of Ho∣nour, harassed these in several Encounters. He routed Chudley at Lanceston, beat him at Chafford, and defeated both him and Stamford in a great Fight at Stratton.Hopton defeats the Rebels at Stratton; He took here One thousand and Seven hundred Prisoners, besides many slain, Thir∣teen Brass Cannon, Seventy Barrels of Powder, &c. This Victory restored the Neighbouring Provinces to their Duty to the King; and Hopton himself, for his eminent Services, was created Baron of Stratton, where he had fought so bravely. The Rebel-Chieftains fled to Exeter, where they were besieged, and forced afterwards to surrender to Prince Maurice. Hopton, after his Victory, march∣ed into Somersetshire, encountring Sir William Waller, a famed Champion of the Rebellion,Fights Waller at Lands∣downe. at Landsdowne near Bath. The Fight was brave, contested with equal Valour and Obstinateness, and continued till late in the Night. The Enemy at length drew off into the Town, leaving lighted Matches in the Hedges, and Walls (to amuse the Royallists) behind them. The Enemies greatest Loss was in their Foot; and ours, in that of the Noble Sir Bevil Greenville, who with a Stand of Pikes, had sustained the reitera∣ted Charges of the Roundheads, and repelled them. He was a Person of no less Loyalty than Courage, which made him equally lamented by the Brave, as well as the Good. The Rebels Loss was greater than ours, as well in Officers as Souldiers, though abundantly compensated by the Death of the said Greenville, and the blowing up of our Powder; fired, as was believed, by One of the Prisoners. The General himself was much endangered, being hurt by the Flame of it; the which, together with
the Want it occasioned, obliged him to shut him∣self up in the Devizes, until he could be recruited with new Stores. Waller, intent upon Oppor∣tunities, followed him close, and block'd him up in the said Town, where they were forced to use their Bed-cords for want of Match. But, the Siege lasted not long; for, the King, admonish'd by the Danger these brave Men were in, sent the Lord Willmott, to whom was joined Prince Maurice, the Earl of Carnarven, and the Lord Byron, excellent Persons all, with Fifteen hundred Horse to their Relief. Being advanced near the Town,Battel of Round∣way-Downe, July 13. 1643. the Horse were drawn up upon Roundway-Downe, in One entire Line; save that a Forlorn-Hope ad∣vancing before the Body, encountred and beat another of theirs up to their Army, which stood in Battalia upon the Hill. A Valley divided the Two Armies, which, by reason the Enemy kept their Ground, and the Advantages of the Height they stood upon, we were obliged to pass; which was done with Resolution, notwithstanding the continual Discharges of the adverse Cannon, and in very close Order; and charging their Horse, most of them being Curiassiers, we bore them be∣fore us, broke and entirely routed them. We had only Two small Field-Pieces, which were also Dis∣charged but once from a high Hill upon our Left Hand, being guarded by a few Dragoons, to give Notice to the Town of the Approach of their Re∣lief. The Enemies Foot, notwithstanding the Flight of their Horse, stood firm; nor would be broken, until they perceived our Foot marching out of Town, who advanced but slowly for fear of Ambushes; and then they threw down their Arms, and dispersed, but to little purpose, being well nigh all kill'd or taken. There were Eight hundred slain, Two thousand taken, Four Brass Pieces of Ordnance, with all their Ammunition,
and great Store of Provisions; besides Eight and Twenty Foot Colours, and Nine Cornets of Horse. The Loss on the King's Side was very small, ex∣cept that about Thirty young Gentlemen, most Vo∣luntiers, (whereof the Relater, being sorely wound∣ed in the Head and Right Hand was one) being too far engaged in the Pursuit, were taken, and carried Prisoners to Bristol, from whence they in a little time were relieved; for, that City being ill defended, was surrendred by Colonel Fines, the Governour, to the conquering Army; for which Act, as savour∣ing of Pusillanimity, he was tried by a Court-Mar∣shal. But he had approved himself Valorous against the Unfortunate; having cruelly hanged and murthe∣red Robert Yeamans,Yeaman and Bou∣chier mur∣thered at Bristol. and George Bouchier, Two prime Citizens, and eminent for their Loyalty, upon Pretence of their Designing to deliver the City to Prince Rupert; notwithstanding the King's and the King's General, the Earl of Forth's Letters, Admonitions, and Menacing to the contrary. Waller and Hazlerigg fled to Bristol, but appre∣hending a Siege, went thence to London to recruit; and the Citizens, out of the high Opinion they had of Waller, easily consented to supply him. At the same time of the Bristol-plot, there was another Conspiracy discovered at London. Mr. Waller, by his ingenious Confession, and the rare Eloquence of Ten thousand Pounds,Chaloner and Tom∣kins at London. saved his Life. Chaloner and Tompkins, more loyal, and deserving a better Fate, were hanged before their own Doors. The King's Forces were very successful also in other Places, though the Victory gained at Hop∣ton-Heath, where Gell and Brereton,Hopton-Heath Fight. Two of the Rebels Champions, lost their Cannon and the Day, was very dear; for it cost no less than the Life of the most Noble Earl of Northampton, who being unhappily fallen from his Horse, amongst Concy-Borrows, was barbarously murthered. After this,
Prince Rupert joining his Forces with these, thus de∣stituted, having forced Burmigham, a very Recep∣tacle of Sedition, though with the Loss of the old Earl of Denbigh, took Leichfield-Close. The Lord Brookes, a fierce Zealot of the Party against Bishops, in the attempting of it before, upon his Advance to it, had inauspiciously implored a Sign from Heaven, of the Divine Approbation of his Design; for, whilst he was ordering his Battery, though com∣pleatly armed, a Bullet glancing near him,The Lord Brooke kill'd at Leichfield. shot him into the Eye and Brain, upon St. Chad's-Day, the Patron of that Cathedral. Some time after, Es∣sex having recruited his Army, besieged Redding; and having repelled the Cavaliers designed for its Relief, at Causum-Bridge, had it surrendred to him by Fielding the Lieutenant Governour; Sir Arthur A∣ston, who commanded in hief, being sore hurt. They were startled at Oxford at this Surrender; and there wanted not them, who blamed Essex, for not moving that way with his Forces now victori∣ous. But others again excused him, fancying that he designed to put an End to the War by a Peace, not a Conquest. Taunton and Bridgwater fell like∣wise into the Rebels Hands. On the other side, Prince Rupert beat the Round-heads at Chalgrave Field, where many of them of Note, were kill'd and taken Prisoners. Colonel Hambden (one of the Five Members who commanded.) was slain in that very Field, where he first rendezvouz'd his Men against his Sovereign. Very many other Fights and Skirmishes happen∣ed with various Success, in th several Counties of the Kingdom; which, to  rolixness, I have de∣signedly omitted, or but slightly mentioned, con∣tenting my self to be particular in those only, which seemed decisive as to the Fate of the King∣dom. The Queen having raised an Army in Yorkshire,
and the neighbouring-Counties, leaving a consi∣derable Force with Sir Charles Cavendish for the Defence of Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire, march∣ed with the rest, consisting of about Four Thou∣sand Men, Six Field-pieces and Two Mortars, to∣wards the King,The Queen meets the King at Edge-hill. whom she met at Edge-hill; not more famous for the Battel fought there, than for this Royal Congress. The Joy after so long an Absence was very great, as may be justly presu∣med, since the Passions of Affection and Esteem ne∣ver appeared more eminent, than in this Pair-Roy∣al of Lovers. And now, with joined Forces and Desires, they marched towards Oxford. After the destroying of Sir William Waller's Ar∣my at the Devizes, and the taking of Bristol, the King was absolute Master of the Field. The Mar∣quiss of Newcastle having also ruined Fairfax at Bramham-Moor, and subdued the whole North, ha∣ving shut up the Remains of the Enemy in a few Garrisons, was likewise at Liberty to act what he pleased. But the King, contrary to his own Senti∣ments and Advice, being overborn by his Council of War, or rather betrayed by his Fate, and the Per∣fidy of some pretended Friends, omitting London the Head of the Rebellion, miserably squandered that Time which was irrecoverable, in the unfor∣tunate Siege of Glocester, whilst Newcastle amused himself about Hull. Whereas, if they had joined their Forces, the Rebels having no Army then in the Field to oppose them, he might not only have routed the pretended Parliament, who were already upon the Point to dissodge, but have given Law to that proud City, the Source of the Rebellion and his Misfortunes. But, it seemed otherwise good to Providence; and, the Two Houses, who were in a desponding Condition, raised with this unhoped for Opportunity, recruited their empty Regiments well nigh ruined with Sickness and Sedition, with
all imaginable Speed; and, alluring to their Assi∣stance the City-Forces, they not only relieved Glo∣cester, but raised their declining Cause to a Balance with the Kings. But of these in Order. Essex mar∣ches to the Relief of Glocester.Essex mustered his Army, the Members of both Houses being present, upon Hounsley-Heath, which did not exceed Ten Thousand Men; too weak for the Expedition they were designed: but being much reinforced by the City-Auxiliaries, and Trai∣ned-Bands, marched that Night to Colebroke, and so forward. Glocester, seated upon the Banks of Severne, was, with the Addition of some Works, and the River, esteemed strong. Colonel Massey, an a∣ctive and vigilant Commander, was Governour, strengthened with Two Regiments of Foot and Two Troops of Horse: who, however vigo∣rously attacked, did no less vigorously oppose Force to Force, Sallies to Assaults, and Countermines to the Mines from without. But, in truth, neither understood the Methods of besieging, or defending as yet; that Part of War being but in its Infancy amongst us. But, we must allow the Defensive to have carried it here, seeing they held it out, until the Arrival of their Succours. The King being advertized of the Enemies Advance, sent Prince Rupert with all the Horse to retard their March; which he did, by continual Excursions, Velitations and forcing of Posts and Quarters. At Stow in the Wowld, the Prince drawing all his Horse in one con∣tinued Line, upon the Side of the Hill, made a very great Appearance. On the contrary, the Rebels march up the Ascent in Battalia. Lieutenant Colonel Bayly, with the City-Regiments, were in the Left-Wing; and, Colonel Harvey, with his Regiment of Horse and Two of Foot, being some-what advan∣ced in the Right, the Prince sent a strong Party, with orders to endeavour to get betwixt them and Home; which being perceived, Three Regiments
more were presently sent to his Assistance; the which, with the Thunder of their Cannon, obliged the Royallists after some skirmishing to retire to their Body, which being composed only of Horse, did also give way to this great Army which advanced upon them. The King preferring the Blessings of Peace, be∣fore the Triumphs of Victory, sent a Trumpeter with Propositions to Essex, who answered crudely enough, That he had Orders to relieve Glocester, not to treat; which he also did, the King rising from the Siege at his Approach, and passing the River, with a Resolution to fight the Rebels▪ up∣on their return. And this seemed another Omissi∣on;The Siege of Gloce∣ster raised. for, if the King had fought them before they reached the Town, he had probably either beaten them, or impeded their Progress; both, or either of which, would infallibly have obliged them to surrender. Essex having relieved the Town, his next Care was to preserve his Army, especially the Lon∣doners, the Chief Strength of it; which he in a great Manner did, by his Surprizal of Cirencester, where he found Store of Provisions, which he much wanted. The Royallists obstructing the Enemy in their Return, upon every Occasion, fell into their Rear upon Auburne Chase with all their Horse, for∣cing it up to their Main Body. They charged them a second Time, with the same Success; but ha∣ving no Foot, by the Advance of their Enemies and the Night, they retreated with little loss, save that of de Vieuville, a French Marquiss. The Rebels lost many, as well slain as taken. The next Morning, the King's Army being drawn up near Newbury, having the River on their Right-Hand, expected the Rebels there.The Battel of New∣bury. There was a little Hill Five Hundred Paces from the Town, which the Cavaliers had possessed and fortified with Guns. Essex perceiving it, and having no other
way to pass, he himself with his own Regiment and C. Barclay, and Holborne's Brigades, attacks it bravely, being as bravely received by the Royallists. Stapleton, with his own Regiment and that of the General's Guards, charging the Earl of Carnarven, was repulsed, but the Earl pursuing too far, was kill'd by a Shot, in the Head of his own Men; a Per∣son no less remarkable for his Fortitude, and Fide∣lity to the King, than for the Nobleness of his Ex∣traction. Prince Rupert valiantly charging the Right-Wing of the Rebels, who were rallied again, did again disorder them, driving them to the Entry of the Lane by which they were come. But, the Cavaliers were forced to make as much hast back, having been saluted with a Volley of Shot from the adverse Foot, posted there, and not without loss. The King's Right and the Enemies Left-Wing, being hindred by Hedges and Inclosures, fought only by small Parties and light Skirmishes. Nor had the Foot, though they fought stoutly, any signal Ad∣vantages of each other; the Earl of Brentford, on the King's side, and Major General Skippon on the Rebels, behaving themselves with equal Courage and Vigilancy. The Royallists had taken some Field-pieces, which they were forced to quit again with loss. The approaching Evening put an end to this bloody Contest, and the King's▪ Army rallied and drew up again, as at first, in the Field where they had fought, with design to renew the Combat in the Morning; which yet they did not, being content to send Major General Harvey, who had lately de∣serted them, with a strong Party of Horse and Foot to fall in their Rear. They had also stood in Arms all Night, not retreating before the Morn∣ing, at which time they were close followed, and charged; their Rear-guard, commanded by Sta∣pleton, being forced up to their Foot with conside∣rable Loss. There were slain on the King's Side
many eminent Persons, as the Earls of Carnarven and Sunderland, the Wise Lord Faukland and Co∣lonel Morgan, with others. The Rebels also lost many, but of no great Quality, being most Ple∣beians. And this was the End of the famous Ex∣pedition of Glocester, wherein Essex and his Party had gained much Honour, if they had not fought against their King. Nor did the Royallists behave themselves less Valiantly, though more Commenda∣bly, as having the Better Cause. The Rebel Parliament invite the Scots to their Aid.The Men at Westminster, being heightned with this Appearance of Success (which carried more Noise with it, by reason of the Loss on the King's Side, of so many Noblemen, whereas they had but few to expose) they yet prudently considering the Equality of the Balance, not over-confident in their own Strength, invited the Presbyterian Scots to their Assistance; and to oblige them the more strictly to their Party, being not to be gained by the or∣dinary Stipend of Mercenaries, they mutually ob∣lige themselves by a Solemn League and Covenant, contrary to all Laws, Humane and Divine, to ex∣tirpate Episcopacy and the Liturgy, and to obtrude in their Places, the Scottish Ecclesiastical Discipline, built upon the Basis of Rebellion and Tumult. Moreover, Archbishop Laud, retained hitherto in the nauseousness of a Prison, was now, as Straf∣ford had been formerly, to be immolated a Sacrifice to the Malice of these Hirelings; and, the Re∣venues of the Church, to be divided amongst these Sacrilegious Confederates, as will shortly appear. This best of Princes, might have expected better Things from the Scots, as being his Countrymen as well as Subjects. Nay, he had heaped so many Graces upon them upon his being in Scotland, ha∣ving refused them nothing they had demanded of him; that their Parliament, taken with so great Indulgence, had decreed, That if any whosoever
should levy Men, or take up Arms upon any Pre∣tence whatsoever, except by the King's Express Order, he should be guilty of damnable Treason. Nay, they profess farther upon Oath, That in Case the King's Person should at any Time be endangered, they would defend his Majesty's Cause and Honour, as they were in Duty bound, with their Lives and Fortunes. When the King was at Edinbrough, he had advanced Two very Ingrateful Persons to great Honour. Lesley he made an Earl, and Hamilton a Duke. The First exstasied with the Greatness of the Fa∣vour, protested solemnly (perjured Wretch!) That he would never bear Arms more against his Ma∣jesty. And the other, if we may believe publick Fame, betrayed all his Master's Counsels to his Enemies, but perfidiously concealed Theirs, though a Privy Coun∣sellor, from his King. It may not be unworthy Notice to declare, what farther happened at the same Time. There was a great Noise rumour'd,A pretended Conspiracy against Ha∣milton and Argyle. of a Conspiracy against the Lives of Hamilton and Argyle, with some o∣thers, contrived by the Earl of Crawford and his Party. This Report, however fictitious and ima∣ginary, gained such Credit, that the King himself was not obscurely reflected upon: Which his righ∣teous Soul took in such Scorn, that he could not forbear to tell Hamilton (when, as the Custom is, he delivered him his Patent in Parliament, where∣by he was created Duke) That he did not deserve to be suspected by him, who could not choose but remember, That at that very Time when he was accused to him of High-Treason, he suffered him that very Night to lie in his Bed-Chamber. After this, the Wars grow∣ing Hot in England, the King advertised his Privy-Council in That Kingdom, of the State of his Af∣fairs in This, demanding their Advice, and Aid; who returned an Answer full of Duty and Loyalty, but with a Resolution to perform nothing they had
promised: For, the Business being known at Lon∣don, they of Westminster caressed their lately acknow∣ledged Brethren so effectually, that they did not scruple to declare, That they would act nothing against the Parliament, no not in Favour of the King himself; which they also, perfidiously faithful, did per∣form. Nay more, these Ungrateful Wretches, forgetful of their Honour and Allegiance, invade England with a Great Army, causing that Fatal Change in the Kings Affairs, till then very Prospe∣rous, that cost him his Life, and them their Liber∣ty, to those whose Encrease they had so obstinately pursued. The King perceiving how furiously the prevail∣ing Faction did drive on, and that it daily received Strength from London, resolved to remove the Parliament to Oxford, which he did by publick Proclamation; where most of the Lords, and a∣mongst them, the Earls of Holland, Bedford and Clare (who were lately come in to the King, tho' they left him again with the same Levity) and near Two Hundred of the Commons, met at a Day. The rest, in Scorn of their Duty, continu∣ed at Westminster, until they were outed thence by their own Servants. The first Business that the Parliament at Oxford undertook, was, to admonish the Scots by Letters, That they should not hostilely In∣vade England, it being no less than High-Treason to attempt it. But this, as also the King's Dissuasory Message, was to no purpose. Nay, they were so rudely impudent, that they caused a Letter writ to them, and Signed by all the Lords, to be Burnt by the Hands of the Common-Hangman. The Scots enter En∣gland, March 1.They therefore Invade England, the Year being far spent, with Eighteen thousand Foot, Two thousand Horse, and One thousand Dragoons; and, passing the River Tine, send their Declara∣tion before them, pretending, That they designed,
nothing, but the Reformation of Religion, the King's Honour, and the Peace of the Kingdom. The King extreamly surprized with this Inva∣sion, having been still kept up with a Belief, that the Scots would not enter England; finding himself deluded, committed Duke Hamilton, and his Bro∣ther Lanerick (who were newly posted out of Scotland, as afrighted with the News they brought) to Prison. The former being accused of several other Treasons also,Hamilton sent to Pen∣dennis-Castle. was afterwards sent to Pen∣dennis-Castle: His Brother escaped to London, and so to Scotland, which he lately abandoned as unsafe; whereof he was Secretary, though the Court-Signet had been taken from him. But, to march with the Scots into England, where the Parliament had long since seized upon the King's Castles, Forts, Arms, Ships, Revenues, Treasure, Ornaments, &c. they now, to Complement their new Allies, urge their impious Covenant so far, that the Subject must either forfeit his Faith or Estate. But Religion was always pretended, and all their Undertakings veiled with the Masque of Godliness. They divest her of her Ornaments, under pre∣tence of dressing her; and, with Impious Hands, prophane her Monuments, transferred to us from our pious Ancestors, who sealed the Faith we own with their Bloods. Their zealous Fury extends to our Churches, destroying whatever was in them, either Reverend for Antiquity, or to be Esteemed for its Ar∣tifice. They turn Temples into Stables, and the House of Prayer into a Den of sacrilegious Impurity. A∣mongst other Acts and Triumphs of their Reforma∣tion, they demolished Charing and Cheapside-Crosses, eminent for their Beauty and the Artificiousness of their Structure; converting the Superstitious Metals they were composed of, to their own Use. It may not be from the Purpose, to relate a Story of ludicrous as well as impudent Boldness.
Harry Martin,H. Martin Inspects the Regalia. who had said in the House, That the Felicity of the Nation, did not consist in the Family of the Stuarts, (for which he then, to palliate the Impudence, had been confined) was ordered to Survey the Regalia; which he did: for, breaking the Iron Chest wherein they were kept, he took out of it the Crown, Sceptre, and Vestments belong∣ing to Edward the Confessor, wherewith the Kings of England had since been always inaugurated; say∣ing, though falsly, with a scornful Laughter, There will be no more Ʋse of these Trifles. With the same unmannerly Impudence, he caused George Withers, a pitiful Poet, then present, to be dressed in those Royal Vestments; who being also Crowned, walked at first stately up and down, but afterward putting himself into a Thousand Mimick Postures, endea∣voured to expose those Sacred Ornaments, to the Contempt and Derision of the By-standers. These afterwards, as also the Robes and Plate belonging to the Church, were sold. Nor could they be perswaded, to leave one Silver Cup, to be used at the Communion, affirming, with barbarous Sa∣crilege, That a wooden Dish would serve the Turn. Nor is it any wonder, That these Sacred Ʋtensils were thus abused, when the Sacred Function of Mi∣nisters, was so Inhumanely treated; of whom a Hundred and Fifteen in the City and Suburbs were, for their Fidelity to the King, according to the Laws, and their Zeal to the Established Religion, according to their Conscience, together with their Wives and Children,The barba∣rous Ʋsage of the Loy∣al Clergy. Ejected, Plundred, Spoiled, and barbarously Consumed in Prison, in Exile, and with Hunger. To relate all the Inhumanities committed against the Loyal Orthodox Clergy, their Usurpations upon the Revenues of the Church, and their Dilapidations and Ruines of the Houses of God in the Land, would require a vast Volume, and might deservedly employ a very good Pen▪
which I purposely omit, as wanting Ability and Leasure for so Great a Work. The Scots being entred into England, the Mar∣quess of Newcastle (for he had been made such, for his Eminent Services) marched with his Ar∣my to oppose the Progress of this new Enemy. He had kept them at Bay for some time, by frequent Encounters and Velitations, till the taking of Selbie by Fairfax, and Lincoln by the Earl of Manchester. Both which, especially the Latter, being very nu∣merous, moved after him. So that, Newcastle unable to fight them all at once, and lest he might be inclosed by their Three Armies, retreated to York, where he was surrounded and besieged by their United Forces. The King being very sollicitous for the Safety of so good a Man, and so good an Army, sent Prince Rupert with great Forces to their Relief. The Prince had some Time before relieved Newark, having slain a Thousand of Sir John Meldrum's Men, who besieged it, and reduced the Rest to a Necessity (though Six Thousand strong) of part∣ing with their Arms and Baggage. High with these Successes, he marches toward the North, and taking Stopford and Leverpoole in his Way, relieved the Illustrious Countess of Derby in Lahame House, where she had been long Besieged. Bolton daring to defend it self, was at the second Assault forced; Eight Hundred of the Garrison, most Townsmen, being slain. For, relying upon their Numbers and Works, they had not only abused the Prince by scurrilous Language, but hang'd One of his Ca∣ptains whom they had taken, which occasioned this not undeserved Severity. After this, continuing his March, he came without any Opposition to York, where he joined with Newcastle, the Enemy having raised the Siege upon his Approach, with a Resolution to engage them. The Besieged, upon
the Rebels drawing off, did some considerable Exe∣cution upon their Rear, but being secure, had no mind to try the Hazard of the War any farther. They had been wearied with a long Siege of Nine Weeks; and, supposing that their Deliverers were also tired with their long March, thought it better to leave the Enemy to their own Dissentions (for, their Generals did not well agree about the Com∣mand in Chief) than to occasion their Uniting, by so hazardous an Adventure. But, the Prince fa∣tally resolved, and not thinking he had done enough in relieving the City, if he did not also beat the Scots, the only Obstacle to the King's Victories, marched after the Rebels, and found them drawn up in a Corn-field on the South side of Marston-Moor, Four Miles from York. The Enemies Three Armies, contracted in One, was commanded by the Three Generals. The Battel of Mar∣ston-Moor July 2.The Two Fairfaxes, Father and Son, had the Right-Wing; Manchester the Left, and Leven the Main Body, consisting all of Scots; and each Divi∣sion had his Auxiliaries and Reserves. The Prince observing the Adversaries Order, ranged also his Army in Battalia; and, reserving to himself the Left-Wing, gave Newcastle the Right, entrusting the Command of the Main Battel to Goring, Lucas, and Porter. And, as no Field since these Unhappy Wars, did produce so Great Armies, so none had been fought with greater Valour. Rupert charg'd the Fairfaxes with so much Resolution, that he broke them, and the Scots their Reserves; but, pursued them (to his own Ruine) too far. Our Main Battel did also repel the Scots. But, Affairs went otherwise in the Right, the Mancesterians having routed the Royallists, and not following them too far, fell upon the Prince's and Goring's disor∣dered Troops, hindring them to Rally, and quite dispersed them. It is affirmed, That the Three
Rebel-Generals quitted the Field, leaving to Crom∣well, Manchester's Lieutenant General, the Honour of the Day; for, he keeping his great Reserve of Horse in a firm Body, followed the Cavaliers so close, that he hindred them to Rally and Embody a∣gain. The Fight lasted from Seven, till Ten at Night, with great Courage and Slaughter on both Sides; though the Victory fell to the Rebels, as also the Cannon and Spoil of the Field. There were Two of Newcastle's Regiments, called his Lambs, being old Souldiers, who fell not unrevenged. For, the rest being fled, they casting themselves into a Ring, did alone resist Cromwell's Assaults; nor could they, however abandoned by their Friends, and surrounded by their Enemies, be broke, until, being shot at like Fowl at a Distance, and overwholmed with showers of Bullets; not then perishing, without Slaughter of their Enemies, scarce any of these miserable Bravo's escaping, tho' worthy of a better Fortune. The slain were com∣puted at Eight Thousand; the Slaughter made by Cromwell, being compensated in that made by the Prince upon the Fairfaxians, and especially the Scots, being most animated against them. His Highness being returned from his Pursuit too late, rallying what he could of his dispersed Troops, returned with his Remains into Lancashire; whilst the Mar∣quess retreating to York, left that also; and, with his Two Sons, and very many of his Principal Of∣ficers, leaving England to its Dissentions and Tu∣mults, sailed for Hamburgh. York sur∣rendred July 23.The Royallists being thus dispersed, York is again Besieged by the Three victorious Armies; but, wanting Powder, wherewith they had furnished their Camp before the Fight, the City was delivered up by Sir Thomas Glenham, the Governour, upon Ho∣nourable Terms; most of the Northern Counties, following her Fortune.
But, the King was more successful in other Places, especially where he commanded in Person. Waller having lost his Army at the Devizes, had raised another in London; the Citizens, that they might contribute to this Holy War, defrauding their bark∣ing Stomachs of one Meal by the Week. His first Exploit, was the Recovery of Arundel-Castle, some∣time before taken by Hopton. Being joined with Balfore and Hazelrig at Winchester, not unmindful of his Defeat at the Devizes, he did now in some Sort bravely revenge it upon Hopton himself at Branden-Heath near Alsford,Branden-Heath Fight, Mar. 29. the Lord John Stuart being mortally wounded in the Fight. The Foot stood bravely to it at push of Pike, till the Royallists be∣ing outnumb'red, were forced to give Way. The Earl of Forth having sent the Cannon away before to Winchester, and that he might likewise save the Horse, wheeled about with them to Basing, and so to Oxford. There fell of the Royallists in this Combat, near Five Hundred, besides the above-mentioned Lord; as also Sir John Smith, and the Colonels, Sandys, Scot and Manning. The Rebels ac∣knowleged scarce One Hundred of theirs slain; be∣sides Colonel Delbier, and Colonel Tompson, who were wounded. Nor did Waller insult long; for, his Forces being joined to Essex's, both were designed to besiege Oxford. The King having Notice of the Enemies Inten∣tions, sent the Queen toward the West, and him∣self (having left a strong Garrison in the City) with Three thousand Horse and Four thousand Foot, marched towards Worcester. The Two Ge∣nerals follow the King, with Two distinct Camps; but, meeting again at Burford, Essex joining Massey to Waller, sent them a King-catching, as they termed it; whilst he himself moves with his Army into the West, to subdue those Counties. By this means, they were both defeated; for, the King
slipping by Waller, returned with quick Marches to Burford, where he met his Cannon and Ammu∣nition from Oxford; and afterwards encountring Waller at Copredy-Bridge, Eleven thousand strong, overcame him.Copredy-Bridge Fight, June 20. The Enemy had possessed them∣selves of a Hill, from whence watching the Royal∣lists Motion, they bravely attempted them in their Passage of the Bridge; but, being as bravely re∣cieved by the Earls of Northampton and Cleveland, who commanded the Rear, they were beaten and routed. The Rebels lost their Cannon; near a Thousand wounded and slain, besides several of their Officers. Waller being ruined, the King hastens after Essex; and came with his Army to Liskard, Eight Miles from Lestithiel, where the Rebels lay Encamped. Essex had taken Taunton and Weymouth in his Way; and, being advanced near Exeter, the Queen, who was brought to Bed in that City of the Princess Henrietta, sent a Trumpet to him, to desire him to forbear from Hostility for some little time, till she was recovered; but she was denied. A while after, she sending again to him for a Pass to go to the Bath, was brutishly refused, with this Answer; That,Essex his Rudeness to the Queen. if she would go to London, where she might be furnished with every Thing necessary for her Health, he would send her a Convoy; adding, he knew no other way. Whilst Essex was upon his March, it was sharply contested at a Council of War, Whether he should proceed in his Journey Westward, or return and fight the King, who was not far off; lest if he continued his March, he might, when he came into the Straits of Cornwall, be inclosed betwixt him and Prince Maurice, then in those Parts. And, this was the Opinion of the wisest part of the Council, but did not prevail; for, the Lord Roberts was earnest to advance, and relieve Plymouth, which had been a long Time besieged; which done, he
sheweth them Cornwall, where they might quickly be recruited, by means of his Dependants and Friends, and obtain an easie Victory of Prince Maurice, who would be in no competent Condition to oppose them. And, this Opinion, the worst by the Sequel, carried it. The Royallists fierce with their late Victory, demanded to be brought to the Enemy. But the King, though not without commending their Ardor, thinking to gain a blood∣less Victory, commanded all the Passages and Avenues to the Camp to be shut up. The King himself, who joined Prince Maurice near Exeter, lay at Boconnock, sending Sir Richard Greenville to Bodmin, and Sir Jacob Ashly to Hule. Goring with Horse, and Sir William Basset with Fifteen Hun∣dred Foot were sent Westward, with strict Orders, to stop and cut off all manner of Provisions from the Besieged; so that the Enemy, reduced to great Wants and Distress; were willing to treat; which was no less willingly assented to by his Majesty, to whom no Victory was more grateful, than when he overcame his Enemies by their own Consent. The Horse commanded by Balfore,He leaves his Camp to the King's Mercy, and flies. Essex defeated, Sept. 1. under pretence of Skirmishing and drawing out to Fight, broke through the Intervals of our Quarters, and came safely to Saltash, and thence to Plymouth, leaving their Foot and Cannon to Mercy. The General himself, with Roberts and some others, secured themselves likewise, taking Boat at Foy for Ply∣mouth. But yet he could not escape the Obloquy of some, who wond'red, that so great a General should leave so brave an Army, in such certain Danger; though others excused him, he having thereby conserved himself, and his Chief Officers and Souldiers, for the Service of the Commonwealth. But all Men blamed Waller, Manchester, and espe∣cially Middleton; because they seemed to loyter, when they should have made all imaginable Haste to
his Assistance. The Foot being thus abandoned, sent Commissioners to the King to treat about the Surrender of the Camp; which was easily assented to, Quarter being granted to all, and their Swords and Pistols to all above the Degree of Corporals. There were found in the Camp, Forty Brass Pieces of Ordnance, Two hundred Barrels of Powder, and Arms for Nine thousand Men. Several Hun∣dreds of the Foot, took Arms with the Victo∣rious; and the rest, had Liberty to go where they pleased, upon Condition they should serve no more against the King. But these, as well as they of Brandford, broke their Words, violating their Promises with the same perfidious Levity; for, being come to Basing, they were again armed. And, it was observed, that none fought so eagerly against the King, as those very Fellows. An usual Testimony of their Gratitude. The King raised with no Success, but in order to Peace; did now again from Tavestock, as he had formerly done from Evesham, court the Two Houses by a Message to them, earnestly desiring, they would appoint some Commissioners to treat; but all to no purpose. His Majesty had likewise invi∣ted Essex, when besieged at Lestithiel, very graci∣ously, to join Forces with him, that so they might jointly procure what they both so earnestly contended for, the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom. Wherein also, he should lay an Eternal Obligation upon his King; and if any should oppose their Pious Endeavours, they would ren∣der them happy, whether they would or not. But he wretchedly neglected this amicable Summons, af∣firming, That his Orders were to fight, not to treat. Essex being strengthened by the Accession of his old Foot, by several City-Regiments, by Manche∣ster's Army, as also other Forces under the Com∣mands of Waller, Browne, and other Chiefs of the Party, grew suddenly so numerous, that he again
attempted the King at Newbury. He had designed before any more Action, to repair to the Parlia∣ment, and give them an Account of the Misfortune of his Expedition, as also to excuse it. But, they perceiving his Design, writ to him, that they were satisfied, that nothing happened by any Omission of his; and therefore being assured of his Fidelity and Courage, they desire him not to despond, but chearfully to prosecute the War; adding further, that he should endeavour with all his Power, to hinder the King's Return to Oxford, and rather ha∣zard a Battel than suffer him to pass thither; which he also did, and it was fought on both Sides with equal Conduct and Bravery until the Night part∣ed them. The second Battel of Newbury.The King had possest himself of the Town of Newbury; but being far short of the Enemy in Numbers, he fortified the Avenues of it, drawing up the rest of his Army in Spean-Field, an oppor∣tune place betwixt the Town and the Castle. Where he expected Prince Rupert, who was absent; with Three Thousand Horse, and the Earl of Northampton, who had relieved Banbury, with a Thousand more. When the Enemy saw they could not allure the Royallists to engage by Skirmishes, and that they durst not attempt them without Manifest Danger, they divide their Forces, sending a good part of them with Waller, Balfore, and Skippon to Cheveley, on the other side of the Town, with Resolution to attack the King's Camp from both parts at once; which accordingly they did; and, after a brave Fight, both highly animated, whilst the Royallists thought to revenge their Loss at Marston-Moor, and the Roundheads theirs of Cornwall, the latter prevailed; insomuch, that they forced the Cavaliers to abandon the Ditch, and Nine Pieces of Ord∣nance. Nor did the Fight end so, until the Night and Darkness parted them. There were slain on
the King's side Three Thousand Men, amongst which, were Charles the Lord Goring's Brother, St. Leger, Trevillian, and others. The old Earl of Brandford was shot in the Head, Sir Jo. Greenville, Campfield the younger, Walgrave, &c. wounded; and amongst the Prisoners, the brave Earl of Cleveland was of Chief Note. Nor was the Slaughter, much inferiour on the Rebels side, theirs amounting to no less than Five and Twenty Hundred. And yet, we must not deny the Enemy the Advantage of the Fight, by reason of the King's going off by Night; who leaving his Cannon and Baggage in Denning∣ton-Castle, marched without Interruption (which shewed he was not vanquished, though worsted) with his Army to Wallingford, and thence to Ox∣ford. Denning∣ton-Castle bravely de∣fended.The Royallists being retreated, the Essexians ha∣ving swallowed the great Booty in their Thoughts, besiege Dennington-Castle, but not with the same Success; for, Boys the Governour, having been thrice summon'd, and thrice assaulted, did as of∣ten reject and bravely repel those Insults of the Re∣bels; preserving himself and the Treasure depo∣sited with him, until the King, having brought back his Army from Oxford, after some sharp En∣counters, did not only relieve the Place, but also brought off his Guns, possessing himself of Newbury, a most convenient place for his Winter-Quarters. The Members at Westminster, being dissatisfied with the Proceedings of their Army, appointed a Committee to examine their Errors and Omissions, especially those that were committed since the Fight at Newbury, and at the succouring of the Castle, their Forces being double the Enemies in Numbers. The Faction suspecting Essex to be either care∣less, or discontented, and that he did not act with the same Vigour as formerly; apprehending him perhaps, too much enclined to Peace (for he had
dared to write to the Parliament some time since, to incline them to it) or, over-affectionate to the Nobility, which they grew weary of; were casting about, though they did not seem to suspect his Fi∣delity, how they might with least Noise (for he was still very considerable for his Interest) be rid of him. Cromwell, in his Narrative of the raising of the Siege of Dennington, had aspersed Essex's Forces, with some oblique Reflections; which so transported him, that he was resolved to vindicate his Honour with the Ruine of the Informer. And, for the more Security, he closed with the Scots Com∣missioners, as knowing them highly incens'd against them, because of the profuse Liberty of Speech he had used in their Concerns. Having therefore convened a private Meeting of choice Friends, both he and the Chancellor of Scotland, used all their Arguments and Elocution, to prove him an Incendiary betwixt the Two Nations; which they had further proceeded in, if they had not been disswaded, by the contrary Opi∣nions of Maynard and Whitlocke, whom he had cal∣led thither, and advised with in this grand Affair. But, the Grandees at Westminster did not desist; re∣solving, not only to remove him, but with him all the Presbyterians in Power. Yet, first to sweeten him, and lest he might oppose their Design; they vote him Ten Thousand Pounds per annum out of Delinquents Estates, as a Testimony of their Gratitude for his eminent Services for the Commonwealth; for, the Independants growing rampant, designed to get the Command of the Armies into their own Hands. The Houses therefore voted, (pretending nothing of their own private Interest, but all for the Pub∣lick,) That no Member of either House should during that War,The self-de∣nying Or∣dinance. enjoy or execute any Office or Command Mi∣litary or Civil, which had been granted or conferred on them by either House, or by Authority derived from them.
The Lords, though often pressed by the Commons to pass this Ordinance, could not be induced to do it, not obscurely foreseeing their Design against the Nobility, and most eminent Presbyterians; nay, some looked upon this Change in the Militia, as the Grave of Monarchy and their Peerage. And yet, after some Time, they so far concurred with the Commons, that they assented to the List of Officers for the new Modelling the Army; insomuch, that they were thanked by the Commons, and assured of their Affection and Support. Cromwell only was exempted from this General Order, being permitted by a particular Act, to continue in the Camp. The Command of the Ar∣my, was conferred upon Sir Thomas Fairfax, a Per∣son thought obnoxious to the Artifices of every pre∣vailing Faction, and therefore approved of by the Suffrages of both Parties. He was daring, and no Self-seeker. Constancy was attributed to his Na∣tural Temper, being Melancholy, which was not∣withstanding thought ductile where Religion was in Question; and therefore Cromwell, that famous Impostor in Godliness, was given him for a super∣vising Lieutenant. The Forces, as if new raised, were new mustered and modelled; the Presbyte∣rians being by various Arts dismissed of their Em∣ployments, and the most zealous of the Independant Sectaries put into their Places. And here we may also observe, that the Clause for conserving the King's Person, which was inserted in Essex's Com∣mission, was by Vote of the Lower House, left out of that which was given to Fairfax; and not ab∣surdly, it seeming superfluous to except him, against whom you point a Hundred Thousand Darts. It was now Winter, and the Armies on both sides were in their Winter Quarters, whilst the Houses were busie in modelling theirs, especially in
their Choice of Officers. In the mean Time, lest the Sword should be too sparing of Blood-shed, the Ax likewise was to be glutted with the Effusion of it. Sir Alexander Carew, as also the Two Hothams, repenting,Hull, Ply∣mouth. though too late, of the Crimes they had committed by their Rebellion against the best of Princes, would have delivered the Fortresses they had so unjustly detained, to the true Owner again, as an Expiation of their Offences; but, be∣ing intercepted, they were Tried by a Court-Mar∣shal for High-Treason, and by Sentence thereof, they were all, as equally Guilty, beheaded; but, fell unlamented, by Reason of their Inconstancy. Of the Hothams, I have made some mention already. And, of Carew, I will add this not unworthy to be noted, which happened at the Tryal of the Earl of Strafford. Sir Bevil Greenville (a Person never to be mentioned but with Honour) at the passing the Bill of Attainder, said to Sir Alexander, sitting then next him, and both serving for Cornwall; Sir, pray let it not be said, That any Member of our County, should have a Hand in this Ominous Affair, and there∣fore pray vote against this Bill. But, the other instant∣ly replied; If I were sure, to be the next Man that should suffer upon the same Scaffold, and with the same Axe; I would give my Consent to the passing of it. And, wee have seen, how truly and how circumstantially exact, he foretold his own Fate. Archbishop Laud, mur∣thered, Ja∣nuary 10.William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, followed next, more truly lamented of all good Men. They had abolished the Book of Common-Prayer, and the Liturgy, as Preludes to his Fate and Function. But, not daring to hazard his Tryal by a Common-Jury, (for no Law could condemn him) nor by the Peers, as equally dubious; he then was voted Guilty in the Commons House, the Lords by an inauspicious Com∣pliance sitting with them. The Scots had former∣ly
declared him an Incendiary, and a publick Ene∣my, upon which Accompt he had been thus long kept in Prison: And now they demand his Life, as a grateful Retribution for their Assistance; which was also sacrificed to their Ambition, and Fears. Thus the Covenant betwixt both Nations, was to be cemented with Episcopal Blood. This Great Pillar of our Church, as he had been eminent in his Life for Vertue, was no less re∣markable at his Death for his Piety. He preached his own Funeral Sermon upon the Scaffold, and that with a Countenance no less serene than his Mind, which he was going to offer up to his Crea∣tor, and far from that seeming Weakness (as he then Prophesied) which appeared in him, when the Illustrious Strafford, going that same way, called to him for his Benediction. Generous Spirits, be∣ing no less affected for their Friends Sufferings, and sometimes more, than their own. And, thus fell this Good Man and Good Bishop, by the nefa∣rious Ambition of Pretended-Reformed Christians. We must acknowledge, that the Bishops fell by the Envy of the Presbyterians, who stirr'd up the People against them, as too seemingly imperious. Not that they would have their Power abrogated; for, That they pretended to themselves, being re∣solved to assert that of Archbishops in their National, and that of Bishops in their Provincial Synods, whilst every Individual Presbyter, should exercise more than Prelatick Jurisdiction in his own Classis. The publick Severity requiring more Blood, the Lord Macquire and Macmahon, Two Irish Noble∣men, Chief Contrivers in the Bloody Conspiracy in Ireland, deservedly suffered the Gallows, though not proportionable to their abominable Contri∣vance. And yet these, especially Macquire, had been tampered with, to accuse the King, as an Abettor in this nefarious Rebellion; which he yet
generously enough disowned upon his Death. Fortune as yet, or rather Providence, had not decided the Quarrel. The War was unhappily prolonged; and there appeared some Hopes of composing our Troubles by Treaty; and particu∣larly, in that of Ʋxbridge.The Treaty of Ux∣bridge. The King, as is al∣ready mentioned, after his routing of Waller at Copredy-bridge, and defeating of Essex at Lestithiel, had sent Messages to the Parliament with offers of Peace, which he now again renews from Oxford; no less graciously than affectionately inviting them to comply with him, in restoring these harassed Kingdoms to their former Tranquillity. But, it proved fruitless, and all the King's Concessions, how indulgent soever, could effect nothing. For, the Demands of the Faction were so high, and their Propositions so unreasonable, that the King could not assent to them; without ruining his Con∣science as a Christian, and his Majesty as a Prince. For, these modest Men did require The Extirpation, of Hierarchy, by the Abolition of Episcopacy and the Liturgy; and, the Introduction of Presbyters, and the Directory in their stead. They would divest the King, of all his Power, both Military and Civil: And did press, That the Nobles, and such as had been true to their Duty, should be delivered over to their Justice; that is, to Death, to Imprisonment and Exile: Which appear∣ed so Inhumane and Tyrannical, that it is abhor∣ring to Sense and Reason; whilst these nefarious Conspirators do not think, that the King hath done enough in pardoning his Enemies, unless he also betray his Friends. By this it appeared, how inclinable they were to Peace. As also, by their sud∣den breaking of the Treaty, contrary to the King and his Commissioners Desires, they did demonstrate, that they were resolved to permit the Decision of the Cause to the Sword, and to perpetuate them∣selves thereby, in their Usurped Tyranny.
Shrewsbu∣ry surpri∣zed.About this Time, Major General Mitton surprized Shrewsbury, betrayed to him; being of very great Detriment to the King. Scarborough and Weymouth were also taken; which happening presently after the Treaty, the Houses ordered a Day of publick Thanksgiving for these great Victories, as being Evidences from Heaven of their Sincerity. Sir Thomas Middleton had formerly beaten Colonel Marrow from the Siege of Oswestry. Nor was he less fortunate at Montgomery. He had surprized the Castle by Intelligence, which by reason of the Consequence of its Situation, being an Entry into North-Wales was again Besieged by the Lord Byron, General of those Countries. But Middleton, with the Assistance of Brereton, Meldrum, and Sir William Fairfax, with their conjoined Forces, relieved the Place; and, after a sharp Fight,The Fight at Mont∣gomery. routed the Ca∣valiers. Fortune seemed at first to favour the juster Side, by forcing away the Enemies Horse; but changing, the Rebels carried the Day. The slain of the Royallists, were at least Three Hundred, and no fewer wounded; though the Enemy scarce lost a Hundred, except Fairfax and Symons. And now Essex (a no less Victory to the Inde∣pendents) as also the Earls of Denbigh, Manchester and Warwick, and the rest of the Chief Officers, lay down their Arms, resting Inglorious, and only not neglected; especially Essex, who denied to give Peace to the Kingdom,Essex dis∣carded. though invited to it by the King himself, when it was in his Power. And now, retiring from Business, he languished away the Residue of his Days, in Discontent and an irksome Retreat.
BOOK III. The Continuation of the Irish Rebellion. The Lords of the. Pale, side with the Rebels. Their Model of Government. The Cruelty of the English in Ireland. Ormond makes first a Cessation, then a Peace with the Irish. Delivers Dublin to the English. The King vindicated from any Correspondence with the Irish Rebels. Fairfax marches Westward; recal∣led, besieges Oxford. The King relieves Chester. Takes Leicester. The Fatal Battel of Naesby de∣scribed. The King's Cabinet taken, and published. Fairfax relieves Taunton. The Fight at Lang∣port. He takes Bridgwater, Sherburne and Bri∣stol. The King's Travels and Labours. The Scots besiege Hereford. They quit it. The Fight at Rowton-Heath. Digby and Langdale defeated in the North. Barclay-Castle, the Devizes, and Tiverton taken. Cromwell takes Winchester and Basing-House by Assault. The Fight at Torring∣ton. The Prince passes into France. The Lord Hopton disbands his Army. Distractions at New∣ark. The King returns to Oxford. The Lord Ashley defeated. Continuati∣on of the Rebellion in Ireland.IT is now time to return to the Irish History, we have hitherto discontinued, with design not to interrupt the English. And, shall now take the same Liberty to represent this, to the Rendition of Dublin to the English, in one continued Rela∣tion. The King had committed the Government of Ire∣land to the Earl of Leicester, a Favourite of the Faction, upon a Supposition, that that Kingdom would be the better provided for. But, he observing the backwardness of the Parliament, however pres∣sed
by frequent Addresses from the Council there, and by reiterated Messages from his Majesty nearer, had no mind, tho' invited to it, and entrusted with it, to stir or engage himself in so hazardous an En∣terprise. He therefore, lest he might seem wholly to neglect his Province, commissioned the Earl of Ormond, a Person made up of Honour and Loyalty, to be his Lieutenant General in that Kingdom; which was likewise approved of by his Sacred Majesty, the best Judge of Men and Abilities; and, who af∣terwards Honoured his Merit with the Chief Govern∣ment of the whole: Which he performed with so much Courage, Constancy, and Prudence, as will raise him a Trophy of Honour in the Annals of Time. Upon his Arrival at Dublin, with a Troop of a Hundred Horse well armed, having been sum∣moned thither by the Lords-Justices, he revived by his Presence the desponding Courage of the City. He also immediately proposed in Council, the rai∣sing of a small Army, which might in the Infancy of the Rebellion have suppress'd, or else stopt its Pro∣gress; but, they being either not able, or not wil∣ling, (and the Reader may believe both, as will too visibly appear hereafter) the Business was laid aside. The Conspirators, especially in Ʋlster, where they were most predominant, having with the Ex∣tremity of Rage and Cruelty, drowned, slain, spoiled, stripp'd and ejected infinite Numbers of the poor Protestants, made Sir Phelim O Neal their General. He was of the House of Tyrone, but bred up in Lincoln's-Inn, and a Protestant till of late, though indeed of no famed Conduct or Courage. However, he took Dundalk, which was surrendred to him, and besieged Tredah by Sea and Land. Tichburne the Governour, doubtful of the Event, had demanded and obtained the Grant of Succours from Dublin. Six Hundred Foot were sent to him
under the Command of Major Roper, with a Con∣voy of Fifty Horse for their Security. But, they were surprized in a Mist by the Irish, and defeated, scarce one Hundred of the Foot escaping to Tredah with the Major, though the Horse with Weems their Commander, brake through, and returned back to Dublin. It is not conceivable, what Courage this Success (then great) infused into the wavering Irish. Those who were content to look on before, became hereupon Actors in this Tragedy. Nay,The Lords of the Pale, join with the Rebels. the Lords of the Pale, who had hitherto stood upon their Guard, now upon the uncontrouled Progress of the Rebels, and the no Appearance of any considerable Forces from England (the Breach there betwixt the King and Parliament daily wid'ning) to oppose them; they also, contrary to the sacred Vows of Duty and Allegiance, forfeited both, by joining with their Countrymen. Nay, all the Provinces in the Kingdom broke out into a detestable Rebellion, being instigated thereunto by their Priests and Confessors, with the Appearance, nay, Assu∣rance of Liberty, and Heaven. Besides, they had understood, that their Country was to be ensla∣ved, and their Estates to be divided amongst the English Adventurers; to each, proportionable to the Money raised by them for the Use of the War. Nay further, that they not only designed to sup∣press the Rebellion, but the very Religion of the Re∣bels. They therefore now declare, That they fight for their Altars, for their Subsistance, and for their Lives; seeing their Countrymen were denied Quarter in England. So that, their taking up Arms was no Re∣bellion, their extream Peril unavoidably obliging them to it. These and the like Arguments, obliged all to run to their Natural Defence, so that there was no Corner exempt from this dismal Infection. And yet it was not so universal, but that some of the principal of the Nobility, continued, to their great
Honour, unshaken in their Fidelity to the King; nor so bloody, but that some Marks of Humanity, appeared in the very Actors in this Tragedy, who sheltered, cloathed, fed, and delivered very many from the Barbarities of their Associates. Which ought not to be silenced, without Injustice, and Ingratitude. The Rebels settle a Form of Govern∣ment.And now the Rebels finding their Strength and Numbers considerable, institute a Form of a Com∣mon-wealth; and choosing amongst themselves a Council of the most eminent Persons of the Party, gave it the Title of The Supreme Council of the Confederate Catholicks of Ireland; and framing an Oath of Association, by which all were bound to obey them, assumed the Form of a Regular Go∣vernment. This Senate consisted of Five and Twen∣ty, Six out of each Province; the Twenty Fifth being Castle-Haven, newly escaped from Dublin, where he had continued a Prisoner a great while. They also made them a Great Seal; coined and raised Money; erected several Courts of Judicature; ap∣pointed several Officers of State; and amongst other Points of Regality, constituted Four Gene∣rals of the Four Provinces; Preston, for Lemster; Barry, Munster; Owen Roe O Neal, Ʋlster; Burk,Their Four Generals. Conaught. They had cleared most of the Inland Countries of the English, and did really bear all before them, until those few English sent over, joining with the Protestants at Dublin, put a stop to their Ca∣rier. In the mean Time, they put out their Re∣monstrance, where amongst other things, they de∣clare, That they had taken up Arms for Defence of the Roman-Catholick-Religion, their own Rights and Privileges, and the King's Prerogative, &c. exactly copied afterwards by the Rebel-Parliament in England. The Irish had hitherto lived in Amity with the Scots, apprehending the Neighbourhood of Scotland, and lest they should buckle with Two Enemies at
once; but finding their Power grow, they also fell upon their Quarters, using them with no less infamous Barbarities than they had done the Eng∣lish. But, the Siege of Tredah went but slowly on; for, tho' they practise all the Arts of Force, and Intelli∣gence, in the assaulting of it,They raise the Siege of Tre∣dah, yet upon the Arrival of Sir Simon Harcourt with a strong Regiment out of England, despairing of carrying it, they quitted it, notwithout considerable Loss. For, the Gover∣nour falling in his Rear with most of his Garrison, did such Execution upon them, that he pursued them to Dundalk; which he also took by Assault, forcing O Neal to pass the River for his Security. For all this, the Enemies by the general Defection of the Nation, grew so numerous, that they threat∣ned Dublin; and, filling the Villages and Country round, extreamly obstructed their Markets and Commerce by their Cavalcades. There were no less than Twenty Thousand reckoned in this Pro∣vince of Lemster, but they wanted Skill and Military Conduct; so that they waged War with Numbers, not Understanding. Whilst the English who were but few, and had received no great Assistance out of Eng∣land, did not only oppose, but dared to provoke them, beating, routing, killing and destroying them in well-nigh all the Encounters they had with them; for, being well armed, well led, and well disciplin'd, they easily vanquished so effeminate and so unknowing and Enemy.The Cruel∣ty of the English in Ireland. But, as the Brittish were more brave, so they were no less cruel than the I∣rish, revenging the Barbarousness of their Adver∣saries with equal Inhumanity. For, they destroyed many Thousands of them, ruining with Fire and Sword, and pillaging all they met with; reducing a well planted, most fertile Country, into a Solita∣ry Desart; whereby they did not only destroy the Natives, but created to themselves irreparable Mis∣chief and Desolation, by ruining that which they
should have subsisted with. Hence grew those Wants upon them which they had occasioned, and were now forced to combat a stronger Enemy than they had yet encountred, as Hunger, want of Pay, Clothes, and all other Nutriments of War. Which they had in vain expected from the Parliament, its self now Rebellious, and so far from assisting them,Their Ne∣cessities. that they themselves seized upon the Money design∣ed for Ireland, taking a Hundred Thousand Pounds of it at once, and employing those Regiments rai∣sed for that Service under the Lord Wharton, to fight their own King, as they did at Edge-hill, in that un∣natural Rebellion. Seeing this, they earnestly peti∣tioned his Majesty for their Discharge, or to be transferred to any other Warfare, where they might contend with any Enemy but Hunger. Ormond makes a Cessation with the Irish.The King being thus daily sollicited by the pres∣sing Miseries of his Subjects, and seeing no other way to relieve or deliver them; commanded the Earl of Ormond to make a Cessation with the Irish for a Year (which he did) and to send Three Thousand of the Protestant Army into England, (lea∣ving the Garrison well provided) to assist him to op∣pose the Rebellious Scots, who then invaded him. This Cessation was variously censured, according to the Interest or Inclination of Parties. Such who disap∣proved it, cried out against the Transportation of the Soldiery, pretending, It would expose the Pro∣testants that remained, and be of too much Advan∣tage to the Rebels. But others, more discerning and equal, were of Opinion, That it is always better to save a Citizen, than destroy an Enemy. It was the prime Interest of a Prince to preserve himself. Ireland was not so formidable, but when England was quiet, it might be reclaimed by fair Means, or by foul. There was more Danger from the Puritans, who threatned Ruine to Religion and Monarchy. The Parliamentarians, and Scots-Irish refused to be
included in this Truce, being supported with Mo∣ney and Supplies out of England; which was deni∣ed the Royallists, by reason of their unshaken Fidelity to their King, which neither the Threats nor Al∣lurements of the now English Rebels, could blemish or overcome. Ormond (now Marquess, and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland) improved this Cessation with much Prudence and Industry, by a continued Treaty, into a Peace: which being proclaimed at Dublin and Kilkenny,Then a. Peace he followed thither with Four∣teen Hundred Men, where he was received by the Supreme Council with due Respect and State, who also surrendred the Government which they had thus long managed, into his Hands. But this Calm did not last long, most of the Chief Towns and Great Officers, as Preston, and Owen Roe O Neal, with others, dissenting. The Archbishop of Firme, the Popes Nuntio, not only protested against this Peace, but, adding the Thunder of Excommunica∣tion, renewed the War with more violence than e∣ver. Ormond ran no small Hazard of being inter∣cepted in his Retreat to Dublin, where he was gi∣ven for lost; and therefore received with very ex∣traordinary Joy by the People. The War had been continued betwixt the Dis∣senting Brittains and the Irish, ever since the Ces∣sation, with various Fortune. But, now think∣ing that a fair Opportunity did present it self, by the Absence of the English Army, for the Conquest of the whole Kingdom, they join all their Forces to∣gether; and, raised with some late Successes (for Owen Roe O Neal had defeated Monroe and his Scots in Ʋlster, slain above Five Hundred of his Men, taken Five Field-pieces, all his Baggage and Five Thousand Arms) they besiege Dublin by Land,The Nuntio dissents and besieges Dublin. which was also block'd up by the Parliament-Ships, now equally Rebels, which lay before the Haven. The Lord Lieutenant unable to resist so many Ene∣mies,
and destitute of all hopes of Relief,Ormond unable to preserve it, delivers it to the Eng∣lish. acquaint∣ed his Majesty with the present State of Affairs; who seeing it impossible to defend the Place, com∣manded him to deliver it rather into the Hands of the Parliamentarians, than the Irish. An irrefraga∣ble Testimony, against the black Calumnies of the English Rebels, who did not cease to accuse his Ma∣jesty of Intelligence with the Irish. But, it will not seem very strange to Posterity, that the Miscreants of the Faction should endeavour to assassinate the Fame of this glorious Sufferer, when they had already usurped his Authority; and, that all the steps they made, tended to the martyrizing of his Person. 'Tis true, their Brethren of Ireland pretended, That they were owned and authorised by his Majesty; and, to amuse and engage the silly Crowd, shewed them a fictitious Commission, with a Great Seal affix∣ed to it, belonging to a Patent of the Lord Caulefield, which Sir Phelim O Neal took, together with the said Lord, in the Castle of Charlemont. Which he afterwards confessed at his Tryal; and, being ur∣ged further by the Judges to declare, Why he did so deceive the People? He repsied, That no Man could blame him to use all Means whatsoever, to promote that Cause he had so far engaged in. Although this Sir Phelim, had been the principal and bloodiest of all the Rebels, yet before Sentence, he was offer∣ed his Liberty and his Estate, if he would prove, he had had such a Commission from the King. But, he generously answered, He could not; and, That he would not further burthen his Conscience by unjust calumniating the King.The King vindicated from any Correspon∣dence with the Rebels. Being upon the Gallows, and ready to be turned off, one Peake, and ano∣ther came posting to the Place, and crying aloud, Stop, pierced the Throng; and, having whispered a while, Sir Phelim answered aloud, in the hearing of several Hundreds of Spectators, I thank the Lieu∣tenant General for his intended Mercy; but, I declare,
good People, before God, and his Holy Angels, and all of you that hear me, that I never had any Com∣mission from the King, for what I have done, in levying or prosecuting of this War. Nor was it only with him, but with several other Prisoners, that they most impiously endeavoured, by Promises of Life, Liberty, and Estates, and no less abominable Ar∣tifices, to sooth them to Confessions, that might entitle the King to this nefarious Rebellion. .And 'twas thus the Enemy did with exquisite Malice (to use the King's own Expressions in his Divine Medi∣tations) mix the Gall and Vinegar of Falsity and Con∣tempt, with the Cup of his Affliction: charging him not only with Ʋntruths, but such as wherein he had the greatest Share of Loss, and Dishonour, by what was committed. Whereas, in all Policy, Reason, and Religion, having least cause to give the least Consent, and most grounds of utter Detestation, he might be represented by them to the World, the more inhumane and barbarous. Dublin surrendred to the Par∣liament.The Treaty being concluded with the Com∣mittee of Parliament, the City was surrendred into their Hands. Ormond stipulating amongst other Things, a Liberty of going to the King, to give him an Accompt of the Progress of that War. He found his Majesty in Hampton-Court, in the Hands of the Army; but, seeing how Affairs were carried, he withdrew himself into France, where he conti∣nued, until the Confederate Irish, terrified with the Preparations made in England to destroy them, by their humble Addresses to the Queen and Prince of Wales, obtained his Return. But, it is now time to return into England, where, upon Essex his being laid aside, the Command of the Army was, as we have already related, given to Sir Thomas Fairfax; who, with great Industry and Toil, modell'd and formed the divers Forces that were dispersed under several Chieftains, into one entire Body. This being effected, he marched
from Windsor, his head Quarters, in the Beginning of May, by Orders of the Committee of both King∣doms, to the Relief of Taunton,Fairfax marches to the Relief of Taun∣ton. which had been long besieged, and reduced to great Extremity. In the mean Time, Cromwell had been sent from Windsor with a strong Party, to disturb the King's Preparations about Oxford. He defeated two Thou∣sand Horse at Islip-Bridge, killing several, and taking Four Hundred Horses, as also Two Hundred Pri∣soners, with the Queen's Standard. Some Runna∣ways, had taken Sanctuary in Blechingdon House; where being followed, and the Place summoned, the unfortunate Governour, to gratifie the Fears of his Lady, tamely surrendred it; which cost him his Life, by being shot to Death by the Sentence of a Court-Marshal. Sir Willam Vaughan, sent with some Foot to Radcot-Bridge, was likewise with Two Hundred of his Party, intercepted by him. Fierce with these Successes, and strengthened with Six Hundred Foot from Abington, he assaulted Faring∣don; but not without Loss, being bravely received by Sir George Lisle, the Governour. At the same Time, General Goring, being sent for by the King to Oxford, fell upon Five Hundred of Cromwell's Men, under the Command of Whaley near Faringdon; where Bethel, who led the Van, was taken, and the rest routed, with the Loss of Three Colours. But Goring having Intelligence of Fairfax's march West∣ward, returned with all imaginable Haste to op∣pose his Attempts upon Taunton. In the mean time, the King taking the Opportu∣nity of Fairfax's Absence, sent for his Horse, under the Command of his Nephews, Rupert and Maurice; and marching himself with his Cannon out of Ox∣ford, joined them, notwithstanding Cromwell and Browne's Endeavour, who were commanded to ob∣serve him, to the contrary. His Forces being uni∣ted (for Gerrard having vanquished Langhorne in
South-Wales, was also come up,) he grew so formida∣ble (the Rebels Army being absent) that he was great∣ly apprehended, especially in the associated Counties, and neighbouring Countries. Fairfax was recalled upon these Apprehensions: And, though advanced as far as Blainford, he there received Counter-Or∣ders, commanding his Return; which he obeyed, sending Col. Welden, with betwixt Six and Seven Thousand Men, to the succouring of Taunton; whilst he himself, strengthened with the Addition of Crom∣well, Browne and some other Chiefs of the Party, marches to Oxford and lays Siege to it.Besieges Oxford. The Roy∣allists at Taunton upon the Approach of Welden, sup∣posing the whole Army to be there, removed from the Town; but, perceiving their mistake, Goring, Hopton, and Greenville joining their Forces, fight and beat Welden, and besiege the Town more close∣ly than before. The King relieves Chester.The King having united his Forces, moved with quick Marches towards Chester, one of the Loyal∣lest, and Chief Cities of his Party, then besieged by Sir William Brereton, who drew off upon Report of his Majesty's Advance. The King thereupon whee∣ling about, flies to Liecester, and by Summons com∣mands the Town to be surrendred to him. The Place lying in a fertile Country, was also well stored with Ammunition and Provision. The Commit∣tee of the Shire was then there, and consulting with the Townsmen about the Summons, told the Mes∣senger, they would return an Answer next Mor∣ning: But, that being refused, and but one Hour's Space granted for Consultation, by a Drum sent on purpose; whilst they delayed, the Cannon began to play, which together with the small Shot, they continued to do without Intermission, that Even∣ing and the following Night. The next Morning, the Town was assaulted in many Places at once,Leicester taken. and after a stout Defence forced. The Garrison
embodied again upon the Market-Place, and con∣tinued the Fight with great Resolution; till being oppressed with Numbers, they were defeated with a great Slaughter. The Plunder of the Place fol∣lowed, which was great; the GovernourColonel Gray. and the Committee, with several other Officers and Gentle∣men, being made Prisoners. The King's Affairs much heightned with this Victory, were judged by most Men, not inferiour to the Enemies. And he himself thought no less, when he writ to the Queen, in these Terms, I may without being too sanguine affirm, That since this Rebellion, my Affairs were never in so hopeful a Way. The Men at Westminster, terrified with the Greatness of the Danger, and in no less Disquiet by reason of the Diffidence, and Dissensions amongst themselves, which every Success on the King's Side would im∣prove, dispatch'd sudden Commands to Fairfax, who had thus long trifled at the Siege of Oxford, That be should forthwith follow the King, and having over∣taken him, fight him if possible, and so decide the con∣troversie by Battel. This City, seated in the middle of the Kingdom, was a great Eye-sore to the Fa∣ction. Besides, it extreamly incommoded London; and, being the Royal-Seat of the King, and head of the contrary Party, it seemed great to attempt it. Nor were they without hopes, seeing the Cavaliers were so remote, and dispersed. But, the King sollicitous for Oxford, as also for Pomfret Castle, which had been long besieged, designed to relieve both; and, being nearest the City, sent a strong Party of Horse, with a great Number of Sheep and Cattel, to its Relief, and encamped with the rest of his Army upon Borrow-hill. The Convoy having succour'd Oxford, the Expedition of Pomfret, by Langdale's Perswasion, was resolved upon. There were they who advised, that the King should march Westward, and join with Goring, who had a very
great Army, and then with united Forces go direct∣ly for London; supposed an easie purchase, as being more than sufficiently distracted with Factions and the Terror of their Approach. Whilst they were thus consulting, News was brought that Fairfax having quitted Oxford, was with his Army at Gils∣burg but Five Miles off, and that he had sent Ireton with a good Body of Horse, to observe the Royallists: who that Night falling upon the Rear of the Army, quarter'd at Naesby, did not only disturb it, but carrying Terror with him, forced the King out of his Quarters, and to make haste to Harborow, where the Van of his Army was lodg∣ed. Upon this, the King immediately called a Council of War; where, neglecting the Opinion of those who disswaded an Engagement, and prudent∣ly advised a Conjunction with Goring, they resol∣ved to fight, and because Fairfax followed them so close, to turn upon him, and offer him Battel. The Battel of Naesby 1645 Jun. 14.And now the fatal Day, the Eighteenth of the Kalends of July did appear, by so much the more dismal, because it ushered in under the Veil of Liber∣ty, the most insupportable of Tyrannies. All Men's Eyes and Attentions were taken up with the Expe∣ctation of the Event of this decisive Day; and, Vows had been sent up to Heaven, at Oxford and London, for the Success of it; since the Fate of the Kingdom, seemed to depend upon it. Monarchy and despised Majesty were to be vindicated on one Side, together with Religion; whilst the other contended for Anarchy and Ʋsurpation, and a Liberty of doing Evil. It was told the King, but falsly, that the Rebels were retreating, designing to shelter themselves in the associated Counties. Whereupon, Orders were suddenly given to march; and, least they might get away, some of the heaviest Cannon were left behind, that they might not retard their haste, in preventing the escape of these pretended Fugi∣tives.
But, they found the Enemy drawn up, up∣on the Advantages they had chosen, in a plow'd Field near Naesby, and ready to fight. Though the Sight was surprising, being unexpected; yet the Royallists embattelling likewise their Army, ad∣vanced towards then. Both sides were full of Cou∣rage, and desirous of doing well, proposing no∣thing less than to overcome. The Cavaliers Word was, God and Queen Mary; the other Side, God with us. The King took to himself the Care of his Main Battel. The Princes, Rupert and Maurice, commanded the Right Wing of the Horse, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale the Left. The Earl of Lindsey, and the Lord Ashley, led the Battalions of Foot towards the Right; and, the Lord Bard and Sir George Lisle, those to the Left. In the Rear of the Foot, stood Col. Howard's Regiment of Horse as a Reserve, the Whole being closed up with the King's Guards and Prince Rupert's Regiment of Foot. Nor was the Enemies Order or Numbers dispro∣portionable. Sir Thomas Fairfax himself, with Skippon his Major General, commanded the Foot. Cromwell, now Lieutenant General of the Horse, and Col. Rosster newly arrived, led the Right Wing; and Commissary General Ireton the Left, the Reserves being conducted by the Colonels, Raynsborough, Ham∣mond and Pride. With these Forces, and a more than Civil Rage, the Armies encountred, both e∣qually animated, and of equal Desires and Hopes, the Contest being for an Empire. Rupert charged with his accustomed Valour, and routed the Three outmost Squadrons of Ireton's Wing; but, suffer∣ing himself to be hurried away with the too great desire of overcoming, pursued them to the very Town. Ireton seeing the Prince past, falls with the Remainder of his Horse upon the King's next Bri∣gade of Foot; where, being ill received, he was hurt with a Pike in the Thigh, and a Halbard in his
Face, and his Horse being kill'd under him, he was taken Prisoner; though presently released by the Victory of his Party. But, Affairs went otherwise in the other Wing; for, Col. Whaley, af∣ter a rude Encounter on both Sides, forced Lang∣dale with Two of his Squadrons, upon Prince Ru∣pert's Men in the Rear; where, whilst he was ral∣lying again, he was quite dispersed by Cromwell, who followed. The Main Battel on both sides, rushing upon each other with great and equal Fury, fought with all the Incitements of Hope and Desire, —Pede pes, densus{que} viro vir: mutually exposing their Arms, their Persons, their Wounds. They slay and are slain, force and are for∣ced. But, the Victory, in all Probability, had been the King's, the contrary Divisions being for∣ced up to their Reserves, if Cromwell had not with his Troops, fierce with success, joining their Main Battel, and charging the Royallists, destitute for want of their Horse, broke and routed them. And yet, there was one brave Battalion of Foot (as that at Marston-Moor) though charged often on all Sides by Cromwell, which could not yet be pierced; till Fairfax, charging them with his Horse, and Guards in Front and Rear at once, at length defeat∣ed them; worthy of better Fortune, who maintain∣ed the Ground they stood on alive, and covered it as if they still would keep Possession of it, when dead. The Princes were scarce returned from the Pursuit (having lost much time in their vain Attempt upon the Carriages, which were guarded with Fire-Locks) and at length come, though too late, when they were forced, with the King (who had performed all the Parts of a Great Captain, and now abandoned by his Fortune, not his Vertue) to leave the Field, and an Entire Victory to the Rebels. Fairfax did not think it safe, to follow the Royallists without his
Foot, lest he might expose the Advantage he had got, to new Dangers. He therefore staid till they were come up, being not above a quarter of a Mile behind; and then opening his Horse to the Right and Left, received them up betwixt the Interval, and so marched as at the Beginning, in Battle-Ar∣my against the Enemy. The King, notwithstand∣ing he had lost all his Foot and his Cannon, would have charged the Rebels Horse with his own, which he had embodied, before their Foot were come up; but, being over-perswaded by the desponding Courages of them about him, and the Infantry ap∣proaching, the Greatness of that Resolve vanished, and he was obliged to secure himself by a timely Retreat towards Leicester, whilst Langdale hasten∣ed with his towards Newark. The Rebels Loss, in those slain and wounded, were esteemed near a Thousand; amongst whom, Ireton and Skippon were signalized by their Hurts, the Marks of their Dis∣loyalty. There were taken of the Royallists near Five Thousand, and Six Hundred supposed to be slain. The Baggage, Cannon, Eight Thousand Arms, and the vast Spoils of the Field, fell into the Enemies Hands. Six Colonels, a Hundred and Four Inferiour Officers, and Two Hundred Colours were taken by them at present, and afterward, the Supreme Pow∣er, as a Dependence upon their Victory: for, The Royallists being entirely broken, lost at the same time, all possibility of renewing the War.The King's Cabinet ta∣ken, and published with mali∣cious Anno∣tations. The Rebels took, amongst other Spoils of the Field (for, the opprobrious Actions of their Triumph must be also told) the King's Cabinet, with his Letters which he had writ to the Queen, and other particu∣lar Friends. These they caused to be printed, with most malicious Annotations. It was a com∣mon thing for these impure Barbarians, to calumni∣ate the King, and to worry his Reputation, who
preferred his Honour before his Scepters, with Pasquils and infamous Reflections. But, these Epi∣stles effected the contrary, as being writ with Inge∣nuity, with Candor and a Majestick Style. Besides, the pretended Parliament was justly blamed, for di∣vulging the Secrets betwixt Husband and Wife. against the Laws of Modesty, and Humanity; and, that by a Brutality, that Infidels would blush at. The Casualties of humane Affairs, are so various, and changeable, that they no less surprize us, than move our Admiration. And here we have a lively Representation of their Incertainties. The Royal∣lists, disappointed in their vast Hopes, are now ne∣cessitated to endeavour their own Security, not at∣tempt upon others. The Field at Naesby being lost, they fled to Liecester; where depositing their sick and hurt Men, the King went to Ashby-de-la-Zouch that Evening: And, hearing of the Enemies Advance, left it about Midnight, and hasted to Liechfield, and thence into Wales to Hereford, a Place of more Safe∣ty for the present; where, by the Assistance of the Neighbouring Counties, he might raise Foot, which he mainly wanted, and which were in some Measure furnish'd to him by draining of the Garri∣sons in his Obedience, and the Accession of a Thou∣sand Foot and some Horse, sent him by Gerard from the Siege of Pembrook. Langdale fled, as is said, to Newark, and 'twas wonder'd he escaped Gell, then marching with Two Thousand Horse from Nottingham to Leicester. Fairfax in Pursuit of his Victory, followed the Royallists close, and laying Siege to Leicester, takes it without any considerable Opposition. Here it was sometime disputed, Whether they should fol∣low the King, to hinder and obstruct his Levies; or, hasten to the Relief of Taunton, reduced well-nigh to the last Extremity. Both press'd; and there∣fore, in order to either, he marched with his Ar∣my
through Warwickshire toward the Severn, in Ex∣pectation of Orders from his Superiours; but, upon receiving some Letters intercepted from Goring to the King, the latter was preferred, especially the Scots being advanced as far as Nottingham, in or∣der to their March towards Worcester, and Wales, to disturb the King's Recruits. A cunning Fellow, upon raising of the Siege be∣fore Oxford, stole into the Town some time be∣fore, and told the Secretary, Sir Edward Nicholas, somewhat of the King's Progress, as also of the de∣signed Removal of the Camp and Siege; which gained him so much Credit, that he was employed, though with seeming Reluctancy, into the West. At Bath, he met with the Prince (our since glorious Monarch) who richly rewarding him, sent him further to Goring, lying before Taunton;Fairfax marches to the Relief of Taun∣ton. who also speedily returned him to the King, with Assurance, that in Three Weeks he should take Taunton, and his Majesty be Master of the West; humbly advi∣sing him, by no means to engage till he had joined him with his Army. But, this suborned Villain, be∣ing an Agent of Watson's, the Scout-Master Ge∣neral, brought these Letters to Fairfax; which, if the King had received, 'tis more than probable, that his Majesty had declined fighting when he did. Fairfax quickned with this Advice, and lest Goring might still join his Forces with the King's, whose Horse were almost entire, and so renew the War; receiving also Orders from the pretended Par∣liament, and the Committee of both Kingdoms, to ha∣sten his March into the West with all Expedition, he moved accordingly. He took High Worth in his Way; and, dispersing the Club-Men who pretend∣ed to be Neuters, and only up in their own Defence; advancing with all Diligence, the Siege seemed to be raised by the Fame of his coming. Goring was not ignorant of Fairfax's Motion, and therefore,
removes from the Siege with a tumultuous Retreat, supposing that the besieged transported with the Joy of their Deliverance, would sally out upon him; which they did, with much Confidence. But, the Roy∣allists turning upon them, beat them back with consi∣derable Loss, and shut them up closer than before. But, this last Restraint was of no long Duration; for, Fairfax approaching indeed, the Besiegers drew off in good earnest, and marched toward Langport, with design to join the Horse they expe∣cted from the King. They at first encamped at Sutton, having broke the Bridges of that River, guarding the Avenues and Fords of it, that the Ene∣my might not pass to them. But, the Rebels having forced the Passage at Evil, and repaired the Bridge, they got over with all their Forces. And thus Taun∣ton, now again upon the point of being forced, was delivered; having been bravely defended in both Sieges by Colonel Blake the Governour, who will also signalize himself hereafter at Sea, for Courage, worthy to be transmitted to Posterity, if he had not sullied it, by employing it against his own Prince. Colonel Massey was sent with Four Thousand Horse, and some Regiments of Foot, to disturb Ge∣neral Goring's Rear; which he did, being also well received. Fairfax followed with the Rest of his Army; and, drawing up upon a Hill near Langport, saw the Enemies Horse in Battalia, upon another opposite to him, being marched out of Town to de∣fend a Passage which hindred Massey to join with the Fairfaxians. The Rebels made a sound Charge upon the said Avenues, and after a brave Resi∣stance, forced the Royallists out of the Hedges, and their Horse charging vigorously into the Lane,Langport Fight. were as vigorously repelled, until being seconded with Reserves of Horse and Foot, their Cannon also ha∣ving done much Dammage amongst our Cavalry, they forced the Passage; the Royallists in their Re∣treat
setting the Town on Fire. In this Fight and Rout (for the Enemy pursued within Two Miles of Bridgewater) there were not slain above Four Hun∣dred on both Sides, but near two Thousand of the Royallists taken; a Thousand Horses, Twenty Foot Colours, One and Thirty Cornets, Two Guns, and all the Baggage. Lieutenant General Porter, and Fifty other Officers, were numbred amongst the Prisoners. The loss on the Rebels Side, was very inconsiderable, only Two Captains, one Lieutenant and Fifty private Souldiers; Bethel and Cook, with some others of the forwardest, being wounded. Fairfax did not pursue the Run-aways, being unwil∣ling to leave Bridgewater behind him. It was there∣fore resolved, in a Council of War, to attack; and to loose no time, to attempt it by Assault. The Town seated on the Banks of Severne, and divided into Two by a Branch of it, was very strong. The Moat, though deep, was but narrow, not exceed∣ing Thirty Foot in Breadth, which was filled with the Flood every Tide. The Circuit of the Place was not large, being defended by Eighteen Hundred Soldiers, Forty Guns mounted upon the Walls, with great Stores of other Military Provisions. But, the Rebels fierce with their former Victories, and slighting all this, cast Lots for the Posts they were to attempt. But, first they summon the Citizens to a Surrender, with Threats of all the Extremities of War in case of Refusal. Colonel Edmond Windham, the Governour, no less brave than Loyal, returning the Messenger with Scorn, prepared for Defence. Which so irritated the Enemy, that planting their Cannon, they also ran floating Bridges into the Graft, which was not difficult, by reason of its nar∣rowness; and, storming the Walls, with great Vio∣lence, notwithstanding their utmost Resistance, mounted them, and beating the besieged from their Bullwarks seize their Cannon, and turn them upon
the other Town; whilst the rest forcing the Gate, and cutting down the Draw-bridge, opened a Pas∣sage for their Horse to enter at. And thus this part of the Town (it being, as is said, divided by a Chanel) was taken, as also Five Hundred of the Defendants in it. Nor did this terrisie the Gover∣nour, who refusing another Invitation to surrender, consumed with Fire from Granadoes, and glowing Bullets, that Portion of the. Town which the Enemy had possest. Fairfax having provided all things for another Assault, sent a Trumpet to the Gover∣nour; and, that he might add the Fame of Cle∣mency, to that of his Success, he signified to him, That seeing he was resolved to maintain the Fortress, he would notwithstanding (making War against Men only, and being loath to involve the Innocent with the Guilty) permit the Women and Children, Li∣berty to go where they pleased. Upon publishing hereof, the Governour's Lady, and some other of that Sex, accepting this unexpected Gallantry, went out: Who were no sooner departed, but the Enemy thundred upon the Town with their Mortar-pieces, Cannon, Fireballs and incessant Showers of small Shot, that the Buildings were all in a Flame. The Citizens and Souldiers astonished with this unusual Tempest, sent Mr. Elliot, who had formerly carried the Great Seal from London to York, by the Governour's Consent to Fairfax, with Con∣ditions of Peace. But, he rejecting all mention of Treaties with the Governour and Garrison, fiercely replied, That since they had destroyed so sine a Town by their Obstinacy, they should imme∣diately surrender themselves to the pleasure of the Parliament, upon Quarter for Life only. Which was done;Bridgwa∣ter taken. July 23. the Souldiers remaining Prisoners of War, but the Townsmen permitted their former. Immunities. The City of Bath terrified with the Fate of Bridgewater, tamely surrender'd it self to the
Colonels Rich and Okey; but, Sherburne was defend∣ed more nobly. Sir Lewis Dives, a Man of Cou∣rage and Honour, was Governour of the Castle. Who rejecting Fairfax's Summons, and Offer of fair Quarter, replied, That he would sooner lose his Life, than his Fame, especially in such a Cause. And, he bravely defended himself and the Place, until it was ruined by Approaches, by Mines, and by a Breach made in the Wall, capable of Ten Men a∣breast, with the Rubbage whereof the Moat was filled and levelled; so, that after much Resistance, it was taken by Assault.Sherburne taken. Many brave Men fell into the Enemies Hands, at least Four Hundred. A∣mongst whom, were Colonel Thornhill, Sir Jo. Wallot, and others. Nor did they slay Sir Lewis Dives, nor Mr. Strangeways; who being Members of Parliament, were reserved for more exemplary Punishment. Sherburne being taken, they were at a stand what to undertake next. Some advised, their March Westward, to hinder Goring's recruiting of his Ar∣my, which was broken at Langport, which he might easily do by new Levies in the Provinces of Devon∣shire and Cornwall, being countenanced by the Prince of Wales, and by the Addition of Greenville, Barkley, and the rest of the King's Generals. They also de∣monstrated, how the Plague was in Bristol, which might endanger the whole. Army, if they moved that way, by the Infection. But, others perswaded the taking of Bristol, lest Prince Rupert, who was Governour with Five Thousand brave Souldiers, should draw the wavering Club-Men to his Party; and, having the Severne open, invite, and obtain Auxiliaries from Ireland and Wales, and consequent∣ly form a formidable Army a-new in the very Bowels of the Kingdom; which would not only render him terrible to the Parliament, but troublesome to them also, if he should exclude their Forces, whilst they
were in the remote Counties of the West, from all Commerce with London by Land, and disturb their Rear whilst they had Goring in the Van. They fur∣ther remonstrated, of what Moment that City was to the Royallists, as being their chief Port, and great in shipping and Wealth. Bristol being pre∣ferred for these Reasons, Ireton was sent with Two Thousand Horse to hinder the Excursions of the Garrison, and to oppose the firing of the Neigh∣bouring Villages and Buildings. And yet, Bedmin∣ster, and Clifton, and some other houses nearest, were burnt. The whole Army being advanced, all the Avenues were stopped up,Bristol be∣sieged. and the City entirely closed by the taking of Potsheard. Point, and the ob∣structing of the Severne by Seven of their Men of War. Nor did the Rebels fix their Quarters and Stations about this great Town, without vigorous Interruption, being obstructed in their Approaches by the continual Sallies of the besieged, though with mutual Slaughter. But, the Multitude prevailed; for, the Club-Men, of whom the Rebels doubted be∣fore, now Rebels themselves, joined with the other Rebels; so that the Defendants being shut up within their Works, they were also summoned to a Surrender by a Trumpeter. The Prince de∣manded Permission, to send to the King to know his Pleasure; which was denied, under pretence of Delay. The Trumpet sent again, was notwith∣standing his Orders to return that Evening, not dispatch'd till next Morning, and then returned with a Draught of Conditions from the Prince, a∣bove the supposed State of a vanquished Enemy. Fairfax perusing them, and finding some things doubtful in them, and others not to be granted but by the Parliament it self; he proposed, that Com∣missioners on both sides, should meet with power to conclude, sending with all a Scheme of what was in his Power to grant. But, the Messenger be∣ing
delayed, and bringing but a dilatory Answer, he was commanded in Anger suddenly to return, and tell the Prince, That unless he would immediate∣ly accept of what had been offered, all that had been hitherto done, should pass for nothing. The Trumpet returning again later than ordered, car∣ried with him an Answer not unlike the former. The Prince desired to procrastinate the matter in hopes of Relief, which he seemed to expect from the Conjunction of Goring's Forces with the Oxford-Horse. For, he had writ from Collumpton, that he would be ready in Twenty Days to succour the Besieged. Fairfax had also intercepted some of those Letters, which made him prepare for a General Assault, which he designed with his utmost Vigour and In∣dustry. But, these were Dreams; and, all At∣tempts for renewing the War, after the Defeat at Naesby, and Goring's Loss of his Foot at Langport, but imaginary. The Royallists would notwithstanding attempt every Extremity, for the Defence of their dear Master and King; in whose Safety, the Church, the Laws and Liberties of all good Men, (lest they should be enslaved to the worst of Tyrannies) were included. Bristol as∣saulted. Dec. 10.All things being ready for the Assault, the Sign being given early in the Morning, by firing Heaps of Faggots and Straw, and the Discharge of Four great Guns; they fell on upon all sides. Montague and Pikering, assaulted Lawford-Gate with their Re∣giments, and enter'd it; and, being followed by Desborough, with the General's Regiment of Horse, routed the Defendants, and siezed upon. Two and Twenty of their Cannon. Sir Hard. Waller with Two Regiments of Foot, fell upon the Line, betwixt the said Port of Lawford and the River Frome, and mastered it. Raynsborough and Hamond had the like Success by Prior's-Fort; which, after a brave De∣fence, (Price the Governour being slain) was for∣ced,
and all the Defendants cut in Pieces. The Lines and Hedges being levelled by Pioneers, the Horse entered, and charging the King's Cavalry, occasioned a Bloody Encounter; where, Colonel Tay∣lor a Royallist, and Major Bethel of the Enemies side, were sorely wounded. But, the Garrison Horse being overpowered, were obliged to secure them∣selves by retreating betwixt the Great Fort and that of Coulston. The Enemies Success, was not the same on the other side of the Town; for, the Wall being higher, the Defence was easier, Welden, who attack'd it with Four Regiments, being beaten off. The Royallists set the lost part of the City on Fire; which they also extinguish'd (a new Treaty being set on foot) at the Desire of Fairfax.and surren∣dered. And, thus Bristol was surrend'red; upon harsher Conditions, than the Enemy had formerly presented: For, the Foot were allowed their Swords only; but, upon the Prince his Desire, and Engagement of Restitution, they had a Thousand Arms lent them for their Defence, against the Insults of the Club-Men. The Enemy lost about Two. Thousand Men, and a few Officers in this Enterprise. Nor did the taking of this Noble City, and the Recovery of the Cannon, which the King had taken from Essex at Lestithiel, which were laid here, cost them any more. Which will seem less strange, when we consider, that the King's Party was every where broken. But their Vertue was invincible, and they themselves above their Misfortunes, which they will yet abundantly testifie. Bristol being thus taken, Fairfax fearing the Contagion, retires to Bath, a better Air, and sends his Souldiers, after so many Toils, for some Days, to fresh Quarters. In the mean time, whilst the Rebels are indulging upon his Ruines, it will be requisite to relate the Actions and Labours which the King underwent in person. After the Fatal Battel of Naesby, this magnani∣mous,
however unfortunate Prince,The King's Travels and La∣bours. retired (as is said) to Hereford. To add to his Calamities, as the Miserable are usually neglected, so he is now al∣so insulted on by the degenerate Scots Ecclesiasticks. Who, in a Letter, most impudently admonish him, That acknowledging his great Sins, he should seriously, and suddenly repent. How could he think, that God would bear with his fighting, against his faithful and pious Subjects! his authorising their Murther and Slaugh∣ter by the Irish Rebels; and his permitting of the Exer∣cise of the Mass and other abominable Idolatry? He had wearied the Patience of his Subjects, which if he persisted in, they denounce, would be his inevitable Ruine. They advise him, Not to neglect the Demands of his faith∣ful Subjects, and that he should at length repent, and suffer the Son of God to reign over him and his. King∣doms, in the sincere Worship and Discipline of his Church, &c. These barbarous Reproaches from a less bar∣barous Generation, however false, might have been in some sort born; but, to haveClodius accusat Maechos. Rebels pretend to Loyalty, Schismaticks to Piety, and Superstitious Dis∣ciplinarians to rail against Idol Worship, where there was none, is only proper to such, who usurping the Title of God's Vicegerents, would reign and domi∣neer over the Kings of the Earth. But, his Majesty, not to be moved with these Impertinencies, no more than the scurrillous divulging of his Cabinet, being Proof against the Malice of Calumny, as well as Fortune, after some time left Hereford, and with Three Thousand Horse hastens by Liechfield to Bewd∣ly: Where falling upon some Troops of Scots Horse, he beats and routs them. From thence, by a swift March, he enters Derbyshire, and beat Gell at Sud∣bury, and Ashburnham. He thence came to Welbeck, and ravaging the associated Counties, surprising the Guard at the Gate of Huntington, enters the City, and imposing a reasonable Ransom upon it, did the Inhabitants no further Harm. He passed by Cam∣bridge,
which he looked upon with a benign Eye, it being the Seat of the Muses and Learning. But, he fined St. Ives Five Hundred Pounds. And finally, passing through Ouburne and Doncaster, returned to Oxford. It is not to be wondred, that he obliged some Towns in his March to redeem themselves, with no great Pecuniary Mulcts, seeing they had always been exempted from any quartering of Ar∣mies, and had perpetually contributed to the Main∣tenance of the Rebellion. The King had continued his Cavalcade through these Counties with so much Celerity, that he baffled the Sedulity of his Fol∣lowers. And, though he had been pursued by Ten Thousand Horse, the (Scottish Cavalry being joined with the English) and that with the utmost Obstinacy, yet they could not prevent him. The Scots, however fattened with their Rest and Quarters, would not yet leave them, without the Allurements of Prayers, and Money. Being then paid, they were perswaded to move Southwards; and,The Scots besiege Hereford. having taken Canon-frome, a small Garrison of the King's, they marched directly for Hereford, and laid a formal Siege to the place. The Conven∣tion at Westminster, had sent General Leven a Jewel, va∣lued at Five Hundred Pounds, as their Acknowledg∣ment for his late Success, and an Incitement to greater Things. This did not a little quicken him; and, now the City is approached, mined, battered, and assaulted by his no less craving Souldiers. But, be∣ing bravely received and beaten off with great Loss, they attempted the Surrender, which they had not been able to compass by their Action and Threats, by the offer of very fair Conditions. The Parlia∣ment had also joined in these Demands; and, the Inhabitants of the Country round, forced by Fear, added also their desires to the rest. But, in vain; for, Scudmore the Governour, rejecting these Invitations with Contempt, told them, He would deliver the
City to none but to the King that had entrusted him with it, or to his Majesty's Commands. And thus the Scots,but raise is after a sharp, though no long Siege of Five Weeks, seeing there was no good to be done, raised their Camp, and marched Northwards, occasioned per∣haps by their Apprehension of the King's Motion from Oxford; or, rather, affrighted with the stu∣pendious Victories of Montross in their own Coun∣try, Rosseter being commanded thither with Six Thoufand Horse. The King having again left Oxford (for, his pri∣vate Affairs there, no less than his publick abroad, grew by the Distractions and Divisions in his own Court daily worse) marched to Ludlow, with de∣sign to relieve Chester, long labouring under the Pressures of a close Siege. The Parliament, hear∣ing of the Kings Motion, ordered the Colonels, Poynts and Rosseter, to observe him: with orders, that in case he moved towards Hereford, they should act by consent with Leven; but, if he should go to∣wards Bristol, they should then move by Commu∣nication of Counsels with General Fairfax, their Forces being joined, Four Thousand all Horse, fol∣low the King close. And, the unhappy City of London, to promote this Design of King-Catching, as they called it; or, rather,The Common-Council of London order their Members, to find each a Horse to persuethe King. their own Slavery, made a Decree in Common-Council, that every Member of it, should have a Horse with Accoutrements, ready to join with the rest in pursuit of the King. His Majesty in the mean time, hastens towards Chester, and being come to Routon-Heath within Two Miles of it, Rosseter falls with great Resolution upon the Royallists, who received them with no less Courage. The Fight was very hot, wherein the Rebels were not only disordered, but had been quite defeated, and an entire Victory obtained, but that Colonel Jones coming in that instant with near a Thousand
Men from the Siege of Chester, turned the Day, by confirming their own Party, and restoring to them the Success they despaired of before.The Fight at Row∣ton-heath. The King be∣ing overpowered with the Accession of these new-Commers, lest he should be surrounded by them, charged through them, and not without much Slaughter on both sides, recovered Chester. The untimely Death of the Lord Bernard, no less emi∣nent for Courage and Loyalty, than Illustrious for the Nobleness of his Extraction, aggravated the King's Loss, he being the Third Brother of the Duke of Lenox, slain in his Majesty's Quarrel in this unnatural War. The King did not stay long in Chester, the Ene∣my growing upon him after their Victory, but re∣tired into Wales, still loyal to his Interest; he be∣ing a Prince however unfortunate, insuperable in Afflictions, and Superior to all Calamities. Nor did he at all despond, however harassed, trusting that the same God who from small beginnings had raised him once to an Equality with his Enemies in Power, might yet of his Goodness restore him in his good time. He then by his indefatigable Industry, and the Accession of Prince Maurice his Troops with some other scattered Remains, had got a considera∣ble Body of Horse together; which he divided, and delivering Fifteen Hundred of them to Digby and Langdale,Digby and Langdale defeated. sent them with Commands, to en∣deavour to conduct them to Montross; which if these great Men had been able to have compassed, might have changed the whole Face of Affairs. He had already acted to a Prodigy, as will be hereafter de∣clared; but, they could not reach the Borders, and Confines of both Kingdoms. For though they had broke Colonel Wren's Regiment of Horse, and ta∣ken Eight Hundred Foot at Sherburne, and Mylford, they were afterwards surprised by Copely and Lil∣burne, who being fresh, fell upon their wearied
Troops, and defeated them. Carnaby and Hutton, Two Knights, with some others were slain; and, Four Colonels, together with many Inferiour Officers, and Four Hundred Horse, fell into the Enemies Hands. The Lord Digby's Coach was also made a Prize, wherein amongst other Spoils, several of the King's Letters, too carelesly guarded, were found. And these, as those formerly taken at Naesby, were printed with the same Malice and Impudence. Nor is it to be wondred, that as they began the War with Tumults, Scandals, and all Kinds of Barbarity; so they should end it, with the same Arts, and the same Bruta∣lity. Digby was again routed by the Scots upon Carlile-Sands, and scarce saved himself by with-drawing with very few Attendants into the Isle of Man, and from thence into Ireland. So that this whole Party, toge∣ther with its Design, was destroyed and vanished. But to return to Fairfax into the West, where the main Stress of the War was (for, what happened in other Provinces, were rather Velitations, and Encounters of Parties, than formed Designs of Bat∣tels) after the taking of Bristol, the Enemy consult∣ed what to undertake next. Many were of Opini∣on, they should march to the Relief of Plymouth, labouring under the Evils of a very long, and irksom Siege. But that Town having the Sea open, and the Parliamentarians abounding in shipping, having the Navy at their Disposal, it was thought more expe∣dient, to dislodge the Royallists out of those Garri∣sons, which impeded the Commerce betwixt Lon∣don and the Western Counties; and, so open a Passage for Travellers, to and fro, at Pleasure. In order to this, Barclay-Castle, as nearest, was first attempted. This Fortress lying betwixt Glo∣cester and Bristol, did not only disturb the Com∣merce of both those Cities, but extreamly incom∣moded the Country on every side, with Excursions. Fairfax had formerly sent some Horse to hinder
their Cavalcades; and now Colonel Raynsborough is ordered with Three Regiments of Foot, to besiege and reduce them. Which he also did, having for∣ced their Out-Works,Barclay-Castle taken by Raynsbo∣rough. and particularly the Steeple and Church which overlooked the Castle. For, Sir Charles Lucas, however brave, being unequal to the Enemy in Power, was forced to surrender; which he did, considering the State of Affairs, upon no contemptible Conditions. In the mean Time, Crom∣well took the Devizes;The Devi∣zes by Cromwell. without any great Opposi∣tion; as also Laicock, with the same Facility, the Souldiers being permitted to march away with their Arms. And now Fairfax commands him, with Three Regiments of Horse, and Four of Foot, to reduce Winchester, and Basing-House, the Seat of the Marquis of Winchester, whilst he himself marches with the Rest of his Army Westward. His Souldiers were mustered, and paid, and new cloathed. Be∣ing come to Chard, he was advertised, that the Royallists had a design to break through his Army, and join with the King. Which seemed neither incredible, nor unreasonable; for, that being ef∣fected, the Enemy would be obliged either to di∣vide his Forces, which might expose both Parties, or follow with his whole Army, and so leave the Two fertile Provinces of Devonshire and Cornmall entirely in the Prince's Hands. He therefore lay in the Field all Night, and forced the advancing Royallists to retreat over the Isca. Goring had fal∣len into the Enemies Quarters near Chard, with Success, having slain some, and taken about Sixty. But,Tiverton by Fairfax. Fairfax closely pursuing them, took Tiverton, as also the Castle and Church, by storm, occasioned by a casual Shot which broke the Chain of the Draw-bridge, by which Accident the Passage was immediately seized, Sir Gilbert Gerard; the Go∣vernour, and the whole Garrison being made Pri∣soners.
The Winter being far advanced, and the Robels wearied with so many Toils, thought it neither fit nor safe to attempt the Royallists further, or besiege Exeter, well fortified, and strengthened, with a Garrison of Five Thousand Men. They therefore resolve to block up the City at a Distance; and rai∣sing some Redoubts, and Skonses, upon the River Clyssa, within Command of each other, though Three Miles from the City, put Guards into them, whereby they might, with no great Force, extreamly disturb the Communication betwixt the Town and Country. They might have done the same on the other side of the Isca, and so at once have shut up the Garrison from all Commerce with the adjacent Neighbourhood; which they also af∣terward did. Cromwell having possessed himself of the City of Winchester, without Opposition,Cromwell takes Win∣chester, battered the Castle with Six Cannon, and made a Breach in the Walls. Which being observed by the Lord Ogle the Gover∣nour, who thinking every Defence in this declining State of Affairs superfluous, beat a Parley. And, being admitted to treat, having compounded for the Security of his Garrison, he surrender'd this Fortress, however furnished with all kinds of Mili∣tary Provisions for a long Siege. But, the Mar∣quis fell by a nobler, however more unhappy Desti∣ny; for, Cromwell having battered his Works, as∣saulted them with Four Battalions, and passing the Moat, and Ramparts, brake down the Gates; and so, however bravely opposed, forced his Passage in∣to the House, and became Master of it.and Basing House. The Mar∣quis, Sir Robert Peak, with others of Quality, with immense Spoils, were the Reward of the victorious. There were a hundred slain, a Girle of a masculine Courage being found amongst the stript. And thus this Fortress of Loyalty, having baffled ve∣ry many Attempts of the Rebels, for its Reduction
hitherto, fell now by the uncontrouled Fortune of Cromwell. And, being first pillaged, was after∣wards burnt to the Ground, out of spite, rather than any advantage to the Conquerours. Langford fearing the like Fate, prevented it by a timely Sur∣render. And now, the Passages being cleared be∣twixt London, and the more distant Provinces of the West, Cromwell rejoins his Forces to Fairfax's Army. The Prince sends to Fairfax a∣bout Peace.During these Traverses, the Prince of Wales had sent to Fairfax, his Desires for a safe Conduct for the Lords Hopton, and Culpeper, to go to the King, with design to endeavour to compose the Differences be∣twixt his Majesty and the Two Houses. But, Fair∣fax returned Answer, That it not being of his Pro∣vince to treat of Peace, he had sent his Highness's Letters to the Parliament, from whom an Answer was to be expected. Goring having sent the Colonels Scroop and Philips, had attempted the same before, pro∣posing, That by the united Force of both Armies, they should compel both King and Parliament to an Accomoda∣tion. The like Conjunction of Forces had formerly been motioned to Essex, which was then rejected by him, as now by his Successor. All hopes of Peace being vanished, the Prince sol∣licitous for Exeter, draws his Army, consisting of a∣bout Seven Thousand, to Okehampton. His Highness had been informed, that the Rebels Forces were very much diminished by Death and Diseases, which gave him room to hope for some favourable Occa∣sion to attempt upon them. But, being suddenly after assured, that they were daily furnished with new Levies,Fairfax surprizes Three of Went∣worth's Regiments at Bovey. and fresh Supplies (which was true,) he changed his mind, and with-drew his Forces to a greater Distance. But, the Enemy advancing, sur∣prized Three of Wentworth's Regiments at Bovey. The Troopers (except Fifty, and a Major, who were taken) escaped by Favour of the Night, but
they left near Four Hundred Horses behind them. Fairfax was careful to advertise Plymouth of his Ad∣vance, and the Royallists Retreat, which was also relieved by the drawing off of the Besiegers. This Place had been very long blocked up by Land; and having been often bravely attempted, by Sir Richard Greenville, did defend it self with no less Bravery. For, the Sea always open, and the Rebels Masters of it, they could not be forced. Dartmouth was the next Trophy of the Conquerours,Dart∣mouth ta∣ken. which they took by Assault, without the Loss of scarce one single Man, though the Town was strengthened with a Hundred pieces of Ordnance. Nor was the Slaugh∣ter greater on the Defendants side, Sir Hugh Pollard the Governour, the Earl of Newport, Seymour, Den∣ham, and about Eight Hundred, being taken Priso∣ners. .... Carey, and his Officers, upon the Delivery of a Fort which he guarded, was permitted his Li∣berty, and the Souldiers had also leave to retire every Man to his own Home. The Cornish-men, who they were many, had each Two Shillings al∣lowed for their Journey; not absurdly bestowed, to tempt the rest of their Countrymen, who were now the only considerable part of the King's Forces. The Rebels marched thence to Totnes, and after∣wards returned to the Siege of Exeter. Sir Hardres Waller had commanded there; and, now it is re∣solved, to attempt the forcing of the Place, it ha∣ving hitherto been but block'd up with Forts and Redoubts. They therefore commanded Ladders to be brought out of the Country, for an Assault; un∣til upon fresh intelligence of the Prince's Preparati∣ons and Design to relieve the Besieged, they again leaving Waller with Three Regiments of Foot, and one of Horse, to continue the Blockade, moved with the Rest of the Army to meet the Royallists. The Lord Hopton commanded the King's Forces.
For, the Lord Goring being gone for France, and ha∣ving entrusted his own Troops to the Lord Went∣worth's Conduct; the Government of the whole was devolved upon this excellent Personage: Who now had, with Three Thousand Horse and Four Thousand Foot, possessed himself of Torrington, with a Resolution to defend the Town, and to ha∣zard there the Extremity of War. Fairfax being advertised of all this by his Spies, quickens his March: and, to give the Royallists no time to fortifie themselves, made all imaginable haste. Hopton had lined the neighbouring Avenues with Musqueteers, which he again quitted upon the Enemies Advance, who also possessed the said Places: Where they fix'd their Station, by reason of the Darkness, un∣til a Noise in the Town, creating an Opinion that the Royallists were dislodging, obliged them to send a Party to see what was the matter. These Disco∣verers being received with a Volley of Shot, were seconded by a Reserve, and they again by a Third and Fourth Party; so that Supplies being succes∣sively sent from both sides, both Armies were at length engaged. The Passage into the Town was barricado'd up,The Fight at Tor∣rington. where the Fight was very sharp, at push of Pike, and Butt-Ends of Musquets; but that being gained, the Encounters in the Street were no less brave. The Royallists had Twice repelled the Enemy, and being as often beat back them∣selves, were forced at length to quit their Ground, to the more numerous Assailants. Hopton in Per∣son, very conspicuous, and well mounted, brought up the Rear of his Horse; but, was not able to save his Foot, whereof scarce Six Hundred escaped. The Horse, by Benefit of the Night, and Know∣ledge of the Ways, did well-nigh all save themselves by Flight. Four Hundred as well Commons as Gen∣tlemen were taken; of which, near Two Hundred were blown up with the Church. Hopton had left
Fourscore Barrels of Powder in it, which being fi∣red by Accident, or by one Watts, as it was said, hired thereto for Thirty Pieces of Gold, I will not determine. But however it happened, very many of the Rebels perished with it; the Town was mi∣serably shaken, and Terror and Destruction were scattered every where by the Dreadfulness of the Noise, and the Vibration of the Ruines of the Tem∣ple. The Enemy following the Chace, forced the Cavaliers over the River Tamar; and, advancing forwards, beat Colonel Basset out of Launceston, which they also possessed. The Prince sails to the Isles of Scylly.The Prince of Wales admonished by the frequent Misfortunes of his Party, and seeing, after this last Defeat, no possibility of renewing the War, took shipping at Truro. And, that he might with-draw himself, from these barbarous and bloody Enemies to his Life, and Fame; and being attended on by the Lord Capel, Lord Culpeper, and Sir Edward Hyde, since Lord Chancellor of England, sailed to the Isles of Scylly, and thence into France; reserving himself, by the Care of Providence, for the signal Restitu∣tion of his enslaved Kingdoms, to their former Glo∣ry. Fairfax did not omit to improve this Oppor∣tunity of the Prince's Retreat, by inviting Hopton, by honourable Conditions, to disband his Forces, as being abandoned and left to himself. The Greatness of the thing, kept him in suspense for some Time. It grieved him to the Soul, to see his King, and dearest Lord, deprived of so many brave Men, and such a gallant Body of Horse, and that by his own Act. But, to conserve them, seemed morally impossible; for, there was no Help to be expected from Abroad, and he himself shut up within the compass of Six Miles, in the Streights of Corn∣wall, surrounded by the Sea, and a victorious, ho∣stile Army. Nor, did he know whither to go, in case he had broke through; the Ways being ob∣structed
with Trees, cut down and laid cross them on purpose; the Passages every where kept with strong Guards; and what was more dismal, the King's Affairs were under such sad Circumstances, and so desperate, that we were deprived of the very Solace of Hope. In this Extremity, it was determined, to lay by our now useless Arms, and submit to the Necessity of our Fate. A Treaty was therefore entered upon, by Commissioners from both sides,The Lord Hopton disbands bis Army. who met at Tressilian-Bridge; and, af∣ter a great Contestation, concluded a Dissolution of the Royal-Army. The Officers, each according to his Quality, were permitted the Enjoyment of their Arms, Horses and Equipage. But, the com∣mon Troopers, were obliged to deliver theirs, receiving every one Twenty Shillings in Lieu of them. All had their Bag, Baggage, and Li∣berties secured to them, and Permission to return to their Homes, or to pass into Foreign Countries at pleasure. The Army being disbanded, and the Garrisons thereby excluded from all Hopes of Re∣lief, did likewise fall. Exeter the Chief City of the West, surrender'd upon honourable Terms. Barnstable followed, as also the remaining Garrisons, upon Demand. And now Fairfax having subdued the West, marched with his victorious Army towards Oxford. Whilst he is on his way, it may not be from the Purpose, to relate what happened in other Parts of the Kingdom. Which I hitherto design∣ingly omitted, not willing to interupt the Progress of this Western Expedition. Being content, to de∣liver the greater Actions in their Order, rather than to distract them, with a regard to the Things them∣selves, more than the Times they were acted in, though that also will appear in the Margent. After the Defeat of Digby and Langdale, which we have mentioned, the King had continued for some time at Newark, until wearied with the Dis∣sentions
of his Party, he was necessitated to depart. The Lord Gerrard, Sir Richard Willis,Distracti∣ons amongst the Royal∣lists at Newark. and others had deserted his Majesty; and, the Princes, Rupert and Maurice having capitulated with Poynts, for Passes to go beyond Sea, which was assented to by the pretended Parliament, were upon the point of abandoning him. The Dispute was about Digby, who being accused by these Dissenters with more Fervor than Duty, considering the Times, found an Ad∣vocate of his Innocency in the King, and Bellasis the Governour. Hereupon, his Majesty with Six Hundred Horse came to Oxford, where being en∣tertained with heavy Countenances, and a lugu∣brious Accompt of Affairs, he replied with un∣daunted Constancy; That Three Years ago, he had been in yet a lower Condition than at present. The same God, who from such despicable Beginnings had render'd him great and formidable, did live and reign still, to whose Goodness he also recommended the Care of his present abject Estate. But however confident he seemed to be, he was, as is usual in great Cala∣mities, too much neglected by many. And, though he daily performed, whatever could be expected from a brave and prudent Prince, yet nothing suc∣ceeded, by reason of the perpetual Distraction of his Nobles, his Officers and Counsellours, agitated by the Infelicities of the present Condition of Af∣fairs; or rather, actuated by the secret Dispensa∣tions of Providence. Nor was he long permitted to reside there,Ashley beat at Stow. the Lord Ashley having been defeated and taken at Stow. He had drawn a Body of near Two Thousand out of several Garrisons, evacuated for that Purpose; which were the last Field-For∣ces that appeared for the King. So, that the Re∣mains being forced to save themselves in their For∣tifications, were, since there was no Success to be expected from Abroad, easily divested of them also.
BOOK IV. The King leaves Oxford, and goes to the Scots Army. Hereford is surprized, and Chester surrender'd. Oxford besieged, and taken. The other Royal Gar∣risons follow. Massey's Forces disbanded. Contests with the Scots. Their barbarous Ʋsage of the King. They sell him. He is imprisoned in Holmbey-House. The History of the Scots Rebellion, and valorous Actions of Montross. Independency triumphant. The Army mutinies, and seize upon the King at Holmbey. They court him, but deal treacherously with him. He flies to the Isle of Wight. FAirfax had sent Ireton with a Body of Horse, to hinder the Excursions of the Oxonians, and to invest the City with his Troops, whilst he him∣self followed with the main Army, in order to a formal Siege. This obliged the King to think of a Retreat. He had attempted all ways of Peace, and invited those barbarous Tyrants at Westminster to it, though neglected, by near Twenty Messages. They refused a Pass for the Duke of Lenox with Pro∣positions, though the King had (in vain) con∣jured their Assent; they being then, as they said themselves, upon others, to be sent to his Maje∣sty. They also flatly refuse the Scots Commissioners, who pressed for a Treaty, pretending to great in∣terruption in their Affairs, by the delays and difficulties, the joint Councils of both Kingdoms produced. And therefore vote, That the King's Answer shall be desi∣red to their Propositions without Treaty. And being indeed weary of the Scots, they also voted, That they do intend to carry on the War of Ireland with the Forces of England; and, that the Scots Forces should be called away.
The Parlia∣ment design to gratifie their Gran∣dees.In their Debate about the Propositions to be sent the King, they think it time to gratifie their Gran∣dees; and, in order to it, Vote, That Sir Thomas Fairfax be made a Baron, with Five Thousand Pound per Annum settled upon him; and, that his Father be made an Earl; Cromwel a Baron, and two Thou∣sand five Hundred Pound per Annum; Northumber∣land, Essex, Warwick, Pembroke, Dukes; Salis∣bury, Manchester, Marquesses; Roberts, Say, Wil∣louby of Taram, Wharton, Howard, Earls; Sir William Waller a Baron; Hazelrigg, Stapelton, Barons, each Two Thousand Pound per An. Vane, a Baron; Brown, fifteen hundred Pounds per An. and Skippon a Thousand Pound. Thus they were dividing the spoil, whilst the good King offered, provided they would suffer his Friends to live secure∣ly at home, whatever the most nefarious of Crimi∣nals could desire, to wit, An Act of Oblivion for what is past; the Fruition of all they had acquired; Accession to Offices and Dignities. And, because they might have no colour or pretence for Jealousies and Suspicions, he would immediately disband all his Forces; and, would not only return to his Parliament, but also ratifie whatever they should judge necessary, for restoring his afflicted Kingdoms to their former Tran∣quillity. But, all this was absolutely refused by these modest Men, who at length laying the Veil of Hypocrisie aside, did not blush to declare to the whole World, That there was nothing less in their thoughts, than what they had so often solemnly declared, promised, protested, vowed, and sworn to perform; which was, To rescue the King out of the hands of Evil Counsellors, and to bring him back to his Parliament. Nay, now they take care by Proclamation, that he shall not come; and command their Militia-Officers, in case he at∣tempted it, to secure his Person, and detain all his followers Prisoners. The King perceiving him∣self
in such unusuall streights, this potent Monarch of three Kingdoms, and sometimes Supream Arbitrator of Peace, and War, knows not now where to lay his Head. Heu! faciles dare summa Deos, eademque tueri Difficiles! He therefore, reassumes his Thoughts of a Re∣treat. Being rejected by the Parliament,The King leaves Ox∣ford, and goes to the Scots Army. he had a design to throw himself into the Arms of the Ar∣my; but, being refused by these also, he puts him∣self into disguise. And, accompanied only with two Attendants, Ashburnham of his Bed-Chamber, and Hudson a Divine, he left Oxford, and conveyed himself to the Scots Army, then at the Siege of Newark Monsieur Montrueil, the French Resident, then in the Scotch Camp, had stipulated for securi∣ty, and equitable conditions for his Majesty, who upon that confidence, and the assurance he had entertained of his Countrymen's Loyalty (as he wrote to the Mar∣quess of Ormond Lord Lieutenant of Ireland) he cast himself into their Protection.May 1646. Some thought, he was gone into Wales, still true, however oppressed, to his Interests: Others, that he was withdrawn in∣to Scotland, to the renowned Montross; and not a few were of opinion, that he was conceal'd in the Ci∣ty: Which, the Parliament so far believed, that they declared by beat of Drum, and sound of Trumpet, That what Person soever shall harbour or conceal, or know of the harbouring or concealing of the King's Person, and shall not reveal it immediately to the Speakers of both Houses, shall be proceeded against as a Traytor to the Commonwealth, forfeit his Estate, and die without Mercy. A while after, contrary to the opinion of all Men, he was rumoured to be in the Scottish Camp; which was also signified to the Grandees at Westminster, by the Commander in
chief of the Scots Army. The pretended Parliament, as soon as they were informed of the King's De∣parture, and were assured of his being in the Scotch Army, desire and require of the Scotch Commissioners at London, and of the Scots General in the Camp, That they would deliver his Majesty into their Hands, to be secured in Windsor-Castle, un∣til the Parliament should otherwise dispose of him. Moreover, they barbarously Vote, That the King, by going to the Scots Army,He goes with the Army to Newcastle. did prolong the War against the Parliament, and foment the Discord betwixt the Two Nations. But, the Scots not ignorant of the value of their purchase, gave no Ear to their Dear Bre∣thren; but, breaking up with their Army (a Ru∣mour being spread that Cromwell was advancing towards them with all his Horse) marched in haste to Newcastle with the King, affirming, That as his Majesty came to their Camp of his own Accord, so he followed it with the same Liberty, the Army neither per∣swading, nor opposing him. And, this was a place garrisoned with their own Soldiery, and near the Confines of their own Country. The Royallists being, as is related, shut up in their Fortresses, and languishing with the despair of Re∣lief; some of them taking occasion from their ad∣verse Fortune, surrender'd upon demand: Whilst others, defended themselves till they were forced, as Col. Stanhop at Shelford; or famished out, as the Heroick Countess of Darby at Lathome-House, which she had kept two Years, against all the Insults of the Rebels. But, the Fate of Hereford was more dismal; which, having baffled and beat the Scots from her Walls, was not able to prevent the sur∣prizal of a less considerable Enemy. The Colo∣nels Morgan and Birch, with Two Thousand Men drawn out of Gloucester and other neighbouring Garrisons, by the favour of an obscure Night, and a quick March, accomplished the Enterprize.
For, having sent Six choice Souldiers, with a Lieu∣tenant, who pretended to be a Constable, all in Country-Habits,Hereford miserably surprized. early to the Gate; the said ficti∣tious Constable, calling to the Guard, told them, That he was come thither with his Men, according to the Governour's Command, to break the Ice in the Moat, expecting only till the Bridge was let down. Being ad∣mitted with their Rural Instruments, which they carried for show, they immediately making use of the Arms they had under their Clothes, in an in∣stant seized the Guard, killing some few, and se∣cured the Gate, letting in a Hundred and Fifty more, who were in Ambuscade near Hand. The rest of the Party not far off following, and intent upon the Occasion, seized upon the Port and City, and in it upon the Governour, and a great many Persons of Quality, with immense Riches and Plun∣der. The Misfortune of Hereford,Feb. 3. 1645/6. was followed by the Surrender of Chester, a Place of no less Conse∣quence. This City had been long besieged; for, the Rebels, under the Conduct of Jones and Lou∣thian, had surprized the Suburbs the preceding Sep∣tember. And, Sir William Brereton, joining them with greater Forces,Chester, makes a brave de∣fence. attempted the Town by Assault, having made a considerable Breach. But, they were beat off with much Loss, Venables being slain in the Action. This Success added so much Courage, and Confidence to the besieged, that they did not de∣spair of being able to defend themselves, and disturb the Enemy. In the mean time, the King sollicitous for the Relief of this important Place, had attempt∣ed it, but unsuccessfully; for, being defeated, as is already mentioned, at Rowton-Heath, his Maje∣sty not willing to be shut up in a besieged Place, re∣treated into Wales. The Lord Byron, a Person of great Honour, and Loyalty, was Governour of this considerable Garrison, who no whit dismayed after
the late Misfortune, however pressed by the Ene∣my, omitted no Duty of a brave Commander. Poynts, after the King's Departure, fierce with his Victory, did not doubt to carry the City by Force, not being able to gain it by Threats. For, beating the Walls with their Cannon from Three several Batteries at once, they made Three considerable Breaches; which however repaired by the lauda∣ble Bravery of our Women, were valiantly assault∣ed by them, especially that next the River, though repelled with great Loss. Sir William Byron, the Governour's Brother, had got Four Hundred Horse with Provisions, which he attempted to relieve the Place with; but, he was beaten, and himself made a Prisoner near Holt. Neither was Sir William Vaughan more fortunate, although followed by Two Thousand Horse; for, he was forced by Colonel Mitton, with additional Troops from the Siege, near Denbigh, after several sharp Encounters, to a Retreat. The Enemy returning victorious, lay a more close Siege to the City; for, they now also encamped on the Welsh Side, which had hitherto been kept open. So, that the Place being shut up all round, the besieged in time spent all their fresh Provisions; and, not long after, their Patience. Whereupon they, especially the Citizens, began to be very uneasie, although their Mutterings, did not surpass the Modesty of Words; for, as they had several times bravely sustained the Insults of the E∣nemy, so they did not suffer themselves to be over∣come with ordinary Necessities. The Garrison consisted most of Welsh, the Officers being of the same Nation, resolved to suffer all Extremities for their King, rather than the imperious Government of the Rebels. Nor were the Citizens less signal in their Valour and Constancy, until their whole stock of Provisions was spent. Horse-flesh and o∣ther Viands less consistent with Nature, were now
accompted Delicacies; but, those likewise failing, they were necessitated to desire a Remedy for so many Evils, in a Surrender; which seemed yet worse than the Disease it self, at least to the brave. They therefore besiege the Governour, and hum∣bly intreat him, since there was no visible Hopes of Relief, that he would be pleased to treat with the Enemy for their Preservation. Brereton demand∣ed the same, at the same Time by a Trumpeter: demonstrating, the King's Forces to have been beaten out of the Field every where, and their Remains shut up in Garrisons; so that, there was no kind of Relief to be expected. He would notwithstanding, and did, offer very reasonable Conditions, provided they did not refuse them, whilst they might have them; which he the more easily consented to, because he much desired to preserve that Place, he was himself, upon its Rendition, to Command. And, Byron did not seem altogether averse to the Supplications of the Citizens, or the Invitation of this Civil Enemy; yet, he delayed the matter, upon a Report, that Colonel Vaughan having joined the Lord Ashley and some Recruits of Welsh and Irish, designed again the Succour of the Place. But, being uncertain of these Preparations, and shut up from all Commerce from Abroad; he sent the Author of this Relation, to see what was to be expected from that Conjunction of the Royal∣lists; resolving to attend his Return. He, having broke through the Enemies Quarters, with Five and Twenty Horse, found all these Reports to be false; which, having signified by Fires from the highest Tower of Flint-Castle, as was agreed upon, designed himself to return by Water into the City again; which he might possibly have done, by Fa∣vour of the quick Tides, if he had not been hindred by great Sholes of Ice, which filled the River; so that with much ado he recovered Flint again. He also notified this Misfortune by Fires to the besieged;
which being perceived, considering every Delay now superfluous,is surrende∣red upon honourable Conditions. the City was delivered up upon honourable Terms. The Garrison was led by the Governour into Wales, where it was dismissed; but, he shut himself in Caernarven, where being again besieged, he was again forced to surrender upon Conditions, and to retire from that War, where∣in he had behaved himself with no less Valour, than Misfortune. Fairfax being before this time advanced with his Army within sight of Oxford, lay down before it; and, having observed the Situation of it, made a large Quarter capable of receiving Three Thou∣sand Men upon Hadington-Hill. Which he also for∣tified very well; and, drawing a Line from thence round, he strengthened it with other Forts, ap∣pointing the Colonels, Raynsborough, Lambert, and Herbert to command them. Whereby the City was entirely shut up.Oxford besieged by Fairfax. The Enemy had seriously considered in a Council of War, how they might best render themselves Masters of this important Place, and at length agreed unanimously, that it being well fortified, it was safer to famish, than force it. They judged, that the only way to car∣ry it, was to leave it to its own Necessities, and Dissentions. They knew, the City was fortified after the modern Fashion, the Bastion and Flanks mutually defending each other. They saw, that the Rivers Isis and Charwell, did with their Inun∣dations cover Three Parts of the Town; and that the Fourth, which pointed to the North, was ap∣proachable but on that side, though otherwise for∣tified with Two Lines, and strongly defended by the Colleges; appearing like so many Castles. To all this, the Garrison consisted of Five Thousand Ve∣terane Souldiers, and the Flower of the King's In∣fantry; provided with all Kind of Stores for many Months, and commanded by Sir Thomas Glenham;
Famous for his defending of York, and Carlile; the lat∣ter of which he had kept above Ten Months against the main Forces of Scotland, suffering well-nigh a Sa∣guntine Famine in its Defence. Nor did then quit it, but upon equitable Terms, for the Security of his Garrison. At York also, he had extorted good Con∣ditions from their victorious Armies. These things being considered, Fairfax invites him also to treat, with very large Offers, which he seemed to hearken to; requiring First, permission to acquaint his Majesty, and to know his Pleasure therein. This being de∣nied, Commissioners were some time after appointed to treat on both sides. But, they could not agree; for, the Terms the Royallists demanded, were so high, that Fairfax transferred them to the Par∣liament, by which they were rejected as incongru∣ous; and new Orders sent to the General, to reduce the City with all his Power and Skill. But, the Treaty was after some time reassumed, though no Cessation intervened, neither did any Military Action happen, worthy the recital; and, after some Disputes, agreed upon, being comprehended in Six and Twenty Articles. Faringdon was likewise surrender'd upon the same Terms; for, Sir George Lisle, the Governour of that Fortress, being then in Oxford,Oxford surrender'd, Jan. 24th 1645/6. was comprehended in the Oxford-Paci∣fication. The chief of the Articles were; That Oxford, with the Castle, Forts, Works, Arms, Can∣non, and all Provisions of War, should be delivered to Sir Thomas Fairfax's Possession, on the 24th of January. The Duke of York, received, and treated, accor∣ding to his Dignity; should be permitted to go to Lon∣don with his Family, and continue there with the King's Children, until his Majesty should otherwise dispose of him. The Princes Rupert and Maurice, with their Train, not exceeding Seventy Persons, should in Six Months depart out of the Kingdom. The Seals and Sword of State, should be lock'd up in a Chest, and secured in
the publick Library. The Governour, Colonels, and all other Officers and Souldiers, should be permitted to march with their Horses, Arms, Standards, flying Colours, Musquets and Pistols loaden, Match burning at both ends, &c. (the usual Solace of the vanquished) Fif∣teen Miles which way they pleased, where the private Souldiers should lay down their Arms, and then, at their choice, either return to their Homes, or dispose of them∣selves into Foreign Service. The Nobles, Peers, Gen∣tlemen, and all others of what Quality soever, should not be obliged to compound for above Two Years Revenues of their Estates. The Chancellour; Masters, Professors, Students, &c. of the Ʋniversity, should enjoy their Pos∣sessions, Customs, Institutions, Privileges, and Govern∣ment, without Disturbance. The Citizens should also enjoy all their Immunities and Freedoms, nor be burthen∣ed with a Garrison, or enquartering of Souldiers, but upon great Necessity. The Kings Houshold-Servants, shall, together with all his Houshold-Stuff, be convey∣ed to Hampton-Court, where they shall continue until his Majesty shall otherwise dispose of them. To conclude, Immunity for what was pass'd, was grant∣ed to every Individual; and that no Man should be questioned, for any thing done during the War, or the present Siege. And thus, this Seat of Loyalty and Learning, where the King had kept his Court during the Troubles, fell with the Fate of the Kingdom; whose Example and Fortune, the re∣maining Royal Garrisons did readily follow: the which, to gratifie the Reader, we will also mention, though not without Reluctancy. Wood stock. Banbury▪Raynsborough had stormed Woodstock not without great Loss, which Place notwithstanding was after∣wards surrender'd to him. Banbury stoop'd to the same Fate, however bravely defended for a long time by Sir William Compton, and signalized with several Slaughters of the Rebels. Radcot was deli∣vered by ..... Palmer; and, Bostol-House by ano∣ther
Compton. But, nothing was more sensible, than the Loss of Newark, which had been defend∣ed by the Lord Bellasis, with Conduct and Valour, against the united Forces of the English and Scots, until delivered up to Poynts upon the King's Order, now in the Scots Army.Worcester and Wal∣lingford, Ragland, &c. Worcester held out till the Surrender of Oxford, and then veil'd. Wallingford submitted with the same Facility, but better Con∣ditions. Ragland, was kept, during the whole War, by the Marquess of Worcester (a Man of great Parts and one who had greatly obliged the King) who, however Bed-rid, had an active Soul, which made him maintain the Place, till there was not a Garri∣son left to go to, upon the Rendition. Nor did he yet part with it, till Fairfax himself came to re∣ceive it. The Lord Charles Somerset, his second Son, Commanded under him, who had also sig∣nalized himself in many Rencounters during the War, but all failing, was forced to surrender, the Marquess Sacrificing his own Liberty to the free∣dom of his Soldiers. Pendennis, involved in the same fate, was forced to submit to the same necessi∣ty, being delivered up by Colonel Arundel. There remained yet some few Castles in North Wales, which had the honour to hold out longest in this Scene of Blood. Conway was taken by force by Colonel Mit∣ton, and the Archbishop of York, who sacrificed the honour of his Robe and Loyalty to his Ambition and Revenge. Ludlow was delivered, as also Litchfield, to Brereton upon Chester-Articles. The Isles of Scylly ran the same fortune. The Dutch had much desired the Possession of them, for the convenience of Na∣vigation, and offered great Sums for them. But Sir Jo. Greenville, the worthy Governour, now Earl of Bath, prudently chose, rather to deliver them to the English Rebels; being not ignorant, that if annexed to England, they might one day return to their obedience, and duty to their Natural Prince
again. Some time after, Holt-Castle, and those of Harlegh and Denbigh (in which last place,as also Denbigh and Harlegh, the two last Scenes of this War, were delivered up. the Author of these Commen∣taries, besides many other Gentlemen, was besieged) after long and tedious expectation of some good from the North (tho' contrary to the Proverb) closed the last Act of our unnatural Tragedy.Omne ma∣lum ab A∣quilone. The Royallists being wholly subdued, it pleased the Parliament, the Independant Faction in the House being paramount, to order Fairfax their General,Massey's Forces dis∣banded. to go and disband Massey's Forces, being Five and Twenty Hundred, all Horse. The pretext was ve∣ry plausible, the easing of the publick charge of the Treasury; and, 'twas therefore perhaps, that they allowed them but six weeks Pay, whereas they had many Months due to them. This considerable Ser∣vice being done, Fairfax came to London, where he was received by the Militia of the City in Arms; by the Speakers of both Houses, with Congratulatory Spee∣ches and Thanks; and, by the Court of Aldermen and Common-Council, with great Assentation and Flattery. The King prosecuted by the Scots at Newca∣stle.The King at Newcastle, being no less prosecuted and afflicted by the Scots, to whom he had betaken himself for Sanctuary, than by the Parliament, which he had escaped, was yet constant to himself. And, to use his own words in his Divine Soliloquies, Not to be compelled by any hardship, to renounce his Ho∣nour, or depart from his Judgment: Not that he would peremptorily deny, what was fit to be granted; but lest he might yield to that, which both Reason and Religion commanded to deny. As soon as he was come to New∣castle, Leven commanded by Proclamation, That no Papists or Delinquents (that is, any who was Loyal or Faithful to the King) should be permitted to ap∣proach him. And it was moreover cautioned, That no Soldiers, or Officers, should contract any com∣merce of Friendship, or Civility, with Malignants
(that is, such as were addicted to his Majesty.) But, the Independant Grandees did fret and fume, that the King was detained by the Seots, their Mercenaries, and Hirelings, as they termed them, as being nourish'd by their Pay. Affirming fur∣ther,Contests betwixt the Independ∣ents and Scots, That the Kingdom of Scotland had no right, or joint Interest in disposing of the Person of the King, in the Kingdom of England. Hence they come to Threats, and Vote, That they have no more Occasion for their Assistance, the Kingdom being no longer able to bear them. Yea, they took care to publish to the World by Declaration, their Rapines, Extortions, Cruelties and Errors. The Scots, on the other side, pretending the Laws of Nature, of Nations, and Hospitality, affirm, That it is in no Kind permit∣ted them, to deliver up the King, and especially their own King, to any whosoever against his Will, His Majesty having refuged himself under their Power; of his own Accord. But, lest they might altogether displease their Dear Brethren, they force the King to send Orders to his Governours, to deliver such Places as they had yet in their Power, to the Parliament; to the Marquess of Ormond, not to conclude any Treaty with the Irish; and, to Montross, to disband all his Forces in Scotland. These things being ex∣torted from the King, they also would wrest his As∣sent, to the Parliament's Imperious Propositions, which they sent to Newcastle to him, viz. That he should ra∣tifie the Solemn League and Covenant; abolish Episcopa∣cy; deliver the Power of the Sword into the Hands of his Enemies; and exclude the Peers made by him, with several others of his chief Friends, from Pardon, &c. They had themselves, not as yet corrupted with English Gold, condemned many of these Propositi∣ons, which they advance now with Menaces; lest both Kingdoms should agree, he refusing, to settle Peace and Religion without him, to his, and his Posterity's ir∣recoverable Loss. Nor did they thus terrifie this
magnanimous Prince, who chose rather to expose his Crowns and Scepters, than his Honour and his Religion; and to see himself and Posterity, divest∣ed of the Imperial Dignity of Kings,Montross disbands by the King's Command. by the vio∣lence of others, than his own Act, by a tame Sub∣scription to the unjust demands of his Enemies. The Scots had deputed Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Crawford, and others, to the King (al∣tho' their Parliament had Voted, That he should not come into Scotland, declaring it to be contrary to their agreement with the English, and the Treaty,) to perswade, exhort, warn, and urge his Assent to the Covenant: And that he would be pleased also, to approve and enact the English Propositi∣ons. These were followed by Delegates from their Sy∣nod, denouncing, in case he were refractary,The Scots barbarous usage of the King. the Wrath of God against him, and the hate of his Subjects. Some of these were appointed to remove his Scruples, and clear his doubts, whereof one being admitted to Preach before him, after several bitter Invectives in the Pulpit, his Sermon being finished, he com∣manded the fifty second Psalm to be sung, Why dost thou Tyrant boast? &c. But the King perceiving his malicious Reflection, unexpectedly stood up, and ordered the fifty sixth Psalm, Have Mercy Lord on me I pray, to be sung. Which the People, negle∣cting the Parson, unanimously did. Nor were the Fortunes of David and Charles much unlike (the one being detained by the Philistines at Gath, and the other by the Scots at Newcastle) when this Psalm was composed by the Royal Prophet, and sung by the Royal Sufferer. But now the main Controversie amongst the Rebels, was, about the disposal of the King's Person: Un∣til the Scots moved by Contumelies, and the Sarcasms of the Cromwellists, and, perceiving the Parliament, al∣though they had conquered England, did not dis∣band, were more inclined to agree with them; and
perhaps softned by the Parliament's offers, after some previous formal disceptations, to heighten the Price of their Treachery, they at length resolved to de∣liver him up: And, he was delivered to the En∣glish Rebels, by his native unnatural Subjects of Scot∣land, to whom he had fled for Security, with all the circumstances of Irreligion, of Impiety, of Perjury, of Treason, and of detestable Avarice; being sold for Two hundred Thousand Pounds.They sell him. Which they having received, and evacuated their Garri∣sons in England, they returned with this Reward of their Iniquity, into their own Country. But, with a Curse also; for, it is observable, That after that time, they did never thrive, nor nothing they undertook prosper. There had indeed been some attempts made for the King's escape. But, they were all prevented by the vigilancy of his cruel Keepers; Leven assu∣ring the Parliament, That he would, according to their desire, take care that his Majesty depart not away. And he was as good as his word; for, his Majesty ha∣ving changed his Keepers, being, as he had truly said, Bought and Sold, and now in the hands of his bloodiest Enemies,He is im∣prisoned in Holmby, and cruelly used. was carried to Holmby-House, not far from Naesby, where he had so unfortunately fought, that he might be perpetually tormented with the sight of that odious Companion. Nor was he less perplex'd within doors, not being permitted to enjoy a freedom in his Solitude. His Friends, and his Chaplains (which a common Civility would not refuse to the most Criminal) being inhumanly kept from him, whilst some of their own unknow∣ing Factious Levites, are obtruded upon him. These mistaken Creatures, had neither Modesty to cohabit, nor Learning to dispute with this Royal Divine; who being equally capable of the Mitre, as well as Scepter; of the Sacerdotal, as well as Kingly Of∣fice, was truly inimitable in both. How good a
Divine he was, appears by his Controversies with the Marquess of Worcester, a Person no less Emi∣nent for Learning, than Nobility, of the Roman Catholick Religion; and with the Parliament Mi∣nisters; especially by his Writings to Henderson, a Scots Presbyterian, and Champion of the Party, who being vanquished by the strength of his Argu∣ments, testified his Conviction by his Repentance; and died for Grief, as is credibly reported (that he had offended so good and so pious a Prince, not as the Enemy affirm, because he could not perswade his Majesty to sign the Propositions,) a reconciled Son to the Church of England. Whilst the King is afflicted in his noisom Pri∣son at Holmby, it will not be from the purpose to relate what things were performed by the Royallists in Scotland, and briefly to insert them in our Com∣mentaries. Which will be the less difficult, seeing they are for the most part extracted out of the History of Montross, writ in fine Latin by the most Reve∣rend Bishop of Edenburg, Doctor Wishart. The Scots, the cause of all our Evils, deserve to be treated with a more severe style,The History of Mon∣tross. but that we find also even in this Nation, several Persons of Honour and known Vertue, who signaliz'd themselves by the Eminency of their Loyalty, and Endeavours for the King's Preservation. Amongst these, Montross deservedly challenged the first rank, who perform∣ed such stupendious feats of Arms, with such slen∣der means, having neither Soldiers nor Pay to be∣gin with, that we may equally wonder that he un∣dertook, as that he effected them. He had former∣ly been of the Covenanters Party in Scotland, and was the first that led his Men over Tweed, in the first Scotch Invasion. But, when he perceived that his Countrymen design'd not only the King's Ruine, but that of Monarchy too, he resolved to quit them. He also wrote to the King, to testifie his Obedience.
But, his Letters were stole out of His Majesty's Poc¦kets, by some of his Bed-chamber, and Copies of them conveyed to the Confederates; as also, notice of the King's Letters to Montross, which were intercepted, stitched up in a Saddle, as had been notified. This being perceived, he resolved in Person to wait up∣on the King at Oxford. Which he did, and disco∣vered to His Majesty, the Counsels, and Designs of the Confederates; but, in vain, the Faction of the Hamiltons being too prevalent at Court; which continued, until the Scots did actually enter England. The King then perceiving himself abused, sent Ha∣milton Prisoner to Pendennis-Castle, and, at the same time sent Montross into Scotland, as chief Gover∣nour of the same. The King indeed, had ordered the Marquess of Newcastle, to furnish him with some Forces for the Expedition. And, Prince Rupert, after the fatal Battel of Marston-Moor, had promised him a Body of Horse; but all came to nothing, insomuch, that he entred Scotland with only two Companions, him∣self disguis'd in the habit and garb of a Groom, and by swift Journeys, came to the Banks of the Ri∣ver Tai; where he lay close for some days, in the house of Patrick Grimes, his Kinsman, a Person of great worth and Loyalty. Here he understood, how all the King's Friends had been suppressed, by the tyranny of the Rebels. The Marquess of Hunt∣ley, had indeed raised a considerable Army; but he quitted those Arms he had rashly taken up, up∣on the first noise of the Enemies Trumpets, sa∣ving himself by Flight. Montross troubled with the misfortune of the Gurdons, began to cast a∣bout, how and by what means he might draw this brave and Loyal People to his Party, that they might again try the fortune of War under another General. In the mean time, there was a rumour spread amongst the Shepherds, who watched their Flocks in
the Mountains, though very uncertain, of several Irish, who being wafted over,Some Irish Land in Scotland. kept themselves in the Northern Highlands. Montross fancied this pos∣sible, and that they were of those Auxiliaries, which the Earl of Antrim had promised a few Months be∣fore. Which he also found to be true, as well by Alexander Macdonnel's Letters who commanded them, as by others from several of his Friends in the Mountains. Having received these by acci∣dent, he answered them, as if he had been at Car∣lisle, encouraging them highly with assurances, that they should neither want Assistance, nor a General. Ordering them at the same time to descend with all speed into Athol. Which they did, with Joy, upon the immediate Receipt of these Commands, sooner than could imaginably be expected. Mon∣tross, who was scarce twenty Miles off with his Cousin Patrick, habited like a Mountaineer, and on foot, surprizingly met them, which also happen∣ed very opportunely, they being in great dan∣ger of being destroyed. For, the Marquess of Ar∣gile followed them close with a great Army, whilst the Low-landers attended them in the Plains; where, if they descended, they could not escape, being trod to pieces under their Horses Feet. The Ships which had brought them over, to take away all hopes of a Retreat, were burnt by Argile. Nor would the Atholians or others, who favoured the King, run any hazard with them, they being strangers, had no known Authority, nor could produce any Person of ancient Nobility, (which the High-landers chiefly re∣verence) to head them. To this, their number was small, not exceeding eleven Hundred, where∣as ten Thousand were promised.Montross heads them. the Atholi∣ans come in to him with 800 Men. But Montross his Presence, who was received by them as if dropt from Heaven, seemed to compensate all these de∣fects, and in two days the Atholians, to the num∣ber of eight Hundred, and armed, presented them∣selves
with great Alacrity to Montross. Being thus accompanied, he the same day marched through the Fields of Athol towards Ierna, with design to open a passage for his Friends and Supplies, (if any such should be stirr'd up with the fame of his undertaking,) before it should be shut up by the Enemy, surprized perhaps with the novelty of the thing, before they could rejoin their divided For∣ces. Having passed the Tai, the greatest River in Scotland, he was strengthened by the accession of five hundred Men,as also the Lord Kil∣pont, and Sir Jo. Drum∣mond with 500 Men. under the Command of the Lord Kilpont, and Sir John Drummond. They, as well as others, had been summoned by the Confede∣rates, to oppose the Irish as common Enemies; but, as soon as they heard that Montross did command, they both, without any hesitation, (for both, tho' privately favoured the King's Cause,) joined Forces with him. Heightened with these supplies, he beat the Enemy consisting of six thousand Foot, and seven hundred horse, commanded by the Lord of Elchon, and the Earl of Tullibardin, at Tippermoor. Montross had no Horse at all. He therefore to prevent (by reason of the inequality of their numbers) being surrounded, extended his Front as much as possible, so that his Files being but three deep, the first Rank was com∣manded to kneel,The Battel of Tipper∣moor. the second to stoop, and the third, where the properest Men were, to shoot standing, and all to fire at once, and then to fall in with the Butt-ends of their Muskets, and their drawn Swords. All which was valiantly perform∣ed; but they wanting Powder, and not being well Armed, they fought with such Weapons as chance furnished them with; throwing Stones with such activity and animosity at the Enemy, that they forced them first to give Ground, then to run away. The slain were reckoned at two Thousand, and more taken. Perth was surrender'd to Montross the same day; where having rested three more, he
was informed, that Argile was marching towards him with a strong Army. He therefore re-passing the Tai, encamped at Cupr in Angus, lying then, as well-nigh always, in the open Field. Passing thence by Taodan, he marched to Esk, where he met with the old Earls of Arley, with his Sons, and a brave train of Friends and Attendants. Here he had intelligence, that the Lord Burgley was at Aber∣dene,of Aber∣dene. with design to draw the Northern Parts by Money or Force, to join with him. Which Mon∣tross understanding, having passed the River Dee, he found the Enemy drawn up in Battel Array near the City. Burgley had two thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse, which he placed in the Wings; and having chosen his Ground, and planted his Cannon at the head of his Army, expected the on∣set. Montross had but fifteen hundred Foot; for, the Lord of Kilpont's Men were gone home, to convoy the Body of their Lord, who had been murther'd by one of his own Servants; and, very many of the Atholians were also returned loaden with Plunder after the Victory of Perth, and not yet come up to the Army. He also placed his Horse, which were but four and forty, in the Wings: Adding some of his Foot to them, who for their Agility and Strength, were equal to Horses; enjoyning them to have a care, lest the Enemies Troops surrounded them. Which they also valiantly performed; for the Charge being given, the Enemy was defeated, slaughtered, routed. The Horse escaped for the most part; but, the Foot having no place to re∣treat to, but the City, fled thither. But being closely pursued by the Conquerours, entring Pell∣mell with them, the Streets were strowed with their slain Bodies. Two days being allowed the Soldi∣ers to refresh in, Montross was informed, that Ar∣gile was advancing with far greater Forces than formerly; being also accompanied, with the Earl
of Lothan with Fifteen Hundred Horse. He there∣fore left Aberdeen and marched to Kintor, from whence he determined to lead his Forces to the Mountains and Places of most difficult access. In order to this, he buried his Cannon in the Earth, and disburthened himself of his heaviest Baggage. But, the Enemy pressing on all sides, he marched to Badenoth, that he might be out of the danger of their Cavalry, those Quarters being scarce passa∣ble for Horse. The Enemy having left pursuing him, he was surprized by a fit of Sickness, which extreamly harassed him for some days; but, being recovered, he marched again into Angus, hoping either to force Argile, tired with tedious Marches, into Winter Quarters, or to leave him far be∣hind him. Having traversed Angus, and passed o∣ver the Grampian Mountain, he came to Strath-bogy, to invite the Gordons with his Presence to a Conjun∣ction of Arms with him. But, in vain, being op∣posed by the Marquess of Huntley; who, though he did not hate the King, envied the glories of Mon∣tross too much to contribute to their greatness. He went thence to the Castle of Favia, which he took; but being sharply attacked there by Argile and Lo∣than, had much to do to resist their Power; which he yet did, by his own Vertue, and the rare Valour of his Men. Many days being thus spent at Favia, Argile got nothing with so great an Army, but Infamy from his Friends, and Contempt from his Enemy.Montross baffles Ar∣gile, who flies to Perth. Sometime after, Montross understanding Argile to be at Deucalidon without his Horse, re∣solved to attempt him; which coming to his know∣ledge, Montross being as yet sixteen Miles off, he commanded his Men to shift for themselves, whilst he secured himself by his flight to Perth. Montross being of opinion, that an Enemy could be no where so advantageously assaulted as in his own Country, flew with incredible speed and indu∣stry
into Argile; where having forced the Mar∣quess to save himself again in a Boat, he destroyed and filled the Province with Blood, Slaughter, Ra∣pine, and Fire. Nor were the other Neighbour∣ing Countries, as Lorn, and the rest that acknow∣ledged the Dominion of Argile, better used. The Royallists having quitted these Quarters, they at length met with Argile at Innerlock; but, charged him with such Fury, that they broke their Ranks; and, pursuing with a great shout, defeated them with a great slaughter, killing above Fifteen Hundred up∣on the place. Whilst Argile himself, placed in a Boat, and put off from Shore, saw the ruine of his Men at a distance, and without any share of the danger. After this, the Citizens of Elgin, surren∣der'd their Town of their own accord; at which time, the Lord Gourdon,The noble Lord Gour∣don joins with Mon∣tross; and eldest Son to the Marquess of Huntley, a Person above all Commendation; for the eminency of his Vertues, left his Uncle Ar∣gile, and came over to the King's Party, with a very choice Squadron of Friends and Dependants. Montross heightened with this accession, forced Hurrey, Commander of the Rebels Horse, refusing to fight upon his Invitation, to a Retreat; and of∣fered Bayly (sent for purposely out of England, to whom Hurrey was also joined by a Trumpeter) the liberty of Battel. But he replied, That when he was disposed to Engage, it should be by his own, not anothers choice. The Royallists marched forward to Deucalidon, and designing to pass the Tai, were up∣on the point of being ruined, by a very mischie∣vous accident, which they could not forsee. Lodowick Gordon, who had born Arms at Aberdeen on the Rebels side, had by the mediation of his Noble Brother,his Brother Lodowick deserts the army, which greatly di∣stresses Montross. been reconciled to the King's Party. But now, whether upon real, or pretended Letters from his Father, having privately seduced most of the Gor∣dons to a defection, carried them away, exposing
thereby his Brother and Montross to very imminent danger. And truly, it may be a question, whe∣ther of these excellent Persons most hated this Per∣fidy. Montross highly troubled with this defecti∣on, thought how to secure the rest, and immedi∣ately sent the weakest of them away with all his Baggage, with Command to meet him at Brechin. This done, he with an Hundred and Fifty Horse, which was all he had, and Six Hundred nimble Footmen, marched with incredible Speed to Tao∣dun, which he assaulted, took, and plundered. He himself stood upon a Hill which overlook'd the Town, when sudden news was brought him, that Bayly and Hurrey were with Three Thousand Foot,Montross's noble re∣treat from Taodun. and Eight Hundred Horse within a Mile of the Place. By that time he had got his Men out of the Ci∣ty, which was not done without extream difficulty, be∣ing scarce to be withdrawn from their Plundering, the Enemy was come up within Musket-shot of him. His Retreat was admirable, wherein he shewed himself no less a worthy Commander, than he had done in his former Victories. Some advised the General to reserve himself for better times, and secure himself by flight with his Horse; and, others under these desperate Circumstances, were of opi∣nion, they should not perish unrevenged. But he complying with neither, instantly sent Four Hun∣dred Foot before, and commanding the other Two Hundred to follow, he himself closed the Rear with his Horse. The Enemy discovering their number, and seeing them so few, divided their Forces, and followed after them very eagerly, not only coming up with them in their Rear and Flank, but endea∣vouring to obstruct their passage to the Mountains. The Rebels forlorn of Horse, pressed hard upon Montross's Rear, but his Foot facing about, fired upon them, and having slain the three foremost, rendred the rest more cautious, and the pursuit
less hot. The darkness of the Night, put an end to these Skirmishes. By this they were come near Aberbroth, where Montross, considering that the Enemy might have intercepted the direct way to the Hills with his numerous Horse, com∣manded his Men to turn to the South-westward, and march with all imaginable speed; by which artifice and incredible toil, he deluded his Pur∣suers, slipping by them in the night; and wheel∣ing suddenly Northwards, he passed the Esk not far from the Castle of Careston. And having after some light Skirmishes, and a continued March of threescore Miles, without Sleep, without Meat, or any other refreshment, gained the foot of the Mountains, the Enemy at length left them, retiring from their fruitless pursuit. Being thus beyond their hopes come into a place of security, Montross sent the Lord Gourdon, as well to recal those Troops his Brother had de∣bauched, as also to augment them by new Levies; which he also performed with great industry, join∣ing the General in Marr, with a Thousand Foot, and Two Hundred Horse. Being thus inforced, the Royallists defeated Hurrey with Three Thou∣sand Foot, and Five Hundred Horse at Alderna,The Fight at Alderna and Alford, where the Lord Gour∣don was slain. he himself hardly escaping with the Horse. Nor was Bayly, the most knowing of the Enemies Captains, more fortunate at Alford; where having left his Foot, he also fled with his Horse, which the most untimely fall of the noble Lord Gourdon contributed to; a loss irreparable to the King and his Party, and which cast such a damp upon the Victory, that the Soldiers overcome with Sorrow, wore the countenance of a baffled not conquering Army. But Montross, after this, strengthened with a numerous recruit of High-landers, and by the accession of the Earl of Aboyne (who succeeded his Brother Gour∣don) and Arley, who were come up to him with
Three Hundred Horse, resolved to penetrate into the inmost parts of the Kingdom, as well to di∣sturb the Enemies Levies in Fife, as to dissipate the Convention of the States at Perth. Being come into Fife, the richest and most po∣pular Province of the Kingdom, he resolved to pass the Forth. Which he also did, four Miles a∣bove Sterling; and marching forward, encamped at Kilsythe. The Rebels, fierce with their multitudes, thought that Montross's late Marches, and his ha∣sty passing of the Forth, were the effects of his Fear, not Counsel. So that they resolve to attack him in that place he had chosen; their chief care being, to cut off all Retreats, especially to the Mountains. Montross's Army, consisted of Four Thousand Five Hundred Foot, and Five Hundred Horse; the Rebels, of Six Thousand Foot and Eight Hundred Horse. But, their fortune the same; for, the Royallists animated by the rare Valour of the old Earl of Arley, who being sixty years of age, did with his single Troop defeat Three of the Enemy's, and dis-engaged a Battalion of Montross's Foot,The Battel of Kil∣sythe. too rashly advanced; which gave such uni∣versal Courage to the whole Army, that raising a great Shout, they all ran upon the Enemy, beat down such as resisted, and ruined all, scarce One Hundred of the Foot escaping. The Arms, Bag∣gage, and Spoils of the Field, were the present re∣ward of the Victors, who lost only six Men, where∣as, near Six Thousand of the Enemy fell that day. Upon this, the Confederate Lords fled out of the Kingdom, and such who favour'd the King, did no more scruple to discover themselves. This Victory having produced a new face of things over the whole Kingdom, reconciled the Cities and Provin∣ces thereof to their duty to the King. Which he had also maintained, if the Horse which His Majesty
had sent with the Lord Digby and Sir Marma∣duke Langdale, had, as he hoped, come up to him. But, these being dispersed, as is said, in England, he found other Forces than those he expected thence: For, the Confederates upon the fame of his Atchievements, had sent David Lesley with Six Thousand Horse; who, by their intelligence with the Earls of Trequair and Rosburg, whom the King had unhappily trusted, surprized and defeated him at Selkirk,The Royal∣lists surpri∣zed at Sel∣kirk. Montross leaves Scotland. Yet did not so far oppress him, but that he afterwards became formidable a∣gain. But the King being in the Scots Army, he was by his Majesty's Command forced to dismiss his Soldiers, leaving his Country to the disposal of the Confederates. It is now high time to return to Holmbey, and take a view of His Majesty's Diversions in that wretched Solitude. Amongst other things, seeing he heard nothing from the Parliament, he composed an Answer to the Propositions formerly sent to him. Wherein, besides many unexpected Concessions, he promised, To comply with the rest, provided he were suffered to come to London. But having no Secretary, or Clerk to transcribe what he had writ, he desired one from the Commissioners attend∣ing him; otherwise, he would himself scrible it over, as well as he could. This was rejected as soon as sent, although he had assented to most, and desired a Personal Treaty for the rest; they be∣ing deaf to his demands; and whilst he was thus earnest for Peace, Vote him averse to it; affirming moreover, how falsely!The King's miserable restraint at Holmbey. That he had never offer'd them any thing worthy their Acceptation, or ac∣cepted of any thing they had presented to him. In this extremity, he turns to God, and withdrawing himself, writ those Divine Soliloquies which com∣pose his Book, spending that leisure time with Heaven, which was not permitted him to employ
with any he delighted in here below. This Book, as it surpasseth all other except the Bible, in Piety, Prudence and Eloquence of Style, so it containeth a true and genuine discovery of the state of af∣fairs; and consequently, fit to be read of all good Men, and, such who would be satisfied in the reality of our Transactions. In the mean time, the Pretended Parliament force away the miserable from the unfortunate. For, seeing the King's unhappi∣ness and restraint, had not so far divested Men of that Veneration they owed him, but that many sick of that Disease called the Kings-Evil, came to him to be healed; the Novellists, more out of envy than grounded in reason, endeavoured, tho' to no purpose, by Declarations, to divert the Peo∣ple from this pretended Superstition, as they cal∣led it. Although all the Kings of England, have e∣ver since the time of Edward the Confessor, who received this Prerogative from Heaven, made use of it with success. The Rebels being now Masters of the King and Kingdom, having supplanted the true Heir, were upon dividing the Inheritance. Nay, had gratifi∣ed several of their Grandees with splendid Dona∣tives, when dissenting amongst themselves, they by their own Discords, opened a passage to their deserved ruine. The difference and emulation which did arise betwixt the very Conquerors,The Pres∣byterians and Inde∣pendents jarr. who tho' they had ended the War, were yet far from Peace, troubled all; those Twins of Presbytery and Inde∣pendency, which the same Womb lately enclosed, striving for Predominancy, which was, as also the Blessing, extorted by the Younger Brother. The Presbyterians, to comply with their Scots Brethren, had abolished the Liturgy, and to keep Episcopacy from reviving, had confiscated all its Re∣venues. But, the Severity of this rigid Discipline, was not equally pleasing to all, especially to those
who pretended New Light. These blaming all Ty∣ranical Impositions in Holy Things, hold forth a Christian Liberty, which permits every one Indepen∣dent from another to serve God after his own man∣ner. This Doctrine was very pleasing to the Common People, especially the Souldiery, seeing it indulged them with Licentiousness; which, not only the Vulgar, but their Officers did likewise embrace. So that the Fold of Presbytery being thrown down, the strayed Sheep were gathered under other Shep∣herds, forming thereby the several Sects of Quakers, Anabaptists, Millenaries, and the rest. And, these were they, who under pretence of the Self-denying Ordinance, removed Essex and his Chief Officers from the Command of the Army, imposing Fairfax, who though a Presbyterian, was flexile, in his Room. To this Man, being of a melancholy and affected God∣liness, Cromwell, by a particular Dispensation, was adjoined; who, by a feigned Sanctimony, should lead him at Pleasure. The Colonels and Captains, were likewise all Schismaticks, or such who were not averse to them. These also caused Massey and Cooke to be disbanded; as also Poyntz's Forces, for Muti∣nies which they themselves, by detaining their Pay, had occasioned. These and such like Feats, being not perceived, or neglected by the Presbyterians, who were far more numerous in the House, had pas∣sed: But the Faction increasing and growing po∣tent, by the Accession of other Sectaries, they at length resolved to observe them more narrowly. The Enemy now most formidable was the Army, fierce and high with their Victories. These they fear, and therefore desire to dissolve them; which they not daring to attempt at once, they bethink themselves how to diminish their Power and Pride. And a very plausible Occasion presented it self, sup∣plies being to be sent into Ireland. Eleven Thou∣sand
were instantly voted for that Service; and, another Decree passed, for easing of the Common∣wealth,The Presby∣terians en∣deavour to disband the Army. that most of the Army should be disbanded; the standing-Forces to consist of Five Thousand Horse, a Thousand Curiassiers, and Six Thousand Foot, under the Command of Fairfax; though that last Clause, did not pass without much dispu∣ting, which was wonder'd at by many. These Votes however violent, were carried by Cromwell's Skill and Arts, who ceased not to assure them of the Souldiers Obedience and Submission. Not, that he desired the Army dissolved, the thing in the World he apprehended most; but, that by that means the Presbyterians, as Chief Authors of those odious Decrees, might be render'd more hateful to the Souldiers. Which happen'd accordingly; for, the News was no sooner come to the Camp, but they began to mutiny, especially being made believe, they were to be cashier'd without their Arrears. They therefore take a Resolution not to stir, and to try every Extremity rather than go into Ireland, so far distant, to be destroyed with Sickness and Hunger; or indeed, to return to their Trades a∣gain. In this heat, they fly yet higher, and choose Agitators,The Army mutinies. Two private Souldiers out of every Regi∣ment of Foot, and Two out of every Troop of Horse, who were authorized by their Comrades, to consider and determine, what was to be done for the publick Utility of them all. By these a De∣claration was emitted, in the Name of the whole Ar∣my, that the Souldiery would neither be disbanded, nor go into Ireland, until they had received all their Pay due to so many Victories; until the People had their Liberties, and just Powers restored to them; and until Peace was secured to the Kingdom and In∣demnity to the Souldiers. This Declaration, with a Petition, was presented to the Lower House by the Colonels Hammond, Rich, and Ireton, which extream∣ly
offended the Presbyterians, whom they will dare to offend yet higher: For, this impetuous Faction, being sure of the Army, resolve to get the King likewise into their Power; especially being infor∣med, That the Parliament had, unless prevented, the same design. This quickened them; for, laying all delay aside, his Majesty was seized upon at Holm∣bey, where his Captivity was,Surprizethe King at Holmbey. by one Joyce a Cor∣net, sometimes a Godly Taylor, and now a Tumul∣tuous Agitator, with a Party of a Thousand Horse, and carried away against his Will (as he sent the Parliament Word, by the Earl of Dumferling) to the Camp; his Character rendring him very con∣siderable to the Party he was with, however a Priso∣ner. The Surprisal of the King being known at West∣minster, the Members there, hurried betwixt the Passions of Rage and Terror, were ready to de∣spond; until raised by Cromwell, who seeming to detest the Insolencies of the Souldiers no less than his Colleagues, added, That if they thought fit to let him go to the Army, he promised with much Asseveration, that he would not only reduce the Regiments to their Duty, but would oblige the Souldiers to lay down their Arms at the Door of the Parliament-House. The Fathers revived with these flourishes, greatly extol their Author. And there were amongst them, who proclaiming the Actions which he had gloriously performed for the Parliament, judged him worthy a Statue of Gold, if he should compose the seditious Disturbances of the Army. By this Artifice, he got leave to go (though others were of another Opinion, and not obscurely advised his Seisure) whilst he smiles at their Cre∣dulity. He immediately taking Horse, flew with no ordinary Speed to the Camp, where he not only approved what the Souldiers had done, but chear∣fully subscribed their Declarations, Petitions, and Re∣monstrances. And, to shew of what Consequence he e∣steemed
steemed the King's Arrivalat the Army, he did not blush to bragg, That he now had the Parliament in his Pocket. The King was not uncivilly received by Fairfax, but was entertained by Cromwell with all the Testimo∣nies of Duty and Loyalty;We is seem∣ingly civilly received in the Camp. who pathetically expres∣sing his Sorrow for his Misfortunes, did not cease to profess, That the Army, doubtful of his Safety, had rescued him out of the Captivity of the Parlia∣ment; and that he would never lay down Arms, un∣til his Majesty was restored to his Scepters, and his Friends to more equal Conditions. And in∣deed all, as well Officers as Soldiers, did seem to deplore the Injustice and Extremity of his Fate; and particularly, that he had been excluded from the Conversation of his Friends, and as it were buried alive in his own Palace, by the Se∣verity of his Adversaries. The King not displeased with this Change, desired to go to his own House at New-market, which after some time was permit∣ted; Fairfax, and especially Cromwell, in the inte∣rim affirming, That his Majesty could be no where safer, or more eminently honoured, than in the Army. And to improve their Promises, his Chap∣lains, and the usual Forms of Divine Service (a thing which he had greatly desired, and the only Artifice to beget a Confidence in him, of their Re∣ality) were permitted him at pleasure. His Friends and Servants were likewise admitted to his Presence, and Attendance; so that the Royallists were dazzl'd with the Lustre of these Concessions. Nay more, he was indulged the Liberty of writing to the Queen; and, her Majesty's Messages, were in no wise interrupted. His Children had free Access to their Royal Father, and moreover the sick of the King's Evil, were without Difficulty suffered as formerly, to be touched by him. But, all this was precarious, being the Contrivance of those impi∣ous
Impostors, the Father and Son in-law, Crom∣well and Ireton, not out of any Favour to the King, but that by his Accession, they being paramount, might more securely triumph over the Presbyteri∣ans. Upon the King's Arrival in the Camp, Fairfax not a little surprized, acquainted the Parliament with it, professing, That it happened without his, or his Officers Knowledge. And truly, it is not incredible, but that this servile General might be ignorant of the Authors of so great an Attempt: it being also told him by the Council of War, that seeing the thing was done, it was advisedly and op∣portunely enough performed; and, that this was the Opinion of the Army. He therefore had done enough in giving them at Westminster notice of it. But the more piercing and quick-sighted, found, that it was contrived by Cromwell and his Son-in-Law, and executed by the Agitators by their Instigation; no less insolent in their Licentiousness, by confi∣dence of Impunity, than the other Two Impostors, were famous for their Dissimulation and Sagacity. The Pretended Parliament alarmed at the Surpri∣sal of the King,The Parlia∣ment is a∣larmed with the Surprisal of the King. and the Rumour of the Armies ap∣proach, stopp'd them at present at St. Albans with Intreaties and Money. In the mean time, they ad∣vise with the City; and, joining Forces with them, prepare for Defence. But the Citizens Prepare∣tions were tumultuous, and full of Confusion and Distraction, as is usual in unexpected Occurrences. And now the Dissentions betwixt these Parties, growing to a Height, they attacked each other with the same Method and Arts, wherewith they for∣merly had tormented the King. Petitions were suborned on both sides, from the Provinces and Ci∣ty, and nothing more frequent than tumultuous Re∣sorts at the Parliament-Doors. And, 'tis observa∣ble, that none did so much apprehend, or more
condemn these Seditious Concourses, than those who formerly had fomented and stirr'd up the like against the King. The Houses were no less agitated with Seditions than the City, especially upon publishing a new Declaration from the Army.The Army's Declarati∣on. The Sum of it was, That the Parliament should be dissolv'd upon a set-day, another being called to succeed it: That they should give an accompt to the Kingdom, of the vast Treasures they had received: and, That they should suspend from sitting in the House, Eleven Members they named, viz. Hollis, Stapleton, Lewis, Clotworthy, Waller, Massey, Glyn, Maynard, Long, Harley, Nicholas, being the chief Champions of Presbytery, and now accused of High-Treason, &c. The Hou∣ses silent to the rest, answered only to the Point of Suspension, affirming, That it was not lawful to ex∣clude any from the House, without first shewing cause. Forgetful of what they themselves had formerly done in the case of Strafford, and Canterbury; which was also seasonably retorted upon them now, by the Souldiers. Having thus affrighted the Parlia∣ment, they thought good to terrifie the City also, by demanding, That the Militia thereof; might be put into other Hands. This so enraged the Lon∣doners, that running tumultuously to Westminster, they forced the House, by keeping the Speaker in his Chair, To confirm their former Grant of the Militia; and to invite the King by Votes to London. They also made new Levies, and giving Massey, Waller and others the Chief Commands amongst them, made suddenly a considerable force by the Addition of their Reformado's. Whilst they are thus busie, the Two Speakers, with about Fifty Members, fly to the Camp; and, crying out, That the Houses were under a Force, sate daily and voted with the Chief Officers of the Army, in a sham form of Par∣liament.
The Soldiery glad of the Occasion, march to∣wards London, under pretext of reconducting these Tribunes, the fugitive Members, back, and removing all force from the Parliament. The City, the Parent and Nurse of that nefarious Rebellion against the King, now distracted with their own ter∣rors and apprehensions, neglecting a generous de∣fence, delivered themselves up to the disposal of the menacing Army. And, surrendring their Tower and Forts into Fairfax's Hands, they were forced to give new assurances of Fidelity to their new Masters. The chief Citizens, and Members of the contrary Faction, were imprisoned, and banished; the Militia was put into trusty hands, of their own Party; and all the Works raised with so much heat and violence against their King, are now, to prevent new Rebellions against their Mercenaries, demolished by them. Nor did this empty obsequiousness suffice. A Months sti∣pend was paid to these Janisaries for their good Service, and a Donative of Fifty Thousand Pounds bestowed upon their Deliverers. Fairfax, lest the Senate might seem ingrate, was constituted Gene∣ralissimo of all their Forces, more to his Ho∣nour, than intrinsick Power, he still acting but as Cromwell's Substitute; for, whilst he seemed sa∣tisfied with the Title and Shadow, the Indepen∣dents did in effect possess the Substance and Ad∣vantage. The Army having triumphed over the City, by their pompous marching through it; and, over the Parliament, by modelling it according to their Interest; harsher Propositions than the former were sent to the King; whereunto the chief Offi∣cers had likewise given their Suffrages in the House; but take care in the Camp, that his Majesty should not consent to them; promising, that they would
obtain, or give him better themselves: declaiming much against the Presbyterian arrogance and seve∣rity. And they indeed did produce easier, and more equitable Terms; with which artifice, the King being circumvented, seemed to prefer them before the other, to the great satisfaction of the Heads of the Army; as if now, the Camp were more valuable in the King's Esteem, than the Parliament. And yet these Catifs did not cease to imbitter these Members against him, as if despised by him. Nay, themselves forgetting their former Civilities,Risum tene∣is! grew more morose; and now they de∣lay, and pretending a reverence for the Parlia∣ment, reason and dispute things; interpreting their own Promises in a contrary Sence. In the mean time the Parliament Vote, That the King should be convoyed to Richmond, under the Guard of Colonel Rosseter; which was also consented to by Fairfax, until the Army required, That the King should come no nearer London, than the Hou∣ses would suffer their Camp to be. Cromwell, who had obtained his End, having the Parliament in his Pocket, began now to neglect the King, whom he had seemingly adored and courted, with the charming Promises of his Restitution. He did not wait upon him as usual, and nauseating his Conversation, wished him gone. He had former∣ly deliberated with his Cabal how to destroy him, and had once design'd to have him murthered in the Scotch Camp, to satisfie his Revenge, and at once to throw the odium of the Fact upon them he equally hated. But, it now seems sufficient to ter∣rifie him with apparent dangers:Designs up∣on the King's Life. reserving his final ruine, till they gained more Authority, by rendring him more odious to the People, as a∣verse from Peace. Which having obtained, his fall would seem less pitied, being also perpetra∣ted
by a Parliamentary Judicial Act, as most plau∣sible. Nor was the King ignorant, of these re∣bellious Scelerates designed Villainies, having been not obscurely informed of Cromwell's perfidious dealings with him, by some, whom the Eminence of his Vertues, had gained amongst these black Conspirators. Neither were his Friends wanting, in their wishes and endeavours for his safety. A∣mongst whom, we with gratitude applaud the of∣fers of the Scots Commissioners; for the Earls of Lauderdale and Lannerick, meeting his Majesty, as he was Hunting near Nonsuch, and but slenderly guarded; they having at that time Fifty Horse of their Train with them, told his Majesty, That they were come thither on design to deliver him out of his Captivity. And therefore, humbly de∣sired, That he would be pleased not to omit this opportunity to save himself, out of their too vi∣sible perfidious Hands, But, His Majesty answer∣ed, That he had passed his Royal Word not to leave the Army without acquainting the Chief Officers, and therefore would not violate his Pro∣mise, to save his Life. Some time after, he told the said Commissioners, That he was now dis∣charged from his Word, and after many Proposi∣tions about his retreat, he seemed much pleased with that of Barwick, as then ungarrisoned, and in the Confines of both Kingdoms. But that was also waved, by reason of the violent motion of the Agitators, a rumour being also at the same time spread at Court, that they had conspired against his Life; which was not only conveyed to him by his Friends, as believing it, but also by Colonel Whaley his Guardian, who told him, That moved with duty and affection, he could not forbear to beseech his Majesty, to save himself by a timely Retreat; affirming, That this also was the Sense of
the Chief Officers of the Army, who were very im∣willing to be Spectators, of what they could not at present help.His Maje∣sty with∣draws from Hampton-Court. With these Artifices, this best of Princes being circumvented, privately withdrew himself from Hampton-Court, which by the re∣moving of the Centinels was not difficult. Having passed the River in a Boat, he found Ashburnham, Legge, and Barclay on the other side with Horses. He had designed to go to London, where he also had a Lodging provided for him; but, upon a Consideration, that the Citizens, be∣ing obnoxious to the Soldiery, were not to be trusted, and that Ashburnham perswaded the con∣trary; leaving the City, they after much Toil, and the Errors incident to travelling, in a dark and tempestuous Night, came to the Sea-side near Southhampton. Where, not finding a Ship, as they expected, to transport them to Jersey, the King asked, Whither they purposed to carry him? Ashburnham replied, To the Isle of Wight; for, he had great confidence in Colonel Hammond, the Governour, Brother to Doctor Hammond, the King's Chaplain. The King replied, That he would not enter into the Island, unless he first had assurance from the Governour both of his Liberty and Security from danger. Ashburnham therefore and Barclay, were sent to propose these Conditions. To whom Hammond, (dear to Crom∣well, and sent as is supposed to command the Island for that purpose) answered, That he would provide for the King's Security from danger, but could not dispose of his Liberty, but with the Army and Parliaments Knowledge. Our De∣legates having advanced beyond a Retreat, were necessitated through fear to accept of the Conditi∣on, and so brought Hammond with them to the Countess of Southhampton's House near Tichfield,
where the King privately lay. He was no soon∣er come, and His Majesty acquainted with the Terms, but clapping his Hand upon his Heart, he said, too Prophetically alass! I am now undone. Whereupon his Attendants bursting out into Tears, and Expressions of Violence, would instantly have kill'd Hammond. But, His Majesty absolutely for∣bad it, who would not purchase his own Safety, at the clandestine Destruction of a most bitter Enemy. And, so he delivered himself into his Custody, and those Toils which the nefarious Cun∣ning of his Adversaries, had long since laid for him.
BOOK V. The King in the Isle of Wight. His Message for Peace. The four Dethroning Bills. The Votes of Non-address. Cap. Burleigh attempts the King's Delivery; Rolfe his Life. The King ap∣peals to the People. They rise in several Parts of the Kingdom. Are suppressed. Pembroke taken. The Scots defeated, and Hamilton a Pri∣soner. Colchester surrendered. The Treaty in the Isle of Wight broken by the Army. They seize upon the King. Garble the Parliament. The perjur'd Remains of the Commons, assume the Supream Power. Constitute a pretended Court of High Justice. Arraign, Condemn and Mur∣ther their King. His End and Elogy. THE King, upon his Departure from Hamp∣ton-Court, had left upon his Table amongst other things, a Letter to the Parliament. The Contents thereof were, That Liberty being desired by all Men, and no less necessary for King's than others; and that he had long suffered the irke∣somness of a Prison, under hopes of Peace: He now finding the contrary, and the inconstancy of the Ar∣my, had withdrawn himself. And yet wherever he should be, he would use all his Power for the pro∣curing of it, and hinder further effusion of Blood. Finally, if it should be permitted him to be heard with Honour, Liberty and Freedom, he would quick∣ly break through this Cloud of Retirement, and de∣monstrate himself truly to be the Father of his Coun∣try. Being arrived in the Island,The King's Message for Peace, he again ear∣nestly presses the Parliament, for what he had so
often desired, Peace; and having sent them Con∣cessions beyond their Hopes and Desires, he yet invites them to a Treaty, though with the same Success. And yet, lest these pious Patriots might seem too averse from that they had pretended to, the Peace of the Nation, they send the old Pro∣positions to him, but accompanied with four pre∣liminary Articles. Which, how unjust soever, they require him to assent to before any further Proceeding. They demand, The 4 de∣throning Bills. 1. The Absolute Power of the Militia. 2. That the Parliament be not Adjourned, Prorogued, &c. but by their disposal. 3. All Oaths, Declarations, Proclamations against the Parliament should be revoked and annulled. 4. All Honours and Titles, conferred by the King, since carrying away the Great Seal, should be annihilated and supprest. By the granting of these, the King would not only divest himself, and that by his own Suffrage, of all Right to Govern, but take upon him the Guilt of all the Blood-shed in the late War. Moreover, they desire, contrary to Order and Reason, the concession of those Things which were to be treated of, before the Treaty should begin. The Scots-Commissioners also opposed these Demands by Public Protestation, before the Par∣liament at London, and in presence of the King in the Isle of Wight; as being repugnant to Religion, the Honour of the Crown, and the Treaties betwixt both Nations. Which when the King had incul∣cated to them, they were so far from being moved thereat, that these Sons of Violence, railed not only against the King, but even Monarchy it self One of them proposed,Wroth. To have him closely kept
in some inland Garrison, until he could be brought to judgment. In the mean time, they should themselves (he being entirely excluded) govern. It was equal to him, what kind of Government they setled, pro∣vided they admitted, neither Kings,Ireton. nor Devils. Ano∣ther urged, That his rejecting of the Propositions, was no other than the denial of his Protection, and that the People upon that accompt, did owe him no Subjection, being these were reciprocal. But Crom∣well, who was the Bell-weather of the Faction, ad∣monish't the Parliament, To rule by their own pro∣per Power and Fortitude; and not suffer the People longer to expect their Safety from a Man, whose Heart God had hardned; or, subject, those who had served them so faithfully, to the Fury of an implacable Enemy; lest they should force them (clapping his hand upon his sword) to endeavour their security by some other means. The servile Senate being admonished by these Arguments, Vote,Votes of Non-ad∣dress. That no further Address should be made to the King, and that no further De∣mands should be sent to him, or any received for him. To these barbarous Votes, they add their no less barbarous Commands to the Governour of the Isle of Wight, for the King's closer Detention in Caresborough Castle; which he did, by a stricter Con∣finement in redoubling his Guards, and by turning away his Servants, saying, That he was actuated by ill Counsels, to the destruction of the Kingdom.The King a close Pri∣soner. And yet at the same time, he tampered with his Ma∣jesty, by courting Ashburrham and Berkely, who were still retained with him, as also the Earl of Southampton, who was at large, to make new Pro∣posals, whereby to gain his Majesty's nearer own∣ing of the Army; that, whilst they amused the People with appearances, they might the more se∣curely destroy him. But, seeing this did not take, their late monstrous Votes, were followed by as monstrous a Declaration, to mask, in as much as in them lay,
their unjust Proceedings. It was stuft with their old exploded Calumnies, and so often repeated pre∣tended Misgovernments, to abuse the Peoples cre∣dulity, though in vain, however owned by the impious Army, who did dare to profess, That they would live and dye with the Parliament, in maintaining of those dethroning Votes. But this did not hinder a worthy, however fruit∣less attempt, of Captain Burleigh;Captain Burleigh attempts his release. who beat a Drum at New port in the Isle of Wight, with Design to raise a Force, for the delivery of his injured Sovereign; but, being suppressed by Hammond, he was Mur∣thered by Wilde and Mildmay, for levying War against the King. And yet, these Reverend Judges! acquitted Rolfe, who had been employed, upon apprehension of the following Rising, to Poyson the King, or otherwise to remove him, out of the way, as conducing to their Affairs; which was proved, as well in part, by his own confession, as the discovery of Osburne, some time his Confident. This wilful Intention of Parricide, was found Igno∣ramus. Nor indeed, had this Villain been tried at all, had it not been to satisfie the Clamors of the People, who began, as will suddenly appear, to be sensible as well of the Perfidy of the Usur∣pers, as of the miserable Condition of their King. His Majesty seeing himself secluded from the So∣ciety of reasonable Men, and considering the un∣tractableness of the Pretended Parliament, appeals to the People; and, Publishing his most Elegant Apology, not only clears himself from the im∣puted Crimes laid to his Charge, but retorts all those wickednesses they were so justly and visibly guilty of, upon their own heads. He further re∣presents,His Maje∣sty's Apo∣logy. his wretched and disconsolate Condition, improved by the continuance and rigidness of an irksome Imprisonment. He demonstrates, with what
earnestness he endeavoured the composing of all things in a desirable Peace, and gives just and unanswera∣ble Reasons, why he could not yield his Assent to the Four Dethroning Bills.And Ap∣peal to the People. He therefore appeals to the whole World why, or how, he had deserved to be thus used? Especially by those who were his Subjects, being he had Sacrificed all for the Peace of his King∣doms; but, what was much more dear to him than Life, his Honour and Conscience. He further men∣tioned, his compliance with the Army and their In∣terests; as also, of what importance that was to them, and their often repeated Professions and Engagements for his just Rights and Restitution. He finally inferred, If it was Peace they would have, He shewed them the way to it, to which he would contribute his utmost. Was it Plenty and Happiness? They were the inse∣parable Effects of Peace. Was it security? He that did wish, that all Men would forgive and forget like him, had offered the Militia for his time. Was it Liberty of Conscience? He who wanted it, was most ready to give it. Was it the right Administration of Justice? Offices of Trust were committed to the Choice of the Two Houses. Finally, was it the Arrears of the Army? Ʋpon a settlement they would certainly be paid with much Ease, which otherwise would be scarce Possible. But, all this was to no purpose; so that the People, awaked out of that stupid Lethargy they had been lulled in, by these Pretenders of Re∣formation, perceived at length, that the Tyrants. at Westminster, had designed wholly to exclude the King, and Usurp the Government themselves. Which being evident by their late pernicious Votes, and that nothing but Slavery and Oppres∣sion was to be expected from these new Masters, they resolved to vindicate their Sovereign, and their Liberty, by the way of Arms. But,They rise in several Parts of the King∣dom. first they would try the way of Petitioning. The Men of Essex began; being followed by them of Surrey
in greater Numbers, requiring, That the Treaty with the King, might be renewed, and the Army paid off, and disbanded. But, their reception was very rude; being beaten, and plundered, and slain, by their Guards. Insomuch, that the Kentish-men having likewise framed a Petition for Peace, upon the like usage, by a Party of Horse, and being threatned, to have two harged out of each Parish that were Promoters of it, and the rest sequestered; they threw away their Paper, and betook them to their Arms. The first appearance of an Insurrection, broke out in the City of London, being accidental, not upon the King's Accompt. The Parliament had piously voted down Holy-days, abrogating all the Festivals of the Church, having appointed one Day in every Month, in lieu of them, for Pub∣lik Recreations. The Apprentices, as usually, had met in some Numbers in Moor-Fields on the 9th. of April, to play and divert themselves. But, this being Sunday, moved the Zeal of some precize Schismatical Officers of the Trained-Bands, who with their Guards would force them away, but were themselves routed by the Boys, with Stones and Clubs; who also took their Colours from them, and in a Childish Bravery, marching into the Streets, frighted Warner the then Mayor into his House; and, taking away a Drake from his Door, Planted it at Lud-Gate nearest the Foe, the Army, then about White-Hall. But, Fairfax on the Morrow following, ent'ring with some Regiments of Horse and Foot at Alders-Gate, easily dispersed them, though then numerous, no Person of Quality undertaking their Conduct. The Fame of this tumultuous Insurrection, or ra∣ther Riot, was quickly noised throughout the Kingdom, which although strangled in its Infancy, seemed to animate the oppressed populace to follow
the Example; whereby they might redeem them∣selves, and Liberties from their impending slavery. The Welch were the first that took up Arms un∣der the Conduct of Major General Laughorn,The Welch in Armes. and the Collonels Poyer and Powell, all Three former∣ly stiff Assertors of the Parliaments Jurisdiction. But now, being to be disbanded by Orders of the Council of War of the Army, they refuse to obey. And, the better to secure themselves, declare for the King, acting by Commission and Powers from the then Prince of Wales. Laughorn grew suddenly by the accession of Major General Stradling, and others of the King's Party to a considerable Army, esteemed Eight Thousand strong, which rendered him Master of the Town and Castles of Pembroke and Tenby. Sir Nicholas Kemish, at the same time surprized Chepstow Castle; and, Sir John Owen, another eminent Cavalier in North wales, de∣feated and took the High-Sheriff of Caernarvan. So that all Wales, seemed at once to shake off that cruel Yoak they laboured under. Nor were the preparatives for a War of the Kentish-men, less considerable. For,As also the Kentish∣men. Rendezvouzing near Rochester, they chose the Earl of Norwich, then upon the place, to be their General. Very many Apprentices, and reformed Officers and Souldiers flocked from London daily to them. Inso∣much, that the Juncto terrified with the apprehen∣sion of what might happen, restored to the City their Militia, which they feared otherwise might be extorted from them, hoping by this Confidence to render them more addicted to their interest. Which also happened, not upon sentiments of generosity, but to manifest their aversness to op∣pressed Monarchy, even then when it was in their Power to restore it; Skippon being also readmitted to the Command of their Forces, the Communi∣cation with Kent was interrupted, by placing Guards upon the Passages of the River.
But, the Clouds that threatned the fiercest storm, gathered in the North, where Sir Marma∣duke Langdale, Sir Charles Lucas, and others having surprized the strong Town of Berwick,Berwick and Car∣lile surpri∣zed. and Sir Phillip Musgrave and Sir Thomas Glenham that of Carlile, and raised considerable Forces to joyn with the Scots now ready to enter England, seemed no less able than willing to effect what they pretended, the King's Restitution. Though it be true, that the Scots-Declaration, had so many untoward Re∣strictions in it, that nothing but the Frank Loy∣alty of the Royallists could joyn with them. Upon the first noise of the Scots arming, many English repaired into Scotland, which obliged them at Westminster, by their Deputies, to require the delivery of the chief of them as Incendiaries. They named particularly Wogan, who carried a Troop thither, with Sir Thomas Glenham and others. But the Scots refused it, seeing it was not stipulated in the Treaties betwixt both Nations; They not judging those to be Incendiaries between the Two King∣doms, but only between the King and England. These Revolts and Preparations for a new War, did strangely disquiet the pretended Par∣liament, who thereupon reviving their Votes of 1642. declare, That it appears, that the King seduced by wicked Counsel (though then a close Prisoner) intends to make War against the Parliament. Cromwell being dispatcht against the Welch with great Forces, the Kentish Expedition was not thought unworthy Fairfax's Conduct. He therefore marches with Six Thousand Foot and Two Thousand Horse against the Cavaliers, who being fatally di∣vided, whilst they Fight singly by Parties, they are all overcome. Fifteen Hundred stout Men were sent to Maidstone,Fairfax defeats the Ken∣tish-men. to oppose their Enemies Passage there; who fought with so much Valour, that after
they had been beaten from the Avenues and Hedges, they kept that Town, firing from the Houses and Leads, about the space of Six Hours, with great slaughter of the Enemy. So that it is believed, if the Earl of Norwich had come up with the rest of the Army to their Assistance, the Rebels might have been defeated that Day. But, he dividing his Forces, sent half of them to Dover, and him∣self marched with the rest to Black-heath; and be∣ing denied a Passage through the City, which had been promised him, he Ferries and Swims his small Army over to the Isle of Doggs. From thence, he moved to Mild-end-Green. But, seeing none come out of London to his relief, as he ex∣pected; he himself with only Five Hundred, the rest being upon the obstinacy of the Citizens slipt from him, joyned with the Essexians at Bow under the Command of Sir Charles Lucas. They all stay'd here some time, to favour any Loyal At∣tempt that might be made at London; until warned by the approach of Fairfax, who having dispatcht Rich and Barkstead with their Regiments, to reduce those Castles which the Kentish had taken towards the Downs, had passed the Thames at Graves-End, they were also forced to dislodge. And, marching further into the Country, seized store of Arms and Ammunition, in the Earl of Warwick's House at Lees; and, having surprized the Parliament-Committee at Chelmsford, went thence to Colchester, where the brave Lord Capell joyned them, with some Horse: And, all of them received the Van of Fairfax's Army with such Gallantry at the Towns-end, that they forced them to retire to their main Body, with considerable Loss. They had designed to march further, if they had not been so closely pursued by the Enemy, with Hopes of strong Assistance from the Inhabitants of Norfolk and Suf∣folk. But, these failing, and indeed joyning with the
Rebels, contrary to their solemn Promises, the Royallists were besieged in this Town, no way tena∣ble, but by the rare Fortitude of the Defen∣dants. Cromwell the Welch.Nor was Cromwell less successful in Wales. Laughorn having been beaten at St. Fagons, by Col. Horton, with scarce half his Number, Fifteen Hundred of his Men being killed, and near Three Thousand taken Prisoners. Cromwell be∣sieged the Fugitives in Pembroke, having first ta∣ken Tenby Castle, and forced that of Chepstow by Col. Eure, who slew the Governour in cold Blood. The Rumor of the Scots Invasion great∣ly encreasing, animated. Cromwell to employ all his skill and force for the Reduction of this impor∣tant Post. The Garrison within was strong, and the Place well fortified, which he resolved how∣ever to attempt by Storm. And, falling on with great Courage, was as bravely received, and at length beaten off with great slaughter of his Men. After this, not thinking it adviseable to expose his dismayed Souldiers to new hazards, he resolves to gain that by famine, which he could not effect by force. Which being perceived by the Garri∣son, they chose rather to surrender upon Terms, than lanquish in the Toyls of a long Siege, tho they saw a Prospect of a General Rising in the Kingdom, and the certainty of the Scots Invasion. But, Cromwell knowing how precious time was, offering the Souldiery and Inferior Officers very good Conditions, he had this strong Place, with the Three chief Leaders, Laughorn, Poyer and Powell, delivered into his hands by these faithless Miscreants. Nor was Sir John Owen more fortunate in North Wales, being defeated and taken Prisoner by Colonel Mitton. So that, the whole Country be∣ing reduced to the Parliaments Obedience again,
Cromwell was at liberty to march against the Scots with all his Power. The Earl of Holland defeated.The Earl of Holland, the Duke of Buckingham, with the L. Francis his Brother, the Earl of Peter∣borough, and some others of Quality appeared near Kingston, with Five Hundred Horse and some Foot, but were instantly suppressed, tho not with∣out some bloody Shirmishes; in one of which, the Young and Generous Lord Francis refusing Quar∣ter, was barbarously slain by an unknown Hand. Holland was taken in his flight at St. Neots by Col. Scroop, where Dalbier, sometime a Favourite of Essex's, and a great Parliamentarian, was killed in his Quarters. But, the Scots seem now to demand our Atten∣tion, being advanced with a very numerous and well accoutred Army, far into the Kingdom. And here may be observed the Vicissitudes of the Times, as well as of Affairs. For, the Scots, whom the Parliament had formerly with great Endea∣vours and Charges, allured to their Assistance; and whom, the War being done, they had like∣wise twice dismissed with vast Rewards as Friends: These same Scots, the Faction being changed, be∣come Enemies, and invading England again, joyn Forces with the Royallists their now reconciled Friends, against their sometimes dear Brethren of the Parliament. Duke Hamilton, upon the surren∣der of Pendennis Castle, where he had been de∣tained Prisoner by the King's Command, being set at liberty, was now General of this great Army, consisting of Fifteen Thousand fighting Men, to whom Langdale and Musgrave brought Three Thousand English; which forces, if God had not determined otherwise, might have effected what they designed. As soon as the King was informed, that Hamilton commanded the Scots Army, he too prophetically foretold the Fatal Issue of the
Expedition, as fancying him unfortunate or incon∣stant. But, Cromwell being come out of Wales, with a victorious and disciplined Army, and joyn∣ing with Lambert, who had hitherto attended the Enemies Motion, fell upon the main Body of the Scots within Two Miles of Preston in Lancashire, and routed them by Skirmishes,Cromwell defeats the Scots at Preston. and beating up of Quarters, without the Formality of a Battle. Langdale and his English fought bravely, but be∣ing neglected, and no ways succoured, were op∣pressed by the adverse Multitudes. The Scots pre∣sumed perhaps upon their own Power, and think∣ing to conquer by themselves, and consequently reap the whole Advantage of the Victory, as also the entire Honour of restoring the King (if they had any such design) abandoned them that fought so well, and by this foolish precaution or pre∣sumption, contributed to their own ruin. Besides, the Scots Forces, either by Ignorance, or Malice, or Discord (for, Hamilton, and Calander, who was Lieutenant-General of the Army, did not agree well) were so untowardly marshalled, that they could not all be brought to fight or assist each other, by reason of the over great distance of their Wings, whereby they were all defeated. Bayly, after sharp encounters with those who pursued him, having recovered Warrington-Bridge, delivered up himself and Four Thousand Foot to the Con∣queror, upon Quarter. Major-General Midleton, was intercepted with Four Hundred Horse, and Hamilton himself General of the Expedition with Three Thousand Horse, was taken without a Blow at Ʋttoxeter, by the Lord Gray and Colonel Waite. Very few returning by the way they came, met with Monroe, who followed Hamilton with a Sup∣ply of Six Thousand more; but, hearing of the Defeat, returned with the other Fugitives back in∣to Scotland. Cromwell following in the Rear of
these, came to Edinburgh, where joyning Forces and Councils with Argile, by whom he had been invited; they not only obliged the contrary Facti∣on to lay down Arms, but having summoned ano∣ther Parliament, condemned the late Expedition as unjust. Scotland being pacified, Cromwell secure on that side, having also concerted with Argile concerning the Ruin of the King, and Extirpation of Mo∣narchy it self; they also advised and agreed on the Form and Method of the future Regicide. And so, after sumptuous Treats, and many high Expressi∣ons of Gratitude, and Acknowledgments for his meritorious Services, Cromwell returned into England. All this while, Colchester held out with incredible Courage and Constancy, upon hopes of Relief from the Scots; and, not only content to defend themselves, did extreamly annoy the Enemy, by their frequent Sallies and Camisadoes. They had consumed their Horses, Dogs, Cats, and what else was no less abhorring to Nature; but, their hopes, with the defeat of Hamilton, being likewise spent, they were forced to surrender. Which they did, upon no other Terms, than Quarter for life to the Souldiery, and Mercy to the Officers. But,Colchester surrendred. how cruel the Mercies of these Scelerates were, instant∣ly appears; for, they had no sooner possest the Town, but Three most Noble Persons, Men of Eminent Valour and Loyalty, the Lord Capell, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle (to whom was added Sir Bernard Gascoyn, but exempted upon the accompt of being a Stranger) were sen∣tenced to be shot to death by the Court-Marshal, tho the War was done. Sir George and Sir Charles, were immediately murthered, by Souldiers ap∣pointed for the Slaughter. The Stone they fell upon being sprinkled with their Blood, could not
be cleansed of it, but continues still a Monument of this horrid Impiety, with this Inscription engraved, Hic jacent Car. Lucas & Geor. Lisle, a Fairfaxio mactati. Capell was reserved for the Scaffold, who afterwards suffered with no less Constancy and Greatness of Mind, than his illustrious Colleagues now did, as we shall see in the Sequel of this History. Nor was it on Land only that the Sword did rage, the Sea also had its Scenes of Blood and Horror; for, a great part of the Navy, detesting the Ty∣ranny of their Old Masters, deserted them, and revolted to the Prince of Wales.The Revolt of the Fleet. Batten, one of their prime Leaders, having been dismissed by them, returned to his Duty, and joined his High∣ness with some more Ships. The Sea-men had exposed Rainsborough their Admiral, and a Tur∣bulent Leveller, by putting him on shore (who was afterwards slain in his Quarters by a Party from Pomfret) and now embracing the King's Party with universal Consent, seemed resolved to expiate their former Rebellion by a Return of Duty, and to merit their Pardon by the Eminency of their Services. Prince Charles, with the Duke of York his Brother, who lately escaped from St. James's in Womans Cloaths; Prince Rupert, the Earl of Brandford, the Lords Hopton, Willmot, Willoughby, Culpeper, and others of Name and Quality, sailed from Holland with this brave Fleet, consisting of Twenty Ships of War, and came into Yarmouth-Road, with design to attempt every thing that was possible for the Relief of Colchester. But, find∣ing the distance from that City too great, and the Shore and Passages possessed by the numerous E∣nemy, his Highness sailed to the Mouth of the Thames, carrying Terror and Force with him to awe the City of London. But, his stay there was not long, the Castles of Deal, Walmer and Sand∣wich requiring his Assistance; which he attempted,
by landing Five Hundred Men; who, though they fought with extream Gallantry, were yet forced back with great loss to their Ships again. The Castles, after this Defeat, were immediately sur∣rendered. By this time, the Earl of Warwick, lately made Admiral again, had equipt another Fleet in the River; and, having joyned that of Portsmouth, resolved to fight the Prince; which he yet delays for the present, not only terrified with the Revolt of others, but in some doubt of the Fidelity of his own Men. The Prince per∣ceiving this, courted the Earl with magnificent Offers, to the Return of his Duty. But he perfidiously constant, persisted in his Rebellion; and, in recompense of his Services, shall see him∣self disgracefully outed of all Trust, and his only Brother, the Earl of Holland, beheaded for his late Return to his Obedience. Some were of Opinion, that the Royallists omit∣ted an opportunity of fighting, the Sea men being high in Heart, and seemingly very Loyal, and the Enemy supposed to waver; tho the Event after∣wards proved the contrary. In the mean time, the Prince seeing his Land-Forces every where de∣feated, and the adverse Fleet growing daily strong∣er, returned into Holland, giving the Command of the Fleet to Prince Rupert. But, many of the Ships, out of an innate levity of their Sailors, leaving the Prince, returned to their old slavery un∣der Warwick, whilst the rest continuing in their Duty, stuck close to their New Admiral, whose Acti∣ons and Adventures shall be hereafter related. Some other Fortresses, besides those already mentioned, declared for the King, as,N. B. Tinmouth-Castle, seized upon by Major Lilburn; Scarborough, by the Return of Sir Matthew Boynton the Go∣vernour to his Allegiance; and, Pomfret, possessed upon the same score by Major Morrice. Tinmouth
indeed was retaken by Assault, the Governour losing his Life with the Place. Boynton got Terms not unworthy the Defence he had made; and Morrice, and being lost, bravely exposed him∣self to save his Garrison. Who, tho he broke thro the Camp, which was the Conditions he had ar∣ticled for, yet was afterwards taken and mur∣thered under colour of Justice in cold Blood. The Visita∣tion of Oxford.But, before we proceed further in these Occur∣rences, it may not be impertinent to take a Review of some Transactions in the entrance of this Black Year, 1648. seeing, they seem to tend to those monstrous Catastrophes it ended in. The first thing our pious Reformers undertook, was visiting the Ʋniversity of Oxford. They had long since garbell'd Cambridge to their Interest, and, will now, as much as in them lyes, extinguish this other Luminary, by removing its Candlesticks, and eject∣ing all the Members thereof, that were any ways notable for Learning, Loyalty, Piety, or Obe∣dience to the Church or State, as established by Law. The Earl of Pembrook being made Chancel∣lor, together with several Delegates of the Factious Clergy, and some of the Laiety (as good Divines as himself) were appointed for this Service. Which was performed, with all the Rigor of an Inqui∣sition, none being spared, from the Reverend Heads of Colleges, to the hopeful Striplings of Sixteen. And yet, the entrance of this Year, had thus much extraordinary in it, in that it con∣tributed to the Deliverance of the Duke of York, out of the Hands of those worst of Rebels,The Duke of York escapes in∣to Hol∣land. being conveyed away in a Virgin-disguise, and carried into Holland by Col. Bamfeild; who after∣wards, aspersed the Honour of this Service, by un∣dutiful Intelligences.
But, to return whence we digressed, the Army with Cromwell being absent, and in Scotland; se∣veral Petitions from the Country, the Captains, Masters and Sailers, as also from the City of Lon∣don, were presented to the Men at Westminister, requiring, with more than ordinary earnestness, a personal Treaty with the King. This did so far, work upon the Presbyterian Faction in the House, very jealous and apprehensive of the Power of the Independants, that they resolved for their own pre∣servation, to make a Peace with the King. And,The Treaty in the Isle of Wight. in order thereunto, forthwith recalled their Votes of Non-Address, and sent Commissioners with Proposi∣tions, not much unlike the former, with Power to make Peace, allowing Forty Days for the time of treating. They indeed permitted his Majesty the attendance of several Lords of his Council and Bed-Chamber, many of his Servants, some of his Chaplains, some Lawyers and others: But, they refused the Assistance of any but himself in treat∣ing. Nor was it truly necessary; for, it presently appeared, that as he was a Prince of prodigious Parts; so he seemed more than humanly inspi∣red, who could singly manage so weighty an Affair, against Fifteen Commissioners, Persons prejudiced, and of great Subtilty; and with that success, that he made Converts of some of his bitterest Ene∣mies; and, however unwilling, forced their very Reason. But, they having no liberty to recede, or any way to remit of the Rigor of their Propositions, His Majesty out of his affection to Peace, granted ma∣ny things above their Desires, being content to divest himself of most of his Regalities for his time, and trust those insatiable Men with the exercise thereof; as appears by his Concessions. And, now the Hopes of Peace, and a Happy Accommodation, seemed at and; which had also been effected, if the Parlia∣ment had not wretchedly lost too much time in
frivolous disputations of no weight. Whereby it appeared, as formerly at Ʋxbridge, that they ne∣ver designed, that this Treaty should take any effect, nor that they would be satisfied with Part, who had already devoured the Whole in their thoughts. The Army, who seemed to acquiesce in the Pleasure of their Superiors, whilst engaged in War, did dare now, the Royallists being every where supprest, changing their Principles with their Success, plainly to dissent; And, to declare openly to the whole World, That nothing would satisfy, but the Destruction of the King, and the Subversion of Monarchy. In order hereunto, a fierce Petition was pre∣sented from the City against the Treaty, which was also seconded from Oxfordshire, New-Castle, York. &c. and, in particular, Ireton's Regiment insisted upon the same, demanding, That the same fault, may have the same punishment in the Person of King, or Lord, as in the Person of the meanest Com∣moner. A Prelude to the designed Regicide. They had formerly designed the Murther of the King, by the Ministry of that Villain Rolfe, as is already mentioned; but now, fierce with their Victories, they will themselves destroy him. To this purpose they emit a Remonstrance,The Armies Remon∣strance. execrable as it's Authors, Cromwell and Ireton; which was pre∣sented to the Commons House by Col. Eure, and Se∣ven other Scelerates like himself. In this they furiously declaim against the Restitution of the King, or any Accomodation with him, requiring, That he, as the Capital Enemy, should be brought to judgment; That the Prince and Duke of York, should be summoned in by a day; That the Parlia∣ment should constitute a Government for the future; and, fixing a Period to their own Session, should take care for Annual or Biennial Parliaments; and the like stuff, which they offered in their own
Names, and as the Agreement of the People. They were grown now to that insolence, that their mo∣dest General writ to the Committee of the Army for Money, or he should be forced to receive (that is, take it) out of the Collectors and the Receivers hands, where he could find it, if speedy course be not taken to supply him. Which, however high it appeared or unbeseeming in the General, was connived at. And, now again the Army de∣clare, That they can see in the Majority of those trusted with the Affairs of the Kingdom, nothing less than a treacherous or corrupt Neglect of, and Apo∣stacy from, the publick Trust reposed in them, and therefore they appeal from them to God, and the People. In order to this, the Army marches to∣wards the City, and in contempt of the Parlia∣ment's Order, who commanded their stay, ad∣vance, sending a Declaration before them, where∣in, They accuse the Members of Folly, of Infidelity, and Inconstancy; threatning, They would come to Westminster, where they would further act as God should inspire them. And thus the Parliament, after successes above their desires, are agitated and tormented, with the Mutinies of their own Army. They had indeed declared the seditious, and mutinying Souldiers Enemies; but now by a desponding Compliance, they Vote them their Pay, and the Officers their Arrears; and also, that the Declaration against the Army, be rased out of the Journal of the House. They further, as also the Citizens of London, and the Counties, began to make all their pplications to the General, especially Cromwell nd the Army. The Parliament seemed now eglected, whilst the Army triumph, and all Men are affraid of doing any thing that may isplease them.
The King hurried to Hurst Ca∣stle.During these traverses, and the Treaty at New∣port not yet finished, the King by command from Fairfax, was by Col. Eure hurried to Hurst-Castle, a place Infamous for Cold, and the Insalubrity of the Air. At parting from the Isle, the Parliament-Commissioners coming to take their leave of him, he gave them his Answer unsealed, and having ac∣quainted them with the Condition of the Times, he told them, He had parted with All how dear soever to him, except wherein his Conscience was dis∣satisfied. And finally added, That he had reason to believe, that this would be the last time of their enterview. But that blessed be God, he had made his Peace with him; and should without fear under∣go, what he should be pleased to suffer Men to do un∣to him. As for them, they could not but know, that in his fall and ruin, they saw their own, and that also near to them. He prayed God, to send them better friends than he had found. He was fully in∣formed, of the whole Plot and Carriage against him and his. But that nothing so much afflicted him, as the sense and feeling he had of the Sufferings of his Subjects, and the Miseries that hung over his Three Kingdoms; drawn upon them by those, who upon pre∣tences of good, violently pursue their own Interests and Ends. Fairfax, by so much the more wicked, in that he witlesly acted for others, brought the Army (equally Rebels to the Parliament now, as they had been to the King before) to London; and, in Contempt of the Treaty, impudently took up his Quarters at White Hall. And yet the pretended Parliament, that had hitherto rejected, as well the King's Concessions, as his Demands, in contempla∣tion of the Armies Insolence,The Par∣liament Vote his Concessions satisfacto∣ry. voted His Majesty's Answer, to the Propositions of both Houses, to be Satisfactory. But, this was too late; for, thee double Rebels were so furiously enraged thereat,
that they immediately demanded by writing from the Parliament, That the late accused Members, and such other who favoured the Scots, the King, or the Personal Treaty, should be excluded the Houses: Nor were they pleased to stay for an Answer, but besetting the Senate, they seize upon One and Forty of them, whom they imprison; and seclude a Hun∣dred and Sixty more; leaving none to sit, but such who were mancipated to Cromwell, and the Faction. The Common-Council was purged with the same In∣gredients from the Army, the vacancies being sup∣plied with Plebeian fanaticks, whereof any Forty should be a Quorum and Superior to the Mayor. These petitioning with the same fury against the King, as the Agitators had done, involved the City in the Guilt of the Regicide, as well as the Rebellion. The Government being thus changed from one Tyranny to another, the Supream Power, which the Presbyterians had so long hunted for, was surprized by the Independants. Who to shew their Authority, dissannul whatever the Presby∣terians had voted concerning the Treaty, or their secluded Colleagues. And some time after, divers of the Lords, how degenerate! did so far compliment Fairfax upon his Proceedings, that they let him know, They would wave their Titles and Priviledges, in case they should be judged burthen-some to the Common-wealth, or the Peoples Liberties. Things being thus disposed, and the Obstacles that might hinder their premeditated Parricide, removed; the King, the designed Sacrifice to their hellish Ambition, hurried from one Prison to another, was brought to Windsor, where the usual Ceremonies of the Knee, and other Marks of Honour were laid aside. Col. Harrison, a Butcher's Son, had the Impudence to sit with his Majesty in the Coach with his Hat on, lea∣ding this most innocent and pious Prince, like
a Lamb to the Slaughter. There were yet some amongst these Barbarians, Who could not judge the King obnoxious to Law, and seeing they had van∣quished him by Arms, they did not at all esteem him considerable or to be feared. But, the furious No∣vellists pronounce with much bitterness, That they will have him forthwith removed. Nor durst they, who had other Sentiments, mutter against them, for fear of being expelled. Yet, these States had a mind to delegate this worst of Em∣ployments, as being unheard of, and beyond all Precedents, to be perpetrated by these worst of Men, the Souldiery. This being perceived, the Chief Officers however unnaturally desperate, yet decline it; thinking it might suffice, if they re∣mitted the performance of so villainous an Act, to those who sate by their Favour and Permission. The Commons therefore of the Lower House, being scarce the eight Part of the whole, whereof many also were Commanders in the Army (so that n∣thing remained of a Parliament but the Name) ar∣rogating the Supream Power to themselves, that they might seem to avoid the Infamy of Perjury, absolved themselves by an Ordinance from the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,The Com∣mons as∣sume the Supreme Power. which they had so often taken to the King; thinking perhaps, to e∣vade what they had done separately, by this conjunct Abjuration. This done they Vote, That it is Treason, by the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, in the King of England, to levy War against the Parliament: And send up the same to the Peers by the Lord Gray of Grooby, who rejected it with Indignation, as inconsistent with Reason, and the Laws of the Land. This enraged the Commons, who slighting the Assent and Power of the Lords, unanimously decree, That, 1. The People under God, are the Original of all just Power.
2. That the Commons of England in Parlia∣ment Assembled, have the Supream Power of the Nation. 3. That whatever is enacted or declared for Law by the House of Commons in Parlia∣ment, hath the force of Law. Constitute a High Court of Justice.This Foundation being laid, they constitute a High Court of Justice, without any consideration of the Lords, or those Thousands who desired to preserve the King from the Destruction he was threatned with, and the Nation from the Guilt of his most Innocent Blood. The Scots, by their Commissioners, protested highly against this pre∣tended Tryal. The Dutch deprecated it, as of most pernicious consequence to the Reformed Re∣ligion. Some of the Chief Nobility, as the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of Hartford, and the Earls of Southampton and Linsey, endeavoured his Conservation by Prayers, and Proffers; Offering themselves, as being the Chief Ministers of his Will, as Hostages for him; and (by a generous Example of magnanimity) in case the Kings pretended Crimes could not be expiated without Blood, presented their own to be shed in lieu of his. Prince Charles, piously endeavoured by all manner of ways, to deliver his Father from the impending danger: For, besides the Dutch Embasladors which his Highness had procured to be sent over, to mediate for him; he and the Prince of Orange enquired after, and sent for such Officers, or others in that Country, who were of Kindred or related to Cromwell, Ireton, or any other of the Conspirators; and sent them into England, with full Power to offer, present, pro∣mise and yield, to every thing; mingling Thrats with their Entreaties, that might divert them from their designed Parricide, or at least retard it. The Queen was no less active on her side, to save her
Royal Consort,Endeavors to preserve the King. who also writ to Lenthall the Speaker, in terms capable to mollify every thing, except these Hyrconian Monsters, which Letters were also delivered by the French Embassador, but laid by without being opened. Nor could there any thing in those days be expected from France, la∣bouring then with the same Frenzy of Rebellion. Amongst others, the Presbyterian Preachers, who had betrayed the King into these Streights, pierced with the Infamy of their Treasons, and perhaps apprehending their own turns in case the Indepen∣dants should persist, very earnestly besought, and conjured them by monitory Letters, Petitions and Remonstrances, as also admonished and exhorted them out of their Pulpits, to desist from their de∣signed enterpize, Lest they should defile the English Nation with so horrid a Guilt, as that of Regicide. For, that execrable fact could not be] perpetrated, without violating the Obligation of so many Oaths as they had taken, without breaking the Publick Faith exhibited by so many Protestations and Declarations, without transgressing the Law of Nature and Nati∣ons; and finally, without prostituting the Dictates of the Scripture and our Religion. But, all this was to no purpose; as also, the Princes sending of them White Paper to write their own Conditions. For, nothing seemed enough to them, who had swal∣lowed all the Hopes of Empire, and were ready to ascend into the Throne. They therefore name One Hundred and Fifty of the most Petulant of the Faction, and the most adverse to Monarchy, to judge the King. Some of the Nobility, whom they had pitcht upon, as also the Judges, however raised to that Dignity by them, for daring to de∣clare, That it was not lawful to bring the King of England to Tryal, were expunged out of that black Catalogue; others being introduced in their places.
A subor∣ned Pro∣phetess pro∣duced, to encourage their Vil∣lainy.But, to encourage the doubtings of the less Per∣swaded, and entitle their Actions to Providence, these divine Jugglers, produced an Impostor, a Virgin they called her, out of Hertfordshire, who told the Officers of the Army, That she had a Message from Heaven to them; and, being admit∣ted, affirmed, That God did approve of their Designs. Which did exceedingly encourage the most wavering. The Contemptibleness of the Judges, did in some sort aggravate their Crimes, many Petty-foggers, Brewers, Carr-men, Goldsmiths, Coblers, and other Mechanicks being of the Num∣ber; who thirsting after the King's Revenues, as well as his Blood, were forward to perpetrate any mischief, how tremendous soever. At this Tri∣bunal, the King was impleaded, baited and con∣demned, unheard, unconvict, as Guilty of those Crimes of Treason, Tyranny and Murther, which those incarnate Divels, his Judges had committed. I had purposed to omit the Particulars of this Black Tragedy, as being exactly described al∣ready by better Pens: But, lest these Commenta∣ries might prove imperfect, it was thought re∣quisite to present the Curious, if this empty Nar∣rative can render any such, with an Abridgment of the same: Quamquam animus meminisse horret, luctu{que} refugit. The pretended Court of High Justice, having spent some days in settling the Method and Formalities of their Proceedings, rejected the Opinions of such, who would have the King first deposed, and then put to Death, as dangerous by its delay, and savouring of Popery. But, those who gaped after the Government, the Democratick, would have the King tryed as King, that by the Effusion of his Blood, as such, they might extinguish Majesty
and destroy Monarchy it self. For, several of them confessed, That Charles his only Crime was, his being King; and, that the Eminency of his Ver∣tues, together with his Right of Succession, rendered him uncapable of being a Private Man. They therefore, having first by their Serjeant at Arms, with sound of Trumpets, cited such profligate Witnesses as they could get, the stress of whose Depositions was, That they had seen the King in Arms at several Battles and Encounters: Having also the same Day, voted the making of a New Great Seal, because of the incongruity of using the King's against himself; those Sanguinary Judges met in Weminster-Hall, at the End whereof, they caused a Theater to be erected, on which they acted the ensuing Tragedy of Horror and Blood. John Bradshaw, the Shame of the Long Robe, and only known by this horrid Fact, the impudent President of this execrable Court, com∣manded the King to be brought before them, where he was accused of all the Blood-shed in the late Wars;The King is arraign∣ed. with the injurious Terms, of Tyrant, Traytor and Murtherer; and required, to give his Answer to the Charge. The King with an inimitable presence of Mind, and a Fortitude truly Royal, slighting what he had heard, instead of an Answer, demands of these Novel Judges, By what Authority he was brought thither? Adding, he knew very well, that there were many unlawful Authorities, as those of Thieves and Robbers. He bid them remember, he was their King, and would know by what lawful Authority he was seated there, and he would answer? In the mean time, he would not betray his Trust, de∣rived to him from God, by old and lawful Descent. The President replied, That he was brought thither by Authority of the People of England, by whom he was elected King. His Majesty denied this, affir∣ming,
the Kingdom of England never to have been Elective, but Hereditary, for near a Thousand Years. He stood more for the Liberties of his People, than any there; and there∣fore, desired to know by what lawful Authority he was brought thither? and he would answer; otherwise, not. But the President often interrupting the King, and chattering the same Tune of the Peoples Authority, His Majesty said, That no body did more esteem a House of Commons rightly constituted, than himself. He saw no House of Lords, that might with the King constitute a Parliament. Was this the bringing of the King to his Parliament? Is this the bringing an End to the Treaty, in the Publick Faith of the World? Let him see a Legal Anthority, warranted by the Word of God, the Scriptures, or Constitutions of the Kingdom, and he would instantly answer. But, the Pre∣sident urging, that unless he would answer, the Court would consider how to proceed. His Majesty replied, That unless they would satisfie God and the Country, con∣cerning the Premises, he would not betray his Trust, and the Peoples Liberty. For, he did avow, That it was as great a Sin to withstand lawful Authority, as it was to submit to a Tyrannical, or any other ways unlawful Authority. He was not afraid of their Bill. And this was the Sum of the first Days Convention. Two Days after, the King, the Best of Princes, was again brought before these Worst of Rebels, his Judges; Where the President, upon the Solicitor's Motion, requires his Positive Answer again, or else the Charge may be taken pro Confesso. He added, That this Court was fully satisfied with their Authority, which he also ought to acquiesce in, and therefore they yet again required, his par∣ticular Answer, by confessing or denying it. If the later, Witnesses were at hand in behalf of the Nation, to make good the Charge against him. To this the King said, If it were his own particular Case, he would have satisfied himself with the Protestation he had made against the Le∣gality
of the Court, and by demonstrating, that the King of England, cannot be tryed by any Superiour Jurisdiction upon Earth. But it not being his Case alone, but the Free∣dom and Property of the People, he must stand for their Li∣berties. For, if an illegitimate Power, might make and break the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom at Pleasure, no Man could be secure of his Life or Goods. He did expect Reasons to know by what Law, what Authority they did pro∣ceed against him; but, hearing none, he would produce his, with as much brevity as he could. But, he was interrupted here, the President telling him, They must suffer no ar∣guing, concerning the Authority of the Court, nor hear any Reasoning against it. The Votes of the Commons in Par∣liament, were the Reason of the Kingdom, not to be questioned by any; to which also, he, and his Predecessors, were always obnoxions and responsible. This being denyed by the King; he further denyed, That the Commons of Eng∣land were ever a Court of Judicature. Which vext the President to that Degree, that he told him, That he was not to be permitted to go on in that Speech and those Discourses; and, if he would not Answer, he should be recorded as contumaci∣ous. Hereupon, the King desired, That his Reasons at least might be heard; but was answered, That his Reasons were not to be heard against the highest Jurisdiction. Where∣unto, the King returned, That they should shew that Ju∣risdiction, that would not hear Reason. To which the President replied, That they shewed it him there; and, that the next time, he should know more of their Pleasure, perhaps their final Determination. Commanding withal, That they should take the Prisoner away: Who bid them remem∣ber, That the King was not suffered to give his Reasons, for the Liberty, and Freedom of the People.
The next Day, the King being brought now the Third time, before this nefarious Tribunal, con∣tinued with the same Constancy as at first, to deny the Authority of the same. And being insulted upon by the President, was required at length to submit, and that with Threats, That although he would not under∣stand it, he should find, that he was before a Court of Justice, which knew no respect of Persons. But the King replied, As for the Charge, he did not value it a Rush; it was the Liberty of the People he stood for, and therefore he neither would, nor could, being a King, acknowledge a new and un∣heard of Court, against their Priviledges, and the Funda∣mental Laws of the Land. The Prefident hereupon sub∣joyned, That the King had now denied the Authority of the Court Three times, contemning the Dignity thereof. Adding, That his Actions, Writ in bloody Characters throughout the Kingdom, did sufficiently demonstrate, how far he had pre∣served the Priviledges of the People. The King had designed to deliver his Reasons in writing against the Jurisdiction of the Court. But, it was not permitted, the President, saying, He would admit nothing against the Parliament, from which there was no appeal. And so, the King was remitted, and the Court Ad∣journed. Three Days after, the King was again brought be∣fore this Impious Court, where He desired the President (cloathed now in Scarlet, suitable to the Bloody Design of the Day) to be heard a Word, hoping to give no occasi∣on of interruption. But, the President refused him, saying, The Court must be first heard. And thereupon told the Auditors, how the Prisoner had been several times convented, and brought before the Court, to make Answer to a Charge of Treason, and other Crimes. Which he not only refused to do, but took upon him, to offer Reasonings and Debates against the Authority of the Court, and the Highest Court that con∣stituted
them to try and judge him; which being considered, as also his Contumacy, and the Probability of the Fact, they had resolved to pronounce Sentence against him. But, the Prisoner desiring to be first heard, the Court was content to hear him, provided he said nothing against the Authority thereof. The King then said, Since they would hear nothing of Debate, concerning what he thought most material for the Peace of the Kingdom, he would wave it; only tell them, That all Things had been taken from him this many a Day, but what he valued dearer than his Life, his Conscience and his Honour. And, if he had respect to his Life more than the Peace of the Kingdoms, and the Liberty of the Subject, certainly he would have made a Particular Defence for him∣self, whereby he might have at least delayed an ugly Sentence, which he believed would pass upon him. And therefore, if his Zeal to his Country, had not overborn the Care that he had of his own Preservation, he should have gone another Way to Work. He conceived, That a hasty Sentence once passed, might be sooner repented of, than recalled. And, the same desire that he had for the Peace of the Kingdom and the Liberty of the Subject, more than his own particular, did make him now at last desire, that having something to to say that con∣cerns both, he might be heard in the Painted-Cham∣ber before the Lords and Commons. This delay could not be prejudical to them, whatsoever he said. If Rea∣son, it would be worth the Hearing; if otherwise, those who heard him might judge. He therefore conjured them, as they loved what they pretended, the Liberty of the Subject, and Peace of the Kingdom, that they would grant him a Hearing before Sentence past. If not, he did protest, that so fair shews of Liberty and Peace, were but meer shews, and not otherwise; and, that they would not hear their King.
This being heard, however the President had said, That it was but a new Delay, and a farther declining the Jurisdiction of the Court; yet there were some amongst the Judges, who would rea∣son the Business in Private. And, lest they might seem to dissent amongst themselves, they with∣drew into the Court of Wards. Where after some sharp Contests, They Vote, That what the King had tendered, tended to delay. Several of the Judges were of a contrary Opinion, desiring to know what the King would say to them. But, it was voted by the major part, in the Negative; whereupon, some of them exagitated with the Terrors of their Consciences, went away in discontent. The rest being returned into the Court, the President, in a very long nauseous Speech, ripping up all the Mis∣fortunes and Errors committed in the Govern∣ment, imputed them to the King. He further affirmed, That Kings were inferiour to the People, and to the Laws; producing Examples of some Kings of England deposed from the Government (which happened by Parliaments no less impious than this) and more particularly in Scotland, where of 109 Kings, near half were removed by untimely Ends. This tedious and hated Speech being ended, and the Charge read, the Sentence followed in these Terms, He is con∣demned.That Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traytor, Murtherer, and Public Enemy, shall be put to Death, by severing his Head from his Body. It may not be from the purpose, to mention some particular Passages that intervened extraor∣dinarily, at the various Sessions of this Court. The King behaved himself with that Firmness of Mind, Wisdom and Majesty, that he did nothing that
was not truly Royal, cluding their Epithites of Tyrant and Traytor with Smiles.Casualties that hap∣pened, du∣ring his Tryal. Some time af∣ter, the Head of his Cane falling off, he was him∣self forced to take it up, not one amongst so many Barbarians, offering at so small a Civility; and perceiving the By-standers seemed to look upon it as sinistrous, he said, That was nothing. The Second Day, the King offered his Reasons in Wri∣ting against the Jurisdiction of the Court, but was not permitted. The Third Day of Meeting, the General's Wife (whilst he impiously commanded the equal impious Army) ventur'd to disturb the Court, when they were baiting the King, calling out, That was a Lye. Adding, That the Tenth part of the People (she might have said the Hundredth) were not of that Opinion; but, that it was done by the Artifice of that Traytor Cromwell. She also blamed the Subjects Irreverence to their King. In∣somuch, that the Souldiery had much to do to silence her (though Axtel called her Whore) and others moved upon that occasion. I cannot tell, Whether this may not in some sort Parallel that of Pilates Wife. But, what I was seriously told by one that was present, of Bradshaw's Wife, comes nearer. She, the Morning of the Day that the King was Sentenced, rushing into her Husbands Chamber, fell upon her Knees at his Feet, and dissolved into Tears and Sighs, besought her Hus∣band, That he would have nothing to do with His Majesty, nor Sentence this Earthly King, for fear of the dreadful Sentence of the King of Heaven. You have no Child (said he) and why should you do so monstrous an Act to Favour others? But, Bradshaw bidding her get about her business, added, I confess he hath done me no Harm, nor will I do him any, but what the Law commands. The Sentence being pronounced, his bloody Mur∣therers, Seventy Two of them being present,
stood up, thereby expressing their Assent.The King delivered to the Soul∣diers who abuse and mock him. After which, His Majesty was hurried away by his Guards; the Souldiers, instigated by Axtel and Peters, crying, as he went along, Execution, Exe∣cution, as the Jews had done formerly to their Saviour, Crucifie him, Crucifie him. To these, the King no less immoveable in Adversity, than Prosperity, replied, Alas poor Souls! for a piece of Money, they would do so by their own Com∣manders. Which also happened upon the Re∣stauration of Charles II. when some of these Miscreants, cryed out for Justice against the King's Judges, with no less Violence and Clamour. There were amongst these Wretches, some who puffed Tobacco, the Smell whereof was odious to him, in his Face, and threw Pieces of Pipes, as he walked along, at his Feet, And, lest he might not be like his Saviour in his Sufferings, he was mocked, and had his Reverend Countenance defiled with Spittle; which he wiped off, with no other Re∣proaches, than, That Christ had suffered more for his sake. He spent the Rest of his Time in preparing himself for his Last Hour, however disturbed with the Questions, Cavils, Scoffings and Petulancy of the Enthusiastick Souldiers. All which, he either repressed by Arguments, or eluded by neglecting them. Nor did he say any thing, however pro∣voked by Arrogancies, unusual to Princes, or unwor∣thy his former Magnanimity. Dr. Juxton, the Reverend Bishop of London, was at length admitted to wait upon the King; to whom, by reason of his Holiness of Life, and the Consolation he brought him, he was excee∣dingly welcome. But, coming later than he was expected, the King said to him, That you are not come sooner, is, I know, none of your Fault; and now, seeing these Rogues will shed my Blood, you and I must consider how I may best part with it. The
Faction had offered some of their own Fanatick Levites, whom the King had rejected, as miserable Comforters. He would not pray with them, who had always pray'd against him; but, they might pray for him if they pleased. Having then the Benefit of his own Chaplain, he prepared himself for Death so well, that he overcame the Terrors of it before it appeared. Amongst these Preludes of Death, some of the Prime Officers of the Ar∣my came to the King, offering him certain Pro∣positions, with Promise of Life, and some Shadow of Royalty, if he would sign them. Of these, one was, That the Army consisting of Forty Thousand Men, should be perpetuated under the Present Ge∣neral and Officers; and, that the Council of War, should be impow'red to supply Vacancies from time to time,He rejects the Souldi∣ers impious Propositi∣ons, tho' to save his Life. as occasion should happen, and settle Taxes for the Pay of the Army, to be levied by the Souldiers, &c. But, the King having read some of these Tyrannous Proposals, threw them away with much Indignation, saying, That he would rather become a Sacrifice for his People, than thus betray their Laws, Liberties, Lives and Estates; with the Church, the Common wealth, and Honour of the Crown, to so intolerable a Bondage of an Armed Faction. Pre∣ferring, with his usual Greatness of Mind, a Glo∣rious Cross, before an ignominious Life. Nor did he only prefer the Public Good, before his own Particular; but, would not expose private Friends to inevitable Danger, to save himself. Which abundantly appeared at his being at Bagshot, where, when the Lord Newburg and his Noble Lady had demonstrated to His Majesty, Means whereby he might elude his bloody Keepers, who led him to the Slaughter;His Chil∣dren come to him. His instructi∣ons to thm. he waved their Proposals, saying, If I should escape, they would cut you to Pieces. It was some Solace to the King in his Streights, that his Children were permitted to see him. The
Lady Elizabeth and the Duke of Gloucester, very Young, were only left in the Power of the Faction; the Duke of York having, as is already men∣tioned, escaped their Bloody Hands. To these Princes, of rare Endowments and Hopes, the King gave in Charge, That they should consider Charles, not as their Brother, but as their King; That they should forgive their Enemies; Love one another, and all of them be Obedient to their Mother. He told them also, whatHooker's Eccl. Pol. Bish. Andr. Sermons Laud a∣gainst Fi∣sher. Books they should read to con∣firm them in their Religion; and, giving them his Blessing, dismissed them in a Deluge of Tears. The Prince Elector and the Duke of Richmond, had also obtained Permission to visit the King, though His Majesty now intent only upon his Meditations, would not admit them, how dear soever to him. And now, the Fatal Day, the 30th. of January being come, the King being guarded from St. James's through the Park on Foot, he spake to the Souldiers to go faster, saving, That he now went be∣fore them to strive for a Heavenly Crown, with less solicitude,The King prepares for his End. than he had often encouraged his Souldiers to Fight for an Earthly Diadem. Being come to White-Hall, he spent most of his time there in his Devotions. And, having received the Blessed Communion, he was much raised, by the reading of the History of the Passion of our Saviour, described by the Evangelist St. Mathew; and, more particu∣larly, when he knew it was not done upon Design, but prescribed by the Rubrick for the Service of the Day. Being brought through the Banquetting-House to the Stage, covered with Black; the Block, the Axe, and the masqued Executioners presented themselves to his Sight. Which did not so much dismay his Heart, fortified with Innocence and Piety, but, that his Care for the Living seemed no less, than his Solicitude for Dying. He there∣fore, lest he might seem to submit to the Guilt
as well as the Punishment, in Vindication of his Innocency, demonstrated; That it was not He, but the Two-Houses that be∣gan the War. He acknowledges God's Justice, in punishing one Unjust Sentence with another. He not only forgiveth his most bitter Enemies, but prayes also, that God will Pardon them. Being solicitous for Peace, he warns them not to seek it by Conquest; but, to give God, the King and People their due: God, by setling the Church; the King, according to Law; and, the People, by such a Government, whereby their Lives and Goods might be most their own. Finally he told them, He dyed the Peoples Martyr, and a Christian, according to the Profession of the Church of England. After some short Prayers, he submitted his Head to the Axe; an unheard of, and surprizing Example of Human Fragility. It is wonderful, with how much Constancy and Christian Fortitude,He his Murthe∣red. he laid down his Head, used to wear Crowns; and, with what Meekness, who by all Laws Divine and Human, was exempt from the Penalties of any. Perhaps insulting, in that he was to change this Earthly Crown (however splendid, yet heavy) for that of Immortal Glory. As he seemed to in∣timate, in that prophetick Anagram, composed by himself, the Day preceding his Martyrdom. CAROLUS REX. Cras ero Lux. And truly, as there was never any Parricide, except that of our Saviour, so detestable as this; so, never any Man was equally lamented, as this best of Princes. No Sex, nor Age, nor Order of Men was found, that did not mourn this univer∣sal
Loss. Children, how little soever, sensible of the Public, dissolved in Tears, could hardly be appeased. Those who were more advanced in Years, could scarce bear their Sorrow: Whilst the Weaker, not able to support their Grief, as Thunder-struck, sunk under it. And, Breeding-Women, laboured with Untimely Births; and, like her, who, when the Glory was departed from Israel, would admit of no Consolation. And truly, not only his own Subjects, but the Universality of Man∣kind (for, Quae Regio in Terris, nostri non plaena Doloris?) did lament the undeserved Fate of this Prince. Nay, the outragious Faction it self, did blush to approve the Infamy of so flagitious an Act.The Facti∣ons disap∣proving the Infamy of the Re∣gicide, im∣pute it to each other. The Presbyte∣rians, to shift the Envy of it from themselves, threw it upon the Independants, condemning upon the Stage, what they had designed in the Tyring-room. But, whether out of true Sentiments of Repen∣tance, or, that they could act no further, let them look to that; being equally Regicides in their In∣tentions, though not in the Execution. The In∣dependants said, That they only put to Death, a Private Man, and an Enemy. The King had been long since killed by the Presbyterians, as being despoiled of his Prerogative, whereby he excelled others; of the Militia, wherewith he protected his Subjests; and, of his Freedom of Vote, whereby he made Laws. They also remembred, How he had been divested and robbed of his Liberty, as a Commoner; of the Society of his Wife, as a Husband; of the Conversation of his Children, as a Parent; of the Attendance of his Servants, as a Master: Yea, of every Thing that might render his Life comfortable. So, that there was nothing left for the Independants to do, but to put an end to the Calamities, wherewith this Man of Sor∣row, had been so cruelly overwhelmed and afflicted
by the Presbyterians. But, who ever were the Au∣thors of this Impiety, we grieve at what they did; which, seeing it cannot be undone, we may wish, that the Memory of it may perish, with them who designed and perpetrated so Hellish a Mischief. Nor had the Scelerates of the Faction, yet satis∣fied their Cruelty. They were inhumanly bar∣barous to his Dead Corps.Their In∣humanities after his Death. His Hair and his Blood were sold by Parcels. Their Hands and Sticks were tinged with his Blood: And, the Block now chipt, as also the Sand sprinkled with his Sacred Gore, were exposed to sale. Which were greedi∣ly bought, but, for different Ends; by some, as Trophies of their slain Enemy, and by others, as precious Reliques of their beloved Prince. It is certain, that Cromwell, to satisfy his greedy Eyes, had caused the Coffin to be opened in White-Hall; and, did with his Fingers search the-Wound, as if he had still doubted of the effecting of his Hel∣lish Cruelty. Nor did it suffice, to have raged against him living, and dead; they will also, for as much as in them lies, kill his very Fame. Which they endeavoured to do, by the enslaved Pen of a needy Pedagogue, one Milton. Salmasius indeed had writ a Defence for the King; but, he being a Presbyterian, as the other an Independant, both very good Latin (if we believe the Learned Hobbs) and hardly to be judged which is better; and, both very ill Reasoning, and hardly to be judged which is worst. And thus both Houses, as they had often sworn with hands lift up to Heaven, did make him a Great and Glorious King, by changing his Fading Crown, which they had interwoven with Thorns, into an Immortal and Incorruptible one. They made him great indeed; great in Suffering, in Patience,His Cha∣racter. and great in his Martyrdom. Thus fell Charles the Great and Just, Monarch of some∣times
Three flourishing Kingdoms. A great Ex∣ample, if any, of both Fortunes. The Best of Kings, The Meekest of Men. His Countenance was Comely and Majestic. He was Constant, Valiant, Pious, Eloquent; of infinite Reason and Reading. His Integrity was entire, and no Guile found in his Mouth. His publick and private Vertues were emi∣nent. He had been born for the Good of Mankind, if he had not fallen amongst Monsters, not Men. The best of Princes, the best of Men; the best Parent, the best Husband, the best Master. Famous for Patience, for Piety, for Chastity, for Justice; and of an unshaken Fidelity towards God and Man. His Greatness only rend'red him Guilty; being, by the Suffrages of his most bitter Enemies, worthy of Empire, if he had not reigned. The Royal Corps being embalmed, and exposed for some Days to publick View at St. James's, was afterwards delivered to Mr. Herbert,And Fune∣ral. one of his Servants, to be translated to Windsor. He had earnestly solicited, to have had it deposited in Henry VII's Chappel, near to the Monument of King James. But, they refused it, lest the Place, as they said, might be prophaned by the Superstitious Concourse of the People. He was therefore carried o Windsor, by the Direction of the Duke of Lenox, the Marquess of Hartford, and the Earls of Southampton and Linsey, who had got leave om the Faction for the decent Enterrment of their ear Lord, provided the Funeral-Charges did not xceed Five Hundred Pounds. These Sacred Re∣ques being then born by the Officers of the Garri∣on, attended on by the Four Lords, were laid  Henry VIII's Vault. It is observable, that ough the Air was serene when they set out, efore they reacht the Chappel-Door, the erse of Black Velvet which covered them,
was all White with Snow; which seemed to fall, to testify their Candor and Innocence. But, it troubled the Assistants, that the Fanatic Governour would not permit them the Use of the Common-Prayer, the Bishop of London attend∣ing there to do this Last Office to his Dearest Ma∣ster. So, that he was interred with the Sighs and Tears of his Servants. And thus,Lam. C. 4. V. 20. the Breath of our Nostrils, the Anoint∣ed of the Lord, was taken in their Pits; of whom we said, Ʋnder his Shadow, we shall live among the Heathen.
COMMENTARIES ON THE REBELLION OF England, Scotland and Ireland. PART II. BOOK I. The Regicides prohibit the proclaiming of the Prince of Wales. They abolish the House of Lords, and the Government by Kings. Choose a Councel of State. Displace and Fine the Lord Mayor for refusing to publish the Act for abolishing of Mo∣narchy. Declare they will-maintain the Funda∣mental Laws. Erect a High Court of Justice. Hamilton, Holland and Capell, condemned by it and murthered. Several Acts of State. The Scots proclaim Charles II. Some Actions of the Levellers. The King leaves Holland, and goes by Brussels into France. The Duke of Glou∣cester,
banished. Continuance of the History of Ireland. The King at Jersey. Prince Rupert Sails from Kinsale to Portugal. Loseth his Bro∣ther Prince Maurice, by a Hurrycane. The King at Breda, Treats and Concludes with the Scots. Montrosse's unfortunate End. Fairfax routed, and Cromwell General. His Actions in Scotland. The Scots barbarous Ʋsage of the King. They are defeated at Dunbar. The King crowned at Schone. He enters England. The Battle of Worcester. The King's miraculous Escape. CHarles the Martyr being removed by a Parricide black as its Authors, as is de∣clared in our former Commentaries, the Regicides endeavour with the same Fury to supplant his Son, Heir of his Diadems and Vertues; in order to which, they immediate∣ly after his Fathers Death,The Regi∣cides pro∣hibit the proclaim∣ing of the Prince of Wales. made an Act, prohibi∣ting the proclaiming of the Prince of Wales without consent of Parliament, and that under pain of High Treason. This Decree being dispatched by swift Messengers into all Counties, the High Sheriffs had likewise Orders sent them, to see the same publisht with all Expedition; which was likewise done. Their next care was, to disable the Seclu∣ded Members from being admitted to sit for the future; which was performed, by voting them quite out of the House, as desiring no more sha∣rers in their Oligarchy. The House of Lords came next under consideration. These had sent a Mes∣sage to the Commons, for a Committee to settle the Kingdom; which, upon no great Debate, was refused Admittance,They abo∣lish the House of Lords. and a Vote pass'd, that the House of Peers in Parliament, is useless and dange∣rous, and ought to be abolished; and consequently was laid aside: being the less pittyed, because they had so unnaturally abandoned their Sovereign.
Only they had this Comfort left, that they might sit in the Lower House (if they had the luck to be elected) which some did, as Pembrooke, Salisbury, Escreek. This is in no wise mentioned, to reflect upon those honoured Peers who attended the King in all his Fortunes; those we honour for their emi∣nent Courage and Loyalty; but, upon that hated Juncto, that continued their Session even to this Moment. And yet they will not separate without a Protestation against these Tyrannical Proceed∣ings of the Commoners, affirming,And Mo∣narchical Govern∣ment. their Treason and Insolencies exceeded those of the Malignants, that is, the Loyal Party. And now, the Kingly Government was likewise abolished, under pre∣tence, that it was chargeable, useless and dangerous. And that Monarchy which had continued from the Beginning of Times, changed into a detestable and many-headed Tyranny, under the Chymerical Title of a Free State. This being done, the Pseudo-Parliament (for they still abused the reverend Title of Parliament, by assurning it, as most grateful to the People) to ease themselves of part of the Government, choose a Councel of State, upon which they transfer the Execution Part of the same.Choose a Council of State. These were Forty in Number, chief Officers of the Army, and other principal Sticklers of the party, sufficiently infa∣mous in their own Persons, tho they had not cho∣sen that execrable Parricide Bradshaw for their President; whom they also gratify with the Do∣nation of 2000 l.per Annum. The City seemed all this while uneasie; which put our Usurpers, upon diminishing their Great∣ness; which they did. Reynoldson, the Lord Mayor, had refused to publish their Act for abolishing Monarchy, which enraged them to that Height, that they cast him into the Tower, fine him 2000 l. and also put him from his Employment, electing
Alderman Andrews,Displace and fine the Lord Mayor, for refusing to proclaim the Act for abolishing Kingly Go∣vernment. one of the Regicides, in his place. They further empower any Ten of the Common Council (which was modelled to their De∣sign, by new choice of young, needy, enthu∣siastick Fellows, in stead of the grave and wealthy Citizens whom they had elected) to convent this City-Senate where they pleased, tho the Lord Mayor should not consent to it. But as they had displeased some, they would content others, especially the Populace; which they did, by rescinding the old Laws against Heresy and Schism; which opening a vast Door to Liber∣tinism, procured them very many Proselytes.Abrogate Laws a∣gainst Schism and Herey. This Religious Indulgence in opinions strangely di∣stracted the Common-wealth; insomuch, that they burst out into infinite Errors and Schisms, being mainly animated by the Hystrionick preaching of their Itinerant Teachers, industriously displaying the Doctrine of the Democraticks, and holding forth a Liberty in Holy Things. But, upon more serious consideration, lest these Concessions of Liberty might terminate in Confusion, it was thought fit, at least seemingly, to countenance Presbytery, as most popular; but, with a strict inhibition: For, these busy Ministers, were curb∣ed by an Act, wherein according to the method of the Low Countries, they were forbid, under severe Penalties, to meddle with any Affairs of State. They moreover endeavour,Allow of Presbytery. to draw these Dissenters to their Fold, promising generally to all their Preachers, Settlements out of the Kings Revenue. Nay further, they tell these, that differing from the King in Civil Interest, puts them at a greater Distance from him, than any Contests about Religion could do. They add, that the Presbyterians first raised War against him, subdued him and delivered him to the Independants to be put to Death. That his Successor therefore would consider them, as equally
noxious and criminal; and therefore insinuate that they ought in Prudence for their own preservation, to joyn with them in their common Defence. Declare they will maintain he Fundamen∣tal Laws.However, they will flatter the People, by de∣claring, that they were fully resolved to maintain the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, as to the preservation of the Lives, Liberties and Properties of the Subject, saving those Alterations, concern∣ing the King and House of Lords already made. And yet at this very time, they levyed Taxes, by Souldiers, permitting them free Quarters: and, contrary to all Laws, erect a pretended High Court of Justice, with the same bloody President,But erect a High Court of Justice. who being gorged with Royal Blood, would not stick at any other Sacrifice how Sanguineous soe∣ver. And now, as they had subverted Monarchy, the most excellent Form of Government, by mur∣thering their Prince, so they will lay the Founda∣tion of their new Republick, in the Blood of his Nobles. Hamilton, Holland, and Capel condemned and mur∣thered by i.Duke Hamilton, by the Title of Earl of Cam∣bridge; was the first that ascended this Fatal Tri∣bunal, of whom it was doubted, whether his Am∣bition or Infidelity were greater. The Earl of Holland, the most ungrateful of Men, followed him; yet, both deserving our Sentiments of Pity in this, that when they would have been good they could not. Both had pleaded Quarter, but in vain, tho Hamilton had offered vast Sums for his Ransom; and Holland urged, the many S∣vices he had formerly done for the Parliament. The generous Lord Capell, was the third in this Scene of Blood, involved in the same Fate with the other; but lamented with more real Sorrow, because of his eminent Loyalty and Vertues. He had not been wanting in his defence with those un∣merciful Judges (who had already resolved his Death) chiefly insisting upon the Quarter given
at Colchester; but to no purpose, Fairfax then in Court no less impiously than unsouldierly, in∣terpreting, that the said Quarter, regarded only the Military not the Civil Power. His Colleagues had argued much in extenuation of the Crimes objected against them. But he being brought to the Scaffold, behaving himself with a most Christi∣an Bravery, looking upon the People with Assu∣rance, told them amongst other Things, That he was brought thither, for obeying the Fifth Command∣ment, written by Gods immediate Finger, which com∣mands Obedience to the Magistrate; and paying his Duty to his King, the most pious, most vertuous, and most sufficient of Princes. As for the present King, having been his Councellor, he affirmed, That he never saw greater Hope of Vertue in any young Per∣son than in him; great Judgment, great Ʋnderstand∣ing, great Apprehension, much Honour in his Na∣ture, and a very perfect English-man in his Inclina∣tion. By which just Character, he raised and re∣newed the Desires of the People after so deserving a Prince. As for himself, in Imitation of our blessed Martyr's Ingenuity about the Death of the Illustrious Strafford; he confessed, That he had given his Vote to that Bill that took away hs Life, which he greatly bewailed: And, at length, having earnestly prayed for the King, the People and his Murtherers, he was indisputably added to the Number of the Blessed. Norwich and Owen reprieved.The Earl of Norwich and Sir John Owen both signal for their Loyalty and eminent Endeavours in the late War, were likewise condemned to the Block; but both reprieved by the glutted Votes of the House, tho they will make other Examples in other parts of the Kingdom. Beaumont a Mini∣ster, was hanged at Pomfret,Others in other parts put to Death. being Chaplain to that Garrison. Major Monday, was shot to Death at Lancaster. Morris dyed with no less Bravery,
than he had lived Nine Months in the Defence of Pomfret. Poyer, one of the Three revolted Gran∣dees in Wales, was likewise shot to Death; his Comrades, Laughorne and Powell, escaping by Lot, which was indulged to all, by reason of their for∣mer great Services the to Rebel-Parliament. There were also some others, slaughtered upon the same accompt; Unhappy Monuments of un∣fortunate Loyalty, and the Regicides Cruelty. Tho several considerable Persons, eluding the Sagacity of their Keepers, escaped; as, Col. Massey, Sir Lewis Dives, Mr. Holden, the Lord Capell (tho unfortunately betrayed into their Hands again) the Lord Loughberow, and others. Nor was it only against the persons of Men that these Tyrants raged; they also seized the King and the Churches Patrimony, Revenues, Pallaces, &c. and force such of the Cavaliers as they did not confiscate, to a ruinous Ransom of their E∣states. And now, to render the Peoples Obedience to the Usurpation more easy, they absolve them from all Oaths made to their Sovereign and his Posterity, but will enchange them with a more rigid one; obtruding an Instrument upon them, where∣by, they engage themselves to be true to the Common∣wealth of England,Several Acts of State. without King or House of Lords. And now, having declared themselves a Free State, make it Treason in any, who by Word or Writing should dare to oppose them as such, or should contrive the death of the General, the Lieute∣nant General, or kill any Member of their Parlia∣ment. They also put a Period to their Monthly Fast, God having indulged them what they fasted for, the Death of the King, and Possession of his Inheritance. They had already made a new Great Seal, with this Inscription; In the first year of Freedom by God's Blessing restored, 1648. They also
took down the King's Statue from the West End of St. Paul's; and that other in the Old Exchange, putting this Inscription under the Niche in Letters of Gold, tho with no less Falseness than Impu∣dence: Exit Tyrannus, Regum ultimus, 1648. But they could perswade but half of their Judges, tho all made such by them, to comply with their Change; however, they easily supplied the Vacancies. And now they proceed to another Act of State, which was, coyning of Monies, markt with the Arms of England and Ireland, on one Side, and on the Reverse, with the House of Commons; to demonstrate thereby their Sovereign∣ty, where-ever their Traffick might extend. The Scots in the mean Time (in whose power it had once been to restore the late King to his Royal Throne) exagitated with the Guilt of having sold him, found the Infamy of it aggra∣vated by his calamitous Murther. They there∣fore, to vindicate themselves from so black a Crime, as they had declared their Dissent against His Majesty's Tryal, so they protested highly a∣gainst his Death: and, acknowledging the Suc∣cession of his Son Charles II. proclaim him King with great Pomp and Solemnity;The Scots proclaim K. Charles II. which being done, they dispatcht Commissioners to acquaint his Majesty with it, who was then at the Hague, attended by a noble Train of Peers and Gentle∣men, who followed his Fortunc. It will be now Time to return to the Army. The Faction had quite supprest the Fast, and Pervers∣ness of the Presbyterians. And with the same ease, oppressed the Levelling Sect of those,The Story of the Le∣vellers. who pre∣tended to a Community, and Equality of all Things. The Souldiery actuated with the Leven of the Agitators, did not only dream, but consult of dividing the Possessions of the Kingdom a∣mongst the Godly, that is, themselves. Cromwell
had brought them to his Lure with these kind of Baits before the King's Murther, with the Hopes whereof, they were grown numerous in the Army: But seeing no Effects of these fine Promises, began to be troublesome and tumultuous; in so much, that Lockier, one of their Ring-leaders, was shot to Death; though sumptuously butyed by the Rable of his Party. This Execution, rather madded than appeased them; and, being too feeble a Remedy for so growing an Evil, it was thought fit to separate them; which was attempted, by voting Eleven Regiments of these Mutineers for Ireland. But this enraged them to that Height, that perceiving that instead of enjoying those Happinesses they had been deluded with, they were exposed to new Hazards, and the Dangers of a starving War; they absolutely declare, they will not go for Ireland, till the Peoples Liberties, for which the Army first engaged, were secured. These also require, that the so often promised Representative might be chosen. They inveigh against the High-Court of Justice, and Council of State, as tyran∣nous, not without blaming the Injustice and Illegality of the Regicide. They add, That the People had only changed, not shaken off their Yoak; and, that the Rump's little Finger, was heavier than the King's Loyns, &c. And because Discourses were fruitless, they flye to Arms. Scroope's Regiment of Horse, quartering at Salisbury, having cashier'd all their Officers, march with their Colors to joyn with those of Harrison, Ireton, Skippon and others (confederated by the briguing of the Agi∣tators) which they had also done, if they had not been prevented by the extraordinary Diligence of Cromwell and Fairfax, who posting Forty Miles in one Day, overtook them at Abington. But, being doubtful of the Event, they offer a Treaty, where∣in satisfaction might be mutually given; and till that
were effected, that neither Party might come within Ten Miles of each other. Things being upon these Terms, the Levellers march to Burford, where resting secure, upon the Engagement of those Twins of Perfidy and Ambition,They are supprest. the General and Lieutenant General, they had their Quarters sur∣prized, and beaten up about Mid-night by Rey∣nolds, where Four Hundred of them were made Prisoners, and Nine Hundred of their Horses ta∣ken. The Democraticks or Levellers being thus defeated, our brave Hero's march to Oxford, where both of them, Fairfax and Cromwell, were made Doctors of Law, who had themselves trampled upon all Laws both Divine and Human. After this, having visited Portsmouth, they return to London in Triumph, where after a Thanks-giving for their late Successes, they were together with their Servile Senate, invited, treated, and regal'd by the more Servile City; who again, not to seem ungrateful, or rather to intangle them in their Interest, bestowed New-Park, with all the Deer in it, upon the Citizens. The Regicides being now secure at home, at least in Appearance, began to look after Foreign Cor∣respondence and Amities. Amongst which, the Friendship of the Ʋnited Netherlands seemed prefera∣ble, by reason of their Neighbourhood, of their Resemblance in Government, and the Genius of the Nation.Doris∣lawes and Ascham, in their Embassies. Doctor Dorislawes, a Civilian, as al∣so a German by Birth, was sent thither with In∣structions, not only to propose a strict Friend∣ship, but also a Coalition of both People: But he was prevented in it, being assassinated in his Lodg∣ing by one Whitford a Scot; who with Ten or Twelve more, having perpetrated the Fact, with∣drew without any Pursuit, though they were af∣terwards colourably summon'd in by the States. The reason of this Remissness, was his presuming
to appear, as it were in the King's presence, having contributed so eminently to the Ruine of his Fa∣ther. And thus God permitted one Injustice, to be retaliated with another. Nor had Ascham (ano∣ther of their Envoy's at Madrid) better Fate, be∣ing kill'd in his Inn, upon his Arrival, by one Sparks an English-man; who though he took Sanctu∣ary, was pulled thence by the Spaniard, apprehen∣ding the rising Greatness of the new Common∣wealth; for, the Regicides had declared, though they much esteemed the Amity of so great a King, yet they ought, and did require the punishment of so Nefarious a Parricide (as they called it) adding, that unless Justice were immediately satisfied, they did not see how the Friendship betwixt both Nations could be sincere and durable. The King acknow∣ledged at the Hague.The King had continued hitherto at the Hague, acknowledged and reverenced by all; and though the States, that they might not altogether seem to displease their Sister Common-wealth, of whom they began to be jealous, had dispensed with the Cere∣mony of Public Congratulation, yet the Swede and Danish Embassadors had saluted His Majesty with the usual Testimonies of Condolence and Congratulation. He was also King in Possession, Scotland having proclaimed him, and Ireland being upon the point of being reduced; so that, his Af∣fairs calling him away, he left the Hague, and being attended by the Princess Royal, his Sister, and the Prince of Orange, his Brother-in-law (to whose generous Friendship he owed all Things) through Rotterdam, Dort and Breda,Treated magnifi∣cently by the Arch-Duke. being re∣ceived at these Places with the noise of their Can∣non and Bells, and all other marks of Honour, he came to Antwerpe, the principal City of the Spanish Netherlands, where he was magnificently enter∣tained and presented with a rich Chariot, and Eight brave Horses, sent him by Arch-Duke Leo∣pold,
Governour of the Low-Countries. His Ma∣jesty was also Royally treated by him at Brussels; from whence after some Stay, being conveyed on his way to France by the Duke of Lorrain,Goes into France. and feasted and honoured every where with the same Grandeur, as if the King of Spain had been there; he came to Compeigne, where the French King, accompanied with a great Train of his Nobility, received him with all the Testimonies of Affection and Honour, and brought him thence in State to his Mother, the Queen of Great Brittain, then at St. Germians. Whilst the King was in France, the Duke of Gloucester, his Brother, and the Lady Elizabeth, his Sister, both Princes of divine Endowments and Hopes, were removed from the Earl of Nor∣thumberland's Guardianship, to Carisbrook Castle, (infamous for having been the Prison of their Mar∣tyred Father) to the custody of that impure Villain Anthony Mildmay;The Lady Elizabeth dyeth, and the D. of Glouce∣ster is banished. where the Princess (afflicted with the daily Sight of that odious Mansion, and consumed with Grief, and the Maladies it occa∣sioned) breathed her last, being denied by those barbarous Parricides, the Assistance of such Phy∣sicians as she had desired. Her Brother the Duke, was presently after banished out of England by the Regicides; the only agreeable Thing they did, in rescuing him out of their Bloody Hands by their own Act. The Kingdom being thus subdued, and the Army reduced to Obedience; the Mock-Parlia∣ment or Rump (for,Continua∣tion of the History of Ireland. it grew famous, by that Title of Infamy) thought Ireland now worthy their consideration. They therefore Vote Eleven Re∣giments to be sent thither, under the conduct of Cromwell, with the Title of Lord Governour, whereof he was very fond, which he could not forbear testi∣fying for all his Dissimulation. The Fame of these
Preparations immediately flew over, which obliged the Irish Rebels, however dissenting amongst themselves, to think of uniting for their Public Safety, and, although the Nuntio opposed this Confederation with all his Power, excommunicating the Authors of it, whilst they declared him and his Party Traytors, resolving to force him by Arms; which they did,The Popes Nuntio expelled. driving him into Galloway for his security, where they prest him so hard, that notwithstanding the Thunder of his Excom∣munication, he was necessitated for his personal safety, to abandon his Principality and the King∣dom. The Irish-Grandees thus at Liberty, invite and obtain the Marquess of Ormond (as is men∣tioned in our former Commentaries) with an Assu∣rance of an entire Obedience to his Majesty's Lieu∣tenant. He being arrived, the Confederates grew formidable by the Accession of the Lord Inchequin, President of Munster, and the Scots in the Province of Ʋlster. Both these had served the Parliament with much Vigor, until the King and Monarchy had been destroyed in England; but abhorring the sordid Tyranny of the Regicides, they deserted that Party they had so unjustly followed, and re∣turn to their Duty and Allegiance to their So∣vereign. Owen-Roe-Oneal refused to be included in the Confederacy, upon pretence that sufficient Provisi∣ons had not been made for the Security of their Religion; but, in reality, because the Confederate Delegates, had foolishly denied the no extrava∣gant Conditions, which his Quality seemed to require, and he had demanded. The Difference was about the Command of Four Thousand Men, which they were willing to grant, and Six Thou∣sand which he insisted upon, which they after∣wards tho too late (after his conjunction with
Monk and Coot, and his relieving of London-derry) were glad to assent to. During these Traverses, the Marquess of Ormond entered upon the Government,The Mar∣quis of Ormond, Lord Lieu∣tenant of Ireland. but with too pre∣carious and Authority: for, he was forced to grant every thing the Irish insisted upon; and consent, that Inchequin should have Munster entire to him∣self, for the subsistance of his Army; which was indeed the Ruin of the Old Irish Regiments of that Province. The Peace being thus made up, and these several Interests, however ill cemented, seeming to acquiesce in the main, their Obedi∣ence to the King; and Army was raised by the ex∣traordinary Labour and Prudence of the Lord Lieutenant, and being reinforced with the considera∣ble Troops of the Lords, Inchequin, Clanrickard and Castel-Haven, they marched towards Dublin. Inchequin was by the Impatience of the English and Scots Forces, declared Lieutenant General of the Army.Raiseth an Army. Clanrickard and Castel-Haven seem disgusted with this Preference, tho both acquiesced, preferring their Loyalty before the satisfaction their Merits might deservedly challenge. Col. Jones, Governour of Dublin, advanced with his Forces as far as the Naas to obstruct the March of the Army; but being unequal in Numbers, retreated into the City again. Ormond had omitted no Ca∣resses, to draw this brave Rebel to his Party and Duty again; but in vain, he obstinately perseve∣ring in an Infidelity which he had engaged in, for Spite, because a Lieutenant Colonel had been pre∣ferred over his Head. Which may serve for a President, not to prejudice deserving Men in their just pretences; tho no Excuse can serve to vail those abominable Sins of Perfidy and Rebel∣lion. Ormond encamped his Army at Finglas, being content at present to shut the Garrison within
their Walls, and keep them from foraging, until the several parts of his Army were come up to him. Inchequin now Lieutenant General, was sent with a strong Party to reduce the neighbouring Fortresses, possest by the Enemies Garrisons; which he did, defeating also a Batalion of Oneal's Men commanded by Farell, marching to the Re∣lief of the Nuncio. He also routed the younger Coot with the Dublin-Horse, and had Dundalk de∣livered to him by the Garrison, who also entered into the Kings Pay,Inche∣quins Suc∣cesses. notwithstanding the endeavour of Colonel Monk their Governour to the contrary, and their promises to stick close to him. Trim, the Newry and Tredagh it self, ran the same Fortune; so that all being cleared on that side, Inchequin re∣turned triumphant, and increased in numbers by so many Victories, to the Camp again; where it was forthwith resolved, by Advice of the Peers and the Council of War, to invest and press the City with all their power. Dublin, the Seat of the Kingdom and the War, called by Ptolomy, Eblana, and by the Irish, Balaeleigh, because founded upon Piles and Hurdles, is seated at the Mouth of the Liffny, which would render the Haven very commodious, but that it is ob∣structed by Heaps of Sand, often thrown up by Reciprocation of the Sea. This City was first fortified with Works and a Garrison by the King, and after by the Parliament, being now very de∣fensible by its Numbers and Fortifications. But, the Lord Lieutenant relying upon his great Army, consisting of at least Twenty Thousand, and the Defection of the Souldiers in Dublin, whereof most had formerly served under his Command, and daily came over to him,Ormond besiegeth Dublin. resolved upon a vigorous and close besieging of the Place; in Order to which, leaving the Lord Dillon with a strong Party at Castel-knock, he transferred his Camp to
the South side of the City; and, that he might wholly shut up the Enemy, and particularly their Horses and Cattel from grazing, he commanded a Fort to be built at Baggot-rath, giving the Charge of this considerable Trust to Patrick-Pur∣cell, Major General of the Army. Some Regi∣ments from England were in the mean time Landed at Dublin, under the Conduct of Reynolds and Venables, to the Number of Three Thousand Horse and Foot; whereupon, a Rumor was spread, that Cromwell himself designed for Munster, as not yet confirmed in their Defection from their late Masters. This Report obliged Inchequin, to desire the Lord Lieutenant's permission to go thi∣ther, affirming, all his Troops would revolt, unless prevented by his speedy Repair to them; which Ormond, not being in a condition to refuse, was forced to assent to. He parted then with Eleven Hundred Horse, dividing thus the Army, whereas the whole did scarce suffice for the Enterprize in Hand. Jones the Governour of Dublin, perceiving the Progress of the Work at Baggot-rath, and con∣sidering that if it were finished, it would entirely shut him up from all Commerce by Sea as well as Land,Aug. 22. 1648. resolved to obstruct it by a vigorous Sally; which he did; for, the Garrison rushing out upon the Pioneers, easily dispersed them, and with the same Facility dispersed the Watch that guarded them, and possessing the Place, routed the amazed Irish; and, their Courage encreasing with their Success, they pursued them to the Avenues of their Camp, where falling upon the Guards there, who seemed rather to look on, than prepare for Defence, they put them likewise to Flight. The remaining Garrison in the Town,The Siege is raised. seeing the success of their Friends, together with the Inhabitants, flew all to their Assistance, and with very little Pains, ob∣tained
a very great Victory. For, the Army be∣ing upon the sudden surprized, with a more than Panick Fear, the Souldiers forgetful of their De∣fence, threw down their Arms and ran away. In this Confusion, there were about Three Thou∣sand slain, amongst whom Sir William Vaughan was one, who had also fought well: The Prisoners were no fewer. Collonel Butler, the Lord Lieutenant's Brother, and a Hundred Officers, being of the Number. The Cannon, the Camp, and the immense Spoils of it, sell to the present sharing of the Conquerors; and, presently after, the whole Kingdom, the Forces of it being irrecoverably lost by this Blow. Ormond who had spent the Night on Horseback in rounding and viewing the several Posts of the Army, being but newly laid to rest, was raised, by the coming of the Lord Taffe, General of the Ordnance, but too late, the Camp being distracted with Fear, and its Consequence, Confusion. He therefore, in this General Conster∣nation, having in vain opposed himself to this resistless Torrent, until abandoned by them that followed him, hastened to the Lord Dillon's Camp; but those Irish had fled upon the Noise, having scarce seen the Enemy. About this Time London-Derry was likewise re∣lieved by Owen Roe-Oneal,London-Derry re∣lieved. the most bloody of the Irish Rebels; who leaguing with Coot and Monk, as above mentioned, forced the Scots from that Siege. But, as if these Misfortunes had been but light ones, they were followed by a grievous Plague, brought to Gallowav by a Spanish Vessel; which raged with that Fury, that it swept away many Thousands in that City, and the Neighbouring Country. To heighten these Calamities, Cromwell, the worst of Plagues, who ruined not only Per∣sons, but whole Cities and Provinces, Landed at
Dublin with an Army of Fifteen Thousand, Horse and Foot. They were not very forward till they heard the Siege was raised, and the Royallists over∣come; and, in probability, if Dublin had been taken, would never have attempted the Re-Con∣quest of Ireland. But now they flye to share in the Spoils of a regained Kingdom,Cromwell Lands in Ireland with an Army. and Cromwell will triumph for another's Victory. Having refreshed and mustered his Army, he marched with it to Tredah. This Town was well fortifyed, and a Garrison in it of Two Thousand Five Hundred Foot and Three Hundred Horse, the Flower of the Royal Army, under the command of Sir Arthur Aston, a brave and experienced Souldier. The Lord Lieutenant had foreseen, that this Place, by reason of its Neighbourhood and Situation, would be first attempted; it not being advisable in the Enemy, to leave so considerable a Fortress be∣hind him. And, he hoped he might have time to recruit his shattered Army, and repair the Loss of his late Overthrow, which he endeavoured with all his Might, whilst Cromwell was employed in the difficulties of the Siege. But, this impatient Conqueror, omitting the common Forms of ap∣proaching and turnings, fell to battering, and made two accessible Breaches in the Walls, which were Twice bravely assaulted, and Twice no less vali∣antly defended, the Enemy being as often repelled; until reinforced by Cromwell's presence and conduct, renewing the Storm, having slain Collonel Wall in the Breach, they at length entered. A tumultu∣ous offer of Quarter being made, and accepted sooner than it ought to have been, was the Ruine of the Defendants, and, by their incautious Faci∣lity, of the whole Garrison: For, the Town be∣ing thus taken, they were all put to the Sword; though they did not fall unrevenged, for they fought in every Street, the Market-place, and
from the Houses and Towers whither they had retreated. Ashton the Governour, withdrew into the Castle, where the Enemy entring Pell-Mell with his Men, slew him. Others who fled into a Tower, imploring the Enemies Clemency,Takes Tre∣dah. were forced to yeild to a Decimation, about Thirty of the Re∣mainder of them, being condemned to the Plan∣tations in the Western Islands. There fell besides the Governour, several brave Men, amongst whom Sir Edmond Varney; the Collonels, Warren, Flem∣ming, and Brinn; Lieutenant Collonel Finglass, Major Tempest, and many other Gentlemen and Officers. The Garrison being slain, the City was spoiled and pillaged; and, though it had repelled the Fury of the Irish Catholic-Rebels for three whole Years, it did not suffice to resist the Force of the English Fanatick Rebels, the space of one Week. I would not condemn the promiscuous slaughter of the Citizens and Souldiers, of Cruelty, because it might be intended for Example and Terror to o∣thers, if the like Barbarity had not been commit∣ted elsewhere. The Garrison of Trim and Dun∣dalke, apprehending the Fate of Tredah, quit them; which the Enemy having taken possession of, Cromwell marches with his Army to Wexfora'; and, having routed a Party of Inchequi to his way, had the Castle betrayed to him  Straf∣ford that commanded it. The Town was otherwise strong by Situation, and a good Garrison; but be∣ing thus surprized, was assaulted, and entred, all being put to the Sword with the same Cruelty as at Tredah. Wexford being taken, he hasts to Rosse,Wexford and Rosse. a Port capable of very great Vessels, seated upon the Banks of the Barrow. After some great shot, this Place was delivered undefended, and in sight of the King's Army, by Luke Taffe, who was permit∣ted to pass with his Garrison, consisting of Fifteen
Hundred Men, to Kilkenny, besides Six Hundred English, who deserted and took Pay with their Coun∣try-men. Cromwell, after so easie a Victory, passes the River upon a Bridge of Boats, with design to force Ormond to Fight, or oblige him to separate his Army. The English, in the mean time, besieged Duncannon, which was relieved by an Artifice of Castel-haven's. He sent over in Boats, (the Tract being at least Three Miles) by favour of the Night, Fourscore Horses, with their Saddles and Accoutrements, but without Riders. These were mounted by English, most Reformado-Officers; who,Duncan∣non re∣lieved. under the Conduct of Collonel Woogan, the Governour, sally'd out with so much Suddeness and Vigour, that the Enemy, knowing they had no Horse before, and feeling them now, fancied that the Royallists from without, had bro∣ken into their Camp; with the Apprehension whereof, leaving some Cannon behind, they tu∣multuously ran away. The King's Army was by this very numerous and strong, being increased by the Forces of In∣chequin, Ardes, and Oneal; who being rejected by the Fanaticks, had also complied. But, they o∣mitted a fair Opportunity in not attempting it, that is, to wage Battle, their Souldiers being chearful and willing, and the Enemy on the other side, weary and faint with so many Toyles and Sicknesses. But, these Forces, how great soever, mouldered away through the Dissensions of their Chief-taines; for want of Pay, and conveniencies; by the Aversion of the great Cities and Towns, which refused to contribute to the Public; and by the daily deserting of the Brittish, allured by the Temptation of Cremwel's Mony and his promises of Preferment. By these means, Reynolds took Carrick, in part betrayed to him; which the Roy∣allists attempted to recover in vain. Cromwell who
had lain sometime Sick at Rosse, being restored to his Health, formed a Design upon Waterford, which he notwithstanding deferred, when he per∣ceived the Constancy and Resolution of the Citi∣zens to defend themselves. And now, not willing to tempt Fortune any further,The Chief Towns of Munster revolt to the Regi∣cides. having taken Pas∣sage Fort, a very strong Place, he resolved to put his Souldiers into Winter-Quarters: which he also did, very opportunely, by the traiterous Sur∣render of Corke, Youg-hall, and the other Fortresses of Munster into his Hands. Ormond prest also with want of Necessaries to subsist, with having attempted Passage and Waxe∣ford (this by Inchequin, and that by Tarell) in vain, was also necessitated to send his Army into Winter Quarters, but too separate and far distant from each other. The Ʋlster Men, except Sixteen Hundred, sent to Clonmell, returned home, to choose another Ge∣neral in Oneal's place lately dead, as was agreed. Others were distributed into other Places; Tasse to Conaught, Inchequin to the County of Clare,The Con∣fedrates dersed into Quar∣trs. and Dillon into Methe. It is scare credible, with what Industry and Prudence, Ormond endeavoured to allay the wild Animosities and Dissensions of the Confederates, though to little purpose, which occasioned the daily Defection of the Souldiers. And now, the Irish as well as Brittish, allured by the Regicides Successes and Invitations, as also de∣terred with the Plague that raged amongst them, together with want of Pay and Necessaries, ran by Troops to Cromwell's Camp. Hereupon, Ormond seriously considering the untoward State of Affairs, having appointed Castel haven Governour of Lem∣ster, he himself removed to the County of Clare, to raise new Forces, to oppose, for as much as in him lay, the Enemies Progress.
But Cromwell being abundantly furnished with Recruits and Provisions out of England, the Win∣ter drawing to an End, takes the Field; and having possessed himself of some Neigh∣bouring Garrisons, forced Goram, betrayed by the Sedition of the Souldiers, causing Hammond the Governour, with some of his chief Officers, to be shot to Death in Cold Blood. This done, he marched with his victorious Troops to Kilkenny.Kilkenny besieged and sur∣rendered. This City, the Nursery of the late Rebellion, and the Residence of the Supream Council, was by the Diligence of Castle-haven, well provided with Defendants and Provisions. Nor were they wan∣ting in a generous Defence, having repelled the Enemies Assaults with Slaughter of them. But all Hopes of relief vanishing, Collonel-Butler, the Governour, at length surrendered it upon reason∣able Conditions. Clonmell ran the same Fortune, though Hugh Oneal, who commanded there, having beaten off the reiterated Assaults of the Enemy, and slain above Two Thousand of their Men, was neces∣sitated through want of Powder to quit the place; which he did with so much Secresie, that the Ene∣my ignorant of it, gave very good Conditions to the Towns men next Morning. The Bishop of Rosse with Four Thousand Foot and Three Hundred Horse attempted to,The Bishop of Rosse taken and hanged. relieve it; but unhappily, being routed and taken by the Lord Broghill, who without any Respect or Reverence to his Character, caused him to be hanged up. The Bishop of Cloger runs the same fate.Emir Mac Mahon, Bishop of Cloger, who suc∣ceeded Oneal in the Command of the Ʋlster Army, ran the same Fate: for, being overcome by Coot and Venables (who had joyned him with Two Re∣giments of Foot and one of Horse of Cromwell's Ar∣my) he was also hanged. Coot with the same Fa∣cility over-ran Ʋlster, routing both Scots and Irish that opposed them; and rendering himself Master of their Garrisons on all sides.
Cromwell returns in∣to Eng∣land.It is now Time to sail back into England, where Cromwell is likewise hastening, leaving his Son-in Law Ireton in Ireland, to finish what he had so prosperously carried on, and put an End to the Reliques of that War, whilst he himself is destined to new Empires, and new Triumphs. Nor was there indeed any thing of moment done by the Mock-Parlament, without his Consent, or in his Absence, save, that the Regalia and the Revenues of the Church were exposed to Sail, and a nefari∣cus Tribunal of Mock-Justice erected, as well to terrifie as enslave the People. During these Traverses, the Scots apprehending the Changes of the Presbyterians in England, were glad to look back towards their own King, whom they had so cruelly offended. They knew it would be no difficult Business, to raise an Army by the Influence of his Name and Title. Nor were they mistaken; tho taking Advantage of his Necessities, they would impose upon him;The Scots send Win∣dram to the King? and therefore de∣mand, amongst other Things, That he should take the Covenant; ratify the Decrees of the late Parlia∣ment; revoke his Commission to Montrosse; drive Papists from his Court and Presence; renounce his Negative Voice in Parliament; and name a place in the Ʋnited Provinces, where they might further treat of all Things. These Propositions, were sent by Windram of Liberton, to his Majesty who was then at Jersey, whither he was retired out of France, upon the little Prospect of Relief from that Court: as also to be nearer England, where the Levellers were stirring; and near Ireland, now wholly, except Dublin and London-derry, at his Devotion. The Confederates had earnestly desired his Presence amongst them; and 'tis not doubted, if he had gone thither, but that he would have been absolute Master of the Kingdom. Others were of another Opinion, urging, that if he mis∣carried
in Ireland, he would also loose the Hopes he had conceived of the Protestants in England and Scotland. As if a Sovereign Prince, were not permitted to make use of his own Subjects, of what Religion soever they were, for his Service and Defence; especially, they being willing to assist him, and he satisfied in their Loyalty. But, when the News of the Overthrow at Dublin came, the Scots demands were taken into Consideration. Some of the Council, seemed to reject all kind of Commerce with that People, affirming, That as they had sold and betrayed the Father, so when their Fear and Covetousness prompted them, they would serve the Son, and therefore there was no Faith to be given to such Perfi∣dious Men. But others more moderate in their Councils, advised the King, by no means to omit the Opportunity which so fairly offered it self, but im∣mediately to close with the Scots: for, that Kingdom being recovered, his Attempts upon the other would be less difficult. The Queen-Mother was also of this Opinion,He is re∣turned with a satis∣factory An∣swer. and so was Montrosse; who offered now, to go into Banishment, as Strafford formerly to Death, voluntarily, rather than interrupt so Hopeful a Peace. The King at length perswaded (tho not without Repugnancy) dispatcht Windram back into Scotland with no unpleasing Answer, and Assurance, that he would do every thing for the Good of his People; appointing moreover Breda, a Town in Brabant, for the Place of Treaty; commanding and desiring the Committee of Estates, to send Commissioners thither, to meet him on the 5th of March following. Windram being sent into Scotland, the King left the Island, as well upon Accompt of the Regicides Preparations to invade it, as of his being at Breda. by the Time appointed for the Treaty. Whilst the King is in his way, it may be proper to say some∣what
of the Royal Fleet, under the Command of Prince Rupert. The Rebels being too strong for him, he was necessitated to shelter himself in the Haven of Kinsale, where he had long been shut up by them. And now Cromwell approaching the City with his victorious Army to besiege it by Land, he was forced to adventure to Sea, and did break through the Enemies Fleet with the Loss of Three of his Ships; and, directing his Course for Lisbone, he entred the River Tagus with full Sail, where he found not only a friendly Reception, but Protection also from that Prince. The Rigi∣cides irritated with this Civility, declare War a∣gainst the Author of it; and sending Blake with a Fleet, blockt up the Mouth of the River, ex∣treamly interrupting the Traffick of Portugal, by seizing their Ships in their Return home. He lay long there; but not being able to oblige that King by Intreaties or Force to abandon the Prince he at length, his Provisions being spent, was constrained to go seek for more. The Prince, taking the Op∣portunity of his Removal, put to Sea, and sail∣ing towards Malaga, took and burnt several English Vessels; but, Blake pursuing him, mastered and seized the Roe-buck, a good Man of War, and forced Five more upon the Rocks and Shore. The Prince escaped this Misfortune, tho reserved for a greater; for, being forced into the Western Islands,Prince Maurice lost in a Hurricane. after many Hazards and Adventures, Prince Maurice being separated from his Brother in that Tempestuous Ocean, perished in a Hurricane. The immature Fate of this Royal Youth, was justly lamented by the Good and Brave; for, being no less eminent for Fortitude, Gentleness, Greatness of Mind, and all other Vertues, than Illustrious for his Birth; he was snatcht away, leaving his Fame to his Posterity, and to us his Contempora∣ries, the Desire of him.
The King being come to Breda, met the Scots-Commissioners, who attended his Majesty some Miles out of Town. The first Congress was fair, but the Disceptations and Arguings in the Treaty, long and sharp. The main Disputes were, about the Covenant, the Directory and the Catechism. And, tho the said Covenant, did naturally regard the People, not the Sovereign; yet, the Commis∣sioners, instigated by the English Presbyters, did so obstinately adhere to them,The Treaty at Breda. that they refused to grant the King that Liberty in Holy Things, which they challenged to themselves. But, to sweeten him, they promise, if he would consent to their Demands, that they would not only restore him to the Scottish Throne, but assist him in the Recovery of the rest of his Dominions, and to bring to condign punishment the execrable Mur∣therers of his Royal Father. His Majesty readi∣ly consented to the Civil Part of their Proposals, remitting all Things to the Determinations of Parliament, but stuck at the other; until over∣come by the Perswasions of the Prince of Orange, and the greatest part of his Council, as also by the Desperateness of his Affairs, ruined both by Sea and Land; he, tho very unwillingly, at length yielded. And now the Treaty was upon Con∣clusion, when the unfortunate Defeat and Death of Montrosse, had like to have quite broke it off. Those who were averse to any Agreement with the Scots, took Occasion hence to disswade his Majesty, from having any Commerce with them; daily inculcating to him, That this perfidi∣ous Nation, had no other thoughts but of his Ruine, be∣cause they had in the very time of Treaty, so in∣humanly murthered his Lieutenant. But, no Man did more affectionately bewail the immature and cruel End of this excellent Personage, than the King himself; who did not cease to expostulate
the Injury done him in it, by so barbarous an Act of Hostility, even then whilst they pretended to Peace. But Time, and the Necessity of his Affairs, did somewhat allay his Resentments; so, that the Treaty being at length happily concluded,Concluded. he and the Commissioners embarking at Scheveling, with Young Trompe, sailed towards Scotland. Whilst His Majesty is upon the Ocean, it will not be impertinent to be more particular in the sad History of the Illustrious Montrosse. Our former Commentaries, have noted those Actions of Glory he had performed in Scotland, with the Lustre whereof he appeated so eminent in the Courts of Foreign Princes, that his Exile seemed rather a Progress than Banishment, until the Com∣mands of the King obliged him again to arm and invade. his Ungrateful Country.The last Scene of Mont∣rosse's Actions. This was done by his Majesty, with Design, that by the known Valour of the General, he might force his un∣tractable Country-men to more Equal Terms. But, the Event proved unsuccessful. Scotland was then full of Armed Men, and their Forces in∣tire; whereas, he had scarce. Seven Hundred Soul∣diers with him when he landed. Nay, the Inha∣bitants either wearied with the War, or terrify'd with the noise of Foreigners, came but slowly in to him, notwithstanding his known Valour and Conduct; but, forsaking their Dwellings, fled with their Fears about them, and filled the Coun∣try with the Apprehension of this Pretended Inva∣sion. Hereupon, Lesley was sent with the Army to sup∣press this new Enemy, who was also defeated by Straugham, sent before with a Party of Three Hun∣dred Horse, and being betrayed by the Laird of Aston, one he had entrusted with his Safety, was taken, and murthered, with all the dire Circumstances of En∣raged Malice, and his Quarters sent to the Four principal Cities of the Kingdom, to be fixt over
their Chief Gates. It is strange, with what Firm∣ness of Soul, and unshaken Constancy, he heard this dreadful Sentence, saying only, That he took it for greater Honour, to have his Head fixt upon the Prison Gate in such a Cause, than to have his Picture in the King's Bed-Chamber. And, lest his Loyalty should be forgotten, they had highly honour∣ed him, in designing lasting Monuments to Four of the Chiefest Cities, to bear up his Memorial to all Poste∣rity; wishing, he had had flesh enough to have sent a piece to every City in Christendom, to Witness his Loyalty to his King and Country. Being ready to mount the Scaffold, they put a Rope over his shoulders, with his Declaration and History fast∣ned to it; which he wore with the same Calmness as formerly, affirming, That he embraced that, with no less Alacrity, than he had done the Garter, when he was admitted of that most Honourable Order, by his present Majesty. He further asked these Bar∣barians, Whether they had any more Dishonour to put upon him. And thus ended this renowned Marquess, not unjustly paralell'd to the great Cap∣tains of Antiquity, if he had not fallen in the Un∣timely Prosecution of a most Just Cause. The King having escaped the Dangers at Sea, and eluded the Snares laid for him by the English, landed (having been convoy'd by Three Men of War, lent him by the Prince of Orange) at Spey in the North of Scotland; where being received by a Noble Train of Attendants, and welcomed by the grateful Acclamations of the People as he passed, he came to Edinburgh. His reception there from the Parliament, and Committees of the Kirk, was honourable, and with all the Appear∣ance of Affection and Loyalty;July 15, 1650. the People con∣gratulating his happy arrival, with continual, and perhaps more sincere Shouts of Joy. And, now the Second Time, he was proclaimed King of
Scotland, England and Ireland; tho his Coronation was deferred as yet, by reason of the pressing Diffi∣culties of the War. The English Parricides were not ignorant of these Triumphs and Preparations of their Neigh∣bours, and were also informed of their promises to restore the King. They had Intelligence of what was transacted in Scotland, by their Friends there; and of what was done at Court, by their Spies and Hirelings about the King. They there∣fore, to prevent a War at their own Doors, re∣solve to transfer it to the Enemy, as well to pre∣vent their Invasion of England, as to remove into another Country the Calamities that attend Camps and Armies. But, Fairfax could not be perswaded to bear Arms against the Scots, their Brethren, and sworn Confederates; his Aversion to it being much fortified by his Wife, and the Pres∣byterian Teachers. Nor was the Mock Parliament much concerned at his Refusal; for, thinking they had done enough, in having sent a Committee to perswade him, they conferred the Generalate up∣on Cromwell, lately called out of Ireland to this Purpose. Cromwell having at Length obtained what he had so long coveted, the Command of the Forces of the Commonwealth, high with this Accession of Honour, prepares vigorously for War; and hast∣ning to the Army, he mustered it near Berwick, Sixteen Thousand strong, brave Men, and well accoutred, flesht with so many Victories, and con∣fident of Success. He, thus accompanied, enters Scotland, having sent his Declaration before him,July 22.1650. amongst other Things, denouncing War against them, because they had proclaimed Charles Stuart King, who was their Publick Enemy, and had pro∣mised to support him against the Common-wealth of England.
Being come to Dunbar without seeing an Ene∣my, the Inhabitants being all fled, tho he had invited and courted their staying at Home, he re∣freshed his Army there with Rest and Provisions, brought by shipping out of England. From thence he marcht to Musselbourg, with Design to attempt the Scots, who lay encamped not far off. But, be∣ing opposed by the Rains, the adverse Tempests, and the Toyls of his Men, who lay in the open Field; he was forced to return to his Camp again. The Enemy pursued him close, charging and continually disturbing his Rear, until they were repressed by Lambert and Whaley, who hastned thither with fresh Supplies. The following Night, Montgomery and Straugham, with Fifteen Troops of Horse, fell upon the English with so much Vio∣lence, that having forced their Guards, and beaten a Regiment of Horse that seconded them, they brought Terror into the rest of the Army. But, these recollecting themselves, the Scots were charged by Parties that hastened to the Danger from all Sides; and, being way-laid by Okey in their Return, they bravely broke through, and returned after much Dammage given and received, to their own Camp. The King was then acci∣dentally in the Army, by whose conduct (for see∣ing the danger of the Men, he had hastened to their Assistance) their Retreat was secured. The Chief of the Army, and the turbulent Delegates of the Kirk, were much vexed at it, urging the Kings Departure. Nor would they suffer this magnanimous Prince, to stay in the Camp, pre∣tending the danger of his Person; but more truly, lest, as it appeared in that Encounter, he should gain too much upon the Souldiers Favours, and thereby render himself Master of that Army, which had been raised by the auspicious Influence of his Name.
There were Three prevalent Factions in Scot∣land at that Time. The First and Greatest, was that of the Parliament and Kirk, which would indeed have a King, but precarious, and one who should govern as they directed. Another Faction, was of the most rigid Presbyterians. These dream∣ing of I know not what Theocracy or Government by the Church, equally abhorr'd both King and Commonwealth as profane. But this, upon the Defeat of Straugham and Kerr by Cromwell, quick∣ly vanished. The Third was, that of the Royalists, but unarmed, and excluded from Publick Em∣ployments; to which the King was forced to retire, in Expectation of better Times. The English, in the mean time, raised with some small Successes, as the taking of Collington, and Red-House by storm, endeavoured to draw the Scots to Battle. They approached their Camp; seemed carelesly to wander under their Trenches; and with the contumely of Words, daily dared them to fight; but in vain, for the Scots were fixt not to adventure the Hazard of a Battle, but to overcome the Enemy without Danger, with Hunger, Cold, Sicknesses, and the Rigor of the Climate. Cromwell seeing then he could not force the Scots, by reason of the Situation of their Camp, nor oblige them to fight out of it; his Provisions being likewise spent, he determined to bring his Army back to Dunbar; which he also did, tho not without much Difficulty by reason of the close pursuit of the Scots. From thence he resolved to return with what haste he could, with his sick and weary Forces, by Sea or Land, for England; for, he despaired of any Hopes of Suc∣cess in this inauspicious Expedition. Dunbar is a Sea Town, seated betwixt Edinburgh and Berwick, surrounded on the Land side with Mountains and Precipices; which are likewise so
steep, that there is but one passage at Copperspeith, scarce large enough for Ten Men a-brest, which was also possessed by the Enemy, who now insult∣ingly bragged (which they might also have per∣formed, if God had not infatuated their Under∣standings,) That they had the Army of the Schis∣maticks in a Pound. And thus this so famous a Leader, had brought his Army, by ill Conduct, into such Streights; that all his Glory got by so many Victories, had vanish'd in Infamy, if Fortune and the Follies of his Enemies, had not contributed to his Relief. For, it would have proved a business of extreme Difficulty, to have shipt his Men, they pressing so near upon him: nor would it have been less dan∣gerous to return by Land, all the Passages and A∣venues being guarded by an Enemy so numerous, and much more healthful, as being in the Clime they first breathed in. They were Twice as many as the English, and hovered like a Cloud upon the Hills about them. But, their Impatience to overcome, lost them the Victory; for, wheeling to the Right, they, in Confidence of their Strength, descended into the Plain, as if they designed to deprive them of all Hopes of Retreating. Cromwell perceiving this, as if he had cooped himself up, but with Design to break out with more Lustre, sent Lambert with Six Regiments of Horse and Three of Foot, to charge them. He was bravely received at first; but afterwards, by the Fatal Va∣lour of Despair, routed the adverse Cavalry. The Foot seeing their Horse broke without any re∣sistance, ran also away, in vain seeking that Safety in their Legs, which they had had in their Hands. And thus, a very great Victory was gained by the English in a Moment, wherein Three Thou∣sand were slain, and near Ten Thousand taken; Two Hundred Colours, Fifteen Thousand Arms, and
the whole spoil of the Camp, with the Loss of scarce Three Hundred English. Nor did this signal Victory, which made them Masters of the South side of the Frith, cost them any more: For, it being known at Edenburgh, by the Arrival of Lesley who fled with the Horse, the Nobility and Souldiery quitted that City, as also Leeth, a commodious Station for shipping, and posted away to Sterling, leaving all except the Castle of Edinburgh, to the Disposal of the Con∣querors. This Battle seemed indifferent to the King, who could lose none but Enemies, whoever vanquish∣ed. The Presbyterians were no less averse to him, than the Independants; and the Scots, if they had overcome, would have used him no better, than they did his August Father at New-Castle: They had extorted Conditions from him, equal to those their English Brethren had forced from his Mar∣tyred Predecessor in the Isle of Wight. Nor did those Concessions suffice; somewhat was still super∣added and obtruded upon him. And, as if that were not enough, he himself, as also his Friends, were excluded from sharing in the Government. He had no command in the Common-wealth, al∣tho all its Forces were raised in his Name. And, even now, their Army being lost, they did not cease, unseasonably to torment this excellent Prince with their Impertinencies. They impose new Con∣ditions upon him; pretend to reform his Family; and endeavour to extort a Declaration from him, against himself, and such who were faithful to him. Provoked with these insufferable Indignities, and with the Impatience of bearing with their rei∣terated Follies, he withdrew himself privately our of their Guardianship; and, taking Horse, under pretence of taking the Air in his Shoes and Stee∣kings, he rode towards the Provinces of the North,
where the Atholians and the Guordons expected him in Arms. It is incredible, how unworthily he had been used since his first Arrival in Scotland. It may not be impertinent, to mention some of those barbarous Passages. In his way from Spey to Edinburgh, some of the Towns did not only con∣gratulate his happy Arrival with their Acclamati∣ons, but with their Presents also. Aberdene be∣stowed Fifteen Hundred Pounds upon him; which the Commissioners took so ill, that to prevent the Liberality of the other Towns, they commanded, That such who had Money to lavish away, should bring it into the Treasury. Cautioning hereby, that the People should not demonstrate their Af∣fection to their Prince, or the Prince be sensible of the good Will of his Subjects towards himself. Yet more; when the English Parricides had re∣proached them with their Agreement with their King, they declared, They would not own his Cause, until he acknowledged and repented his own Sins, the Transgressions of his Father, and the Idolatry of his Mother. By all which, it is evi∣dent, That his Majesty was now in the same Dan∣ger, his Royal Father had formerly been, in the Hands of the Presbyterians. But, the Parliament seriously considering the King's Recess, and perceiving their own inevitable Ruin at Hand, if they persisted in their Obstinacy and Follies, they sent Montgomery with a choice Party of Horse after his Majesty, humbly to de∣sire his Return. Which he also effected, upon pro∣mise of better Conditions for the future; which were also performed, the Grandees being much mollified by their late Overthrow. And, now the King was admitted, as concerned, in the Publick Transactions; tho the Ministers mainly opposed it, not yet sensible of the imminent Destruction,
which threatned the continuance of their Dissensi∣ons and Feuds. The King now at the Helm, Orders were gi∣ven out for new Levies; his Friends were admit∣ted to Publick Employments; and he was crown∣ed, with as much Pomp and Magnificence, as the Troubles would permit, at Scone. And now, the Minds of the most Seditious being in some sort appeased, the King's Standard was set up at Aber∣deen; and, all who were fit to bear Arms, were in∣vited to take them up against their invading Ene∣mies. Whilst the King is busied in raising Forces, Cromwell was no less intent in Prosecution of his Victory. Edinburgh and Leith, opened their Gates to him. And the Castle annexed to the City (In∣expugnable in it self by reason of its Situation) af∣ter no long siege was surrend'red to him. He took also all the Fortresses, by himself or Liuetenants, on this side the Frith; so that the King solicitous for Sterling, encamped under the Walls of it. He removed thence to Torwood; where being well en∣trenched, he slighted the Provocations and At∣tempts of the Enemy, resolving to hazard nothing, before his new Levies, which were raising for him in the Northern Counties, were come up to him. Whilst the Two Armies were thus in fight of each other, a Presbyterian Plot was discovered, which was detected by I know not what Letters found in a Ship at Ayre. The Design was formed by their Parsons in London; who expecting a choice Body of Horse from Scotland, under the Command of Massey, pretended to raise some considerable Disturbances in Absence of the Army. But, the Secret being laid open, Love and Gibbons, for Terror to others, were by Cromwell's Recom∣mendation both heheaded.
Cromwell, when he saw he could neither pro∣voke nor compel the King to fight, impatient of Delay, he commanded Col. Overton to attempt a Passage into Fife; which he did, with Fourteen Hundred Foot, and Four Troops of Horse. And after some light Skirmishes, landing at North-Ferry, he immediately cast up some Works for his De∣fence, where he also contained himself until more Succors came. Which quickly happened; for, Lambert flying to his Aid with Two Regiments of Horse, and as many of Foot, they fought and defeated Browne, who was sent thither by the King with near Four Thousand Men. Him they slew, and kill'd and took well nigh all the Royal∣lists. Whilst this was in Action, Cromwell braved it before the King's Trenches, and seemed to design to assault them; but, hearing of Lambert's Suc∣cess, he marched back with his Army; and, passing the Forth, joined the rest of his Victorious Forces; and, marching with speed to St. Johnstone, after having drained the Mote and planted his Cannon, he had the Place delivered to him without any further Resistance. The King, who had long since designed to march into England, is now necessitated to do it, and to transfer the War into England, which he was not in a Condition to support in Scotland. Hearing therefore of the Siege of St. Johnstone, whilst the Rebels were busied there, he re∣moves his Camp with swift Marches towards England; permitting all such, who were dissatisfied with the present State of Affairs, to depart at pleasure. Many, especially of the Faction of Ar∣guile and the Kirk, leaving him, he led the Rest, now entirely at his Command, along with him. Cromwell being informed of the King's Departure, sent his Horse after him; and having left Monk behind him, with Six Thousand Men, to finish
the Reliques of the War in Scotland, follows with the Strength of his Army, whilst the rest of his Forces which guarded the Borders, en∣deavour to hinder the King's Advance. The Rump terrified with the Rumour of this In∣vasion, condemned Cromwell of Temerity and Precipitation; but, raised with his Letters, pre∣pare for Defence. And, lest the Provinces wearied with their Tyranny, should look back towards their Lawful Prince, they fill them with their nu∣merous Troops, forcing the Trained Bands of the Counties, to joyn with them against the Inva∣ding Scots. The King's Army not exceeding 12000 Ef∣fective Men, had entred England;July. 1. 1651. and being ad∣vanced into Lancashire, notwithstanding Lambert and Harrisons Interruption with their numerous Cavalry, joyning with the Earl of Darby out of the Isle of Man, forced their Passage at Warrington-Bridge; and continuing their March through the thick Squadrons of the Enemy, and the Opposition of frequent Encounters, came at Length to Wor∣cester, a City affectionate to His Majesty's Service. The King left the Earl of Derby behind him in Lancashire, to raise new Forces. But, this excel∣lent Personage, however great in Reputation in that Country, had scarce got Fifteen Hundred Men together, when he was attacked by Collonel Lilbourne with far greater Numbers; and, being unequel to those Veteranes, after a sharp Fight, he was defeated by them. And, however he escaped their present Fury by Flight; he was afterwards taken in the Battel of Worcester, and being brought to Chester, was there, notwithstanding the Quar∣ter given him, beheaded by the Regicides; fi∣nishing his Course with no less Gallantry, than he had lived with Glory.
The King upon his Entry into England, was ploclaimed by a Herald at Arms, King of ENG∣LAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND; which was also done in all the chief Towns as he passed along, and was now repeated at Worcester with greater Pomp and Splendour. He had by Letters and Messages in his March, invited several of the Rebel-Com∣manders and Governours to the return of their Duty, but in vain. He had also desired the same of the Mayor and Common-Council of London, but with the same success. There were, however, se∣veral Noble Persons who came in to him, as, the Lord Talbot, Packington, Howard, Broughton, and others, with about Two Thousand private Souldiers. The rest kept back, either surprized with the sudden Advance of the King, and con∣sequently unprovided; or terrified with the Cruelty of the Rump, and so durst not appear; or averse to the Scots, now unseasonably mindful of the for∣mer Injuries received from them, and would not come. The King had been advised, and it was his own Opinion, to march from Warrington directly to London, which in probability ought to have been done, if the Army had not been so much wearied with their former Toyles and Labours. They therefore came to Worcester, a Place convenient enough; where having recovered, and repaired their Strength, they might either expect or pro∣mote the War. Hither Cromwell came Six Days after, with the conjoyned Forces of the Party, amounting to near Sixty Thousand Souldiers and Trained-Bands, and having beaten Massey from Ʋpton-Bridge, approached the Town. The Re∣bels having passed the Rivers Severne and Tame, upon Bridges and Boats, advance towards the Walls, however very bravely opposed by the Scots,
out of the Hedges and Ditches in their way. But, the Royallists being out-numbered, were forced to retreat towards the City. The Rebels having re∣pulsed and wounded Montgomery at Powick, Cromwell advancing, drew up near ..... Wood. The King with Forbes's Foot, a small Body of Horse, (for Lesley with Two Thousand more stood a loof of, and did not approach) and some English Voluntiers, charged the Van of the Enemy with so much intrepid Bravery, that he not only repelled them, but took their Cannon; which yet he could not keep by reason of their numerous Reserves, and Supplies incessantly relieving each other: Inso∣much, that the King having performed all the Parts of a Great Commander, by rallying his bro∣ken Troops, and embodying his scattered Foot, and encouraging them by his Example and Pre∣sence in their renewed Encounters, being over∣pow'red by the adverse Legions, Duke Hamilton who kept close to him, being also wounded (of which Hurt he shortly died) he was forced to re∣treat towards the City, which he entered on Foot at Sudbury-Gate, being then obstructed by a laden Waggon overthrown in the Passage. Nor did he long stay there, but mounting another Horse, when he saw all was lost, and that the E∣nemy entered on all sides, he at length, slipping away in the Croud, escaped out of the City. The Royal-Fort, defended by Col. Drummund with Fifteen Hundred Men, was taken by Assault, where all were put to the Sword. The slaughter in the City, was not less barbarous; the Citizens and Souldiers be∣ing promiscuously slain, all being filled wih Rapine and Murther. There fell as well with∣out, as within the Walls, where the Slaughter was greatest, Three Thousand Five Hundred, and the Prisoners were above Six Thou∣sand, most of the English escaping by the Benefit of their Tongue. Duke Hamilton, having his
Thigh broken, died there; and, amongst the Prisoners of most Note, were the Earls of Derby, Cleveland, Lauderdale, Rothes, Carnworth, Kelley; as also Packington, Greves, Fanshaw the King's Secretary, and many other Noble Persons, ta∣ken in their Flight. It is a Wonder, that the King escaped the Diligence of his Pursuers; but, the Means by which he escaped, dou∣bles the Miracle. Five Poor Brethren, by Name Pendrills, with Francis Yates married to their Sister, and Three Females their Companions, who con∣cealed, conducted, and nourisht him; justly me∣rited the Glory, not only of saving a Citizen (as they had done before in the Person of the Earl of Derby, whom they had formerly secured) but of preserving their Prince. No Threats of Punish∣ments, or Death, nor the offer of a Thousand Pounds to those who discovered him, would pre∣vail with these, however needy Plebeians, whose Loy∣alty surmounted both their Hopes and their Fears. The King having spent several Days in this mise∣rable Solitude, passed through many Hands of both Sexes and Religions; Men and Women of the Middle and Lowest Sort. And, by many Acci∣dents, and Spottings of Fortune, wandering as it were in a Cloud for the space of Two Months, he at length going on Board a small Collier, and not unknown to the Master, at Bright-hemston in Sussex, was conveyed, together with the Lord Wilmott, his Achates and Companion in Dangers, into France; reserved by Divine Providence, for the Glories that attended his Restitution. At Rohan he discovered himself to some English Merchants, where he changed his Apparel, and went the next Day to Paris; where his Fame arriving before him, he was met in the way by the Queen his Mother, and the Duke of Orleance, with a great Train of Nobility. Thus convoyed, he was brought to Court; where
he was received with the Applause of all Men, and the particular Congratulations of the French King, and all the Peers of that Kingdom. BOOK II. Cromwell enters London Triumphantly. Continua∣tion of the Irish Affairs. Ormond leaves Ireland, and Clanrickard, his Deputy there. Ireton dyes of the Plague. Monk takes Sterling, Dundee; and Subjugates Scotland. The Isles of Scilly, Bar∣badoes, Garnsey, Jersey, and that of Man, sur∣rendered to the Regicides. Their Greatness. They are courted by the Neighbouring Kings and States. They send a solemn Embassy into Holland. Crom∣well cabals. Turns out the Mock-Parlia∣ment. Chooses another. Is chosen Protector. The Wars with the United Provinces. The va∣rious Sea-Fights betwixt the Two States. Cromwell makes a Peace with them, and a League with France. The Expedition of San Domingo and Jamaica. Blake's success at Tunis and Santa Cruz. Dunkirk taken. The Death of Oliver Cromwell. His Character. THE Scotch Army being defeated at Wor∣cester, and Lesley, Midleton and the o∣ther Chief Officers, who fled with the Horse, taken; Cromwell having sent his Prisoners before him, entered London; the West∣minster and City Senates and Grandees, receiving him with all imaginable Honour and Flatteries. And now the Common-wealth having overcome all their Enemies, exceedingly gloried in their Acqui∣sitions. Ireland was also subdued, the remaining Natives being transported into Connaught. But, of these Tumults it will be expedient to treat more particularly.
Ireton having been left by his Father-in-law to command in Ireland, as we have already men∣tioned, he began with the Siege of Waterford. Which Preston, who commanded there, seemed resolved to defend; until, finding himself shut up with Approaches, and Trenches, and attacked with the adverse Cannon; but, above all, seeing no hopes of Relief, he surrendered this strong City, upon Articles of Indemnity for the Inhabitants, and Liberty for the Garrison to march away with their Colours and Arms. Carlaw and Duncan∣non, ran the same Fate at the same Time, Young Preston marching away with the Souldiers of those Fortresses. All this while, the Confederates con∣tinue in their unhappy Dissensions, the Catholicks and Reformed teazing each other with their wild and unseasonable Controversies. No due respect or obedience were paid to the Lord Lieutenant. And now, the Clergy endeavoured to distract the Protestants amongst themselves, animated parti∣cularly against Ormond; whom they labour with Calumnies to separate from Inchequin, and him again by the same Arts from his Excellency. The furious Heat of some of the Bishops grew to that height, that impatient of the Government of the Protestants, they pronounced it abrogated; excom∣municating all such, who dared to disobey their Dictates. Ormond having tried all ways to allay these fatal Differences, and perswade them to unite for their Common Defence, to no purpose; per∣ceiving their Obstinacy, he resolved to quit them, lest he might be involved in their Ruine. To these Indignities, they of Limerick besieged on one side by Ireton, refused him Entrance on the other, though he came with Forces to their Assistance, under pretence, That they themselves sufficed for their own Defence. And yet, lest the King's Affairs, might suffer by their Folly and his Absence, he
gave the Earl of Castel-haven the Command of the Forces; and, by the Suffrages of all, constituted the Earl of Clanrickard, Deputy of the Kingdom. Clanrickard having undertaken the Govern∣ment, more to delay the Rebels Conquest, than out of any Appearance of Success, in hopes it might advantage the King upon his march out of Scot∣land, makes new Levies; recruits the Veteranes; provides Warlike Instruments; and, being power∣fully assisted by the Ecclesiasticks, endeavours to repair the lapsed condition of their Party: Not, that he thereby fancied the Recovery of the King∣dom; but, to give the King Time to try the For∣tune of a Day with Cromwell, as His Majesty had himself inculcated to him by his Letters. Nor were the Forces he raised contemptible, amounting to Five Thousand; but, by the continual Avers∣ness of Fortune, they effected nothing of moment. They indeed took some small Garrisons of Ire∣ton's, he being gone to his Winter-Quarters; but, being assaulted by Collonel Axtel in the Isle of Milech, and their Trenches forced, they were broken, Five Hundred at least of them being slain and drown'd. The Residue attempting no further, secured them∣selves in Connaught, interposing the River S..... and the Curluvian Mountains, betwixt them and this Fortunate Enemy; guarding the Passages and Avenues of that Province, the only thing they were now capable of. Nor could they long secure themselves there; for, the Spring advancing, Ire∣ton took the Field; and, having sent for Coot out of Ʋlster to meet him, he (Coot) under Pretence of besieging Slego, thereby diverted the Enemies Forces, passing the Colluvian. Mountains, whilst the other got over the Shannon at Killalo, by the Trea∣chery or Cowardise of Collonel Fenel, appointed to guard it. Having joyned Forces, they took Athole; and separating again, Ireton besieges Limerick, and
Coot, Galloway. Limerick, however strong, weakened with their own Dissensions, did not resist so long as it might have done, being well garrisoned and well victuall'd; but delivered it self, the Garrison marching away without their Arms, leaving Four and Twenty of the Principal in it to Mercy. Of these, the Bishop of Firne, and several others active in the first Part of the Rebellion, were hanged. Nor was this Victory less fatal to the Conquerour, who did not long survive it, being extinguished by the Plague. This Monster, having been bred up in the Law, whereof he had some smatterings, had been largely imbibed from his Youth, in the Frantick Ravings of the Ecclesiasticks. Which Cromwell observing, as also his Ingenuity, took him into his Fellowship, and Family; and matching him to his Daughter, made him his Son-in-law. He was active, vigilant, and stedfast; nor impro∣per for Council or Execution in War; and conse∣quently, a chief Champion and Contriver in the ex∣erable Regicide. Ireton being dead, the chief Command of the Army, was at present devolved upon Ludlowe, a Man bold and daring, to whom Three more Collegues were afterwards associated. In the mean time, Galloway was surrendered, Clanrickard ha∣ving articled for Permission to depart. Neither was any more warring there save against some, Mountai∣ners and Tories, the Garrisons every where opening their Gates; and, the Souldiery yet in Arms, having conditioned their Transportation, passed most of them into the Spanish Service in Flanders; a Militia, not much more Fortunate than their own. Ireland being subdued, all vailed to the Conquerors. General Monk, after Cromwell's Departure, besieges Sterling, which however filled with Arms, Cannon, Provisions in Abundance, and the Records, and Monuments of their Kings, was tamely surren∣dered
to him Dundee, by the Valour of Lunisdane the Governour, held out; but, being over-power∣ed, it was taken by Assault, and the whole Gar∣rison put to the Sword. The slaughter was cruel, and the Town no less unmercifully pillaged by the covetous Souldiers; which struck such a Terror in others, that Aberdene, and the rest of the Scotch Garrisons, that they might not be involved in so ruinous a Fate, prevented it by a timely Rendi∣tion. Sir Phillip Musgrave had attempted to raise new Forces in Galloway, so did also a Convention of some of the Nobility at Ellit: but, being sur∣prised, the Earls of Leven and Crawford, Ogelby, Musgrave, and others, were taken Prisoners. The Scots made yet one Attempt more under Midle∣ton, Huntley, Glencarne, and other Highlanders; but, they also were supprest by the Valour and Vigilancy of Col. Morgan. There was no Ene∣my more that appeared; and, to take all hopes of embodying from them for the future, Four strong Cittadels were built in Four principal Parts of the Country, viz. Leith, Ayre, Inner∣ness, and St. Johnstons. And now, Scotland being sufficiently subjugated, was subjected to the Laws of England, and incorporated into one Common∣wealth with that Kingdom. During these Traverses, Sir John Greenvil had detained some Merchant Ships belonging to the Dutch at Scylly; which so irritated the States, that they sent Tromp with Twelve Men of War to re∣claim them, or require satisfaction for the Dam∣mage. He had also Instructions, to treat with the Governour for the Surrendry of that Place into their Hands; but, the Secret was not carried so close, but that these Transactions were known to the English, who thereupon sent Blake with a Fleet to hinder the Alienation of so Important a Place,
by reason of its exceeding Commodiousness for Navigation. Greenvil being thus assaulted on both sides, chose rather to deliver the Isles to his Coun∣try-men, than Strangers; presuming, that being annexed to the Kingdom of England, they might by that means be one Day, together with it, re∣stored to the Crown again. He therefore, upon very honourable Conditions, surrenders that Post he could not preserve longer, having the King's Permission for it; and will in the close of this Hi∣story, grow eminently illustrious, for his Services in the Restauration of his Sacred Majesty. About that Time, the Island of Barbadoes, the Richest of our Western Plantations, was surren∣dered to Sir George Ayscue. He had for some Months hovered with a Fleet about those Coasts, until the Inhabitants, destracted with their Intestine Dissensions, obliged the Lord Willoughby, the Governour, to deliver it up; which he did, upon very good Terms for himself, and the Islanders: being also followed by the Subjection of the rest of our Occidental Colonies. The Rebels had long since been Masters of Garnsey, except the Castle, situate in the Sea, and defended for several Years (being relieved by ship∣ping from France, and the Neighbouring Isles) by Roger Burges, the Governour; which at length, all being lost, he likewise quitted, stipulating some Months Pay for his Garrison, and Permission to depart. Col. Haynes, a Principal Tribune amongst the Rebels, with Two Regiments of Foot, and Four Troops of Horse, having slain ..... a brave Man, at his landing, the rest upon the fall of their Leader running away, left him the Possession of Jersey. There were Two Castles in it, almost impregnable, but, that nothing is so, where fear is predominant. Mont Orgueil made no Resistance.
And, Castle Elizabeth, surrounded with Rocks and the Ocean, and consequently inaccessible, tho it held out some considerable Time, followed the Fate of the Island; Sir George Cartaret, the Gover∣nour, having obtained Conditions for himself to pass into France, and Impunity for the Islanders that returned to their Houses. Finally, the Isle of Man, hitherto kept by the Noble Countess of Derby, who had so bravely de∣fended Lathome House against the Insults of the Rebels, closed this Fatal Roll; by so much the more illustrious, as being the last, who fell in De∣fence of her King and Country. After so many Victorious and uninterrupted Successes, the Common-wealth grew eminently high, enjoying Peace, and the quiet Fruition of their U∣surped Tyranny. The Regicides were not only fear∣ed at Home, but formidable to their Neighbours. And yet, one thing seemed still necessary to esta∣blish their Government, which was, to reconcile the King's Party to them. But, this being not on∣ly difficult, but impossible, with such who prefer∣red their Loyalty and Honour before all things, and particularly, so sordid a Compliance; the Enemy, upon consideration of it, had several bloody Consults about their Extirpation and Massacre. The business was long debated in a Council of War; and, carried in the Negative, as too Cruel, but by Two Voices. And now, what they cannot effect by Severity, they will endeavour to compass by fair Means. An Am∣nesty, or Act of Oblivion, tho with many intri∣cate Exceptions, is published, which gave hopes to such who lived quietly and peaceably, of being in time admitted to Publick Employments in the Common-wealth. Nor was it absurd in them, to pretend to a continuance of their Usurpation, by allaying the Heats and Hate of all Parties. But,
this precaution proved fruitless; for, an unexpect∣ed Adversary of their own hatching, starting up amongst themselves, did as suddenly suppress them. In the mean Time, the New Common-wealth, as they were great at Home, so they were formida∣ble Abroad; being acknowledged by all, courted by some, and looked upon as very considerable, by such who affected them least; The Spaniard, French, Portugal, Suedes, Ʋnited Provinces, and others, saluted this Rising State with Embassies; being also resaluted in form, especially by the Dutch, by reason of their Parallel Beginnings, and manner of Government. St. Johns and Strickland were de∣puted with great Pomp, not only to offer them Peace, but to invite them to a Coalition or Incorpo∣rating of the Two Nations in One. But, these Em∣bassadors not having been received with such Warm∣ness as they expected by the States, but also used with all manner of Indignities by the Royollists, and such who favoured the King, they returned home without effecting what they came for, fraught with rage and scorn against their Rival-Sister; Which afterwards broke out into a most cruel and lasting War, as we shall see here∣after. Cromwel, after the Victory at Worcester, as if endued with another Spirit, seemed to arrogate the Supreme Power to himself, which appeared by his offering to knight Lambert and Fleetwood in the Field of Battle; which he had also done, if he had not been disswaded by some of his Confidents. The War being now ended, and he at leisure, he reassumed his Thoughts, which he had always in∣dulged, of his future Greatness. He had, for as much as in him lay, rendered the Parliament o∣dious to the People, as the Authors of Blood∣shed in Time of Peace, and the only Authors of
all their Grievances: And, as he had incited the Agitators to Murther the King, he now again stirs them up with the Charms of Promises, to per∣secute this hated Juncto. They therefore, accuse the Members of it, with Covetousness, Tyranny, and a Design of perpetuating themselves in their Empire. They tell, how they had arrogated to themselves, their Friends and Dependants, all the Honours, Commands, and Lucrative Employments of the Kingdom. They therefore, whose Arms were not Mercenary, but taken up in Defence of their Common Liberty, and who would not lay them down till they had obtained the ends they strove for, did (how ever threatned) require, That the Parliament should at length put a Period to their Session, and let another more equal Representative be chosen in their Place. The Commanders hoped perhaps to be elected in their Rooms. And, some undoubtedly had a regard to Liberty, that the People might not still be subjected to the same Masters. The Senators were not a little perplexed with these Novelties; the Army especially mutinying to that Height, that some of the Common Souldiers, did impu∣dently dare to draw their Swords upon their Lords with Threats and Insultings. Nay, the Citizens of London, sometimes their best Friends, who had so often promised and protested to live and dye with them, actuated with the same Spirit of Sedi∣tion, do now question their Integrity, blame their Conduct, and disown their Proceedings. Things being at this pass, Cromwel having con∣vened the Chief Officers of the Army, and se∣veral of the pretended Members of the Juncto, in the Speaker's House, declaimed highly against the present State of Affairs; demonstrating, that there was no Good to be hoped or expected from a Par∣liament so constituted, as being corrupt, and de∣signing to perpetuate it self. He added somewhat
of a mixt and well tempered Monarchy, which how ever magnified by the Lawyers who were pre∣sent, as most consonant to the Laws and Genius of the Nation, was highly opposed by the Officers, who were more than Monarchs in their Com∣mands and Governments. Some had proposed, to elect the Duke of Gloucester, the King's Young∣est Brother, as least obnoxious to the Wiles of the Enemy, by reason of his tender Years; but, this also displeased, and nothing was fixed upon. In the mean time, several Petitions out of the Counties, were presented to Cromwell; in which, after an Enumeration of his Glorious Actions, they earnestly desire, That God having given him the Power of the Sword, they might be eased of their Grievances, by his and his Armies mediation. Moved with these Supplications, and his own Ambition, he ceased not to press the Members singly and col∣lectively, to put an End to their odious Domina∣tion, and permit the Election of a new Represen∣tative of Men, singular for their Integrity and Holiness of Life, to whom the Government might be transferred. But, these Conscript Fathers, be∣witcht with the Sweets of Empire, turned every Stone to prevent their casheering; and, being ve∣hemently urged to it, promised that they would name a day for the ending of this Session. But, Cromwell raving with the Thoughts of Supremacy, and looking upon every Delay as pernicious, rush∣ing into the House of Commons, having taxed all with their Crimes, pointing at several with his Finger, accused some of Adultery, some of Drun∣kenness, others of Gluttony, and not a few of Rob∣bing the Common wealth; And, his Officers, upon his stamping with his Foot, which was the Sig∣nal, crowding in to him, he turned out this Hated Juncto; putting a Period to that detestable Con∣vention, which had thus long abused the Sacred Name of Parliament.
And, here we ought to adore the unsearchable Judgments of God, seeing them, who violated the Majesty of their own Lord, become Slaves, by as just Retribution, to their own Servants. 'Tis scarce credible, with what universal Applause this Dissolu∣tion was effected: not, that better Times (unless the King were restored) durst be hoped for; but, that People were willing to try every Change, ra∣ther than longer to bear the Yoke of this odious Domination. And, thus this perfidious Servant, subverted his equally perfidious Superiors; and constituting a Council of State, which should go∣vern at his beck, requires by Proclamation, the Subjects Obedience and Submission, under great Penalties, to their Dictates. Many eminent Men, have acquired Dominion over their Fellows by Fortitude and Vertue; and, some by flagitious and detestable Crimes; but, very few by cheating; and perhaps, scarce another be∣sides Cromwell, who ever invaded, and obtained the Supreme Power, by Tears, and Sighs, and Lyes, and Pretences of Religion. And yet, it was with these Arts, that this Ambitious Trooper, and False Pro∣phet, having deceived the Army he commanded, being Fanaticks, and gained the Independants by Benefits, durst attempt what ever Power and Am∣bition could suggest. The Mock-Parliament being turned out, the Ci∣vil Employments in the Kingdom, were by Pro∣clamation confirmed in their Hands that enjoyed them: whilst the Souldiery by Sea and Land, as also the Armies in Scotland and Ireland, did not only approve of this Change by their suffrages, but by their congratulatory Addresses too, pro∣testing their Obedience to their Generalissimo and his Orders in all Things. But Cromwell, lest he might seem to arrogate the Supreme Power to him∣self, and thereby offend the Dissenting Brethren;
and, the better to delude the Democraticks with the jugglings of Appearances, convened another Assembly by advice of his Officers, to the num∣ber of one Hundred and Four and Twenty. To these, being Godly Men, and chosen by himself out of the Provinces, he devolved the Supreme Power; who, being Sectaries and Enthusiasticks, met at Westminster; and, usurping the Name of a Parliament, as most plausible, began to manage the Affairs of the Kingdom. But, they perform∣ed nothing of consequence, save, that they endea∣voured to take away Tythes, and alienate the Revenues of the Church, as Antichristian. They attempted also, to abrogate our Laws, as Badges of the Norman Conquest, imposed to enslave us; to suppress our Ʋniversities and Publick Schools, as savouring of Paganism; and, to annihilate Titles and Nobility, as contrary to the Law of Nature and Christianity. All which, they had al∣so effected, if they had not been stopt in their Carreer by a suddain Dissolution. Cromwell had many Privado's amongst this mad Rabble; who, seeing they could do no good with them by tem∣pering their Obstinacy; and, considering that they acted by a precarious Authority and the Will of another, the Speaker being likewise of their Cabal; they took their time when many of the other were absent, declaring, that since no good was to be expected from the Common-wealth so con∣stituted, it seemed consonant to reason, that the Parliament should be dissolved. Which, by the Speaker's leaving the Chair, was done; who march∣ing in the Head of the rest of the Party to White-Hall, they surrendered to Cromwell the Authority they had received from him; opening thereby a Passage, to that Supremacy he so eagerly thirsted after. Being then by a Decree of the Council of War, and Consent of the Army (Lambert contributing
mainly to it, for he also hoped to have his Turn in the Government, after the Death of his General) chosen Protector, he was no less vigilant in con∣serving his Dignity, than he had been industrious in acquiring it. But, first it was thought fit he should be installed in this New Dignity; which was done in great state at Westminster-Hall,Dec. 18. where he took an Oath according to the Tenor of an In∣strument then presented to him, To govern the Na∣tions according to the Laws. Statutes and Customs: to seek their Peace; and cause Justice and Law to be equally administred. The Heads of the said In∣strument were, That the Protector should call a Parliament every Three Years, which should sit Five Months; That their Bills, unless he consented to them in Twenty Days, should pass without him; That his Council should not exceed One and Twenty, nor be under Thirteen; who immediately upon his Death, should choose another Protector; but, that no Pro∣tector after him should be General of the Army. That he should have power to make Peace or War, and with his Council make Laws in the intervals of Parliament, that should be binding to the Subjects, &c. His Council for the present, seemingly appoint∣ed by the Chief Officers, but allowed by himself, were Fourteen in Number; Harrison, and some others being disgusted with the Change, being lest out, tho they had hitherto strenuously, but blind∣ly contributed to it. But, the City not content to have testified their Joy by their Bells and Bon∣fires, invited this New Dictator to a magnificent Feast at Grocers Hall, where he Knighted Viner the Mayor; but, in his Return, was saluted with a Brick-bat which light upon his Coach, nothing else save a profound Silence accompanying this splendid Cavalcade. But Cromwell not taken with Appearances, in Order to his Settlement sends his Son Henry to
Command in Ireland, and General Monk into Scotland; securing thereby the Three Kingdoms in his Power. At home, he discountenances Brad∣shaw the Regicide, with Scot, Vane, and other Ene∣mies to Monarchy, and erected a High Court of Justice to terrify the Royallists, by which Colonel Gerrard, and Mr. Vowell were inhumanly butcher∣ed. And truly, there was no Appearance of stir∣ring at Home, all being quiet, and the Patties quite wearied out, besides the dread of so power∣ful an Army hovering over them. Abroad he had been courted by an Embassy out of France, and Whitlock in Sweden concludes a Treaty with that Crown. But, what he most earnestly seemed to desire, was, the Friendship of the Dutch, as ne∣cessary for his Establishment. But, before we deter∣mine that Difference, it will be proper, to give some Accompt of the War betwixt the Two Nations, which had been so ruinous to both, especially the Hollanders; having according to my usual Me∣thod, not thought fit to disjoyn the Relations of things of Importance, tho distant in Time. The People of England, had about Two Years past commenc'd a War against the Ʋnited Provinces; which was, by so much the more fierce, as being betwixt Two Rival Common-wealths, both equally jealous of each others Greatness; besides, that both did endeavour to render themselves Masters of the Traffick of the Ocean. The Causes divulged in Manifesto's and Declarations on both sides, were va∣rious, the English insisting chiefly upon Dorislaus his Murther, and the unrevenged Contumelies thrown upon their Embassadors St. John and Strick∣land at the Hague. The first Blow was, a Civil Edict, prohibiting all Men of what Nation soever, to bring any Commodities or Merchandize into England, but such as was of the Growth of the Country from whence they brought them. This, as it was very
advantagious to the English, so it was ruinous to the Dutch, whom it also chiefly aimed at, as a∣bounding in Shipping, and producing nothing of their own Growth but Butter and Cheese; who, however potent at Sea (the Scots being now van∣quished) sent Four Embassadors into England to endeavour to mitigate the Rigor of this Act, and conclude the Treaty which had been begun at the Hague; but, to little purpose: For, the English being heightened with so many Victories, propose new Conditions to the Dutch, arrogating to them∣selves, reasonably enough, the Herring-Fishing, and the Honour of the Flag. They also, revive the Slaughtering of their Country-men at Amboy∣na, and pretend a free Passage for Navigation thro the Scheld to Antwerp. The Embassadors disdaining the Pride and Haughtiness of the Eng∣lish, bragged also with no less Arrogance of their Hundred and Fifty Men of War, which they had in Readiness. Whilst they were thus cavilling, they were both surprized with the Rumor of an Engagement betwixt Blake and Tromp, their Two Admirals. The manner thus; Tromp with a Fleet of Forty Ships of War, met Blake with only Fifteen, to whom Bourn came with Eight more out of the Downs, tho not till after they were engaged. The English, to vindicate the Honour of the Flag, warned the adverse Admiral by a Shot to strike, which was repeated Thrice: But Tromp confident in his Numbers and Strength, answered him at first with Contempt, by discharging a Gun on the contrary side; and then putting out the Bloody Flag, gave him his whole Tyre of Ordnance. Blake replyed in kind, which engaged both Fleets, both fighting with great Valour until the Night parted them. The Dutch lost Two of their Ships, one being taken, as also the Captains of both; whilst the other abandoned by the English, was
left to the Mercy of the Waves. The English were much endamaged in their Rigging and Sails, their Loss in Men being but inconsiderable; not above Forty slain and wounded. The Embassadors being informed of the Suc∣cess of this Fight, and finding they had got no∣thing by it, seemed to deprecate the Offence, as an accidental Encounter, and in no wise commit∣ted with the Knowledge, or by any Command of the States General. But their Excuses were not received; so that they broke out into an open War on both sides, which was carried on with equal Violence and Emulation. Blake sailing Northward, fell in with the Dutch Herring-Fleet, which he dispersed in a Moment, taking all their Convoy, which consisted of Twelve Men of War. Tromp came shortly after into that Sea, with Design to meet their East India Merchant Ships; which having sent Home, he re∣solved to adventure another Battle with Blake. But, being diverted by a violent Storm, he could not recover his own Coasts without Difficulty. Several Encounters happened bewixt these potent Parties upon other Occasions, with various Successes. Sir George Ayscue defeated a Fleet of Merchants in the Channel, taking and sinking several of them. And, some time after, meeting another Crew of them, convoyed by Sixty Men of War, fought them. The Combat lasted from Four in the Afternoon, till the Night separated them, with equal Valour and Loss. The Dutch continued their Way un∣disturbed, the English retreating to Plimouth, to repair the Dammage received in the Fight, which seemed to imply the Advantage of the Enemy. In the mean Time, several Trading-Ships, as well of the French as Dutch, were daily made Prize of. And, Blake took the whole French Fleet, de∣signed for the Relief of Dunkirk, whereof he
brought Seven to Dover; which obliged the Dun∣kirkers, to surrender their Town into the Hands of the Arch-Duke, who besieged them. The States, for the better Government of their Fleets, had appointed some of their Members to embark with them, as well to advise with their Councils as to supervise the Actions of their Chiefs. And now De Wit is at Sea with Sixty Ships of Force; but, he did not think fit, to wait Blake's sailing towards him out of the Downs; who not∣withstanding, did dare to disturb his Rear with his nimblest Sailors. But, Tromp having got to∣gether a great Fleet, consisting of Fourscore brave appointed Ships, resolved to attempt Blake in the very Downs; who, however not exceeding half the other in Numbers, stay'd for him. The Fight was great, and the Victory bravely contested for, until the Night parted them. But, the English be∣ing overpowered, having lost Two Ships, re∣treated with the rest to Dover, and thence into the River of Thames. Nor was the Victory blood∣less on the Enemies side, having many of their Ships torn and disabled. Tromp fierce with his Advan∣tage, wandered now at pleasure uncontrouled, and vainly bearing a Beesom at his Main Top, bragg'd he would sweep the Sea of the English. The Parliament having prepared a very great Fleet of Eighty Ships of War, constituted a Trium∣virate of Admirals, Blake being still one, Dean and Monk the other. These being ready sooner than the Dutch expected, attended Tromp with a great Fleet of Merchants, returning from the Ports of France and Spain. Nor had they waited long, when they discovered this numerous Enemy be▪ betwixt them and Portland. Blake sails direct∣ly towards them. And Tromp no less for∣ward, prepares to receive him. The Fight was cruel and bloody, the Success also being various in
the divers Parts of it, until the Night parted them. On the Morrow, they engage again. Tromp having sent his loaden Vessels before, closed their Rear with his Ships of War, and fights retreating. The Third day the Battle being renewed, the Dutch after a stout Conflict, got away by Favour of the Darkness, having lost Eleven of their Men of War, and Thirty of the Merchant Ships. The English lost the Sampson (but saved her Men) as also the Captains, Mildmay and Ball, command∣ing the Triumph and Vanguard; and, Blake him∣self was wounded in his Thigh. The slaughter on both sides, especially the Enemies, was very great. Tromp gained great Honour, and that de∣servedly, for saving his Fleet; justly attributing the Cause of his Retreat, to his Care for his Mer∣chants, which he convoy'd. The Hollanders, admonished by their Losses, write to the Rump for a Reconciliation; but, seeing the other Provinces had not concurred, their Letters were rejected. But, what the Dutch lost in the Channel, seemed to be compensated by their Victory in the Tyrrehenian Sea off of Leghorn, where Van Galen defeated Appelton, taking and sinking Fire Men of War. He had formerly taken the Phenix at Porta Longona, which was afterwards recovered by Cox, sometime her Lieu∣nant; who in the Night, under the Notion of Fisher-men, clapt her on Board with a Hundred Men in Three Boats, forcing Young Tromp who commanded her, to save himself out of the Cabin Window, and brought her to Naples. The Danes favouring the Dutch, had detained an English Fleet in the Sound, loaden with Masts, Pitch, Tar, Hemp and other Naval Provisions, which the English mainly wanted. Nor would they release them, although pressed to it by Cap∣tain Ball, with a great Fleet of War.
In the Beginning of this Year, 1653. Cromwell, as is mentioned, had dislodged the Rump, assuming to himself the Supream Authority over these Nati∣ons. And now the Dutch proposing to themselves much Advantage by this Change, and, as they supposed, unsetled state of Affairs, prepare a great Fleet, consisting of Fourscore brave Ships of Force. Wherewith Tromp sailing out of the Texel, made Northwards to meet their French Merchant Fleet, coming round Ireland and Great Brittain, for fear of the English; who obstructed the Passage through the Channel. These being sent Home in safety, Tromp sailed to Dover, which Town he battered with his whole Fleet a whole Day. The English in the mean Time, under the Command of Monk and Dean, sailing along the Coasts of Scotland, Denmark, and the Belgick Strands, carried no less Terror with them.June 2. The Coasts having been thus al∣larm'd on both Sides, both Fleets came in Sight of each other, and engaged. The Fight, as usual, was brave and bloody. Dean was slain by a Can∣non Bullet from the first Broad-side; but, the Dutch, in Revenge, were so ill treated, that the Night coming on, they retired towards Dunkirk, securing themselves from the Enemies greatest Ships betwixt those known Sands. The next Morning, the English augmented by the Accession of Blake with Eigh∣teen Ships, renewed the Fight, and, after a sharp Encounter, force the Dutch to flye, notwithstanding Tromp (who put himself at the foremost of them) his Endeavours to the contrary. The Belgians lost at least Fifteen of their Ships, sunk and taken; the Dammage the English suffered, being very inconsiderable. The Conquerours raised with their Success, besieged the Havens and Ports of Holland and Zealand, to their very great Detri∣ment; for, the Ships homeward bound, ignorant of what had happened, fell into the Hands of the
Besiegers; and, those within, durst not venture out. The Dutch finding the Inequality of the Party, send Embassadours into England to treat of Peace; where, whilst they are disputing about the Condi∣tions, the Fleets again meet not far from the Texel. This Naval Battel, seemed to exceed all the other in Fierceness and Slaughter; though, nothing memo∣rable happened, that, or the following Day, by reason of the Tempestuousness of the Weather. On the Third Day,July 31. being the 31st. of July, the Fleets from the Texel and Zealand being joyned, Tromp and De Witt made up to the English; who bea∣ring off at Sea, by reason of the Sholes and a Lee∣shore, quickly tackt upon them; and, receiving their Attack with equal Fortitude and Fierceness, at length repelled them. The Fight dured from Six in the Morning till Noon. Nor did the Party seem unequal, until Tromp was slain, being shot in the Breast with a Musket Bullet. And, thus fell this great Man, to be mentioned with Honour for the Glory of his Achievements, and his skill in Naval Affairs. He finished his Course, with no less Reputation than he had continued it; seeing, he died in Defence of his Country, and, that the War which he had begun, expired with him. The Admiral being dead, the Valour of his Men vanished with him; who, unequal to the English in Perseverance, fled before them with much Dis∣order and Loss, towards the Texel. Nor were they much pressed in their Retreat; for, Monk, however successful, bought his Victory dear, be∣ing necessitated to return into England, to repair his Breaches and Losses. He had Six of his Cap∣tains slain, and as many wounded, and Two of his Ships lost. Pen and Lawson did particularly signalize themselves. What the Enemy suffered, was not known; save, that Five of their Captains
were made Prisoners, and scarce Ninty of One Hundred and Twenty Ships they had fought with, escaped into the Texel. A day of Thanksgiving, was appointed in England for this Victory; the Chief Officers, and Captains of the Fleet, being honoured with Gold-Chains and Medals, as Marks of their Valour and good Service. Opdam, a Person of Honour, and of the Nobi∣lity which is conspicuous in Holland, succeeded Tromp in the Command of the Fleet. And, now both Republicks weary of the War, seemed desi∣rous of Peace, which was also concluded betwixt them upon Conditions honourable enough for the English, if the Protector, too solicitous for the fu∣ture, had not too much apprehended the Young Prince of Orange, then in his Nurses Arms. The Danes were included in the Treaty, the Price of the detained Ships being paid by the States. Peace was likewise concluded with the King of Portugal, as also with the Sweeds, by splendid Embassies from both Sides. A more strickt League was also made with the French, and all upon his own Terms: For, he forced the Dutch, and Por∣tuguese, to pay the Charges of the War. Nor would he conclude with the French, without inserting an Article (their King being then under Age) That France should upon Demand, assist him with Ten Thousand Men, to establish his Authority, against the King, against the People, and against the Defecti∣ons of his own Army, which he had reason to ap∣prehend. Nay, they valued the Friendship and Favour of this Usurper at that Rate, that they forced King Charles by an unheard of President, upon his Demand to leave that Kingdom; ba∣nishing him out of his very Exile, against the Law of Nations, which allows Sanctuary to the distressed, and against the Rights of Blood and Hospita∣lity.
Cromwell being offended with Spain, or perhaps in Consequence of the League with France, Pro∣claims War against that Nation; from whom, having in vain attempted Hispaniola, he extorted the Island of Jamaica in the West-Indies; and, Dunkirk, a famous Sea-port nearer Home, by the Assistance of the French. But, these deserve a more particular Narrative. He had equipp'd Two considerable Fleets, with great Cost and Application; one whereof he sent with Blake into the Mediterranean; and, the other under the Command of Pen and Venables, fraughted with Land-Souldiers, set Sail about the same Time. The Design was kept secret, which did not a little amuse the Neighbour-Princes, and particularly the Spaniards, who sent the Marquess of Leda, Governour of Dunkirk, into England, to penetrate into the Reasons and Designs of these great Preparations. But, conjecturing by the Ambiguity of the Answers he received, that it might concern his Country-men, he immediately returned. The Fleet arrived happily at the Barbado's, one of our Principal Indian Colonies. Where, as also out of the Neighbouring Isles, the Land-Forces they brought out of England, consisting but of Three Thousand, were made up to at least Ten Thousand; Servants and others, being invited to take up Arms, upon Assurance of their Liberty, and Hopes of Plunder. But, though the Army were great, the Provisions made for it were not so; the Generals perhaps thinking, that they did but need, to Come and Conquer. With these Forces and vast expectations, they sailed towards Hispaniola. Be∣ing come within the Sight of San Domingo, the Spaniards terrified with the Danger, abandoned their City, and fled into Woods, leaving all to the Discretion of the Assailants. But, the
English, by the vain Precaution of their Governours, fearing I know not what imaginary Ambuscades, omitted and lost the Opportunity; for, leaving the Port, Venables landed Ten Leagues from the Town with Seven Thousand Men. The Souldiers were brisk and fierce, promising themselves Gold and Wealth, even to Satiety. But, their Joy did not last long; for, it was proclaimed under pain of Death, that none should plunder Gold, Silver, Jewels, or any other precious Moveables, or kill any tame Cattle. The Souldiers damp'd with this unseasonable Order, destitute now of the Solace of Hope it self, moved but dully; and, marching through thick Woods, scorching Sands, excessive Heat of the Sun, and its concomitant, unsufferable Thirst, they at length came to the assigned Ren∣dezvous. Collonel Buller met them there, with Three Regiments from the Fleet, where they were some∣what refreshed; for, there was a River of Fresh∣water, which discharges it self into the Sea. The Forces being joyned, Venables marches with his Ar∣my towards the City, having sent Captain Cox, who was also their Guide, with Five Hundred Men be∣fore as a Forlorn. And, they proved so. In the mean Time, the Spaniards taking Courage from their Enemies loitering, and perceiving the Dif∣ficulties they laboured under, betake themselves to their Defence; and, falling briskly upon them in the Intricacies of their Passage with a handful of Men, they kill Cox, and rout his Party, who rushing upon the next Regiment put it to Flight. Upon advance of the Army, the Spaniards retired into a Fort they had in the Wood. Venables, after this brush, return'd back to the River, with a Re∣solution, to re-assume his Design: And, having mounted Two Guns, provided Scaling-ladders, Mortars, Granado's and Fire-balls, he marches the second Time towards the City. But, being be∣trayed
by the Errors of his Guides, who under∣took to lead him a more commodious Way for the avoiding of the Fort, he is brought into the same place where they had already fought so unluckily. The Spaniards, but Seventy in Num∣ber, sallying hastily out of their Ambushes, fell with such Violence upon the Van Guard, that the Forlorn being beaten into the next following Battalion, that also turned upon their own Army, and filling all with Terror, they all ran away. The Enemy pursued with a great slaughter; nor did they retire, till they were wearied with killing, and carried away Seven Colours in sign of Victory. Collonel Haynes having with great Courage endea∣voured to make Head against them, being aban∣doned, was slain by them, and with him Six Hun∣dred more, besides several wounded. These Mis∣carriages, were followed by the Negligence of the Commanders, with want of Provisions; so, that several of the Souldiers straying in the Woods in Quest of Victuals, were snapt up by the Enemy. Their Wants growing daily upon them, they eat all their Horses, which they had brought in a fine Troop with them from the Barbadoes; and, these not sufficing, they at length resolved to leave this unlucky Shore: Which they did, sailing with their baffled Army to Jamaica; where, the News of their Defeat not being yet arrived, they easily landed, the Spaniards there articling for Liberty to depart, which they easily consented to. This Island is very pleasant, Sixty Leagues in Length, and Thirty in Breadth. But, they met here with an Enemy more severe than the Spani∣ards, which was the Plague; which, in a little Time, reduced their Army to sewer than Two Thousand. Those who survived, being recruited with Pro∣visions and Men from England, the Island being also cleared of Spaniards, is now become a famous Colony of the English.
But, Admiral Blake's Successes were greater, tho' they did not make more Noise in the World. The Algerines, upon Sight of the Fleet so far superior to theirs, making a Peace with him, consented to the Restitution of the Brittish Slaves, and a Liber∣ty of Commerce. But, they of Tunis, trusting to their own Strength, answered Blake's Summons fiercely; shewing him, by way of ostentation, their Castles in the Guletta, and their Fleet in that impregnable Receptacle of Porta-ferino. Blake resolving always on the brave, filling his long Boats with his boldest Adventurers, sent them into the Haven to burn their Ships. Which they also effected, consuming Nine of them with Fire, with the inconsiderable Loss of Five and Twenty Men. All this while, the Ships of the Fleet thundred terribly with their Cannon upon their Castles and Batteries, dismounting for the most part their Guns, and forcing the Defendants to abandon their Works. The Infidels thus chastised, became more submiss, being glad to accept of that Paci∣fication, they had lately so insolently refused. Cromwell being secure Abroad, had at Home de∣feated all the Endeavours of the Royallists, as al∣so of the Presbyterians and Democraticks, for the recovering of their Liberty. All these Attempts were stifled in their Infancy, or betrayed in their Growth, before they came to any Ripeness; ef∣fecting nothing, but the Ruine of such who were concerned in them, and the securing of him in his Tyranny, whose Destruction was so passi∣onately desired. This cruel Protector, had affli∣cted the Royallists with all manner of Torments in their Persons. And now, having constituted Ma∣jor Generals, after the Manner of the Turkish Bashaws, in all the Kingdom; decimated, and confiscated their Goods; and raging against their Per∣sons with Incarcerations, Banishments, and Death it
self, exposed them to all the Miseries their inexo∣rable Malice could invent. But, seeing that all would not do, and that they were Proof against the utmost severity; he changed his Battery, and will now try to gain them by Civilities, and a more gentle Usage. But, that taking no effect with Men immoveable in their Loyalty, and whom nothing could oblige to abandon that Cause, they had so religiously maintained; he thought of other ways to be rid of these Men, so averse to his Tyranny. Upon this accompt, he permits Fo∣reign Ministers in League with him, to make Levies of them for their Wars, the Prisons having often times been emptied for that purpose. The Colonies, in the West Indies, consumed many of them by Slavery, and others allured into the unfortunate expedition of San Domingo, perished in it. His Domestick Enemies being thus removed or op∣press'd, the Ʋsurper became also formidable to Strangers. And, now it seemed seasonable for him to think of transmitting his Tyranny to his Poste∣rity. As he had usurp'd the Power of a King, so he ambition'd the Title, which a Parliament he had convened for his Purpose, endeavoured to invest him with. But, he was opposed by the Chiefs of the Army, who expected, and hoped after his Fate, to have their Turns in the Supremacy. How∣ever, he managed his Design so well, that he was created Sovereign Protector, with Power to name his Successor; which was, in effect, what he de∣sired, in rendring his Tyranny Hereditary. The Spaniards, to repay one War with ano∣ther, seized and confiscated all the English Mer∣chants Goods and Shipping in his Dominions, and by a Publick Edict, declared War against the Nation. But, Cromwell acting more Effectually, sent Blake and Montague with a Fleet to shut up the Haven of Cadiz, where the Rich Ships from
the Indies usually arrived. Stayner, with his Squadron of Seven Frigats,1656. Sep. 1. fell upon Eight of them, in the Absence of their Admiral; whereof, he took Two, burnt One (with the Marquess of Badaiox, the Vice-Roy of Peru and his Lady in it) sunk Another, forced Two on Shore, and the o∣ther Two escaped into Port. This was a great Victory, wherein they took above Two Millions of Pieces of Eight. But, that which Blake won at Teneriffe the Year following, surpassed all other in Nobleness of Action, and Resolution of the Un∣dertakers. The West India Fleet, consisting of Sixteen Rich Ships,1657. Apr. 20. having Intelligence that the English were cruising upon the Atlantick Ocean, put into the Haven of Santa Cruz; where, by the Advantage of their strong Castle at the Entry, and Seven Forts round the Bay, they thought themselves secure. But, Blake perceiving their Order, sen∣ding Stayner, a brave Commander, with some nimble Frigats before, followed himself with the rest of his Fleet. And, plying the Castle and Forts, with his great Ships, beat the Spaniards from their Guns; and, after a sharp Fight, took the Fleet, abandoned by the Sea-men who ran on Shore; but, not being able to carry it away with them, they set in on fire, consuming both it and the im∣mense Riches it was fraughted with. A Thanks∣giving-Day being appointed in England for this so eminent a Victory, Blake was honoured by the Parliament with a Present of Five Hundred Pounds. But, this so famous Admiral, did not long survive so many Victories, expiring at his Entrance into Plymouth Road, by the Malignity of the Dropsy and Scurvy. Thus ended this brave and fortunate Warriour, worthily to be cele∣brated, if he had not so audaciously resisted his own Prince.
Nor was it at Sea only that Cromwell plagued the Spaniard; for, he sent Six Thousand Men, under the Command of Collonel Reynolds into Flanders, who much facilitated the Successes of the French. Mont∣medy and St. Venant, were taken by their As∣stance; and, some time after, Mardike, which was delivered to the English, and by them so strongly fortified, that it firmly withstood the As∣saults of the Brittish Regiments in the Ser∣vice of Spain Hereupon, Dunkirk was Besieged by the Confederates. But, Don Juan of Austria, Go∣vernour of those Low-Countries, Solicitous for the conserving of so considerable a Sea-port, and to prevent the Excursions of the French into Flanders on that side, having drawn his Army together, and strengthened it with Veterane Souldiers taken out of their Garrisons; and being joyned by the Duke of York, with four Batalions of English, and Irish, then under his Command; he marched to the Relief of the Besieged, and suddenly possessing the Height of the Sand-Hills opposite to Turin's Camp, pitcht his there. Marshal Turin having left Guards to Defend Forts and Posts against the Sallies of the Besieged, drew the rest of his Army out of his Trenches. The English were in the Van; who, notwithstanding the Showers of shot powered upon them, ascended the Hill, and after a sharp encounter at push of Pike, and Butt-end of Musket, forced the Enemy from their Ground. This being done, the French Horse charged the opposite Cavalry, which being long sustained by the Valour and Vertue of the Duke of York, and his Brother Gloucester, was at last, the English advancing upon them, obliged to leave the Field. There were above a Thousand slain, and more then Two Thousand taken Prisoners. The Can∣non and Spoil of the Field, were the present Re∣ward of the Victors; and, some time after, Dun∣kirk
it self: Which, by the Death of the Gover∣nour, the Marquess of Lede, was surtendered upon Conditions, and put into the Possession of the English by Contract. Cromwell however heightned by this Victory, did not long survive it; being oppressed with a Melancholy, which he had contracted upon the Death of his beloved Daughter Cleypoole; Which accompanied with a Fever, and Faintings, snatcht him hence (deprecating his immature Destiny in vain) to that Tribunal, where he was to give an Accompt of his Rebellions, Sacriledge, Perju∣ry, Parricide, and Tyranny. He died indeed, like other Men, in his Bed; but, not without some ex∣traordinary Commotions of Spirit. Nay, the whole Frame of Nature suffer'd violent Concussions, by a dreadful Tempest at the Exit of this Impostor; which threatn'd, by Tumult, and Noises, loud as his Sins, to reduce the World into its pristine Chaos again. We cannot with Justice, deny this great Artist in Dissimulation and Imposture, Courage and Vastness of Mind; since he rai∣sed himself up from a Private Condition, and a simple Gentleman, to the Supream Height of Empire; not altogether unworthy the De∣gree he attained to, if he had not acquired it by ill Means.
BOOK III. Richard succeeds his Father in the Protectorate. He is deposed by the Army. The Rump restored. Lambert defeats Sir George Booth. Monta∣gue returns with the Fleet out of Denmark. Lam∣bert turns out the Rump. Monk dissents, and declares for the Rump. Lambert marches against him. Being deluded by Treaties, he is deserted by his Army. The Committee of Safety routed, and the Rump yet again restored. Monk marches to London. Readmits the Secluded Members. The Parliament dissolv'd by its own Act. An Abstract of the King's Actions and Motions a∣broad. He is proclaimed by the Parliament. Returns into England. His glorious Reception. The End of our Troubles. OLiver having during his Sickness been vainly confident of his Recovery, which he also had been deluded into an Assurance of, by his Chaplains and Flatterers; had neglected the Nomi∣nating of a Successor, as he was authorized to do by the Petition and Advice. 'Twas thought, he ballanced in his Choice betwixt his Son and Son-in-law Fleetwood; which his Council finding, and perceiving his Spirits and Senses to fail, demanded of him, If he did not appoint his Son Richard to Succeed him? To which he answering, as is sup∣posed, in the Affirmative; Richard, as soon as he expired, was saluted and proclaimed Protector in his Fathers Room. But very unlike him in For∣titude, and the Arts of Government; as will ap∣pear, by his being disturbed from the quiet Pos∣session
of Three Kingdoms, by those he neither had Wit nor Courage to suppress or oppose. He was in the mean time, as well as his Father, ac∣knowledged and saluted, by the Army, the City, the Provinces and Foreign Ministers and Embas∣sadors. The Beginning of his Reign was serene, and his first Care, the Funeral of his Father. Which was performed with a more than Royal Magnificence, there having been Sixty Thousand Pounds expended in it; this Treasure, as it had been extorted by Tyranny, being consumed in Luxury. His Corps, however wrapt up in a Sixfold Cerecloth, a Lead, and a Wooden Coffin, fermenting in this restraint, burst out of it; and, filling all with a most noisom Odour, was private∣ly deposited in Henry Vll's Chappel, amongst the Ashes of King's; but, by the just Judgment of God, to be transferred and buried under the Gal∣lows, as we have since seen. The Officers of the Army, after all their Ad∣dresses to Richard, grew weary of him, as soon as they had well owned him; and, unmindful now of their Duty and Promises to him, by the Insinu∣ations of Lambert, formerly cashier'd by his Fa∣ther, and the Concurrence of the Democraticks, having also drawn Fleetwood his Brother-in-law, and Desbourough who had married his Aunt, into the Cabal, consult how to abolish the Protectorate, and restore themselves to their former Freedom. Nor was Richard ignorant of their Designs, but wanted Resolution to suppress them; and, indeed, cou∣rage to countenance the Undertakings of others, who offered their Service for the scizure or killing of these Mutineers. He had called a Parliament, by whose Authority, he supposed these Heats might be allayed; and, they endeavoured it. But, this Puny Prince, affrighted with the Threats and Noises of the adverse Party, was perswaded to dis∣solve
that Convention, however addicted to him. Hereupon, he is likewise laid aside. The Rump, composed of those Antimonarchists which his Fa∣ther had formerly ejected, being introduced and seated in the Government again. His Brother Henry, Vice-Roy of Ireland, quitted also that King∣dom, and the Army there, by command of this re∣stored Senate, with the like Pusillanimity. Where∣by it appears, how sordidly these Fellows degene∣rated from their Father in Audaciousness, though they resembled him well enough in Wickedness. Monk, who commanded in Scotland, did likewise submit; but, kept his Employment, thinking he had done enough, in congratulating their Restau∣ration by Addresses and Messages. The odious Oligarchy being restored, under the Title of a Common-wealth; and, acknowledged by the Army, and their Partisans in the Provinces, drive more furiously than before, endeavouring to remove all Obstacles and Impediments to their designed Tyranny. In order to this, they exact a spontaneous Abdication of the Protectorate, from Richard; which he tamely granted, promising further, To behave himself peaceably under the Go∣vernment, from which he expected Protection. And thus this Mushrom-Prince, the untimely Birth of a short Relgn, turned out of White Hall, vanished; and, will be no more heard of, but with Obloquy and Infamy. And yet, if he had had either Honour or Honesty in him, he might have had one Game more to play, no less probable, than glorious, which was, the restoring of the King; several Overtures having been made to him, by the Royal Party, to that Purpose. The which, with his Interest in the Army, and Two Houses, before their Dissolution, might have been effected without a Miracle.
The Rump was no sooner seated, but they began to divide the Inheritance amongst themselves; and, whatever the Cromwellian storm of Hail had left, these rapacious Locusts did consume and devour. But, the Universality of the Nation, trembled at these Preludes of Tyranny and Slavery; and, be∣ing resolved to suffer any thing, rather than the known Domination of the Regicides, took up Arms in divers Counties. Nor were the Parri∣ciaes ignorant of these Designs. They therefore to prevent them, fill the Prisons with the most suspected, and command all those who had served the King, to leave the City, and not to return without Permission. The swift Motion of their Horse, hindred the Risings in Kent and Surrey, and some other Counties. And yet, they got to∣gether in Cheshire, under the Command of Sir George Booth, to a considerable Body, being assist∣ed by Sir Thomas Middleton, Randal Egerton Ma∣jor General, and Colonel Worden, with others, As∣serters of Liberty, and a Free Parliament. Having possessed themselves of Chester, Manchester, and Warrington, they became formidable. The grow∣ing Power of these Royallists (for such they were e∣steemed) extremely terrified the Rebels at West∣minster; and therefore, Lambert was ordered with Seven Regiments of Foot, and Two of Horse, to march with all speed against these new Adversa∣ries, and suppress them. Which he also did, with no great Difficulty; their raw unexperienced Militia, not being able to stand the shock of an Army, flusht with so many Successes. So that, attacking them at Norwich-Bridge, where Morgan, a brave Youth, was slain, they forced it, routing and defeating the whole Party. Chester, and the other Fortresses, were all retaken; and Booth him∣self being fled, was afterwards discovered in Womans Cloths at Newport, and was cast into the Tower.
The Men at Westminster swoln with this Victory, having thereby reduced the Kingdom to their O∣bedience, resolve to call the Authors of this Late War, to a very severe Accompt, thirsting no less after their Estates and Possessions, than their Blood. In the mean time, Montague, who had been sent in Richard's Protectorate into Denmark, with a great Fleet, invited by the King unto whom he was reconciled, and commanded by him, sail∣ed towards England with his Naval Power, to help to free his Native Country from Oppression and Slavery. But, hearing by the Way, of the De∣feat of the Royallists, the Secret was not disco∣vered, tho he returned with the Fleet; and was commanded by the Rump, who suspected his Faith, to his House, till they should be at leisure to take an Accompt of his Voyage, and Actions. The Enemy being subdued, these Blood-Cani∣bals judging of the Justice of their Cause by the Success, and thinking nothing bad, but what was improsperous, looked upon themselves as owned by Heaven. But yet, their joy was but short-liv'd; for, whilst they go on securely, they were yet a∣gain by the Just Judgment of God, disturbed by their own Servants. Lambert after his Victory aiming at greater Things, began not only to neg∣lect his Equals, but to despise his Superiors also. But, the Army was first to be gained, which he endeavoured to do, by the usual Charms of Am∣bition; attributing to them, the Glories of their Atchievements, and the Honour of the late Suc∣cess. He also distributed amongst them, the Thousand Pounds, which these nefarious Senators had bestowed on him: affirming, that Presents of that kind, were no less due to them by whose For∣titude Great Actions were performed, than to him by whose Conduct they were effected. With these Arts, he rendered the Souldiers not only
favourable, but subservient to his Designs. Whilst he is thus employed, he received Letters from the Senate (who began to suspect him of ambitious In∣treagues) but very obligingly writ, to invite him to Town; which he instantly obeyed, being secure in the Souldiers affection, and that he might give no Shadow of Distrust by his Delay. A Pe∣tition from the rest of the Commanders to the Parliament, followed the General, wherein they re∣quired, That Fleetwood and Lambert should have the Chief Command and Generalship of the Army. The Parliament who had conferred that Province upon their Speaker, who had also hitherto com∣missioned these very Officers, startled at so unusual a Demand, and fancying if they yielded they were undone, Vote, That to have any more General-Officers in the Army, than are already settled by the Parliament, was unnecessary, burthensom and dan∣gerous to the Common-wealth. But, the Souldiers persisting in their arrogant Demands, this Vote was followed by another, declaring, That it should be Treason for any Person or Persons, to levy Money without the consent of Parliament. By this means, these States thought, and reasonably enough, to render the Souldiers for the future, more obedient to them from whom they were to expect their Sti∣pend and Rewards. This done, they (animated perhaps more with Choler than Counsel) casheer Lambert, as Chief of the Conspiracy, and Eight more of the boldest Tribunes of his Party; trans∣ferring the Chief Command of the Army, upon Seven of their own Tribe, viz. Fleetwood, Monk, Hazelrig, Ludlow, Walton, Morley and Overton. But, the disbanded Officers disdaining to be thus used, armed with Revenge and Ambition, flew with their Regiments to Westminister, filling the A∣venues of the Court with their Souldiers, resolving to hinder the sitting of the Members. The Parlia∣ment,
on the other side, loth to dislodge, solicited the rest of the Army to their Assistance, and had them. Being drawn up on both sides, they yet past no further than Threats, being pacified by the Care and Authority of the Council of State. But, Lambert gained his desir'd end, in hindering the Speaker to go to the House, and sending him Home without his Pretorian Troop which had attended him thither, and more like a Captive, than a Ge∣neral, or an Imperial Speaker. The Independant Faction being thus divided, the Civil Part of it was forced to truckle to the Mili∣tary; and now in Contempt of the Authority of their Senate, Fleetwood, no great Souldier but a valiant Holder-forth, by Suffrage of the Council of Officers, was made General, and Lambert Lieu∣tenant General; to whose Artifice, the other was obnoxious. They also, erected a Council of State or Committee of Safety, consisting of Three and Twenty Commissioners, most Officers; to whom, the Supreme Care of the Laws and Government were at present committed, with Instructions, to introduce a new Form of a Common-wealth. The State being thus settled, Lambert endeavours by a Declaration, to calm the Minds of Men, distract∣ed with so many Novelties, with the Show and Assurance or their Liberties, both Sacred and Ci∣vil; and sending some of hisColbet, Barrow. Confidents into Scot∣land and Ireland, attempts all ways to draw those Armies to his Party. But, without Success; for, Ireland being addicted to the Rump, continued faithful to them. And Monk, did dare openly to dissent from the new Modellers. Part also of the Fleet, under their Vice-Admiral Lawson, did sharp∣ly demand the Restitution of the Parliament; and, Portsmouth, a strong Sea Town, revolted from our Novelists.
The Committee of Safety being in these Streights, provide with their utmost Care, Remedies for so many Evils. Lambert is sent with a great Army, consisting of Twelve Thousand Men, against Monk; and Forces were likewise sent to reduce Portsmouth, the Fleet being invited by Messages and Promises, to return to their Obedience. But, these precau∣tions proved every where fruitless; for, the Fleet blocking up the Mouth of the Thames, persisted in their Obstinacy. The Parlamentarians at Ports∣mouth, were grown formidable, by the Accession of those that besieged them, who had revolted to them; and, Ireland following the Example of the other Dissenters, declared for the Parliament. But, the greatest Danger that threatned them, appear∣ed in the North; for, Monk in his Letters to Fleet∣wood, did dare to disapprove the Actions of the Army, requiring the immediate Restitution of the Parliament. And, mustering his Army, having turn'd out such of his Officers as favoured the contrary Party, he marched Southwards and seizes the strong Town of Berwick. The Committee of Safety startled with Monk's Proceedings, send Embassadors to him to treat of Peace and a mutual Correspondence betwixt them, giving out at the same time Commissions and Or∣ders for new Levies; being resolved, if the Treaty did not succeed, to vindicate their Power by Arms. Lambert, as is said, was marched towards the Confines of the Kingdom with his Army, the Committee omitting no Industry, whereby they might divert this growing storm in the North. Monk also, revolving the Danger and Greatness of his Enterprize, will do nothing rashly. He appre∣hended the English Army as brave and numerous, and therefore resolves, to protract and delay Time. His Friends also out of England, had assured him,
that the New Government there was odious to the Nation, which would also, for want of Mo∣ney and Council, if he delay'd a little, fall by its own Weight. Moved with these Reasons, and the Backwardness of his own Preparations, he seems less averse to Peace than formerly; and, sending Three Delegates to the Committee of Safety, magnifies his Desires of an Accomodation. These Embassadors, met Lambert at York; and, satisfy∣ing him abundantly of the peaceable Inclinations of the Scottish Army, wrought so with him, that he prohibited the further Advance of his Forces. Monk having thus lull'd his Adversaries, sum∣mons a Convention of the Scots Nobility; from whom, not obscurely informed or presuming of his Intentions, he obtained Contributions for his Army for a Year before-hand, allowing them in return, Liberty to arm themselves for their De∣fence. In the mean time, a Pacification was a∣greed upon at London, betwixt Commissioners of both sides; where, amongst other things, the Name and Family, and Royal Title of the Stuarts, was wholly excluded; a Tyrannous Stratarchy, or Club-law being introduced under the Vail of a Free State. Monk having received the Articles agreed upon, recalls his Commissioners. And, casting Wilks, the principal of them, into Prison for exceeding his Orders, refuses to ratify the Treaty; and, declaring the Pacification null, breaks out into Open War. The City of London during these Traverses, al∣tho they had disapproved the Interruption of the Rump, did openly refuse to joyn with the Army; daring, by Petitions and Tumults, to manifest their Desires for a Free Parliament. And truly, such were the Sentiments of the whole Nation, which enraged the Souldiery to that height, that
a great part of the Army was sent into the City to keep them in their Obedience, denouncing Death and Ruine to the obstinate. Nor did they thus attain the Ends of their Desires, opposed by the contrary Strivings of the People, who would be satisfied with nothing, but the Restitution of This, or the Convocation of a New Parliament. Which they at length assented to, but with most servile Restrictions. There was nothing of moment, happened this while upon the Borders. Monk was resolved to delay and gain time; which he also did, by a∣voiding Battle, and amusing his Adversaries with another Treaty at New-Castle. But, Fleetwood, head of the Chymerical Republick, unequal for so great a Weight, as ignorant of his own Strength; a Man neither constant to himself nor bravely perfidious, thinks of laying down his Burthen. Which he was the more inclined to, as believing, if Lambert returned with Victory, his Reign would be but very short. To this, his Endeavours to reduce the Fleet had proved but vain, and that the Souldiers sent against the Rebels at Portsmouth, had revolted to them. To all this, he wanted Money for the Army he commanded, the Soul∣diers being ready to Mutiny for want of Pay, and would infallibly rage with all the Extravagancies of Sedition and Tumult. Prest with so many Evils, and dreading greater, this miserable Holder-Forth, wretchedly submits his Grandeur to the Rump, which he had so lately routed; and,Dec. 26. with sordid Assentation, permits his old Masters to re∣turn to their Assembly as before. The Rump being thus restored, their first Business was, to remove Lambert, by whom they had been disturbed, from his Command. Which was not difficult to effect; for, the Irish Brigades left him, and Desborough's Regiment of Horse, by the Ex∣ample
of Fleetwood's Souldiers, had abandoned him, which the rest of his Army likewise did, upon receiving the Parliaments Pleasure and Orders for that purpose. So that, this General who so lately hoped for Triumphs, by a strange Vicissitude of things, was forced to search for a Retreat to hide himself, not unworthy the Fate that attended him, since he suffered himself to be deprived of so great an Army, without the Circumstance of a Blow. Moreover, as most ample Conditions had been formerly presented to Oliver, and his Son Richard, upon returning to their Duty; so, no less Honours and Dignities, with the same Argu∣ments, had been offered by the Lord Hatton in the King's Name to Lambert; and, not without Threats (which proved Prophecies) That if he refused this Opportunity, the King's Restitution would be worught, and that suddainly without him, and against his Will. He should therefore make use of the Occasion, to render himself and Posterity great to after Ages. But, this Advice was in vain, he, as the rest, being blinded with Ambition and the Frantick Desire of Rule. Monk being glad that the Enemy was dispersed without a Blow, enters England with his little Army of Five Thousand Men; tho the Parlia∣ment had assigned him but Five Hundred, sending the rest back with Morgan into Scotland. All the several Parties and Factions, had an eye upon his Motions. The Rump presumed by his Means, to tame the Contumacious City; and, the Citizens hoped that he would compel the Rump to admit of the Secluded Members again, or fill the Vacan∣cies with new Elections. They had sent their Sword-Bearer to Complement him upon his com∣ing into England, and he was likewise congratu∣lated by all the Provinces he past thro, as also by Deputations from the most remote Counties. The
desires of all good Men were, for a Free Parlia∣ment, as the only remedy against the impending Evils, and, the true means to reduce the Common∣wealth to its pristine Forms of Government, and most holy Laws again. Monk, tho he was of the same Opinion, did not as yet think it convenient to discover himself so far. Lest therefore, he might displease those, for whose sake he had arm∣ed, his Returns to those many Addresses to him were general and civil, intimating, that he would acquaint the House with their Petitions, and re∣commend them; but, exhorts them for the pre∣sent, that they keep themselves quiet and within the Bounds of Modesty, permitting the Disposal of Affairs to the Judgment and Prudence of the Parliament. And, thus he moves forwards with slow Marches, forming the Garrisons and Forces in his Way to his own Humour. The Rump troubled that he was come with more Forces than they had designed, he pretending to secure them from all violence by them, solicitous of the many Petitions and Addresses to the General, and con∣vinced of the Hate of all Men towards themselves, not knowing where to fix, send Two of their Members Scot and Robinson, cunning Men to him, under pretence of congratulating his Arrival in England, but in effect to pry into his Actions, and to see what was to be expected from him. Monk received these Gentlemen with the greatest. Ob∣servance imaginable, very careful least he might betray himself by any Inadvertency to these crafty Discoverers. Being come to St. Albans, he was again salu∣ted by a Splendid Embassy from the City, which he received and dismissed with great Civility co∣vering his Purposes, with a profound Dissimulati∣on. On the Second of February, he entered the City with his Army, and took his Lodging at
White-Hall, against the Opinion of all Men. The Third Day being attended upon by Scot and Ro∣binson into the House, he refused the Chair ap∣pointed for him. But, leaning upon it, after he had received the Speaker's Thanks and Comple∣ments for his great Service in restoring the Parlia∣ment by his Council and Arms, he replyed in these Terms. First, having modestly declined so great praises; since he had done nothing but what his Duty obliged him to, He humbly offered to them, That they would be pleased to satisfy the People's Expecta∣tions, by a Vindication of their Laws and Liberties, God having restored them, not so much to study their own as the Publick Welfare. He then desired them, To remove the Jealousies some Men conceived, of their Design of perpetuating themselves in the Go∣vernment; and, that mindful of future Parliaments, they would fix a Period to this. Moreover, he ad∣vised them, Not to burthen the Subjects with New Oaths. And finally, That they should take heed to the Royallists and Fanaticks; and commending Scotland, and a Free State to their Care, he finished. There were they in the Assembly, who fancied, he spake more like a Dictator than an Orator, and yet he left them, loaden with Thanks and Congratulati∣ons, to take his place appointed him in the Council of State. Here, he prudently declined the Oath of Abjuration presented to him; not as absolutely refusing it, but as desiring time to consider of it. For, the Rump compell'd all in Office, to a Re∣nunciation of the Right and Title of the King. By which means, they insured them in their So∣ciety, and insnared them in the same Bond of Re∣bellion with themselves. The Londoners deceived in their Expectations, began to Mutiny. They will acknowledge no Authority, but that of a Free Parliament, and make a Decree in their Common Council, that for
the future, they will pay no Taxes nor Imposts whatever, to any but by order of such a Conven∣tion, full and entirely their own Masters. The Rump, mad with Anger, command Monk to march into the City with his Army, and order him to beat down the Gates and Portcullises, break their Posts and take away their Chains out of the Streets. Several also of the Prime Citizens, Assertors of Liberty, were put in the Tower, Secta∣ries and Fanaticks, being introduced into their Va∣cancies. The People were amazed at these Acti∣ons of Monk, from whom they had hoped better things. Whilst he, revolving the Odiousness of what he had done; however necessitated to it, by the pressing Commands of the Juncto, and lest he should imprudently spoil what he had so well be∣gun; and, not ignorant that these Tasks had been imposed upon him, as well to try his Obedience as to break the Friendship and Intelligence which was betwixt him and the City, resolved to at∣tempt greater Matters. To all this, he apprehend∣ed a Diminution of his Power with the Souldiers, which was likewise effected that very Day; the Command of the Army being given to a Septem∣virate of their own Confidents, he being but one of the Number. This highly displeased him; nor could he endure Co-Equals in Power, which the Rump forgetful that it was Lambert's Case, had obtruded upon him. And, who indeed can en∣dure Sharers in that Power, he is solely Master of? Monk impatient of so sordid an Indignity, com∣plains to his Officers of this Mutilation of his Au∣thority; who, upon consideration of the Matter of Fact, did unanimously declare, That the Par∣liament forgetful of them by whose Merit they did reign, had designed and resolved to casheer them, and, by continuing their Session, to perpe∣tuate their Tyranny over the most Noble English
Nation. Upon these Grounds the Army marches into London, resolving to joyn Hands with the Citizens, now Assertors of the Publick Liberty, and declare, together with them, for a Free Par∣liament, as the only Remedy for so many Evils. Being thus united, the Souldiers pathetically testi∣fied their Resentments, and Sorrow for the Injuries and forced Violence done to that Noble City, which was put upon them against their Wills. This happy Conjunction, fill'd the Town and whole Kingdom with so universal a Joy, that the People demonstrated their Satisfaction by their Acclamations,Feb. 9. ringing of their Bells and infinite Bonfires, besides the roasting of all manner of Rumps, in Contempt of the pre∣sent Juncto; resounding in these Transports and glad Ecstasies, the Name and Fame of the Ge∣neral. The Mock-Parliament troubled at this unex∣pected Change, and forseeing their infallible Ruin, if Monk persisted, omitted no Arts, no Allure∣ments, Wiles, Flatteries, Threats, Treasons, or any other means whereby they might reclaim Monk or destroy him. It is affirmed, that the Sectaries, who could suffer any Lord, but their own, whom they had so cruelly offended; offered him the Protectorate, upon condition he would not change Party. Which he Prudently, as well as Loyally, refused, considering, that tho the Employment was magnificent, yet it was very hazardous, the stream of the Peoples Incli∣nations flowing towards their old Government. It was reported, that Monsieur Bourdeaux, the Em∣bassadour of France, offered the same, but, with the same success, though he had also offered the Assistance of France for securing of the Digni∣ty.
Monk had given the juncto, who had usurp'd the Power over their Colleagues (they themselves be∣ing scarce an eight part of the whole) a Day, by which they were to fill their Vacancies with new Elections. Which being omitted by the Fanaticks, the Secluded Members having given him satisfacti∣on in several Conferences, why they ought to be readmitted, were, however mainly opposed by the Rumpers and chief of their Conspiracy, freely permitted to return to their Duty again. The House being encreased by double the Number, and at liberty to act, began where they had ended in 1648. Voting the Concessions of Charles the Mar∣tyr in the Isle of Wight to be satisfactory, and declare, That what ever had been done by their Ʋ∣surping Colleagues since, was null, and of no effect. But, these Gentlemen being Presbyterians, and con∣sequently tenacious of their old Principles, con∣demned indeed what was done by the Independants, but recall'd none of their own Unjust Decrees, nor voted any thing at present in favour of the King. On the contrary, they declare, That Charles I. did first raise up Arms against the Parliament. They impose again, the Solemn League and Covenant, the Root of all our Evils; and Vote, That none who had born Arms against the Parliament, should be admitted in the next Elections. But withal, they make Monk Captain-General of all their Forces; vote the Gates, Portcullises, Posts, Chains, &c. of the City, to be set up again at the Publick Charge; release Booth and others out of Prison; put the Militia of the Kingdom into good Hands; and having fixed a day for their Dissolution, as they had been obliged by Monk, they appointed a Free Parliament to convene in April next. These things being done to the Satisfaction of all Men, they further constitute a Council of State, who should govern during the Interregnum. And, re∣commending
the Souldiery to Monk's Care and Prudence, they dissolve themselves by their own Act and Decree (putting an end to that Long and Bloody Parliament, which could not be determined but by their own Consent) after they had exercised their Tyranny upon their Fellow-Subjects (besides the Horrid Murther of their Sovereign) the Space of Nineteen Years; except Oliver's Quingquennium, Richard's short Empire, and Lambert's Ten Weeks domineering. And thus ended that unhappy Parliament, which gave Life and Being to those viperous Factions of Presbytery and Independency; by whose violence and impetuous ambition of ruling, they did not only destroy the Hierarchy of the Church, but Monarchy out of the Common∣wealth, involving themselves in the Ruin of that Parent that begot them. 'Tis scarce credible, with what excess of joy the People, wearied with the continuance of that Black Parliament, and freed from the fear of its Re∣furrection, entertained the News of its Dissoluti∣on. The Fanaticks only, and the Dependants of the Hated Juncto, who left nothing unattempt∣ed for the perpetuating the Session of the Regicides, were averse to it. To effect which, they solicited Petitions out of the City against their Dissolution; they tempted the Tribunes and Chief Officers, with the usual Charms of Largesses to their Party; they caused fictitious Lists of the Militia to be printed. And, when all would not prevail, some of them, as St. Johns and others, were for im∣posing Conditions upon the King (for they no more doubted of his Restitution) that might re∣strain him from acting beyond their pleasure. But His Majesty's Rights and Prerogatives, were in∣violablely restored to him, by the Prudence and noble Endeavours of Monk. This enraged the
Regicides to that height, that they began now to condemn their own Precipitation and Folly, ac∣cusing themselves of Madness, in that, that they did persecute Lambert so rashly, and unseasonably to their own Destruction. They now call to mind, how ridiculously they had rejected the King's Gra∣cious Letters presented them by Nevil (who had accidentally received them) wherein they were assured of Indignity for all their monstrous Crimes and Treasons, if they yet at length would return to their Duty. They therefore, like Men in Despair, agitated by the Flagitiousness of their Guilt, resol∣ved to vindicate their Crimes by attempting great∣er, and to try the Matter once more by the Sword. Nor was it long, before an occasion presented it self. Lambert, who had been imprisoned in the Tower, because he had refused to give bail for his good Behaviour, had escaped thence and appear'd armed about Northampton. Some Sectaries, and several disbanded Souldiers repaired to him; all the Fanaticks of the Army being upon the Wing, till stay'd with the News of his Defeat. This Se∣dition was extinguish'd in its Birth. And Lambert being taken by Ingolsby without a Blow, hs Party was easily dispersed, whilst he was return∣ed into a more safe Custody in the Tower. During this Interval of Parliaments, the Council of State administer'd Affairs with much Prudence and Courage; and, putting out a Proclomation against all Disturbers of the Peace, easily restrain∣ed the Seditious Minds of the most dissenting. Monk also, purging his Army, by the Casheering of Fanaticks; and, living more familiarly with his Officers than usual, reconciled the most fierce a∣mongst them, to an Acquiescence in the Resolves of the future Parliament. The Disturbers of our Peace, being thus suppressed or quieted, the Loyal Party, as if indued with new Spirits, put on more
chearful Countenances, and shaking off their Fears with their Shackles, appeared more eminently con∣spicuous. But, being traduced by their Adversa∣ries, as thirsting after Revenge and Blood, they abundantly demonstrated by their Declaration, their own Innocence, and the Enemies Malice, restifying, That they would leave Vengeance to God, and Justice to the Disposal of Parliament. And now the City of London did also publish a Declaration, whereby they endeavoured to clear themselves from the Guilt of the Regicide and Ʋ∣surpation; as being actuated and oppressed, by the Counsels of Despair and Violence. Nor will we deny, but that they contributed by the like Tu∣mults to the Restitution, as they had formerly fo∣mented the War We have hitherto made but little mention of the Particular Actions of our King; for, we would not intermingle the History of the Best of Princes, with that of the most Scelerate of Subjects. We shall therefore, deliver the Series of his Actions by themselves, wherein notwithstanding will ap∣pear, as Extreams do best shine by Contraries, not only the Eminency of his Vertues, but the Errors, Impieties, Rebellions, Treasons, Slaughters, Sa∣criledges, Pride, Rapine and Infamy of his Ene∣mies. For, what Mischief did they not commit, and were guilty of? After the King's miraculous Escape from Wor∣cester, through a thousand Hazards, he at length got safe into France; being received at Paris, as if sent from Heaven. A pregnant Example, of the Care of Providence for the Persons of Kings. That Monarchy was actuated then, with well-nigh the same Spirit of Division, which had so lately distracted England, the Parisians inveighing a∣gainst the Errors of the Government and Evil Counsellors, pointing particularly at Mazarin
with the same Rage and Passion, as the Londoners did against Strafford. The Princes were grieved, that a Stranger should be First Minister of State, and would have him therefore removed. In or∣der to which, they raised an Army, obtaining Assistance from Spain (that Nation being very offi∣cious in helping their Neighbours upon such like Accompts.) Nor did they find King Lewis unpro∣vided, but resolved to oppose them with all his Power. King Charles perswaded Lewis and the Princes, by his own example, to peace; but, could not prevail, tho he carried himself with that Equality, that both sides were Jealous of his Conduct. For, the Princes refused to lay down Arms, unless the Cardinal were removed. And, the King, with the Queen-Regent, his Mother, would not have Laws prescribed to them by their Subjects. The Princes, had called the Duke of Lorrain to their Aid; who also entered France, with an Army; but returned, upon the Interposi∣tion of King Charles, who had discoursed with him about his undertaking the Protection of Ireland. This enraged the Princes against Charles, who blamed him much; and the Parisians did dare to calumniate and affront him to that Height, that he was forced to retire to St. Germains. Where he also, for the most part continued, until a League being made betwixt Cromwell, and that Crown (which he had opposed in vain) he was compel∣led again to go into Exile, out of his very Ba∣nishment. The Duke of York had thus long served in the Armies of France, with such Bravery and Forti∣tude, particularly in the Battle of Estampes, that he attracted the Eyes of all Men upon him. And, his behaviour in General, in Court and Camp, were so signal, that the Duke of Longville would have bestowed his Daughter upon him, the greatest
Fortune in France. And Marshal Turene being very Sick, recommended him to his King, as the fittest Person in that Great Monarchy, to com∣mand his Armies. But, he would not stay in France after the King his Brother, though he was offered to be Liuetenant-General of their Forces in Italy; but, leaving that inhospitable Land, accepted the Invitation of Don John, the Governour of the Spanish Low-Countries, where he largely asserted the Glories of his former Actions. The King in his passage to Germany, was re∣ceived at Leige with all imaginable Honour; and, going thence to the Spaw, met his Sister, the Princoss of Orange there. Very many Persons of Quality, as is usual at the Season, but in unusal Numbers upon this Occasion, were come thither out of the Neighbouring Nations, as well to see this Royal Congress, as to take the Waters. And all of them paid His Majesty as much Reverence, and Honour, as if he had been their own Natural Prince; or, would have vyed with us, who had the Happiness then to attend him, in Duty and Obedience, and Veneration for him. He was afterwards received at Colen by the Magistrates there, which the same Testimonies of good-will and Esteem: Where he resolved to fix his Court for some Time, as a place delectable, and con∣venient, for his Designs. A while after, he ac∣companied his Sister in her Return to Holland, as far as Dusseldorp, where he was magnificently received by the Duke of Newburgh, and treated during his Stay with Hunting and other Royal Di∣vertisements. Being returned to Cologn, he found his Brother the Duke of Gloucester there, lately ar∣rived from France. The King had been informed, now he had been thrust out of England by the Re∣gicides, which they had done to save the Expence of his Maintenance, and to Ship-wrack his Reli∣gion.
Besides, it was supposed, that Cromwell had designed his Removal, for that some in his Council had moved his Assumption to the Crown, as no ways obnoxious or prejudiced by reason of his Youth, as is already mentioned. 'Tis scarce imaginable, with what Constancy he de∣fended his Religion, however very young. In so much, that armed with Instructions from the Lord Hatton, and Doctor Cousens, he eluded the Assaults of Abbot Montague and the Marquess of Plessis, the one employed by the Queen-Regent of France, and the other by the Queen of England. Neither the charming Pleasures of the French Court, nor the Purple Dignities of the Church of Rome, nor yet the extream Severities of the Queen his Mother, who did not only refuse him his or∣dinary Sustenance, but denied him the Solace of her Benediction, were of strength to shake his Faith. Which they yet would endeavour to force, by shutting him up in the Jesuits Colledge; if the King his Brother, displeased with these Novelties, had not sent the Marquess of Ormond to his Rescue, and to bring him to Cologn to him; which he did, though not without Difficulty. But, nothing was impossible for this Great Man. After this, the King went to Franckfort, famous for its Marts. And, in his Progress, saluted the Queen Christina of Sweden at Koningsteyn. Where, after a Reception worthy Two such great Princes, and some private Discourses, the Duke of Glou∣cester, and his Royal Sister did the same. The Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Norwich, Lord New∣burgh, and others of His Majesty's Train, be∣ing also admitted, paid that great Princess the Respects due to her Highness. The Queen con∣tinued her Journey to Insprug, where, after a splendid Reception from the Arch-Duke, she made Public Profession of the Roman Religion.
The King leaving Franckfort, with the univer∣sal Acclamations of the People, and thundring of their Cannon, went to Ments, whither he had been invited by that Elector, where his Reception was truly Royal. And, after three Days Treat, parting with the same Magnificence, returned to Cologn. Nor did his Majesty spend the Time idly, whilst the Regicides triumphed in England. He had already sent Embassies, to all the Princes of Europe, to desire their Assistance against his Re∣bels. But, with little success, though the Cause were Common. The French flourishing in Pro∣mises, made a League with the Regicides. The Spaniards, though they seemed to grieve at the Murther of the King, were yet the first that ac∣knowledged and owned this rising Common-wealth. The Grand Seignior, corrupted with English Gold, delivered Sir Henry Hyde, the King's Embassa∣dour at that Court, against the Law of Nations, into the Hands of the Parricides; who Murthered him, by cutting off his Head before the Exchange. Swedeland was then in an unsetled Condition. Por∣tugal unable, being attacked both by the Spaniard, and Dutch in the Indies. Poland was worried with her own Domestick Distractions. Denmark was exhausted, with the Treasure formerly lent to Charles I. Others indeed, restified their good∣wills, by their Contributions; as, the Great Duke of Muscovy, the Count of Oldenburg, the Electors of Mentz and Brandenburg, and some other Prin∣ces of Germany, by the Earl of Rochester's negoria∣ting at Ratisbone. But, what could this import, to make a new and great War? Whereas, it scarce sufficed, to defray the Charges of the Embas∣sies. The King then seeing no Hopes of his Restaura∣tion from abroad, wisely sought a Remedy where the Wound was received, from the Benevolence
and Loyalty of his Subjects, which the Eminence of his Vertues could not in Justice refuse him. Neither was he any way wanting to himself, but most intent upon all Occasions; leaving nothing unattempted, whereby he might raise his sinking Affairs. He kept constant Correspondence with his Friends in England. Caus'd great Disturbances to the Rebels on every side, and exposing himself to the Danger, did more than once incite the People to arm against the Usurpers. He now kept his Court at Bruges in Flanders, nearer hand, having been invited by the Spaniards, repenting their too early Compliments to the Regicides, and supplied with 9000 l. per annum; which Money was punctually repaid upon His Majesty's Restitution. The Duke, in the mean Time, having recalled all the Kings Subjects in the French Service, joyn∣ing them with those in the Spanish Low-Countries, composed a considerable Body; which he com∣manded, with no less Honour than he had done in France, although they were well nigh destroyed by the fatal Valour of the English Rebels at Mardike and the Battle of Dunkirk. The Duke more illustri∣ous by Misfortunes, did not only for some time resist, but retard the Progress of the Victors; until oppressed by multitudes, as is already said, he was necessitated to comply with the Fate of the vanquished. Cromwell dying soon after, however a way seemed thereby to be opened to the Kings Restauration, his Majesty received the News of it with remarkable Constancy and Calmness of Mind, in no ways insulting, though he saw his most Mor∣tal Enemy extinguished in the Person of this Ʋsurper. Cardinal Mazarin, however averse to King Charles, did at the same time congratulate the Queen his Mother, upon the Hopes of her Sons Restauration, since he was, by the Death of
that Tyrant, delivered from his most implaca∣ble and successful Enemy. The sudden Change in England, followed by the Deposing of Richard, and the Resurrection of the Rump, and the other Innovations already menti∣oned, which followed; as they augmented the Hopes of the King at Home, so they varied the Counsels of Princes abroad: Which his Majesty applyed, in as much as was possible, to his own Use, by Negotiations and Embassies. But there being now a Treaty in Agitation betwixt France and Spain, he would himself be present at it. For, if a Peace were concluded, which was more than probable, betwixt these great Princes, it was but reasonable to suppose, that they might spare some of their numerous Forces to assist an injured King, their Ally by Blood, and Common Interest. And yet, the King would rather reduce his Rebel-Sub∣jects to Obedience, by the Appearance of his Power, than by the Use of his Forces. In the mean time, accompanied with the Duke of York his Brother, and the Marquess of Ormond, he hasted Incognito through France, having saluted the Queen his Mother at Paris, in his way to St. John De Luz, where the Great Ministers of the Two Crowns were then in Treaty. Don Louis de Haro, upon Notice of the Kings Approach, went to met and receive him. Which he did (alighting from his Horse, and Embracing and kissing his Knees) with as much Honour and Splendour, as if he had been his Master the King of Spain. The next Day, his Majesty was visited by Cardinal Mazarin, the other great Plenipotentiary, who was courtly, though reserved. And yet, the King behaved himself with so much charming Prudence to both these Ministers, and gained so much upon them, that he not only defeated the Designs of Lockhart, the Regicides Embassadour then there,
but having obtained an Assurance of being assisted by the Forces of the Two Crowns for his Restituti∣on, he was dismissed with the same Honours he had been received. At Paris in his Return, he was splendidly treated by the Duke of Orleance, as King of England; and acknowledged such by all Men, none now doubting, of his sudden Restau∣ration. From thence, he came to Brussels, enter∣ing into that City publickly, and with a Pomp worthy his Grandeur, where he also was magni∣ficently caressed, and where he designed to con∣tinue until the Dissolution of the Parliament. Whilst these things were in Agitation, the Di∣stractions and Risings in England were various; the Impatience of the Royal Party to restore their Prince, precipitating them, as usually, into great Inconveniencies. And yet, they got to a Head in Cheshire, under Sir George Booth, as is already mentioned; and, the King himself was in private about St. Malos, attending some favourable Oc∣casion to transport him into England. These Ri∣sings, especially Booth's, were lookt upon as formi∣dable, it being supposed, that Monk was inter∣mingled with them. But, they being supprest every where, the King returned again to Brussels, in expectation of the event of the Pacification con∣cluded betwixt the Two Crowns. He had not con∣tinued long there, when being informed of the Differences betwixt the Army and Rump, his Hopes being raised thereby, he took also a Resolution not to be wanting in himself. He had tryed the ways of War, and had also attempted the perfidious Fidelity of his Enemies, but with no Success. He will therefore, put himself upon o∣ther Counsels: And seeing Monk commanded the Rebels in Scotland, in Chief, he will enquire into the Secret of his Intentions and Mind. The King had found him a sharp Enemy, but Noble; free
from Calumnies and Revilings, nor any way di∣stained with the inexpiable Guilt of the Regicide. In the former Wars, he had served King Charles I. but being taken, and perhaps neglected, he pre∣ferred Liberty before Confinement, and the Ma∣nagement of Arms to the clinking of Shackles. It was therefore thought expedient, to attempt him under these Circumstances, and endeavour to re∣claim him with the Charms and Honour of being the Deliverer of his Country and King, the Church, and State. Sir John Greenvill, eminent for his Loyalty, and of kin to Monk, was employed to manage this important Secret. Who in order to it, having gained Mr. Nicolas Monk, a Mini∣ster, the General's Brother, on whom, as Patron, he had bestowed a very considerable Benefice, he sent him into Scotland, with Commission, in the King's Name, to offer him any Conditions he should please to Demand. But, Monk wisely suspicious, under pretence of the incertain Vicissitudes of Af∣fairs, answered ambiguously, neither openly de∣claring his sentiments nor wholly concealing them. He also, having exacted an Oath of secresie from his Brother, sent him back with his Daughter, which was the Pretext for his coming into Scotland; as also, a Message to the Members outed by Lam∣bert, to assure them of his Fidelity to the Parli∣ament. These Gentlemen, raised with these Hopes, presumed all things upon that Accompt, and was a plausible Vail for him in the modelling and forming his Army, according to his Designs. But Greenvill being not well satisfied with the Parson's Declaration, acquainted the King with it. Who, notwithstanding the Abstruseness of it, drew no ill Augury thence, commanding Greenvil to attend the General when he came to London, and make all imaginable Enquiry, of what Intentions he was towards His Majesty's Restitution. And, this he
happily performed, being admitted by the Assi∣stance of Mr. Morrice, a great Confident of Monk's, and afterwards Secretary of State to the King. The Enterview was in Morrice his Chamber; where, no Body but themselves being present, Greenvill de∣livered Monk the King's Letters. To which, after Twice reading of them, he answered, That he would not only comply with the King's Desires, but also restore him without Conditions, or any the least Di∣minution of his Royal Authority. Neither would he think of any Terms for himself, humbly sub∣mitting that to the King's Pleasure when he re∣turned. Greenvill ecstasi'd with the Joy of his Suc∣cess, desired Letters to the King, to testifie so great a Secret; but he replied, That he would commit nothing to Writing, nor send any Body to the King besides himself, whom he had found so faithful and secret. He hoped, His Majesty would Pardon what was past, professing, That he always had a Veneration for the King, and now upon this first Occasion would testifie his Obedience to him, with the Hazard of his Life and Fortune. Greenvill overjoyed with this happy Conclusion, hastened to acquaint the King with it at Brussels, who was in∣finitely pleased with Monk's generous Actings; es∣pecially, having received Letters out of England from some Friends there, desiring him to accept of the Isle of Wights Conditions, they being the best they could at present procure him. But, Green∣vill was, by Advice of Sir Edward Hyde (then made Chancellour) and the Marquess of Ormond, presently returned into England, with a Commis∣sion for Monk, as General of all the Forces in the Three Kingdoms; and, a Letter all writ with the King's own Hand, full of gracious Expressions and Acknowledgments for so great a Benefit. Greenvill had also other Letters, which we shall mention in their Place. And, lest he might himself re∣turn
empty, after he had been so signally meri∣torious, the King honoured him with a Warrant for an Earldom and 3000 l. a Year. Whilst these things were in Agitation, the Eng∣lish observing that the Treaty betwixt France and Spain upon the Borders, would end in a Peace, shewed themselves likewise not averse to it; especi∣ally considering, the vast Commerce they always had with the Spanish Countries. Hence followed, a spontaneous Cessation from Arms. But, the King would not expect the Event of it, for fear of being imposed upon here as he had been in France; and therefore, removed his Court to Breda, be∣longing to his Sister the Princess of Orange. The sudden Change in England, occasioned Changes of Councils. And, now it was supposed that the King should take shipping from Calais, or some Part in Flanders, having been earnestly invited thereto from both France and Spain: But, to con∣tent both he accepted of neither, but continued at Breda, cluding thereby the Arts of both Princes, the French Designs, as well as those of the Spa∣nish, longing for the return of Jamaica and Dun∣kirk to their Obedience. The King then being se∣cure at Breda, was saluted there by Deputies from the States-General, where he was also magnificently treated by the Publick. The Parliament being now met, consisting of Two Houses, free, and full in their Numbers, their first Care was to give Publick Thanks to God for rescuing their Country from Usurpation and Ty∣ranny; and, the next, to thank the General, who by his Courage and Conduct had contributed so mainly to it. They then Vote, Declare, and De∣cree, That the Government of England is Monar∣chical, consisting in a King and Two Houses of Parliament. After this, King Charles I. his Statues, thrown down by the Sectaries, were set up again;
and, the New Arms of the Common wealth, with extream Contumelies, trn and defaced, those of the King being put in their Places. A w Days after, the King himself the Members of Bth Houses as∣sisting, and an Ifnity of People, was with the usual Ceremonies, but unusual Transports of Joy, proclaimed at Westminster, in London, and after∣wards in the whole Kingdom, King of Great Britain and Ireland; In these following Terms: Although it can no ways be doubted, but that his Majesty's Right and Title to these Crowns and King∣doms, is and was every way compleat by the Death of his most Royal Father of glorious Memory, without the Ceremony or Solemnity of a Proclamation: Yet, since Proclamations in such Cases, have been al∣ways used, to the End that all good Subjects might up∣on this occasion testifie their Duty and Respect. And, since the armed Violence and other Calamities of many Years last past▪ have hitherto deprived us of any Op∣portunity, wherein we might express our Loyalty and Allegiance to his Majesty: We therefore, the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London, and other Freemen of this Kingdom now present, do, according to our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully, and unani∣mously acknowledge and Proclaim, That immediately upon the Decease of our late Sovereign, King Charles I. the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and all the Kingdoms, Dominions and Rights be∣longing to the same, did by inherent Birth-right, and lawful, undoubted Succession, descend and come to his most Excellent Majesty, King Charles II. as being Lineally, Justly and Lawfully, next Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm. And, that by the Goodness and Providence of Almighty God, He is of Eng∣land, Scotland and Ireland, the most Potent, Mighty and Ʋndoubted King, and thereunto we most humbly
and faithfully do submit, and oblige our selves our Heirs and Posterities for ever. At the Ceremony of this Proclamation, the Publick Joy expressed by Shoutings, Acclamations of God bless the King, Bells and Bonfires, were no less extraordinary than infinite, the People being at length redeemed out of so long and so wretched a Captivity, by the miraculous Restauration of their Beloved Prince. Our most August Monarch, had hitherto, as is already mentioned, wandered in Foreign Courts, and as usual in the Disgraces of Fortune, too much neglected; especially, where Reason of State seemed more prevalent, than all the Tyes of Blood or Hospitality. He was at Brussels, the Metropolis of the Spanish Netherlands, when he first heard of this Change in England; from whence he re∣moved to Breda, a more secure place under the Circumstances of the present Times. And, now he hastens Greenvill away again, with Letters to the Two Houses of Parliament, to the City, to Monk, and to Montague, joynt General at Sea. In these Writings, He Pardons all Men and all Crimes, committed against his Royal Father or himself; ex∣cept such as the Parliament should except against; promising further; The Souldiers their Arrears tho' they bore Arms against him; and, That he would from that time receive them into his own Trust and Service, upon the same Terms they did now enjoy, &c. This Declaration being received and read in Parliament, with inexpressible Satisfaction and Joy, was voted infinitely Satisfactory, and a splendid Embassy ordered to the forthwith sent to the King, with their humble Thanks for his Gracious Decla∣ration and Letters; and, to invite and press His Majesty's return, to his Parliament and People. Six Lords and Twelve Commoners, with Twenty Prin∣cipal Citizens, with a noble Train of Attendants,
were sent upon this happy Occasion. Who, the Wind favouring them, after a quick Passage, found His Majesty at the Hague in Holland, where he had been treated and defrayed by the States of that Province, with all imaginable Demonstrations of Honour and Friendship. The Embassadours be∣ing admitted to the King's Presence and graciously heard, had their Desires crowned with a wisht-for Answer. So, that nothing now impeded His Majesty's Return to his Dominions, but the Wind, which in favour to the kind Dutch, kept him some little time longer there. In the interim, the Duke of York visited the Fleet, lying at Anchor before Scheveling, under the Command of General Mon∣tague, formerly (as is mentioned) reconciled to His Majesty. After a magnificent Reception, his Royal Highness taking the Oaths of Allegiance from the Sea-men, and having changed the Names of several of the Prime Ships, restored this first Pledge of Empire to our Monarch. The King having taken his Leave of the States General, and of the States of Holland in their Assemblies (the Honour of which visit they ac∣knowledged in a most Elegant Speech, with all the Expressions of Gratitude and Satisfaction) he im∣barked in a Boat, prepared for him by the States, whose Flag had this memorable Inscription, Quo Fas et Fata vocârunt. The Ways, the Downs, the Sand Hills and Shores, were crowded with an innumerable Multitude of all Sorts of People, ecchoing his Departure with Vows for his good Success. By the way, upon the Approach of a Brigandine from the Fleet, he entered into it. And, going aboard the Royal Charles, formerly the Naesby, with his Two Royal Brothers, the Dukes of York and Gloucester, he was
receieved there by Montague with all submissive Veneration, who again treated him with a Gracious Testimonial of his Affection. The Season was very clear, and the Sea so calm, that his Majesty mounting upon the Poop did dain to turn his Eyes to the Shore which he had so lately left; and, seeing the infinite Crowds of Spectators there, he was pleased to say, That he thought his own Sub∣jects could scarce have more Tenderness for him than those People, on whose Affections he saw he reigned no less, than he was going to reign on the Wills of the English. After this having kiss'd his NephewPrince of Orange. and the Queen his AuntQueen of Bohemia., and bid them farewel, he had much ao to be separated from his Sister.Princess Royal. This matchless Princess, who had born and slighted so many Vicissitudes of Evil; and who had frequent∣ly solaced the Calamities of her Brothers by her charming Discourses, can scarce now, without shaking her Constancy, endure the Absence of a few Days; being what she had desired with so much Impatience, and what was so glorious to both of them. The Anchors being at length weighed, he left this friendly Shore, with the thundering of the Cannon on both sides, and sailed towards England, now truely his own. On the 25th of May, he came into Dover Road; where, upon his landing, he was received by Monk with Joy and Obser∣vance. This best of Servants, had thrown him∣self upon his Knees, to adore this best of Masters. But, the King not forgetful of what he owed him, took him up, embraced him and kist him. Other Noble Men and Persons of Quality there present, were likewise admitted to the Honour of his Ma∣jesty's Hand. Which done, the King, with his Two Royal Brothers, the General and the Duke of Buckingham, took Coach, amongst the charming
Congratulations and Shouts of a pleased People, and went that Night to Canterbury. The next Day, Monk was install'd Knight of the Garter, the En∣signs of that Honour, being put upon him by the Two Royal Brothers. He went hence towards London, ac∣companied with the whole Nobility of the Nation, and a numberless Multitude of the Commons, flocking together to see their Restorer. He view∣ed the Ships at Chatham by the Way, and the Army drawn up upon Black-Heath. On the 29th of May, it being his Majesty's Birth-Day, he entered London in Triumph, he himself the greatest and goodliest part of it. Where he was received by the Universality of the People, sensible of the End of their Miseries, and the smothering of a most cursed Rebellion, with joy not to be expressed, scarcely conceived.
PART III. BOOK I. The REBELLION breaks into new Flames. Some Millenaries secur'd. Venner's Insurrection, and End. The Presbyterians stickle for new E∣lections. Several Seditious Tumults detected and punished. The Plague consumes the People. The Conflagration of the City. Tumults in Scotland. Oates's Plot. The Parliament insist upon remo∣ving the Duke from the King's Presence and Councils. It is dissolved. Another Parliament call'd. The Duke retires from Court. A new Council chosen. The Parliament refuse the King Money, and insist upon the Bill of Exclusion. It is also dissolved, another being Summon'd. A new Rebellion in Scotland. The Arch-bishop of St. Andrew's inhumanly butchered. The Rebels are defeated at Bothwel-Bridge. The King sick. He recovers. The Duke returns to Court. Mon∣mouth Cabals, and is outed of his Employments. The Lord Strafford beheaded. The Parliament dissolv'd, and succeeded by another at Oxford, which is likewise dismiss'd. College is hang'd and Shaftsbury try'd. The strange Encrease of the Eanaticks. Their Insolence and Power in the City. They form a Conspiracy. The Council of Six. The Plot to Murther the King and Duke. The Providential Fire at New-Market. Keeling dis∣covers the Conspiracy. Russel and Sidney are executed. Monmouth absconds, but upon his Sub∣mission is pardoned. He again transgresses, and is banished. The King dyes of an Apoplexy. The Duke succeeds.
KING Charles II. being restored to the Great∣ness and Glories due to his Birth and Ver∣tues, was not yet Crowned, when the Faction har∣dened in Wickedness, did dare to disturb his, and the Publick Quiet of the Nation. The Acts of Grace and Oblivion Decreed in Favour of these worst of Rebels, could not hinder them to con∣spire against the King; by whose immense Bounty, they enjoyed not only Impunity for their Crimes, but Rewards in the undisturb'd Possession of their Rapines and unjust Acquisitions. But, no Indul∣gence of the Prince, could acquire him the Good Will of this perverse Generation. Some therefore, whose Clandestine Councils were penetrated into, were secured; as, Overton, sometimes a Major-General in the Rebles Army, Day, Courtney and others, Millenaries, or, Fifth Monarchy Men. Nor did the Detention of these, hinder the Rest of the Party to attempt their designed Insurrection, which they did with such impetuous Madness, that it exceeds all Belief, and may justly lay an Imputation upon the Credit of History in the Re∣lation of it. For, how is it possible to imagine, that a handful of Men, not exceeding Fifty in Number, should undertake, and that in Cold Blood, and by Day-light, to assault so great a City as London, with Confidence of Success? By this unheard of Enterprise, it is visible how far the outragious Liberty of the Enthusiasticks, may oblige them to dare. On the Sixth of January,1660. having armed them∣selves in their Conventicle, with Weapons they had conveyed thither (for the King had indulged to all Opinions, a Liberty of serving God their own Way) they came about Twy-light to St. Paul's Church-yard. Where, drawing up their small Army, they placed Sentinels in all the Avenues that led to it. One of these, kill'd a Man that
passed by, for that being asked, Who he was for? he had answered, for God and King Charles. This Noise raising the Neighbouring Train'd Bands, they were repell'd by the Rebels, who marched thence thro Bishops-Gate; and, wheeling about, entred again by Cripple Gate. And finally, forcing their Passage by affrighting the Guard at Alders∣gate, they declared, They took up Arms for King Jesus. Continuing their March thence, they shot a Constable dead in Beech-Lane, who would have opposed them, and retreated thence into Cane-Wood. Where they absconded for some time, with De∣sign to raise greater Tumults in the City; which they might probably have done, if they had not been prevented by a Party of Horse and Foot sent to disperse them. Nor were they thus appeased. For, having publisht an abominable Libel against the Royal Family, they returned to London with more wild Confidence than before. The King was then at Portsmouth, whither he had accom∣panied the Queen his Mother, and the Princess Henrietta his Sister, in their Way to France. These Wretches, would not omit so fair an Op∣portunity as seem'd to present it self by his Ab∣sence; but, take Arms again, under the Conduct of one Venner, a Wine-Cooper. This Fellow, by his Preaching had strangely incensed the furious Zeal of these Mad-men, pronouncing to them with Confidence, That no Weapon framed against them should prosper, nor a Hair of their Heads pe∣rish. They should look upon the Example of Gideon. It was the same thing to God, whether he saved by a few, or a great Multitude. These Discourses, together with the Impunity of their first Attempt, precipitated these desperate Enthusiasticks, to the Disturbance of the Publick Peace and their own Destruction.
Their first Appearance, was in Thread-Needle-street, behind the Exchange, where they beat back a Party sent from the Guard there. But, upon the Advance of more Forces, they retreated to Bishops Gate street; where, after a smart Encounter, Two of each side being slain, slipping here and there away, they disappear'd. A while after, like the Flashing of Clouds, they were seen again at College-Hill; from whence crossing Cheap-side, they pass'd into Wood-street. Here, after a Cruel Fight, wherein they shew'd Skill, as well as Va∣lour, having ruffled some Train'd-Bands, and repell'd the Horse Guards that came to assist them, they were not overcome, until Venner being knockt down, and sorely wounded, and Tuffney and Cragg, Two of their fiercest as well Preachers as Com∣batants, were slain. These being killed, the rest fled; and, being for the most part taken, Eleven of them were drawn, hanged and quartered, some others, tho convicted, being repriev'd by the King's Clemency. There sell of the Royallists Two and Twenty, and as many of the Rebels. Those who were executed, expired with Execra∣tions in their Mouths, against the King and the Government; and, Blasphemy against God, da∣ring to say, That if they were deceived or misled, God had deceived them. Thus, no less wickedly, than foolishly charging God with their Fancies and Delusions. The King having dissolved his First Parlia∣ment, which he had honoured with the Title of the Healing Parliament, had summon'd another. 'Tis remarkable, with what Industry the Presby∣terians stickled in the Elections to choose Members of their own Faction. Tho to no purpose; for, the People now freed from the Impostures of the Godly, using their own Liberty in giving their Voices, and not forgetful of the Tyranny of the
Disciplinarians, did openly reject them; which mainly contributed, to the Settlement of the Peace and Religion of the Kingdom. So that this Parliament, by their endeavours to restore the Commonwealth to its antient Splendor, so far irri∣tated those Wasps of Independency and Presbytery, that they did dare to buz after a New Change. The Champions of the late Anarchy, were the principal in this Conspiracy. But, being detected before they broke out, theBare∣bone, Moyer, Salmon, &c. chief of them being apprehended, the design vanished without do∣ing any great harm, except to the Contrivers of it. About the end of this Year, the Novellists were again suspected to hatch new Designs; which gain∣ed Credit so far, that the City Train'd-Bands kept extraordinary Guards all the following Sum∣mer. But, the Plot being discovered, by the Confession of one of the Actors in it, was also expiated by the Execution of Philips, Tongue, Gibs and Stubs, for High-Treason. They had conceived a new Form of Government, their most secret Councils being actuated by a Juncto of Six. Ludlow the Regi∣cide, was designed to be their General, having devoted the King, the Duke, and the present Go∣vernment to Destruction, and, to surrogate a new Domination of Enthusiasticks in their Place. Nor were the Fanaticks deterred with these Severities, against so many Criminals. The Poyson diffused, and the Factions uniting closer amongst themselves, contrive how to lay the Foundation of a New War. Their Consciences were so exagitated with their former Guilt, that their Fear of Punishment, obliged them to move in Contempt of the King's Mercy, as well as his Justice. The executed Re∣gicides, were represented to the People as Martyrs, and their last Speeches upon the Gallows, were ob∣truded as the Oracles of expiring Saints. The Pul∣pits thundred Curses and Terrors, and the Streets
crowded with Libels. One amongst the rest, that magnified the Example of Ehud, who kill'd the King of Moab by Surprise, was timely sup∣prest as it was peeping Abroad. The unquiet Faction, were still acting or con∣triving; and, now they lay the Scene further off. They designed to intercept the Castle of Dublin, together with the Lord Lieutenant, the Duke of Ormond, in the Desguise of Labourers; whilst o∣thers were appointed, to seize the Tower of London and White-Hall; and, others again to surprise the Passages of the Severne, Trent and Tine, by pos∣sessing themselves of Nottingham, Gloucester and New-Castle. All the Rable of Sectaries, were en∣gaged in this Conspiracy; some of Cromwell's Old Souldiers, as also the Assertors of the Long Par∣liament, how dissenting soever amongst themselves, yet agreeing like Herod and Pilate, to ruin the Government, and crucify the Lord's Anointed. But, this, as the rest of their Conspiracies, vanisht in Smoke; Fifteen of them, confronted and con∣victed of this Black Treason, being executed, some at Leeds in York shire, some at York; who dyed not only in their Impenitency, but with strange contempt of Death it self. London, the Old Forge of Rebellion, had also its Pseudo-Mar∣tyrs, a Printer being hanged for publishing Sediti∣ous Pasquils, and others Pillory'd for the same Crimes, Preludes to the designed Attempts of these bold Enthusiasticks.  And yet they continue their Endeavours, by false Rumors to separate the King from his Friends, and by the same Arts, more strictly to unite theirs amongst themselves. They would begin a New Rebellion, by the inter∣cepting of Carlile. In order to which, some of them met at Kirby-Stevens; but being fewer in Number than were expected, they again dispersed themselves; Three only being taken, who having
been also engaged in the former Conspiracy, were executed as Travtors at Appelby. Their Names were Waller, Weatherhead and Petty, fit to be inserted in the Martyrology of these Perjur'd Saints. In the following Years, these Domestick Evils broke out with new Violence, taking rise from our Distractions, occasioned by the War with the Dutch, and the Plague raging amongst us; to which it may be presumed, the Negligence of our Inferiour Magistrates did so much contribute. The Sword, the Pestilence, and Fire (which well-nigh consumed the City) as if they mockt at the publick Calamities, were made use of to enrage the very Madness of the People; exagitating their Conster∣nations, with fictitious Stories and Prophesies; and not obscurely pointing at our Chief Magistrates and Governours, as the Authors and Causes of all these Calamities. This subtile and contagious Spirit of Rebellion creeping into the Minds of Men, did at length infect with its Poison the very Par∣liament it self, which will too evidently appear by the Sequel. In the mean time, Eight of the late Ʋsurper's Veteranes, were hanged at Tyburn, for contriving to murther the King and subvert the Common-wealth. One Alexander, furnished these Wretches with Money and Advice, for the carry∣ing on of their Wickedness; but, they deferred the executing of their Designs, till the Third of December following; for, having erected a Scheme, they fancied that would be a Fortunate Day, a Planet averse to Monarchy being then predomi∣nant. The Scourges of War and Pestilence, were fol∣lowed by a terrible Conflagration in London. Where, however Thirteen Thousand Houses were consumed with the Fire, the Sacrifice could not expiate their former Rebellion, and their not oppo∣sing
the Murther of their Sovereign; which, some of them had encouraged, all permitted. The Tumults in Scotland, were carryed on with the same Licentiousness and Contempt of Autho∣rity. Sir James Turner, for his more severe Pro∣secution of the Laws against Dissenters, as was pre∣tended, was barbarously used by them, to the endangering of his Life. For, being violently ta∣ken out of his Bed at Dunfreese, he was by the wild Rabble, dragg'd naked into the Market-Place, hardly escaping their Fury by the Perswasion of some of the more moderate amongst them. Nor were they contemptible for Numbers, being by the Accession of the Multitude encreased to Sixteen Hundred, so that they durst march in a Body to∣wards Edenburgh. But, being at Glencarne, and fought by the Royallists, they were broke and routed. Five Hundred of them were slain upon the place, and One Hundred taken; whereof, some of them being affixt to the Gallows for the Terror of others, the rest were pardoned by the King's Clemency. But now the Factious have new Matter to work upon, the Odium of conspiring being thrown upon the Papists. All Things were quiet at Home. Our Wars being husht up by the Treaty of Breda. The Plague did devour our People no more, its Poison being extinct. And, the City lately of Wood, was now by the King's Munificence rebuilt of Brick and Stone: When one Titus Oates, who had had his Education and Orders in the Reformea Church of England, being afterwards reconciled to that of Rome, passed over first into Flanders, and thence into Spain: Where, under pretence of Religion and his Zeal for it, he gained so much Favour with the Priests and Jesuits, that he had Oppor∣tunities, as he pretended, to penetrate into their most secret Councils. This new Proselyte, changing
Parties again, returned into England; where he in∣forms the King, of a Design of the Papists against his Life, against the Reformed Religion, and the present Government. And, naming several Lords, as, Bellasis, Powis, Peters, Arundel, Castelmain, Stafford, and other Men of Quality, as prime Con∣spirators in this Treason, gained so much Credit with the Parliament, that the accused were all im∣prisoned, the Papists commanded to remove Ten Miles from the City, and all of them to be cashier'd out of all Employments both Military and Civil. The mysterious Death of Godfrey, inflamed the Parliaments Credulity to Vote, That there was a Plot, execrable and Hellish, as they termed it. In∣somuch as the King, at their instant Desires, past a Bill to disable all Popish Peers or other Members so affected, to fit in either Houses of Parliament. Offering further, to comply with any Expedient they should propose, for the Security of the Prote∣stant Religion, so as they tended not to impeach the Right of Succession. Coleman, Ireland, Picke∣ring, Groves, Fenwick, Whitebread, Langhorn, Staley, Green, Berry and Hill, condemned by the Testimony of Oates and others of his Associates, solemnly attested their Innocence at their Death. Nor did so great Effusion of Blood, suffice to re∣move the Jealousies they had of the Papists: so that the Houses of Parliament, to whom the King had granted all things for the security of Religion, not contented with these Concessions, proceeded so far, as to press the King to remove the Duke of York from his Presence and Councils. To this, they added the Imprisonment of his Secretary Williamson, without his Knowledge. Which did so far irritate his Majesty, that he dissolved this Parliament, after it had continued Seventeen Years.
Fanaticism, which had lurk'd for some Time under a Protestant Mask, and infused its Contagion into the Parliament, began now under Pretence of Godliness to appear more openly. The King ha∣ving dissolved the Parliament, as is said, had sum∣mon'd another, from which he hoped for more good than he had hitherto experimented. And, lest the Presence of his Brother might prove any Obstacle, he commanded him to retire until the Heat of the Faction did a little cool. Which he obeyed without Repugnancy, that he might in no wise occasion any the least Dissension betwixt the King his Brother and the Parliament. But the King's Indulgence, and the Duke's Observance, were equally valu'd. Nor could all his Concessi∣ons, with those Limitations, not meddle with the Succession or his Prerogatives, satisfy their Con∣tumacy.  Nay, he had dismissed his Privy Coun∣cil, as being ill look'd upon by the Parliament, surrogating others in their rooms not so obnoxious to the Faction, making the Earl of Shaftsbury President. But, all this was to no purpose; for, the Parliament omitting those Things which they were to have treated of, and postponing the King's Demands of Subsidies, they again attacked the Duke of York, absent then in Flanders, the Commons voting his Exclusion from the Succession. But, the King seeing the contumacious Animosity of the Party, and not obscurely perceiving, that he him∣self was aimed at through the Duke's Sides,July 10. Octob. 17. dis∣solving this present Parliament, commanded a∣nother to convene in October following. Whilst these things are in Agitation in England, the Tumults in Scotland flew higher. Dr. Sharp, the Arch-bishop of St. Andrews, was most inhu∣manly murthered in his Coach, by a Party of the barbarous Covenanters. Which done, the Rebellion they designed, was, by the Concourse of
those Multitudes that flockt together, suddainly formed into a considerable Army, consisting of Sixteen Hundred Horse, and above Four Thou∣sand Foot. Nor were the Royallists less active, the King having sent the Duke of Monmouth thi∣ther as General; who joying with the Scots Nobi∣lity, they raised such a Force, that fighting the Rebels at Bothwel-Bridge, chey defeated them. The Slaughter was not great; for; the Enemies Horse not being prest or pursued, by the Connivance if not Command of Monmouth (for he himself had other Designs, as it afterwards appeared) retreat∣ed in a Body at least Twelve Miles from the Place they had fought in; and, separating there, dispersed themselves, some of the Foot being slain. A few of the Prisoners were punished for their im∣prosperous Treason. After this, the King fell sick of a Fever at Windsor, which was so violent, that the Physiti∣ans despaired of his Recovery Upon News whereof, the Duke hastened from Brussels to Court. But, it seemed otherwise good to the Almighty; who was pleased to prolong his Life, until he could leave the Kingdom, agitated at present with so many Distractions, settled and composed to his Succes∣sor. Being restored to his Health, the Joy of it was celebrated by the Universality, at least the Good Part of the Nation; the City also sending their Lord Mayor and Aldermen, with a great Train with Thirty Coaches; and a Troop of a Hundred Horse, for their Convoy to Windsor, to congratulate his Hapyy Recovery. But Monmouth, however illegitimate, blinded with Ambition, and not content with those great Honours and Places he enjoyed, aspired to the Crown it self; inviting and alluring with the Baits of Employments and Rewards, some of the most interested, to his Party. But, this caballing, was
discovered to the King by the Earl of Oxford; who, abhorring the Treason, preferr'd his Loyalty before all the Offers of Ambition and Greatness. The King being justly incensed against the Ingrati∣tude and Vanity of the Pretender, divested him of all those Dignities and Offices which he enjoyed, and banished him the Kingdom. Moreover, to prevent the Chymerical Delusions which the Re∣port of his being married, or contracted to the said Duke's Mother might occasion, his Majesty by re∣peated Declarations publickly emitted, as also by Writings under his own Hand, declared, Ʋpon the Faith of a Christian, and the Word of a King, that he never Married; nor gave any Contract to any Woman whatsoever but to Queen Katharine his Wife. This the King did, with so much Solemni∣ty, to prevent the Peoples being abused by these false and malitious Reports; and, lest the Facti∣ous might thereby mislead them, to disturb the Publick Peace, or violate the Rights of Successi∣on: Whereby also, the vain Pretences of Mon∣mouth, and the ridiculous Machinations of the Seditious, might be disappointed. The Parliament,1679. 1680. which the King had sum∣moned to meet in October, being delayed by seve∣ral Motogatives, did not come together before the October following. Nor were their Councils now less violent, punishing some of their own Members by expelling them the House, and persecuting se∣veral of the Judges, and others faithful to the King. Nor did this suffice. For, they not only voted, but past a Bill which they called, An Act to aisable the Duke of York from inheriting the Imperial Crown of England and Ireland, and all the Territories thereunto belonging. But, it went no further; for, being carried up to the Peers by the Lord Russel, after a second reading it was thrown out of the House.
After this,Dec. 17. the Lord Viscount Stafford was brought to his Tryal, being prosecuted by the Commons upon the Testimonies of Oates, Turber∣ville and Dugdale; and, condemned by the Suf∣frages of the Peers, was beheaded. Not were the Commoners thus satisfied. They press the Bill of Exclusion a-new; and, demand Permission for the Protestants, to associate themselves for security of the Protestant Religion. They declare all other Remedies in sufficient and obnoxious to Dangers. And, that therefore they could give the King no Supply, without Danger to his Person, Hazard to the Protestant Religion, and Ʋnfaithfulness to those by whom they were trusted. Nay, they required, That the Lords Hallifax, Worcester, Clarendon, Rochester and Feversham, should be removed from all Offices of Honour and Profit, and from his Coun∣cils and Presence for ever. And, with the same Breath, with unheard of as well Fury as Arro∣gance, Vote, That whosoever shall lend, or cause to be lent by way of Advance, any Money upon the. Branches of the King's Revenue, arising by Custom, Excise, or Hearth-Money, should be adjudged to hinder the sitting of Parliaments, and should be responsible for the same. And, when they per∣ceived, that the King wearied with such monstrous Insolence, designed to Prorogue their Session, they had  vote and denounce, That whosoever advised the King to prorogue that Parliament, to any other purpose, than in order to the passing the Bill of Ex∣clusion, should be lookt upon as a Betrayer of the King, the Protestant Religion and the Kingdom of England, a Promoter of the French Interest, and a Pensioner of France. But,Mar. 24. the Parliament being however Prorogued, and then Dissolved by Proclamation; the King in∣timated his pleasure to call another, which should convene in March following at Oxford, as a place
less Subject to Faction and Tumults. Which so stung the Common Council of London, and such Peers as were emancipated to the Party, that they endeavoured by Petitions to divert his Majesty from thoughts of so remote a Design, upon ima∣ginary reason of Danger, and Unfitness; praying, it might therefore sit at Westminster. But, to no purpose. So that the Parliament met at Oxford, composed for the most part of the same Delegates. The major Part of the Deputies, as also the Fa∣natick Lords, depending upon their numerous At∣tendants and Friends which they were accompany∣ed with, drove on futiously; and neglecting the King's Admonitions (who had declared, That as he had resolved never to use Arbitrary Government himself, so he was resolved never to suffer it in others) rage with more Fierceness against the Duke, and press the Bill of Exclusion with so much Violence, that the King putting a stop to their career, imme∣diately dissolved them. And, it was time, seeing they designed, not only to retrench his Prerogative, but also to seize his Person. Upon that Accompt, Rouse, Hains, White, College and the Earl of Shafts∣bury, were committed to Prison. Of those, College and Shaftsbury were brought to their Tryals. But, in vain, being acquitted by their Juries, against the Testimonies and Evidences of irreproachable Wit∣nesses. Which was no Wonder, the very Corts of Justice being enslaved to the Faction, and act∣ed by their Prescripts. So that the King, who himself was religious in the equal Distribution of Justice to all Men, could not obtain Justice for himself. But College being brought before another Tribunal, less subjected to the Authority of the Faction, received such Punishment as his Treason deserved. He had no less offended at Oxford, than at London, and was try'd and executed there. The Fellow was of the Lees of the Rabble, a Joyner by
Trade; vain, restless, inquisitive, and perpetually busie in Affairs that least concerned him. But, Shaftsbury's Fortune was better, who eluding the Publick Justice, by a Jury addicted to himself and the Faction, and retorting the Danger upon his Accusers, triumphed, whilst they hardly escaped the Fury of the Rabble. And 'twas no wonder; for, this destructive Faction was so prevalent in the City, that it had infatuated the People and the Companies of Tradesmen, with a reverent Opini∣on of their Sanctity; And, spreading wider, the Contagion had diffused it self into most of the Provinces of the Kingdom. And now, all such whose Crimes had rendered them Guilty, or In∣digence bold; such whose Zeal made furious, or Ambition lofty, joyned themselves to them. The same Pretences of Liberty, Property and Re∣ligion; and the same Methods wherewith the Reign of Charles the Martyr had been involved in Blood and Confusion, were now again made use of, mostly by the same Men; cunning, restless and implacable, to seduce weak and irresolute Persons, as also to disturb that Peace, which we hitherto enjoyed to the Envy of all Europe. By such Instruments, the mildest of Govern∣ments was branded with the Name of Tyranny; The Church of England is traduced, and the faithfullest Ministers and Servants to the King and Crown, calumniated with Male Administration. In the mean Time, Schism and Sedition are e∣very where promoted; Jealousies and vain Ter∣rors are suggested; proditorious Discourses and infamous Libels are scattered about; and things abhorring from Christianity, are dayly exercised, under the genuine Veil of Protestantism. Finally, the old Opinions and Doctrines of the Demo∣craticks, so ruinous to Monarchy, are now again coun∣tenanced
and asserted with the same Fierceness and Confidence, as they had been in the late Rebellion. With these pickeerings of Rebellion, they gradu∣ally proceeded to Action. Parties are distinguished. Names and Signs of Separation are distributed. Unlawful Conventicles, in despite of the Laws are patronised. Tumultuous Banquets, and factious Clubs are every where set up. Clandestine and se∣ditious Assemblies are frequented. Unusual Quan∣tities of Arms, are bought up by private Men. Insolent Progresses are made through the Country, to the End they might shew how numerous they were, spread their Terror about as they moved, discover their Party, and demonstrate their readi∣ness upon all Occasions. Nor were these Caballings unknown to the King, who when he saw his Clemency so highly abused, by those whom he had pardoned yet grea∣ter Offences, resolved to chastise them, and oppose the severity of Law to their Extravagancies. In the Two preceding Years, Two Favourers of the Faction being Lord Mayors by Turn, had pro∣moted turbulent Fellows to the Magistracy, and chief Employments in the City. Of these, the Two Sheriffs were chief, who directed the choice of Jury's at pleasure, which gave the licentious Liberty to offend: For, what durst they not at∣tempt, who were certain of Impunity? But, the King resolved at length to stem this growing Evil. Which he did, by restoring the Free Election of the Sheriffs according to the an∣tient Custom, and taking the Forfeiture of the City-Charter, adjudged so by Law, into his own Hands. These means, however proper for the Common-wealth, had like to have destroyed both. For, when so many Criminals and Wicked-doers saw the Magistrates, especially the Sheriffs changed.
and honest Men put into their Places; and, con∣sidering that there was no Evasion from the Law, under pretence of it, they resolve upon a high At∣tempt, and worthy their Hellish Conspiracy; which was, to subvert the King and Kingdom, and involve them in the same Ruin. Shaftsbury being conscious of his Guilt, and not ignorant of the Injustice of the Sentence by which he escaped, terrified with the unexpected Change, and seeing himself obnoxious to that Justice which he had frustrated and eluded; moved with the greater Precipitation, he terrifies his Associates with the Greatness of the Danger, encourages some to rise, others to Parricide, resolving to hazard all rather than tamely betray himself into the Hands of his Enemies. He therefore exhorts his Compa∣nions, To vindicate their Liberty, Property, Religi∣on, [the old Cant still] against Popery, Tyranny, Superstition, Idolatry, Oppression, Murther, and the other growing Evils of Servitude. With these kind of Orations, they incense the furious. So that, what they could not effect by Fraud and pretended Sanctity, they resolve to compass by the way of Arms. To this End, they advise about raising of Forces. But Shaftsbury thinking they moved not swiftly enough in it, impatient of every Delay, and fearing (for every Noise alarm'd him) of being intercepted, as he had already withdrawn himself from his own Dwelling, exagitated with his own Guilt, he fled the Kingdom, and retreated into Holland. Where, this most torbulent of Men being neglected, found that Repose in Death, which the impetuous Desire of Ruling had deprived him of here. The Conspirators however troubled at the loss of so eminent a Patron, and not ignorant that they were advanced beyond a Retreat, constitute a Supream Council of Six, to manage their Affairs.
Besides this, they had another more Inferiour Court, who consulted how to remove the King and the Duke by Assassination or otherwise, and to solicite the Revolt of the Commonalty in Order to a War; which they resolve to carry on, against the King and the Common-wealth. The Scots, under the Conduct of Arguile, were invited to joyn, and act in this nefarious Rebellion: Who had also their Commissioners at London, who together with the English Conspirators, should move by consent. And, it was concerted amongst them, that they should break out into open Hostility in both King∣doms at the same Time. They resolve to secure London, the Head of their Design, by the same Methods it had been circumvented in the former Rebellion. They further, divide the City into Twenty Parts, which they distributed under the Conduct of so many Commanders. Some were to seize the Tower, and the principal Posts in the City; others White-hall, and particularly the Guards which were to be surprized and cut off. They had a Hundred of Cromwell's Officers at hand, ready to head the Peo∣ple upon their Insurrection, being abundantly pro∣vided with Money and Arms by voluntary Con∣tributions from the Chiefs of their Party. The Country was no less addicted to them, espe∣cially those Parts which Monmouth, who was re∣turned from his Banishment without Permission, had visited in his Progresses. Whilst they thus prepare for War, the Design to Murther the King and Duke, kept pace with them. Hone, another Godly Joyner, proposed to have them shot from Bow steeple as they passed, with Cross-Bows. Rumbald the Maltster, would have the Play-House blown up with Gun-powder when they were present, declaring further, That he he had laid a Design Ten Years ago to have slain
them, as they returned from New-Market, if they had not by accident taken another way, whereby they escaped the Danger. Some designed to at∣tempt them as they walked in St. James's-Park, which they frequently did with no great Train. Some fancied it easie to sink them in the River, when they took the Air by Water in their Barge, by shocking them with a greater Vessel. There were again others, who would have them pistol'd in the Play-House, whilst intent upon the Comedy, or kill'd as they came thence along Bedford-wall. Other places betwixt Windsor and Hampton-Court, about Winchester and Red-Lyon Fields, if they should come there, were judged proper enough for this black Parricide. But these all, as subject to too much Hazard and Danger, were laid aside upon mature Deliberation, of the more convenient Si∣tuation of the Rye, a House belonging to the afore∣said Rumbald seated, in the Way to New-Market, Eighteen Miles from London, in the County of Hart∣ford. This Place being Moated about, and the Passage near it narrow and strongly fenced and wall'd, was judged the most proper of any for the Purpose; Rumbald himself, the Designer of this Wickedness, offering in Person to undertake it with Forty more Associates, and at once to destroy both the Royal Brothers. Which he had pro∣bably effected, if God, the Protector of Kings, had not wrought a Miracle in their Favour. The Conspirators full of Hopes and Assurance, seemed in nowise to question the Success of their so well laid Enterprize, when the Divine Provi∣dence disappointed in a moment all their Con∣trivances and Plots, by a Fire undoubtedly sent from Heaven, which burnt a great part of New-Market. The Conflagration was so terrible, that the Flames of it approaching the King's Pallace, forced him thence, to another part of the Town
further off. Where, by reason of the Commodi∣ousness of his Lodgings, he proposed to pass some days more in Hunting, and the other usual Di∣versions of the Place. But, he had no sooner re∣solved it, but the Wind, conducted by some Invisible Agent, suddenly changing, fills his new Lodgings in a moment with Smoke and Cynders. Which obliged the King, seeing no other con∣venience for his Reception, to declare, That he would immediately return to White hall; which he also did, before he was expected, or that the Conspirators Preparations were in a Readi∣ness The Noise of so unexpected an Accident, was diversly received by the Parricides. Some believed, That so unusual Burnings, could not happen without the Direction of Providence. Walcot profess'd, that he thence conjectured, That God did not approve of their Design. Whilst Ferguson, without any the least Horror of so hellish an Undertaking, did dare to affirm, That he plainly saw, that God had reserved the King for his own Judgment. And yet one of these Conspirators, Keeling by Name, a Schismatic, greatly addicted to the Faction, and number'd amongst the Forty Murtherers, perceiving the Averseness of Heaven, and agitated with the Terrors and Storms of a Guilty Conscience, after many Combats in his Soul, resolved at length to disburthen himself, by discovering this Tartareous Secret to the King. At first, the Monstrousness of so horrid a Design, discountenanced the Credit of the Relator, until verified by demonstrative Ar∣guments, which gave Opportunity to the Conspi∣rators to withdraw themselves. Yet, some of them were taken, as Howard, Essex, Russel, Rumsey, Sidney, Walcot, Hone, Rowse, and the Lord G. but, he escaped out of the hands of the Messenger. The Lord Russel and Collonel Sydney
were both beheaded. Walcot, Rowse and Hone were executed at Tyburn; and, others in other places, suffered the punishments due to such execrable Treasons. The Earl of Essex, the unfortunate Son of a good Father, by his own hands prevented the Kings Clemency, who could not shew the utmost of his Severity, against a Son of my Lord Ca∣pels. Of those who fled, some obtained the Kings Pardon by their ingenious Confessions, as Barber, Blaney, Bourn, How, Howard, Rumsey, &c. Nor is it unworthy of Notice, that scarce any of those who were executed, did dye, without confessing enough to demonstrate their Crime, though not their Repentance. Amongst the Fugitives, the most considerable were Armstrong, Ayloff, Burton, the Two Goode∣noughs Brothers, Gray, Holloway, Norton, Nizbet, Row, the Two Rombalds Brothers, Smyth, Wade, Tyley and Ferguson, the Shame of his Coat and Calling, a Canting Teacher, and more cruelly wicked than all those he had endeavoured to mislead. Sir Thomas Armstrong and Holloway, being inter∣cepted, the First at Leyden in Holland, the other at Mevis, one of our Western Plantations, and brought into England, were both executed accor∣ding to the Merit of their Crimes. The Parricide designed thus in England, a∣gainst His Majesty and the Duke, being discovered and prevented, the Conspiracy in Scotland fell also, as depending on it. James Stuart, Monroe, Melvin, Cockran, Bayley, Castares, Spence, Alex. Gordon, Nezbet, &c. were the Chief of the Party, acting in all Things by Agreement with Argile. This perverse Son of a wicked Father, had Demanded 30000 l. of the English to buy Arms, engaging himself to make a powerful Diversion in his own Country. Which he also effected, as we shall
see hereafter, having procured Supplies by other means. The Duke of Monmouth youthfully rash, in∣constant, ambitious, and hurried on with the Pre∣tense of vindicating Liberty and Religion, agitated now with the Guilt of his Crimes, had also with∣drawn himself. But, being proscribed, and finding but little safety in a Retreat, though it his best course to implore that Clemency which he had so cruelly offended. Which he did by his Letters, seemingly full of Ingenuity, wherein he acknow∣ledges his Crimes of Unfaithfulness against the King, and of Ingratitude to the Duke; bewailing what he had done, and humbly supplicating Par∣don for what was past. With Imprecations of Vengeance upon himself, if he offended any more, or violated the Promises he then made of his future Fidelity. The King, the mildest of Princes, moved with his Submissions, answered him under his own Hand in these Terms, That if the Duke of Monmouth would render himself capable of his Mer∣cy, it was necessary he should surrender himself into the Hands of Secretary Jenkins, and should tell His Majesty all that he knew, submitting himself as to the rest entirely to his Pleasure. This peremptory Declaration of the King's Will, extorted other Letters from Monmouth, wherein, he patheticaly aggravates his Sorrow and Tortures of Mind for his failings against his Majesty; Confessing, that being fatally circumvented by the Enchantments of others, he was drawn into their Design, and precipi∣tated into those Evils, the Consequences whereof he had not suspected. He declares, that his Crimes ap∣peared to him with so terrible an Aspect, that he would rather dye than be tormented with their stings; he therefore implores the King's Grace and Pardon, which he did not desire, but by the Mediation of his Royal Highness. He further professes, That he
saith this seriously and sincerely, not only submitting himself for this Time to the King's Pleasure, but for his whole Life. Concluding, That he should be the unhappiest of Men, until he were raised with a grate∣ful and mild Answer. The King after this,1683. Nov. 25. not questioning the sinceri∣ty of Monmouth's Conversion, admitted him to his presence: Where throwing himself at his Majesty's Feet, he plainly and fully acknowledged himself conscious of all the Conspiracy, except the Parricide; discovering many things to the King, which they had hitherto been ignorant of. Monmouth being, by the Intervention of the Duke, restored to his Ma∣jesty's Favour as formerly, obtained also the Fa∣vour not to be produced as a Witness against any Body (which Grace had been formerly refused to the Duke of Orleance in France) and that undoubt∣edly was the reason, that his old Associates and Friends impudently gave out, that he had discover∣ed nothing of the Conspiracy, but contrarily, had vindicated the Innocency of those that had so in∣juriously suffered. The King moved with so great Arrogance, and perceiving that Monmouth did continue his Society with those who se∣duced his unwary Youth, after some Admo∣nitions, he commanded him to publish in Writing, what he had declared to himself and to the Duke his Brother. Nor did he refuse it, wri∣ting to the King in these Terms. That he was in∣formed, that it had been reported of him, as if he had designed to extenuate the late Conspiracy, and traduce the Testimonies against them that suffered. His Majesty and the Duke knew, how ingeniously he confessed all Things, and that he was not conscious of the least Evil against his Majesty's Life. It grieved him however, that he had so greatly countenanced the said Conspiracy. He would publish this for his Vin∣dication, beseeching his Majesty not to look back,
but that he would please to forget those Injuries which he had forgiven. It should be his Care for the fu∣ture, to sin no more, or suffer himself to be misled from his Duty. Yea, he would spend his whole Life, to deserve that Pardon, which he had granted to his most Dutiful Monmouth. But, these Flourishes were no less fickle, than short-liv'd. For, the unhappy Youth, being be∣witcht by the Artifices of wicked Men, and his own Ambition, broke that Faith which he had so solemnly promised to preserve inviolable. For, being foolishly perswaded, That the Declaration he had so lately made, was a Diminution to his Honour, and might rise up in Judgment against him hereafter, he redemanded it from his Ma∣jesty: Who, tender of his Good, endeavoured to divert him from so preposterous an Attempt; but, being more obstinately pressed, he in great Anger restored it him, banishing him at the same time from his Court and Presence. The King did not long survive this: for, being intercepted by a violent Apoplectic Fit, he changed his Terrestrial Crowns, for one of Glory; being so universally lamented by the Good, and leaving so great a Desire of him behind him, that our Loss was in a Manner inconsolable. He was succeeded by James Duke of York, who was immediately proclaimed King. But he was scarce setled in his Throne, when the Hydra of Rebellion, lift up her Head again out of the Lake of Schism and Faction.
BOOK II. The Rebellion breaks out in Scotland under Ar∣gile, in England under Monmouth. Both are vanquished, taken and executed. The Final Ruin and End of the Rebellion. ARchibald Campbel, Earl of Argile, and Son to the late Marquess of that Name (who had been beheaded for his Treasons and Rebellion) treading in his Fathers steps, out went him in adding Ingratitude to his Infidelity. For, being restored in Blood, by the King's Clemency; as also, to the Dignities and Honours of his Family, ex∣cept the Title of Marquess, he forfeited all again, by his Caballing, and Endeavours to disturb the Publick Peace. Which being discovered, and he forced to Baishment by his own Fears, he now joyning with Monmouth (both Heads of Factions, the one in Scotland, the other in England, both exiled for conspiring the Destruction of the Govern∣ment, and both upon that Accompt looked upon as the Idols of their Parties) he now again, to∣gether with the other, contracting their Fury into a last Push, being at that time both in Holland, resolve with United Councils and the whole Force of their Factions, to attempt the Disturbance, if not the Ruin of the yet unsetled, as they fancied, Government of the King. To this End, they make great Provision of Arms and Ammunition, being assisted and furnished very nobly, as they said, by several good Protestants (most Dutch I suppose) And having hired several Ships for their Transport, they with their Friends and some few
Souldiers, sailed, Argile towards Scotland, and Mon∣mouth towards England. The Scot was first ready,May 2. and setting Sail from the Ʋlye in Three Ships, notwithstanding an Ar∣rest which the States had sent for the searching of them, he touched at Orkney; where, having sent his Secretary and Chyrurgeon on shore, to try the Temper of the Inhabitants (who seized upon hem) he Sailed thence for the West of Scotland, and landed at Dunstafnage in Lorne (a ruinous Castle,May 13. sometime belonging to himself) and put a Garrison therein. His first Care was, to put forth a Manifesto in his own Name; and, some of his Party had emitted a very large Declaration of Six Sheets of Paper, to invite their Country-men, and all other well affected Protestants, to joyn with them; with the old Cant, To engage with them for the maintenance of Religion in its Purity, and the due Administration of the Laws of their Native Country, in Opposition to Arbitrary Government, Tyranny, Popery and Prelacy, against a Persecuting Tyrant, and an Apostate Party; for, so they call the King, and his Loyal Subjects. Their Colors were Blew, and their Motto, Pro Deo & Patria. But these Rebellious Declarations, and pretended Protestants, found other Entertainment in England, being not only marked by the Infamy of Treason, but a Vote passed in the House of Commons, That they will stand by and assist his Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes, against the pretended Earl of Argile, and his Adherents, and all Rebels and Traitors and all other whatsoever, that shall assist him or any of them, &c. Nor was the Parliament of Scotland, less vigorous in their Voting and Acting against the Rebels; who however encreased by the Accession of Malignants and Schismatics, could not amount to the Number of a just Army. Nor did they effect any thing, proportionable to the
Noise they made; for, being unequal to the Royallists, they were forced to sculk from one Island to another to avoid them. Which they easily did by help of their Shipping and Boats, until the Arrival of some Vessels of War sent by his Ma∣jesty, as the Falcon, and Mermaid, and some other Frigats, which shortly after happened. Argile having Intelligence of the approach of his Majesty's Ships, quitted the Island of Boot, and went over to Cowal, one of the Divisions of Argile-shire, bring∣ing his Vessels and Boats into Loch-fine towards Inverary; where they were also blockt up by the King's Ships, lying in the Mouth of the said Loch. In the mean time, Argile having brought his Ships under the Castle of Ellengregg, gave out, he would fight the Marquess of Athol, who lay about In∣verary, though his Design was to avoid it; his Men not finding the People to come in in such Numbers as were promised, daily deserting him. Nor could his Ships, detained by contrary Winds, get into Loch-fine, but were so discouraged upon the Ad∣vancement of the King's-Fisher and Faulcon to the entrance of Lochrowan where they lay, that they began to fortifie the said Castle of Ellengregg, and a Rock that lies near to it in a little Island, for securing their Ships. This being done, Argile having put his Cannon, Arms and Ammunition into the Castle, leaving One Hundred and Fifty Men for the Defence of it and his Ships, marched away towards the Head of Loch fine; and, returning thence, after an untoward Reception by the Mar∣quess of Athol's Men, passed Loch-long, marching towards Lenox in Dunbartonshire. The same Day, his Majesty's Ships came up to the Castle with a Resolution to batter it, and to destroy their Ships; but, upon the firing of the first Gun, Two Men came off in a Boat with a White Flag, and told them, They might save their Labour, for
there were none to oppose them, all the Rebels being fled. Whereupon, they sent a Boat on Shore, and finding it to be so, took Possession of the Castle, Ships and Boats, with Five Thousand Arms, Five Hundred Barrels of Powder, with Ball and other Stores in Proportion; besides the Can∣non, some whereof were mounted, and others sunk, but recoverable. The Rebels had a Design to blow up the Powder, but it was prevented. Whilst this was a doing, the Argilians marched by the Head of Gaviloch, towards the Fords of the Ri∣ver Levin, betwixt Loch-Lomand and the Town of Dunbarton. The Earl of Dunbarton, General of his Ma∣jesty's Forces in Scotland, was then with the Army at Glascow, where having notice that the Rebels had passed the River Levin above Dunbarton,Jun. 17▪ he marched very early in the Morning after them, they taking their Way towards Sterling, and overtook them in the Parish of Killerne. The Horse and Dragoons, kept up the Rebels till the Foot ar∣rived: But, they were posted in so strong a Ground, that it being late in the Evening it was not thought fit then to attack them. So the King's Army stood in Battle-Array all night, as well to prevent Sur∣prisals, as to be ready so soon as Day-light ap∣peared, to fall upon them. But, the Rebels with great silence marched off in the Night, undiscern∣ed by the Royallists, towards the River Clyde, which they swam with their Horses, wafting their Foot in Boats, and so go without any considera∣ble Opposition into Reufrew. The King's Army missing the Rebels in the Morning, marched with all Diligence to Glascow, and thence Dunbarton with his Horse and Dragoons hasted after them, leav∣ing the Foot to follow with what speed they could make. At Reufrew, Sir John Cockram undertook to provide Guides to carry his Friends safe into
Galloway, but they mistaking the way, carried them into a Bog, where having lost their Horses and Baggage, the Foot dispersed into small Parties; whereupon Dunbarton, likewise divided the King's Forces to pursue them. Argile seeing all lost, returned towards Clyde, and was fallen upon by two of Gree∣nock's Servants, but would not yield, firing at them when they called to him. He received a Wound in the Head; upon which, not trusting his Horse, he alighted and ran into the Water. The Noise brought out a Country-man, who ran into the Water after him, where he was almost up to the Neck. He presented his Pistol to the Country-man, but it missed Fire; whereupon, the Country-man gave him a Wound in the Head, which stun∣n'd him, so that he fell, and in falling cry'd out, Ʋnfortunate Argile. Before he recovered, they took him and carried him to their Commander, from whence he was brought to Glascow, and thence to Edinburgh; entering the City with his Hands bound behind him, bare-headed, with the Hang-man going before him. A sad, tho deserved Spectacle of unfortunate Disloyalty. The Rest of the Rebels being totally defeated, Rumbald the Malister, who fought desperately, was taken, and Colonel Ayloff, who after he was a Prisoner, ript up his own Belly with a Pen-knife, but recovered to be hanged in England, as the o∣ther had been in Scotland, his Wounds not per∣mitting his Transport into his own Country.June 30. Ar∣gile closed the Scene of this Rebellion, being be∣headed; which could not yet expiate for so much Blood and Confusion, which he had occasioned by his Ambition and desire of Revenge. Nor was Monmouth more successful in England, whose Enterprizes being carried on with more Noise and Hopes, may require a more particular Re∣lation.
The Duke of Monmouth having hired a Ship at Amsterdam of Two and Thirty Guns, with a Hundred and Fifty Men in it of several Nations, and paid for it in Person; was by the States Ge∣neral, at the Solicitation of the King's Envoy with them, ordered to be arrested, which notwithstand∣ing got to Sea, and in it the Duke of Monmouth; and, not long after, Two small Vessels more, up∣on Accompt of the Rebels. With this Fleet,1685. June 11. he sailed Westward, and landed at Lime in Dorsetshire about Seven a Clock in the Evening. He was accom∣panied with the Lord G. a Person daring and despa∣rate, and about Two Hundred more well appointed, all appearing as Officers, and each with a Carabine and Two Pistols by his side. With this Equipage, did this bold Rebel dare to attempt the Crown of England. Having possessed himself of the Town, he likewise took Possession of an Old neglected Fort, in which were Seven Guns. And setting up his Standard, which was Blew, he invited all Men to his Assistance for the Protestant Religion, against the Duke of York. Nor were there wanting such, who, abused by his Pretences, came in to him; his Emissaries being dispatched into the Neigh∣bouring Towns and Villages, to incite the People to an open Rebellion against his Majesty. Their Numbers being in few Days encreased, they sent a Party of Horse and Foot to Bridg. Port; where they surprizd some Gentlemen, whom they inhu∣manly murthered, as Mr. Strangewayes, Coaker and others. But, the rest getting to their Arms, esca∣ped to a Party, who maintained a Post not far off; whither the Rebels still pursuing them, were beat∣en off with the Loss of Seven of their Men, and several Arms and Prisoners, which they left be∣hind them.
The King, upon Notice of this Invasion, caused Monmouth, and all his Accomplices, and Companions to be proclaimed Traytors, and a Reward of Five Thousand Pounds to any who should bring the said Monmouth in alive or dead. Monmouth on the other side, dispersed a Declarati∣on, fraught with Treason and Imposture against the King, under the Title of Duke of York. Which, upon consideration of the infamous Calumnies it contained, was condemned by the Two Houses of Parliament, to be publickly burnt by the Hands of the Hang man; which was done accord∣ingly. The Duke of Albemarle, the Day of Monmouth's landing, had mustered the Militia of Devonshire, whereof he was Lord-Lieutenant; and, keeping them in a Body, he much impeded the Resort of Novellists and Fanaticks to the Enemy. And yet it was not safe for him to fight them, being scarce secure of his own Men. For, the changing Rab∣ble, attentive upon Novelties, seemed to prefer great Incertainties, before their present Enjoyments. The Duke of Beaufort, on the other side, secured Bristol with his Presence and Forces, whilst the King's Troops hasten to meet from all Parts. The Lord Churchil with his Dragoons came first, and disturbed the Rebels with various Skirmishings, and was followed by the Earl of Feversham with greater Force, who also was appointed General for the Expedition. The Duke of Grafton marched to the Rendezvouz with Eighteen Hundred of the Guards, whereof he was Colonel. And, Eighteen Field-Peices, with all their Accoutrements, wee sent to the Camp under the Convoy of some old Companies of Dunbarton's Regiment. To these, new Levies were suddainly made, of Eight Regi∣ments of Foot, and several Troops of Horse. Al∣so the Six Regiments of Britains, which were in
the Service of the Ʋnited Provinces, were recalled; Three whereof being Scots, were sent against Ar∣gile, but he being defeated, they returned into England. On the other side, Monmouth having left Lime, marched to Taunton, an old and obstinate Recep∣tacle of Fanaticism; where his numbers encreasing, tho no one of Quality came in to him, he usurpt the Title of King. But, the Reign of this Ephe∣merous Prince, was neither propitious nor long. What he could not effect, under pretence of the Protestant Religion (for, those who are truely Pro∣testants, of the Church of England, do detest no∣thing more than Rebellion) he resolved to attempt by assuming the Title of Prince; but, no less impiously than foolishly. For, the Chief of his Party hated Monarchy, since they could not all be Kings; and, seemed mainly to contend for a Common-wealth. What Argile, oppressed by his adverse Fortune, did pathetically express in this Case, deserves to be mentioned here. His Ex∣pressions against those of Amsterdam first were, That they having made a Collection among Four Hundred of them to set him out, had failed in car∣rying on the Ʋndertaking. But, against Monmouth, As one who had broke Faith both with God, and Man: With Man, when taking him by the Hand at parting, he promised to be in England as soon as he in Scotland; and, with God, in that he had upon the Sacrament declared at Amsterdam, that he would never pretend to the Crown. Nor, must we omit a Saying of Rumbold's at his Execution, being moved when he heard that Monmouth had taken upon him to be King (for, it seems, they were all for a Commonwealth) We have, said he, a better than he, that is called so already.
Monmouth left Taunton again, accompanied with a Multitude of sorry Fellows, scarce half armed; for, they had left most of their Equipage of War at Lime, where the King's Ships seized up∣on a Pink and a Dogger, with Forty Barrels of Powder, with Back, Head and Breast-pieces for near Five Thousand Men; and, Lime it self was secured, by a Garrison sent thither from the Duke of Albemarle, of Three Companies. The Rebels changing their Quarters often, and in perpetual Motion, seemed desirous to pass into Gloucester∣shire; but, were repelled at Canisham-Bridge be∣tween Bristol and Bath, with the Loss of Two Troops of their Horse. They hereupon returned back by Bath where the King's Forces were, and marched towards Philips-Norton, being followed in their Rear by the Royallists. For that purpose, a Detachment of Five Hundred Foot, with some Dragoons and Horse-Granadiers, commanded by the Duke of Grafton, whilst the Rest of the Forces followed with the Cannon, were sent in Pursuit of them. Being advanced near the Town, he fell into an Ambush, the Lane being lined on both sides with Foot and Horse behind the Hedges, who made very great Fire upon our Men. Grafton went as far as the Gate of the Town, with as much Courage and Resolution, as can be expressed; but, the Enemy continuing their fire, he retired; and, passing thro the Rebels Horse, with no less Bra∣very than good Fortune, got safely off. Eight of his Men were killed in the Adventure, and about Thirty wounded. The Rest of the Army being come up, the Earl of Feversham drew it up in good Order, upon a little Hill within Distance, an∣swering the Rebels Cannon with the Noise of his own, tho with no great Effect on either side. He had designed to have fought the Enemy there, but was impeded by the Excessive Rains which fell
at that time. So that towards the Evening the Royallists marched to Bradford, and the Enemy to Frome. But, the Rebels doubling, and changing Quarters often to avoid their Pursuers, came to Wells, where they prophaned the Cathedral with unusual Barbarity; plundered, ravished and robbed the Citizens, upon pretence of want∣ing Pay. From hence they marched to Bridge∣water; and, the Earl of Feversham, from Somer∣ton to Weston, where he encamped, Three Miles distant from the Rebels. The Horse and Dragoons lay in the Town, and the Foot in the Field, covered towards the Campaign with a Parapet and Trench, formerly made by the Country-men against Inundations; and, their Rear was secured, by the said Village behind them. Towards Evening it was told my Lord Feversham, that the Rebels were stirring, in Order to march. Whereupon, he sent frequent Scouts out to learn News of them. But, Monmouth eluding the said Scouts, enters unobserved, and with great Silence, into the Plain before the Royallists Trench. Where drawing up his Army, which consisted of Six Thousand Foot, and having entrusted the Lord G. with the Horse, which amounted to Twelve Hundred, he marched in Battle-Array against the Adversary. The alarm being taken, the Royal∣lists consisting only of the Guards and part of Dun∣barton's Regiment, were quickly ready to receive them. The Fight began with great shouts, and brisk firing. The aforesaid Dike being in the Na∣ture of a Parapet, was of great use to the Royal∣lists, which occasioned the Enemies shot, as being aimed higher, to five for the most part over their Heads; whilst they, as being more exposed in the open Field, were more directly armed at and wound∣ded. The L. G. hastening with his Horse to the Assi∣stance of the Foot, loosing his way in the Night, fell
unexpectedly upon a Party of the Royallists. Which he endeavoured to avoid, by wheeling from them. But turned upon his own Men, who thinking he ran away, did effectually do so themselves; and, filling all with Fear and Confusion, the whole Horse were broke and routed, and that without a Blow; every one shifting for himself, and searching his Safety in his Flight instead of fighting. The Foot stood bravely to it, until attacked by our Horse, at length come up, in Flank and Rear; as also, our great Guns beginning to play upon them, they seeing themselves abandoned by their Cavalry, were also broke, routed and slaughtered. The slain on the Rebels side, amounted to near Two Thousand, besides many taken. Collonel Holmes, Major Perrot, Crookhorn and other unknown Names, were made Prisoners. There were also taken, Three Field-Pieces, and Six and Twenty Colors. Of the King's side Three Hundred were slain, and many wounded. And, undoubtedly the loss would have been greater, but for the fore-mentioned Breast-work, the Rebels so far out-numbering them. Immediately after this Victory, Feversham marched with Five Hundred Men to Bridgewater, the Rebels next Station. Which he possest him∣self of without Resistance, they dispersing and fly∣ing upon his Advance. And, here he left Collonel Kirk, to compose the Disorders of the Town. Monmouth and Gray seeing all lost, escaped out of the Battle; and changing their Vestments, sought where best to conceal themselves. But, the Lord G. was taken in the disguise of a Shepherd, one other only being in company with him; and, being brought to the L. Lumley, he was discovered at first sight, being also known by a Servant of the said Lord's, who had formerly been his Groom. So that, putting off his Disguise, he professed, That since his landing in England, he had never had one good
Nights Rest, or eat one Meal in quiet. Nor is it a won∣der, being perpetually agitated with the perturba∣tions and cares which accompany unfortunate Am∣bition. Two Days after, Monmouth himself fell into the Hands of his Pursuers. The Immensness of the Rewards, raised the Country in the search; so that, the Ways and Woods were filled with their Num∣bers. Some went out by break of Day, and taking a Dog with them, as Men usually do in Hunting Beasts of Prey, the Dog made the first Discovery of one hid in a Ditch, who proving to be a Foreigner (which appeared by his broken Lan∣guage) and threatningly required to tell where Monmouth was, pointed at his Covert; whither they immediately went, and there seized this un∣happiest of Men, in great Distraction, pale, trembling and full of Disorder. He was brought thence to the Lord Lumley's; and, from Ringwood sent a Letter to the King, Protesting the Remorse in him, for the Wrong he had done His Majesty in several things, and now in taking up Arms against him. He complained of his Misfortune, in meeting some Horrid People, that led him away to believe, That it was a shame and a sin before God, not to do it. But, he would not trouble his Majesty at present, with many things he could say for himself, that he was sure would move his Compassion. The chief end of this Letter, being only to beg, That he might have the Happiness, to speak to his Majesty, having that to say to him, that he hoped might give him a long and Happy Reign. He concluded, That he really thought himself the most in the Wrong that ever any Man was, and had from the Bottom of his Heart, an Abhorrence for those that put him upon it, and for the Action it self. Hoping, that God Almighty would strike his Majesty's Heart with Mercy and Compassion for him, as he had done his with the Ab∣horrence
of what he had done. Finally, he hoped to live, to shew how Zealous he should ever be for his Majesty's Service. And, could he say but one word in this Letter, he would be convinced of it; but it was of that Consequence, that he durst not do it, and there∣fore he beg'd once more, that he might speak with him. For, then he would be convinced, he should ever be his Majesty's most humble and dutiful, Monmouth. Being brought to the Tower, he did not long survive his Misfortunes.July. 14. 1685. For, being Attainted of High-Treason by An Act of Parliament, he was beheaded, on a Scaffold for that purpose, erected on Tower-Hill. He had delivered this following Paper, before he mounted the last Stage of his Life, referring him∣self to it in all the Discourses he held upon the Scaffold. Which I thought fit to subjoyn. I Declare, that the Title of King was forced upon me; and, that it was very much contrary to my Opinion when I was Proclaimed. For the Satis∣faction of the World, I do declare, that the late King told me, he was never Married to my Mother. Ha∣ving said this, I hope that the King who is now, will not let my Children suffer on this Accompt. And, to this I put my Hand, this 15th day of July, 1685. Monmouth. His Actions, sufficiently declare his Character. And, his Body, being inhumed by Order in the Chappel of the Tower, put an End to his Chimeri∣cal Principality, and this REBELLION. FINIS.
Books Printed for Thomas Newborough at the Golden-Ball in St. Paul's-Church-Yard. SEveral Chyrurgical Treatises, by R. Wiseman, Serjeant Surgeon to his Majesty, Fol. New. Travels of Monsieur Thevenot into the Levant. (viz.) Into Turkey, Persia and the East-Indies, Fol. A New and Easy Method to the Art of Dial∣ling. Containing all Horizontals, all upright, Reflecting Dyals, and Dyals without Centres, Nocturnal, and upright Declining Dyals, with∣out knowing the Declination of the Plane. 2. The most natural and easie way of describing the Currelines of the Sun's Declination on any Plane: By Thomas Strode Esq Quarto. A New History of China; containing a De∣scription of the Politick Government, Towns, Manners and Customs of the People▪ &c. Octavo. Geographia Ʋniversalis, the Present State of the World; giving an account of the several Religions, Customs and Riches of each People, the Strength and Government of each Policy and State: The curious and most remarkable things in every Region, &c. By the Sieur Du∣val Geographer to his Majesty, Octavo. The Muses Farewel to Slavery. Or, a Collecti∣on of Poems, Satyrs and Songs: By the Eminent Wits of the Nation; the Second Edition, Octavo. Books Printed for and Sold by Luke Mere∣dith, at the Angel in Amen-Corner. Books written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick. THE Christian's Sacrifice: A Treatise, shew∣ing the Necessity, End, and Manner of re∣ceiving the Holy Communion; together with suitable Prayers and Meditations for every Month in the Year; and the principal Festivals
in memory of our blessed Saviour: In Four Parts. The Third Edition corrected. The devout Christian instructed how to pray and give thanks to God: Or, a Book of De∣votions for Families, and particular Persons, in most of the concerns of human life. The Se∣cond Edition, in Twelves. An Advice to a Friend. The Fourth Editi∣on, in Twelves. A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist, in Octavo, Two parts. Jesus and the Resurrection justified by Wit∣nesses in Heaven and in Earth, in Two Parts, in Octavo, new. The Glorious Epiphany, with the devout Christian's Love to it, in Octavo, new. The Book of Job Paraphras'd, in Octavo, new. The whole Book of Psalms Paraphrased, in Octavo, Two Volumes. The Proverbs of Solomon Paraphrased, with Arguments to each Chapter, which supply the place of Commenting. A Paraphrase upon the Books of Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon, with Arguments to each Chapter, and Annotations thereupon, in 8. The Truth of Christian Religion, in Six Books; written in Latin by Hugo Grotius, and now Translated into English, with the Addition of a Seventh Book against the present Roman Church in Octavo. Search the Scriptures; A Treatise, shewing that all Christians ought to read the Holy Books; with directions to them therein: In Three Parts. A Treatise of Repentance and of Fasting, espe∣cially of the Lent Fast: In Three Parts. A Discourse concerning Prayer, especially of frequenting the Daily publick Prayers: In Two Parts.
A Book for Beginners; or a Help to Young Communicants, that they may be fitted for the Holy Communion, and receive it with profit. Books written by Jer. Taylor, D. D. and late Lord Bishop of Down and Connor. DƲctor Dubitantium, or, the Rule of Con∣science, in Five Books in Folio. The Great Exemplar; or, the Life and Death of the Holy Jesus, in Folio, with Figures suit∣able to every Story, engrav'd in Copper: where∣unto is added, the Lives and Martyrdoms of the Apostles: by W. Cave, D. D. , or a Collection of Pole∣mical Discourses addressed against the Enemies of the Church of England, both Papists and Fanaticks, in large Fol. the Third Edition. The Rules and Exercises of holy Living, and holy Dying: the Eleventh Edition, newly Print∣ed, in Octavo. A Collection of Sermons, Fol. The Golden Grove; a Choice Manual, con∣taining what is to believed, practised and de∣sired, or prayed for: the Prayers being fitted to the several days of the Week; also Festival Hymns according to the manner of the Ancient Church. Books written by the Reverend J. Goodman. D.D. THE Penitent pardoned; or, a Discourse of the Nature of Sin, and the Efficacy of Repentance, under the Parable of the Prodigal Son. A Winter Evening Conference between Neigh∣bours; in Three Parts. The Old Religion demonstrated in its Principles, and described in the Life and Practice thereof.
A Serious and Compassionate Enquiry into the Causes of the present Neglect and Contempt of the Protestant Religion and Church of England: with several seasonable Considerations offered to all English Protestants, tending to perswade them to a Compliance with, and Conformity to the Religion and Government of this Church, as it is Established by the Laws of the Kingdom. A Centry of Select Psalms, and Portions of the Psalms of David, especially those of Praise; turn'd into Meter, and fitted to the usual Tunes in Parish Churches; for the use of the Charter-House, London: by J. Patrick, Preacher there, in Octavo, new. The Sinner impleaded in his own Court: wherein are re∣presented the great Discouragements from Sinning, which the Sinner receiveth from Sin it self. To which is added the signal Diagnostick, whereby we are to judge of our own Affections; and as well of our present as future State, By Tho. Pierce, D. D. Dean of Sarum, and Dome∣stick Chaplain to King Charles the Second: the Fourth Edition, in Quarto. Go in peace; containing some brief Directions for young Ministers in their Visitations of the Sick. Useful for the People, in their state both of Health and Sickness. In Twelves, new. The Practical Christian; in Four Parts: Or, a Book of Devotions and Meditations. Also with Meditations and Psalms upon the Four last things; 1. Death. 2. Judg∣ment. 3. Hell. 4. Heaven: By R. Sherlock, D. D. Re∣ctor of Winwick, Octavo. The Life and Death of King Charles the First: By R. Perenchief, D. D. Octavo. Bishop Cozen's Devotions, in Twelves. Les Provinciales, The Mystery of Jesuitism, discovered in certain Letters, written upon occasion of the present Differences at Sorbonne, between the Jansenists and Mo∣linists, displaying the pernicious Maxims of the late Casuists, with Additionals, in Octavo. Bishop Taylor's Opuscula: The measures of Friendship, with five Letters to Persons changed and tempted to a change in their Religion. To which is now added his mo∣ral Demonstration, proving that the Religion of Jesus Christ is from God. Price bound 1 s. Twelves. The Countess of Morton's daily Exercise; or a Book of Prayers and Rules how to spend the time in the Service and Pleasure of Almighty God, the Thirteenth Edition, 24. THE END.
