N1010 R222282 99833466 37942
Nevves from the North. OR, A DIALOGVE BETWIXT David Dammeeslash a Souldier, and Walter Wheeler, a rich Northerne Farmer. Wherein is Discoursed what injuries they did to the Countrey Farmers, and how they used to Pillage; with the extreame joy the Coun∣trey men take at their disbanding. woodcut of man on horse Printed in the yeare, 1641.
Newes from the North. Wheeler. NOW Master Dammeeslash, you looke very dejected, me thinkes your countenance be∣wraies some unxpected chnce or other late∣ly hapned, what is it I pray? have you beene watching all night lost the enemies should breake in upon you? or have you beene building a Sconce, or making some munition to defend you from the thundring Ordi∣nance planted on the Steeple? if any such unhappi∣nesse as this hath befalne you, I can easily elevate your drooping thoughts with more joyfull tidings. Dammee. How's that Mr. Wheeler, can you give me any comfort? What is it? for heavens sake tell me, is pay day come? but why should I aske such an unseasonable question, when twenty daies, (pay daies I meane) are past since I received one crosse of my Captaine; has my Captaine received any mony lately? or does he intend to ransacke the inscrutable bagges of gouty Mr. Gripe, the forty i'th hundred man? or what other newes is it good Ma∣ster Wheeler? Wheel. All your minde my sonne of Mars is on sacke and pillage, but now you may leave off that trade if you please, for there's a Commission sent downe from London for your enlargement, you may now walke where you please without interruption,
unlesse Master Constable, the Stockes, or Whipping-post stand in your way. Dammee. And you are glad of these tydings, are you? you believe now that your hens may walke safely and none bee borrowed, none shall hereafter come limping home, who have miraculously escaped our clutches, which hapned seldome, unlesse we were overloaden; your Geese may graze securely, and not be continually confin'd to their pens, your Ducks, Turkies, and all other Poultry may encrease and mul∣tiply like the Sisters of St. Antholines. Wheel. For my part I have not any to encrease at all, (thankes to your ragged Regiment) but since I heard of this good newes, I intend to revive my stock, my harmelesse sheepe I hope now may rest securely in their folds and not be afraid of the night wolves, nor I in the morning be constrained to use the Art of Subtraction, 25. being taken out of 80. to know I have fifty five onely remaining: beleeve me Master Dammeeslash your disease was more infectious to them then the rot, my hogs may now (with your leave) walke abroad all day, and retire at night to their lodg∣ings, whereas before your company was so mercilesse that (although they were sent on Canterburies embas∣sie) they would not spare the Parsons tyth Pigge, but it must goe into the number, my Calves were no soo∣ner ten dayes old, but one of your noble order long'd for it, marry my Kine themselves you have made bold with too; but I beseech you Sir without offence to your feather, may I aske you a question, had you any Butchers among you to dresse your meat? Dammee. Butchers? yes, enow, of every Artificers Trade we had some, but especially of Shoomakers and Taylors, whom you might easily distinguish from
the rest. The Shoomakers were they that contrary to their Charter, were drunke two dayes a weeke, be∣sides Sunday and Munday, and the Taylors were they that eat so much hot Bread and Butter, they were no great drunkards, and the reason why so many Knights of the Needle turn'd souldiers, was because there was not roome enough in Blackefryers for the French men of that trade; but me thinkes you should rather bee sorry then rejoyce at the losse of so good company, we were ever sociable, wee could not en-endure that you should want company on a Sunday at dinner. Wheel. That's true indeed Sir, you came both Sun∣day and Munday many times, but it was before you were sent for, I did not take any great delight in your pleasant society, good I am sure you never did mee any, unlesse by keeping my meat from stinking, or by ridding me of the loud clamors my wife would whis∣per into my eares, for I could never have her compa∣ny so long as you or your rue and ravenous Copart∣ners had any occasion to use her, I durst not gainesay it, unlesse I had a mind to have my throat cut, or my house puld about my eares, my maids and daughters were more serviceable to you then to their Father and Master; therfore I pray what reason have I to be sorry for your departure? Dam. Why, had your wife ever such service done her from your weake backe as she had from us, your daughters too, puling fooles, how did they looke be∣fore we tooke them in hand? how they were troubled with the greene sicknesse, and lov'd no diet, but lime, chalke, and oatmeale, before they were our pati∣ents, wee prescribed them wholsome pils that tooke off that feminine disease, they I warrant them
grieve that wee must leave them. Wheel. Yes and good cause they have, for you have left testimonies of your love to them; our Country will scarce be able to preserve your bastards, sure never was Country so pestred with a rout of rogues; I pray thee tell me, what good did you ever dome or any Countrey man? Dam. Why thou forgetfull fellow, how may shillings have we sav'd thee that thou wouldest have spent in reaping thy oates, and mowing thy grasse? have not wee sent thee a whole troope of horses into fields to save thee that labour? have not we eas'd thy maids that were loaden with the reapers victualls, and rather then the poore maid should bee troubled to car∣ry it any further, eate it our selves? Wheel. You have indeed, you have beene very li∣berall of such kind of curtesies as you speake of: Tru∣ly Sir you have sav'd me both the labour and charge of reaping either oates or any corne else; your light horses would with much dexterity vault over my hedges, & would not spoile so much of my long grasse in eating as in treading it; I and the rest of my neigh∣bours have received so many of these favours that we are utterly undone; wee shall sve you a lbour in helping us the next yeare, for we have no corne to sow, thinkes to your curteous usage: besides, this is one other of your charitable deeds (if I be not mista∣ken) you would not thinke much to borrow a paire of cleane sheets off the hedge, and forget to bring them home againe; or to exchange a shrt, which though if were farre richer then mine both in colour and qua∣lity, yet I assure you, there was little faire dealing in it; many of you were good huswivs too, you could  my kin forsooth, and a million ore of such
favours have you done me, and I am sure my neighbours have fair'd no better then my selfe. But now Gentleman with faire leaves you must depart from hence to the place you came from, and except you can mend your manners from thence to Tiburne, the commissiion for your disbanding is comming, therefore your trading here is spoi∣led, it is your best course to thinke of your old trade at London. Dam. Nay, but doe you speake seriously? what then will become of me? I see I must fall to the old course of life againe. Wheel. I pray good Mr. Dammislash, what course was it you tooke before we had your company here? surely you were well employed. Dam. Truly I had many waies to live, but never affected any so well as this course of life: sometimes I was in service, I lived with that notorious whore Mistris Clayton that lies in the middle of Fetterlane, there I was her chiefe gentleman usher, and many times upon occasion her hackster; when I was gentle∣man at large and out of service, I hunted bowling al∣lies, and lived much upon the rooke there, and mny times at nine pins in Lincolns Innefields, & for varie∣ty sake, at Pigeon holes on the backe side of West∣minster, and in the Terme time, all forenoone I wal∣ked Westminster Hall, and in a great crowd when I had occasion to feele for mony, should mistake a Countriemans wide pocket for my owne; I have had a hundred of these waies to live by, which I must too againe. Wheel. But what if these trades all faile; what course will you take then?
Dam. Simple fellow, I have so many trades it is unpossible they all should faile, but if it happen they doe, I can at the worst turne ballad singer, which I am inform'd is at this present a very thriving trade. Wheel. Well, seeing 'tis certaine you must leave us, in hope I shall never be troubled with thee nor any of thy profession againe, Ile give thee a dinner. FINIS.
