o441a 99826643 31048
A DECLARATION OF THE LORD LIEVTENANT GENERALL OF IRELAND. DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms Printed at Corck, in the yeare 1648. and are to be sold at Roches building.
BY THE LORD LIEVTENANT GENERALL OF IRELAND. ORMOND, TO prevent the too frequent prejudices incident through jealousies, distrusts, and mis∣constructions to all under∣takings, Wee accompt it not the least worthy our la∣bour upon the instant of our Arrivall to prepare this people, whose welfare Wee contend for, with a right understanding of those intentions in Us, which in Order to his Maiesties service Wee desire may terminate in their good. To enumerate the severall reasons by which Wee were induced (for preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the English interest) to leave the City of Dublin, and other his Ma∣iesties Garrisons then under our power in this Kingdome, in the hands of those intrusted by his two Houses of Parliament, were to set forth a
Narative in place of a manifest. It may suffice to be knowne, that those Transactions had for one mayne ground this Confidence. That by being under the power of the Houses they would upon a happy expected Composure of Affaires in England revert unto, and be reve∣sted in his Maiestie as his proper right. But having found how contrary to the incli∣nations of the well affected to his Maiesties re∣stauration in England, the Power of that King∣dome hath unhappily devolved to hands im∣ployed onely in the Art and labour of pulling downe and subverting the Fundamentalls of Monarchy (with whom a pernicious Partie in this Kingdome doe equally Sympathize & Co∣operate.) And being filled with a deepe sence of the dutie and obligations that are upon Us strictly to imbrace all oportunities of imploy∣ing our endeavours towards the recovery of his Maiesties iust rights in any part of his Domini∣ons. Having observed the Protestant Army in the Province of Mounster (by speciall providence discovering the Arts and practizes used to in∣tangle the members thereof, in ingagements as directly contrary to their duties towards God & man, as to their intentions and resolutions) to have found meanes to manifest the Candor & Integrity thereof in a disclaimer of any obedi∣ence to, or concurrence with those powers or persons which have so grosely varyed even their
owne professed principles of preserving his Ma∣iesties Person and rights, by confining him un∣der a most strict Imprisonment, his Maiestie al∣so vouchsafing graciously to accept the decla∣ration of the said Army as an eminent and sea∣sonable expression of their fidelity toward him, and in testimony thereof having layd his Com∣mands upon us to make our repayre unto this Province to discharge the duties of our place. Wee have as well in obedience thereunto as in pursuance of our owne duty and desire to advance his Maiesties service, resolved to evi∣dence our approbation and esteeme of the pro∣ceedings of the said Army by publishing unto the world our like determination in the same ensueing particulers. And accordingly Wee professe and declare. First, to improve our utmost endeavours for the settlement of the Protestant Religion ac∣cording to the example of the best Reformed Churches. Secondly, to defend the King in his Prero∣gatives. Thirdly, to maintaine the Priviledges and Freedome of Parliament, and the Libertie of the Subiects; That in Order hereunto Wee shall oppose to the hazard of our lives, those Re∣bells of this Kingdome who shall refuse their Obedience to his Maiestie, upon such Termes as Hee hath thought fit by us to require it; And
Wee shall endeavour to the utmost, the sup∣pressing of that Jndependent-Party, who have thus fiercely laboured the extirpation of the true Protestant Religion; The ruine of our Prince; The dishonour of Parliament, and the Vassaladge of our Fellow Subiects, against all those who shall depend upon them, or adhere unto them; And that this our undertaking might not appeare obnoxious to the Trade of England, but that Wee desire a firme union and Agreement be preserved betwixt us; Wee doe likewise declare, that Wee will continue free trafique, and Comerce with all his Maie∣sties good Subiects of England; And that Wee will not in the least manner preiudice any of them that shall have recourse to our Harbours, either in their bodyes, shipps, or goods, nor shall Wee take any thing from them without payment of ready money for the same; And now that by his Maiesties said Command, Wee have proceeded to reenter upon the worke of his service in this Province, Wee conceive no higher Testimonie can be given of his Maiesties acceptation, or of the estimation Wee beare about Us towards their Proceedings then by resorting unto them in person with His Maie∣sties Authority, and exhibiting unto them the incouragement and satisfaction they may re∣ceive in this assurance. That as Wee beare an especiall regard to their present undertakings
and performances accompanyed with a reall. Sence of their former sufferings. So least there should any advantage be derived unto those who indeavour to improve all oportunities of sowing sedition and distrust by this suggestion, that the former differences in Iudgement and opinion which have induced persons to serve diversly under His Majesty, and the Parliament, will occasion prejudice, or ill resentments to arise towards such Persons as have not for∣merly concurred in Iudgement with others in His Maiesties service, Wee doe declare, that Wee are quallified with speciall power and au∣thority from His Majestie, to assure them, that no distinction shall be made in any such Con∣sideration, but that all persons now interested and engaged in this Cause, shall be reflected up∣on, with equall fervour and regard; And that Wee shall make it our endeavours so to im∣prove and confirme His Majesties Gracious dis∣posure towards them, as that Wee will never call to memorie any past difference in opinion, Judgement, Action, or Profession to the preiu∣dice of any Member of this Army, or any per∣son relating to it, but on the contrary, shall be very ready to attest our good affections to∣wards them in the discharge of such good Offices as shall be in our power, In re∣turne whereof Wee shall onely expect their perseverance in their present ingagements for
his Maiesties service with such allacrity, con∣stancy and affection, as may suit with their late publique declaration, & Professions. To whom Wee desire this assurance also may be inculca∣ted. That as Wee shall in the future use our ut∣most care & diligence to provide for their pre∣servation from the like hardships, to those they have formerly undergone; So Wee have al∣ready imployed our best industry and endea∣vours for the settlement of such a course, as we may (with most reason) hope will in these un∣certaine times produce a constant & competent Subsistance for them, enabling them to make such a progresse in their present undertakings as may with the accomplishment of the great ends thereof establish their owne honour and content. Thus much Wee have thought fit to publish unto the world, to furnish it with an e∣vidence of strong conviction against Us, if We ever swerve (to the best of our power from the iust wayes of maintaining the true Protestant Religion, the honour and interest of His Sacred Maiestie, the iust rights of Parliament, the Li∣berties of the Subiects, and the safety, quiet & welfare of the people intrusted to our Care. 6. Octob. 1648.
