P1807A R1670 11876291 50262
THE PETITION Of the Knights, Gentlemen, Free∣holders, and others the Inhabitants of the County and City of York, presented to the Honorable House of Commons now assembled in Parliament. Wherein (inter alia) They humbly offer to Billet and mayntain at their own charge 300 of their Horse, and 3000 of their Trained Bands within their owne Shire of three Moneths, if the Parliament shall think fit. Subscribed by the Lord Major and Aldermen of York, By the high Sheriff and very many Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of good quality. With the manner of their taking the Protestation, before they subscribed the Petition. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Franke, and are to be sold at his Shop next doore to the Kings Head in Fleetstreet, 1642.
To the Honourable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses assembled in Parliament, The humble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Free∣holders, and other the Inhabitants in the County and Citie of Yorke, Sheweth, THat your Petitioners do with all than fulnesse acknowledge and resent the benefit of those good Lawes which you have already provided for us, as most seasona∣ble and precious fruits of your pious and prudent consultations, As also of that most happy and re-united Peace betwixt us and Scotland, our Neigh∣bour Nation, and the blessed care you have lately taken both to relieve our distressed Brethren in Ire∣land, and to put the Town of Hull (the chief strength of our County) into such an hand, as for his integri∣ty wee have good cause to conside in; As also to
purge the House of Peeres of the Prelats votes (a mayne obstruction to your happy undertakings) And having received so much refreshment from you in our so important Concernments, do take boldnesse to represent our humble requests. That your pious care for the further reliefe of our distressed Brethren in Ireland, may be conti∣nued, and your wise resolutions thereupon put into speedy execution. That this whole Kingdome may speedily be put into a Military posture of Defence both by Sea and Land. That the Composition of Recusants (with which his Majesty rests satisfied) being paid, the residue of their lands and goods forfeited by the Statute may be disposed of, aswell for the safety of defensible Ports and places in this Kingdome, as also for set∣ling and mayntaining necessary Guards over the hou∣ses of papists and popishly affected persons. That the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremaci may be impartially and speedily tendred to all pa∣pists and popishly affected persons whatsoever, ac∣cording to the Statute in that case provided. That the Laws against Priests and Iesuits may be fully executed, and that some present course may be directed for the disarming and confining of papists to their owne houses, or else that some of the princi∣all & most dangerous spirits of them in every Coun∣ty may be as caution for the peaceable deportment of the est confined to the custody of trusty persons in some places of safety, if to your wisdoms it shall seem meet. And th  may be deputed for these services as ae not to be spected to use any forbea∣rance
therein. As also that such as are convicted Re∣cusants, some speedy course may be taken against them, either by the present Laws in force, or other∣wise as shall seem best to your wisdoms, that they may not be left so full handed, and so readily prepa∣red upon all occasions to manage either their owne, or the Designes of others, to our so eminent and con∣tinuall danger. That the Votes of popish Peeres and others com∣ming in by proxie, being so apparant a Grievance may be redressed, which are found not only prejudi∣ciall to the wisest results of your consultations, but also affords them liberty and opportunity to act and encourage the promoting the popish Cause in the Kingdome. And because that to the making of a more succes∣full passage to the accomplishment of all these our so important concernments, it will be especially a∣vailable, that matters in Religion be chiefly regar∣ded: We therefore humbly desire that all such im∣pediments as may hinder the progresse thereof may be removed. Amongst which wee ranke in the first place scan∣dalous Ministers, as also places unprovided of such maintenance as is competent for persons of better endowments. Humbly beseeching that for the reme∣dy of both these, you will be pleased to pursue your former pious intentions, as also that Ceremoniall burdens may be removed, and religion setled in such a way, that such as make all conscience obe∣diently to submit to Magistracie and civill authori∣tie in every degree and latitude of it, both supreme and subordinate may not suffer under any penaltie
meerely and only for conscience sake. And forasmuch as these our Counties have under∣gone very great damage by the billeted souldiers which now they are lesse able to susteine then be∣fore, by reason of the Manufactury trades of our Countrey daily decaying, which we visibly discern not only tending much to the present impoverish∣ing of a great number of Families, whose mainte∣nance and livelihood hath beene hitherto wholly supported upon that Foundation, which being not prevented may prove to bee of dangerous Conse∣quence, but also to the weakening of the estates of Farmers and others, because the benefit of Woolls and other Commodities of our Countrey do much depend upon the prospering of these foresaid Trades of Manufacture: Wee therefore humbly desire that you would be pleased to direct such Course, where∣by considerable satisfaction may be made (for what rests unpaid) to such of our Countries as have been by the said billeted souldies thus enammaged. That this Honourable House would bee pleased to move the well affected Lords, and they and you both joyne in supplication to his Majesty, that his Majesty would discover, and nominate who those evill Councellours were that advised to those unparalall'd breaches of the prviledges of Parlia∣ment in charching those worthy members in so ille∣gall a way, and that were any occasion so long to remorate the reliefe of our distressed brethren in Ireland, to the end they may be brought to condigne punishment: And in case his Majesty shall not de∣clare who they be, that then you your selves would be pleased to endevour to find out and declare who
in your judgement have beene the Contrivers and Fomentors of those evill counsels. And being confidently assured of your redinesse to answer our desires, as in other things, so especial∣ly to further the Military posture of the Kingdome, we humbly tender it to your consideration, that for the speedy safetie of our owne Countrey, both against any homebred Commotion or forraigne in∣vasion, we are ready and willing at our owne charge for three Moneths next ensuing to maintaine and billet three hundred of our bond of Horse, and three thousand of our private Train-bond of foot, in some most convenient places of the severall Ridings of our said County (concerning which we have more particularly expressed our intendments in a sche∣dule hereunto annexed) to be in readinesse upon all occasions, if in your wisedomes it shall be approved of: And if so our most humble desire is, the way may receive Countenance and confirmation by some Order from your honourable House. And lastly, that such things may be archieved as are worthy of the excellent wisedomes and painfull labours of such noble instruments, whom unto our great rejoycing of heart wee evidently discerne to be for faithfully and indefatigably studious for the publique weale of this Nation: Wee therefore for the better accomplishment of your Honourable en∣devours, and for our more compleat enjoyment of the precious fruits thereof, Most humbly desire that the high Court of Parliament of the infringement of the liberties whereof we are very sensible, & which in all your just and honourable wayes wee shall be ready to our utmost abilities to assist against the ene∣mies
of God, the King & State) may in all the power and prviledges of it be inviolably maintained. And your Petitioners shall daily pray, &c. Subscribed by Sir Tho. Gower Sherife. Sir Math. Boynton. Sir Tho. Farrefaxe. Sir Io. Bourchier. Sir William Fairefaxe. Sir Jo. Ramsden. Sir Arthur Robinson. Sir Tho. Gower senior. Sir Hugh Bethell. Sir Jo. Savile. Sir Marmaduke Langdale. Sir Edward Rodes. Sir Richard Darlye. Sir Jo. Goodricke, & ali. Mil. And by 50. Esquires, and divers Gentlemen, and others of qualitie, and by Edmund Cooper, Lord Major of the City of Yorke, and by the Alder∣men of that City. Before the subscription to which Petition the High Sherife first tooke the Protestation, and all the Knights and Gentlemen in order after him, and af∣terwards agreed, (if the dangers increased, and the Parliament so approved thereof) to Muster 3000. Foot, and 300. Horse, to be kept for six weekes in such parts of that County as might most conduce for the safetie thereof, and sent the proposition thereof unto the Parliament by Hen. Bethell Esquire, who was employed by that County to present this Petition to the house of Commons, and two more, one to his Majestie, and another to the House of Peeres. FINIS.
