P2143 R34553 14509818 102454
A Physical Dictionary: OR, An Interpretation of such crabbed Words and Terms of Arts, as are deriv'd from the Greek or Latin, and used in Phy∣sick, Anatomy, Chirurgery, and Chymistry. With a definiion of most Diseases incident to the Body of Man; and a description of the Marks and Characters used by Doctors in their Receipts. This Dictionary will be as useful and suffici∣ent to all our late English Practitioners in Physick or Chirurgery (especially such as are not Scholars) as any Dictionary of Ten Shillings Price. Approved by several Doctors, Surgeons and Apothecaries: And Recommended by them in an Epistle to all English Practitio∣ners in Physick and Chirurgery. London, Printed by G. D. for John Garfield, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sin of the Rolling-Press for Pictures, near the Royal Exchange in Corn-hil, over against Popes-head-alley. 1657.
To all English Pra∣ctitioners in Phy∣sick, Anatomy, Chi∣rurgery, and Chy∣mistry. HOw great the necessity is, of having a PHYSICALL DICTIONARY for ex∣plaining hard Words
and terms of Art in the Medicinal Sciences of Pysick, Chyrur∣gery, and Chymistry; such as are vers'd in the understanding those most useful, mysterious and noble Arts, do very well know: It is intended for such Per∣sons as spend their time and employment in studying Physick, and are acquainted with no other than
their Mother tongue; yet, many times more readily Cure a Disease, by their observant, dili∣gent, and strict keeping to an approved Me∣dicine, than many o∣thers, that trust wholly to their Art: There∣fore, for the help of charitable and honest∣meaning People, this Dictionary was Com∣piled, which hath in it as much as is necessary
for understanding hard Words in the fore∣mentioned Arts, be∣ing freed from that troublesome and su∣perfluou Number of unnecessary Words, which serve for no∣thing but to swell up the Bulk and Price of Books. And thus much we have thought fit, (English Reader) to say unto thee in
Commendation of this best of Physical Dictio∣naries. George Starky, Doctor of Physick. George Thornley, Doctor of Physick Thomas Herbert, Student in Physick and Astrologie. John Rowland, Doctor of Physick. John Hawkins, Chirurgion. John Roane, Chirurgion. John Beach, Student in Physick and Surgery. Philip Frith, Student in Physick and Astrology. Ralph Wood all, Chirurgion. John Bryan, Student in Physick. Anthony Rowe, Chirurgion. John North, Apothecary. John Straw, Practioner in Physick. John Harvy, Apothecary.
THE STATIONER TO HIS COUNTRY-MEN. Kind Countrimen, THe Explaining the Art of Physick, ha∣ving found so welcome En∣tertainment, I hope for the like friendly acceptance amongst you, having preserved this Dictio∣nary for your Good, which o∣thers
would have depriv'd you of, wherein such difficult terms as are deriv'd from the Greek or Latin, and dark to the English Reader, are made English; and such Marks and Characters as are used by Physitians and Apo∣thecaries in their Receipts ex∣plained; and for your ease and better understanding, put down the signification of their Weights and Measures according to their Characters: with a definition of most Diseases incident to the body of man. And whereas there are many Words in Mr. Tomlinson's Translation of Rhaenodaeus Dispensatory, not understood by any ordinary
Scholars (much less such as are not) I have caused them to be explained by able persons, well acquainted with the Practice of Physick, so that the mean∣est Capacity, by making use thereof, may rightly understand whatever difficult expressions he shall meet withal in the said Dispensatory. Your Friend, ad Servant, Joh. Garfield.
THE EXPLANATION OF Weights and Measures. A Handful is written thus, M. 1. Half an Handful thus, M. ss. A little small Handful thus, P 1. A Scruple thus, ℈ 1. Half a Scruple, 10 Gra. or thus, ℈. ss. A Drachum thus, ʒ. 1. An Ounce thus, ℥. 1. Half an Ounce, or half a Drachm thus, ℥. ss. ʒ ss. A Grain thus, Gra. 1. A Drop thus, Gut. 1. The Number of any thing thus, Numb. 1. &c. Half of any thing thus, ss. A Pound, or Pint thus, lb. 1.
Twenty Grains, make a Scruple. Three Scruples, make a Drachm. Eight Drachms, make an Ounce. Twelve Ounces, a Physical Pound. Ana, is, of either of them so much. P. ae. is, aequal parts, or parts alike. S. a. secundum artem, according to art. Q. s. so much as is sufficient. Viz. that is to say. ℟. recipe, take.
A PHYSICAL Dictionary. A ABdomen, the Belly or Paunch. Abeston, a stone found in Arabia, of the co∣lour of Iron, which being once
set on fire can hardly be quench∣ed. Ablegate, remove, turn out, send forth, or out of the way. Ablution, washing. Abortion, miscarrying in Wo∣men, when the Child is born so long before the time, that it's in no capacity to live. Abscescus, an Imposthume or Botch. Abscinded, cut off. Absinthites, Wormwood-Wine. Abstergent, clensing forth, scowring away filth. Abstersive, clensing or wiping away. Absumed, taken away. Acatia, a little Thorn grow∣ing in Egypt, out of the leaves nd fruit whereof they draw juyce or black liquor, which be∣ing dried is called Acatia, and is
very astrictive or binding; our Apothecaries have seldom the right Acatia, but instead thereof use the juyce of Sloes. Accended, burned. Access, a fit of an Ague, Gout, &c. Accelerator, in plain English, an hastener: Physically it is used for the Muscle that opens the passage of the Seed, and U∣rine. Acerb, sowr, or sharp. Acetum, Vinegar of Beer. Acetaries, Sallets, or Herbs mixed with Vinegar to stir up appetite▪ Acetum Vini, Vinegar of Wine. Acetum destillatum, Distilled Vinegar. Acetabula, see Cotylidones. Achor vel tinea, or scald▪ head, is a Disease possessing the mus∣culous
skin of the head, or hairy scalp, and eating thereinto like a Moth. Accidents, something ncessa∣rily accompanying a Disease,. Acquires, obtains. Acrimony, sharpness, or fret∣ing of any sharp or corrosive water, or humour of the bo∣dy. Aconite, a venemous herb ha∣ving a root like to a Scorpion, shining within like Alabaster. Acuminated, sharp pointed. Acute, Diseases, such as are sharp and violent, but of short continuance. Adamant, A pretious stone, commonly called a Diamond, brought from Arabia and Cy∣prus. Its the hardest of all stones insomuch that it cutteth Glass, and yieldeth neither to the ham∣mer nor fire, yet it may be
dissolved with warme Goats∣blood. Adeps, fatness. Adjacent, neer adjoyning. Adjection, casting, or adding to. Adimpleates, fills up. Adjuvant causes, such as are subservient to the principal cau∣ses. Adjument, help and relief. Adjuncts, qualities, dispositi∣ons, and symptomes annexed to a Disease. Adjutorious, helpful. Admixtion, mingling toge∣ther. Adscitious, false, counterfeit. Adulation, flattery. Adust, the blood is then said to be adust, when by reason of extraordinary heat the thinner parts are evaporated, and the thicker remain black and dreggy.
Adustion, burning of the blood. Adulterate, corrupt, or coun∣terfeit. Adventitious, not natural, but proceeding from some Cause existing without the proper body. Adstriction, binding, or shut∣ting up the pores of the skin. Aegilops, fistula lacrymalis, a tumor in the great corner of the Eye, by the root of the Nose. Aestuary, an hot-house, or Stove. Affectus animi affectionis, mo∣tions, or passions of the mind. Affected, troubled, or distem∣pered. Afflux, flowing to any parti∣cular part. Agaric, a kind of Mushrom, or Toad-stool, of great use in Physick: it grows upon the
Larch tree in Italy, and is white, light, brittle, and spungeous; it purgeth phlegm, and opens ob∣structions in the Liver. Agitation, shaking any liquor together in a glass. Ahenum, a brass skillet with a cover. Ablution, is exaltation, clen∣sing impure things by often in∣fusion reducing them to puri∣ty. Albation, is the abstraction of Dust, moths, gret, cleaving to a thing, with a Hares foo, feather, spather, or such like. Albugo, is the white spot in the Eye, called, pin and web. Alacrity, chearfulness. Alchimy, is an art dissolving natural congealed substances, and likewise congealed substances dissolved for the more grateful, wholsom, safe preparing of Me∣dicines
for mans body, an art which produces magisterial and essential medicines from mixed bodies. Alkakengie, winter Cherries, the red round beries whereof are good against obstructions of the Liver, the stone, and divers dis∣eases of the Kidnies and Blad∣der. Alcolismus, is an operation by calcination, ribellation, and other means which reduceth a matter into Allcool, the finest pouder that is. Alexipharmaca, Medicines to resist the plague, and poyson. Aliment, food, nourishment. Aliotica, altering Medicines. Alopecia, a falling off of the hair. Alumen, raw Allum. Alumen combustum, burnt Al∣lum.
Aloes Zoccatrina, its brought from India: the best is clear and red like the liver: its an excel∣lent medicine to purge choler, and proper to be taken by them that are troubled with the Em∣rods. Allantois, the skin that holds the Urine of the Child during the time it abides in the womb. Allauded, praised, commend∣ed. Alteratives, medicines chang∣ing the humor and temper of the body. Amalgamation, is the putting together, solution, or calcination of familiar vessels by argentum vivum. Amaritude, bitterness. Amaurosis Gutta serena, A disease in the eyes, viz. when the sight is gone, and no fault to be seen.
Ammoniac, a gum like fran∣kincense, so called, because it grows in Lybia where the Tem∣ple of Ammon stood: Hence is also a Salt so called found in Af∣frick, under the sand. Amnios, the inner skin that compasseth the Child round in the womb. Amputation, dismembring, or cutting off the arm, leg, &c. Amulet, any thing hang'd a∣bout the neck to preserve one from inchantment. Analeptica, restorative Medi∣cines. Analogical, answerable in eve∣ry particular. Anastomasis, an opening of the mouths of the veins. Anastomaticum, Medicine o∣pening obstructions. Anatomy, is an artificial cutting of the outward & inward parts.
Aneurism, a swelling caused by the breaking the internal coat of an Artery, the external being whole. Anfractures, turning and winding. Angina, a swelling in the throat, which hinders breathing and swallowing, and yet no de∣fect in the lungs or breasts. Animosity, courage, stoutness. Anodines, Medicines to as∣wage pain. Anorexia, a loathing of meat caus'd from abundance of crude and raw humors. Anthera, a Compound medi∣cine used for ore mouths. Anthrax, a Carbuncle coming from blood which is black, thick and filthy, burning exceeding hot. Anthonies fire, the shingles. Antidote, a Medicine against
poyson, or any medicine which serves to amend any distemper of the body. Antimony, a Mineral, like to Lead. Antimonii vitrum, Glass of Antimony or Stibium. Antimonii Regulus, Antimo∣ny preciptiate. Antinomasia, a naming before, or that of any sort which is most excellent, as Barbary gold, Ori∣ent pearl, &c. Anus, the fundament. Apertion, opening. Apophlegmatisms, Medicines which draw Flegm from the head. Apoplexy, a deep sleep where∣in there is a total privation of sense and motion, except brea∣thing. Apostema Hepatis, the Apost∣hume of the Liver which comes
from a fall, bruise, or being too strait laced. Appellations, Names. Apothects, an Apothecaries▪ shop. Apozem, a Drink made with Water and divers herbs and spi∣ces, used in stead of a syrup. Aprique place, where the Sun shines. Appropinquating, adjoyning, bordering near, Neighbour∣hood. Aptha, certain Ulcers bred in the uppermost part of the mouth. Aqua fortis, strong Water made of Copperas, Allum, and salt-peter. Aqua Regis, a Water which divides Gold, made after the manner of Aqua fortis, only ad∣ding sal Armoniack. Aquatical, Which grows in
the Water. Aranea tunica, the cobweb, coat, or tunicle. Arbuscle, a little shrub. Arceates, drives away. Ardent, burning, or heating. Arid, dry. Aromata, Spices and sweet∣smelling drugs, or perfumes. Aromatical, smelling sweet like spice. Aromatized, spiced, or per∣fumed. Aromatization, is an artificial manner of peparation whereby Medicaments are made more sweet to the smell, and acceptable to the taste, and more comfort∣able to the heart: it is done by spices commonly. Arsenicum, Arsenick, many wayes a good healer. Arteries, proceed from the heart are in a continual motion,
quicken the body, they carry the vital blood to every part of the body; their motion is that which is called the Pulse: you may feel it at your Temples, Wrist, Groin, &c. Arthetical, Medicines proper for the joynts; especially for the heart. Arthritis, is a pain in the joynts which comes for the most part by fits, stirred up by an in∣flux of humors into the said joynts; but in plain terms the Gout. Arthritical, Gouty persons. Arthrodia, is a Ligament, which conjoyns the head of the bone, which is of it's self little, and that stands in shallow ca∣vity. Articles, joynts. Arundinaceous, resembling reeds, or reedy.
Ascharides, Worms in the arse-gut. Ascites, is a swelling of the belly caused of a serous matter, sometimes from a swelling in the teeth. Assation, rosting. Assumed, taken inwardly. Asthma, shortnesse of brea∣thing, viz. when the breath is hindred by the sympathy or propriety of the part. Astmatical, short breathed. Astringent, Medicines that bind or close up the pores of the skin, or that bind the belly. Astrictive, binding. Atomes, Motes. Atrophy, a Consumption. Attenuating, or making thin. Attracteth, draweth together, or to its self. Attraction, The drawing quality of any thing, as
the Loadstone draweth Iron. Attrition, rubbing or grind∣ing, a certain manner of prepa∣ration, like grinding on some convenient stone with some hu∣midity, whereby Lapis Judaicus, Collyria, and the like, are prepar∣ed. Augmentation of a Disease, is, until it comes to its worst state. Austere, sour. Auricles, the ears. Auriculum, a Chalx that con∣tains gold, gold calcined to pou∣der. Auripigmentum, Orpiment of a deadly taste, yet used outward∣ly in medicines. Axilla, the arm-pit. Axungia, Hogs-grease. Azure, an excellent blue co∣lour.
B Balm, a pretious liquor or juyce, otherwise called balsamum, or opobalsamum: It dropeth by cutting out of a little low Plant about a yard high, having leaves like Rue, but whiter; which plant groweth in Egypt, and some places of the Holy∣land: This juyce is somewhat like oyl, but more clammy, and inclining to a certain redness: It hath a strong smell, and no very pleasant taste: being dropt into a vessel of Water, it will sink down to the bottom like a round pearl, and may be taken up a∣gain on the point of a knife: its excellent to take away a skar, and many other purposes: but it's very dear, and hard to be gotten. Balneum Mariae, a pot of seeth∣ing
Waer, whereinto is set a vessel containing any fit matter to be distill'd, or digested. Balneum sulphureum, a Bath which hath the vertues of brim∣stone. Basilisk, a Cockatrice, the most venemous Serpent that is; it kills a man with its very sight (as some say) but by its breath in∣fallibly: it's about a foot long, with a black and yellow skin, and fiery red eyes. Bdellion, Bdellium, the name of a gum brought out of Arabia and the Holy-land, of a sweet smell, and bitter taste; its ver∣tues are to mollifie hard swel∣lings, and is good against stiff∣ness of sinews, or other parts, and against the biting of vene∣mous beasts. Bechichal, Confections, Me∣dicines, or Electuaries made for
the Cough. Benedicta laxativa, a purging Electuary. Benign Medicaments, gentle, harmless Medicines▪ Benzwine, a sweet smelling Gum of many signal vertues. Brillus, a pretious stone cal∣led beryl. Bezar, a stone of excellent vertue against poyson, of the bigness of an Acorn, dissolved it may be in Water, it's taken out of a Beast in India of the same name, and is exceeding deer. Biles, Tumours, or knots. Bilious, Chollerick. Bitumen, a kind of natural Lime and Clay, clammy like pitch; it grows in some Coun∣tries of Asia: it's of a bright cer purple colour, and of a strong smell; the black is ac∣counted naught. There is lso a
liquid bitumen in Sicilly used in∣stead of lamp-oyl. Blanching, is the separation of the skins and hulls from di∣vers seeds and kernels, as Al∣monds, pease, barley, &c. and it's done by steeping them in hot Water, after which the hulls or peels will slip off by rubbing with your thumb. Bolus, a morsel, or lump of a soft Medicine to be swallowed down. Bolus armenus, Bole-armoni∣ack, is cordial, drying, healing, and cooling. Bonity, Goodness. Borax venetiae, Borax. Breathing a vein, is blood∣letting properly, where but little blood is taken away. Bronchia, the hollow pipes which are dispersed through the substance of the Lungs, being
branches of the wind-pipe. Bronchochele, the Rupture of the throat, a great round swel∣ling in the throat. Buccellation, is dividing into gobbets, or by piece-meals. Buglossum vinum, Wine made of Bugloss. C Cacoethe, is a species of the canker, and so poysonous, that it continueth with one all his life time, being by most held incur∣able. Cachechtial persons, such as are bloat up with a moist widy hu∣mor, and have a pale ill colour in their faces. Cachectical, an evil habit of body. Cadmia nativa, a kind of mi∣neral.
Cadmia officinarum, Tutty. Caducus morbus, the falling∣sickness. Caeliaca, the Arteries of the stomach, which accompany the branches of the Gate-vein. Calcanthum Vitriolum, Cop∣peras, or Vitriol. Calcedonius, a pretious stone. Calcination, a burning to ashes by drying up of the native moi∣sture by reverberate ignition, by putting them together with aqua fortis, the spirit of salt, vitriol, sulphur, &c. Calamine, the oar of brass much used among Chirurgi∣ons. Calamites, rana viridis, a green Frog. Calefaction, is a certain way of preparing Medicines, simple or compound, by a moderate heat of the Sun, fire, or horse∣dung.
Calefactive, heating. Calefy, that maketh warm. Caliginous, dim, dark sight∣ed. Callous, hard, brawny. Calx coma, is abstersive, dry∣ing, healing. Calx viva, Quick lime used chiefly in caustick Medicines. Camphir, a strong smelling juyce, or sap of a tree in India. Cancer, is a hard tumor, rough and unequal, round and unmove∣able, of an ash or liquid co∣lour. Canina fames, Cynorexia, Dogs appetite, unnatural hun∣ger. Cantharides, Spanish flies of a golden colour. Carabe, Amber. Carbo, Carbunculus, a Plagu∣sore, or Botch.
Carbunculus, Anthracites, A Carbuncle stone coming out of the Indies. Cardamomum, a spice. Cardiack passion, passions of the heart. Cardiaca, the median or liver∣vein. Cardialgia, distempers, or griefs of the heart. Cardiacks, things proper to the heart, or Cordials. Cardiogmos, heart-burning. Carenum musum ad tertias co∣ctum, Must, or new Wine, boyld till the third part remain. Carminaing Medicines, are such as break wind. Carnose, Fleshy. Carpobalsamum, the fruit of balsamum. Caryophillum, Cloves. Carus, rottenness, or corrup∣tion of a Bone.
Carncle, a bit of flesh grow∣ing out on any part of the bo∣dy. Cassia flos, prepared Cassia of excellent use in Physick, it being as harmless and gentle a purge as is. Castigation, Correction, chasten. Catagmaticks, Medicines to consolidat, or knit together bro∣ken bones. Catagma ossium, fractura, A fracture of the bones. Catalepsis, numbness, or stiff∣ness, with which whosoever is taken, he retains the same figure of the parts of the body which he had when he was taken, whe∣ther sitting, or lying. Catapasms, sweet pouders. Cataphora, a dead sleep. Cataplasm, a pultise. Catopotium pillula, a Pill, or
little ball. Catharticks, purging Medi∣cines. Catarrh, a flowing, or distil∣ling of humors from the brain upon the Lungs, causing a cough. Catheter, an hollow instru∣ment to thrust into the yard when the urine is stopt by stones or gravel lying in the passage. Catholicon, an universal Me∣dicine. Catoche & Catalepsis, a strange kind of disease, and seldom heard of. Cavity, hollowness. Caulicles, little stalks. Cavous, hollow. Causos, ardens fbris, continua tertiana, a continual tertian, or burning Fever. Caustick, Medicines to burn the skin, to make issues, &c.
Cautery actual, burning with a red hot iron. Celebrious, frequent, eminent. Cementum, a mineral matter like lute. Cementation, is the softening an hard thing till it be like soft Wax before the fire. Center, the point in a circum∣ference. Cephalalgia, head-ach. Cephalica, the head-vein Cephalaea, capitis dolor diu∣turnus, a continual head-ach. Cerates, Cerecloaths used a∣gainst Inflamations and vomit∣ings. Cerasites, Wine made of Cherries. Cerebllum, or After-brain▪ in Greek parencephalis is as i were a private and small brai seated in the back and lower par of the skull under the brain.
Cerotum or Ceratum, a plaister made of oyl and wax. Cerussa venetiae, Venice ceruce, it is healing, cooling, and dry∣ing: White lead. Cervicornula tenella, Harts∣horn. Ceterach, Finger-fern, An Herb that hath neither stalk, flower, nor seed: it's much used in agues, against the black jaun∣dice, quartan agues, and stop∣ping of the spleen. Chalibeate liquor, is such as hath had steel quenched in it. Chalisticum, a Medicine to provoke heat. Chermes, Granum tinctorum, Couchenil. Chiragra, the gout in the fin∣gers. Chlorosis, the green-sickness, the Virgins Disease; the pale colour of Virgins: the White
jaundice. Cholerica passio, a great pain in the Belly with pricking and shooting, and avoiding of chol∣er, both by vomit and stool. Chologogon, purging choler. Chondril, an Herb like Suc∣cory. Chondrus, Cartilago, a gristle. Chorion, the outward skin which compasseth the Child in the womb. Chronical diseases, are diseases which last a great while, as Con∣sumptions, &c. Chrysocal, a kind of Mineral found like sand in the veins of some Metals. Chylus, the food in the Sto∣mach, by the first digestion tur∣ned into a white cream, or pap. Chylosis, the hurt concoction of the stomach.
Chyrurgery, an Art teaching the cure of all the pains and in∣firmities of the body by the right use of the hand. Clyptica, Medicines to clense and beautifie the skin. Cicatrize, the scar at closing up of a wound, or sore. Cinefaction, a reducing unto ashes. Cinnamon, a sweet smelling bark, very well known. Cinaper, Vermilion. Cinnabaris Indica, sanguis Draconis, a liquid gum brought out of India. Cinneres ligni, ashe of wood of which abundance of Medi∣cines of worth are made, both in Physick and Chirurgery. Circulation, a chymical ope∣ration wherein the matter to be circulated is inclosed in a glasse ody, and a blind head being
luted on, and the glass placed in horse-dung, as fast as the Spi∣rits or moisture ascend up into the head, finding no vent, they fall down from whence they came, and this is called Circu∣lation because the vapor moves round in the head of the glass. Circumcinge, environ, en∣compass about, or round. Circumduce, to carry about, as the hand is carried about in grinding upon a marble stone. Circumforaneous, idle, wan∣dring, prating knaves Circumvolution, turning a∣bout. Circundated, encompassed. Citta, Pica malacia, the affecti∣ons of a longing in Women with child. Citrine, yellow. Civet, a sweet substance like Musk, which yet is but the turd
of a little Beast like a Cat. Clarification, purging of li∣quid medicaments from their dregs and grosser matters, that so they may be more acceptable to the palat, and more easily di∣stributed. Climacterical, every seventh year of a mans life. Clavicles, or Coller bones, termed in Greek cleides, because they shut up the whole chest. Clement, gentle. Clinica, a Woman Doctor. Clitoris, is a sinewy part in the Womb of a Woman. Coacted, pent up, kept toge∣ther by force. Coadunation (sometimes ter∣med by the name of a more ex∣cellent species, Coagulation) is a perfect and skilful working whereby such things as disagree re united.
Coagmentation, like to Glu∣tination, is by liquate things, to which dissolving pouders are cast, and afterwards are made concrete by laying them in a cold place, or by evaporating their moisture. Coagulum, the Rennet that turneth milk. Coagulated, curdled. Coagulation, is the forcing of things agreeing in nature from a thin and fluid consistence into a solid Mass by the privati∣on of moisture. Coalition, the uniting, or heal∣ing up, or growing together of the lips of a wound, or ulcer, or any other part that should be o∣pen. Coarctation, a streining or pressing together. Couscateth, shineth. Coction of humors, is their
separation from the mass of good blood, and preparation for ex∣pulsion. Cocted, digested. Cognation, affinity, or like∣nesse. Cohibit, That doth restrain. Cohobation, when the distill'd liquor is often poured on its faeces and distill'd again. Coincide, the falling in, or hapening of divers thing toge∣ther at once. Coindicants, divers indicati∣ons or signes in a disease, shew∣ng, or pointing to one and the he same remedy for the cure. Colation, the sending of that hich is moist through a strain∣r, that the liquor may be had parated from a dryer sub∣ance. Colatorie, a streiner. Colature, straining.
Colcothar, a good caustick medicine; for it is of a cooling, drying, healing, and clensing quality. Collyries, Medicines for the eyes, particularly oyntments. Collyrium, an eye-salve. Collysion, a breaking, bruis∣ing, or knocking together. Colon, the Gut that is the seat of the disease called the chol∣lick. Collick, so called from the gut colon, which is the part affe∣cted, and is long, winding, and ordained for receiving the ex∣crements of almost all the body: the reteining these excrements too long, cause this pain. Colliquation, or colliquefacti∣on, is the joyning of many fufils or liquables to make one com∣pound by eliquation on the fe.
Collumella, Inflamation: see Uvula. Collusions, filth, impurity. Coloration, is whereby the perfect colour of gold, silver, Philosophers, and such-like ob∣scured by any sulphurous vapor is renewed and made bright by maceration, frequent ablution in any sharp liquor or salt, argal, spirit of wine-vinegar. Coloquintida, a kind of gourd which the Persians call gall of the Earth, because it destroyes all herbs near which it groweth; it's a very dangerous purge, yet frequently used. Colourated, coloured. Coma vigil, waking coma is a disease in which the patient lyeth with his eyes shut as if he were asleep, when he is awake and di∣stracted. Combustion, see cinefaction.
Combustible, is that which will burn. Comitialis morbus, epilepsia, the Falling sickness. Comitate, accompany. Commaculate, to defile, or stick to the fingers. Comminution, is the reducing of any matter into such fine pou∣der by dilation, filteration, ex∣ication, confusion, calcination, cribration, that no roughness or corpulency be felt. Commissura, the mold of the head where the parts of the skull are united. Commutation, change, alter∣ation. Compact, close, solid, united together. Complexion, is the nature of a part, hot, cold, or dry. Complication of diseases, when divers Diseases afflict the pati∣ent
at one and the same time, Composition, is the putting to∣gether of divers things. Compression, a thrusting or pressing any thing har toge∣ther. Concave, ulcers, hollow ul∣cers. Conception, is from a mingling of seeds in the womb, wch is the most noble nurse, gathering and contracting it self exactly, that it will not admit the point of a needle, then the womb rouzeth and raiseth up the sleepy and lur∣king power of the seeds, so that that which was before but poten¦tial it bringeth into act. Concretation, wrangling Dis∣putes. Concinnated, made fit for the purpose, trimmed, apparel∣led. Conciliating, causing, perswa∣ding,
procuring by fair means. Concertion, is divaporation of humidity in fluid things by gentle decoction on fire. Concocted, digested. Concords, equalities. Concrete juyces, juyces of plants that were once liquid, but for their better preservation are hardened either in the Sun or by the fire. Condense, thick, hard. Condiloma, a swelling of the fundament. Condiments, sawces. Conditure, the art of preserv∣ing. Conficted, mingled. onfirmed, A Disease is said to be confirmed, when the sympoms that distinguish it to be of such or such a particular dise do appear. Cofication, rubbing or grin∣ding.
Confusion, is properly a mix∣ture of such things as are fluid. Congelation, benumning, unsuitablenesse, a freezing toge∣ther with cold. Congestion, a gathering toge∣ther, or heaping up. Conglomerated, heaped toge∣ther. Conglutination, is the com∣pacting of Metals, jewels, glasses, &c. by gums, glue, whites of eggs, and the like; the nature of the conglutinated remaining: a glewing together. Conjugations, or pairs of nerves. Conjunctiva, a coat of the eye so called, because it sticks fast to the eye, and helps it in its place. Conquash, mash together. Consentaneous, agreeable con∣sonant.
Consistence, the thickness or thinness of any substance or li∣quor. Consolidation, closing up a sore or wound. Consopiated, lull'd asleep. Consternation, fear, astonish∣ment. Constipation, stopping up. Constitution, the complexion or temperament of the body. Contagion, infection. Continuity, an oneness, or one continued quantity without in∣terruption. Contorsion, a wresting or drawing awry. Contracted, shrunk or drawn together. Contraindicants, are such in∣dications as forbid such or such a course to be used. Contumacy, stubbornness, and
that will not be wrought upon by the medicine. Contunding, pounding, beat∣ing. Contusion, bruising, a bruise, also a beating of very thick bo∣dies into very subtil parts. Conus, a geometrical figure resembling a sugar-loaf. Convex, standing out like the back-side of a buckler or plat∣ter. Convulsio, spasmus, a con∣vulsion or cramp. Copal, white Rosin, very bright. Cophosis, is when the hearing is totally gone, so that the pati∣ent either heareth no noyse, or if he do, he cannot distinguish. Copiously, plentifully. Corda barbarorum, nervus, A sinew. Cordis palpitatio, panting, or
beating of the heart. Coronal suture, the seam which divides the skull of the head in two parts. Cornea, the coat of the eye of a horny substance. Corpulent, fat, thick, gross. Corpus callosum, a thick body, it is a part belongs to the brain. Corpus varicosum, is an inter∣weaving of the veins and arte∣ries which carry the vital and na∣tural blood to the stones to make Seed of. Corpulent, fat, gross. Corral, is cordial, cooling, drying, and prepared chymical∣ly hath a wonderful comforting vertue in it; yet the red corral far exceeds it. Corroding, biting and fret∣ting. Corosion, is calcination, redu∣cing things coagulated by the
corroding spirits of salt, sulphur, wine vinegar distill'd, aqua for∣tis, &c. into ashes. Cortices, barks, peels, the out∣ward rind. Corymbiferous, bearing ber∣ries. Coriza or pose, is a catarrh fal∣ling from the brain into the nose. Cotylidones, in lattin acetabu∣la, the joyning of the ends of two pair of veins, (one coming from the spermatical, another from the hypogastrical branch) with the mouths of the umbilical vein, making a connexion be∣tween the mother and the in∣fant. Couched with a needle, that is, something taken away with a needle from the eye, or pressed down. Cranium, the brain.
Crasse, gross, thick, dull, hea∣vie. Crassamen, or crassamentum, Wine lees. Crassitude, thickness or grosse∣ness. Cremaster, is the muscle that holds up the stones. Cremor, the top or flower of any liquor or cream of milk, yeast, the juyce of steeped barley, &c. Cribration, sifting. Crisis, the sign of natures vi∣ctory over the disease, whereby is judged, Whether the disease will prove deadly or dangerous to the patient. Critical day, is every seventh day in Fevers, wherein appears some remarkable or eminent ac∣cident, serving to shew, Whe∣ther Nature or the Disease be in most probability to get the vi∣ctory,
and these accidents are either some swelling, evacuation, bleeding, or other great change, to the better or worse, whereby the patient is judged in a condi∣tion hopeful or hopeless. Crocus martis, saffron of iron, good against all fluxes. Crocus veneris, saffron of cop∣per or refined verdegrease, it ex∣pelleth, drieth, clenseth, and healeth. Chronick diseases, such as con∣tinue a long time. Christalline, an humor in the eye resembles a little cake of chrystal, if you open a Calves eye care∣fully, you may take it out whole. Cruciate, to torment, afflict, put to pain, to grieve, or vex. Crucible, a Glasse wherein things are burnt to prepare them for beating to pouder.
Cubebs, A certain fruit sold by Apothecaries like Pepper, it comes out of India: its hot and dry, it comforts the brain and quickens the spirits being chew∣ed in the mouth. Crude, raw, undigested which happens to the blood, or to the meat in the stomach. Cruent, bloody. Cucupha, Caps quilted with medicinal things, as dryed rose∣mary, &c. Culins, stalks Culinary, belonging the kitching. Cumulation, congestion. Cultellated, made sharp, edg∣ed. Cultivate, to manure, till, dress the earth, to improve or better any soyl or grain. Cupping glass, is a glass fa∣stened to the skin with lighted
tow, or flax, to draw blood, or raise a blyster. Cummin, one of the four greater hot seeds: its hot and dry, good to break or dissolve windiness in the body. Cutchoneal, a Drug brought from beyond Sea of great use in Physick, it being an excellent cordial. Cuticle, scarf-skin, the first containing or investing part which runs upon the surface of the skin. Cydoniatum, conserve of quin∣ces called marmalade. Cynorexia, appetitus caninus, a greediness and unnatural appe∣e of meat. D Dandril, scales of the head, beard, and eye-brows.
Daphnaelion Oleum Laurinum, oyle of Bays. Dation, the quantity or dosis of any medicament that is admi∣nistred to the patient at once. Dealbate, that maketh white. Debility, a weak state of bo∣dy. Declination, is that time of a disease which follows that we call the state, the going away of a disease. Decoctio Epythemi, the Deco∣ction of Dodder. Decoction, the liquor or broth wherein are boyled herbs and o∣ther simples to serve as the basis or foundation of many medi∣cines. Decorticated, stripped of their skins, peels, or barks. Deduce, draw to and fro. Definitly, exactly, particular∣ly.
Defluxion, the flowing of hu∣mors to any particular part. Deject, cast out. Deleates, takes away. Deletary, poysonous, destru∣ctive. Deliquation, is the preparati∣of things melted on the fire. Deliquium, is the liquation of a concrete (as salt powder calci∣ned) set in a moist place. Delirium, raving, and frenzy, a talking idlely in sickness. Demerged, plunged under wa∣ter. Demoniack, one possest with a devil. Demonstrated, proved to the sense beyond contradiction. Denigrate, that maketh black. Denominated, so called. Dentifrice, such things where∣with the teeth are rubb'd to make them white.
Depose, put off. Depraved, wicked, vile, base. Depurges, draws forth. Descention, is when the essen∣tial juyce dissolved from the matter to be distill'd is brought back and doth descend. Despumation, a scumming or taking off the froth. Despumed, purged, clarifi∣ed. Detersory, clensing. Detriment, hurt or damage. Deturpates, fouleth, defileth, makes filthy. Diabetes, a continual and un∣natural making of water, after which there comes a violent thirst, and consuming of the whole body. Diacatholicon, an Electuary much used in Physick, so called because it serves as a gentle
purge for all humors. Diagnosticks, signs whereby is known the disease which the pa∣tient hath. Diagalanga, a confection of hot spices, good against the wind chollick and cold distempers of the inward parts. Diagridiates, medicines that have scamonny or diagridium in their composition. Diagridium, Scammony is the juyce of a forreign plant dri∣ed, its a most strong and violent purge, being boyled in a Quince it is in part corrected, which when its thus prepared Apothe∣caries call diagridium. Diamond, a well known jewel or pretious stone. Diapasm, medicinal pouders, unguents or liniments used for delicacy, and perfume. Diapedisis, the sweating of
blood through the pores of the veins. Diaphnicon, an electuary u∣sed by physitians to purg phlegm and choler. Diaphoreticks, medicines pro∣voking sweat. Diapnaetica, medicines that bring a tumor to suppuration that it breaks a sore. Diaphragma, the midriff, a skin that separateth the stomach and breast from the belly. Diaprunum, an electuary made of Damask prunes and divers o∣ther simples, good to cool th body in hot burning Fea∣vers. Diarhaea, a looseness of th belly, by which the excrementi∣tios humors are sent forth with∣out blood or food, and with∣out the Ulceration of the In¦testines.
Diasena, a purging electuary, good against quartan Agues, and all other Diseases proceeding from melancholly. Diatraganth, a Confection of Gum Traganth, and other sim∣ples, good against hot diseases of the breast. Diet, signifieth most com∣monly a diet drink. Difflation, is when through heat, spirits arising, and with a kind of bellows blown in the ad∣verse Camaera, and there are found congulated. Diffoded, digged, as a hole or ditch is digged in the earth. Diffused, dispersed, scattered, or spread. Digestive medicines, are such as prepare evil humors to be purged out of the body. Digestion, is simple matura∣tion, whereby things uncon∣cocted
in artificial digestry heat (as food by natural heat in the stomach) is digested. Dignotion, the searching out of any kind of knowledge. Dilacerat, to tear, to rend in pieces. Dilated, enlarged, made wi∣der, or opened. Dilucidely, clearly, plainly. Dilutely, shining bright. Discuss, is to dissolve a swel∣ling insensibly by degrees with∣out breaking the skin, or causing a sore, as many knavish Surgeons do for their private gain. Discussive, that disperseth, dissolves, unlooseth. Dislocation, putting out of joynt. Dispel, to thrust, drive, or put away. Disquisition, a search, or en∣quiry.
Dissentany, things disagree∣able. Dissipated, diffused, or spread abroad. Dissect, to cut in pieces, to open, to cleave in sunder. Dissite, remote. Dissoluble, in a possibility of being dissolved. Dissolution, is a preparation of Medicine simple and com∣pounded by some convenient moisture to a certain consi∣stence. Dissolved, its used to be spo∣ken of dissolving hard knots, kernels, or swelling by applica∣tion of outward medicines, and internally by dispersing any co∣agulation, or gathering together of humors by diet drinks. Distemper, any excess of heat or cold in the body of man. Dissention, stretching.
Distillation, is a flowing down of thin humors from the brain into several parts; also a separa∣tion of things pure from things impure. Distillatio per descensum, is when the liquor drawn from the distilled materials falls down in∣to a vessel placed below that which contains the matter, the particular way and manner here∣of is to be sought in the books of Chymists. Distortion, writhen, or turned from the natural place and situa∣tion in the body. Distraction, is a disuniting of divers things before uniting and agreeing. Diuturity, long continuance of time. Diuretical, Medicines to pro∣voke urine. Divaporation, is exhalation
by fire of vapour. Diverting medicines, which turn aside the course of the hu∣mor, so that it doth not run to any particular part, which the residence of that humor hath made the seat of a disease. Dolor aurium, pain in the ears from cold winds; it happens to many through a hot distemper or inflamation, and sometimes sharp and biting humors cause pain in the ears. Dolor nephriticus, stone in the Kidneys, and pain in the Reins, the vulgar call it stone-chollick, because of the great affinity it hath with the chollick. Dose, the quantity of any medicine usually prescribed to be taken at one time, so much as may safely be given at once. Dolor ventriculi, is a sad and troublesome sense in that part
from some things that gnaw and stretch it till it break or be wounded. Dropax, is a topical medica∣ment, sometimes hard like a salve, sometimes soft as a pul∣tise as the case requires: its pro∣per use is in long tedious dis∣eases. Dulciaries, sweetners, such things as sweeten. Dulcification, is the correcting of mineral medicines by Ablu∣tions, &c. Dulcity, sweetness. Dulcoacid, sweet, and yet sharp, as syrup of Lemons. Dulco-amare, bitterish sweet. Dulcorate, sweeten. Duration. when things mol∣lied at the fire, are set in a cold place, and harden. Durity, hardness. Disepulotica, an hard dry
scar, after the healing of an Ul∣cer. Dyspepnia, ill concoction. Dyspnaea, difficulty of brea∣thing. Dysentery, an often and bloo∣dy loosness of the belly with pain and torment depending up∣on the ulceration of the inte∣stines: in plain English, The bloody Flux. Dysury, a scalding or stopping of the urine, a painful pissing. E Ebullition, boyling or working of the blood and humors in the body like new Wine in a hogs∣head. Eclegma, a Medicine or Con∣fection not to be eaten or chewed but licked or sucked, and suffered softly to melt down into the
Lights or Stomach, it is a liquid Confection thicker than a syrup, and thinner than an electuary. Educed, brought forth, pres¦sed forth. Eduction, a bringing forth, Edible, that which may be eaten. Efferous, fierce, cruel, viO∣lent. Efficacious, powerful. Efficient cause, the working or making cause, as the Apothe∣cary is the efficient cause of a compound medicine; the mate∣rial cause is the Druggs, where∣of it is made; the formal cause is that proper form given it, where∣by its distinguished to be a Pill, a Potion, an Electuary; and the final Cause is to procure health. Effigired, formed or shap'd. Effluxion, a flix of the seed.
Effoded, digged up. Effrenate, unbridled, head∣strong. Effluded, powred off. Effringed, broken, ground to powder. Egritudes, griefs, sicknesses, diseases, calamities. Elaboration, a manual opera∣tion, an extracting of ignoble matter from that which is more excellent. Elaterium, the juyce▪ of wild Cucumbers dryed, being taken inwardly purgeth waterish hu∣mors, and is good against the dropsie: but it must be well cor∣rected or it will be extream pain∣ful in operation. Election, is a chusing of sim∣ples according to time and sea∣son. Electuary, a soft form of me∣dicine, made sometimes purging,
sometimes not. Elephantiasis, a kind of white scals or leprosie over the whole body of the patient, making it like the side of an elephant. Elevation, is when subtil things are forced from those which are thick. Elicite, make choice of. Elixar, a quintessense or me∣dicinal liquor refined by distil∣lation to the highest purity and exalted to its utmost degree of vertue. Elixation, gentle boyling by a moderate heat. Elution, the preparation of common Bole by pulverization, calcination, lotion, &c. as Tal∣cum, Crocus martis Terra▪ lem∣nia. Emanates, proceeds from. Embrocated, moistened, sprinckled, wash'd, or bathed.
Emends, cures, or takes away. Emetos, or Emesia, vomiting, a depraved motion of the sto∣mach. Emelica, vomiting Medicines. Emphrastica, medicines that clog up the pores of the skin by their clamminess. Empirick, a Mountebank, or Quacksalver, that administreth Physick without any regard to le or art. Emollient, softening or dissol∣ving oyntments. Emollition, a softening by steeping. Emollient herbs are four: mal∣lows, marsh-mallows, black violet, and bears breech. mpasms, medicil pouders sed o allay inflamations, and to scarifie the extremity of the kin. Emplasters, are a Compositi∣on
of several Simples for sever∣al diseases according to the Phy∣sitians dcretion. Emplaiick medicines, all such kind of food which is o a clam∣my glutinous ubstance. Empneumasis, Windiness in the stomach. Emprostotonos, A kind of Cramp. Empyema, corruption or quit∣tour lying between the Breast and Lungs after a plurifie. Empyici, are such as have an imposthume or bladder broken in the side of the Lungs. Emulgent veins, those passages whereby the wheyish excrements of the bloud is conveyed through the kidneys into the bladder. Emulsions, the steeping or dissolution by steeping of any seeds or kernels in liquor till it come to the thickness of a jelly.
Emunctories, certain passages whereby nature clenseth the bo∣dy from many hurtful peccant humors, which are certain kernels in the groins and under the arms where risings most commonly happen in pestilental and vene∣mous diseases. Enecated, killed. Eneorema, the clouds that hang in distilled waters, or in urins, especially when the Disease is breaking away. Energetical, very forcible and strong. Enchanthis, an immoderate encrease and swelling of the car∣uncle or little flesh in the corner of the eye coming from the a∣bundance of bloud in that part. Encomium, praise, commen∣dation. Entrals, the bowels▪
Euntiates, signifies. Ephemera febris, a light Fever that lasts but one day. Ephractica, medicines open∣ing the pores of the skin. Epicrasis, a leasurely evacua∣cuation of evil humors. Epidemical diseases, are such as are universally spread over a whole Naion or Country, such are the plague, small pox, fluxes, sweating sicknesse, &c. Epidemia, the plague. Epiglois, is a gristle and a cover of the cleft of the Larynx made to fall upon it, whn we swallow, that nothing should slip into the weason. Epilpsia, the falling sickness which is a convulsion of the whole body, not continually, b by fits, with an hindranc both of the mind and snss.
Epiphora, involuntary weep∣ing. Epispastick, blistering plai∣sters, or any other strong draw∣ing plaister; they are also cal∣led vesicatories. Epithems, bags of dried herbs, pouders, or spices; sometimes moistened with rose-water, wine, or vinegar: sometimes applied dry to the region of the sto∣mach, heart, liver, spleen, or brain. Epuloticks, pouders or other medicines that dry up ulcers and sores. Eradicate, plucked up by the roots. Eraded, scraped off, or raked away. Erector, in plain english, A lifter up, physically the muscle that makes the yard to stand. Eroded, rusted, canker'd, or
eaten asunder. Erumnies, griefs, miseries. Errhins, sneezing medicines to be snuft up into the head to purge the brain. Erugates, Takes away wrinckles. Eruption, a breaking or bur∣sting out. Erysipelas, chollerick humors or swellings. Escheoticks, potential caute∣ries: see Cauteries. Esculents, whatever things may be eaten. Essences, or chymical extracts, being the most refined and spiri∣tual part of any matter or sub∣stance. Essential, accidents of a Dis∣ease, without which they could not be said to be, as heat in a Fe∣ver, leanness in a Consumpti∣on, &c.
Eviscerate, to unbowel, or draw out the bowels. Euphorpium, a gum or tear of a strange Plant growing on the mount Atlas in Libia: its yel∣low, clear, and brittle: it's good against palsies and shrinking of sinews. Exhalation, is when the spi∣rit of any matter, solid or in pouder, is lifted up through heat, and vanisheth into the air. Evacuation, purging or dis∣charging the body of what is dangerous or superfluous. Evaporation, consumption by steem caused by a gentle heat in evaporations of liquors, the flat∣ter & broader your vessel is that holds your liquor, the sooner will the Operation be effe∣cted. Eventilated, fanned, cooled,
or clensed by the wind, as musty corn is made sweet by casting to and again abroad in the air. Euchima, good blood, or a good habit of body. Evocative, that calls forth, or brings forth any offensive matter, or humor. Euphoy, sound, pronuntia∣on. Exacts, drives away. Exanthemata, the small pox are pustules, and the meases spots which arise in the top of the skin from the impurity of the corrupt bloud sent thither by force of nature. Exaltation, a chymical pre∣paration whereby any thing is brought to its highest vertue and purity. Exanimate, drive out the life. Exiceate, to make dry, or
dry up. Exasperate, provoked to be more painful, fell and angry than before. Excavated, hollow. Excite, stir up, provokes. Excrement, the dregs or resi∣dence of the nourishment of the body voyded by dung, sweat, and urine. Excrementitious, that which is mixed with any impure or un∣necessary excrementitious hu∣mor. Excorticated, fleyed or piel∣ed. Excreta, things voided out of the body. Exenterated, having the bow∣els plucked out. Exesiuate, destroy the heat of any part. Exhalation, vapors drawn by the Sun upwards off the face of
the earth and waters. Exhausted, drawn dry, spent. Exhibited, given, admini∣stred. Exhilerate, make chearful, enlighten, revive. Exiccation, drying. Exigent, a streight or necessi∣ty, an eminent peril. Exiguity, meanness, littleness, smalness. Eximious, excellent, eminent, exceeding, admirable, great. Exonerate, disburthen, dis∣charge. Exotick, strange, forreign. Expetible, desirable, wor∣thy to be wish'd for, or sought after. Expel, to drive forth. Expectorate, to help an easie spitting out of flegm. Expressed, squeezed out.
Expletes, empties. Expulsion, the driving forth of excrements, dung, urine, sweat, or any hurtful humor of∣fending the body. Expurged, clensed. Exquisite, perfectly per∣fect. Extension, stretching forth. Extenuation, leanness, a con∣sumption. Extergeth, clenseth. Extinct, dead, or put out like a candle. Extraction, pulling, or drawing out. Extranous, strange, forreign, from without. Extrinsecal, from without. Extruct, build, set up. Extrudes, drives out. Exucce, without juyce. Exulcerate, make sore. Exuperant, over abounding,
exceeding, F Fabrick, the whole compo∣sition or frame of the body. Fabrication, building. Factitious, counterfeit. Faculty of a medicine, is a cer∣tain cause or quality whereon its proper action or vertue depends, as the faculty of Aloes is to purge. Faex vini, the lees of wine▪ Fames Canina, Boulimia, dogs appeie, when the appeite is deprved or offendeth in quani∣ty or quality: in quantity when nourishment is required in grea∣ter quantity than nature can bear▪ and is called Boulimia: in quali∣ty when things are required which are evil, or not food, and is clled ca Citta.
Fartures, filling or cramming as they fill puddings; whence the word is borrowed. Febris Catarrhalis, a Feaver caused by distillation of Rheum from the head. Faeces, dregs, settlement in the bottom of any liquor, dross, &c. Feculent, foul, drossy, dreg∣gy, fervid, very hot. Fecund, fruitful. Fedity. foulness. Fnugreck, a Plant or Herb, the seed whereof is much used in Physick: it's yellow, being hot in the second dregree, and hath power to mollifie and dissolve. Fermentation, a working of the humors or any oher liqor as new drink works in a vre. Ferulaceous, like the herb e∣rul. Ferrminatio, a soldering or
fastening together. Fibres, similar parts, cold and dry, engendered of the seed, and therefore white, solid, and long, like spun thread, appointed for motion, and to hold the flesh of the parts wherein they are toge∣gether. Fictation, is the accustoming of spiritual badness by fire, by calcination gentle and continual decoction. Ficus, Marisca, sycon & syco∣sis, the Piles or Hemmorrhoids in the fundament of a man. Figuline, earthen vessels. Filtration, a Chymical ope∣ration performed by letting the liquor run through a brown pa∣per, or by laying a piece of cloth list, with one end in the liquor, and the other into an empty ves∣sel placed lower than the bottom of that containing the liquor
whereby th clearest part will run out of that above into that below. Fimus Equinus, Horse Dung wherein Chymists use to set their medicaments to purrifie. Fistick Nuts, oulandish Nuts brough out of Syria, and other hot Countries, not much unlike a Hazel Nut: They are very good against stoppings of the li∣ver being steeped in sweet wine, and for such as are afflicted with shortness of breath: they are pleasant to the stomach. Fistula, a hollow Ulcer like a pipe running aslope into the flesh, having a narrow mouth or hole for the issuing forth of the quittour, hard and insensible round about the edge which keeps it from healing. Fixation, a fixing of bodies so as to make them endure the
fire. Flatuosity, windines. Flatulent, windy. Flegmone, a general name for all Imposthumes, which the ∣bundance of inflamed bloud pro∣duces. Flos maris, Sperma coeti. Flos lactis, cream. Flos Rosarum, the yellow seed within the Rose. Flos Aeris, Verdegrease the rust of Copper: it is a good a∣stringent desiceation, and cor∣roding medicine. Fluent, running, apt to low, any thing that is liquid and will run like water. Fluid, apt to run and low like water. Fluors, streams. Fluvial water, River water. Flux, the extraordinary low∣ing of any humor o a particular
part, or the flux of excrements, called, A scowring. Fluxions, watry humors. Fluxus Hepaticus, or flux of the Liver: it is that wherein se∣rous and bloody humors (like water wherein flesh hath been washed) are voided. Foetor Oris, stinking of the mouth through the putrefaction of the Gums, or Teeth, or meat sticking in the teeth. Fomentation, the application of spunges or cloths dipped in some liquor, and so laid to the part grieved, and so often re∣newed. Forated, pricked full of holes. Forceps, Tongs or Nippers to take hold of any thing to be plucked out of the ears, mouth, womb, &c. Formica Herpes, a corroding Ulcer.
Formicans pulsus, a weak pulse beating extreme thick; and yet so feebly, as its compared to the creeping of a pismire, as the name imports. Fotified, strengthened, con∣firmed. Fortuitous, that falls out by chance, or at adventure. Fossile, earth which is, or may be digged up. Fotus, a fomentation. Fraction, breaking in pieces. Fracture, breaking of a bone. Fragile, brittle. Friable, apt to crumble short like puff-paste: it's opposed to clamminess, or sliminess. Frication, a rubbing. Friction, rubbing and chafing a great while together. Frixion, frying. Frontals, certain forms of medicaments to be applied to
the fore-head in distempers of the head. Frontal veins, fore-head veins. Fructical, bringing forth stalks. Frustaneous, in vain, ru∣strate. Fugacius, apt to fly away. Fulciments, props, stayes. Fuligo Canini, soot of the chimney. Fulmination, a Metallical g∣dation causing a sudden & bright light. Fumigations, any thing burnt either to qualifie the air, or im∣mediatly applied to the body of the patient, as for the pox, wo∣mens courses, &c. Fundament, the arse-hole. Function, the office or pro¦per faculties of operation in any part or member of the body.
Furfures capitis, the white dust of a mans head. Fusible, that may be mel∣ted. Fusitive Art, Chymistry, especially that part of it, that is conversant in melting of Me∣tals. G Galangale, an herb so called: the root whereof is hot and dry in the third degree, and much used in physick. Galbanum, a gum or liquor drawn forth of a plant in Syria, called metopion, or as some say, sagapene. Gallia muschata, a sweet smel∣ling Confection of the Apothe∣caries so called. Gallicus Morbus, the Crin∣komes, french pox, the foul
disease. Gangrene, is a running and creeping sore, that as far as it runs mortifies the flesh, causing it to rot; so that of necessity that member wherein a Gangrene is radicated, must be cut off. Ganglium, a Wen or Gan∣glium, is a swelling sometimes hard, sometimes soft, yet al∣wayes round, and useth to breed in dry, hard, and nervous parts. Gargarisms, medicines to wash and gargle in a sore mouth or throat. Gastrick, the stomach vein. Generating, breeding, beget∣ing. Generous, brave, noble, li∣beral. Geniculated, kneed, or knob∣ed, or full of joynts. Germinating, growing.
Gibbous, bunching out. Glans, the top of the yard. Glandules, kernels such as are about the throat, and are called the Almonds of the ears, also the sweet-bread; and whatever is like to these is said to be of a Glandulous substance. Glaucoma, so called from its changing the chrystalline humor into a fiery redness. Glottis, or cleft of the Larynx, is that body which maketh the cleft or fissure in the Larynx, which is the chief instrument whereby the voice is formed and uttered. Glumosity, hulliness. Glutinous, clammy, sticking like glue. Glutinatious, such things that (like glue) are used to joyn and close up broken bones, veins, &c.
Glyster, an instrument used to thrust up into the funda∣ment. Gomphosis, is a joyning of a bone, as a nail is joyned in a board, and so the teeth are fasten∣ed in the jaws. Gonagra, the Gout in the knees. Gonorrhaea, the running of the reins. Gracile, lean, slender, and tender. Gradation, is an exaltation of Metals in the degree of affecti∣ons, where, by weight, colour, and constancy, they are brought to an excellent measure, but the substance unchang'd. Grains of Paradise, a little seed brought out of Armenia, of a strong sweet smell, and somwhat sharp in taste: it is hot and dry, of a subtil substance, and often
used in Physick; for it warms the outward parts, and is good against the falling-sickness. Granulation, proper to Me∣tals by infusion on fire; and effusion into water is their com∣minution into Granula. Gristle, is a similar part, cold and dry, made out of the thickest part of the seed, gathered toge∣ther by the power of heat, and ordained to secure the variety of motions, and as a bulwark a∣gainst any outward violence. Guaiacum, a wood called by some Lignum vitae: it's a pecu∣liar remedy for the pox. Gula, the throat. Gum Animi, Indian Amber. Gum Arabick, a kind of white clear Gum, growing on a thorn tree called Acacia in Arabia. Gurgulio, the gullet. Gust, the taste.
Gustative, tasting, or that which is tastable. Gutta Rosacea, is a preterna∣tural redness which possesseth the nose and cheeks, and oft-times all the face besides. Guttural tumors, swellings in the throat. Gynglimos, is a joyning of a bone when the same bone receiv∣eth another, and is received by another. H Habit of body, the Constituti∣on or temperament thereof. Haesitation, sticking, stagger∣ing, or doubting. Haemoplois, or Haemopiosis, spetting of blood, which comes from the vital parts, as the Breast, Lungs, and rough Ar∣tery.
Haemorragia, bleeding at the nose, or any other part; a sym∣ptome in the excrements of those things which are wholly against nature. Haemorrois, sanguinis proflu∣vium per venas ani, the bleeding of the Hemorrhoids, or Piles. Haemorrhoides verucales, the Piles. Haemorrhoides nasi, an ulcer∣ation of the nose. Halituous, thin, breathy. Harmonia, is the juncture of a bone by a line. Hectica, a wasting, or con∣suming Fever. Helcticum, a medicine draw∣ing the humors downwards, op∣posed to a repelling medicine. Hemicrania, or Hemicrane, a kind of Head-ach, when but one side of the Head is griev∣ed.
Hemiplegia, the palsie posses∣sing one side. Hepatis oppilatio, a stoppage in the Liver. Hepatica, the liver vein, things proper to the liver. Hepatrical, of, or belonging to the liver. Hepaticus, one diseased in the liver. Hepsema, sodden new wine. Herculeus Morbus, the falling Evil. Hereditary diseases, such as are deriv'd from the Parents to the Children. Hermaphrodite, one that is both man and woman. Hermetical, after the Chymi∣cal or Paracelsian way; that tribe being so called from Hermes Trismegistus. Hernia Humeralis, tumors in the Testicles, and Scrotum.
Hernia Ramex, a Rupture. Herpes, a Carroding Ulcer called the Wolf in a Womans Breast. Heterogeneal, of divers sorts or kinds, of divers and contrar natures. Hippocras bag, is a bag made of white cotton like a sugar loaf pointed at bottom. Hirae Picrae, certain extreme bitter purging pouders. Hispid, rough with thorns. Holy fire, sacer Ignis, a red inflamation called St. Anthonies fire, (being the disease that St. used to heal) or the Rose. Homogeneal, all of one sort or kind. Homogeneous, alike in all its parts: of one and the same sub∣stance. Hordei Cremor Ptisana, barley husked and sodden in water.
Horrors, shakings and trembl∣ings. Hortensian, Herbs which grew in the garden. Humectation, moistening. Humectative, the same. Humeralis vena, the shoulder vein. Humidity, humor or moi∣sture. Hydraeleum, a medicine made of Oyl and Water beaten toge∣ther. Hydrocephalus, a Dropsie of the head by a waterish humor, and is a disease almost peculiar to infants newly born. Hydrogogon, Purges for wa∣try humors. Hydromel, a Drink made of Honey and Water, called Mead or Metheglin. Hydrophobus à rabido Cane morsus, one that is bitten of a
mad Dog. He that is afraid of water. Hymen, a slender membrane about the neck of the womb. Hydra, a monstrous Serpent in the lake Lerna, which having divers heads, as fast as any one was cut off, two rose up in its stead. Hydragogus, drawing water. Hypercathartica, most violent purges: too purging. Hypocaust, a Stove or Hot∣house to sweat in. Hypochondria, the region of the body beneath the ribs. Hypoglottion, medicines so called, because they are to lie un∣der the tongue and melt. Hypogion, or matter under the Cornea, a great inflamation of the eyes with swellings. Hysteta, uterus, loci Matrix, the Mother in Women, Matrix
or Womb. Hysteralgia, pain in the Belly or Womb. Hystcrica passio, Fits of the Mother: Diseases of the Womb. I Jacinth, the name of a preti∣ous stone, of a light violet co∣lour. Jasper stone, a pretious stone so called. Jaundice, is a yellow Color coming of the whole body, spread over all the skin. Idiopathica, the obstruction of breathing by propriety comes from the Lungs distempered, and therefore every disease of the Lungs hurts their action, which diseases are either in the substance of the Lungs, or in the vessels
thereof. Ignition, burning, fiery hot. Ignave, cowardly, sluggish. Ignavy, dulness. Illiac passion, a griping in the uppermost small guts, a miser∣able disease, and commonly deadly. Illinetus, Eclegma, a medi∣cine which is licked up and not swallowed. Illiquation, is the mingling of earthy bodies with mettalline so as both retain their own sub∣stance. Illited, annointed. Illumination, enlightening. Imbecil, weak, without strength. Imbibition, a philosophical ope∣ration is ablution, when liquor adjoyned to a body is lifted up, and finding no vent, falls back & wasteth it with humectations.
Imbued, filled full of any li∣quor or vertue by soaking like a spunge, or lying buried in such things as we desire it shold be imbued withal. Immature, unripe. Immedicable, which cannot be healed. Immersion, to plunge or bury any thing over head and ears in any liquor or poudr. Immutation, a changing, or altering. Impetigo, is properly a ring∣worm. Impetiginous, itchy, scabby. Impinguates, makes fat. Implete, fill up. Implicated, enfolded. Improbation, disproving. Inanition, emptiness of the body. Inappetency, want of appe∣tite.
Incalescence, heating, warm∣ing gently. Incarnate, to breed flesh. Incantation, charms, witch∣craft. Incrnicle, a sieve. Incising medicaments, such as cut tough flegm, as Oximel. Incision, the cut or wound the Surgeon makes with his Lancet either in opening an imposthume, letting blood, or the like. Inclination, a pouing the thin from the thick of any li∣quor from one vessel to ano∣ther. Incongruous, disagreeable. Incrassation, a thickening. Increment, the encreasing of a sickness. Incrustated, covered over. Incubus, the night Mare, the Hagg Indagation, searching out.
Indication, is some kind of signes or symptoms appearing in the sick patient whereby the Physitian is hinted, or as it were pointed with the finger to such and such a course of Physick or particular remedy, as abundance of blood. Indiate, declare, point at. Indicates bloud-letting, the like doth te stopping of cour∣ses in Women. Indigenous, home-bred. Indomitable, untameble, not to be tamed. Induration, hardening. Inebrites, makes drunk, be∣sos. Infarctures, stoppings. Infirm, sick, weak, not sound. Inflamation, burning, heat, and extreme redness. Influence, flowing from a∣bove,
or into. Influx, flowing into. Infunded, that is infused. Infused, that is steeped. Infusion, a strained liquor wherein medicaments have been steeped either hot or cold. Ingrede, go into, or help to make up a medicine, Inherent, stick to, or within that will not be separated. Inhumation, is the setting o two pots (the head of the upper most being well luted and cover¦ed) with his bottom full of pin holes fast in the ground, and co¦vering them with earth, havin a circular fire made for distill tory transudation. Integral, whole or entire. Injection, a medicinal liqu cast with a syringe or Clyste pipe into the Womb, Fund¦ment, or Bladder.
Innoxiously, without harm or danger. Inoculate, is by cutting a round hole in the bark of one tree and a bud off another to set it on the hole of the former with clay. Inodorous, without smell. Inordinate, irregular, unuly, masterless. Inquination, defilement, cor∣ruption, pollution. Insensible passages, are certain passages in the body not perceiv∣able to sense by reason of their smalness. Insensible, not to be perceived by the senses. Inserted, engrafted, or joynted into. Instinct, a strong inclination, impuls or secret prompting. Insipid, tasteless. Insolation, is a steeping or
infusion of any thing in liquor ad setting it in the Sun. Inspersion, sprinckling up∣on. Insoissate juyce, is the juyce of some herb boyled to the thick∣ness of honey. Intension and Remission, en∣crease and decrease. Insuavity, unwholsomness or stinking. Insuave, unpleasant. Integral, whole. Intercept, stopped in the mid∣way. Intercostales, the Muscles which are woven between the ribs, and fill up the distances be∣tween them. Intermission, ceassing, leaving off between whiles. Internal, inward. Intermediate, mediating be∣tween.
Intermitting pulse, is that which the fit holds up a while, and then beats again, which is a sign of extreme sickness. Intervention, coming be∣tween. Intestinum Jejunum, the emp∣ty gut. Intestinum caecum, the blind gut. Intestinum rectum, the arse∣gut. Intestinum duodenum, the gut next the stomach. Intestina Gracilia, the little guts. Intestina terrae, Lumbrici ter∣restes, earth-worms. Intoxicate, to bewitch, to a∣maze, or extremely dull ones spirit. Introsumed, taken inwardly. Invalidity, weakness, want of strength.
Invasions of a disease, the re∣turn of the fit. Inversio ventriculi, an inver∣son of the stomach. Investigate, search out. Inveterate, grows old. Involution, a wrapping up one thing in anoher. Irradiation, a shining upon. Irrigation, a sprinkling of moisture upon things that are to be dissolved, that they may melt more easily. Irritated, provoked, stirred to anger. Ischias, the Sciatica. Ischuria, urinae retentio, a stop∣page of the urine. Jucundity, pleasantness. Jugular veins, the throat veins. Jugulates, signifies to choak or kill. Juleps, pleasant cooling drinks
made most commonly of distill'd waters and syrups, and given to allay heat and quench thirst in Fevers. Jujubs, certain Plums of Italy, sold here by Apothecaries, some of them are white, others red, round like an Olive, of a sweet taste, having a small hard stone: if they be long kept they grow dry, and full of wrinkles: they are of a temperate quality, and are good against the cough, roughness of the throat, and a∣gainst all exulcerations of the kidneys and bladder; but of hard digestion. K Katagmatica, medicines effe∣ctual in conjoyning broken bones.
L Lacca, a kind of red Gum brought out of Arabia, and sold here by Apothecaries, good a∣gainst diseases of the breast, and comfortable to the liver. Lac Virginis, Maiden milk: see the preparation in the general practice of Physick. Lacrymae, the tears of juyces or gums that distill from trees and plants of their own accord. Lacteous, milky. Lagopthalmus, or the flare∣eys; in this disease the patient sleeps with his eyes open, be∣cause his eye-lids are so short that it will not cover them. Lambative, medicines to be lick'd up, and swallowed down softly; appropriated to the Lungs. Lapis Granutus, the Granate
stone; it is pretious in medi∣cines, but by reason of its costli∣ness is seldom used. Lapis magnetis, the Loadstone for value far exceeding the Dia∣mond, of a drawing and healing quality. Lapis Hematis, Bloud-stone, good to stench bleeding inward∣ly and outwardly, with many o∣ther medicinal vertues. Lapis prunellae, a stone made of salt-niter: it is good against tooth-ach▪ inflamations, and sores of the mouth or throat, and hot fevers, taken inwardly. Lapis sabulosus, is a great se∣cret in curing a Fracture, being daily given the patient one dram a day, mixing it with the out∣ward medicine, and applied to the pained place. Larynx, diseases of the teeth, gums, jaws, pallate, wind-pipe,
the throat or organ of the voice. Larch turpentine, a kind of Rosin or Turpentine that grows upon Larch-tree in Italy: its of∣ten used in oyntments and play∣sters to clense and heal wounds: it may be taken inwardly with Hony, and so it cleanseth the breast, loosens the belly, and is good to expel the stone and gra∣vel. Lassitude, weariness. Lateres, stones or bricks for furnaces. Latifolious, with broad leaves. Lateres Cribrati, pouder of bricks used in preparing medi∣cines, to make good lute as well as otherwayes. Laudanum, a yellowish gum as some write; but others affirm it to be made of a dew which fal∣leth upon a certain Herb in
Greece▪ some say its taken hang∣ing at Goats-beards that feed a∣mong that plant: It's often used in Pomanders, and being an∣nointed upon the head with oyl of Myrtles, it strengthens the skin, and keeps the hair from fal∣ling off. Lapis Lazuli, a blew stone of a kind of marble with veins of gold in it; it is hot and dry: and being rightly prepared it's good against melancholly dis∣eases, and by cleansing the bloud preserves from the leprosie. Leguminous, a kind of pulse. Leniating, looseness. Lenitive, a gentle purge. Lenocinies, gentle medicines. Lentor, a clammy or glewish humor. Lenetives, gentle medicines to loosen the belly, or plaisters, or oyntments to ease pain. dis∣ease
causing a roughess of the skin, with black wannish spots, and dry parched scales, and scurff. Lethal, deadly. Lethargy, a sleepy disease in which the senses and reason it self seem to sleep. Levative, medicines easing pain. Leviate, ease pain. Levigated, finely poudered. Leucophlegmatia, a kind of dopsie. Liberates, frees, or releases. Libidinous, lustful, leacher∣ous. Lichen, a tetter, or ringworm. Lienteria intestinorum levitas, a kind of flux of the stomach, when the meat and drink runs from a man as he taketh it with∣out concoction or alteration. Ligamenta, sinews.
Ligature, bands wherewith joynts dislocated and broken bones are bound up and contain∣ed in their places, till they may knit and grow together again: it signifies also a binding of any part so hard as that thereby the bloud and humors (through the pain and straitness of the liga∣ture) is drawn from the place or diseased part, to the part so bound. Ligneous, a woody substance. Ligula Uvula, a little piece of flesh in the roof of the mouth. Limbeck, a still, to distil wa∣ters. Limation, filing. Limatura martis, the filings of horn used for the making of Crocus martis. Limpid, clear, pure, transpa∣rent. Linetus, Eclegma, lambe∣tivum,
or Confection that is not chewed but licked in; and by the Apothecaries is called by an Arabian word, viz. Lohoch. Liniments, oyntments used for curing the scurvy, dropsie, and palsie. Lipitude, purblindness. Lipothymy, a swouning where∣in one seemeth to be dead, the vital spirits being suddenly op∣prest. Liquation, making liquid. Liquified, made liquid, or turn'd to water. Lithargy, the foam or scum that riseth from Lead, Silver, or Gold, &c. when they are try∣ed. It is cold in operation▪ and of frequent use with Surgeons in oyntments and plaisters, being of a gentle, drying, clensing, binding nature. Lithiasis, the Disease of the
stone, engendered in a mans bo∣dy. Lithontribon, a Confection of the Apothecaries so call, because it drives away and beks the stone in a mans body▪ Lithontriptica, Meicine baking the stone in the Bld∣der. Lixivium, see Lucinium. Lixive, Lee. Lochs, or Child-bed purg∣tions, and immoderate flx ca∣sed from the over-wide opening of the vessels, or their tering in hard travel. Loch, Lohoch or Linctus, is a thick syrup, or other soft sub∣stance, not to be swallowed but let melt in the mouth, that so i may gently slide down, ad thereby have the more vertue a∣gainst diseases of the breas, lungs, and throat.
Longanum, the arse-gut. Longaevity, long life, or old age. Lotion, a preparing of medi∣cines, or washing. Loture, the washings, or water wherein any thing that leaves a aste or tincture behind it hath been washed. Lozenges, little tablets made up of several things with sugar to lie and melt in the mouth: ta∣ken for colds. Lubricating, making slippery, loosening. Lues, a plague or pestilence. Lues venerea, the French pox, a plague containing all diseases in one, and seldom cu∣red perfectly. Lucinium, lixivum, lye made of ashes, which is profitable in healing outwardly and inwardly, & the best in caustick medicines.
Lunacy, a disease wherein the patient is distracted at certain times of the Moon. Lutation, is a medicine thick or thin according to the heat and continuance of the fire which ex∣actly stops the mouth of the vessel that no vapor pass out. Lutetta, Paris. Luxation, a loosening of the joynts. Lycium, a decoction made of the juyce or dcoction of the bramble root. Lysiponium, medicines miiga∣ting pain. M Maceration, steeping or soak∣ing any thing in liquor till it be almost dissolved. Macerated, steeped. Macilent, lean, slender.
Madefaction, weting, or ma∣king wet. Madid, moist, wet. Magistral syrup, is a particu∣lar syrup prescribed by a skilful Physitian to his patient for a particular disease. Malacia, Pica, a corrupt ap∣petite by reason of humors ga∣thered about the mouth of the stomach, which is the cause of longings in women. Malaxation, softening, loo∣sening. Malcolent, that hath an ill smell. Malignant medicaments, vio∣lent, pernicious, unwholsom, destructive medicines. Malleable, abiding the Ham∣mer or Malle, or which may be wrought or beaten there with. Mamillary veins, passag
from the Womb to the breasts, serving to convey the menstrual bloud thither to be converted in∣to milk. Manducated, chewed. Manna, a kind of sweet dew, like sugar. Mania madness, a doting without a fever, with raging and fury. Maniple, an handful of herbs, flowers, roots, and such like things. Mansuete, tame. Manus Christi, sugar boyled with Rose-water without putting any thing else to it; it may be made with violet water, or cin∣namon water. Mandrake, a forrein plant, bearing yellow round Apples: the root of this herb is great and white like a Parsnip, growing in two branches, like the legs of a
Woman, which gives opportu∣nity to Jugglers to Counterfeit obscene beastly Images there∣with: the root, especially the bark is extreme cold and dry, e∣ven to the fourth degree: it is therefore very dangerous to be taken inward: it's usually given to cast people into a dead sleep when they are to be dismembered or cut of the stone. Marchasia, minerals which are unprepared, as silver oar, lead oar, &c. Marchasite, a stone participa∣ting with the nature of some me∣tal, yet in some small quantity that the metal cannot be melted from it but will vapour away in smoak, the stone turning to ashes. These Marchasites are commonly in colour like the me∣tal mixed with them, whether it be gold, silver, brass, or any o∣ther.
Some call any stone out of which fire may be struck, a Mar∣chasite. Marcid, musty, unwholsome, stinking, nasty. Marcor, corruption, rotten∣ness. Margarites, the fairest sorts of pearls. Mariscus, the Piles. Mastick, a white and clear gum of a sweet savor; it grows on the Lentisk tree in the Island of Chios: it's temperate in heat, and of a dry binding nature, whereby it strengthens the sto∣mach, stayes vomiting, and stops any issue of bloud: it's good to rub the teeth to fasten them, and make them white. Masticatories, medicines to be chewed to bring away Rheum from malignity, the venemous or poysonful quality of certain
Humors and Diseases, which makes them for the most part deadly. Matter or Quittou, the whie thick filth that issues from sors and ulcers when they are on the mending hand. Matrix, Mediana vena, the Median vein. Matrix, the Womb, or place of Conception. Maturity, ripeness. Measles, a kind of small po which arises from the impurities of the Mothers bloud. Mechoacan, a whitish root brought out of India, called by some, Indian, or white Rhubarb it's hot in the first, and dy in the second degree; and purgeth all humors of what kind soever, with much ease: it clenseth and comforteth the liver, and all in∣ward parts.
Mediastinum, so called because it mediateth or divideth the chest in the midst. Medicamen de Turbith, a purging medicine. Medick, Physitian, an abbrevi∣ation of the Latin word medi∣cus. Medium, whatever is trans∣parent, or may be seen through, is called a medium to the sight, principally the air as its either thick or thin; also glass, water, horn, are called mediums when question is of seeing through them. Medulla, pith, marrow. Mel, Honey is laxative, clen∣sing, softening, and healing. Melancholia, a melancholy kind of madness, a doting with∣out a fever with fear and sad∣ness. Melanogogon, purgers of Me∣lancholy.
Melitites, honyed Wine. Mellifluous, sweet as hony. Membrane, a fleshy skin, a coat serving as a coat for the ar∣teries and veins. Membranous, skinny substan∣ces like parchment. Meninges, the films or Tu∣nicles which are the coverings or coats wherein the brain is con∣tained. Menstruous, a Woman which hath upon her her monthly flowers: or which belongeth to them. Mercury, and Mercurial purges, such as are made of Quicksilver chymically prepared. Mercurius, Quicksilver, like a seeming friend which heals and kills. Mercurius praecipitatus and sub∣limatus, Mercury precipitate and
sublimate. Mercurius solis, mercury of gold: I shall leave the descripti∣on hereof to the Philosophers by the fire. Mercurius Lunae, mercury of silver. Mercurius martis, mercury of iron. Mercurius jovis, mercury of tin. Mercurius saturni, mercury of lead. Mercury, is a liquid substance, sowr, or sharp, volatile, pene∣trable, airy and most pure, from which all nourishment pro∣ceeds. Meri, Arabum, Osephagus, the mouth of the stomach. Mesentery, the skin which holds the guts together, and runs along amongst them full of fatty knobs.
Metra, Hippocrates uterus, the Womb. Metrenchyta, an instrument to inject lquid medicines into the Womb. Michleta, the name of a Con∣fection so called. Microcosmographia, a descrip∣tion of the body of man. Microcosmus, it properly sig∣nifies a little World; but it's commonly used to signifie a man who in himself hath some∣thing or other answering to any part of the great World. Mictus sanguinis, is a disese of the Reins, through which thin wheyish bloud is passed. Midriasis, is the dilatation of the pupil of the eye. Midrif, a sinewy skin passing over-thwart a mans body, and divides the heart and lungs from the stomach, guts, and liver,
lest the vital parts should be of∣fended with ill vapors from those below. Milt, so term'd because it draws away the dross of the bloud. Minium, red lead, of a cool∣ing, drying, repelling, healing, softening, and discussing quali∣ty. Mineral, any thing digged out of the earth. Minorative, lesser, or making less: it's particularly used to di∣stinguish a gentle purge from a more violent, which is called eradicative pulling away the of∣fending humor by the very roots as we say. Minuates, lessens, diminish∣eth. Miscellany, a mixture of things without any order: a Galamafry or hotch-potch of di∣vers
things mingled together. Miscible, apt to incorporate, or mingle together. Misy, a kind of yellow Cop∣per shining like gold, brought out of Egypt and the Isle of Cy∣prus: it is of a fretting, burn∣ing quality, as the common cop∣peras is. Miligation, abatement of pain. Mithidrate, a great Confecti∣on invented by King Mithri∣dates; it is of singular vertue a∣gainst poyson, and hath so ma∣ny and strong simples in it, that it ought not to be taken before it be six months old. Mixtion, or mingling of se∣veral Herbs together. Modes, wayes, fashions, and manner of doing things. Mola, an unshap'd piece of
flesh in the mother. Moles, marks with children. Mollition, the beginning of liquation. Morbus Caducus, the falling∣sickness. Morbus spinalis, the disease of the spine of the back, the Rick∣ets. Morbifical matter, is that which in most diseases is the principal cause of them. Mordacity, biting quality. Mordacious, biting. Mother, a disease of the womb incident to Women when the womb riseth with pain upward: in this disease the smelling to sweet savors is evil, but to stink∣ing and loathsome smells very helpful. Mortification, deading of any part of the body, as in a Gan∣grene.
Mortiferous, Mortifical, dead∣ly, or bringeth death. Mucagines, a mucilage: a slime or juyce which is drawn ei∣ther out of herbs, roots, or seeds by steeping in some distill'd wa∣ters, or some other convenient liquor. Mucronated, sharp pointed. Mucaginons, clammy, sli∣my. Mumia, a thing like pitch sold at the Apothecaries: some affirm it's taken out of old Tombs, be∣ing the embalming of dead bo∣dies: others say it's made of mans flesh boyled in pitch: it's hot in the second degree, and good against bruisings, and spit∣ting of bloud. Mundane, clean, pure. Mundification, is the clensing of any matter by few or many operations from that which
filthy and vicious, that the most excellent may be admitted to the work in hand. Muscle, is an organical and dissimilar part made up of nerves, flesh, fibres, veins, and arteries. Mutilated, maimed. Myrobolanes, a fuit growing in Egypt and Syria like plumbs or damsons: there are five kinds of them, Citrinae, Judae, Ce∣pniae, Emblicae, and Belliricae; the first purgeth choler, the se∣cond melancholy, and the three last phlegm: they are cooling, and comfortable to nature. Myrrh, a gum brought out of Arabia and Assyria, of colour between white and red: it is hot and dry in the second degree, or as some say in the third: it's of∣ten used in physick, being of an opening, clensing, dissolving na∣ture.
N Narcotick, Medicines that stupifie and dull the sense of feel∣ing they are also given to pro∣cue eep, as well as to ease pain. Natural faculties, the seat of them is the stomach and liver, &c as the heart is of the vital, and the brain of the animal. Nausea, is a desire to vomit with trouble, and only sending and pewking forth a thin water∣ish humor by salivation. Nauseousness, squeaziness of the stomach, enclining to vo∣mit. Nbula oculorum, the dimness of the eyes. Ncromancy, the art of Divin∣ing by dead bodies, and parts
thereof. Necrosy, deadness. Neotericks, modern Writers either in Physick or any other Art so called in opposition to the Antients. Nephritica, medicines proper for the cure of the stone. Nephritis, Renum dolor, a grief, or sickness in the Reins. Nervalia, medicines proper to the sinews. Nerve, is the same with a sinew, and is that wherby the brain adds sense and motion to the body. Nervorum resolutio or dis∣solutio, is a dissolving or weak∣ning of the sinews, called paraly∣sis. Nicotian, Tobacco. Nidorous smells, are like burnt salt, scorched meat, or fryed oyl.
Nigredes, makes black. Nigritude, blackness. Nitent, shining. Nitre, salt-peter, as it's com∣monly used to signifie; but the true nitre is found in the bowels of the earth, and is very rare▪ whereas salt-peter is artificial and common. Noivous, hurtful. Nocumental, hurtful. N, knotty. Nde, naked. N, are pledgets or pessa∣s made of lint or cotton wool, and dipped in some unguent, and used either in wounds, or sores, or in diseases of the Womb. Nutrition, nourishment. Nutrition, the mixing of moi∣sture by little & little, for chang∣ing the quality of the medicine. Nyctalps, Lusciosus, one that is pur-blind.
O Obdulcorated made sweet, or sweetned with sugar or hony. Obdurate, hard. Oblique, flanting, athwart, crooked. Obnoxious, lyable to punish∣ment. Obrted, buried, covered, hidden. Obsolete, old, out of mind, forgot, out of use. Obsomes, all manner of meats used at meals. Obstructions, stoppages, in the passages of nutrition. Obtenebrated, clouded, dark∣ned, or hidden from the light of the Sun. Obverted, overthrown, spoil∣ed. Obvolved, wrapped up close.
Occult, hidden, mysteri∣ous. Ocular Medicaments, Medi∣cines for the eyes. Odentick, belonging to the teeth. Odors, smells. Odoriferous, sweetsmelling. Odoraments, perfumes. Oeconomy, houshold govern∣ment. Oedema, a tumor or swelling caused by flegm; and is soft, white, and of no great pain. Oesephagus, the mouth of the stomach, the gullet. Oleagynous, oily, fatty. Omentum, the caul or sut wherein the bowels are wrap'd, which by reason of its loosness to receive humors that come from other parts, it is subject to di∣vers diseases, as the Mesentary and Pancreas.
Omphacy, unripe, it signifies properly the juyce of unripe Grapes. Omoplata, the muscles of the shoulder-blade. Operative, active, working. Operculated, close covered. Ophiogenes, generated of Ser∣pents. Opthalmy, Diseases in the eyes. Opiats, are such medicines as have opium in them, and are used in infectious diseases. Opobalsamum, natural balsom. Opium, the juyce of black Poppies, sold dry by Apothe∣caries: it is sometimes used in Physick to make one sleep, or to asswage excessive pain: but it must be corrected and given with other things, and with great dis∣cretion, or it may make the pa∣tient sleep till doomsday.
Oppilation, stoppage of the brest. Opopanax, a sap or liquor flowing out of a plant called panax in some of the hot Coun∣tries: it's brought hither dry, being of a yellow colour with∣out, and white within if it be not too stale: it's good for agues, and bruises. Opisthotones, a Convulsion so named when the body is drawn backward. Opticks, the Art of Per∣spective, or wherein the natures and differences of Seeing is handled. Optick nerves, so called from their action, because they com∣municate to the eye the sense of seeing. Orchal, a stone like Alum used by divers in dying red. Orifice, the hole or mouth of the stomach, veins, womb, or of
the incision made by a Surgeon, when he lets blood; or the mouth of a wound or ulcer. Orgal, the lees of Wine dry∣ed, and used by Dyers to make their cloth to take the colour. Organs, are organical parts of the body, those that are ordain∣ed to such or such a particular use different from others, as the foot to tread, the eye to see, or the ear to hear, &c. Oringoes, the roots of Sea∣holly; it grows in many parts of England, on the Sea-shore, in great plenty: preserved (as they are to be had at the Comfit∣makers) they are excellent good for such as have Consumptions, or old aged people. Orthopnaea, a straitness of breath by stopping of the Lights, that one cannot breath, but hol∣ding his neck upright.
Orthopnoical, short breathing. Oscitantly, carelesly, negli∣gently. Os Cribosum, a bone full of small holes like a sieve, whence it hath its name; it's placed a∣bove the nose, and by it the snot and snivel that comes out of the nose, is drained from the brain. Otalgia, pain in the ears, a violent disease both in respect of the part affected, viz. the in∣ward membrane which goeth a∣bout the cavity of the ear, as al∣so by reason of the nearness of the brain. Oval, the shape of an egg. Oxicrate, a medicine of vine∣gar and water mixt together. Oxydorcica, sharp medicines to quicken the sight. Oxymel, simple syrup made of vinegar and hony.
Oxyrrhodinum, oyl of Roses and Vinegar mixt together, whereof medicines are made. Oxysaccharum Compositum, a compound syrup of vinegar and hony. Ozaena, a sore in the nose cau∣sing a stinking breath. Ozylete officinarum, perfum∣ing Candles. P Papulum, fodder. Paerinaeum, the seam which runneth like a ridge between the privities and fundament both in men and women. Palm, the hand. Palmos, Palpitatio Cordis, the panting of the heart. Palpebra, the eye-lid. Palliative Cure, is when a dis∣ease is not eradicated, but only
mitigated or covered, whereby either the pain, or trouble, or de∣formity is somewhat eased and remedied; to this end were wooden legs, arms, fingers, glass-eyes invented. Panada, a pap made with bread. Panicles, Cats tails, any thing that groweth round and long. Pancreas, the sweet-bread, serves to prop the vessels lest they should break, and are in∣stead of a pillow to the sto∣mach. Panchymagogon, such purgers as are universal, purging all hu∣mors. Pandalea, a kind of paste or massapan, good for a cough. Panpharmacal, an universal medicine. Paracousis, noise in the ears which comes from a praeter∣natural
motion of the air which is naturally contained in the ears. Paralitick, sick of the Pal∣sie. Paralysis, the palsie wherein the loss of sense and motion is in some parts of the body by rea∣son of the stopping of the pas∣sages of the animal parts. Paranitium barbarorum, a dis∣ease bred in the fingers. Paraplegia, the same with Paralysis. Paranomasis, likenesse in name. Parastatae, are bodies placed without the Abdomen in the Scrotum or Cod, set upon the Testicles, to which they are a∣like in nature and use. Paregoricum, medicines easing pain. Perforated, boared through.
Pericardium, a thin skin or film compassing the heart. Peripneumonia, an inflama∣tion of the lungs or lights with a vehement fever. Pericranium, the skin that co∣vers the scull, the hairy scalp. Perite, skilful, cunning. Peritonaeum, the rim of the belly, the inner coat of the bel∣ly next the guts, which when it is broke the Women say the rim of the belly is burst. Peristaltick, motion of the guts, is a motion whereby the guts press themselves together a∣bove the excrements, and so squeez them out. Perperously, foolishly and un∣skilfully. Permeate, pass through the pores of the body. Permixtion, mixing through∣ly.
Pernicious, deadly, destru∣ctive, wicked. Perspicuous, clear and transpa∣rent as glass, chrystal, fair wa∣ter, &c. Perspirable, the body is said to be perspirable when the invi∣sible pores or holes in the skin are kept open, so that the vapors arising from evil humors may freely breath out. Perturb, to trouble. Pervious, thin, that which may be past through, full of holes like the bottom of a sieve. Pessary, a certain medicine made like a finger to thrust into a Womans privities with a string tyed to it. Pestis, the plague, a deadful disease, venemous, contagious, lothsome, noysome, and hateful to mankind.
Pestiferous, that which brings the plague. Petrous, rocky. Phagadena, a running canker or pock. Pharmaceutick remedies, all such medicines as are made by the Apothecaries. Pharmacopaeia, a Dispensato∣ry or Book wherein is set down the Composition or Receipts of Medicines for direction to the Apothecary. Phigethlon, is an inflamation of the parts, and if it become in∣durable, it is reckoned amongst the flegmatick tumors, and by Guido termed scrophulous. Philter, an amorous medicine, a Potion to procure love. Phisiologer, a searcher of Na∣tural Secrets. Phlebotomy, bloud-letting.
Phlegm, slime, watrish moisture. Phlegma, it is used for any distilled water which hath no spirit, as Rose-water. Phlegmagogon, purgers of flegm. Phlegmon, a tumor or swel∣ling caused by bloud. Phreniae, veins in the liver. Phrenitis or Phrenzie, an in∣flamation of the brain, and it's membranes, with a continual dotage, & a sharp constant fever. Phthisis, a kind of consumpti∣on: see Culpepper's Practise of Physick. Physiognomy, an art to judge of ones nature & conditions by his countenance and orm of body. Pia mater, a little skin that co∣vereth the brain. Pica, an unnatural longing in Women. Piger Henricus, an instrument for distilling, so called for his
exceeding slowness. Pillula Cochiae, Pills which purge the head. Pillulae Iliacae, Pills for the Chollick, or pain in the small guts. Pillulae Opthalinicae, Pills for the eyes. Pllulae pestilentiales, pills a∣gainst the plague. Pillulae stomachiae, pills for the stomach. Pituitous, filthy. Placenta, is the proper name of a sugar-cake: physically it's used for a piece of flesh in the co∣vering of a Child in the womb. Plethorick, a too full habit of body, or an evil constitution of the body wherein the humors offend rather in quantity, than quality. Pleura, a membrane taking his
name from the ribs, which are called pleuras, because it is stretched under them all except the twelfth. Pleurisie, is the swelling of the membrane that goes about the ribs, of the internal, intercostal muscles. Pleureticus, one that hath the pleurisie. Plexus Choroides, hath his si∣tuation in the forward ventricles betwixt them and the arch, they are termed coroeide, plegmata, because they are like the chorion or membrane which compasseth the infant. Plumbum philosophorum, the Philosophers head, a mysterious preparation. Pluvial water, rain water. Podagra, the Gout in the feet. Podagrical dolor, the same with
podagra. Podex, the arse-hole. Pollicitates, promises, assures, warrants. Polychrestum, a medicine of frequent use. Polypus, a certain imposthume in the nose. Polypodium, a kind of herb like fern, growing much at the roots of Oaks: the root thereof is used to purge melancholy, gross, phlegmatick humors. Poma odorata, Apples to smell to, to prevent the plague. Pomada, or pomata, a sweet smelling salve made of Apples. Pomatum, a drink made of Apples. Ponderous, weighty. Pontian, Wormwood, se Wormwood. Poplitis vena, the vein of a mans ham behind the leg.
Populaeon, an oyntment in the shops made of poplar. Pores, the skin is full of small unperceivable little holes, where∣by sweat and vapors exhale from the body. Poros, that matter which con∣solidateth the broken bones with∣in. Posca, a kind of small hous∣hold Wine mixed with Water in the press. Potent, powerful. Potential, that is any thing in quality, hot, or cold, or burn∣ing, opposed to actual, as a red hot iron is actually burning. Potible, that which may be drunk. Precided, cut off. Praecipitation, is when bodies dissolved in Aqua fortis into Water, and Mercury cast upon them, and beaten into ashes,
they are made perfect medi∣cines. Praecipitated, thrown head∣long. Praeforations, stoppings. Praeparation of humors, is to make them fit for expulsion, and consists in separating them from the mass of good bloud, or in thickening them if they are too thin, or in thinning them, if too thick. Praeposterous, out of season, unhandsome, unseemly, disor∣derly. Praepotent, strong, effectual, potent, above, or before o∣thers. Praesidies, auxiliary forces, helps by the by. Praesidy, help, comfort, &c. Pregnant, big with child. Prepuce, the fore-skin of a mans yard which the Jewes used
to cut off in Circumcision. Praestigiators, cozeners, chea∣ters. Preternatural, contrary, o besides the course of nature. Privation, God knows what it is, there is no such thing in na∣ture. Probable, likely to come to pass. Procatarctick Causes, the pri∣mary, first working or moving Causes, as in a Fever, the next immediate moving Cause is pu∣trefied Choller, &c. but the first working and occasional Cause was the patients taking cold, or by swimming in cold water whereby the poes became shut, and so the matter of the Disease inflamed by being pent up in the body. Procerity, height. Procidentia Ani, the falling
down of the fundament, which is very frequent in children. Procidious, ready to fall out. Profligation, the overthrow∣ing, driving away, or bringing any thing to destruction. Profluvio sanguinis ex naribus, flux of bloud at the nose. Profound, deep, subtilly, learned. Prognosis, the fore-know∣ledge of a disease. Prognosttcks of diseases, signs foretelling what will be the event of any particular disease, or i the patient shall recover or not. Projects, cast forth. Propomates, all kind  drinks made with sugar and h¦ny. Prostates, the kernels whic keep the seed after the ston have finish'd it.
Propriety, a pain by propriety is when the cause of the pain is in the part pained, as when the head-ach comes from the hu∣mors in the head it's called a pain by propriety when it proceeds of vapors sent up from the sto∣mach or any other part it's cal∣led head-ach by consent or sym∣pathy. Protopium, Wine new pressed out of the grape. Protraction, is the lengthening out of the disease and making it last long, as most of those you call Doctors are wont to do, to get the more fees from their pa∣tients purses. Protrusion, casting out. Pryapismus, an unnatural standing of the yard, without a∣ny desire to generation. Pseudo-medick, a false physi∣tian, or counterfeit Empirick.
Psilothers, medicines to take off hair from any part of the bo∣dy. Psora Plinii sera scabies, a certain kind of scurvy itch so called. Pterygium, or Haw in the eyes called Unguis, is a hard nervous little membrane which coms out of the great corner of the eye, covers the white, and after by continuance the black, and co∣vering the pupilla hindereth the sight. Pthiriasis, morbus pedicularis, the louzy disease. Ptisan, a Decoction of Bar∣ly. Pules, the hairy hillock above the privities in men and women, the word signifies ripeness, be∣cause that hair being grown out shews the party to be fit for Ge∣neration.
Pugil, as much in quantity as may be taken up between the three fore fingers and the thumb. Pulsation, beating of the ar∣teries in any part of the bo∣dy. Pulse, beans, pease, vetches, &c. Pulverication, bringing to pouder. Pupil of the eye, is the round black spot in the middle, which we commonly call the sight or apple of the eye. Pulchritude, beauty. Pulverable, hard things (as oyster-shells) brought to pou∣der. Purgation, is the clensing of impure liquor, having a thick sediment and froth by Decocti∣on. Putrefaction, is dissolving or
opening of mixed mineral bodies by a natural warmth and moist pu∣trefaction, viz. by horse dung, and Balneum Mariae. Putretude, filthiness. Purilence, the dissolution of any thing into a thick slimy substance. Pyramis, a geometrical figure broad at bottom, and growing less and less towards the top till it end in a point: the Sepulchers of the Egyptian Kings were o this form, and therefore called pyramides. Pyroticks, Causticks, burning medicines as the name im∣ports. Q Quartation, is the separation of gold and silver mixt together by four unequal parts.
Quinque-angular, five cor∣ner'd. Quinta Essentia, is an absolut pure and well digested medicine drawn from any substance either animal, vegetable, or miner∣al. Quittour, matter. Quotidiana, a daily Ague, commonly call'd a Quotidian A∣gue. R Radical moisture, the funda∣mental juyce of the body, where∣by the natural heat is nourish∣ed and preserved, as the flame in a Lamp is preserved by oyle. Ramex varicosus, a Rupture of swollen bones. Ranula, a swelling under the tongue in that part whereby it is
bound to the ligament, it is of∣tentimes so large that it is seen a∣bove the lower teeth. Rarefaction, making thin. Rasion, rasping, shreding, or fileing. Recenseate, reckon up. Recency, newness. Recipient part, is that part which receives the offending hu∣mor. Recruted, repaired, restored, made up: it's a term in the Art Military. Rectification, when the distil∣led liquor is oftentimes distill'd over again. Redacted, brought, constrain∣ed, reduced. Reduced, brought back a∣gain. Reduction, the restauration of any thing that hath suffered a change or alteration to its for∣mer
condition. Reduplicated, often doubled, or repeated. Refaricated, stuffed, quilted. Referted, replenished, well furnished. Reflux, flowing back again. Reficiates, amends, com∣forts. Refocilate, refresh, revive. Refractions, the breaking of the representations in visible ob∣jects: it's a term in Opticks. Refragates, contradicts, gain∣sayes. Refrigeration, cooling. Refrigeratory, is in general any plate or vessel used for cool∣ing: particularly it is taken for a vessel like a pail placed about the head of an Alembeck of Copper or Pewter, and is used to be filled with cold Water that so the Still-head may not grow
hot, but that the Spirits which in distillation ascend up may the more easily be made thick and turned back into the Receiver, which otherwise would be dis∣persed and consumed. Relax, is used sometimes to signifie the loosening of the bel∣y. Relaxing, slakening, unbind∣ing. Remitted, lessened, abated, eased, pardoned. Renovation, a renewing. Repelled, driven away. Repercussives, medicines which are applied to drive back the hu∣mors from a diseased part. Repletion, too great an abun∣dance, or fulness of bloud and humors. Reposed, laid up, to lie a great while. Represses, restrains▪
Reptant, creeping. Repullulate, bud, or spring a∣gain. Repurgation, the purging of metals from all superfluities ad∣herring to them of a nature dif∣ferent from themselves. Resartiate, to revive or repair, or make amends for. Reserate, to open, or unlock, Residence, settling, or more properly the thicker part of any liquor that with standing settles to the bottom. Resolving Medieaments, are such as loosen and scatter evil hu∣mors gathered to an head in any part of the body. Resolution, weakening or dis∣solving the strength of the body, or any part thereof, as when it is palsied. It signifies also a sepa∣ration of things mingled one from another.
Rspiration, breathing. Respendeth, answereth. Resumptive, refreshing, or recovering. Retentive faculty, that power or faculty in the body whereby the food is retained till the sto∣mach and vein have sucked the nourishing virue from it. Rtort, is a vessel of glass, or earth, which the Chymists use in distillig such Spirits and oyls as quire a violent heat to be distilled. Reorted, forced back, turned back. Retunded, dulled, blunted, a∣bated. Retuseness, hoarseness, gross∣ness. Revlled, drawn back. Reverberation, is the burning of bodies in a most violent he in a furnace made for the pur∣pose:
it's a Chymical busi∣ness. Revulsion, drawing back the blood or humors from the part affected. Revulsive remedies, remedies to draw back the humor from the diseased part. Rhagadia, or Rhagades, chaps and clefts in the hands, and other parts of the body. Rhagoides, the third rind or skin that compasseth the eye. Rheuma, Rheum, or a distil∣lation of humors. Rhodomel, hony of roses. Rhyas, a certain consuming, or diminishing of the flesh in the great corner of the eyes, from whence it is enlarged. Rigated, moistened, dissolv∣ed. Rigidity, stiffness, coldness. Rob, the juyces of plants and
fruits pressed forth and thickened in the Sun. Roboration, strengthening, comforting. Rose, a certain tumor or infla∣mation called Erysipelas. Rosinos, matter like rosin. Rough Artery, or (as the latin term used by Anatomists is) the Aspera Arteria, is the wind-pipe, or wezand, which is rough, or the out-side with circles, or gristly rings. Rubetude, redness. Ructus, a belching, or break∣ing wind upwards. Ruderous places, places where rubbish lies. S Sagacity, prudence, foresight. Sane, sound, healthful. Salacity, lechery.
Sal Alkali, that which the Chymists call their vegetable salt. Sal Ammoniacum, a certain salt brought out of Turky. Sal colcotharis, the salt of vi∣triol after the spirits are drawn off: it's exceeding astringent, and drying. Sal Communis, common salt: it's discussive, clensing, healing, very pretious. Sal gem, a clear transparent salt like chrystal, growing in the Mines in Polonia, near Craco∣via. Saliture, the art of salting or seasoning any meats. Sal petrae, salt-peter, of admi∣rable effects, both good and e∣vil. Sal prunellae, salt-peter purifi∣ed with brimstone: clean white salt-peter is as good for any use.
Sal tartari, the salt of Tartar, or Wine lees, of excellent use in physick. Salutary, healing, or whole∣some. Salutiferous, bringing health. Sanguification, the making of bloud, or the conversion of the chylus into bloud. Sanies vint, Wine lees. Sanity, health. Sapes, are medicinated juyces which having been pressed out of fruits and herbs, have been brought to a consistency by stan∣ding in the Sun: but properly a Rob or Sapa is the juyce of ripe Grapes squeezed out and boyl∣ed to the consistence of hony. Saphaena, the vein in the ankle usually opened for menstrual affects in Women. Sapo, Sope, a good attractive and softening medicine.
Sapor, a taste. Sapors, tastes. Sarcoma, flesh growing in the nostrils like the proud flesh in a sore. Sarcotica, medicines used to breed flesh in hollow sores. Sarments, twigs o trees. Sature, sowing of eeds. Satyismus, the same with Pryapisus, i s a discae wher∣by a mans yard is kept continu∣ally standing. Scapulation, beating o brui∣sing with a staff. Scapula, see Omophlata. Scabies, a scab or itch. Scabies-Hispnica, the pox. Scansory, climbing. Scarrification, is the cutting of the skin to make a vent for it to bleed into a Cupping-glass. Sceleton, the whole frame of bones in a mans body, the
skin and flesh being consumed off. Sceiles, the veins of the Milt or Spleen. Scabrosity, roughness, filthi∣ness. Schirrus, an hard tumor or swlling without much pain. Sciatica, the Hip gout which lies not only in the joynts but in the flesh also of the bottocks. Sciolists, smatterers in know∣ledge. Scorbut, the Scurvy. Scorbutick persons, such as are diseased with the scurvy. Scotoma, a giddiness in the hed. Scrophula, the Kings-evil so called because it comes in the Scropulous parts of the neck and throat. Scretum, the cod or skin wher∣in a mans stones are contained.
Scruple, is twenty grains, or the weight of so many Barley corns. Scrupeus humor, the Gout. Scurvy, is a disease which pro∣ceeds of the putrefaction of Me∣lancholy. Scutum, an Emplaister cut in form of a shield or buckler, to be applied to the stomach. Sealed earth, in latin it is cal∣led Terra sigillata: it's brought out of the Turks Dominions, and to prevent cozenage, sealed with a common seal which hath his badge, viz. the halfe-Moon on it. Sebel Arabum, the ruddy skin of the eye. Secession, ceassing to remain, departing away, separation. Section, a cutting or dividing any thing. Secundine, the skin or mem∣brane
wherein the child is wrap∣ped in the Womb. Sediment, the settling or dreg of urine or any other liquor. Sedulity, diligence. Segragate, separated, or ga∣thered together apart by it self. Selection, choosing of sim∣ples. Semi-cupium, an half bath, o shallow bath that reaches but up to the navil. Separation, a Chymical term signifying to divide or separate the parts of any liquor or simple each from other, as the moist parts by themselves, the dry by themselves, &c. Seplasiaries, shop keeprs o such as keep shops of medicines▪ Druggists, or Apothecaries. Scricum crudum, raw silk. Serous-matter, wheyish, like whey.
Seton, an hole made in the skin, and a skein of thred or silk drawn through, and kept in, which being stirred and moved every day, causeth the matter and corruption to come away. Siccation, is the drying up of excrementitious humors in bo∣dies, either by the fire, in the sun, or in the shade. Siccity, dryness. Sief Arabum, a medicine for the eye. Sigillum Hermetis, Hermes seal: a sealing or luting of glasses in a more excellent way and manner than ordinary. Similarity, likeness. Similar diseases, are such as be∣fal the substance of the body, not considered as formed into any limb, organ, or part: and these are opposed to organical distem∣pers, which are peculiar only to
the organs, and particular limbs of the body. Sinapisms, see Empasms. Sincere, pure, unmed. Singultus, sighing or sobbing▪ it signifies also a depraved moti∣on of the stomack called the Hic∣cough by which it desires to ex∣pel somthing that's burdensome unto it. Sisarcois, a joyning together by flesh. Sitis Morbosa, the thirsty dis∣ease, caused by an extreme salt and hot constitution of the body, and want of drink a great while together. Soda Arabum, the head-ach. Solely, alone. Solution, a Chymical term: signifying the dissolving of a bo∣dy or salt after it hath been co∣agulated. Solution of Continuity, a divi∣ding
of such parts as naturally ought to be united, so every wound or ulcer is called a solu∣tion of continuity. Sonitus Aurium, noise in the ears caused by windy vapors. Sorb-Apple, a service-berry. Sorbicle, broth, suppings. Sorditude, filth, dross, dregs. Sparadrap, an old linnen rag dipped all over in any kind of plaister melted. Spasmus, Cramp or Cunvul∣sion, an involuntary retraction of the Nerves and Muscles to∣wards their original. Species-Laetificantes, a pouder whereby the heart is mightily cheared, and exhilerated. Species retained in the mind: are the shapes, ideas, or patterns of things either seen, or felt, or heard, or tasted, or smelt. Specifick quality, a peculiar
hidden property or effect, for which no reason can be rendred, according to the received Max∣ims of the schools. Specifical virtue, that is the proper essential virtue peculiar t one particular simple, and no o∣ther. Species of objects, represent∣tions of things seen; for the vi∣sible things themselves do no enter into the eye, but certain fi∣gures and ideas of them. Speculum-oris, an instrumen to hold open the mouth that the Physitian may view the diseased parts of the throat. Sperm, the seed of men o Women. Sperma-coeti, it's commo with all Apothecaries, being mixt with other things, it's used for blood clotted in the body by a bruise, or any other accident.
Sphacelus, deadness of any part, when the flesh and bone are dead. Sphacelation, the same as be∣fore. Sphacelus, or mortification in the brain, is a suppuration or corruption of the matter or sub∣stance of the brain, and is called a Gangrene, Syderation, or blast∣ing of the brain. Sphincter, the muscle of the arse. Spinal, of, or belonging to the back bone. Spinalus, a Carbuncle. Spinous, prickly, thorny. Spiracles, breathing-holes. Spissating, thickening. Splenetick, troubled with the spleen. Splenetica, medicines good for the cure of the spleen: it signifies also the vessel of the spleen.
Splen, the Milt. Spiritus acousticus, that por∣tion of the Ammal spirit which in the ears discerneth sounds. Spiritus vini, spirit of Wine, a pure essential liquor distilled from Wine, cordial, and of in∣finite other virtues. Spiritus vitales, the vital spi∣rits, the seat wherof is in the heart and arteries. Spondilia, the bones of the back. Spontaneous, free, willingly, without constraint, agreeable. Spume, foam, or froth. Spurious, counterfeit, not true. Sputation, spitting. Squalor, lothsomness, nasti∣ness. Squallid, filthy, unwholsome. Squinancy, the squinzy, and inflamation in the throat.
State of a disease, is when it is come to the worst or highest extremity. Steeled, liquor wherein steel hath been quenched or insed. Stegnotica, things stopping, or that cause obstructions. Stercus Caninus, Dogs urd. Sternon, the great bone of the breast. Sternutation, sneezing  swift motion of the brain wby the breath is forced out of the ole. Sternutatortes, mes to snuff up into the nose to provoke sneezing. Stillatitious, distilled liquor, either waters, vinegar, or any thing that is capable of drop∣ping. Stimulates, thrusts forward, provokes. Stomachicals, medicines pe∣culiar to the stomach.
Stranguria, the strangury. Strangulation, choaking. Strenuously, stoutly. Stupesctives, medicines that enumn and stupifie the part whereto they are applied. Stupes, pledgets of lint, tow, o cotton wool. Stupifying, taking away the  o feeling; benumning. Stphs, stoves, or hot houses . benumned, besotted, th  no feeling or sense. Spor, dulness. Syp ines, binders. Savelt, sweet smell. Sub, kneaded together with the hands. Subduion, is an abstraction of juyces, oyls, and other liquid mtters, by straining, or fil∣tring. Subth, Arabum, a sleepy dis∣ease
or dead sleep. Subject, a Logical term, sig¦nifying any thing tht hh some∣what adjoyned, or nnexed to it. Subjected, put under. Sublevated, carried upward, as the vapors and sp ∣lation, or the dew wh S riseth. Sublimation, is a Chymed operation, when the  matter in distillation,  car∣ried to the highest  of the helm, and finding no pge forth, sticks to the sides there∣of. Subsident, that which in ex∣tracts and disolutions es to the botom of a thicker consi∣stency than all the rest. Substitute, put instead. Subtiliation, the dsslving and separating the thin parts from
the thick. Subvertio ventriculi, the de∣struction, or loss of appetite. Succe, juyce, vital moisture either of a plant, or of an humane body. Succedaneous, that take place, or succd in the room of o∣thers. Succinum Album, white Am∣br. Succinum Citrinum, yellow Amber. Succoraceous, juycie. Sudoroficks, medicines to pro∣cure sweating. Sudour▪ sweat. Suffocated, choak'd, smother∣ed. Suffecation, stisling, choak∣ing, smothering. Suffuicious, between a shrub and an herb. Suffusion, a spreading upon
any thing: it's commonly used to signifie a pin and web in the eye. Sugacious, full of juyce. Sulphur, Brimstone: it's of a discussive, healing, drying vir∣tue, good to preserve the natur∣al heat of the body. Sulphur Philosophorum, God knows what the Chymists mean by it; it signifies most common∣ly an universal medicine. Superfaetation, is the concepti∣on of a second child in the womb before the first be come to the birth. Superficial, sleight, shallow, thin. Superficies, the out-side of a∣ny thing. Superfluous, needless, un∣necessary, that doth more hurt than good. Sppository, a little knob or
roll of some saltish, sharp, tickl∣ing stuffe that may provoke to stool being thrust up into the fundament: there are also Sup∣positories to be thrust into the Womb for divers causes. Suppression, stopping of the terms. Suppeditates, affords. Suppressio Nocturna, the night-Mare. Supurated, a tumor is said to be supurated when it's ripened ready to break. Surcles, yong twigs or bran∣ches. Suspirious, broken winded. Sutura, is a joyning of bones or any thing else, as the bones of the scull are joyned; it signifies properly a sticking together: the futures of the scull are the seams thereof where its pieces are joyn∣ed together.
Silvestrian, such things as de∣light to grow in woods. Symbolical, eminent, distin∣guishing marks or tokens to know any thing by. Sympathy, when things agree one with another by an hidden property: it signifies a fllow-feeling: also disases are aid to be by sympathy when the prin∣cipal cause is in some other part wherewith the part offending holds a correspondency: so pains in the head caused by evil humors in the stomach are sid to come by sympahy: and sick∣ness of he stomach caused by the ston is a disase of the mach by sympathy. Symptoms, evil dispositions of the body which depend on, a accompany a ise e, as heat▪ tirst, head-ach, want of sleep, sickness at stomach, faintg,
swooning, &c. Syncepe, swooning, a dstru∣ction of all feeling and stirring of the whole body with extream faitness. Synchonochsis, is a joyning together by a cartilage or gristle. Syncput, the fore-part of the head. Syncurosis, a joyning toge∣ther by a ligament. Synlotica, medicines to dry up a ore, or to bring it to a Ci∣catrice. Systol, and Dyastol, are the motions of the pulse forward and backward: the Diastol, is that which the Artery thrusting it self forth doth as it were smite upon the finger of him that feels the pulse, and the sinking down a∣gain is the Systol.
T Tabefied, wasted, melted, cor∣rupted, dissolved. Tabid, wasted, melted, con∣sumed. Tablets, are the same with Lozenges, which are medicines made up in little flat cakes of the bigness of an half-peny either round or squar. Tact, taste. Tacamahacca, a sweet Gum whereof Plaisters for the tooth∣ach are usually made. Talcum, Talc, the oyl Talc is much magnified in diseases of the eyes though the thing it self be scarce known. Tartarous matter, congealed hard substances of an acrimoni∣ous sharp nature, and therefore compared to Tartar of wine, be∣ing coagulated in the joynts it's the principal cause of the Gout.
Tartar, Argal, the Lees of Wine dried, of excellent and frequent use in Phisick. Tenasmus, a continual desire of going to stool though nothing be voided; the place of this dis∣ease is the end of the Arse-gut, hard by the fundament. Tenuious, thin, slender. Tenuifolious, thin-leav'd. Tepour, warmness. Terenjabin, Manna. Terra, earth, vulgarly taken for potters-earth to make lute of. Terestrial, earthly, heavy. Testicles, the stones called testes, because they witness a man to be a man: in the male they hang out at the roots of the yard at the bottom of the belly: but in women they are within by rea∣son of a colder disposition.
Tertiana, a fever of that name. Thorax, the chest is called the middle belly, it is circumscribed by the ribs and patel bones, and is separated from the lower belly by the midrif, and is the seat of the vital faculty, which hath its principal residence in the heart. Tigillum, a melting-pot or crucble such as Chymists and Goldsmiths use to melt metals or make strong calcinations in. Tile-tree, or Linden-tree, is a tree that bears a fine sweet blo∣som of frequent use in physick. Tincture, the virtue or strength of any medicine drawn forth by steeping in vinegar, spirit of wine, or any piercing liquor whereby the virtue and colour thereof being retained, the liquor is called the tincture of such a plant or simple. Tonsilla, the kernels growing
within the mouth. Tonsillarum Inflamatio, the in∣flamation of the Almonds, which are of an hot and moist nature, and therefore moe subject to in∣flamation, they are most vexed with this evil who abound with bloud. Topical medicines, such as are outwardly applied to the part affected, as plaisters, unguents, oyls, cere-cloaths. Torcular, a press. Tormina, fretting or wringing in the belly or guts. Torpor, numbness, or stupidi∣ty of the body or mind, the in∣sensibleness of any part. Torrefaction, the highest de∣gree of Siccation, or rather the parching or scorching any thing by the fire, or in an oven. Tortions, gripings of the sto∣mach or bowels.
Tortura oris, if it be from moi∣sture, is a kind of palsie; if through dryness, then a kind of cramp; and is commonly a sign of death. Toxicum, a venom or poy∣son wherewith Arrows are poy∣soned. Tract, place. Traction, drawing. Trajection, straining, as cheese is strained from the whey. Trafine, an invention of ou famous Chirurgion Mr. Woodal, it being an instrument by him u∣sed instead of a Trepan, and far more commodious, as you may see in his Surgeons Mate. Translation, the removal of an humor or disease from one part of the body to another. Transmeat, that passeth through the pores of the body, as through the bottom of a sieve.
Transmutation, is the chang∣ing of any thing in substance, colour, or quality: it's a Chy∣mical term, signifying the con∣verting of one metal into ano∣ther. Transparent, clear, that may be seen through; as glass, cry∣stal, horn, fair water. Transpiration, the breathing or steeming forth of vapors through the skin of the whole body invisibly, only it may be discerned by the smell, which differs according to the predomi∣nant humor, some more, others less offensive. Transpire, to breath through. Transudation, sweating through. Treblequantity▪ thrice as much. Tremor trembling, is an invo∣luntary motion of the whole bo∣dy, caused by fear or the appre∣hension of some eminent danger.
Trepan, an instrument where∣with Surgeons (when necessity requires) take out a piece of the scull, it being to bore with like a wimble. Trient, a third part. Triture, breaking, crumming, or grinding. Troches, or Trochises, medi∣cines made up in little flat bowls as the name signifies; they are never taken (for what intention soever) but they are first dissol∣ved in some convenient liquor. Tubercles, knobs or swellings in a mans body. Tmor, a swelling that riseth in any part of the body for the most part, with design to break forth into an ulcer. Tundation, stamping, bruising, or pounding in  mortar. Tunica reteformis, the net-like coat, or tunicle of the brain.
Tunicles, little thin coats or coverings whereof the eye for the most part doth consist lying one within another like the scales of an onion. Turbinated, round at the top. Turbith mineral, a certain pre∣paration of quicksilver, much u∣sed in the cure of the French∣pox: it had need be rightly pre∣pared, or it's very dangerous. Turgent, swelling, working, frothing, bubbling, moving to and fro: it's usually spoken of the humors of the body when they are in combustion and vio∣lent motion. Tussis, acough. Tutia, the scum of copper. Tympane, the drum of the ar. Tympany, a disease wherby the belly is caused to swell as if the patient were with child.
Typliodes, a kind of continual Ague▪ V Validly, strongly, Vapid, naughty, old, musty, Vaporus matter, any thing that is apt to flie up in fume o steam. Vapors steams ascending into the head like the steam we see ascend from a boyling pot. Varices, broken veins in the legs, or any other part of the body. Varicosa, the same with Va∣rices. Variegated, differenced, sort∣ted into many kinds. Vasa deferentia, vessels which carry the seed from the stones to the instruments of Generati∣.
Vasa praeparantia, vessels which prepare the blood to be concocted into seed as they con∣vey it to the stones. Vehicle, is that liquor, or o∣ther convenient matter, wherein any medicine is administred, that it may be the more effectually carried to the parts of the body whereto it's intended. Vena, a vein. Vena Cava, the great hollo vein which receives th bloud from the Liver, and by its bran∣ches distributes it to all parts of the body. Vena Comunis, the median vein, or black vein. Vena Manifesta, the mother vein. Vena Pulsatilis, the pulse vein▪ Vena quieta, the bloud veins▪ Vencry, the act of Love, o carnal Copulation: it's usuall
put to signifie excess in that sport. Venenosity, poysonfulness. Ventricle of the brain, a certain hollowness in the head wherein the brain lies. Ventriculus, the ventricle, or the stomach. Vermicular, worm-like, the pulse is so called when it's very weak and feeble and moves un∣equally more or less, much like the creeping of a caterpillar. Vertebrae, the little joynt∣bones which serve for the making up the back-bone, and for the bending and turning thereof. Vertex, the top of the head. Verticulate, turneth ound. Verig, a giddiness in the head, near of kin to the falling sickness, wherein the head and all objects seem to turn round, so that the patient is neither able
to stand nor go, but falls down, except he lay hold on something to stay himself upon. Verrucales-Hemorrhoides, the Piles or Hemorrhoides. Vesicae, biliariae, the receptacle of pure choler. Vesicatories, things applied to he skin to draw blisters. Viisude, changes, turnings,  a perpetual succession of chan∣ges. Vimineous, any thing made of wicker rods, like a Bs∣ket. Vinum dilutum, Wine mixt with water. Visid Phlegm, clammy tough phlegm, roping like bird∣lime. Viscous, clammy, roping, tough, like bird-lime. Visive-Nerve, the nerve that is the instrument of the visive fa∣culty,
or of seeing, whereby the objects of sight are carried into the brain to the imagination and judgment. Visor, or visive spirits, the spirits which are the principal instruments of sight. Vital Faulty, the faculty of life, whereof the heart is the prin∣cipal seat of residence▪ this is the cause of life, pulse, and breath∣ing. Vitiligo, a foulness of the skin with spots of divers co∣lours. Morphew. Vitrification, is the violent calcination of any Clx or Ashes, till it melt into Glass. Vitriol, Copperas. Vitrous humor, a moisture like to molten Glass o Chry∣stal, which is a part of the eye: you may see it if you
dissect the eye of a Calf or Sheep. Vitrum, Glass; i'ts used to signifie Glass distilling vessels, or any other vessels made of Glass. Ulcerated, a sore turned to an ulcer: a part that hath Ulcers in it. Ulcus, an ulcer. Umbilical Vessels, the Navel and the parts thereto belonging which is called Umbilicus from its Convolutions or foldings one within another. Urbane, pleasant. Urine, both of men and chil∣dren is used in Alchymy, as also in Physick and Chirurgery frequently▪ both externally and internally. Unctious, oyly, fatty. Uncultivated, untill'd. Universal Evacuation, a ge∣neral
purging of the whole body all at once. Voluntary faculty, that power of the body which serves the Will in disposing the whole man to any action, as going, running, speaking, or what∣ever is voluntary and obedient to the command of our Wills and may be acted or forborn at pleasure: Whereas the powers of beating in the pulse, of di∣gestion in the stomach or liver, of motion in the heart, are not within our own power; and therefore are termed involunta∣ry. Vovulus, Iliaca passio a pain in the gu uppe
Child in the Womb to the Al∣lontois. Ureters, certain long and very slender pipes or pas∣sages which convey the urine from the Kidneys to the Blad¦der. Ureting, pissing. Urethra, a common passage of the yard both for seed and urine. Ustion, burning or scorch∣ing of any thing whereby it may the easier be reduced to pouder. Usurped, used. Vulva, a Womans privie member. Uvula, the palat of the mouth. Uteri Phymosis, straitness of the Womb, insomuch that it will not admit of seed, but if it do, it brings death to the
Woman: sometimes the yard of a Man is troubled with this Phymosis upon the fore∣skin. Uvea Tunica, a Coat of the Eye, resembling the skin of a Grape, whence it hath its ame. Vulncral, Medicines belong∣ing to Wounds, viz. Plai∣sters, Salves, &c. And in∣ward Potions, Diet-Drinks, &c. W Warmth, heat. Watry Humor, A certain Humor resembling fair Wa∣ter in the Composition of the Eye. Watergate, a Womans privie member. Whites in Women, is a flux of
filthy corrupt stuff, from their privities. Womb-fury, a lustful desire. Womb-Imperforated, such as Virgins have, like a barrel of beer unboared till it have a spigot put in it. Z Zanie, a foolish imitator to a Tumbler: the familiar of a Witch. Zachariae flos, the blue-bottle. Zacutus Lusitanus, a Jew that practizing Physick at Amster∣dam, became very famous in his Art: there are many Pieces of his in Print; he was of the Gallenical way, & not unlearned. Zarsa parilla, the Root of rough Bindweed, brought us from Spain and Peru, where it had this name given it.
Zedoary, a certain Root brought to us from beyond Sea, sold at the Druggists. Zenith, that part of the Hea∣vens which is direct over our heads. Zyrbus, Barbarorum, the caul or suet wherein the bowels are wrapt. FINIS.
Books printed and sold by Iohn Garfield at the Rolling press for pictures near the Royal Exchange, in Cornhil, Viz. RHaenodaeus Medicinal Dis∣pensatory; containing the whole Body of Physick, disco∣vering the Natures, Properties, and Virtues of the Plants, Mi∣nerals, and Animals, the manner of Compounding Medicines, with the way how to administer them: Methodically digested in∣to Five Books of Philosophical and Pharmacentical Institutes; Three Books of Physical Materi∣als▪ both Galenical and Chymical▪
with a perfect Apothecaries shop: and a Physical Dictionary adjoyned with the said Dispensa∣tory, explaining all the hard Words and Terms of Art in the said Dispensatory. Ochinus his Dialogue of Poly∣gamy and Divorce; wherein all the Texts of Holy Scripture and Arguments from Reason and the Laws and Customs of Nati∣ons that have been, or can be brought for, or against Polygamy, are urged and answered inter∣changably, by two persons. Daphnis and Chloe, a most sweet, amorous, and pleasant Pastoral Romance for young La∣dies: Translated out of Greek by George Thornly, Gentleman.
