R2254 99830078 34527
RULES FOR CONVERSATION, OR A Collection Of Moral Maxims and Reflections. By a Roman Catholick. LONDON, Printed for J. Eaglesfield, at the Mari∣gold over against the Globe-Tavern in Fleet-Street. 1686.
ADVERTISEMENTS. THere is newly published a Farce (as it hath been Play'd before the King and Queen) called The Devil of a Wife, or a Comical Transforma∣tion. As also Rules for Conversation or a Collection of Moral Maxims and Re∣flections. Likewise a new Book Entituled Latine Songs with their English, and Poems; (Chevy-Chace turn'd into Latine by Order of the Bishop of London) By Henry Bold formerly of N. Coll. in Oxon, afterwards of the Examiners Of∣fice in Chancery. These Printed for John Eaglesfield Bookseller at the Ma∣rigold near Salisbury-Court in Fleet∣street.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. Reader, THE following Observa∣tions are most of them cer∣tain Rules and Axioms which diverse great good Men have u∣sed in their Conversations to their no small honour and advantage, and they may be of the same use to thee, if well digested and with Prudence reduced to practise; They are true, and a small Expe∣rience
will tell you so; The more thoughts you spend on each parti∣cular, the better wilt thou like them; for my own part, I fear no Censure of the Book or its Author, since I am resolved not to be known, Judg as thou pleasest, perhaps thou mayest have Read several of them where I did, I think it no criminal theft to write what hath been written, though the Author be not Named, for that which I approve is my own in such case, be∣sides I make no claim, the greater Number are a Collection as the Title speaks, however of this I am sure, they all are or may be useful, some of them are Common and ob∣vious,
yet the advantage of con∣sidering and using them, may ne∣ver be the less, others may seem a∣like and to the same purpose, but on Second thoughts they'l yeild different Precepts, Others may seem contradictory, but if reduced to particulars for use they'l appear otherwise; There may be many more added and much more Material, but nihil simul inceptum est & perfectum, and time perhaps may increase the number of these, In the Interim take what follows, they being first Collected for pri∣vate use, are now Published for the Booksellers Benefitand Thine, which if attained, I am Content.
A COLLECTION OF Moral Maxims and Re∣flections. I. NO Man is ever so Happy or so Miserable, in this Life, as he does Imagine himself to be. II. The Happiness and Misery of Men, depends as much on their Humour and the temper of their Mind, as on their Fortune and Condition in the World.
III. Always put more confidence in those who have obliged you, then in those that you have obliged, for the former are more likely to do you a further kindness, then the latter, to acknowledg or requite what they have received. IV. The contempt of Riches in the Phi∣losophers was only a secret to prevent that contempt which attends Povertie. V. He that councels others to be Vir∣tuous, doubles his obligation to be so Himself. VI. By trifles are the qualities of Men as well discovered as by great Actions, for in the latter they are many times strain∣ed,
and in the former more Natural. VII. A Generous Man least regards Mony, but when he hath it not, he wants it most. VIII. In any great Action, he that will be his own Counceller, shall be sure to have a Fool for his Clyent. IX. Nothing is of more Importance in all a Mans Behaviour, then to know how to take an advantage when offer∣ed X. He that Winks at his own Faults thinks all the World Blind. XI. What you are to do, advise with ma∣ny,
what you are resolved to do com∣municate but to few. XII. No Man in Prudence will threaten when he hath any thing to Desire. XIII. When a Man is compelled to do an Act, 'tis most commonly best for him to seem to do it Frankly and without Con∣straint. XIV. He that will improve his Memory must not too much distrust it. XV. To be a Judge of Neighbours Differen∣ces, is dangerous and always makes one or both Eenemies. XVI. The readiest way to be deceived is
for a Man to beleive himself more sub∣tile and clear sighted then other Men. XVII. Fancy and Chance lift most to Em∣ployments. XVIII. When Men Eminen and Worthy are preferred, their Fortune seems due and no Man Envys the payment of a debt. XIX. Valour is a Quality which he that hath shall have least need of. XX. A Bashful Man is not his own Mas∣ter. XXI. He that will be safe in troublesome times, must 1. Engage in no Faction,
and 2. Favour and releive the lowest, for the first preserves kindness with the present, and the second prepares against the Future. XXII. Such as have respect only to a few things are easily misled. XXIII. He that understands amiss, concludes worse. XXIV He that will be truly Charitable, should give to poor House-keepers as do not receive Alms of the Parish, for to give to those, is only to save so much Money to the Rich, who by Law are bound to releive the Poor. XXV. Many glorious Actions that make a
noise in the World, as the Effects of a wise Design, are produced only by Hu∣mour and Passion. XXVI. We should not take delight in obser∣ving the faults of others, if we had none of our own. XXVII. We disparage Eavourites and Men ad∣vanced in the World, from Pride and Love of Favour, and the contempt we testifie against such preferments, serves only to mitigate our own greif for not obtaining the like. XXVIII. We have commonly more Strength then Will, and we imagine things im∣possible as an excuse to our selves for our own Laziness.
XXIX. What passeth for Sincerity in the World, is often-times but dissimulation, to attract the Confidence of others. XXX. Men blame the faults of others rather to perswade of their own Innocence then with a real design of Reformation. XXXI. Men discover an abhorrenge of Ly∣ing, very often with a design to gain Credit to what they say themselves, and Render their own Testimony the more Considerable. XXXII. Prosperity makes us known to others, whether we are what we seem to be, & Adversity makes others known to us,
whether they are in reality what they seem in Profession. XXXIII. They who Addict themselves to lit∣tle things with too much Application are seldome capable of any grand under∣taking. XXXIV. He that begins an affair without Judgment and is hasty in the prosecu∣tion, must not wonder if it want Suc∣cess. XXXV. He that is discouraged from a worthy design meerly upon the account of diffi∣ty hath a mean Spirit. XXXVI. Be Liberal to your Friends of your discourse and your purse, but beware of
being bound for more then you are willing to give, for he that is surely know's not what he is worth. XXXVII. He that sets his Mind and Affections on things supersluous, is commonly re∣duced to want those which are necessa∣ry. XXXVIII. On many occasions without scruple one may refuse to promise, but in few or none without shame can he refuse to performe. XXXIX. He that is unwilling to pay what he owes when he hath it by him, shall live to be willing and not be able. XL. Philosophy can triumph over past
and future Calamities, but is Conquered by a present Evil. XLI. The Refusal of Commendation, is often-times, with a desire to be Praised Twice. XLII. Few Men Praise others but with some exception, and ordinarily with a design to be Praised themselves. XLIII. No Man is so easily deceived and im∣posed upon, as when he thinks to de∣ceive others. XLIV. He that talks more then cometh to his share, and with Confidence and Pas∣sion in disputable matters, may easily be observed to contradict himself, and that's
the only Method to shame and silence him. XLV. Boldness and Confidence many times obtain that which cannot be compassed by ordinary means. XLVI. Tis not enough for a Man to have good qualities, but he must likewise know how to use and manage them. XLVII. That Noise and Show that proves a Man not to be Ingenious or Wise, is of∣ten-times the cause of his reputation for being so. XLVIII. Many who are excellent for one qua∣lity have not the Reputation of being so, because they are excellent for ano∣ther,
as Caesar is beleived to have been as Eloquent as Cicero, and yet is Famous only as a Warriour. XLIX. A great Reputation doth rather abase then exalt those who know not how to answer and sustein it. L. We Judg of other Mens merit by their carriage towards us, our self-love doth either augment or lessen their good qua∣lities in Proportion to the Pleasure and Satisfaction we have by them. LI. One Man is not more unlike another, then every Man is unlike himself consi∣dered at different times. LII. No Man is ever so ridiculous by the
qualities he hath, as by those which he affects to have. LIII. Tis ever reckoned more shameful to distrust ones Friends, then to be deceived by them. LIV. All Men complain of their Memories, but no Man of his Judgment. LV. No difguise can for any long time hide Love, where it is in reality, or feigns it where 'tis not. LVI. We please more in our conversations by our weaknesses and failings, then by any of our good qualities.
LVII. A Man may know others by him∣self, for as in water face answereth to face, so doth the heart of Man to Man. LVIII. Folly attends us in every time of our Life, if any one appear wiser then ano∣ther, 'tis because his follies are more pro∣portioned to his Age and Fortune. LIX. Many would discover greater Wis∣dom and Ability then they do, did they not over earnestly desire and affect it. LX. The wisest Men may be often at a loss in the company of Fools. LXI. Tis more easie to be Wise for o∣ther
Men then for himself, as it is to give good Councel then to follow it. LXII. There are some Commendations which reproach a Man, and some re∣proaches on the contrary which are ra∣ther to a Mans Praise. LXIII. Tis as easie to deceive a Mans Self and not observe it, as tis difficult to de∣ceive others without being observed. LXIV. Men commonly magnifie the good qualities of others, not from an esteem of their merit, but from a value for their own, and would attract Praise to them∣selves by bestowing it on others. LXV. No greater mark of an extraordi∣nary
merit then to hear a man praysed by those who do most Envy him. LXVI. The reason why so few seem Ration∣al and Agreable in their Conversation, is because most Men consider what they would speak themselves rather then what they should answer to that is spoke. LXVII. Try the Fidelitie of a Friend in such a time and instance as you can bear his refusal without great inconvenience, for he that would borrow when he hath not, must borrow when he hath. LXVIII. Resolve never to do that by another which you may do by your self, nor do that to morrow which you may do to day, nor neglect or despise the least thing.
LXIX. He that excuseth a Fault by a Lye, thinks it better to be Guilty of two Faults then to be thought Guilty of one. LXX. Remember not the Favours you have done to others, and forget not those which others have done to you. LXXI. Many Wicked Persons would be less dangerous then they are, and do less mischeif, if they had not some good∣ness. LXXII. The honour a Man hath already ac∣quired is caution for more and great∣er.
LXXIII.'Tis more difficult to know what not to say on any Subject then to speak much. LXXIV.'Tis much easier to appear worthy of those Employments which a Man hath not, then of those which he actu∣ally hath. LXXV. We many times confess little Faults with a design to perswade that we have not great ones. LXXVI. Most Men Love new acquaintance, not so much because they are weary of the Old, or find Pleasure in change, as because they think they are not admir∣ed
enough by those who know them too well, and hope to be more so by those that know them not so much. LXXVII. What seems to be generosity is often∣times but Ambition in disguise which condemns little interests and designs to aspire at greater. LXXVIII He that endeavours only to imitate other Men, doth not take the way to ex∣cell. LXXIX. Tis some kind of ingratitude to be earnest and pressing to acquit our selves of our obligations to another. LXXX Little Passions are diminisht by ab∣sence,
but great ones are augmented, as the Wind Blows out a Candle but in∣creaseth a Fire. LXXXI. We magnifie the Affection and ten∣derness which our Friends have for us, rather to declare our own merit, then our gratitude. LXXXII. Thankfulness for Favours is general∣ly with a design to obtain more. LXXXIII. Pride, which inspires us so much with Envy, doth oftentimes seem to moderate it, for we should more envy other Men, did we not extreamly flat∣ter our selves.
LXXXIV. The Encouragement we give to those who are entring on the World and be∣ginning an Imploy, proceeds often∣times from a secret Envy we bear to some already setled. LXXXV. Tis more difficult for a Man to be Faithful to a Mistris when he is favou∣red, and happy, then when he is ill treated. LXXXVI. There are such accidents sometimes fall out in the Life of a Man, that be he never so wise, he must a little act the part of a Fool to extricate himself. LXXXVII. All Men have some time or other an
Oportunity offered for their advance∣ment and happiness, which if they miss and do not improve, they seldom meet with the like while they live. LXXXVIII. All Men almost take Pleasure to re∣pay little Obligations, but few or none are thankful as they ought for great ones. LXXXIX. We need only be jealous of those who are studiously careful to avoid giving Jealousie. XC. Jealousie is always born with Love, but oftentimes survives it. XCI. Whence comes it to pass that we have
Memory enough, to retain even the smalest particulars of what happens to our selves, and yet forget that we have ever repeated them more then once to the same Person. XCII. What distrust soever we have of the Sincerity of those who tell us any thing, yet we always believe they tell us more Truth then they do to others. XCIII. Any one that Loves may know when another ceaseth to Love him. XCIV. That which renders the Pride of o∣thers insupportable, is because it wounds our own.
XCV. A Man hath few Faults less pardonable then the means he makes use of to hide them. XCVI. Whatsoever shame almost we have deserved, 'tis almost always in our Power to Re-establish our Reputation. XCVII. No Man can please for a long time who hath but one kind of Humour or is always in the same temper. XCVIII We oftentimes appear greater then we are by an Employment beneath our merit, but are diminisht by an under∣taking above our Capacities.
XCIX. Novelty and long use or Custom do e∣qually hinder us from taking notice of the Faults of our Friend. C. Those that Love will sooner par∣don the greatest indiscretion then the least unfaithfulness. CI. What disposition soever the World hath to Judge amiss, it is yet more frequently kind to false merit then unjust to true. CII. Our Enemies do commonly come nearer to the Truth in their Opinion
of us, then we do in Judgment of our selves. CIII. The same Pride that makes us blame the Faults from which we think our selves Free, causeth us to despise the good qualities of others which we want our selves. CIV. That Steddiness of Temper which seems to resist Love, seemes also to ren∣der it violent and lasting after once it is admitted. CV. Fearfulness and Cowardise are Faults whereof 'tis dangerous to reprove those you would cure of them. CVI The Calmness or discomposure of
our Humour, depends not so much on the most weighty and considerable acci∣dents of our Lifes, as on the disposition and ordering of those little things which occur dayly. CVII No quarrel lasts long where but one side is in Fault. CVIII. Though Errour be blind, yet by dis∣pute she produceth knowledge. CIX. Disputations about Evinced Certain∣ties renders them many times uncertain and doubtful. CX. Vulgar Air is more easie got then kept, the Mobile ever desiring rather to make
a Man great than endure him when he is so. CXI. Hasty honour is generally short li∣ved, arising mostly from Expectation, which if not seconded by a double per∣formance turns to contempt, besides that a sudden rise occasions a more strict enquiry. CXII. Fame undeserved is a Silent invitaion to merit. CXIII. Disoblige no one, for though he be not worthy to be a Friend he may be able to be an Enemy. CXIV. Quality makes the best Friends, there
being no danger either of Envy or Con∣tempt, either of which when any way Predominant dissolves the Frame. CXV. In dissimulation artis est celare ar∣tem. CXVI. Great Persons stand for Imitation, les∣ser for Observation, from both may be learned Experience. CXVII. Company like Climates Alter Com∣plexions, therefore be sure keep Com∣pany with Persons above rather then beneath your selves. CXVIII. Reputation is like a Glass, once crackt and always crazy.
CXIX. A Wise Man will once in an age come in Fashion. CXX. No one can be merry that hath more then one Woman in his Bed, more then one Friend in his Bosome, and more then one Faith in his Heart. CXXI. Extravagantly to commend another is an argument of arrogance, for he who so Commends another would have him esteemed upon his own Judgment. CXXII. Every Mans Fault should be every Mans Secret. CXXIII. Every Man a little beyond himself is a Fool.
CXXIV. Envy knows what it will not confess, and yet an Envious Person never attains any knowledg of himself but by re∣port. CXXV. All Controversies leave truth in the middle, and are false at both ends. CXXVI To Obey well is as great action as to govern, and more mens duties. CXXVII Nature hath produced few persons strong, but Industry and Exercise makes many. CXXVIII He who understands his own and
his Adversaries strength can hardly ever miscarry. CXXIX. Sudden Accidents are not easily pre∣vented, but those that are foreseen are prevented without difficulty. CXXX. He that Encounters with a desperate Person runs a great Hazard of making himself so. CXXXI. He that is a Wise Man will prefer the publick good before any private Quarrel of his own. CXXXII. He that would do any great thing by his own Authority, must first extinguish Envy.
CXXXIII. A Man once disobliged is never af∣ter to be imployed in any, matter of great Importance. CXXXIV. He is many times mistaken, that with Meekness and Humility expects to work much upon a proud Per∣son. CXXXV. He that changeth his Humour, or De∣meanour, or Party, must not do it at a leap, but by gradation, that before the Diversity of his deportment deprives him of his old Friends, he may gain new ones, otherwise being discovered and deserted he is certainly Ruined.
CXXXVI It is never advisable to put a Mans whole Fortune on the Hazard for any Prospect whatsoever, considering the Instability of Humane Assairs. CXXXVII. It is a quaere, whether an Envions Man Laughs more when ill betides another or when good to himself. CXXXVIII. What is good for the Hive is good for the Bee's. CXXXIX. To Enrich a Mans self with anothers Loss is unnatural. CXL. He whose Duty it is to defend others,
ought not rashly to run himself in dan∣ger, for more then one is Concern∣ed. CXLI. Tis more Wisdom to be reckoned mi∣serable, which is an Imputation rather Infamous then Odious, then be thought Liberal, and run your self into a Necessity of being dishonest, which is infamous and Odious both. CXLII. He that neglects what is done to fol∣low what ought to be done, will sooner learn how to Ruin then how to preserve himself. CXLIII. Humane Frailty and Fortunes In∣stability are Arguments for Clemen∣cy.
CXLIV. There is nothing sooner dissolves Humane Society then the Vice of ingra∣titude. CLXV. An Honest Mans Word is as good as his Oath. CXLVI. He that Permits a Crime when he ought and can hinder it, is Particeps Criminis. CXLVII. The reason why Men are Revengful, is because they think to asswage their own greif by occasioning another Mans, but 'tis unnatural to do so.
CXLVIII. Love is always Venturous and con∣ceives difficult things easier then they are. CXLIX. The reason why Men Study and En∣deavour to Justifie their Passion, is Love of Ease, for though they Love the Cor∣rupt Pleasure of Passion, yet they Love not the Reflective part, besides Pride hath no small share in the occasion. CL. He that will advance an interest, must Study more how to oblige others then how to Enrich himself. CLI. Tis a good Rule in apparel to let your Wife go above your Estate,
and your Children according to your Estate, and your Self below it, so that you may make all even at the Years end. CLII. Old Men live more by Memory then by hope CLIII. He is the safest Preserver of a Secret, whose Secrecy and Silence need not be feared. CLIV. Great deservers are generally either hated or feared or both by the party obliged, and that either because of the Expectation of as great a return or the Power to do as great a mischeif. CLV. He is a Fool that will adventure a
Double Duckett for a single Peny. CLVI. Hidden Musick is nothing Worth. CLVII. It is better to live where nothing is Lawful then where all things are so. CLVIII. They that pursue a design in the Common Road, shall be soon met with∣all and opposed, for a design once known ceases to be such. CLIX. It is only for great minds to prosecute their Intentions, though their Actions be censured and controuled.
CLX. That Evil Words Corrupt good man∣ners, is no less a true then Common Speech. CLXI. Tis business and imployment which makes a Man as well as trys him. CLXII. Absence is the best safe-guard for a Man that hath offended his Superiour. CLXIII. The greatest Strength and Power of ony Person consists in his Re∣putation. CLXIV. Most Men attribute that to a defi∣ciency of Wisdom which is a meer
want of fortune, and some ascribe that to cunning which is the effect of pure chance. CLXV. The reason why most are so unfor∣tunate is because they feel more the Pre∣sent time then they Fear the Future. CLXVI. Tis seldom Prudence to Endavour that by Force which you may obtain by fair means, for the former cer∣tainly gets you an Enemy but renders the event uncertain, whereas the latter gets the end more easily and when got is more durable. CLXVII. Self love is the most subtle and dan∣gerous Flatterer in the World.
CLXVIII. He that speaks much and thinks him∣self Wise, is worse then a Fool and more Incorrigible, CLXIX. There is a prepetual Succession of Pas∣sions in the Heart of Man, so that the Ruin of the one is almost always the Establishment of another, there being an easy Transition from one to another, as from Love to Hatred or Aversion. CLXX. We should oftentimes be ashamed of our best Actions, if the World un∣derstood the Motives that produced them. CLXXI. The Lip of Truth shall be Established
for ever, but a Lying Tongue is but for a Moment. CLXXII. The Love of Flattery hath more or less infected all Mankind, and ought to be watch't, against as the most dangerous Poyson. CLXXIII. Our readiness to advise others, unless an Intimate Friend, or earnestly desired, is rather an Effect of Pride then Proof of Friendship. CLXXIV. Tis much more difficult to behave our selve as we ought in Prosperity then in Adversity. CLXXV. Prid and Vain-Glory are always fol∣lowed
with contempt and hatred, but to the meek Person all Men pay a re∣spect. CLXXVI. He that attempts any thing beyond his Strength, and above his Capacity, should not think it strange if he meet with disappointment. CLXXVII. He that delights in the Conversation of Vain and Wicked Persons, cannot Re∣lish the Company of Wise and good Men, or be pleased with Serious dis∣course. CLXXVIII. He that sets his Mind and Affections on things Superfluous is Commonly re∣duced to want Necessaries.
CLXXIX. We think we have Strength enough to support the Miseries of others, and yet are very impatient under less ones of our own. CLXXX. A Prudent Man foreseeth the Evil, and hideth himself, but the Simple pass on and are punisht. CLXXXI. The Flatery of other Men could never do us mischeif if we did not slat∣ter our Selves. CLXXXII. There are some Vices which seem to enter into the composition of vertues, as Poysons into that of the most usefull Medicines.
CLXXXIII. He that makes too litle an account of himself, is as far from true Modesty as he that esteems himself far more then he ought. CLXXXIV. Old Men love to give good Coun∣cells to comfort themselves that they are no longer in a condition to give Ex∣amples. CLXXXV. A Man is happy by injoying what he loves rather then that which most others reckon Lovely, Felicity depend∣ing on our Taste and Relish of things more then on the things them∣selves. CLXXXVI. Most Men would have little or no
Pleasure in this World, did they not sometimes flatter themselves. CLXXXVIII. Some Men and Things are better Judged of, when near at hand, and o∣thers better at a distance. CLXXXIX. VVe easily forget our own Faults, when they are only known to our Selves. CXC More betray the Secrets of their Friends, and prove unfaithful by weak∣ness and inconsideration then by de∣sign. CXCI. We are so accustomed to disguise our
selves to others, that at length it comes to pass that we do the same to our selves. CXCII. We are never pleased to be Cheated by our Enemies, or betrayed by our Friends, but we commonly are very well Satisfied to be deceived by our selves. CXCIII. Nothing is less Sincere then the usual way of asking and giving Councel, he that beggs Advise, seems to have a re∣spectful Defference for the Opinion of his Friend, though he designs only to gain an approbation of his own, and he that gives Councel, seems to reward his Confidence with an Ardent and Dis∣interested Zeal, though oftentimes he Aims only at his own Interest or Glory by the Advice he gives.
CXCIV. To hear with Attention, and Answer pertinently to what is said, is one of the greatest Perfections in Conversa∣tion. CXCV. As 'tis the Character of a great un∣derstanding to express much in a little, so of a shallow one to say little or no∣thing in very many Words. CXCVI. They that Love talking, will rather speak Evil of themselves, and mention what they are concerned to Conceal, then hold their Peace. CXCVII. That which hath been is now; and that which is to be, hath already been,
and there is no new thing under the Sun. CXCVIII. Only by Pride cometh Contention, but with the well Advised is Wis∣dom. CXCIX. Never talk of what you know not, and speak but little of what you know, and that not rashly without consideration. CC. Do not put off to another time, that which you may do at present as well. CCI. He that dispiseth his Old Friends in Prosperity or advancement, must ex∣pect to meet with none when the Scales are turned.
CCII. He that cannot bear with the weak∣nesses of other Men, makes his own to be insupportable. CCIII. He that loveth Pleasure shall be a Poor Man, and he that loveth Wine and Oyl shall not be Rich, the Drunk∣ard and the Glutton shall come to Po∣verty, and Drousiness shall Cloath a Man with Raggs. CCIV. He that is not content with the midle Condition, between Poverty and Riches, doth commonly take a great deal of Pains to lessen his Fortune hy his Endeav ours to Enerease it.
CCV. Be not curious to understand the Se∣crets of other Men's Affairs, and be very careful to whom you impart your own. CCVI. Seest thou a Man Diligent in his bu∣siness, he shall stand before Kings he shall not stand before Mean Men. CCVII. Most Men owe their Integrity to their Ignorance of Vice rather then to the knowledg of Virtue. CCVIII. There is one inseparable reward of good Actions, viz. The Satisfaction of having done them.
CCIX. Eloquence in speaking, depends as much almost on the Tone of the Voice, the Eyes and Airs of the Person, as on the choice of Words. CCX. A Prudent Man concealeth knowledg, but that which is in the midst of Fools is made known. CCXI. There are Persons of very great Me∣rit who yet do not please, and there are others who are very acceptable though they have many failings. CCXII. A Man of ordinary Abilities that knows how to Husband and Improve them, will have more esteem and Re∣putation in the World then another of
'twice as much Merit who wants that Skill. CCXIII. There are very many undertakings that seem very Absurd and Foolish which are founded on very Wise and So∣lid Reasons. CCXIV. While only Sloth and Fear keep us within the Bounds of our Duty, our Vir∣tue hath oftentime the Honour of it. CCXV. When Vices forsake us, we flatter our selves that we have left them. CCXVI. The Love of Glory, the Fear of Shame, the design to raise a Fortune, or the de∣sire
to abase others, are oftentimes the causes of that valour so renowned a∣mongst Men. CCXVII. Our Repentance for the most part is not a Regret for the Evil we have done, so much as a Fear of that Evil which may betide us for it. CCXVIII. Envy is more irreconcileable then hatred. CCXIX. A Man may beleive that he hates flattery when he only hates the manner of it. CCXX. Constancy in Love, is a perpetual in∣constancy, causing the Heart to fix it
self successively to all the qualities of the Person we Love, giving sometimes the Preference to one and sometimes to the other, insomuch that constancy is no∣thing else but inconstancy inclosed with∣in one and the same Subject. CCXXI. Perseverance in Love is neither worthy of Praise or Blame, because it is only the continuance of those Sentiments which a Man doth neither give to himself nor can deprive himself of. CCXXII. Men of the least Merit are usually most content, and they complain most of their Fortune and Condition in the World who have least reason to do so.
CCXXIII. When our Superiours intrust us with a Secret, or great Men put Confidence in us, we regard it as the Fruit of our own merit, whereas tis oftentimes the effect of their Vanity, and because they cannot keep Secrets. CCXXIV. Tis ordinarily from Pride rather then from want of Light, that Men op∣pose themselves with obstinacy to the most received Opinions, finding the first Places already taken on the Right side, they are not content to have the last. CCXXV. Tis a Peice of Folly to be wise alone, and to affect Singularity from the rest of the World in things indifferent.
CCXXVI. Hypocrisy is an homage which Vice renders to Vertue. CCXXVII. The Valour of most Men, and the Vertue of most Women is from Pride or Shame, or Bodily Temparament. CCXXVIII. Flattery applied with Art doth commonly receive the reward of Merit. CCXXIX. Nothing is so contagious as Exam∣ple, we never do any considerable good or Evil but they produce the like, we imitate good Actions of others through Emulation, and their Evil ones through the Malignity of our Natures which
was Restrained and held Prisoner by Shame, but is fet at Liberty by Exam∣ple. CCXXX. No Man can preserve those Senti∣ments which he ought to have for his Friends and Benefactors, if he indulge himself too great a Liberty to talk of∣ten of their Faults. CCXXXI. Tis impossible to Love a Second time that which one hath truly ceased to Love. CCXXXII. Tis difficult to love those who do not at all Esteem us, and tis almost as dif∣ficult to Love them who Esteem us much more then we do our selves.
CCXXXIII. Tis the Artifice of Pride by a feigned Submission and Humility to deceive, and 'tis never more likely to deceive then under that disguise. CCXXXIV. The Accent of the Country where a Man was born, continues in the mind as well as in the Language. CCXXXV. Tis true of certain good qualitys, as it is of the senses, that those who are altogether without them, cannot com∣prehend them. CCXXXVI. If there be any Man who in no Action of his Life, and in none of his qualitys did ever appear Ridiculous, tis
because no Man was ever at the Pains to search narrowly into him. CCXXXVII. Some follies of other Men are as in∣fectious as some diseases. CCXXXVIII. That which for the most part hin∣ders us from discovering the bottom of our Hearts to our Friends, is not so much a distrust of them as of our selves. CCXXXIX. The Humours of our Bodies have an Ordinary and Regulated Course, which moves and turns our Wills without be∣ing perceived, they Exercise Successive∣ly a Secret Dominion over us, and have a considerable part in all our Actions, though we do not know it.
CCXL. The Violences which others cause us, do oftentimes give us less trouble then those which we cause to our selves. CCXLI. Humility is the truest Evidence of all other Vertues, without that we con∣tinue all our Faults, and they are only covered by Pride, which hides them from others, and oftentimes from our selves. CCXLII. Every own knows that he ought not to talk much of his nearest Relations, but no Man knows Sufficiently that he ought much less to talk of him∣self.
CCXLIII. There are some good qualities that are Faults when Natural, and others that are never perfect when they are ac∣quired, viz. Our reason must teach us how to manage our Mony, trust and Confidence, but goodness and courage must be received from Nature. CCXLIV. There are some kind of Tears whereby we our selves may be deceived, after we have deceived others by them. CCXLV. He is much mistaken that thinks he Loves a Mistris for her own sake. CCXLVI. To force ones self to continue Faith∣full
to one we Love is little better then Infidelity. CCXLVII. A Man may give good Councels but cannot inspire conduct in the Observa∣ion of them. CCXLVIII. Few are more often mistaken then such as cannot suffer to be told of their mis∣takes. CCXLIX One is oftentimes less unhappy in be∣ing deceived by a Person we Love, then to be undeceived. CCL. He Preserves his first Love a long time indeed that hath never a Se∣cond.
CCLI. The most dangerous Folly of Old Persons, who have been amiable, is to forget that they are so no longer. CCLII. The greatest Proof of Frindship is not to discover our failings and imperfect∣ions to others but to make us see our own. CCL III. We easily pardon those Faults in our Friends which do not respect our selves. CCLIV. Tis easier to know Man in general then any one Man in particular.
CCLV. We should desire very few things ar∣dently, if we knew what it is we de∣sire. CCLVI. In Frindship as in Love one is often∣times more happy by those things he is ignorant of then by those he knows. CCLVII. Shame and Jealousie would not be so painful and troublesome but that our Pride cannot assist us to support them. CCLVIII.'Twould be more to our advantage to appear as we are then to Endavour to appear otherwise.
CCLIX. We never desire very earnestly that which we desire only according to rea∣son. CCLX. While the Heart is agitated by the remainders of any Passion, a Man is more likely to receive a new one then when he is perfectly Cured. CCLXI. Covetousness hath oftentimes very contrary effects, Multitudes Sacrifice their whole Estates to doubtful and dis∣tant hopes; and others despise very great advantages that are in prospect for little interests that are present. CCLXII. All the Constanty of the Philosophers
was caused by the Necessity of dy∣ing. CCLXIII. To say that a Man Lyeth, is as much as to say, that he is brave towards God and a Coward towards Man. CCLXIV. There is no Passion in an Humane mind that is so weak, but in some Men it Mates and Masters the Fear of Death. CCLXV. To be thought Secret inviteth dis∣covery, as the more close Air Sucketh in the more open. CCLXVI. He that talks all that he knows will
certainly talk somewhat which he knows not. CCLXVII. No Man can be secret unless he useth dissimulation, for a bare Silence in some cases discovers as much as Speech. CCLXIII. By dissimulation sometimes you may better discover another Mans mind, for to him that seems open and free, will another be so. CCLXIX. The Care of the publick and of pos∣terity is many times most in them that have no posterity. CCLXX. Wives are young Mens Mistresses,
companions for middle Age, and Old Mens Nurses. CCLXXI. The reason why new Risers are En∣vied by Men in height, is because the dis∣tance is altered, and like the deceipt of the Eye, that when others come on, they themselves go back. CCLXXII. Persons of VVorth and Merit are most Envied when their Fortune conti∣nues long, for by that time, though the Vertue be the same, it hath not the same Lustre, Fresh-Men growing up that darken it. CCLXXIII. Great Spirits and great Business keep out Love.
CCLXXIV. Love is always rewarded either with its reciproque or with an inward and Secret Contempt. CCLXXV. Great Men are the first that find their own Greifs, but the last that find their own Faults. CCLXXVI. The reason why boldness doth such Feats is, because the greatest part are shallow in Judgment or weak in courage and wise Men have their weak times. CCLXXVII. The mind of Man is more cheared and refreshed by profiting in smal things then by standing at a Stay in great, for he that useth to go forward and findeth a Stop, falleth out of his own Favour.
CCLXXVIII. More danger have deceived Men then forced them. CCLXXIX. It is a Point of cunning to wait uopn him, with whom you speak, with your Eye. CCLXXX. When you have any thing to obtain of present dispatch, amuse the party with some other discouse that he may not be too much awake to make ob∣jections, or move it when the party is in hast and cannot stay to consider advised∣ly of what is moved. CCLXXXI. If a Man would cross a Business, that he doubts some other would hand∣somly
and effectually move, let him pretend to wish it well, and move it himself in such sort as may foyl it. CCLXXXII. To mention a thing desired at par∣ting, as almost forgot, or offer it on a Question asked, which you may lay a bait for in your Discourse, is many times a good peice of prudence. CCLXXXIII. In Business, the keeping close to the matter, and not taking of it too much at once, procureth dispatch. CCLXXXIV. He that will keep but of even hand, his ordinary expences ought to be but to the half of his Receipts, and if he think to wax Rich, but to the Third part.
CCLXXXV. There is nothing makes a Man to suspect much, more than to know but little. CCLXXXVI. Honour hath Three things in it, the vantage ground to do good, the access to Kings and principal Persons, and the raising a Mans own Fortunes. CCLXXXVII. If a Man that is not perfect be ever in Practice, he will practice his Errours as well as his Abilities, and induce one habit of both, and 'tis to be helped but by a seasonable intermission. CCLXXXVIII. The Folly of one Man is the Fortune of another, for no Man prospers so suddenly as by anothers Errours.
CCLXXXIX. A little of the Fool, and not too much of the Honest, are generally two fortunate properties. CCXC. It is many times better not to deal by Speech but by Letter, and by the Mediation of a Third then by a Mans self. CCXCI. Small matters win great Commen∣dation, because are often in use and note. CCXCII. It is a good precept in seconding another to add something of your own, as if you agree with an opinion, let it be with a distinction; if you'l follow
his motion, let it be on condition, if approve his Council, let it be with al∣ledging some farther reason. CCXCIII. Too much magnifying of a Person or Thing doth irritate contradiction and procures envy and scorn. CCXCIV. That which keeps a matter safe and intire is good, but that which is desti∣tute and unprovided of a retreat, is bad. CCXCV. He that would not do a thing, if he thought it would not be known, doth not do it for truth or goodness, but for opinion sake.
CCXCVI. Good things never appear in their full Beauty till they turn their back and are going away. CCXCVII. That which a Man hath procured by his own default, is a greater mis∣cheif then what is laid on him by ano∣ther, so that which a Man gets by his own Industry, is a greater good then that which comes by another Mans curtesie or the indulgence of Fortune. CCXCVIII. He hath his Work half done, who ere hath well begun. CCXCIX. Despair of Cure is worse than the Infirmity.
CCC. The more Perpendicular a danger hangs over our head, the less its shadow grows. CCCI. By diverse means Men come to a like end, as to appease one offended, some do it by Submission, others by Cou∣rage and Resolution. CCCII. A Thousand by ways miss the mark, one only hits the same. CCCIII. A Man may discover himself more by Company, occasion and chance, then he can do by a bare reflective Speech.
CCCIV. The reason why some Men chuse ra∣ther to speak of any other Trade then their own, is because they suppose it to be so much new Reputation got∣ten. CCCV. That which makes timrousness so ill a quality, is because the Party many times fears that which should help. CCCVI. No Judgment to be made of a Mer∣chants Estate till after his Death. CCCVII. The greatest Scholars are not always the wisest Men, because their own wit droops and diminishes to make room for others.
CCCVIII. Great Men have a Preheminence a∣bove us in every thing, even to a breach of good manners, and their other good qualities are their licence. CCCIX. At the upper end of a Table, Trifles are so much discourst, of that many a good discourse at the lower end is lost, by the Ceremony of being placed highest. CCCX. Glory and Curiosity are the Scourges of an Humane Soul. CCCXI. Nothing too much, is a Rule as useful and as generally true as most.
CCCXII. In general conversation it may be advisable to love another as if you should one day hate him again, and hate him as if you should Love him again. CCCXIII. Fortune is oftentimes met withal in purfuite of Reason. CCCXIV. There be such as advise to nothing but what they trust themselves can imi∣ate. CCCXV. It seems a common fault, to be both more consident and more terrified by things unseen, hidden, and unknown.
CCCXVI. No Wind makes for him, that hath no intended Port to Sail unto. CCCXVII. All actions more than ordinary and common, are subject to sinister inter∣pretations. CCCXVIII. There is no recompence false unto vertue, how great soever it be, if it once have pass't into custom. CCXIX. A word ill taken defaceth the merit of many years service. CCCXX. Need and Want is much more un∣seemly, and much more hard to be
indured in Women then in Men. CCCXXI. Vertue provoked adds much to it self. CCCXXII. The very name of Vertue presuppo∣seth difficulty, and infers a resistance, and cannot well be exercised without an Enemy. CCCXXIII. Want of Apprehension and Stupidi∣ty do sometimes counterfeit vertuous effects. CCCXXIV. It is better to learn and know more than we need, then nothing at all. CCCXXV. There is nothing can be spoken so
absurdly which hath not been so. CCCXXVI. No Man in the World so cross and humoursom, but there is something he delights in, whereby you may win him. CCCXXVII. He who judgeth by apparences, judgeth by a thing different from the Subject. CCCXXVIII. Rareness and difficulty give an esteem to things, and increase Mens desire af∣ter them. CCCXXIX. Nothing in the World so popular and generally amiable, as goodness is.
CCCXXX. The finer headed and more subtile brained a Man is, the more he is hated and suspected, if once the opinion of honesty be taken from him. CCCXXXI. Of all the Pleasures and Goods we have, there is none exempted from some evil and incommodity. CCCXXXII. That which we often see we wonder not at, though we know not why it is done, and we call that against nature, which is only against custom. CCCXXXIII. An honest Man may have false opini∣ons, and a wicked Person may preach truths, yea such as he beleives not.
CCCXXXIV. So much are Men enamoured of this miserable Life, that no condition is so poor but they will accept, so they may continue in the same. CCCXXXV. He who will provide for every thing provides for nothing. CCCXXXVI. Many Professions and Trades subsist and are grounded only upon publick abuses and popular errours. CCCXXXVII. No Man living is free from speaking foolish things. CCCXXXVIII. Who is unfaithful to himself, may
be excused if he be faithless to his Master. CCCXXXIX. Malice sucks up the greatest part of her own Venom, and there with impoy∣soneth her self. CCCXL. The consequence of all designs con∣sists in their seasons; for occasions pass, and matters change incessantly. CCCXLI. He may well walk a foot that leads his Horse by the Bridle. CCCXLII. To divert a Man from importunate imaginations, and the insinuation of particular conceits, there's no better way then to have recourse unto books.
CCCXLIII. No Man trusts a Drunkard with his Secrets, for he that can't keep his own will never conceal anothers. CCCXLIV. A little thing will divert when a greater and of more weight will not. CCCXLV. Wisdom hath her excesses, and hath no less need of moderation then folly. CCCXLVI. Profitable thoughts, the more full and solid they are, the more cumber∣some and heavy to the mind of Man. CCCXLVII. No continuance of time, no favour of Prince, no Office, no Vertue, nor
any Wealth can make a Clown become a Gentleman. CCCXLVIII. It is no longer time to wince what one hath put on the Shackles. CCCXLIX. The obligation of a benefit hath wholly reference unto the will of him that giveth. CCCL. It is against the nature of Love, not to be violent, and against the condi∣tion of violence, to be constant. CCCLI. He who hath once been a very fool, shall at no time prove very wise.
CCCLII. Whosoever hath his mind on taking, thinks no more of what he hath taken, Covetousness hath nothing so proper as to be ungrateful. CCCLIII. Most Men are better instructed by contrarlety then by similitude, and more by escaping the bad then following the good; therefore Cato said, wise Men have more to learn of fools, then fools of wise Men. CCCLIV. Tis impossible for to Treat quickly and discourse in any order with a Fool, CCCLV. A judgment is not to be made of Councel, or Advice by the Event.
CCCLVI. It is an ill seeming thing for Men in jest to Bite or in sport to Strike one ano∣ther. CCCLVII. The measure of Mony is limited, not by the Estimate of Wealth or Place, but by the Furniture and manner of Li∣ving. CCCLVIII. Many teach others to deceive, while they fear to be deceived, and give them Just cause to offend by fuspecting them unjustly. CCCLIX. Preparation gives more to hope, then it brings with it, and he that would please, hath nothing so great an Impediment, as expectation.
CCCLX. Nothing is so dear, as what is given, for the Will of the donee stands high∣ly indebted for fear of being ungrate∣ful. CCCLXI. It is certainly worth while, to change a bad Estate for an uncertain, and there can be no loss by the bargain. CCCLXII. To be always complaining, is the way never to be moaned and seldom pi∣tied, for he that makes himself seem dead while alive, is Subject to be ac∣compted alive when dying. CCCLXIII. A generous and free minded con∣fession
doth disable a reproach, and dis∣armes an Injury CCCLXIV. Sometimes it is good choice not to choose at all. CCCLXV. Each custom hath its reason. CCCLXVI. There is nothing so good and benefici∣al that yeilds profit in a glance, or be∣ing slightly passed over will do you much Service. CCCLXVII. Pleasure it felf is Pain in its height. CCCLXVIII. We must live in, and by the World,
and such as we find it, so we must use it. CCCLXIX. He will endure a fall, that cannot bear the Starts on't, utter disappoint∣ment Ruins that Man which little cross Accidents do Stagger. CCCLXX. If we direct affairs at the begginning, we hold them at our Mercy, but if once undertaken, they guide and trans∣port us, and we follow them. CCCLXXI. Such as by bashfulness are apt to grant whatsoever is demanded, are as prone afterward to Recant and break their Word, tis better therefore
to attempt Coldly and pursue Hotly then è contra. CCCLXXII. To be Proud of every profitable and Innocent Action is fit only for Fools and Madmen to whom tis extraordi∣nary and rare. CCCLXXIII. Men generally give most Credit to things they understand not, and the reason is because they would not be thought to have less Wit then the Par∣ty who proposee it. CCCLXXIV. An Injury (though the Damage be less) undoubtedly causes more greif and sharpness then a loss. CCCLXXV. He that keeps himself in his own
Power, is the most Powerful of any. CCCLXXVI. He greives more than he need, that grieves before that he needs. CCCLXXVII. It is much easier to speak as Aristotle and live as Coesar, then speak and live as Socrates. CCCLXXVIII. We cannot err in following Nature CCCLXXIX. Words reported again, as they have another sound, so generally they have another sense. CCCLXXX. There are more ways to the Wood
then one, a balk in one track ought not to discourage further and other at∣tempts. CCCLXXXI. That which makes Company so in∣fluencial, is because tis a kind of re∣proach, not to do or not to dare, what one sees his Companions do or dare. CCCLXXXII. Many times 'tis prudence gently to obey and endure the Laws of our con∣dition, strugling against that we can∣not overcome makes it more painful and troublesome. CCCLXXXIII. The greatness of a Mans mind con∣sists not so much in lofty attempts as in knowing how to range direct and cir∣cumscribe it self.
CCCLXXXIV. He that Husbands his time best, will find very much of it employ'd idely. CCCLXXXV. He that walks upon Stilts must use his own Legs, and the greatest helps signifie nothing without a Mans own Prudence, and conduct to use them. CCCLXXXVI. A Man may be known much by his Garment, by his Countenance, by his Laughter, and by his Going. CCCLXXXVII. He that keepeth his Ignorance secret doth much better than he that hideth his Wisdom.
CCCLXXXVIII. Tis folly to contradict an Inferiour, for there always arises more shame in being overcome by him, then Honour in a Victory. CCCLXXXIX. Many Men complain when a House or Room is dark, when the fault is only in their own Eyes. CCCXC. No Drunkard would willingly have his Wife, Child, or Servant such. CCCXCI. There's nothing more odious and distasteful to most Men then to be cen∣sured and reprehended; he therefore who doth that least, doth generally oblige most.
CCXCII. He that will oblige all, must abase himself to those above him, submit to his equals, and curteously equal him∣self to those beneath him. CCCXCIII. He that speaks any thing untrue to his own advantage, shall be accounted both vain and a lyer; the lye renders him odious, and the vanity rediculous. CCCLXCIV. To be obstinate in any Argument which touches the Profession of him you converse with, will certainly cre∣ate a distaste, for by presuming your self in the right, you make a reflection on him as ignorant, which is always reckoned injurious.
CCCXCV. Dess and Carriage generally gains more respect, then Riches and Ho∣nour. CCCXCVI. Fear sways more Men and Influences to more venturous exploits then hope. CCCXCVII. All Extrams are generally short lived. CCCXCVIII. Invention is a solitary thing, and the result of one Mans thoughts, as true Judgment is of many, therefore in all Companies let one Man propose, and the rest judge.
CCCXCIX. Interest is generally stronger then love, and yet Friendship grounded on Interest is little worth, for remove the advantage and your Friend is fled. CCCC. To conclude, the precepts of Pru∣dence may easier be put in writing then in practice, hic labor hoc opus. FINIS.
