r490 12798476 94023
REASONS for Encouraging the Bank of England; I. In respect of Justice and Common Right. II. Of its Ʋsefulness and the Publick Good. First, As to Justice and Common Right, These Things may be considered: I. IN Anno 1694 after all Ways had been tried to raise Money, and more was still wanting, the Parliament did not think fit to Tax the People farther; but found out a Way to perswade them to Tax Themselves of their own accord, by encouraging such who would advance 1200000 l. to receive the Recompences and Advantages proposed in the Act for Erecting the Bank: Which were framed on purpose to convince every Man, it was his rivate Interest to serve the Publick. And the advancing the Money was a voluntary Act, for the sake of the Advantages offered; which were proposed for no other End, but to encourage the advancing the Money, upon the Credit and Reputation of that Act; which therefore ought not now to be shaken. II. The Encouragement did not only consist in the Profit of the Advantages proposed, but in the Certainty and Assurance the People depended on to enjoy them for the term of Eleven Years; being granted by the highest Sanction the Government can make, and such as might be relied on securely, That the said Term should not be shortned, nor the Conditions altered or changed, much less weakened and made worse: Which as it was the main Encouragement to the bringing in the Money; so the least Disappointment of the People's just Expectation, to enjoy the promised Advantages fully and solely, for the said Eleven Years, will lessen the Publick Credit, and discourage Loans to the Government hereafter.— And therefore 'tis to be hoped, That since the Power and Wisdom of the Nation has made such a Constitution, the Honour and Justice of the Nation will maintain it. III. Besides the Parliamentary Authority, which the Subscribers relied on, the King, by his Commission, did declare his Royal Intentions, and gave his Gracious Assurances of promoting the Design of the said Act, and putting the same in execution, that the Corporation might be settled To its own Content, as the Words of his Commission are. IV. And his Majesty, the more powerfully to induce a free and liberal Contribution, annexed to his Commission the Draught of the Charter he intended; that all his Subjects, before they parted with their Money, might
know, what the Recompences were, which they were to expect: And the said Draught was Printed, and Copies dispersed, that every Man might have a true Prospect of the Advantages he was to enjoy; which were these, viz. First, That this Bank should be the only Bank in England; which is not only plainly imported by its very Name, but also by the Reason and Justice of the Thing it self: For though there be no Words of Exclusion in the Charter; yet it could not be apprehended that the same Priviledges should be granted to any other such Corporation: Because such a Grant must of necessity destroy the very Design of the Act for Erecting the Bank; it being a known Rule in Law, That an Act of Parliament introductive of a New Law, implies a Negative. So that the Bank of England, in point of Law, hath the same Security against Erecting any other Bank, as if it had been so provided for in the very Act. And can any Man think (in case either the King or Parliament had told the Subscribers, That they should be made a Bank, to continue for Eleven Years; but yet that in a Year or two's time, other Banks should be erected by the like Authority) that any Person would have ventured to sub∣scribe one Penny? And indeed, those Things which the Act declared should be Recompences and Advantages, would cease from being so, when other Banks were erected by like Authority; and the certain Recompences and Ad∣vantages, by the Act intended, would at this rate become certain Disadvantages to the Subscribers. — Besides, common Experience confirms us, That the Crown never grants the same Things twice: For when a Charter grants certain Priviledges to one Society, 'twas never known that another Charter granted the same to any others. — Moreover, the Practice of other Nations did convince the Subscribers, that they were to be the sole Bank of England; there being no known Government in the World, that ever erected Two Banks by Publick Authority. Which may be supposed to be grounded on Reasons of State: For if Two or more Banks be established, the Credit will be divided, and become less useful to any Nation. And though both of them should be equally willing to serve the Government, yet each would render the other unable to do it, by the Industry and Endeavours the one would use to supplant and under∣mine the other; in regard their several Interests being either different from, or opposite to each other, would naturally engage them both in perpetual Con∣tradictions and Disputes. Secondly, The second Recompence was, That the Subscribers should be incorporated by a Charter, with the usual Powers granted to other Corpora∣tions, as well as those particularly directed by the Act: Which when granted to others, are in a great measure taken away from the present Bank. Thirdly, That each Member should have an Interest in the Capital Stock of 1200000 l. in proportion to his Subscription. Fourthly, And also in the yearly Fund of 100000 l. per Annum. Fifthly, And Liberty to Deal and Trade in Borrowing and Lending Money, in Bills of Exchange and Bullion, and in Selling Goods, the Product of their Lands. Which Liberty will be much impaired, when the same is granted to other. Lastly, If the time be considered when this Money was advanced, viz. in 1694. it must appear the Subscribers could not be supposed to have advanced
their Money so cheerfully, on the bare Encouragement of the 8 per Cent. in regard at that time they could have made more of their Money, by 14 to 20 per Cent. (over and above the 8 per Cent.) in Lending it upon other Funds, (which the Goldsmiths and Tallymongers well know to be true.) And there∣fore the 8 per Cent. was but a part of the Encouragement to the Contributers, who had an eye to the other Advantages proposed by the Act, and the term of their duration, and the other Consequences of the same, without which they had never writ. And therefore seeing they have writ, and paid their Money, in full assurance of those Advantages; it cannot seem Justice or Equity to deprive them of any one of them, or to shorten the term granted for their enjoying them; especially considering the hazard they did run, in case 600000 l. had not been subscribed: For then they must, for Eleven Years, have been confined to the 8 per Cent. without a Charter, and other the Advantages con∣sequential thereupon. Which would have been such a Bargain at that time, that none would have taken off their hands for 20 per Cent. of their Principal. Therefore seeing these were the Advantages proposed to the People, and the Assurances given by the Government for their enjoying the same for the certain term of Eleven Years; in Confidence whereof, the whole 1200000 l. was writ, and 300000 l. of it paid in Ten Days time; there can be no reason the Subscribers should be deprived of any of the Advantages offered; and may expect that nothing should be done, within the space of those Eleven Years, to weaken their Security; since it must be granted, If once PARLIAMEN∣TARY Securities are made so Doubtful, it will LESSEN the Credit of the Government for the future. As to the Usefulness of the Bank of England, it appears by these Considerations: First, That it serves the Occasions of the Publick. Secondly, And the Necessities of Private Persons. I. The Publick has for 18 Months past, experienced the Usefulness of it, in these Instances, viz. 1. The 1200000 l. raised by the Bank, was paid into the Exchequer, with much less charge to the King, than either the Million-Lottery, or any other Fund. 2. The Cheerful speed in raising it, shews the good Inclinations the Sub∣scribers had to the Government in time of need, and the Confidence they had which ought not to be frustrated) in enjoying the Advantages promised them for Eleven Years certain. 3. The Bank has been the sole cause of lowering the Interest of Money; which is the only Fund that ever lower'd it, and that too, in time of War, when usually Interest rises; by which the Nation, since the Bank was erected, hath saved a great Sum of Money, having been supplied at much cheaper Rates than formerly.— Which lowering of Interest, doth moreover, 1. Excite Industry: 2. Raise the Value of Land; and, 3. Increase Trade. 4. It hath also, in 12 Months past, greatly advanced the Reputation of
Tallies, which are now become (instead of 30 per Cent. loss on them) to be as desirable as Money it self; and therefore instead of giving Money to change them, Money has been given to procure them. 5. The Bank hath and will render all the other Publick Funds more speedily Useful to the Crown than ever, by bringing Money into the Exchequer sooner than otherwise it would come in, for supplying the present Exigencies. 6. The Bank hath delivered the Government out of the hands of those griping Lenders; whose Extortions upon the Publick Necessities, have exceed∣ingly enrich'd themselves. II. The Private Necessities of single Persons, have been also easily and cheaply supplied in these Instances, viz. 1. In lending Money on Mortgages at 5 per Cent. without any Procuration or Continuation. 2. In discounting foreign and in land Bills of Exchange, some at 3 per Cent. and others at 4½ per Cent. 3. In Lending Money on Pawns at 5 per Cent. whereas some in their Neces∣sities have heretofore paid above 100 per Cent. for Money lent them on Pawns. 4. In lending Money on the Orphans Fund at 5 per Cent. which has relieved divers Orphans; who otherwise must have been forced to sell their Interest at under-Rates, to answer their Necessities. 5. In lending Money at 5 per Cent. on the Benefitted and Blank Million Lottery-Tickets; whereby the Necessities of Many have been relieved, and the Credit of the Publick Funds preserved. The Bank hath not directly nor indirectly Traded in any sort whatsoever, nor is any part of the Stock now in Trade nor ever was, except in Bills of Exchange for Payment of our Armies and Fleet abroad; whereby there hath been saved to the King at least 130000 l. since May, 1695. And the Armies and Fleet have been more speedily and punctually paid than ever they were before: Nor hath it at any time directly or indirectly Ingrossed any kind of Goods. It hath nothing in it of the Nature nor of the Effect of a Monopoly; for it excludes none from any Trade. It doth not Ingross all the Money, nor in truth any; being only a Great and a Secure Chest, whereinto the Subjects put their Money, and take it out at pleasure. It hath never imported directly or indirectly, any Guineas or Gold from Holland, &c. Which if it had done (as by Law it might,) many Thousands of Pounds had been gained thereby. But on the contrary, at one time Pay∣ing out One Hundred Thousand Guineas at 24 s. 6 d. When at the same time, the Price Currant in Town, was 25 s. 6 d. and 26 s. and ever since nei∣ther Paying, nor Receiving any; and by other ways it hath endeavoured all it could to prevent the Rise of Guineas. Vide Mr. Godfry's Account. It did never send any Guineas into the Countries, nor to any Place whatso∣ever, to Exchange for Silver Money or Clipp'd Money, nor to purchase any Directly or Indirectly. It hath Lent above 40000 l. on Land, and did never refuse to Lend Money upon any Mortgage, that ought to be deem'd a sufficient and proper Security. FINIS.
