S3436 R40614 19411035 108837
The SHIFTS of REYNARDINE The SON of Reynard the Fox, Or a Pleasant HISTORY OF HIS LIFE and DEATH. Full of Variety, &c. And may fitly be applied to the Late Times. Now Published for the Reformation of Mens Manners. Raro antecedentem Scelestum Deseruit pede Poena claudo. LONDON, Printed by T. J. for Edward Brewster at the Crane in St. Pauls-Church-Yard, and Thomas Passenger at the Three Bibles on London-Bridge. 1684.
TO THE READER. I Confess my self but a Foile to the Lustre of the first Author of the Delectable History of Reynard the FOX: And tho perhaps I may (by some) be thought equal, or not much inferiour to him that writ the Con∣tinuation, or Second Part of that History: Yet I dare not presume to present my self as worthy to be compared with other Parabo∣lick or Romantick Writers of this Age; least I justly undergo the same Censure with him, to whom Appelles tartly said, Ne Sutor ultra Crepidem. Therefore I here offer the present Work (such as it is) not garnished with Eloquence, but rurally habited, to the view of All: well knowing that a Clown is as well pleased with a Cock's Feather in his Cap, as a Young Gentleman with a costly Plume. For every one gives his estimate of Things,
not indeed as they are in themselves, but as his Capacity is, either dilated, or constring∣ed. If this my Labour yield pleasure and delight to the Readers, I have my End; if otherwise, I a not the first that hath proved himself a Fool in Print. Yet, because such Books as these are more frequently read by Persons of mean Ʋnderstanding, than by Men of sound Judgment; I have good Rea∣son to expect, either less Censure, or more Praise than I deserve. However the mat∣ter is, I shall not much trouble my self: for Praise; or Dispraise affects not him, who re∣gards neither. Yet, that I may not give too great Occasion of Reprehension; I am willing to satisfie the Reader, that as the perusal of the First Part of Reynard the FOX, is neces∣sary for understanding the Continuation or Second Part; so the perusal of both is no less needful for the better understanding of seve∣ral Passages in this following History of Reynardine the Son of Reynard.
The Contents The Introduction, for the better understanding of the following History. Page 1. Reynardine the Fox and his Brother Volpus enter the Province of Longwood with their Fathers Treasure; they are discovered, the Treasure taken from them, and Volpus killed by the Robbers. Chap. 1. 3. How Savage th Bear, Truculent the Tyger, and Ver∣sute the Panther, in dividing their stoln Treasure, fall together by the Ears about the Crown found a∣mongst other things. Noble the Lyon hearing the Noise fairly appeaseth the Tumult, but takes the Crown away with him. Chap. 2. 8. Reynardine having escaped the Robbers; goes into the Kingdom of Zalap, where he contracts Amity with Brocket the Badger: whose Counsel he takes, and goes on Pilgrimage towards the Monastery of Manton. Chap. 3. 10. Noble the Lyon Presents the Crown he had taken to Magnificent his Father, who receives it unwillingly, commands it to be lock't up, and never worn by his Son or his posterity. Magnificent dies, and Noble succeeds, &c. Chap. 4. 14. Reynardine coming to the Monastery of Manton, is cha∣ritably lodged for Three days; then permitted to abide a Months probation, and afterward received into Orders. Chap. 5. 17. The Fox's Oration to the Prior, Subprior, and Senior Monks when he was admitted. His Office appointed him, and Behaviour therein. His Theft discovered, and Penance enjoyned. Chap. 6. 26. The Fox doing Penance, escapes with his Religious Ha∣bit: Reads a Lecture to a Congregation of Geese, kills two of them, and escapes; is pursued, but not taken, Chap. 7. 26.
The Fox escaping in the Night, leaves the Dutchy of Manton, enters the Kingdom of Zalap, Shrives many, at length finding Brocket, goes with him in∣to his own Countrey, where he takes Sir Firrapels Confession, and Absolves him. Chap. 8. 28. The Fox leaves Feraria, and returns into the Kingdom of Zalap, alone without the Badgers Company; con∣tinues his newly assumed Course of Life, and at last (through his own folly) loses his Religious Habit. Chap. 9. 34. The Fox having lost his Religious Habit, is in danger of Death by his own Votaries; escaping that danger, be∣ing in great Penury, cozens Vorax the Wolf of a piece of Flesh; and after that durst abide no longer in Za∣lap. Chap. 10. 37. The Fox entring the Kingdom of Feraria, meets Old Grimbard the Brock, shrives him, and asketh his Coun∣sel. He wisheth him to advise with Zani the Ape. The Ape (upon Sight of the Ass) counsels him to turn Physician: makes a Disguise for him, &c. Chap. 11. 43. The Fox disguised and attended on by Zani the Ape, enters the Forrest by the Name of Doctor Pedanto: His Bills and Method of Practice. Chap. 12. 48. The Fox going to Sir Firrapel the Libbard, purposely kills him with Opium; but escapes without Suspicion. Zani, upon a falling out, leaves him, intending to set up for himself in the Forrest. Chap. 13. 52. Zani the Ape attempts to practice Physick, discovers Dr. Pedanto to be Reynardine the Fox, who is suspect∣ed guilty of the Death of Old Sir Firrapel: the Fox Flies, but the Ape is Hanged. Chap. 14. 57. The Fox returning to the Dutchy of Manton, agrees with a Mountebank to cut off his Tail and Ears. Af∣terwards renews his Acquaintance with Grimlook the Mastiff, who brings him to his Cosin Brindle, &c. Chap. 15. 61.
The Fox returns again to the Forrest in Feraria, where he (as a Stranger) is entertained in the Lord Sly∣look's Service, by the name of Crabron: he gains the Love of his Lord, &c. Chap. 16. 66. Crabron the Fox, being preferred to wait on his Lord in his Chamber, most Traiterously Poysons him: after∣ward so hypocritically laments his Death, that the King makes him one of his Purveyors. Chap. 16. 72. Crabron the Fox, now one of the Purveyors to the King, is first visited by Gibbrel the Cat, whom he draws into a Snare and kills, least he should Discover him. Afterward Grimlook the Mastiff is, for the same Cause, by him betrayed to Death. Chap. 18. 77. Brindle the Mastiff enters the Forrest, and seeing Cra∣bron, knows him to be Reynardine, whom he at length accuseth before the King; but through his own indis∣cretion is committed to Prison, and there Poy∣soned by the Fox. Chap. 19. 84. The Fox by his Craft, is not Accused for the Murther of Brindle the Mastiff: but afterward, to satisfie the Kings Jealousie of him, he is Rackt; and then con∣fesses himself to be Reynardine. Chap. 20. 90. Reynardine committed to Prison, after his Confession makes his escape in the Night, and goes into Pit∣wood, where he lies concealed for some time; but the Pranks he there played, soon discover him. Chap. 21. 96. Sir Firrapel the Libbard, with Quick-scent the Lurcher, and many Soldiers, are sent to apprehend the Fox. He is taken and brought before the King, who pas∣seth Sentence of Death on him, to be Executed the next day. Chap. 22. 101. Reynardine the Fox at the place of Execution; makes a long and lying Oration to the King, whereby he gains a Reprieve to a further time. Chap. 23. 105. The King sends for Reynardine, demands an Account of the Treasure he spake of. The Fox gives a feigned Account, which is taken in Writing, and he re-mand∣ed to Prison. Chaep. 24. 112.
The King sends for the Fox again, and after some fur∣ther discourse, sends Quick-scent the Lurcher with him into the Province of Longwood to dig for, and take up the aforesaid Treasure. Chap. 25. 115. The Fox and Lurcher enter the Province of Longwood, where (after the Fox had offered most of his Sacrifi∣ces) he makes his escape: and Lurcher returns a∣shamed to Court. Chap. 26. 119. The Kings Proclamation, promising Preferment to him that should apprehend Reynardine, encourages many Beasts to go out in pursuit of him: their Names, and how they Reason with themselves thereabout, &c. Chap. 27. 125. The Misfortune that befel the Pursuers of Reynardine, after they came into the Kingdom of Zalap, &c. The Ass takes the Fox; but is himself taken and made a Slave. Chap. 28. 130. Witless the Asse's Discourse with his Fellow Asses. He runs away, is re-taken. He carries Wood into Squire Careless his Palace; is upbraided by the Fox, &c. Chap. 29. 136. Reynardine's manner of Life in the Kingdom of Zalap. His Taking by Quick-scent the Lurcher. Chap. 30. 140. Reynardine's fruitless entreaties to be dismissed by Quick-scent. Ferox the Tyger rescues Reynardine, and con∣trives the death of Quick scent; but he escapes, and hastens to the Court in Feraria, &c. The Tygers O∣ration, who carries the Fox Prisoner to the Court Chap. 31. 145. Ferox the Tyger, hoping to obtain the Honour promised for aprehending the Fox, is shamefully repulsed, Quick-scent the Lurcher is honoured by the King. Chap. 32. 150. Reynardine's last Speech, which discovers all the Trans∣actions of his fore-passed Life. He is hanged and quar∣tered, and his Quarters disposed of as pleased the King. Chap. 33. 155.
The SHIFTS of RAYNARDINE The SON of REYNARD the FOX, OR AN HISTORY OF HIS LIFE and DEATH. The INTRODUCTION, for the better understanding of the following History. AFter Reynard the Fox his Treason, when he fled early in the Morning to his Castle of Malepadus, he no sooner there entred, but called to him his Two Sons, Volpus and Reynardine, to whom he thus spake: Sons I am now by proper Experience too sensible of the mutability of Mundane Affairs; Fortune, which so lately was, and for a long time had been my greatest Friend, is now become my mortal Foe; suddenly changing her love into ha∣tred: and when I trusted her most, she most deceived me. The Instruments by her used, were those two perfidious Lods, Sly-look the Panther, and Firrapel the Libbard, who most Traiterously betrayed me and
all mine. Them therefore you shall hate unto Death, and persecute during Life. Which the better to effect, you shall be supplied with Store of Wealth, equally to be divided between you Two after my Decease. In the mean time, I would have you to reserve it for me, and not to diminish ought thereof, till you shall be certainly assured of my Death. The Countrey where∣in I would have this Treasure lodged, is called the Province of Longwood (which is about five days Iour∣ney from this place) there shall you conceal the same, and your selves, in a Cave, which the Guide I shall send with you will shew you, until you be certainly assured of my Estate and Condition, whether living or dead. The Treasure is bound up in Ten Fardels, which ten able Servitors shall carry for you; when you, by Information of the Guide shall be come with∣in a Stones cast of the Cave, dismiss the Servitors, sending them home, that they may know nothing of your Intent. Then, when you are assured they are gone far away from thence, do you (with the Guides help) carry all the Fardels into the Cave, and when all are safely lodged there, kill the Guide suddenly, that no Tales may be told. Having said this, he immediately called for the Guide and Ten Servitors, three days before appointed to be ready to Travel whensoever he should give command, and spake to them thus: Sirs I would have you Ten each of you to take up one of these Fardels, and go along with this your Guide and my two Sons into the Province of Longwood, and at your return I will take care that you shall be all very well rewarded. Travel not after Sun-rise, but rest un∣til Sun-set, and all Night Travel until Sun-rise; and continuing this course of Travelling Nightly un∣til you come to your Iourneys end, which will be in four or five days at farthest. You have now almost an
hours space till Sun-rise, improve that time to get in∣to some Wood or Grove, as far from our Castle as you can, and there resting conceal your selves till Sun-set; then proceed in your Iourney as I said. Having given this Instruction, he dismissed them with Tears, hearti∣ly wishing his Sons (whom he never saw more) a more lasting and durable continuance of Fortunes Fa∣vours than he had found. Vpon this they departed, and Reynard the Fox ascending his Castle Walls, looked after them, till they were gone out of fight. What became of Reynard afterward, is not our pur∣pose here to shew; because that is plainly enough de∣clared in the Continuation, or Second Part of the History of Reynard the Fox long since published: Our business here is only to Discourse of the Life and Death of Raynardine the Son of Reynard the Fox, his Bro∣ther Volpus (soon after they came into the Province of Longwood) being killed, as the First Chapter of this Book immediately following, clearly shews. CHAP. I. Raynardine the Fox and his Brother Volpus enter the Province of Longwood with their Fathers Treasure; they are discovered, the Treasure taken from them, and Volpus killed by the Robbers. AFter Reynardine and his Brother Volpus, with their Guide and Servants were come into the Province of Longwood, as near to the intended Cave (by the Guides Information) as their Father had wish∣ed them to go, they dismiss all the Ten Servitors, with great and nfinite Promises of Wealth to be heap∣ed on them by the extraordinary Gratitude of their good Father (of whose desperate Condition they the
said Servitors knew nothing) promising well to re∣ward them when they returned. Of which Reward (knowing nothing) they nothing doubted. The Sons having thus dismissed them, accost their Guide in this manner: Sir, our Father left you as our Patron, to dispose of us and his great Wealth: Therefore, we earnestly intreat you speedly, before the Sun be fully risen upon us (for they had entred that part of the Province just at break of day) least we and our wealth be discovered, to dispose both of us and it in that large and uninhabited Cave you promised our Father to shew us. To this the Guide thus answered: Sirs, the Cave is at hand, and there is not only Room enough for your selves and Treasure, but for forty or fifty Camels and their Burthens also, if occasion were to use them. To this Reynardine (being wiser than his Brother) thus replied, Sir, I pray conceit us not either Fools or Fatuates, lead us to the place you speak of, and there shall you find a most noble Reward; for you are not left to expect our Fathers uncertain Bounty, but the Bounty of two Brothers, who (nei∣ther by Labour of themselves, nor by Industry of Strangers) but by the greatest of Paternal Obligations are inriched with infinite Treasures, and thereby ren∣dred most capable to reward you or any other (living) in your degree with ample Riches. Doubt nothing of our Integrity, but suddenly lodge both us and our Treasure in the Cave you speak of. To this the Guide said, Sirs, you are great Lords, and I am but a mean Servant of yours: I pray therefore be mindful of your promise to me, and I will immediately satisfie your de∣sire To this Volpus (more rashly than wisely said) Do you question our Honesty? The Guide thus repli'd, No Sirs; but blame me not, if I request to know whether you will immediately give me some part of your Trea∣sure,
or refer me to a further time. For if you re∣fer me to a further time, I cannot but doubt the Se∣quel: because I have reason to judge you cannot want a vast number of Enemies, and if my satisfaction be delayed till that time, what recompence I shall then find, I cannot tell. Here Ranardine interposing, said, Friend, you shall immediately (as soon as we and our Treasures are lodged in the Cave) be rewarded with a Twentieth part thereof, by which you may live splen∣didly all your days; either in Company of us, or by your self, as you please: doth this Content you? The Guide said Yes: and immediately brought them and their Treasures into the Cave, out of which he never returned, for they presently strangled him (with An evil Re∣ward for so great a bene∣fit. one of the Cords wherewith the Fardels were bound) as their Father gave Command▪ and having strangled him, cast out his dead Body to be devoured by Crows, or▪ whatsoever other Bird or Beast would taste there∣of; themselves scorning to Bury the same: But this this was the the occasion of the loss of their whole Treasure and the Death of Volpus. About fifteen days after this Murder, they heard by certain Travellers that had been in the Kingdom of Feraria The King∣dom where∣in Raynard the Fox had been so high∣ly advanced, and lived and died in. of the demo∣lishing their Fathers Castle, his Execution, and their own Banishment for ever, upon pain of Death, if they at any time returned. At the hearing of this, they being both astonished, stood for some time mute▪ but at length Volpus breaking silence, thus said, If this be true (Brother mine) as undoubtedly it is, be∣cause spoken by Strangers that know us not; It will be time for us to divide the Treasure. Raynardine Answered, No, Brother, it is not convenient to do so as yet, let us rather remove it further into this Coun∣trey, and nearer the Wood Long-wood, whence that Province hath its name. it itself. To this Volpus agreed, but would have it first divided: To which Ray∣nardine
(tho unwillingly) consented; when they had by Lot divided the Treasure, each went to seek a Com∣modious place to hide his five Parcels, which having found to their content, they agreed to help each other to carry, stow, and lodge early on the morrow, till both their Hares were concealed to their minds, and after that to consider how to bestow the same in pur∣chasing some great Lordships, or else some beneficial Office or Offices, that they might for the future live like themselves, as they then said. But alas, a sudden unlucky Accident mars all. The smell of their Guides stinking Carcass, by the Wind far dispersed through the Air, attracted to it self many Ravenous Birds, among whom was Corbant the Rok (an old Enemy of Raynards Family) who seeing them removing their Treasure, ascended a Tree, from whence she could easily discern all they did, and whither they went: For she knew them, but they neither knew nor mistrusted her. Therefore, when she had observed them to lodge their Treasure (in ten distinct Burthens) in two Caves but little distant each from other; away slew she to a small Grove, about Two Furlongs from the Wood it self. There she saw Savage the Bear, Truculent the Tyger, and Versute the Panther, who were met on purpose to go forth on Hunting that Morn∣ing. These she thus Saluted: Noble Sirs, I come to bring you good Tidings. Into this Coun∣trey are lately come Raynars two Sons, who have but just now hid in Two several Caves on the South side of the Wood, a very great Treasure (as I suppose) in Ten Parcels. Raynards Sons! said Sa∣vage the Bear, are they the Sons of the great Lord Raynard of Feraria? Yes, quoth Corbant. Then said he, Assuredly they are very Rich, let us go and take
away their Wealth. Here Versute the Panther, inter∣rupting No Rob∣beries can so safely be committed by Day as by Night. said: It can in no wise be for our profit to go in the day time about such a Work; let us stay till Night, when all the Inhabitants of the Wood are at rest, then may we act securely: For doing otherwise, we shall have too many Partners. 'Tis true indeed, said Truculent, Night is only fit for such Attempts. Hereupon they all agreed, and promised Corbant to give her a full Tenth of all they found, if she would shew them the true Place, and they should take Pos∣session of the same supposed Treasure. To this she glad∣ly consented, and accordingly appointed them to meet her in the same Grove in the Evening, an hour before Sun-set; promising then to conduct them to their desired Riches. Here they part, and meet agian in the Even∣ing at the time and place appointed. The Caves they are plainly shewed by Corbant, but agree to enter nei∣ther of them till the closure of the day. Corbant takes her leave, promising to return for her part in the Morn∣ing. When Night was come they first enter Raynar∣dines Cave, and take away all they find. Raynardine saw them, and made his escape out of the Cave through a privy passage: but when they came to the Cave, in which Volpus and his Treasure were, the said Volpus (instead of flying to save his Life, as his Brother Ray∣nardine Covetous Men will en∣dange their Life to save their Riches, dearer to them than Life it self. had done) in great fury bites the Bear by the Nose the Bear crying out for pain, the Tyger came to his Rescue, kills the Fox, and in a rage hurls him out of the Cave. Then they take away his Treasure also, carrying all into the Wood. Raynardine seeing and hearing all this, immediately flies for his Life. Him we leave in his flight, and proceed to shew
CHAP. II. How Savage th Bear, Truculent the Tyger, and Ver∣sute the Panther, in dividing their stolen Treasure, all together by the Ears about the Crown found a∣mongst other things. Noble the Lyon hearing the Noise fairly appeaseth the Tumult, but takes the Crown away with him. WHen all the Parcels were carried into the Wood, Night favouring their Enterprize, no other Light appearing then what Dame Cynthia (tho then in her greatest Splendour) could at times and by intervals darr in through the Dense Boughs of that huge Wood (Sixty Furlongs in length) they begin to divide their Booty with great silence, and seeming content, tho not very well affected each to other: For (being neither Merchants nor Iewellers) they understood not the true Value of any thing they saw or handled; nevertheless each thought his fellows part better than his own. However they quietly proceed until a very fair Crown of Gold enriched with many and divers Iems (of value almost inestimable) presented it self to fight. This being seen, suddenly changed the Scene. For Base Men do sometimes aspire to So∣vereignty upon the least probability of means cor∣respondent to that end. As is plainly here evident by the Bear, Tyger and Panther. every one coveted it, all would have it, and by that means all were compelled to lose the same. The Bear first said, Sirs the Antiquity and Nobleness of my Family is not unknown to you, if you shall therefore think me worthy to possess this Crown, I will in lieu thereof give to you the full Value, to be divided between you out of my share. Here the Tyger interrupting said, It is well known that my Family is neither less No∣ble nor less Ancient, but rather more Noble than yours; therefore I may (by better Right) claim the Crown
for my self. The Panther hearing this, said: To boast of the Nobleness or Antiquity of our Ancestors is vain and absurd. To whom the gods have given great∣est strength and beauty of Body, to them is Sovereign∣ly and Dominion over others also given. Therefore this Crown I take my self, as the proper Bounty of Fortune to me only, not to you in the least: for I am the strongest and most beautiful. Having said this, he set the Crown upon his own head. The Bear and Ty∣ger seeing this, suddenly in a Rage fall upon him; the Panther retired a little back, took the Crown from his head, and set it on the Ground, and then began a fierce fray against them both; which was continued with great fury and noise. Noble the Lyon hearing this Hubbub, with eight or ten Attendants, hasted to the place, where by the Light of the Moon he plainly saw the Crown, which he took up and set upon his Head; then spake to the Combatants thus: What means this Outrage and Tumult at so unseasonable a time of Night? If this Vproar come to my Fathers (the Governour's) ear, I fear it will tend to your detriment. So soon as he began to speak, they ceased Fighting, and plainly enough saw the Crown (by them striven for) on his Head; but no one of them durst di∣spute how he came by it. This sight ended their strife and contention; and they (by Nobles perswasion) be∣ing suddenly become Friends, presenting the said Noble a Chain of Gold, so pleased him, that he promised, if they would be peaceable for the future, this Nights Outrage should be forgot and forgiven. They humbly thank him, hoping he would deliver them the Crown, but he took it away with him.
CHAP. III. Raynardine having escaped the Robbers, goes into the Kingdom of Zalap, where he contracts Amity with Brocket the Badger; whose Council he takes, and goes on Pilgrimage towards the Monastery of Man∣ton. RAynardine having made his Escape as you have heard, the very next Morning left the Province of Longwood; and (as soon as he could) entred the Kingdom of Zalap, a Countrey chiefly inhabited by Men. Here he was often in danger of his Life by Hun∣ters, and once an Hunting Dog had certainly seized him, had he not suddenly pist in his Tail and strook it in∣to the Dogs Eyes, and so escaped, Therefore he be∣wailed his sad condition, which was so much the more deplorable, because he had neither Friend nor Coun∣sellour, By the Badger here, and throdgh the whole course of this History, it shewed the Nature of a faithful Friend. until his good hap was to meet with Brocket the Badger, who (after Salutations and some small Ac∣quaintance) soon taught him how to secure himself from sudden danger: For he shewed him all the By-ways, secret Caves, and under-ground Passages, near about the place where he was; saying, all this King∣dom over are such secret Recesses, By-ways, and Pas∣sages, which necessity (the mother of Invention) hath taught us to make. Otherwise there was no living here. For the Men of this Countrey no sooner take a Beast, but they either kill him presently or make him their Slave. Dogs here are also Slaves; but their Slavery is better than ordinary, going at large whither they will, only their obsequiousness to their Masters is such, that they come running at a Whistle or Call; and
then, if their Masters do but point at any of my Kindred or yours; or at an Hare or Coney, or the like; they will presently run uyon us and kill us to be sure if they can. Here Raynardine interrupting said: These are Hunting Dogs (I perceive) you speak of; I had certainly been killed by one of them, had I not nimbly pist in my Tail and slopt it in his Eyes. Yes, Cosin Raynardine, quoth Brocket, they are so. The other Dogs commonly cal∣led House-Dogs, are very serviceable to Men, and not so injurious to us. For those Dogs choose rather to assail Men than Beasts, especially if the Men be Thieves. These Dogs are commonly chained up all day (therefore in the day time we need not fear them) and at Night have their liberty, and are then very serviceable to their Masters for defence of their Houses, and all that appertains to them. Yet beside these two sorts of Dogs, there are a third sort, small of Growth, and therefore called Whiffling Curs; these contrary to the former, have their liberty all the day to range where they please; but, when Night comes they are shut up in their Masters House, where with their bawling and yelping they sometimes discover the approach of Thieves: Sometimes they have the priviledge to sleep upon a Pillow; and too often lie in their Mistrisses Bosomes, nay sometimes between the Sheets, in the ery Bed with their Master and Mistriss. And call you this Slavery (said Reynardine) if this be Slavery, what is Freedom? To this Brocket replied, Slaves too of∣ten approach their Masters Bed. Good Cosin Brocket, quoth Raynrrdine, tell me what other Beasts are here in Slavery, Are not (said Brocket) all Horses, Ca∣mels and Asses perfect Slaves, see you not how they drudge daily, what vast Burthens they carry, and how men follow them continually with Whips to make them mend their pace? Are not Oxen also forced to
draw Waynes and other Carriages? Are not Foxes (your own Kindred) daily seen chained in the Court-Yards of great Mens Houses? From which Chains they can never be freed during Life. And if they can∣not be taken alive by some Stratagem, they are pre∣sently killed in the place by those Hunting Dogs be∣fore spoken of. If it be thus Cosin (said Raynardine) I too plainly perceive I go in danger of my Life every moment, is there no way to swear the peace against them? Here the Badger laughing, said, Hah Cosin Raynardine, to what Iustice will you go here to take such an Oath? If you should go your self before a Iustice (Iustices here, being all Men not Beasts, are bound by the Rules of their own Laws to defend Men against all Beasts, whether Humane or Animal, they accounting Thieves, Robbers, and Murtherers, tho Men in shape, yet Beasts in Act) that Iustice will be sure to apprehend you, and if he make you not his Slave, certainly kill you. Yet you may safely enough live here, if you will carefully look to your self, and make it your business to learn the most ready way of passing in and out of those subterranean Passages I before spake of some of which I have already shewed and more will I discover to you, if you think good to abide in this Countrey; but if you be otherwise mind∣ed, I am ready to give you the best Advice I can. I heartily thank you good Cosin) quoth the Fox, your Advce I chiefly need: I see no safety in staying here, nor in returning into the Province of Longwood, where I know my lfe is sought; some other Coun∣trey would please me better, especially for a time, till I have gained greater Experience in the Affairs of this World; being at present young and unexpert. You speak well, said the Badger; if you be disposed to Travel, I like it well: Travel sometimes learns such
Younkers, as you, Experience: Are you minded to enter into Religious Orders? There you may have your Belly full of Victuals, good Lodging and Cloath∣ing convenient, if you can bear that austerity of Life which I never could well approve of, tho 'tis tolerable enough. Austerity of Life, Cousin quoth the Fox) Hre by the Fox 'tis apparent that Interest is the princi∣pal motive to pretence of Religion, in wicked Men. For, as Chap. sustain I not now, living always in fear of sudden Death or perpetual Slavery, a greater austerity of Life then I can be exposed to in any Religious Order whatsoever? Nay Cousin, said Brocket, I but pre∣mise the worst. If you like a Religious Life, I will endeavour the best I can to direct you to a Monaste∣ry, where (if you prudently act) you may undoubtedly be admitted: but it will be at least ten days Iourney, the greatest part of which way, I purpose to guide you. I humbly thank you, said Raynardine, direct me but thither, and I shall be bound to serve you during life; the greatness of the Iourney, or any other Ob∣stacle (if Fortune will but favour my Enterprize) shall be no hindrance to me. If this be your Resolution Co∣sin, said the Badger, on the morrow early we will begin our Iourney, you going all the way in form of a Pilgrim, and I as your Guide; we may both se∣curely Travel any whither: But if the worst come to the worst, and any danger be suspected from those un∣ruly Currs (called Hunting Dogs) before spoken of, our retiring into some of the Caves and Recesses I well know, will certainly prevent all dangers. Here the Fox said, But Cosin I have no Pilgrims Weed, how then shall I be known to be a Pilgrim? O Cosin, said Brocket, take no thought for that; here died a Pilgrim lately, whose habit I have; that shall serve. Ray∣nardne hearing this, thanked the Badger, and having rested with him all Night, began his Pilgrimage, on the morrow early, in which we leave him, intending to speak further of the Crown before mentioned.
CHAP. IV. Noble the Lyon Presents the Crown he had taken to Magnificent his Father, who receives it unwillingly, commands it to be lock'd up, and never worn by his Son or his Posterity. Magnificent dies, and Noble succeeds, &c. NOble the Lyon, the next Morning after he had seized to himself the Crown, found amongst Raynards Treasure, presents the same Crown to his Father Magnificent (Governour of the Province of Longwood) thus speaking: Great Sir, This Badge of Sovereignty, found last Night in this very Wood, is not fit to be possessed by any other then your self; therefore here I humbly lay the same at your (now Majesties Feet.) His Father hearing his Words and seeing the Crown, at first by his Countenance dis∣covered both Grief and Anger, and afterward passio∣nately uttered the following Words: Who could have thought, that I, who for so many years have Go∣verned this Province, in serenity of Days, Peace, and continued Plenty, should new in my Old Age, through the Ambition of those that have issued from my Bow∣els (especially of you my Son, from whose thoughts I judged Ambition to be always furthest) see, or at least know of the inallible and inevitable Ruin, not only of my whole Posterity, but of this Province al∣so. You think you expose to my view a pleasing Ob∣ject, but alas, I never saw a more dreadful fight; therefore bear it from my Presence, and (now 'tis so unluckily here) bury it in the most secret part of all my Lodging, or rather lock it up safe for the Hands of that
most unfortunate Prince, who shall be so proudly am∣bitious as to set the same upon his own head. For it was prophesied long before you were born (tho al∣ways reserved by me as a secret, not to be revealed till the hour of my Death) that whensoever this Province shall become a Kingdom, the King and Kingdom should suddenly be ruined. I have a great reason to believe this, because the same Prediction said, The Crown (that would occasion the Destruction of my Posterity) should be Presented to my sight before my Death. Therefore Son I here charge you, by all the Obliga∣tions of Paternal Obedience, never to wear this Crown during Life, nor permit your Self, Children, or Successors (if possible) to be imposed upon by any to assume Regal Power. This did Noble promise to observe inviolably all his days; and then (according to his Fathers Command) lock'd up the Crown, returning the Key to his Father; who died not long after. Him Noble the Lyon succeeded in the Govern∣ment, and according to his Promise, would neither wear the Crown, nor assume any Royal Title. This displeased his Brother Haughty the Lyon, not a lit∣tle; yet he dissembled his Displeasure for a time, until after Consultation with Truculent the Tyger, Versute the Panther, Savage the Bear, and some o∣ther of the most potent Beasts of that Province, no less ambitious than himself, he had perswaded them joyntly to petition Noble, their present Governour, either to assume the Title of King and wear the Crown, which was undoubtedly (say they) for that end pre∣sented to him by their great goddess Fortune; or else, if he in his Wisdom thought it not good so to do, to deliver the same to the three Part-owners thereof, to be broken to pieces, and equally divided between them. When this Petition was drawn up and presented to
the Governour, he put them off with mild Words, saying; He would take time to consider of the Matter, and after mature Deliberation return them his An∣swer. But he delaying this, longer then was epect∣ed, his Brother Haughty apprehended he too well un∣derstood his Interest to deliver up the Crown; and therefore 'twould be in vain to solicite him further thereabout; and his not assuming the Title of King, he imputed either to timerousness or obstinacy; or ra∣ther because he at present had no Son, and if he soon after his Coronotion should die, the Crown must ne∣cessarily fall to himself, whom he supposed his Bro∣ther Noble envied that Honour. Therefore he resolved to purchase the Crown, he so ambitiously desired, by Treason; and so lay the Foundation of his future King∣dom in his Brothers Blood. Which accordingly he effected at a Solemn Feast, in which he treacherously kills his Brother, and after that assumed the Title of King, wore the Crown, and Insignized all the Part∣ners of his Treason with Noble and Honourable Ti∣tles. Thus he founded his Kingdom in Blood, but held not the Reward of his Fraticide above 30 days, he and all his being by Fire and Sword utterly destroy∣ed, according to the before mentioned Prediction. The particulars of this Destruction is not to our purpose here to relate, therefore we omit it, and proceed in our intended History.
CHAP. V. Reynardine coming to the Monastery of Manton, is charita∣bly lodged for Three days; then permitted to abide a Months probation, and afterward received into Or∣ders. THe Ninth day, about Noon, Brocket the Bagder had brought Reynardine the Fox in his Pilgrims habit, to the borders of the Dutchy of Manton, when there the Badger spake to the Fox thus: Now Cosin Reynardine we are just ready to enter the Countrey, wherein that Monastery I promised to direct you to, is scitua∣ted. We have now but one easie days Iourney to it, if I mistake not; I will keep you company so far, as un∣til we come within Sight of the same, afterward com∣mit you to Fortune. I humbly thank you said Reynar∣dine, you have shewed me more than Common Kindness, if Fortune ever prosper my Endeavours, I will fully re∣compence the same. Having said this, they rest themselves a while, and afterwards proceed on their Iourney: That Night they lay in the Dutchy of Manton, and on y• Morrow, an hour before Noon, came within Ten Fur∣longs of the Monastery There Brocket the Badger, with many good Wishes left Reynardine, and returned into the Kingdom of Zalap; that Evening Reynardine pro∣ceeds on his way, and was by a soft pace got to the Monastery Gate a little before Dinner time: Here he was about to knock, but was prevented by the Sub∣prior, who had just then opened the Gate: who seeing a Pilgrim stnd there presently demanded of what Coun∣trey he was and what had moved him to undertake that Pilgrmage? Reynardine was glad of this opportunity of Speech, said, Reverend Sir I am a poor Pilgrim,
come from the Kingdom of Feraria, above thirty days Self-ended Persons pre∣tend Religi∣on for the Advance∣ment of their Interest only. Iourney from this place; moved hereunto by the fame of your great Devotion, of which I am extreamly desirous to be an Ear and Eye-witness: For I see nothing in this World worthy to be delighted in, except Religion only; for the love of which I have undertaken this long and perilous Iourney, and more could I gladly suffer to be made partaker of so great a Benefit, as you (most de∣vout Persons) through the favour of the gods continu∣ally enjoy. You speak well, said the Sub-prior, come in, here you shall have Three days of Entertainment on free cost (for such is the Charity of this House to all Pil∣grims) during that time you will have the opportunity of seeing, hearing, and observing the Rules and Govern∣ment of our whole Order. Reynardine humbly thank∣ed him, and immediately followed him into the House: But just as he entred, Grimlook the Masiff (Porter of the Gate) would have fallen foul of the Fox, had not the Sub-prior severely chid him, and so restrained his malice. When they were gone in some distance from the Gate, the Subprior turning to Reynardine, said, This is al∣ways the churlish nature of our Porter, to snarle at and assail every Stranger that enters: This we could easily redress, but are not willing, because we esteem it a necessary Tryal for all Pilgrims coming hither, that they may hence learn, that the way to rest and quiet re∣pose, is always attended with danger and trouble. To prevent this for the future, your only way is now after Dinner, and so at every Meal time, to pick up some of the Bones that are left, and give them to the Porter, who will by that means be your continual Friend. Rey∣nardine failed not to observe this Order, all the time he lived in that Monastery, and so made Grimlook his con∣stant Friend. When he was brought into the Hall to Dinner, many of the Monks asked him the like Que∣stion as the Subprior had done; to whom he gave the
same Answer he did to him; that he might not be found in two Tales During these three Days he very well observed all they did, and seemed above measure, delight∣ed with their Devotion and Order of Living. This seem∣ing content of Reynardine, was as well observed by those Monks who were appointed by the Prior himself, di∣ligently to note his Carriage and Behaviour during that time: Who therefore asked Reynardine (as they had been before instructed by the Prior) how he liked their Order, and whether he could content himself to Live as they did? To this the Fox answered, Worthy Sirs, I like your Order so well, that if I might be thought wor∣thy to be admitted the meanest Member thereof, I should esteem it the greatest Happiness of Life, and the best of Blessings. They hearing this, told him he could in no wise be admitted there, unless he first underwent a Months Probation: After that, he might have admit∣tance upon such and such Conditions as should be then proposed to him. To this he answered, if I may be admitted, I shall gladly undergo a Months Probation, and no Conditions (whatsoever they be) shall hinder my firm Resolution of being a true and constant Observant in all that shall be enjoyned me: For I do from hence∣forth piously resolve totally to abandon this wicked World, and all the Deceits and Devices thereof; & so∣lemnly promise to live a chast, peaceable, and unblame∣able Life all my Days. They hearing him thus speak, brought him before the Prior: who said, Reynardine I have heard you desire Admittance into this our Reli∣gious Order; which (if your future Behaviour be such, as thus far it hath been▪ I doubt not, but 'twill be gran∣ted you; yet, that you may not afterwards say, you wist not what you did, when you entred or made your Vow of Chastity, Obedience, and you shall have a Months time for your further Probation, that if either you dislike us,
or the strictness of our Order, or we have cause to dis∣like you; we may fairly part without further trouble. Here the Fox bowing low to the Prior, said, Most Reve∣rend Lord Prior, I hope neither your Lordship, nor any of this Fraternity, shall ever find Cause of dislike in me during Life: for I have not rashly, but deliberately de∣termined never more to embrace, love, adore, or follow the World; never more to be taken, delighted, or affect∣ed with the Riches, Pomp, and Vanity of the same; nor ever to lead other than a Sober, Chast, Pious and Reli∣gious Life. You speak very well said the Prior, go your way and do accordingly. So the Fox all the time of his Month's Probation shewed himself a more strict Obser∣vant of all their Ceremonies, than any of them. Also, at Hours appointed he would always be first in the Chappel, and the last that should come out: Besides him none were so seemingly Devout, nor should any of them mumble over more Prayers than he. Holding this Course till his Month was almost expired, the Sub∣prior told him, that three or four days after there would be a Convocation held for his admittance him, and then it was expected he should make an Oration; of which he thought good to advertise him, that he might have time to premeditate what he intended then to speak. The Fox humbly thanked him for his so courteous Advertisement, promising to use his utmost endeavour not to fail their Expectation. On the Fourth day a Convocation was held, and Reynardine at his Admittance into Orders spake as follows.
CHAP. VI. The Fox's Oration to the Prior, Subprior, and Senior Monks when he was admitted. His Office appointed him, and Behaviour therein. His Theft discovered, and Penance enjoyned. MOst Reverend Lord Prior, Reverend Subprior, and you the venerable Seniors of this Sacred Fraternity; my honoured Father Reynard the Fox (late Lord Chief Baliff of the Kingdom of Feraria) of happy Memory, through his own too great Ambition, falling into an eminent danger that proved his Ruin, sedulously endeavoured to retrieve all by some notable Exploit; but in vain. For after he had attempted as an Addition to his Grandeur, to usurp the Soveraignty of that Kingdom; though he might easily have escaped (when his Treason was discovered) he would notwith∣standing stay and abide the Brunt, hoping by future Wa∣riness to escape out of that Labyrinth of Peril into which he had so unwarily plung'd himself: but so doing lost both Life and Fortunes. This brought to my mind that Versicle of Ovid, I learned of my Tutor. Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. A Saying worthy of Note, for Wariness to shun that harm we our selves have once received; and into which we have too unwarily precipited our selves, is unsea∣sonable, fruitless, and nothing worth. My Father u∣sing like Caution, found the same too true by woful Ex∣perience. My Brother also, tho (when we were both assailed by Robbers) he saw me warily to eschew the danger of Death by flight, did unwarily assault the As∣saulters,
and so lost his Life. This I was willing to mention before so noble an Auditory, that it might be known I had sufficient Reason of deserting the World, and distrusting the treacherous and uncertain Favors of Fortune. Could I have safely brought my Wealth hither, as I intended, I had offered all here to Chari∣table uses; which would have been to me a great solace and delight: but 'tis otherwise. Therefore the true reason of this my desired retirement, is the observance of the great Enormities, Murthers, Thefts, Rapines, and infinite other Villanies, daily comitted by Persons, professing and pretending always the contrary: who con∣demning Murthers, daily kill; blasting Thievery with an ilname, all ways practice it; contemptibly speaking of Rapines (as forbid base Acts) never cease Ravening; commending Chastity always study Lechery saying, Parents ought to be honoured, in the same breath clan∣destinely condemn their Progenitors; hating Idleness, never labour unless to do Mischief; dispraising Lies, never speak Truth; and praising Religion hate the same; for in all my Life I never saw one truly Religious, ex∣pect in this place, to which as to a sacred Anehor, and most safe Asylus, I have now at length (I hope not too late) betaken my self. The Fox having thus ended his Oration, was with the usual Ceremonies of the House, admitted into their Order; and the Subprior with his own hands took off his Pilgrims Weed (which was laid up for a Relick) and put on him a Gown of their Order, spick and span New. Then the Prior himself said, Brother Reynardine (as now I may call you) the Rules of our House appoint every Novice or newly admitted Brother to Three years Ser∣vice, either in the Kitchin or Buttery, or in the Chap∣pel or else where, before he can be taken into the Order of Senior Monks: I will not (considering your Parts
and Learning) appoint you to the meanest of these Ser∣vices, but will put it to your Choice whether you will serve in the Buttery or in the Kitchin. To this Rey∣nardine said, Noble Lord Prior, I account it a great Hap∣piness to serve even in the meanest of Offices; but seeing your Lordship so highly favours me, as to put it to my Choice, I shall gladly (if I may) serve in the Kitchin ra∣ther than else where. Be it so, said the Prior; then was Reynardine commended to the Cook as one of his Assistants. For a Months space after this, the Fox so behaved himself, that he was not only praised but highly approved of by All. The Cook himself reposed so great trust in him, as he often times left the Kitchin (when he had occasion himself to go abroad) and all that was in it, to Reynardines care, not trusting any of the other Novices whom he had found always ready to pilfer and steal Meat, if he did but turn his Back. The Fox knew this as well as he, and therefore very strictly watched them, and by that means had the opportunity to steal himself; and if the Meat was at any time missed by the Cook, he would say he had always diligently watched, till he was enforced to go out to Piss or ease his Belly; and though he made all the hast he could in again, yet he should be sure to miss something when he returned, but was loath to speak of it, because he knew not who to accuse: This excuse held Water for a while, but long it could not. For, as Reynardine strictly watched the o∣ther Novices (as they came of any Errand into the Kitchen) so they had no less suspicious Eye upon him; saying each to other, this Villian Reynardine is a grea∣ter Thief than any of us; and if we cannot sometime or other take him tardy, he will be sure at length to ac∣cuse us, or some of us peculiarly by Name; but our discovering him first will prevent that danger. Accord∣ingly they watched him, and saw him (as they said) put
a Capons Leg in the Sleeve of his Coat, and to carry it a∣way to his Cell, which was not far from the Kitchin. They accuse him to the Cook, who searching his Cell and not finding the same, blamed them as Thieves them∣selves, and Forgers of Lies upon Reynardine, purpose∣ly to hide their own Thievish Disposition: Then the Fox told the Cook that these Novices who had now so un∣justly accused him, were the very persons though he knew them not by Name that daily pilfered one thing or other out of the Kitchin, as he was now certainly as∣sured, seeing them all together: The Cook believed him, but they gave the Fox the Lye, affirming that he only had stole all that ever was lost, since he was admitted into their Fraternity. This was by them uttered with so great vehemency and passion, that it was not long be∣fore many of the Senior Monks heard of it, one of which acquainted the Prior therewith, who immediately sent for Reynardine, the Cook, and all the other Novices; and after a long and strict enquiry, the Cook said he daily lost Meat or Fish out of the Kitchin, both before and since Reynardines Admittance, who stole it he could not tell, he supposed the other Novices, not Reynardine. The Novices said none of them ever stole any thing, but the Fox (who was the only Thief as far as they knew) they saw carry away the Capons Leg, of which they told the Cook, who upon Search said he could not find it: Then the Cook blamed us, say they, judging us Thieves, who had Forged Lies upon Reynardine to clear our selves. But my Lord, neither the Cook nor he can prove any such thing against us. The Prior per∣ceiving the Matter difficult and uncertain, said no more, but go your ways, let me hear no more of this. Yet in the mean whie imployed a trusty Servant of his, whom he commanded to pull down a piece of the Wall of his Chamber (which abutted just upon the Kitchin)
and cause a Workman in building it up again, pur∣posely to leave an hole in the new built Wall, that he himself might (through that Hole) see into the Kitchin, and not be seen by any. This was done, and the Pri∣or himself at every Meal time dayly Watched: At length he saw Reynardine on a Fish day, to thrust a whole Carp into his Coat, with which he was about to march off; but the Prior speedily got out at a Door near by, and seeing a Novice at hand; commanded him present∣ly to search Reynardine; who accordingly did, and found the Carp, at the Sight of which the Novice was exceeding glad; but the Fox extreamly ashamed. After Dinner a Convocation was held, wherein at first it was agreed his Habit should be stript off, and he turned out of Doors immediately; but afterward upon his sub∣mission and promise of Amendment, he was enjoyned Pennance, which was thus: After Supper he was to be put out of the Monastery Gate, and in the Penitent Cell (which was for that use there purposely made) to abide two Nights and two Days without Food. This was intended to be Executed accordingly, and he after a full Supper (being first searched, that he carried out no Victuals with him) was turned out of the Gate into the aforesaid Cell.
CHAP. VII. The Fox doing Penance, escapes with his Religious Ha∣bit: Reads a Lecture to a Congregation of Geese, kills two of them, and escapes; is pursued, but not taken. REynardine the first Night seemed exceeding peni∣nitent, and so continued the next day till Noon, always reading his Prayers aloud; but when Dinner time was fully come, and Dinner almost ended, see∣ing nothing drop over the Walls (as he constantly hoped) and being extreamly pinched with Hunger, he resolved to take the opportunity of that time to make his escape. Accordingly, fetching a Compass about, he purposed to run to the further side of an Hill, which stood right against the Monastery Gate, where being come, he espied many Geese sporting themselves in a large Pond at the foot of the Hill on that side. Before the Fox would go near them, he sought out a retiring place for himself; which being there ready, and there∣fore by him quickly found; he walked softly towards the Pond, seeming devoutly to read all the way he went; but when he was come near, he read louder, that they might hear him. The Geese seeing his Re∣ligious Habit, and hearing him read so devoutly, fear∣ing Under the Guise of Reli∣gion, Mur∣ders are too often perpe∣trated. nothing, came all out of the Pond, and became his Auditors; among whom two of the eldest (tho not the wisest) would needs thrust their heads even in∣to his Mouth, to look upon his Book. The Fox see∣ing his, immediately kills them both: and then all the other in great fear fied into the Water again, sounding an alarm all the way they went. This Rey∣dardine minded not, but hasted all he could to lodge him∣self
and his Prey, in his before provide Cave, which with great care, speed, and diligence he performed, stopping up the mouth with Stones and Earth so close, as he could not be perceived by any. In the mean while he was missed by one of the Novices, who im∣mediately after Dinner was sent out of an errand. He not finding Reynardine in the Penitents Cell, called to the Porter and told him, The Fox was fled. The Porter tells others, and they the Prior, who present∣ly sends out Ten of the ablest and most nimble Monks, with Grimlook the Porter, to search for Reynardine, and strip him of his Religious Habit. When these were gone out but a little way from the Monastery, they meet with three or four of the eldest of the Geese, who were coming to the Monastery to complain of the great Out∣rage they had received from a Member of that House, who seigning himself Religiously disposed, had killed two of their Fellows; they hearing this, presently knew it was Reynardine, that had committed those Murthers; therefore desired the Geese to conduct them to the place where this Miscreant (as they called him) had perpetrated that Villany. They accordingly do, and shew him some of the Feathers, and a drop or two of the Blood of their stain Fellows; but where the Murderer carried them, they say, their fear was so great, they could not observe. They pursue this way and that way, Grimlook the Mastiff in the mean while Hunting in every Corner; but all to no purpose. Reynardine heard them well enough, and notwith∣standing he had so firmly fortified himself, he was eve∣ry moment in fear of being surprized and taken. But such was his good Fortune at that time, that they found him not. The next day they sought him fur∣ther from home to as little purpose. All this the Fox knew, because the pursuers in all places inquired for
him, of every Passenger they met. The Third day, they pursued him not, nor any more after: Therefore on the fourth day, just at high Noon, he opened his Cave a little, looking this way and that way, to see by which way he might best (when Night came) make his escape. CHAP. VIII. The Fox escaping in the Night, leaves the Dutchy of Manton, enters the Kingdom of Zalap, Shrives many, at length finding Brocket, goes with him in∣to his own Countrey, where he takes Sir Firrapels Confession, and Absolves him. WHen Evening was come, the Fox travelled as far from the Monastery as he could, and the next Morning (by day-light) discerning which way to take, he mended his pace, until he got quite out of that Countrey and was again entred the Kingdom of Zalap, to his great content. Into which Kingdom he had not gone far before he saw a Pilgrim coming to∣wards him. This Pilgrim he purposed to rob, if he could, and strip him of his Habit: but when he drew nearer, the Fox was of another mind, for he saw he would be much too strong for him; so that he might very well fear to be robbed and stript (if not killed) by the Pilgrim. Who intending no hurt to any, drawing near to Reynardine, saluted him thus: Re∣verend Sir Priest (for such I take you to be) you are happily met this Morning: In One and Twenty days Iourney hitherward I have not met with or seen any Religious Person, therefore am now exceeding glad to see your Worship, and may well call this an happy
Meeting. I perceive, Sir Pilgrim, said the Fox, Wicked Persons al∣ways make Lies their Refuge. that you are no Stranger to Religion, seeing at first sight you can so well discern me. For I am such as you take me to be, and was Educated in the Priestly Function, from my Infancy, under my Father a fa∣mous Bishop. I suppose you are going to the Mo∣nastery of Manton. Yes; quoth the Pilgrim, my Pilgrimage ends there. Truly Sir Pilgrim, said Reynardine, I would gladly accompany you thither, partly because I never saw that Monastery; but chiefly because (according to my Office) I hold it a part of my Duty to conduct Pilgrims on their way. But the Commands of my Superiors will at this time force me to omit that part of my Duty, and because my Business requires haste, I must (though much against my Will) abruptly leave you. Having thus spoken; shook hands with the Pilgrim, and bid him farewel. The Pil∣grim then could do less, but return him his good Wishes, and so depart. The Fox joyful that he had thus deluded the Pilgrim, went on his way, and in a little time met with a Company of Ferrets, who de∣sired Shrift: These he Shrived, enjoyning only for The Peo∣ples Igno∣rance expo∣ses them to the Ruin of crafty Per∣sons; especi∣ally if Reli∣gion be as a Bait propo∣sed. Penance, a couple of Young Rabbits among them all; they request him to stay, and soon bring them to him, with these he Feasts, and then proceeds in his Iour∣ney. All the day after, tho he met very many, yet none desired Shrift, except (just about Sun-set) one poor silly Ass; him he Shrived, and for Penance en∣joyned him to fetch a good Bundle of Straw; which the Fox said he would himself lie upon that Night. The Ass obeys, and going to a Barne, that then stood open, not far off, had readily taken up a Sheaf of Wheat in the Straw, which he was in all haste bearing away to his supposed Father Confessor; but being met by the Owner, had the Sheaf taken from him, and
was soundly bang'd for his labour. The Fox seeing this, laughed heartily, and went his way. For that Night he lodged near thereabout. On the Morrow early, as he was passing forward he met many Beasts, which (upon the Report, the aforesaid Fer∣rets had made of his easie Pennance) sought him out, on purpose to be Shriven. He Shrives them all, and for their Pennance enjoyned them, when and where∣soever he should meet them, or any one of them, they should impart to him of their Store, according to his necessity: for more than daily necessaries (said he) I desire not; only this days Dinner I shall expect from you. They promise to perform all, and before Noon bring him a Fat Goose, which he thanks them for, and further said, I here solemnly promise you, at my return from the Kingdom of Feraria, whither I am now going, to bring with me plenary Indulgences, to be by you purchased at a cheaper rate, or lower price than ever Priest sold them for; by vertue of which, you may live how you will, and do what you list, without fear of punishment, all the days of your life. They humbly thank him, wish him a good Iour∣ney and speedy return. He passeth on his way, and after he had Shriven many other Beasts, with the injunction of like Penance as before; it was his hap to meet with Brocket the Badger, whom with Ioy he thus Saluted; Cosin Brocket, I hope now (very speedily) I shall be in some good capacity to re∣quite all your love, care, and pains taken for me. By your good Counsel and Conduct I purchased this Gown, which (like Fortunatus his Purse) always sup∣plies me with abundance of all things needful. I pray thee good Cosin Reynardine (quoth the Badger) what mean you thus to speak. That you have been admit∣ted into the Monastery I doubt not; your Habit plain∣ly
proving that. But how you came out thence, and still retein with you the same Vesture you there wore, is a Riddle to me. For I well know the Rules of that House do enjoyn, that no one leaving the Monastery, shall be permitted to wear their Religious Gown any longer. It is true Cosin, said the Fox, this Riddle I will another time unfold between you and me. But the reason why I compared my Coat to Fortunatus his Purse, is this: Fortunatus never put his hand into his Purse, but always pulled out as much Money as he needed; so my Gown is never seen by the ignorant, All things are judged off, as they seem to be, not indeed as they are. but it always supplies my wants to the full, they (as it were▪ offering Sacrifice to the Gown, not to me. For should I lay off my Coat but for one hour, instead of giving me any thing, they wou rather take from me all I have. I believe it (said the Badger) for the outward appearance only, is all that the vulgar gaze at; according to which, they positively deter∣mine this or that. But pray Cosin tell me which way you intend to Travel now. Now I purpose, said the Fox, to direct my Iourney towards my own Coun∣trey; which I fear not to do, having got so good a Pas∣port as this: I fear (quoth Brocket) you will find no good Entertainment there. I must put that to a ven∣ture, said Reynardine, however I am sure you will like that Countrey well: If you think good to bear me Com∣pany thither, I know it will be for your Good: if I see no safety in staying there, i'll soon make a quick Re∣turn. They agree to go together, and all the way in their Iourney through the Kingdom of Zalap, are plen∣tifully supplied with all Necessaries, by the Fox his Votaries. The Fox and Badger in the mean time laugh in their Sleeves, and secretly deride the mad Devotion of those Ideots, who would needs offer their Service to accompany Reynardine and Brocket to their Iourneys
end: But the Fox forbid them, saying, ere long I will see you again, and then abide with you a longer time; in the mean while go home, and expect my speedy Return with my before promised Indulgences, which will give you all content. They return home, and the Fox and Badger proceed in their Iourney, through the Province of Logwood, which they find totally Ruined, as in the latter part of the Fourth Chapter of this present Book, is briefly mentioned: therefore there they stay not, but hasten forward, till they come to the borders of the King∣dom of Feraria, where they lodge that night. On the morrow, when the Sun was fully risen, they walk fair and softly into that Kingdom, and so the third and fourth day until almost Noon, about which time they were come nigh to the L Firrapel the Libbard's Countrey Palace, in which he at that time lay sick of the Gout. One of his Servitors seeing Reynardine, and suppo∣sing him to be a Priest, told his Lord an outlandish Priest was come into those parts, and was now near his Palace. To this the Lord Firrapel said, hasten quick∣ly and call him hither, for I would gladly confess my self and be absolved before I die. The Servitor runs to Reynardine, and after Obeysance made, saith, Sir Priest, my honoured Master the Lord Firrapel sends for you, desiring Absolution before he dies; for he is at this time Sick, Weak, and very full of Pain, I pray Sir come quickly. The Fox goes with him, and when brought into the Lords Chamber, was thus accosted by the Lord Firrapel: Sir Priest, I desire Absolution, because I have at such and such times committed such and such hainous Offences, particularly naming all (too many to be here recited) among which he plainly Read the second part of the Histo∣ry of Reynard the Fox. confesses his betraying of Reynard the Fox, his now Confessors own Father. All which Reynardine with great Patience and seeming Gravity diligently listned to,
and after some small pause said: Sir Firrapel your Sins are great and hainous, yet upon easie Penance may all be pardoned, except that one of Betraying Reynard the Fox (as you call him) whom at that time you acknow∣ledge was Superior to your self: Had you not con∣sented to the same Treason with him, you would have found no Cause of Repentance at this time upon that score. But seeing you are now Sick and Weak, and a true Penitent (as I believe) I will help to bear your Burthen with you, and enjoyn as easie a Pe∣nance as possible I can. You shall for all your other Sins, except this last mentioned, pay to the Poor of this Kingdom a Talent of Silver by way of Alms giv∣ing; and for this last, so soon as you shall be able to go to Court, you shall not cease to petition the King, that the head and right hand of Reynard may be taken down from the Poles, on which they are af∣fixed, unil the King shall grant the same: then shall you bury them. This you are willing to perform? To this Sir Firrapel said, I will perform all if I live; but if I die the Alms shall be given: This I Solemnly Promise. Then I, said the Fox do here as Solemnly Absolve you, and you are Absolved to this day. Af∣ter ths, the Lod Firrapel commanded Victuals and a good Rewrad to be given to this supposed Priest; who having received the same, presently went his way.
CHAP. IX. The Fox leaves Feraria, and returns into the Kingdom of Zalap, alone without the Badgers Company; con∣tinues his newly assumed Course of Life, and at last (through his own folly) loses his Religious Habit. BRocket the Badger, having long expected Reynar∣dines coming, and at length seeing him come out of the Gate, hasting to eer him, said, how is it Cosin, that you staid so very long? I have heard you shrive se∣veral who have confessed a multitude of Sins, yet you never stayed so long at the hearing of any Confession. True Cosin, said the Fox, but I never shrived a Lord before, and great Folkes (you know) love many Words, and much Waiting on. But this Old Villain hath paid me well enough: look here, he gave me all this, half of which I give to you, in part of Recompence for all your Kindness. The Badger took one oity of the Libbards Benevolence to eynardne, returning the Fox great Thanks for the same. After this they continued several Days together thereabout, without any Profit: for the Beasts of that Kingdom would come and stand still to gaze upon the Fo's Religious Habit; but none would offer to request Absolution, or desire Shrift: Therefore the Fox had a mind to re∣turn into the Kingdom of Zalap, but the Badger was desirous to go into the Forest, where Reynrdne durst not shew his Head. Hereupon they agree to part in Friendly sort; and accordingly the Badger goes into the Forest where he lived long after and the Fox re∣turns to the Kingdom of Zalap, where his Votaries had long expected him. But before he went in thither, he provided himself with several Scrolls made of Leaves;
written with a certain Gibbrish Language, wholly un∣known both to himself and others. These he called In∣dulgences, which the Ignorant sort as eagerly Coveted, as if they had been true Indulgences indeed. When those he had before shrived, saw him, they infinitely rejoyced, as if some God had appeared among them; Him they salute, bow and cringe to: He again after a state∣ly manner, resalutes them. Then they ask him for his Indulgences, he saith hey are ready; but must first know whether they be fit to receive them. Hereupon they come all to a new Shrift, which brings in no small Grist to the Fox's Mill. After that he sets his feigned Indulgences to Sale, and every silly Beast that could purchase one of them, thought himself happy. The Prices he set on them, were not to all alike; but he ra∣ted each Indulgence, according as he thought each Beast was best able to pay: Money he esteemed not, because Hereby is shewed the mad Devoti∣on of Igno∣rant Persons. he could not Traffique there where it was used: There∣fore his prices were so many Chickens, so many Hens, Ducks, Geese, Rabbets, Pidgeons (if they could catch them) or the like. Thus he lived long without labour, in the fulness of all things: And that he might want nothing to make him a compleat Abby Lubber, Hick∣rel the Stalking Horse comes to him to be shriven; of him for Penance he requires half a dozen Wild-ducks. He readily Robs his Master, and brings them to him. Likewise Jowler the Setting-dog (Servitor to the same Master) after the Example of the Horse, comes to Shrift. The Fox requires for his Pe∣nance a dozen of Patridges, which he (robbing his Ma∣ster) also brought. After this, in Imitation of other Beasts, both these Ideots requested Indulgences, which they paid for out of their Masters Store. Ma∣ny more Beasts came to him upon the same Account, to all which he Sold his Indulgences, to be paid for at
set times to come, because for the present he found he had more than would be spent whilst it was good. Notwithstanding all this fulness, he failed not in the Night, hunting for his pleasure, to follow his old Trade of Stealing; but he was not able to play the Thief so deterously as before; because, through his too much Feeding, he was grown very Fat and Vnweldy. There∣fore he would have left off his Night Trade altogether, had he not esteemed his Stoln Morsels sweeter than all that was gven hm. On a Day a certain Grave Beast, wser than his Fellows, comes to Reynardn, deman∣ding of him, why he abused the Credulty of the Gul∣gar in so gross a manner? To this the Fox suddenly answered, They will have it so. S Vulgus vult ecipi, decipiatur, is a common Maxim of the Schools. I do nothing, but what they desire of me: they cheat them∣selves, if I do not take advantage of their Follies, o∣thers will. Hah Villain, said this Grave Beast, get The Vul∣gar too fre∣quently abuse their Bene∣factors, in de∣fence of their proper Ene∣mies. you packing or I will send you hence with a Vengeance. The Fox being sore afraid, slies, and be pursues, intend∣ing to drive Reynardine quite out of that Kingdom. But the Vulgar seeing this, immediately rescue their Father Confessor, and his Pursuer was now glad him∣self to fixe to avoid their fury. Thus he continued his Roguery, without other Controul, for a long time after, until one Night, intending to Rob a Wealthy Farmers Hen-roost, he by the slender Light of the wayn∣ing Moon, discernied a Steel-Trap, laid in the Pas∣sage to welcome such Night Guests as himself; over this he knew he could not pass without eminent dan∣ger, therefore he struck at it with the lapper of his Gown, but being not nimble enough to draw it away, that was catcht back, and he pulled down with the sud∣den jeck of the Engin. He laboured all he could to free his Gown, but could not, upon the noise of the Engin
falling out comes a Young Man (who had purposely Watched that Night) with a Prong in his hand, in∣tending to kill him that was taken. The Fox perceiv∣ing this, was constrained to leave his Gown behind him, and flie away Naked with all the speed he could. Thus ended the Fox's Priesthood. CHAP. X. The Fox having lost his Religious Habit, is in danger of Dath by his own Votaries; escaping that danger, be∣ing in great Penury, cozens Vorax the Wolf of a piece of Flesh; and after that durst abide no longer in Za∣lap. THe Fox after this great Loss hastens to his Lodging that Night, and lay there Two days, not stirring forth or shewing himself to any: Many of his Clients supposing him Sick, come to Vi∣sit him: but he refused their Visit, saying he had en∣joyned himself a Penance of four days Fast, which be∣ing ended he would shew himself to them; before he durst not (as he said) because of his Vow. They believing this, depart and return at the time appointed in greater Numbers than before. He then knowing he could not well refer them to a further day, and because his Pro∣vision failed, was forced to shew himself▪ not without Shame and Grief) to his Votaries, who knew him not: Therefore hoping by his glozing Tongue to retrieve the loss of his Gown, by his words, thus spake: Here stands your Priest, naked and poor, by sacrilegious hands spol∣ed of his Religious Habit, and all he had during hs Fast. For the Night before the last a strong Villain, such an One as you formerly saw pursuing me, entered here, and bearing me sore, robbed me of all, as I said:
But to your comfort and mine I speak it, I doubt not but that in a few days the Sacrilegious Varlet shall be forced to restore all. Here he was interrupted by the murmuring noise of many in the Company, some of whom pittying his Condition, said, they would pursue the Sacrilegious Villain that had so wickedly spoiled their Priest: but others said that he hmself was the Sacrilegious Person that had most barbarously murdred their Priest, conveyed away his Goods, and hid his Religious Habit purposely to usurp his Place: There∣fore say they, let us revenge the Priests Death on him. Others of them were of a contrary Opinion, not alto∣gether agreeing with the first: These said let us not rash∣ly Kill him, but wait to see whether he can (as he says he doubts not but that he shall) force the Villain to re∣store all, If so, the Truth will be manifest, and we in the mean while shall not need either to Pursue the one or Kill the other. This Councel (rare in the Vulgar) was applauded by all; only some (wiser than their Fel∣lows) said, let us watch him that he escape not, till we certainly know whether he be our Priest or not. Then the Fox standing up, said, Sirs I certainly know (for so it was revealed to me in a Dream this last Night) that the Sacrilegious Person will not only be discover∣ed, but also be enforced against his will to restore my Religious Habit, and all things else he robbed me off, except the Victuals he hath eaten; and this within Ten days at farthest. In the mean while, seeing he hath left me nothing to eat, after my Four days Fast, I reuest you would supply me with Food during my Confinement: for if you your selves do not confine me, I must confine my self, having made a Solemn Vow not to stir out of this place (unless enforced▪ till my Gown be restored to me again. They hearing this, promise him daily Food, and accordingly supply him for that day; at night they
appoint four Beasts to watch that he slip not away Rey∣nardine glad at his Heart, he had so deluded them, when it drew towards Midnight feigned himself fast a∣sleep, snoring so as his Keepers thought no less; there∣fore they mistrusting nothing fall asleey, thinking he would not start. The Fox waiting this Opportunity, took time by the fore-top, and got softly out by them, and so escaped; not daring to abide there longer, lest his fraud should be discovered: for had they then known, as they afterward did, how he lost his Gown; they would never have suffered him to escape alive, because he had so busely cheated them with his pretended Indul∣gences, which they also (not long after) found to be false. Reynardine having escaped this danger, wanders solitarily in By-places, as far from Company as he could and whereas before, he pretended a feigned volun∣tary Fasting; now he is constrained (full sor against his Will) to Fast sometimes two or three days ogether, so that his Fat abated a-pace. Thus he, who but a lit∣tle before lived in the fulness of all things, a bounding with plenty; is now reduced to Extream Penury and Want. In this poor plight he lived, till he was almost weary of Living: but it happened, after a long Fast, Fortune presented him with an opportunity of obtaining a better Meal than he at any time since his Escape could ever find: For in a clear day ascending a little Hill, high enough for him to view the Plain round about, he espied Vorax the Wolf, hasting a-pace from a Vil∣lage where he had stoln a piece of Flesh; him he meets in the way, and thus Salutes: Happily met Cosin Vorax, since the unlucky time wherein our Parents fell into that dismall Disaster, that hath ruined us all; it was never my fortune to see you, or any of my Cosins of your Family: Now I hope you will shew me some Kindness in my present distress. More the Fox would
have spoken, but the Wolf interrupting him, said, I will not own you, nor any of your Family, to be of kinn to me, seeing I too well understand, that your Fathers great Ambition was the Ruin of my Father, the Noble Lord Chief Prelate Isgrim, and of all us his Children and Nephews: I know your Craft well enough, you only scrape acquaintance with me now, in hopes to be artaker of my Booty bt I will see you choak'd be∣fore you shall have a bit ont. You shall never abuse me, as your Father abused mine: no no, I have more wit, than to be so deluded. Dear Cosin, said the Fox, why speak you so harshly to one that is even at the point of Death, not for want of Food; Alas! that is not my Disease, but (this very Morning) eating too much, hath brought on me so Violent a Surfeit, that I fear it will cost me my Life, unless I can be informed where dwells a Leech, that repairing to him, I may by Medi∣cine find relief; otherwise I am sure I cannot live two days to an end. Relief by Medicine, said the Wl, you are a Fool, I never was willing to expose my Body to the practices of any Leech; my Fathers way and mine always was to Fast it out: that is the best Remedy in the World But I pray where met you with so great plenty, as to Surfeit therewith; I'le assure you, in this Countrey such Abundance is rarely found. Ah! Cosin (quoth the Fox) I wish I may never more have such Findings; for if I had not in some measure bridled my Appetite, I had certainly died with eating; so lucious, and above measure pleasant was the Booty I met with: And could I have been so happy as temperately to have used my Abundance, I had undoubtedly had, of that ex∣cellent Provision, enough to have served me a whole Week after, nay I think for a much longer time. I pray thee Cosin, said the Wolf, where met you with so fair a Booty, what sort of Meat was it? Why Cosin,
to tell you the Truth, it was Lamb. Lamb, quoth the Wolf, I love that above all Meat in the World. Ah! said Reynardine, and well you may; for in all the Earth no Meat is so delicate and pleasant as that. I being a∣broad this Morning early, met with two Sucking-Lambs, strayed far from their Dams; finding these in a private and very convenient place, I killed them both; and by the sweetness of their Blood understood what Dainties I had met with. Opening them, I whol∣ly eat up the Heart and Liver of one, and more than half the Liver of another, besides other parts of their Flesh, but I shall have cause to repent this Eating (for ought I know) as long as I live. This fulfils the Proverb, Sweet Meat must have Sower Sauce. Which I find too true in my self. Good Cosin tell me where dwells a Leech, that I may go to him for a Purge or Vomit, to ease my over charged Stomach. You need no Purge or Vomit said the Wolf, if ye will be ruled by me, only Fast, and Sleep as much as you can, and that will be a safe and easie Remedy. Tell me but where you met with this Noble Booty, and I shall account my self ob∣liged to you for ever. That I will Cosin, quoth the Fox, with all my Heart. See you not yonder very high Elme, that is higher by much than all the Trees about it? Yes, said the Wolf, There quoth the Fox, under a Quick-set-hedge, in a dry Ditch, I laid them both, and covered them with Leaves, that they might not be seen by Passengers; there you will readily find them. How far think you, said the Wolf, is that high Elm from this place? The Fox replied about Ten Furlongs off, not further I am sure: Well then, uoth Vorax the Wolf, I will hasten thither; but what shall I do with my piece of Flesh in the mean time? That said the Fox you may leave here with me, if you please, I will carefully keep it till your Return; on∣ly
let it be said up in this Cave, out of my Sight; for I hate the sight of Flesh, and always shall, till my Sto∣mach is discharged. During your Absence, I wil (ac∣cording to your Advice) endeavour to Sleep, hoping that Too many lose their own proper Goods pur∣suing their greedy hopes of what is not. will do me good: It will I'll warrant you, said the Wolf, Here lies the Flesh, I will bid you farewel, and hasten thither. Do so saith Reynardine, I wish you well good Cosin. The Fox having thus abused the Wolf's Creduli∣ty, laughs in his sleeve, and hastily (so soon as he per∣ceived the Wolf was gone far enough) Eats up the Flesh, and runs a clean contrary way to that the Wolf was gone, and hides himself in a Cave all that day. The Wolf coming to the place the Fox spake of, saw neither Quick-set-hedge nor Dry-ditch near thereabout; therefore, af∣ter a long and tedious search (for what was not to be found) he returned in a rage to find out Reynardine, whom he could never after see, to the day of his Death. When he could neither find the Fox nor the Flesh he had intrusted him with, he cursed his own Credulty, and vowed to revenge his Abuse, by the Death of Rey∣nardine wheresoever he could find him. The Fox well knowing his own danger, which his present Hunger had precipited him into, resolved with all speed to leave that Kingdom and (as soon as possible) to return into his own Countrey, whatsoever should betide him. This Resolve he put in Execution, and about three days after got into the Province of Longwood, in or∣der to his before intended Iourney.
CHAP. XI. The Fox entring the Kingdom of Feraria, meets Old Grimbard the Brock, shrives him, and asketh his Coun∣sel. He wisheth him to advise with Zani the Ape. The Ape (upon Sight of the Ass) counsels him to turn Physician: makes a Disguise for him, &c. IN that Province he stayed not, but hastned all he could into the Kingdom of Feraria, where being entred, after he had sculked about for some time, he at lengthe spied Old Grimbard the Brock, who (for ve∣ry Age) was full of Gray Hairs all over; him he thus Saluted: Reverend Cosin, my Honoured Fathers Old Friend, I am very glad to see you. To this the Brock (being by reason of his Age dim-sighted) replied, who are you that thus Salutes me, I cannot remember whose Son you were? Why Sir, aid the Fox, I am Reynardine the Son of Reynard. O Cosin, said the Brock, I am glad to hear you speak, but plainly discern you I cannot, by reason of my weak Sight; however pray tell me how it is with you, and what is become of your Brother Volpus? Reverend Sir, quoth the Fox, my Brother died long ago, and I have been put to my Shifts ever since the Death of my Father: I was once a Priest in Orders; but the extream Austerity of that Life, was too severe for my young years to brook. Here Grimbard interrupting, said, If a Priest, Cosin I pray shrive me, for I have shriven your Father more than once, and he had always good luck after it. Reynar∣dine hearing this, immediately shrived Grimbard the Brock, and speedily after said: Good Cosin, I pray favour me so much, as to advise me what Course is best for me to take: I see no safety in living abroad?
No nor at home neither, said the Brock; have you not heard how by the Kings Proclamation) it is made Death for you to return into this Kingdom? Yes Sir, quoth the Fox but is there no way to live here, and escape that danger? Not that I know of said Grimbard. Besides Cosin (said he I am Old, and am now studying how to de, not to teach such Youngsters as you how to live. Your young Cosin Zani the Ape lives close by. I will go with you to his Lodging, if he be at home, he will Ad∣vise you ten times better than I; for he makes it his business to study Craft and Subtilty, and to teach de∣sperate Persons how to retrieve their lost Fortunes. So on they went together to Zani's Lodging, who being at home, very kindly saluted them bath: but Old Grim∣bard (being by Age taught to be wiser, than to med∣dle in such Matters) gravely took his leave of them, and departed. When he was gone, Zani (extream glad to see Reynardine) said, Cosin, I am heartily glad to see you alive and in health, but considering the Proscri∣ption you le under, and the danger you are hourly exposed by reason of that, troubles me not a little What Course intend you to take? Have you not in all your Travels learned some Science, or Mystery to live by? To this the Fox replied, Cosin, I have undergone various chan∣ges of Fortune, sometimes vp, sometimes down; once I was a Priest in Orders, after that (when I left the Monastery, the Severity of which I could not brook) I lived most splendidly, by taking Shrifts often and di∣spensing Indulgences; but most unfortunately losing my Religious Habit, I was in danger of Death, which o∣ver-hastily endeavouring to escape, I too suddenly fell in∣to extream Poverty. After this I was constrained to Wander like a Vagabond, until I could come hither; but being here, am (as you see) in little better Plight than before. You know the Old sayings, Necessity is
the Mother of Inventions; and Adversity is a better Schoolmaster, than Prosperity: And Poverty (to be sure) sharpens the Wit. Therefore Cosin, if you can think of putting me into any way, whereby I may with Safety live here (for I hate the thoughts of living else where) doubt not, but you shall find me capable to embrace and practise the same. While he thus spake, Zani the Ape saw Simleton the Ass (cloathed in Russet-Velvet, with a List of Black Satin down the Back, and about his Shoulders) passing by in great State, with his Lacquie at his Heels. Him he shewed to Reynardine, who ask∣ing what he was, the Ape Answered, This is Sim∣pleton the Ass, Doctor of Physick. How! said the Fox, what Ideots were they, that made such an Ass-Doctor? You mistake Cosin, quoth Zani, He made himself a Doctor, and the Ideots believing him such, have caused wiser than they to be of the same belief. For he is now going to Visit the Lord Firrapel, at this time (as he of∣ten is) Sick of the Gout and this Lord is so far perswa∣ded of his great Ability, that he hath commended him to many other Nobles; in so much that the Ass now is the only Physician of Note in the Forest. And well he may, for this I will say in his Behalf (and a Fig for him) he is excellent in administring Purgers, Vomi∣tories, Clysters, Blisters, and Opiats, which etream∣ly please the greatest part of the Inhabitants of this Kingdom, whether poor or rich, noble or ignoble: and tho, by this way of Practice he kills more than he cures, 'tis no matter for that, the Grave covers all, and he in the mean while knows how to please their Relations: saying, their time wss come. But Csin, said the Fox, doth not this famous Ass-Doctor also let Blood? To this Zani the Ape replied, yes osin, yes, I had forgot that. That is his Master-piece. Yet on my Conscience, Blood-letting also does often times more hurt than good.
I believe no less, said the Fox; but Fools must be plea∣sed. You say very true, quoth Zani; therefore Cosin, (if you think you can please Fools) I would advise you also to turn Doctor. Well Cosin, said the Fox, Iest not, as unlikely things have come to pass. I have read over Gallens Method of Physick, more than once; and am not a little Skilled in the use of Simples by him prescribed. Also I know how to prepare and administer Emeticks, Catharticks, Diaphoreticks, and Diureticks. What hard Names are these Cosin, said the Ape? These quoth the Fox, are only Terms of Art, used by Physicians, that their Patients may admire, what they cannot un∣derstand. A few Cramp words spoken by a Doctor, al∣ways creates Admiration in the Vulgar. For words or things commonly known are not regarded. You say well Cosin, said the Ape; I see nothing to the contrary, but that you may very laudably practise Physick: but without some notable Disguise rhat cannot be done with Safety: Besides (if I understand the temper of our Country Folk) it will be also necessary, that you present your self as a great Traveller and Stranger, come from Forrain Parts; otherwise (Doctor Simpleton having already got so great repute) you will hardly e∣ver It is the great Folly of almost all Nations, that they rather give Credit to Strangers, than to their own Country Men. come to be Famous or Eminent. And a Doctor with∣out Fame (how skilful soever) shall never get any thing to purpose. All this is true, said the Fox, I can easily play the Counterfeit any way that shall be needful; but I have no Disguise to wear, nor know I how to pro∣cure any. Leave that to me, quoth the Ape, for I have all things necessary for the purpose. It is not long since I (with my Companions) going out upon a Frolick, found a Pedlar asleep, with his Pack lying by him. This Pack we took away, and as equally as we could divided all the Wares amongst us. By this means I am stored with Razors, Lancets, Scisers, Combs, &c. By the
help of which, I doubt not but to make you a complete Disguise? For first I must shave off all the Hair of your Tail, then dye your Coat all over Black; and lastly, make you a Perriwig of Sheeps Wooll (dyed also Black) that shall wholly cover both Head and Ears: being thus Disguised, you may securely proceed in the Practice of Physick. But when I have done this, I shall expect to be requited with some part of your Profits, which I know will be great; if you admit me for your Servitor, I have a Striped-Livery fit for my self, suitable to the purpose: Besides I can feel the Pulse, and let Blood with my Lancets; and by that means shall be not only serviceable, but also very beneficial to you. You say well Cosin, said the Fox, let us go about our Work, I doubt not but it will take well; and you shall be sure to have the third part of my Profits, in Apples, Nuts, and what lse you please to make up your full third part. Content, quoth the Ape. Having thus agreed, the Ape in a few days had dyed the Fox's Coat, shaved his Tail, and made him a complete Black Perriwig, that covered his Head and Ears; and then they sat together in consult how to manage their future Business to their best Advantage.
CHAP. XII. The Fox disguised and attended on by Zani the Ape, enters the Forrest by the Name of Doctor Pedanto: His Bills and Method of Practice. AT the end of their Consult, it was agreed be∣tween them, that Reynardine should enter the Forrest, by the Name of Doctor Pedanto; Zani as his Servitor, and both affirm that the Fox was a Stranger, Native of a very far Countrey, that hearing of the fame of the Kingdom of Feraria, was come thi∣ther purposely to see it, and shew his Skill there. Ac∣cordingly the Fox in great State walks into the Forrest, Zani the Ape following him as his Lacquie. In the way they went, whensoever Zani was asked by any of the Beasts of the Forrest (as he often was) what Stranger that was, he always answered he was an Outlandish Physician, very Learned, and a great Traveller, by Name Doctor Pedanto. When they were come into the For∣rest, after their Choice of several Lodgings, this new Doctor took one in the High-street of the Forrest, not far from Doctor Simpleton's Palace. But Simpleton cal∣ling him Mountebank reproachfully scorned him, saying, Two of a Trade cannot agree. (which was in part truer than he himself thought) this is some Vagabond Rascal that cannot live else where, who hearing of my great (though not undeserved) Fame, hopes either to eclipse my Repute, or to procure to him∣self the like Honour. The Fox either not hearing or not minding this Reproach, so soon as he was settled, caused his Bills to be Pasted up, upon many of the Trees of the Forrest; the Tenor of which ran thus.
Good Tidings to the Sick and Lame. WHereas there is lately come into these Parts, a ve∣ry honourable, truly, wise and learned Physician, by Name Dr. Pedanto; who by his great Tra∣vels The Brag∣ing Boasts of Outlandish Doctors. in Forraign Kingdoms, can speak Five and thirty se∣veral Languages; and having been Physician to three Emperors, seventeen Kings, thirty nine Dukes, infinite other Great Lords, and Persons of Quality, hath attained the true Art of Healing, equal to the Knowledge of Hip∣pocrates and Galen, and far beyond the Skill of any other yet known in the World at this day. This Physician hear∣ing of the great Fame of this renowned Kingdom, ha∣ving Travelled far to see it, is now desirous to shew his great Skill in this place. Therefore proposeth to all Dis∣eased Persons whatsoever, to Cure the Running of the Reins (by Artists called the Gonorrhaea) the Pox, Gout, Scur∣vey, Dropsie, and all other Distempers whatsoever, inter∣nal or external, whether curable or not. And all this for a very reasonable Reward, The com∣mon pretence of Quacks; tho they mean far o∣therwise. requiring nothing before the Cure be fully performed. This Famous Doctor is to be spoken with every hour of the day (if urgent Business hinder not,) at his Lodging in the High-street of the Forrest, within five doors of Dr. Simple∣ton's Palace. VIVATREX. As this Bill greatly troubled Doctor Simpleton, and some few other such Physicians of the Forrest, so it ex∣treamly pleased the Vulgar, who stock in heaps to this supposed Outlandish Doctor. For, though they under∣stood not what the Bill meant, because they could not read; yet by Hear-say and Zani's profuse Praises of his Master, they concluded that Doctor Pedanto was the only Physician then living in the World; and Doctor Simpleton was but an Ass to him. Therefore one
comes for a Purge, another for a Vomit; a third (be∣cause of great Costiveness) requires a Clyster; a fourth would needs be let Blood, because of a great Itching (he said) he had every where about him. Another (ha∣ving a pain behind his Ear) requires a Blister or two to be raised Many more came, complaining of other Ma∣ladies, but each of these thought himself wise enough to teach this new Doctor what he should Administer to them. The Fox well knowing the old temper of the Vulgar, pleases all; therefore to one for a Purge; he gives Jallap-root infused in Liquor for a Night or two; to another (upon the same Account) he gives Ru∣barb (in a large quantity) infused in the Iuice of Grapes; to a third, a Decoction of Sena Leaves, to a fourth Troches of Alhandal; to a fifth Scammony, and to others Coloquintida. To some to provoke Vomiting, he gave White Vitriol (dissolved in Water) Asarabacca Leaves steeped in Wine; Stibium, Gam de Peru, Helle∣bore, and the like. His Glisters (alias Cylsters) were only such as were commonly used and prescribed by Doctor Simpleton the Ass: for better he knew not. Like∣wise in letting Blood, he without distinction of Age or Sex (except in the quantity only) let all Blood that came according to the usual mode; and if Mischief came thereof, he had his Answer ready: They would have it so. His Blisters were usually raised with Cupping-Glasses, or else with Spanish flyes, or other like Vesti∣catory Torments; which made his Patients after the first Experiment, never to venture a second Tryal: and yet (for all that) they remain no less free from Pain than before. But the most raging and Epidemical Dis∣ease of the Forrest, was the Surfeit; which swept a∣way many yearly, and almost every Month invaded one or other. In the Cure of this, he forgot not to enjoyn Abstinence from Food, as a neceffary part of the Cure,
according to the advice of Vorax the Wolf, given to him∣self, when he feigned he was aflicted with the same Di∣stemper. Nevertheless for his own profit, he pre∣scribes a Vomit or two at first, and after the Stomach was well emptied, failed not to open a Veine; hoping by this means they would return to him the sooner: As indeed some did, but others never came again, being through too much loss of Blood so enfeebled, as they could never after play the Gluttons any more. The Run∣ning of the Reins, few were troubled with, but, to such as were so afflicted, he gave Turpentine in a New-laid-Egg, Bolearmenac, and other Astringents, though not much to the purpose; howsoever they pleased many, because of some abatement of the Malady for a time. The Pox it self fewer had, that would come to him: Such as did, he fluxed with Mercury. And by these and the like ways, he procured to himself no smal Re∣putation; in so much, that he had many of the Asses patients, and those nosmal Fools neither. For amongst others, Witless the Ass (Doctor Simpletons own Cosin) who thought himself equal, if not far superior, to his Cosin in Wit, came to Doctor Pedanto: saying, Reve∣rend Doctor, I hear you are a very skilful Leech, come from some far Countrey, pray therefore be pleased to heal my Belly-ach; for I cannot (either wet or dry) ease my Belly: If you cure me Sir I will be sure to blast our your Worships Praises so, as all the Beasts in the For∣rest shall certainly hear the same; and then a Fig for my proud Cosin Simpleton's Doctorship: For I know well enough Sir (Maugre all my Cosin shall object to the con∣trary) if I but once commend you as a skilful Doctor, it's twenty to one, but that all the Beasts of the For∣rest Eccho to what I say; and immediately after that, to be sure you will be called the Famous Doctor Pedanto. The Fox hearing this (tho he laughed secretly at the As∣ses
Folly) gave him a Laxative Medicine, whereby he eased his Belly-Ach for the present; but found little or no increase of Practice, upon the Commendations of Sir Witless: Notwithstanding (his Fame other∣wise encreasing) he was often sent for to several of the most Eminent Beasts of the Forrest, among whom Sir Firrapel the Libbard (otherwise called, Lord Firrapel) sent a Messenger purposely to fetch him to his Countrey Palace, about Seven Miles distant from the Forrest, where he lay sick and weak, partly with Age, but chief∣ly with the Gout afflicted; finding no Relief or Ease by all the Medicines Doctor Simpleton or others could Ad∣minister to him. CHAP. XIII. The Fox going to Sir Firrapel the Libbard, purposely kills him with Opium; but escapes without Suspicion. Zani, upon a falling out, leaves him, intending to set up for himself in the Forrest. THe Messenger coming to Doctor Pedanto, said, Worshipful Sir the Lord Firrapel (my honour∣ed Master) lying very Sick and Weak, and so extreamly full of Pain, that he cannot Rest Night or Day; requests your Worships Presence and Assistance; promising (by me) nobly to recompence all your Care and Pains. This he bad me tell you Sir. To this the Fox said, How far from this place is your Lords Palace? The Messenger Answered, Threescore Furlongs or thereabout. Wait a while said the Fox, and I will go with you. Then Reynardine well remembring his Fa∣thers Charge, given to himself and his Brother, to hate unto Death the Libbard and Panther, speedily a∣mongst
other Medicines, puts up a good quantity of Opium, It is a wic∣ked thing for Parents to bequeath Re∣venge (as a Legacy) to their Chil∣dren. Thus did Amilcar to his Son Hanibal; which pro∣ved the De∣struction of more than Three hun∣dred thou∣sand Romans; besides the utter ruine, and devasta∣tion of his own Coun∣trey. which he had carefully kept (Zani not knowing what it was) from the time he first began his Practice of Phy∣sick: This Fardel made up with speed, he delivers to the Messenger, and commanding Zani to put on his best Coat, and go with him; he went forth, leaving his Lodging to Gibbrel the Cat, who had been (for some time before) admitted into his Service; charging him to tell all that enquired for him, whither he was gone; and that he would be at home the next Morning betimes. Having said this, he walks on (after the Messenger) in great State, with Zani at his heels, until they were got quite out of the Forrest. Then bidding the Mes∣senger to go faster, they all so mended their pace, that in two Hours time, they were got within fight of Sir Firrapels Palace. At the sight of which, the Fox commanding the Messenger to go before, saying, we will come after▪ The Messenger did so, and before the Fox and Ape were come up to the Gate, Young Sir Firrapel was come forth to meet them; who Saluted the Fox with great respect: saying, Reverend Doctor Pedanto, you are a very welcome Guest at this time, for my Father is almost at Deaths door; I pray good Sir walk in, and refresh your self a while, and then go up to my Father. For my Servant tells me what haste you have made, for which I give you great thanks. The Fox replied, Honoured Sir, it is not the part of a good Physician, coming to visit a Patient in great Distress, and at the point of Death, (as you say my Lord your Noble Father is) to respect his own case or refresh∣ment so much, as his Patients welfare. Therefore I will first (if possible) give your Father some ease, and afterwards refresh my self. Young Sir Firrapel hearing this, presently brought him into his Fathers Cham∣ber, where after some few Questions were asked of the
Diseased Lord, he called for his Servitor Zani, whom he commanded to bring the Pot of Oyntment, that was for aswaging Pains. The Ape obeys, and (having brought it) was by his Master commanded to anoint and supple the Old Lord's Gouty Limbs, with that Anodine Unguent. He did so, and took great Pains there∣about, much to the Sick Lords content, tho but little Ease was inferred thereby; yet some he had, which gave hopes of more. After this Vnction was over, the Fox Ad∣ministred a Cordial, and not long after that a Iulep; then left his Patient, to ease and refresh himself, and his Partner Zani; for it was by this time almost Night. In the mean while Young Sir Firrapel had provided a sumptuous Supper for the Doctor and his Servitor; which being set before them, the Fox forgot not to tell the Young Lord, that his Servitor took no great pleasure in eating of Flesh; therefore he humbly re∣quested he might have a few Apples and Nuts for his Servant. This was presently performed, and Zani and his Master plentifully Supped that Night to both their Contents. After Supper they were conducted to Beds of Fresh Straw, where they lay down to Sleep. But a little after Midnight, when the stupefactive or benumming faculty of the Vnguent was wholly enerva∣ted, the Old Lord's pains returned with greater Violence than before. Vpon this, the Fox was hastily called and the Ape (to besure) could not lie long after. So they go to Work with their Vnguent as before, anointing his diseased Limbs therewith, until he found some respite from his extream Torture, then they desist. Not long after, the Fox perceiving the time now to favour his ma∣licious enterprise, tells Young Sir Firrapel, he could give his Father something to bring him to rest; but he feared he would Die in his Sleep, and therefore durst not do it. The Young Lord hearing this, said, Sleep
Sir, is that which my Father only wants, and could he Sleep well, I doubt not but he would Recover. 'Tis true, said the Fox, Sleep is the Arcanum of Medicine, and the only thing he wants: for could he once Sleep, tho but for some small time, I certainly know his Pains (through the Efficacy of my Medicines) will all sudden∣ly vanish; but should he Die in his Sleep, as I have just cause to fear he may, then I (being a Stranger) shall be exposed to the danger of the Law, through the malice of my Enemies. To this Young Firrapel said, Fear not that good Doctor, upon my Honour no Evil shall befall you, if my Father happen to die this time; only procure some rest I pray Sir. That I will my Lord, said the Fox, and immediately gave the Old Lord so large a Dose of Opium, that he soon after fell asleep and never waked more. But before he was fast asleep, Reynardine told his Son, that after his Father had slept four hours he must awaken him, not with any jogging, noise, or violence, but gently and sweetly with a Tabor and Pipe, at first plaid upon very softly, and afterwards louder and louder, till he should be fully and well awakned. This the Young Lord promised, and so dismissed the Fox with a great Reward, giving Za∣ni also a good Present: After Doctor Pedanto and his Attendant Zani were gone, the Old Libbard slept indeed, snoring so loud that the whole Family (his Son espe∣cially) heard it with such joy, that they all betook them∣selves to rest, which they also much wanted: by which means the Fox's Counsel was forgot, till he was stark dead, cold and stiff. Then they knew too well that the Tabor and Pipe could be of no use at all. So he was afterward honourably buried; and Doctor Pedanto's Reputation not in any wise called in Question: For Young Firrapel and all his Attendants secretly bla∣med themselves, not in the least suspecting the perfidi∣ous
Villany of Reynardine, who not long after was discovered, and then justly suspected Guilty of that Mur∣der. But in the mean while he dreamt of no such matter, until he came home. Then indeed, the first beginnings of his Downfall, were manifest, for he and his Ser∣vitor, or (more truly to speak) his Partner, were no sooner entred their Lodging, but Zani demands his third part of Reynardines Reward, received from the Lord Firrapel. To this the Fox answered, he was con∣tent, provided he would likewise depoūte his Prefent, that the whole may be equally divided; otherwise saith he; and equal Dividend cannot be made, The Ape well Thieves & Murtherers often differ a∣bout the Spoil they have taken; and by such strife discover themselves; as is evident by the fol∣lowing Dis∣course. knowing, if he did so, little more than what he already had, would fall to his share, refused; saying, my Pre∣sent was given, in recompence of the great Pains I took, therefore is properly my own, but the Reward you re∣ceived ought (according to our Contract) to be equally divided into three parts, one of which is mine, the o∣ther two are yours. I require nothing but my due: Nor I neither said the Fox. For if the Present be whol∣ly yours, the Reward also is wholly mine; both being received upon one and the same Account. More they would have said each to other, but were interrupted by Patients that came in. After that, tho they continued several Months together, they had often and frequent debates about the same thing; but neither Party would yield to make an equal Dividend. At length the differ∣ence grew so high, that the Ape left him in an Puff, in∣tending to set up for himself.
CHAP. IV. Zani the Ape attempts to practice Physick, discovers Dr. Pedanto to be Reynardine the Fox, who is suspect∣ed guilty of the Death of Old Sir Firrapel: the Fox Flies, but the Ape is Hanged. ZAni the Ape, having thus left Reynardine (other∣wise called Dr. Pedanto) resolved himself to turn Doctor also, and accordingly took a Lodging in a Narrow-lane, abutting upon the High-street of the Forrest, pretending (as his quondam Master did) to cure all Diseases whatsoever, internal or external, cu∣rable or incurable. For though he had far less skill and judgment than Reynardine, yet he had a greater Stock of Impudence, by which he presumed not only to perform as much as his Master could, but also much more; withal affirming that Dr. Pedanto had never been so Famous had it not been for him. I (quoth he) was the only instrument of his raising, I taught him to let Blood, and breath a Vein; I taught him Scarifica∣tion, and the use of Clysters and Blisters, it was I on∣ly that put him into the way of the Practice of Phy∣sick; yea, had it not been for me, he had been discovered and hanged long ago: for I made a Disguise for him; dyed his Coat black, and shaved off all the Hair of his Tail; and (besides all this) I humbled my self to be∣come his Servant: and am for all my kindness basely requited. Thus the Ape reasoned privately with him∣self, for openly he durst not say so much. In the mean time Reynardine (alias Dr. Pedanto) seeing the Ape had left him, called Gibbrel the Cat, to whom he thus spake: Gibbrel, you see how unworthily Zani the Ape hath left us: therefore if you will now with diligence
supply his place, I will instruct you as well as I can, teaching you all Requisits for the purpose. I well know, that Zani (envying our Welfare) hath taken all his Lan∣cets away with him; supposing (because Blood-letting is one of the main props of our Faculty) that without them we can do nothing. But I know otherwise, for his Lancets are made by Art, the works of men, and being Artificial, cannot be so truly Serviceable, as what are Natural. You your self have natural Lancets (your Clawes I mean) by which, with my Instructions, you may laudably open the Veins of the Noblest Beasts in the Forrest, and to their Content too: and then to be sure all other inferior Animals will gladly follow their Example: For 'tis a received Maxim of the Ancients, Regis ad Exemplum totus componitur Orbis. Such as the great ones are, such will the inferior sort be: Therefore Gibbrel, be diligently careful to keep your Clawes always keenly sharp, and sedulously endeavour to follow my Directions, and in recompence of your Eare and Pains I will double your Wages; and over and above (if you be very diligent) will not fail to speak to all my Patients, as often as they can, to supply you with Mice, which I know you Love above all the Dain∣ties in this World. The Cat hearing this (extreamly overjoyed) said, Honoured Master, you shall find me very industrious and careful to learn, and as ready to put in Practice what I have learned, as ever Zani was, or could be. We shall soon have occasion to prove that, (said Reynardine) do as you say, and I will not fail to give you what I promised. The Cat said he would, and accordingly performed his part, as well as was possi∣ble, tho nothing near so dexterously (because not so hand∣some handed) as Zani the Ape: yet he so far pleased the ge∣nerality
of the Fox's Patients, that he lost few of them by Zani's Practice. For the Ape had not the Art of Wheedling as the Fox, nor could he speak so well, nor was he able to answer those Crabbed Questions, that were often put to him, by such as Reynardine purpose∣ly sent; Craftily thereby intending to nip his Fame in the very Bud, as accordingly he did: in so much, that (by this means) there was a general Report spred a∣bout the Forrest, that the Ape was but an Ignorant Pretender, knowing nothing of Physick. Zani well knew that such an Opium was cast upon him; but from whence, or from whom, it should first take beginning, he could not imagine: only because he was conscious to himself, that he hated Reynardine, he concluded (as Truth was) that the Fox's Malice had procured to him that great Defamation. Therefore he resolved to pay him in his own Coin, and in order thereunto, very im∣prudently (tho wisely enough, as he thought) speaks first to one, then to another, afterward to many others: saying, I have great Reason to believe that Dr. Pedan∣to is no other then Reynardine the Fox (the Son of Reynard that Arch Traitor) and if occasion were, I question not but that I could prove the same. These or the like Words he often spake, hoping this Rumor would spread (as indeed it did) to the ruin of Reynar∣dines present Prosperity, and his own Life. For this report was quickly brought to the Court, and so to the Kings Ear; who was not a little startled thereat: yet, because he favoured the access of Strangers into his Kingdom, he would not send any one to apprehend Dr. Pedanto, before he had throughly examined Zani the Ape, who was therefore (by a Purfivant) immediate∣ly brought before the King. Of him the King asked why he had raised such a report of the Outlandish Doctor,
and what ground he had so to do; withal adding, that if he could not prove what he had asserted, he should be se∣verely punnished. The Ape extreamly surprized, knew not what to Answer, only said he spake as he thought, and meant no hurt by it. Now, said the King, mean no hurt! I have reason to judge that this Action of yours proceeded from a propensed Malice: for I am told you were his Servant, and because he turned you away for your Misbehaviour (as I suppose) you requite him with this Envious Apersion. You say you can prove this Doctor, your Quondam Master, to be Reynardine the Son of the Traitor Reynard: prove that, and you will satisfie me; otherwise by exemplary Punishment on you, I will teach all my Subjects, for the future, to abstain from abusing any Stranger, how mean soever. The Ape being greatly terrified, stood mute for a time; but at length said, Great Sir, I know him to be Reynar∣dine the Son of the Traitor Reynard: for I met him, when he came first (after his Excile) into this King∣dom, and at his request shaved off the Hair of his Tail; died his Coat black, and made him the Perruke he now wears. By reason of this Disguise he cannot be known to any but my self; who, though in shew his Servant, was his Partner in the Practice of Physick, which he rather learned of me, than I of him: This is the Truth Sir, The King hearing this, committed him to Prison, and sending for the Lord Firrapel, told him what the Ape said. Then Firrapel the Libbard suspected Reynardine to be (as indeed he was) the Author of his Fathers Death. Hereupon the Ape was Examined thereabout; but he knowing nothing, could answer no∣thing to the purpose: Therefore he was remanded to Prison, and the Lord Firrapel had Orders presently to apprehend Reynardine. This he would have done, but was prevented by some secret Intelligence that
Reynardine had: for before the Messenger he sent could could come near his Lodging, he was secretly Fled; having left his Perruke behind, which the Messenger took and brought to his Lord, who presented it the King, as a Testimony of the Truth of Zani's Assertion. Vpon this, the King commanded that Zani the Ape should be hanged for disguising and concealing a Traitor; and all the Fox's Goods seized on: This was speedily Exe∣cuted, and Gibbrel the Cat had also been in like dan∣ger, had not the Ape (at his Death) wholly cleared him. Thus ended the Fox's Doctorship. CHAP. XV. The Fox returning to the Dutchy of Manton, agrees with a Mountebank to cut off his Tail and Ears. Af∣terwards renews his Acquaintance with Grimlook the Mastiff, who brings him to his Cosin Brindle &c. THe Fox was now in great distress, fearing every moment to be taken, because he supposed there were lyers in wait for him. But no such thing was commanded by the King, he being satisfied with his Flight; concluding that thenceforth he would ne∣ver any more presume to enter into the Forest, or any other part of his Kingdom: Yet the King himself was greatly deceived herein, as the following History plain∣ly shews. for after Reynardine had absconded and se∣cretly hid himself for a time in Feraria, he (by Night journeys, because in the day time he durst not Travel, for fear of being surprized by Vorax the Wolf, whom he had so greatly injured) treading unknown Paths, and fetching a Compass a great way about, at length got into the Dutchy of Manton; where being arrived a little after Noon, it was his hap to espy a Mounte∣bank
upon a Stage, who pretenbed he could cut off dis∣eased Arms, Legs, or particular Ioynts affected, without Pain; and dexterously perform many other rare, strange, and unparallel'd Cures, Adding, that such as were wil∣ling to have any Member cut off, upon the Stage, he would do it for them, without expectation of Reward; provided they would publickly afterward (upon the same Stage) own so much to the Expectators. The Fox hearing this, thought it now time for him to consi∣der what he had best to do, to Disguise himself, without the help of any, that should be capable afterward to discover him. But to lose a Leg, or Arm, he was not willing: Therefore he determined to have his Tail and Ears cut off; which could do him little hurt, and would so remarkably disfigure him, as he could not possibly be known by any, as he then thought. This determi∣nation he pursued, and accordingly requested the Moun∣tebank to cut off his Tail, within one Inch of his Rump, and both his Ears as close to his Head, as could be done with safety; promising publickly to affirm, that he felt no Pain in the cutting, and afterward (as ma∣ny days as he pleased) to shew himself upon the Stage to all the Spectators, to procure Credit and Repute to his Worship. The Mountebank well pleased to hear this Proposal, sets about his work, and very spee∣dily cut off his Tail and Ears, according to his request. When this was done, and the Blood stanched, the Fox publickly declared (though therein he lyed egregiously) that he felt no pain at all. And after that, every day, till the remains of his Tail and Ears were perfectly well, he shewed himself upon the Stage, daily praising and highly applauding the Operators skill and dexterity. But so soon as he perceived his Wounds were throughly healed, he gave the Mountebank the slip, and hasted as fast as he could toward the Monastery; whereinto he
hoped now (assuming to himself a new Name) he should again be admitted, and a second time deceive that Fraternity. But his hopes failed him, for when The most subtile do sometimes extreamly o∣ver-shoot themselves in discover∣ing their Se∣crets; as here the Fox did. he was come within two Furlongs of the Monastery, he met Grimlook the Mastiff, who knew him not; to whom he thus spake: Sir Grimlook I am glad to see you, how is it that you are so far from the Monastery, it being now about Dinner time? Grimlook answer∣ed: Sir Stranger, I am not concerned for or with the Monastery, nor regard I their Meal-times, it is well if I can provide for my self. But Sir, said the Fox, I am very much mistaken, if you were not Porter to the Monastery, about two years since. 'Tis true, quoth Grimlook, I was so; but now a Cosin of mine named Brindle, enjoys that Office. I pray Friend, how came you to know me? I cannot remember that I ever before saw you; who are you, and what is your Name? My Name, quoth the Fox, is Reynardine, and I was a Member of that Fraternity, when you was Porter there: I well remember, said Grimlook, there was at that time one of that Name (who run away from the Monastery) but surely you cannot be the Per∣son, being not at all like him, if I forget not. I am that very Person, said the Fox, but being in great dan∣ger of Death, through the Malice of my Enemies, I was constrained thus to Disguise my self, that I might not be known. If you can be a means to help me again into the Monastery (by another Name, and as another Person) I will not fail to repay your kindness to the full. To this Grimlook answered, All I can do in this Case will be to bring you acquainted with my Cosin Brindle the Mastiff, now Porter of the house; he may do much for you; meet at the Monastery Gate too Mor∣row Morning by Day-break, and you shall speak with him. But I pray Sir, said the Fox, discover not
my true Name to any one. No, no, quoth Grimlook, I am not such a blab of my Tongue; but if my Cosin should ask your Name, what answer shall I make? Tell him, quoth Reynardine, my name is Shifter, That I will said the Mastiff, and so they parted for that time. On the morrow morning early the Fox fail∣ed not to meet Grimlook at the Monastery Gate. To him Grimlook the Mastiff (after mutual Salutations) said, now Sir Shifter, I will go in and speak with my Cosin first, and afterward bring him out to you; then you may speak your mind. So Grimlook went in (not through the Gate, but by a privy Passage, known only by his Cosin and himself, and acquainted his Cosin who was without telling all he had heard, and naming his first, and also his second Name, but with this charge, Be sure you mention not his Name Reynardine, but Shifter only. Brindle promised this, but intended nothing less: for he took this to be a design of Grim∣look's, to worm him out of his Office; well knowing how Reynardine was hated in the Monastery, and should he be a means to introduce him by a feigned Name; it would certainly occasion his own Exclusion. But he having never seen Reynardine, was very willing to go out to see him, that he might know him another time. Accordingly he did so, not forgetting to salute him by the name of Sir Shifter, withal telling the Fox he was throughly informed (by his Cosin Grimlook) of his parts and worth, and would therefore in his behalf intercede for him, with several of the Senior Monks of his Acquaintance, that he might be admit∣ted into the House as he desired, for his probations according to custom. The Fox humbly thanked him, asking him when he should wait upon him again. Brin∣dle Answered, a little before Supper in the Evening; then will be a very fit time. The Fox promised to come
at the time appointed, and Brindle took his leave of them both, and returning into the Monastery, plot∣ing and contriving how he might best enervate this sup∣posed Treachery of his Cosin Grimlook. The Fox in the mean while, hoping himself now sure of Admit∣tance by Brindles means, heartily thanks Grimlook, promising to Reward him highly, so soon as he should be in a Capacity to perform the same: Grimlook suppo∣sing he had done the Business to Reynardines content, took his leave and departed. Reynardine also hoping to Sup in the Monastery, took no further care, than for a good Breakfast, which having obtained, he gave himself to rest, till the Evening was come. But Brindle in the meam time was very diligent to acquaint first one, and then another, of his Cosin Grimlook's base intent (as he called it) to introduce Reynardine the Fox, by the name of Shifter; withal adding, that he believed it to be no other then a design of his Cosin's, pur∣posely to make him odious in the Monastery, that he himself might be admitted again into his Office. They hearing this, told the Prior of it, who commanded that such as formerly knew Reynardine, should attend in the Evening, when he came, and give him Notice. They did so, and when Reynardine came in the Even∣ing, they knew him not; but after they understood, by Brindle's Information, how (by his own Confession to Grimlook) he had maimed himself, and desired to be admitted as another Person, by a feigned Name, they called him Villain, and drove him away from the Gate, in presence of the Prior himself, who commanded the same. Then did Brindle, who loved not his Cosin Grim∣look, shew the Prior that privy Passage (made by his Cosin and himself) through which Grimlook was wont Night and Morning to enter the Monastery; affirming (tho falsely) that Grimlook made it by force, which he
might well do, being much Stronger than himself, as he said. The Prior hearing this (after he had severely checked Brindle for concealing this Mischief so long) ordered that privy Passage to be presently stopped, and Grimlook the Mastiff to be never more admitted with∣in the Monastery, under any pretence whatsoever. This Recompence he had for endeavouring to assist the Fox. CHAP. XVI. The Fox returns again to the Forrest in Feraria, where he (as a Stranger) is entertained in the Lord Sly∣look's Service, by the name of Crabron: he gains the Love of his Lord, &c. THe Fox extreamly disturbed at his so shameful re∣pulse, knew not what to do; but instead of suspecting Grimlook, he extreamly doubted his present Disguise was not sufficient. For he well knew Grimlook to be a greedy, covetous and gluttenous Beast; therefore could not think he would ever disco∣ver him, but rather Act clean contrary. Notwith∣standing all this, he travelled that Night as far from the Monastery as he could, to avoid further danger, which he shrewdly suspected. On the Morrow, the Sun shining clear, at every Pond or clear standing Wa∣ter he came to, he viewed himself by the Suns Reflecti∣on, and finding his Disguise very sufficient as he thought, he blamed the Malice of Fortune only; impu∣ting his late disappointment solely to her Envy, and to no other Cause. Therefore he resolved to leave that Countrey, hoping she would prove more propiti∣ously favourable to him elsewhere. In pursuance of this Resolution, he Travelled hard that day, till he was got
a pretty way into the Kingdom of Zalap. But being there, he found less safety than before, for all the Hunting-Dogs that saw him, wondring at the strangeness of his Form, were the more eager to pursue him; and had undoubtedly seized him, had he not used the Policy of speedy retiring into some of those secret recesses Brocket the Badger shewed him. Wherefore perceiving the great danger he lived in, he resolved whatsoever the Success should be, once again to adventure into his own Countrey. Accordingly he did so, and when he first entered there, it was his good Fortune to meet with Brocket the Badger, who (not knowing him) enqui∣red his Countrey and Parentage: but after he under∣stood who he was, he was more than ordinarily careful to preserve his Friend Reynardine from all dangers whatsoever; and accordingly told him, he must not too rashly adventure to Discover himself; telling him if he intended to keep out of Harms way, he must only say he was a Stranger, and no more. Reynardine hearing this, took his Counsel, and (whensoever asked) said he was a Stranger, but of what Countrey none could learn, for he would not tell them: resolving never to discover himself to any. For he now found by Expe∣rience, that his Disguise was sufficient, and having told his Name and Parentage to none, except his Friend Brocket, he thought all was well: but he was great∣ly mistaken; for Gibbrel the Cat lying behind an Hedge, over-heard all the Discourse between Brocket and Rey∣nardine, of whom he also had a full view. However Gibbrel at that time took little Notice of it (because he could not believe his own Eyes) until afterward, as in the following Chapters we intend to shew. Broc∣ket the Badger walking with Reynardine on-ward of his way toward the Forrest, asked him what Course of Life he intended to lead for the future? To this the Fox An∣Answered
Truly Cosin I am not yet fully resolved what to do. If I should again presume to Practice Physick, I fear that will not be safe. You must by no means (Cosin) entertain any thoughts of re-assuming that Pro∣fession, said the Badger; but rather pretend to be whol∣ly Ignorant of every Science, and present your self on∣ly as a Servant, not otherwise. So doing you will un∣doubtedly be safe, and may afterward rise to good For∣tune, as many others have done; especially if you can get into the Service of some Eminent Lord. The Fox hearing this, resolved to follow that Course of Life; and therefore gave Brocket thanks for his good advice. By this time they were got within Sight of the Forrest, then the Badger admonished the Fox further thus: Co∣sin Reynardine, I have but two things more to Advise you of, and then I shall leave you; for 'tis high time. The first is, that if ever you meet me in any part of the Forrest, you take no more notice of me, than of a Stran∣ger you never saw before: I will do the like by you. If this Rule be exactly observed by us, I shall always be in a Capacity to serve you in a time of need, otherwise can∣not. The second thing is, that you invent and assume to your self a new Name (as formerly you did) not before heard of or known in the Forrest; and above all, be sure ne∣ver to mention your Fathers Name, your Brothers Name, or your own, whatsoever you shall hear related of them, or of your self by any one, that either knew, or hath heard of your Father, or any of your Family. Thus do∣ing, Cosin, I doubt not but you may live safe and free from danger, and in time mend your Condition very much: for I know you are both witty and ingenious. Having said this, the Badger took his leave, shook hands with the Fox, and so left him. The Fox (returning like Salu∣tations, with thanks) went on his way toward the For∣rest, resolving to assume the Name Crabron: there∣fore
henceforth we shall call him Crabron the Fox. After some few hours Travel, he entered the Forrest a little before Sun-set. Here Crabron the Fox was much won∣dred at, by reason of the strangeness of his Form. Some of the Beasts of the Forrest, whom the Fox well knew to have been his quondam Patients, demanded his Name and Countrey. His Name (he told them) was Crabron, but his Countrey was so far off, that should he tell it them, they would be never the better, nor could they come to that Countrey in less than a year and a halfs Travel. After this manner he Answered all, not only that Night, but ever afterward. The next Morning, purposing in his heart the death of the Lord Sly-look the Panther, he went directly to his Palace, as if he had come thither by chance, and not purposely. When there, he knocked, and asked to speak with his Honour the Lord Sly-look. The Porter answered he was not yet stirring, but (being himself taken with the strange∣ness of his Shape and Form) he would acquaint his Simple Per∣sons give sim∣ple Iudgment what they see, or hear. Lord, that an Outlandish Beast was there to speak with him. Accordingly the Porter went to his Lord, and told him, that at the Gate was a very strange Outlan∣dish Beast (he supposed some Forrain Ambassador) that desired to speak with him. The Old Lord (who him∣self also loved Novelties) hearing this, commanded he should be brought in. When Crabron the Fox came into the Lord Sly-look's Chamber, he bowed to him with great Reverence, and spake as follows: My Lord, After my Travel, long and tedious (for I was above a year and a half in my Iourney, from my Native Coun∣trey to this place) I am now come into this happy King∣dom, the fame of which was often, by my quondam Tutor, related to me in my Infancy. This my Tutor was Native of this Land, as my Parents frequently
told me, who could never blieve it was so vastly distant from ours, as I now by proper Experience find it is. Of him I learned your Language, whilst very Young. This is the true Reason I pronounce it so distinctly, without hesi∣tation or other deficiency, incident to Forrainers learn∣ing any strange Speech. My Tutor and Parents dying, I was left sole Possessor of much Wealth, which I con∣verted into Iewels of great Price, easily portable; and then with a Servant attending me, resolved to visit this famous Kingdom: with the sight of which my Eyes are now sufficiently blessed. But, that which should here have made me an happy & most welcome Guest (my great Treasure I mean) was barbarously taken from me by Thieves, and my Servant (because he stoutly Fought to defend both me & mine) cruelly murthered. Thus was I, most Noble Lord, through over much Curiosity, reduced to extream Necessity: Therefore am now hi∣ther come humbly to pray the protection of so excellent a Patron, as your Lordship, whose Servitor I would gladly be, in any Servile Office how mean soever; and in order hereunto, do humbly prostrate my self at your Honour's feet, wishing continual Prosperity and a Long-life to your Lordship. The Panther (otherwise called Lord Sly-look) hearing this supposed Stranger speak so well, and won∣dring at his uncouth and strange Shape, answered him thus: Our most Heroick King, and we his Servants (taught by his Example) have always shewed our selves Courteous to Strangers; therefore I will in no wise deny your Request: but am very sorry that at this time I cannot prefer you according to your Education and Worth; hereafter I may. In the mean while I do admit you to serve at large in my House, till some further oc∣casion of Advanceing you, shall present it self; which I will not fail to take, if I see you worthy and deserving,
as (if you answer your own Education, and my present Thoughts) I doubt not but I shall. The Fox very submis∣sively bowing himself to the Panther, said, Honoura∣ble Lord, I am not ambitious of Greatness, I only de∣fire a mean Living under so worthy a Patriot as your Lordship; of whose good Nature and Vertue I have heard so much (in this little time I have been in these Parts) that to be but a Skullion in your Kitchin, I shall account a mighty favour. The Panther hearing this, said, What is thy Name? My Name quoth the Fox, is Crabron, which is the Ancient Name of our Family. All our Ancestors were so called, with little or no alte∣ration, for Five hundred years past, as was apparent by very Ancient Deeds my Father had in his Custody at the hour of his Death; which Deeds I sold to pur∣chase those Iewels before-mentioned. You have said e∣nough, said the Lord Sly-look, abide here, and be ready al∣ways to perform what I shall command, and it will suf∣fice. The Kitchin is too mean a place for you, you shall have an Office fit for you, so soon as it falls. So the Fox accordingly abode in the Lord Sly-looks house, wherein he shewed himself so obsequious to his Lord, and so respectful to all his fellow Servants, that he not only obtained the Love of his Lord, but of his whole Family also.
CHAP. XVII. Crabron the Fox, being preferred to wait on his Lord in his Chamber, most Traitorously Poysons him: afterward so hippocritically laments his Death, that the King makes him one of his Purveyors. IN this good favour and liking of the Panther, the Fox lived for three or four Months: then it happened that his Lords Chief Servitor, who waited on him in his Chamber, and went always abroad with him, was preferred to serve the King himself. This opportuni∣ty the Lord Sly-look the Panther, according to his pro∣mise before made to Crabron the Fox, failed not to take for the promotion of his supposed Outlandish Servitor. Therefore calling the Fox to him, he thus spake, Crabron, I now purpose, as I before promised, to advance you to the Office of my Chief Servant, who this day leaves his Place for a more honourable Office at Court. I expect you will prove as faithful & diligent as he was; if so, you will find me hereafter ready to prefer you, as I have done him. The Fox hearing this, said, Honour∣able Lord, you shall never, I hope, have occasion to think you immense favours conferred on me ill bestow∣ed. I have the same hope, said the Panther, therefore follow me. Accordingly the Fox followed his Lord to Court that very day; where he was gazed on by all, but known by none. Then in the Evening he waited on him in his Chamber, lying there all Night, on a Bed of Straw purposely made for that purpose. In this Of∣fice he pleased his Lord extreamly, so that he had thoughts of preferring him (by the Kings favour) to some pub∣lick profitable Imployment: and this he had done, had he not been prevented by Sickness. For not long after
he thought of the Fox's Advancement, he contracted to himself a violent Surfeit by over-much eating at a Feast. Vpon which Dr. Asino the Ass was sent for; who first of all prescribed a Vomitory Potion, then a Purge, and lastly ordered a Vein to be opened, and a large quanti∣ty of Blood drawn out: All which was done, but to no purpose. For, tho his Body was very much weakened by those Evacuations, yet the load and burthen at his Stomach lay still unremoved. Hereupon this Ass Doctor, being at a Non-plus, fancied a Diet-drink, compounded of many and various Herbs might do the work: for he thus thought with himself, perhaps some one or more of the Ingredients will do the feat. There∣fore Ignorant Persons are always most Confident. he upon this conceit, presently told the Lord Sly∣look, that he had now thought of a Medicine that would certainly cure him. This sounded well in the sick Pan∣thers ear; but fearing to take any more Purgers or Vo∣mits, he spake to the Ass thus: Dr. Asino, in what Form will you give me this Medicine? If it Purges, or Vomits, 'twill certainly Kill me. O no, my Lord, quoth the Ass, I will not give you any thing to Purge or Vomit, but a pleasing Diet-drink, which shall remove the Load at your Stomach, and cure your Lordship with ease, speed and safety. I pray thee (said the Panther) make haste and get it ready, for I am Heart-sick; how is it you thought not of this Medicine no sooner? O my Lord, said the Ass, had I given this Medicine before those necessary Evacuations you have undergone, I should have Acted like an Ass indeed, and done your Lordship more hurt than good. Say no more, quoth the Panther, but get it me with speed. So away went the Ass into the Sick Lords Garden, and there gathered (or rather caused Crabron the Fox to gather) of almost every Herb, there growing one handful; all which he commanded the Fox to infute in two Gallons of Spring Water, and
set the infusion in the Sun all that day. The Fox did so, and in the mean while the Ass went his way, pro∣mising to return early the next Morning, to prescribe the Dose, that should be given to his Lord. When the Ass was gone, the Fox craves leave of his Lord, to have the Charge of that Diet-drink, and that none o∣ther of his Lords Servitors, or any other Person, might touch it, or come near the place where it was: for said he, your Lordships Life is dearer to me than my own, Its dange∣rous trusting to the over Officiousness of Strangers. and I am shrewdly suspicious least one or other, either through Ignorance or Malice, should add to, or dimi∣nish ought of the Ingredients, so well ordered by the Do∣ctor and by that means some irreparable Damage to your Lordship follow. Besides my Lord, said he, in the heat of the day, Spiders, or other venomous Incects, may creep into the Diet-drink, and being there drowned, infect the same with their Venome; and so your Lord∣ship shall most unhappily take Poyson instead of a Re∣medy. You speak well, said the Panther, it shall be as you desire, I leave the ordering of this Diet-drink whol∣ly to your Care; which, so soon as I can recover Health; I will largely Recompence. Having said this, he pre∣sently commanded that none of his Servants should med∣dle with, or come near that Infusion, except Crabron only. The Fox having gained this point, resolves now (seeing so fair an Occasion offer it self) no longer to de∣fer the Execution of his malicious intent. Therefore, because he well observed the Ass purposely to omit ga∣thering of Henbane, Wolfsbane, and other Poysonous Herbs, growing in several parts of the same Garden, knowing that Diet-drink would do his Lord little hurt, if it did him no good; he resolved to make an Addition, as would render the Infusion Poysonous enough to di∣spatch him out of the way quickly. Accordingly, when ight came (for his pretended Care was such, that he
watched all Night) he took fix great Loads, and crush∣ing out all their Moisture, put that into the Infusion-and (to prevent the Discovery) buried their empty Ear, cases in the Earth that Night. When Morning came, This shews the great Im∣prudence of those Physici∣ans who pre∣pare not their own Medi∣cines, or trust to the Prepa∣rations of o∣thers, of whose Fide∣lity they ne∣vr had Ex∣perience. the Ass Doctor failed not to come according to promise, to prescribe the Dose, which after so much of the Clear Liquor was poured from the Herbs) he ordered should be thirty Ounces, or thereabout. This deadly Dose, the Ass supposing no fraud in Crabron the Fox, admi∣nistred to his Lord, who greedily swallowed all, to the great content of Dr. Asino, who promised perfect Reco∣very after the taking it three or four times at farthest. The Ass was not gone far from the Gate, before the Panther's Stomach was extreamly Pained and he began to swell all over, but at length Vomiting extreamly his Swelling abated somewhat. Nevertheless, by reason of his Age, and the great weakness of his Body, his Strength being before too much exhausted by the former Evacua∣tions, the quick spreading Venome (maugre all the Ass could do) so impaired his Vitals, that in a few hours after, he miserably died. When dead, the Fox in the presence of many, fetched a deep, but feigned Sigh, and said, O my Dear Lord, I wish to our great Goddess The too common pra∣ctice of Mur∣derers. Fortune I had died for you. But why do I speak to the Dead, who cannot now reap any benefit by my fruitless wishes! To you, that are here alive and present with my Dead Lord: I thus say, Had not I my self, by this Reverend Doctors order, made this his last Dose, which I believe was as well compounded, as Galn and Hipocrates (had they both been alive at this time, and here present) could have composed the same; and had I not also, all yesterday, and all the last night, with∣out Sleeping one wink, carefully watched that compo∣sition I should have (so unfeignedly did I love my Lord) been too apt to entertain a Iealousie, that
some false play had been played, by some malicious and wicked Enemy of his: but I am now throughly satisfi∣ed, that no such thing was. All that can be said is this; My Lords Body was too weak to sustain the Operation of so powerful a Remedy; otherwise he had undoubted∣ly been in a way of Recovery by this time. The Ass hearing the Fox thus speak, was glad at his heart; and then taking Courage: said, Sirs I am throughly per∣swaded in my mind, that my Lord's time was fully come. Against death there is no Antidote. Sir Crabron hath The Old Excuse of Ig∣norant Phy∣sicians. Acted the part of a true and faithful Servant, and I have done as becomes a just and honest Physician. My Lord is indeed dead, yet I am sure he died according to Art. The By-standers, being the Deceased Lord's Kindred and Servants, who all hoped to be Profited by his Death (more or less) said, they believed no less, and it would be great wickedness in any to asperse ei∣ther of them upon that Account. The Ass well satis∣fied in what he heard, took his leave of them, and went home. The Fox would not stir from the Dead Body, but lay in a Melancholy posture by it, as if he had been a true Mourner indeed, tho all was but Hypocricy. Yet because he had been his Lord's Chief Servitor, his ad∣vice was taken about the Funeral, which was solemniz∣ed two days after, with suitable Pomp. When the Corps was buried, Crabron the Fox (who was wont every Morning after his Lord's death, to rub his Eyes with an Onion) would lie uyon the Grave, refusing to eat or drink all the day; and if he had occasion to Piss or ease his Belly, he would be sure to go a good distance from the Grave to do it. This Course he held day by day, for more than twenty days after his Lords Inter∣ment. Hypocrites and Parasi∣ties often pro∣sper the best. During which time, most of the Beasts of the For∣rest came to see him; all admiring his great Love and Af∣fection to his Deceased Lord. The King himself hear∣ing
of this, was wondrous desirous to have such a Ser∣vant, therefore the two and twentieth day after the Panther's Burial, he sent for him; and then greatly commending his (supposed true) Fidelity to his Lord, made him one of his Purveyors. In which Office he behaved himself very well, to the great content of the King. CHAP. XVIII. Crabron the Fox, now one of the Purveyors to the King, is first visited by Gibbrel the Cat, whom he draws into a Snare and kills, least he should Discover him. Afterward Grimlock the Mastiff is, for the same Cause, by him betrayed to Death. BVt before he had been full two Months in this Of∣fice, Gibbrel the Cat, hearing his Name, re∣membred the Discourse he heard between him and Brocket the Badger; and because he then saw him, he doubted not, but (seeing him once again) he should know him; and then, his being acquainted with the Fox, he judged would not a little conduce to his own benefit. Therefore he resolved to go to him, and accordingly did, very early one Morning, and espying the Fox at his Lodgig door, he knew him to be the same Person he saw discoursing with Brocket the Badger; and for that Cause very confidently saluted him thus: Sir Crabron, your Qundam Servitor Gibbrel wisheth you long to hold and possess the Wealth and Prosperity you now enjoy. To which the Fox replied, Friend I am a Stranger in this Kingdom, wherein I have Served, but never kept Servant. Sir said the Cat, I well remember when you and Sir Brocket were talking together, I (lying behind an hedge) heard you discover your self to him, and he
alo advising you not to tell your Name to any one, but say you were a Stranger, and no more. This you know to be true Sir, and I am very sure you are the Lord Rey∣ards Son, and my Old Master Dr. Pedanto. The Fox hearing ths, and well knowing that what the Cat said was true, suddenly gave him his hand, saying, Cosin Gibbrel, I perceive you know me. If you can but keep your Tongue between your Teeth, and will not discover me to any one, you shall find me a true and con∣stant Friend; but should you at any time disclose who I am, you will utterly ruin both me and your self. I'll warrant you Sir Crabron, said the Cat, no one in the whole Kingdom shall ever know who you are for me. Well then, quoth the Fox, come to me too Morrow about Noon, and I will provide you a good Dinner; this day I cannot, because it is my day to look after the Kings Provision. The Cat hearing this, very joyfully took his leave, and went his way. The next day about Noon, he failed not to visit the Fox again, who entertained him very lovingly: said, Cosin Gibbrel, I spake to you ye∣sterday about keeping Silence; remember what befel to Zani the Ape for being too Lavish of his Tongue. I hope you will be wiser than he proved: yet there is ve∣ry great difference between him and you. What he dd was in spight to me, if you betray me, your own folly (not spight) will ruin you. Having said this, he Feast∣ed him plentifully, and then appointed him to come two days after. This Course of Feasting the Cat once in two or three days, the Fox continued so long, till he grew weary of his Guest, whom he always feared would Discover him; therefore to put an end to this fear, he contrived his Ruin in the following manner. The Fox well knowing the Cat's extream fancy for Mice, a∣bove all other Meat in the World, told him that hither∣to he had not entertained him so well, as he would have
done because he wanted opportunity: but now he was in a capacity to make him a Feast indeed. The Cat hearing this, said to the Fox, Sir Crabron, what sort of Meat do you intend to have? Why Cosin, quoth the Fox, I remember when you Served me. I heard you say you loved Mice better than all other Dainties whatsoever: therefore I resolve to make you a Feast of that sort of Meat only. But I cannot do this at my own House, because (being a Publick Officer) I want that privacy, which will be necessary for us both: For I resolve to be merry with you Cosin. With all my heart Sir, said the Cat. But when shall this Merry-meeting be? To this the Fox replied, The next day after too Morrow, sooner I shall not have leisure. But I forgot to ask you one thing: Cosin had you rather have your Mice living and kill them your self, or ready killed and it to be eaten? If the place (said the Cat) where they are, be secured so as they cannot escape, I love to kill them my self: for I delight very much in that sport; to me it is the most pleasant paftime in the world. I also, quoth the Fox, would gladly see your nimbleness and dexteri∣ty in that Exercise; for I remember well, while my Fa∣ther lived, he caused your Vnkle Tybert one day to shew him how he hunted and caught Mice: Tybert did so (my Brother and I standing by) and in a very short space caught three or four But the wily craft, subtilty and diligence he used, the admirable nimbleness and agility he shewed, was wonderful to behold: so pleasing a sight in all my life before or since, I never saw. To this Girel ye Cat said, I doubt not Sir Crabron, but you will find me every way as well accomplished to perform that Exer∣cise, as my Vnkle Tybert was. I verily believe it, said the Fox, therefore fail not to come to me at the time a∣pointed, an hour before Noon, because we must go out of the Forrest, at least Ten Furlongs, to the place pro∣vided for your Entertainment. Vpon this, the Cat took
his leave and departed. But when the third day was come, at the hour appointed he failed not to wait upon the Fox, who (after a little stay) conducted him to his place of Entertainment, as he called it. When they came near it, the Cat espied three Mice lying dead on ye ground, whch the Fox seemed not to see, tho he had purposely laid them there as a Bait that very Morning. Vpon the sight of these, Gibbrel the Cat said, Sir Crabron, I sup∣pose we are near the place, for here are three Mice dead. True, said the the Fox, I am apt to think these were accidently killed by my Servants, whom I ordered to stock a close Cave, we are almost come to) with a good Number of them. They tell me, they have shut up for∣ty living Mice there; which I suppose will be more by far, than you can eat at one time, and occasion sport enough. Yes, yes, Sir, said Gibbrel, if half of them es∣cape It is a point of great Im∣prudence to leave a Cer∣tainty for an Uncertainty. there will be sport enough, and more than I can eat said the Cat. By this time they were come to the Cave (for the Cat despised the former dead Mice, in hopes of others of his own killing) in the mouth of which the Fox had craftily laid a Snare; into which the Cat over eagerly thrusting himself, was so intangled thereby, that he could in no wise dis-intangle himself. Then crying to the Fox for help, he met his Death: for Crabron had most perfidiously provided for this before, having at the Caves mouth laid a great heap of small Stones & Dust, which with his feet he failed not to spurn down upon him, so long as until he Buried both him and the Snare, with which he was caught. Having done this, he stopped up the Caves mouth very firmly, and went his way rejoyce∣ing that he hath rid himself of so dangerous and trouble∣some Acquaintance. But this joy of his lasted not long: for that very day (tho the Fox knew it not) Grimlok the Mastiff was come into the Forrest, hoping to live better there, than he had done since his Exclusion out of
the Monastery. After he had stayed ten days in the For∣rest, he heard talk of an Outlandish Beast, without Tail or Ears (as they said) that came to great Prefer∣ment under the Lord Sly-look, and since his Death was made one of the Kings Purveyors. The Mastiff hearing this, concluded (as truth was) that this was Reynar∣dine the Fox, whom he knew both before and since his Ears were cut; therefore he enquired where he dwelt, and being directed to his House, went to him early in the Morning, as he was advised; and having learned his last assumed Name, saluted him by that, in these or the like Words. Sir Crabron, I joy to see you in so happy a Condition, and my joy is the greater, when I call to mind our former Friendship. Necessity brought me in∣to this famous Countrey, where I had hopes to live bet∣ter than before; but being a Stranger, I see little like∣lyhood thereof, unless assisted by your Worships bounty. The Fox at first fight of Grimlook was extreamly trou∣bled, but knowing his violent and furious Nature; he durst not shew him any Discountenance, least it should turn to his own Ruin. Therefore (tho not without Qui nescit dissiulare nescit vivere, an old and true Maxim; especially when it re∣lates to vici∣ous Livers, who keep up their Repute by Dissimula∣tion. great dissimulation) he very couteously embraced him, and said: Sir Grimlook, you are a very welcome Guest to me at this time, I being now in a Capacity to requite you for all your kindness. I pray come in, and partake of such Provisions as I have. Then the Mastiff entred the Fox's Lodging, where he had a very good Breakfast. After they had done eating, the Fox told him, that as soon as he could have an Opportunity, he would speak to the King, who was a great Lover of Strangers, to pre∣fer him to some profitable Imployment; if he would be sure not to discover him to any one in the mean while. For, said he, there are none in this Kingdom (tho it be my Native Countrey) that know me. To this the Mastiff Answered, Sir Crabron, you shall never find
me a blab of my Tongue, but as secret as your own Heart. Be but my Friend Sir, and I'll warrant you I shall never be your Enemy. Your Friend I will be as long as I have breath, said the Fox; But I pray, good Sir Grimlook come hither to Dinner too Morrow at Noon, I shall have but ordinary cheer then; yet in a day or two, I hope to make you a Feast to your content. I humbly thank your Worship, said the Mastiff, I will wait on you too Morrow without fail. Having said this, he went his way. The Fox from that hour consulting his Death, resolved to Feast him as he hath done Gib∣brel Policy exceeds Strength. the Cat; but because he feared his huge bulk, great strength, and natural fierceness, he concluded, that no Snare he could contrive or make, would be sufficient to hold him. Therefore he thought of another way to Mur∣der him, which was as follows. He well knew, in a little Grove, not above one Furlong distant from the Forrest, was a very deep Well (formerly made by Men) the mouth of which he himself covered with Reeds, Boughs, Leaves, and earth thinly spread over all so, that it seemed a pretty even Plat of solid Ground. Vpon this false covering of the Wells-Mouth (which the Fox well knew to be too weak to hold the weight of Grim∣look's Body) the third day in the Morning, an hour be∣fore the time he expected his coming, he laid several Marrow-bones round about the Covering, and in the ve∣ry midst one large Bone with much meat on it, which he knew the Mastiff would chiesly covet: Having done this, he hastens home, immediately after he was come Banquets are too often used, as ne∣cessary Pro∣dromes to Treason and Murder. home, the Mastiff came, whom he saluted thus: Sir Grimlook, I have this day provided a Banquet for you; such as I am sure you will be well content with; for the Banquet will consist chiefly of Marrow bones, which I have heard you often say are the most pleasant of all Meats. Besides you have told me, that you took great
pleasure in picking of Bones: therefore I caused my Servants to lay no Bones there where you are to dine, but such as had good store of Meat on them. The place where this Banquet is, stands not above one Furlong di∣stant from the South-side of the Forrest; I hope Sir, you will not think much to go so far. So far! quoth the Mastiff, I hope your Worship takes me not for a Lazy Beast. I'll assure you Sir Crabron, whatever o∣thers think of me, I never refused to take pains for my Living; and can you now think I will (through Idle∣ness) refuse so fair an offer? Nay, Sir Grimlook, said the Fox, I do not in the least question your Diligence and Care to live; for I know that is very great. I only spake so, because I could not with Conveniency prepare this Banquet at home. But, that I may detain you no longer, I pray let us go. The Fox having said this, went out of doors, and the Mastiff followed him. When they came into the Grove, and were very near this Trea∣cherous Banquet, the Fox (that he might do his business to purpose) spake to the Mastiff thus: Sir Grimlook, here is the Banquet I promised you; before you have done eating, my Servants will bring Wine enough and then we will be mery together. But suppose here were a great Company of your kindred or others, and a Re∣ward should be promised to him that won the middlemost Bone from all the rest, how would you go to work to win that? Shew me that Sir Grimlook and you will please me extreamly. That I will Sir presently, said the Mastiff, and having said this, immediately leaps to catch at the middle most Bone, which he no sooner touch∣ed but that and all the other, together with himself, fell down to the bottom of the Well, where he was very quickly sted with the Mud and Water, to the great pleasure and content of the Fo.
CHAP. XIX. Brindle the Mastiff enters the Forrest, and seeing Cra∣bron, knows him to be Reynardine, whom he at length accuseth before the King; but through his own indis∣cretion is committed to Prison, and there Poy∣soned by the Fox. WHo now thought all was well, and promised to himself Halcion days, and a continued se∣ries of Tranquility and Peace during Life. For now said he (to himself) it is no longer in the power of Fortune to expose me to Misery, by the Malice of my Adversaries. This hath certainly happened to me, through my great Willingness to perform my Fathers Will and Command. For those two perfidious Lords, Evil men frequently paliate their Evil Deeds, with pre∣tence of Ju∣stice, and Self-preser∣vation. that put a stop to the Progress of his growing Great∣ness, and were the sole and only occasion of his Death, and of mine and my Brothers Ruin, died by my hand; not so soon as they deserved, but so soon as 'twas pos∣sible for me to effect the same. As for these too incon∣siderable Gluttonous Beasts, by my Contrivance also done to Death; neither of them died for any ill will I bore them, but for the preservation of my own Life, which Nature teacheth all Creatures to endeavour. More he would have said, but was interrupted, by the sight of Brindle the Mastiff, who (being come into the For∣rest but the day before) seeing him, knew him, and there∣fore saluted him thus: Worthy Sir Sbister, I am glad See the 15th Chapter. to see you in this place, where I know no body else. No nor me neither, said the Fox, for I am not the Per∣son you take me to be, nor do I know any of that Name. I am sure Sir, quoth Brindle, if my Eyes deceive me
not, if pour Name be not Shifter (as in truth I think it is not) your Name is Reynardine. No nor that nei∣ther, said the Fox; for my true Name (if you would needs know it) is Crabron. Hereupon Brindle the Mastiff thinking he was mistaken, went his way, and said no more. The Fox glad at his heart he had so de∣luded him, went home very well pleased. Yet after he had considered the matter, he was jealous that Grimlook and he had conversed together, since Brindle came into the Forrest: but this his jealousie soon ended, after he understood that he had indeed enquired for Grimlook, but never saw him. In the mean while Brindle the Mastiff lived poorly in the Forrest, and for many days after, never so much as thought af Crabron the For. But one day being in Company of others, whilst he pas∣sed by, he then asked them who he was, and they answer∣ed, it was Sir Crabron one of ye King's Chief Purveyors. To this Brindle (smiling) said, Sirs surely this is Reynar∣dine the Fox, or else I am much mistaken. They tell him Reynardine was a Traitor, Native of that Countrey; but Crabron was a Stranger; born in the furthest part of the World, and highly in the Kings favour; there∣fore he must have a care what he said. This Company Brindle left, and a little after falls into the Company of Ferox the Tyger, who was very Aged, but extreamly ambitious; to him he tells his tale, what he thought of Crabron the Purveyor, and gives his reason for it. This news pleased the Tyger not a little, who at that time fancied to himself no less than a Lord-ship, for re∣vealing to the King so important a Secret; therefore he promised to go with Brindle the Mastiff the next day to Court and help him to the Speech of the King. So they parted for that time. But, after the Old Tyger had well considered the danger of accusing one of the Kings Ser∣vitors, upon the bare Say So of a Stranger, he resolved
not to meddle any further in that matter. Nevertheless the next Morning Brindle came to him, expecting he would go with him to Court, as he had promised: but the yger put him off, saying he was not then at leisure, but would go with him after Noon. When Afternon came, he feigned himself somewhat indisposed, telling the Mastiff if he came about Sun-set he would (sick or well) go with him. But coming then, the Tyger told him the matter was difficult, and he would not meddle with it. Hereupon Brindle was in a great rage, and cal∣ling the Tyger Coward, threw down his Glove and chal∣lenged him. Ferox the Tyger, who (tho Old) was eve∣ry way as haughty as the Mastiff was Cholerick, ac∣cepted the Challenge, and appointed a certain hour the next Morning, in a Meadow at the East-end of the For∣rest. But the next day being an High Festival, the King (who had notice of this intended Duel) early in the Morning sent for them both. For he feared some great Vproar would happen, on such a day, by reason of that Duel. When they came before the King, he first enqui∣red the Cause of their Difference; which, when he well understood, he sent a Messenger for Crabron his Purvey∣or: but afterward, he extreamly blamed the Tygers Bashness to accept of a Challenge from a Stranger. But when the Fox was come, he asked Brindle, what ground he had to think, or imagine, his Purveyor Cra∣bron to be Reynardine the Fox. Vpon this the Mastiff said, If it be your Majesties pleasure to hear me, I will declare the Truth. Speak on said the King, you shall be heard: Then Brindle the Mastiff spake as follows. About a year since, Reynardine the Fox came to our Monastery of Manton, of which I then understood he had formerly been a Member, and I (when he came that second time▪ was Porter of the same Monastery: one Grimlook a Mastiff was my Predecessor in the same Of∣fice,
(I hear) is at this time, or hath very lately been in the Forrest. He can witness to the Truth of all I shall say. He it was that brought Reynardine to me, which Name he told me was his true Name, but he de∣sired to be called by the Name of Shifter; having (as Grimlook told me) for several Misdemeonors been ex∣pelled the Monastery. But afterward, that he might be again admitted (for which purpose I was made use of as an Instrument) he feigned himself to be an other Person, and assumed to himself the Name of Shifter: and to the end he might not be known there as Grimlook told me) he caused his Tail and Ears to be cut off, be∣fore I saw him. This is the very Truth, Great Sir. Then the King thus spake to the Fox, Crabron, here is one tells me a strange Tale of you, I wish it be not true. To this the Fox, after low Obeysance to the King said, If your Majesty gives Credit to the Words of this Idle Vagabond, who all the ways he can shuns Labour, and because he hates Pains-taking, makes it his business to forge Lies, and invent false Accusations, that he may rise by the ruin of others, I am indeed utterly un∣done; but how unjustly time will manifest. For this odious and most pestlent Villain (I hope your Majesty will pardon these rude Expressions; 'tis zeal to Iustice makes me thus to speak) with great Impudence, and no less falshood, did not Blush to tell me to my face, that I had been a Member of a Monastery I never saw, or heard on before, and that my Name was Shifter, Rey∣nardine, and whatsoever his Malice or Envy could in∣vent. Here he was interrupted by Brindle, who (not considering where, or in whose presence it was) with∣out Inconside∣rate Rashness hath Ruined many. endeavouring to confute Crabron's Lies, giving too much sway to his own passion, violently flew upon the Fox, and would at that instant have killed him, had not the Lord Firrpel the Libbard, and Ferox the Tyger sud∣denly
taken him off by force. The King seeing this, committed the Mastiff to Prison: saying, When he is less Cholerick he shall be heard. The Officers haste to hurry the Mastiff away to Prison, pleased the Fox not a little. But after Brindle was carried away, the King spake to the Fox, saying, Crabron, here is a Stranger like your self (for you have always told us you are such) if he, when his Passion is over, can prove what he hath said, what shall we think of you? Most Noble Prince, said the Fox, if this Caiiff can prove a title of what he hath falsely affirmed, let me die the worst of deaths: For I am as Innocent as any Whelp newly born. I hope so, said the King, therefore go your way, and let the great Goddess Fortune keep you innocent. Hereupon the Fox shewing great Reverence to the King, departed with a pleasant Countenance. But resolved, if possible, to put an end to the Mastiffs life: for he well knew, if he were a second time heard, the King would give ear to his Words, Maugre all credit he himself could say to the contrary. Therefore he contrived his Death that very day, in manner following: He well knowing Ar∣senick or Rats-bane (as 'tis commonly called) would ef∣fect the business to purpose, put that into a Bowl of Fresh-broth, which smelt well. When Night came, the Fox putting on a Servitors Livery, went to the Keeper, whom he himself (by another Person) had de∣signedly made to drink high, not long before, and (hav∣ing put a Stone in his Mouth to alter his Speech) said, Sir Iailor, my Lord commanded me to carry this Mess to the Stranger, that was this day committed by the King himself. Vpon this the Keeper, supposing him some ords Servant, opened him the Prison door, and directed him to the Prisoners Lodging. When he came there, the Keeper being not with him, he spake to the Mastiff thus: Sir Stranger, my Honoured
Master the Lord Pantaloo, the Kings only Cosin, hearing of your Imprisonment, was very sorry; there∣fore so soon as he heard of it, he Commanded me to bring you this Supper, and withal did me tell you, that on the Morrow, he will send you a good Break∣fast, and after that plead your Cause before the King, to the utter Ruin of your Enemy Crabron, whom he verily believes to be a Counterfeit; and other Courtiers, who resolve to Second my Lord in your defence, are of the same mind. Therefore Sir, be of good chear, and eat what I have brought. The Mastiff hearing this, said, I thank you Sir, who∣ever you are, and I pray in my Name, return my hearty thanks to your Lord, and tell him, I doubt not (if his Lordship will be pleased to countenance me) to make good my Accusation, to the Satisfaction of the King. Having said this, he greedily eat up the Broath, and delivered the empty Bowl again to the Fox, who carried it away, and (to avoid Discove∣ry) threw it into the Well, where in he had drown∣ed Grimlook.
CHAP. XX. The Fox by his Craft, is not Accused for the Murther of Brindle the Mastiff: but afterward, to satisfie the Kings Jealousie of him, he is Rackt; and then con∣fesses himself to be Reynardine. CRabron the Fox early the next Morning, after he was assured that rindle was dead, and before his Death was publickly known, went to Court, and (as soon as was possible) got admittance to the King, to whom after Obeysance made, he thus spake: Most Nobe King, I hope your Majesty will this day acquit me of those most false aspersions Brinde the Mastiff (for such I hear that Strangers Name is) cast upon me ye∣sterday in your Royal presence. To this the King said, It will be your part to vindicate your self. Stay you here, and I will give command to bring the Prisoner hi∣ther: perhaps his Choler is by this time abated. Here∣upon the King immediately sent an Officer to the Iailor, commanding the Prisoner to be brought. When the Officer came to the Prison, the Keeper shewed him the dead body extreamly swollen, and said, Sir this Stran∣ger hath, as I verily believe, by the help of some of his Acquaintance, purposely Poysoned himself, being as I suppose quite mad: for he raved, and was outragious all day yesterday, and would never touch any thing I gave him to eat, but last night, late in the Evening, no sooner did one (to me unknown) bring him a Mess of Broath, but he swallowed that with Greediness; which was undoubtedly the Poyson by which he died. This the Iailor had devised, to excuse his own Negligence, in admitting any one to a Prisoner, without going him∣self, or sending a Servant with him. Vpon this the Of∣ficer
said, If it be so Sir, it will be your safest way to ha∣sten to the King, and give him the same Account; o∣therwise your own Life may be in danger. The Keeper hearing this, hastily went with the Officer to Court, and told the same Tale before the King without variati∣on. The King asked the Iailor what this unknown Person said to the Stranger, when he brought that Poy∣sonous Broath? Nothing at all, said the Keeper, they had no discourse, only at the Messengers first coming to the Prisoner, he said, Here's your Supper Sir, and spake not a word more, nor did the Prisoner answer him at all, but eat up the Broath, and the Messenger took away the Vessel (it was brought in) with him. Great Sir, this is the very Truth, and all I can say. The King greatly wondring at the Prisoners sudden death, concluded some Enemy had Poysoned him, and the Keeper, notwithstanding what he said, might be privy thereto. Therefore he asked the Keeper, Why he did not of himself come to Court, and discover the Death of the Prisoner before the Officer came to him? to this he Answered, Your Majesty knows, it is yet very Early: I did this Morning, as every Morning I do, visit all under my Custody, and having with great horror and grief espied the dead and poysonous Carcass of my Out∣landish Prisoner, my Thoughts were so confused with that sudden amazement, that I knew not what to do in so great a distraction of mind, therefore could not per∣form my Duty as I ought. But the Officers coming uickly after soon rectified the Error I was in: for when I had, as my duty was, shewn him the dead body, I made all posible speed hither with him. Therefore humbly crave your Majesties Pardon for omitting my Duty. More he would have said, but the King had him say no more, but go home and speedily bury the dead Carcass, least (said he) the Iayl be infected. When the Keeper was gone, the
King also dismissed Crabron; and afterward command∣ed Brindles Information against him, to be registred. For ye King was jealous of his Purveyor Crabron, whom he had resolved to prefer to some more honourable Office, before he heard the Mastiffs Tale; but having heard that, and this Murther since happening, was wholly of another mind. Yet, concealing his suspicion, he spake to the Fox as kindly as before. This made Crabron to suppose (as before he had done) that now all was well, and the Monastery could produce no more Witnesses a∣gainst him. But in this also he was greatly deceived, Malefact∣ors are com∣monly most secure, when nearest their Ruin. for the Old Prior of the Monastery being dead, and a new one chosen in his room, this new Prior dismissed Light∣foot the Greyhound, and Quick-scent the Lurcher, who had both (from their Infancy) served his Predecessor; because they having never (to their remembrance) lived else where, desired to live abroad, that they might, as they said, know the World. After they had ranged a∣bout together for some time, Lightfoot left Quick-scent, and travelled into the Kingdom of Feraria, and so into the Forrest. When there, he was admired by all, be∣cause of his beauty and comely form; and it was not long (the King hearing of him) before he was sent for to Court. When brought into the Royal Presence, the King asked his Name, and place of Birth. To this the Greyhound Answered, Noble Prince, my Name is Light-foot, but my Birth place I know not; because I was carried very Young into the Monastery of Man∣ton, where I served the Prior himself, until the day of his death. He being dead, I and my Fellow-servant Lurcher, requested the New Prior to be dismissed, that we might Travel and learn the Fashions of the World. He granted our request, and we kept Company together for sometime, till I (being desirous to see this King∣dom, and he not consenting) left him and came hither.
The King hearing him thus spake, asked if he knew not one Reynardine, that was a Member of that Society? To this the Greyhound answered, That there was one Reynardine a Member of the Monastery, who (being enjoyned Perinance for his misdoing) ran away with his Religious Habit, and a great whle after would have been admitted as another Person, I have often heard, not only of my Master the Prior himself, but even of all the Members of that House. But if I should see him, I know him not; because I cannot remember I ever saw him. When he lived in the Monastery, I was too Young to remember him; and when he came again Dis∣guised, I could not see him, because at that time my Master had shut me and my fellow in his own Chamber unadvisedly. The King hearing this, said no more; but always after this, entertained greater suspicion of his Purveyor Crabron; yet kept it to himself. To Lightfoot the Greyhound, he always shewed great kind∣ness, but charged him to tell none of his Subjects where he lived. For the King resolved to understand the truth of the matter, but was willing to take time, till further Discovery should be made. For he doubted that Lightfoot had learned his Lesson in the Forrest, of some Enemies of his Purveyor Crabron. But this his doubt was soon cleared by the coming of Quick-scent the Lur∣cher, who not long after (being loath to lose his Old Companion) came into the Forrest. When there, hear∣ing Lightfoot Lodged in the Court, and was highly in the Kings favour, he went directly to his Lodging, and that Night lay with him. On the Morrow Light∣foot brought Lurcher into the Kings presence, and said, Noble Prince, this was my Fellow-servant, Lur∣cher is his Name, he came into the Forrest late Ye∣sterday, and I have now presumed to present him to your Majesty. You have done well Lightfoot, said the King:
and to the Lurcher he also said, Friend, you are wel∣come, and so shall all Strangers be to me and mine, whilst I live. But I pray thee tell me, since you came from the Monastery of Manton, whether ye knew one Reynardine? To this the Lurcher answered, as Light∣foot had done, more he could not say, being almost of the same Age, and of no longer standing in the Mona∣stery than he had been. Therefore the King spoke to both of them thus: Surely, tho you knew not Reynar∣dine, you could not choose but know Brindle the Mastiff, and his Predecessor Grimlook, that were both Porters of the same House. Yes, say they Great Sir, we knew them very well. Vpon the hearing of this, the King said no more, but immediately sent for Crabron the Fox, to confront him with them. In the mean while, he further asked them, What manner of Person Brindle was? To which they gave so plain and true a Description of him, that the King well understood they both told the Truth. Then he believed Brindle's Information to be (every tit∣tle of it) true. Therefore when the Fox came before him, he could no more, as formerly, speak kindly to him; but sternly said, Crabron, I have now good reason to believe that you (if Truth were known) were the sole and only Murther of Brindle; also I am now assured that you are Reynardine, Son of that arch Traitor Rey∣nard the Fox. Look upon these two true, and not (like your self) feigned Strangers; these were Contempora∣ries with you in the Monastery of Manton. They know you well enough, therefore ell me the Truth, and use no more of your Sly Evasions to blind and deceive others, to you own ruin: for their Testmony can in no wise, I dare to say, be dsproed by you. What say you to this? The Fox stood ute for some smll time, and at length thus spake: Dread Soveraign, I am very sorry your Majesty should entertain so edl an Opinion of
me, as in any wise to suspect my fidelity, or to suppose me what I am not. I never saw one of these Persons till this very time I came into your Majesties presence, nor ever did I see, or had knowledge of the other, till I saw him here in Court. I know not what either of them can say of me, Brindle they may indeed have known, because they were in the same House with him; but 'tis impossible they should either of them have known me be∣fore they came hither; nor was I ever in their Countrey, therefore could not possibly see or know their Monastery. I hope your Majesty will not give credit to the false Te∣stimony of Strangers, and New-comers, against one of your Majesties most faithful Servants, tho a Stran∣ger also. And as for the Death of Brindle, I know no more of that, than doth a Young-suckling-Beast. Well then, said the King, if it be so, that all I have said will not make you speak Truth, I will try what Torments can do. Having said this, he immediately commanded four of the strongest Servitors about the Court to take up Crabron, two of them by his Arms, and the other two by his Legs, and with all their strength to draw four several ways, till they had disjoynted his Limbs. They take him up, as the King commanded; but the De∣vise being new and they themselves fearful, each suppo∣sed he drew more than his fellow, and so used not half their strength. Nevertheless Crabron fearing they would indeed disjoynt his Limbs, and so he should be enforced to live Miserably for some short time, and then unavodably die a shameful Death cried out extream∣ly, and with a feigned, low and faint voice, said, Rey∣nardine dies. The King hearing this, commanded them to leave him.
CHAP. XXI. Reynardine committed to Prison, after his Confession makes his escape in the Night, and goes into Pit∣wood, where he lies concealed for some time; but the Pranks he there played, soon discover him. WHen they had left him, he lay groaning, as if he had been Tormented indeed, whereas in Truth he was not hurt. Nevertheless, to de∣ceive the King, and that he might not be Fettered, as Murtherers and Traitors are wont to be; he feigned he could not stir hand or foot. The King not discerning his Dissimulation, took pitty of him, and commanded he should be carried carefully to Prison; and there laid without any Fetters, upon a bed of Straw. Also the King would have sent for a Leech, to apply Plaisters to his joynts; but Reynardine (as now we shall always call him) hearing the King speak of sending for him, said, Dread Soveraign, if I lie without Fetters, I am sure my Limbs will better heal of themselves, than by the help of any Leech. The King knowing that the Fox himself had practised Physick, said no more thereabout, only ordered he should be secured, till he called for him. So he was carried to Prison, and laid down easily, (ac∣cording to the Kings command) upon a Bed of Straw. The Keeper also knowing him, put him in the best room of the Prison, and fed him with his own hands; be∣cause he thought the Fox could not feed himself. But he very evilly requited the Iailor's kindness: for when Night came, his Chamber being a Ground Room, next to the High-way, he dug his way out, and so escaped a∣bout Midnight. But when got out, he knew not which way to go, therefore he then earnestly and unfeignedly
(as he never before did pray'd to Fortune thus, O Great Wicked Per∣sons in di∣stress will be, or (at least) seem to be, devout. Goddess Fortune, vouchsafe this once to assist me. Ha∣ving said this, he espied an Ignis fatuus, or Will with the Wisp; which he then took to be sent by Fortune, to direct his way. This he followed, till he came into Pittwood, which formerly belonged to Isgrim the Wolf, but after he was Executed for Treason, the King gave it for an Inheritance to Chantacleer and his Family. Yet he knew not where he was, till day-break. When he perceived he was in Pittwood, he rejoyced not a lit∣tle; because he knew none of the Beasts of the Forrest durst come there, by reason of a Proclamation (lately set forth) which prohibited all Beasts whatsoever, from entring any part thereof. This Prohibition was made at the request of Old Chantacleer, who with all his Family were in like manner forbid to enter the Forrest. All this Wood was inhabited by Chantacleers Family, except Isgrim's Palace, which none of them would dwell in, because he was a Traitor. Here the Fox took up his residence. The first day he imployed (without any food) to observe how Chantacleer's Family (which he saw were very numerous) were fed. He then perceived the old ones went out into the Fields, and pict up Barley, which they brought in abundance to their young. He likewise took good notice, where the Chickens roosted at Night. Having learned all this, when Nght came he first fiilled his Belly with such of them as he could best come at: afterwards he went out into the Fields, and (in an old Sack he found in his new Lodging) gathered together as much Barley, Oats, and other Grain, as by the slender light of the waining Moon he could see to pick up. This he carried home, and then bestowed the remainder of that Night in sleep. The next day he scattered part of the Corn in two or three small ground-passages into the Palace. This
Bait allured the Chickens to come nearer and nearer, till they were out of their Mothers sight, and within his reach. Thus he lived very plentifully for ten or twelve days; but afterward, the Hens so well guarded their Chic∣kens, keeping them always all together about them, that the Fox could get nothing in the day time, what he got was by night, and that but little neither. Therefore he devised another shift (never thinking he was obser∣ved and should be called to account for his Misdemean∣ors) which was as follows: In the Night he digged se∣veral small and very deep holes, over which he laid small Reeds, which with the least weight, would suddenly break; upon these he scattered some few Grains of Corn, and so left them. By these Snares, the youngest and weakest of the Chickens were caught, but the elder and stronger (by help of their Wings) escaped. Yet in the mean while, it was well known to Old Chantacleer himself, and to many of his Children and Nephews, that the Murtherer of their off-spring kept his refidence in the Wolf's Palace, but none of them could ever have a perfect sight of him. Therefore after this last Misrhief was known, they resolved to watch the Holes, to see who he was, that should come out to take the Chickens, fallen into those Pits. In order to this, Chantacleer commanded several of them to ascend the Trees, that stood nearest the Pits, and there lie close, and be very Watchful to observe who he was, that had done them so much mischief. They do accordingly, and in the mean time he himself and all the other (as if they had de∣spaired of ever knowing who had hurt them) went their way far from the Pits, and came no more near them all the day. This the Fox plainly saw, but knew no∣thing of those that had ascended the Trees. Therefore, hunger pinching him, he (long before Night) came to
the nearest Pit, and took out Three Young Chickens, which he hastily carried into his Lodging, supposing none had seen him. But he was at that time plainly seen by them, that watched in the Trees; these spee∣dily described his Form and Shape, to Old Chantacleer; who presently commanded three or four of the Eldest of his Sons to follow him, and that in the mean while, such as were best able, should help the Younglings (re∣(maining alive) out of the Pits, into which they were so unluckily fallen, and if possible fill up the Pits with Earth before night. Having given this Order, he and his Sons went out of the Wood, and travelled towards the High-Road going into the Forrest. Here they met with se∣veral, to whom they told their Grievance, describ∣ing the Murtherer to them, that they (according to the Kings Proclamation) might carry Information there∣of to the Court. But they not regarding what they heard, took little or no notice thereof: saying, It is no part of our Business. This angred Old Sir Chan∣tacleer not a little, being grieved at his Heart (for into the Forrest it was not lawful for him, or his to enter) that he could not see no other Beasts more civil than they. Whilst he was in this angry mood, it was his good hap to espy Sir Firrapel the Libbard (who was going to his Countrey Palace) with several At∣tendants following him, to whom he thus spake, Ho∣noured Lord Firrapel, the Necessity and Distress I and mine are in, by reason of the many Murders and Depredations committed upon my Family, by a cer∣tain strange Beast, having neither Ears nor Tail, who (in less than twenty days time) hath Murther∣ed near an hundred of my Grand-Children, enforceth me to interrupt your Lordship at this time, &c. More the Cock would have spoken, but was prevented
by Sir Firrapel the Libbard, who said, Old Sir Chantacleer I pitty your Case, but am glad to hear where this strange Beast is. For what he is, I al∣ready well know. He is, I'll assure you no other than Reynardine the Son of Reynard the Fox, that Arch Traitor. About twenty days fince he broke Prison: but I hope ere twenty days more are passed, he will not be living. For I verily believe, he (in the Form of a Physician, and Doctors you know have too often priviledge to kill) Murdered my Father with a Dor∣mitory Potion. Therefore I willl stay my Iourney, and return back to Court, and this very Night ac∣quaint the King with your Condition. But be you careful in the mean while, to keep all hush and still all Night (that the Fox may mistrust nothing) and on the Morrow I doubt not, but I shall by the Kings command be with you early in the Morning to appre∣hend this Villainous Beast. Chantacleer, hearing this, humbly thanked him, and went his way to∣ward the Wood, where he forbid all noise and clai∣mor, during the whole Night, expecting the Lord Firrapels coming early in the Morning.
CHAP. XXII. Sir Firrapel the Libbard, with Quick-scent the Lurcher, and many Soldiers, are sent to apprehend the Fox. He is taken and brought before the King, who pas∣seth Sentence of Death on him, to be Executed the next day. THe Lord Firrapel, according to his promise to Old Chantacleer the Cock, did that night disclose what he had heard to the King, who commanded him to take with him Quick-scent the Lur∣cher, and a Band of Soldiers, and very early in the Morning to march to Pittwood, and (if possible) to ap∣prehend him, but in no wise to kill him (whatsoever resistance he made) if they could by, any means avoid it. Withal he gave strict charge to Sir Fir∣rapel, that, no violence should, by any of his Soldi∣ers, be offered to Chantacleer or any of his Family. According to this Precept, they set out at day break the next Morning and marching apace, were quickly come to the Borders of Pittwood, where Old Chantacleer and many of his Family, met them with joy, and im∣mediately (after short salutations passed) conducted them to Isgrim's Palace, where the Soldiers, hoping to find the Fox) rushed in with great violence; search∣ed every hole and corner thereof; but find him they could not. For Reynardine was up before they came near the Wood, and hearing a noise, and seeing a great Com∣pany marching towards the same; presently apprehend∣ed his own danger, and fled. But Quick-scent the Lurcher, having found the scent of his footing, immediately ran after the Fox, who in that flight used all his Arts,
turning and returning various ways, and sometimes he would run circular, and then into a direct path again: for he knew he should be pursued, because Quick-scent the Lurcher (whom he most feared) and Light-foot the Greyhound were Courtiers, and he supposed might be among the Soldiers he had seen. Therefore he led Quick-scent such a dance, that it was almost Noon before he could overtake him. In the mean while, Sir Firrapel the Libbard, knowing Quick-scent was in pursuit of Reynardine, and therefore had conceived good hope of his being taken, led all his Soldiers out of the Wood, to the great content of Chantacleer and his Family; promising rhem not to return into the For∣rest, till he carried the Fox Prisoner with him to Court. When got out of the Wood, he forgot not presently to send several Soldiers to assist Quick-scent, who just about Noon returned with the Soldiers, and the Fox his Prisoner, being all sufficiently tired: therefore Sir Firrapel commanded they should all rest with him and his Company for an hour. Accordingly they did so. Du∣ring this time of Rest, Old Sir Chantacleer, and ma∣ny of his Family came out of the Wood, partly to con∣gratulate the Lord Firrapel's good success in taking Reynardine; but chiefly, that they might see him, that is the Fox, whose Eyes some of the Youngest of that Com∣pany would have pecked out, had they not been preven∣ted by Chantacleer himself; who fearing some Mischief would happen (as soon as was possible) took his leave of the Lord irrapel, Quick-scent the Lurcher, and all the Soldiers, returning them hearty thanks for the pains he had taken in apprehending the Fox their Grand Enemy, and for their great Civility to him and his. Then he departed, wth his retinue into the Wood. Not long after this, the Lord irrapel commanded his Solders to march, he hmself leading them fair and
softly. When they were entered the Forrest, in every Street (they passed through) great Numbers of Beasts were gathered together to see the Fox, who all the way he went hung down his head; not so much for shame, as for grief and anger, to see himself made so publick a Gazing-stock. When they came to Court, none entred but Sir Firrapel the Libbard, and Quick-scent the Lurcher, whom the King (being just then at Dinner) comanded to eat with him. The Soldiers Guarding the Fox without the Court Gates, had enough to do to defend him from the violence of the Multitude; who reviled him The Opini∣on of the Vul∣gar is often true, tho but conjectural. extreamly, calling him Murderous Hipocrite, Trai∣tor, Liar, Dissembler, and what not. In all which, they spake more truly, than themselves were aware of. After the King had Dined, he thanked Sir Firrapel and Quick-scent, for taking Reynardine alive, accord∣ing to his Will; withal asking how, and where they took him? To this the Lord Firrapel (after due Obey∣sance The true a property of Noble Com∣mander. to the Kng) said, Dread Soveraign, the Ho∣nour of this days Enterprize appertains to Sir Quick-scent only, not to me, or any of my Soldiers. For after we came into Pittwood, and had searched Isgrims Palace, we could not find Reynardine, who (as it seems) was escaped before we could enter his Lodging; which escape of his, Sir Quick-sent first perceiving, followed him by the Foot, and at length (after a long, tedious and intrate pursuit) over-took and seized him, about nine Furlongs distant from the Wood. All that I did, or could do in this Case, was only to send out some few Soldiers to assist Sir Quick-scent; who, with those Sders I sent, were sufficiently tired, before he could be taken. After he was taken, and brought before me, lying (with my Soldiers) on the North∣de of the Wood having given the Pursuers some time to rest themselves, we marched into the Forrest; not
hastily, but wich a flow pace, that all might see and know the Prisoner. You did very well, said the King, and in a little time I will not fail to reward Quick-scent according to his desert. But now let me see the Prisoner. Then was the Fox at the command of Sir Firrapel, brought into the Kings presence by a lusty stout Souldier, to whom he was chained. The King seeing him, spake thus, O Execrable Villain! the off-spring of a wicked and pernicious Traitor. Your Father I well remem∣ber, was by my Royal Father twice pardoned Offen∣ces deserved Death; in requital of which, and to make amends for the great Honours afterward conferred up∣on him, he, you (as I have just cause now to think) and others, traiterously contrived not only his ruin and mine, but a total extirpation of all the Royal Line. You since, that you may run parallel with your cursed Father, have by flight twice evaded Iustice; if you escape a third time, the fault will be more mine than yours. Therefore, now make a true and unfeigned Confession of all your Wickednesses, which I am sure are very great; for you shall die before Sun-set. The Fox hearing this, being sorely terrified, knew not what to say; but at length (after some short pause) spake as follows, Great Sir, I do confess I have been a very Wicked Liver; but since my Discovery I have preferred Death before Life; be∣cause I always lived in fear of Death: Dead I would gladly be, but to die I am afraid. The particular Pas∣sages of my Life, I would willingly (if I my be per∣mitted) declare before I die; but cannot do that, without some time granted me to collect my self, and call to mind what I shall speak. Therefore humbly beg, that my Life may be prolonged till too Morrow at Noon, longer time I desire not. To this the King said, Reynardine, you have already broke Prison, I cannot trust you a second time. Vpon this, Sir Firrapel, hoping
the Fox would confess the Murther of his Father) said, Dread Soveraign, I will undertake the Charge of him this Night, if he escapes, let me Die for him. No, said the King, the disparity between him and you is too great; it shall not be so. But if he escape, they to∣whom you shall commit the Charge of him, shall certain,+ly die as Traitors. The Lord Firrapel hearing this-said, I hope Sir, neither I, nor any other, shall be ex¦posed to that danger: for if he were ten times stronger, and more subtile than he is, I am sure I could secure him. Do so, said the King. Then was the Fox led a∣way by Sir Firrapels Soldiers, who secured him all Night, till next day near Noon. CHAP. XXIII. Reynardine the Fox at the place of Execution, makes a long and lying Oration to the King, whereby he gains a Reprieve to a further time. THe Solders (by the Lord Firrapels Order) a little before Noon, carry the Fox bound to the appointed place of Execution, where the King himself, many of the Nobles, Dr. Asino, and a multitude of other Spectators, were Assembled to hear the Fox's Speech, before his (supposed) nigh approaching Death. Over the Gallows purposely erected for this intended Execution: All the Fox's Names were written in Capital Letters, thus, REYNARDINE, PEDAN∣TO, SHIFTER, CRABRON, REYNAR∣DINE. His true Name being twice Written, viz. first and last, that all might understand who he was. The King seeing the Fox led up three or four steps of the Ladder, erected against the Gallows whereon he was to
be Executed, said, Now Reynardine, I have given you the time you requested; therefore be Ingenious; and without fraud or faculty discover the whole Intregues of your Life; that others by your Example, may take warning. The Fox hearing this, spake as follows. YOur Majesty, Dread Soveraign, and all you Nobles and Commoners, that shall hear me this day, may ve∣ry well in me, and in the various changes of my life; ob∣serve the mutability, unconstancy, and uncertainty of Worldly Prosperity. For when your Majesties Royal Fa∣ther (of Happy Memory) first Advanced my Father, who (I must needs say) proved too ungrateful and wicked, in Plotting and Contriving the Ruin of so Magnanimous a Prince, and Noble Benefactor: I was so Young, that I was utterly uncapable to know what my Father then was, or in times past had been; but after I grew up, and perceived the great State he lived in, and knew him to be a Lord; I thereupon assumed haughty thoughts, judging my self inferior to none of the Sons of the great∣est Lords in the Kingdom. These Ambitious Thoughts of mine, were the Grand Causes of my future Misery. For after my Father's Treason was discovered, and he had committed all his Treasure to me and my Brother Volpus, we went with it into the Province of Longwood, where that Treasure lies hid unto this day. There my Brother through his own folly, presuming to fight with one that was too strong for him, lost his Life. After his Decease, I went into the Dutchy of Manton, and in the Monastery there was entertained as a Member; but judging that Life inferior to the supposed Nobility of my Birth, I grew out of Conceit therewith, and one day (being not content with my Allowance) I stole a small Fish out of the Kitchin, Being taken with my Theft a∣bout me, I was enjoyned a most cruel long fast for Pen∣nance,
which I could not bear: Therefore I left the Monastery, and coming into this my Native Countrey, I was (by Zani the Ape) Advised ro turn Doctor of Phy∣sick, and present my self as a Stranger, by the Name of Dr. Pedanto. His Counsel I took, and Practised Physick with good success, as is very well known; until he dislik∣ing my Service, setting up for himself, Discovered me me to my Undoing, and his own Ruin. After this Dis∣covery, being enforced to flie for the safeguard of my Life; I returned into the Dutchy of Manton, where see∣ing a Mountebank upon a Stage, I requested him to cut off my Tail and Ears, offering as a Recompence (be∣cause other Satisfaction I could not give) to affirm to all the Spectators, which were that day very Numerous, that I felt no Pain at all; tho therein (I now confess) I egregiously lied. However Necessity forced me at that time so to do: For I had hopes, by reason of that dis∣figuring, to be admitted again into the Monastery, as Brindle the Mastiff truly told your Majesty. This hope failing, I returned again hither, and was admitted into my Lord Sly-look's Service, a very Noble Lord; and Worthy Master to me, Ah! his Death, his Death, (I say) Notable Hypocricy here expres∣sed by the Fox's feigned lamentation. pierceth my very heart to think of: for had he lived till now, I might have lived longer in safety. But alas your Majesties good will, and immense favour, in Advance∣ing me to a place of Profit and Repute, was the Occasi∣on of my being known and discovered. Here the King interrupting him, said, Reynardine, I thought in the Condition you now are, you would have made a free, true, and ingenious Confession of all your Misdemeanours; but instead of so doing, you tell a Story, (well known already) of your Theft in the Mo∣nastery, of your Practising Physick, and of your Tail and Ears being cut off, which every body sees. But what say you to the Murther of my Old Lord Firrapel,
and of Brindle the Mastiffs Poysoning; How can you clear your self of these Crimes? Then the Fox proceed∣ed thus: I humbly crave your Majesties Pardon, that I have not hitherto spoken so fully to the purpose as your Ma∣jesty expected. As touching the Old Lord Firrapel, I am in no wise guilty of his Death; I wish some of those, that then were his Attendants could as well clear them∣selves from Guilt, as I can. Here is my Young Lord Firrapel, who knows well I had not given his Father that Dormitory Potion, but at his earnest desire, and upon his promise (upon his honour) to endempnify me. For (as I told him) I feared his Father would die Sleeping; to prevent which, I ordered that after he had slept four hours, he should be awakned with a Taber and Pipe, played on at first softly, and afterwards louder and lou∣der, till he was fully awakned. If this way was not ra∣tional and ingenious, The Fox's Appeal to the Ass, shews the craft of Sophisters, to procure an Ignorant Voucher for their own cursed and deceitful A∣ctions. I Appeal to the Reverend and most learned Dr. Asino here present, who for my late Honoured Lord and Master the Lord Sly-look, made a Composition so admirable and excellent, that Apollo him∣self, or Aesculapius, or Machaon, (had they all, or ei∣ther of them been then present) could not have made a better or more salutary Diet-drink, The Com∣mon Excuse of Physicians, when they do amiss. but my Lords The Ass calling the Fox Empyrick, shews the Nature of Wealthy Phy∣sicians, who brand meaner Practicioners with the Name of Em∣pyricks, tho more skilful than them∣selves. Crazed Body and Weak Nature frustrated all his good and laudable Endeavours. Here the Fox Paused, and was Silent. Then the Ass glad to hear himself so highly Praised; said, Great Sir, Reynardines's Advice for awakning the Deceased Lord out of so profound a Sleep, as Ano∣dynes are wont to infer, was very commendable, and highly to be praised in an Empyrick. For I well re∣member, being (on a time) sent for to Court, to cure an Eminent Courtier then Sick; I stayed there all Night, and being on the Morrow early to go to wait upon ano∣ther
Person of Worth, was (after great Weariness, and a profound Sleep thence ensuing) awakned after the same manner, and that method of awakning out of Sleep, was very delightful, pleasant and salutary, as I then found by Experience, and have since used with very good success in others. Here the Ass ceased to speak, and the Fox proceeded as follows: As to the Poysoning of Brindle the Mastiff, Dread So∣veraign, I know nothing; for I had no hand in it, but was and am as innocent thereof as a Whelp in the Womb. It is true indeed, and I must now needs con∣fess, that I was glad to hear of his Death; because I knew he could (being dead) tell no Tales. But Reynardine, said the King, all this while you say nothing of your Fathers Treason, to which you (be∣ing then grown up) must needs be privy: for else, how could he maintain so many Soldiers in his Castle, and you not know why they were there kept. Besides, you confess you had your Fathers Treasure, which you say lies hid in the Province of Longwood: If you had so great Treasure, what need had you to herd your self in a Monastery, and after that to come hither twice Dis∣guised, only for a living (as I suppose) when you had so much, by the benefit of which you might have lived any where? To this the Fox Answered, Great Sir, seeing your Ma∣jesty The great∣est Liers, and Worst of Men; are most apt to use Impreca∣tions before others, to confirm their Lies. is pleased to give me so great Liberty of Speech be∣fore I die, I intend to relate the whole Truth, and no∣thing but the Truth, and I here invoke our great God∣dess Fortune to send some Eminent Plague upon me, if I utter one word that is false or untrue. When my Fa∣ther first contrived his Treason, or how, when or where he treated with his Fellow-Conspirators, I can in no wise tell. I saw him daily to entertain new Soldiers in his Castle, but why he did so, I could never understand. For
whensoever I asked him thereabout, he would Answer me thus? Son, trouble not your self at present, in time you shall both see and know, why I do this. Such gene∣ral Answers I always had from him, and knew nothing of his intent, till the morrow morning early after he had put his intended Treason in Execution. Then I saw him march in hastily with his Soldiers, immediately calling for me and my Brother: To whom he thus spake, Son's, Fortune hath frowned upon me, but I hope will be to you propitious: Therefore you shall take my Treasure, the Bulk of which we then saw (tho never before) ready bound up in ten Packs, which were delivered to ten a∣ble Servitors to carry. We went away with these Ser∣vitors (after we had received Our Fathers Benediction, and several private Instructions) by Night Journeys, in∣to the Province of Longwood, where the Treasure was deposited in a very commodious private and drie Cave. This Treasure, after we heard of Our Fathers Death, my Brother Volpus (contrary to my Fathers Order) would have had equally divided between us; but I not consenting, it was left undivided till after my Brother was killed. Then knowing my self the sole and only Possessor there∣of, I resolved to follow my Fathers Instructions; which were that we should bury the same for some years, that if Adversity should afflict us, it might be a Succour to us in time of distress. This I resolved to do, but fearing it might be taken up by Robbers; I addressed my self to Adramand the Inchanter, who then lived on that part of Long-wood, that bordered upon the Kingdo of Zalp. He required at twentieth part of the Treasure: saying, If I gave him that Reward he would secure the Remainder by Art Magick for a certain number of Years, Days, Hours and Minutes. Hereupon I agreed to give him what he demanded; and then he used his Art to bind the remainder to me and for my use for ever; but not to be
taken up by me or any other Person, till the term of five Years, five Days, five Hours, and five Minutes, should be fully compleat and ended. The five Years are now within two Days fully accomplished, so that (had I li∣ved) about seven Days or eight at farthest, I should have re-possessed all the Remainder of that vast Treasure, by which I might have made my Peace with your Maje∣sty, and stopped the mouths of all my Adversaries. This was the true Reason why I broke Prison, and fled into Pittwood, where I intended to have stayed till the time a∣foresaid was expired; and then according to the Instru∣ctions I received from Adramand, my purpose was to go into Long-wood, take up my Treasure, with part of it satisfie Old Chantacleer (who spake greater evil of me, than I deserved) for the wrong, I did to his Family, and faster that come to Court and lay all at your Majesties feet. This had I lived, I should have done. Here the Fox ended his Oration, and seemingly of∣fered himself to Death, by the Executioners hand. But the King (well knowing Old Reynard was very Rich, and no part of his Wealth was found, when his Castle was taken by Storm, rifled and ruined by the Soldiers) because he thought the Fox's Tale thereabout might be true, bid the Executioner stay; saying, Hold your hand, the Prisoner shall nor die this day. I will ap∣point some other time for the purpose; therefore take him away, and let him be carefully secured, till I call for him. So the Fox was led away to Prison accor∣ding to the Kings Command.
CHAP. XXIV. The King sends for Reynardine, demands an Account of the Treasure he spake of. The Fox gives a feigned Account, which is taken in Writing, and he re-mand∣ed to Prison. THe next day after Dinner, the King sends for Reynardine to Court and spake to him as fol∣lows. Renardine, I have respited your Exe∣cution for a time; but you know the Proverb is, For∣bearance is no Acqutance. So a Reprieve is no Par∣don. Therefore mind what I now say, if any part of what you have affirmed in your yesterdays Speech, be found false, you shall certainly die; but if all be true (which I very much suspect) you may find mercy, and be restored to your Office again. To this the Fox after low Obeysance made to the King, said, Dread Sove∣raign, if one tittle of what I yesterday spoke be false, let me die the worst of deaths. But if your Majesty will promise me Pardon at this time, I will unfeignedly dis∣cover the way of breaking the Spell, that Adramand the Inchanter laid upon my Treasure, whereby it shall be easie for your Majesty, or any other by your Maje∣sties appointment, to take up the same, and bring it hi∣ther, or into any other part of this Kingdom. Stay Reynardine, said the King, I will make no promise to you, but if you be honest and ingenious, and do your part▪ as you have said; I will then act as becomes a Prince. Leave all to me, but first give me an Account of the Particulars of that Treasure. To this the Fox said, Great Sir, as far as I can now remember, I will; but I humbly request my Words may be taken in Writ∣ing,
that your Majesty may when the Packs come to be opened, find more by much than I can now call to mind, and so be assured of my fidelity and truth. It shall be so, said the King. Then was a Secretary immediate∣ly called, who being come into the Royal Presence, was commanded to sit down, and write what the Fox should dictate, which was as follows. Inprimis, One Chain of Gold three Yards long, weigh∣ing Sixty Ounces, three drams and a half. Item, Two Chains of Gold two Yards and a half long, weighing forty nine Ounces three Granes. It. Five other small Gold Chains, not fully two Yards long, weighing Sixty five Ounces, four Drams, and two Scruples. It: That Head of Gold which your Majesties Royal Father caused to be put upon a Staff to be born before my Father, when he was created Lord Chief Bailiff. In the hollow of which Head are a great number (how many I know not) of Pearls; some small and some large, but all very round and transparent. The weight of these I know not. It. An Emerald, admirably Polished and very translu∣cid, weighing near half a Pound, and sexangular in form. It. Thirty six other small Emeralds, the weight of which I know not. It. Ten Rubies of great value enclosed in Gold. Their weight I know not. It. Many Lockets of Diamonds, their number or va∣lue not known to me, all inclosed in a large Silver Cas∣ket curiously wrought. It. About thirty or forty Saphire Stones, their value unknown. It. Fifteen Goblets of Gold, weighing seventy two Ounces.
It. Twenty three Gold Cups, not weighed. It. Fourteen Pieces of Unicorns-horn of very great value. It. An Ebony Cup curiously wrought, and inlaid with Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, and Emeralds. An incomparable piece, of value inestimable. It. A Table of Ebony, with Ivory-feet, curiously in∣layed with Silver and Gold. It. One large Box of Tortoise-Shell, finely polished. It. Of Silver Vessels, of various Sorts, Sizes and Forms, almost an infinite numbet; besides Combs, Ear-pickers, Tooth-pickers, and the like; the value or weight of which I cannot remember. It. Of Corinthian Brass, esteemed more precious than Gold, a good quantity; but not wrought into form. It. Of Gold in Wedges unwrought, about Seventy pound weight. It. Of Silver unwrought, Three hundred and thirty five pound weight, or thereabout. There were many other things, but these are all I can now remember. All! said the King, and I fear a great deal more than All; for (tho I know your Fa∣ther was Wealthy) yet I cannot imagine where or how he could get so much. To this the Fox said, Dread Soveraign, when I saw all these Things, I wondred extreamly; but after I had called to mind the many Pre∣sents (besides Bribes taken on both sides) my Father daily received, my Admiration soon ceased. For every Common Beast of the Forrest, that had either found or stoln any thing that is rare and curious, would present∣ly bring or send it as a Present to him. Therefore I humbly request your Majesty to permit me to have a Co∣py of this Account, that nothing in it may (by others) be changed to my prejudice; and your Majesty shall find
that I have not lied in the least, but given an Account far short of the Riches will there be found. The King ordered him a Copy, which being writ, and compared with this, agreed exactly. After this was done, the Fox was sent back to Prison, where he remained three or four days, hearing nothing from the Court. CHAP. XXV. The King sends for the Fox again, and after some fur∣ther discourse, sends Quick-scent the Lurcher with him into the Province of Longwood to dig for, and take up the aforesaid Treasure. IN the mean while the King dispatched away a swift Messenger, to go and enquire for Adramand the In∣chanter, whether any such were, and if he found him, to learn of him what he could of Reynardine and his Treasure. The Messenger making exceeding great haste, returned the third day, and brought word that A∣dramand was dead. Which the Fox knew before; other∣wise he durst not have mentioned his Name. When the King heard there had been such a Person as Adramand, and that he was but lately dead; he gave more credit to the Fox's words than he could before do; yet wondred in his mind, which way 'twas possible, that Reynar∣dine's Father should scrape together so great a Mass of Wealth. But after he had considered his Ambitious design to usurp the Kingdom, his Wonder ceased. There∣fore early the next Morning he sent for Reynardine, to whom coming before him, he thus spake, Reynardine, you told us of a very large Treasure (the particulars of which you have since given) hid in the Province of Longwood, and there secured to your use by the Art
Magick of one Adramand an Inchanter; Is this Adra∣mand living now? To this the Fox answered, Sir I know not; he was living when I came last into this Kingdom, but since I have not heard of him. Admit he should be dead (said the King) what Course will you then take? Great Sir, said the Fox, if he be dead, he hath verified his own Prediction of himself, which was, that he should not live till the five Years were ex∣pired; but said he, if I be then living I will assist you; if not, then do you proceed thus. When the time is fully expired, you must attend other five Days, five Hours, and five Minutes, before you can take up this Treasure. On the first day, having made a Circle as near as possible to the place where your Treasure is (or at least where you think it is) there within the Circle, sa∣crifice a Chamelion to ye great Goddess Fortune, Patro∣ness of your Countrey, & rest your self within that Circle all that Night. The next day make another-Circle, and within that sacrifice a Young Cock to Mars, but lie not within that Circle as you did in the first. The third day make another Circle, also cutting the circumference of the first; in this Circle sacrifice a Dove to the Goddess Venus, with great Devotion, abstaining from Venery all that day and night, and abide no longer within that Circle than whilst you are Sacrifising. The fourth day make another like Circle, cutting the Periphery of the first, in which sacrifice a Serpent to Mercury: in that Circle abide till Sun-set, but no longer. Lastly, on the fifth day, having made a fifth Circle, cutting the Circumference of the first. In the Center of this Cir∣cle make an hole, and in that hole kill a Mole, for a sa∣crifice to Pluto, God of Riches; this Sacrifice bury in the Earth within the same hole, and lie upon it till that day is fully expired. The remaining five Hours and five Minutes, imploy in lying without all the Circles
(said he) and diligently watch, where you shall see a living Mole thrust out his head. Seeing this, dig there; for there lies your Treasure, said Adramand. I wonder said the King, why he appointed to sacrifice things so different in Nature, and did not assign one sacrifice to all the Gods; but above all, I most admire why a Cha∣melion should be sacrificed to our Goddess, to whom we offer no sacrifice at all. To this the Fox said, Dread Soveraign, I asked the Inchanter the reason of these different Sacrifices, and he answered thus. In Magical Works, all Sacrifices and other Requisit Rites to be performed, must be consonant to the nature of the Gods, and agreeable to the intended Business. There∣fore to satisfie your Curiosity, I will explain the mat∣ter as follows. To Fortune, your Goddess (said he) we sacrifice a Chamelion, magically intimating the vari∣able and mutable Nature of Fortune. For as a Chameli∣on upon various representations of things, or as its own Affections are diversifyed and altered, variously va∣ries and diversifies its Colour; so the great Goddess Fortune, as she is diversly affected, bestows Wealth, Ho∣nours, Prosperity, and what not in one hour; and a few days after snatches all away in a Moment, to satis∣fie the variety and changableness of her own Will and Pleasure. To Mars, we Sacrifice the Cock a martial and war-like Creature, magically indicating the Heroick and War-like Nature of Mars. To Venus, we Sacrifice the Dove, an aimiable, loving and chast Bird, magically to denote the Beauty, Loveli∣ness, and Chastity, of the Goddess Venus. To Mercury, we sacrifice a Serpent, a most subtile, wa∣ry, and ingenious Creature, magically to shew the sly ingenious subtilty of that God Mercury.
Lastly, To Pluto, God of Riches, we sacrifice a Mole, (as it were a magical emblem) to signifie the greedy and insatiable disposition of Covetous Persons, who never adore or offer Sacrifice to the Gods, but when they would add Riches to Riches, as the Mole scrapes up Earth upon Earth, and perpetually delights therein. Like∣wise this God Pluto, and all his Worshippers are blind as the Mole; therefore to offer him any other Sacrifice, would be no less than derision. And to deride the Gods is danger∣ous. Much more he spoke touching them all, than I have here mentioned, but (because I would in no wise be guilty of false∣hood) I will rather speak too little, than utter one word that is not true. Only this I can most truly add, that (as I now well remember) he then said, All other Sacrifices than these above-named, are nauceous to, and disesteemed by these Gods and Goddesses. If so, said the King, then we (that offer no Sacri∣fices) do far better than they that offer to the Gods, what pleaseth them not. True, Great Sir, said the Fox, 'tis dangerous to be falsely religious. Well Reynardine, said the King, Religion is not our Task now. I will at present discharge you of your close Con∣finement. You shall be a Prisoner at large with Quick-scent the Lurcher, he shall be your Keeper, with him you shall go into Longwood, to take up the Treasure you speak of: the Sacrifices only I am careful about, to think how they will be gotten. The Fox hearing this (with very great tho concealed joy) said, Dread Soveraign, if Quick-scent be my Keeper, I doubt not with his Assistance, in our Iourney to provide all but the Cock and Dove; and those I am sure your Majesty can command; if not, Quick-scent and I can easily get them in the Kingdom of Zalap, where are plenty of
Cocks, and Dove-Coats not a few. Vpon this the King commanded Quick-scent the Lurcher should be cal∣led; to whom, when come before him, he thus spake, Quick-scent I sent for you to commit to your Care the Charge of Reynardine, with whom you shall go into Longwood to search for, and take up his Treasure. When you have (by his Arts, which will be strange and mysterious) found the place where it lies, and are come to a plain fight thereof, then shall you send him away to me, but stay your self there to secure the Treasure. It will be convenient for you to take a Servitor with you, to go to and fro of your Errands; but let him know no∣thing of the main Business, that no Tales may be told: and when you send away Reynardine, send your Servi∣tor with him, as it were to wait on him to Court. But in secret, the King gave the Lurcher other particular Instructions, all tending to the securing of Reynardine, least he should slip away, as (maugre all his Care) he afterward did. Here the Lurcher asked the King when his Majesty would command them to begin their Iour∣ney? To morrow morning early, because the Iourney is long, said the King; according to which Command they began to set forth before Sun-rise the next day. CHAP. XXVI. The Fox and Lurcher enter the Province of Longwood, where (after the Fox had offered most of his Sacrifi∣ces) he makes his escape: and Lurcher returns a∣shamed to Court. AS they went forward in their Iourney, the Fox spake to the Lurcher thus, Sir Quick-scent, We are now upon an Enterprise, that will save my Life and highly advance you. For when this Busi∣ness
shall be well ended (as I question not but it will) the King will undoubtedly make you a Lord, and par∣don me. By which means you may live splendidly all your days, and I enjoy peace and quietness during Life. I expect not honour, said the Lurcher, if I please the King, and your Life be saved thereby, 'tis as much as I desire. For Sir Reynardine, to tell you the truth, my Cosin Light-foot and I (when we heard you were con∣demned to die) were extreamly troubled; because our words innocently spoken, were the principal occasion of your Discovery. I never thought otherwise, quoth the Fox; for the gentle and courteous usage I had from you, when taken after I fled from Pittwood, shews no less. Therefore I was glad at my heart, when I heard the King say I should be your Prisoner; which I will tru∣ly be, till his Majesty shall be pleased either to put me to death, or discharge me; the last of which I stedfast∣ly hope and believe. For I am sure we go not about a Sleeve-less Errand; but go in quest of a Treasure, that will as certainly be found, as if it were now in our own Possession. Thus they Travelled, Discoursing for full three days before they entred the Province of Long-wood. Every Night as they Lodged by the way, the Fox would be sure to keep close to the Lurcher; and if he was at any time but any distance from him, he would not fail to cry out Sir Quick-scent, where are you? I am here. Vsing this Craft continually, the Lurcher was almost perswaded the Fox was more afraid to lose him, than he was to lose the Fox. Yet re∣membring the great Charge he had from the King, he very diligently watched him. When they were come in∣to Longwood, near the place where the Fox said his Treasure lay, Reynardine at Sun-rise in a Morning, having his first Sacrifice ready, made his first Circle, (doing all things exactly as he had told the King, least
Lurcher should perceive his deceit) wherein he killed and offered a certain Beast, more like a Land-Lizard than a Chamelion; but being strange and unknown, it was taken for a true Chamelion. In this Circle the Fox lay all Night; but Quick-scent and his Servitor lay without the Circle carefully watching him, who did not in the least offer to stir out of his place all the time. In the Morning before Sun-rise he told Quick-scent that the Great Goddess Fortune had appeared to him in his Sleep, highly praising his Devotion, promising him certain and good success. Withal adding, as he said, that she alone was sufficient to restore to him his Trea∣sure; but because other Gods as well as her self were concerned, she would not defraud them of their Honour. Then just at Sun-rise he made his second Circle, cut∣ting the Periphery of the first (according to Adra∣mand's directions, as he feigned.) In this Circle he offered a Cock to Mars, and quickly after went out of the Circle; but lay near it all Night. The next Mor∣ning at Day-break he told Quick-scent he saw in his Sleep a strange Vision; Two Combants (said he) entred the Circle, and there fought furiously a long time, till at length one overcame the other, and drove him out of the Circle. Then the Victor remaining in the Circle, (which I suppose was the God Mars himself) with a loud voice, calling me by my Name, said, Reynardine, the Gods have compassion of you, and will certainly recompence all your Devotion and Pains, with the Accomplishment of your desire. The Treasure hid is safe, and reserved for you. Having said this, he Va∣nished, and I saw him no more. Then at Sun-rise, did the Fox again make a third Circle, cutting the Circumference of the first, as before is said; in this, just in the Center thereof, he offered a Dove to Venus, and immediately went out of it, not staying to make a∣ny
seeming (or pretended) Orisons, as he was for∣merly wont. Quick-scent the Lurcher seeing this, said, Sir Reynardine, how is it that you make such haste out of this Circle contrary to your former Custom? O Sir Quick-scent, this Goddess is aimiable, chast, and virtuous; therefore to stay in her Circle would be a Crime; and might be the means to procure her high dis∣pleasure, and then a g for all our Endeavours to find out my Treasure. For she is a tutchy and angry Saint; if we displease her all the fat is in the fire, and all our endeavours would be in vain. Besides, she hath resol∣ved never to comply with any one that questions her Ver∣tue, or doubts her Chastity; therefore to enter her Cir∣cle, and see what is done, at these magical moments, wherein she entertains her most unchast Lovers, would be a piece of the greatest ingratitude in me, if not the highest Impiety. I beseech you good Sir Quick-scent urge me not to be uncivil. Not I, upon my faith, said the Lurcher, I was not willing to intermeddle with your Secrets; what I said, was only to satisfie my own Curiosity; therefore I pray be not angry good Sir Reynardine. Not I upon my honesty, quoth the Fox, I am so far from thinking amiss of what you speak, that (were it lawful) I would tell you my Thoughts. What are they I pray good Cosin Reynardine, quoth the Lur∣cher? Indeed Sir to tell you the Truth (which at this time I am loath to speak) this Goddess, tho she hath most demure pretensions, is a meer Strumpet. Vul∣can is her Husband, but Mars is her Common Bed-fellow. If ths be not true, I appeal to all the Poets (of which there are an infinite number) that have written ever since Homers time. But I pray good Cosin Quick-scent, let all that is spoken be under the Rose: for should what I have now uttered be told to the great Goddess Venus, I am undone for ever, and the Treasure we
are now in quest of, will never be found. Vpon my Life said the Lurcher, not a word shall be spoken to any Creature Living. So that day passing on, on the fourth day at Sun-rise, he made his fourth Circle, Sacrificing a Ser∣pent to Mercury; in which Circle he abode until Sun-set, according to his pretended Directions from Adra∣mand. Then did the Lurcher ask the Fox how it came to pass, that the last Night after his Sacrifice to Ve∣nus, he had no Vision, as the two Nights before he had? To this the Fox Answered, Sir Quick-scent I had a rare and incomparable Vision, but over-sleeping my self this Morning, had not time to tell it you. It was thus. I saw five fine and very beautiful Lasses enter the Circle, in which I Sacrificed to Venus; these Danced and Sung admirably well for a long time; but at last, they all vanished, except one only (which was un∣doubtedly the Goddess Venus) who in a very pleasing and grateful manner (with a low, shrill, and effeminate voice) said, Reynardine your Sacrifice is accepted, and we the Gods will recompence your Devotion with∣in three days. Having said this, she also vanished, and I saw her no more: but I could gladly have be∣held her all the days of my Life, she was so very aimiable and delightful to look upon. The Fox now knowing it was high time to cease de∣vising feigned Visions, and to think of his own escape, told Quick-scent the Lurcher, that the next day, and all the night following, after his Sacrifice to Pluto he must lye within the fifth Circle, and after that for five Hours and five Minutes diligently watch without all the Circles, till the very place of the Treasure should by a certain and infallible Sign be shewed to him: therefore (said he) it is time for me to give my self to rest this Night; because I can have no time for any sound or long Sleep, till the Treasure is found & taken up.
You speak well Sir Reynardine, quoth the Lurcher, you will indeed have need of rest; therefore neither of us will lye near you this Night, least (by talking coughing or otherwise) we should disturb you. If you favour me so much, you will do me a pleasure, said the Fox, for I would willingly now go to rest; and on the Morrow I will not fail to relate to you the Vision I expect to have from Mercury this Night. Having said this, the Lurcher and his Servitor left him, retiring into a Cave some distance from him; because at that time it rained much. The Fox glad he had so deluded the Lurcher, but more especially rejoycing that so much Rain fell (sent from Fortune as he then superstitiously imagined) to favour his Escape, made speed away, Travelling all that Night as fast as he could toward the Kingdom of Zalap: where we leave him, to return to speak of Quick-scent and his Servitor. Sir Quick-scent and his Servitor lay till after Sun rise the next Morning: for the Carriage of the Fox ever since he came out of eraria, had been such, as they did not (in the least) suspect his Falshood. But after they went to seek him, and could not find him near a∣ny of the Circles he had made, nor in all the Wood (which was by this time indifferent well grown) the Lurcher was in great trouble and amazement, and wholly unresolved what to do. By his footing he could not follow him, by reason of the great Rains that had fallen; what Course to take he knew not: but after he had considered that the Kingdom of Zalap (through which he had formerly passed) lay nearest the place where they they then were, he concluded he was gone thither. Therefore he resolved to run thither also in quest of the Fox. It was now about Noon before he set forth, and he entred into Zalap a little before Sun-set, about which time he met a Traveller alone, of whom he enquired
for such a Person as Reynardine. The Traveller an∣swered, I saw one (without Tail or Ears) this Mor∣ning early near this place, running hastily; but because I met him, and knew him not, I took no notice which way he went: for it Rained so hard, that I was glad to make all the haste home I could. Quick-scent hear∣ing this, knew 'twould be in vain to pursue him any further: being well satisfied that he was entred that Kingdom. Hereupon he resolved (tho with a sorrow∣ful heart) to return into the Province of Longwood for that Night, and afterward hasten to the Court as fast as he could. The next day he began his Iourney, and the third day following arrived at the Court of Fera∣ria greatly ashamed: however he failed not to inform the King of all that had passed. CHAP. XXVII. The Kings Proclamation, promising Preferment to him that should apprehend Reynardine, encourages many Beasts to go out in pursuit of him: their Names, and how they Reason with themselves thereabout, &c. THe King greatly troubled to find himself so high∣ly affronted by the perfidiousness of Reynardine, issues out his Royal Proclamation for appre∣hending him; in which great Honours are promised to him that shall take him and bring him alive to Court, or a'great Reward for his Head, if there be a necessity of killing him. The Nobles supposing this Proclama∣tion concerned not them, stirred not; but the Com∣mons hoping to better their Conditions, and to equa∣lize themselves with the Nobles, were strangely tick∣led
and aected with the desire of Honour; and too ma∣ny of them und ertook this Enterprize to their utter ruin. Yet each of them before he set out, seemed to well weigh and consider what he went about, and to give him∣self a Reason why he did so. The Reasoning of these with themselves, we will in order set down as follows. Sir Ferox the Tyger to himself said, many of the Nobles are of my Kindred, I am therefore most like∣ly to take the Fox, wheresoever I find him. The Proclamation saih he is in the Kingdom of Zalap: the Iourney it is true, is long; but what of that? the Ho∣nour is great. How many in the World have run strange and difficult Adventures to die Honourably, all Histories plainly shew. I will try what I can do (as Old as I am) had I had such an Opportunity before, I had sure enough been a Lord long ago, as well as the best of my Kindred. With these vain Conceits he went in quest of the Fox. Oon the Bear, Nephew to the Traitor Bruin, said to himself thus, My Vnckle Bruin by his Treason hath extinguished the Nobility of our Family, if I can re∣trieve what he hath lost, my Name and the Memory thereof, shall be renowned to all Posterity; besides in the mean while, I shall be made a Lord and live splen∣didly all my days: therefore I will go and take the Villain Reynardine. Cornige the Hart, hearing of this Proclamation, reasoned thus with himself; When Honour and Pre∣ferment call so loud, who can stop his Ear? I am one of the swiftest Beasts of the Forrest, therefore may (more easily than others) take the Fo wheresoever I find him: and who can tell, but that Fortune hath to me only made this great offer of Nobility; I'll try the Experiment with all speed.
Tauro the Bull also resolved upon the same Iourney; for he thought within himself thus, Surely I that am one of the strongest Beasts of this Kingdom, may with∣out difficulty take that poo, wak and inconsiderable Beast Reynardine, so soon as I ca but set Eye of him. Therefore I will not delay (for the Reward is great) to try what I can do. Having said this, he began his Iourney fair and softly. Hippus the Horse would also undertake this new Ad∣venture, to himself saying, Nothing venture nothing have. It is but Travelling into the Kingdom of Zalap, which undoubtedly will (as all Places usually do) yield me Food sufficient, and there waiting for a time, till I can understand where he is. Knowing this, I will go to him, and tell him if he yields not himself to be my Prisoner, I will dash out his Brains with my Heels: being thus terrified, he cannot choose but surrender him∣self and follow me. Then shall I be made a Lord. Witless the Ass (wiser in his own thoughts than all others) said to himself thus, I have a proud Cosin, called Doctor Asino, who disdains me because of my Poverty; but now I have an Opportunity to pay him in his own Coin. For it will not be long before I shall be made a Lord, and then will I look as disdainfully up∣on him, as ever he did upon me. I am sure, tho many other stronger and abler Beasts than my self are gone in quest of the Fox, I only shall take him: for so it was signified to me in a Dream this last Night, and all my Acquaintance know I am wont to have true Dreams. Therefore I long to be going, and think every Minute an Age, till I set out. So away jogs he. Kamo the Camel, tho he lived at his ease in the For∣rest, would needs undertake this Enterprize also, rea∣soning with himself as follows; I have the Advantage of all other Beasts, not only because of my great Sta∣ture,
but also by reason of the length of my Neck: for if the Fox be climed up a Tree, I can easily take him down thence; or if he have hid himself in a Pit, 'tis but kneeling down on the brinks thereof, and taking him up, which I can very well do. Besides all this, by the benefit of my long Legs, I can out-go all Beasts what∣soever; and being able to Travel two or three days without Water, and with little Food; I can rid more Ground in one day, than others can in five or six. All which Advantages considered, I have the greatest Reason of all others, to go in quest of Reynardine. Accordingly he went. Climerock the Goat, Eldest Son of Old Hircus, would have taken his Younger Brother Caper along with him, but his Father refusing his Consent, he resolved to go by himself, in pursuit of the Fox. For (rejecting all the good Counsels his Father gave him) he framed and devised strange Chymera's in his own Brain, fancying (because he could Clime and Leap well) he should certainly take Reynardine, and so sud∣denly be made a Lord; yea, he was so foolishly Opinio∣native, that he imagined himself no less than a Lord, before he had set one foot forward in his Iourney, which he undertook with more haste than good speed. Grunt the Swine, Surnamed the Boar, made one a∣mong the rest; for he with himself thus Reasoned: I am in scorn called Swine, and filthy Beast; and all this for a matter of nothing, only because I (by En∣sample of my Predecessors) do often lay my self down in a Quagmire; the delicacy and softness of which Lodg∣ing, had any of them known, they would never have de∣spised. But here is now an expedient offered to wipe off this Infamy. The . by his Royal Proclamation, promises to invest with Nobility, and number among his Nobles, him that can take Reynardine alive, Ma∣ny
I see are ready to undertake this Enterprize, why not I? If I lose my Labour I am where I was, and cannot be more contemned, than now I am; but if I take the Fox I am made for ever, and all my reproach will vanish as Smoak. For who then dares (I being Vices in great Persons are too often applauded and imitated. a Lord) to call me Swine, or filthy Beast? Nay, 'tis an hundred to one (after that) if it be not accounted an Honour to wallow in the mire. Therefore I'll go and see what I can do: So on he went. Many other Beasts (without discretion, being altoge∣ther unable to seize the Fox if they should see him) would needs go out on the same Errand, to their gaeat preju∣dice, as shall be shewed. Brocket the Badger (Rey∣nardines secret Friend) went in this Troop, not so much desiring to take, as to see Reynardine, that he might prevent his being taken by others, as he after∣ward did. But Quick-scent the Lurcher, after he had obtained Licence from the King, went out in pursuit of Reynar∣dine not excited by hopes of obtaining the promised Re∣ward, but spurred on by desire of Revenge upon the Fox, who had so basely deluded him. For before he went, he made a solemn Vow to the King, not to return to Court, till he had himself taken Reynardine alive or dead; or should certainly know he was taken or killed by others.
CHAP. XXVIII. The Misfortune that befel the Pursuers of Reynardine, after they came into the Kingdom of Zalap, &c. The Ass takes the Fox; but is himself taken and made a Slave. IN the mean while all the Pursuers made what haste they could in their Iourney, striving who should first enter Zalap. Each of them feared his fellow should have fight of him first; therefore they all dispersed them∣selves several ways, every one choosing that way he best fancied. The Fox who expected to be pursued, saw ma∣ny of them; but durst not shew himself to any, until he espied Brocket the Badger, to whom he thus spake, Sir Brocket, My Old Friend, I am very joyful to see you. I am no less glad I have found you, Sir Rey∣nardine, quoth the Badger, but are you sensible of the danger you are in? Here are a great number Beasts ent∣tred this Kingdom in quest of you, whom if they take and carry alive into Feraria, they shall be highly Reward∣ed; and he that alone takes you and carries you alive to Court, is promised no less than a Lordship: if he cannot take you alive, he shall have a great Recompence for your Head presented to the King. I know you may escape all these well enough, if you be careful; but how or which way you will evade Quick-scent (who is more than all your other Pursuers) I cannot tell. When I know your Lodging, I will divert them from you as well as I can. Then did the Fox after great thanks given to the Badger, shew him his Lodging. Hereupon they agreed where to meet every Night, then the Badger left him, and the remainder of that day, and every day after,
he carefully waited for the coming of some of the pur∣suers, whom he always directed further and further from the Fox, till they all fell into one danger or other; as shall be shewed in particulars as follows. Ferox the Tyger was by him sent so near to a Coun∣try Village, that all the Villagers were up in Arms against him; but he stoutly defending himself, and the Townsmen being afraid, escaped with Life, tho wound∣ed in the Thigh with an Arrow shot at him. This Wound proved so grievous to him, that he Cursed the day of his setting out, and hastned all he could out of that Kingdom; resolving never more to pursue the Fox: so home he went limping as fast he could. Orson the Bear was sent another way, but he either mistaking the Directions the Badger gave, or through his own Carelesness, entring a Field instead of a Lane (through which he should have passed) disturbed the Feast of seven or eight Shepherds sat down to Dinner with their Dogs by them. The Shepherds and their Dogs assault the Bear, who defends himself as well as he can, At length Orson sorely bitten, and extreamly worried with the Dogs, laid himself down as breath∣less. The Shepherds seeing this, called off their Dogs and immediately put a King into his Snout; by which; after they had muzled his mouth, they (with the help of a Rope) tied him to a Tree; where after they had ended their Dinner, they left him till towards Night. Then they sold the Bear to a Gentleman that kept him for his pleasure to be Baited with Dogs as often as he plea∣sed: So that he lived a miserable Life, worse than death it self. Corniger the Hart, having broke into a Park, was found by the Keeper, amongst other Harts, and Hunt∣ed to Death in a few days after.
Tauro the Bull had no better fortune: for he was found fighting with a Bull of that Countrey, had a Rope cast about his Horns, was Baited with Dogs, and then sold to a Butcher. Hippus the Horse sped not so ill; yet he (being a Stray, as they call beasts without an Owner) was taken up for the Kings use, who kept him among his Chariot-horses, where he was well used (tho a Slave) all the days of his Life. Kamo the Camel had the same Fortune, not to be slain; but made a Slave he was, and constrained to car∣ry heavy Burthens as long as he lived. Climerock the Goat sped worse than these: for he was taken among an Herd of Goats of that Countrey, and was (by the Goatherd soon after) singled out with some few others to be slain by the Butchers Knife. Grunt the Swine underwent the same fate, tho in another manner: for Squire Careless the Prodigal (Rey∣nardine's Master, as the next Chapter shews) with his Dogs, and other Companions of his, being gone forth an hunting, met him; at the sight of whom they were greatly amazed, saying, Here's a Wild Boar! what shall we do? Careless the Prodigal said, be of good Cheer Sirs, I'll warrant you we kill him. So they a Tailed the Boar, who stoutly defended himself long, killed some of the Dogs, and hurt one of the Men; but at length, being run through with a Boar-spear, which one of the Company had, he was quickly after killed. His dead body the Fox to his great content, saw it carried into his Masters Kitchin. The other inferior Beasts that came in pursuit of the Fox, were most of them killed for their Skins or Flesh; some few only escaped to carry the News in∣to Feraria.
Witless the Ass, the Bade had not diected to go a∣ny whither, but let him range where he pleased, judg∣ing it impossible he should ever take the Fox. Yet in this he was mistaken, for the Ass wandring he knew not whither, came by chance to the Gate of the Back-Court Yard of Squire Careless his Palace; where rub∣bing his Neck, he with his Head thrust oen the Gate, and then espied Reynardine fast asleep in the Sun-shine. To him he went softly, and seized him, presently car∣rying him out of the Gate. The Fox knowing he was taken, was surprized with extream fear and amazement; but after he perceived in whose Custody he was, he was the better satisfied, and spake to the Ass as follows. Sir Witless, I am now where I would be, thanks to our great Goddess Fortune who hath now fully answered my Requests: for being weary of my Life, and knowing well so many fierce and uncivil Beasts of my own Coun∣trey, were come out in pursuit of me, I always desired to fall into your Hands, and be by you taken. Sur∣render my self I durst not, for fear of my other Pur∣suers, who will certainly (if they meet us) rescue me out of your Custody, and murther you (to be sure) to have the Honour promised to themselves. I saw you coming towards the Gate, which I presently unbolted before you came near, that you might easily thrust in your Head, and seeing me, seize me as your Prisoner. I did indeed feign my self asleep, because I feared, if you found me in any other posture, you would suspect I had some design o draw you into a Snare; and so (be∣ing, as you are very wise and circumspect) warily eschew the danger, and I by that means be frustrated of my hope. The Ass hearing this Lying Story, all which he believed as most true, said, Sir Reynardine, you shall never have Cause to repent your being my Prisoner; for I will use you so well, as if you were my own Bro∣ther.
I believe no less, said the Fox, but have you well considered, Sir Witless, how I shall be kept alive all these seven days we have to Travel into Feraria. For the Iourney will not be ended in less, tho we go the nearest way, as I am sure we shall, if you will be informed by me, who know all the nearest, most private, and best ways into our own Countrey. Indeed Sir Reynardine, quoth the Ass, I did not consider that; but I suppose you know how to provide for your self. True Sir, said Reynardine, I do so. And to tell you the truth, have already provided enouh to serve me all the Iourney; but it is at least eight or ten Furlongs off this place, where my Provision lies ready packt up in a Waller, commodious enough for you to carry, if your Worship will be pleased to take the Pains. The Pains! said the Ass, doubt not that, I will do any thing that may hasten our Iourney: for I think every Minute a Year, before I shall come into Feraria, and there be made a Lord, as I shall now sure enough. Therefore good Cosin Reynardine, go fetch your Wallet, that we may proceed in our Iourney with speed. So on they went, the Fox marching by the Asse's side for a Mile or more, until they came to the Pales of a great Park. Then the Fox said, Sir Witless, look over these Pales, see you not an Hill close by? Yes, quoth the Ass. There said Reynardine, on the further side in a dry Cave firm∣ly closed, lies my Wallet. I wish you could go with me thither, for I am loath to leave you; but there is no Passage for you into the Park, unless we go twen∣ty Furlongs about. It is but a short cut thither, and I shall return presently, if your Worship be pleased to give me leave to go without you. I prethee do, quoth the Ass, I hate delays. So the Fox went through an hole of the Pales, glad he had so deluded the Ass. In the mean while the Fox being gone, the Ass to himself thus spake.
O Great Goddess Fortune, how infinitely am I bound to serve you! who neglecting the greatest, prou∣dest, and strongest Beasts of the Forrest, hast confer∣red this great benefit on me, the humblest and weakest (tho in truth the wisest) of them all. Now shall every one I meet call me Lord Witless. Now my proud Co∣sin Dr. Ano will, so soon as I enter the Forrest (like a base Sycophant as he is) congratulate my happy re∣turn, saying, I am glad to see your Lordship, hoping your Lordship is in good health, and the like: but I'll see him choakt e're I will take a bit of Physick of him. My thinks I already hear my self called, the Honoura∣ble Lord Witless, who did more by his Policy, than all the Pursuers of Reynardine could do by their strength▪ Vndoubtedly they will also say, had I not been very wise (as I well know I am) it had been impossible for me to take so subtile and crafty a Politician as Reynar∣dine, who had deceived the King himself, the wisest of all Animals at this day living. The Ass continued this vain Exultation, until he thought Reynardine's absence over tedious; then with a loud voice he said, Reynar∣dine, Reynardine, hasten quickly and come away. But tho Reynardine heard him not, a certain Woodman (who was wont upon the Backs of Asses to carry Wood to sell) heard him well enough, and (because he under∣stood not the Language of Feraria) he called his Speech, Braying. This Woodman had long waited to find this strange Ass, of whom he had been told by many; but now, by his Voice directed to the place where he was, being come) ready provided with an Halter to take him very near him, the Ass had scarce ended his second Call to Reynardine before the Woodman's Halter was about his Neck. This rude Assault the Ass took in great scorn, for his (imaginary) Lordship took it for no less than a very high Affront, which he would have revenged pre∣sently,
had not the Woodman prevented that, by be∣labouring him soundly with a Cudgel. The Ass feel∣ing the smart of the Blows, would fain have broke his Halter, but could not: for maugre all he could do, he was forced to go with the Woodman, who tied him fast to a Tree until Night. CHAP. XXIX. Witless the Asse's Discourse with his Fellow Asse. He runs away, is retaken. He carries Wood into Squire Careless his Palace; is upbraided by the Fox, &c. THen did he drive him home with five other Asses he had before. To all these five, as they came into his Service, he had given Names, by which he called them ever after. The first he called Stare The second Dry. The third Col. The fourth Lit. The fifth Drone. And Witless (now the sixth) he named Tat. When they were all come home, the Woodman put them all together into one Stable, where was Straw enough, but very little Hay. This kind of Food Wit∣less the Ass, tho hungry, would not touch, His Fel∣lows observing this, said, Brother Ta, because you are a Stranger we leave the Hay to you, Straw will con∣tent us very well. Tat Answered not, nor would he eat. Vpon this, Drone spake to him thus. Sir Ta; When I first became a Slave to our Master, I did (as you now do) forbear to eat my meat the first Night; but I sorely repented it the next day. To second this Stare spake as follows, I was so silly as to do so too at first; nay I thought my self utterly undone when I came first
to Service. But serving so good a Master I now think my self in a very happy Condition. To what Stare had said, all the other assented, commending their Master highly. Then said Tat, I suppose you were all born Slaves. No, say they, we were not born Slaves; but the Man that can first master any of us, makes him his Slave for ever, unless he be pleased to sell him to ano∣ther. As most of us have been sold to several Masters, of all which, him we now serve is certainly the best. For said Kol, Its true, in Summer time none of our Kin can want Food, what Master soever they serve; because every Bank yields Thistles, and every Lane (not to mention the Fields we often pass through) hath Grass growing more or less, besides other good Herbs fit for Meat. But alas when Winter comes many of them are even starved, and I may truly say are too often back-beaten, as well as belly-beaten. For the Men of this Countrey take us to be silly inconsiderable Asses, such as they may use as they please; nay I dare to say, some of them think it no greater Sin than to kill one of us, than it is to kill a flye. But our Master is of a con∣trary mind. Whensoever any of us are Sick (tho that but seldom be) he presently leads us to a Leech, who gives us a Drench, and we are cured. If in the dead of Winter, we have eaten up all our store, our good Master carefully provides for us, or (to speak more properly) teacheth us how to provide for our selves. For if there be any Provision in the Countrey, far or nigh, we shall be sure to have our part. I well re∣member this very last Winter, in a very cold frosty sea∣son, when all our store was eaten up, our Master cal∣led us all together, and bid us follow him; then did he lead us about seven Furlongs from this place, to a ve∣ry fair Stack of Hay, commanding us to fall too; and whilst we were eating he loaded every one of us with
as much Hay as we were able to carry. When this Store was spent, and more Hay to be got with safety a∣ny where, and the Spring not yet fully come on, he di∣rected us to a low thatcht House, in which o body dwelt; with this Thatchd we lived, till hard weather broak. What of all this, quoth Tat, how good soever he hath been to you, Iam sure he hath done e the great∣est Injury, that ever was done by Man to any Creature. For when he so rudely and with violence seized me, I was calling upon one Reynardine my Prisoner, whom I should have carried into my own Countrey, and then (so soon as I came there) have been made a Lord. O the thoughts of this Lordship is even ready to break my heart. But I'll run away with all speed, whensoever this Prison door is opened. As he said, so he did the next Morning. For being not tied, whereas his Ma∣ster thought he had left him tied, he went out with the othe Asses, who stood still to have their Pack-sadles put on, but he ran away as fast as he could. His Ma∣ster missing him, soon ran after, and having over-took him, bang'd him soundly. Then he brought him back, saddled him, led him into the Wood with the rest, and loaded him first of all. Poor Witless (now Tat) could not endure any more to think of his supposed Lord∣ship; for by resisting his Slavery he made it the worse, being continually beaten, if he seemed unwilling either to be loaded or to carry his load. After three or four days the Woodman loaded all his Asses with Wood, to carry to Squire Careless his Palace. When they came there, Tat being the last in order, was last to be un∣loaded. Him the Fox espied in his Masters yard, with his burthen of Wood on his back therefore coming ve∣ry near, he saluted him thus, Honourable Lord Wit∣less I am glad to see your Lordships Vesture so splendid∣ly embelished with the truest Embems of your Nobili∣ty.
I have seen many Nobles, but none like your Lord∣ship. I perceive according to the Art of Herauldry, Your Honours Coat-Arms must needs be the Pack-saddle and bundle of Fagots, Field Verd, emblazon'd with Halters and Girts. So Noble a Coat none of your Lordships Ancestors could ever pretend to. The Ass hearing himself thus flouted by him, who was (as he thought) the sole occasion of his Slavery, resolved to kill him if possible. But as he ran to∣wards the Fox, intending to trample him under his feet, he brake his Girts, down fell his Wood, and the Fox ran away laughing. His Master seeing this, hastned to him, and in a great rae beat him more than ever he had done at any one time before. So the poor Ass was constrained to bear both Slavery and Derision, for his aspiring to Honour too sub∣lime for his Capacity. After this Bocket the Badget knowing well that all the Pursuers of Reynardine, were either killed, fled home, or made Slaves, except only Quick-scent the Lurcher, whom he had sent to the further part of the Kingdom, from whence he supposed he would never come, took his leave of the Fox, and returned into Feraria.
CHAP. XXX. Reynardine's manner of Life in the Kingdom of Zalap. His Taking by Quick-scent the Lurcher. THe Fox escaping from Quick-scent the Lurcher, as is above shewed (in the 26th Chapter) and coming into the Kingdom of Zalap, well knew he could not safely there live, without being either kil∣led, or taken for a Slave. Therefore he purposed with all speed to put himself into some Gentle-man's Service, and with him to make as good terms for his Liberty as he could. Accordingly he went directly to the House of one Squire Careless (which House seemed to him a state∣ly Palace, and it was by Men called the Squire's Place) who took great delight in Novelities, and to entertain strange Beasts, many of which he at that time kept. When the Squire saw the Fox, he asked him of what Countrey he was? He Answered, he was born in Fera∣ria, but by reason of his great Enemies he durst no longer dwell there. What is thy Name, said the Squire. My Name Sir, quoth the Fox, is Reynardine, and I came hither purposely to entreat your Worships Patron∣age, that I may live safely without fear of them that seek my Life. But said the Squire, What canst thou do towards a Livelyhood? I have too many to feed alrea∣dy, that live idly and do nothing. Sir all I request of your Lordship (said the Fox) is only a dry Lodging, and my Liberty to go in and out, as I see Occasion, e∣specially in the Night. If these be granted me, I shall be so far from wanting Food of my own providing, that I shall be in a Capacity now and then, to present your Worship with a couple of Ducks, a fat Goose, Capon,
young Rabbets, Pullets, Chickens, or the like. All that I want at present is only my Dinner this day, af∣terward I shall need no further Allowance from your Worship. Squire Careless, glad to hear his new Servi∣tor thus speak, presently called for his Huntsman, commanding him to feed Reynardine among his Hounds that day. The Huntsman obeyed, but the Hounds at fight of the Fox were all in an Vproar; yet after he was removed to eat his meat further off, that Tumult ceased. So the Fox came no more in sight of the Hounds, for he needed not; because his Master had ordered seve∣ral secret Passages to be made under the Walls (that enclosed his Court-Yards, Garden and Orchard) so that he could go in and out at his pleasure, day or night. The Court-Yards were before and behind the House, and the Garden and Orchard of each side. Here the Fox lived safely (except his being taken by the Ass) until all his Pursuers, save Quick-scent only, were taken, slain or fled; and for some time after, till his Masters extream Prodigality constrained him to break up House-keeping, and fly to avoid the fury of his Creditors. All the other Beasts that Squire Careless had kept were divided among his Creditors; and had not Reynardine escaped by one of the before-mentioned secret Passages, he had been shared among the rest. This Disaster happening, the Fox was now at a Non-plus, and knew not what to do, till he called to mind that not far off lived a wretched Covetous Fellow, who was in derision called Gripe the Miser. The House he lived in was little, Old and much out of Repair. A true de∣scription of a Niggard. Garden he had none, but the Ground that lay round his House was let out to others. Two small yards he had, one before and the other behind his House, according to the Custom of that Countrey. Here he lived like
an Hog in a Stye, without a Servant. For he durst not keep any, because of the Charge. He would drudge like a Slave, and pincht his own Belly to save his Mo∣ney; but was Glutton-like when invited to anothers Table. To this goodly Master the Fox resolved to pre∣sent his Service, not doubting but that his own Thefts would be highly acceptable to so great a Thef. There∣fore waiting his Opportunity, he went to him into his Yard, and thu spake: Reverend Sir, I am a poor Stranger in Distress; and more he would have said, but Gpe the Miser interrupted him, saying, What is that to me? Whence come you, and where lived you last? To this the Fox answered, Sir I last lived with Squire areless. Ah! quoth Gripe, and because you help'd to undo that Prodigal Rascal, therefore you in∣tend to endeavour my undoing also; away Miscreant, get you gone, or I'll send you packing. Pray Sir hear me one word, said the Fox, and I will go as soon as you please. Well, speak on, said Gripe To this the Fox said: Sir I neither received Food nor Wages of my Master Careless; all that I had of him was only his Protection within his Walls, and a little Hovel to e in; for which I made him satisfaction more than twenty fold For almost every Night I brought him in either a Rabbit or two, or an Hen, or a Cock, or else a Capon, or a Pullet, or two or three Chickens, and commonly once in two or three days a fat Goose, and Ducks often. But after I considered how riotously and profusely he spent all, I was not a little troubled, that I should take pains for such a Spend-thrift. How∣ever, being a Stranger, and not knowing where to bet∣ter my self, I bore all patiently, till he broke and run away. Then hearing of your great Thriftiness, I thought it better to offer my Service to you, than to a∣ny other. This Sir, was the only reason that moved me
to come to you. You speak well, said Gripe. What is thy Navie. My Name Sir, quoth the Fox, is Reynar∣dine. Covetous Persons ra∣dily embrace any unjust, Course, for accomplish∣ing their ends. And you, said Gripe, desire to serve me upon the same Account, as you served that Rogue Careless. Yes Sir, said Reynardine, but I request I may be Lodged in your Back Yard, and that I may have Passage made under the Pales to the Field side, that I may go out and in as I see Occasion: and then on the Back side of your House have also another Paage into some one room, to lay up the Provision I bring in. You shall, said Gripe, have all you can desire. I have an Hovel ready for you on that side, and the Passages you require shall be made this day to your content. Will, you stay now you are here, or come again annon? To this the Fox answered, Sir my greatest danger of being surprized by my Ene∣mies is in the day time, at Night I am secure; there∣fore I request I may be Lodged presently in the Hovel you speak of, It shall be so, said Gripe, come in Rey∣nardine. So the Fox went through the House into the Back-Yard to take possession of his new Lodging: and at Night had very industriously stole for his new Master a good fat Goose. Which, when Gripe saw in the Mor∣ning, he was overjoyed: and after he had commended Reynardine for his Theft, he pulled off the Feathers, and carried it to Market. For his Covetousness would not suffer him to dress and eat it. Here the Fox lived above four Months, by all his diligence scarcely satis∣fying the avarice of his greedy Master. With Squire Careless he had lived near three Months, during which time of seven Months or more, Quick-scent the Lur∣cher had Travelled all the Kingdom over in quest of the Fox; escaping the danger of Slavery by his swiftness of foot only.
Now the Lurcher despairing ever to find the Fox, was contriving how to get out of the Kingdom, and to return to the Monastery of Manton: for he resolved (ac∣cording to his Vow made to the King) no more to go into Feraria. But whilst he was in this mind, and on∣wards of his Iourney thitherward, it was his hap (just about high Noon) to lie down to rest himself close by the Pales of that Yard, wherein Reynardine's Lodg∣ing was. Here he had lain long before he espied the Fox coming out of his Masters house, and plainly saw him (with meat in his mouth) go into hs own Lodg∣ing. This sight greatly rejoyced Quick-scent, who had thoughts of seizing the Fox presently; but fearing that attempt would be too hazardous in the day time, he de∣ferred it till Night. Therefore well observing the place, he went into the next Wood, and there rested himself all that Afternoon: When Night came he re∣turned again, and leaping over the Pales, went directly to the Hovels where Reynardine had been; but was gone out before he came. Here he lay for some time, till the Fox returned, who suspecting nothing, carried what he had got into his Masters House, and made haste out again. Him the Lurcher saw, but would not take him whilst in the Yard, fearing danger that was not. After the Fox was gone out into the Field, Quick-scent pursued, and soon overtook him, whom he hasti∣ly seizing, as hastily carried away; the Fox crying out, but all in vain.
CHAP. XXXI. Reynardine's fruitless entreaties to be dismissed by Quick-scent. Ferox the Tyger rescues Reynardine, and con∣trives the death of Quick-scent; but he escapes, and hastens to the Court in Feraria, &c. The Tygers O∣ration, who carries the Fox Prisoner to the Court. WHen day-light appeared, and the Fox well per∣ceived in whose Custody he was, he began to intreat the Lurcher thus, Sir Quick-scent, I know I am but dead, if you carry me into Feraria. I am heartily sorry I deluded you so (as I did) in Long∣wood; but it was the fear of Death constrained me so to Act. If now you will be pleased to hear me, I can shew you the great Inconveniency of your enjoying the honour and title of a Lord in our Countrey. I will hear you Reynardine (said Quick-scent) but be brief, for we must hasten our Iourney. Then the Fox spake thus. The Nobles of Feraria do generally all hate each other. The reason of this I suppose is, because they all (except the Kings own Family) possess not their Honour and Title by Inheritance, as in other Kingdoms, but are advanced and depressed at pleasure of the King. For in my remembrance almost all the Nobles have been changed: but that great change had not happened so all at once, had it not been for my Fathers Conspiracy a∣gainst the King. Yet had that never been, by mutual ha∣treds they would all have lost their Honours, perhaps before their Deaths, but after Death to be sure) their Sons might possess their Wealth, but not their Ho∣nour. Therefore if they (being all Natives of the same Kingdom) because they envy each other, can any one of
them, as he gets the Kings Ear, depress his Fellow Lord, as is daily seen, what safety in so slppery a Sta∣ton, can you expect that are a Stranger? I tell thee, Reynardine (said the Lurcher) I have not taken all these Pains, spent so many Months time, and run so many dangerous Adventures to make my self a Lord, but on∣ly to perform my Word and Vow to your King to do my utmost to apprehend you, and bring you to Court, or never more return ino Feraria. Nor have I malicious∣ly, or for Revenge, so earnestly Pursued you, but on∣ly to recover my lost credit, and for the end aforesaid. Therefore I can most truly say, if the King will par∣don you when we come to Court, I shall de heartily glad. I humbly thank you Sir Quick-scent (said the Fox) for the good will you have towards me, tho I deserve your utmost hatred. Yet Sir, if at this time you will save my Life, I will be your Slave as long as I live. This you may do without breach of your Vow. Hold Reynardine, said Quick-scent, you are greatly mista∣ken. I Vowed if I found you (as now I have done) to carry you into Feraria, and so to Court. This I am resolved to perform; but when I come there, I will do what in me lies to obtain your Pardon. In the mean while let's hasten on our Iourney, in which if you offer to escape, I will maime you, not kill you, but carry you a Criple to Court. Whilst he was thus speaking, Corbant the Rook sitting upon a lofty Elme very near, plainly heard their Discourse, and as plainly saw the Fox in the Lurchers Custody Therefore she (being a great blab of her Tongue, and also hating Reynardine) rejoyceing greatly at what she had seen and heard, hast∣ned by the help of her Wings with all speed possible in∣to Feraria, and so into the Forrest; where she failed not to tell her Errand to Ferox the Tyger (as to a Person of note) who promised her a large Recompence, if she
would say no more of it, till he himself had taken the Fox, and brought him to Court. Hereupon she pas∣sed her word to keep Silence in expectation of the promi∣sed Reward. But she had talked so loud to Ferox, and he to her (because she was upon a Tree, when they had this Conference) that many others as well as them∣selves heard what was said. These other Beasts soon en∣tertained the same thoughts of going forth to meet the Lurcher, and take his Prisoner from him, as Ferox the Tyger had conceived. So all went out, tho seve∣ral ways, about the same Errand. Each of them in∣tending to supplant his Fellow; yet all said they would assist each other against Ferox the Tyger, and circum∣vent him if possible. But the Tyger prevented all their vain Endeavours, getting first into the Province of Longwood, where he met the Lurcher and his Pri∣soner, within half a days Iourney of the Kingdom of Feraria. When he came near to them, he imperiously commanded Quick-scent to deliver up the Fox to him. Quick-scent the Lurcher obeyed, because he durst do no other. The Fox finding this change of Keepecs, was glad: for he now hoped assuredly to make his escape in the Night. But this his hope was frustrated by the coming in of those other Beasts before spoken of, who (as they had before agreed) resolved to fight the Tyger, and seize Reynardine to themselves. Yet their resolu∣tion was so disjoynted, that three only of the stoutest assailed Ferox, the rest stood by as Lookers on. Du∣ring this Combate, the Fox had certainly escaped, had not Quick-scent kept a watchful Eye upon him, and as he ran away presently seized him. Ferox the Tyger in the mean while (tho old he was) made shift to kill two of his Assailants, sparing the Life of the third, upon his promise secretly to kill Quck-scent the Lur∣cher, in whose Custody he saw the Fox again was.
But the Lurcher immediately after the Fight was ended, returned the Fox to his new Keeper the Tyger, who feignedly thanked him for his Care, which he was resolved to requite with Quick-scent's ruin, tho herein he was greatly deceived. For he that had undertaken to kill the Lurcher, com∣municated his intent to another, who (promising his Assistance) gave Quick-scent notice of this design against his Life. The Lurcher (as was Reason) believing this Information, fled away early in the Evening, be∣fore the hour came, in which he should have been mur∣dered, and in less than two days time arrived privately at the Court in Feraria; yet shewed not himself to the King, until the third day in the Morning. Then he in∣formed his Majesty, both how he had taken the Fox, and how he was rescued and taken from him by Ferox the Tyger's haughty Command, which he durst not but o∣bey: but spake not of the Tyger's design to murther him, because he feared he should have no Witness; also he thought, seeing the Tyger was so bold to take away his Prisoner, and by other Persons contrive his Death, he would not stick to murther those, whom he had im∣ployed to murther him, that no Tales might be told. As he thought, so it was in effect; for when he that should have killed Quick-scent, was disappointed of his purpose, and told by him, whom he had made privy to this design, that the Lurcher was fled; he very foolishly hoping for a Reward from the Tyger, ran hastily to him and said, Noble Sir Ferox, I have executed your Command, and buried your Enemy in a Pit, too deep to be Discovered by any. Hereupon the Tyger presently killed him, as he before intended. This Murder was committed be∣fore Sun-rise. Not long after the Tyger calling all the Company together, by whom the Fox had been all the Nght suficiently guarded, he spake to them thus
Sirs, I am willing to let you understand, that Quick-scent the Lurcher (like a perfidious Stranger) hath basely forsaken us, tho to him the Care of securing the Prisoner was left; as you may very well know by ye∣sterdays work, when Reynardine (seeing me ingaged in fight with those three Villains that assaulted me) attemp∣ted to escape, but was prevented and secured by the Lurcher. I to ease him, both before and after that, took charge of the Prisoner my self until last Night, when I committed him to your Care. Now having ear∣ly this Morning received true Intelligence, that one of those three Assassinates (whose Life I yesterday spa∣red) conspired with that false Miscreant, Quck-scent, to set the Prisoner at liberty, rather than I should have the Honour promised for his Apprehension, for that Cause I justly slew him, as he deserved. Therefore I command you all (in the Kings Name) not to enter∣tain any Familiarity with Quick-scent, if he should come near you, by Day or by Night, till we shall have ended our Iourney: and always be diligently careful, that the Prisoner escape not. For that Person that permits him to escape, shall certainly suffer for him. Having said this, he led them forward, and the fourth day (a little after Noon) he brought the Fox Prisoner to the Court.
CHAP. XXXII. Ferox the Tyger, hoping to obtain the Honour promi∣sed for apprehending the Fox, is shamefully repulsed, Quick scent the Lurcher is Honoured by the King. BVt in the way thitherward, Ferox the Tyger told the Fox if he would before the King acknowledge him (and not Quick-scent the Lurcher, or any other) to be the only Person, by whom he was apprehended, he would use his inetrest with the Nobles, to intercede with the King for the saving his Life. Reynardine the Fox hearing this, tho he had no reason to believe, hope or except pardon, by any Intercessian whatsoever; yet that in the remainder of his Iourney, he might be the better used; he promised so to do. When they came to Court, and the King heard thereof, he commanded the Fox should be secured in the Common Iail, and Ferox the Tyger come to him on the Morrow. Accordingly the Fox was carried to Prison, and there laid in I∣rons for his better securing. In the mean while the King spake to Quick-scent, who was privily concealed in Court, commanding him, to continue his retirement, and not shew himself to any one belonging to the Court, till he should call for him on the Morrow to confront him with Ferox the Tyger: whose ambitious Nature the King well knew. Therefore he was glad of this Op∣portunity to check him severely, to put an end (if pos∣sible) to his aspiring thoughts. On the Morrow, two hours before Noon, the Tyger failed not to go to Court. For he was in mighty haste to obtain the Honour he had not deserved. The King hearing he was come, com∣manded he should be brought into his presence. When
there, the King said, Sir Ferox, you have here done us a notable piece of Service in apprehending Reynar∣dine that pestilent Traitor. Your first attempt of this Nature was not so successful as this, pray tell me how, where and when you took him? For I am told it is not above eight or ten days since you went last out of the For∣rest. Here the Tyger after Obeysance made, spake as follows, Great Sir, as it is most true according to your Majesties words) that my first attempt was without success; so it is no less true, that this last had better success than I did expect, or hope to have. For in the first I was desperately Wounded by the Men of Zalap, and constrained to return home, re infecta; but this ex∣cited in me a more eager desire of re-gaining my lost Cre∣dit by a second Adventure; especially when I under∣stood how many had lost their Lives and Liberties, whilst they attempted to find and apprehend this Trai∣tor. Therefore so soon as I had recovered my full Strength, after the healing of my Wound, I was ex∣treamly desirous to make this second Tryal; yet not in the least promising to my self so speedy an Attainment of the wished end. For I no sooner had set foot upon the Borders of the Kingdom of Zlp, but I espied Rey∣nardine running before me; therefore I speedily pur∣sued, and soon overtook him. Then the King said, Who was with you when you took the Fox? I am told a great Company came home with you yesterday. It is true Great Sir, said the Tyger, I had Compa∣ny enough, and more than I desired, not before, but after the Prisoner was taken, three of whom set upon me in the way, to have rescued the Fox (as it plainly appeared afterward) but in fighting with these I killed too of them, and pardoned the third. This third Person in great requital of my kindness, conspired with Quick-scent the Lurcher (who was also in the Compa∣ny)
to set the Prisoner at Liberty, purposely to deprive me of the Honour promised in your Majesties Procla∣mation. This coming to my Ear, I quickly took him, I had before pardoned, and put him to death (as he just∣ly deserved) least he should combine with others to ef∣fect the same: for I well knew that Quick-scent was fled. Whither did he flie, said the King? I know not, quoth the Tyger. Then (said the King) I do. For he fled hither, for fear of foul play from you, as I have now good reason to suspect. He shall be called, and then we will hear what you can both say. At these words of the King, the Tyger was extreamly amazed: for he supposed Quick-scent had been murthered; but now finding himself deceived, he knew not what to do, or say: all he could think of was stoutly to deny all that the Lurcher should affirm, and to appeal to the Fox's Te∣stimony for Confirmation of his own feigned pretensi∣ons. The Lurcher being called, quickly came into the Kings presence. To him the King said, Quick-scent I am very much mistaken if you did not tell me, that you your self took Reynardine in the midst of the Kingdom of Zalap. Here is now Sir Ferox, who took the Fox from you (as you say) but (as himself saith) first found him, and saw not you nor any other, till after the Fox was his Prisoner. You took him in the midst of the Kingdom, he in the very Border of the same. How do these two Tales hang together, one of you must be a Liar, or else, after you had lost him, Sir Ferox found him, what can you say to this? Great Sir, said Quick-scent, I told your Majesty nothing but the truth. I took Reynardine in a Village about the middle of the Kingdom, and with him Travelled hard two days and a half; until we were entred three or four Furlongs within the Province of Longwood: There Sir Ferox the Tyger met us, and very imperiously (as if he had
come in your Majesties Name) commanded me to sur∣render my Prisoner. I did so, and when he had con∣ducted him forward about five or six Furlongs more (not a full Mile I dare say) there met him about twen∣ty or thirty Beasts of several Families, three of which assailed him in my fight, Whilst he was combating with these (two of which he killed upon the spot, and gave the third his Life at his request) the Fox had cer∣tainly escaped, had not I very carefully look't to him; for he began to run, but I soon over took him; and when the Fight was ended, yielded him up to Sir Fe∣rox again. That Night after this, seeing Guard suf∣ficient about the Prisoner, and also suspecting my own safety, I made haste hither to inform your Majesty of what had passed. Very good, said the King. What say you to this Sir Ferox? Great Sir, said the Tyger, I utterly deny all that Quick-scent affirms, except as to the number of Beasts that met us, of which number he himself was was one, and my being assailed by three of the stoutest of them, for Rescue of the Fox; for whereas he saith, the Prisoner was like to escape, 'tis utterly false. His Escape was that, which Quick-scent and his Company endeavoured: for he, and that perfidious Villain, whose Life I spared, contrived the Fox's Rescue (as I truly told your Majesty) for ends best known to themselves. To the Truth of what I have now asserted, I appeal to the Prisoners Testimo∣ny. What credit, said the King, can we give to the Testimony of such a Varlet? Nevertheless he shall be brought hither. Accordingly the Fox was brought by his Keeper (Chained as he was) into the Royal pre∣sence; to him the King thus spake: Reynardine, tho I thought never (till at the place of Execution) to have seen you more, yet at this time to expound a Riddle, that none can so well unfold the Intricacy of, as your
self, I have sent for you. Therefore I now offer you your choice, either of extream Torment preceding your Death, or of a merciful Death without Tor∣ture; that is Torments, if you do not truly answer, without Equivocation, or any mental Reservation, to what I shall ask of you; or if you speak the very Truth, Death simply without any Torturing. My Question is two-fold: First who it was that apprehended you? Great Sir (said the Fox) I was apprehended once, as I lay sleeping, by Witless the Ass; but him I easily de∣luded, and so escaped. Long time after I was taken by Sir Quick-scent here present, who held me so fast, that I could not escape, nor did I, till he delivered me up to Sir Ferox the Tyger, whose Prisoner I was till brought hither. Very good, said the King. My second Questi∣on is, Whether Quick-scent lost you, and afterward you were found and taken by Ferox? Sir said the Fox, Quick-scent after he had taken me, never lost me, but (for fear I suppose) delivered me up to Sir Ferox, from whom I had certainly made my escape, whilst he was Fighting with others, had I not been re-taken by Quick-scent, and the second time delivered up into the Tygers Custody. As we went on our Iourney hitherward, Sir Ferox told me he would perswade the Nobles to inter∣cede for me to your Majesty, for the pardon of my Life, if I would (before your Majesty) acknowledge him (and not Quick-scent the Lurcher, or any other) to be the only Person that apprehended me. These were the very words he then spake, as far as I can now re∣member. Here the Tyger would again have spoken, but the King commanded him to be silent, saying, I am very certain the Prisoner hath now spoken nothing but the very Truth; therefore get you gone, and (in∣stead of Reward) hold your self well contented, that I punish you not, for what you have done. So away went
the Tyger greatly ashamed; and well he might, for this base Act of his made him contemptible to all the Beasts of the Forrest. But Quick-scent the Lurcher was high∣ly praised and honoured by the King, who himself cal∣led him Lord Quick-scent; giving command to all then present to publish his Honour to all his Subjects. To the Fox was given a Reprieve for three days, that he might the better fit himself to declare all the Transacti∣ons of his whole Life, as the King required, and he had promised he would. CHAP. XXXIII. Reynardine's last Speech, which discovers all the Trans∣actions of his fore-passed Life. He is hanged and quar∣tered, and his Quarters disposed of as pleased the King. WHen the day appointed for the Fox's Execu∣tion was fully come, he was in the Fore∣noon taken out of the Prison, not with vio∣lence and contempt of the Multitude (as his Father had been) but only bound as Malefactors are wont to be, and very civilly led to the place designed for his Execution. For such was the Kings command, that he might (without too great perturbation of mind) disclose all the Intregues of his former Life. When the King and Nobles had placed themselves as com∣modiously as they could do to avoid thronging of the Multitude, the King himself spake to the Fox (stand∣ing on the Ladder erected against the Gallows, where∣on he was to be Executed) saying: Reynardine I ex∣pect
you will be ingenious, and according to your promise, now give us an exact and true (tho brief▪ Ac∣count of the Transactions of your whole Life; that in after times, when your History shall be read or related to others, they may take Example by your Misdemeanours. I know you cannot but be guilty of many hainous Crimes: therefore I expect a free, true, and candid Confession from you, wherein I hope you will not deceive my expectation. To this the Fox said, Dread Soveraign, I wil conceal nothing of all I have done, or can remember I have done worthy of blame, reprehension or punishment, from the time of my Fathers Treason, unto this day. Reynardine, said the King, you speak well; if you do as you say, I also will keep my word, and you shall die with Mercy, not with any the least Torment; if otherwise you intend to baulk us, take what fol∣lows. By these words of the King, the Fox well understood it would be in vain for hm to hope by Lying, to reap any profit. Therefore sincerely, and without fraud or falacy, he began his Speech as follows. I Reynardine, the only Son (surviving) of Reynard the Fox, quondam Traitor, am here now (as I justly de∣serve) ready to be Executed, for Crimes indeed (long before this) deserving death. For altho of my Fathers Treason I knew nothing, before the Morning, in which he returned with about Four hundred Souldiers to his Castle of Malepardus; yet that very Morning, when he sent my Brother Volpus and my self away with his Treasure into the Province of Longwood, he told us that those two perfidious Lords (as he called them) Slylook the Panther, and Firrapel the Libbard,
had betrayed him; therefore commanded us to Pro∣secute them with perpetual hatred, till we had ruined them both. This fatal Command hath been by me fa∣tlly Executed, as in order I purpose most truly to declare. As touching the Treasure, which was bound up in ten Packs, that we devided equally, after we had (as our Father commanded) killed the Guide that conducted us into that Province. What the particu∣las of that Treasure were, I never knew; nor had I ever any such conference (as I feigned) with A∣dramand the Inchanter about hiding the same. For it was not long before we were rob'd of all by certain very potent Beasts of that Countrey, whose Names I never knew. At that time my Brother, too unseason∣ably striving to defend his part of the same Treasure, lost his Life. Then also I fled for my own safety, and it was my good hap to go into the Dutchy of Man∣ton, where I found Entertainment in the Monastery, and was afterward admitted a Member of that society; but being enjoyned Penance for my Thefts there commit∣ted, I unhappily ran away with my Religious Habit; by the benefit of which I lived very plentifully for a time; yet not without abundance of Lies, and feigned pre∣tences of Sanctity. For I was never in all my Life truly Religious; but always sacrificed my Honesty to my Pro∣fit. My pretence of Religion quickly ceased after the loss of my Religious Habit, and I was reduced to extream Pover∣ty. This necessity forced me to adventure, naked as I was into this Kingdom, where (by advice of Zani the Ape) I practised Physick, as is very well known. During this Practice, I wilfully and purposely killed the Old Lord Firrapel with an Opiate Medicine, which caus∣ed him to Sleep eternally. After I was discovered, I again went into the Dutchy of Manton, and by a Mounte∣bank's
help, had my Tail and Ears cut off. Thus dis∣figured I hoped to have been a second time admitted in∣to the Monastery, but was discovered and repulsed with shame. Then I hastned hither again, and by feign∣ed Lies got admittance into the Lord Sly-look's service, whom I purposely poysoned, mixing the Juice of Toads with the Diet-drink, that was made for him by Doctor Asino's order. My feigned lamentation for my Lords death, occasioned your Majesty to make me one of your Purveyors. In this Office I had not long been, before I was known by Gibbrel the Cat; him I drew into a Snare and murdered. A while after came Grim∣look the Mastiff, whom I (fearing he would discover me) by Policy caused to drown himself in a Well. Not long after that Brindle the Mastiff came also into the Forrest and so to me; but I supposing he had not known me, denied my true Name, and so put him off, that he came no more to me, nor saw I him afterward, till in your Majesties presence, where he uttered nothing touching me, that was not most true; yet to save my own Life, I denied all, and approbriously accused him, till his violent fury caused your Majesty to cast him into Prison. That Night I Poysoned him with Arsenick in Broath, which I my self made, and carried to him. The de∣predations I made upon Chantacleer's Kindred in Pitt∣wood, were only to sustain my own Life, and not out of malice or wantonness, whatsoever may be said or thought to the contrary. And I do now here truly con∣fess that the Inventory I gave to your Majesty of my Fa∣thers Treasure, was all a meer Fiction, containing not one syllable of Truth; but invented only to escape the pu∣nishment I then deserved. Also all and whatsoever I pretended was taught me by Adramand the Inchanter, was falacious and devised. So likewise were the Cir∣cles
I made, Sacrifices offered to the Gods, and pre∣tended Visions, all Devices invented for the same end; and to delude the Lurcher, now Lord Quick-scent, as accordingly I did. After this having fled (by the benefit of a great rain, which hindred his pursuing me) into the Kingdom of Zalap; where I well knew I could not be safe, without entring into the Service of some Inha∣bitant of that Countrey; I was directed to the Palace of one (Nick-named for his Prodigality) Squire Careless, with whom I dwelt almost three Months at my ease, and with Liberty enough. Here it was in the Back-yard of the Squire's Palace, that I was taken by Witless the Ass; who (too rashly giving credit to my feigned Speeches) not only lost me his Prisoner, but his own Liberty ever after. For he was taken and made a Slave by a certain Woodman. Him in a few days after, I saw (among other Asses his Fellow Slaves) with a Load of Wood upon his Back in my Masters yard; as a little before, I had seen the dead Body of Grunt the Swine, carried upon Mens Shoulders into my Masters Kitchin. But this good Master of mine had made such haste to spend all and more than all, that he broke and ran away; leaving all his Slaves to the Custody of New Masters: by one of which I should have been taken, had I not warily escaped by flight. Then went I to my second Master, whose true Name was Thrift; but he by reason of his extream Covetousness, was in derision called Gripe the Miser. With this Master (whose unsatiable A∣varice, with all my Thefts, I was not able to satisfie) I lived somewhat more than four Months, until that ve∣ry Night came, in which I was taken by the Lord Quick-scent; of whom again I here most truly say, that after he had taken me, he never let me go out of his reach by day or night, till Sir Ferox imperiously com∣manded me from him; then indeed, as I said before
I had escaped, had it not been for him. Now Dread Soveraign, as I have spoken nothing but the Truth in all I have said, I hope your Majesty will command my Exe∣cution to be without Torture. To this the King, Rey∣nardine, I do believe you have indeed truly declared te principal and most hainous Transactions of your Life; but it grieves me not a little, that so vile a Malefactor (as your self) should die without Torture; nevertheless for my promise sake it shall be so. Yet after death your Body shall be severed in Parts and your Head and Quar∣ters exposed to publick view, till they perish by length of time that all that see and behold the same, may by your Ensample take warning. Having said this, he asked the Fox whether he had any thing more to say? To this the Fox answered, No, not any thing more. Then the Exe∣cutioner, by the Kings Command, did his Office. After he was dead his Head was stricken off, his Entrails ta∣ken out and buried, and then his Body divided into four parts, which were set up upon Poles in the four prin∣cipal places of the Forrest; but his Head was delivered to the Lord Firrapel to be set upon his Countrey Palace, to shew to all, that his Father was Murthered by him, whose Head that had becn. The Lord Sly-ook's Dwel∣ling was too near the Court, therefore no one of his Quarters could be placed there. After this the King set forth a very severe Proclama∣tion, prohibiting any of the Fox's Lineage to enter the Forrest by Day or Night; but this Proclamation was ineffectual: for no Laws, how severe soever, can debar that Family, from insinuating themselves into all Socie∣ties, as experience daily manifests. FINIS.
