S4041 99831959 36426
The Last SERMON Of Mr. Henry Smith. Sometime Master of Arts in Christ-Church College in Oxford, & late Minister in Sallop. With his earnest Invitations to the Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper. And Directions to young beginners that they may be fitted for that Holy Communion, and receive it with profit. 2. His Holy and Pious Sayings in general, necessary for all persons. 3. Instructions for young People, Exhor∣ting them to Obedience, and duty towards their Parents. 4. The sad effects of disobedience, in the Examples of many wicked and unnatural Children, who ame to untimely ends. With Prayers sutable to divers occasions, by the same Author. ublished for the instruction and benefit of all Christian People. Licensed and Entred according to Order. Printed for J. Blare at the Looking-glass on London Bridge. 1686
The Epistle to the READER REader in this small Treatise, you will  such Spiritual Consolation, as will (if it  rightly applied) strengthen you, and inable  to resist the wiles of the Tempter, who l snares to intrap the doubting or careless So and not only so, but hereby you will be furnis with Coelesal Manna to sustain you and k you from fainting in your Pilgrimage, thro the wilderness of this World, till you safely ∣rive at the Heavenly Canaan, where all is  and peace: The which that it may be the  and portion of all faithful and sincere Chri∣ans is the hearty desire of him who is a well-wer to Soules. J. B.
The Last SERMON OF Mr Henry Smith Late Minister in Salop. &c. Luke 10. Chap. 13. Verse. Woe unto thee Chorazin; woe unto thee Bethsai∣da: for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sydon, which have been done in you, they had long ago repented in Sackcloth & Ashes. OUr Blessed Saviour, the Prince of Peace, the Mediator and Judge of the World, in order to recover lost nd undone Man, and restore him to the state rom whence he (through disobedience) was allen, laying aside the Ensigns of Glory and Majesty, for a time was content to leave the Right Hand of his Almighty Father, and to orgo those Hallelujahs and Triumphant Songs, sung in his praise by Saints and Angels, o take our Nature upon him, and fulfill his Fathers pleasure, that he might take away the
Curse, by becoming an acceptable Sacrific and a propitiation for the remission of sins▪ But what Entertainment did this low cond∣scention of the Second Person in the blesse▪ Trinity meet with among the ingrateful So of men? why? almost as soon as he was bo (though his humble Birth was celebrated an proclaimed with greater magnicence tha the greatest of Kings, which might have con∣vinced te stupid world that he was the Mess a Tyrant seeks his life, and all along snar were laid to intrap him: ye he went abou doing good even to those that were his enemy many of whom his Miracles (though the were such as never man did) could not mo to relent, or once so much as consider th miserable state they were in; which ma our compassionate Lord use these words of  Text, viz. Woe un thee Chorazin; woe  thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty works had be done in Tyre and Sydon, which have been done you, they had long ago repented in Sackcloth a Ashes. By which it is plain, That Mec and the offers of Grace ighted and neglect draw down impendant Judgments upon t Heads of the Sons of men: for certain it i that Tyre and Sydon had not the means used  them, that were used in Chorazin and Beths∣da; they had not the Gospel preached unt
them, nor the visible presence of God among them; no, they were in darkness, and groped for that Light only, which others had as bright as the Sun at Noon day, yet shut their eves against it, they reused his instructions, and would ave none of his Reproos, that (out of the abundance of hs love) came to pluck them out of the snares wherein Saran had intrapped them, and Chose darkness rather than light, because their deds were evil; Oh had they but considered in that the day of their peace, when grace and mercy was offered, how happy had they been! but by carelesness and negligence leting so great a mercy ip, he that came to save them, pronounced in the followig verse of my Text, that It should be more tolerable for yre and Sydon at the day of Judgment, than for thse Cities. And now let us consider a little with our selves, and exami whether we are not in the same Balance with those people: whether the oers of Gac have not ben equal: whether our ighing them have not been more: and if , how we shall avoid hose woes pronoun∣ced, which wos are not temporal; but eter∣nal. Have we not had the Gospel in its pu∣rity for many years preached amongst us, and its light shining bright as the Morning tar, whilest Nations fit in Darkness, and the
shadow of Death? how often has Life and Salvation been held forth, and how often refused and slighted? Consider, I say, how the precious moments (upon the well-using of which our immortal souls depend) have been vainly and idly squandered away, in pursuing vanity, and our own idle imaginations, in taking care for the things of this World, which profit not, but are fading and momen∣tary, almost lost as soon as obtained, making themselves wings, and flying away; which caused the Royal Preacher to say, That (after his considering all things under the Sun) he found them to be but vanity and vexation of Spirit; and indeed, they are less than vanity, if compared with those immortal joys, that are layed up for the Righteous, which Eye hath not seen, nor Ear heard: neither have they entred into the heart of man to conceive. Have we, I say, slighted and carelesly re∣jected these favours and offers of Grace? the certain it is, we may expect to be included into the number of those that were bidden to the Marriage-Feast, and by many trivial Ex∣cuses denyed to grace the Chamber of their Lord, and so be pronounced unworthy, which must needs be the greatest misery that can befall us: for that Parable relates not to a temporal Feast, but to the fulness of joy, that
hall be hereafter, in the presence of the great God of Heaven and Earth; and how then hall we mourn, when too late we find our elves shut out from the Beatifick vision, hrough carelesness and negligence, whilest hose that travelled in Lanes, and by the High-way, little expecting so happy an in∣itation, supply our places. O What a tor∣uring and tormenting sting will it be, when e consider, that for the trifling momentary anities of this deceitful World, we have ost those immeasurable and unspeakable Joys hat were freely offered, and might have been ur own, for mortifying a few carnal Lusts nd vain delights, wherein we found no satis∣action; Nor will it be the least addition to ur misery, in our lost Estate, to think how we have been invited, and once, and again in∣reated to embrace Life and Salvation; ay, how we have been almost at the Gates of Heaven▪ and then fainted and turned back, not hinking it a prize worh striving for: In uch a case, I say, if God withdrawing his avour, should give us up to a Reprobate ense, and we by sad experience find the hour of Grace is past, and not the least Beam of t left to comfort and refresh our weary souls, hen, I say, we should be miserable; and yet this will be the case of every impenitent Sin∣shadow
for although God is a God of Patien and forbarance, long-suffering, and abu∣dnt in mry, and pardon, yet will not h spirit alwaies strive with mn, but bei grieved and often affronted, will withdraw  self, and then will they be given up to be g∣verned by their own Lusts and unr passions, and run into all wickedness: as to plain are the examples of Cain and Judus, a many others that I might instance as  examples of Divine Vengeance, through th own pererseness and folly: for the mo Mercies and Opportunities we have to repe the greater will e our punishment and sham if we neglect to lay hold on them: for if b such neglect we grieve and affront the Ho Spirit, that with sighs and groans unuter∣ble makes intercessn for us, what can we le expect, than that so high an affront should b as highly resented. And upon the like oc∣sion was it, that the Prophet Isaiah, in t 1. Chapter of his Prphecy, the 2, 3, 4, an 5. Veres, thus complains, viz. Hear, O He∣vens, and give ear, O Earth: for the Lord ha spoken; I have nourishd and brought up Childre and they have rebelled against me. The Ox know∣eth his owner, and the Ass his Masters Cr but Israel doth not know, my people doth not cons∣der. A sinful Nation! a Nation laden wi
iniquity, a Seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel to anger, they are gone away backward. Why should you be striken any more? you will revolt more and more: the whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart is faint. In consideration of this, I say, let us look back, and consider what God has done for us, how gracious he has been, and what little Reason we have to sin against so much mercy and goodnes, against so much light and so much love, and how we by doing it provoke him to withdraw the light o the Gospel, and to remove his candlestick from among us, and overshadow us with darkness and deslaion; as too sadly the Churches of Asia (though planted by the bessed Apostles) have experi∣enced, of which once glorious and flourishing Churches now remins nothing but a Name, those Cunries being at this day totally overspread with Paganisme and Superstition; and this proceeded from their luke-warmness and coldness in holy Duties; plenty of the Gospel, for want of being rightly usd, sur∣feited them, made them grow wanton, and so forget the hand that protected them, cavelling about niceties, and falling at variance among themselves, to the scandal of their profession.
And what less can we expect, unless in tim we repent, and be heartily sorry for the mer∣cies we have abused, and thankful for the ma∣ny deliverances we have had; no Natio under Heaven having more visibly participa∣ted the Almighty's immediate favour. How often, and how mraculously have we been delivered from the treacherous conspiracie and bloody contrivances of our implacable Enemies, visited as with a Fatherly correctio by Plague, Sword, Fire, and mny othe calamities, to wean us from our Sins, and ye have been hardened the more, which may justly incense the God of mecies to deal wit us according as he has pronounced by hi Prophet eremiah, in the 23. chapter of hi Prophecy, verse 10. Moreover, I take fro them the Voice of Mirth, and the Voice of Glad∣ness, the Voice of the Bridegroom, and the Voi of the Bride, the sound of the Milstone, and th light of the Candle. In which words are comprehended all that can render a people miserable in this Worl and the World to come: Therefore, whilst i is to day, hear his Voice, ad put not off Repen∣tance till to morrow, for no man knows what a day may bring forth; Delays are the guilded Baits, smoothed over, by which the Devil insnares and deludes mens Souls, leading them through
he whole progress of their life by vain flat∣eries of long continuance here, when God nows we are as often cut off in the flower of ur Age, as when Palsey-Winter chills our lood, and leades with trembling steps unto he Grave: and then we may assure our selves s Death leaves us, so will Judgment find us: nd woe, and alas! will be our condition, if at he coming of the Bridegroom we want Oyl n our Lamps, for then it will be too late to y, and we shall for ever be shut out; or if e should enter, wanting a Wedding Gar∣ent, that is, if we should by vain flattery, or  condent relyance on Gods mercy, have ome propect of Heavenly happiness, and yet ever enjoy it, our case will be so much the more miserable. And it will be more tolera∣le for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of udgment, than for such, because they never ad the means of Salvation offered them, but groped in the dark Mist of Errour, darker han tht the Angel overshadowed them with, when they groped for Lot's door. And what an be then expected, but for ever to be shut ut from the Beatiick Vision, to hear the dreadful Sentence of, Depart from me ye cursed nto everlasting Fre: And who can dwell with everlasting burning? er. 33. 14. And ten to ne this will be the end of such as trifle out
their time in hopes a Death-bed epentan will be sufficient to attone for the sins  their whole life, when for the most part th are at that time neither able nor willing,  especially of all impenitent sinners; for  the Son of Sirach says, Eccl. 21. 10. he way  sinners is paved with stone, but at the End is  Darkness, and Pains. And holy David in  61. 12. saith, God rewardeth every man acco∣ding to his Works; yet is not God willing th any should perish, but that all should be save and has in the Gospel of his Son left precio promise, as Balm to cure the wounded Sou Nay, he is not only desirous, but etrea desirous, we shou'd be saved: for our ble Saviour assures us, There is more joy in Ha over one Sinner that repenteth, than over Nin and Nine just persons, that need no Reenta And God expostulating with the rebellio Israelites, demads of them the question,  will ye dye, O house of Israel? seeming ther b loath to stretch out his hand against them but like an indulgent Father strives to relai them by mildness, and prevent their ruin for certain it is, that his mercies are over  the works of his Creation. Nor was ou Blessed Saviour's compassion less, when  wept over Jerusalem, with this Lamentation O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! didst thou know in th
hy day the things that belong to thy peace, but ow they are hid from thine eyes: How often would I have gathered thy children, as a Hen gathereth er Chickens, and you would not? Now, I say, east this should be our case, let us no longer delay our repentance, but labour with dili∣gence to make our Calling and Election sure: Let us labour while it is day, least the night of Death come upon us, wherein no man can work: and contend earnestly for the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints: that having run he race, we may receive the Crown, which only can make us eternally happy; which God of his infinite mercy grant to all those that rust in him, and call upon him. And now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three persons, and One eternal God, be ascribed (as is most just∣ly due) all honour, glory, power, praise, might, majesty, and dominion, both now and for ever, World without end. Amen. Seasonable Instructions in order for a Prepa∣ration for the receiving the Holy Sacrament. REceiving the Blessd Sacrament is so necessary a point of Christian Duty, and
so great a Mystery of the Christian Religio that it is highly to be observed by all Chr∣stians, with the most profound Reverence an the stritest preparation: for in receiving  worthily, we mystically or spiritually eat t Flesh and drink the Blood of our blessed S∣viour, that is, by Faith and a full Affiance  him, whereby he dwelleth in us, and we  him; therefore it is not a thing rashly or u advisedly to be undertaken, least the unwo∣thy receiver far as the man did that wante a Wedding-Garment; for notwithstanding the Bread and Wine are but Elements for no∣rishment, yet in such a case they are to be r∣ceived as a pledge of the Lords death, till h coming: it being his special command to  Disciples, That as often as they did it, th should do it in remembrance of him; and b them injoyned to the Primitive Churches, a from thence continued to this day, in spight  all Opposition, Persecution, or whatever coul be invented by Heathens or some professers  Christianity, that were worse to abolish i or render it useless. Therefore let such  are desirous to participate of so great a bene∣fit, conducing to the Salvation of their precio and immortal Souls, consider. First, Let not any that is in a known sta
of Sin approach the Lords Table, unless he have entred into a state of Repentance, and re∣solv'd amendment for the future, least instead of receiving benefit thereby, he eat and drink his own damnation, not discerning the Lords Body. 2. After a man hath examined himself, let him consider the wretched state he is in, by na∣ture, and the inestimable value of that precious Blood, that was shed for his Redemption, and beg pardon of God for his past offences, and earnestly desire, that through his grace he may for the future be armed against Tempta∣tion. 3. Let a man consider well if he have any prejudice against his Neighbour, or have in∣jured him, and if so, he must reconcile him∣self, for otherwise he is not worthy of so great a Blessing: for as our Saviour saith, If a man love not his Brother, whom he hath seen, how can he love God, whom he hath not seen? 4. When a man is minded to approach the Holy Table, he must lay aside all worldly thoughts, and fix his mind wholly on Hea∣venly things, considering well that he is more immediately in Gods presence, than at other times, although he is omnipresent, and his eyes at all times pierce the darkest corner of our thoughts and actions.
5. We must put on bowels of compassio and Charity towards our poor Brethren con∣sidering that God made us Stewards of hi good things, that we might dispence them to such as stand in need, and that therby he may try our Zeal and Love to himself: for He that giveth to the Poor, lendeth to the Lord, &c. 6. Have a stedfast faith in Christ, and a∣dore his goodness, that he vouchsafed to hm∣ble himself to the deah of the Cross, to sav lost Man, and (like the Angels) love and won∣der at such his condescention, often putting up praises in Divine breathings to him, fo such his infinite love and favour. 7. When you kneel to receive the consecra∣ted Elements, let not your thoughts wander, for thereby you will give way to the Tempter, to steal away your affections, and place them upon Worldly matters, and triing vanities, and so lose the benefit of the Holy Mystery. 8. When you have communicated, retire with a stedfast Faith fixed on Christ, in assu∣rance, that through his merits, Salvation can only be derived to Mankind. 9. Do not so soon as the blessed Solemnit is over, return to the World, to mind tempo∣ral matters, nor give heed to vain and idle discourses, but spend the remaining part of the day in works of love, charity, holy exer∣cise,
meditation, prayer, and thanksgiving: or suffer at any time what you have done to ip out of your mind, nor forget the promises  amendment of Life, least God be displea∣ed with such trifling, and withdraw his race. 10. Learn to be contented in whatsoever aion or condition it has pleased God to ace you: And if at any time you have any oubts, or trouble arising in your mind, know  proceedeth from the temptation that is yed to withdraw you from Holy Duty, and e best Remedy to withdraw such obstructi∣ns is Prayer, and a stedfast faith, and laying 'd upon the precious promises of life and alvation, offered in the Gospel to all that are fflicted or heavy laden. And thus much may riefly suffice for the instruction of such as are esirous to receive the holy Communion of the Body and Blood of our Blessed Saviour: the enefit of which is great, if with a true and ely faith in Gods mercies, and a resolution f amendment of life, it be received; and the anger as great, if it be unworthily recei∣ed. The Holy and Pious Sayings of H. S. B. of D. in general.
LEt no man take care for the things of th World, more than is necessary, least  setting his heart thereon, he forget God. In all Estates learn to be contented wi your condition, for if God sees it requisite,  can raise you from a low condition to a high or bring you from the top of honour, to  with Job on the Dunghill. Refrain evil conversation, least by hearin vain discourse, you addict your self thereto and it becomes habitual in you. If any one injure you, mildly reprove him that so he being overcome by your meekness may take shame to himself & repent of the ev Good words are more forcible than threats for what is done unwilling is not done heartily Avoid the snare of the beauty, for that (like a Trap) is set to intangle thy Soul. Be not credulous to believe reports, least in so doing you creat to your self much trouble. Let not anger over-power you, nor be sub∣ject to unruly Passion: for he that cannot govern himself, would do ill to rule others. If Parents or Children dye, consider they were born to that end, and that we may go  them, but they cannot return to us; and therefore restrain from immoderate sorrow, for no sorrow (unless for Sin) is available.
Let every man be just in his dealings, least God blast his endeavours: for there is no∣thing so secret, but his eyes behold it. If we submit our selves to those that are set ver us, we do not therein so much obey Man  God, whose pleasure it is that it should be so If any be afflicted with sickness or calamity et him not repine, but bear it as the chaste∣ing of the Lord, who sancties affliction to hose that trust in him, to the saving of their ouls. he profitable Sayings of H. S. to exhort Children to be Dutiful and Obedient to their Parent. LIttle Children, next to serving God, ob∣serve to be obedient to your Parents  all things: for so is the will of your Hea∣enly Father. Remember what is threatned to naughty d disobedient Children: That the Ravens of e Valley shall pluck out their Eyes, and the young gles shall eat them up. Moses in his Law sayes, That whoever rseth Father or Mother, shall dye the death. herefore take heed, and do it not, no not  your Heart: for although Man regards it t, God will surely punish you. If your Parents be angry, strive to pacifie em with soft and gentle words, and so wll  win their love.
If at any time you have committed a ∣deny it not, but be sorry for so doing,  observe for the future you do so no more. Children, above all temporal Blessing prize the Blessing of your Parents: for ne any prospered, on whom their Pare Curse was intailed. Consider what Christ sayes: He has ∣clared, That whoever breaks the least  the Commandments, is guilty of the wh Law; And the Fifth ommandment  Thou shalt honour thy Father and Moth that thy dayes may be long in the L which the Lord thy Geth th. Those that cast off Obedience to th Parents, will never be obedient to any b∣side them. The lowly and mek God giveth Gra but the proud and stubborn shall be abash Consider, little Children, that you  dye, for Death as often crops the blosso as the ripe fruit, and then what will beco of you, if you are not found obedient to th that God has set over you for your good? Satan first striveth to alienate the hearts  Children from their parents, then from Go O let Virtue (my little ones) be yo Treasure, that so you may (when you dy be numbred among those little ones th Christ took in his Arms and blessed.
Obedience is the Crown of Youth, and in all God accepts it before Sacrifice. Obey not through fear, but love, and so God will bless you, and you shall see many happy dayes. Sad Examples of the untimely ends of Chil∣dren, disobedient to their Parents. THE first in Holy Writ that I find dis∣obedient to his Father, and to despise im, is Ham, the Son of Noah the Patriack; who beholding his Fathers nakedness, de∣pised and scoed at it, holding him that ade him a being next to God, in derision; for which he and all his Posterity inailed a Curse, for ever to be sernts and slaes to his Brethren and thei▪ Seed and to have no portion in the Inheritance of his Father; wherefore Josephus is of opinion, that be∣oming a unagate in the Earth, in process of time, his own children aose up against him, and slew him. The second example in Scripture, is of Phineas and Hophni, Sons to Elie the High riest; who in despight of their Father, li∣ing licentiously, despising him & disobeying is commands, they both in one day fell by he Sword of the hiliines. At what time
(for their wickedness) God suffered the  of his Covenant to be taken, and old  their father, who had been too tender towar them, to fall ack and break his Neck. The Third is of Absalon, who und mining the Throne of a too indugent fath conspired his death, and rose in Rebelli against him; but what ensued? He w caught by Gods Divine hand in an Oak,  there (whilst he was hanging) thrust throu by Job, and cast into a deep Pit. The fourth is of Adonija, who casting  all tyes of Duty and Obedience, usurped h fathers Throne, whst he was yet alive; b what was his end? He was slain by t Sword of King Solomon. Nor have t Examples of our later days been less drea∣full; for few Youths that have been execut for Robbery, or such like Crimes, but at t place of Execution sadly confessed, that d obedience to their arents, and falling in evil company, brought them to their untime∣ly ends. A Prayer in Sickness, or at the point of Deat O Holy and most Gracious Lord and Savi∣our Jesus Christ; in whose hands th souls of the faithful are layed up till the day of Recompence; have mercy upon the so and body of me thy poor and afflicted ser∣ant;
O spare me a little, that I may reco∣er my strength before I go hence and am no more seen; cast me not away in thine anger, nor forsake me when strength fails; let not thy hot displeasure burn against me, least n a moment I am consumed; nor turn away by Amiable countenance, but be thou my Physician, (O thou Physician of souls) let y precious blood wash and cleanse me from  Iniquitie, that so whether I live, or whe∣er I dye, I may be thine; and through thy Grace be added to make up the number of y Elect; Even so be it Lord Jesus, Amen. A Prayer for young People. O Lord regard my tender years, and accept in good part these my early Sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving at I most humbly offer to thy Holy Name; rengthen and support me O most merciful ther, that as I grow in years I may grow  Grace, and the knowledge of thy Divine ll; that so when I have with patience pas∣d through this troublesome World, I may rive at the place thou hast prepared for all se that love and fear thee: and this I  thou wouldst grant me, not for my own e, for I am unworthy of the least of thy rcies; but for the sake of my blessed rd and Saviour Amen.
A Prayer and Thank'sgiving after the receiv the Holy Communion. MOst merciful Father, we reder u thee all thanks, praise, honour, a glory, for that it hath pleas'd thee of t great mercy to grant unto us miserable s∣ners so excellent benefits and priviledges,  to be received into he fellowship and co∣pany of thy dear Son Jesus Christ our Lor yea, by his means we are thy adopted Ch∣dren, and he is made our elder Brother. Y O Lord, we come nearer than so: He is o Head, and we are the Members of th mystical Body. And all this proceeds fro thy gracious goodness, and compassion. F thou hast delivered him to death to give  life: Thou hast made him a Sacrifice  the necessary food and nourishment of  Souls; thou gavest way to the piercing of  sides, from whence issued water and Blo that we might know how we came clean from ou sins, and redeemed from damna∣on. Yea, O Lord God, thou hast present us in this Sacramnt that whole Tragedy his passion, that we out of Sorrows might cover Joys, out of his Groans might be co∣forted, and out of his death be presented life everlasting: we beseech thee, O Heav∣ly Father, to grant us this request, that th never suffer us to become so unkind as  forget such worhy Benefits, but rather m  of them in our hearts
