S4130 99832123 36594
THese few Lines are to all such as have an hand in Persecut∣ing the Innocent People of God (called Quakers) for the Exercise of their pure Conscience towards God, whom Christ Jesus the Light hath redeemed, ad is redeeming by the blood of Cleansing, into that spiritual Worship which he bore testimony to in his day when he was in the flesh; and all other Worships we deny, but that which stands in Spirit and in Truth, and redeems up to God, out of Sin and Iniquity, and brings to know the Translation from Death to Life, and so leads to the new birth, which gives an Entrance into the kingdom of heaven; and so we coming to know a measure of the Son of God, to live and bear rule in us, we come to inherit substance, and therefore can we not go with you to sit down in your dead Forms, nor be content with those empty shadowes, nor feed upon those Husks, because there is no life in them: For the Lord hath brought us to know the living bread which came down from heaven, which bread is sure unto us: And he causeth us to feed upon the hidden Manna, blessed be his name for ever: for he is large in his Mer∣cies, and plenteous in his Redemption to our souls: And if we should deny him before men, then might he justly deny us before his Fa∣ther, and deprive us of his living refreshments which we enjoy, and of his presence which is better than life uno us, and so cause him to pour down his fierce wrath and indignation upon us, and for ever to blot our names out of the book of lfe. And so for these Reasons, (do I declare unto you in the fear of the Lord) dare we not bow to your Law which is made against Conscence; For Conscience is Christs Throne, and none ought to usurp Autho∣rity there: So Bind not the Spirit of the Lord, nor limit the holy one of Israel unto a Form: But in love to your souls, I advse you, to let the Lord alone, prescribe him not a Way, but leave the work to himself, for he is the only wise. It is he, even he that con∣founds
the Wisedom of the wise, and turns the Counsel of the prudent backward. For Is not the wisdome of this world, fool∣ishness with God? In the fear of the Lord therefore (oh friends) take heed what you do, for the Lord will be too hard for all flesh: Bryars and Thorns cannot stand before him in battle, when he (That is a consuming fire) arises to plead the cause of his suffering seed. Oh be warned whilst you have a day; and remember hard-hearted Pharaoh, who would not let Israel go free, but their God wrought their deliverance through the destruction of their enemies: And did he not reprove Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm? And is he not the same God, and changes not? Or do you think that he hath forgotten to be gracious? Or is the sighs of the poor, and the groans of the needy hid from him? Nay surely, he is the same as ever he was, and will assuredly deliver his people (in his own appointed time) in this day, as ever he did in the dayes that are past: Therefore consider well these things all ye that forget God, lest he vex you in his wrath, and consume you in his sore displeasure, when there is none to deliver. Ah! Why should you bend your bowes, and make your Arrows ready to shoot at an innocent people, whose God is the Lord, who never harmed nor wished evil to you, but seeks the Lord on your behalfs, and supplicates him with brokenness of spirit, that you might not perish in your gain-saying, but that you might turn unto him that smites, wounds, and reproves you in secret, and lets you see all the outgoings of your minds, and vain imaginations of your hearts, when no eye sees you, nor ear hears you. This is he that would gather you up to God: Oh friends, resist him not any longer, he hath long born your Iniquities, and long waited over you, to be gracious to you: Oh turn, turn at his Re∣proof, Why will ye die in your transgressions? (Of a truth, He delights not in the death of a sinner) Why should his head be wet any longer with the dew, and hs locks with the drops of the night? Oh that you could feel the breaking of my bowels over you, and the tra∣vel of my soul for you, that you might come to believe in Christ Je∣sus the Light of the world, for he is near you, in whom the treasures of life are to be found.
How soon would he shew mercy to you, and heal your backslidings; and though your sins were as red as scarlet, he would wash you, and cleanse you, he would purge you, and purifie you, and make you vessels of honour, and then would he open of the rivers of life to your souls; and make you taste of the pleasures which are at his right hand for evermore. Oh friends, feel the bowels of an infinite God to you, whose mercies are unutterable, they cannot be declar'd! Oh how doth my soul earnestly invite you to Come and taste and feel how good the Lord is, that so you might come to comprehend with his people, what is the length, and height, and breadth, and depth of this Love of God which we enjoy in Christ Jesus. My Counsel therefore and Advice unto all where this may come, is, That you lay aside all your carnal Weapons, and seek not by them to force us from our Beloved, for you never shall be able (the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it) so in vain do you expect it, for the Lord hath determined to exalt his Christ (the Light of the world) and to set him upon his holy Hill: For no weapon formed against him shall prosper, because he is the Heir of all things, and it is he that shall rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron: And though he now be trampled upon as an enemy, and his face more mared then any mans, and no beauty nor comliness to be seen in him, yet to him shall the gathering of the Nations be, and the Isles afar off shall come to the arising of his Glory: and though now his people be led as sheep to the slaughter; and given dayly into the hand of the Devourer and Destoyer, and not thought worthy to live, nor tread upon English ground, Yet the Lord of Hosts is our strength, the God of Jacob is our Refuge: And though you feed his people with the bread of Affliction and water of adversity, yet the Lord forgets them not. And though it seems nothing to you to lay Fa∣milies waste, and separate Wife from Husband, and Husband from Wife, Parents from Children, and Children from Parents, not considering that the Lord sees you; and whatsoever ye do to his Members, he takes as done unto himself; yea surely the Lord sees you, he laughs at you, he hath you in dirision, and where will you appear, when he comes to plead the cause of his own suffering seed,
which hath long groaned under such hard Task-masters, who will not let Israel go free to serve the Lord their God, according to the Leadings of his own spirit: Had it not been better for you, you had never hd been born? Will your then saying, You had a Law, stand you in stead, when the judge of all the world comes to plead with you, who now condems and reproves you, and lets you see, you ought not to do it: Consider these things all ye that for∣get God, lest he tear you in peices in his wrath, and there be none to deliver you: For we are as the Apple of his eye, the peo∣ple of his pasture, and the sheep of his Flock: and mighty is our Deliverer, for there is nothing more desired by us then to do his Will, and in his heavenly Will do we lye down, where none can make afraid. Blessed be his Name for ever. It hath been much upon my Spirit, to clear my self amongst you, who have been a Sufferer by you, for no other cause, then for cal∣ling upon the name of the Lord, and the clearing of his precious Truth and people, that so you might not plead Ignorance in the day of Account, for dreadful will the Lord our God be to all his E∣nemies, he will render himself in flames of fire upon the heads of all the workers of Iniquity. For this is he who you are contending against, before whom all Nations are as the drop of a Bucket, and the small dust in the ballances: And when the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah arises to plead the cause of his suffering people in the fierceness of his Wrath, where will you hide your selves; Neither Rocks, nor Mountains shall cover you from his dreadful Vengeance, when he comes to plead with you, for his day shall burn as an Oven, and all the wicked and ungodly shall be as stubble before him: for all flesh is as grass, and the glory of man as a flower, which flourisheth to day, and to morrow is cut down and withered. So I exhort you all not to exalt your selves against your Maker, for he is determined to abase all flesh, and bring low all the lof∣tiness of man, and to make all the tall Cedars of Lebanon to bow be∣fore him; and all the strong Oaks of Bashan will he cause to fall at his appearance, who will not that Christ Jesus the Light of the
world, the Son of his Love should Reign, to whom all power in Heaven and in Earth is given, to whom we bear our testimony, who is as broad Rivers to our souls in this day. Glory be given to his Name for ever and for evermore. Written by one who is a Lover of the souls of all people, and travels for the Redemption of the imbondaged Seed, which lies in spiritual Sodome and Egypt in this day, as it did in the dayes of Old. Mary Smith. From Myddlewych-house of Correction in Cheshire the 10. moneth 1665. Printed in the year 1667.
HERE is another Warning which was given forth some years before, to the Majestrates and Ministers (so called) of the City of York, and several Copies of it was given into their hands, but their hearts were hardened, and they rejected Counsel: so the Prophesie is fulfilled, and the Lord is clear of them, and his people hath Peace in him, who forsakes them not in the six trou∣bles nor in the seaven. Glory to his Name for ever. IN vain do you Rulers and Magistrates upon the earth consult and take Counsel together against the Lord and his Christ: For I declare from the Spirit of the Lord, that there is no Weapon you form against him shall prosper. Again I declare to you by the pure moving of the Spirit of the Lord God, that made heaven and earth, that by that power which we live in, (whom the world in scorn calls Quakers) and are led by, to bear our Testimony against this wicked genera∣tion. By that power, I declare again to you from the Lord, shall you all be broken to peices like a Potters vessel, therefore in the dread and fear of the holy God, am I made to warn you in love to all your souls, that Repentance may be found amongst you in this day when he requires it of
you, that your destruction come not suddenly, and your Calamity like an armed man, then your Maker will not save you, nor he that formed you, will not pitty you. Therefore this is a Visitation from the Lord God to you all about this City of York, who are called Aldermen and Justices of the Peace or Ministers, Chuse whether you will bear or forbear, the Lord is clear of your blood, and this shall stand a wit∣ness against you for ever. Written by one who is a Lover of all your souls, whose name is known to you after the flesh to be Mary Smith. From Ouse-bridge Prison the 9. day of the 7. moneth 1659. The End.
