S718B R21150 12226356 56518
A SATYR ON THE Pretended Ghost Of the Late Lord RUSSEL. Si Natura negat, facit Indignatio Versum. Juv. Sat. 1. WHen sullen Darkness had o'er-spread the face O'th Universe, when th'Sun had ceas'd to grace The spacious Earth with his Illustrious Beams, And dipt his Golden Head i'th western streams; VVhen every Mortal was dispos'd to rest, And anxious care was banish'd from each breast: Tir'd with the Labours of the fore-past day, Each one to sweet Repose makes hast away. VVhen pleasant sleep had clos'd up ev'ry eye, And ev'ry honest man did slumbering lye: When none but Tories stagger'd up and down, And Bullies, to disturb our peaceful Town. Like Owls and Batts they shun the hated Light, To act their deeds of darkness in the Night. Then did begin this Pleasant Comedie, VVich prov'd to th' Actor almost a Tragedie; As by the Sequel, you will plainly see. The envious Tories with the Devil combin'd, T' asperse that noble Lord, who lately shin'd As a bright Star, in our terrestial Sphear, Alas too glorious to continue here Longer amongst poor Mortals; but he's gon To joyn in Consort, with the Heavenly throng: Where he enjoys eternal peace and rest, And with Felicitie's, for ever blest: Above the reach of the malicious hate Of wicked Tories, and of cruel fate That would allow to's Life no longer date. But now the scene begins, O horrid sight! A dreadful Ghost appears, drest all in white: Enough to scare a Tory out of 's senses, Who loves to see nothing in white but wenches. And thus he did begin, with hollow voice, And a shrill tone, utter'd with doleful noise. I am the late Renown'd Lord Russel's Ghost, That with a Lye'n my mouth went off the Chast
Of this vain World: O what a grievous pother Is made o'th' Speech of which I'm not the Author: For though it went Disguis'd under my Name, Yet Doctor Burnet only made the same: I cannot rest in quiet in my Grave— No, says the honest Whig, then thou shalt have That which will make thee; 'T was no sooner said, But strait the Restless Ghost he bravely laid. Not by th' uncertain Art of Magick Spells: Or pious cheats, us'd in Religious Cells; But the ne'r failing, sovereign Remedy Did to 's Jolt-Head, and Asses Ears apply, Of oyl of Club, which did him so deface St. Dunstan's Devil, was ne'r in such a case. Thus was the Foppish, and unthinking Sot Catcht in the Noose of his own shallow Plot. Like silly witches when in great'st distress Left by the Fiend they ador'd, find no redress: E'en so did our deluded wretched Cully Reap the Reward, of his prodigious Folly: Left by the Devil his master, and too late For him to 'scape, (O inevitable Fate!) Without sound drubbing, and a broken Pate. O Horrid Villanie, as ever can Be perpretated by perfidious man! Towzer, the wide mouth'd Bandog of the Nation May have new matter for his Observation, Since Tory visions, are come into fashion. The whiggish Maid of Hatfield was a cheat: 'Tis this Gigantick Soul must do the feat. VVhat envious Roger, and his yelping Crew, VVanted by sence and reason to prove true, This Gallant counterfitted Ghost must do. Over the dead t' insult, and Tyranize Argues but base, unmanly cowardise. Yet when this Noble Lord to Natur'd paid His Debt, their rancourd malice was not staid: Steep'd in the Livid Gall of raging Passion To Sacrifice his former Reputation, By shamming, cheats, and Lies upon the Nation. Thanks to kind Heavens, Defenders of the good And just, which all their curst designs withstood: Laught at their Pride and Folly, and has cast, On this their well form'd Tory Plot a Blast. Therefore let every honest man engage In hearty Votes to Heaven to save our Age, From Popish Malice, and from Tory Rage. By J. H. FINIS. Entred according to Order. London, Printed for Edw. Golding.
