V15 R6702 13090377 97358
The Ladie's Blush: Or, THE HISTORY OF SUSANNA, THE GREAT EXAMPLE OF Conjugal Chastity. An HEROICK POEM. By W. V. Attentant formâ celebréin{que} pudore Susannam Injusti, quibus est facta repulsa, Senes: Ira metús{que} fidem laesam testantur, at insons Fatidici vatis solvitur ore nece. LONDON: Printed by James Cotterel, for Robert Robinson, neer Grays-Inne-gate in Holborn. 1673.
To the AMOROUS READERS. PRREFACES to Books are as Gentlemen-Ʋshers to Ladies; when they have given a short account of the person or Subject they introduce, your own prudence will dictate to you, that your entertainment of them should be, in some measure, answer∣able to their quality. But the La∣dy we here bring into your view being of greater emi∣nencie then any other, as to the vertue for which her me∣mory hath been celebrated through all ages, it is thought requisite, to do it with more pomp and ceremony. The Author of this Poem having spent some time in the perusal of the Apocryphal part of the Holy Scri∣ptures, reflected, that there were three eminent vertues re∣commended to us in the persons and examples of three re∣markable Women. The first is Prudence, in those of Judith, a Woman, as to Counsel and Condct, in the grea∣test extremities of a tedious Siege, surpassing the best Po∣liticians of the Jewish Government; and as to Action,
out-doing all the Stratagems of the Inhabitants of the Hill-countries, to the admiration and amazement of Po∣sterity. The second is Fortitude, observable in the ma∣gnanimous Matrone mentioned in the Maccabees, who, with undaunted courage, chose rather to follow her seven sons through the gates of death, by a generous Martyr∣dom, then violate the Law of her Country. The third, Continence, exemplifi'd in the incomparable Susanna, for which she will be look'd on by all subsequent generations, as the great Example of Conjugal Chastity. Our Author hath thought fit to pitch upon this last for the Subject of his Work; waving the first, as implying a wish of that which the world calls Dissimulation for the more prosperous management of her designe; and the se∣cond, as being too great a precedent of Feminine courage, to be expos'd to the world, when those of that sexe, being made Egyptians by the Publick Faith of the Covenanting Cause, were already over-forward to be personally en∣gag'd against the late Royal Standard. For about that time do I conceive this Piece to have been written; if not rather in the year—Forty four, famous for the Story of the Four-legg'd Elder. History tells us of a Romane Lady, who, reflecting too seriously on a forc'd enjoyment, whether confounded with shame at her not having made a greater resistance, or the more to animate her Relations to revenge the violence, dagger'd her self out of a loath'd life. But as to our Susanna, what can be imagin'd more neerly approaching Martyrdome it self, then for a young Lady, of transcen∣dent
Beauty, to be brought to a publick and shameful Exe∣cution, surrounded with her disgrac'd and lamenting Re∣lations, to avoid a pleasure she had often tasted (as being a Wife) and might then have accepted, from persons who manag'd the Government of her Nation, and had the title of Elders, not so much upon the score of their Age, as that of their Authority? Could there be a greater discovery of Resolution, then for a delicate person of that tender Sexe, to prefer Stoning in the open field, before the pres∣sing sollicitations of two Elderly, yet not too far super∣annuated Gallants, in the shady solitude of a Garden? But never was so violent a temptation so bravely op∣pos'd, yet without any other defensives, then those of a meek and innotent resistance. Let any but imagine the horrour it must have been to her, to be so strangely sur∣priz'd in that posture of Paradise; and what confusion of thoughts it must have rais'd in her, to observe, in the Chrystal Mirrour of her Cistern, the representations of two persons so little expected, and, ere she could lift up her eyes to look about her, to finde her self within their un∣welcome embraces: Let any, I say, but imagine these cir∣cumstances, and thence compute, what an incredible pre∣sence of spirit what a recollection of vertuous and Matri∣monial obligations was requisite, to withstand the shock of so sudden an assault. These reflections, I suppose, occasion'd our Author's dressing up of this History of Susanna into an Heroick Poem; which he might have much enlarged, had he not thought it more convenient, to make it somewhat propor∣tionate
to the Story it self, as it lies in Sacred Writ. Wherein, if I am not mistaken, he hath oblig'd several sorts of persons, as first, those who are mightily affected with a Story put into Verse or fitted for publick Action, when in dull Prose it makes no impression at all upon them; and would rather see Susanna represented with Scenes in the Theatre, then hear of her exemplary Vertue and deliverance in a Sermon at St. Paul's, before the whole Representative of the City. To another sort espe∣cially the Sisterhood of the Nation, it may serve for a smart reproach of their frailty, who, upon the very score of this Story, have entertain'd such a pique against the Apocryphal Writings, that, of the many hundreds of Thousands of Bibles, printed during the five fatal O∣lympiads of the late Usurpation; I doubt the number of such as had those bound with the Canonical, does not a∣mount to the square root of the whole. In fine whoever are concern'd in the sacred bond of Matrimony, are ac∣cordingly concern'd in the strange accidents occurring in this Story; finding here how innocent Vertue was mira∣culously rescu'd out of the jaws of death; and the guilty contrivers of Susanna's shame brought to condigne pu∣nishment; to be perpetual precedents, to all such as shall presumptuously attempt the tasting of that fruit, which the Laws of God and Man have forbidden them.
The Lady's Blush: OR, The HISTORY of SUSANNA. SLeep on, perfuming Morn, let not thy smiles With one Reflex gild the Molucca-Isles: 'Tis time enough; on Tython's Saffron-bed Repose the curls of thy refulgent head; And let the Aethiopians Pearly Ore, Sown by thy hand, lie on their Swarthy shore A while ungather'd, that no Signal may Alarm the nimble minutes of the Day To harness Sol's fierce Steeds, lest while the Fates Enforce a passage through th'East's Lattice-gates, And send them panting up the Indian hill, This monstrous change him with amazement fill,
To see, since he descended last t'allay His flaming Temples in th' Atlantick Sea, Nature inverted, heat with cold thus fight Within one body, as before rude Night First spread its frozen arms to entertain That warmth which after brooded on the Main; And chill December quit his weeds of gray, T'usurp the Robe and Diadem of May: Chaste Groves polluted, where fair Daphne's hair True concord holdeth with th'affrighted Air, And sacred streams complaining as they scape From Springs attempted by the Elders rape; So pure a Fountain, that the mighty Jove Might thence make Hebe mix him Healths of love, And Iris draw her Aromatick dews Which on the Persian Vales she daily strews; VVhilst Justice with her mystick Scepter saves Vertue, that's shipwrackt, from the raging waves. The Scene's Judea, Babylon's the Stage Of Jacob's toyling issue's pilgrimage, VVhereon oft acted was the Tragick story Of Heav'ns First-born, Israel's expiring glory. Backsliding Nation! yet still forward went First unto Sin, then into Banishment. Therefore it pleas'd th'eternal power to raise Assyria's Monarch, to proclaim his praise, By sound of Ethnick Trumpets, too too shrill Not to advance the great Commander's will
Against those Tribes which took Roboam's part, And laid not the diviner threats to heart, Till, fury answering folly, they did lie Under the doom of God's enraged Eye, In miserable thraldome, to bemoan Judah's extinguisht light in parts unknown. Among the rest, Joakim, next of kin, As well to Judah, as to Judah's sin, His progress made; where, ere long seated, he VVisely provideth for Captivity, By loosing bonds with bonds. For Cupid drew A golden Shaft armed with flames that flew First to his bosome, then to one most rare As ere perfum'd the uncorrupted air. She was Chelkiah's daughter, brought along, At Babel's brooks to sing a Sion-song. And though their mournful Harp was quite unstrung, And tuneless on th' Assyrian willows hung, Yet Hymen took it down, and play'd so true, That discontents fled like the morning-dew, Or winged sleep, and darkness drew amain Her sable Ensignes from the Shinar-plain, By Dian's Torches chac'd, who led the way Before this Couple to their Marriage-day, And joyn'd them hand in hand; so great a Prize As she's, both Indies scarce can equalize. Besides her Beauty, which was highly fair, Her youth and comeliness beyond compare,
Greater perfections she yet own'd, chaste, good, And milde as Euphrates's Silver-flood, Which, softly gliding where old Eden lies, Seems here to court a better Paradise. There was besides, wherewith this Bride was stor'd, Another vertue yet, She fear'd the Lord; And as she fear'd, she lov'd; no servile fear, Such as base Slaves unto their Tyrants bear, But like a Daugther, who with filial care T'her Fathers just commands doth give an ear, Sh'observ'd her Maker; so 'tis hard to say If Love or Fear most taught her to obey. Thus was she by her righteous Parents bred, And in the holy Laws of Moses read. Who would not Solon or Lycurgus be, To have their Laws confirm'd by such as she? Or what good Law-giver could then repent To chuse, as he did, lasting Banishment? Then Numa's labour surely vain had been In his retirements to that Faery Queen; When here's Egeria, this the substance whence His frantick Raptures did at first commence; Yet he mistook it, that the fate of Rome Might still joyn hands with pre-ordained doom. Susanna therefore i'th' Chaldean land Doth for the Jewish Nation's wonder stand,
Where like her Fathers parcht and in distress 'Mongst scorching Sands in Paran's wilderness, She served him that by a flaming light His servants guided through the horrid night; Though here confin'd, like Noah in the fold Of damned wolves lost in the world of old; Or Lot in Sodom, Daniel in the Den Of Lions, milder then those cruel men; Or as Ezekiel 'mongst the Scorpions, where No holy Charm could make them lend an ear: So she, where God's a stranger, 's always known A Votary at his eternal Throne. For Joakim's riches, none of all the East, Nay wealthy Job can't call himself the best; Mighty in stock, and happier far in this, Job's wanton Dinah ne'r compar'd with his; Nor churlish Nabal, though his flocks could bring A widow's Dowry fit for Israel's King. Moreo're, a House whose building stretcht so wide, As might compare with the Neronian pride; No less a wonder then Rabyrus wrought, VVhen Stars and Poles idaea'd to his thought, VVhat work might take the proud Domitian, Corinthian, Tuscane, or Ionian. Besides a Garden, which the Curious will Best see describ'd by learned Bacon's Quill; Or in a lesser Folio view the same By th' Muses sacred held to Danby's Name.
Hither therefore the scatter'd Jews refort, In stead of Judah's, now to Joakim's Court, As to an Embleme of their sad White-hall, Because he had more honour then they all. About this time two Judges chosen were To stand at Helm, and the Republike steer, Both sons of Belial, far more like to split Poor Judah's tatter'd Bark, then manage it; Of cursed Ahab's race, whose wickedness Claims here in them by Metempsychosis. Thus unto Wolves committed were the Sheep, And over Lambs, two Lions sent'nel keep: For such they were, as oft the Lord foretold, With  from the days of old, Should cast up Babel's foam, men grave with crimes, Who seem to govern, but pervert the times. This place these Judges made their Rendezvous, Where daily muster'd the litigious Jews Their forlorn troops, for Orders here to call, As Ragged Regiments from a General; Even those who Zealot-like at Law contend, And counter by as with their dearest friend, Though Bench and Ear corrupt: the Judges here And Pleaders as in after-ages were, Knaves, and the most part Fools, ere Dulman knew Whether his Master could write false or true,
Or ever Sleep produc'd upon the Stage That Lawyer Ignoramus with his Page. The throng therefore of jarring Suitors gone, And clouds of bus'ness chac'd by Noonday-sun, Susanna, as the Season'd heat requir'd, Into her husband's Garden oft retir'd, With trembling leaves to fan, and shades asswage Th'hot entertainments of the Tropick's rage. Mean while, stern Lust with eyes more subtle far Then those pure Opticks of the Eagles are, Or Lynceus, whose perspicil, they say, Could measure paces with swift-footed day, Stirs up these purblinde Elders still to view The usual walkings of this matchless Jew. As Artists fingers busily convey Notes to that Instrument whereon they play: So every step of hers, as she did move, Jars on the Frets of their exalted love, But Discord raiseth with a murm'ring tone, Unheard by any save themselves alone, Till what before did gently glow, now streams Out in the atomes of devouring flames. For suddenly, this gale of lust awoke Hell's smothering embers wrapt in clouds of smoke, And our choice pair obliquely turn'd their eye, Looking asquint upon Eternity,
Lest that most simple undivided light, Once breaking in, might their black souls affright, As yet securely quiet and asleep, While stubborn thoughts no watch at all will keep. Howere they knew quite to desist was good; But wickedness, swell'd to so high a flood, Broke down that saving rampart, till at length Rebellion plumes it in her pride and strength: Reason commands, what then shall Heaven say no? Or Conscience check, when Nature bids men go? Yet here a witness unperceived stood, VVhile thus they did consult with flesh and bloud. For as in Fields appointed foes display Ensigne gainst Ensigne, till the doubtful day, Sway'd by Fates hand, unto one side doth yeeld; So now it fareth in a Spiritual field. The Battel's pitcht, Colours on each side flie, Upon the wing of hoped Victory; Launce threatning launce, conjoyned Bodies meet, And one another with loud Volleys greet. Both Flesh and Spirit grapple, parties made Hence from a congress of th'infernal shade. On th'other side, One, onely, subtil, pure, Th' adverse Phalanges able to endure. These Elders then, who such brave Champions had, (So potent was deceit) with joy grew mad At th'honour of their crime, and both apart This dispute eccho'd from's redoubling heart.
'Tis true, I'm great, and do the people awe By Israel's spotless and impartial Law; The Tribes committed are unto my hand, As to a Shepherd in a Captive-land; And if the Shepherd chance to go astray, To Savage beasts my Sheep must be a prey: Their lovely fleeces briers and thorns will tear, VVhen they, orewhelm'd with pensiveness and fear, Without their Leader wander, whose disgrace Advantage gets by th'honour of his place. Know it the people may, who oft forsake The paths of goodness for examples sake; And great mens faults move in a Sphere so high, As to be noted by each vulgar eye: Just as from Conflagrations in the skie, Star-blazing streams prodigiously do flie. But yet my greatness a disguise will lend, That safely I accomplish may my end. Fond mortal! thinkest thou Heav'ns clearer fight Hath now put on the mourning robe of night? Can mists, or darkness, or ought interpose Betwixt his eye that all things does disclose? No, no, there's one with flames of fire that flies Strictly t'avenge the world's impieties, And by the blast of his consuming breath Sure to repay sin, with its wages, Death. Though it be so, my unconfined will Is towring now upon too high a Quill
To minde such weak reclaims: I cannot stay, For fierce desire, like to a raging Sea, Bears me along; and though the best I love, Depraved sence makes me the worst approve. Let Bears and Tygers, all the Monsters that First roar'd upon the Mountain Ararat, (As Satan at the Sun-cloath'd woman hurl'd The Lethe-vomits of his dreadful world) Our Tribes pursue, then scatter and divide, My headstrong passion will not be deny'd: Destruction come, I'm satisfi'd if I May satiate my lust, and after die. Thus as Ripheus fell most good and true, Scarce matcht for vertue mongst the Trojan crue, Because the Gods thought fit: so in this heat Heav'ns powerful Spirit's pleased to retreat, And this Triumvirate of darkness weilds Its conqu'ring Sword through the forsaken fields, And reins once laid upon the stubborn neck Of each proud Elder, not the sharpest check Of Conscience might them stay, blindfold proceed, As always those whom Hellish Princes lead. Thus Vertue bleeding lay, successful Sin Beats down the Bulwarks, lets the Victor in, Who to compleat his Triumph, strives t'unite Those which did under his black Banner fight, Unknown to one another; though both were Wounded alike, yet neither durst declare.
So tim'rous guilt is, ere its branches shoot, Having i'th' minde but newly taken root. How many black conceits within them move From day to day hatching lust-raging Love? The object fair Susanna, whom to win, These Sages walk their usual rounds in sin, Contented with a bare reflex, till Chance Conspir'd their hellish purpose to advance. For being both departed at high Noon, Each to his several habitation, They wheel'd about, turn'd by an unseen rein, VVhich brought them to the self-same place again. Ev'n as a Needle toucht by th' Magnet-stone Abhors all points of variation: So these, impregnate by infernal fires, No point inclin'd to but their base defires. Therefore as rays that to one centre tend, Or different footsteps to th'same journeys end, They meet from whence they went, (dissembling it, And forc'd to leave their former counterfeit) Each on the other gaz'd, their wrinkled veins Swell'd up with guilt, dy'd in Vermilion-stains, Exchanged red for white, and white for red, More then a thousand tongues discovered, Till each as in the Mirrour of a Glass Reflections darted to the others face, And prologue thereunto was first to learn, The certain cause of either's quick return.
So that at last they both reveal'd their lust, And hudled up the thing 'twixt fit and just. Both thus alleadg'd: I thought at home to stay, But there's no food my hunger can allay, That longeth much, since first I chanc'd to see The golden fruit of one forbidden tree, Neer to this place, which flourishng doth stand, As if ne'r planted by a mortal hand, Or that its fruit was ne'r ordain'd to grow For the rude taste of worldlings here below. It is the wondrows Spouse of Joakim's bed That hath m'unwary hopeless fancie fed With new Idaea's; yet mean while I pine For that which shuns these restless lips of mine. Nor may ones thirst be quenched with that drink Which touched once, forthwith away doth shrink. Observe the motions of this glorious Star, Not such another's in our Hemisphere; Nay, Venus, whom youth call the Queen of Love, Doth not with such a radiant lustre move: In short, those women came not near her, when Angels of God were Sons-in-law to Men. The thought of home therefore's abhorr'd, for Hell's In every place but where Susanna dwells; And th'entertainments of our Beldames breath More dreadful are then shocks of sudden death, Who with revengeful kisses daily strive Kindly to bury us poor two alive.
But, doating Fools! they are mistaken, why? Old Aeson's Bath proves now no Poetry: Experience hath confirm'd it true and good I'th' vigour of our metamorphos'd blood. We're young again, and, like the Lads of Greece, We'll venture to surprise this Golden Fleece. All Colchos can't withstand, nor Dragons keep Their dreadful guard, whilst charm'd by us a sleep. Yet, fair Laverna, this request fulfill, That when all's done, we may seem righteous still. Now was that time when the Nemaean beast Stretch'd out his paws with rage on Cancer's breast, Rouz'd by the Delian God, roars out amain Quite through the fields of the Celestial plain, VVhilst from his furious breath fierce flames are hurl'd, VVith Thunders mixt upon the lower world, And frozen Stars which court the Arctick Pole In sweltring Thaws about their centres roul. As then of old, the chaste Nymphs made their streams A refuge from that Boy's misguided flames: So here Susanna to the Spring retires, To countermand the heat of July's fires, I'th'Garden to her Husbands Palace nigh, Where stood a Fountain that was never dry, But like to those which Paradise once sed, Sendeth fresh glories unto every Bed, Two Maids attending onely. Th'Elders had Themselves before into this place convey'd,
Whey they lay hid like Serpents to deceive, Taught by that Monster which so served Eve. Ye lofty Pow'rs! some reasons to us mind Why Hell, the World, and Flesh are thus combin'd, VVithin that place Cothurnick steps to tread, VVhere Flora does her various beauties spread? VVhat is the cause that made them this devise? Are Gardens Stages fit for Tragedies? In such a place first was the Devil's Prize God and the creature to make enemies. Prodigious Garden, that could bear a weed So full of poyson, as all Adam's seed Still cies, O wrerched man, what hast thou done, Thus to orewhelm us in perdition? David did there, with an adulterous eye, Bathsheba naked in the Fountain spie, An eye with winged murther charg'd, which flew As far as Rabbah, and V;riah slew. A Garden 'twas wherein a painful floud Sweat from our Saviour like to drops of bloud; And in a Garden Judas him betray'd; VVhere also was his righteous body layd. VVhilst thus the Elders and their Engines lie, Not the least thought of sordid Jealousie Disturbs Joakim's quiet, who affords No small respect to these Judicial Lords, VVhom to mistrust were madness, their gray hairs Being Antidote enough against such fears;
But rather thinks, These learned Sages will Susanna with some vertuous precepts fill; On whose each look an aged Hist'ry sits, The best improvement of all younger wits, Whereby she may, or ere old-age draws on, The prospect have of a free Horizon, Her understanding clearly so to view Fore pass'd events, and judge what shall ensue: Such guides I wish our Fathers had, perhaps They ne'r had long'd for these accursed Grapes That edge their childrens teeth, whose off-spring we The cause lament in our Captivity. Thus Joakim's well-composed minde foresees Not ought of the two Elders treacheries, But, unsuspecting man, receives as friends Those that disguised lusts with lawful ends; VVhich freedom bound them to this fixed day, VVherein they might his vertuous Spouse betray. For being here, she thinks it fit to lave Her wearied limbs in the refreshing wave; So said unto her Maidens, Hence, be gone; The place is private, leave me here alone: Haste, balls perfum'd, Sabaean Odours bring VVithout delay, to wash me at the Spring. Susanna then unveils her orient skin, Like Eve's in Eden, ere imperious sin First found an Apple, then a Leaf to hide The spotted Beauty of her new-born pride,
Into the Fountain goes, whose amorous brims Dropt tears for joy, t'embrace such snowie limbs, And curled in a wanton brayd, t'orecome Love's fire concealed in its watry womb. Had you but see, when yet she was half-bare, Part of her Mantle sporiing with the air, The rest in folds about her middle born: So sparkling Phlegon looketh in the morn, VVhilst glorious cloud in glittering fleeces flye, To interpose 'twixt it and humane eye. But once aloft, and to th'Meridian fled, His naked body on the hills doth spread; Such was she when those weeds or rags of clay From her diviner flesh were cast away. Ye fabulous Anoients! was not this same She Your Aphrodite, descended of the Sea? VVith Nymphs, not Neptune thus encompassed, VVhilst now Lucina brings the Spring to bed. Yea sure the same, although your purblinde eyes Mistook when she did from a Fountain rise. And this the Piece, Apelles to pourtray Durst not adventure hove one line a day. Glean'd up from thousand Beauties that might give The Painter fire to make his Picture live. So rare th'Idaea seem'd, such work there was T'extract from mortals an immortal face. Her Ivory-neck's like David's Tower of war, VVherein so many conqu'ring Bucklers are,
And Arrows numberless, and sure to hit Unhappie Man that gazeth once at it. Her Rosie Brests like the two Indies stand, A Globed Hemisphere on either hand; The cause perhaps our Fathers first did call East the right side of Earth's ever-rowling Ball; And hither Merchants, laden with desire, Hurry to quench the flames of fire with fire. The other Regions which beneath those lay, Are not unfitly term'd Incognita, Hid by the swelling water, which denies Further pursuit to our discoveries. Howere the Elders who stood watching here None of the worst Geometricians were; Like him, who having on Olympus found Alcides foot imprinted on the ground, Did thereupon his whole proportion guess, And so engrav'd the big-bon'd Hercules: These not unlike conclude, from what they saw, An image they of th'unseen features draw, And argue from the lesser; Vales close by Must needs abound with more variety: For when hills vaunt their fruitful pride, sure we In lower parts shall richer pasture see. Thus swell'd with hope, they made out all their Sail, And swiftly rid before a prosperous Gale; Their Keel's the Flesh, the Devil Pilots it, Like some grave Artist, whither he thinks fit:
Hell lends them Wind, Presumption plies the Oar, To land it safely at Susanna's shore. Not many leagues this well-mann'd Vessel flew, Till now within its wished Harbours view, VVhen rapt with joy the goodly Steers-man cries, Io, my Babes, lift up your aged eyes! Behold your peace, rejoyce, for yonder is Th'expected Port of all true happiness, Where bliss more then eternal rests in store: Go, and possess; what can be wisht-for more? Hereat these Elders, though until this time The Gout and Palsey troubled every limb, Make shift to run; those who of late had gone In Lordly Chairs to the Judicial Throne, Now finde their heels. Desire, as well as Fear, Oft wings the slowest feet, turns earth to air. Love knows no pomp, but stoops to meanest things, And levels Subjects with their Captive-Kings. Ev'n like two Eagles that are tow'ring high Within the Champian of the liquid skie, No sooner do discern their harmless preys, But th'on them with ne'r-failing talons seize: So they by Lust's most hungry rage compell'd, Susanna in their eager gripings held. She strives and cries: alas! what should she do? One naked woman in the arms of two, Not men, but monsters, such as Poets feign The Cyclops were, that did in Aetna reign.
Think how Susanna blush'd, look'd pale, and then A trembling fear, blush'd, and look'd pale agen; VVhilst they: ' Fair creature, now behold the doors ' Are all made fast, y'are now within our pow'rs; ' Yet we intreat: consent, come, do n't deny; ' We're smitten, Lady, and with you must lie; ' There's none can see't, 'tis witness causeth shame, ' VVhilst unrevealed Ills are free from blame. Susanna sighs, and strives, and cries agen, ' O subtle Elders! O polluted men! To which they: 'If thou't not, we Judges are, ' And 'gainst thy innocence will both declare, ' That, as we walked in this neighb'ring Grove, ' Thou play'dst the harlot with thy wanton Love. ' Therefore thy Maids away were sent, lest they ' Should notice take of thine Adultery. A strange Dilemma put forth to perplex The wav'ring judgement of that tender Sex. Therefore Susanna: ' Heavens be my guide; ' I am betray'd, distress'd on every side: ' If I consent, by Moses Law 'tis said, ' No wife shall climb up to anothers bed ' Unpunisht; which divine decree implies ' Death the reward of all Adulteries. ' But if refuse, y'already have design'd ' VVhat base return true Vertue's like to finde!
' Howere I must not, dare not sin: your skill ' Extends no further then this life to kill; ' But God will me avenge, and one day plead ' My guiltless cause with vengeance on your head. Thus as a Rock perceiving her unmov'd, The more she did refuse, the more they lov'd. For threats prevailing not with her, they try By speeches fair, and thus to her reply: ' Lady, such Coyness misbecomes your years; ' 'Tis time enough, when care hath sown gray hairs, ' And plowed furrows on your aged head, ' Then to confine unto a husbands bed. ' Y'are young, and handsom, of a comely feature; ' Can it be thoughtere God made such a creature ' For one man's sole embraces? why should Law ' Men more then other baser creatures awe? ' What though our Fathers Moses led? must he ' A pattern be to all posterity? ' Or if he must, what sin can you it call, ' To break one Law, when we oft break them all? ' No, no; regard the days 'fore Moses was; ' There were no sins, till he invented Laws. ' Can you suppose the Dest'nies ere withstood ' A free Community in what is good? ' Observe the Air, nothing more spotless is, ' Yet in a thousand thousand bosomes lies. ' Y'are born not for your self; the Lord doth hate ' Those that are backward to communicate;
' And rashness 'tis t'engross Heav'ns liberal store, ' Lest he who gave too much, should give no more. ' Nor be offended that old age hath drawn ' A ghostly curtain o'r our youthful Lawn, ' Or think it strange that lusty bloud remains ' Still in the chanel of our paler veins. ' 'Tis you that gave it life, the fault is yours; ' Do but consent, and then it shall be ours. Yet she again (tears trickling down her face) Reflecteth on their Honours, Charge and Place. All's labour lost. When they could not perswade, A rash attempt they on her body made. Whereat Susanna (for it was high time) Cry'd out aloud, 'O Heav'n avenge this crime! And shriek'd so, that the Palace did rebound With dismal ecchoes of that dreadful sound. The Servants all amaz'd run to and fro, Distracted, ingorant which way to go. By this the Elders therefore roar'd as high Against Susanna: for those that were nigh Such yells had never heard before; for there Two throats appear'd one open Sepulchre. Her Servants then in a most frightful maze Into the Garden rush at several ways; But when they saw their beauteous Lady stand Stark naked, and the Judges on each hand, What num'rous thoughts possess them! yea what shame! While the lewd Elders do this scandal frame:
' Friends, wonder not, our clamour though so high, ' Had cause enough ev'n for the stones to cry, ' Out of this Garden-wall, so to declare ' Your Lady's wickedness beyond compare, ' T'her Husbands shame, by being naught with one ' Young and spruce Gallant, who now hence is gone. ' For us to wink at such a fault, had bin ' Upon our own heads to pull down the sin. The Servants, much astonished to hear The Elders give her such a character, Durst not their Lady's cause defend, though she Ne'r was before charg'd with unchastity, And no such blemish was till then laid on The candour of her Reputation. By this report, Susanna's ill name's flown In one small moment through all Babylon. Fame's wings are long, and ever as it flies New courage gains, and strangely multiplies. How swiftly was the Persian once o'rthrown! That loss from Greece unto Mycale blown Ev'n in a point of time. Th'immortal Pow'rs Themselves confine not unto days or hours. There's sure some secret hand that doth convey With more then nat'ral speed, an infamy. This was Susanna's fate, in Vertue's place Onely succeed base titles of Disgrace; Made Town-talk: What, is modest Susan, she, Turn'd Harlot, taken in Adultery?
O wretched woman! infants yet unborn This fact will rue, and for their mother mourn, If she should scape with life; but 'tis unfit The earth should bear so arch an Hypocrite. Nay, old wives scarce with teeth to chew their bread, The thing through streets and every corner spread: ' VVhat think ye, Neighbours, of that youthful Bride ' In whom such holiness was thought t'abide, ' To day the Strumpet plaid, and's apprehended: ' Is this that Vertue men so much commended? ' The world is surely chang'd; both young and fair ' Our selves were once, yet 'twas our constant care ' Our Husbands not to injure; now it's common: ' He wants not faith, that henceforth ere trusts woman. VVhat art thou; Lust? or where is thy black seat? VVhat Dev'lish pow'r did such a fiend beget? 'Tis thou that mov'st in hell through every part, And (whilst Love bindes the world that nothing start) Confusion bring'st, and shatterest asunder Its pleasant frame, to trembling Nature's wonder. How is't that love so soon should hatred prove? And fierce revenge possess the seat of love? Or what unites such different extremes, But that Revenge and Love are equal flames? And Good and Bad oft lie so close together, That 'tis not easie to distinguish either. Sin, when conceiv'd, Lust for a parent hath, Lust the Grandsire unto that monster Death;
A wretched off-spring by these Elders got Upon Susanna, though they knew her not. For night was come, and it they wholly spent In thoughts of their inten ded Ravishment, And Junctoes set consisting but of three, Resolv'd before debate on Villany. ' Mischief, said they, must in progression be; ' There's no retrogradation in Villany: ' Let's then pursu't; he has but half a will ' To be unjust, who seems a fraid to kill; ' Nor knows he well a mischief how to cover, ' Who ere compleated thinks fit to give over. ' Her life must pay for this disdain, else we ' Our selves of guilt shall scarce acquitted be. Spotless Susanna! what misfortune's this, Occasion'd by these Elders wickedness? Thus Joseph's Mistress would have slily brought Him to th'embraces which to eschew he sought: Or that brave Grecian boy, whose bloud was spilt, To expiate his lustful mothers guilt. Sol had by this ran his nocturnal round Over the utmost Antipodian ground, And coming to Aurora's Rosie place, From off the Ocean sends his smiling rays, Whom to adore the mixed Heathen rise, Devoutly ordering their Idolatries. But wo is me! he did the summons give Unto a Judgement, where for no Reprieve
Susanna hoped: O immortal Steeds, Turn back for shame, be clad in mourning weeds; Why should ye read in such resplendent glory The fatal accents of a Jewish Story? Your Maker's darling, one that's innocent, Unto the place of Execution sent? That day therefore a greater concourse met At Joakim's house, where was the Judgement set; These Elders Pres'dents, and if that wo'n't do, They will be Judges and Accusers too. O barbarous men! and more perverted Law! Where none is found, will you there make a way? Like Hannibal the horrid Alps climb ore, And force a passage never known before? And that pure Justice might attest the deed, A Court is call'd to make good Naboth bleed. These Elders then gravely began to call For poor Susanna to the Judgement Hall: ' Go, bring her in; she folly did commit, ' Such as our Law by no means may acquit. With Father, Mother, Kindred, and a Train Of num'rous Friends, piti'd Susanna came; VVhere think what blubber'd eyes, what dreadful grace By this usurpt the splendour of her face. And blame her not, when harmless soul she's come From wicked hands to take her final doom.
Yet ne'r theless her glorious beauty shone, Like to the Studs of Ariadne's Crown; Or as the Sun, after a latter rain, Out of the clouds begins to peep again; Wherefore these wicked Belials gave command T'uncover her, that she might bare-fac'd stand, And with her Beauty feast their hungry eye, Before the Sentence pass'd that she should die. Corrupted Elders! what bewitch'd your minde? Nay, though you saw her, what made you thus blinde? Mark but her Friends and Kindred that stand by, Shew me amongst them any cheek that's dry: Behold the tears out of their pensive womb, Themselves deliv'ring silent Suitors come For Susan's life; see, see what trembling speed Poor hearts they make for th'innocent to plead. Where are your Children, if you ere had one, Suppose Susanna's, their Destruction. But vilest wretches, 'cause you ne'r had any, Chelcias, though but one, yet hath too many. And could the Tempter (view her well, I pray) Perswade? what Rhet'rick us'd he to betray A matchless woman! O eternal Pow'rs, Can this be born with, and not flaming show'rs VVith Sulphur mixt into their bosomes flow, VVho are contrivers of this Lady's wo? She's now Arraign'd; th'Indictment being read By th'Elders laying hands upon her head,
Amongst the people, whilst discons'late she Weeping implores aid from Eternity, VVherein she trusted, whose all-pow'rful King Could easily save her, and deliverance bring. The Elders thus: 'O sons of Jacob dear, ' To these Impleadings lend a gracious ear; ' Our Legislator of erelasting name, ' You know, did all our sacred Statutes frame; ' VVhich after were confirm'd by Heav'ns broad Seal, ' That did each Ordinance to him reveal. ' Amongst the rest, if man or woman be ' Surprized in th'act of Adultery, ' Both of them must adjudged be to die, ' That they, not we, may bear th'iniquity. ' This wicked woman, as we lately were ' I'th' Garden walking for to take the air, ' And chancing by great hap to look aside, ' VVith her adult rous mate by us was spi'd. ' But that to innocence she might pretend, ' Two Maids at first upon her did attend; ' Till Vice impatient grown, they did straightway ' By her commands, themselves from thence convey, ' And shut the doors; none but in private we ' The perpetration of the act could see. ' For then a young man, by appointment sure, ' Secretly lodg'd in the Grove's coverture, ' Draws neer unto her, kindly doth embrace; ' She likewise him; such willingness there was,
' Till close approaches (for we both it saw) ' Made them transgressors of that sacred Law. ' Then from a corner of the Garden, whence ' VVe closely standing saw this foul offence, ' Both of us made to the adult'rous pair, ' And came upon them ere they were aware; ' Them apprehended, but the sturdy knave ' Sprang from our feeble hands, and did us leave; ' And in such haste out of the Garden flew, ' As those whom guilt of Conscience doth pursue: ' And she, though much intreated, ne'rtheless ' VVill by no means th'Adult'rer's name confess. ' These things are true, which we here testifie; ' Now judge, my Brethren, if sh'ought not to die. A confus'd murmure from th'Assembly brake, VVho thought all true which these two Elders spake, B'ing also backt with such Authority As might by patent colour o'r a lye. They therefore soon believ'd, O foolish Jews! E'r unbelieving, or too credulous! Susanna's then condemn'd, false Judgement hath, By this, her sentenc'd to a shameful death. She now no more appeals to flesh and blood; No favour craves of men, nor yet withstood Their wicked dealings by her just Replies, But unto Heav'n in such-like language cries: ' O everlasting Pow'r, to whom alone ' The thoughts of all men are entirely known,
' Things secret open, and events most clear ' Before their causes in the Embryo's were: ' O great Jehovah! whose admired eye ' Runs through the Circle of Eternity, ' Thou know'st, and none but thou, the wrong I bear ' From those that have polluted Moses Chair, ' Thy Law perverted, witness being given ' Against their Conscience, my poor self, and Heav'n; ' 'Gainst me, that now must guiltless die, and shame ' To after-ages my disgrace proclaim, ' VVhen all the Monument my life shall have, ' Will be th' advantage of a scandal'd grave, ' O'rlaid with sland'rous Marble; wo is me! ' The fatal subject of this Tragedie, ' Contriv'd in darkness, by those wretched men, ' Who place the guiltless in the guilty's Scene. This said, Susanna's Angel swiftly bears Her pray'rs beyond the rowling spangled Sphears, And does them soon to the Almighty show, Whilst all's secure and careless here below, The Elders safe, Revenge its end attain'd, VVhere Lust could not; Injustice also gain'd A dreadful Goale; all things compleatly done That might ascertain her confusion. Th'Almighty VVord then forthwith leapeth down From th'highest Spire of the Celestial Throne, Like to a man of war, whose direful pow'r Commission hath whole Kingdoms to devour,
VVith horrour, death, and with amazement flies Into th' surprized Camp of Enemies: So this descending with his great Commands, At length within the Chaldee's Palace lands, And findes out Daniel, one of great renown VVith King and Princes all in Babylon; An Hebrew Captive, young, but very wise, And able to unfold hard Mysteries, Though wrapt up secret in th'eternal deep, VVhere 'tis not fit for mortal men to peep. This Word commanded him to undertake Susanna's Cause, examination make VVho her Accusers are, and vindicate The injur'd truth, before it be too late. Hereat inflam'd with zeal, this Youth forth fled Amongst the Throng which woful Susan led To execution, with as eager haste As even now rash Sentence on her pass'd. Then with a loud voice cry'd, ' Sirs, O Sirs hear, ' From this just woman's bloud I am most clear; ' VVhy, why so fast, ye heedless Brethren, why, ' To see Chelcia's vertuous daughter die? This said, the over-hastie multitude To Daniel turn'd: ' Youth from above endu'd ' VVith knowledge great, tell us thy meaning; we ' VVould gladly be inform'd the truth by thee, ' If ought's amiss: just and transgressor too ' Cannot consist; the latter we do know
' Prov'd by sufficient Test, but do not see ' How vertuous wives commit Adultery. ' Our witness uncorrupted Judges were, ' We think it rashness to think they should erre: ' Then, noble Youth, belov'd of God and men, ' Shew us this thing, and we will turn agen. By this therefore they had enclos'd about Daniel, to be resolved of their doubt, Who with a comely grace i'th' midst doth stand, And gravely calls for Silence with his hand; Which being made, ' Are ye such fools indeed, ' In weighty things to make such careless speed? ' Where life's concern'd, what doth of right belong ' Ev'n Heathens know, thinking delays not long; ' And shall the Gentiles Moral righteousness ' Shew Heav'n-taught Jews the way not to transgress, ' And yet unfollow'd be? For shame, my friends, ' See what dishonour all rash acts attends, ' Us odious renders in the sight of those ' Who neither God nor yet true Judgement knows, ' That thus, the truth unsearched, or the Cause, ' You are so forward t'execute our Laws, ' And upon Israel's daughter Sentence give, ' Who nought has done but that she still may live. ' Infernal Angels sometimes seem as bright ' As those blest ones in unapproaching light; ' And Justice often in its full careers, ' The true complexion of Injustice bears.
' Return ye then unto the Judgement-seat; ' Examine well, for sure th'imposture's great; ' And witnesses more false then Hell have stood ' T'imbrue their hands in this chaste womans blood. The people then with one consent rejoyce, And shout aloud with a confused noise, Saying, To the Tribunal let's return, And try if these men have false witness born. Think how perplex'd the pensive Elders were, 'Twixt stings of Conscience, re-inforc'd with fear, And Heav'ns revengeful hand, that thus had sent Means unexpected for their punishment; VVhilst its Revenge doth still in triumph ride For Murther more then any sin beside. No am'rous blushes now, no lustful eyes; To Cytherea no more Sacrifice: But Reason's offer'd succours once-betray'd, (Known too too well to those that are afraid) Bloud from the Circle to the Centre flies, And that which first does live with life supplies. Hence came the Elders paleness, that wan fit VVhich did on their cadav'rous temples sit, Whereby to each indifferent person there Their guilt appear'd, ere to the place drawn neer. Thou sacred Conscience! O mysterious thing! From what hid cause does thy bright essence spring?
And most unhappie he whom fear alone Hath strength to chain in desolation. Fear, Mortal's bane, and this world's slavery, That makes too pensive man not dare to die, But slight his happiness which no where dwells Within the concave of our earthly cells, And forceth silence where most need's to speak, And courage stops when she her flight should take. Such was our Elders fate; no word we hear They said, till to the Court return'd they were: Then passion somewhat overcome, they mutter These speeches as their stammering tongues could utter: ' Thou Princely Youth, admired for thy fame, ' Since first we to th' Caldean Nation came, ' Great is thy wisdom, that all Asia know, ' That 'mongst the Heathen makes thee honour'd so, ' And doth thy hand with such a Scepter fill, ' As shines no less then our dread Monarch's will, ' Who thinks the Gods do love thee, whilst such years ' To thy great gifts but small proportion bears: ' Come, and with us, thy Seniors, sit down, ' Since God does youth oft-times with knowledg crown, ' And turns Gray-hairs to Babes; come, let us see ' (If thou canst shew it) our iniquity. ' We both are Witnesses, th'Indictment's read; ' Then as truth shall appear thou may'st proceed.
VVhereat young Daniel to th'Assembly said, ' Let these two Elders forthwith be convey'd ' To sev'ral distant places, not to speak ' T'each other whilst I shall enquiry make. ' Whom once examin'd, you will surely finde ' This woman guiltless, and they both combin'd ' To second Lust with Murther, and disguise ' With shew of Justice their leud Villanies. ' Justice sometimes becomes that cooling shade ' Wherein Serpentine wickedness is laid. The Elders are (to all the peoples wonder At Daniel's strange proceeding) set asunder; And Joakim's house did more with men abound Then Dagon's, when from Gaza Sampson bound Was brought, to make th'uncircumcised sport; So great's the throng, so num'rous the resort. A sudden change and great, methinks, to see Two Judges late, now Prisoners to be. Such is the nature of polluting sin, T'enslave those souls where once it enters in. VVhen Righteousness a Kingdom gives, no less Is Bondage purchased by Wickedness. Such was that grand Rebellion, those evils That poison'd glorious Angels into Devils, Till spirit'al pustules to appear began, And Leprosie those Spirits over-ran,
That to the world's amazement their bright frame Is grown as loathsome as their cursed name. One Elder forth is call'd; observe his pace, And read Guilt's crimson lines upon his face, Drawn in a duskie Argent; he, whose pride With murther joyn'd, even now his God defi'd, Arraigned stands 'fore man, his junior too: 'Tis VVisdom's priviledge, and this Truth can do. VVherefore our Princely youth unto him said, ' O thou in sin grown old! wert not afraid ' False Judgement gainst this woman to declare, ' VVhose spotless dealings so resplendent are, ' Adorn'd with Vertue, that renowned Gem ' Of Honour, and immortal Diadem? ' VVas not, think'st thou, just Heaven's dreadful hand ' VVith vengeance arm'd, enough to countermand ' Such high presumption? O most foolish spight, ' That dares against the very Thunder fight! ' But 'tis decreed, thy sins hith'rto lyen hid ' Now in their time should be discovered. ' Thus have you dealt with the poor innocent, ' And Malefactors freed from punishment; ' Regarding not that Greatness which doth say, ' The guiltless soul thou by no means shalt slay. ' Now therefore, since this woman thou didst see, ' And took'st i'th'act, tell me, under what tree?
The Elder at this Question could not chuse Demurring, till th'enrag'd concourse of Jews Most part Susanna favouring, now bethought Themselves she might be to this Tryal brought Unjustly, and with a tumultuous cry, Say, Answer Elder, or expect to die. After some pause, astonish'd, he declar'd, Under a Mastick they their pleasure shar'd. Then Daniel smiling, ' Very well, reply'd; ' Against thy self, vile man, thus hast thou ly'd: ' Behold, I see an Angel now receiving ' Command to take thee from among the living. ' But stand aside,—And bring his fellow hither, ' That as two Brethren both may go together; ' VVhen't shall appear false witnesses own breath ' Themselves, not I, shall sentence unto death. The other's brought, for whose true counterfeit Unto the former we need not retreat, Being much confounded and amaz'd to hear The Court with Acclamations rend the air. At last a silence made: ' O cursed breed ' Of Cham, says Daniel, not of Judah's seed! ' Could Beauty thus bewitch you? why then see ' Its full perfection, blest Eternity; ' Thou shouldst have looked thither, where thy fill ' No less were then to understand and will.
' So hadst thou been too high for Satans lure, ' And all false joys beneath thee lain obscure. ' But Lust's still armed with most pois'nous stings; ' And where it woundeth, swift destruction brings. ' This hath thine heart corrupted, and one stroke ' The slender clue of thy short Dest'ny broke. ' Thus Israel's daughter have you serv'd, whilst she ' Stood fearful of big-look'd Authority, ' And gazing on your place, durst not deny ' The freedom of Adulterous company. ' But Judah's daughter, she, would not transgress; ' Her chaster soul abhorr'd your wickedness; ' Nor threats nor death prevail'd which you conspir'd, ' For she refus'd to grant what Lust desir'd. ' O glorious woman! may this ever be ' A Jewel to adorn thy memory! ' But since thou saw'st her, to her charge hast lay'd, ' That in the Garden she th'Adultress play'd, ' Under what tree? I pray declare it here, ' And thou thereby thine innocence shalt clear. Now comes the proof: many a doubtful thought This perjur'd Elder to confusion brought, Lest from the others answer he might vary, Or for the right, light on the quite contrary: Since the Almighty hath one Truth dispos'd To be unto lyes numberless oppos'd. Yet forc'd to speak after some short delay, This desperate anxious speech t'himself did say:
' I am now straightned; hereon doth depend ' The utmost tryal of my fatal end: ' Come life or death, or hell or heaven, whether, ' Under an Holm tree they were naught together. Then pious Daniel mildly to him said, ' Ev'n now thou hast thy cursed life betraid; ' God's holy Angel has Commission ta'n ' Forthwith to cut thy wretched life in twain, ' And with a sword attends, this very hour, ' Fierce vengeance on thy sinful head to pour. Convicted plainly thus the Elders stand, And Susan's freed by holy Daniel's hand. VVhereat th'impatient Jewish concourse rise; The Palace trembles at their thundering cries, To God with praises first that still doth save Distressed sinners who his mercy crave; Nor any forlorn creature will forsake, That heav'n doth onely his sure anchor make. This godly heat howe'r soon had an end; They all their fury 'gainst the Elders bend, With such a rage as Nature doth possess (So violent 'twas) the whelp-rob'd Lioness; That had not mighty Justice them reserv'd Unto the shameful death by both deserv'd, Their bloud had doubtless wash'd the Judgement-floor, And dy'd its Marble in a Purple-gore.
But they who Innocence would have betray'd, To publike Execution are convey'd: Nor is there Law more just, then when man shall Perish by that he laid for others fall. Thus did one day, e'r-blessed may it be, The guilty punish, and the guiltless free. Unpiti'd di'd these Elders, whose black soul In hell about the fiery wheel may roul, Whilst Susan, late i'th' period of her age, Betakes her to a better Pilgrimage; To see those Vertues in their native rays, Which gave their follower here such lasting praise. Behold her Parents, Kindred, Husband too, (The mists exhaled of all former wo) Observe them now, imagine with what chear They do congratulate their Susan dear, From death to life restor'd, brought from the grave, And, one foot in, snatch'd from the Stygian wave. Then to compleat their joy, with one accord, For her deliverance they praise the Lord. ' O thou most worthy to be fear'd great God, ' Who rul'st the Nations with an Iron rod, ' But gently dost thine own choice Israel bring, ' To be refreshed at thy mercy's spring; ' Our Fathers trust in thee was not mistaken, ' Nor were they in their greatest wants forsaken:
' Thou heard'st the groans of this thy servant, when ' She stood betray'd, condemn'd by wicked men, ' Who falssy charg'd her, though no stain was found ' Whereby thy faithful Handmaid to confound. ' Bless'd, and for e'r admired be thy Name; ' May worlds to come sing forth thy mighty fame, ' That to death's portal turnest man, and then ' Proclaim'st, Return again ye sons of men. By this time Daniel's glory proudly ran Like panting Phoebus to th'Meridian Of Babylon's Court, where it still rising tow'rs Neerer and neerer to th'eternal Bow'rs. Divinest Youth! well worthy of a Throne More glorious then ere earthly wight sate on, And of a righteous Crown, whose guards shall be Such mystick Gems as Susan's Chastity. FINIS.
