W2659 12497606 62566
VIRGINIA'S Discovery of SILKE-VVORMES, with their benefit. AND The Implanting of MULBERRY TREES. Also The dressing and keeping of Vines, for the rich Trade of making Wines there. Together with The making of the Saw-mill, very usefull in Virginia, for cutting of Timber and Clapbord, to build with∣all, and its conversion to other as profitable Uses. LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Iohn Sephenson, at the Signe of the Sun, below Ludgate. 1650.
To all the VIRGINIA Merchants, Adventurers, and Planters. Gentlemen: THE unhappinesse to be amongst the low∣est of men, for parts and fortune, can∣not hinder mee from the satisfaction which I receive in my selfe, that none is possessed with a more eager passion of contributing towards the advancing Virginia to that degree of felicity which the bounty of nature, richnesse of soyle, and temperature of Climate designed her to: and were my power but of as strong a Wing as my inclinations and desires, that above-example Countrey should be placed in such a Zenith of stability, wealth, and glory, that it should behold all the other Nationall happinesses of the World in a Sphere beneath her; and her Merchants Adventurers and Planters, like so many Load-starres to conduct Mankinde into an innocent O∣cean of unfathom'd wealth of unrocky prosperity. No Countrey under the Sunne is lesse ingratefull then Virginia, if she be but justly courted, but to Complement a Virgin for her affection by breathing smoake in her nostrils,
to expresse our Civilities by vapour; and for all that vast Dowry of spaciousnesse, wealth, bounty of aire, and plenty of provisions, to proffer her a joynture of Tobacco, is a Com∣plement indistinguishable from incivill rudenesse. What Riches may not the Silke-worme, Vine, Olive, and Almond afford us? By these noble undertakings wee contract China two thousand Leagues nearer to us, and are not trou∣bled though Spaine and Italy were remooved five thousand more distant from us: and if wee could not satisfie the impla∣cable curiosity of our Senses without the Easterne Spices, it i without dispute, that what every Orient hath of Aromatick, ould grow without any deterioration in this incomparable Countrey. Yet if, by some occult propriety of nature, these Spices, and Gummes should not prosper with that successe in the Coun∣trey o which they are onely adoptive, as where they are natu∣rall: The South Sea flowing upon the skirts of this gloriously apparelled Virgin, would not onely furnish us, but (through our meanes) all the Westerne Worl with whatever the Philip∣pines and China have in heir brow, or bosome: which that it may be discovered, a Publique incouragement from the Merchans here, and the Colony here, would awaken all spirits which have any scintillation of Honour, or industry, to under∣take the imployment, effect it undertaken, and by the effect raise an unperishable structure for their owne glory, perpetua∣ted by the publique felicity. The greaest defect that Colony can with consent complaine of, is their want of shipping, and the greatest with which o∣thers finde hemselves perplexed, is the want of industry to build them. If Virginia had not as stately Timber as any other Region whasoeer: is it had no a Soyle naturally in∣viting them to improve her in Iron for Gunnes, Anchors,
and other conveniences; in Hempe for Cordage, Flax for Canvase, and Pine trees for Mast: this defect might be allowed for reall: but where all these concenter, it is as unreasonable to complaine, as for a man seated at a Table covered with excellent provision, to accuse his fortune for suffering him to perish wih hunger, because his meat is not digested in his stomack, wihout putting his hands and teeth to labour. I could cordially wish that there were such quantity of clea∣red ground in Virginia, that every one at his fist arrivall might ix upon the Plough, that the so much discoursed of Saples of Wheat and Rye, might be brought to an absolute ripenesse of perection: But to imagin so many millions of trees of a facile removall, or that old Planters knowing the benefit thence arising, should part with them to ohers, and seeke new uncleared grounds for themselves, were meerely to dreame of impossibilities. But the Vine, Almond, and Olive, may be set where the tree is onely barked about to hinder it from leaving; be∣sides if here were a necessiy to have absolutely cleared grounds, (hich reason it selfe cannot imagine,) yet foure Acres of ground so cleared or the Vine, will reurne (by much) more profi, and lsse trouble, then twenty Acres of Wheat, at such raes as they are prized in the common estimation. But since his profi reverts to the Purse wihout the toyle of radicaing trees, as great emlument, as if the ground were alogeher treelsse, to what purpose should we court sweat and afflction? or increase our miseries wihout any addition to ou happinsse? Genlemen, he happinesse o this Ntion depends upon your costancy and prosperiy, i you seriously erect these staples, wee shall be free rom the imperious usurpations of forraigne Prin∣ces
upon your estates, and shipping, from the rapine of Pirates upon your lives or liberties. The decayed number of our ship∣ping may be resupplyed by encouragement of Carpenters of all Nations, to make use of those materialls which the inimi∣table liberality of this Countrey gratefully presents you with: all Staples (diffusively spread in other Regions) will meet here united, and we shall arrive to that degree of happinesse, to make our intrade by much exceed our exportations: for the compleating of which, if such an inconsiderable, and lost thing as my selfe, could be any way instrumentall, I should as cheer∣fully hazard my life in the employment, as I now subscribe my selfe, Your ready, faithfull, and most humble servant, ED. WILLIAMS.
The Discovery of Silke-wormes; with their benefit, and implanting of Mulberry trees. THE Mulberry tree, yielding the sole food of this exellent Worme, must first bee provided for, whereof there are Myri∣ads dispers in the wide Continent of Virginia, which may bee collected by transplanting, grafting, or nursering. For transplantation there are infinite advantages both of well-growne and springing Mulberry trees, which may with much facility be removed, and with great felicity thrive upon such a removall, of which experience can afford frequent examples. The Grafts must bee chosen from excellent good Plants which expresse a large fertility, and bee something large of themselves, by which election there will bee a greater certainety of the good∣ness, and a more speedy expectation of gowth in those Grafts, which thrive better when grafted one upon another, then upon the Chesnut, Apple-tree, Elme, White ople, or any other, which if they are not mortally opposite, are however praeternaturall to the Silkeworme. The Nuseries have so much of tediousnesse and difficulty, that I shall hardly advise to put it in practic; yet to those who have a stronger dulity then my reason ca perswade mee to I shall of∣fer the ol xpedient of effecting it, if that may bee caled aptly an exp, which hath so little of expediion in it. Let h  to make a Nursery, observe, and gather such  will suit with his necessity of the ripest Fruit
growing upon those Trees which beare the fairest and roundest leaves: These thus gathered, you must wash in two or three wa∣ters, pressing them with your hands, by which meanes you shall fide the expressed seede in the bottoe of the water: I cced more to the sowing of the Mulberries whole without such expres∣sion, how ever, either the Mulberry entire, or the seede may bee sowed after the manner following. A bd of fa earth being digged, husbanded, and the Mold brought into a small Powder must have strait Rowes or Lines in Furrowes all hafe a foot equally distant every Furrow two in∣ches deepe, and fue broad, this distance may bee something lar∣ger that an inervall may bee made to the Weeder in the weeding of such things s may hinder the Mulberries growth by participa∣ting in its aliment. A great care must bee had to water it often for the first yeare, i the weather b dry, the succeeding yeare you may pul up and trans∣plant your Mulberry trees int another ground more at large, viz. at two or three f distance, which must bee not retransplanted till the growth arise to some six inches in the circumference at which bignesse you my remove them to the ground designed for their constant fixation, leaving betwixt each Tree a distance of six∣teene or twenty foot, that the too muc iinity may not make the extending branches mutually inconvenience either by exclusion of a full Sunne, or wound themselves by intertangence of one another In such warme Countries as that of Virginia, the Root must bee preserved coole and moyt, by a deeper implantation then is usuall in colder Regions. For the election of your Plants or Sciens you may take notice of two Families, or Races, of Mulberry trees, the black, and the white, discordant in Wood, Leafe, and Fruit; onely having this in com∣mon to spring later then other trees, as never emittig their leaves till all apprehension of cold is vanished, the black Mulberry is not subdivided into any other species having the wood solid and strong, the leafe large, and rud in the handling, the fruit black, great and acceptable to the Palate: Bt there are three apprent∣ly diferent species in the white, distinguishe onely by the colour of the frit, namely, white, black, and red: Yet is this fruit by
much lesse gratefull to the palate then that of the black Mulberry. No other distinction besides, the colour of the fruit discernes them one from the other, the Leaves of all three being of the same meane greatnesse of the same smooth feeling, the wood of the same internall yellownesse, almost as firme as that of the black Mulber∣ry. But the silke taking his quality from the leafe make us lay aide the black Mulberry tree, since the bottomes from thence are too grosse and heavy, whereas the white Mulberry makes silke fine and light, to temper which many feed the Wormes with two orts of meats by dictinction of times, viz at the beginning with white leaves, that the silke may bee fine, in the closing, with black to fortifie it, and make it weigh: Yet this though it have an ap∣pearance of reason t the first inspection, rarely answers the ex∣pectation, the very alteration of the meate as from that which is more delicate, to that which is more grosse, being disagreable to the nature of the Worme, who must shew that diminution in the quality of his silkes which hee feeles in the impairing of his ntri∣ment. Others make a contrary application of leaves by a more (imaginative solid foundation) which is to begin their dieting with black, and conclude with white; which cannot succeed bet∣ter, for the black having disposed the matter of the silke, the white leaves after administred have no power to alter that seminall dispo∣sition. Wee shall therefore fixe upon it as a Principle of Nature, not to vary the nourishment of this industrios Creature. If wee be∣gin with the black Mulberry, the continuance of it will bee neces∣sary. If the Ground you possesse bee already planted with black Mulberries, it is so much losse of time and expences to replant white: But if wee are to commence a thing de Novo, every mans reason leading him to chuse the most profitable, and common ex∣prience telling us that the white antecede the black ones so incre∣dibly in the poynt of Maturation, that six years of growth advance not so much the latter as two the first; it were an act declaring Bethlem for Dicator, not to prefer the most speedy and profita∣ble before the tedious and improper commodity. Besides which Emlument the Branches which by that speedy shoot they bring
forth will bee usefull for propagation of that tree to infinite Num∣bers. There is yet experimentall election amongst the white Mulber∣ries. Some affirming that the Leaves of those trees which emit the white fruit are fittest to bee assigned for this nourishment, which they fortifie by this reason; That Pullen and Swine doe most de∣light in the white, and never eate the red and black but by con∣straint, a conjecture not altogther irrefragable; for why may it not bee controverted that Pullen and Swine being a greedy Gene∣ration, may rather ballance that which is most grosse and fulsome, as bst adapted for their Palate, then that which is nice, and subtle, and best according to the delicate tendernesse of this Creature? Others who have their owne experience to fortifie their assrtion, commend the white Mulberry bearing the black fruit, the colour demonstrating a better concoction in the fruit, and consequently in the leafe then the others. But (which wee must bee extreamely curious in) wee must ex∣pell from our yard all Muberry trees bearing leaves too much inden∣ted, which, besides that it is an apparent signe of small subsistence and ncompleated nature, is more defective in quantity and quali∣ty of nourishment, then that which is lesse interruptedly circular: Yet this may easily bee remedied if you inoculate such tres in the Bud, or Eseuchon, having neede of such freedome; the profit thence arising being very coniderable for this kinde of nourish∣ment: For by this course that inconsiderable quantity of worthless and famelick leaves receives a happy melioration into an abundant plenty of substantiall and nutritive nature. Nor is this transmuta∣tion improper, for any other Orchard Plants which will succeede to yor most advantagious expectation, and all indomestick and wild trees may by this bee made capable of a most happy cultiva∣tion. This infranchizing may bee practised to the answer of your desires in Mulbrries of all Ages: In the older, on their new shoots of the antecedent yeare then lopped; in the yonger upon the smal∣lest trees of the Nursery. But to graft these trees in the first sea∣son, tht their growth will permit it is most opportune and profi∣table for by this meanes your Groves of Mulberry will bee in∣irely delivered from all apprehension of jejune sterility, or insub∣tantiall
deficiency Nor can ever you feare a want of supply, if you constantly maintaine a Nursery of such Grafs, not fom the seede, but from the shoots and branches of your best trees thus propagated to an unperishable infinity by couching them in the ground, and the trees encreasing by their reimplanting are con∣stantly furnished with Leaves of an excellent sweetnesse and great∣nesse, exquisitely abundant in nourishment, and consequently ex∣empt from all the inconveniencies which walke hand in hand with n ingratefull wildnesse. Having described what Trees, Grafts, and Nurseries are best conducent to our mystery; let us next di∣late of their most proper soyle, and best order in planting. The best soyle and order for planting the Mulberry. FOr the soyle it must bee chosen in particular much like that of the Vines, inclining rather to dry then moyst, light then heavy, sandy then layie; for those which opinionate themselves that a ft ground is inconvenient t Mulberries as supplying leaves of too grosse and unsubtile aliment; The Objection is pritty, but under pardon scarcely solid, neither am I capable of any reason to the contrary, why a rich soyle should not emit the growing Tree with a greater maturation and bignesse, then a leane Plantation, where the tender Plants are even starved with the sparenesse of di∣stributive moysture and aliment: Yet to prevent the too grosse substance of the leafe after the tree by the advantage of a rich nou∣rishment, hath arrived to a competent greatnesse; the order which wee shall prescribe in their planting will admit the Plough amongst them, where cultivation will easily take off the soyle from all exuberancy of fullsome ranknesse. The soyle which is full of Springs, Lakes, Rivers, or (which is worst of all) Marshes, is par∣ticularly to be avoyded. The manner of implanting them would require a distance of foure fathomes or more, which in Virginia where wee labour not under a penury of ground, may bee something more spaciously en∣larged the Reasons why this extent of distance are: First, the intermixture of spreading Branches, where by their contingency they violate and mutually wound themselves will bee avoyded.
Next, the Sunne hath a more unimpeached immiion and distrib∣tion  his Beames, with which this tree is most particularly de∣lighted. Lastly, this largenesse of intervalls permits a free passage for the Plough, to take off all luxuriancy of ranknesse, which to much inspissate the leafes, which must feede this admirable Crea∣ture. But of such Graines as may with least impairement bee sowen under the Mulberry trees, Oats and Pease are the most proper, which during the collection of the leaves may with very small detriment bee trodden upon (the season commonly falling in A∣pril and May, when their blades are backward) nay the very com∣pressure of the Earth makes them afterwards arise more strongly. I approve much more of interplanting the Vine; but (which I conceive the most convenient for Virginia i) the setting of the In∣dian Potato hath the most inestimable benefit; the Potato having such a happy multiplicaion of and in it selfe, that whilst there is but a string of the Root left behinde in the earth, the species will bee renewed. Besides the excellency of the food, whether for man, or (where such a vast abundance may soone introduce a satie∣ty) Cattle will bring alone with it an inestimable advantage; whereas Corne may too strongly impoverish a Ground, and the Vine it selfe when it comes to its ripest excellency, will want the compleat comfort of the Sunne beames to give fruit a well con∣cocted maturity, the Mulberry like an Ambitios Grandee, e∣grossing all that favour to himselfe by his prevalency of height and greatnesse. Nor should wee bee too curious to plant the trees one over a∣gainst the other exactly opposite; but still observing for beauties ake to set them in a right line) rather one against the Intervall of the other, that so th Sunne may have no interposition from any Angle, to warme, comfort, and enrich this tree, which aides the pro∣duction of so many incomprehensible Miracles. The order for collection of the Leaves. THe order to bee observed for collecting the leaves should bee precisely insisted upon, that the trees may bee of longer and
flourishing duration, and the food of a more curious and unsoyled nourishment: It is a truth not to bee denyed, that the disleaving of trees is extreamely prejudiciall, and in some irrecoverably dead∣ly; the reason is their extraordinary scorching, by being left with∣out any shade of protection: But the Mulberry being (as it were) destined to this worke which it naturally supporteth, more inpre∣judicially endures this temper of disleaving then any other trees whatsoever. But for the obviation of this inconvenience, it will bee absolutely necessary for our Master of the silkeworme, to have such a proportionable number of trees, that the halfe may alter∣nately repose unpluckt every second yeare. This diligently put into practice will make your trees continue verdant and vigorous for many Generations. To gather them with both hands leafe after leafe, is confessedly the most proper, but yet withall the most expencefull; for the multitude of hands which such a circumstantiall labour would ex∣act. The other way of gathering them with stripping them from the branches, is without doubt extreamely ncent to the tree, and worm: to the tree by unbarking, wounding, and perishing its bran∣ches. Nor is it lesse detrimentall to the Worme seeing this disor∣derly collection corrupts and sullies the leaves, which this delicate nice Creature perceiving, either rejects them, or sickens upon their reception by bruising the leaves, and expressing that which is the life of its substance, the juice, and this commonly with un∣washt hands, which leave the ill odour unremoveable upon them. The removall of these inconveniences is easily effected by follow∣ing the course they practice in some parts of Spaine, which is by clipping the leaves from the branches with a sharpe instrument, like a Taylors sheares; by this way you disleave many stalkes at once, which falling into a cleane sheete spread under that tree for the purpose, seperating afterwards the leaves also, such as are sound from unsound, such as peradventure have much of the stalke, from those which are nothing but leafe, (the stalke being hurtfull to this tender Creature) and administred to them the Sunny side of the leafe upward is the most commendable practise of gathering and feeding that hath hitherto been delivered.
The leaves of the old Mulberry are to bee much prefer'd before those which are not come to an absolute perfection; the age of perfection in the Mulberry, we reckon to be accomplished in seven or eight yeares, as to soundnesse of nourishment; not that they grow not after, but by that time it is growne powerfull to concct such succulency as might before over master it. The trees disleaved must by a diligent hand be pruned immediat∣ly after the last collection; what ever is broken, wounded, or made unprofitable must bee carefully cut off. The extreames of all the branches must be top'd a little with a sharpe pruning knife, which is an invitation to nature to send forth the next yeare more vigo∣rously. But whether it be in gathering the leaves, or pruning the trees, it must bee our principall care that they be intirely beared the omission of which, by not taking all the leaves off, turnes back the liberallity of the repeating Spring. This observation hath been grounded upon practise, made so successefull by experience, that it hath been found, that trees after such culture and disleaving, have within a month attired themselves with such a new border of leaves, that the former imbalding them hath been impercep∣tible. Which induces me to believe a former assertion, that it is possible to have a second silke harvest by this meanes, and why not equall with the first, I know not, since the seed is more youthfull and vi∣gorous then that of the yeare preceding growne feeble by its con∣tinuance. The raines if they fall about the time this noble creature drawes unto her perfection and period, is by much more strangely prejudi∣ciall, then when they are in the greatest of their feeding, the wet leaves occasioning them many desperate diseases: the usuall way of prevention is to have a provision of leaves before hand, when there is any jealousie of rainy weather; but this provision must be laid in a cleane dry place which is fresh aired, and tht w may re∣move all dangers of contracting too much heat, to be turned oten, which course, although the Raine should not opprsse us, yet is it of great conveniency, not so much out of apprehension o be nece∣ssitated as for the quality of the food, it being much better after fourteen or fifteen houres resting in a place cleane and drie, then
when fresh from the tree. But if you are surprized by an unexpe∣cted season of wet, take those Mulberries which you intend to op the next yeare, (and the Mulberry would be lop'd every ten or twelve yeare, which revives and strengthens the tree with a new youth) and ut their branches which hung up in a drie corner, ei∣ther of your house or barne, or any other coverture in airy places, will soone have their leaves drie, better condition'd, and of more efficacy then any leaves set to a fire, which is too suddaine, or to winnowing by a winde artificiall and unnaturall. The Mulberries chiefe profit consisting in the leafe, we must be carefull to lose nothing of this revenue; which considered, wee should delay the disheading or lopping of them till the Wormes have done feeding, which would be about the latter end of May, or the beginning of Iune and altough by the disbranching of them in such a season, we cannot expect such lrge returning shoots as those which were cut in February or March, the distance of time being materiall in their growth, yet the profit of the leaves being double, very well answer such inquality. The Mulberry be∣ing of so ranke and plyable a disposition that notwithstanding its ampation in unseasonable Moone and wather, no injuries shall hinder him from Regermination. Yet are not these advantags (no necessity obstructing them) to be omitted by any which are not enemies to their owne profit. The Mulberries in the increase of the Moone poued, or lopt, bring forth their young shoots long without spreadng Braches; in the Wane short, with many little Branches crossig the principall. To recocile this (the election of the time being i our power) the Mulberries seated in leane grouds, are ost properly disheaded in the new Moone: those whic are plnted in ich ground, in the last quarter; so will those in the leane soyle emit shoots as long as the barrennss of the place will afford them: and those of the faer, though the benefit of thei seat, coveniently gaine that which they would not easiy have done, cu in the incase Fo those a∣spiing branches, wee they not rstaid by the counte shoots who participate with thm in nouhmet would by reason of thei unweldy length, be foced to bnd downewds to the defor∣ming of the tree fom the shape of a Muiberry into that of a Palme-tree,
which is not to bee feared in the rest, by reason of the leane∣nesse of th ground, forbidding all abundance of shooting: Wee have provided for the feeding of this little and great Artificer, let us now expresse an equall care in his lodging. The lodging of the Silke Wormes. TIS a vanity to expect emolument from this mysterious Crea∣ture, if wee sort him not with a lodging proper and agreeable to his nature, who cn with no lesse disprofit bee ill accommoda∣ted in his habitation, then in his nourishment; who to show a par∣ticular affinity with the noblest of Creatures, Man, makes his af∣fection of habitation equall to his. Spaciousnesse, pleasure, health∣fulness, distance from offnsive vapours, damps and humidities, warmth in the extreames f colds, coolenesse in the extreames of warmth. Wht ever wee naturally desire and abhorre, does this Creature by the prosperity or iflicity of his labou show a most experimentall rsntment f His tation thereore ust bee i the meane twixt the top and bottom of a foundation, the first being too much obnoxious to hats or wides, the second to colds and Dmps. The Platforme therfore of your building his station must be so contrived, as to have his Basis three or foure foot above the gound, nor ascending within an ell distanc of the Tils. A Fabick (saith De Serres) of seven fathome in length, three in breadth, and two in height, will entertaine with ease the Worms enlivened from ten ounces of seed: this prportion may be raised accoding to your seed. In VIRGINA these may be of very sudden erection; Nature hath furnihd hat excellent Countrey with materials, to invite all who have the desire to attempt it. Tht the aire ad winde (if coole and dry) may have free pas∣sage to refresh these laborious spinners, who near upon the per∣fection of their worke are upo the point of stifling (the season, and th bundce of  silke wherewith they are filled, both coo∣prating theruto) We must hve windowes opening to all An∣gles to receive ususpted infigitions in extreamitis of heat, and wamng transpiratios in immodate colds; Yt with this
Proviso, that these windowes bee fit not onely to receive any fa∣vourable aire, but to expell all noxious vapous; and because this Creature loveth any thing that is white and luminous, it will sort excellently well with his disposition and safety, to prget or pla∣ster the inside of the house very well and smooth, boh to satisfie the eye and preserve him from the danger of Rats, which cannot clime up such a wall, though a principall care ought to bee used that the severall stations on which they are lodged, bee re∣mote from all fixures to walls, which might give Rats and Mice advantage. To build the Saffolds containing these Wormes: Many Pillers of Carpenters worke diectly squared, shall bee pependicularly erected, from the ground to the seeling, to support the Tables which crossing the pillars upon little joynts sixteene inches ditant one from the other (excpt that from the gound which must bee 36 inches.) Upon these Tables doe wee ly our Wormes but their boards must not bee equall in breadth, evry table as it exceeds in height, being to bee narrower then the next below by foure inches, and the highest approaching the eeling to bee narrowest of all. This Pyramidicall forme is of most beauy and safety to the Wormes; when wandring upon the Edges from one end of the Scaffold to another, seeking a fit place o omi their ilke, they fall in such a precipice from the higher scaffold to the ground, that they break themselves in pieces: But by this means faling but from one scaffold to another, the smallnesse of the distance contri∣butes to their preservation. The breadth of the most lowst table shall bee limited even to this proportion, that easily of one side a man with his hand may reach the middle to atend the Wormes; as for the ascending scaffolds their continuall diminution makes the serving of them of greater easinesse. A Roome of any capacity will admit severall of these scaf∣folds (distinct from the wall for reason before recited of Rats) and also that the attender may come on either side of the scaffold, such space being alwayes to bee left betweene their position. These scaffods must bee made of an unsuspected fimenesse, to prevnt the falling downe of ay art of it, or th whole either by the ladder which the Keeper ascends, or the weight of th Worms
themselves, when once growne great and heay. To ascend these scffolds, some make boards about the, s it were by Galleries others have their getting up to them by little staires appropriated to this; others by formes. I approve of none more covenient then a light ladder which fits all, and posssses but one place. The timber fittst to employ in the tablure of this scaffolding is usually firre or such light wood: In VIRGINIA I apprehend none fitter then Cedar or Cypresse, because o their delicious o∣dours. Wee hve already spoken of such meanes as may refresh the overheated worme; rsts now to dliver an experiment to wame the Aire, this Creature bing no lse Enemy to cold in the begin∣ning of his apprentissage, then to heae when ee is ready to goe out f this Wld Mstr workeman. Aftr aving built your house for worm; let there be a hole pier∣ced through your wall, where you must make an Oven, the mouh whereof must be on the o side of the hous Then before you make it off, take pots like flower pots, but such a will indure the fire and lay them with the mouth side of these pots tending inwards towards the house and the bottome within the Oven, lay these u sidelong at an equall distance and work up the Oven with the po incorporate therunto. This done you may make a fire in the Oven, which by the benefit of the pots convys al the heate to you without any inconvenience of smoake. To make this heate the more agreeable to the Womes, and to keepe the house in a temperate and inoffensive warmth, you may put into these  branches of Rosemary, Time, Roses, Juniper, &c.
This Figure heweth the order for nking the Tbls on e Seffolds, to lay the Laves on, for feeding the Wormes.
This Figure sheweth how to place the Rods, betweene the Tables, for the Wormes to climbe up, and spin their silke.
This Figure representeth the Engine, to wind off the silk from the Cods, wh Furnaces and Cawlderns necessary thereto.
T Fure ourras the Cods, with the Butterflie come forth of them, o ly heir Eg upon black Sg, Chamlet, ammy, or such like ffe, as in this Treatise is shewed.
The election and use of the seed of the Silke-Worme. THere is a great deale of Reason, that we should be curious in the election of ou eed; and tis not more Poetick then Philo∣sophick, that of HORACE: Est in juvencis est in equis patrum, Virsu nec imbellem feroces Progenerant aquilam columbae. What can we expect of generosity in that which has a dispositi∣on to degenerate before produced: of all the seeds proper for the vivifying this animall, there is none more excllent, as yet ari∣ved to our knowledge, then that of Spaine: this De Serres ffir∣meth, though he seeme to be in a kinde of haesitation, whether that of Calabria march not in a higher degree of reputation, as yielding more abundance, and of equall hardnsse with the Cod of Spaine; yet this is certaine in nature and reason, that seed transported ino other colder Regions, can no way lay claime to a parity of hriving with that continued in its owne Climate; and I doubt not but if the South of VIRGINIA, where the Silke-worme is aoiginally native, were duely inquired after, the Seed of that would have a particular excellency, to which all the Europaean Naions must give the glory, the right hand of preheminence. But leaving this to the scrutiny whch shall be made by time, and experience, we must grant the prim opinion to the Spnish, which however it thrive in France for foure yeares yet afterwads it degenerates extreamely, so that it must every foure yeares be renew'd, for within that circle it suffes a mnifst dclension in goodnesse. Comming from Spaine it is of a dark tawy colour, after certaine generations, gray. To prove whether the seed b dead or not, you must expeiment it upon your naile, that which breaks in crcking, csting forth u∣mor and moisture, you may ssuredly steem for good, the other is to be rejected. The smallns of the Spnish sed incrass the number of Wormes, for which it deserves  prticular paea∣tion. No seed of above a yeare old is any futher profitable, till you
put them to Hach, you may preserve them in Boxes thrust amongst wollen clathes in a Trunke or Chest, and let the Chamber where such Trunkes or Chests are, be now and then aired with a fire, to the intent they being rather warme then cold, may be prae∣disposed for a hasty production when the season of the yeare shall invite you to put into practise. To imbibe or steep the seed of Silke-wormes in the most gene∣rous Wine you can procure, is an experiment that hath alwayes an∣swered with a happy successe; for this not onely discriminates betwixt the good and bad, (the good alwaies subsiding, and the o∣ther floating) but addes legitimation and strength to the approved ones, making them come forth free and fortified, and causeth them to hatch almost all at one time. After the good are taken out, they must be set to drie in the Sunne, or before the fire, layd upon very clean paper, covered with white linnen, or smooth paper, lest the eat might bring it prejudice. The vivification of the Seed. THE Spring being come, and the Mulberries budding, it will be seasonable to put them to hatching, which (all other wayes mitted, as the keeping them in a Boxe, in ones pocket, between a womans Breas, &c.) sorts b with Reason and convenience, performed thus, viz. That the seed removed from its first vessell, shall b committed into a Box lined with Cotton, over which you must put a white paper, which must seperate the seed from the Cotton, then cover the seeds (being not above halfe an inch thick) with a little bed of sow, over which Tow you are to lay a paper pierced very thick with small holes, much about the bignese of the tag of a point; over this paper you shall lay some Mulberry leaves. And this is the preparative to hatch them. To bring them forth, lay your Boxe so prepared between two Pillowes, which moderately warmed with a Pan every two houres, and after the first three and foure dayes visiting the Box at every such warming, to the end to seperate such as you shall see hatched, who will not faile to creep through the Tow, and pierced paper to the Mulberry leaves, to which they will cleave: which to remove,
you must draw them out of the Boxe by taking hold of the Mulber∣ry leaves with a needle, and removing them and the Wormes adherent into a bigger Boxe or sive; with paper at the bottomes, distinguish those of a hasty production from those of a more slow, that the worke may arise more equall. These thus brought forth must by gradations be accustomed to indure the coolenesse of the Spring, diminishing dayly something from his accidentall warm∣nesse: the first foure daies let them in the sieve covered with cleane linnen continue upon the bed, the curtaines closely drawne, then removed into a warme chamber, close from all penetrations, layd upon ranks close together, that they may give and receive mutuall warmth, allowing them a larger proportion of roome, as they in∣crease in boy. But the most assured way to preserve the Wormes untill their second change in warmth and security from Vermine, dust, or o∣ther hostilities of nature, is by a great Presse or Cubbord made with many stages, pargetted or pasted for the agreeablenesse of the odout with Oxe dung, made of firre, or mats, and to draw out at will seperately, equally distant foure inches, compassed round about with Linnen tackt to the doores, with paper wndowes on the sides and formost doore, to admit or exclude aire after the exigency of the occaion; and here vacant places being left at first to enlarge them, as they increase in growth may they bee distinguished accor∣ding to the Dates of their first appearance upon the Mulberry, re∣jecting all that seed, which is not enlivened before the fifth day as unprofitable for working by confuion of times, and uselesse by their weaknesse. Foure times doth this excellent Artist change his skinne, which is the cause of his so many sicknesses. The first sicknesse arriving within eight dayes from the beginning of his life, is knowne by these symptomes; the head growes bigge and white, and hee des himselfe under the leaves: To administer any food were need∣lesse; but that they are not all sick at one instant, so that some must bee given to nourish thm which have not arrived to, or past over their sicknesse, which you shall know by their change of colour and creeping upon fresh leaves. The second sicknesse arising within eight dayes, or thereabouts,
rom thence is knowne by the same accidentalls, and must have the sme applcations, onely now they would bee removed into new, cleane, and more spacious places: The third is in all like the two oher, though something more dangerous; heere you must care∣fully prevent the accession of all cold ayres whatsoever: It may happen that some of these Wormes may grow yellow, which is almost incurable in themselves, and deadly contagious to all the rest; thse must bee carefully selected from the rest and ejected. Remove, enlarge & cleanse as before. Eight or ten dayes after appears the 4. change or sicknes & now the recovered Wor being increased to their full growth, must be removed, enlarged, & cleansed, as before. At appoynted houres morning and evening must this Worme bee fd from their hatching to their fist change or sickness; from the second chang to the third or fourth, they must bee fed three times the day at the lst, taking this for an assured maxme, that after the recovery from their last siknesse, The very cloying of them with leaves even to the satiety of their ppetite, accelerates th to the perfection of their taske; for these curious Vssells will the sooner discharge themselves of their precious inclosed sub∣stance, by how much they are the sooner replenished. Nor is there any podigall improvidence in this; for it hath beene obser∣ved that Worms have eaten neare as much in eight dayes when more sparingly distributed, as in foure when liberally handed to them; so that by such wary dispnsaion they save no leaves, and lose foure dayes in point of time. But a particular eye of care must bee had to the quality of the leavs you feede with. No goodnsse of a selected tree being ca∣pable to secure it selfe against ccidentall diseases arising from the unnaturalinesse of sesons, wheein by extreames of drought or moisture mildewes, heat drops, and other distempers, all the leaves oftentimes becomming yellowish, spotted, or speckled, declare the nature of that food highly unwholesome and pernicicus: Such as grow out of the unne in the interior umbragious parts of thick trees are almost as dangerous: Nor are the leaves of the second Spring which shoot afresh on trees already disleaved of lesse guilt, through the inequality of their Ages. One banquet of those gives the last repast that your Wormes shall have neede of, a iuxe thence
arising killing them, and easing you of further trouble, if you ∣count it so to be vigilant over your own proit. The most agreeable to all Wormes is to bee fed with leaves of their owne age, and by this the feeble Creatur shall meete with tender leaves, then growne strong with leaves, ful growne corres∣pondent to boh their complexions. The fault of the wet leaves may bee corrected by patience, attending the serener season; but of dry leaves you ought at no time (if you regard your owne pro∣fi with a sober povidence) to bee unprovided, and he way how to prepre hath beene already delivered in this Treatise. Ts preciou creatures exact no great expence or laborious care during the first three or foure weekes, being satisfied with lit∣tle, as most agreeeble to the tendernss and smallns of bodies, and are very wll entertained with the leaves of the uccours or other branches, from whence for the profit of the tree one should ncsrily cu thm. At the beginning we go to gather leaves with Hnkerchiefs, then with little baskets, latly with sacks & maunds, as growing to a bignesse to require it, and a prfection to discern it. That the Gatheres of these leavs shold handle them with pure and washt hands, wee have already declaed absolutely neces∣sary: But the Governour of these chast and magnificent rea∣tures must bee Master of an exact purity. The smell of Tobacco is deadly to them: Let his observance forbeare it: Let him have a watchfull eye, that none of an offensive smell approach them; all ill breathings upon them whether contracted by fusome foode or nature make this innocently noble Creature expresse her resent∣ment by her owne death, or sicknesse Let him puifie the ranknsse of his owne breath (when fasting) with good Wine ere he ap∣proach them, with the odour whereof the worme is highly cheri∣shd. Let the Lodging be swept evry day, and prserved so by spinkling the floue with vinegar, and afterwards strawing it with Lavnder, Spike, Rosemary, Time, and such like of well comfor∣ting Odours. To these we may sometimes adde a perfume compo∣sed of Frankincense, Benioin, Storax, and other quickning aroma∣ticks burned in the lodging. Let the Tables be often made cleane and shifted, by often, I meane evey rd o fourth day at the furthst, at which time the
litter begins to bee offensive to this curios natured Creature; espe∣cially with the increase of the heate, let his diligence increase, that no uncleanesse (at that time more then ordinary maligne) cut him from the benefit of his labours. The litter must not bee taken away by degrees to the trouble of our curious Creature, but all at once; which may bee effected, if you leave at the end of each Scaffold an empty station to place the adjoyning Wormes on, whose left station being made cleane is fitted for the next neighbourhood, and thus may all bee removed and shifted by degrees, and a vacant table at the other end of the scaffold rmaines to begin againe (as afore) within two, three, or foure dayes at the longest. And thus without carrying far, the Wormes shall bee removed with ease and security, not once laying the finger upon their tender bodies; for giving them fres leaves at the time of their replacing, the Worme will fasten to the leafe, and the leafe may bee removed with his precious burthen, with no lesse safety then convenience. It will bee requisite to dispose the tables in such a fashion that they may bee seperately taken from the scaffold like tills out of drawers; for this the easiest and lesse nocent way of cleansing, as preventing the falling of any stench upon the lower tables and by which they are more suddenly discharged of their filth and ordure, meerely by striking them gently on the floore, which done, let them bee swept and brushed perfectly well; Let the tables on which you put your Wormes after their first sicknesse bee sprinkled with Vinegar or Wine, then rubbed over with sweete Hearbes to delight and encourage them to labour. Some have made tryall, which hath succeded happily of the smell of Garlick and Onions to refresh them; I dare not absolutely assent to this experiment; but it is cleare as Sunne-shine, that the Worme not onely rejoyces in agreeable odours, but is succoured thereby in his greatest mala∣dies: of which we now intend to discourse.
The causes of extraordinary maladies in Wormes, and their cre. THe extreames of colds and heates, the too sparing, or too a∣bundant administration of victualls in their severall ages, and a maligne disposition of the leaves are the principle causes of all extraordinary maladies which afflict this Creature. If the incle∣mency of Cold hath benummed or diseased this innocent Artist, the stove or oven formerly mentioned will recover it (the stopping of all windowes, and other admisories of aire cooperating:) To the greater complement of the cure, let the lodging bee perfumed with redolent Gummes, with Wine, strong Vinegar, or Aqua vi∣tae If on the contrary, the torrid violence of heate have wasted the strength of this suddaine and excellent spinner: The fresh aire admitted at the doores and windowes some brave artificiall Fannes or Ventalls to raise this breath, if too little, or at the last the expo∣sing them upon their tbles out of their lodgings to enjoy an un∣controuled and liberall communion of the aire, some halfe an houre before Snne rising are the proper meanes of their recovery. Those which by a wastfull liberality of their keeper in the tendernesse of their age have injured themselves with over feeding, must bee cu∣red by a two dayes abstinnce, and for some two succeeding dayes dited with a moderation. Those who famished by the negligence of their keeper are almost languishing to death, must bee restored by giving them meate in slender proportion, but frequently repea∣ted, by such a dyet regaining their forfeited appetite. Those which by having fed on yellow spotted, or too yong leavs have con∣tracted a fluxe, and fom thence a jaundice and spotted colour, ac∣companied with black bruisings, must upon the first inspection bee immediately removed into seperate chambers, that the change of ayre and dyet may labour for their almost desperate cure, and to prevent a contagion, which from thence would universally domi∣neere. But sch Wormes which as n accession to this last disease you should behold bathed on the belly by a certain humour flowing in that part of their bodies, are as incurable, good for nothing but to repast your Poultry.
Indeed excepting this last inexpugnable malady perfumes and change of chambers are generally conducing to overcome all di∣seases and to resore a new health and vigour. But this noble Creature is by nature sufficiently priviledged from these diseases, if the unskilfullnesse or negligence of the keeper did not violate this priviledge, and by that violation increase his owne trouble. Nor is this care of the keeper to bee onely limited to the day, the night too must require a part of his vigilance; Mice and Rats then take advantage, and grieved that any Creature should labour for man without their participation or obstruction devoure them by Troops, and the Cat her selfe enters ino a league with these her usuall prey to prey upon these poore things, whose inocency and excellency makes them the more obnoxious to their cruell ava∣rice. To remedy this, the house must not bee without continall Lampes, Bells, and other vaine terrus to affight them: The keeper himselfe also, or his Depuy must frequently walke round about his little Army. And let the Oyle (which occasions divers indispositions, if it fall ut in a drop upon these nice Artists) might bee pejudiciall, the Lamps should bee affd on the wall, and the portable ligts with which hee visits his curious charge of Waxe, Tallow, firre tree, or any other of innoxious, but illumi∣native substance. These things well observed, within seven or eight dayes at the most, succeeding their fourh and last exuviall sickness; The Wormes dispose themselves to pay the expnce of their Diet. T make prepaation for them, there must bee accommodations of ods necessary for these Wormes o cme up to vomit their silke, and fasten their Wbs by. To assmble these Wormes (the terme assigned to this worke) the most proper matters are Rosemary, cutting of Vines shots, of Chestnts, Oes Osiers, Sallows, Elmes Ashes, and in genrall of all flexible shrubs, not having a∣y disagreeing odur. The feet of these rods vnd for the bet∣ter fixure shall bee joyned at 15 inches distant to the table below, and the tops of them rched together at that above. Wich Epi∣tomall Amphitheater is Maste of as much beauty a those of the CAESARS in the greatt volume of their lustre and magnificence; the pper part of the Arch must bee plentiully interwoven with
sprigs of Lavender, Spike, Thyme, and shrubs delectable to the smell. By this intermixture the Wormes shall have ample satis∣faction to their restlesse curioity, where firmly to fasten their rich matter, having an election of such delectation of Perfumes, & varie∣ty of shoots: But these twigs must by no means be green, the moi∣sture extreamly offending the Cattell, and not suddenly withering, if the aire be moyst. The Wormes being removed to these Amphitheatrall Trophies, you may easily discover their gratefull inclination to spinne, by their bignesse of body, brightnsse, and clearenesse of belly and neck, neglect of meat, and irregular wandring through the Troope; and a little after to fulfill these promises they ascend their branche to vomit, or rather spinne out their silky substance. Here you must diminish their Ordinary, dayly, for they will in short time have united themselves to those shoots or twigs, quite forsaking the ta∣ble. Those Wormes which clime not before the others union to the branches, are of a latter hatching; and to prevent all nseaso∣nable intertextures in generall, to the retarding and perishing of the whole worke, must be assembled two other tables arched as these, that they may worke together at one time. The knowledge (when these Wormes have perfected their Cod or bottoms) may be obtained by an eare that is but the leastwaies curious, these creatures making both a pleasant humming in fee∣ding and continuing it in fashioning their bottoms, give that noise and their compleated worke over both together. That which falls next is the propagation of the seed to be preserved till the next Harvest. The Propagation of the Silke-Worme seed. HAppy creature, which livest onely to doe mankinde service, and dyest when thou hast accomplished it! Miracle of Nture! a Worme shut up in his owne monument, breakes through his silky grave, transformed into a Butterflye! employes ten dayes to erect himselfe a sepulchre, and an equall proportion of time to leave it! disimprisoning himselfe from his owne interment, by perforation of his bottome, he returnes to the view of Mankinde in the figure
of a Butterflye, with wings, as if he had already tryumph'd over his Mortality; which done, he and his co-triumphall Females, coupling together perpetuate their species by dissolution of their bodies; and that which compleats the miracle, may arise from the long abstinence of this living three and twenty dayes imprisoned without any sustenance or fruition of that which he takes a particu∣lar delight in, day light. Removing your branches from the Tables, and your silke-balls or bottomes from the Branches 5 dayes after the worke is perfect∣ed, the Balls are then to be made election of, for such seed as you wil preserve for the year following. Bonoill, & De Serres do both agree that there should be proportioned 200 Balls for one ounce of seed,he Balls Male and Female (the description of which here∣after.) But whereas Bonill is of opinion that a hundred double or trebble Bottomes which two or three Wormes have spunne and made up in common, will produce so many Wormes as Bottom: I demand his pardon if I accede rather to the judgement of De Serres: for from every double or triple Bottome there come forth but one Butterflye, though it hath more within: the Reason is, it being not probable that they should be all ripe together, that which is most mature by perforation of the Balls, exposes the other to the assault of the aire, which giving them cold, they dye imper∣fect. To distinguish the sexes. THE Male of the worme, when grown great, is knowne from the Female, by a wrinkled head, and a great appearance of eyes; the Female hath the head round without any such appea∣rance. In the Bottomes of Balls the Male is knowne, as having work'd himselfe into a Bottome, long, slender, and by much shar∣per at one end then the other: the Bottomes of the Female are big∣ger, softer, round at one end, halfe poynted at the other. The Sex in those Butterflyes is thus distinguished: the Male is lesser of body then the Female, stirring the wings more often and more strongly. Selecting then two hundred bottomes (male & female included in the number) you must passe a thread through the first and outward
Downe, called the Sleave of the Ball (using a wary hand that you pierce not into the silke, lest the cold getting in you should quite abortive your Wormes) of which you must make severall connexi∣ons composed of an equall number of both Sexes; these (to pre∣vent Rats and Mice) must be hang'd upon some hooke in a chamber of middle temper, but something inclining to coolenesse, yet how∣ever not subject to moysture, that the Butterflyes may come out with the more facility, Having pierced through their confinement, though nature her selfe infuses in them disposed applications to finde out their oppo∣site Sexes, it will be necessary to couple such as yet are disjoyned: all which, after you shall perceive them in conjuncture, must bee set either upon Say, Piropus, Tammey, Chamlet, the Backside of old Velvet, (in generall vpon any stuffe which has no woolly Downe, wherein the graine may be lost, or where it may get betweene the threads, as is linnen) hang'd upon the wall close by their Balls, or in defect of such stuffe, take Walnut-tree leaves one handfull, or more as you shall see occasion, tye them by dozens backsides toge∣ther, hang them at severall nailes or pinnes, and set the coupled Buterflies thereon. Take the Chamlet, or other stuffes, receiving the seed, and rub it gently between your hands, and the seed will come out with great facility. The principall time of the Butterflyes issuing out from the Cod, is in the morning about eight of the Clock: the seed collected must be put into a Boxe very cleane pasted with paper, to exclude all aire or dust, kept in a Chest in a drye temperate place where it may be preserved till the Spring following, avoyding to make a∣ny continuall fires in such Chambers, lest the warmth untimely hatch the Wormes, which being brought forth at such a season must perish for want of food. The Spaniard takes commonly the double and triple Balls for seed, not that he conceites every double Ball should produce two Butterflyes, or which is a conceit of more fondnesse, Male and Fe∣male; but because the multiplicity of creatures spinning their silk in common, make the worke so confused that they cannot well winde it off, which makes them be put in the ranke of the pierced ones for sleave, and I must ingeniously acknowledge my self to
accede to his opinion; for these double and triple balls are not un∣apt for this purpose, since they commonly, as De Serres observes, come rather from a lustinesse and supplenesse of the Worme, then any naturall debility: Which sure are so much fitter to bee culled out, that the best balls may bee made into silke, which will easily winde, and the seede of these which is fully as proper for seed, but lesse apt for silke: neither doe I know why they should not bee pre∣ferred, since the Spanish seed proceeding from these double and triple Balls carries a particular preheminence above the rest; which if wee shall make use of, the use is the same with others, except that they must bee clipped at the smaller end with the poynt of a paire of scissors, with a regard that you cut not cleane through the bottome, which would by admission of wind destroy the Worm, and this they doe that the Butterflies, if more then one, may finde an easie passage; the best bottomes (if you will preserve them) for Graine, are great, hard, weighty, and of carnation or flesh co∣lour. The balls preserved for seed being made choice of, the next thing wee are to fall upon is, how to winde off the bottomes de∣signed for silke: Which would bee of much more advantage for purity and plenty of silke, and facility of labour, if they could immediately bee wound off. The silke so freshly taken unwinding without any losse or violence: But this delayed, the Gumme, by which the Worme fastens her threads becomming dry, doth so harden the bottome, that without difficulty and losse, the winding cannot bee accomplished. This expeditious winding prevents the enclosed Worme of her full metamorphose into a Butterflye, and the bottome from perfo∣ration: But then where shall wee finde so many workemen if the designe were generall, as could in seven or eight dayes winde off so many millions of bottomes? Not excluding therefore such as can have that conveniency, the next best course to kill the Butter∣flyes in those bottomes which wee cannot winde off, is by expo∣sing and laying them in the Sunne, the heate of which in its owne worke stifles this Creature: But let this bee two or three dayes successively (not all at one exposure, lest your silke be burned in∣stead of stifling its spinner) two houres before, and two houres af∣ternoone
each day respectively. Let the bottomes, spread upon sheets, be turned often, that the heate may destroy equally, no one excepted from this sharpe insolation; but this must not bee done with a rude hand, which instead of turning them may bruise the Worme, the slimy matter of whose body, being thus bruised, is very prejudiciall both for staining the silke, and gluing it so toge∣ther, that no Artist can ever unwinde them. Removing them therfore oftentimes during such sunning with a gentle hand, wrap them thus warmed in sheets, and let them lye in a frsh dry chamber. But if the Sunne should faile, an Oven of such moderate heate a is usuall after two houres drawing the bread, or heated to such a degree of wamth (laying it over with boards, and the bottomes in sacks upon those boards, there remaining each time an houre and a halfe, repeating it till your experience by opening the most suspected bottome finde the inclosed Worme consumed) will bee of equall operation. But that which is the best and least practised course is this: Take your bottomes, and fill such a Furnace or Copper as your Brew∣ers use, halfe full of Water: Within three fingers breadth of this boyling water, lay a lid or planke or board within the Copper, bo∣red through as thick with holes as a Cullender, and so fit to the side of the Furnace, that it by no meanes may sinke into the water: Upon this cover lay a thin Carpet of Darnix or the like, and upon the Carpet the silke bottomes, which must bee often stirred, with care not to use too much violence. The mouth of the Copper, except when you stir the bottomes, must bee constantly covered, that the heate may smother the Womes: Your Wormes being dead, lay your bottomes in some roome, where there is aire to dry their moysture. This is an assured (though not vulgar) experiment, and by it your silke becomes as easie in the winding, and as pure in colour and substance, as if it had beene spunne the same mo∣ment the Worme had given it perfection. To wind ff the Silke frm the Cod, or Bttome. THe winding off the ilke from the Cod or bottome, is thus ef∣fected: fill a Caldron full of very faire water and st it upon a Furnace, heate it to such a degree that the wate becomes bubbled,
as though there were small Pearles in the middle, being ready to seeth; then cast in your Cods' or bottomes, still stirring them up and downe with broom or other small bushes, if yo shall see that the heate is not capable to make your bottomes winde, aug∣ment your fire, otherwise abate it. The bottomes winding the threads will take hold of the broome or brushes; draw those threads so affixed the length of halfe a yard and more out with your fingers, till all the grossenesse of the bottome bee wound off, which cutting off and laying aside, take all the threads of your bottomes united into one and according to the bignesse of thread you intend to make (as whether sowing or stitching) chose the number, not letting the other threads fall into the water againe, which must bee reserved to succeede) which you must runne through an Wyer Ring, appoynted for to ranke the threads which (as you shall see in the draught or Picture,) must be fastened upon the fore part of a piece of wood set directly upon a forme before the round or circle, which wee call a Bobin, in the top of which piece in a little space that there is, are fastned two Bobin, distant from one another two fingers; from this wyer ing the thread must bee drawne and crossed upon the bobins, whose onely use there is to twist the silke through a ring which is fastned in the middest of a staffe; above the Bobins you must continue the draught of your thread; this staffe which moves with the wheele is called a Lincet set a crosse beneath the wheeles, from that Ring you must fasten your thread upon the wheele it selfe, which must bee still turned till the skeyne of silke bee wound up, the Repre∣sentation see in the next figure. Observe, when any thread discontiues, his bottome being wound off, to repaire your number from another bottome, this you shall perceive when your full number of bottomes stir not altoge∣ther. Bee sure that you artificially cut the knots which will bee in your threads, that your silke may bee more pure and uniforme. Those which cast Gumme Arabick in the water under pretence to make the silke winde more pre and glossey, are but impostours, it being a meere cheate to make the silke weigh the heavier. Basins, or Caldrons, wherein you pt your bottoms to winde, if
of Lead retore the silke more pure then those of Copper, this Met∣tall being subject to a rubiginous quality, from which Lead is wh∣ly exept. Let th wheeles be large for the better speeding of the worke, that two skeines may be wound off together. That the fire of the Furnace may be pure, and without smoake, let it be made of Charcoale. The difficulty of their winding may be mollified by sope, put in the Basin or Caldron; the old Cods or bottoms hardened by time, will have the naturall Gumme which glues their threads dissolved, and the silke come off much more easie. Those bottomes of silke preserved for seed, and pierced by the Butterflyes, may be made of good use, if washing them in water you throwe them into a Caldron ready to boyle, with sope in it, which must be dissolved before the bottomes are cast in: thus let them boyle a quarter of an houre, or thereabouts, which done, take them out, wash them in cleane water and dye them being dyed you must beat them with a round stffe of a good bignesse upon a stone or some block which is better, which will make them be∣come white, and smooth as wooll. The way to spinne them after is this. They must with the fingers be pul'd one from one another, and opened as wooll uses to be in such preparations, let it then bee put on a Distaffe and spunne as small as you can, or please. Treatise of the Vine. THat the use of the Vine is really intended by nature for VIR∣GINIA, those infinite sore of Grapes which crowne the forehead of that happy Country are so many speaking testimonies: But what fate hath hitheto diverted our English there inhabiting from the publick undertaking a Commodity of so inestimable be∣nefit, I doe not say for a publick Staple (though it would bee as rich as any other one species of Traffick whatsoever) but even from private Vineyards, where they might sit under their owne Vine, drinke of their owne Grapes, satisfie even the most irregular desire of their, voluptuous appetites, and all this de suo, without entring
into the Merchants books for Wines, peradventure adulterate, without paying the sweat of their browes for the exudation of the Grape, I dare not determinately judge, lest I might bee forced to ascribe it either to a strange nonchalency or sluggishnesse to their owne prof, or which is worse an inveterate contempt of all other wayes of improvement (of what ever returne) in compari∣son of Fume of Tobacco. But that they may not bee ignorant of the profit of the Vine, they will bee pleased to know that the Vine requires (once plan∣ted) little more labour then the Hoppe. To attend upon foure A∣crees of Hops is the ordinary undertaking of one man in ENG∣LAND, who besides this, neglects not many other labours. If one man in VIRGINIA bee not sufficient to doe as much as another in ENGLAND,  shall either imagine him to bee lame or idle; nor let them ojct to me the heat of the Countrey; if the mid-dayes be hotter, the mornings are much colder, and the Labourer in VIRGINIA hath this advantage of being full of bread to atiey, whereas oftentimes the Hireling in ENGLAND having a family to feed, and sometimes no imployment, comes to worke with a famish'd body, and courage, lives meerly de die in diem, with as little hopes of ever changing the copy of his fortune, as renew∣ing the lease of his Cottage with his Landlord: those are but leane encouragements. In VIRGINIA the meanest servant (if he have any spirit) is still in expectation of improving his condition, and without any presumption may cherish his hopes, which promise him (his time expired) a present happinesse and future possibility of a Fortune equall, if not outgoing his Master, the encouragement being greater, the care lesse, and his provisionall subsistence by much better: why the Laborer in VIRGINIA should not e (I do not say superiour) but equall in strength of body and resolution of minde, to the miserable day-Hireling in ENGLAND, needs an OEDIPUS to unriddle. By this I hope it granted, that the VIRGINIAN may without any extraordinary efforts of sweat and spirits, labour equally with those of ENGLAND, and upon this accompt I shall assigne a Vig∣nard of four Acres to his tillage, an easie taske; let us compute the profit with the labour, and see what may be the proceed of this portion well husbanded.
That an acre of Vines in VIRGINIA (when once growne to perfection) will yield an equall increase to a common Acre of Vines in FRANCE, there being as great a difference between the soyles as the Acres, and much greater) will I believe be denyed by none, who pretend to modesy or reason: yet the Acre of Vines in FRANCE, one with another, very few excepted, will yield yearely ten or twelve Muyds of Wine, a measure containing seventy two gallons (a very famous Frenchman LIEBAULT, is my Au∣thor:) what the common Acre, or Arpent, is in FRANCE, the same man informes us: an Arpent (the common Arpent or Acre of FRANCE) is 100 Pole in the square, the Pole being longer then ours by eighteen inches; so that one French Acre yields three Tun of Wine and upwards; Our Acre being near upon 50 Pole more, we doubt not of profit equall. The excellent VIRGINIA will pardon me, if for dilucidation of an argument, I make her pure and unexhausted browes descend to weare a Gyrlond of fertility equall to that laborious and over-teeming Mother, the French Kingdome, nay to her common Vine∣yards: yet let us compute the profit arising from the foure acres, be∣ing but one mans labour, we shall finde the product even by that estimate, to be twelve Tunne of Wine, as the recompence of his particular toyle: let us imagine this but at ten pounds the Tunne, and the profits of this single person amounts to 120 pounds per annum. Here they will object the dearenesse or difficulty of Caske; but this objection must be made by those who know not VIRGINIA, where there is such an excellent convenience, and abundance of pe∣culiarly proper Timber, that the Winter will afford the other La∣bourers together with our Vigneron leasure, to cleave Pipe-staves sufficient for private use of Caske, and to sell to the publique; one man (during that little season) being easily able to make foure thousand. But our acre being a third part bigger, the soyle ½ better, why we may not promise to ou selves this profit, is an incredulity in ENGLAND, wrth a band of misunderstanding, in SPAINE would deserve the Inquisition,
What soyle is most proper for the Vine. HEE which will goe to pant the Vine without the twinne co∣sideration of the qualyty of the soyle, and the disposition of the aire, hath much affinity with him who goes to Sea without Lead or Compasse: the one seldome attaines his Port, nor the other his Harvest. The quality of the ground whereon the Vine thrives best, is a fine small Mold, of a subsistance rather inclining to a gentle light∣nesse, then a churlish stubbornesse: they which would not have it to be very fat, are ignorant that while the Vine is yong, the soyle where you plant may be imployed to other tillage, and by such expence of its native richnesse, reduced to that which they com∣mend so highly, mediocrity. But if the fitnesse of the ground transmit a rich and never-failing sap into the nascent Vine, making it grow speedy and strongly, if the Vine participate of this fat∣nesse, which it may be they call grossenesse, as desiring to have it more subtile, there is small question to be made, but that this Wine so imbodied and Fortified by nature, must have extraordinary spi∣rits to preserve it, and that age will have resined all that grossenesse into more pure and noble spirits; that if transported, the Sea will contribute to its melioration: whereas this Wine which they call subtile and delicate spirits, if either preserved long or transported far, will with so much applauded subtilty and delicacy lose all his spirits by age and evaporation. Scruple therefore at the richnesse of your ground no more then at the ranknesse of your purse; tis in your power to correct either if there were necessity: let it have the qualities of gentle, easie, fine and light, to be stirred, seated (if possible) on the decline of a Hill, not neare to any Marish ground, nor having any springs gliding through it; these Marish grounds you must avoyd as you would doe Levell in a Valley. And the reason is, that the Vine growing in these parts has a crude and ndigeted bloud, quickly soures, and has neither strength to commend or preserve it, and the Frosts in the winter time sinking to his rots, by the moyst passage of his scituation, kills it; the Grapes plumpe and breake, and when as
an additionall judgement to your injdicious election, a Rainy yeare comes to afflict, the Kernells breake out, the true juice of the Grape accompanying it, and though it fall out that the Grape swell againe, yet let not your expectation swell upon it, for in∣stead of good Wine proceeding from thence, you will receive no∣thing but Viny water. The gentle, easie, fine, and light ground being the best, does not so wholly arrogate all excellency, as to deny an accession, a neigh∣bourhood of goodnesse to other soyles. The gravelly ground yiel∣deth Wine of a great delicacy, but a small quantity; besides the in∣fant Plants are in danger of being wash'd away in any extraordina∣ry surfeit of raines, such grounds being not able to give them a deep rooting. The like may be said of sandy ground which not∣withstanding in some places especially where it is of a nitrous sub∣stance, will not yield the Palme to any ground o whatever rich∣nesse; other grounds may have an enforced richnesse, but because usually all such enfatning compost consists of Dung and Urine, which spoyle the purity of the Vine: If my advice were of any weight, they should never be used for Vintage, till necessity com∣manded my obedience. For the disposition of the aire, as particularly whether inclining to a Meridian, or Oblique to the South, South-East, or South-West; If we contemplate the nature of the Vine, that it by instinct, pre∣fers places rather hot then cold, drye then moyst; that it areth stormes and tempests, it affecteth a gentle breathing winde, or a serene calme; we may presently collect that it is neither to be pla∣ced open to the North, North-East nor (in VIRGINIA especial∣ly) to that Nursery of storms, the North-West quarters, nor upn the tops of Hills, where it lyes equally assailable to all: the deare place then for the Vines imbraces, is a Descent, towards, not in a Valley (except never subject to inundation) that being sheltred fom the more blustring Dominerers in the aire, it lye open to the South, South-West, South-East, or any part of the East and West, within the South quarter, for such a gratefull mansion, and accep∣table soyle assigned him, doubt not, but he will returne you a rent which shall stisfie your most unbounded wishes. But let the eye in the option of your Vineyard, may impose u∣pon
you, considering that every grund hath some arcane quali∣y which the sight is not able to discover: to make a most certaine experiment, let me propose this way of Examen. Make a pit in the ground (where your intentions are to plant) two foot deep, take a clod of the earth so cast up, powder it, and infuse it in a glasse full of cleare Raine-water, do your best to incorporate it with the water by frequent agitation and mixture: let it repose till the sub∣sided earth have made his perfect residence and settlement in the bottome, and the water recovered her native clearenesse; taste the water, and arrest your judgement upon this, that such a tast as the water delivers to your pallate, will that earth transmit to your wine: if of an inoffnsive or acceptable relish, you may confident∣ly promise your selfe a Wine pure, and consequently (if the soyle be rich very noble, nor is a salt taste an ill argument: but if it be a bitter aluminous, or suhury gust, this place is not fit for your planting, you lose your Wine and your labour. But VIRGINIA has a more certaine assurance; God and na∣ture have pointed them a soyle ou with their owne finger; let them therefore fix their eyes upon those places where either the Vine or Mulberry grow conjoyn'd, or seperate, and let them assure themselves of the excellency of the soyle, a diffience in this being an affront to Nature: yet this caution is to be used that though Val∣leyes are Marshy places may sometime have them by nature, yet their florescence would be much more excellent and healthfull if removed to such a ground as formerly we have made choice of. To make election of Plants. CUriosity about the choise of your Vine Plants will commend your Husbandry; let the Vine therefore from whence you take your Plant be of as little Pith as may be, such unpithy Vines being both fruitfull and fortified by nature, bearing a remarkable abundance of substantiall Grapes and strongly resists the violence of the weather, and of this fertility and firmenesse will your Plant also participate. Let not the Vine you meane to plant from, be a∣bove the middle of his strength, or age, and observe abut Septem∣ber thse which are most laden with Grapes, fullest of eyes in their
branches, and have been least wounded by the unseasonablenesse of Weather. Take not a Vine growing on a South side to transplant him to a Northerne: and set this downe for a principle in Nature, that all plants removed to a better scituation and soyle, answer your largest hopes, by their fruitfulnesse: but transplanted to a worse, assure your selfe that without an extraordinary cultivation, there cannot be the least probability of its thriving. Let your Plant (if you may with conveniency) immediatly be planted after its seperation from its originall; for while it yet re∣taines any vitall vigour, it will the sooner apply it selfe to the de∣sire of life and nourishment. If your necessity will not admit of this festination, wrap it tenderly in its owne earth; and when your leisure will permit you to plant it, let it soake some foure or five dayes in water, and (if possible) running water: this immer∣ging is a very strong preparative to its sudden taking root. If you apprehend a necessity of keeping him long or transpor∣ting him, (imagine it the Cyprian or Calabrian Grape thus to bee transportable into Virginia,) put him into a close Barrell fil'd up with earth; and that no aire may mortifie him, let both ends of the Plant be put into Onions or Garlick, or (which is better) made up with wax, and now and then watred, but not more then to keep the earth from resolving into a dry dust; for too much moy∣sture might (instead of preserving him) make him fructifie, and your Plant would become all root. Wee have already spoken how we must chuse, but not what we must make choice of: Let your Plants therefore be of those which grow between the highest and lowest, (the lowest having too much of earthy juice, and the highst too little) let them bee round, smooth, and firme having many eyes, and about one foot and a halfe of old wood cut off with the new. The manner, and way to lan Vines. HUman curiosity plungeth us in so many unnecessary toils, that it would almost take a person off from necessary labour: Look into Columella, the Countrey Farme, the Duch Husbandry and all those supercilious Writer, and you shall see them stand upon such
impertinent Puntillos; one while the dependance upon starres be∣nights a man, another while the ground which should produce this or that, must be cast after this forme, or else it will be barren in spight of the bounty of the Divine Providence. Not enumerating therefore all their wayes of Planting, I dare lay my life that if the Vine were but set on foot in VIRGINIA, the ground prepared for it as they doe their Tobacco there, by a right line, holes made instead of their Hillocks, but larger, deeper, and at greater distance, that there might something grow betwixt them which might be inoffensive to it by nature, and cleare it from being choak'd with weedes, or something drawing a con∣trary juice, (peradventure Onions and Garlick) or something re∣quiring small nourishment, (as Lupins) which turn'd into the earth againe (distance of five foot being left for a Plough, with caution not to come too neare the Roots, which must be bared with a stowe, the Plough running first the length, and then the traverse of those rowes, which therefore must bee lineally straight) would both fatten the earth, and cultivate the Vine all at one moment. Yet submitting my selfe to judgements of greater experience then my modesty or natue can ever hope for, I shall deliver the seve∣rall way of planting the Vine, with as much brevity as the matter, and my first resolution rather to contract then inlarge, will per∣mit mee. The first preparing of the earth to receive the Vine must bee done in Spring or Summer, where the ground you digge or cast must bee cleansed from all manner of superfluities whatsoever; nmely, Roots, Weedes, Stones, &c. this digging must bee severall times repeated, that the earth by alternate changing its place of top and bottome may bee throughly tempred, the dry refreshed, and the moyst qualified: Thus cleansed, cast in into many urrowes (the sides whereof the French call Chevaliers or Guides, because it should guide you in the planting) the depth of eighteene inchs or more; let the mould cast up above, bee so disposed, that t may an∣swer to the depth below. Note that these furrowes in a sandy, , or wet ground must not bee so hollow as in that which is rough and crabbed: In the bottome of the first you may put stones about the bignese of an
ordinary brick (but round) not bigger, which in the heate of Sum∣mer refreshes, in violence of Raine opens a passage to the water, that it dwell not at the root to rot it. The best season for planting of Vines is in October, the Moone increasing, the Furrowes must bee made in August, that the expo∣sed earth may have time of digestive preparation. If your plant have Roots, you must when you plant it cut them of all, except it bee newly gathered, if it bee a slip or cut, which though it bee not so swift of growth the first yeare, yet is of much longer continuance, you must soake it in water, if it bee possible in running water five or six dayes. Hee which plants the Vine, the ground thus prepared, and have∣ing a line with him, that hee may observe a just evennesse and streightnesse, both in the Row, and to the opposite Plant, that so every foure may make a regular quadrangle, must bow his plant, the bigger end forward one foot into the earth of the Ditch, let∣ting first some of the Mould from the sides fall into it; let him tread upon the Mould the better to fixe the plant, and with his hand (the foot still pressing upon that part of the plant which is inearthed) gently raise or bow the top of the plant that it may grow erect: this done, let him cast some more Mould on it, to the thicknesse of six inches, and cut the top of the Plant, so as not to leave above three knots or joynts above the earth: Let him pro∣ceede in planting of the rest, observing the prescribed order: some set two plants together in this order, that if one shoud faile, the other might recompence the default. If you will have your Vine to grow without stakes or props, cut it so, that you let it no: increase above two or three joynts in the yeare, which will make it to stand firme against all stormes, i but naturally violent. It will bee extreame ill husbandry to plant Vines of different kindes or qualities together, such diversity there is in their season of ripenesse; some preventing your expectation by the suddaine∣nesse of their maturity, others deceiving it by their late ripenesse. Wee have spoken of the planting, let us now handle the culture and dresse of it, that his fertility may in some measure requie the labour of his implnting.
The manner of dressing the Vine. MId May will bee a season which will best informe you, whe∣ther your Plants have taken so good root, that it expresses a verdure and germination in his Branches; when therefore the shoot is able to indure dressing, let it bee cut within two or three knots of the old Wood, and if any other slips spring from the Root, cut them away (with care however that it wound not the Root, or the maine stock, which are wonderfully offended by the too neare approach of any toole that is edged) that the whole strength of the Vine may unite into one common stock or pillar, to support and convey the sap into the permitted branches, of which you may not let any flourish the first yeare of its growth. It is ob∣served, that to cut the Vine in the decrease of the Moone, makes the fleshy part of the Grape of a more substantiall grossenesse and feeding, and is a peculiar remedy for those Vines which are given to bee over-ranke with wood: Let it bee the care of the Vigne∣ron to remoove all obstructions of Weedes which uninvited parti∣cipate of the Vines nourishment: the surest way to kill which, is, to turne them in towards the earth, which is not onely a destructi∣on to the thiefe of its moysture, but a rstitution of the robbery for the Weedes so inverted enrich the ground to the great encou∣ragement of the Vine, and the no lesse profit of the Vine dressers. Let your knife with which you cut your Vine bee very sharpe, and let your Vine bee cut sloping at one cut, if possible, and not far from the old Wood, that the growth of the Vine may the more speedily cover the wound. The Vines must bee dressed or husbanded hree times the yeare, the first culture of it must bee in March, at which time you are to digge about the Root three quarters of a foot deep, or thereabouts: The next season must be in April, wherein you must digge about the Roote, within a third of the former depth, then you must also prune it by cutting all the branches, and leaving some three knobs or joynts of the new wood in your Vine of the first yeares growth, and cutting off all dead or superfluous branchs of the old, whose permitted branches must also bee pruned, lest they
should spend that aliment decreed for the Grape in elongation of the branches, all succors also must bee plucked away. In August the like course is to bee used in the Wine of the precedent Autumne leaving two or three joynts or knobs of new wood: againe the old ones may bee onely digged, if at that time, and at all other times you perceive any dead or wounded branches, you must cut them off something further then the mortification or hurt extends; and in all prunings let no Vine bee cut in the knob or joynt, but in the space betwixt; there following usually nothing but absolute and irremediable decaying, where they are cut in the articula knitting If in Aprils dressing, the Vine hve no branched but onely bud∣ded, which is most usuall (but more especially in March) you must nip the bud off with your fingers, to the end that the juice which would ascend to hasten the germination, may bee stopped to strengthen and engrosse the store. The third yeare the Vine will beare you Grapes in these Coun∣tries, but I am confident that in VIRGINIA it woud beare at the second; and this my confidence is grounded upon the hasty perfection all things receive in VIRGINIA by much precding all our neighbour Countries. The Pactree arrives not to that viriity of growth in eight yeares, in ths rgions, which it ob∣taines at foure there. The like is verified in Apples and Cherries: and if it be quetioned how such men which peradventure bing in a necessity, are not able to attend two yeaes for a retune, shall in the meane while subsist: it is easiy answered that the inter∣valls betwixt the dressings of the Vines will fford space enough for a reasonable Crop of Tobacco; and ther is much moe labour in looking to 5000. Plants of Tobacco then the like number of Vines, especially if the interspces be plughed, and owd with Turnips or Lupines, which both add to the fatnesse and unwilding of the ground, and choake up all weeds and grasse which might afflict it. Contrariwise, Tobacco will admit nothing in the Va∣cant saces, and must be perpetually weeded. Further, though other Vine-Masters prescribe the digging about the roots of their Plant in August which is the busie sson of inning th Tobacco, yet I am driven by divers reasons to wish such culture omtted at that time of the yeare, since it layes the root by so much the nearer
to a violently torrid Su which is so far from cherishing of it, that it burnes it; by whic meanes his Cop of Tobacco need not at all to be neglected: but these Vines steale into such perfection by that time hey are arrived at foue yeares growth, that twenty thou∣sand Plants of Tobacco, though sold at 6 pence per pound, (a great rate in VIRGINIA) will not returne you a like profit, which though it my be something springly believed, yet may be made apparent. For admitting our Vines by tht time of 4 foot high, by their so often cutting of the shoots, nourished uto a stock strong enough to support it self; of Banchs, by the like tillage, equall in vigour, yield but a gallon of Wine per pice, yet here is 20 Tun of Wine yearely, for 30 yeares together, (so long will the Vine thus husbandd, last fruitfull, and vigorous, if Planted with the slip ra∣ther then the Root) without any interruption but that which sets bounds and limit to all things, the divine providence in his dispen∣sation of seasons. Of the Dseases of Vines, and their Remedy. BEfore we can justifie our expectations of a good Harvest, we must providently foresee and prevent (as much as in us lies) such casualties as may make our hope abortive; let us therefore cast our eye upon such Diseases which my make the Vine un∣fruitfull, or after the fruit produced, destroy its desired fertility. To prevent the Frost from benumming, or absolutely destroy∣ing your Vines, let there be layd up in divers places heaps of drye dug, with an itermxture of chff and straw, and when you conjecture the approch of the Frot, set this combustible stuffe on fire, and the smoake arising from thence will so temper and qulifie the aire that your Vine for that season will be secured from Dmnge: yet if (before you have applyed ths preventive reme∣dy) the fruit of your Vine be destroyed, cut it off very short, and the strength continuing in the reminder will so fortifie it, that the next yeare it will recompence you double in the quantity of your fruit; for what it hath been rob'd of by the present. To provide against the blasting of your Vine: When you per∣ceive it upon the point of budding, cut it as late as may be; for
this late cutting it will make your Vine something later and by consequence, blossme or flower at such time as the Sunne is ascen∣ded to his greatest degree of heat and fervor. To breake off such Mists and Fogs as are already gathered in the aire, and give probable menaces to fall upon your Vines, you must apply your selfe to this remedy: let a smoake round about your Vineyard be made with Gots dug, kindled and set on fire. Such Fogges as have outstripped your care and already fallen upon, and endammaged your Vnes, must have the malignity of their vapors taken off, or at least asswaged by irrigation of Vines, with the water in which the leaves or roots of wilde Cucumbers, or Colo∣quintida have been layd some time to infuse: this must be applied immediatly after the mists. Some are of an opinion that Bay-trees (which by the way are dangerously sociable to the Vine) planted round, but not too near the Vineyard, wil priviledge the Vine from this ditaster, by attracting all the ill disposed mallice of those Fogs nto it selfe. This till experimented will hardly be worthy beliefe. It is an opinion no way contradicted, that fertility is restored to a Vine become barren, if humane Urine kept a long while stale, to make it the more salt and ranke, be dropt by degrees upon the Vine stock, which must immediately after be laid about with dung and earth mixt together: the season for the application of this Cure must be in Autumne. Another way I should conceive to be altogether as effectuall, namely, to leave it nothing but the stock, bare the roots, and lay there either Acornes, Chesnuts, or rotted straw; and if the bignesse of the root will permit it, to cleave it a little way, and to thrust into the issure a piece of Vine wood, cut small for the purpose; it being certaine that trees themselves some∣times groane under the sicknesse of being hide-bound: Vines are perceived to want moisture, when their leaves turne of a deep red colour: this Disease is cured by watring them with Sea-water, or stale Urine. The Bleeding of the Vine. THE Vine sometimes is troubled with an extraordinary Efflux, or emanation of its juice; some call it the weeping, others the bleding of the Vine, and this Disease is commonly so violent,
that if not stopped it leaves the Vine without blood and life. Th remedy is to breake the barke of the Vine upon the body thereof, and to anoynt the wound with oyle boyled to the half, or else with the Lees of Wine not salted; this done, let it bee watered with Vinegar, which by how much the stronger it may bee, is so much more effectall. The scattering Vine. THE Vine sometimes is oppressed with an unretentive scattering disase, as unable to maintaine the fruit she hath produced, which shee therefore discharges, and let fall from her; the symptomes by which you are to judge of this disease, are an un∣naturall palenese and drynesse of the leaves, the branch it selfe lnguid, broad, and of a more pithy softnsse then usuall. The cure to this, is to rub Ashes beaten and mixed with strong Vine∣gar abou the foot of the Vine, and to water all tha is round a∣bout the stock: Quaer, whether fissures in the Barke made with a sharpe knife some fixe inches long may not bee an additionall Re∣ceit to the former prescription. The tree peradventure having con∣tracted this malady by too close imprisonment in the barke, being in a manner hide bound; how ever the foregoing Medicine can∣not in this case but sort to better effect, if the tree and barke joynt∣ly be rubbed over then the barke onely, unlesse this Medicine could give a relaxation to the barke, which I have no faith in. The Vine too full of branches, or luxurant. THE Vne expending it selfe too wastfully in overmany bran∣ches, must bee cut very short. If this overcome not that lux∣ury, the usuall remedy is, let it bee bared at the Roots, and River gravell layd round about the stock, together with a few Ashes or else some stones. The reason I apprehend not, except it bee to check its fertility which I conceive may more prosperously bee ef∣fected, if onely the branches being cut, and the stock low, you suffer that exubrancy to waste it selfe in adding more corpulency to the stock, which will of it selfe bee a sufficient spender to re∣straine
and confine the former liberality of juice. The withering Vine. IF the Grapes languish and dry away as they hang upon the Vine, before you apply a remedy you must cast away all that are alrea∣dy affected with this contagion; then water the rest with Vinegar, in which Ashes of Vine branches have beene infused The most assured remedy is to water the Root of the Vine, from whence the disease cometh with the stalest Urine; the former Remedy being something irregular, as if it were easily feisible to remove a malady by application to the effects, without considering the efficient. The rotting of Grapes upon the Vine. THere are of Vines whose fruit putrifie upon the Branches before they come to maturity: this disease is remedied by lay∣ing old Ashes to their Root, or Gravell, or Barley meale mixed with the seed of Purcellane about the body; Quaere, whether this disease proceed from a Plethorick ranknsse or emciate debility: if from rankenesse all application of ashes hurt it: the symptomes of rankenesse are, when a tree lavishes his moysture into too many branches, which may make him neglect to feede the fruit, as unable to maintaine two spenders; and I am confident the naturall remedy for this is to bare him (as much as possible) of wood, that it may divert the nourishment to the Grape; if from debility, which you shall perceive by a flaccid palenes in the leaves, the same remedy which wee prescribed to the withering Vine, vi. to water the Root with Urine of a long stalenesse, will bee the most proper. The biting of the Cow or Oxe. INdeede the best way to prevent this disease, is to have your ground either well paled or quicksetted, or both: But that the biting or breathing of Kine may not endamage the Vine (which rdly recovers afer such wound or infection) water the ft stock
of your Vine with such water as the Tanners have used in dressing and mollifying their raw Hides, and you may promise your selfe to bee secured from them, they as mortally hating such sents, as the Vine abhors their bite or breathing. Against Caterpillars. THe opinion is that Caterpillars and other noysome, though little Vermine, will not molest the bud or leafe of the Vine, if the hooke or hedgebill wherewith you prune and cut off the superfluous branches of the Vine be anoynted over with the blood of a Male Goat, or the fat of an Asse, or of a Beare; or with the Oyle wherein Catterpillars or brayed Garlick have beene boy∣led, or if you anoynt and rub them with the purse or sheath of a Badgers stones, after your hooke has beene ground: These are curious rather then apparently approved Medicines, and for their reason I must demurre to give it, Quaere, whether the Oyle wherein Catterpillars or brayed Garlick have beene boyled well, rubbed about the stock of the Tree, may not make those Repti∣lia abor the acending, or whether the uce of Rew so applyed, have not the like vertue. The driving Locuts from the Vine is done by fumigation, as ei∣ther fiing of old Oxe dung, Galbanum, old shooe soles, Harts-orne, womens haire; but that which they propose las, I con∣ceive to bee the best, namely, to plant Pionie neare them. To prevent Pismires. PIsmires, who divers times fret in sunder the wood of the Vine, even to the very marrow, will not at all approach it, if you a∣noynt and rub the slock with the dung of Kine, or grease of As∣ses. The Bay-tree, Hasell-tree, and Colworts beare a particular en∣mity to te Vine, and expresse it by effects when plnted neare; this I cannot believe to bee out of any Magicall Antipathy, but rather that these (as the Plum-tree) are great and strong succors of juice, and happily drawing of the same, by which the Vine is
more particularly nourished, of which being cheated, it is no wonder if she expresse a decadency. The manner of the Vintage. AND now wee are come to that which is most acceptable to mankinde, the successefull fruit of his labours reaped in his Vintage, which wee must not of a naturall geedinesse precipitate, till the Grapes bee of such a kindely ripeness of age, that to let them continue on the Vine longer were to lose them; this ripenesse is visibly understood by a mutation in the Branch and Grape; in the Branch you shall perceive a manifest mutation by an incline to rednesse in the Grape; if it bee white it alters towards a yellow, if red towards a black colour; nor are the tate and touch lese dis∣cerners of such full maturity; for if they bee sweete in taste, and the liquor of a glutinous substance, cleaving to the finger; wee may conclude that both they, and the time to gather them are of full ripenesse. There are also other signes, if the kernell expressed out of the grape betweene your figers, come out cleane, and al∣together seperate from the flesh or pulpe of the Vine, if after such expression (gently performed) the Grape diminish nothing from his bignesse, &c. These all, or the most of them concurring, pre∣pare for your Harvest. Yet in VIRGINIA, where the Harvest is more abundant then the Labourers, to prevent a glut of worke flowing upon few hands, and consequently not possible to bee throughly equalled: It will no bee amisse to use both anticipation by accelerating na∣ture with artificiall meanes in some, and retardation by arresting the speede of growth in others, to accelerate Ashes layd to the foot of Vines, and those Vines planted to something more advan∣tage of an amrous Sunne, will make them antecede the others, at the least by their advance of foureteen dyes; the other in their naturall course following that spice after, and the others more particularly retarded (which may bee easily effected by the pruning of them later then the rest just upon their preprative to bd; which arresting the sap mkes it afterwards (though later) returne with a greater abundance) staying foureteene dayes later, there
will be compleately sixe weekes time  gathering in of your Vintage. And by this meanes you  Vineyard tilled or manured every third yeare all over, which  no ingratefull accession to its duration in fertility and : Those of the most forward ripenesse this year, being retarded the next, and those of the naturall maturation husbanded in that manner, the next Winter. The fittest season to gather them must bee in a serene unclouded sky (the Grapes having any Raine or Dew upon them when ga∣thered, losing much of their perfect strength and goodnsse;) for the Wine made of Grapes throughly dryed in their collection, hath a greater priviledge of force and continuance: But before this collection bee attempted, all things fitting to receive yu Vin∣tage must bee prepared in cleanlinesse and order, viz. Baskets, Caske, and Fatts strongly hooped, Tubs great and small, Stands, Prees, &c. and all scoured, washed, and furnished with thir ne∣cessary instruments and conveniencies. The Grape gatherer must distinguish and seperate the leane, green, sower, withered, or rotten Grapes, from those which are of absolute ripenesse and soundnesse. That the Wine by such an un∣comely confusion or mixture may not bee lesse pure, sprightly, and healthfull, then it was intended by nature, such inconfiderate Gatherers are sayd to bee of the Divells sending, to spoyle Gods provisions. Nor should they conusedly mixe good with good, if of different quality, as to mingle that which is strong and rich, with which is small, but delicate. They prescribe that the Grapes so gathered should bee left in the ground at least a day or two, and that ncovered, provided it raine not, by which meanes, say they, they will become much better, since the Sunne, dew, and earth, by this exposure taking from them what ever they have of bad unpro∣fitable moysture, refine and purifie them. A couse as far as my span of reason can extend, so far from this promise of refining and purifying, that it absolutely tends to their corruption. Have they wanted the Sunne and Dew when upon the stalke? Could not the same Sunne and Dew which enripened them, refine and purifie them there? As for the earths meliorating them, if melioration bee understood by putrfaction, 'tis easily granted; Apples that
lye on the ground are so meliorated, that is to say rotted, and shall the Grape a more delicate and tender fruit avoyd it? This is by way of digression, but it is necessary for without this caution a modest man which redes with an obedient judgement any booke of these men, taking the Authour for an , subscribes to it, observes the prescription, and gaines a doctrine of future provi∣dence, by the losse of his present Vintage. But after the Grapes have remaned a day or two in the house, it will bee time to put them into the Ftt to bee trodden out equal∣ly. Those which tread the Grapes should before they go into the Fatt have their feete and legges washed extreamely, and themselves covered with a shirt as well s drawers, that their sweat may not mixe with the Wine, and that nothing in the act of eating fall from their mouths into it, they must bee punctuall in abstaining from eating of the Grapes, while they are at this their labour. Surely this way of treading the Grape is derived from some ab∣stenious man, who devised this stratagem under a pretence of ex∣pediting the worke; but indeede to deter men from drinking that which is so uncomely prepared. I know they will alledge that by treding it flowes more naturally, and withall more pure forth, then that which is pressed; but withall give mee leave, say that the very Presse it selfe if it bee not too violently and greedily la∣boured, makes it glide forth altogether as naturally and purely, and which is more with greater equality; for in the Presse, all the Grapes feele the impultion at once, and if the Owner bee not too covetous to bring the drosse and grose parts of the Grape to a se∣cond squeezing and mixing with the fist without dispute the Wine so expressed is altogether as good and strong as that which is trodden, but I am certaine much mor clealy. The Wine (however being expressed must be poured, drosse, Huskes, and all, into a Fat to worke or boyle in, which it must doe for the space of foure and twenty houres at the least, if you will hve it fine, delicate, and subtile; but if you desire to have it strong and noble, let it worke in the Fat foure or five dayes, with a Cove∣ring over it, that so the vapour thereof may not exhale, or his force waste it selfe. The Fat, or Tub prepared, must have immediatly before his re∣ception
of the Wine, a little bunch of Vine branches laid before the Tap-hole, which (that it may not heave up with the Wine) must be kept downe with a cleane stone or Brick, or which is bet∣ter and lse offnsive, a ring of Lead wound about it: this when you draw the Wine will hinder the Huskes or Grapes from com∣ming out with the liquor. Your Fat must not be full by halfe a foot or more, that the Wine may have the more space to boyle or worke in. Your Wine in vessel'd must not be filled up to the Bung, nor the Bung closed, that the Wine may have the greater liberty of de∣spumation, and rejecting whatever it findes reluctant to its owne nature. Every day you must fill up what is expurged, and something more, till you inde the Wine throughly appeaed, and discharged of whatever might be obstructive to its generosity: nor must this Caske be in the Cellar, but either in the open aire, or in some Brne where it has a liberall respiration; besides the defects in Caske cannot be so easily discovered when the Wine is in the Cel∣lr, s in open places. When it is so throughly settled, that it hath given over all appetite or signe of boyling, you may have it com∣mitted to your Cellar, which should stand upon the North here, (in VIRGINIA upon the North-west as the coolest and driest An∣gle) paved wit gravell or drye earth, which is lesse subject to moysture or exdations then Brick, or especially stone, absolutely remote and unmoested by any ill odours of Stables, Sinkes, Bathes, Marshy places, &c. neither should it have any thing shut up or kept in it, which have any sent of acrimony or harshnesse, as Cheese, Garlick, Onions, Oyles, (Trane, Neatsfoot, Linseed, and others, not the Salade-Oyle) it being observed, that nothing is more open or obnoxious to contagion then Wine, especially when new. Your Vessells must be so rank'd in order that they touch not one another, by this meanes to leave a liberty of sight to foresee a mis∣fortune, or prevent it when happened. They must be so close stopped in the Bung with Clay, that not the least irreption of aire may be capable to taint it, to which it is very subject. To cause new wine to bee quickly purged, put (after this pro∣portion
in the rest:) to 15 quarts of new Wine, halfe a pint of strong Vinegar, and within the space of three dayes it will bee fined. To preserve Must or new Wine all the yeare, take that Vine which voluntary distilleth from the Grape; before is suffer the presse, and put it into a Vessell pitch'd within and without the same day: let the Vessell be halfe full, and very well stop'd with plaster above; and thus the new Wine will continue a long while in his sweetnesse. But to adde to this experiment and the conti∣nuance of the Wine, you must hinder it from working, which you may well doe, if you put the Vessell into some Well or River, there to remaine thirty dayes; for not having boyled it will con∣tinue alwayes sweet, and is preserved by the heat of the Pitch. Others prefer the burying of this Vessell in moist gravell: and (which in my opinion is the best) others cover the Vessell first with the drosse of the Wine presse, then heap upon it moyst gra∣vell; by which meanes, something interposing betwixt the extra∣ordinary moysture and cold of the gravell, which might have some influxe upon the Wine, your Must preserved in an excellent meane of temper. To know if there be any water in the Wine. THE Malice of servants sometimes swallowing downe their Masters Wine, and fearing to be discovered if the quantity be diminished, or the basenesse of the Dealer to impose upon the Merchant, makes both of them adulterate it with water, which not being discernable to the eye, may be made familiar to your knowledge by this experiment: Take a withered Rush, immerge it in the Wine; after a small space draw it out againe: if the Wine have been thus bastarded, you shall perceive the water cleaving to it. Otherwise, take raw and wilde Peares, cutting, and cleansing them in the midst, or in lieu of them, Mulberries, cast them into the Wine, if they float, the Wine is neat and cleare from such sophi∣stication; if they subside there is water in it. Some doe anoint a Reed, a piece of wood, or paper, hay, or some other little bundle of herbs, or strawes with Oyle, which if they drye, put into the
Wine and after draw them out, if the Wine have been embased with water, drops thereof will gather unto the Oyl. Another sure tryall is to cast unlaked Lime into the Wine; if there be any adulteration, the Lime dissolves, if the Wine be undevirginated, the Lime collects thereby a harder cementation. Others take of the Wine, and inject it into a Frying-pan wherein there is boyling Oyle, and the Wine (if depured) declares it with a loud noise, and frequent Bubbles. To make another tryall, lay an Egge into the Wine, the Egge descending, manifests the abuse, not descending, the Wine is as the Grape bled it. To seperate Wine from Water. BUT as the miserable man in the pit desird his friend not to question how he fell in, but to advise how he should get out: We will not be satisfied that there is water in the Wine, but how it may be sepeated from it; which if we may believe the deliverers of it, who have published it to the World in their names, you must put into the Vessell of Wine melted Allum, then stop the mouth of the Vessell with a spunge drenched in Oyle, which done, turne the mouth of the Vessell so stopped, downewards, and the water onely will come forth, leaving the Wine pure: the reason of this I cannot give, and have onely read (not seen) the experi∣riment. The way to correct ver much waterishnesse in Wine. IF gluts of raine have made the yeare so unseasonable, that the Grape hath contracted a watry quality to the diminution of his Winy goodnesse: or if it fall ou that after the time of gathering them, there fall such store of raine, that the Grapes instead of Dewes are too much wetted; (such is the profit of exposing the ga∣thered clusters into the open aire for 48 houres) the remedy is to tread them quickly, and finding the Wine weake, by tasting it af∣ter it hath been put into the Vessell, and begun to boyle there, it must presently be changed, and drawne out into another Vessell, for so the watr parts that are in it will stay behinde in the bot∣tome,
yet the Wine standing still charged, will be totally correct∣ed, if you put to every fifteen quarts of Wine, a pint and a halfe of Salt. To make Wine of an acceptable odour. IF you will perfume your Wine with a gratefull odour, by which the braine may be strengthened, as well as the heart exalted: take a few Myrtle-berries dry, bray them, and put them into a little Barrell of Wine; let it so rest, close stopped, ten dayes after∣wards use it at pleasure. The like effect will follow, if you take the blossoms of the Grapes (those especially which growe upon the shrubby Vines) when the Vine is in flower, and cast them into the Wine, the brimmes of the Wine-vessell being rub'd over with the leaves of the Pine and Cypresse tree, and this will give it a fra∣grancy delightfully odorate: Or which is of equall facility, you may hang an Orenge, or Pomecitron, (being of a convenient great∣nesse) and prick it full of Cloaves, and that in such sort as it may not touch the Wine, shut up in all these Applications, the Vessell very close. If this like you not, take the simples of such matter as you would have your Wine to smell of, infuse them in Aqua vitae, the infusion may be repeated by percolation of the old herbs, and addi∣tion of new, till it have gotten a full and absolute perfection of thse odours you desire, then poure the Aqua vitae (the herbs trained from it) into the Vessell of Wine. To make Cute. YOU may make the boyled Wine called Cute, if you boyle new Wine that is good, lovely, and very sweet untill the third part thereof bee consumed; when it is growne cold put it into a Vessell and use it. But to make this Cute, that it may continue all the yeare, gather your Grapes whole, and let them lye spread three dayes in the Sunne, on the fourth about noone tread them. The liquour or sweet Wine which shal runne out into the Fatt be∣fore the droey substance come under the presse, must bee boyled one third as before; then to every nineteene quarts of Wine adde
an ounce of Irees or Corne flag well brayed, straine this Wine without the Lees, which being done, it will continue sweet, firme, and wholesome. To cause troubled Wines to settle. TO cause troubled Wines, and such as are full of Lees to settle, poure into thirty quarts of Wine, halfe a pint of the Lees of Oyle boyled, till the third part bee wasted, and the Wines will im∣meditely returne to their former settlement. Otherwise, which is better and more easie, cast into the Wine-Vessell the whites of six or seven Egges, and stirre them together very well with a stick. To know whether the Wine will keepe long. THE knowledge whether the Wine will continue long or not in a good condition, is thus made apparent: When your Wine is tunned up, you must within some time after change it into ano∣ther Vessell, leaving the Lees behinde in the first; which you must diligently stop from taking any vent whatsoever; after some time you may looke into the Lees with carefull animad version, whether they change or contract any ill sent or not, or whether they breed any Gnats, or other such Creatures; if you espye none of these mutations or corrupt generation, repose your selfe with all confi∣dence that your Wine will continue pure to the longest: But tse symptomes discovered, will bee so many admonitions to dispose of that Wine with the soonest, which is already by nature inclined to urne bad and corrupt; others take a pipe of Elder, or such other wood as may bee hollowed through, with which they receive the sent of the Lees, and by them informe themselves how the Wine is conditioned. A good pallate will divine of Wines by the taste, namely that if the new Wine bee sharpe and quick, they repose confidence in its goodnesse and continuance; but if flat and heavy, then they expect nothing but the contrary to good qualities: againe, if the new Wine (when put into the Vessells) be fat and glwy, the sign is prosperous; but if contrariwise, it be thinne and weake, it is n
argument that it will easily be turned, To keepe Wine at all times. TO effect this, you may cast Roch-Allum (very finely powdred) into the, Vessell which you meane to put your new Wine in, or bay Salt very finely powdred: or pibble stones, and little flints taken out of some Brooke, or which will retaine the spirits of the Wine from evaporating; more certainly Salade Oyle, so much as will cover the superficies of the Wine. To make that Wine shl not Flowre. VVIne will have no Flower, if you put into it the Flowers of the Vine, gathered, and dryed, or the meale of Fet∣ches, changing the Wine into another Vessll, when the meale or Flowers are settled downe to the bottome. To prepare Physicall Wines. NEither is this digression impertinent; Physitians are not so frequent in VIRGINIA, as in PADUA, or LONDON, and were there more, yet the vast space of ground, those people take up in their scattred dwellings, makes the addresses to them very difficult: that therefore they may (in absence of the Physitian) have some common remedies for common diseases; I have thought fit to give them this accompt of Medicinall Wines out of LIE∣AULT, all of them of excellent Virtues, and easie preparations: the first shall be To make Wines of Wormewood. TO which effect, take of Sea-Wormewood, or in default of that, common Wormewood, especially that which hath the small stalke, and short leaves, eight Drammes; stamp them, and binde them in a cloath which is not woven too thick, cast it into the Vessell, pouring new Wine upon it, making this accompt, that to
every three pints of Wine there must bee eight drams of Worme∣wood; continue this proportion in the filling of your Vessell, which you must leave with the vent open, that the Wine fall not a new to boyling. The use of this Wine is good for the paine of the stomack and liver, and to kill Wormes. To make Wine of Horehound. THis Wine being very soveraigne for the Cough, must bee made in the time of Vintage, to which purpose you must ga∣ther of the Crops and tender stalkes of Horehound, of that spe∣cially which growes in leane untilled places; afterwards cause them to bee dryed in the Sunne, make them up into bundles, tying them with a Ruh, sinke them in the vessell to 65 quarts of new Wine; you must put eight pound of Horehound to boyle there∣with, after the Wine is settled the Horehound must bee taken out, and the Wine stopt very diligently. The Wine of Anise and Dill very good against the difficulty of the Urine: The Wine of Peares against the flux of the belly; the Wine of Bayes against the ach and wringings of the belly; the Wine of Asarum Bacer against the Jundise, Dropsies, and Tertian Agues; the Wine of Sage against pines and weakenesse of the sinewes, are all made as the Wine of Wormewood. To make Wine of Betony. TAke Betony, the Leaves and Seedes about one pound, put it into twenty quarts of Wine, and at the expiatio of the se∣ven moneth, change the Wine into new Vessells. This most ex∣cellent Wine aswageth the paine of the Reines, breaketh the stone, and healeth the Jaundise. To make the Wine of Hysop. TAke the leaves of Hysop well stamped, tye them fast in a very fine cloth, and cast about one pound of thm into twenty quarts of new Wine; this Wine is peculiarly excellent against the
diseases of the lungs, an old Cough, and shortnesse of breath. Wine of Pomgranates, made of Pomgranates that are scarce ripe, being throughly bruized, and put into a vessell of thick red Wine, serveth of singular use against the fluxe of the belly: to which end also serve the Wines made of Services, Mulberries, and Quinces. The Ancients had a very high opinion of Treacle Wine, from consideration of its extraordinary vertue in asswaging and healing the bitings of Serpents, and other venemous Beasts. Nor had the Vine solely this virtue in its Grape, but in the leaves also stamped and applyed unto the grieved part. This Vine is thus prepared: cleave three or foure fingers breadth of the Plant you intend to set, take out the pith, and replenish the vacant part with Treacle, af∣terwards set the cloven part covered and wrapt in paper. Thus Vines may bee made soporiferous, if you prepare them in the same manner with Opium, as before with Treacle, laxative by prepa∣ring it with some soluble purge. By this meanes you may have Wine to taste like the Greeke Calabrian Frontignac, or any other noble for its excellency; if the Lees purified and preserved bee in∣serted into the pith of the branch, Aromatick, if to these Lees you adde compounds of Cynamon Cassia, Cloves, o what ever shall bee most agreeable to the nostrill and pallate. To remedy Wines inclining to corrupt; and first of Wine beginning to soure: IF you perceive Wine beginning to waxe soure, put into the bot∣tome of your Vessell a pot of water well stopt, close the Vessell, yet so as at a vent hole to receive and transmit a little aire: the third day draw out the pot, and you shall se a noble experiment of at∣traction, for the water will be stinking and the Wine sound & neat. At what time, and by what accidents Wine is most apt to cor∣rupt, with its remedy. THE season when Wines are subject to turne or bee troubled, is about the Summer soltice, viz. the 11. of June, at the same
time that the Vine emits her blossome; nor then alone, but some∣times about the Dog-dayes by reason of the variety of heates: ge∣nerally the Wine is in some sort of commotion, when a constant Suth winde disturbes the aire, whether it bee in Winter or Sum∣mer, in great and continued raines also, and windes in Earthquakes or mighty Thunders. To keepe them fom turning is by the in∣jection of pan salt, when they boyle or worke, or else o the seed of smallage, Barley-bran, the leaves of Bay-trees, or of Fennell seed brayed with the Ashes of the Vine brayed. The like effect have Almonds cast into the wine or the Ashes of the Oake the Meale of the hite Fetch both defends the wine from turning, and keepeth it in his soundnesse. Allum broken in pieces the same, the worst application is of Brimstone, Lime, Plaister, &c. To rco∣ver the wine when turned, must bee effected either by changing the Vessell, by beaten pepper; or take whites of Egges, beate them ve∣ry well, and take the froth from thence arising of them, poure them into the Vessell, which you must immediately roule after its infusion: Or else take twelve Kernells of old Walnuts (the Vir∣ginian Walnut I conceive exceeding proper) rost them under the Ashes, and while they re yet hot, draw a thread through them, hang them in t wine, where they must bee till the wine (which will not fail) recover its former colour. If the wine become troubled, either the Kernels of Pine Apples, or Peaches, or the whites of Egges, and a little salt will not faile to cleare and refine it: Others take halfe a pound of Allum, as much Sugar, make a very small powder thereof, and cast it into the Vessell. To helpe Wine that beginnes to wast and die. IF you by manifest Symptomes apprehend your wine suddenly inclining to degenerate and corrupt, this course is prescribed: If it bee Clarre, take the Yelke of an Egge, if white, the white adde to it three ounces of cleare bright stones taken out of a running River, make them into a small powder, together with two ounces of Salt, mingle all together, and (the wine shifted into another Vessell neat and cleane, not tainted with any smell beforehand)
cast in this Compound; mingle it with the wine five or sixe times the day, untill three or foure dayes bee past. This remedy is not prescribed when wine is absolutely spoyed, for then it would bee applyed to no purpose; but that the carefull Master should by his observation of it to such a disposition, prevent it by this experi∣ment. To restore Wine growne musty, unto his former purity. CAst into the Vessell Cowes milke salted Some (but to the in∣finite unhealthfullnesse of him that drinkes it) attempt this restauration with Allum, Lime, and Brimstone, a more undange∣rous way is to infuse in it Juniper-berries, and Irees Roots: Yet if the wine should continue this ill senting qulity, by having taken winde: Let it bee rouled too and againe to awaken the spirits thereof, that they may the better disperse the strength of its infui∣on: afterwards set it againe upon his cantling, replenish the Vessel and shut it close to prevent winde for the future. To preserve Wines from sowring, may bee performed by your disposing of your Vessell in a place that is very coole and dry (the Vessels being very well filled and well stopped) to prevent as well the emission of the spirits, by which the Wine continues vigorous, as the admission of aire. But in regard all men are not the masters of such opportune conveniencies, being foced sometimes to make uses of places obnoxious to heate, and drawing one Vessell a long time, cannot hinder the secret invasions of aire; yet if you perceive in time that your Vine begines to harbour an acid or soure quality, you shall preserve it from falling into a full degree of sourenesse; if you take a good piece of Lrd, wrap it well in a Linnen cloath, tye it to a small cord, and let it downe by the Bunghole into the middle of the Wine, still letting it lower as the Wine decreaseth. Some advise, and not without a great apparence of reason, to put into the Vessell, Oyle Olive, or Salade, in such quantity, that it may onely cover the suprficies of the Wine: Which Oyle when the Wine is drawne off from the Lees, may bee seperated from them, and preserved. To take away the waterishnesse and crude moisture of the wine,
put into the Vessell the leaves of the Pomgranate-tree, though in my opinion such Wine being easily knowne in the Fatt, when first trodden, should be corrected by boyling, as afore. The remedy against venemous Beasts falling into the Wine, as Adders Rats, &c. is, so soone as the dead body is found, to burne it and cast the Ashes into the same Vessell, sirring it about with a wooden stick: Others give advice to put hot bread into the Vessel which will attract all the venemous qualities to it selfe, and cleare the Wine. Of the Olive. THE Vine and Olive being such delightfull associates as to expresse a mutuall emulation for the Glory of fertility when planted together. This Treatise shall not divide them, they are both exhilaratives, the Vine rejoyces the heart, the Olive glads the countenance; and that VIRGINIA may expresse the delight she affords to mankinde by being reinforced with this second Sister of laughter, the Olive; this discourse particularly designed to her im∣provement, showes its planting and culture when planted. The Olive tree, though it delight in a rich fat ground; yet if he have a warme aire, and a South, or South-East wind to refresh him, will in all places testifie a bounteous gratitude for its scituation in an almost unlaboured for fertility: Yet to prepare a place for this rich plant to prosper on, his prosperity being no small part of your owne, you must digge the pits where you intend to plant them, a yeare before such implanting; in this pit burne some straw, or which is better castings of Vine or Brambles (but no part of Oake, there being such a particular enmity betwixt this tree, and the Oake, that the Olive not onely refuses its neighbourhood, but dies if planted in the place where the Oake has beene rooted up) or you may leave it to the Sunne and Raine, which will without such a∣dustion exhale and purifie all infectious vapours: The place being provided to plant upon, we must next select our Plant. Select your Plants from the Shoots or Branches of those Olive trees which are yong, faire, and fertile: Let them bee in thicknesse the circumference of an ordinary wrst, in length eighteene inches; plant it the bigger end downewards into the earth, prepared as be∣fore,
and ramme the Mould, mingled with Dung and Ashes close about it: Let it be digged every yeare in Autumne. The time to plant it is in April or May, it must not be transplanted for the first five yeares, nor the Boughs cut or pruned till it have attained eight. Graft it not but upon it selfe, so will it beare fruit better in the species and number; in its transplantation you must take up as much of the soyle with its roots, as you can possible, and when you reset it, give it the like scitution for Coast and Quarter that it had before. Olives are intended for two uses when gathered; either to be served up at the table in collation, or to make Oyle of the largest sort of Olive, is most proper for the table, the lesser more particu∣larly convenient for Oyle: They must bee gathered with the least offence to the tree that may bee, the bruising of the branches with Poles as some use it in striking downe the fruit, makes the tree bar∣ren: The best way therefore is to ascend the tree by a Ladder, in faire weather (not so much for conveniency of the Gatherer; as for the profit comming from the Olive, which is not to bee taken from the tree, but when it is exceeding dry) and pulling them with your hand put them into a Wicker Basket, which you shall have carryed up with you to that purpose. Those Olives you inten to preserve or pickle, must not have that full ripenesse which is re∣quisite for those you purpose to make Oyle of. The Olive whic you keepe for Banquets must be full of flesh, firme, fast, large, and ovall; if you will pickle them, put them into an earthen pot, and cover them with salt brine or verjuice, or else with Honey, Vine∣gar, Oyle and Salt smally beaten. If you intend to keepe them long, by changing your salt brine constantly every two or three Moneths, you may effect it. For the Olives whereof you are to expresse your Oyle, you must gather no more at one time then what may be made into Oyle that day, and the day following: before you bring them to the Presse let them be spred upon hurdles, well pick'd, and cul'd; let the hurdles not be too thick set with twigs, that the Lees and watry humor of the Olive (which if xpressed with Oyle would make it extreame full of faeculency, and corrupts it both in the nostrill and Palate) may expend, waste it selfe, and drop through; some there∣fore
that this malignant humor may have a full defluxion before they bring the fruit to the Presse, make a high and well-raised floore, with provision of partitions to keep every dayes gathering seperate; (which is, if your abundance be such that your Presse is not able to discharge you of them dayly) the bottome of these par∣titions must be paved with a decline descent, that the moistnesse of the Olives may flow away, and be received into gutters or little channels there provided for their transfluxe. The Olives being thus prepared for the Presse, and the Presse readily provided of all things necessary, viz. of Fats, Vssels to receive your severall Oyles, scoopes to draw, and empty out the Oyle, Covers great and small, spunges, pots to carry out the Oyle, tyed about by bands or Cords of Hemp, or Broome-barke; the Mill-stones, Oyle-mills, Pressers, and all other instruments serving thereunto being very well cleansed, and the aire having been be∣fore as well heated by a plentifull fire; (if it be not warme enough by its naturall scituation) for the assistance of heat makes all Oyly Liquors resolve and runne more gently and freely, whereas cold astringes, and detaines it. This Presse-house therefore should be so seated, that it may enjoy a full admission and benefit of the South Sunne, that we may stand in need of very little fire, if any at all, such heat being no more assistant to the expression, then accessary to the corruption of the Oyle. Carry your Olives thus cleansed to the Presse, under which put thē whole in new willow baskets (the willow adding a beauteous and innocent color to the Oyl;) the Willow also something staving off the rude strokes of the Presse, that the Olives may be bruised with as little violence, and as much leisure as possible: Nor would it be inconvenient if their skin and flsh were a little broken at the first with a Milstone, so set, that it should not breake the Kernels, which would utterly spoyle the Olive, taking them from the Mill thus prepar'd: let them be stronglier bruised in the Presse, and put foure pound of Salt to every Bushell of Olives. The Oyle which comes first is by much th best, and theefore called Virgin Oyle: the second which comes with more violent expression is fitter for Liniments then the Table: but the last, which is ex∣torted from the drosse, and stones, is of no use but for Lampes; or such sordid employment.
The Tuns and Vessels wherein the Oyle is to be put, must be well dressed with pitch and gumme, made very clean with warme Lees, and carefully dryed with a spunge, into which you may powre your Oyle within thirty dayes after the expression of it, so much time being necessarily allowed for the settling the Lees, which by that will have grounded upon the bottome. The Cellars where the Vessls of Oyle are to be conseved, must be in a place of constant drynesse and coldnesse, heat and moysture being corrupters of the Oyle; provide therfore a Cellar on the North coast of your house: and for the better and more neat preservation of your liquor, poure it ather into glasse Vessels or earthen pots, which (if they be made capacios) are far more convenient then the pitcht retainers we formerly spoke of. Accidents befalling Oyle with their Remedies: and first to recver frozen Oyle. IF (in the time of Winter) Oyle doth freeze together with his Lees, you must put into it twice boyled salt, which dissolves and clears your Oyle from all further apprehension of danger; nor need you entertaine a jealousie that it will be salt, since unctuous matters (and especially Oyle) have seldome any relish of it. To keepe Oyle from becommimg ranke. VVHen the Oyle begins to change from his first purity of taste to a disposed rankenesse; the rmedy is to melt an equall proportion of wax and Oyle together, to which you are to mingle salt fried in Oyle before; this you must poure into the Ves∣sel, which composition above the prevention of it, when begin∣ning to grow ranke, effects an entire restitution to its simple pure∣nesse, when already affected. Anniseeds cast into the Vessell by a particular attraction, performe the same operation.
To purifie troubled Oyle. SOme are of advice, that the applying it to the fire or Sun re∣cleares it. Others, if the Vessell be strong, cat into it boyling water: how these remedies agree with their former assertions, (wherein they declare heat so unnaturall to Oyle) is beyond my re∣conciling: I for my part, should rather make an experiment of Vineger, which being cast into the Oyle by degrees, hath such a penetrating and inquirent faculty over all the parts, that it would without doubt recompose it. To recover Oyle corrupted in the Sent. TO performe this, take green Olives, pound them, free them from their stones, and cast them into the Oyle: or else cast the crums of Barley bread mixed with corne salt: otherwise, in∣fuse in your Oyle the flowers of Melilot: or else hang in the Vessell a handfull of the herb Coriander, and if you finde the putri∣fying quality yet unexpelled, cast in divers times of the same herbe, and which is better, change his Vessell; this ill odour others drive away thus: They take Grapes, pick out their Kernells, stampe them, and with Salt make them into a lumpe or lumpes, which you must cast into the Vessell, and after ten dayes faile not to change it: Which must necessarily be done after the application of any re∣medy to Oyle growne ranke and putrified, the Vessell still impai∣ring what the remedy recovers. Wee have done with the Oyle Olive, after the manner of whose expression may bee extorted any unctuous matter of fruits, plants, or seeds namely, Waluts, Filberds, Almonds (both sweete and bitter) Nutmegs, the Kernells of Peaches, Pine-Apples, Abricots, Cherries, Plums, Pistachs, the seede of Line, Rape, Cole, Must∣ard, Hempe, Poppy, Henbane, the seeds or Pipins of Apples, Pears, Cucumbers, Gourds, Melons, and other such like: But that wee may give the Reader a more cleare dilucidation of the manner of preparation, Wee shall briefely discover the method used in the expression of Oyle from Almond and Nutmegs, which will easily
make him apprehend all the rest; the particuar reason which per∣swades mee to introduce the example of Almonds, is bcaus I have purposed bfoe I finish this concluding Treatise, to discouse particularly of th plang the Almond. Whose Oyle i o bee ta∣ken inwads, is to bee thus expressed. Pill the Almonds after they have steeped some time in warme water, pound them in a Mortar of Stone or Marble with a wood∣en pestle, make them up in little Lumpes or Loaves, which you may kned with your hands against the vapour of warme water, or put them in a glasse vesell of a large content for some foure or five houres: (let the seate and Glasse bee so contrived, that it may ra∣ther bee above the water to receive the vapour on its sides and bot∣tome, then in it) the Almond being thus mollified by the dispositi∣on of the moisture, must bee put into a haire cloth or hempen bag, and laid in a presse, whose bottome must be wel heated, hollow, and bending downewards to give the better delabency for the Oyle thus expressed, you may bake the drossy part of the Almonds un∣der the Ashes, which in time of necessity will serve for bread, of plenty for a dainty and fatning food to your Poultry. This Oyle is of soveraigne, excellency to mitigate and remove the throwes and gripes of women newly delivered, and to aswage the paines of the Collik or Reines, taking it in two ounces of white Wine, or one of Aqua vit; the Line, Cole, Rape Wallnut, and other need not these curiou preparations, and their Cakes are of unmat∣chable nourishment to fatten Kine and other Cattle. Oyle of Nutmegs. OYle of Nutmeg (which in the South part of VIRGINIA not subject to any inconveniences of cold would undoubted∣ly flourish) is thus made: bray them with a wooden stamper, after∣wards presse them out, the plankes being very well heated; to ex∣tract it more rich, divide them into little heapes, and steepe them three daes in very good Wine, after dry them in the shaddow of the Sunne two whole dayes, then heate them reasonably in a fry∣ing pan upon the fire, sprinkling them with Rose-waer, and pre∣sently presse them. This I judge conveniently sufficient for Oyles:
Let us descend to the planting of the Almond-tree, which as it hath a peculiar excellency, so without dispute returnes as ample profit. Of the Almond tree. THough the Almond tree delight particularly in gravelly pla∣ces, of which VIRGINIA is too rich to afford a convenien∣cy; yet there is no dispute, but if the Mould wherein you plant them bee mingled with Oyster-shels, or ch like, of which there is to bee found inexhaustible Quantities, they will have a greater virtue then gravell to the quickning and ingerminating of this tree; having the perplexed hardnee of gravell and unctuousnesse of marle united. The soyle thus prescribed; let the seat of your Almond be in a hot place fully exposed to the South or South-West, and it will not onely flourish to your expectation, but its fruit will bee excellently qualified, and in vast abundance: it groweth very well of the stone, which because it cannot bee procured new should be kept close in a Vessell of earth; to be transported, set i as you would your Peach; it thrives very well too of the branch o scien, which must bee cut from the top of the tree, and planted as the Olive, the earth rammed very hard about it, and prepared as before, both the stone and the scien should bee steeped for the space of twelve or foure and twenty houres in homed wter; the best season to set or plant it in VIRGINIA, is in October and No∣vember. This tree will bee of admirable use there, in regard that both that and the Olive will hinder no undergrowing Corne; let neither this tree nor your Olive grow above ten foot in the stock, and in this as in Olives, if you see any branch aspiring higher then his neighbours, represse such ambition by cutting him off, oher∣wise hee will divert all the sap of the tree into his owne body an leave his fellowes in a starving and perishing condition; amongst which if you maintaine equality, they will altogether consent in gratitude to returne you a plentifull Harvest. The barren Almond tree will become fruitfull if you lay oen his Roots in Winter, or else if you pierce some part of the stock close to the earth, and put through the hole a wedge of Oake, wa∣tering it about with stale Urine.
The bitter Almond will bee capable of buloration, if you lay round about his bared Root Swines dung tempered with Urine, casting afterwards much mould upon it, this must bee practised yearly, till hee bee perfectly reclaimed, you will finde the same ef∣fect if you bore a hole in the stock of the tree, and put therein a wedge wrapped about with cloth dipped in Hony. Beasts by brousing and cropping of the first and tender branches, change the nature of sweet Almonds into bitter Almonds, are gathered when their Huskes through the heate of the Sunne begin to divide; (I should therefore advise that those made choice of to set, may bee taken before such exact ripenesse, that the heate of the Sunne may not exhale their generating vigour) if when you have beaten them downe you shell them altogether, and wash them in brine, they will become white, and bee preserved a long time; cautionarily that you dry them in the Sunne; their repository or granaries must have good open admissories for an unmoist aire, and lye upon that Coast that is most open to the North-West, being the driest winde in that Country. The Medicinall excellency of Almonds, is, that they are good for those which are troubled with a clammy fleame in their throat, with weake lungs, and such as are subject to the gravell in the Reines or difficulty of Urine, they are great restorers to nature, and fortifie the parts tending to generation; nor is it onely bene∣ficiall in its fruit, for the Gumme also of the Almond tree arrests the spitting of blood. Of the Fig tree. THE Fig tree groweth with an unusuall celerity, as beginning to beare the second yeare from his planting, and is of that na∣ture, that during a moneth or five weekes when Grapes are ripe and good to eate, the Figge also is at that season dayly mature, and fit for the pallate, it may bee planted as the Vine, and effects the same soile; such as have roots grow sooner, but without doubt the branches continue longer; the order you observe in planting the Vine adheare too in this, and it will prosper. The fittest season to plant it is in October, and the succeeding Moneth to the 15. or
twentieth: You shall cause them in planting the better to take root, if you loosen the barque, or which is better bruise it gently at the nether end of the stemme about halfe a foot. To cause them to bee fertile, and bring forth fruits remarkable for fullnesse and verdure, put to his root rich Mould beaten and tempered with the setlings of Oyle Olive, and mans dung, or which I like better then this stercoration if it have already a benine soyle, crop the tops and ends of the branches when they first spring. To reclaime a wild Fig-tree, water him at the roots with Wine and Oyle mixed together. If you make a composition of an equall quantity of salt brine and water bestow this irrigation in a small trench round about the body of the tree, your Figges are prevented from unripe fallings. To have ealy Figs, water the tree with Oyle and Pigions dung, if your ambition be not only to have the earliest, but the latest, take away the fist Buds, when they are about the bignese of a Beane. To keepe or preserve them, lay them in a pot of Honey full and well stopped, but so that they neither touch the sides of the pot, nor one another. Or take an arthen pot (the Figs being put in) stop it close, and immerge this Vessll to another full of Wine, no taint or corruption will possesse your Figges so inclosed, while the Wine retains his goodnsse. The plant steeped in brine, or the end thrust into a Sea Onion, becomes much more fruitfull when planted. This fruit is of great vertue in making the belly soluble in a∣bundance of nourishment and provocation of sweat, dryed and mingled with the flower of Linseed or Fenugreeke, it resolveth and killeth all Impostumes, and hard tumours, in decoctions it as∣sists much in driving away of the Cogh, and difficulty of breath, which last vertue the fruit also expresseth very happily, if steeped in Aqua vitae, the night precedent, and taken every morning du∣ring the dominion of this disease after you, the Milke of the Fig-tree dropt into the eare killeth the Wormes in it, the Leaves of the Fig-tree rubbed doe provoke the Hemorrhoides: the juice of Figs is of equall felicity in opening them, which to increase his excel∣lency amends all roughnesse, ill conditioned scabs small pocks, purples, freckles, ringwormes, and other yesad blemishes of the
face or body therewith anointed, being first tempered with the flower of parched Barley, a little Cotten wool dipped in this juice, and layd upon the aking tooth asswageth the paine. Of the Pomeganate tree. THE Pomegranate tree, which may be planted either from the Branch or succour, is one of the most absolute encouragers of an idle person in the world; provided, it be exempt from the intemperate operation of the cold, neither the torrid heat of the Sun, nor the barrennesse of the Soyle, shal make him forgoe his glorious Rubies; no culture or dressing is required by it: yet if it be set in a rich soyle, it will be sure to make an advantage of it to his owne flourishing, and your profit: the wine thereof (for it affordeth Wine as wel as excellency of fruit) may be made after this manner Take the ripe kernels, freed and cleansed from their skins, put them into the Presse, and exact the Wine, keep it in Vessls till it is fully fined from all working, which finished, distribute such a quantity of Oyle as may float over all the top of the Vessel, and this preserves it from sowring or corruption. The Pomegranate apple put in a pot of new earth, well covered, and Luted with clay, and set into an Oven so long, till the Fruit may be resolved into powder, is of very Princely vertue; for (taking the weight of half a crown thereof in red Wine) it mira∣culously stops the Bloudy flux. It is also good in divers diseases of women, which (because they are more arcanely peculiar to that Sex) I shal forbear to speak of. Of the Quince tree. THE Quince tree groweth much sooner from the Root then Branches: it delighteth in a soyle of a moyst and cold nature, and would therefore be planted towards the more umbragious and coole corners of your Garden. The Garden, or reclaimed Quince, beareth two sorts of fruits, to which curiosity hath assigned Sexes, and they are called the Quince and Quincesse; the Male, which is the Quince, is of a more wrinkled, drye, redolent Fuit, and gol∣den colour then the Quincesse. If you graft the Male upon the Fe∣male, or E convers, the Quinces thence proceeding will be tender,
and may be eaten raw, which without such an Hermaphroditisme must of necessity have beene prepared, to which nature, rather then to eate it, crude hath deigned it. The use of Marmalade, and its preparation is so publickly known, that it is unnecessary to repeate it. It is not enough to enjoy the delight of these fruits for the Sum∣mer onely: The Winter too in reason should claime a part of our Summer contentments, which cannot bee better expedited then by ying such fuits as are capable of a refaction, and agreeable when dryed, the principall whereof are the Vine or Gape, the Fig, the Peach, and Abricot. How to dry Grapes, that they may bee kept. YOur Grapes being at their just ripenesse, select the fairest out of your Vineyard, for such quantity as you shall use, let them lye thin spread while you prepare a Lye for them, made of faire water and Ashes, proceeding onely from the cuttings of the Vine without any other mixture of wood whatsoever: seeth this lye till you have made a strong and cleae liquor, then taking or strain∣ing away the Ashes, put the liquor into a cleane Caldron, set it a∣gaine over the fire till it bee ready to seeth; then tying the stalkes of your Grapes with thread, and fastening the thread to such sticks and in such order bunch by bunch, as Chandlers use to dip their Candles, which dip them into this lye foure or five severall times: Which done, let them dry in the Sunne, either so hanging on their sticks, o which is better upon Lattices or Hurdles of Rods, or the like, untill they bee conveniently dry; then barrell them, pressing them very hard and flat in the Vessell, others dry them upon such Lattices or Hurdles without steeping them even as they come from the Vine, and peradventure more successefully. How to drie igges. LET them (as the Grape) bee gathered very ripe; then lay and spread them upon Hurdles or Lattices of Reeds or Osier joyned together, with rifts or vacancies betwixt the covering of
those Osiers, that the aire transpiring through those voyd spaces may assist the Sunne in the drying them; but you must bee cauti∣ous that during their exposure to the open aire no Raine or Dew incommodate them: When they are dry barrell with the same poise of pressure used to the Grapes. Others take a bigge Reed or Cane of two or three foot in length, boring little holes all the length of it, through which they put little sticks of two foot ex∣tent, being the small and harpe upon which they thread the Figs, till they are very full of them, and so hang the Cane in the Sunne, which dryed they barrell up using the same course as before. How to dry Peaches ad Abricots of all sorts. VVHen they are very ripe, pare off the upper skin, cleave them into foure quarters, dry them as you did your Figs, barrell them and keepe them for the Winter. The manner how you shall prepare them to eate is this; provide an earthen pot, and after you have washed your Peaches in faire water, put them into the pot with as much Wine as will cover the Peaches, then seeth them halfe a quarter of an houre. They may be made ready without boyling thus; let them infuse three or fore dayes in Wine, (which way they are much better) put to them beaten Cynamon, and thus they will last a Moneth in the Wine, eaten every morning they are very wholesome, and pro∣voke a good appetite. The fittest seasons for sowing of seeds. TO prescribe Rules according to our Climate, to tha of VIR∣GINIA, may have much of affection, but without all perad∣ventures, little of Wisdome. Wee must therefore seeke for a nea∣rer correspondence in parallells. Having therefore seene some let∣ters of an ancient date written by Frenchmen, then employed in VIRGINIA to their Intrusters, wherein they confss that of all the Provinces of FRANCE: None came so neare to that noble Countrey, as LANGEDOCK and PROVENC, two of the Eyes of that Kindome, abounding withall the dlights and deli∣cacy
that ITALY can pretend to, or SPAINE boast of; I could not but apprehend that their times of sation and insition, of plan∣ting and replanting, might in some measure correspond with that place where the English are now seated, and having seene a regu∣lar ditribution of the moneths and seasons in the yeare for sowing, grafting and other offices belonging to the industrious Lovers of Agriculture; I should both unsatisfie my owne conscience and disoblige that Countrey, and its Christian Inhabitants if I did not publish it with the same resentment of affection I received it; not that any should bee so pinioned to these Precepts, that neither wea∣ther, inconveniency, or want of opportunity should make him recede from the punctuall observation of them: But I speake it out of a very strong confidence that the observations of the sea∣sons according to these prescriptions will sort well with VIRGI∣NIA in generall, and the Planters in particular, to whom it is in∣tended, and indeed it is as exact a Directory as any yet published. I am not ignorant that Criticks will laugh at this; much good doe it them, and why so many Moneths for the same seed? Why so many Repetitions? My Exceptionist forgets that wee not onely covet to have things early, but their continuance: Will it offend him that wee have Artichokes in May? and July both? Be∣cause wee may have Cabbage, Lettuse in April, shall wee bee for∣bidden to have any in May: the principall scope of this directer was to show how long such and such seedes might bee continued to bee sowen, and in what Moneth and Moone, if hee apprehend it not; I can send him to no Moneth, but that of June, nor Moone, but that of Midsommer.
He that will sow seed, must know that, Some may be sowen at all times of the Moneth and Moone, as, Asparagus, Colewort of all sorts, Spinage, Lettuse, Parsnips, Reddis. Other would be sowed in a certaine Moneth and Moone, as there must bee sowen in February, the Moone being — New Spike Garlike Borage Buglose Cheruse Coriander Gourd Water creses Mjorane Palma Chriī Flower gentl White Poppy Pustane Radish Rocket Rosemary Sorrell Double Marigold Thyme. Full Anise Violet Blites Skirworts White Succory Fennell Parsley. Old Holy Thistle Cole Cabbage White Cole Green Col Cucumber Harts-horn Sampier Diers graine Spinage Cabbage-Lettu Melon Onion Larkes-heel Burnet Lekes
So in March the Moone being, New Garlick Borage Chervile Coriander Gourds Mjorane White Poppy Pursline Radish Sorrll Double Marigold Thme Violets. Full Anise Bleets Skirworts Succory nnll Apples of Love Marvellous Apples. Old Artichoke Bail Thile Blssd Thisle Cole Cabage White Cole Greene Cole Cirons Cuubers Hart horne Sapire Dier graine Spinage Gilly flower ysop Caage Letuse Melon Onyon Flwer Burnet Leeke Savory. So in April the Moon being New Majoran Flower gee Thyme Violet. Full Apples of Love Marvellous Appls. Old Artichokes Cabbage Cole Citrons Harts-horn Sampire Gilly flowers. In May in the old of the Moon Blessed Thile In June the Moone New Gords Radishes. Old Melons Cucumbers. In July the Moone ll White ccry Old Cabbage Letue. In August the Moone being Full White Sory
Herbes growing of seedes that are sowne may bee transplanted t all times, except Chervils, Arrage, Spinage, and Persely, which are nothing worth when they are transplanted; ever observed that such transplantation bee in a moist, rainy weather, otherwise they must bee very diligently watered. You may take notice that the choise and age of seedes is dou∣ble, in chusing them you are to regard that they bee ripe, full, hea∣vy, firme, grosse, and of a good colour, not falling to powder through rottennesse or bruises. Some grow bettter of new seedes, as Leeks, Cucumbers. Others grow better of old seeds, as Coriander, Persley, Savory, Beets, Origanum, Creses, Spinage, Poppey. Further observe, that you must preserve from cold, Lettuses, Ar∣tichokes, Basill, Cabbage Cole, Diers graine, Melons, fifteene dayes after they put forth from the earth. Make account that seedes thrive and prosper much better, when they are sowen upon such dayes as are betweene the ex∣treames of cold and heate, then in hot, cold or dry dayes. Bee pleased to remember, that seedes must bee gathered in faire weather, in the Wane of the Moone. They must be kept some in Boxes of wood, Dry, and not layd upon the ground, but kept very cleane. Bagges of Leather, Dry, and not layd upon the ground, but kept very cleane. Veels of Earth, Dry, and not layd upon the ground, but kept very cleane. others, as Onions, In their Huske. Chibols, In their Huske. Leek In their Huske. To do regularly, w sould Plant in the last of the Moone Gather Grafts in the last but one of the Moone Graft two dayes af∣ter the change of the Moone
An Explication of the Saw-mill, an Engine, wherewith force of a wheele in the water, to cut Timber with great speed. THIS Engine is very common in Norway and Mountaines of Sweden, wherewith they cut great quantity of Deal-bords; which Engine is very necessary to be in a great Towne or Forrest, to cut Timber, whether into planks or otherwise. This heer is not altogether like those of Norway: for they make the piece of Timber approch the Sawes on certaine wheels with teeth; but because of reparations which those toothd wheeles are often subject unto, I will omit that use: and in stead thereof, put two weights, about 2. or 300. pound weight a piece, whereof one is marked A. the other B. The Cords wherewith the sayd weights doe hang, to be fastned at the end of the 2. peeces of mo∣ving wood, which slide on two other peeces of fixed wood, by the meanes of certaine small pulleys, which should be within the house, and so the sayd weights should alwayes draw the sayd peeces of moving wood, which advancing alway towards the Sawes rising and falling, shall quickly be cut into 4. 5. or 6. peeces, as you shall please to put on Saws, and placed at what distance you will have for the thicknesse of the planks or bords ye will cut: and when a peece is cut, then let one with a Lever turne a Rowler, wherto shall be fastned a strong
Cod which shall bring backe the sayd peece of wood, and lift again the weights: and after put aside the peece already cut, to take againe the Sawes against another peece of wood. Which once done, the ingenious Artist may easily convert the same to an Instrument of thresh∣ing wheat, breaking of hempe or flax, and other as pro∣fitable uses. FINIS.
