W3499 R39144 18229184 107212
A MINISTERS DVTY To reprove Sin in the Pulpit, as God Himselfe doth in His Scriptures. Thou shalt not hate thy Brother in thy heart: Thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy Neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him, Lev. 19. 17. Open rebuke is better then secret love, Prov. 27. 5. Lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, cry aloud, spare not, shew my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins, be not dismay∣ed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them, Isa. 58. 1. Jer. 1. 17. Them that sin re buke before all, that others also may fear, 1 Tim. 5. 20 Veritatem negat, qui eam non liberè predicat; He denies the Truth with holding it in unrighteousness, who doth not speak it out fully and truely. LONDON, Printed for Henry Cripps, and are sold at his Shop in Popes-head-alley, neer Lombard street, 1656.
The first Treatise and Query arising from the result of the Debate upon the former Queries, whether a Godly Minister setled in his heart, upon Scripture grounds, as to the negative in all the foremen∣tioned, may not deliver himself in these matters unto his people, clearly and plainly, as he himself is perswaded the truth is in Je∣sus? &c. It is resolved in the affirmative, that he may and ought, and stands char∣ged by his God so to do. CHAP. I. SIR, you have occasioned the putting this question. And now as it is our duty, so is it our businesse to put this out of questi∣on, That a Godly Minister ought, as to de∣clare
the truth of Christ unto his hearers, that he may, through him that strengthneth, esta∣blish them therein; so also to fence and guard them against all that which is as the remorest extreams are, cleave crosse and contrary there∣unto. And truly, Sir (to make bold with Answer to Mr. Bl. p. 394. that learned mans words, in a matter somewhat different.) But that the interest of mens immor∣tal Souls, is come to be concerned herein, we should think the time exceedingly lavish'd that will be spent in this enquiry. Let him that is ignorant (about this his duty) let him be ignorant still, were a suffi∣cient answer thereunto. Yet considering that great interest aforesaid, we will give you our perswasion in this matter, and leave it to the Godly-wise to judge, how consonant it is with the holy Scriptures. Your judgement, as is too evident, bends the contrary way; you would have drunkennesse, and such like prophanesses, and ranting doings, declaimed against in the Pulpit, as also abhominable Idolatries, and damnable Heresies, not forgetting that cursed toleration—&c. Truly Sir, we can speak clearly, our Consciences bearing us witnesse in the Lord, that we hate, yea, loath such doings, with those Idolatries and Heresies (not to make comparison) with our hearts and spirits: only for that Toleration so much Anathematized, we are not so clear about it as we ought to be, before we curse it Clear light is needfull for men who walk in paths which lead directly to houses of blood, Dr. Owen of Tol. p. 40.: only this is clear unto us by the Spirit of God in his word, I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are evil.
Now how far our Rulers are to be faulted herein, is not for us to judge. So let that pass without our curse, till we know more certainly of it; yet we hope we shal be found in the num∣ber of those that cannot bear with that which is evil in our selves, or in others, so far as may lie within our compasse to hinder. And this last said layeth (as we conceive) a charge upon us, to deal with you here, as we have done in those sacred matters hitherto, plainly and clearly; and this is it we would say first. That we cannot think that drunkennesse, pro∣phanesse, those ranting doings there, and here,  and every where, no nor those abhominable ido∣latries, nor those damnable Heresies, do procure such mischief to the Church of Christ, as your doings do in the house of God (if we may call your meeting places by that name) Your free admission of all Infants to the Font, and of all Pa∣rents to the Lords Table, so be they were bapti∣zed into your National Church. It is our perswa∣sion, that these your doings (you being in ac∣count, as we hope you are, a Godly man) do the Church of Christ the greatest mischief, together with the toleration of an Heathenish feast, you call the Feast of the Blessed Nativity; and the profanati∣on also, you your self helping it on, of the Lords Prayer, these are the doings which do mischief the Church of Christ very much, at the least have a tendancy that way; for we know, mis∣chief it these cannot: Because, he that watereth Is. 27. 3. it every moment, being his Vineyard of Red-wine, will see to it, lest any hurt it, keeping it night and
day: On this very day, though a day of trouble and of rebuke, and of provocation; the onely wise God is working gloriously for his Church, and making a blessed method of all these confu∣sions; he will give unto his people an expected end, Peace, Peace, to all those whose hearts are staid upon him, because they trust in him. So Isa. 26. 3. that we have concluded from Scripture promi∣ses, That the Church of Christ could not have wan∣ted any of your doings, either at the Font, or at the Lords Table: He that spake light out of dark∣nesse, brought life out of the Grave, a most glorious Blessing, from a most cursed Crosse, will (his people can trust him) bring glory to his great name, and good to his Churches, by all the evil of your doings before mentioned, and yet not yours more then theirs who are Bre∣thren in office with you, all over your National Church, doing the same things, rather the same provocations. But no thanks to you for all this, no more then we can give to them who have done, and to this day do their utmost to undo us; your doings have a tendency the other way, to set things back, or to turn them to the posture they were in; to hinder that imperious reformation, which will not leave an hoof behind in Aegypt; your doings are a meer provocation to God (we are plain with you Sir, and we must be so, but for your good, if you can see it) a meer provocation we said; ye provoke your God more then the Drunkards do, then hypo∣critical mockers do; more then prophane per∣sons, as was Esau, yea more then the Ranters
do; or those abhominable Idolaters, and dam∣nable Hereticks, those they call Quakers; ye provoke your God more then do any of these, or all these. Sir, for love-sake, we would call somethings to your remembrance: The Lord God did not take it so ill, it was not full up to the height of such a provocation, that the Phi∣listines carted his Ark, they did like Philistines that had no light nor rule to walk by, so up they hoisted the Ark, and no breach upon them for so doing: Israel doth so too, and we al know what 1 Sam. 6. 19 Num. 45. 20. followed, Uzzah is smitten dead, performing as he thought a service of love unto it, which speaks out plainly, and like Thunder in our ears, that the Lord God will take that from a Phili∣stine, 2 Sam. 6. 7. 1 Chr. 13. which he will not take from an Israelite; from an Infidel, which he will not take from a A parvum mi∣nus & mini∣mum est in ci∣vilibus in sa∣cris nihil non maximum. Nu∣ga sunt nuga in ore plebes, in ore sacerdo∣tis blasphemae. true Beleever; from a Drunkard, which he will not indure from his Disciple; from a Ranter, which he will not bear with from his Saint; from an Idolater, which he will not from him who pro∣fesseth to flie from Idols; from an Heretick, which he will not from him that hath received the truth in love. A Drunkard does like himself, you cannot liken him to any other, unlesse it be to a Svvine; a Ranter like a Ranter, you cannot liken him to any other, unlesse to his father the Di∣vel, who had he flesh and bone, would act as you see a Ranter doth: Quakers wil do like Qua∣kers, like persons possessed with a Divel; for as the Proverb saies, they run whom the Divel drives, and they quake whom the Divel shakes. The Lord God may bear with these a long
time after his manner, as he did with the Amo rites; yet when (take it by the way) he begins to strike, he will make an end, there shall not need a second blovv: But vve find not he did ever bear so long vvith his ovvn people in cove∣nant vvith him. Therefore surely those vvords contain much, and teacheth us a great lesson. Beware of him and obey this voice, provoke him not, Exo. 23. 91. for he will not pardon your transgressions. Not pardon (vve must open this in passage.) Then that Lord vvho multiplieth pardons seems to deal more hardly vvith his peculiar people (for of them he speaks in that Scripture) then vvith the bulk of that people vvho had broken that covenant vvith him; for thus vve read, he, full Psa, 78. 38. of compassion forgave their iniquity. Surely, this cannot be meant of a true and proper pardon of sin; but onely thus, upon their feigned repent∣ance and humiliation for sin, the Lord respited their judgement; he did not punish them at that time, so the follovving vvords are exegeticall, they explain the former, He forgave their iniqui∣ty and destroyed them not, yea many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath. But these vvords in Exodus, He will not pardon your transgressions, speaks forth this, as vve con∣ceive, and it is very observable, he vvill not vvink at his Churches sins; no, Christ him∣self vvill not, and for many reasons, too long here to set dovvn; yet, take this one amongst many, sith it is to our purpose, he so loved his people that he gave himself for them, and vvash∣ed Ephe. 5. 25. Rev. 1. 5. them from their sins in his ovvn blood; novv
having so done, he vvill not bauk, nor bear vvith the sins of these people; he vvill be quick vvith them, vvhom ever he spareth, he vvill not spare them, if they vvill sin against him, nor look vvith a favourable eye upon them till they have repented heartily for that they have done; He will not pardon your transgressions for MY NAME IS HIM. The sum of that wee would say to that you have said, that you would have drunkennesse and ranting sins, and such lke reproved in the Pulpit. The sum of what we would say thereunto is this, that the prophanesse of you the Prophets and Stewards in Gods house, which from you is gone forth into all the land, is rather to be repro∣ved in the Pulpit, then any of the forementioned, for the reason above said, because those sinners do not so much hurt without Gods house-(un∣lesse you admit them in) as your prophanesse doth within Gods house, being more conragious then a Plague-sore there. And because the Lord doth not so narrowly observe a bastard people poor and foolish, what they do, they do Jerem. 5. 4. (as was said) like themselves; as in the Divel their father, doth what his sons and daughters do; nor doth he so much regard what is done at our own Tables, as what ye do or suffer to be done at his own Table, The Lord thy God is a Deut. 6. 15. jealous God: Where? among you saith Moses, they sin to day and are punished to morrow, That holy man expected present judgement would Josh. 22. 18. Job 10. 14. Isaiah 31. 9. fall upon Gods people sinning, Thou makest me, and wilt not acquit me, saith Job. His fire is in
Zion, and Furnace in Jerusalem, they that sin there cannot escape long. God will indure ten times as much from another, a prophane person him, or her, then he will from whom he loves, and hath taken into covenant with himself. And as the Lord is sooner provoked to anger by the sins of his own children, then of any other men, so his anger wont to be hotter, and his correcti∣ons sharper on them then on any other. When the Lord saw it, saith Moses (that his Deut. 32. 19 ovvn people fell to Idolatry, and other grosse sins) He abhorred them, because of the provoking of his Sons and of his Daughters. He will not take the contempts and indignities done against him by his own Children, and Stewards in his own house, the place of his glory, at his own Table, where he, in as visible a way as can be to the eye of faith, sits and communicates with his people there in the midst of it, as in a Chair of State. And this be spoken, for the vindicati∣on of them, who will never cease, till they cease to speak in the Pulpit, to declame against those abhominations that are comitted in Gods house, and more especially at the Lords Table, more against these then against all the Swinish Drun∣kards and Divellish Ranters in the Nation, or Church National. For to speak out once more, we cannot be inclined to think, that the Swinish Drunkard, that jeerer and scorner of all good∣nesse, that abhominable Idolater, who derideth the words of Christ, as once they did that cove∣tous person, we cannot think that any one of these, or all these do so much mischief in the
Town where you were born, as the Minister there doth, giving forth water to the Babes of those Parents, and at the day appointed as Mr. H. doth the Lords Supper to the Parents them∣selves, as abhominable as Sin and Satan can make them. And now we have spoken plainly and proceed so to speak, that we may in the first place prevent if it may be, what is suggested, against this plain dealing in the Pulpit, wherein we have cause to fear our Minister hath not dealt so fully and plainly with his people (whatever is sugge∣sted or forced to the contrary, that he is too plain) as he is charged from his God, and hath his Warrant from his Scriptures so to be. Therefore in the second place we will grant  unto you, that there are times and cases, when the Prudent shall keep silence, for it is an evil Amos 5. 13. time. There are times for all things, and among these all, a time to keep silence, and a time to speak; Eccles. 3. 7. and it is a great part of Prudence to know this time, to hit the Article or joint of it, and so well to time this season, when to speak, when to be silent. Truth it self hath its season, when to bee spoken out and made publique, when to be kept in. We have thought heartily of excellent Tin∣dals Letters, which speaks fully to this matter: But we made some mention of it before. That worthy man in his Exposition upon Job. 13. 5. speaks yet more fully to this, how to know our season for silence, and for speech, which con∣cerns us very much to take notice of, because we know in some cases, it is our wisedom to be silent, and in some cases, it is our folly not to
speak. Wee will onely borrow that learned mans general, It is our season to speak, when by speaking we may bring glory to God, and do good to our brethren. Then a Minister of Christ must speak, if there be a Must, to do his duty, come on it what will. Be the time never so perillous, hard and sierce, yet when he may bring glory to God, and good to his Brethren, then the Pru∣dent man will not keep silence, though it is an evil time. Nay he cannot keep silence, though he would, for so would his flesh, it would be spared; but keep silence he cannot, His love to Christ constrains him, Christs love to him, his 2 Cor. 5. love to Christ, is like fire within him, it will flame forth, together with his anger against all that, which is contrary to the mind and will of his Lord and Christ; so now in this case, where∣in Luke 6. 15. Acts 1. 13. the glory of Christ is concerned, you may sirname him as one was the Zelot; for of those two affections love and anger, Zeal is compoun∣ded. Anger is as much out of love, as hatred; Ira est tam ex amore, quam ex odio a true rule though it may seem a Paradox; he that loves Christ dearly (else he loves him not) is carried out angerly, yea hatefully against that which his Lord hateth, whether in himself (this hatred begins within) or in other persons or things; for it hinders union and communion with the person he so dearly loves. This mans zeal is for Christ, who was so zealous for him, as that to accomplish his peace, he was content and chose rather to suffer the pangs of Hell, whence it is that the faithfull of the Lord have appeared for him in the most perilous times, and
have not been able to hold in and conceal them∣selves, though they might have saved their lives and escaped terrible tormentings, by with∣holding the truth in unrighteousness, would the Christians in the Primitive times, have offered a grain onely to the cursed Idol, or have suffred it to be said they had offered, when they had not? what dreadfull sufferings had they prevented! But you have read the story of those times, and have vve doubt not, vvalked over those fields of blood once, and again. We proceed to tell you our persvvasion, that  a Minister of Christ cannot keep silence, at this time, though it be an evil time, but the rather lift up his voice like a Trumpet; and against those things vvherein you vvould persvvade, if not command silence; surely the charge of God unto him, and the Word of his God vvithin him, is like fire there, or like new Wine, it must have a vent. He hath the mind of Christ, as all the faithfull before him; and as they have done in the cause of Christ, and matters of his service, so must he. Hear how Isaiah roared in the ears of an Idolatrous people, like a Lyon in the For∣rest, calling the Princes of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, Rulers of Sodom, and people of Gomor∣rah. Isaiah 1. 10. It cost him his life, though another thing was pretended and laid to his charge. Time would fail us should we speak of Jeremiah, Eze∣kiel, and all the other Prophets; we passe all these, and come to them who come nearer to our case. John the Baptist observing the best
men in the Country, upon common account, thrusting in upon him to take Sanctuary, after the manner against the wrath to come, at an Ordi∣nance (the very case we had in hand) we mean sheltring themselves under that shadow, as great and larg among us, as that Tree casteth we read of Matth. 3. in Dan. 4. 21. he, if we observe wel, chaseth them a∣way, as we would do so many Vipers (which was hinted before) he was bold in his Lord and Ma∣sters cause, come on it what would. And we know how plainly he dealt with Herod, that great and notorious person, as well as we know how Herod dealt with him: what though? John must do his duty though it cost him his head, which Herod would have, that he might bee sure of his tongue, that wherewith he should re∣prove him no more. To go on here, Peter and John were bold in the like cause, to a wonder, and not onely they, Acts 4. 13. but all the Apostles; truly said they, we cannot Acts 4. 20. but speak the things which we have seen and heard; we cannot, as if they had said, ye must deal with us as Herod dealt with John, take off our heads before our tongues will bee silent, in our Lord and Masters cause; and Paul, wee know, was as resolute too in the same cause, putting his life into his hands, who knows how often? had he conferred with flesh Gal. 1. 16. and blood (which through grace he did not) what need he have suffered persecution? which yet he met with in every place, and at every turn; 2 Tim. 3. 11, 12. and concludes upon it, yea, and bids every man
to conclude so too, that is resolved to appear so his God, and to live Godly in Christ Jesus, he shall suffer persecution. I know a way saies Paul, to live as quietly among my neighbors as others do, and to gain the love of all, and to make a gain of it; and truly, common nature is but a Bawd to this thing, but I could skill of the way though: Could I cease to preach up the Crosse of Christ, and Salvation by it, and by no other means under Heaven; and then forbear to preach down Circumcision, and observation of daies, and such like Idols: Could I do so, I should come fully up to as high a rate in the markets of the World, as others do; If I yet preach circum∣cision, Gal. 5. 11. why do I yet suffer persecution? then is the offence of the Crosse ceased. It is a full Scripture, and Luther hath a full Exposition upon it; but we passe on, yet cannot we forbear to tell you: Sir, by the way, our Godly jealousie of you, that you are not so resolute in the cause of Christ, to say no more, as Paul was, and all the faithfull of God ought to be, and assuredly are, if they are indeed what they professe to be; and the reason of our jealousie is, because you are so quiet among your neighbours, and they so qui∣et with you; it is much feared you never storm their Idols; for when you shall so do, past all peradventures they will storm you, though you carry your matters never so wisely. It is well you do, if so you do: The wisedom of the Ser∣pent is allowed you, to be prudent and discreet Mat. 10. 16. in the management of your affairs; but you do
remember you must be as harmless as a Dove; Study to be quiet is the Apostles counsel, and it is to be followed by you, though ye should be as a Sheep in the midst of Wolves. And in the midst of them every faithfull Minister is at this day, as the faithfull before him were in former daies; and the more he shall declare his faithful∣nesse, the more his people will declare their Wol∣vishness. And surely, Sir, you fare not better then your Brethren; you are in the midst of Wolves too, however they may look like Sheep, presenting their Infants to Baptism, and them∣selves a moneth after to the Lords Table; for then they are in Sheeps cloathing, when inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Ye have by your so free admission dressed them up like sheep, and they have for a day changed their actions, but their natures are the same, and as very Wolves as they were before, and more grievous (which may be, and cannot possibly but be so) ever since they had admittance to that place, where∣unto onely Sheep and Lambs should be allowed to come, we mean true Disciples. And now it is easily understood how it comes to passe, that you live so quietly in the midst of these (though Wolves they are, as sure as Nero was a Lion, and Herod a Fox, unlesse ye have made them sheep at the Lords Table; that is, have converted them there, for that is possible, say you) it is because you reckon all Sheep, and none Wolves, Dogs and Swine in your Parish, and continue such till by the Word and Spirit our nature bee
changed as well as our actions: But yet this we were saying, this is the way to be taken, and it is an easie way to be found, being a beaten path, and the road of the National Church, to live quietly amidst your people, and they quietly with you; account them all Sheep, and admit them all to the Lords Table, upon that account, because they can shew for it, they were born and baptized within the Pale of a Church-National. We have told you our jealousie and so will proceed, but we are clearly of your brother Humphrey's mind, and others of your Brethren of the same perswa∣sion and practise with you, how that there will not be any difference betwixt you and your people. But when you shall fetch a full blow (it is Luther's expression) at your Disciples and Saints, who hold their Saint-ship by no other tenure, but that of Infant-Baptism, then you shall hear them rage and roar, as their Father will when hee is pin∣ched. There will not be any difference betwixt you and your people. In the next place we take in what you plead  for your self to justifie your prudence in the ma∣nagement of your matters, as to Gospel admi∣nistrations; you preach unto your people necessary truths, you call fundamental, which they must know or perish for ever. It is well you do, and yet to be plain with you, we make some doubt thereof. It is a necessary truth, and in the first place to be declared unto us, what creatures we are by our first birth, be∣ing born children of wrath, and bringing in with
us a most fruitfull root which puts forth (if by one member onely, then how much more by all) a world of iniquity. This must be declared unto us, and in some measure understood by us, be∣fore James 3. 6. ever we will look after Christ, or attend the means whereby he is made known unto us, or can be received by us. He that would make the way plain for Christ, must be∣gin with the true sense of the depth, breadth, and length of original sin. We must be told there is no more in us by nature then in Divels, why we should be justified, Mr. B. of Just. p. 183. To bee born lame, blind, or deformed, is judged an heavy calamity: But to come into the World an enemy to God, and God an enemy to us, is not at all regarded. Now you, that teach your people to account so highly of their birth-priviledge, as that they are born Believers, Di∣sciples, Saints, being baptized into your Church; ye cannot (as we conceive) hold our before them, as you ought, that horrid state of nature, as worthy Shepheard calls it, wherein every mothers child is born. Truly Sir, we are more then jealous of you, Sinfull pra∣ctises are but expositions up∣on our natures, Mr. W. J. upon Jude 601. and your brethren in your way, that ye make the people idolize their first birth, we mean the porti∣on they have by Nature; though yet thereby we are instated in, and possessed of nothing but a Curse (which was hinted before) having brought into the world with us that sinning sin, which is virtually or seminally every sin, the horridst and most prodigious that can be thought on, being the root of all sins. Could one kill the Divel, (worthy Capels words) yet you could not name the Temp. 38. sin that original sin would not draw and entice a man unto, there being no sin that is committed, but p. 40. might be committed if Sathan were dead and buried.
Therefore (so the good man goes on) He is not truly acquainted with the depth of original sin, nor soundly humbled, who thinks he had never done these faults except the Divel had tempted him. There is no abhomination so prodigious, but our original sin would water at it: It is the goodness of God and his p. 68. meer favour alone, who hath kept us and our fami∣lies, from occasions of such sins, or such occasions from us. Blesse God then (worthy Capel speaks still, and did you ever hear words more pat to our purpose, and more full to give instruction and to call to remembrance as some Psalms are titled.) Bless God then that Cain hath not killed Abel in our houses; that Amnon hath not deslow∣red our Tamar; that our Absolom hath not been the death of his brother Amnon; aye, that our son Absolom hath not sought our lives also; that Reuben hath not gone up to his fathers Couch. What are we? what are our fathers houses, that we have been preserved in our houses from such scanda∣lous sins? Are we better? are we so good as these fathers were? Should God sit still, and the Law of Nature look on, and let our original sin or lust within shew it self? The next would be sin upon sin, against Scripture, against nature, no bonds, no bounds would hold us from growing worse and worse still, with greatest violence wee should long after the greatest sins, and the end would be a Reprobate sense; from the which, Good Lord deliver us. It may be of use to look over these words again, as we all, so you with your brethren, above many, have need of them. You cannot make us believe that
you have preached to your people all necessary truths; ye have if not clean omitted, yet ye have slurred over this one so necessary a truth before∣mentioned, what cursed creatures we are in the state of nature? Give us leave to say, what you should say to your people, but they abhor to hear it, and then would abhor you for speaking it; what grievous Wolves, mad Doggs, filthy Swine they are by Nature; they are in every mire of sin, or would be there. Ye have slurred over this sure, what beasts we are? how stiffe∣necked? Iron-sinewed? self-willed (all laws in one) how willfull we are? All which might be proved to us, and fully argued from Jeremiah 6. ver. 16. and last words, but they said we will not walk therein; you, and we remember it Sir, the place where, and time when those words were passed over; we doubted lest they should be as goads in our sides to awaken us out of our dead sleep—But to go on, ye have to speak in the Lords own words, healed this our hurt slight∣ly. Ye have bid your people glory in their birth∣priviledge (as ye and they call it) for thereby they are instated in, and possessed of as soon as they are born all Church-administrations, the in∣fants priviledge for Baptism; the Parents them∣selves Dogs and Swine, though they are privi∣ledged for the Lords Table. Thus ye have hea∣led the hurt of your people slightly, saying, Peace, Jer: 6. 11. Peace, when there is no peace. The manner of those that hold for a National Church, all, and throughout holy, every one of them, being
born and baptized there, a Garden inclosed, a Fountain sealed, a chosen generation a royal Priest∣hood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, all and every one of them born in England and baptized there. And upon that account, bring ye all your Infants to Baptism, and your selves to the Lords Table, seeing all the Congregations are holy. every one of them. We will conclude, for the further we go, the more resolved we are; That you have not dealt roundly with your people, shewing them the root of the matter, and so not preached unto them all necessary truths; nor have ye behaved your selves comely, as Stewards ought to do in Gods-house. CHAP. II. BUt to let you have your saying, you preach unto your people necessary truths, that being granted, what follows? why? meddle not with any other matters before them, as with ad∣mission to Baptism, and the Lords Table, observa∣tion of daies; or saying of the Lords Prayer, for hereby you shall make them fall off from hearing those necessary truths; this is the drift of your words. Now we will grant you, that necessary truths, are mainly and chiefly to be insisted up∣on the people; ay, that but one necessary truth is to be preached, as the object of our faith, way, and means of Salvation, Christ Crucified and no other but what is reductive to it, meets in it, or flows
from it; Jesus Christ is the sum and center of all Divine revealed truth, which was hinted before; he, and the unspeakable benefits his people have by him, and the weightiest matters to be treated on; and yet other things there are, which will hold weight too in the Ballance of the Sanctuary and must necessarily have their consideration in their due time, place, and order, so as we may say in allusion to those words, Thus ought you to have done, Preach Christ crucified, and leave the other undone. We will observe here, and oh that we could withall observation, what our Lord and Masters manner was while he was here on earth; he is a sure pattern to be observed, to be followed, see his zeal for his fathers house, it even eat him up; his fiery indignation against all that which was a provocation to his father there; aye, or might cast the smallest vail, or least shadow over his fa∣thers glory. See how he was carried out against false worship, and Worshippers, who were taught to worship the father by the precepts of men; giving him no other worship, but what was the Spawn of their own understanding, which is as abhominable to God, as is the poison of Vipers unto us. See we how far he was from humouring the people in those things which we may call indiffe∣rent, and judging after the flesh, we might think had he yeelded unto the people therein, he might have made way for his Doctrine to take place with them, as a Godly Minister may now, say
you, if he shall forbear to anger the people, by preaching against free admission to the Sealing Ordinances; observation of (an Heathenish Feast, but we call) Christmas, or the day of Christs Nativity; and the saying (prophaning) of the Lords Prayer. But observe we the carri∣age of our Lord and Master in these petty mat∣ters (for such they do passe in common ac∣count.) His healing day, was the Sabbath day, And  this displeased the people very much, the chief∣est Luke 6. 6. 13, 14. John 9. 14. of them, wholly mistaken in the proper works thereof, and carried out to a superstitious obser∣vation of the day, according to their own under∣standing, which made them very rude and un∣civil with our Lord, and set them in a rage against him, reproving their superstitions, and informing them touching the right observation of the day (as now it doth, in that and other matters against the faithfull Ministers of Christ, reproving them for their prophanations, and horrible abhominations that way) Our Lord laid his hands on a woman which had a spirit of in∣firmity 18 years, bowed together with it, and could in no wise lift up her self, and immediately no sooner was his sacred hand on, but the infirmity was off, she was made streight and glorified God. And the Luke 13. 13, 14. Ruler of the Synagogue answered with indigna∣tion (take it in passage, and see how wanting our Rulers are in their zeal for the Lords day) he could not see the people do that, which hee thought to be a prophanation of the Sabbath,
without great indignation, because that Jesus had healed on the Sabbath day, which he superstitious∣ly thought was a breach of the day. There are six dayes in which men ought to work, in them there∣fore come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day. Did not the man speak reason? Certainly, car∣nal reason will judge so; for to speak after the manner of men, and to our case in hand; It was a high offence to the lookers on, as we have read, to observe the Lord Christ heal on the Sab∣bath day; might not he to remove this scandal, bid the people come to him on the six daies, ra∣ther then by healing on the Sabbath day, raise the Spirit of man against his sacred person, as here the spirit of the Ruler, even to an indignati∣on? Surely carnal men would have reasoned the case if they durst, with the Lord Christ then, as you now with his servants against doing their duty, charged upon them by their Lord; you will by so doing anger the people, and raise up their Spirits, even to an indignation against you; nor will they hear you treating of most necessary truths, if you shall deal with them in these mat∣ters. We pray you Sir, for quietnesse sake, and that you may prevail with them in higher matters, forbear to heal on the Sabbath day; take any one, or all six it will do as well. This is to confer with flesh and bloud, which  Paul would not do, and to reason thereafter, as you now do against the Ministers of Christ, do∣ing their duty, they shall but conjure up the peo∣ples spirit, by speaking against their admission to
the Sacraments, observation of Christmas, and praying (blaspheming) the Lords Prayer; med∣dle not with those matters (it is your Counsel) they ingender strifes; well, the faithfull of the Lord may thank you for your counsel; but ac∣cept it they cannot. They look up to him, whom they have trusted; and as they have seen him do through grace so do they; and this very exam∣ple of Christ, in healing on the Sabbath day, teacheth them very much, what they are to do, as in other matters relating to his worship, so in relation to the Lords day; to beat of the people from a superstitious observation of that day; The foolishness of God is wiser then men; and the Job. 10. 22. 585. weaknesse of God is stronger then men, 1 Cor. 1. 25. This relating to our purpose and instruction, we will give you the exposition thereof, as it is gi∣ven us. God is onely wise, onely strong, how then speaks the Apostle of the foolishnesse or weakness of God? His meaning is, look what act soever of God appears to man as having foolishness or weakness in it, even that foolishness is wiser, and that weakness stronger then men. The foolishness of God is Wise∣dom, the weaknesse of God is strength, the dark∣ness of God is light; for as God is strength, and in him there is no weaknesse at all; light, and in him there is no darknesse at all; so God is wisedom, and in him there is no foolishnesse at all; It is but mans foolish heart that thinks so.) But let him think this with it, the foolishnesse of God is wiser then men, and if the wisedom of men cannot match with the foo∣lishness of God, how shall it contend with the wise∣dom
of God? If you can receive this, receive it, and much use may you make of it, as the Godly Ministers do, doing their duty, though charged with foolishnesse for so doing, so was their Lord and Master before them. We cannot forbear to hold forth our Lords  practise in one thing more, not yeelding for qui∣etnesse sake to the wisest and best learned of the people, no not in the poorest and most beggarly ceremony, that is well imaginable; washing of hands, which we have heard say is a point of manners to Matth. 15. 2 Mark 7. 4. Luke 11. 38. do, though but newly made clean, yet for satis∣faction to others; notwithstanding, i this poor ceremony, as our reason conceiveth it, our Lord would not yeeld unto them; he would not wash his hands, nor should his Disciples neither, when they sate down to meat. We do not doubt but had you lived in those times, you could have ar∣gued with the Lord about this matter, as well and as learnedly as others could have done, and have shewen him reason sufficient, why he might have been more yeelding; wash your hands, Sir, a others do, and let your Disciples do so too, and you may gain the peoples ears to attend you in high∣er matters, for after this Dialect speaks your good Counsel to the Godly Ministers now as was hinted before. And perhaps you may mar∣vel why they do not take your counsel (take it they cannot, if indeed they be Godly) as much as the Pharisee did, who seeing the Lord sitting down to meat, marvelled that hee had not first washed before dinner, Luke 11. 38. And here
not knowing who the Reader may be, we would inform him in one thing; That the Lord Christ did not, nor did his Disciples eat with defiled hands as the word is rendred, Mark 7. 2. that is with common or unclean hands. They did observe even in those matters, decency and order. They did not wash as the Pharisees and all the Jews washed, not so often as they did, for when they came from the Market, except they, wash they eat not; nor did they wash up to the elbow, as the Phari∣sees and all the Jews did; for such a manner of washing wee have heard the word importeth. Thus they did, and they put Religion in it, in washing the outside onely, and none in this, none at all (the manner of men in those days, and so up to our days, and will be their manner till the great day, when daies shall be no more, but all daies swallowed up in that eternal day or ever∣lasting night) we were saying, no religion at all do they put; in cleansing their hands, and purifying their hearts, that so they may draw nigh God, and he draw nigh to them. But observe we with all observation, how the Lord contesteth against them in this thing. And let all the faithfull of God learn their duty here from the example of their Lord, to contend against lying vanities, and superstitious observations till they die, Come on it what will, they have their warrant sealed unto them, even from their Lord and great Master himself, and his very practise here, from which we shall now come off and proceed.
CHAP. III. HEre we find it urged to take off the Godly Mini∣ster from doing his duty in contending against the abhominable doings of Ministers in Gods house, and the like practises of the people without the house: In so doing (so it is forced) they may Personate men in the Pulpit, at least deal too particularly with them, which serveth but to inrage and raise the spirits of men even to an indignation against the good things that may bee spoken and against him that speakes them. To this we reply, first We cannot see how this can be avoided by a  Godly Minister; unlesse he shall deal with all his hearers, as many, yea the most do, but he would tremble so to do under the notion of Believers, Disciples and Saints. If he deal plainly with these and according to the truth as it is in Jesus, holding out before them, what they are instated in, and possessed of by their first birth (so much gloried in, we mean their supposed and imagi∣nary priviledges therefrom) and assure them from the Word of God, that before they can be admitted to the Lords Table, they must make some proof, that by the prevailing power of the blessed Spirit with the word, they are passed from that through Death, they were born in, un∣to life, being born again: At least that they have some discerning or insight into that state we are all in by nature, and some breathings to God the
father through Christ his son in the use of means, whereby to be brought out of that estate: We were saying, if a Godly Minister shall deal with his people according to the tenour or import of the words fore-mentioned, then are his hearers, specially these nominal Believers, Disciples and 1 King. 22. 8 Jerem. 26. Saints, inraged against him, as Ahab was against Michaiah, or as the Princes were against Jere∣miah; we cannot bare his words say they, no nor our Nation neither, he prophecieth no good concerning us but evil; for whereas our Mini∣sters all over the National Church have a good esteem of us (we speak your Disciples words) ever since we were born and baptized there, ac∣counting us Believers, Disciples and Saints, (at large, and that serves our turn in our wide, large and broad way) he now for ought we perceive, quite overlooking our Saint-ship, the great pri∣viledge of our first birth, reckons little better of us, then of Wolves, Doggs, Swine, as if we were Turks, Pagans, Infidels, and worse, as worse they are, because they are not better, and had not been born and baptized in England. This is that which inrageth us, and will so do till the cur∣sed Mr. Greenhil on Ezek. 13. pag. 547. pride of our spirits be subdued in us; we flatter our selves, and we love to be flattered; what is more pleasing to us? (we borrow anothers word) being content to be taught here to speak by those who we are assured, speak to us from God) then to have our own mind, do our own will, walk after the imaginations of our own hearts? And what softer words more suitable to us can be said (we
vary a little here from that learned mans words, not from his sense) then are these, Though you o walk as aforesaid, yet sith a gracious Providence hath cast it so, that ye have been born and baptized in a Church, you may reckon your selves as me rec∣kon of you (and shall deal with you as to Church Ad∣ministrators, to be Beleevers) Disciples and Saints, and so you may conclude no evil shall come unto you. These are milky, oyly words, such as please men, and battel their humours, and so have a great advantage with men, who love to be humoured. But the God∣ly Ministers speak verba veritatis, which have salt and fire in them, and so cross, fret, provoke mens lusts, and stir up their hatred against them. But here is the comfort. As the other with their lies and flatteries find favour with men; so the faith∣full Ministers shall find favours with God for their truths, who loveth truth. We will put a close to this we had first to say, in the Lords own words, which he spake to us by his Prophet, Isa. 3. 12. They who ld thee, are they who call thee blessed; and calling thee so while thou art in a cursed way, and pursuing a curse all the day long, they cause thee to erre out of the way, and in state the curse up on thee. We can grant you that there is an holy craft, and an harmlesse guile, which a Godly Minister  may use, and doth use whereby to catch souls; but he is carefull with all his care, that be useth 2 Cor, 12 1 so much craft and guile, and no more then what his God alloweth him, just as much of the Dove, as he takes of the Serpnt, he must see to it, that
as he sheweth himself to be Prudent and Wise, so also that he is holy and harmlesse. And now how to behave himself in your large and spacious house, your National Church, and give no of∣fence either to God or men, hic labor, hoc opus est; nay let him use all care and all diligence that way, it is not possible to do it, he must displease this glorious God, or this wretched man, as possi∣ble to please both, as it is to serve two Masters; if he please God he displeaseth man; if he pleaseth Isa. 30. 10; man (take him as he is, and not renewed, he can be taken, that is pleased with nothing but lies, and so) he displeaseth God. A resolved case Gal. 1. 10. long ago. If I yet pleased men I should not be the Servant of Christ; He hath learnt his duty, and in the strength of God will do thereafter, divide the word of truth rightly, give to men as their seve∣ral 2 Tim. 2. 15. states and conditions are; words of instructi∣on one for sort, of reproof for another, of com∣fort for a third: A Godly Minister hath not as they in Mr. Hs, way, one and the same word shall serve for every soul, for the Sinner, and for the Saint; or if they do vary a little, and strike the sinner down at the Pulpit, they will raise him up at the Lords-Table, and stroke him there; & if they deal smartly with the sinner in the body of the Church, as if he were a Divel incarnate, they will deal sweely with him in the Chancel, though as if he were a Saint. In∣deed upon the matter they have bu one word, which they make to serve every soul, and that is a word of comfort; for though the men be not more like men then Divels, yet they speak to
them, and deal with them as Believers, Disciples, Saints, words of comfort; And truly, why should not the same word serve all commers, as well as the same Table, like the Tyrants bed, made to serve all guests; If the guest was too short for the bed he wracked him out longer; if too long he cut the man shorter. This was acted at the highest rate of Tyranny, you will say, to make one bed serve all; what shall we call this; To make on Table serve all commers? say you, or the sacred Scripture will speak for you. But the Godly Minister not so, he makes a difference betwixt those whose hearts are broken under the weight and sence of sin; and those that are hard∣ned in their sin; and the same difference he makes at the Lords-Table, else that which is one mans meat there, would be anothers poison; so then he is resolved upon the case, he will please God, preach the preaching, that God hath spoken to him, come on it what will; he dareth not for his life, speak smooth things, or prophecy deceits, to your Isa. 30. 10. Believers in name, your Disciples at large, your Saints, not so much as in shew; he abhorreth (as he doth the Divel and Hell) to dawb with untem∣pered Mortar, to see Visions of Peace for them, who have no Peace, truly so called, still making war with God and fighting against him. A Godly Minister for a World would not be found in the number of these, who sow Pillows to all arm-holes, and slay the Souls that should not die, and save the Ez. 13. 16. Souls alive that should not live: Before we pro∣ceed, take the Exposition on these words, which
that excellent man gives, the Souls that should not die, are said to be slain, when we threaten where we should promise; and we save the Souls alive that should not live, when we promise, when we should threaten. Though the unskilfullness of man cannot make the faithfullness and the Councels of God of none effect, either by slaying one Soul of whom he hath said live, or by saving one Soul of whom he hath said die, yet their words that run knowingly crosse to the Word and Will of God are justly charged with slaying those, whom God will save; and of saving those whom God will slay. We were saying a God∣ly Minister dares not do thus, he dares not call him a Believer that hath no faith, or not so much as the Divel hath; nor him, nor her, a Disciple, that hath not learnt Christ, nor careth to learn him, nor him, nor her a Saint, that are such enemies to peace and holinesse, that they would pursue both out of the World; yet in the mean time cleave fast to a form of godlinesse, neglect∣ing, yea despising, yea opposing, yea crucify∣ing the power thereof; it is a dreadful thing for a Godly Minister so to do, for he dreads that woe, a little word, as he saith, but very comprehen∣sive, all evils are contained in it, woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darknesse; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. A Godly Minister abhor∣reth such doings, for he dreadeth the woe; he will speak the truth as it is in Jesus; give every one a portion as becommeth a good Steward, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear,
falls much of it besides his consideration, and causeth him no trouble at all but upon their own score and reckoning now and hereafter; because the good Minister knows, nor can he conceal his knowledge, That he who bardneth his heart (un∣der all the means of softning) shall fall into mischief Prov. 28. 14. 29. 1. Rom. 2. 5. he shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without re∣medy; he is still treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath; for as an hard heart (hardned by be∣ing often reproved) is Satans treasury for sin, so is it Gods treasury for wrath; upon this account the good Minister is sad and grieved; yet having done his duty, freed his own Soul, as we say, and through grace acquitted himself of blood-guilti∣nesse, he rejoiceth. In the third place we cannot but tell you our observation; that we find our Ministers, some  of them, if not the best, yet worthy to be num∣bred amongst the best, too apt to hold their peace in Gods matters, and the concernments of Souls, too open and ready to speak in their own, we mean they are too much, though others much more in complying with the people, too loath to offend flesh and blood (sinfull man) as must needs be while they confer with their own. They find it Neh. 4. 14. Isa. 51. 7, 8. hard sure to bear up with open face against wind, tide, and storm. These, even the best of men. do not remember God alwaies, and then for∣getting him, they fear man; these look back sometimes upon wife and children, and so, if not take off, yet slacken their hand from the Plough, so said our excellent Jewel. It is not alwaies
fresh in the best mans mind, God is my Shepheard Psalm 23. I shall want nothing; nor doth he alwaies ponder upon that question his Lord put to his Disciples, whom he sent forth to preach, and their answer thereunto, When I sent you without purse, and Luke 22. 35. scrip, and shooes, lacked ye any thing? And they said nothing was lacking. O for faith to rely up∣on him, for provision, protection, all things needfull, for so he hath said: Trust me, and do Is. 33. Heb. 13. 5. thy duty, Bread shall be given thee, thy water shall be sure, Ile never leave thee nor forsake thee; our English cannot reach the Emphasis or force of those Negatives we translate by one Never; something hinders now, the Lord help the God∣ly Ministers to search out what it is, that they do not search our hurt to the bottom, they do not speak home to us, we are horn-skinned all over, and a deadly core at the bottom, and they for fear of they know not what, will not cut and lance us; we are rough and rugged pieces, and they won't hew us, perhaps they will wound us or sacrifice us at least in the Pulpit; but then, before we feel our selves at hurt, they will heal us at the Lords-Table; where is that man that is carried out with that zeal, as God requires against the abhominations committed in his house? the Prophanation of the Lords day? the observation of mans days, and other cursed usages frequent amongst us? Indeed as good Latimer said of old de est ignis, men speak in the Pulpit, as if they had no fire in them, no love to Christ, nor hatred against sin; yet they that are
as cold as frost in these matters, may think a little heat in another to be as hot as a fiery Fur∣nace. But to take off what is suggested here; you like  not the personating of men in the Pulpit; nor we neither, unlesse it be so done that a Minister hath a sure word from his God so to do, and so orders the matter, that his fin shal personate or point out the guilty man, and not his name; though why his name should be concealed, when his sin is publick and notorious, we know not, and are yet to seek. But this we know, the faithful servants of Christ in al ages of the World, have, according to the word and example of Christ, reproved sinners to their faces, dealing particularly with them, thou art the man, ye are the men: And indeed, when men are ascended some degrees above Hypocrisie, to im∣pudence and shamelesnesse in sinning, why should the servant of Christ be shame-faced in reproving? If wickedness will appear with open face; Godliness must not keep within dores, if wickednesse dares trade open∣ly; godlinesse must not dare to keep in as a Bankrupt that dare not be seen; so said an excellent Preacher in his time. 1. Let us observe the manner of John Baptist; first, and how roundly he deals with the best and  choicest men in the Country in common account which was said before. 2. Our Lords example is to be observed too, what a Volley of Woes he dischargeth, Mat. 23. and would have all the World to know those persons against whom he dischargeth them, and
then subjoins: Ye Serpents, ye generation of Vi∣pers, how can ye escape the damnation of Hell? Verse 33. Surely the servants of Christ, and Paul for one to mention no more; he would not give place to false Brethren, no not for an hour, and he withstood Peter to the face, and blamed him boldly and smartly, because he was so to be blamed nor did he take him aside, and whisper him in the ear; nor did he tell his Brethren he had done amisse, but comes to Peter himself, tells him so, dealing roundly with him, and before them all, Gal. 2. 5. 11. 14. Indeed Paul deals very particularly and as smartly every where. If any 2 Thes. 3. 14. 2 John 11. man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man excellent Fennor opens that word, Note him with a brand of infamy; Note him as a Rebel against Jesus Christ, look upon him as a wretched miserable crea∣ture take heed of him, avoid him, with-draw your self from him, point at him; yonder goes a wretch that will not obey the voice of his Teacher; excommuni∣cate him from your company, certainly there is a great wrath hangeth over him. So (he directs his words to Ministers) if any obey not your word, note such persons, such Parishes, such Families, the wrath of Heaven hangeth over them: Notorious Towns, notorious People, notorious Families, no∣torious Persons; they reject Christ in the Preach∣ing of the Gospel, they obey not his Word, they press on to this Table to receive him there; Note those men, and note their Minister also, who hears and sees all this, and yet sees Visions of Peace for them; whereas there is no Peace (saith the Lord) but woe,
woe unto them Minister and People. These words of Paul implies all this, said that worthy man, who did not heal the hurt, the breach of the peo∣ple, as the manner of some is, slightly saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no peace. We would observe Paul's particular dealing with sinners from two or three Scriptures more: There are some, saith he, that have put away a good conscience, and concerning faith (an Hypo∣critical profession of the true Doctrine of faith, (as that learned man hath it) have made shipwrack. And he points unto two of them, and names them, of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander; and he tels you what you ought to do a little after, 1 Tim. 1. 20. them that sin (that is, who sin openly and scanda∣lously) 1 Tim. 5. 20 rebuke before al; rebuke them to the faces of all men, who are such bold and shameless sinners, that they dare do presumptuously in the face of every man: One Scripture more, their word doth eat, saith he, as doth a Cancer; he stays not there, but notes two of those corrupt and pestilent Teach∣ers of whom is Hymeneus and Phyletus. Thus Sir, we have taken off, as we conceive, the  edge of your Arguments, Why a Godly Minister ought not to deal with his people, about the fore∣mentioned admission to the Sealing Ordinances, and so forth, which shall be particularly, but briefly, set down anon after; and in special, why he may not deal particularly with them, as their case may require.
CHAP. IIII. ANd now we take leave, after our manner, to set down our Arguments, whereby to prove, that it is the duty of every Godly Minister, to treat with his people, about those matters fore∣mentioned, Admission of all to the Sealing Ordi∣nances, observation of Christmas, for we speak as we may be understood, and the saying the Lords Prayer; and to make clear proof unto them: That these things ought not to be done, as com∣monly they are done all over the National Church, being a meer provocation of wrath, a fire that burneth all the day. First, then we argue it thus, that which the Lord God hateth, all the Godly Ministers and  people do hate also, else they are not Godly; do I not hate them, O Lord, that hate thee, them that professedly, openly, and in some eminent way of opposition set themselves against God and godliness, do I not hate them Lord, that hate thee? certainly, the Godly throughout the World, are made so like their God now, having received his spirit with the word, holy, as he is holy, that what their God hates, they hate, and with a per∣fect hatred they hate it, and what he loves they love. God hath placed affections in the soul, that we may imbrace good things and welcom them, with love, joy, and delight, and avoid evil things with indignation, hatred, and soul-loathing.
Now sit we down and bethink our selves what doth the Lord hate more, then he doth those presumptuous doings at the place, where the Font, as commonly we call it, standeth, and that other place, where is the Lords-Table? First, We shall need to adde but little to this, in the first place having spoken so much to it be∣fore. Surely, you will grant, that that high and mighty person (such he was by his place) you read of in the Church Chronicles, dealt hatefully, rather depitefully with God and good men, when he did at the Communion-Table, what he should have done without dores, and be∣fore the wall. * Sir, look to it now whether Julian Uncle to Julian the Apostate, but memorable was the revenging hand of God up∣on him; for na∣ture vented it self not by the accustoned pas∣sages, but through his mouth, and so he died. you (of Mr. Hs. perswasion and practise) may not do as hatefully with your Lord Christ, whom you profess to know, to love, and to fear, in ad∣mitting his enemies and adversaries to his Ta∣ble? taking no other account from them, but be∣cause they were baptized in that large and wide Church, the Nation there? These were hateful doings sure (we will remember you once more of Calvins words) To take the sacred body of Christ, and cast it to Dogs by them to be rent and torn in pieces; but so hatefully do these Ministers deal with his sacred body, that give the Signs and Seals of it to Dogs and Swine. We pass from that, onely remember the point we are making out, the Godly Minister hateth what his heavenly father hateth, therefore cannot but contend against such hateful doings. Think you, Sir, which of the two abhominati∣ons
rise highest: the horrible prophanation of the Lords day, or the celebration of Christmas day? And judge your self about it whether you can give the least countenance to it; or do not withall your might and main contest against it: Surely so you must do, else you do not as the Godly do, hate that which their Lord hateth. You will find it an hard work to take off your people from that annual observation, as it is, to take of a Turk, a Jew, or a Papist from his Religion; yet if you will approve your self a Godly man, and so to hate what God hates, you must set about it; for untill they shall draw off their observati∣on from that day, they can never be drawn on to the observation of the Lords day; the one or the other will be an abhomination to them, we passe that also. In the next place think you here also whether the dreadfull Name of God is not fearfully pro∣phaned † 3. every day by the wicked man? saying the Lords Prayer; we know not how often in the week daies (for commonly he can say no other Prayer) but so often as he comes to the meeting place, there he says it, but how doth he blas∣pheme his God in so saying it? Truly we could hope, that if you would speak to your hearers in Isidorus words, about their saying this Prayer and not call them what they are not, Believers, Disciples, and Saints, but what they are, till re∣newed in the spirit of their minds, Wolves, Swine, Dogs, which is said of all ungodly men at once, without are Dogs, Revel. 22. 15. we were saying,
it might be hoped they would as soon let Wild∣fire into their mouth, as let this prayer go out of their lips. Though yet we remember a wicked man is a very bold man and presumptuous; spe∣cially at this point of praying the Lords Prayer: A fool rageth (that is sinneth outragiously) yet is Prov. 14. 16. he confident. Isidorus words are these, as we have heard them Englished unto us, and as you Isid. Pelusi. l. 4. Ep. 24. may English them unto your people fully out, for we will give you but a line one or two. That person is ascended above Hypocrisie to impudence; he is bolder then boldness it self; who dares call, God fa∣ther, while he knows he gives him neither fear nor honour: And saith Hallowed be thy Name, all that [whereby to us he is known, all his attributes, his Dr. Owen Saints persev p. 134. whole will, all his glory, the cause and end of what he doth, or the principle from whence, with the mo∣tive wherefore he doth it] this name, saith he, be Hallowed? But how doth he blaspheme it, being the first born of Satans children, the chiefest of the black guard belonging to the King of the bottomless pit? That worthy man goes on, shewing the blasphemy of this wicked man go∣ing on in the Lords Prayer, Thy Kingdome come, thy will be done, whereas his father the wicked one himself is not a more deadly enemy to the comming of the one, and doing of the other, then this wicked person is, he or her. There is much more which is commended to your private reading, and as was said, please you, to your translating, that so your people may understand it, so you may do them good, whereas he saying the Lords Pray∣er
before them, which they will repeat after you, You do them infinite hurt, for you make them hlaspheme, which every Godly Minister hateth to do, because his heavenly father hateth it, that is first. In the next place, we argue it from the dread∣fullness  of Gods vengeance executed upon Mi∣nisters, that have by their more then connivance, suffered the Throne of his glory to be prophaned in those places by free admission to all commers; My flesh trembleth because of thee, and I fear for thy Ps. 119. 120. judgements. It is evident and clear to a discern∣ing eye, as is the Sun-beam, that the Lord hath made these Ministers vile before all his people, who have countenanced, and more, those cur∣sed mixtures at his Table, together with the ob∣servation of that Idol day, and the saying the Lords Prayer; so blaspheming this Name Father, and calling Christ accursed; the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. Micah 3. 6. God would inflict a greater darknesse upon them the Prophets in his just judgement, then upon the people, Those that abuse most light, they come into most grosse darkness: The Seers especially, they should be blind, who would see visions of peace for them against whom the Lord threatens War: The night shall be upon the Prophets, their Zach. 11. 17. Arm shall be clean dried up, and their right eye ut∣terly darkned. They are smitten in the Crown of a man, the understanding they abused it, they perverted it, therefore the Lord cursed his bles∣sings. And behold them now, they are besot∣ted
in their very parts and abilities. It was ex∣cellent Burroughs observation, There is more dark∣nesse upon wicked Ministers this day amongst us then upon ordinary people. What should be the reason of this, the procu∣ring or meritorious cause of it? Surely, the ab∣hominations they have committed, or suffered to be committed in Gods-house, where they professe themselves to be set as Watch-men, and as Stewards, having the charge of the Lord com∣mitted unto them, to give every one their por∣tion in due season, and they have been more slight and carelesse here in admitting filty and noisom ones into his house, which they durst not do being Stewards to an earthly Lord; nay, which they would do in their own house, which you know was Calvin's complaint long ago, whereof anon after, which made him foretel what he did fore-see, terrible wrath comming upon the Christian world, and behold it is come. And great is the wrath that is powred down upon the people too, they were permitted to communicate at the Lords-Table, before they were prepared for it by the word Preached to discern of the Lords-body, and now they are gi∣ven up to their own lusts, and being past feeling commit sin with greedinesse, and sitting under the dropping of the word, they are stirred no more then a Mill-post; Now the Lords Day is sligh∣ted by them, and Mans day honoured. The Lords Prayer as ordinarily blasphemed as his
Name; O the terrible wrath that hath pursued, and hath overtaken Ministers and people, people presuming to come, whether they had no more call to come, then a Swine hath to come to your Closet, and Ministers consenting that they should come, having no more warrant from their Lord for it, then they have to suffer a man to stab himself, with the sword they could take out of his hands; knowing therefore the terrour of the Lord, and that because of these things the wrath of God is come upon the children of disobedi∣ence. A godly Minister cannot but perswade Ministers and people by the terrour of the Lord, and intreat them by the mercies of Christ to con∣sider well what is done, or what they suffer to be done in Gods house, as to these sacred admini∣strations there, and other horrible prophanati∣ons, which alwaies follow the prophaning of these sacred things, as the thread followeth the needle. And if there be such a destruction to the wic∣ked  (the wicked Minister especially) so strange a punishment to the workers of iniquity, as is the sword upon their arm (of Ministers and peo∣ple) and upon their right eye then how can it be, but the destruction from God, as Job speaks, must be a terrour to a godly Minister, that he may not by connivance or silence, which is a consenting be an occasion to draw down this destruction upon the people. The destruction upon another, which yet he hath drawn upon himself, with both hands and as with cart-ropes, is terrible to the behol∣der
or stander by, how much more terrible to a Minister, when he shall consider, that he hath (to speak in a word) by his dawbing occasioned that destruction? he never told his people, and fore-warned them of the destruction, which would follow their prophaning of holy things, as to our ear the Thunder clap, the lightning, they were suffered to do it, and they did it, and their Mi∣nister restrained them not, he wrinkled not his 1 Sam. 3. fore-head upon them, he frowned not. Surely, this is the manner of a godly Minister, while his peo∣ple are doing him hurt, he will be keeping them what he can from hurt; while they trouble him, he will discover his tendernesse towards them; that if possi∣ble, he may prevent their trouble, which certainly will follow their prophanation of holy things. De∣liver me from blood (saith David) blood-guilti∣ness Ps. 51 14. we will render it, to allude to it; there is the blood of Christ, which being sprinkled on us by the spirit, with the word working faith in us, whereby we lay hold of it, is our righteousnesse: And there is the blood of souls, which is a peri∣shing for ever in their blood, that is in their wic∣kednesse, being never discovered unto them; from the contemning, slighting, spilling, pro∣phaning of the one, and from being a cause or an occasion of the others perishing for ever; the Lord will deliver every Godly Minister. These are two Scriptures (we think these are excellent Bolton's words) which every Minister should bind for a sign upon his hand, they should be as frontlets between his eyes, he should write them
upon the Posts of his house, or upon his gates, or please him upon his study door; or which may do as well (yet nothing will do till they be writ∣ten upon the heart) upon the Chancel door (if that order be observed as once it was by as abho∣mmable Idolaters as they, who worshipped to∣wards the Last) and the Lords Supper celebrated Ezek 8. 16. in the upper-most parts of the World, as high Eastward as we can go, we will but name the Scriptures, the first is, Ezk. 3. 18. 19. When I say unto the wicked thou shalt surely die, and thou gi∣vest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wic∣ked man from his wicked way, to save his life, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand: Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickednesse, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity but thou hast delivered thy soul. The other Scrip∣ture, 1 Cor. 11. 27. Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, as guilty as all they were, or any one of them all, who shed his blood of malicious wickednesse. And now, Sir, for we must take it in by the way, we know here you and your brethren put by the stroke of these Scriptures, not suffering them, if we may so expresse it, to make any dint upon you: Ye do warn the people, ye do thunder out against them in these or the like words, and they regard your thunder as much as they do the rumbling of the Cart in the street, or the sound of Thorns un∣der the pot. Alas, Sir, this your warning is va∣nity
and worse, it will not bear you out before men, Godly men, how much lesse before your God, to whom you must give an account of (we should tremble to speak it, as you should to hear it) your bloody doings; you warn them, you threaten them, you lay the judgements of God before them, bibunt & comedunt tamen, not∣withstanding ye suffer them to eat and drink their own damnation, what becomes of your warning now? O Sir, we pray for you, and your bre∣thren, that you may repent of these doings, and correct them, else you and your warnings must perish together. And this much in the third place to assure you, that a godly Minister cannot be silent in these matters, the destruction from God is a terrour to him, as sure as the consolations from God are not small unto him. 'Tis the great ambition of his soul, to gain souls over unto Christ, to profit those his Lord  hath set him over; he would further conversion what is possible, but he would not be a stumb∣ling block, or bar in the way of conversion for a World. In a word, he would profit his hea∣rers: why then he must take Gods way, he must take counsel at Gods mouth, he must Preach the preaching that God commands him, he must do all things as they of old, according to the pattern or as they were commanded (how often repeated in the last Chapters of Exodus?) according to the mind, will, rule of God, prescribed him in Gods word, else they shall not profit his people at all saith the Lord; he must be a good man, he Jer. 23. 32.
must stand in Gods way, he must take counsel at Gods mouth, who looks for good successe; we dare not say absolutely that a carnal Minister shal never have good success in his Ministry; it is the word that converts, and not the person of the speaker, we tie not God to the goodnesse of any mans person: He, as one saith, can write well with a bad pen, and cut well with a blunt and naughty knife: He is infinitely above his Ordi∣nances, and we as much below them; he can sanctifie an unsanctified means, for the turning the heart unto himself, as the ghastly looks of a dead man, or the sight of a man falling down suddenly be∣fore him, as we read one Waldus was converted. He can bless the words of a poor country-man, (but rich in faith, so speaking glorious things of the Kingdom of heaven) for the conversion of a sinner, as he did to Junius, together with a very looking into the Bible, which his good father had laid in every room Junius his son came into. But it is not what the Lord can do, but what he will do, which he hath declared unto us in his word, who they are that shall profit his people, and who shal not; they who stand in his counsel, and cause his people to hear his words, these shall profit the people. They who do not so shall not profit the people at all, Jerem. 23. 22. 32. we shall set down Cal∣vin's words upon that Scripture, as we have heard them opened unto us, having such a ten∣dency to our scope: It was not the purpose of the Prophet to set down the counsel of God in the several parts and pieces of sound, wholesom, and saving
Doctrine; for we have in the Prophets but a brevi∣ate or abstract of their Sermons, as much as the holy God saw needfull for us, but it sufficed the good Pro∣phet to refell or reprove the false Teachers, who yet would be accounted the onely men, though they stood not in Gods counsel, nor caused the people to hear his word, though they had no regard at all to build up the people, but themselves, and to make themselves fat by the sins of the people, that was indeed all their care: So though they saw all things, like the counsel of the froward, carried head-long in a direct way or tendency to utter ruine; yet what cared they? They saw wickedness in its Throne, and impetuously run∣ning as righteousnesse should do, through the land like a Flood, or mighty stream: They saw, and they heard horrible contempts and affronts to God, and which must needs issue from it, as a filthy stream from a more corrupt Fountain, the filthy convesition of the wicked. Yet their unrighteous soul hearing and seeing all these unlawfull deeds, were rather cheared then vexed, Caecutibant ad haec omnia, they were more then Pur-blind, they saw none of all this, nor did they hear it (to reprove it, but rather to al∣low of it) for who so blind and deaf as my servant (saith the Lord) that will neither see nor hear. So far we have read Calvin, giving us an E∣pitome or Abstract of our times, and what false Teachers do, even as they have done, suffered the people to make themselves vile, and restrai∣ned them not, and so could not profit the people at all; and what true and right Ministers ought to do, do their office, stand in Gods counsel, cause
their people to hear his words, which is the way of Gods prescribing, to turn their people from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings which is to profit them indeed. So we have con∣cluded that it is not, what is the custom of men to do, but what is the mind of God that they should do. Sith then the Lord in this Scripture hath shewen his Ministers the way they must take to profit the people, if they have any mind that way, we take leave to proceed a little further in it, and inquire whether Godly Ministers all over the National Church (in common account, such with your self) are not far out of this way, to profit their people at all? and so are to be repro∣ved from that Scripture before opened to your ears? we appeal to you in this, do they lift up their voice like a Trumpet? do they open their mouths and speak against those horrible abho∣minations, they are eye and ear-witnesses of? They hear the name of their God pierced, to say no more, his day prophaned, presumptuously, openly before all Israel, and before the Sun, at noon day, rather all the day long; ay and som∣times in the place and time of hearing (& ad huc lex stertis?) And the day (for we will put it together, because where the Lords day goes down, mans day goes up, and where the Lords day hath its due elevation in the soul, as is proper for that day) there mans day, that hath the stamp or ordination of man for it, is cast out, for it hath its exaltation onely in that heart where Sa∣tans Throne hath his; we were saying, they see
the Lords day prophaned, Mans day honoured; they see and hear the word of his grace; the one∣ly means of Salvation reproached, contemned, vilified; Christ and his glorious Gospel made as light of, as we of that, we cast behind our backs, or tread under our feet? Notwithstand∣ing Mat. 10. 13. Acts 13. 46 these despisers, deriders, scorners of Christ and Salvation by him; these unworthy ones, that put the word of life from them, judging them∣selves unworthy of eternal life, these, we were saying, are invited to come to the Lords Table, and are taught to hold out their right thereunto, as to Gospel-fellowship, and to all Church-ad∣ministrations, by priviledge of their first birth, and upon account of their Infant-Baptism. How can he that is wholly void of a lively faith and true repentance, that hath nothing of the spirit of Christ, how can he receive Christ? Nay, he that is wholly possessed of sin and Sa∣than, how, is it possible he can be capable of Christ? What a filthy mixture is here, when without any choice the veriest Varlets openly fla∣gitious are admitted to the Lords-Table, whom no honest or ingenious man would admit to his own? And can we wonder now whence are Wars, Plagues, Droughts, Dearths? &c. Calv. 1 Cor. 11, 27. 30. v. Sirs, You cannot think your selves too deep∣ly charged in this matter, for you do, if you do as Mr. Hs. your fore-man and leader doth (which you professe to do) you make the Lords-Ta∣ble the very ubi, or Randezvouz of all the Doggs,
and Swine in the Parish, he admits all thither, come, who will come (and such wil come, and wil have no nay) howfilthy soever, yet clean enough, and guests well enough becomming the Lords-Table, though too nasty, and ill becomming ours, which was Calvin's p. 252. I think Calvin incomparably the wisest man that ever the French Church did injoy, Mr. Hooker Preface p. 3. &c. See Mr. Bolton Case of Consc. 252. complaint long ago, whereor you may have read, but we doubt you have not read it, at least not observed it, for had you so done, you could not do as Mr. Hs. doth, he doth not only admit these worst sort of beasts (for beasts in the shape of men, as you must grant, are the worst of all beasts) to the Lords-Table; but he tels us, That the sacred things dis∣pensed there, do more properly belong to such beasts, than to the sheep of his Pasture, his beloved, chosen, and faithfull people. Hear his words, To speak sincerely, if we should propose two men, one that is not in Covenant with Christ, and one tbat is, this Sacrament doth more ingeniously belong to the first. Ingeniously spoken, for so may we mock the mocker, and speak by contraries, for how could he speak more sinfully? But that worthy man, replieth unto him after this manner very well, Come ye Drunkards, Whore-Masters, Murderers, Dr. Drake and all the rabble of Hell, here is (ingenuous) sincere and comfortable Doctrine for you indeed. The Sa∣crament doth more (ingeniously) belong to you, than to any that are in Covenant with Christ. But it is not our work to make answer now, this we have done before as we could, and as matters under debate did require; here we are to shew our dis∣like
of these Doctrines, and our Ministers charge from the Lord to rise up in their might against them. Yet this we would speak here, that he groundeth this his ingenious position (for we may speak contraries, in this case, as he to the truth) upon this supposition, that actual receiving is a converting Ordinance: Or thus, The Sacrament is not onely food to nourish, but it is, as the word is, an immortal seed to beget to Christ. It is in vain, say our Godly Ministers, to put bread and wine into a dead mans mouth. Therefore an unrege∣nerate man dead in sin (namely the guilt of his sins, and the Circumcision of the flesh, (that is in Col. 2. 13. respect of the power of corrupt nature) is not to be admitted to the Lords Table. Let him be admitted to that Table, for it is not vain, saith Mr. H. to put bread and wine into a dead mans mouth; if it can quicken the dead, and recover life, as he believes it doth, and upon that presumption admitteth all to that Table, the wicked and ungodly, rather then holy and precious ones; for they need quickning, being dead and void of the first grace, more then the other weak ones (as the strongest feels themselves in their own strength, very weakness) need strengthning: And Sir, is not this your conceit also. Now we would refer the Reader for his satis∣faction at this point, to that, which the Lords four Worthies one after another, have replied to this—We had almost said monstrous conceit, being, as we conceive, as abhorrent to grace, as Monsters are to nature. That actual
receiving is converting; and crave leave humbly to give our opinion or perswasion in reference to those holy exhortations, and prayers are given forth there, before and after the action of recei∣ving, which may be through the spirit, as effectu∣al for conversion (say some of the godly) as those that are delivered from the Pulpit. We humbly conceive, no, and so we give our perswasion, That those concomitant duties, perfor∣med at the Lords Table, in the time of receiving, have not the stamp or Seal of God upon them for con∣version work. These shall effect that for which they were appointed, the strengthning the weak in faith, and increasing of grace already begun, not for the working, or begetting of grace, where it is not. It is true, many speak glorious things, what quicknings they have felt by the exhortati∣ons and prayers, they have heard at the burial of the dead, and amongst the living at the Lords Table. But we believe they have erred in their hearts, and have been wholly deluded in that mat∣ter; for most apparent it is, to those that can ob∣serve their walk: That whatever they say, there is no change wrought upon them thereby; but for the worse, being rendred more obdurate and seared; more, if more can be, earthly seasual, and Divellish, as they must needs be whose wisdom is not from above, and therefore do Idolize the word spoken at those times and places, which they contemn and reproach, spoken to them on the stated day from the Pulpit. And hence it Mat. 8. 22. Luke 9. 60. p. 425. was, as we conceive. That excellent Cartwright
would have neither Prayers, nor Sermons at Fu∣nerals, his reason is, There the dead will be stran∣gers from the life of God, and stubborn opposers Bez. 56. of the word of life, the Gospel of the grace of God; Ishmael wil be as studiously obsequious Gen. 25. 9. 35. ω. Gen. 50. about the burial of the dead, as Isaac was, and Esau, as Jacob; the Egyptians, as the Israelites; or to speak after our manner now adaies. They that never regarded a Sermon all their life long, will have one if they may have their will at the burial of their dead, and they that cast the Pearl of Ex∣hortation at their heel, or under foot, and rent them that bring it, will seem to make an high ac∣count of it at other times and places; Therefore said that worthy man, ob eam{que} causam preces, & consciones non esse, in funere adhibendas, quoniam exequiae, & funus ita procurari debent, ut tam in∣fideles, quam fideles, illi inter esse possunt. But holy things are not to be given to Dogs, neither are Pearls to be cast before Swine, such as are known prophane persons, enemies to the Crosse of Christ, deriders of the Word of his grace. Hence we would infer for our information, and the Readers if he need any, and to ratifie our perswasion. 1. That Believers and Infidels (if any such there be in a National Church, where all are ho∣ly) who ought to come together for the burial of the dead, ought not to come together in one place, where the signs and seals of Christs body and blood are given forth.
2. We infer, that the admission of prophane ones, deriders and scorners, to hear and see what is spo∣ken, and done at the Lords-Table, serveth to har∣den them more, and to build them up in their su∣perstitious conceits, as do the Prayers and Sermons at the burial of the dead: We are for the most part, as Idolatrous, as were the Jews, and as now the Heathen are, they worshipped with their faces Eastward, so do we now; witnesse the build∣ing our Chancels, our comming into the Church, the honour we give with our races Eastward, the more Eastward, the more honorable though at the back of the Preacher; the placing the body in the grave witnesseth our superstition also, as doth the placing of the L. Table if it be where it was wont to be, as we believe it is not among Believers; for 3. We infer in the third place, That what I∣dolaters did, and now do, we must not do: But the contrary, as the Lord taught his people Ido∣laters worshipped towards the East, his people should worship toward the West; for so he com∣manded his Temple to be built, the worshippers there should look towards the West, Ezek. 8. 16. The sum is this, and so we will contract, if we expect Gods blessing, keep we close to the way and means of his own prescribing, Good ends have straight ways, as holy and pure aims, carrying level therunto. Look we not as that worthy man saith, That God wil go out of his ordinary rode-way, to meet Mr. F. of . p. 175. us in our by-paths. God deals with us by means suitable to us, as reasonable creatures having rea∣son, though we have not grace: And because this
reason, not sanctified, is a dreadfull enemy to the power of Godliness; he deals with us as such sin∣ners, that are not onely indisposed to come to Christ that we may live, which makes our com∣ing to him impossible, as to ordinary means, wor∣king in their own strength; Therefore doth he by his word and spirit put forth towards the people of his choice, the efficacy of his power, for the immediate and especial working of those things in them, and by them, Read Dr. Owen p. 285 & which as rational creatures bound unto an orderly obedience, they are pressed & exhorted unto. Whence it is, That he who truly glorieth, glorieth in the Lord. For man doth nothing when he doth his best, but God doth it in him, and with him; God layeth his work before him, gives it him to do, & strength to do it. What a Master do his servants serve! He shews them their work, inableth them to do it, then pays them for doing it, working so in them, as if they did nothing (as indeed of them∣selves they do nothing but sin) and then rewards them, as if they had done al: O unspeakable grace! To shut up this Paragraph, and to give the rea∣son in brief why wee have been so long in it. 1. That we might through Gods blessing with it, beat off our selves and others from a fleshly car∣nal confidence in empty Titles and bare Forms, neglecting the while the power of Godliness. 2. That beholding the judgement that is writ∣ten, and now executed upon that mother Church, the Jews, we may hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously. What Circumcision and Sacrifi∣ces, and the Temple were to the Jews, the same
Baptism, the L. Supper, & frequenting our religi∣ous Assemblies are to us; And as the Jews, in the midst of all their dutes, had wholly laid aside Christ and Sanctification, so have generally chri∣stians now. They resting in Circumcision, and in the Law, are fallen from Christ, and are ignorant of the spirit; the very same may be said of us for∣mal Prtestants, we have turn'd al Gospel dispen∣sations into externals meerly (which is M. Burges his charge against us) and so are becom Christians of the flesh and not of the spirit: O take heed, saith that excellent man of this Epidemical disease, be not damned or trodden down in this crowd. Surely Mr. Hs. with the men of his way, and fleshly mind, have by their sayings and doings, greatly incouraged a carnal confidence in these externals. For what other use can there be made of their Popish Doctrines, whereof before, but that the Sacraments do confer grace ex opere ope∣rato from the very work done, and application of them to their mouths (you did read his Tenet be∣fore) Which made Melancthon wish, the very word Sacrament were removed out of the Church, because as people then were informed (and now are by men of Mr. H. way and judgement, perswasion and practise) they thought in the Elements of a Sacrament some inward super-natural force lay couched to save them: And therefore they took these Sacraments, as men would medicinal potions, that by an inward Physi∣cal power, produce their effects; by this means all vi∣sible Ordinances were turned into meer Idols: They attributed that to Baptism which belonged one∣ly
to Christs blood: They would give that glory to a Sacrament, which belonged only to Christ, and made as much of the linnen wherein Christs body lay, as of the body it self, mutato nomine de. We conclude, a godly Minister whose zeal is for God, and the good of his people, will keep close to Gods way, and stand fast in his counsel; he will not expect God should work by means: He never commanded, or ever came it into his heart, not by Prayers and Exhortations at his own Table; He hath not said to our best remem∣brance, that he wil convert any thereby. These shall serve for the inlivening and strengthning of grace already given, we may call the first grace, not for the begetting of it; Grace must be used put forth and exercised there, it is not gained there, being neither the time nor place for it. And so much for our fourth Argument, and why we were so large upon it; a godly Minister cannot but be much grieved, and stirred, hearing and see∣ing that, which obstructeth the way to our hea∣venly Canaan, Jerusalem, which is above. 5. A Godly Minister, he must speak out in these cases, he must lift up his voice like a Trum∣pet, he must open his mouth, and speak against such doings as these are, and are done in Gods house too, and before his Lords face, sitting as in a Chair of State there; he must speak aganst such horrible doings, si natura negat facit indig∣natio, as you know one did that was dumb, see∣ing a man offering to kill his father, he spake, who never spake before, what? will you kil my fa∣ther?
So it is with a Godly Minister, though tongue-tied before, or as Moses, though he be not a man of words, hut slow of speech, and of a slow tongue, yet hearing the name of his hea∣venly father blasphemed, his Lord called accur∣sed, those matters prophaned, or worse dealt with then if trampled under foot, si natura negat facit indignatio, he hath a zeal for his God, a compound of love and anger both; O how he loves his God who loved him first, and gave him to his Son! and his son so loved him, that he gave himself for him, and washed him in his blood; O how he loves his God, his Lord, and Christ! and now with what a fiery indignation, is he car∣ried out against those abhominable doings in his fathers house? truly with the very same anger, in his measure, as his Lord and Master was car∣ried out with, when he whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, making it, as now it is all over the Nation, a Den of Theeves. It is his zeal for his fathers house, &c. 6. A godly Minister must do it, because of the charge of the Lord unto him; If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my Jer. 15. 19. Ezek. 44. 23 mouth. They shall teach my people the difference be∣tween the holy and prophane, and cause men to dis∣cern between the clean, and the unclean: cause men to discern; if they will not see, they must be made to see what is as clear to be seen as the Sun-beam. See! there is a superstitious person, an observer of times, according to his own understanding: See! he cleaves to a bare form of religion, opposeth
the power with all his might; yet see, how he pres∣seth us to partake of holy things; cause him and her to see this, that these belong not to them; Surely a Minister of Christ defiles the Pulpit, and prophanes the holy things of God, if he doth not so do; her Priests have violated my law, and have prophaned my holy things: Hw so? They have put no difference between the holy and prophane neither have they shewed difference between the un∣clean Ezek 22. 26. and the clean. It is a token of sore wrath powring down upon a people, Thy Watchmen are blind, they have no discerning, they see no difference, and they can make none betwixt the precious and the vile; and so as to Gospel-administrations, they deal with all alike, as was said, but with the wicked more kindly. This is a sign of the sorest wrath, that can be in∣flicted on this side hell; The giving of the peo∣ple Pastors after their own hearts, brutish ones, who seek not the Lord; a sign the people are gi∣ven Jer. 10. 21. up into a reprobate mind, an obstinate spirit, having cast the word of the Lord behind them, now they have Teachers suitable to their hearts lusts; like Ahab they are, and now they shall have four hundred false Prophets to teach fals∣hood and please their lusts; and but one, that speaks the truth, and with him they shall deal as Ahab with Micaiah. But it is Gods mercy to the good, whom he hath made good, they shall have such Teachers as shall speak to them for their good; as David had a Nathan; Asa an Hanani; Jehosaphat a Jehu, the son of that god∣ly
Father. O it is a great mercy from God the Lord of the Harvest, to have Pastors given us after his own heart, and not after ours, till our hearts be changed; who can according to the Jer. 3. 15. charge of the Lord, put a difference between the precious and the vile, and cause men to discern between the clean and the unclean. It may be said here, If a Minister shall so do, he may shew his godliness in so doing, but no point of discretion. He cannot well shew himself a truly godly man, and not a truly discreet man; and yet, if he have lesse of the Serpent, and more of the Dove, there will be no lack. But why doth he not shew himself discreet? It will be answered, because he will stir up the peoples anger and in∣dignation against him; for they cannot indure how bad soever they be, to have any difference put betwixt them and the good, specially in point of Church-administrations; for they were baptized, and are all holy every one of them. To this the answer is easie; he is the discreet man, that manageth all his matters full up, in desire and indeavours, to the charge and com∣mand of his God; doth his duty and feareth not, knowing whom he hath trusted, whose he is, and Sin and Grace act most like themselves when they act against all op∣position. Mr. Caryl on sib. 9 ver. 4. whom he serveth; he remembers his Lords pro∣mise, as sure to him now, as when it was first made to Jeremiah; I will make thee unto this peo∣ple a fenced brazen Wall, they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: For I am with thee to save thee, & to deliver thee, saith the
Lord: This is a point of sound discretion, to do Jer. 15. 20. Ezek. 3. 8. what the Lord commands us to do, come on it what will. The conclusion is peremptory, we ought to obey God rather then men; and fearing God as we ought, we cannot but be fearlesse of men: And even of these men now set apart, and severed from others, as the Lepers were because of their filthi∣nesse, wherein they wallow like Swine: Shall this Godly Minister be honoured so doing his duty, and full up to his charge, if ever by the glorious work of the spirit and word upon their hearts, they be brought to themselves, and to see their own nastiness; for you know a Godly mans design is the same in these matters with his Lords; He commands this difference to be made, that we may have a discerning into our state and condition, and bethink our selves what is to be done to get out of it; for it will not be safe sure for us to remain among the uncircumci∣sed and vile ones, with whom we must be num∣bred while such we are; so this making a diffe∣rence serveth as to the end, and intendment of it, as delivering up to Sathan, did for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; And this we thought fit to adde, thereby to take off if it could be, that heavy charg of uncharitableness, and rash judging every god∣ly Minister stands under, while he is doing his du∣ty, according to the charge and command of his God; He can say and take God to record upon his Soul, as to the truth of that he saies; That he
knows no possible way to make them precious, who are now vile, as we all were while we were in the state of nature; but by speaking and doing full up in desire to all that his Lord hath charged upon him. They are corrupt men in their Do∣ctrine or practices, or both, who corrupt their hearers, and so destroy themselves; It is daw∣bing putting light for darkness, and darkness for light; It is the seeing Visions of Peace for us while we walk contrary to God, are resisting of him and fighting with him, all this destroies. But while a Minister, as every Godly Minister doth, stands in Gods counsel, and causeth his people to hear Gods words, he shall profit the peo∣ple, turning them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings, for so saith the Lord. Your worthy brothers words shall put a close to this, Beleeve it, no Soul receiveth good by the word but that soul that thinks every word of the Lord good and labours as it is proper to his condition, to apply it, he is willing to hear all Thunder and Cannon-shot, Mr. Ford of adop. p. 265. from the word as his case may require; but this is the cursed pride of our hearts, when we please our selves in our sins, we will hear no Minister, except he will sing a cursed requiem to our spirits, not yet made tender by that Thunder and Cannon-shot from the word.
CHAP. V. WE have two words more, both relating to this charge of the Lord, that every man in his place may do his duty, and live up to it, having spoken these, we shall close this Treatise. A Minister is bound to speak home in particu∣lar, and say as the case may be, Thou art the man,  the vile person and must be separated, and not Omnis actio fit per cotum aiu in sacri∣ actione vel maxie loum habet. Dctri∣na omnis prpo∣sita in genere versatur adhuc quasi in too re∣moto, nec potest ad ipsam ani∣mam pertingero sed cum specia∣tim accomoda∣tur quasi in do∣mum ipsius mentem venit, & illam con∣tingit & pene∣trat, Dr. Dav. in col. cap. 1. 21. pag. 108. Dolus versatur in generalibus. dealt with as if he were precious, you have a say∣ing, as we have heard, that Medicina non curat hominem, sed Socratem, Physick doth not cure men under that general notion, but this or that man in particular; so the word like a plaister to the wounded man, and a potion to the sick man, must be put home, else it profits not, and this a Minister stands charged to do, to the very utmost he can do; It is not fire in general that burns, but this or that fire, so it is not sin in general that humbles me, or damneth me, but it is my sin, which if not repented of, and humbled for, will certainly do it; it is not repentance in general, but my repentance for my particular sins, that is a means sanctified of God for my turning; the like we may say of faith, it is not faith in general that will save me; but my faith laying hold on Christ, as with my own hand, emptied of all that which filled it before, it is that which saveth. The Divel opposeth not a general faith, but a particular faith, because this brings Christ home.
Actions are of singulars, an universal man cannot reason, nor see nor hear; it is that man and this man that sees and hears, and reasons; particulars are operative, speaking to men in particular, that his words may look every one in the face; as the eyes of a Picture seems to do, this being accord∣ing to the mind of God, may by his blessing pre∣vail with us; be that preacheth otherwise, that is, preacheth in general, he works in us but a con∣fused knowledge of sin in general; so of repen∣tance, of humiliation of faith, all in the general. And so perhaps a man may account himself a sin∣ner in the general, and as yours, a believer in the general, and a Disciple at large: but if ever he be saved, and a beleever indeed, he must be a sinner in particular, and in his own eyes the vi∣lest of many, the chief, or first of sinners, and he must renounce that vain conceit, through your 1 John 1. 1. means, he had of himself, counting himself ac∣cording to the rates had of men in the Mar∣ket of the National Church, a Beleever without Faith, a Disciple with-out Discipline, a Saint without Holinesse: It is particular preaching that will doe good, faithful dea∣ling with mens souls: you have heard and per∣haps found it so by experience, pray you see you make use of it: If a man be fast asleep (as your Nominal Beleevers are fast asleep in sin) and you would awaken him, you must call him by his name, Richard, John, or Thomas, you must speak particularly to him, and see whether that will not awaken him, which a greater noise will
not do. Verily your Disciples and Saints must be particularly dealt with, else they will never prove Disciples indeed, till a thistle proves a sig∣tree. Let a godly Minister do what he can, yet we will put it off from us, as they did, for we have the same naughty hearts as they had, When Mat. 21. 40. the Lord of the Vine-yard cometh, what will he do to those Husbandmen? that have so villanously dealt with him? They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men; not thinking the Lord spake of them; we can bear any thing till it be put home to our selves, it is the burthen laid up∣on my back that presseth me; but when these Husbandmen understood the Lord spake it of them, that they should be miserably destroyed, Luke 20 16. then they said, God forbid, and the very same hour they sought to lay hands on him, for they perceived, that he had spoken this Parable against them; and this brings us to our other words, so brief we would be, and then an end. I a Minister shall resolve in the strength of his  God, to act according to his Commission and ful upto his charge, let him look to find his people all that are haters of God, and of the word of his grace, haters of him, and dealing despitefully with him; for the wicked cannot indure to be dealt withall after the rate of wicked men, but as they are rated and reputed, being baptized in a Church, for Believers, Disciples, and Saints, under that notion you must deal with them; if you mean to please them; if a Minister shall tell them, as he must needs do, if he be godly, that
they are meerly abused, and made to believe a loud lie being made to believe, that they are Be∣lievers, Disciples, and Saints, for they might as wel, and as truly have been told, that a Thorn, is a Vine; and a Thistle, a Fig-tree; a Wolf, a Sheep; and a Lyon, a Lamb; we were saying, if a Minister deal plainly and as the truth is, else he shall not profit them at all, then let him look for all the hard usage that is imaginable, and to be accounted a troublesome man; or to speak in Je∣remiah's words, and as he found it to be, a man Job 21. 31. pag. 816. of contention to the whole earth, Jer. 15 10. we must take in that learned mans exposition of those words, Why was Jeremiah a man of strife and con∣tention? What? Because of his pronenesse to con∣tention, or because he was of a quarrelsome spirit? No his contentiousnesse was not from his disposition, but from his Commission, not from the temper of his spirit, but from his calling, he was a quiet and a peaceable Prophet, but he was commissioned to pro∣phesie terrours and troubles, he was sent forth to de∣clare the way of that people to their faces; and he was faithfull in doing it, he spared none, he put a diffe∣rence betwixt the precious and the vile, and there∣fore though he medled not in buying or selling, in gi∣ving or taking upon Usury, though he had no worldly negotiations, nor mingled himself with those affairs, which usually cause strife and contention among men yet he was a man of contention. O this is a grievous work to tel those Believers, Disciples, and Saints, being instated to, and possessed of their Saint∣ship by priviledge of their first birth onely to tell
these; if this be all they have to shew for their Saint-ship, that they are Wolves, Dogs, and Swine indeed. And truly, as this is a Ministers duty to tell them thus, come on it what will; so is it their misery not to be told it, their misery we say it again, and their curse too; for by this means this flattering of them into a Fools Paradise, ma∣king them believe what they are not, to be Belie∣vers, Disciples or Saints, as if their Minister should make them beleeve they are Kings and Emperours, whereas they are the basest slaves and oneliest beggars: by this means they hear nothing of their own waies and practises, and so are deprived of the greatest benefit of friendship, and humane society, faithfull admonition. The Job 21. 18. Lord threatens it as one of the sorest judgments, Hos. 4. 4. Let no man strive, he doth not mean it of corporal strife, or of striving with blows, but of strife by convictions and arguments, so its ex∣pounded in the next words. Let no man strive or reprove another, to reprove another is to strive with him for his good, and it is one of the saddest reproofs (so speaketh that excellent man) and greatest evils that can fall upon a man, when God saith, Let no man reprove another, when God saith of a sinner he shall not be reproved: Its more then probable, that he hath said of his sin, it shall not be pardoned. To be reproved hath so much good in it, that to be reproved, is better then to be lo∣ved. Open rebuke is better then secret love, faith∣full are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an Prov. 27. 5. enemy are deceitfull: By the wounds of a friend, he means not sword-wounds, but word-wounds,
as those blows that a friend giveth by rebuking. But yet the kisses of an enemy, that is, his flatte∣ries and soothings are as delightful to the flesh as they are deceitful and destructive. It is a Prince∣like thing to do wel, and yet to hear ill for so do∣lng; but it is a slave-like thing to do ill, and yet to be desirous to hear well. To be a Professour or Protestant (such the Orthodox were called at first, as you read in holy Fox his Martyr, p. 989. making a solemn protestation against these Arti∣cles of Popish Religion, which were to be establi∣shed) to be a Protestant in tongue therwith to pro∣test for God and his truth; and worse then an In∣fidel, protesting against God and his truth in their life, as all they do, and cannot possibly do otherwise, who can give no other evidence of their Christianity, but that they were baptized: this is their Anchor-hold, and onely lean-to, and do they never so foolishly (as you know who did, yet they could not indure to be called fools) so these, do they never so wickedly, yet they must not be numbred amongst the wicked, but be dealt with according to the work of the righteous. An infallible note how to know a wicked and unrea∣sonable man, a washed Christian, but indeed hath renounced his Christianity. We draw to a close, a godly Minister if he shews himself such a one, will with the same liber∣ty (as he said) rebuke sinners, as they take in sin∣ning, openly, and not in a parable, or in the clouds, by remote intimations, but directly and to their faces, for they sin in the face of every man. He wil follow St. Paul, I please all men in all things 1 Cor. 15. 33 Rom. 14 2.
not seeking my own profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved, he will please his neighbour for his good to his edification, and not with lies for his hurt to his destruction, making him believe, he is a Believer, a Disciple, or Saint, when he is no more such an one, then Gall is Honey, a Bramble a Vine, a Thistle a Fig-tree, an Ape a man. He knows full wel this plain dealing cannot be plea∣sing, and therefore cannot be profitable; may be, he knows he shal be persecuted as an enemy for speaking the truth; he looks for it, it must needs be so, so they dealt with his Lord and Ma∣ster before him, and so they will deal with all them that follow their Lord, treading in his steps. They are well assured, if their Lord Christ were now amongst us in the fashion of a servant, and in a low condition, as once he was, and should convince men of their wickednesse, as searching∣ly as once he did, he would doubtlesse be the most hated man upon the earth; so must they be who in desire and indeavours do as he did, as to that matter of sharp and cutting reproof. Men may ask what is truth, as Pilate did, but as he could not, no more can they stay their answer, or John 18. 38. indure to hear it. But a godly man is at a point for that, he seeks not his own profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved, and rejoiceth to go through dishonour and evil report for righ∣teousnesse sake, and doing his duty, and com∣forts himself in the assurance of approbation from God, and protection from him. The words of the Lord to Jeremiah, and Ezekiel are
very observable, where he not onely cheareth up the fainting Prophet to his duty, but threatens, if he do it not. Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, speak unto them all that I command thee, be not dismaid at their faces, lest I confound thee be∣fore them, Chap. 1. 17. Lest danger should deter him from speaking to their faces, the Lord sets a greater danger before his face; if he did not speak what he had in commition from his God to speak, lest I confound thee before them. And so to Ezekiel, I send thee to a Rebellious Nation that hath rebelled against me, be not afraid of them nor of their words though Bryars and Thorns be with thee, and thou do∣est dwell amongst Scorpions, yet be not afraid of them; but speak my words, and be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house. The Lord God will Ezek. 2. 4, 5, 6, 3. 7, 8. account that man rebellious, that will not re∣prove, and that cuttingly, whom he bids re∣prove. Surely God will account no better of those Ministers, but as of rebellious ones, whom he sends out in his name, and Authority to fight against the corruptions of the World; and in the mean time, they shall hang down the head, and be tongue-tied. How ill will God take it when we shall have more boldnesse to destroy our selves, and to do Sathans work, then a Minister of Christ shall have to save us, and to serve his God. We will leave these words upon your thoughts, repeating them once more, Son of man be not thou rebelli∣ous.
The Almighty God accounts it Rebellion in his Ministers not to do as he commands them to do. Reprove sinners to their faces, and look well to it, speak what I bid you, speak, lest I con∣found thee before them. Sir, We have been the longer here in evincing a Ministers duty to cry aloud against the abho∣minations committed in Gods-house; That we might evidence also our tenderest respects to you and your godly brethren in your way. We are very tender over you, because of the judgement that is written, and is hastning upon you; if re∣pentance of what is past, and amendment of mat∣ters cleane out of course for present prevent not: Surely, if we understand any thing of the Lords mind revealed to us in the Scriptures, he will ere long be very severe with you, with you I say Stewards in his house, and in common account faithfull and godly; yea, and so reputed by the godly. He will not indure you long conniving at, yea suffering such abhominable doings in his house. The Lord doth not so narrowly observe, what the filth and scummy and sink of the Nation do; we mean what the foolish brutish people do, nor Jer. 5. 4, 5. what the garbidge or sink of corrupt Ministers do: No, he observes what you do that pass for godly and faithful Stewards. He observes what ye do, and be well aware of it. He will either mend you, or end you, as the saying is. Ye shal
not be long Stewards in his house, unlesse ye walk more like Stewards there: Think on it we beseech you, and remember the judgements of God, begin at his Sanctuary, for there Reforma∣tion must begin also. And bear with them at the least, who feel the weight or their charge, and must do thereafter, these words of the Lord be∣ing a terrour to them: Lest I confound thee before them. FINIS.
