B3240 E465_5 99864613 162267
A BLOUDY FIGHT AT SEA Disputed and maintained by the Royall Navy, under the Con∣duct and Command of His Highnesse the Prince of VVales, with the exact and true particulars thereof, the number kil∣led, wounded, and thrown over-board. And the further pro∣ceedings of the Earl of Warwick concerning the Prince, with a Letter to his Highness, from the English Sea-men, and their resolution thereupon. Also, exceeding good Newes from the Isle of Wight for Peace. depiction of the sea battle between the Swallow and the Admiral depiction of the ship the 'Swallow' The Swallow. depiction of the ship the 'Admiral' Admiral. Printed for R. Emerson, 1648. Sept ye 28
BLOUDY NEWES From the Princes NAVIE Declaring The proceedings of the Revolted Marriners, and Sea-Royalists, and their bloudy Fight neer Goree Harbour. Noble Sir, THe Princes Royall Fleet continues their great insolent and deboystness to the Flemmings, and runs ashore at their owne will and plea∣sure,
drinking and disordering themselves, and fighting with the Dutch-men, insomuch, that the Boars, and o∣ther of the Inhabitants began to rise, forced them a∣board their ships, and are now resolved to suffer no more to land. Whereupon the Sea Royalists began to mutiny a∣mongst themselves, and at the last fell into such an a∣gony and passion, That they encountered each other, fought resolutely, disputing their Decks with halfe Pikes, Musquets, Swords, and other Warlike weapons, killing neer vpon twenty, and wounded many, throw∣ing them over ship-board into the Sea. In which insurrection some of the Commanders in chief were wounded, who used all means possible to beget a calm to lay so great and bloudy a storm, and after great diligence, and much importunity therein, they prevailed, promising a generall Act of Oblivion to all the Abettors, Fomenters, and others, who had a hand in the said Riot or Insurrection. The aforesaid differences being composed, a Letter were sent to the Prince, purporting, the great wants of the Marriners for want of money, and their mutining in the ships, which caused a great distraction amongst them, de∣siring some considerable summe to satisfie their Desires: whereupon it was ordered, that the prizes taken at Sea should be sold for payment of the Marriners. A sudden Engagement is expected between the E. of Warwick, and the Princes Navy, for we hear that the Parliaments Fleet are floting upon the Neptune Seas towards Goree in Zealand, to sight the revolted ships. Amsterdam 26. Sept. 1648.
A Declaration of the further proceedings of the Treaty, between his Majesty and the Commissioners. SIR, the Commissioners of parl. for themselves and attendants are putto a very large expence of money, which is necessarily required for the carrying on this great and publike employment, and therefore do desire the parliament to supply them with the re∣mainder of the 10000. l. with convenient speed. As for the begining and some dayes progresse in the Treaty you may be pleased to take notice of the passages between his Majesty, and the parliaments Commissioners, meeting in the Treaty Chamber the 18 of this in∣stant Septem. in the Forenoon little businesse was dispatcht, onely the Commission read of the parliaments Commissioners, and some introduction made into the Propositions, after which his Majesty went to dinner and met the Commissioners again in the afternoon and after they were set, The Commis. proceeded to this effect. May it please your Maiesty, Having made known our Commissions to treat perso∣nally with your Maj. upon the propositions formerly presented at Hampton-Court, as they concern the Kingdoms of England & Ireland. And this Treaty to be for 40 days, beginning this pre∣sent, and to proceed in the first place upon the propositions fol∣lowing in order, viz. For recalling all Oaths, Declarations, &c. And to receive your Maj. Answer in writing. Then his Mai. desired nothing to be binding, but what should be agreed upon in writing, which was assented to. The Commissioners then desired his Maiesty to give his Roy∣all assent to this proposition insuing, That whereas both Houses of Parliament have bin necessitated to undertake a war in their just and lawfull defence, &c. An Act of parliament may passe, whereby all Oaths, Declarations, &c. against both or either hou∣ses, or against any for adhering unto them, &c. to be declared null, and that publikely intimated in all parish Churches in all your Maiesties Dominions of England and Ireland.
Then his Majesty desired to have the Propositions of the English and Irish intirely together. To which the Commissioners answered, That the Proposi∣tions themselves were formerly presented to your Maiesty at Hampton Court we conceive are in your Maiesties hands, ex∣cepting that of the Court of Wards, delivered since in the Isle of Wight, &c. what concerns our instructions we shall doe; but we have no warrant from our Houses to do that. And to the latter part of the second paper delivered in the morning, we shall acquaint the Houses, that no agreement put in writing, be binding till the conclusion of the whole Treaty, unlesse it shall be otherwise especially agreed. On Tuesday Septemb. 19. the King and the Commissio∣ners met again in the same order that they had done the day before, and treated both forenoon and afternoon. None of them do go to the King at all, but in the Treaty Chamber, and altogether publikely, where there are made gallant speeches. And the 19. Sep. his Majesty brought in a paper to this effect. CHARLES R. In answer to your proceedings the 18 Sep. concerning the recalling of all the Oaths, Declarations and Proclamations heretofore had, or to be had, against both or either Houses of Parliament, or against any for adhering unto them, or for doing, or executing any Office, place or charge by any au∣thority derived from them: And all Judgments, Indite∣ments. Outlawries and Inquisitions in any of the said Cau∣ses, and all Grants thereupon, made or. hnd to be made or had, be declared null, suppressed and forbidden, and that this be publikely intimated in all Parish Churches, and other places needfull within his Majesties Dominions of England and Ireland. His Majesty concerning that expression that both Hou∣ses
of Parliament have been necessitated to undertake a war for their just defence, which seemes to lay the blame of the bloud spilt on his Majesty; therefore his Majesty desires that part may be referred to be treated on last. Septemb. 19. 1648. The Commissioners then put in a paper to this effect. For our giving the Propositions intirely together, we find not our selves warranted to present our desires concerning all the Pro∣positions at once, or in any sort to treat them but in Order, but what we have drawn out for our own use, wee shall give your Maiesty to expedite the Treaty. And this draught is separated from what concernes the Kingdom of Scotland. And this we do not in way of Treaty, but out of desire to sa∣tisste your Majesty. VVe humbly desire your Majesties Answer to our paper deli∣vered yesterday concerning the Proposition for recalling all Oaths, &c. and other proceedings thereupon against the Parlia∣ment, or those that acted by their Authority. So that the business that thus holds in Dispute is, about the matter of the fault, upon whom the guilt of the bloud shed in these wars shall be laid, and how as to freeing his Majesty, which his Majesty would have done, and about this the Commissioners have written to the House. There is as yet nothing denyed by the King to be passed; though nothing actually granted. But the great rub is not yet removed. His Majesty is loath to charge himselfe with the guilt of the bloud spilt. The Commissioners are very faithfull to their Instructions.
Postscript. SIR, THis morning his Majesty came somewhat early to the Treaty, and sitting in the Chair of State at the up∣per end of the Table, He rose up, and made a Speech to the Commissioners of both Houses, intimating, That it was His Majesties gracious will and pleasure to passe an Act, for justifying the proceedings of Parliament in the late War, and for declaring all Oaths, Declarations, Proclamations, and other proceedings against it to be void, to the end, that no obstruction whatsoever, may hinder or indanger this blessed work in hand, that so all differences may be composed, all jealou∣sies removed, and the peace of this languishing Kingdom firmly setled and united. This gallant speech took great impression in the hearts of the Commissioners, who forthwith dispatched a Messenger to the Parliament, to communicate the joyfull tydings from the King. Newport 25. Septem. 1648. FINIS.
