B3916 R203420 99896499 132231
THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE: BEING A Geographical and Historical Description of those Parts of EUROPE, which are most Famous in this Present War, Viz. I. Flanders, II. The Rhine, III. Savoy, IV. Catalonia, V. Hungary, VI. Greece. With an Account of the several Revolutions of those Places, either by Conquest or Treaties of Peace, particularly from the Treaty of Munster in 1648. to this present time. By A. BOYER, Gent. London, Printed for Tho. Salusbury, at the King's-Arms near St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXCIV.
The CONTENTS. SECT. I. Flanders. GEneral Division. p. 1. Chap. I. Of the Ne∣therlands in General. p. 1. Chap. II. Of the Catho∣lick Provinces or Flanders in general. p. 3. Art. 1. Of the County of Flanders. p. 6 Art. 2. Of the Dukedom of Brabant p. 22 Art. 3. Of the Marqui∣sate of the Holy Em∣pire p. 35 Art. 4. Of the Lordship of Malines p. 37 Art. 5. Part of the Duke∣dom of Gelderland p. 38 Art. 6. Of the Dukedom of Limburg p. 48 Art. 7. Of the Bishoprick of Liege p. 42 Art. 8. Of the County of Namur p. 48 Art. 9. Of the Dukedom of Luxemburg p. 51 Art. 10. Of the County of Hainault p. 55 Art. 11. Of Cambresis. p. 63 Art. 12. Of Artois p. 65 Sect. II. The Rhine. Chap. I. Description of the River Rhine in general p. 73 Art. 1. Of Alsatia p. 75 Art. 2. The Palatinate of the Rhine p. 85 Art. 3. The Archbishop∣rick of Mayence or Mentz p. 95 Art. 4. The Archbishop∣rick of Treves or Triers p. 98 Art. 5. The Archbishop∣rick of Cologne p. 102 Art. 6. The Succession of Cleves and Juliers p. 108 Sect. III. The Duke of Sa∣voy's Dominions. Chap. 1. Savoy p. 121 Chap. 2. Piedmont p. 132 Chap. 3. County of Nice p. 146 Chap. 4. Montferrat p. 149
Sect. IV. Catalonia p. 153 Art. 1. Description of the Places of Note under the Spaniards p. 156 Art. 2. Catalonia be∣longing to the French p. 162 Sect. V. Hungary. Art. 1. Hungary p. 166 Art. 2. Transylvania p. 190 Art. 3. Podolia p. 194 Art. 4. Moldavia p. 196 Art. 5. Walachia p. 198 Art. 6. Bulgaria p. 200 Art. 7. Servia p. 202 Art. 8. Rascia p. 205 Art. 7. Bosnia p. 207 Art. 10. Sclavonia p. 209 Art. 11. Croatia p. 212 Art. 12. Dalmatia p. 214 Sect. VI. Greece p. 223 Chap I. Albania p. 227 Chap. II. Epirus p. 230 Chap. III. Macedon p. 232 Chap. IV. Thessaly p. 235 Chap. V. Achaia p. 238 Chap. VI. Morea p. 245 Chap. VII. Of the Islands about Greece p. 262 ERRATA. PAge 4 l. 1 read Graveline, p. 33 l. 7 r. Neerlanden, p. 65 r. Art. XII. p. 134 l. 20 r. Masseran.
THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE SECT. I. THE Places of Europe which are now most famous for Great Actions and Warlike Exploits may be reduced to six, viz 1. Flanders. 2. The Course of the Rhine. 3. Savoy and Piedmont. 4. Catalonia. 5. Hungary. 6. And Greece. I shall begin with Flanders be∣cause it is the most remarkable of them all, as being the Field where our Glorious Monarch has so often signaliz'd his Conduct and Bravery at the Head of our Gallant Englishmen. CHAP. I. Of the XVII. Provinces or Netherlands in general. THese Provinces were known to the Romans under the NameName. of Belgium, at present they are called, sometimes, Low-Countries, sometimes Netherlands, and sometimes, Lower Germany, from their Si∣tuation on the lower part of the Rhine. They are bounded on the South with France, on the East with Germany,Bounds. on the North and West with the Ocean.
Their extentExtent. is from the 49th d. 10. m. to the 53. d. 37. m. of Latitude; and from the 21. to the 26. d. 28. m. of Longitude; in form somewhat Triangular; being in length from the Northest parts of Gro∣ningen, to the South parts of Luxemburg 264 miles; and in breadth from the West parts of Artois to the East parts of Lux∣emburg 192 miles. Division.They are divided into XVII Provinces, which are, IV. Dukedoms, viz. Brabant. Limburg. Luxemburg. Gelderland. VII. Counties, viz. Holland. Zealand. Zutphen. Flanders. Artois. Hainault. Namur. I. Marquisate of the Holy Empire. V. Lordships or Ba∣ronies, viz. Mechlin or Malines. Ʋtrecht. Over-Issel. Friesland. Groningen. To which we may add the Archbishoprik of Cambray, and the Bishoprick of Liege, which are inclosed in them. These Provinces were first Conquered by the Ro∣mans,History. afterwards by the French, and then divided into several Governments depending on the Crown of France, till the year 1305. reduced to one by Philip Duke of Burgundy (of which house is the King of Spain) Then they passed to the Crown of Spain by Mary Henrietta Heiress of the House of Burgundy. The Emperor Charles the Vth (having gotten from Francis I. King of France, his Prisoner at Ma∣drid a renunciation of the Old right the French had to Flan∣ders) was sole Master of these Provinces; But in the year 1581. some of them openly revolted from Philip II. his Son,
King of Spain, having two years before made their Ʋnion at Ʋtrecht to secure themselves from the Cruelties and Barba∣rous usage of the Duke of Alva their Governour. Since that, there are in the Netherlands two very different States; the one is a Republick called the Ʋnited Provinces or Holland, (from the chief of them) The other belongs to the King of Spain, under the name of Catholick-Provinces or Flanders (the principal of them) but is possessed partly by the Spaniards, partly by the Hollanders, and partly by the French, as you shall see in its proper place. The Ʋnited Provinces are eight in number, viz. 1. The County of Holland. 2. The County of Zealand. 3. The Barony of Ʋtrecht. 4. The Dukedom of Gelderland in part. 5. The County of Zutphen. 6. The Barony of Over-Issel. 7. The Barony of Groningen. 8. The Barony of West-Friesland. These Provinces being not, as yet, the Seat of War, 'twould be beyond my purpose to say any thing more of them, and therefore I pass to the Catholick-Provinces. CHAP. II. Of the Catholick-Provinces or Flanders in general. THE Spanish Netherlands, or the nine Catholick Provinces, commonly called by the general nameName. of Flanders, (the principal of these Provin∣ces,) including the two Fees of the Empire, viz. the Archbishoprick of Cambray,Bounds. and the Bishoprick of Liege, are bounded on the North with the Ocean and the Ʋnited Provinces; On the West or, North-West, with the Ocean: On the South and South-West with France: and on the East with Germany. Their ExtentExtent. South and North is about 140 miles, from Thionville in Luxemburg to Boisleduc in Brabant, and
about 150 West and East, from Gravelins in Flanders to Aix la Chapelle on the confines of the Dukedom of Juliers. Flanders is generally one of the best and most plentiful Countries in the World;Quality. extremely Po∣pulous and full of excellent Towns and Villages; its Air is good; its Soil most Fertile; the People good na∣tured, hardy and laborious. This Countrey was once so very rich,Riches. that the King of Spain's Reve∣nues from thence, when he had all, was greater than any Prince in Christendom, the King of France except∣ed; but at present the charge of keeping is much greater than the Revenues. The strengthStrength. of these parts is ve∣ry great; but its best and strongest places are in the possession of the French; and for a long time the Spaniards have not been able to keep those they have still, without the help either of the English, Dutch or Branden∣burghers. The TraffickTraffick. in Flanders has been always very great, but now nothing so much as formerly, by reason of the prodigious increase of the Ʋnited Provinces in these late years. It chiefly consists of several sorts of Manufactures, as rich Tapestries, fine Camlets, Ser∣ges, coloured Says, Mock Velvets, great quantities of fine Linnen, Damasks, Cambricks, Taffaties, Points, Laces, and striped Stuffs for Beds, which are transported into many Countries; all sorts of Ribbons, Bastard Sattins, and many other things of this Nature, made at the Cities of Mons, Ghent, Brussels, Ypres, Lille, Bruges, Mechlin, Valenciennes, &c. The InhabitantsInhabitants. of these Provinces consist of Flemmings, Walloons, Spaniards, with some intermixture of French, Dutch, and English, especially at present. The ReligionReligion. among them is various, according to their several Na∣tions. In those places which are in the Possession of the Spaniards and French, that of the Roman Church is only pub∣lickly allowed, and the Protestants tolerated out of Policy by the Spaniards only. On the contrary in those places that belong to the Hollanders, the Protestant is only publickly ex∣ercis'd, and the Popish suffered in private. The Archbishop∣ricks and Bishopricks are all Roman Catholick. The LanguagesLanguage. most generally used in these Parts are the Walloon and Flemmish; The Wal∣loon
is a corrupt French, spoken in Artois, Hainault, Namur, Luxemburg, French-Flanders, part of Brabant, and the Bishop∣rick of Liege. The Flemmish or Low-Dutch, is a Dialect of the German, spoken in the Marquisate, Mechlin, part of Brabant, Flanders, and part of the Bishoprick of Liege. The Spanish is also much in use among the King of Spain's Subjects, and the French among the better sort; The Ger∣man has been lately introduced there by the Duke of Bavaria Governour of the Spanish Netherlands. The Principal RiversRivers. in these Parts are the Maes or Meuse, and the Scheld or Escaut. 1. The Maes Lat. Mosa has its source in France near Mount de Vauge in the Bishoprick of Langres in Champagne, passes through Charlemont, Bouvines, Dinant, Namur, (where it re∣ceives the River Sambre) Liege, Maestricht, Venlo, Grave and Dort, and falls into the Wahal (a branch of the Rhine) near Hervoerden, where it takes the name of Merwe, and having form'd an Island called Ysselmonde near Dordrecht, runs into the Ocean. 2. The Scheld has its source in Picardy a Province of France, and having wash'd the Towns of Cambray, Valenciennes, Tournay, Ghent, and Antwerp; and embraced the Island of Zealand, it falls into the Ocean big with the Waters of the Rivers, Lys, Lieve, Dendre and Rupel. In these Provinces are two Archbishopricks,Archbishop∣ricks. 2. viz. Cambray and Mechlin; and eleven Bishop∣ricks,Bishopricks. 11. viz. Antwerp, Boisleduc, Bruges, Ghent, Ruremond and Ypres, under Mechlin; Namur, Arras, St. Omers, and Tourney under Cambray; and Leige under Cologne in Germany. Here are also 155 Cities or Walled Towns,Towns 155. besides those in Cambray and part of Gelderland,Chief City. (and 6867 Villages,Villages 6867. besides the Castles, Forts and Noble Mens Houses which are almost innumerable. The Chief City of the whole is Antwerp, but Brussel is now adays the most remarkable, being the seat of the Spanish Governour. The Chief City of the French is Mons; of the Hollanders, Boisledue or Maestricht; and of the Bishop of Liege, Liege. The GovernmentGovernment. of this Country belongs by right to the Spaniards, but at present they have only the Marquisate, Mechlin,Spanish. about 3 quar∣ters of Brabant, nigh half of Limburg and Flan∣ders, a quarter of Hainault, with some of Gelderland. The French
have Artois, Cambray, Luxemburg, Namur, three quarters of Hainault,French. nigh half of Flanders, and a quarter of the Bishoprick of Liege. The Hol∣landers have above half of Limburg,Dutch. above a quarter of Brabant, a sixth part of Flanders, and a small part of the Bishoprick of Liege. The Bishop of Liege has above half of that Province. Flanders comprehending the Cambresis the Country of Liege,Division. and part of Gelderland is di∣vided into twelve parts, viz. 1. The County of Flanders Ghent Bish. 2. The Dukedom of Brabant Brussel Capital. 3. The Marquisat of the Holy Empire Antwerp Bish. 4. The Lordship of Mechlin Mechlin Archbp. 5. Part of the Dukedom of Gelderland Gelders. 6. The Dukedom of Limburg Limburg 7. The Country of Liege Liege Bish. 8. The County of Namur Namur Bish. 9. The Dukedom of Luxemburg Luxemburg. 10. The County of Hainault Mons 11. The Cambresis Cambray Archbp. 12. The County of Artois Arras Bish. Article I. Of the County of Flanders properly so called Co∣mitatus Flandriae. FLanders is the first County of the Low Coun∣tries, and the most considerable and noble in all Christendom; some derive its NameName. from Flandrina, Wife to Lideric II. Prince of Buc and great Fo∣rester of Flanders, who governed it under Charlemaigne, and Lewis the Debonair. Others fetch it from Flambert Nephew to Clodion King of France, who having married Blesinda Daugh∣ter to Goluerus King of the Ruthinians, drove the Romans out of the Belgick Gaul. This Province borders on the North, the Ocean and the Mouth of the Scheld,Bounds. (called the Hont)
that divides it from Zealand. On the West, the Ocean and part of Artois. On the South, Artois and Hainault. And on the East, part of Hainault and Brabant. It is extended South and North about 66 miles,Extent. and near as much West and East. It is a very fine and rich Country;Quality. most plen∣tiful in Corn and Pastures; it has Fish in abun∣dance affords Kine and Warlike Horses. There are in it 28 or 30 Walled Towns,Towns. and some others of no small consideration; 1154 Villages;Villages. 48 Ab∣beys,Abbeys. and a great number of Priories,Priories. ColledgesColledges. and Monasteries.Monasterys. It is in most places so populous that the Spaniards who followed Phillip II. in Flanders were used to say that the whole was but one City. It has five Viscounties, viz. Ghent,Viscounts. Ypres, Furnes, Wynoxberg and Haerlbeck; 3. Prin∣cipalities,Principali∣ties. viz. Steenhuyse, Gavre and Epinoy.Ports. 4. Famous Sea-ports, viz. Dunkirk, Newport, Ostend, and Sluys. And 31 Chattelenies or Castelanships. This Province was heretofore governed by Earls, which did Homage to the King of France,History. as did also Philip Duke of Burgundy, after that Flanders was fallen to him by marrying Margaret Daughter of Lewis Malatin, Earl of Flanders in 1369. passing afterwards into the House of Austria, by the Marriage of Mary Daughter and Heiress of Charle les hardy Duke of Burgundy, to Maxi∣milian Emperor of Germany. Charles V. (as we have already hinted) when he took Francis I. Prisoner, in the Battel of Pavia in Italy, enfranchis'd it from that servitude. But af∣terwards in King Philip II's time, it was extreamly curtail'd and harrass'd, which made many of the inhabitants retire in∣to England, and this did not only depopulate it, but impove∣rish'd it considerably, by carrying away a great part of its Trade. The Hollanders revolting at the same time, added to its Calamities by a War of 40 years continuance, and the French have of late made great Devastations in it.
A Chronological Succession of the Earls of Flanders.   Years of our Lord. Gov. 1. BAldwin I. Ironside. 860 17 years. 2. Baldwin II. the Bald. 878 40 years. 3. Arnold I. the Great. 918 45 years. (Baldwin III. the young)     4. Arnold II. the young 963 26 years. 5. Baldwin IV. 989 45 years. 6. Baldwin V. of Lile. 1034 33 years. 7. Baldwin VI. of Mons. 1067 3 years. 8. Arnold III. the Unfortunate. 1070 1 year. 9. Robert I. the Frieslander 1071 22 years. 10. Robert II. of Jerusalem 1093 18 years. 11. Baldwin VII. Hapeule 1111 7 years. 12. Charles the Good of Denmark 1118 9 years. 13. William the Norman or the Cliton. 1127 1 year. 4 M. 14. Thierry of Alsatia 1128 40 years. 15. Philip of Alsatia 1168 23 years. 16. Baldwin VIII. the Brave 1197 4 years. 17. Baldwin IX. Emperor of Constantinople. 1195 11 years. 18. Joan 1206 38 years. 19. Margaret I. 1244 31 years. William of Bourbon Dampiere.     20. Gay Dampierre 1275 30 years. 21. Robert III. of Bethune 1305 17 years. Lewis.     22. Lewis II. of Creci 1322 24 years. 23. Lewis III. Malatin 1346 38 years. 24. Margaret II. 1384 20 years. Philip of France.     25. John the Undaunted, or Sans Peur 1404 15 years. 26. Philip the Good 1419 48 years. 27. Charles le Hardi 1467 10 years. 28. Mary of Burgundy 1477 5 years. Maximilian Emperor.     29. Philip of Austria 1482 24 years. 30. Charles V. Emperor 1505 49 years.
31. Philip II. King of Spain 1555 43 years. 32. Elizabeth-Clara-Eugenia 1598 38 years. 33. Philip IV. King of Spain 1636 29 years. 34. Charles II. King of Spain 1665   The Chief RiversRivers. are 1. Scheld which here washes Tournay, Oudenard, Ghent and Antwerp, and soon after falls into the Sea. 2. Lys, which here washes Armentiers and Courtray and falls into the Scheld at Ghent. 3. Dender, which washes Geersberg, Nienove, and Aelst, and casts its Waters into the Scheld at Dendermond. 4. Scharp which washes Doway and St. Amand, and then discharges itself into the Scheld. Flanders is commonly divided in three,Division. viz. 1. Flemish-Flanders, or Flammingant, where the Country Language is spoken; it is extended from the North Sea to the River Lys. 2. French-Flanders or Gallican, where French is most in use; it lies on the South of Flammingant, and on the North of Cambresis, and borders the Scheld on the East and Lys on the West. 3. Imperial-Flanders which lies between the Scheld and the Dender, and comprehends the County of Alost, and the four Offices which formerly belong'd to the Emperor. Flanders is also divided into, Teutonick, Walloon, Imperial and Dutch. The first lies between the Sea and the Lys. The second between the Lys and the Scheld. The third between the two others. And the fourth on the North of them all. But now adays it is usually divided into three parts, ac∣cording to its Masters, viz. the Spaniards, the French, and the Dutch, as you may see in the following Table. 1. Spanish-Flanders in which the most re∣markable places are, Ghent. Bish. Cap. Bruges. Bish. Ostend. Newport. Oudenard. Alost or Aelst. Ninove.
2. French-Flanders in which are Lille or Rissel. Cap. Ypres. Bish. Tournay. Bish. Dunkirk. Graveling. Wynoxberg. Courtray. Doway. Furnes. Dixmude. Cassel. Orchies. St. Amand. Armentiers. 3. Dutch-Flanders. in which are Sluys. Sas van Ghent. Ardenburg. Description of the Chief Towns in Flanders. Chief Towns belonging to the Spaniards. I. Ghent. GHent or Gaunt, in Latin, Gandae aut Ganda∣vum aut Gandavium,Gand. is one of the largest Cities in Europe, being seven Miles in compass within the Walls. They give out, that it was founded by Julius Caesar in a very Commodious place for Trading, viz. on the Confluent of four considerable Rivers, (the Scheld, the Lys, the Moer, and the Leye) which run through it, and di∣vide it into 26 Islands which are joined together with as ma∣ny great Bridges, and 72 little ones. It is well Walled and Trenched about, and the private Buildings for the most part fair and stately. There are a great many Water and Wind-Mills; Seven Churches, and 55 Monasteries or Hospitals. Several Market-places, of which that of Fryday's has no equal in Europe. The Castle, which is the Princes Palace, con∣tains
as many Rooms as there are Days in the Year, there the Wooden Cradle of Charles V. is still to be seen. The Cathedral is a most Magnificent Building, and the Tow∣er Bell-fort is above 400 steps high. The Town-house is al∣so worth taking notice of. The Cittadel consists of four re∣gular Bastions, but it lies not so very convenient as many others in these parts. This City is the seat of the Parliament or Provincial Court of Flanders; yet one may appeal from it to that of Mechlin, which judges without further appeal. The Trade of this City consists chiefly in Cloths, Stuffs and Silks of which there are so great quantity made, that among the 50 Companies of Tradesmen, those relating to Commo∣dities of this Nature make one third. It stands about twelve Miles from the Sea; 27 miles South West of Antwerp; 30 North West of Brussels; 94 South of Amsterdam; 154 North East of Paris, and 160 East of London; Long. 22 d. 58 m. Lat. 51. d. 6. m. Fifty thousand Inhabitants of this City, under the Stan∣dard of Gaunt, have formerly been formidable to the neigh∣bouring States, and their Princes themselves, in the Reigns of Philip of Valois and Charles VI. Kings of France. In 1539. they revolted from the Emperor Charles V. and would have put themselves under the protection of Francis I. King of France, who not only refused their offer, but gave the Empe∣ror free passage thro' his Dominions into the Low-Countries. The Emperor having reduced them to obedience, put to Death 30 of the principal Burgesses, and banish'd a great number; took from them their Artillery, Arms, and Privi∣ledges, and built a Cittadel to curb them for the future. This City was invested by the French King's orders the first of March 1678. On the fourth the King in Person came be∣fore it. The besieged to no purpose cut their Dikes, and drowned part of the Country, for the King lodged his Forces, and pressed so vigorously the Siege, that on the 9th of the same month the Town and Cittadel were both carried. It was restored to the Spaniards about four Months after by the Treaty of Nimeguen. II. Bruges. Bruges or Bruggen Lat. Bruga and Brugae, is scituated in a great Plain within eight or nine miles of the Sea, upon the Canal called Reye, which being divided into several Naviga∣ble
Torrents runs in divers places of the City, and afterwards these join in the same Canal which goes to the Sluce. But this last belonging to the Hollanders the Inhabitants of Bruges about 40 years ago made a new Canal which goes to Ostend, that is but about three Leagues from it, and the Tide mount∣ing above half way, it bears Ships of 400 Tuns to Bruges, which maintains a standing Trade there. Yet it flourished more in former days, before Merchants had bethought of retiring to Antwerp. Pope Paul IV. erected Bruges into a Bishoprick suf∣fragant of Malines in 1559, and Peter Curtius was the first Pre∣late of it. This is one of the greatest and beautifullest Ci∣ties of Flanders, fortified with good Ditches, great Ramparts, and strong Walls. The publick Buildings are very sumptuous, the Streets large and strait, with several fine Places, and chiefly that of the Market, whereat six great Streets begin that lead in a strait line to the six principal Gates of the City. There are seven Parish Churches. The Cathedral is that of St. Do∣nat or Donatian. The Provost of this Collegial Church was born President in the Court called St. Donat and hereditary Chancellor of Flanders, but this dignity has been united to the Episcopal Title, and the Bishop enjoys the priviledge now. Besides St. Donat there are the Collegial Churches of St. Salvator and Our Lady the Abbies of St. Andrew and Audemburg, and about 60 Religious Houses. At the side of the Cathedral is the Bishops Palace, and over against it is a great Market-place, where the Town-house is, an ancient Building enriched with Figures, and divers curious pieces of Sculpture. The Castle also deserves to be seen. Justice is rendred here by six Magistrates, who all have a particular Jurisdiction, viz. The City, the Frank, the Provost-ship at present, the Bishoprick, the Court for Feodal Tenures, Zizleele and Mandasche. There is also the Water-house with an admirable Machin to convey Water into all the quarters of the City. The Spaniards have a great Trade here in Wooll, Silk, Cotton, &c. There are a great many Tradesmen who make Fustians, Tapestries, Cloths, and Stuffs, of Silk. They are divided into 68 Professions. This City had a share in the troubles of the Low-Countries during the Civil Wars. The English loosing Calais in 1558 removed the Staple for Wooll to Bruges, and that for some time preserved it from decaying. Philip I. King of Spain was born here in 1478. Bruges stands 24 miles N. W. of Ghent 11. E. of Ostend. 34. N. E. of Dun∣kirk, 40 W. of Antwerp Long. 22 d. 24. m. Lat. 51. d. 17. m.
III. Ostend. Ostend Lat. Ostenda is a Sea-port Town seated in a Marsh, at the Mouth of the River Guele, and among divers Channels; but is chiefly environ'd almost on all sides by two of the great∣est of them, into which Ships of the greatest bulk may enter with the Tyde: it is very well fortified, having a strong Rampart, a deep Ditch, and eight regular Bastions, its con∣trived so, that the Sea may be let in round the Town for a great space, which makes it much more strong and defensible than before, and as it were impregnable. The Spaniards pos∣sess no other Port in Flanders but this and Newport, and this being the most considerable, they are making the Haven large, and have made a great Work in order to the carrying of their Ships over into that Cut which goes from Ostend to Bruges, out of their Harbour by the means of a very great Lock or recep∣tacle of Water which communicates with both. The Town stands low, but the streets are streight, large and uniform; The Haven such, that it can never be block'd up. This Town was besieged from July 5. 1601. to September 22. 1604. by the Spaniards, being then in the hands of the Hollanders; and at last was surrender'd upon good Articles, after a Siege of three years, three months, three weeks, three days, and three hours. Its stout defence against the Arch-duke Albert of Au∣stria, and Marquess Ambrosius Spinola may be well ascribed to the supplies from England, and conduct of Sir Francis Vere. The Spaniard lost 78124 men before this Place; Tho' when the Arch-duke invested it, they did not expect it should hold out a Fortnight, which made the Dutchess promise she would never shift her Smock until it were taken; the number of those that were kill'd, or died in the Town during the Siege amounts to 150000. Ostend stands about nine miles N. E. of Newport; 11 W. of Bruges, 20 S. W. of Sluys, and almost 35 W. of Ghent, Long. 22 d. 8 m. Lat. 51 d. 18. m. IV. Newport. Newport is a strong Sea-port Town. The little River Yperle runs on one side of it, which tho' but a mean Channel, yet where it falls into the Sea makes a considerable long and se∣cure Haven, especially at high Tydes. This Town is of good strength, has broad and streight streets, but the Houses are generally low, and most part of Timber. The Inhabitants
support themselves chiefly by the Fishing-Trade. It stands nine miles S. W. of Ostend, 16 N. E. of Dunkirk, 19 almost W. of Bruges, and 40 W. of Ghent, Long. 21 d. 55 m. Lat. 51 d. 14. m. Prince Maurice of Nassaw gave the Spaniards a great defeat near this place in 1600. V. Oudenard. Oudenard Lat. Aldenardum is divided by the Scheld in two parts, and secured by a Castle called Pamele, which is join∣ed to the Town by a Bridge over that River. This is a rich place and drives a great Trade by the Manufacture of Tapestry which flourisheth here. This Town was taken by the French in 1658. restored by the Pyraenean Treaty, and retaken by them again in 1667. besieged without success by the Spaniards in 1674. but by the Peace at Nimeguen restored to them in 1679. It stands 14 Miles S. of Ghent, and 36 W. of Brussels, Long. 22 d. 48 m. Lat. 51 d. 15 m. VI. Alost. Alost, by the Natives Aelst, is the Capital City of the Im∣perial Flanders, on the River Dender; it had formerly Counts of its own, and suffered very much in the last Age: The Spa∣niards surpriz'd it in 1576. and committed a thousand disor∣ders. In 1582 the Duke of Anjou made himself master of it; After which the English who had it in keeping, sold it to the Prince of Parma. In 1667. the French took it, but now it is again in the hands of the Spaniard unfortified. The Territory of Alost comprehends about 170 Villages, the County of Waes, and four Cities which are called Offices, viz. Halst, Axtle, Bouchout and Assenede. This City stands five miles from Brus∣sels, and 15 from Ghent, Long. 23. d. 18. m. Lat. 51. d. VII. Ninove. Ninove or Nienove is a small inconsiderable Town in the Ter∣ritory of Alost, on the River Dender, six miles of Alost, 13 W. of Brussels, and 17 S. E. of Ghent. Long. 23 d. 14 m. Lat. 50. d. 56 m.
Chief Towns in Flanders belonging to the French. I. Lille or L'isle. L'isle Lat. Insula, seated on the River Deulle, took its Name, because in former Times it was wholly sur∣rounded with Water and Marshes, which now by the Indu∣stry of Men are drained. It was Built by Baldwin IV. the Hairy Count of Flanders in 1007. And his Son Baldwin V. the Pious, (or, of Lille) who was Born here, Walled it in 1066. and adorned it with a Magnificent Church, and a fine Mona∣stery. It is now the Capital City of French-Flanders. Lewis XIV. took it from the Spaniards in 1667. and it was after∣wards yielded to him by the Peace of Aix La Chapelle in 1668. since which he has Built a Cittadel to secure it, flank∣ed with Five great Bastions, , whose double Ditches are fil∣led with the River Deulle. All these new Fortifications en∣close a Suburb, which has greatly enlarged the City. Nei∣ther does the Industry of the Inhabitants less contribute to its Greatness and Riches, by the many Silk Manufactures made here, so that it is raised to be the third City in the Low Countries, next to Amsterdam and Antwerp; and for the con∣venience of Transporting its Wares, is accommodated with a Channel derived from the River Lys, which runs not far from this City. It stands 15 Miles W. of Tournay, 36 S. of Ghent, 37 S. E. of Dunkirk, and 38 almost W. of Mons. Long. 22 d. 10 m. Lat. 50 d. 43 m. II. Ipres. Ipres or Ypres Lat. Ipra, Iprae, Ipretum, takes its Name from the Brook Yperle that runs through it. It is supposed to have been Built by Baldwin III. Son of Count Arnulphus I. about 960. and that it was not Walled till 1288. by the Consent of Philip the Fair King of France. It is now a very Rich City, and has many fair Churches, whereof that of St. Martin is the Cathedral. The Bishoprick establish'd here by Paul IV. in 1559. is under the Archbishop of Mechlin.
This City is the third in Flanders, and has Seven Chattelenys or Jurisdictions, of which Cassel has 24 smaller Jurisdictions under it. The Country about is extreamly fruitful, and its Situation contributes much to its strength. It is very well Built, and besides the Churches it has many Sumptuous Buildings and Palaces: That of the Lordship is great and state∣ly, as also the Draper's Hall. The City is Famous for its Ma∣nufactures, and has several Fairs, whereof that in Lent is the principal. This City was taken by the French 26 March 1678. and was yielded to them by the Treaty of Nimeguen. It lyes 16 Miles almost N. of Lille, 18 S. of Neuport, 23 al∣most E. of Dunkirk, and 35 S. W. of Ghent. Long. 22 d. 3 m. Lat. 50 d. 57 m. III. Tournay. Tournay Lat. Tornacum, is upon the Scheld with a Bishop∣rick Suffragant of Cambray, whose first Prelate was St. Prat in 623. It is very Ancient, being mentioned in Antonin's Itinerary, and in the 11th Epistle of St. Jerom. The Town is very strong, and defended by a Castle said to have been Built by the English. The French made themselves Masters of it in 1518. but Charles V. retook it from them in 1521. Lewis XIV. took it upon the Spaniards in 1667. and kept it by the Peace of Aix La Chapelle; and has rendered it much stronger than it was formerly by new Fortifications. The Cathedral of our Lady is very fine; besides which there are Ten Parish Churches, Two Abbeys, and several Religious Houses, for the Place is Big, Rich, and of good Traffick, having 72 different sorts of Trades in it. It is the Capital of a little Country called Tournaisis, and the Seat of a Sove∣raign Council, or High Jurisdiction since 1669. It stands 15 Miles E. of Lille, 32 almost W. of Mons, and 30 nigh S. of Ghent, Long. 22 d. 36 m. Lat. 50 d. 43 m. IV. Dunkirk. Dunkirk Gall. Dunkerque, Lat. Dunquerca, is a Sea-port Town, Built by the Earl Baldwin III. call'd the Young. It derives its Name from the Flemish Word Kerk, that is Church, because the Church Steeple is the first thing seen by Seamen above the Downs. It was taken in 1558 by the French, who claim'd it as Francis de Bourbon Earl of Vendome's
Inheritance, but retaken in 1583 by the Duke of Parma. The French took it again in 1646. under the Conduct of the Duke of Enghien; and the Spaniards retook it in 1652. It was taken afterwards by the Mareschal of Turenne in 1658. and yielded to the English, of whom Lewis XIV. King of France bought it in 1662. for 900000 Pounds Sterling. He has Built there a strong Citadel, and other Fortifications. There is a new Trench cut for a Mile together through the Splinter Sands, which will upon the Head of the Tide receive 130 Ves∣sels of 70 Guns apiece; and on the West side of this Harbour is rais'd a vast pil'd and plank'd Work, to intercept and lodge the Sands. It is well Built and populous, and particu∣larly commended for the neatness and regularity of the Streets. Its Inhabitants are Famous upon the Sea, and have enrich'd themselves in these Wars by Piracy. Here is an Eng∣lish Nunnery, and Franciscans have a Cloyster for Persons of both Sexes. At the Mouth of the Haven stands a Wooden Fort, on which are planted 100 Pieces of Cannon. This Town lyes 54 Miles W. of Ghent, 16 S. W. of Newport, 19 almost of Calais, and 24 S. W. of Ostend. Long. 21 d. 30 m. Lat. 51 d. 7 m. V. Graveling. Graveling or Graveline Lat. Gravelinga and Gravelina, is seated near the Sea upon the Mouth of the River Aa, which parts France from Flanders. The Normans ruin'd it, but it was afterwards repair'd by Thierry of Alsatia, Count of Flan∣ders, who died there in 1168. And in the Year 1528. there was a strong Castle added to it by Charles V. so that it is now one of the most regular and strongest Places of Europe. It was taken by the French in 1658. and yielded to them by the Py∣renaean Treaty. As for the Town it self tho' of great impor∣tance, it is neither large, nor well Built, and is besides but thinly Inhabited. It lyes 9 Miles E. of Calais, 10 almost W. of Dunkirk, and 63 W. of Ghent. Long. 21 d. 18 m. Lat. 51 d. 4 m. VI. Wynoxberg. Berg St, Winoch or Winoxberg, Lat. Berga S. Winoci, or Wi∣noci Montium and Vinoberga; and in Times past Groemberga and Mons Viridis, has the Title of a Viscounty and Castelanship,
and has many Villages under its Jurisdictions. It's situated in a most fertile Country. It was taken by the French in 1658. and it remained to them by the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. They have Built there a Royal Fort. This Town stands on the River Colme, 6 Miles almost S. of Dunkirk, and 12 E. of Graveling. Long. 21 d. 37 m. Lat. 51 d. 2 m. VII. Courtray. Courtray or Cortrick, Lat. Corteriacum and Cortracum is seat∣ed on the River Lys; it is thought that in Caesar's time it was under the Jurisdiction of the Nervians and Tournisians, Philip the Bald Built a Castle in it, and others have added other For∣tifications at different times, The French by their too great precipitation lost a Battel here in 1302. and because they of Courtray kept an Anniversary to Celebrate the Memory of that happy Day, it was Plunder'd and Burnt in 1382. Some time after it was Rebuilt again, and is now pretty considera∣ble for its Commerce, good Citadel, and great Territories. The River Lys divides it in two. The French took it in 1646. and the Spaniards retook it in the Year after. Lewis XIV. made himself master of it in 1667. and kept it by the Treaty of Aix La Chapelle in 1668. and Fortified it regularly; but be∣ing afterwards given to the Spaniards by the Treaty of Nime∣guen in 1678. and retaken again by the French, they Dismant∣led it before they restor'd it to the Spaniards by the Truce of 1684. The French took it again in  It stands 12 Miles N. E. of Lille, 14 N. W. of Tournay, and 180 W. of Pa∣ris. Long. 16. d. 45 m. Lat. 49 d. 9 m. VIII. Douay. Douay Lat. Duacum on the River Scharpe, was the Chief Town of the Country of the Catagues mention'd in Caesar's Commentaries, as 'tis thought. Pbilip II. King of Spain founded its University in 1563. which is a Seminary for the English Roman Catholicks. It is of considerable strength, and has a Magazine very well furnished. It is likewise consi∣derable for its extent, ancient Buildings, and September's Fair. The Fort stands about a Cannon shot below the Town upon the Scharpe, and judged by its Situation among Marshes, by means of its Sluces whereby it can drown all the Country a∣bout,
to be impregnable. The Chief Trade of this Town consists in fine Woolen Camlets, sent into many Parts. The French are Masters of it since 1667. It stands 13 Miles al∣most N. of Cambray, and 34 W. of Mons. Long. 22 d. 12 m. Lat. 50 d. 24 m. IX. Furnes. Furnes which the Flemings call Wernen, is a well Built and pleasant Town, tho' but small. The Canals support the Trade of the Town, which consists in Linnen and other Ma∣nufactures. The City is dignified with the Title of a Vis∣countship, and the Jurisdiction of a Lord Castellain. It was three times taken, and now Fortified by the French, and at length resign'd to that Crown by the Peace of Aix La Chapelle in 1668. It was taken by the English in 1692. and retaken by the French in 1693. It stands not far off Sea Five Miles S. W. of Newport, and 12 nigh E. of Dunkirk. Long. 21 d. 50 m. Lat. 51 d. 8 m. X. Dixmude. Dixmude or Dixmuyde is situated on the Confluent of the River Ypre, and another small Stream. It is not very large, but is reckoned a Place of importance, and Famous for a great Fair in July. It has often changed its Ma∣sters. The English took it and new Fortified it in 1692. The French retook it the Year after. It stands Nine Miles N. of Ypres, and 20 E. of Dunkirk. Long. 22 d. 8 m. Lat. 51 d. 6 m. XI. Cassel. Cassel or Mont-Cassel, Lat. Castellum and Castellum Morino∣rum, is an ancient Town situated on a Mountain. It is well Fortified, and has a considerable Jurisdiction, and two Fa∣mous Fairs, one in January, the other in August. King Phi∣lip Augustus took it in 1213. and it was taken and retaken since upon several occasions. The French are Masters of it since 1677. It stands by the River Fene 15 Miles S. of Dun∣kirk. Long. 21 d. 39 m. Lat. 50 d. 57 m.
XII. Orchies. Orchies is an ancient and considerable Town called by Ptolo∣my the Capital of the Atrebatii. It stands between Tournay and Doway 10 Miles off each. Long. 22 d. 26 m. Lat. 50 d. 34 m. XIII. St. Amand. St. Amand Lat. Elno, is seated on the River Scharpe, and is Famous for the Abbey of St. Amand, where died the Saint of that Name, Abbatia Sancti Almandi Elnonensis. The French have been in Possession of it ever since 1667. The Forest of St. Amand beginning on the Frontiers of Flanders, and ex∣tending it self in the County of Hainault near to Valenciennes, was cut down by Order of Lewis XIV. in 1676. after his ta∣king of Conde and Bouchain. St. Amand before the French dis∣mantled it, was a Place of great strength, the River Scharpe on which it stands, falls a little lower into the Schelde; the Lands that lye between the two Rivers are called the Isles of St. Amand. This Town lyes 16 Miles N. E. of Doway, and 40 S. of Ghent. Long. 22 d. 42 m. Lat. 50 d. 27 m. XIV. Armentiers. Armentiers Lat. Armentariae, stands on the Lys, and is con∣siderable for its strength, and Linnen Manufactory, and Trade. It has been often taken and retaken in this last Age. The Archduke Governour of the Low-Countries in 1647. took it from the French, who not long after became Masters of it a∣gain, and still are in Possession of it, by the Treaty of Aix La Chapelle. It lyes Seven Miles almost W. of Lille, 32 S. E. of Dunkirk, and 40 S. W. of Ghent. Long. 22 d. 8 m. Lat. 50 d. 45 m.
Chief Towns in Flanders belonging to the Hollan∣ders. I. Sluys. SLuys Lat. Slusa or Clusa is a Sea-port Town over against the little Island Cadsant or Guisant. It formerly belonged to the Counts of Nemours descended from the Counts of Flan∣ders, and then fell into the Possession of the French. Philip the Bold King of France kept a strong Garison here to curb those of Bruges, and Charles VI. Built a Fleet here against England. The Emperor Maximilian I. took it afterward, in whose Family it remain'd some time. During the Wars of the Netherlands, the Prince of Parma took it for the King of Spain, and the Dutch retook it in 1604. under the Conduct of Prince Maurice, which they look'd upon as a sufficient Com∣pensation for the loss of Ostend, and thereupon Coin'd a Me∣dal with this Motto. Jehova plus dedit quam amisimus. God gave us more than we lost. The Defence of the Besieged was very memorable, for they held it out for three Months, till such time that they were out of all hopes of relief, and had eat up all the Leather, Mice, Rats, &c. which they could find. The Dutch Forti∣fied the Haven and Town, which they repeopled with the In∣habitants of Ostend, who came thither after the Surrender of that Place: But on a Treaty of Peace it was afterwards dis∣mantled: It is now very strong, but thinly Inhabited, and nothing near so Rich as formerly, its Trade being removed first to Bruges, and from thence to Antwerp. It has still the largest Haven in all Flanders, being capable of 500 good Ships. This Town stands 22 Miles N. W. of Ghent, 10 N. E. of Bruges, and 14 S. W. of Middleburg. Long. 22 d. 34 m. Lat. 51 d. 24 m.
II. Sas-Van-Ghent. Sas-Van-Ghent is a small place, but so strong by reason of its situation and fortifications that it is accounted impregna∣ble. Yet the Hollanders took it in 1644. It stands 11 miles N. of Ghent, Long. 23 d. Lat. 51 d. 20 m. III. Ardenburgh. Ardenburgh, is also a small place, but very strong in Flan∣ders, subject to the Hollanders. It stands 20 miles N. W. of Ghent. Long. 22 d. 36 m. Lat. 51 d. 22 m. Article II. Of the Dukedom of Brabant Lat. Brabantia. THIS Dutchy is in a manner an Island encompassed with Rivers having the Meuse on the East and the Nort; the Demer on the South; which runs through part of this Province; and the Schelde on the West, with the Ocean on the side of Breda and Bergin-Op-Zoom: So that it borders part of the Country of Gelderland,Bounds. and the Bishoprick of Liege on the East; The Country of Hainault and the Country of Namur on the South, Flanders and part of Zealand on the West; and Holland and another part of Gelderland on the North. Its ExtentExtent. South and North is about 70 miles; and about 60 West and East. Quality.The Air is generally good and wholesom, the Soil is very Fertile, except some of the Northern parts which are somewhat sandy and barren; The Cities are very fine, whereof there are 26 Wal∣led and Strong,Towns. not mentioning others of less importance, and about 100 Villages.Villages. History.The Brabanders are descended from a Colony of Saxons brought from beyond the Elbe by
Charlemaign and planted in this Country in 806. Divers Authors say that Anchises or Anchisices Father to Pepin of Haristol was Lord of Brabant, Charlemaign and his Children were Masters of this Country until such time as Otho Son to Prince Charles of France, Duke of Lower Lorraine being dead in 1004. without being Married, Brabant became the Porti∣on of Gerbege, second Daughter to the same Charles of France, and his first Wife Bonne of Ardenne, Married to Lambert II. Earl of Monts and Louvain, the Founder of the Branch of the Duke of Brabant and Lothier; at first they took only the Ti∣tle of Earls, but 1235 Henry I. took the Title of Duke of Bra∣bant and Lorrain. Philip III. called the Good, recollected the succession of the Duke of Brabant, which he left to Charles the Rash his Son, Father to Mary of Burgundy, who carried it into the House of Austria by her Marriage to Maximilian, af∣terwards Emperor. This Country has been fruitful in illu∣strious Men and Learned Writers. The RiversRivers. here, besides the Meuse and the Scheld, are, Demer, Dommel, Senne, Aa, Dyle, Gias, Jeckes, Nephte both great and small, and Mert: there is also a great number of small Lakes and Ponds. Brabant comprehends the Marquisate of the Holy Empire, whose Capital is Antwerp; the Lordship of Mechlin; the Dutchy of Arschot, the Marquisate of Bergues, the County of Hooghstraet, the state of Maestricht, formerly that of Liege; and 19 Baronies. Louvain was in time past Capital of this Pro∣vince but now Brussels. Brabant is divided into four parts. 1. Dutch-rBrabant in which the most remarkable Places are, Boisleduc. Bish. Cap. Breda. Bergen-Op-Zoom. Grave. Ravestein. Helmont. Eyndenhove. Maestricht. Lillo.
2. Spanish-Brabant proper∣ly so called which compre∣bends. Brussels. Cap. Louvain. Leuwe. Arschot. Duke Nivelle. Tillemont, or Tienen. Judoigne. Gemblour: Lire. Diest. Vilvoerde. Herentals. Hannuye. 3. The Marquisate of the Holy Empire. Antwerp. Bish. 4. The Lordship of Ma∣lines, which has Malines or Mechlin. Arch. To keep to my General division I shall give you here the Description of the Dutch and Spanish Brabant, and reserve that of the Mrquisate, and Lordship of Malines for the two following Articles. Chiefs Towns belonging to the Hollanders in Brabant. I. Boisleduc. BOisleduc, Bolduc, or Bosleduc, Lat. Boscum-Ducis, Sylva-Ducis, Bolducum, and in Dutch, Hertogenbosch, the Ca∣pital of the Dutch-Brabant, with a Bishoprick Suffragant of Malines, is situated upon the River Domel, which there re∣ceives the Aade, and afterward the Diese, and discharges it self about two Leagues from thence into the Meuse, at the place where it formeth the Isle of Bommel. Boisleduc is built in a plain, where there was a Hunting Forrest belonging to the Dukes of Brabant. But Duke Henry going to oppose the in∣cursions
which those of Guelder-land made into his Country caused this Wood to be cut down in 1172. where the Foun∣dations of this City were laid, which Duke Jeffery finished in 1184. Pope Paul IV. erected it into a Bishoprick in 1559. and Francis Sonnius was its first Prelate; The Bishops now are but Titular and make their residence at Goldorp since Boisleduc is fallen into the hands of the Hollanders. This City is natu∣rally strong as well by its situation as by its fortifications; It is environ'd with Rivers and Meadows covered with Water so that the Avenues to the Town are upon artificial Causeys, made turning and winding, and commanded by one or other of the six Forts, built at some distance without the Town. Its Ditches are filled with the Waters of the said Rivers, which enter into the City by divers Channels very commodious to the Inhabitants. They are almost all Soldiers, tho' they do not neglect Trade, which occasioneth this saying, That the In∣habitants of Boisleduc are Warlike Merchants. The City is large, fair, well built and very populous. The Cathedral Church of St. John is one of the most sumptuous of the Nether∣lands, with a very fine Clock. The Market-place is envi∣roned with fine Buildings where 10 of the greatest Streets do end. The Hollanders became at last Masters of it in 1629. by the Valour and Conduct of Frederick Henry Prince of Orange. This City stands 43 miles N. E. of Antwesp, and 50 almost S. of Amsterdam. Long. 24 d. 30 m. Lat. 51 d. 42 m. II. Breda. Breda is seated on the River Mereck, with the Title of Ba∣rony, which comprehends now about Seventeen Villages, but it had more formerly, and Berg-Op-Zoom did then depend up∣on it. Breda had anciently particular Lords of its own, and was sometimes in Possession of the Dukes of Brabant; but John III. Duke of Brabant sold it again in 1350. to John Polon Lord of Lieck, who left an only Daughter Johanna, Married in 1404. to Engelbert of Nassau. Henry of Nassau begun the Castle of Breda, where the Tomb of Renatus of Nassau is to be seen in the Collegiate Church of St. Peter founded about 1303. This City suffered very much during the War between the States and the Spaniards. The Prince of Parma took it from the Ʋnited Provinces July 18. 1581. Maurice of Nassau be∣came Master of it against in 1590. by a Boat loaden with Turf,
under which he hid 60 Souldiers, who rendered themselves Masters of the Castle, and he afterwards took the City by Ca∣pitulation. They tell a very remarkable thing of one of these Soldiers, that was hidden under the Turf, viz. That not being able to abstain from Coughing, he desired one of his Companions to kill him, for fear his Cough should disco∣ver the Enterprize. Ever since this surprize, it is the Cu∣stom here to search all laden Boats by stabbing them with a Spit. The Hollanders kept Breda until 1625. That the Mar∣quess of Spinola General of the Troops of Spain besieged it, Aug. 27. 1625. and took it the 5th of June, 1625. This Loss af∣flicted the Hollanders extreamly, but they retook it in 1637. and have kept it ever since. Breda is of a Triangular Figure, at each Angle there is a Gate Built with Brick, and the Cur∣tins are flanked with Thirteen Bastions, besides several Ca∣valeers all mounted with Cannon. Breda however is not ve∣ry well Built, yet there is a pretty fair Street in it, the Town-house and some other Places indifferent. It is in a Marshy Ground, and often overflown. Its Fields are plen∣tiful in Pastures, watered by the Rivers of Aade and Mereck, which being joined enter into the City, and form divers Channels. The Palace of the Castle was lately imbellish'd, and the Fortifications repaired, and new ones made, by the Prince of Orange, now King William III. of Great Brittain, (to whom the City and Barony belongs) so that now it is a large Regular City, and is both by Nature and Art thought impreg∣nable: Besides the Ramparts which are all supported by very strong Brick Arches, and raised above the Houses of the Place, there are a great many Outworks, surrounded with double broad Ditches full of Water. Breda is 27 Miles N. E. of Antwerp, 20 W. of Boisleduc, and 52 S. of Amsterdam. Long. 23 d. 57 m. Lat. 51 d. 38 m. III. Bergen-Op-Zoom. Bergen-Op-Zoom, (that is, Mountain upon the Zoom) Lat. Bergae ad Zomam, Berga, or Mons supra Zomam, and Berci Zo∣ma, with the Title of Marquisate, is a small but strong Town partly situated upon the River Zoom, and partly upon a lit∣tle Mountain. The Church of St. Gertruda was Converted there into a Collegial Church about 1442. Bergen-Op-Zoom has had particular Lords ever since 1212. The Emperor Charles V. being at Tournay in 1528. (or according to others
in 1533.) erected it into a Marquisate; since that time the Hollanders got it after the Death of the Marquiss De Bergues, whom the Dutchess of Parma had sent into Spain, where he was Arrested, and Died 1567. They have Fortified this Place well and regularly, with a Channel that goes to the Sea, defended by divers Forts: The Buildings of the Town are fair and handsom, and its three Market-places large and capa∣cious. Amongst the Edifices, the Church of St. Lambert, and the Marquesses Palace deserve Observation. The Com∣mandant of Requesens was defeated in 1574. near this City, which the Prince of Parma Besieged in vain, An. 1588. and Marquess Spinola in 1622. It stands 18 Miles N. of Antwerp, and 18 W. of Breda. Long. 23 d. 32 m. Lat. 51 d. 32 m. IV. Grave. Grave Lat. Gravia, is a strong Town, and of great Impor∣tance, seated upon the left side of the Meuse, whose Waters fill the large Moats, which Environ Seven large Bulwarks with their Half-Moons. John III. Duke of Brabant in 1323. gave it to Otho Prince of Cuick and Heverle who restored it in 1328. Afterwards it was the occasion of great Wars be∣tween the Dukes of Brabant and Holland, who both pretend∣ed a Right to it. It is the Capital City of the Country of Cuickland, remarkable for its Fertility, and has been a long time in the Hands of the Hollanders. Only about the Year 1672. the Torrent of French Victory swept it away into the Power of Lewis XIV. But in the Year 1677. Monsieur Cha∣milli Governour for the King of France, surrender'd it to the Prince of Orange, now our King, after it had been for some time Besieged by Mr. Rabenhauft. It lyes in a Marshy Ground 18 Miles almost W. of Boisleduc, 72 N. E. of Brussels, and 8 S. W. of Nimeguen. Long. 24 d. 56 m. Lat. 51 d. 48 m. V. Ravestein. Ravestein stands upon the Meuse a little below Grave. The Dukes of Cleve have been Lords of Ravestein, where they had a good Cittadel; but William Duke of Cleve and Juliers was ob∣liged to demolish it, by one of the Articles made with the
Emperor Charles V. The Duke of Newburg is Sovereign of Ravestein, but the Hollanders are in Possession of it. It stands 10 Miles almost W. of Nimeguen. Long. 24 d. 53 m. Lat. 51 d. 48 m. VI. Helmont. Helmont is a little Town and Castle on the River Aade, and the Capital of Kemperland. It lies 18 Miles S. of Grave, and 60 N. E. of Brussels. Long. 24 d. 42 m. Lat. 51 d. 32 m. VII. Eyndenhove. Eyndenhove or Eyndoven is a fine little Town in the Territory of Kemperland, subject to the Hollanders ever since 1629. It stands on the River Dommel, 10 Miles W. of Helmont. Long. 24 d. 38 m. Lat. 51 d. 30 m. VIII. Maestricht. Maestricht Lat. Obtricum, Trajectum ad Mosam, or Trajectum Superius, to distinguish it from Ʋtrecht, called Trajectum ad Rhenum, or, Trajectum Inferius. It stands upon the Western Bank of the Meuse, which has here a Beautiful Stone Bridge over it, consisting of Nine Arches, from whence the Town hath its Name, signifying the passage over the Maes. On the Eastern Bank lyes the Wick, which is a Suburb to the City. The Bishops of Liege, and the Dukes of Brabant, heretofore divided the Jurisdiction of this City betwixt them, but it was in the hands of the latter, and with that Dutchy passed to the House of Austria, who enjoyed it till 1632. when it was taken by the Hollanders, who kept it by the Treaty of Munster. The French took it, after a sharp Siege, in 1673. The Hollanders endeavoured the Reduction of it in 1676. but without success; they recovered it by the Eighth Article of the Treaty of Nimeguen in 1678. The Private Houses here are generally covered with a black Slate, or Ardoise, otherwise not very Beautiful. The Town-house is a very fair structure, seated in one of the Piazza's,
Built of white Stone, and very well Painted in the inside. In another Piazza, is a Fountain, a row of Trees and a great Church. This Town is very strong, tho' its Wall be old, the Out-works being very considerable. Towards the S. E. lyes a Hill, which arises gently, and overlooks the Town; under this Hill is one of the Noblest Quarries of Stone in the World. To secure the Town from the disad∣vantage it might receive from this Hill, there was formerly a Fort Built upon it, but it has been long since slighted, and they have cut an Horn-work within Musket-shot of it, and the Bastion answering to it is made very high to cover the Town: On the other side of the River stands Wick, very well Fortified also, and rather stronger than Maestricht, in∣to which they may retire, if the Town should be taken by Storm: All about the Wick the Country is flat; there are here many Inhabitants, about 20 Monasteries, Three Dutch Churches, One common to the English and French, and a handsom Glass-house. Maestricht stands 50 Miles E. of Brussels, and 14 N. of Liege. Long. 25 d. Lat. 50 d. 54 m. IX. Lillo. Lillo Lat. Lilloa, is a strong Fort Built by the Hollanders up∣on the Scheld, Seven Miles beneath Antwerp to the North, where all the Ships that pass up the River to Antwerp are, by the Treaty of Munster, to stop, and to pay Toll to the States of the Ʋnited Provinces, to whom the Place belongs.
Places in Brabant belonging to the Spaniards. I. Brussels. BRussels or Bruxelles, Lat. Bruxellae, one of the greatest, beautifullest, and best peopled City of the Spanish Netherlands, is the Capital of the Dutchy of Brabant; the Seat of the Chancelery and Court of Brabant, of the Coun∣sels of State, of the Revenues, and the Ordinary Residence of the Prince or Governour, whom the King of Spain keeps in the Low-Countries; which draws all the Nobility and Gentry to it. It is situated upon the small River of Sinne or Senne, which discharges it self in the Schelde by a Chan∣nel of the length of Five Leagues, which was made in 1561. Its Avenues are fine, its Circumference about Seven Miles. It is Built part in the Plain, and part upon a Hill, extreamly pleasant, environed with a double Brick Wall pret∣ty far distant from each other, and small Ditches. The Town is divided into upper and lower, the latter is much more agreeable and beautiful than the other, having seve∣ral Fountains, and the the two Branches of the great Canal, bordered with great Keys, filled with a prodigious number of Boats, that come thither from the Sea by the Scheld. The King's Palace is in the upper Town▪ it has many Rich Apart∣ments big enough to Lodge several Kings at once, to which belongs a very fine Mail, a Park full of Deer, and very curi∣ous Gardens near it, with fine Water-works, Grotto's, and a square Wilderness. The Town-house, the Tower of St. Nicholas, which has the Town-Clock; the Church of the Je∣suits, the Prince of Orange's House, deserve to be seen by Strangers. Among the Churches the Collegial Dedicated to St. Gudulle is the Chief and the most Ancient, where they pretend to have an Host stabb'd by a Jew, which shed Blood out of the Wound, whereupon, they say, the Jew was im∣mediately struck with Death. Here you find some Footsteps of the Ancients Fancy for the Number Seven, for there are Se∣ven
Parish Churches, Seven Principal Streets, about which are Seven stately Houses Rented by the Publick, Seven Gates of Dorick Work, Seven Considerable Families, Seven She∣riffs who have the Care of Affairs, and Seven Licensed Mid∣wives, &c. Bruxelles is a Trading Town, and has several Manufactures. There are 52 Trades divided into Nine Guilds or Companies, called the Nine Nations, among which the Cut∣lers and Armour-makers are Chief. Brussels stands 30 Miles S. E. of Ghent, 24 S. of Antwerp, 96 S. of Amsterdam, 150 N. E. of Paris, and 190 almost E. of London. Long. 23 d. 36 m. Lat. 50 d. 54 m. II. Louvain. Louvain, Lat. Lovanium, and by the Inhabitants Loeven, is a great City situated upon the River Dele, which runs in∣to the Scheld at Rupelmondel. This Town is about Four Miles in compass, and is so very Ancient that it is supposed to have been Built by one Lupus, before the time of Julius Caesar: It was at first but a Village that was Walled in 1156. and has been much enlarged since: It is seated in a very fruitful Soil, and has so gentle and pleasant Air, that Wine is made both within the Walls and without. There are within the Walls of this City▪ large Meadows, beautiful Vineyards, and pleasant Gardens and Orchards, which shews that it is not over-stocked with Inhabitants. It is well Fortified, and has many fair Churches, the Chief whereof is the Collegiate Church of St. Peter, besides a great number of Monasteries. The University of Louvain is very Famous, it was founded in 1426. by John IV. Duke of Brabant, and endowed with great Priviledges by Pope Martin V. and Eugenius IV. and has 20 Colleges, founded by several Persons, for the promo∣ting of Learning. This Town is encompassed with large deep Ditches, cut in many places through a flinty Rock, or very hard Gravel. The Walls are strongly Built, being rai∣sed from the very bottom of the Ditch; in the Circuit of these Walls are 53 Towers, and no less than 16 Draw-bridges, placed conveniently for the better securing of the Gates, which are in number 11, Built all of curious white Stone. The Buildings of the City in general are neither well Built, nor well kept, but the Town-house is a stately Structure. Louvain
stands 15 Miles N. E. of Brussels. Long. 23 d. 58 m. Lat. 50 d. 57 m. III. Leeuwe. Leeuwe is a little strong Town and Castle on the River Ge∣te, 16 Miles E. of Louvain, and 21 W. of Maestricht. Long. 24 d. 26 m. Lat. 50 d. 53 m. IV. Arschot. Arschot, Lat. Arscotium, is a small City upon the River De∣me, and a Dukedom belonging to the Dukes de Croy. It lyes 8 Miles N. E. of Louvain. Long. 24 d. 10 m. Lat. 51 d. 4 m. V. Nivelle. Nivelle is a small, and heretofore a strong Town, but now dismantled. It stands 12 Miles S. of Brussels. Long. 23 d. 38 m. Lat. 50 d. 39 m. VI. Tillemont. Tillemont, Lat. Tena, or Tenacae, or Tillemontium, in Flemish Thienen, is a considerable Town on the River Gias. It was one of the Four principal Towns of Brabant, until it was al∣most ruined, during the Civil Wars between the French and those of Liege. The Duke of Guelderland plunder'd it in 1507. but the Inhabitants of Namur pursued him, and having surpriz'd his Camp in the Night near St. Hubert in Ardenne, recovered the Booty, and took many Prisoners. This Town was surrendred to Don John of Austria in 1578. and has a ve∣ry fine Church Dedicated to St. Germain Bishop of Paris. It stands 11 Miles almost S. E. of Louvain, and 23 E. of Brus∣sels. Long. 24 d. 18 m. Lat. 50 d. 52 m.
VII. Judoigne. Judoigne is a small Town on the River Gias, 12 Miles S. E. of Louvain, and 22 E. of Brussels. Long. 24 d. 16 m. Lat. 50 d. 46 m. About Four Miles N. E. of this Place, are the Villages of Elixem or Heylesem, Neerwinden,Battel of Landen. Dor∣mal, Neerlanden, and the Rivulet Landen, Fa∣mous for the Battel that was Fought there in 1693. which happened in this manner, The Duke of Luxem∣berg who Commanded the French Army in Chief, having got Intelligence that King William of Great Brittain his Army was much lessened by the Detachments his Majesty had sent to the Lines 'twixt Ipres and Courtray, and to Liege, attack'd him in his Camp between Neerwinden and Landen, July 29. with double the Number of Men, but was receiv'd with so much Gallantry, and repulsed so often, that tho' the Fight conti∣nued from Five in the Morning till near Five in the Afternoon, the French had perpetually the Disadvantage, till at last ha∣ving gained a Pass into his Majesties Camp, they over-power∣ed him by their Numbers, and some of our Horse not acting their part, the King perceiving things in disorder, did Va∣liantly attempt to renew the Battel, and seeing that it could not be perform'd, commanded a Retreat, which was obey∣ed in very good Order, but the Body being in a Confusion, sustained a considerable Loss, especially at passing the River Geete. His Majesty continued so long in the Field that he had much ado to repass that River, but accomplisht it at length, having behaved himself during the whole Action, with ad∣mirable Courage and Conduct, and Expos'd himself to a Thou∣sand Dangers, yet by a particular Providence, he came off without any other hurt than a small Contusion on the side by a Musket Bullet, and having a piece of his Scarf shot away. The Elector of Bavaria perform'd also Wonders during the Fight: But the Gallantry of most of the English and Scotch is scarce to be parallel'd. The Loss of the French was computed to 18000 Men, and that of the Confederates about 7000. The Chief of those who fell on our side was Count Solms, Lieutenant-General; and his Grace the Duke of Ormond was Wounded and Taken, with many other Officers of Note, but since redeem'd.
VIII. Gemblours. Gemblours, Lat. Gemblacum, is upon the River Orne, with the fine Abbey of St. Benedict, whose Abbot is Spiritual and Temporal Lord of the Town. It is Famous for a Fight in 1578. and stands by the Borders of Namur, 19 Miles S. of Namur, and 20 S. E. of Brussels. Long. 24 d. Lat. 50 d. 37 m. IX. Lire. Lire or Lier, Lat. Lira, is in the District of Antwerp, be∣tween that City and Mechlin, seated upon the River Nethe, which falls Two Miles farther into the Ruypel. It is natu∣rally strong by its Situation, and made much more so by Art; and besides a very fine and pleasant Town, Famous for its Manufactures, and its Fairs for Cattel. It stands Seven Miles N. of Mechlin, 10 S. E. of Antwerp, and 20 N. of Brussels. Long. 23 d. 50 m. Lat. 51 d. 9 m. X. Diest. Diest is a little Town upon the River Demer, with the Title of Barony, and the Head of a Territory Subject to our King as Prince of Orange. It is considerable for its divers Manufactures of Woollen and Linnen Cloth; and for its Two Collegiate Churches. It stands 14 Miles almost E. of Louvain. Long. 24 d. 24 m. Lat. 51 d. 3 m. There are some other small inconsiderable Towns in the Spanish Brabant, such as Vilvoerde, Herentals, Hannuye, &c.
Article III. Of the Marquisate of the Holy Empire. THE Marquisate of the Holy Empire, is a very small Province,Bounds. not being above Se∣ven Miles W. and E. and Four S. and N. yet it is accounted one of the Four Quarters or Tetrarchies of Bra∣bant, bounded on the West by Flanders, from which it is se∣parated by the River Scheld, and on all other sides by Bra∣bant. The Chief RiversRivers. there are, the Scheld, which washes Antwerp, and the Schynt, which also runs by Antwerp, and there falls into the Scheld. This Marquisate belong'd formerly to the Emperor, but now to the King of Spain. The Chief and only Place of Note in the Province is Antwerp. Antwerp. Antwerp, Lat. Antuerpia or Andoverpum, and Antwerpen by the Natives, is the Capital of the Marquisate of the Holy Empire, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ma∣lines. The derivation some give of its Name is Fabulous. This City was formerly one of the Richest and most Beauti∣ful of the whole World, seated in a spacious Plain upon the Right side of the Scheld, where the River divides the Dutchy of Brabant from the County of Flanders. It was en∣larged by John I. John III. and Charles V. It contains 212 Streets, and 22 publick Piazza's. The Houses are all neat and fashionable, and many of them Magnificent. In a word, all the Structures, both Sacred and Prophane, admirable. Our Lady's Church, the Cathedral, is a piece of of incompa∣rable Workmanship: it's above 500 Foot long, 240 broad, and 340 high, contains 66 Chappels, embellish'd with Mar∣ble Pillars, all different in shape, and adorned with curious Pictures, as well as the Body of the Church. The Tower is
one of the highest and fairest of Europe, Built of white Stone, where are 33 large Bells: The Three Chief Doors are cas'd with Marble, and gilt with Gold. This fine Church was almost burnt to the Ground in the Year 1533. and af∣ter that pillag'd during the Civil Wars for Religion. It was erected into a Cathedral by Paul IV. in the Year 1559. There are Four other Parish Churches, viz. St. George, St. James, St. Andrew, and St. Malburge, besides 25 Colleges, Nunneries and Religious Houses, amongst which the Jesuits-Church is very Magnificent; it's paved with Marble on the two lower sides one above another, which are supported by 56 Marble Columns: The Four Roofs are hung with 38 large Pictures of Rubens in Gold Frames, and the Wall pierced with 40 cross Windows lin'd with Marble. The chief Altar is all of Marble, Jasper, Porphyre, and Gold. The Jesuits Treasure is valued Two Millions. The Town-house consists of Four Apartments, and the Easterlings House, the Exchange, and the Galleries that surround it, deserve to be seen. The Cittadel, one of the strongest and most regular is of a Pentagon Figure. It encloses two little Hills that give a Prospect all over the Countrey. This Cittadel was built in 1567. by the Duke of Alva. The City lyes 18 Leagues from the Sea, between Malines, Louvain, Brussels and Bruges. The Harbour is very lovely, and most conveni∣ent, there being no less than Eight Channels for Ships to come up by to the City, in the chiefest of which 100 may ride together. There are 74 Bridges upon these Canals, all which Conveniences brought a great Trade to the Town, but the Neighbourhood of Amsterdam has deprived it of the greatest part. This City suffered much in the Revolt of the Low Countries from the Spaniards, who plundered it Three days together, burnt above 600 Houses, and Kill'd and Drowned 10000 of the Inhabitants. The Confederates re∣pair'd it, but it was after that retaken by the Prince of Parma, after a Years Siege, memorable for the many Ma∣chines and Devices us'd in it. Antwerp stands 24 Miles N. of Brussels. Long. 23 d. 36 m. Lat. 51 d. 16 m.
Article IV. Of the Lordship of Malines. MAlines or Mechlin is another very small Pro∣vince,Bounds. bounded on every side with Bra∣bant, and is nigh the middle of it, and not far off the Borders of Flanders. Its extent is about Eight Miles West and East,Extent. and Five South and North. It is a distinct Province from the rest, and the Residence of the Parliament or great Council for these Countries, but has not those Priviledges that Brabant has. And for that reason most Women here when they are ready to Lie-In, go into Brabant to be brought to Bed, that their Children may enjoy their Priviledges. In the compass of the Province lyes but one Ci∣ty,City. or Walled Town, and Nine Villages.Villages. The chief Rivers are,Rivers. 1. The Dele which runs through the middle, and washes Mechlin, and then into Brabant, and falls into the Scheld. 2. Senne, which here falls into the Dele. Malines. Malines or Mechlin, Lat. Mechlinia, and by those of the Country Mackelen or Meckelen, upon the Dele, is the Capital of the Lordship of that Name. Its Bigness and Magnifi∣cence cause it to be called Malines the Beautiful; as Antwerp the Rich, Brussels the Noble, Louvain the Wise, Ghent the Great, and Bruges the Ancient. The situation is very plea∣sant, and because of the Tide, the Trade is very good. There is an Archbishoprick's See founded by Paul IV. in 1559. with the Title of Primate of the Low-Countries, Car∣dinal Granville was the first Archbishop. The Cathedral Church is Consecrated to St. Rombaut. Malines is the place of the great Royal Council, instituted by Charles Duke of Burgundy in 1473. There is also the Parliament of the
Knights of the Fleece; and the Prince's Arsenal. Speaking of this Arsenal, I cannot but mention, that the Thunder ha∣ving set on Fire several Barrels of Powder in 1546. it broke out with such fury, that it overturned a Tower, and above 300 Houses, dryed up the Ditch about the Town, and cau∣sed extraordinary Damage. In the Suburb is St. Alexis's Nunnery, where there are 15 or 1600 Nuns, who are allow∣ed to walk abroad, to pay and receive Visits, and to Marry when they please. The Lordship of Malines had its own Lords, until 1336. that it became a free Town. After that time it belonged to the House of Burgundy, till it entred into that of Austria in 1477. Its Inhabitants are free from all Taxes, for the good Service perform'd to Charles the Bold, Earl of Flanders, at the Siege of Nuis upon the Rhine. Here have been Two Provincial Councils, the first in 1570. and the second in 1607. The chief Trade of this place con∣sists in Tanning, making of Linnen Cloth, Point and Lace, (which bear the Name of the City) and casting great Ar∣tillery and Guns. It stands 11 Miles N. W. of Louvain, 13 almost N. of Brussels, 14 S. E. of Antwerp, and 30 E. of Ghent. Long. 23 p. 44 m. Lat. 51 d. 6 m. Article V. Part of the Dukedom of Gelderland belonging to the Spaniards. THat part of Gelderland which is Subject to the Spaniards,Bounds. has on the East and North, Cleves in Germany; on the West Brabant, and on the South Juliers in Germany.Extent. Its extent is a∣bout 36 Miles North and South, and about 28 East and West. The Soil is fertile, and yields all sorts of Grains, abounding moreover with rich Pasture-grounds,Quality. which fatten great Droves of Cattel, which are sent from many far Places. The chief Rivers here are, Rivers.1. The Meuse which runs through the midst of this part, washing Ruremonde and Venlo, and so
passes on, dividing Brabant from the rest of Guelderland. 2. Niers, which washes Gelders, and runs into Cleves. The Chief Towns are Gelders Cap. Venlo. Ruremond Bish. I. Gelders. The City of Guelders, Lat. Gueldria, which they of the Country call Gelre, is seated on a Marshy Ground upon the little River of Niers, which environs it instead of a Moat. The Castle is extreamly strong, and said to be impregnable by reason of its situation. In 1627. the Spaniards laboured to have brought the Rhine to the City of Guelders, and in∣to the Meuse, on purpose to have cut off the Commerce be∣tween Germany and Holland, but fail'd in their Enterprize. It stands 26 Miles nigh S. E. of Nimeguen, the Chief of the Province, and 11 Miles almost N. of Venlo. Long. 25 d. 37 m. Lat. 51 d. 31 m. II. Venlo. Venlo is a very strong Town on the River Meuse, by the Borders of Juliers. It is a Hance-Town, but Subject to the Spaniards, and stands 11 Miles S. W. of Gelders, and 11 N. of Ruremond. Long. 25 d. 24 m. Lat. 51 d. 27 m. III. Ruremond. Ruremond Lat. Ruremonde, is the second City of Gelderland, with a Bishoprick Suffragant of Malines, on the River Meuse, at the Mouth of the Roer or Rura, from which it takes its Name. Its Collegiate Church was Erected in 1559. into a Cathedral by Pope Paul IV. William Lindall was the first Pre∣late of it. The City is large, fair, and rich, having many stately Monasteries in it, whereof that of the Carthusians is the most considerable. It stands 11 Miles S. of Venlo, and 21 S. of Gelders. Long. 25 d. 22 m. Lat. 51 d. 16 m.
Article VI. Of the Dukedom of Limburg, Limburgensis, Du∣catus. LImburg has the Dutchy of Juliers to the East and North,Bounds. the Bishoprick of Liege to the West, and part of Luxemburg to the South. Its Extent South and North is about 35 Miles, and West and East about 26.Extent. It had heretofore Dukes of its own,History. but upon the Death of Wal∣raine III. (whom others call Henry) in 1285. A∣dolph sold it to John Duke of Brabant, who pretended a Right to it, as descended from Margaret Daughter of Henry Duke of Limburg, Married in 1172. to Godfrey Duke of Brabant. In 1293. Rainold I. Duke of Guelderland, laid claim to it, in the Kight of Ermengarde his Wife, Daughter of Herman late Duke of Limburg; but he losing the Battel of Woring near Collen, June 5. 1298. and being taken Prisoner, was forced to resign his Right to John Duke of Brabant, to regain his Liberty, and from that time the Dukes of Brabant have en∣joyed it. It has excellent Mines of Iron, and one of Cop∣per.Quality. The Earth is very fruitful in Wheat, Fruits, and Fewel, but above all in Grass and Water. The Famous Spaw-Waters are not above Three Leagues S. W. from Limburg. The Chief Rivers here are, Rivers.1. The Meuse which runs but thorough a little part of this Country. 2. Geul, which washes Valkenburg, and falls into the Meuse. 3. Weser, which watereth Limburg, and runs into Liege. 4. Bervine, which washes Dalem. and falls into the Meuse. This Province hath but Five Walled Towns, and about 120 Villages.
The Towns are Limburg. Cap. to the Spaniards. Dalem, to the Hollanders. Valkenburg, to the Hollanders. Rolduck, to the Hollanders. Remborg. to the Hollanders. I. Limburg. Limburg Lat. Limburgum, is pleasantly seated upon a steep Rock which overlooks all the Country round about; at the bottom thereof runs the River Weser almost round it among se∣veral shady Woods. It is but a small City, for it chiefly consists of one broad short Street; neither is it considerable for its beauty, the Buildings for the most part being of Wood. But it is of no small consideration for its strength, for it is encompassed with a strong Wall and a Trench, and the access to it, which is on the North side, is extreamly difficult, lying all along upon the edge of the Rock: From one side thereof to the other, the Gate of the Town, (over which are the Governours Lodgings) spreads it self, and quite locks up and commands the whole passage. Here was before a very strong Castle. The Hollanders took this City in 1632. but the Spaniards recovered it again. In 1675. the French surprized it, and being forc'd to leave it in 1677. they destroyed the Castle which now lyes in Rubbish. Lim∣burg stands 19 Miles almost E. of Liege. Long. 25 d. 30 m. Lat. 50 d. 28 m. II. Dalem. Dalem is a small but strong Town and Castle on the River Bervin, with a large Territory depending upon it. Henry II. Duke of Brabant took this Town, and United it to his Dominions; it is now subject to the Hollanders, and stands Seven Miles N. E. of Liege, and 15 N. W. of Limburg. Long. 25 d. 5 m. Lat. 50 d. 45 m.
III. Valkenburg. Valkenburg or Vauguemont is a strong Town in Limburg, on the River Geul, and subject to the Hollanders, tho' said to be∣long to the Bishop of Liege. It is large and indifferent neat∣ly built, as well as tollerably fortified: The Castle stands on a steep Rock, and is inaccessible and impregnable to an Ene∣my that brings not Canon along with him. Yet in the year 1672. upon the news of the French coming, it was immedi∣ately quitted. The French took it in 1676. and restored it in 1679. by the Treaty of Nimeguen. It stands 11 Miles E. of Maestricht, 17 N. E. of Liege, and 21 N. of Limburg, Long. 25 d. 18 m. Lat. 50 d. 53 m. IV. Rolduck. Rolduck is an old little Town and Castle, with the Title of County, subject to the Hollanders: it stands 13 Miles E. of Valkenburg, Long. 25 d. 34 m. Lrt. 50 d. 52 m. V. Remborg. Remborg, is also a little Town, on the borders of Juliers and Territory of Rolduck, subject to the Hollandes. It stands 12 Miles E. of Valkenburg. Long. 25. d. Lat. 50 d. 57 m. Article VII. Of the Bishoprick of Liege. Leodiensis Ditio. THIS Country has part of the Dutchy of Gel∣derland and Brabant on the North.Bounds. Part of Brabant and the County of Namur on the West. The County of Luxemburg on the South; And the Dutchies of Limburg and Juliers on the East. It is extended about 70 Miles South-West and North-East, and about 35 West and East.Extent. It
is a part of the Circle of Westphalia in Germany tho' annexed to these Provinces. The Air is here very temperate; The Valleys produce plenty of Grass;Quality. The Plains abound with Corn, the Hills are thick set with Vines, the Mountains have their Quarries of Marble, and Mines of Lead, Iron and Brimstone, beside Pit-coal in abundance. The Forrests afford great store of Venison. The Bishop is Lord of the Country and Prince of the Empire,Government. tho' as Bishop he be under the Archbishop of Cologne; he has also the Title of Duke of Bouillon, Marquis of Franchimont, and Count of Loots and Hasbain, which are all Lordships in this Bishoprick. Besides that,Cities. it contains 52 Baronies, a great number of Abbeys, 24 Wal∣led Towns, and above 1500 Villages.Villages. The Chief Rivers are, 1. The Meuse which here washes Dinant, Huy, Liege, Maestricht, Stochem, and Maeseyck,Rivers. and runs into Gelderland. 2. The Demer, which here washing Bilsen and Haffelt, runs into Brabant. 3. The Jecker which washes Tongres and falls into the Maes at Maestricht. 4. Wesdres, which washes Viviers and falls into the Maes at Maestricht. Besides these there are eleven small Rivers. The Chief Cities are, Liege. Bish. Cap. Huy. Chiney. Thuin. Bouillon. Dinant. Walcourt. Florennes. Horn. Hamont. Brey. Maseick. Herk. St. Truyen. Tongres.
I. Liege. Liege or Luick Lat. Laodium, Laodicum and sometimes Le∣gia, is situated on the left side of the Meuse, a little below the place where Ourt runs into it, with a Bishops See Suffra∣gant of the Archbishop of Cologne. It is a free Imperial City, built in a pleasant Valley, surrounded with Woods and Hills, amongst sweet springs which fall down from them, and the little Rivers of Ʋte, Vese and Ambluat, which fall into the Maes before it enters this City. The publick buildings, as, the Bishops Palace, the Churches, and Bridges are very sumptuous and magnificent. There are a great number of Abbeys and Religious Houses, and eight Collegiate Churches. The Cathedral dedicated to St. Lambert, is famous for its Chapter; to which no Canon can be admitted except he be noble by Birth, or by learning; that is except he be a Gen∣tleman or a Doctor. The Bishops See was first at Tongres from thence removed to Maestricht, and by St. Hubert successor of St. Lambert the Martyr, setled at Liege. A vast part of the Town within the Walls is not built, but employed in Vineyards and Orchards, which are very fruitful. It is supposed by some to have been built by Amborix a German Prince, mention'd by Julius Caesar. It suffered much from the Normans, and from one of the Dukes of Brabant, who took it and plundered it in 1212. In the XVth Century John D. of Burgundy, taking ad∣vantage of their disagreement in the Election of a Bishop, grievously afflicted it in 1409. killing 36000 of them in a Bat∣tel, and entring into the City, caused the Chief of those that had opposed him to be cast into the Meuse. After this in 1468. Charles Duke of Burgundy, again took the City, his Souldiers committing intolerable outrages against the Inha∣bitants. In this last Age it has been ill treated by its Bishops, and the French taking it by surprise in 1675. the next year after ruined the Castle. In 1688. the Baron of Elderen, Great Dean of the Cathedral was chosen Bishop and Prince of Liege by Plurality of Votes, in opposition to the Cardinal of Furstem∣berg, and has repaired the old Fortifications; and added new ones. Liege stands 30 Miles almost N. E. of Namur, and 54 East of Brussels, Long. 25 d. Lat. 50 d. 42 m.
II. Huy. Huy Lat. Hugum and Hugonum, is a Town and Castle on the River Meuse, near the Place where the River Huy runs into it, which gives the name to the Town. 'Tis divided by the Meuse into two parts, and is reputed very ancient. It had particular Earls, who gave it to the Bishops of Liege. It has suffered much in the late Wars. In 1692. the French sat before it, but soon left the Enterprise, the next year they be∣sieg'd and carried it in a few days. It stands 14 Miles almost S. W. of Liege, and 17 almost N. E. of Namur, Long. 24 d. 35 m. Lat. 50 d. 36 m. III. Chiney. Chiney is a small Town on the Borders of Namur, subject to the French ever since 1681. It stands 14 Miles S. E. of Na∣mur, Long. 24 d. 26 m. Lat. 50 d. 23 m. IV. Thuin. Thuin is a little Town on the River Sambre and in le pays en∣tre Sambre & Meuse, it is subject to the French who have lately fortified it. It stands by the borders of Hainault 10 Miles S. W. of Charleroy, and 14 S. E. of Mons, Long. 23 d. 31 m. Lat. 50 d. 22 m. V. Bouillon. Bouillon or Buillon Lat. Bullonium is a fair and beautiful Bur∣rough and Castle, with the Title of a Dutchy; This Castle is very strong, situated upon a craggy Mountain. It gave its name to the illustrious Godfrey of Bouillon King of Jerusalem who undertaking the famous expedition of the Holy Land, engaged Bouillon to Obert Bishop of Liege, upon condition that if he came back he should have the Liberty of Redeeming it. In the XVth Century it passed into the House of la Mark. It is now Subject to the French, and stands on the Ri∣ver
Semoy, 38 Miles almost W. of Luxemburg Long. 24 d. 34 m. Lat. 49 d. 50 m. VI. Dinant. Dinant Lat. Dinantium a rich Town on the River Meuse had formerly a strong Cittadel on a steep Rock, that was ruined by the French in 1554. and has been restored since. The French are in possession of this Place ever since 1675. it lies 14 Miles S. of Namur, and 40 almost E. of Liege, Long. 24 d. 10 m. Lat. 50 d. 12 m. VI. Walcourt. Walcourt or Valencourt is a small inconsiderable Town in the Bishoprick of Liege, tho' often reckon'd in Namur. It is the Capital of le pays entre Meuse & Sambre, and famous for an ob∣stinate skirmish betwixt the Dutch and French, in which the latter sustained a considerable loss in 1689. but made them∣selves Masters of the Town. It stands on a Rivulet nine Miles S. of Charleroy, and 17 W. of Dinant, Long. 23 d. 42 m. Lat. 50 d. 18. m. VIII. Florennes. Florennes is another small Town in Le Pays entre Sambre & Meuse, subject to the French. It stands five Miles E. of Wal∣court, and 11 W. of Dinant, Long. 24 d. Lat. 50 d. 10 m. IX. Horne. Horne is a little Town in Brabant with the Title of Earldom, and a great Domain. It is situated on the River Meuse, with a good Castle. It is an Imperial Mannor tho' subordinate to the ancient Earldom of Lootz in the Dominion of Liege.. It stands six Miles almost W. of Ruremond.
X. Hamont. Hamont is a little Town in the County of Lootz, and subject to this Prince. In stands on the Borders of Brabant 17 Miles N. W. of Maesick, Long. 24 d. 50 m. Lat. 51 d. 18 m. XI. Brey. Brey is another small Town in the County of Lootz, subject to that Prince, 11 Miles W. of Maesick, and 15 North of Maestricht, Long. 24 d. 55 m. Lat. 51 d. 10 m. XII. Maesick. Maesick is a pretty considerable Town in the County of Lootz, subject to this Prince. It stands on the River Maes, by the Borders of Brabant and Gelderland, 13 Miles almost N. E. of Maestricht and 27 from Liege, Long. 25 d. 13. m. Lat. 51 d. 7 m. XIII. Herk. Herk is a small Town in the same County on the borders of Brabant, and on the River Demer, 18 Miles E. of Maestricht and 25 N. W. of Liege, Long. 24 d. 28 m. Lat. 50 d. 58 m. XIV. St. Truyen. St. Truyen, or St. Tron, Lat. Fanum Sancti Trudonis, is the Capital of the County of Hasbain or Haspengo, subject to this Prince. It stands nigh the Borders of Brabant, 18 Miles W. of Mastricht and 20 almost N. W. of Liege, Long. 24 d. 21 m. Lat. 50 d. 52 m.
XV. Tongres. Tongres or Tongeron, Lat. Tungri or Aduacata Tungrorum, is a very ancient Town upon Jecker, it was first ruined by Attila, and afterwards by the Normans. Some pretend that St. Ma∣terne sent by St. Peter preached the Gospel and was first Bishop of this Place, where he had eight successors, until St. Gervais removed the seat to Mastricht, whence it was afterwards changed to Liege. This Town has nothing considerable at present but its name, and the Glory of its ancient splendor. It lies about 13 Miles N. W. of Liege. Long. 24 d. 34 m. Lat. 50 d. 53 m. Article. VIII. Of the County of Namur. THIS County borders Brabant on the North; part of Brabant and Hainault on the West;Bounds. part of Hainault and Luxemburg on the South; and part of Luxemburg and the Country of Liege,Extent. on the East. Its extent North-east and South-West is about 34 Miles, and West and East about 30. It is plentifully stored with all Commodities, the Hills cloathed with Woods full of Fowl and Venison,Quality. and the Valleys fertile in Corn and Pa∣stures. It has also several Mines of Lead and Iron, Quarries of divers sorts of fine Marble, and Pits of Stone-Coal, which they call Houles. Cities.There are here four considerable Towns, and about 184 Villages.Villages. Rivers.The Chief Rivers are, 1. The Meuse, which runs through the midst of this Province into the Bishoprick of Liege, washing Charlemont, Dinant, Bovines, and Namur. 2. The Sambre which here washes Char∣leroy, and falls into the Meuse at Namur.
This County was formerly under the Spa∣niards but the French have in this late War con∣quered its best places.Government. The most remarkable pla∣ces in the County of Namur, are, Namur. Bish. Cap. Charleroy. Charlemont. Bouvines. Flerus. I. Namur. Namur Lat. Namurcum, situated upon the Sambre and near the Maes, lies between two Mountains and has a very strong Castle. Some derive its name from Novo Muro, a new Wall built here by the Romans. The Cathedral dedicated to St. Aubin was built in 1569. and the Bishoprick lies under the Archbishop of Cambray; besides the Cathedral there is also the Collegiate Church of our Lady, and several other Churches and Monasteries. This City has a large and handsom Market-place, a stately Town-house and abundance of good Stone-Buildings. It is no less rich than pleasant and strong. The Council Royal of the Province resided here, from which they did appeal to that of Malines. In 1692. The strength of the Place being discovered to the French by the Treacherous Ba∣ron de Bresse, who under pretence of being taken did actual∣ly desert the Spanish service, Lewis XIV. with 80000 sat down before it, Luxemburg covering the Siege with another great Army; The Town was taken after a few days Resist∣ance, a Parly being beaten by a Drummer, who never disco∣vered who commanded him. While the French continued to Besiege the Castle King William III. of great Brittain, march'd with 90000 Men to its Relief, but the French being advanta∣geously posted, they declined Battle; His Majesty did notwith∣standing drive them from some of their Posts, and laid Bridges over the River to pass it, but in the mean time a great Rain happening, swell'd the River, carried down the Bridges, pre∣vented his attacquing them, and gave them the opportunity to take the Castle also, July 2. 1692. Namur has been since ve∣ry well Fortified by the French. It lies 32 Miles S. E. of Brus∣sels, and 50 almost S. of Antwerp, Long. 24 d. 12 m. Lat. 50 d. 32
II. Charleroy. Charleroy, Lat. Carolo-Regium, is a Town and Fortress built upon a Mountain near the Sambre and Pieton; it was but a Bor∣rough called Charnoy until the Spaniards fortified it in 1666. and called it Charleroy from Charles their King. The French took it the year after, and kept it by the Peace of Aix la Chapelle. The Dutch and Spaniards attempted this Town twice in vain, the first time in 1672. and the second in 1677. But in the year 1678. it was yielded to the Spaniards by the Treaty of Nimeguen. In 1692. the French Bombarded this Place. In 1693 they sat down before it with a numerous Ar∣my, the Marquiss de Villeroy, carrying on the Siege, and Luxemburg covering him, so that King William of Great Brit∣tain, and the Elector of Bavaria not being strong enough to attack them, they carried the Town by surrender, after a gallant defence by the Marquiss de Castillo the Governour, who held out against them 27 days open Trenches, and capitulated on honourable Terms, October 1. 1693. Charleroy stands 14 Miles W. of Namur, and 26 S. of Brussels, Long. 23 d. 42 m. Lat. 50 d. 28 m. III. Charlemont. Charlemont Lat. Carolo-Montium, is a small Town with a good Fortress built by Charles V. in 1555. upon the Top of a Mountain, with strong Bulwarks and other regular Fortifica∣tions. The Meuse runs at the bottom of this Mountain below Givet, and affords the Town a great Trade. This Town has been in the Hands of the French ever since 1680. It lies 20 Miles S. of Namur, Long, 24 d. 10 m. Lat. 50 d. 12 m. IV. Bouvines. Bouvines or Bouvignes, Lat. Bovinae and Boviniacum, was en∣viron'd with Walls in 1173. by Henry the Blind Earl of Na∣mur, after which, the Countess Yolande granted it the Rights and Priviledges of a City. In 1154. it was taken by the French. It was afterwards retaken by the Spaniards. But the French
are Masters of it again. It is but a small Town, and of no great strength, and is only considerable for its being a Pass between Namur and Luxemburg. It stands on the Meuse about two Miles off Dinant; and 12 S. of Namur, Long. 24 d. 12 m. Lat. 50 d. 18 m. V. Flerus. Flerus, is but a Village, yet very remarkable for the fa∣mous Battel that was fought here in 1690. in which the French got the better of the Confederates. It stands almost six Miles N. E. of Charleroy, and 10 W. of Namur, Long. 23 d. 55 m. Lat. 50 d. 32 m. Article IX. Of the Dukedom of Luxemburg. THE Dukedom of Luxemburg is one of the XVII. Provinces, belonging of old to the Treviri;Bounds. it has on the East the Bishoprick of Triers, from which it is separated by the Mosel. On the North the Duke∣dom of Limburg and Liege. On the West the Meuse, which separates it from Champagne and Namur. And on the South Lorrain. Its Extent South and North is about 52 Miles,Extent. and West and East about 60. The West part of it is barren, but abounds with Game; that towards the East, abounds in Corn,Quality. Minerals, Quarries of Stone, and yields Wine in some places. The Chief Rivers here are, 1. Moselle, which here washes Mazieres, Thion∣ville, Remich, and Warserbillick,Rivers. and runs into Germany. 2. Ourt which washes Hofalize, La Rocke, Durbuy, and runs into Liege. 3. Sour which washes Dietkick and Ethernack, and falls into the Moselle.
Luxemburg at first had the Title of Earldom only, but was made a Dukedom by an Emperor of the House of Luxemburg.History. It has about 20 Walled Towns,Towns. and 1200 Villages, which are all under the French since 1684. that they took the Capital. The House of Luxemburg is one of the most Noble Families of Eu∣rope, for it has produced Five Emperors, whereof Three were Kings of Bohemia, and has been possessed of great Estates in Germany and France. It has also yielded Six Queens and many Princesses. The most ancient of this House that we have knowledge of, was Sigefredus, youngest Brother of God∣frey Earl of Verdun, who by Exchange got the Castle of Lux∣emburg of Wiker Abbot of St. Maximinus of Trier, April 17. 963. whence he took his Sirname, and the Title of Earl, which he left to his Posterity. This Family afterwards became ve∣ry considerable about the XIIIth. and XIVth. Centuries, and was divided into Three Branches, viz. That of 1. Luxemburg Ligni, of, 2. Luxemburg Brienne S. Paul, and Pinci, (the Heiress of which Branch the present Mareschal of Luxemburg Married; but he himself is descended of the Earls of Boute∣ville, tho' he calls himself Francis Henry of Montmorency, and has taken the Arms of that House.) The third Branch is that of Luxemburg Fiennes and Martigues, which is also extinct. The most remarkable Places here are, Luxemburg. Cap. Thionville. Esche. Virton. Ivoix. Montmedy. Stenay or Altenay. Damvilliers. Maisiers. Durbuy. Bastoigne. Vianden. Arlon. I. Luxemburg. Luxemburg, Lat. Luxemburgum, or Augusta Romanduorum, or Luciburgum, is situated upon the River Else, one part of it on a Hill, and the rest in a Plain; There is a very strong Castle, and several regular Fortifications. It has a Convent of the Order of St. Francis, in which lyes Buried John King of Bohemia, Father of Charles IVth. Emperor of Germany,
slain by the English at the Battel of Cressy in 1346. This City has suffered much by the Wars between the French and the Netherlands. In 1529. Charles V. took it from Francis I. of France. In 1542. it was taken and sacked by the Duke of Orleans, and retaken, and treated in the same manner the Year following. It is now under the French, who took it in 1684. and have so much added since to its Fortifications, as to render it almost impregnable. It stands 18 Miles S. W. of Trier, 31 N. of Metz, 52 S. of Limburg, and 100 S. E. of Brussels. Long. 25 d. 34 m. Lat. 49 d. 41 m. II. Thionville. Thionville, Lat. Theodonis Villa, upon the Moselle, is so ad∣vantagiously situated, and so well fortified, that it has passed a long time for impregnable. The Duke of Guise took it in 1558. but it was afterwards delivered to the Spaniards. The French were beat before it in 1639. but they made themselves Masters of it in 1643. and kept it by the Pyrenaean Peace. It was in this Town that Charlemagne generally assembled the Prelates and Barons of his Kingdoms as in 806. when he di∣vided his Possessions between his three Sons. This Town stands 13 Miles S. of Luxemburg. Long. 25 d. 32 m. Lat. 49 d. 29 m. III. Esche. Esche is but a small inconsiderable Town, 10 Miles S. W. of Luxemburg. IV. Virton. Virton is another small Town, about 22 Miles W. of Lux∣emburg.
V. Yvoix. Yvoix is a small but pretty strong Town on the River Chier, 33 Miles W. of Luxemburg. VI. Montmedy. Montmedy is a Place of no great bigness, yet it is reckon'd a Place of considerable strength. It is very conveniently si∣tuated upon the top of a high Hill, the foot whereof is wa∣tered by the River Chier. It stands 32 Miles almost W. of Luxemburg. VII. Stenay. Stenay, Lat. Stenaeum or Stenacum, is a strong City upon the Meuse, on the Borders of Champagne and Lorrain. The French took it in 1654. and annexed it to the Dukedom of Bar in Lorrain. It stands Eight Miles W. of Montmedy. VIII. Damvilliers. Damvilliers is a strong little Town in the Dukedom of Lux∣emburg, but annexed to the Dukedom of Lorrain. It was taken by the French in 1659, given them since by the Treaty of the Pyrenees, and dismantled by the same in 1673. It stands 31 Miles W. of Thionville. IX. Maisiers Maisiers is a little Town on the Moselle, about 25 Miles S. of Luxemburg.
X. Durbuy. Durbuy is another small Town, with the Title of a County, on the River Ourt, nigh the Bishoprick of Liege, subject to the French ever since 1681. It stands 20 Miles almost S. of Liege, and 26 almost E. of Namur and Dinant. XI. Bastoigne. Bastoigne or Bastonach, Lat. Bactonia and Bactonacum, near the Forest of Ardenne, is so well Built, and of so great Tra∣ding, that the People of the Country call it Paris in Ardenne. It stands 25 Miles N. W. of Luxemburg. XII. Vianden. Vianden is a considerable Town, with the Title of a Coun∣ty on the little River Ʋra, and about 21 Miles N. of Luxem∣burg. XIII. Arlon. Arlon, Lat. Arlunum, is a strong little Town on the Bor∣ders of Lorrain, dignified with the Title of a Marquisate in 1103. and seated upon a Hill where the Ancient Inhabitants were wont to adore the Moon, about 14 Miles W. of Luxem∣burg, Article X. Of the County of Hainault, Lat. Hannonia. THIS Province is bounded on the North with Brabant and Flanders,Bounds. on the West with the Scheld, which parts it from Artois, and part of the
French Flanders; on the South with Cambresis, Chumpagne and Picardy, and on the East with part of Brabant, and the County of Namur.Extent. Its Extent North and South is about 60 Miles, and about 70 West and East. It bears the Title of Earldom,Name. anciently called Saltus Carbonarius, from the abundance of Char-coal made in the Woods and Forests of it, and now Hainault, from the River Haine, that runs through it. The Air is here temperate, and the Soil very fruitful,Quality. the Country being well watered by Rivers, Lakes, &c. which do much enrich it; so that the Country abounds, in most places, with fresh Meadows, and sweet Pastures, good Fruit, and profitable Trees, but espe∣cially with great plenty of Corn. There are also Lead and Iron Mines, and Quarries of excellent Marble. The Principal Rivers here are, Rivers.1. Sambre, which here washes Landrecy, Armi∣ers, Maubeuge, and runs into Namur. 2. Scheld, which washes Bouchain and Valenciennes, and runs into Flanders. 3. Haine, which washes Binch and Mons, and falls into the Scheld near Conde. 4. Dender, which here washes Leuse, Aeth, and Lessines, and runs into Flanders. This Province is said to contain 24 Walled Towns,Towns, &c. and 950 Villages, among which there are reckon∣ed, One Principality. 10 Counties, 12 Peerages, 22 Baronies, 26 Abbies; with One Earl-Marshal, a Seneschal, a Great Huntsman, a Chamberlain, and divers other Officers, whose Places are Hereditary. Rainier I. Sir∣named Long-neck, is accounted the first Earl of Hai∣nault,History. he had 21 Successors to Charles V. King of Spain, and Emperor of Germany; in the Possessi∣on of whose Successors, to the Crown of Spain, Hainault continued, till the French got the greatest part of it by force of Arms.
The most Remarkable Places in Hainault are, To the French. Mons. Cap. Binch. Conde. Valenciennes. Bouchain. Soignes. Roccles. Quesnoy. Bavay. Maubeuge. Beaumont. Landrecy. Avesnes. Chimay. Marienburg. Philippeville. To the Spaniards. Lessines. Aeth. Enghien Halle. Braine-le-Comte. Fountain, or l'Evesque. Places of Hainault Subject to the French. I. Mons. MONS, named Berghen by the Natives, Lat. Montes, or Montes Hannoniae, is situated on a Hill near the River Trulle. It is large and well fortified with good Bulwarks, and three Ditches, with Sluces that may drown all the Country round about, except the Eastern side where the Ground is somewhat higher, and where they have raised good Bastions. This Town has fine Buildings, and an old Castle; and is fa∣mous for its Trade, good Workmen, and the Abbey of Ca∣nonesses of St. Waltrude. They are Virgins of Quality, who
are present at the Morning Service in Canonical Habit, but wear Secular Cloaths the rest of the day, and are permitted to Marry. The Ancient Earls of Hainault took the Title of Earls of Mons. This Town is in the Possession of the French who carried it after a vigorous Siege, and Gallant Defence of the Town in 1691. It stands 27 Miles S. W. of Brussels, 37 W. of Namur, 39 S. of Ghent, and 48 almost E. of Ar∣ras. Long. 23 d. 12 m. Lat. 50 d. 28 m. II. Binch. Binch or Bins, Lat. Binchium, is situated upon a Branch of the River Haine, within 10 Miles E. of Mons. It is an ancient and pleasant City, in a fertile Country, abounding in all man∣ner of Game, and the Air is very good; for which reason Ma∣ry Queen of Hungary, Sister to the Emperor Charles V. Built in it a very fine House, which the French ruined in 1554. af∣ter the taking of Marienburg and Dinant. It has been sincere-built, and called Marimont. The French are Master of it since 1668. it being yielded unto them by the second Article of the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, since which they have repaired it, and added some Fortifications to it. III. Conde. Conde, Lat. Condatum or Condate, is situated on the Banks of the Scheld, with the Title of Principality. The French took it in 1676. and rendred it a very Important Place. It has given its Name to many of the Royal House of Bourbon, since Francis of Bourbon Count of Vendome, Married Mary of Luxemburg, Eldest Daughter, and Chief Heiress of Peter of Luxemburg, second of the Name, Count of St. Paul, Conver∣sion, Soissons, Viscount of Meaux, Lord of Enghien, Conde, &c. This Town stands 13 Miles W. of Mons. IV. Valenciennes. Valenciennes, Lat. Valentianae, or Valentincanae, is a very ancient, pleasant, and strong Town upon the Scheld. It's thought our Ladies Church there was Built by King Pepin.
There are several other considerable Churches and Colleges, a fine Town-house. The Inhabitants are noted for Commerce and Riches. This Place was Besieg'd in 1656. by the Mares∣chals of Turenne and La Ferte Senneterre, but Don John of Au∣stria, back'd by the Valour of the Prince of Conde, raised the Siege, and took Mureschal La Ferte Prisoner. Lewis XIV. having laid Siege to it in 1677. carried it by Assault, by the favour of one of the Gates, which was half open; and to save it from Plunder, forc'd the Inhabitants to be at the Charge of Building a Cittadel. It stands 17 Miles almost W. of Mons, 41 S. W. of Brussels, and 43 S. of Ghent. Long. 22 d. 44 m. Lat. 50 d. 24 m. V. Bouchain. Bouchain, Lat. Bochonium and Buccinium, is situated upon the left Bank of the Scheld, betwixt Valenciennes and Cam∣bray. It is a small Town, but well Fortified, and has a very good Castle. It is the Capital of the County of Ostervand, which in Times past belong'd immediately to the Eldest Sons of the Earls of Hainault; it belongs to the French ever since 1676. and stands 10 Miles S. W. of Valenciennes, and 28 W. of Mons. VI. Soignes. Soignes is a small inconsiderable Town, on the River Senne, Eight Miles N. E. of Mons. VII. Roccles. Roccles is also a small open Town, Eight Miles almost N. E. of Mons. VIII. Quesnoy. Quesnoy is a small Town, but pretty considerable for its strength, Subject to the French since 1654. It stands Seven Miles S. E. of Valenciennes, and 18 S. W. of Mons.
IX. Bavay. Bavay is a little Town, about Six Miles S. W. of Mons. X. Maubeuge. Maubeuge is a strong, rich little Town on the River Sambre, 10 Miles S. of Mons. XI. Beaumont. Beaumont is a little Town Nine Miles E. of Maubeuge, and 15 S. E. of Mons, Subject to the French, and demolish'd by them in 1691. XII. Landrecy. Landrecy, Lat. Landrecium, seated on the Fountain of the River Sambre, is small, but strongly Fortified, and Famous for the Sieges it has endured. The Emperor Charles V. Be∣sieged it in 1542. for Six Months, with 150000 Men, and re∣tired from it at last without success. By the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. it was left to the French. It stands 15 Miles S. W. of Maubeuge, and 23 S. of Mons. XIII. Avesnes. Avesnes is a pleasant and well Fortified Town, upon the River Hepre, in le pays entre Sambre & Meuse; it was granted to the French by the Pyrenaean Treaty, and stands 10 Miles S. of Maubeuge, and 30 W. of Cambray. XIV. Chimay. Chimay, seated on the River la Blanche, or the White, is at the entrance of the Forests, Six Leagues from Avesnes;
notwithstanding what it has suffered by the almost continual Wars, it is now very well re-establish'd, and has a fine Castle. It stands 21 Miles S. E. of Maubeuge. XV. Marienburg. Marienburg stands on the River Blanche; it derives its Name from Mary of Austria Queen of Hungary, and Governess of the Low Countries, who Built it in 1542. Its situation is so ad∣vantageous, that it was look'd upon as impregnable. Yet the French took it, and kept it by the Pyrenaean Treaty, and have since dismantled it. It lyes 29 Miles S. E. of Mons. XVI. Philippeville. Philippeville, was Built by the same Queen Mary of Hungary in 1555. and called by the Name of King Philip. Besides its Situation that is naturally strong, it was excellently well for∣tified to oppose the French, who are Masters of it now accor∣ding to the Pyrenaean Treaty, in 1659. It stands 11 Miles W. of Charlemont, 15 S. of Charleroy, 20 S. W. of Namur, and 24 S. E. of Mons. Places of Hainault belonging to the Spaniards. I. Lessines. LEssines, or Lessin, Lat. Lessina, is a small City on the Ri∣ver Dender, famous for the Manufactory of Linnen; it stands 18 Miles N. of Mons, 20 almost W. of Brussels, and 22 S. of Ghent. Long. 23 d. 8 m. Lat. 50 d. 50 m. II. Aeth. Ath, or Aeth, is not very large, but Beautiful, Rich, and well Fortified, seated upon the River Dender. It was taken
by the French in 1667. and confirmed to them by the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, but restored to the Spaniards in 1678. by the Treaty of Nimeguen. It stands on the Borders of Flan∣ders, 14 Miles almost N. W. of Mons. III. Enghien. Enghien, or Anguien, is a small place on the Borders of Bra∣bant and Flanders, noted for its Manufactories of all sorts of Tapestries, and for being the first Barony of the Provinces, which gives the Title of Baron, to the Princes of the House of Bourbon. It stands 16 Miles N. of Mons. Two or three Miles S. of Enghien is the Village Steenkirk by the River Senne, and Famous for the Battel that was fought there betwixt the Confederates Army and the French in 1692. The loss of Men was almost equal, but the French carried the Day. IV. Halle. Halle is a small dismantled Town on the River Sennes, plun∣dered by the French in 1691. It stands 21 Miles almost N. E. of Mons. V. Braine-le-Comte. Braine-le-Comte, is another small inconsiderable Town, nigh the Borders of Brabant, between Brussels and Mons, 13 Miles off the former, and 14 off the latter. VI. Fontain, or l'Evesque. Fontain, or l'Evesque, is also an inconsiderable Town of Hai∣nault on the Borders of Namur, 16 Miles E. of Mons.
Article XI. Of Cambresis, Lat. Cameracensis Ager. CAmbresis, is bounded on the North and East with Hainault, on the West with Artois,Bounds. and on the South with Picardy. Its Extent South-East and North-West is about 30 Miles,Extent. and West a∣bout 16. This Country is very fruitful in all things ex∣cept Wine,Quality. and has a Castle called Castle Cambre∣sis, where in 1559. there was concluded a Peace between Spain and France, which last gave 98 considerable Places for St. Quentin, Ham and Catelet. The Chief Rivers here are, 1. Scheld, which washes Crevecoeur and Cambray,Rivers. and runs into Hainault. 2. Selle, which washes Castle or Chateau Cambresis, and runs into Hainault. 3. Sambre, which goes through a little part of this Coun∣try, and runs into Hainault. The Cities or Walled Towns are but Three in number, viz. Cambray. Archb. Cap. Crevecoeur. Chateau Cambresis. Which are all under the French. I. Cambray. Cambray, Lat. Cameracum, seated upon the Scheld, is great, fair, well Built, and one of the strongest Towns of Europe, with Two Cittadels in it. Some Authors write that Camber King of the Sicambrians was the Founder of it. Clau∣dion King of France Conquered it in 445. and afterwards it fell to Charles the Bald in 843. and 870. after the Death of
Lothaire II. and sometimes after, it became the Subject of War between the Kings of France, the Emperors of Germany, and the Counts of Flanders. Baldwin I. Count of Flanders took it, and gave it to his Son Raoul. The Emperors de∣clared it a free Town, but for all that the French never quit∣ted their Claim to it. In 1542. Francis I. of France consen∣ted it should be Neuter; but the Emperor Charles V. took it the Year after, and kept the Inhabitants in awe by a Cittadel Built at their own Expences. It changed Masters some time after, when the Duke of Alencon Brother to King Henry III. was made Count of Flanders in 1582. He was also Master of Cambray, and left it to John Montiu Sieur of Belagny, who soon after join'd himself to the League, and afterwards made Peace with Henry IV. who made him Prince of Cambray, and Mares∣chal of France in 1594. but the Spaniards surprised this Town, and forced him to deliver them the Cittadel, the 9th of Octo∣ber 1595. The Inhabitants acknowledged Philip II. of Spain, but the Archbishop made such Complaints, and shewed such Reasons, that the King was satisfied with being Master of the Cittadel, and Protector of the Country, and left all other Jurisdiction to that Prelate. The Spaniards Fortified this Town very well, and kept such a strong Garison in it, that it was look'd upon to be impregnable. Yet the King of France took it in 1677. The great Cittadel is upon a heighth which commands all the Town; the Ditch is wrought in a Rock. The Ramparts of the Town are also Environed with deep Ditches chiefly to the East, defended with many good Basti∣ons. It reaches to the River, and has another good Fort to defend it of that side, which lying low, may be soon drown∣ed by drawing the Sluces. The Chapter of this City is one of the most considerable of the Low Countries, consisting of 48 Canons, and 95 Ecclesiasticks, which Officiate in our La∣dy's Church. It's affirmed, that Diogenes, a Grecian by Na∣tion, was the first Prelate of Cambray, sent into France by Pope Siricius about 408. Pope Paul IV. made it an Arch∣bishoprick in 1559. upon the Request of King Philip of Spain; and the Bishopricks of Arras, Tournay, St. Omer and Namur, were given for Suffragants. The Archbishops take the Title of Dukes of Cambray, Counts of Cambresis, and Princes of the Empire. The Streets of this Town are wide and very neat, and the chiefest and richest end in a great Place, where the Town-house is Built, and has a very curious Clock. There are also very good Manufactures, as Cambray,
and especially of many sorts of Linnen, that bear the Name of the City. It stands 34 Miles S. W. of Mons, 40 N. E. of Amiens, and 94 almost N. of Paris. Long. 22 d. 24 m. Lat. 50 d. 51 m. II. Crevecoeur. Crevocoeur, is a place of no great Moment, on the River Scheld, nigh Four Miles S. of Cambray. III. Chateau-Cambresis. Chateau-Cambresis is another inconsiderable Town of Cam∣bresis, on the River Selle 15 Miles S. E. of Cambray. Article II. Of the County of Artois Lat. Artesia. ARtois borders, Picardy on the South; The Boulonnois on the West;Bounds. The County of Flanders on the North; and the Cambresis on the East. Its ExtentExtent. South and North West is about 55 miles, and about 40 West and East. It is exceeding fertile in all sorts of Corn, but more particularly of Wheat,Quality. which it pro∣duces in such a measure, that this Province serves as a Granary to a great part of Flanders and Brabant. It has in it twelve Cities or Walled Towns,Cities. 850 Villages,Villages, &c. nine Chattelenies or Castlewards, and several Abbeys and Monasteries. The Chief Rivers in this Province are, Rivers,1. Scharpe which here washes Arras and runs into Flanders nigh Douay. 2. Lys, which here washes Aire and St. Venant and runs into Flanders.
3. Aa which here washes Reutly and St. Omers, and runs into Flanders. 4. Canche which washes Hesdin and runs into France. Artois was subject to the Romans, and after∣wards to the Kings of Austrasia;History and Government. since whose times it has often changed Masters. Lewis the XIth King of France made himself Master of Ar∣ras in 1477. after Charles the Bold or Rash Duke of Burgundy; but Mary of Burgundy, this Charles's Daughter brought it into the House of Austria marrying Maximilian the 1st of Austria, Father of Philip I. and Grandfather of Charles V. and Ferdinand I. Francis the I. of France, was forced by the Peace of Madrid in 1529. to quit Artois to the Spaniards, which was afterwards possessed by Philip II, and III. But the French re-conquered it under Philip IV. Son of the last, who yielded it 'em by the 35 Article of the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. reserving to him∣self, the Towns of Aire and St. Omer since taken by the French, so that they are now Masters of all this Province. The most remarkable places in Artois are, Arras. Bish. Ch. Cit. St. Omer. Bish. Bapaume. Hesdin. Bethune. St. Venant. Aire. Priory. Therouane. Lens. Avesne le Comte. Liques. Pernes. I. Arras. Arras Lat. Rigiacum or Origiacum is seated on the Scharpe with a Bishoprick Suffragant of Cambray. This is a very an∣cient City, St. Vast who died in 540. was its first Bishop. Lewis XI. of France made himself Master of it in 1493. but re∣stored it afterward to the Emperor Maximilian. The Spa∣niards fortified it so as to think they had rendred it impreg∣nable; whereupon they caused the Emblem of some Rats running after Cats to be carved on the Frontispiece of one of the Gates of this City with these two boasting verses. Quand ces Rats prendront ces Chats Les Francois prendront Arras.
That is, When these Rats shall catch these Cats Then the French shall take Arras. This Prophecy proved false, for the Mareschals of Chaune, Chatillon, and La Meilleraye, laid Siege to, and carried it in 1640 after they had defeated the Cardinal Infanta that came to relieve the Place. And the French leaving the said Emblem up∣on the Gate, did but take away the P, in the word Prendront, of the second verse, which quite alters the signification of the Motto, as, Quand ces Rats prendront ces Chats Les Francois rendront Arras. That is, When these Rats shall catch these Cats Then the French shall yield Arras. The Spaniards sate before it in 1654. but were beat off with great loss, so that it still belongs to the French, who have made its Fortifications very strong and regular. It is a place of large circumference, well Peopled, Rich and Trading. The Streets are broad and fair, adorned with a spacious Market-place. Here is also a beautiful Cathedral a very weal∣thy Abbey and a strong Castle. This City stands 20 miles al∣most of Cambray, 30 N. E. of Amiens, and 92 N. of Paris, Long. 21 d. 55 m. Lat. 50 d. 20 m. II. St. Omer. St. Omer in Latin Fanum Sancti Audomari and Ʋrbs Audoma∣rensis lies on the River Aa in the Country of the Ancient Mo∣rins, with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Cambray. St. Omer or Audomarus, Bishop of Therouan built this City in 660. And Foulques Abbot of St. Bertin began to encompass it with Walls in 880. which was afterward finished by Baldwin II. Sirnamed the Bald Earl of Flanders in 902. who also join∣ed the Abbey of Sithieu to the City. Afterwards Therouan be∣ing
demolished in the XVI. Century there were instead of it, founded two Bishopricks in 1559. viz. that of Bologne and of St. Omer. Near to this City is a Lake, containing several small floating Islands, Inhabited by certain Families that never mar∣ry but among themselves without going out of these Islands, which they make to go too and fro at pleasure either with Cords or Poles. St. Omer is a great and fair City, well for∣tified, having on the one side the River and Marshes, and on the other side is defended by a strong Castle, with good Ba∣stions and deep and broad Ditches. In 1639. the French be∣sieged it but in vain. About 1596. Philip II. of Spain founded here a College for English Jesuits endowing it largely: they have since purchased Watton Cloyster, which is within 2 Miles of St. Omer; a very pleasant place and worth 500 pound per annum. The Duke of Orleans the French Kings Brother, took this Town in April 1677. after the Battel of Cassel, and by the Peace of Nimeguen it was yielded to the French. It is a Rich Trading City; and remarkable for the Abbey of St. Bertin, in which it is not lawful for Women to enter during life nor to be buried after. St. Omer stands 17 miles S. of Dunkirk, 21 E. of Boulogne and 36 N. W. of Arras, Long. 21 d. 22 m. Lat. 50. d. 52 m. III. Bapaume. Bapaume is a very strong little Town, the French took it in 1641. and it was left to them by the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. It stands on the borders of Picardy 14 miles almost E. of Arras and 15 S. W. of Cambray, Long. 22 d. 5 m. Lat. 50 d. 9. m. IV. Hesdin. Hesdin or Hesdinfert Lat. Hesdina or Hesdinum is a fortified Town on the River Canche and Frontiers of Picardy, formerly situated a League from the Place where it stands now, for it was ruin'd during the Wars between Francis I. and Charles V. and rebuilt by Emanuel Duke of Savoy, the Emperors Gene∣ral in 1554. in a place called Mesnil: Therefore called Hesdin∣fert, alluding to the old Motto of the House of Savoy. F.E.R.T. It enjoys a very good situation, and is a very regular Exagon,
so well contrived and fortified that it is accounted one of the strongest Holds of Flanders; yet it was taken by the French and yielded to them by the Treaty of the Pyrenees. It stands 25 miles South of St. Omer. Long. 21 d. 20. m. Lat. 50 d. 27 m. V. Bethune. Bethune is the chief Town of the County of that Name it stands on the small River Biette. It is a very good place pretty well fortified, here are two Fairs which bring it a con∣siderable Trade. The French took it 1645. and it was yield∣ed to them by the 35th Article of the Treaty of the Pyrenees, Anno 1659. It has produced several great Men who have been Dukes, Peers and Mareschals of France, and done their Kings great service in the Wars. It lies 18 miles N. W. of Arras, Long. 21 d. 46 m. Lat. 50 d. 38. m. VI. St. Venant. St. Venant Lat. Fanum Sancti Venantii, is a small Town on the River Lies. It was taken by the French in 1669. and for∣merly a place of strength, but now much neglected. It stands 26 miles S. of Dunkirk, and as many N. of Arras, Long. 21 d. 39 m. Lat. 50 d. 44 m. VII. Aire, or Arien. Aire is a very strong Town, with a good Castle on the Frontiers of Flanders, within three Leagues of St. Omer. The River Lys runs through it: it has fine Churches, especially the ancient Collegiate Church called St. Peters, to which Baldwin Count of Flanders added 14 Prebendaries in 1604. The French took this place in 1641. after a memorable Siege, but it was quickly after retaken by the Spaniard. It was again taken by the French in 1676. under the command of Mareschal D'Humieres. It stands 25 miles S. of Dunkirk, 28 N. W. of Arras and 26 E. of Boulogne; Long. 21 d. 30 m. Lat. 50 d. 41. m.
VIII. Therouan or Terouane. Therouane, Lat. Teruana or Cicutus Morinorum was the Capital of the Ancient Morins. It had formerly a Bishops See Suffra∣gant of Rheims. It was lookt upon as an impregnable place; But Pontus de Laillan Lord of Bugnicourt took it in 1553. for Charles V. who ordered it should be demolished; so that now there are but few Inhabitants, who are subject to the King of France. It stands on the River Lys five miles W. of Aire and nine S. of St. Omers. Long. 21 d. 23 m. Lat. 50 d. 41 m. IX. Lens. Lens Lat. Lentium Nemetacum is a small Town upon the Ri∣ver Souchets formerly pretty well fortified but some years since slighted and dismantled. The Prince of Conde gave the Spa∣niards a great overthrow here in 1648. and afterwards took the Town, which was left to France by the 35th Article of the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. It stands nine Miles N. of Arras, and 15 W. of Doway. Long. 21 d. 57 m. Lat. 50 d. 28 m. X. Avesnes le Comte. Avesnes le Comte, is but a small Town on the Fron∣tiers of Picardy, very much ruined by the Wars. It stands eight Miles S. W. of Arras, Long. 21 d. 40 m. Lat. 50 d. 14 m. XI. Liques. Liques is a small Town on the Borders of Picardy, seven miles W. of St. Omer, and 12 almost S. of Calais. Long. 21 d. 12 m. Lat. 50 d. 53 m.
XII. Pernes. Pernes is also a small Town, seven miles W. of Bethune, 9 S. of Aire and 20 N. W. of Arras, Long. 21 d. 33 m. Lat. 50 d. 34 m. There are some other small inconsiderable Towns in Artois, such as, St. Paul, Mont St. Eloy, Renty, Dire or Drien, &c.
THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE SECT. II. The Course of the Rhine. CHAP. I. Description of the River Rhine in general. THE Rhine, Lat. Rhenus, has its Sources in the Alps in Mount Adula or St. Gothar,Source. in the Country of Grisons, or Rhaetia, two or three Leagues from the Fountain of the Rhone. It springs from two Fountains, the one called Veder Rhyn, or first Rhine, and the other Hindes Rhyn, or the se- second Rhine, which join both together. This River begins to be Navigable, near Chur, in Switzerland,Course. and entring into the great Lake of Constance, it passes to Schaf∣fouze, and Basil, from thence it runs into Alsatia, and in∣creasing by the Waters of many great Rivers, it Waters the Palatinate of the Rhine; The Archbishopricks and Electorates of Mayence or Mentz, Treves or Triers; and Cologne or Ceulen; then the succession of Cleves and Juliers: And finally it en∣ters
the Low-Countries at the Fort Schenk, where it di∣vides into two Branches, whereof the one called Vahal runs through Nimeguen, Tiel and Bommel, and joining with the Meuse it looses its name. The other branch takes its course towards the North, almost as far as Arnheim, where it sepa∣rates into two parts, whereof the one called the Yssel passeth to Doesburg and Zutphen and discharges it self into the Zuy∣der-zee; The other Arm, which since the year 860 has form∣med a new Course by the over-flowing of the Sea, is called Lech; and runs not by Ʋtrecht and Leyden as it did then, but to Wyck, Cullemburg, and Newport, and finally, dischargeth it self into the Merwe, and from thence into the Ocean. This River, fam'd by the Greek and Latin Wri∣ters,History. is without doubt the greatest in Europe, next the Danube, and noted for the excellent Wine, which grows on its Banks called Rhenish-Wine. The Etymology of its name is variously discoursed of by Authors; some deriving it from the German word Reyn, which signi∣fies Flowing hitherward; or Rein, which signifies clearness and purity, because it was formerly made a Test of Conjugal Chastity; for as, Hoffman relates, the Ancient Inhabitants about the Rhine, did use to try the Legitimacy of Children, by throwing them into it, reckoning such as sunk to be Ba∣stards, but those who swam, were look'd upon as lawfully be∣got; Hence Claudian, Et quos Nascentes explorat gurgite Rhenus. It was also called, Aurifer by some because of the Gold found mix'd with its Sand. The Rhine was the Ancient Boundary betwixt France and Germany. Constantine the Great, begun a Bridge over this River at Cologne, to strike terror into the French. Charlemaign built a wonderful one of Wood over it at Mentz of 500 paces long, which was burnt by a casual Fire about a year before his Death. In the Description I design to make of the Course of the Rhine, I shall confine my self to that which is most remark∣able both in the Treaties of Peace, and in the present and for∣mer Wars between Germany and France. That is from its en∣trance into Alsatia down to the Fort Schenk in the Low-Coun∣tries; which comprehends six different Territories, viz.
1. Alsatia Strasburg, Bish. 2. Palatinate of the Rhine Heidelberg. 3. Electorate of Mayence Mayence or Mentz, Arch. 4. Electorate of Treves Treves or Triers, Arch. 5. Electorate of Cologne Cologne or Ceulen, Arch. 6. The Succession of Cleves and Juliers. Cleves. Juliers. Article I. Of Alsatia Lat. Alsatia, Germ. Elsalsz. THIS Province has the Rhine on the East; The Palatinate on the North;Bounds. Lorrain on the West. And Suntgaw or County or Ferrete, with some part of Franche Comte, and Switzerland, on the South. Its extentExtent. South and North is about 100 Miles including Suntgaw, and East and West a∣bout 50 including Brisgaw. It is reputed to have been the seat of the Ancient Tribocchi, or Triboces, who retained their name till the time of Charle∣maign. The Romans were Masters of it near 500 years, then it was under the Kings of the France till Otho I. By Otho II. it was erected into a Landgraviat, and the House of Austria enjoyed it till the Usurpations of the French in the late Wars, made it a Wilderness by their unheard of Devastations. And afterwards it was sold to Lewis XIV. of France, with Sunt∣gaw, and Brisac by Ferdinand Charles Archduke of Inspruck in 1648. for the sum of three Millions French Livers: and so the Emperor was forced to resign it to the French Crown by the Treaty of Munster in the same year, 1648. The Spaniard resigning his Right also by the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659. This is one of the best watered Parts of all Germany, and most fertile in Wines, Corn,Quality. Fruits, Pastures. Its Mountains have several Silver, Brass, and Lead-Mines. Yet it is ill peopled because a Frontier and the Seat of War. It is in many places over-grown
with Wood, and has abundance of Iron-works which brings Money into the Country; the Woods being upon the Bank of the Rhine do secure the Country against the Rapidi∣ty of that River. This Province has 46 Walled Towns; 50 Ca∣stles,Cities, &c. Villages. and a great number of Villages. It is di∣vided into Ʋpper and Lower Alsatia, and into five Parts, including, Suntgaw, Brisgaw and Ort∣naw, of which these three, Suntgaw, Ʋpper-Alsatia and Low∣er-Alsatia, are on the left side of the Rhine; and Brisgaw and Ortnaw, on the Right. Alsatia with its dependencies, is divided into five Parts. 1. Lower Alsatia where are, Strasburg. Bish. Cap. To the French. Schelestad. To the French. Weissenburg. To the French. Landau. To the French. Molsheim. To the French. Saverne. To the French. Haguenau. To the French. Seltz. To the French. Ober Ruheim. To the French. Bentheim. To the French. Andlaw. To the French. Lauterburg. To the French. Inguiller. To the French. Hoksstein, County. To the French. 2. Ʋpper-Alsatia where are, Colmas. Cap. To the French. Ensisheim. To the French. Rufech. To the French. Munster in Gregorienthal. To the French. Marbach. To the French. Keisersperg. To the French.
3. Suntgaw, Lat. Suntgovia has Upper Alsatia on the N. the Rhine on the E. the Bi∣shoprick of Basil on the S. and Franche Comte on the W. the principal places in it are, Ferrete. County, Cap. To the French. Alskirk. To the French. Befort. To the French. Hunningen. To the French. Mulhausem Imp. and Free. 4. Brisgaw or Brisgou, Lat. Brisgovia or Brisgoia, lies between the Rhine on the W. and the black Forest on the E. The principal Towns in it are. Brisac. To the French. Fribourg. Cap. To the French. Neweburg, to the Emp. 5. Ortnaw Lat. Ortna∣via lies between the Rhine on the W. Bris∣gaw on the S. the Dut∣chy of Wurstenberg on the East, and the Pala∣tinate on the South, the most remarkable places there are, Ofemburg. Cap. Imper. Gengenbach. Imper. Baden. Marq. Durlach. Marq. Pfortzheim, to the French. Remarkable Towns of Lower Alsatia. I. Strasburg. STrasburg Lat. Argentoratum, or Argentina, or Tribocorum, and Tribocum; and by some Moderns Strasburgum is the Capital City of Alsatia, and one of the fairest of Germany. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Mentz, and was for many Ages a Free and Imperial City, seated in the midst of a great Plain, upon the little River Ill, where it falls into the Breusche about one Mile from the Rhine, over which it
has a Timber Bridge of great length: This is a place of ve∣ry great strength and Wealth, and so ancient, that it is said to have been built Ann. M. 1955. The Arsenal and Town-house do well deserve the view of Strangers, and the Cathedral de∣dicated to the Blessed Virgin their Admiration, not only for the Magnificence and vastness of the Structure, and its Gates of Brass, but more particularly for its Steeple called Tower of Mynster, which is Pyramidal and of a Structure, that lies all open and pervious to the light, being the most esteemed for its Workmanship of any other steeple in Christendom. It is 574 Foot high, and has 700 steps; but that which is most of all admired is the Clock Work, which besides the Hours of the Day, represents the motions of the Planets. In the year 1440 or thereabouts the Art of Printing was first invented by one John Guttenburg a Citizen of Strasburg, who removed about the same time to Mentz, and there mostly used and im∣proved this noble Art; so that a mighty contest has been ma∣naged between Harlem, Strasburg and Mentz, which of them shall have the honour of this Invention. In 1529. This City embraced the Protestant Religion, and the year following en∣tred a League with the Reformed Cantons for her Defence; since that time its Government was Republican, till September 1681. that the French King having before possess'd himself of all Alsatia, suddenly surprized this important Place in a time of Peace when no body suspected it: which may be ascribed to the Pride and Folly of the Town, and their over-great Love of Liberty, by refusing 500 men the Emperor offered them for their security. The old Fortifications of this Town were but a double Wall, and a Fausse-braye so that it was not capable of making a long resistance, but the French have forti∣fied it very strongly, There is a Cittadel built on that side that goeth to the Rhine; and towards the Bridge there is a Horn-Work that runs a great way. There are also two small Forts at the two chief Gates, which lead toward Alsatia, so that in case of a Revolt, they can cut off all Communication with the Country. There are also Forts in some Islands of the Rhine, and some Redoubts; so that all round this place there is one of the greatest Fortifications in Europe. The Ca∣pitulations made with the French have not been hitherto well observed; yet there is not above 200 Romish Converts. This City is already sunk in its Trade; and will sink more when the Fortifications are finish'd. There is an University found∣ed by the Senate in 1538. Strasburg stands 55 miles N. of Basil
140 W. of Ausburg, 64 S. E. of Heidelberg, and 70 E. of Nancy. Long. 27 d. 26 m. Lat. 48 d. 28 m. II. Selestad. Selestad or Schlestad, situated on the River Ill, was for∣merly free and imperial, and of the Government of Haguenaw, but now belongs to the Crown of France, left to it by the Peace of Westphalia. Its Fortifications were demolished in 1673. but new built in 1675. so that it is now a place of considerable strength. It stands 21 Miles S. of Strasburg. III. Weissemburg. Weissemburg, (or Cron Weissemburg, to distinguish it from Weissemburg in Bavaria) is situate upon the River Luter, in the Territory of Wasgow, towards the Borders of the Palatinate of the Rhine. Dagobert King of France built here a celebrated Monastery in 623. which in 1496. was chang'd into a Col∣lege. By the Peace of Munster this Place was granted to France In 1673. it suffered much by the Germans, but is now rebuild∣ing. It stands 24 Miles N. of Strasburg. IV. Landaw. Landaw Lat. Landavia, is situate upon the River Queick, in the Confines of the Palatinate, and Territory of Wasgow. It was yielded to France by the Peace of Munster. The French having plunder'd most Towns of the Palatinate, and a great part of Schwaben. In 1688. laid the booty up here, where all was burnt by an accidental Fire, May 1689. This place stands 13 Miles W. of Philipsburg, and 16 S. of Spire, Long. 27 d. 50 m. Lat. 49 d. 3 m. V. Molsheim. Molsheim, is a little Town on the River Brenche, eight Miles W. of Strasburg; the residence of the Prebendary of Strasburg.
VI. Saverne. Saverne, Lat. Taberna Alsatiae, is seated at the foot of some Mountains near the Frontiers of Lorrain, upon the River Lor, in the Road that goes to Strasburg. It is the usual residence of the Bishop of Strasburg, who is Lord of it. Near this place Anthony Duke of Lorrain, defeated the Lutherans in 1525. It stands 16 Miles nigh W. of Strasburg. VII. Haguenaw. Haguenaw Lat. Hagenoa, is seated on the River Mater, scarce two Leagues from the Rhine, and about three N. from Stras∣burg: it was an Imperial City and the Chief of the lower Alsace before it fell to the French. The Emperor Barbarossa first Walled it about in 1164. and built a Palace therein. Be∣ing seated in a Sandy unfruitful Soil, the old Landgraves of Alsace, did chiefly resort thither for the Conveniency of Hunting. The other places of lower Alsace, such as Seltz, Ober Ru∣heim, &c. are not of great consideration. Remarkable Towns of Ʋpper Alsatia. I. Colmar. COlmar, Lat. Colmaria, and Columbaria, or according to others Argentuaria; is an Imperial Town under the French, and the Capital of Upper Alsace, upon the River Ill. The Duke of Weymar assisted by the Troops of France; made himself Master of this Town in 1633. but this Duke dying, Colmar was yielded to the King of France by the Negotiation of the Mareschal of Guebriant, and confirm'd upon him by the 47 Article of the Treaty of Westphalia, where it is named amongst the Imperial Towns of Alsace. Yet afterwards during the Wars of 1674. it was demolish'd and abandoned. It
It stands 13 Miles W. of Brisac 28 N. of Basil, and 33 almost S. of Strasburg, Long. 27 d. three m. Lat. 48 d. V. Ensisheim. Ensisheim is a small Town once Imperial, but now subject to the French, 13 Miles S. of Colmar. III. Ruffach. Ruffach Lat. Rubeacum is a small Town upon the River Roltback, in the Territory of Mundal, once an Imperial and Free City, but taken by the Mareschal of Turenne in 1675. af∣ter a great defeat of the Imperialists. It's one of the ancient∣est Towns in Alsatia, and was for the fertility of its Soil, for five hundred years, the Seat of some of the Roman Nobility. It stands 10 Miles S. of Colmar. Munster, Marbach, Keibersperg, &c. are small Towns of lit∣tle moment. Remarkable Towns in Suntgaw. I. Ferrete. FErrete Lat. Ferreta, which the Germans now call Pfirt, stands 22 Miles W. of Basil, with the Title of a County, It was resigned to the French by the Pacifications of Munster, and the Pyrenees. II. Hunningen. Hunningen is a Village, a quarter of a League below Basil, situated on the Rhine which the French have render'd very remarkable for the strong Castle they have lately erected there, and which gives no little Umbrage and Jealousie to the Swissers. This Fort is a regular Pentagon with Lodgings for 3 or 4000 Men; Good Ramparts, a large Ditch, Horn-works,
Half-Moons, and other Outworks. Here is also a Bridge over the Rhine, lodged partly on an Island, which is fortified with an Horn-Work; so that it is now one of the strongest Places in Europe, being seated in a great Plain, and commanded by no rising ground. III. Mulhausen. Mulhausen, on the River Ill was once an Imperial and Free City, but in 1515. Leagued with the Swissers, and united to Suntgow. It stands 13 Miles N. W. of Basil, and 17 S. of Col∣mar, but heretofore belonged to Alsatia. Remarkable Towns in Brisgaw. I. Brisac. BRisac Lat. Brisacum, or Brisacus Mons, stands on a rising ground, on the right Bank of the Rhine, which has there a fine Stone Bridge. This place is esteemed one of the strongest places of Europe, whether its Situation be consi∣dered, or what Art has contributed to render it regular; so that some Authors call it the Cittadel of Alsatia. Gustavus Horne a Suede made an attempt on this City in 1633. after his great advantages over the Imperialists; but the Duke of Fe∣ria, broke his Measures, and threw succours into the Place. The Duke of Weymar being sick at Newemburg near Brisac in 1639. the Marquiss of Guebriant possessed himself of this and the other Places, which were left to the French King by a Treaty the year following; and which have been yielded by the 47th Article of the Peace of Westphalia, in 1648. and confirmed again by the 60th Article of the Pyrenaean Treaty. Brisac has given its name to Brisgaw, and has been in former times its Capital, but since Fribourg has carried it. Bris∣gaw belonged formerly to the Dukes of Leringuen; and after∣wards to the Earls of Furstemburg. Hugh or Hegon sold it in 1367. to the Dukes of Austria, to whom the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, had already Mortgaged Brisac about the year 1326. Since that time the Country of Brisgaw has always be∣long'd
to the House of Austria, till the French made themselves Masters of the most Part. Brisac, tho' a Notable Fortification is but a Miserable Town. It stands 26 Miles N. of Basil, and 30 S. of Strasburg. Long. 27 d. 22 m. Lat. 48 d. II. Fribourg. Fribourg, Lat. Friburgum, is the Capital City of Brisgaw, seated upon the little River of Threseim, at the end of a Fer∣tile Plain, and upon a rising Ground where the black Moun∣tain begins. Albert VI. Duke of Austria Founded in it a U∣niversity, and a Sovereign Chamber; the Jurisdiction of which reach'd once a great way, but now not above Four Miles. The Swedes took it three times in 1632. 1634. and 1638. This Town is Renowned for its Riches and other Ad∣vantages, and for a Famous Battel that the Duke of Anguien, since Lewis Prince of Conde, won there in 1644. in which General Merci was Killed. Mareschal Crequi took it in 1677. for Lewis XIV. after a Siege of Seven or Eight Days. It is a large and well peopled City, regularly Fortified with seve∣ral Churches and Religious Houses in it. This is also the Residence of the Chapter of Basil, from which place it stands 26 Miles almost N. and 10 Miles E. of Brisac. Long. 27 d. 31 m. Lat. 47 d. 58 m. III. Newenburg. Newenburg, is a decaying Place, on the Rhine, 14 Miles S. of Brisac, once Imperial, but now Subject to the Emperor. Remarkable Places in Ortnaw. I. Ofemburg. OFemburg, Lat. Offemburgum, is an Imperial free City, in Schwaben, and the Capital of Ortnaw, seated upon the River Kintzig, about one League from the Rhine, and Eight Miles S. E. of Strasburg. Long. 27 d. 37 m. Lat. 48
d. 23 m. It is under the protection of the House of Au∣stria. II. Gengenbach. Gengenbach, is a little Imperial free City on the River Kintzig, 14 Miles S. E. of Strasburg. It is also protected by the House of Austria. III. Baden. Baden, or Bade, Lat. Bada, and Thermae Inferiores, with the Title of Marquisate, is a small, neat City, Famous for its Baths. This Marquisate is upon the Rhine, between Brisgaw and the Dutchy of Wirsemberg. Its Marquesses are Princes of the Empire, and are of a very Noble and Ancient Family; of which there are two Branches, the first is Baden Hocberg, and the other Baden Durlach; the first is Roman Catholick, and the second Lutheran. These two Branches act by turns in the Diet of the Empire, and in the Circle of Suabia; but the Baden Durlach Branch has two Voices, one for Durlach, and the other for Hocberg. The present Prince Lewis of Ba∣den, who has been General for the Emperor in Hungary, and has rendered his Name Immortal by the great Victories he has obtained against the Turks, and who came over into Eng∣land to Visit Their Majesties in 1694. is of the Branch of Hoc∣berg, and the yung Prince his Nephew, that came with him, of that of Durlach. This Town is subject to the Branch of Durlach, and stands 22 Miles N. E. of Strasburg, 34 almost S. of Spire, and 40 N. W. of Tubingen. Long. 27 d. 52 m. Lat. 48 d. 38 m. IV. Durlach. Durlach, is a Town and very good Castle of the Marquisate of Baden, having lso the Title of Marquisate; it give its Name to a Branch of the Family of Baden, and is named Docum in Latin. It is Subject to its own Prince, and stands 16 Miles N. E. of Baden.
V. Pfortzheim. Pfortzheim, is a small Town in the Marquisate of Baden on the Rivers Entz and Nagold, 17 Miles nigh S. of Philipsburg, and 27 N. E. of Baden. It was taken by the French in 1691. left, and taken again in 1692. Article II. The Palatinate of the Rhine, Lat. Palatinatus In∣ferior, Germ. Psaltz auff Rhein, or Nider Pfaltz. THE Palatinate of the Rhine, or lower Palati∣nate (to distinguish it from the upper,Bounds. which lyes on the Danube, and belongs to the Duke of Bavaria, according to the Treaty of Munster, who formerly enjoyed both) Borders on the North the Arch∣bishoprick of Mentz, on the West Lorrain, and the Arch∣bishoprick of Triers, on the South Alsatia, and on the East Franconia, and Suabia, or Schwaben. Its ExtentExtent. South and North is about 80 Miles, and almost as many West and East, including the Bishoprick of Spire. The Air is here good and wholesom, tho' some∣what Cold:Quality. The Soil extreamly fruitful in delicate Wines, Corn and Pastures. There are also seve∣ral Mines of Agath and Jasper; and fine Gold is drawn out of the Sand of the Rhine, of which they Coin very good Du∣cats, which bear the Name of that River. The RiversRivers. here are the Rhine, and the Neckar, which falls into that at Manheim. The Country takes its Name from the Office of Count Palatine,Name of Palati∣nate. bestowed by the Emperor on those who Administred Justice in his Name to the Em∣pire; of which there was two, one on the Rhine who had the Charge of Franconia, and the Neigh∣bouring Countries; and the other in Saxony,History. and other Countries Subject to the Saxon Law. Hence
it is that the Electors of Saxony, or the Elector Palatine, or Elector of Bavaria, are Vicars of the Empire in their respe∣ctive Provinces, when there is an Interregnum by the Empe∣rors Death, or otherwise. At first the Count Palatine of the Rhine had no Possessions on that River; but in process of time got them by Marriage, Purchase, or Imperial Gift, and formed a very considerable Principality; so that besides seve∣ral Fiefs betwixt Coblentz, and Andernach, and in Juliers, and besides the Dutchies of Newburg, Saltzbach and Deuxponts, and other dependencies on them; it has divers more Dutchies and Counties: The Family of the Princes Palatine of the Rhine, is descended from Otho the Illustrious Duke of Bavaria who died in 1245. leaving two Sons, Lewis II. Count Pa∣latine of the Rhine, and Elector, and Henry XIII. Duke of Ba∣varia. The Elector Frederick III. begun in 1576. to enter∣tain many Protestant Families in his Dominions, who fled from the Low Countries. His Successors doing the like did thereby mightily enrich the Countrey. This Prince made his Revenues very considerable by the Reformation, Right of Con∣duct to Strangers, Toll upon Merchandizes that pass'd his Territories, and the Title he had to the Goods of Strangers, or those who died without Will in his Dominions. Frederick the IIId. was Succeeded by his Son Lewis the IVth. who turn∣ed Protestant, and was Succeeded by Frederick the IVth. who also abandon'd Popery. He Married Louise, Daughter to the Prince of Orange, by whom he had Frederick the Vth. who was Chosen King of Bohemia in 1619. but Dethroned after the Battel of Prague in 1620. and his Territories were given to the Duke of Bavaria, with the Dignity of Elector. He died at Mentz in 1632. leaving behind him three Sons by Eliza∣beth Daughter of James the First of Great Brittain, viz. Charles, Robert, and Edward; Robert, commonly called Prince Robert, and well known in England, was Created Duke of Cumberland, and Died without Legitimate Issue. Edward Died a Papist at Paris in 1663. leaving three Daughters by Princess Ann of Mantua, one of them, viz. Anne Married to the Prince of Conde. Charles had part of his Fathers Inhe∣ritance restored to him, by the Peace of Munster in 1648. and a Eighth Electorate was Created in his behalf, viz. that of the Palatine of the Rhine, and the Upper Palatinate remain∣ed in the Duke of Bavaria's Hands. The Elector Charles Mar∣ried Charlotte Daughter to the Landtgrave of Hesse Cassel, by whom he had Charles, and Elizabeth Charlotte, who was Mar∣ried
to the Duke of Orleans, only Brother to King Lewis the XIVth. of France. Charles Succeeded his Father in the E∣lectorate, and in 1671. Married Wiellielmine Ernestine Daugh∣ter to Frederick the IIId. King of Denmark. He died in 1685. without Issue, and was Succeeded by Philip William Duke of Newburg a Popish Prince. In 1688. and 1689. The French entered his Territories, and laid most part of them wast, on pretence of the Allodial Claim'd by the Dutchess of Orleans, Sister to the late Elector, who died without Issue. This Country is divided in two, viz. the Palatinate pro∣perly so called, and the Dominions of several particular Princes adjoining to it. The Palatinate properly so called, where are, Heidelberg, Cap. Manheim, Frankendal, Openheim, Caub, Creutznach. Newstat, Keiserslautern, Bacharach, Simmeren, Earld. Ingelheim. Places adjoining to the Pa∣latinate, and Subject to seve∣ral Princes. Spire, Imper. Bish. Wormes, Imper. Bish. Philipsburg, to the French. Darmstat, Landgraviat. Deux-Ponts, Dutchy. Birkenfeld, Earld. Mont-Royal.
Remarkable Towns in the Palatinate of the Rhine. I. Heidelberg. HEildelberg, Lat. Heilderberga (which some think to be the Budoris of the Ancients) is Metropolis of the Pa∣latinate of the Rhine, seated at the foot of an Hill, on the Neckar, over which it has a Wooden Bridge, it is said to have formerly belonged to the Bishoprick of Worms, but was granted to Lewis Count Palatine in 1225. It was enlarged by Robert Count Palatine, who was Chosen Emperor, in 1392. And Rupertus Count Palatine Founded an University here in 1346. This Town is large, fair, well Built, and well Peopled, and the usual Residence of the Elector, who had a Noble, Magnificent and Strong Castle here, till the French blew it up in the present War, when they were forced to leave it, contrary to the Capitulation with the Dauphin in 1688. The Town-House, and the Churches of St. Peter, and the Holy Ghost, are stately Buildings. The Wine of this Place is much esteem'd. The Castle is also Famous for a great huge Tun, commonly called, The Tun of Heilderberg. The University has great Priviledges, one of which is, Power of Life and Death, over all that belong to it, without Power of Revocation, or Infringement in the Prince himself. This University has been Famous for many great Men, and had one of the best Libraries in Europe, which Count Tilly sent to Rome in 1622. after he had taken the Town, which suffered ex∣treamly in the late German Wars. It was taken by the French in 1688. and a little while after burn'd and abandon'd. In 1693. Heidelberg was Betrayed to the French King's Troops, under the Command of Mareschal De Lorge, the City laid in Ashes, the Tombs of the Dead Princes and Princesses inhu∣manely Destroyed, and their Corps exposed; the Garrison and Inhabitants Cruelly Butchered; and the Women after Protection brutishly Ravish'd: Part of the Garrison flying to the Castle Capitulated. A little while after, Heidersdorf the Governour being Condemned to Death by a Council of War at Hailbron, was Reprieved; but degraded of the Teutonick Order, led about the Imperial Camp in a Cart, buffetted in a
disgraceful manner by the Common Hangman, treated with the heighth of Ignominy, then Banished, and Cudgelled to Death by the Peasants, after he was let go by the Executi∣oner. Heidelberg stands 13 Miles N. E. of Spire, 22 S. E. of Worms, 18 N. E. of Philipsburg, and 48 almost S. of Franc∣fort. Long. 28 d. 27 m. Lat. 49 d. 17 m. II. Manheim. Manheim is seated on the Confluent of the Rhine and the Neckar. It was taken and ruined by the Spaniards in the be∣ginning of the XIIIth. Century, but was Rebuilt and hand∣somly Fortified by Charles Lewis Elector Palatine. It was ta∣ken, and abandoned by the French in 1689. and since that time they have intirely ruined it in a most Barbarous man∣ner. It stands 11 Miles almost N. W. of Heidelberg. III. Frankendal. Frankendal, Lat. Franchendalia, formerly no more than an Abbey, afterwards a Place of Refuge for the Belgian Exiles a∣bout 1574. now a new City, which was well Fortified, scarce a League distant from the Rhine; afterwards taken by the Spaniards, and restored to the Elector Palatine, by the Pacification of Munster; but in the present War most cruelly laid in Ashes by the French. It stands 18 miles N. W. of Heidelberg. VI. Oppenheim. Oppenheim, Lat. Oppenhemium, a small City, Imperial and Free, until it was granted with its Territory to Rupert Prince Palatine by the Emperor in 1402. It stands upon a Hill near the Rhine, 11 miles almost S. of Mentz, and 17 N. of Worms. The French put a Garrison into it in 1688. and have Ruin'd it since.
V. Caub. Caub, is a little Town with the Castle of Gudenfelts, on the Rhine, against which in the middle of the River, is the Castle of Pfaltz, whence some, (but falsly) would have the Princes Title of Pfaltzgrave derived. VI. Creutznach. Creutznach, is a little Town, on the small River Nake, with a strong Castle, Subject to the French since 1688. It stands 20 Miles almost S. W. of Mentz. VII. Newstat. Newstat, is a small Town seated on the River Spirebach, Eight Miles N. of Landau, and 15 almost W. of Spire and Philipsburg. It is now Subject to the French. VIII. Keiserslautern. Keiserslautern, Lat. Caesaropolis, is upon the River Lauter near the Dutchy of Deuxponts; the French call it Caseloutre; they took it in September 1688. under the Marquis of Bouf∣flers, after they had been repulsed in two several Storms. It stands 28 Miles almost S. W. of Worms, 32 W. of Spire, and 40 almost S. of Mentz. IX. Bacharach. Bacharach, is a small Town, on the Rhine, once Free and Imperial, now belonging to the Elector Palatine. It stands 22 Miles W. of Mentz.
X. Simmeren. Simmeren, Lat. Simmera, is the Capital City of a little Province of the same Name, bearing the Title of Earldom. This little Place is adorned and strengthned with a very con∣siderable Castle. It belongs to the Elector Palatine, but is now Subject to the French. It stands 24 Miles nigh S. of Coblentz, and 33 W. of Mentz. Long. 26 d. 52 m. Lat. 49 d. 59 m. XI. Ingelheim. Ingelheim, Lat. Ingelhemium and Ingelenhemium, is a small Town on the Rhine, once Free and Imperial, but now be∣longing to the Elector Palatine, and Subject to the French. The Emperor Charlemaign was Born there in 742. and after∣wards repaired it. Lewis the Debonair died there in 840. It stands Eight Miles W. of Mentz, and as many E. of Bin∣gen. Places adjoining to Palatinate. I. Spire. SPire, or Spires, Lat. Spira, or Augusta Nemetum, or No∣viomagus, is a great, rich, populous City, near the Rhine, with a Bishoprick under the Arbishoprick of Mentz. It is an Imperial and Free City, but under the protection of the Elector Palatine. The Cathedral was Built in 1411. by Conrade the Emperor, in which are the Sepulchres of the Emperors Henry IV. Philip V. Rudolph I. Adolphus of Nassau, and Albert I. The Imperial Chamber which was first Instituted at Francfort in 1495. by Maximilian I. and in the Year 1530. removed to this City by Charles V. Consists of two Presi∣dents, whereof the one is a Protestant, the other a Romanist, and of 15 Counsellors, whereof Seven are Protestants, and
Eight Romanists. The Government of the City was all Lu∣theran, but the Cathedral was in the Hands of the Bishop, a Roman Catholick. There were several Convents of both Sexes, and a College of Jesuits. The Calvinists had also a Church here, but their number was not considerable. Tho' the Town subsisted chiefly by the Imperial Chamber, yet there was an endless Dispute between them and the Cham∣ber, concerning their Priviledges. For the Government of the Town pretended that the Judges of the Chamber, as they were private Men, and out of the Court of Judicature, were subject to them; and in the Year 1685. they put one of them in Prison; and on the other hand, the Judges said their Per∣sons were sacred. In the last War in 1672. between the French and the Emperor, this City enjoyed a Neutrality on the Account of this Chamber, but in the Year 1638. was taken and Garrison'd by the French, and in 1689. a War en∣suing for the Recovery of the Countries Ravish'd from the Empire by the French, they with the utmost Inhumanity burned and destroy'd this Ancient and Venerable City. Here∣upon the Imperial Chamber was by the Diet, with the Con∣sent of the Emperor, removed to Weslar, a City of Hassia. The Ruins of Spire stand 13 Miles S. W. of Heidelberg, and 22 S. of Worms. Long. 28 d. 12 m. Lat. 49 d. 11 m. II. Worms. Worms, Lat. Vormacia, or Barbetomagus, or Barbitomagus Vangionum, is a Great, Famous, Imperial, Free City upon the Rhine, with a Bishoprick Suffragant of Mentz. The Bishop is Lord thereof, as well as of the little Country, whereof it is Capital. Attila destroyed it in the Fifth Century, and Clo∣vis repair'd it again. It was often taken in the last Wars of Germany. The Town was honoured a considerable time with an Archbishops See, whereof it was deprived about 750. by Pope Zachary, who removed that Dignity to Mentz, leaving only the Title of Bishoprick to Worms, in Punishment of Ger∣villon, the last Archbishop his Treachery, who kill'd an an Officer, whom he had invited to come to confer with him out of his Enemies (the Saxons) Camp. Here have been several Councils held, as in 764, 770. 1078, &c. A Famous Diet was also held here in 1521. in which Luther de∣fended his Doctrine before the States of the Empire. Worms
was burnt by the French in 1689. and stands 23 Miles N. E. of Heidelberg and Spire, and 33 S. of Francfort. Long. 28 d. Lat. 49 d. 32 m. III. Philipsburg. Philipsburg, is a very important Fortress near the Rhine, called formerly Ʋdenheim; it took its Modern Name, from Philip Christopher de Saleren, Bishop of Spire, and Archbishop of Trier. This Prelate caused it to be Built and Fortified with seven Bastions, where the Bishops Castle, and the Vil∣lage of Ʋdenheim stood, almost upon the Brink of the Rhine, in a Plain surrounded with Marish Ground. This Place was Consigned to the Bishop of Spire, but still under the Pro∣tection of the Emperor, the Bishop has ever had his Resi∣dence in the Castle, which is a Noble Pile. It fell into the hands of the Imperialists in  through the Cowardliness of the Governour. The Swedes drove them thence Jan. 15. 1634. and gave it to Lewis XIII. but as the Fortification of it could not be finish'd, because of the rigour of the Winter; The Imperialists surpriz'd it by Night, Jan. 23. 1635. Af∣terwards the Duke of Anguien, having defeated the Bavarians at Friburg, retook Spire and Philipsburg, Sept. 1644. The French King caused it to be regularly Fortified, and made it a very important Place. The Germans and their Allies, who had blocked it up for a long time, Besieged it, May 16. 1676. and it was surrendred to them upon Articles, Sept. the 17th. following. In 1688. Sept. the 27th. It was invested by the French. The 6th. of October the Dauphin of France came thi∣ther, and here made his first Campaign; the first of Novem∣ber it was surrendred, when it might have holden out much longer. However this Siege gave liberty to the Prince of O∣range, now our King, to come over into England. Philips∣burg stands seven Miles S. of Spire, and 18 S. W. of Heidel∣berg. Long. 28 d. 10 m. Lat. 49 d. 4 m. IV. Darmstat. Darmstat, Lat. Darmstadium, with the Title of Landgra∣viate, is about Two Leagues from the Rhine. It belongs to a Prince of the Family of Hesse, and has a well Fortified Ca∣stle.
The Castles of Mariemburg on the Rhine and Russelheim on the Main belong also to that Prince. Darmstat stands on the River of the same Name 14 Miles S. of Francfort, 23 S. E. of Mentz, 17 N. E. of Worms, and 30 N. of Heidelberg. Long. 28 d. 16 m. Lat. 49 d. 41 m. V. Deux-Ponts. Deux-Ponts, Lat. Bipontium, Germ, Zweibruck, is a Town on the River Scwolbe, with a strong Castle, and the Title of Dukedom. It stands 44 Miles almost W. of Worms, and a∣bout 50 from Strasburg, Mentz and Triers. Long. 26 d. 54 m. Lat. 49 d. 19 m. This Town gives its Name to a very Ancient and Noble Family, which is a Branch of that of Bavaria, in this man∣ner; Stephen Duke of Sicmeren, second Son to the Emperor Robert the Little, had two Sons by his Wife Anne of Veldens, viz. Frederick and Lewis the Black. Lewis dying in 1489. left Alexander, Sirnamed The Halt, Duke of Deux-Ponts, who died in 1514. and was succeeded by Lewis II. who em∣braced the Protestant Religion, and died in 1532. His Son Wolfgand was his Successor, he added to his Fathers Domini∣ons the Principality of Newburg, and died in France, in 1569. where he had led Succours out of Palatinate, to the Prote∣stants of that Kingdom; he left Five Sons, viz. Philip, Lewis, John, Frederick, and Charles, and two Daughters. John was his Successor, who died in 1604. left by his Wife Mag∣dalen, (Daughter to William Duke of Cleves and Juliers, who brought along with her the Reversion of her Father's Estates) Four Sons, viz. Lewis-William who died in 1581. John II. Frederick-Casimir (who Married in 1614. Amelia Daughter of William Prince of Orange) and John-Casimir, (who in 1615. Married Catherine Daughter to Charles X. King of Sweden, by which he had Charles-Gustavus King of Sweden, and Adolph-John;) and two Daughters. John II. Duke of Deux-Ponts, took the Title of Duke of Cleves and Juliers, &c. and died in 1635. leaving behind him, by his second Wife (Louise-Julienne, Daughter to Frederick IV. Elector Palatine) several Daughters, and one Son called Frederick, who en∣joyed his Fathers Estates by the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648. and died in 1661. without Issue. His Nephew Frederick-Lewis (Son to Frederick-Casimir, and Amelia Countess of O∣range
and Nassau) succeeded him. This Frederick-Lewis was Married to his Cousin Julienne-Magdalen, Daughter to John II. by which he had Lewis-William Born in 1648. to whom belongs the Dutchy of Deux-Ponts. Yet upon the Pretence of the King of Sweden's Right to it, the French made themselves Masters of the Town and Castle of Deux-Ponts in Jan. 1676. which they have kept since, tho' for the most part Ruin'd. VI. Birkenfeld. Birkenfeld, Lat. Birchofeldia, is a small Town with the Title of Principality and Dukedom, in the Palatinate of the Rhine, belonging to the Palatinate of Bavaria, but now Sub∣ject to the French. It stands in the small Country of Hunsruk near the Nab, 24 Miles almost E. of Triers, and 45 almost W. of Mentz. Long. 26 d. 36 m. Lat. 49 d. 45 m. VII. Mont-Royal. Mont-Royal, is a very strong new little Town Built by the French (and subject to the Same) in the Palatinate of the Rhine, in the Limits of the Archbishoprick of Triers, upon the left side of the River Moselle. It stands 23 Miles N. E. of Triers, and 31 S. W. of Coblentz. Long. 26 d. 30 m. Lat. 50 d. Article III. The Archbishoprick and Electorate of Mayence, or Mentz. THE Archbishoprick and Electorate of Mentz Borders Veteraw on the North,Bounds. the Electorate of Triers on the West, the Lower Palatinate on the South, and Franconia on the East.
It is so strangely scattered, and intermixed with other Provinces,Extent. that the Dimensions of it cannot well be given. Its Archbishop is Arch-Chancellor of the Em∣pire,History. and the first of the Electoral College; in all publick Conventions, he sits at the Right Hand of the Emperor. This Dignity is Elective, and depends upon the Chapter, which consists of 24 Canons that have Voice, commonly called Capitularies: There are other Canons, which have neither Voice nor Revenue, tho' they have made the usual proofs of Nobility; (for none but Gentlemen are admitted into this Chapter) but they may fill the Vacancies of the 24. This Elector has a Mareschal and a Chancellor under him, the first for Military Affairs, and the other for the Administration of Justice: His Dominions consist of Five and twenty Bailywicks, which in good Times yield the Arch∣bishop about 1800000 Livres per Ann. The greatest part of this Revenue is raised in Mentz, by the Toll which all the Boats that go through it are obliged to pay. The Chief RiverRivers. which waters this Electorate, besides the Rhine, is the Main, which falls into that near Mentz. The Electorate and Archbishop∣rick of Mentz is scattered in several Provinces. The Places of Note are, Mentz, Archb. Cap. about the Rhine. Bingen, about the Rhine. Weisbaden, about the Rhine. Elfelt, about the Rhine. Rudisheim. about the Rhine. Fredberg, Imp. in Hesse. Fritzlar. in Hesse. Aschaffemburg, in Franconia. Biscoffsheim, in Franconia. Lor, County. in Franconia. Reineck, County. in Franconia. Erfort, in Thuringia. Heiligenstat, in Thuringia. Duderstat. in Thuringia. I shall give you here a Description of those Places on∣ly, which are about the Rhine, the rest being altogether Fo∣reign to our Design.
I. Mentz. Mentz, Gall. Mayence, Lat. Moguntia, or Maguntia and Moguntiacum, is situated upon the left Bank of the Rhine; it deriveth its Name from the River Mein, which falls into the Rhine over against it, and is the Ancientest City in that part of Germany, as having been certainly Built before the Birth of our Saviour, and Famous in the Times of Drusus, General of Augustus. In 745. it was made an Archbishops See, in∣stead of Worms, to which it was Suffragan before. It was ve∣ry severely treated by Frederick Aenobarbus the Emperor in 1158. but rebuilt and restored by Otho IV. In 1462. it was taken by Adolphus of Nassau, its Archbishop. Its University was opened in 1461. Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden en∣tered it in Triumph in 1631. It was retaken from the Swedes in 1635. but they took it again the next Year after, and kept it till the Peace of Munster. This is a very strong Place, adorned with Churches, Monasteries, and other fair Build∣ings, but the narrowness of its Streets, and many old Houses, take away from its Beauty. It is most extended towards the River, and that part excels the other towards the Land, as being more populous and better Built. This City is famous by the Invention of Printing about 1430. or rather by the Skill of one John Guttemberg, who first taught the use of it in Europe, which he had learnt in China, where, 'tis said, they have had it for above 2000 Years. Mentz received a French Garrison in 1688. but being Besieged by the Confederate Forces, under the Duke of Lorrain, it was surrendred Sep∣tember 11. 1689. after six or seven Weeks Resistance. It stands 21 Miles almost W. of Francfort, 28 Miles almost N. of Worms, 48 N. W. of Heidelberg, and 66 E. of Triers. Long. 27 d. 43 m. Lat. 49 d. 57 m. II. Bingen. Bingen, is a fine little Town and Castle upon the Mouth of the little River Nabe, or Nave, on the Rhine. Ammianus Marcellinus, and the Itinerary of Antoninus make mention of it. It was once Imperial, but is now Subject to the Arch∣bishoprick of Mayence, and stands 16 Miles W. of that City.
Near it is an Island in the Rhine, with a Castle called Mauszt∣hurn, wherein it's said, that Hatto second Archbishop of Mayence was eaten alive by Rats: It is now almost wholly ruined. Article. IV. The Archbishoprick and Electorate of Treves or Triers. THE Electorate of Triers lies betwixt Wete∣raw and the Palatinate on the East;Bounds. Lor∣rain on the South; Luxemburg on the West; Li∣fal, the Archbishoprick of Cologne, and Westro∣walt on the North. Its of great extentExtent. from East to West, but narrow from North to South. It is Watered both by the Rhine and the Mo∣selle,Rivers. Quality. and yields most plentifully all things necessa∣ry for the life of Man. The Chapter of Treves has the Privilege of chusing their Archbishops, and receive no Princes, nor scarcely any Counts in their Prebends or Canonicals; the Gentlemen re∣serve them for People of their own rank, as their only means to come to the Dignity of Elector or Prince of the Empire: but the Canons before they are received, must give as good proofs of their Noble Birth, both by Father and Mother, as is required of the Knights of Maltha. The Elector of Triers is great Chancellor of the Empire in the Gauls, and in the Kingdom of Arles, but does not exercise the Function of this Charge, because these Places are not under the German Em∣pire; but has precedency of the Elector of Cologne, and pos∣sesses several other advantages, Votes before all the other Electors in the Dyets and Assemblies of the Electors, in which he has his particular seat over against the Emperor, between the two Banks of the other Electors. The King of France is Master of several Towns and Castles in this Archbi∣shoprick all along the Moselle, which makes it his interest to defend him as Metropolitan of the Bishopricks of Metz, Toul and Verdun, whereof he is Sovereign, but allows the Archbi∣shop
the Ecclesiastick Priviledges and Revenues, which in times of Peace, amount to 1100000 Livres, per Annum This Archbishoprick has 24 Bailywicks. The Principal Cities and Places in this Electorate are, Treves or Triers. Arch. Cap. Coblentz. Hermanstein. Sarbrugh. Grimberg. Bopart. Pruim. Abbey. Ʋlmen. Oberwesel. I. Treves. Treves or Triers, Lat. Augusta Trevirorum is a very ancient City seated on the Moselle, with an Archbishops See and E∣lectorate of the Empire. It was ruined four or five times by the Huns, Vandals, Goths and French, but always reco∣vered with greater lustre, which gave the Emperors, that staid any time in the Gauls, occasion to make it their ordi∣nary Residence, and adorn it with a Cirque and Capitol. The Archbishop of Treves in that quality is Prince of the Empire, and Temporal Lord of his Estates, and was formerly Metropolitan of the Bishopricks of Mayence, Cologne, Liege, Ʋtrecht, Strasburg, Worms and Spire, all which are now se∣parated from his Archbishoprick; so that he has but three Suffragants, viz. Metz, Toul and Verdun which are all under the King of France. They pretend they have our Saviours Tunick at Treves, and that lest it should be stoln away, they conceal the place it's hidden in; tho' its like this care is taken the better to keep the cheat undiscovered. Several Synods have been held here. the Chief whereof was that in 386. upon the subject of the Priscillianists by order of the Tyrant Maximus. This City has 4 Collegiate Churches, 5 Pa∣rishes, 2 Abbeys and several Religious Houses. It was put into the Hands of the French in 1632. to preserve it as was pretended, from the Swedes; They kept it till 1645. Ma∣reschal Crequi was defeated near Treves, at the Bridge of Con∣sarbick upon Sarr, August 11. 1675. and afterwards retired to this Place, which was immediately besieged by the Germans, who forced the Garrison to surrender upon very dishonoura∣ble Terms. The French are Masters of it again since 1688. I
stands 28 Miles N. E. of Luxemburg and 60 W. of Mentz, Long. 26 d. Lat. 49 d. 50 m. II. Coblentz. Coblentz is a very strong and populous City upon the Con∣fluent or meeting of the Moselle and Rhine, for which reason it is called in Latin, Confluentes, or Confluentia. It is a pretty place, with fine Churches and stately Houses, along the Ri∣ver; The Elector of Treves has a Palace here, where he makes his ordinary Residence. It stands fifty two Miles N. E. of Trier, and 42 from Cologne to the South East. Gaspar a Petra much improved its Fortifications by drawing a Line, from one River to the other, with Fortifications after the most regular modern way. On the other side the Rhine, is the strong Fortress of Ebrenbeistein commmonly called Her∣manstein. This Castle is situated upon a Rock, has commu∣nication with the Town of Coblentz by a Bridge of Boats over the Rhine. There is another good Stone Bridge over the Moselle. Coblentz is the most considerable Place that belongs now to the Archbishop of Treves. III. Hermanstein. Hermanstein or Erenbreitstein Lat. Eremberti Lapis, is one of the strongest Cittadels of Germany, on the Rhine over against Coblentz, and the Mouth of the River Moselle in the Archbishop of Triers's Dominions. It is situated on a steep inaccessible Rock, and in the Siege of 1637. it could not be taken but by Famine. It has a stately Palace belonging to the said Elector under it, eight Leagues from Mentz and 10 from Cologne Westward. IV. Sarbrugh. Sarbrugh or Sarbruken, Lat. Saraepons or Saraeburgum, is on the River Sar overagainst St. Jean on the Borders of Lorrain, formerly an Imperial Town, but exempted by the Emperor Rodolphus. I. and belonging to the Electorate of Treves. It
is a fine Town, very ancient and mentioned in the Itinera∣ry of Antonine, but falling under the Duke of Lorrain, is now in the Hands of the French. It gives Title to a Prince of the House of Nassau, and has a Castle which was his usual Resi∣dence. It stands 12 Miles W. of Deux Ponts, and 40 E. of Metz. V. Grimberg. Grimberg is a small Town about 15 Miles S. W. of Triers subject to this Elector. VI. Boppart. Boppart Lat. Bopartium and Bodobriga is a small Town upon the Rhine at the foot of a Hill, anciently Imperial, now sub∣ject to the Elector of Treves. It stands eight Miles S. of Coblentz. VII. Pruim. Pruim or Prume is a little Town and Abbey of Benedectine Monks in the Forest of Ardenne, between the Electorate of Trier and Luxemburg. It is an Ecclesiastical Principality of the Empire, whereof the Abbot was formerly Lord, but since 1576. the Elector of Trier has it, and it was confirmed to him by the Dyet of Ratisbonne in 1654. It stands on a little River of the same name, 27 Miles N. E. of Triers. VIII. Ulmen. Ʋlmen is a small Town 27 Miles W. of Coblentz. IX. Ober-Wesel. Ober-Wesel, Lat. Ficelia or Vesalia is a Town upon the Rhine, Imperial and Free, until in 1312. it fell into the
Hands of the Elector of Triers. It is memorable for St. Wer∣ner's Death, slain here by the Jews in 1287. The Mother of Alexander, the Roman Emperor, is also said to have been assassinated here. This Place stands 20 Miles South of Coblentz. Article V. The Archbishoprick and Electorate of Cologne or Ceulen. THE Electorate of Cologne borders the Duke∣dom of Juliers on the North and West.Bounds. The Electorate of Triers on the South; and Hesse and part of Westphalia on the East. Its ExtentExtent. cannot easily be determined, because it is strange∣ly intermixed with other Provinces. The Archbishop is great Chancellor of the Em∣pire in Italy,History. but never exercises the Function of his Office; For Princes that hold any Principa∣lities of the Empire are its perpetual Vicars, in which qua∣lity they can do in all places in their Jurisdictions what the Emperor could do in common cases, and in higher points have recourse to the Imperial Court. Wherefore the Arch∣bishop of Metz, who is great Chancellor of Germany, is Keeper of the Archives, and the Titles that concern Italy. The Golden-Bull bears, that the Archbishop of Cologne has the Privilege of Crowning the King of the Romans: Never∣theless it seems this does not belong to him, but when the Ceremony is perform'd in his Diocess, or in the Suffragan Bi∣shopricks; for the Archbishop of Metz disputes it with him, when it is done elsewhere. This does not hinder but the Archbishop of Cologne goes before him of Mayence, within the districts of his Metropolitan, and Chancellorship of Ita∣ly, where he puts himself at the Emperors Right, leaving the Elector of Mayence, who preceeds him in all other Places, the Left. The Elector of Cologne has also by the Golden-Bull the second Suffrage in the Electoral College, with Privilege to Vote immediately after the Archbishop of Treves, and exercise Justice by his Officers in all Criminal Cases in the Town, tho' otherwise Free and immediately depending
on the Empire. But the Towns-People do not suffer him to make any long stay with them, nor come with a great Train, which has been the occasion of several Debates these many Ages, and is the Reason why that Prelate keeps his residence for the most part at Bonn. The great Chapter of Cologne is one of the noblest in Europe, It consists of 60 Canons, all Princes or Counts; for they receive no meaner Person; quite contrary to that of Treves and Mayence; where they receive neither Princes nor Counts, unless for some weighty reasons. The twenty four Elders of the sixty form a particular Chapter for the Election of the Archbishop, and have their active and passive Votes, having power to chuse any of the Colleagues, or be chosen themselves to the Vacant Dignity. The Annual Revenues of this Archbishoprick in time of Peace amount to 1800000 Livres. The most remarkable Places in the Electorate of Cologne, are, Cologne, or Ceulen. Archb. Cap. Bonn. Rhineberg. Keiserswert. Nuis. Andermach. I. Cologne. Cologne, or Colon, or Ceulen, Lat. Colonia Ʋbiorum, and Co∣lonia Agripina, is seated upon the Rhine; It is an Imperial Free City, and one of the four Capital Hance Towns, with an University, and Archbishoprick, whereof the Prelate is Prince and Elector of the Empire. This Place is very an∣cient deriving its Origin from the Ʋbiens, who courted Ju∣lius Caesar's Alliance, to resist the Suevi their Mortal Enemies. In Augustus's Reign they put themselves under Agrippa's Pro∣tection, and passing the Rhine they founded on the left Bank the Town of Cologne, which they then called the Colony of Agrippa. Some say the Place was built before they came, and that they only enlarged it, about twenty or twenty four years before our Saviours Birth; and afterwards Agrippina Grand-Daughter of this Agrippa, and Nero's Mother, to shew her power when Married to the Emperor Claudius, made
the Circuit of the City far wider than it was before, and esta∣blished a Colony of Veterans in it, about 48 years after our Saviours Birth. When Vitellius and Vespasian disputed the Empire, Anno Chr. 69. This Town was besieged by Tutor and Sabinus, who had revolted against the Romans. She obeyed the pressing necessity, received their Garrison, which she afterwards massacred, when Cerealis had beaten the Rebels. King Merouee of France, beat the Romans hence in the Reign of Valentinian III. and soon after Attila ruin'd it. But being rebuilt by the Romans; Childeric Son to Merouee, took it from them a second time, and gave it to a Prince his Cousin, Fa∣ther to Sigebert, called the Lame King of Cologne, and Riba∣rols, who was killed in 599. by Cloderic his Son. It was then that Clovis the Great, who for this Murther put the Executioner to death, united the People of Cologne to the Crown of France, under which it remained during the Reigns of the Kings of the first Race. Under those of the second it fell to the Princes of France, Kings of Germany. In 881. when Charles the Big went to have himself pro∣claim'd Emperor beyond the Alps, Godfrey and Sigefroy, Kings of the Normans, took and burnt Cologne with fifteen or twenty of the best Cities in Gallia Belgica. The Emperor Otho the Great, under whom it was repaired, subjected it to its Prelates about 950. but succeeding Emperors made it free. Frederick I. allowed it great Privileges, since which time it encreased mightily, especially in 1260. when it entred into the League of the Hance-Towns, and became Capital of the fourth of their Provinces. After this it was govern'd by Senators until the Senate was changed in 1513. by a rising of the Peo∣ple, who Massacred the Consuls, Treasurers and some other Magistrates, accused to have cheated the Publick. The Se∣nate now is much like that of old Rome. It governs and judges in civil matters; but for criminals it has only the pow∣er to seize and examine them, without the Authority of ac∣quitting or condemning them. For the Elector reserves this to himself as the highest degree of Sovereign Authority; and 'tis for this reason, that tho' the Town is free, yet it does him Homage and swears Allegiance, upon condition that he will preserve the Privileges it enjoys. As for the rest Cologne is called the Rome of Germany, for its greatness, its Senate and fine Buildings. For it is certainly one of the finest, strongest, and biggest of all Germany, environed with strong Walls, that have eighty three Towers, and a Triple
Ditch that surrounds it, in form of a Half-Moon. There are 365 Churches. The Metropolitan St. Peter's would be one of the most magnificent in the whole World, if quite finished. Besides which it has ten Collegiate, nineteen Parish Churches; thirty seven Monasteries, several Hospitals and Chappels The University was re-established in 1388. Besides which there is a Jesuits College built after the Italian fashion, with a very fine Dome. There are five great squares or principal Places in this Town, where, besides its bigness the cleanness of the Streets, the magnificence of both its Private and Publick Structures, the sweet humour and ci∣vility of the Inhabitants, amongst whom there is a great number of Learned Men, contribute much to render it consi∣derable. It has been a Bishoprick in former times Suffra∣gan of Treves, but was erected into an Archbishoprick in 755. ten years after Mayence was made one in favour of Boniface. The first Archbishop was called Adolph. He had for Suffra∣gants, the Bishopricks of Munster, Liege, Osnabruck, Min∣den and Ʋtrecht; but the two last being become secular, there are but the three first that depend on it now. The Ancient∣est Assembly of the Clergy held at Cologne was that of 346. wherein Euphrates then Bishop of the Town was deposed for siding with the Arians, and Severinus put in his Place. Charlemaign ordered another there in the VIII. Century; and there were some others held in the IX, &c. In 1688. Prince Clement of Bavaria was chosen Archbishop of Cologne in oppo∣sition to Cardinal William of Furstemburg, who being support∣ed by the King of France, entred this Electorate to maintain his pretended Right by force of Arms, and made himself Master of Bonn, Keiserswert, &c. which were retaken in 1689. by the Brandenburghers, and restored to the right owner. This contest about the Election of the Archbishop of Cologne is the more remarkable, that it was the first sparkle that kindled the War, which has raged these 5 years through most part of Chri∣stendom. Cologne stands 25 Miles E. of Juliers, 68 almost N. of Triers, 70 S. of Munster and 74 N. W. of Mentz, Long. 26 d. 32 m. Lat. 50 d. 55 m.
II. Bonn. Bonn, is situate upon the Rhine 14 Miles almost South of Co∣logne, in a very fine Country, environed with Hills, and co∣vered with Vines and Wood. Several Authors think that it was built by the Trojans after the destruction of Troy. How∣ever, it is certainly the Ara Ʋbiorum of the Ancients, and the  of Ptolomy. Its name was also found in some Medals of Augustus, related by Goltzius under the name of Colony, Col. Julia Bona. It is a regular Fortification, the Walls are faced with Brick, and the Ditch which is dry, is pretty broad; but the Counterscarp is none of the best. As for the Town it self, it is small and poor, yet remarkable as being the ordinary Residence of the Elector of Cologne, who has there a very fine Castle, and curious Gardens in the Neigh∣bourhood. The Town-House is also very well built, with divers Paintings, and a Clock with a melodious Chime, after the fashion of the Country. There are still fine Churches to be seen, the principal of which is dedicated to the Holy Martyrs, Cassius, Florentius and Malusius. This Town suffer∣ed much in the first Wars of the Low-Countries, and was fiercely attackt partly by the Bavarians, and partly by the Troops of the Duke of Parma, who carried it at last by Fa∣mine, in 1588. In this City Frederick of Austria, chosen in opposition to Lewis of Bavaria was Crowned Emperor in 1314. It was in times past an Imperial City, but now it is under the Archbishop of Cologne. In 1673. the Prince of Orange, now King of Great Brittain, having taken Naerden and secured Holland by a part of the Army, he marched with the rest into Germany, and joined part of the Confederate Troops to Besiege Bonn which had been put into the French Kings hands, by the Elector of Cologne, and the taking this Place forced the French to withdraw his Forces out of the united Netherlands. The French made themselves Masters of it again in the beginning of this late War, Lewis XIV. having given Troops to Cardinal Furstemburg to maintain his pretend∣ed Right to the Electorate. It was besieged in Summer 1689. by the Elector of Brandenburg, who after having almost ruined it with Bombs, took it by Capitulation. At the last Siege of this Town, they found a Vault in which there was an Iron Chest, that was full of Medals of Gold, to the value of 100000 Crowns the Metal was Ducat-Gold and the Impressions
made for Roman, but very ignorantly, as being not above four or 500 years old, some few of them that seem'd true, were of the latter Greek Emperors. III. Rhineberg. Rhineberg or Rheinberg, Lat. Rhenoberga is a little but very strong Town situated upon the Rhine, in the Borders of the Dukedom of Cleves. It was taken from the Spaniards by the Hollanders in 1633. and continued under them till 1672. when it was taken by the French, and restored to the Elector of Cologne the Right Owner. It stands 42 Miles N. W. of Cologne. IV. Keiserswert. Keiserswert, Lat. Colonia Traja, Cayserswerda, and Insula Rheni, is a very mean but well fortified Town, upon the Rhine. It has a broad Ditch, very regular Fortifications, and high Walls faced with Brick; as is also the Counterscarp which is in very good condition. This Town was first Mort∣gaged to Adolph Duke of Cleves, by Charles IV. Emperor of Germany. Gerard Duke of Cleves, Brother of Adolph, sold it to the Archbishop of Cologne for 100000. Florins, about An. 1399. and in 1464. it was finally with Bielstem and Fre∣derberg, confirmed to him, in exchange for Soest and Santen, by John Duke of Cleves. The French had possest themselves of it for Cardinal Furstemberg, but the Elector of Brandenburg retook it in 1689. It stands six German Miles beneath Cologne, to the N. W. V. Nuis. Nuis or Nuys Lat. Novesium, is seated on the Rhine, where it receives the River Erpt. It is an ancient strong City, and famous for the resistance it made against Charles the Rash Duke of Burgundy, who besieged it a whole year. It has been often taken and retaken during the late Wars of Germany. It stands 22 Miles N. W. of Cologne.
VI. Andernach. Andernach stands on the Rhine by the Borders of Triers, 15 Miles almost S. E. of Bonn, it was once Imperial but now subject to the Elector of Cologne. Article VII. The Dukedoms, or, the Succession of Cleves and Ju∣liers, Lat. Ducatus Clivensis & Juliacensis. THE Country of Cleves, Juliers, Berg, Mark,Bounds. Ravensberg and Ravestein, are about the Rhine, but so strangely dispersed that it is hard to determine their Bounds. One may say however that they border the Ʋnited Provinces on the North; the Catholick Provinces on the West; the Archbishop∣rick of Triers on the South; and Hesse and Westphalia on the East. Their extent North and South is about 100 Miles;Extent. and about 70 East and West: including the Electorate of Cologne, which is incircled in them. Quality.The Air is here pretty cold: The Soil fertile in Corn, Wine in some Places, and Pastures. The Principal RiversRivers. here besides the Rhine are Roer and Lipe, which fall both into that, the first at Duysburg, the other at Wesel: There are also several springs of Hot Waters, and some Marishes. The succession of Cleves and Juliers is divided into six Territories,Division. viz. 1. The Dukedom of Cleves Cleves. 2. The Dukedom of Juliers Juliers. 3. The Dukedom of Berg Dusseldorp. 4. The County of Mark Dortmond. 5. The County of Ravensberg Ravensberg. 6. The Lordship of Ravestein Ravestein.
Dukedom of Cleves. THE Dutchy of Cleves lies part on this, and part on the other side the Rhine, having the Dutchy of Berg, County of Mark, and part of Westphalia to the East; Brabant and part of the Dutchy of Gelderland to the West. The Archbishoprick of Cologne and Territory of Aix la Chapelle to the South; Overissel, and the Provinces of Zutphen to the North. This Country is about 15 Leagues in length and four or five broad. The soil, tho' hilly,Extent. Quality. and much covered with Wood, is very fruitful in all kind of Grain, and abounds with good Pasture, and great Quantity of Game. Cleves, is a sovereign Family of Germany ex∣tinct by the Death of John William Duke of Cleves,History. Juliers, Mons, &c. in 1609. without issue by either of his Wives Jacqueline of Bade, Daughter of Philibert Mar∣quiss of Bade, or Antoinette of Lorrain, Daughter to Charles II. Duke of Lorrain. This Death was the source of the Civil Wars of Germany in this manner, Mary Eleanor, the Dukes Eldest Sister (Married to Albert Frederick of Brandenburg Duke of Prussia) left four Daughters. The Elder called Ann, was Married to John Sigismond Marquiss of Brandenburg, and Elector of the Empire. This Elector the Duke of Newbourg, the Marquiss of Burgaw, and John George of Saxony, which three last Married the three younger Sisters, pretended all to the Succession, John II. of Bavaria Duke of Deux-Ponts Son of John of Bavaria, and of Magdalen of Cleves Sister to Mary Eleanor laid his claim, and Charles of Gonzague and Cleves Duke of Nevers, appeared also because he was cou∣sin by the Mothers side, and bore the name too. In the mean time, the Emperor Rodolphus II. would sequester the Estate pretending also that it was a Fief, with an intention, perhaps, to appropriate it to himself. It's thought, that Henry IV. the Great, King of France, was about taking the Field to decide the Quarrel, when he was murthered in 1610. Afterwards the Marquiss of Brandenburg assisted by the Dutch, and the Duke of Newburg supported by the Spaniards, disputed the Succession by force of Arms, which they di∣vided
at last; The Dutchy of Cleves, the Counties of Mark and Ravensberg falling to the first; The Dukedoms of Juliers and Berg, and the Lordship of Ravestein being left to the Duke of Newbourg. The Spaniards under Spinola made themselves Masters of Juliers in 1622. but it was restored to the Duke again in 1659. The Places of Note in the Dutchy of Cleves are, Cleves. Cap. Emmerick. Rees. Wesel. Meurs. County. Genep. Burich. Orsoy. Calcar. Duysbourg. Santen. Fort de Skenck. I. Cleves. Cleves Lat. Clivis or Clivia, because it is built in a Place near the Rhine where there are three deep Acclivities or De∣scents. This derivation of Name from the Latin makes some think that the Town was built by the Romans. However, it is but little, yet well peopled, and lies upon a little River near the Place where the Rhine divides it self into two Branches, and where the Fort Schenck stands. There is a square Tower and other remains of old Buildings seen near it, which shew that it has formerly been far greater than it is now. It stands 12 Miles almost S. E. of Nimeguen and 66 N. W. of Cologne, Long. 25 d. 25 m. Lat. 51 d. 48 m.. II. Emmerik. Emmerik vulgo Embric Lat. Emmerica, is a large beautiful and wealthy City, seated upon the Rhine, between Cleves and the Fort of Schenck, being about seven Miles N. E. from the first it belongs to the Marquiss of Brandenburg, but was Garrisoned by the Hollanders a long time, who took it from the Spaniards in 1600. The Elector of Brandenburg pawned Emmerick, Orsoy and Wesel to the Dutch, and by the taking of them, the French began their Conquest of the Ʋnited
Provinces in 1672. But the year next following they restored them to the Elector. III. Rees. Rees Lat. Reesium, is a small Town upon the Rhine for∣merly well fortified and garrisoned by the Hollanders, tho' it belong'd to the Duke of Brandenburg. It was taken from them by the French in 1672. and restored to that Prince in 1674. but first dismantled. It stands 12 Miles E. of Cleves. IV. Wesel. Wesel is a strong City, seated upon the Rhine, at the Con∣fluence of the Lippe. It was taken from the Spaniards by the Hollanders in 1629. and from the Hollanders by the French in 1672. who left it to the Elector of Brandenburg in 1674. after they had dismantled it. It has been very well fortified of late by that Prince. This Place stands 23 Miles S. E. of Cleves. V. Meurs. Meurs is a well fortified Town, with the Title of County; some place it in the Archbishoprick of Cologne. It had par∣ticular Earls formerly but now belongs to the House of Orange and Nassau, and so to our King. It stands 28 Miles S. E. of Cleves. VI. Genep. Genep or Gennep Lat. Gennaptum is a small City well fortified, 10 Miles S. W. of Cleves. It is seated upon the River Mers where it falls into the Meuse, and kept by a Dutch Garrison, tho' in the Territories of Brandenburg. It was once taken by the Spaniards but recovered by the Hollanders in 1641.
VII. Burich. Burich, or Budrick, Lat. Burichum, and Budrichium, or Burunchium, is a little Town pleasantly seated on the Rhine, and pretty well fortified. The Hollanders were formerly Ma∣sters of it, and it is one of the Four Cities which the French King caused to be attack'd, at one and the same time at the opening of the Campaign in 1672. The Marshal Turenne Be∣sieged and carried it. It stands 20 Miles E. of Cleves. VIII. Orsoy. Orsoy, Lat. Orsovium, or Orsocum, is a strong Town upon the Rhine  Miles of Cleves. It was taken by the Prince of Orange in 1634. for the Hollanders, and afterwards taken from those by the French in 1672. but abandon'd by them in 1674. IX. Calcar. Calcar, is situated upon the River of Meine, a League from the Rhine, and two from Cleves to the S. E. It has a Castle, and is well fortified; the Streets are narrow, so that there is nothing considerable but the great Place, where the Town-House is. X. Duisbourg. Duisbourg, Lat. Duisburgum, is seated on the River Roer, belonging to the Elector of Brandenburg; it was an Imperial Town formerly, but has lost this Privilege. It is different from Duisbourg the most Ancient Viscounty of Brabant. And stands 35 Miles S. E. of Cleves. XI. Santen. Santen, is a large and ancient Town not far off the Rhine, Nine Miles W. of Wesel, and 15 S. E. of Cleves. It is under
the Elector of Brandenburg, and noted for the finest Church in all that Dutchy, wherein are above 30 Altars, with the Hi∣story of the Gospel Carved exquisitely in Timber; they have abundance of Relicks here; and among other things pretend to a Manuscript of St. Paul's Writing. XII. Fort de Skenck. Fort de Skenck, Lat. Arx Skenckia, Germ. Schenkenschans, is a strong Fort on the Borders of Gelderland, in a place where the Rhine dividing it self into two Channels, makes the River Wahal, and the other Branch keeps the Name of Rhine. This Fort takes its Name from the Builder Martin Skenck. The Spaniards took it by Surprize from the Hollanders in 1635. who retook it the next Year, after a Siege of Eleven Months. In 1672. it was taken by the French in two Days, and was by them restored to the Duke of Brandenburg in 1674. and in 1679. Mortgaged by that Prince to the Hollanders, who are now Masters of it. It stands 3 Miles N. of Cleves. Dukedom of Juliers. THis Dutchy lyes betwixt the Meuse and the Rhine, the Country of Cleves and Limburg,Bounds. the Bishop∣rick of Liege, and the Archbishoprick of Cologne. It is about 12 Leagues in length, and 7 in breadth.Extent. The most considerable Places in it are, Juliers, Cap. Duren, Aix la Chapelle, Imp. Zulk, or Zulpich. Kerpen, Dolin, Heinsberg, Erkelens Gueld, Bredebent, Grevembruck, Aldenhoven,
I. Juliers. Juliers, Lat. Juliacum, Germ. Julick or Gulick, is situated upon the River Roer, being an Ancient and strong City with a good Cittadel. Some Authors affirm that it was Built by Julius Caesar, tho' others are of Opinion that it was Built by Drusus. It was taken in 1622. by the Spaniards, but was restored to the Duke of Newburg by the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. This City is 24 Miles W. of Cologne, 15 N. E. of Aix la Chapelle, and 34 E. of Maestricht. Long. 25 d. 50 m. Lat. 50 d. 56 m. II. Duren. Duren, or Dueren, is a small Town on the River Roer, 8 Miles S. E. of Juliers. It was once Imperial, but is now subject to the Duke of Newbourg. III. Aix-la-Chapelle. Aix-la-Chapelle, Lat. Aquisgranum, Germ. Aken, is an Im∣perial Town on the Frontiers of Juliers. It is said to have been Built by Granus the Brother of Nero, Anno Christi 50. and thence called Aquis Granum; others give a fabulous Ety∣mology, deriving its Name from Apollo called Granius, be∣cause of its Medicinal Waters and Baths. Charlemaign Ri∣ding through the Woods a Hunting, his Horse's Foot struck into one of those Hot Springs, which occasion'd his observing of the Place, and the Ruins of many Palaces adjoining, the City having been Ruined by Attila, King of the Huns. He found the Place so agreeable, that he Built it up again, and chose it for his Residence, conferred great Priviledges upon it, and made it the Seat of the Empire in this side of the Alps, ordaining that the King of the Romans should be Crowned here with an iron Crown, as at Milan with one of Silver, and at Rome with one of Gold. He Built also a Collegiate Church Dedicated to the Virgin, enlarged and fortified the City, so that it flourished till 882. that it was destroyed by the Nor∣mans. It has suffered much by the Fire divers times since,
and particularly in 1656. when 20 Churches, and 5000 pri∣vate Houses were consum'd. The Town-house is well Built of Free-stone, having a Hall of 162 Foot long, and 60 broad, where the Emperors, at their Coronation, Treat the Electors and other Princes. The Church of our Lady Built by Charle∣maign, is adorned in the inside with Pillars of white Marble, and Brass gilt Statues, Brass Doors, and much Mosaick Work. In the middle of the Church where Charlemaign was Buried, hangs a Crown of Silver and Brass, adorn'd with 16 little Towers, and 48 Statues of Silver of about a Foot high, and 32 which are lesser, between which stand 48 Candlesticks to receive the Lights Burnt there upon Festivals. This was the Gift of the Emperor Frederick I. who took up again the Body of Charlemaign, and Buried it again in a Silver Coffin, under his own Tomb-stone, which is of white Marble, and said to have been that of Julius Caesar; it has the Figure of Proserpine upon it. Out of this Tomb were taken a great ma∣ny Rarities and Relicks, which the said Emperor had got from Aaron King of Persia, the Patriarch of Constantinople and others. In this Place is also the Tomb of the Emperor Otho, who is said to have first Constituted the Electors in 1000. Near this City are many Mines, as Lead, Sulphure, Vitriol, Iron, Coal, and Lapis Calaminaris, with which they make Brass, or multiply Copper in their Furnaces. This City is al∣so Famous for its hot Baths, which are very much frequented, and exceeding convenient; three of them are within the Walls, and very convenient, the principal is called the Empe∣rors Bath; it has Five Bathing Rooms, in one of which Char∣lemaign used to Bath and Swim. These Baths rise so hot, that they let them cool 12 Hours before they use them. There is also a Fountain of this hot Water, much resorted to, and drunk of in the Summer. A little from this City on the o∣ther side of a Hill, at a Village called Borsett, are many hot Springs on both sides of a little Rivulet, which compose 28 Baths, whose Springs are hotter than any of the City, and are cool'd 18 Hours before they be used. This City suffered much in the late Wars, being taken by the Protestants, and retaken by Spinola in 1614. Several Councils have been held in this City; which is also famous for a Treaty of Peace con∣cluded there betwixt the French and Spaniards in 1668. It stands 32 Miles almost W. of Cologne, 26 almost E. of Liege, and 15 almost N. E. of Limburg. Long. 25 d. 36 m. Lat. 50 d. 48 m.
IV. Zulch, or Zulpich. Zulch, or Zulpich, Lat. Tolbiacum, stands 10 Miles from Cologne, and is the same that was formerly called Tolbiac, Fa∣mous for the Victory won there in 496. by Clovis, because it occasion'd his Conversion. The other Towns in Juliers are not very remarkable, ex∣cept Grevembruk, which is Famous by the Defeat of the Im∣perialists in 1648. Dukedom of Berg, or Mons. THE Dutchy of Berg, or of Mons, Lat. Bergen∣sis,Name. Bounds. Quality. and Montensis Ducatus, is a small Coun∣try upon the Rhine, betwixt the County of Mark, and the Bishoprick of Liege. It abounds with ex∣cellent Corn, and Coal-Mines, and belongs to the Duke of Newbourg. The Principal Places in it are, Dusseldorp, Cap. Solingen, Lennep, Ratingen, Hardemberg, Berg, Everveld, Mulheim, Blankenberg, Siegberg, Wieldenberg. I. Dusseldorp. Dusseldorp, the Chief Town of the Dutchy of Berg, is pretty well fortified upon the Rhine. It belongs to the Duke of Newburg, and stands 20 Miles N. W. of Cologne, and 23 N. E. of Juliers. Long. 26 d. 14 m. Lat. 51 d. 13 m. The other Places are not very considerable.
County of Mark. THis County lyes betwixt the Dutchy of Westpha∣lia to the East,Bounds. the Bishoprick of Munster to the North, and the Dutchy of Berg, or Mons to the West and South. The most Remarkable Places in it are, Dortmund, Cap. Luynen, Ʋnna, Ham, Essen, Werden, Zoest, Asten, Kumen. I. Dortmund. Dortmund, Lat. Tremonia, is a little, rich, and populous, imperial, and Hanse-Town, on the River Empser. It be∣longs now to the Marquiss of Brandenburg, and stands 34 Miles S. of Munster, and 40 almost N. of Cologne. Long. 26 d. 58 m. Lat. 51 d. 28 m. The other Places here do not deserve a particular Descrip∣tion. County of Ravensberg. THis Earldom is a small Territory that lyes between the Bi∣shopricks of Minden and Osnaburgh to the N. and W. that of Munster to the South, and the County of Lippe to the East. The only Place of Note here is Ravensberg, situated upon a Hill, and Subject to the Elector of Brandenburg. It stands 20 Miles S. E. of Osnaburgh, and 30 almost E. of Munster. Long. 27 d. 57 m. Lat. 52 d. 11 m.
Lordship of Ravesteyn. RAvesteyn, is a small Town and Country of Brabant, on the Borders of Gelderland. The City stands upon the Meuse below Grave, 10 Miles almost W. of Nimeguen. Long. 24 d. 53 m. Lat. 51 d. 48 m. The Dukes of Cleves have been Lords of Ravesteyn, where they had a good Cittadel, but William Duke of Cleves and Juliers, was obliged to demolish it, by one of the Articles of the Treaty made with the Em∣peror Charles V. It belongs now by Right to the Duke of Newbourg, but the Hollanders are in Possession of it.
THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE SECT. III. The Duke of Savoy's Dominions. THE Territories by Right belonging to the Duke of Savoy,Bounds. are bounded on the East, chiefly by the Dukedom of Milan, on the South by the Sea, and part of the Commonwealth of Genoa, on the West by Provence, Dauphine, and Bresse in France; and on the North by the Lake of Gene∣va and Switzerland. It is a very irregular, oblong Figure, being in length from Geneva in the North parts of Savoy to the most South Eastern parts of Montferrat a∣bout 190 Miles;Extent. and in breadth from the most Western parts of the County of Nice, to the most Eastern parts of Montferrat about 120 Miles. The Principal RiversRivers. in these parts are, 1. Po, (called Eridanus by the Poets) which here washes Salusses, Carignan, Turin, Verua, and Casal, and so goes into Milan. 2. Tanare, which here washes Ceve, Quieras, Alba, and Asti, and runs into the Po in Milan. 3. Doere, or Doria, which washes Aoust and Ivrea, and falls into the Po a little above Verua.
4. Iser, which washes Moustiers, runs by Montmelian, and goes into France. Here are two Lakes,Lakes. besides that of Gene∣va, viz. 1. That of Bourget, and, 2. That of Anneci. Here are also the Alps, and the Appennine, the most famous MountainsMountains. in Europe. This Country towards the North is generally barren,Quality. because of the Mountains; but towards the South it is exceeding fruitful in all things ne∣cessary, as Corn, Wine, Oyl, Fruits, Venison, Cattel, Cheese, Chesnuts, Hemp, Flax, Minerals, and several Quar∣ries of Marble. Here is considerable TradingTrade. in many good Commodities as Paper, Fustians, Raw-silks, Hides, Cloaths, Linnen, Thread, Iron-work, Fir-Trees for Masts of Ships, &c. yet Money is pretty scarce in most Places. The ordinary RevenueRevenue. of the Duke is said to amount to 1800000 Crowns yearly, yet upon ex∣traordinary Occasions he can raise much larger Sums.Strength. The number of Souldiers which he may conveniently raise, is reckoned about 30000. The ReligionReligion. generally allowed of here is the Roman Catholick; yet the Protestants called Vaudois have the free exercise of their Belief in some Valleys of Piedmont. The LanguageLanguge. here spoken is most commonly the French, or at least a Dialect of it; the Ita∣lian is also very much used. In this Country are two Archbishopricks,Archbishop∣ricks. viz. Turin and Moustiers, and thirteen Bishopricks,Bishopricks. viz. Fossano, Ivrea, Mondovi, and Salusses under Turin; Anneci, Aoust, and Maurienne under Mou∣stiers; Acqui, Alba, Asti, Casal and Vercelli un∣der the Archbishop of Milan; and Nice under that of Ambrun in France. Division.The Duke of Savoy's Dominions are commonly divided into four parts, viz. 1. Dukedom of Savoy Chambery. 2. Principality of Piedmont Turin.
3. County of Nice Nice. 4. Dukedom of Montferrat Casal. Of these, the French have Nice, part of Montferrat, and the greatest part of Savoy; the Duke of Mantua has about half of Montferrat; the Prince of Massarano has a little part of Piedmont; the Prince of Spigno a little of Montferrat; so that the Duke of Savoy has but the greatest part of Piedmont, and about one half of Montferrat. CHAP. I. Savoy, Lat. Sabaudia. SAvoy, Lat. Sabaudia, or Sapaudia, is one of the finest Sovereign Dutchies in Europe.Bounds. It Borders the Lake of Geneva, Swisserland, and the County of Burgundy on the North; the Province of Dauphine in France, on the West; part of Dauphine and of Piedmont on the South; and Piedmont and Vallais on the East. Its ExtentExtent. from the South-East to the North-West is about 110 Miles, and from the East to the West about 80. The Air is here Cold, because of the Mountains always covered with Snow;Quality. and the Country ge∣nerally barren; however the Valleys yield Corn and Wine, the Mountains good Pastures, and all manner of Game, and the Lakes and Rivers store of good Fish; there are also a great many Walnuts and Chesnut-Trees, and Fo∣rests of other Trees. The principal RiversRivers. here are the Isere, Arche, and Arve; and the LakesLakes. are two, viz. that of Bourget, and that of Anneci. The Savoyards are generally good-natured, la∣borious and hardy,Manners. but the Wit of the generality is none of the quickest. The Religion publickly allowed is the Roman Catholick. This Province was of old possessed by the All∣trobroges, Centrones, Brannovices,History. Antuates or Nantuates, Latobrigi and Sabaudi: It was part of
Gallia Narbonensis, and of Celtica or Lugdunensis, and obeyed to the Romans. Upon the declining of the Roman Empire un∣der Honorius, Savoy was left as a prey to several Barbarous Na∣tions; since that it made part of the Kingdom of Burgundy, from whence it came under the Dominion of the Princes that at present are possest of it, who derive their Pedigree from one Bertoldus or Beroldus, who in the Beginning of the XIth. Century was the Rise of this Family. The Learned are very much at difference about the Birth of this Prince, and his Ex∣traction; some derive it from Ancharius Marquiss of Yvree; others from Hugo King of Italy, and Duke of Provence; others say, that he was Nephew of Hugo Capet King of France; and others make him a Descendant of the Counts of Macon. A∣bove fourscore Historians of several Nations follow Guichenon, who derives his Genealogy from Wittekindus the Great Duke of Saxony and Angria, Father of Witibert Duke of Angria; who had two Sons Bruno and Walpert; this last was Duke of Angria, and Count of Ringelbert, and left Immed Duke of En∣gern, who by Huine Countess of Chiren, had Hugo Marquiss of Italy, who was Father of this Beroldus, Earl of Savoy and Maurienne, and had for his Successor Hambert, Sirnamed White-hands. But some French Authors of late (viz. Chorier and Du Bouchet) have endeavoured to make out, that there was never any such Man as Beroldus of Saxony, and have found (or rather fancied) that this Humbert was Grandchild of the Emperor Lewis the Son of Boson, the Son of Benvil Count of Ardenna, descended from Pharamond, or as others will have it, from Charlemaign. Beroldus, and some of his Successors were but Counts of Savoy and Maurienne; several Territories were afterwards ad∣ded to their Dominions: And the Emperor Sigismund digni∣fied them with the Title of Dukes in 1417. They now call themselves Dukes of Savoy, Chablais, Aost, and the Canton of Geneva, Princes of Piedmont, Marquisses of Salusses, Counts of Geneve, Romont, Nice, Aste and Tende, Barons of Fauligni, Lords of Verceilles, Marquisses of Italy, Kings of Cyprus; since Lewis of Savoy who Married Charlotte Daughter to John King of Cyprus; and Vicars of the Empire since Thomas the First.
Chronological Succession of the Forty Counts or Dukes of Savoy and Piedmont. Earls 24.   Begun in Reigned Y. 1. Beroldus I. Count of Savoy 1000 22 or 23 2. Humbert I. White-hands 1023 25 3. Ame I.     4. Odo 1048 12 5. Ame or Amedaeus II. 1061 34 6. Humbert II. the Strong 1095 8 7. Amedaeus III. 1103 46 8. Humbert III. the Saint 1149 39 9. Thomas I. (made Vicar-general of the Empire in Lombardy and Piedmont. 1188 35 10. Amedaeus IV. 1233 5 11. Boniface, Roland 1238 25 12. Peter the Little Charlemaign 1263 5 13. Philip I. 1268 17 Interruption. The Four following had but Piedmont only. 14. Philip II. 1282 23 15. James 1326 38 16. Ame 1366 36 17. Lewis 1402 16 18. Thomas II. 1285 10 19. Thomas III. 1295 15 20. Amedaeus V. the Great, made Prince of the Empire 1310 13 21. Edward the Liberal 1323 6 22. Aimon the Pacifick 1329 14 23. Amedaeus VI. the Green 1342 40 24. Amedaeus VII. the Red 1383 9
16 Dukes.   Begun in Reigned Y. 25. Amedaeus VIII. made Duke of Savoy in 1416. and Pope afterwards 1392 43 26. Lewis I. 1434 31 27. Lewis II. King of Cyprus, (having Married Charlotte Daughter of John, King of Cyprus 1465 17 28. Amedaeus IX. the Fortunate 1482 7 29. Philibert the Hunter     30. Charles I. the Warriour     31. Charles-John-Amedaeus 1489 7 32. Philip 1496 1 33. Gilbert the Fair 1497 7 34. Charles II. the Good 1504 49 35. Emanuel Philibert, Iron-pate 1553 27 36. Charles Emanuel I. 1580 50 37. Victor Amedaeus 1630 7 38. Francis Hyacinth 1637 1 39. Charles Emanuel II. 1638 37 40. Victor Amedaeus-Francis, the present Duke of Savoy since 1675   Emanuel Philibert Married Margaret Daughter to Francis I. King of France, and died in 1580. leaving only one Son Charles Emanuel I. who waged War with France unsuccessful∣ly; he Married Katherine Daughter of Philip II. King of Spain, and died in 1630. leaving several Sons and Daughters. He was succeeded by Victor Amedaeus, who was a great Lover of Peace, but a War breaking out between the French and Spaniards, he sided with the former, and died of a Fever in 1637. leaving by his Wife Christina Daughter to Henry IV. of France, Aloisia-Maria-Christina, Married to his Unkle Mau∣rice Prince of Oneglia. Francis who died in 1632. Charles-Emanuel. Margaret Married to Rainutius, Duke of Parma. Adelais Married to Ferdinand Elector of Bavaria. And Ka∣tharine who died in 1637. Charles Emanuel II. succeeded his Father: In 1663. he Married Magdalen, Daughter to the Duke of Orleans, and after her Death his Kinswoman Mary, Daugh∣ter to the Duke of Nemours, by whom he had the present Duke of Savoy, Victor Amedaeus-Franciscus, Born in 1666.
who Married in 1684. Anna Maria Daughter to the Duke of Orleans, by whom he has two Daughters. Mary and — From Thomas Son to Charles Emanuel I. and Brother to Victor-Amedaeus, are descended by Mary of Bourbon, Daughter to the Count of Soissons, Aloise Married to the Marquiss of Baden; Emanuel Philibert who Married Mary Catherine of Est; Eugenius Mauritius who Married Olympia, Niece to Cardinal Mazarin, by whom he had Lewis Thomas Count of Soissons, who Married Ʋrania, Daughter to the Lord of Beauvois; Philip Born in 1659. and Franciscus Eugenius, so much talk'd of in the present Wars, Born in 1665. The present Duke of Savoy declared War against France, and fell in with the Confederates, Jan. 4. 1690. because of the unreasonableness of the French King's Demands, who sought no less than to Garrison Turin his Capital City; and had pre∣vail'd with him to Persecute his Innocent Protestant Subjects the Vaudois. The French King being before that time possest of great part of Savoy, has seized the whole since; so that the Duke is now confined to Piedmont. But in Summer 1692. he Marched with 3000 Men into Dauphine, took Ambrun, Gap, &c. spoil'd the Country at pleasure, and would have made further progress, had he not been taken with the Small-Pox, which obliged him to return to Turin. Savoy is generally divided into Six Parts, viz. On the South 1. Savoy, properly so called Chambery Cap. 2. The Valley and County of Mau∣rienne Maurienne Bish. 3. The Valley of Tarentaise Monstiers Archb. On the North 4. The Barony of Fossigni Bonneville. 5. The Dukedom of Chablais Thonon. 6. The Dukedom or Territory of Geneva Geneva Free. Annecy.
Savoy Proper. THE places of Note here, Chambery. Cap. Montmeillan. Beaufort. Aix. Rumilly. Les Eschelles. Vigne. Constans. Aiguebele. Miolans. Chatelar. La Rochete. I. Chambery. Chambery Lat. Cameriacum, or Camberiacum or Camberium, is the Capital of Savoy, the ancient Residence of the Duke, and the Seat of a Chamber of Accounts, of an Office of Fi∣nances, of a Bailywick and of a Parliament, which they cal∣led a Senate, because it consisted of Senators and four Presi∣dents. This Town is scituated on the confluence of the small Rivers Laisse and Albane or Orbanne, in a plain environ'd with several little Hills. It is great and well built, with a Castle that commands the Town. There is in the Duke's Palace the Holy Chappel, which has Canons belonging to it, and depending on the Bishop of Grenoble in France. The chief Church is that of the Parish of St. Leger, but there are several others, which together with the Jesuits College, are a great Ornament to it. It is also imbelish'd with many fine Fountains which have their source in the Hill St. Martin, and distribute their Water into the several parts of the Town; besides this, there are several small Channels of the River Orbanne. The Houses in many places toward the Street are built on Pillars which form a Gallery, and are good Places to walk in in Rainy Weather. Chambery to the East has the Suburb of Monmeillan, to the West that of Machee Vernay, and on both sides very pleasant Walks, amongst which the Mail is the most resorted and pleasant. This Town is in the Hands of the French since 1690. It stands 27 Miles N. E. of
Grenoble, 44 S. of Geneva, 55 W. of Lyons, 100 N. W. of Turin and 270 S. E. of Paris. Long. 25 d. 24 m. Lat. 45 d. 4 m. II. Monmeillan. Monmeillan Lat. Monmelianus is a little Town upon the Iser 18 Miles S. E. of Chambery. It has a vast strong Castle on the top of a steep Rock, which commands the narrow pas∣sage betwixt the Mountains; There is a Well cut in the Rock which supplies the Garrison and Inhabitants with Water. The French besieged it 1691. and took it after it had made a very vigorous resistance. III. Aix. Aix which is Dignified with the Title of Marquisate, at the foot of the Mountains between Chambery, and Anneci, and Rumilly, is an ancient Town, but small and ill-built: How∣ever it is famous for the hot Baths of Allom and Sulphur adjoining to it, which are very much frequented. The County of Maurienne. THE County or Valley of Maurienne reaches from the Alps, to the River Isere on the one side, and on the other from Tarentais to Dauphine. It is generally believed to be the Country of the Ancient Brannovices in Caesar, tho' Samson be of another Mind. The most considerable Places here are, St. John of Maurienne. Bish. Cap. La Chambre Marquisate. St. Michael. St. Julian. St. Andrew. Modane. Ʋsse. Braman. Lanebourg.
I. St. John of Maurienne. St. John of Maurienne or Morienne Lat. Mauriana Sancti Jo∣annis, is on the River Arche, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Vienna in Dauphine. It is an Unwalled City seated in a Valley on the Frontiers of France, The Cathedral Church of St. John has many Tombs of the Dukes of Savoy. This City lies 16 Leagues from Grenoble to the East. The Valley of Tarentaise Lat. Tarentasia. THIS small Province lies between the Fossigny on the North; the Alps, and the Dutchy of Aost on the East, the Valley of Morienne on the South; and Savoy Proper on the West. The remarkable Places here are, Monstiers. Archbp. Cap. St. James. St. Maurice. Briancon. Constans. Le Bourg. I. Monstiers. Monstiers Lat. Monasterium, formerly Tarentasia and Forum Neronis Centronum, is seated upon the Isere, with an Archbi∣shops See, which has for Suffragans Sion and Aousle. It has not been Metropolis but since the eighth Age; for before that time all Ecclesiastick Authors agree, that it was subject to that of Vienne. It stands 16 Miles E. of St. John de Mau∣scenne, 28 E. of Monmelian, and 64 N. W. of Turin, Long. 26 d. 14 m. Lat. 45 d. seven m.
The Barony of Fossigny. FOssigni, Foucigni, or Faussigny Lat. Fociniacum and Focinien∣sis Tractus, with the Title of Barony lies between Gene∣vois and le Valais, in a Mountainous Country; its ancient Inhabitants were the Focunates or Focuates. The most remarkable Places here are, Bonneville. Cap. Cluse. St. Gervais. Taninge. Salanche. Bonneville. Bonneville Lat. Bonnopolis is a small Town and Castle on the right Bank of the River Arva, over which it has a Wooden Bridge, two Leagues from Cluse, five from Annecy, and about as many from Geneva. Bonneville is at the Foot of the Mountains, but the Plain on the other side the River Arva belongs to Geneva. It is not considerable, yet several Noble Families of Savoy, as of St. Alban, de Millet, de Chales, &c. have had their Original from thence. The Dukedom of Chablais Lat. Caballicus Ducatus. THis Province Borders the Lake of Geneva to the North; The Country of Velay to the East; Fossigny to the South; and the Territories of Geneva to the West. It comprehends the Bailywicks of Tannier and Galliard, and the Lands of St. Victor. The Romans kept great studs in this Province, which for that reason they called Provincia Equestris, and Ca∣ballica, from the last word comes the present Chablais.
The Places of Note here are, Thonon. Ripaille. Evian. Armoy. St. John d' Aux or of Aost. Thonon Thonon or Tonnon Lat. Tunonium is a small inconsiderable Town on the Lake of Geneva, seven Leagues E. of that Town. The Genevois Lat. Genevensis Ager. THis Province has the River Rhine on the West and North; Chablais and Fossigni on the East, and Savoy Proper on the South. The remarkable Places here are, Geneve. Bish. Free. Annecy. Cap. Albi. La Roche. Tonnes. Faverge. Manigo. Talloir. Clairmont. Mount St. Martin. I. Geneva. Geneva or Geneve, Lat. Januba, Genabum, Geneva, or Ge∣neventium Civitas is an ancient City of the Allobroges, upon the Frontiers of Savoy, seated upon the Rhine, at the ex∣tremity of the Lake Leman, (now called Lake of Geneva.) It is a neat, large, rich City, well fortified, and has an ad∣mirable situation; partly upon a Hill, partly in a Plain which has the Lake on the North. The Rhine issuing out of the Lake, incompasses the City to the West, and divides it from that delightful part call'd St. Gervais. At the end of the City the Rhine receives the River Arve, which is another Rampart of Geneva to the South, and besides the defence it
draws from those Rivers to the South and West, and from the Lake to the North, it has very good Fortifications. St. Peter's Church is built upon a Hill, and was formerly the Ca∣thedral. There are in this City several Piazza's, a fair Town-House, with a Pair of Stairs of particular Workmanship, an Arsenal in good order, vast Walks, and beautiful Streets, es∣pecially along the Lake. The Rivieres or Bank-sides make three different Streets; for there is in the middle a Passage for Coaches and Horses, with Shops on both sides, having Porticco's before them, supported with Pillars, where you walk securely from the Weather. It is a City of great Trade, in a Soil abounding with Wine. It is very an∣cient and was very considerable in the time of the Romans, as severalSee Spon's Antiquities of Geneva. Inscriptions testifie. After several Revolutions and suffering much by the Incursions of the Barbarians she had Counts of her own, of which the most Ancient was Robert or Ratbert in the year 880. After that, this City preserved her Liberty for many years under the Imperial protection, till being de∣serted by the Emperors, engaged in Civil Dissentions, she had recourse to her own Bishops, then in great Authority, but they embroyling themselves with the Duke of Savoy, those Discords strangely afflicted her, being already twice consumed by Fire. So that she was forc'd to struggle with the succeeding Dukes of Savoy for her Liberty; which she did with various Fortune, being reduc'd to great extremities by Charles Duke of Savoy after a long Siege; And like to have been seized by Emanuel, which forc'd her to a strict Alliance with the Cantons of Berne and Friburg, by whom she was deli∣vered from her Fears, and the Dukes of Savoy brought to an easie composition, and Renunciation of their Pretensions. But nothing conduced so much to her Establishment as her embracing the Reformation, first Preached to her by William Farel her first Minister, to whom succeeded Calvin and Beza who both died at Geneva; so that after she had renewed a perpetual League with the Cantons before-mentioned, by their support in 1535. the Council of Geneva abolished the Ro∣man Religion, and forced her Bishop Peter of la Beaume to re∣move his See to Annecy. About 350 years ago this City was twice burnt in seven years time; and the change of Religion having heightened its Neighbours Rage against it, it suffered a very sharp Siege and miserable Famine in 1584. But yet prevailed so far by the help of the Canton of Zurich, that
the Duke of Savoy, and the Bishop were forced to renounce all their pretensions to it. Nor did it reap less glory from its defeating the Nocturnal Scalado of Charles Emanuel in 1602. In these late years the French King has several times threatned this City of a Siege, but has been kept from such a design by the fear of breaking with the Switzers. The Em∣peror Charles IV. instituted here an University in 1368. which is still very flourishing Geneva stands 75 Miles N. E. of Lyons 65 S. of Besancon, 50 N. of Chambery, 120 N. W. of Turin, 120 S. W. of Basil, 210 S. E. of Paris, and 450 N. W. of Rome, Long. 25 d. 38 m. Lat. 46 d. 4 m. II. Annecy. Annecy Lat. Annecium is a pretty large Town at the foot of the Mountains of Saymenoz, and upon a Lake of the same name, The Lake is unfathomably deep, four Leagues long and half a League broad, and gives rise to the River Tioud, which Waters Annecy by divers Channels. This Town is the Residence of the titular Bishop of Geneve since 1535. has several Churches and Monasteries, and the Houses are built upon Arches, so that People may walk in its Streets by any Weather. This City stands 22 miles S. of Geneva, and 26 N. of Chambery, Long. 25 d. 32 m. Lat. 45 d. 37 m. CHAP. II. Piedmont Lat. Pedemontium. THE Principality of Piedmont lies betwixt the Milanese and Montferrat to the East;Bounds. the Republick of Genoa and the County of Nice to the South;Extent. Savoy and Dauphine to the West; and Velais to the North. It is in length about 114. Miles, and in breadth 80. This Country was formerly comprehended in Gallia Sub-alpina,History. and afterwards in Lombardy. The Taurins, Salassians, Segusians, Libicians, and seve∣ral other people did heretofore inhabit it. But yet it is not
well agreed upon how it came to be the possession of the Duke of Savoy. The Duke's Eldest Sons bear the Title of Princes of Piedmont. It is very considerable for its fertility, good Air and the Wealth of the Inhabitants: it abounds with Corn, Wine, Fruits, Venison, Cattel, Hemp, Minerals. It contains besides Baronies and Lordships, 15 Marquisates, 52 Earldoms, and 160 Walled Towns or Castles. This Province may be divided into ten parts, viz. 1. The Dukedom of Aost Aost. Bish. 2. The Principality of Masserene Masseran. 3. The Seignory of Verceils Verceils. Bish. 4. The Marquisate of Ivrea Ivrea. Bish. 5. The County of Asti Asti. Bish. 6. Proper Piedmont Turin. Archb. Cap. 7. The Marquisate of Susa Suza. 8. The Marquisate of Salusses Salusses. Bish. 9. The Valleys of the Vaudois. 10. French Piedmont Pignerol. Article I. The Dukedom of Aoste Lat. Ducatus Augustanus. THIS Dutchy lies at the foot of the Alps, betwixt Valais on the North; The Valleys of Sesia and Lordship of Ver∣ceil to the East; Canavese and Piedmont proper to the South; And the County of Tarentaise to the West. It is the Coun∣try of the ancient Salassi, comprehending six large Valleys, besides that from whence it is named, which the River Doere divides in the middle. It is thought that this Dukedom was annexed to Savoy by the Marriage of Count Odon Son to Humbert. I. with Adelais of Susa Widow of Hermannus Duke of Suabia in 1030.
The remarkable Places here are, Aoste. Bish. Cap. La Sale. Morges. Issogne. Villeneuve. St. Martin. Chatillon. I. Aoste. Aoste Lat. Augusta Salassorum, or Augusta Praetoria. is so called in Latin either as being built by Augustus, or else as being a Roman Colony. It is a Bishop's see under the Arch∣bishop of Tarentaise, and has a Triumphal Arch raised by Au∣gustus, remaining almost entire, besides a Colossus and seve∣ral other Monuments of Roman Grandeur. This City is 50 Miles E. of Turin, and was the Birth-place of the famous Saint Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury. Article II. The Principality of Masseran. THIS is a small Territory within the Lordship of Ver∣ceils; the only place of Note here is Massesaw subject to its own Prince, who is of the House of Ferrari, and is Pro∣tected by the Pope. The Town stands upon a Hill 18 N. E. of Ivrea. 22 N. W. of Verceils and 37 almost N. E. of Turin. Long. 27 d. 48 m. Lat. 45 d. 10 m.
Article III. The Lordship of Verceils. THIS Lordship lies between Montferrat, Ivree and Mila∣nese, and is exceeding fertile and well-peopled. The pla∣ces of Note here, Verceils, Beile, Sautia, &c. I. Verceil. Verceil Lat. Vercellae is situate upon the River Sesse with a Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Milan. It has a good Castle, a Cittadel and several Fortifications, fine Churches, and a famous Hospital. This City flourished under the Ro∣mans, but has had several Masters since their time, for it has been a Common-Wealth, afterwards under the Dukes of Milan, and since under those of Savoy. The Spaniards took it from the latter in 1638. but it was restored again by the Peace of the Pyrenees. It stands 12 Miles N. of Casal, 40 almost N. E. of Turin and as many West of Milan, Long. 28 d. 17 m. Lat. 44 d. 50 m. II. Beile. Beile is a small Town in the Seigniory of Verceil, and the head of a Territory belonging to the Duke of Savoy. It stands on a Hill 8 Miles W. of Masseran and 32 N. of Turin, Long. 27 d. 43 m. Lat. 45 d. 3 m. Article IV. Marquisate of Ivrea. THIS Marquisate lies between the Lordship of Verceil to East, The Dukedom of Aost to the North, the Mar∣quisate
of Suse to the West, and part of Montferrat to the South. The only place of Note here is, Ivrea, Bish. Cap. Ivrea, Lat. Eporedia, is upon the River Doriabalta with a Bishop See under the Archbishop of Turin, and a Marquisate belonging to the Duke of Savoy. This City, according to the Opinion of some Authors, was Built two Years before the Birth of our Saviour, in the Country of the Ancient Salassi, and gave its Name to this Marquisate, which formerly was so famous under Berengarius, who contended for the Empire with the French, descended from the Kings of Arles. Ans∣charius was Marquiss of Ivrea, which came under the Domi∣nion of the Duke of Savoy in 870. This City is of great im∣portance to the Duke of Savoy, having a good Castle and o∣ther Fortifications. It has been an Imperial City, but the Emperor Frederick II. and William Count of Holland gave it to Thomus II. in 1242. And in 1344. John Marquiss of Mont∣ferrat yielded to Amadaeus VI. the Right he had to it. It stands 22 Miles N. of Turin, 29 E. of Susa, and 32 W. of Ver∣ceil. Long. 27d. 33 m. Lat. 44 d. 55 m. The Canavese. Between the City of Ivree, and the River Po, is the Coun∣try called Canavese, which was heretofore part of Montferrat, but now belongs to Piedmont, since it was left to the Duke of Savoy by the Treaty of Querasque in 1631. There are no con∣siderable Places in it. Article V. The County of Asti. THis County is incircled in Montferrat, and has but Two Remarkable Places, viz. Asti and Verua.
I. Asti. Asti, or Ast, Lat. Asta, is an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Milan. This City is seated on the River Ta∣nare, large and well fortified, with a strong new Castle, and Cittadel. The County formerly depended upon the State of Milan, but in 1531. Charles V. gave it to Charles III. Duke of Savoy. It stands 16 Miles S. W. of Casal, and 26 E. of Turin. Long. 28 d. 2 m. Lat. 44 d. 28 m. II. Verua. Verua lyes upon an Eminence, and is very well fortified The Spaniards laid Siege to it, but to little purpose in 1625. It stands upon the Frontiers of Montferrat, and the Banks of the Po, 16 Miles N. E. of Turin. Article VI. Proper Piedmont. Piedmont, properly so called, lyes between the Montferrat on the East, the Republick of Genoa on the South, the Marquisate of Salusses on the West, and the Marquisate of Suse, and part of Montferrat to the North. The Principal Towns and Cities here are, Turin, Archb. Cap. Mondovis, Bish. Ceve, Marq. Fossano, Bish. Rivoli, Carignan, Princip. Vigon, Savillano, Coni, Quieras, Quiers, Moncalier, Orbassan,
I. Turin. Turin, Lat. Taurinum, or Augusta Taurinorum, is seated in a vast Plain, having the River Po on the right, and the Doire on the left. It is the Residence of the Dukes of Savoy, who have spared nothing to render it one of the pleasantest and strongest Towns of Italy. It is adorned with a Senate, a Chamber of Accounts, an Archbishops See, and an Universi∣ty. There is the Old and New City, with good Bastions, Walls, and Out-works. The Duke's Palace is very Ancient and Magnificent, especially the Gallery, which is finely Em∣bellish'd with a great number of Paintings, Statues, Arms, Manuscripts, and other Rarities. There is also to be seen the Genealogies of the Dukes of Savoy; the Coelestial Signs very well represented, and 30000 Volumes in the Library. There are also several other Beautiful Palaces in the Town, with a great number of Noble-Men that form the Duke's Court, which is one of the most Polisht of Europe. The Streets are fine, the Houses well Built, the Churches very Magnificent: The Cathedral is that of St. John, which boasts of having many Relicks, especially our Saviour's Winding-sheet. There is a strong Cittadel, flank'd with Five good Bastions, and Built by the pattern of that of Antwerp. Turin stands 20 Miles nigh E. of Pignerol, 78 almost W. of Milan, 100 almost E. of Grenoble, and 120 S. E. of Geneva. Long. 27 d. 26 m. Lat. 44 d. 34 m. II. Mondovis. Mondovis, Mondovi or Mondevi, Lat. Mons Vici, or Mons Regalis, is seated at the foot of Mount Apennin, two Leagues from the River Tanare, with a Bishoprick under the Arch∣bishoprick of Turin. It is large, and the best Inhabited of all Piedmont after Turin. There is an University, and a Citta∣del Built in 1573. by Emanuel Philibert Duke of Savoy, on a Hill, which produces fine white Marble. This City stands 27 Miles S. of Turin.
III. Ceve. Ceva, is a little Town and Castle, Eight Miles S. E. of Mon∣dovi. It is the Capital of the Country of the Langhes, and has the Title of a Marquisate. The Country about is full of Game, especially Pheasants and Partridges. IV. Fossano. Fossano, Lat. Fossanum, is seated on the River Stura, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Turin, erected by Gregory XIII. It stands 24 Miles S. of Turin. V. Rivoli. Rivoli, is a small Town on the River Dora, about 7 Miles W. of Turin. It has a very Sumptuous Castle. VI. Carignan. Carignan, is situated upon the Po, over which it has a fine Bridge, with the Title of Principality: It has a strong Castle, and its Soil abounds with Mulberry-Trees for the Silk-worms. Thomas Francis of Savoy, Fifth Son of Charles Emanuel, first of that Name Duke of Savoy, and Catharine Michelle of Au∣stria bore in this Age the Title of Prince of Carignan. He was great Master of France, and died in 1656. In 1625. he Married Mary of Bourbon, Daughter to Charles of Bourbon, and begot on her Joseph Emanuel, John who died in 1656. Eugen Maurice Count of Soissons, Annudeus Ferdinand, Char∣lotte Christine, both dead young, and Louise Christine Married to Ferdinand Maximilian. Carignan was taken by the French in 1691. and retaken in the same Year by the Duke of Savoy. It stands 8 Miles S. of Turin.
VII. Vigon. Vigon, is a little but fortified Place by the River Chison, 13 Miles S. W. of Turin. VIII. Savillano. Savillano, or Savigliano, Lat. Savilianum, is a great Town upon the River Magra, under the Duke of Savoy, between Fossano to the East, and Salusses to the West, six Miles from either, and 22 S. of Turin. It is the Head of the Territory that bears its Name, and has a very pleasant and advantage∣ous Situation, between two Rivers, which renders it capable of being made very strong; wherefore also Philibert Emanuel Duke of Savoy thought to make it the Capital of his Dominions. IX. Coni. Coni, Lat. Cuneum, is a strong Town and Castle Situated upon a Hill at the Confluent of two little Rivers, the Stura and Ges. Its Situation renders it naturally strong. It held out against Francis I. but in 1641. the Count De Harcourt, under Lewis XIII. made himself Master of it. Lewis the XIVth. was not so Successful in 1691. for he was forced to raise the Siege. This Town stands 35 Miles S. of Turin. X. Quieras. Quieras, is a small but strong City situate upon a Hill by the River Tanare. It was there that in 1631. a Peace was made between France, the Empire, the Spaniards, the Duke of Savoy, and that of Modena. This Town stands 30 Miles S. E. of Turin. XI. Quiers. Quiers, or Chieri, is very strong by its Situation. It was formerly a fine City, and a Republick, but is now Subject
to the Duke of Savoy. This Place is very famous for the Fu∣stians that are made there, and for the Seed its Soil furnishes the Dyers withal. The Count of Harcourt won a Battel near it from the Spaniards. It stands Seven Miles almost E. of Turin. XII. Moncalier. Moncalier, is a small Town upon the Po, nigh Four Miles S. of Turin. XIII. Orbassan. Orbassan, is a little Village Six Miles S. W. of Turin, re∣markable by the Battel fought near it, Octob. 4. 1693. See Pignerol, Article VII. The Marquisate of Susa. THis Dutchy Borders the County of Morienne in Savoy to the North; Piedmont proper to East and South, and Mount Genevre to the West. The only Place of Note here is, Suse. Suse, Lat. Susa, Capital of the Marquisate of the same Name, is upon the River Doere, at the foot of the Alpes Cot∣tiae, now called Mount Cenis, and Mount Genevre, which se∣parate Piedmont from Dauphine. Some Learned Men take this to be the place where Augustus Erected his Trophy four∣teen years before the Birth of our Saviour; the Inscription being still to be seen on a Triumphal Arch in this City. But others place it at the foot of the Maritime Alps, near to a place called Tourbie, by a corruption of the word Trophie, and is confirmed by a piece of Stone, on which are seen part of
the Letters composing these words, Gentes Alpinae Devictae, with the Names of some other Nations. Some are of Opi∣nion, that Augustus caused the same Trophy to be Erected in two several Places, and so endeavour to reconcile both these Opinions. The Sepulchre of Cottus, whence the Cottian Alps take their Name, was to be seen in this Town. The adja∣cent Country abounds with Wine and Honey. The French made themselves Masters of Suse in 1690. without any re∣sistance. It stands 24 Miles N. W. of Turin, and 19 Miles N. of Pignerol. Long. 26 d. 50 m. Lat. 44 d. 46 m. Article VIII. The Marquisate of Salusses. THis Marquisate lyes at the foot of the Alps betwixt Pied∣mont Proper on the East, the Valleys of the Vaudois on the North, Dauphine on the West, and the County of Nice on the South. It was formerly in the Possession of the French Kings, but Henry IV. gave it to Charles Emanuel Duke of Sa∣voy, in exchange for Bresse, Bugey, and some other places on this side the Alps in 1600. The River Po takes its rise in this Country from the Mountain Viso, the highest of the Alps. The Marquisses of Saluces have caused a Vault to be hewed here out a Rock Four Miles long, for the more commodious con∣veying of Merchandizes from Italy to France. It is said that the Family of the Marquisses of Salusses had its beginning from one William an Italian Count who lived in 910. This Marquisate has above 50 Castles, besides the Towns, of which the most remarkable are, Salusses, Bish. Cap. Carmagnole, Stafarde, Revel, Droner, Cental, Roquespaviere, &c. I. Salusses. Salusses, or Saluces, Lat. Salutiae, or Augusta Vagicinorum, stands upon a pleasant Hill, having a very fine and good Ca∣stle,
and Magnificent Cathedral, which deserves to be view∣ed, being a Bishop's See under the Archbishoprick of Turin. This Town was taken by, and retaken from the French in 1691. It stands not far off the River Po, 12 Miles nigh S. of Pignerol, and 22 S. W. of Turin. Long 27 d. 8 m. Lat. 44 d. 15 m. II. Carmagnole. Carmagnole, is a place of great Importance for its good Fortress. Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy made himself Ma∣ster of it in 1588. during the Civil Wars of France, and also subjected the Marquisate of Salusses, which was afterwards left him by a Treaty in 1600. This Town was taken by the French in 1691. but they lost it again the same Year. It stands Two Miles from the River Po, Nine Miles S. of Turin. III. Stafarde. Stafarde, is a small Town Four Miles N. of Salusses,Battel of Stafarde. remarkable only for the Victory which the French obtained there over the Duke of Sa∣voy's Army, August 1690. This was the first Bat∣tel that his Highness was present at, wherein he signalized both his great Courage and Conduct; but his Forces being raw and undisciplined, were over-matched. The Loss of the Confederates was about 800 Men Killed, and as many Wound∣ed or Taken, that of the French was not above 500. Article IX. The Valleys of the Vaudois. THE Vaudois have made themselves so famous in this late War, by their Vigorous Sallies upon the French, that it will not be amiss to speak a word of their Original and Habi∣tation. The Name of Vaudois was given to those poor Men of Lyons, who were the Followers of Peter of Vaud or Valdo, a
Rich Merchant of Lyons about 1160. who seeing a Friend of his die at a Feast, began to think seriously of Eternity, and study the Holy Scriptures. He discovered the Errours of the Roman Church, and acquainted his Friends and the Poor, (who continually received the Effects of his Bounty and great Charity) with them, but had no thoughts of making himself Chief of the Sect, until the Clergy Excommunicating him, and Persecuting some of his Disciples, they retired into the Valleys of Piedmont, where they found some Ancient Christi∣ans that were also called Vaudes. Their Opinions little differ from those of the Church of England. The Valleys of the Vaudois lye betwixt the French Pied∣mont on the West and North. Piedmont Proper on the East, and the Marquisate of Salusses on the South. They are divi∣ded into Five Remarkable Valleys, viz. The Valley of 1. Pragelas or Cluson, 2. Perouse, 3. St. Martin, 4. Angrogne, 5. Lucerne. In the Year 1688. the Duke of Savoy at the sollicitation, and by the help of the Dragoons of the French King Persecu∣ted the poor Inhabitants of those Valleys, who having made all the defence they could to preserve their Religion and Liberties were at last taken Prisoners and cast into a Jayl, where a great number of them died; the rest, at the sollicita∣tion of the Reformed Cantons of the Switzers, being al∣lowed to go where they listed, most of them retired into the Marquiss of Brandenburg's Territories, who received them with a great deal of Charity, and gave them Lands to Culti∣vate. But in 1690. the Duke of Savoy at his Majesty of Great Brittain's Request recalled these Refugees to their own Coun∣try, and restored them to their Priviledges.
Article X. French Piedmont. THat part of Piedmont which now belongs to the French, lyes between Piedmont Proper, and the Valleys of the Vaudois. The Places of Note here are, Pignerol, Perouse, Brigueras. I. Pignerol. Pignerol, Lat. Pinarolo or Pinarolium, is situated between the Mountains upon the River of Cluson or Chison. This Town is very well fortified, and has a very good Cittadel Built up∣on a Rock. It belonged to the Duke of Savoy, and serv'd as an Appennage to the youngest Sons of that House; but the French have been Masters of it since the Year 1631. by a se∣cret Treaty held at Queiras by the cunning fetches of Cardi∣nal Richelieu. The Dutchess Dowager of Savoy, who was of the French Blood, put it into the French King and his Suc∣cessors Hands, with all its Appurtenances and Sovereignty, and the King, besides Alba and the Albesan which he gave up to him, paid also a Sum of Money in pursuance of the Trea∣ty. This Town stands 20 Miles almost S. W. of Turin, and 43 Miles almost E. of Ambrun. Long. 27 d. Lat. 44 d. 26 m. There is a Fort called St. Brigide, which has Communi∣cation with the Cittadel by a covered Way, and subterraneous Passages. The Duke of Savoy at the Head of the Confederate Forces, took it in the Summer in 1693. But instead of go∣ing on vigorously with the Siege of the Town and Cittadel, left it block'd up, and went to Fight Catinat the French General, who lay Encamped with 12 or 14000 Men betwixt the Mountains of Fenestrelles and Rossa, Seven or Eight Leagues North-west of Pignerol; but when they were gone so far, they perceived they could not come at him; so that af∣ter
much time lost they went back, and opened the Trenches before Pignerol in September. Catinat by this time having re∣inforced his Army by the Detachments that were sent him, from Germany and Catalonia, and coming to the Relief of Pig∣nerol, the Confederates raised the Siege, and having blown up the Fort St. Brigide, went to meet him near the Village called Orbassan 10 Miles N. E. of Pignerol; as many N. W. of Carmagnole, and about Six S. W. of Turin, in the Plain cal∣led Marseillane. The two Armies Engaged on the 4th of October 1693.Battel of Marseil∣lane. The Battel was fought on both sides with great courage and resolution, but a last the left Wing of the Confederates Ar∣my being over-powered by the French, who were much Superior to them in number, his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy commanded a Retreat, which was execu∣ted in very good order; the Germans carrying Seven or Eight Pieces of Cannon along with them, and the Spaniards Five or Six. The French got the Victory, yet was their Loss grea∣ter than that of the Confederates, for their Army which be∣fore the Battel consisted of 36000 Men, was by their own Confession reduced to 30000. That of the Duke of Savoy consisted of 22000, of which they found but 5500 missing, viz. 1500 of the Emperor's Troops, as many of his Majesties of Great Brittain, and Duke of Savoy's Forces. and 2500 of the Spaniards. The most considerable Loss of the Confederates was Duke Schomberg, who having done Wonders at the head of his Regiment, received a Mortal Wound, of which he died 13 days after. CHAP. III. The County of Nice. THis County lies between the State of Genoa, and part of Piedmont on the East;Bounds. the Mediterranean Sea, called here Mare di Genoa, or Riviera di Ponente on the South, Provence in France on the West, and Piedmont on the North. This Country is for the most part rough and mountainous,Quality. yet it is so well manured that they
have little need of their Neighbours; only some Places are defective in Wheat, which they are supplied with from Pied∣mont and Provence. It is divided into Six parts, viz. The Vicariates of 1. Nice, Bish. Cap. 2. Barcelonnette, 3. Solpello, 4. Puerin. The Counties 5. Bueil, 6. Tende. To which we may add the Principality of Oneglia, incircled in the State of Genoa, which belongs to the Duke of Savoy, and that of Monaco which belongs to its own Prince. The most Remarkable places in the County of Nice, are, Nice, Bish. Cap. Villa Franca, Monaco, Princip. Oneglia, Princip. Tende, Barcellonette. I. Nice. Nice, Lat. Nicia, is seated upon the Shore of the Mediter∣ranean Sea, at the foot of the Alps, with a capacious Haven, and one of the strongest Castles in Europe, between the River Vas and Villa Franca. It has the Title of an Earldom and Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Ambrun, and was Built by those of Marseilles, and probably took its Name from some Victory they obtained against the Ligurians. The City at pre∣sent is great, splendid, and populous; it has a Cathedral, three Parishes, one College, and several Religious Houses. The Amphitheatre that is still to be seen here, with the In∣scriptions of other Roman Monuments, are abundant Testi∣monies of the Antiquity of this City. It belonged to the Earls of Provence till 1635. when Queen Joan left it to Lewis II. Duke of Savoy, with the County belonging to it, and has ever since been Subject to that Family, till the Year 1691. when it was taken by the French. In 1543. Nice was taken by Francis of France, and by the Turks under Barbe∣rosse,
who appear'd before it with 200 Sail, but neither of them was able to take the Castle. It stands 68 Miles S. of Pignerol, 78 almost S. of Turin, and 72 S. E. of Ambrun. Long. 26 d. 52 m. Lat. 43 d. 18 m. II. Villa Franca. About three Miles East of Nice is Villa Franca, a Town and strong Castle, now Subject to the French, who took it in 1691. It has a large Port on the Mediterranean Sea. III. Monaco. Monaco, or Mourges, is a Principality between Nice and Oneglia, composed of three little places, viz. Monaco, Rocca∣bruna, and Menton. The access to Monaco is difficult, and the Castle is Built on a steep Rock, washed by the Sea where the Port is. It is the Monaecium, or Herculis Monoeci Portus of the Latins. This Principality under the Protection of France be∣longs to the Family of Grimaldi. Monaco stands Eight Miles E. of Nice. Long. 27 d. 4 m. Lat. 43 d. 17 m. IV. Oneglia. Oneglia, is a Sea-Town and Principality incircled in the State of Genoa, and belonging to the Duke of Savoy. This Territory consists of a very pleasant Valley, extreamly fruit∣ful in Olive-Trees, Wine, and all other sorts of Fruits. The City was Bombarded by the French in 1692. It stands 42 Miles E. of Nice. Long. 27 d. 45 m. Lat. 43 d. 28 m. V. Tenda. Tenda, is a small Town with a good Castle in the County of Nice, and the Head of a Territory of that Name. It stands on the River Rodia in the Appennine, 25 Miles N. E. of Nice, and 19 S. of Coni.
VI. Barcelonnette. Barcelonnette, or Barcelonne, Lat. Barcelona, and Villa Bar∣celonae, is a Town and Valley formerly of Provence, but now belonging to the County of Nice. It was Built in 1231. in the time of Raimundus Berengarius, the Fifth of that Name, Count of Provence, who called it so in Memory of Barcelona in Catalonia, whence his Predecessors came into Provence; o∣thers say it was Built before, but being ruined by the Wars, was Rebuilt by Raimundus. It stands 42 N. W. of Nice. CHAP. IV. Montferrat, Lat. Monsferratus. MOntferrat lyes betwixt Piedmont on the North and West, the State of Genoa on the South,Bounds. Extent. and Milan on the East. Its Extent North and South is about 65 Miles, and about 36 East and West. This Country is Mountainous in most Places, yet it is exceeding fruitful in all things;Quality. and compre∣hends near 200, either Boroughs, Castles, or Towns, with the Title of Marquisate and Dukedom. This Province was formerly part of Lombardy.History. It has had particular Lords since the beginning of the Tenth Century. The Emperor Charles V. gave it to the Duke of Mantua, notwithstanding the Duke of Savoy's, and the Marquiss of Saluces's Claim to it, which caused the War of Montferrat begun in 1613. after the Death of Gonzague II. Duke of Mantua. Divers Treaties, as, of Verceille in 1614. of Ast in 1615. of Pavia in 1617. could not end this War, which was like to inflame all Italy; but at last a Peace was happily thus concluded at Queiras in 1613. Victor Ame Duke of Savoy had that part of Montferrat, on this side of the River Po, and beyond the Tever; and the rest of the Province was yielded to the Duke of Mantua, who sold the Capital City, and Important Place of Casal to the French King in 1681.
Monferrat is divided into four parts, viz. 1. The Territory of Casal—Casal. Bish. Cap. 2. The Territory of Trino—Trino. 3. The Territory of Alba—Alba. Bish. 4. The Territory of Acqui—Acqui. Of these the first is under the French, the second and third under the Duke of Savoy, and the last under the Duke of Mantua. Article I. French Monferrat. THE only place under the French in Monferrat is Casal. Casal or Cazal of St. Vas Lat. Casale or Bodincomagus, is seated upon the Po between Turin and Valence, and is one of the strongest Places in Italy. Pope Sixtus IV. made it a Bi∣shops See under the Archbishop of Milan in 1474. at the soli∣citation of William Paleologue Marquiss of Montferrat, then it became Capital of the Country, and the residence of the Marquisses of Monferrat, who before that resided at Occimian. Its situation upon the Po is very advantagious, the Land about it very fertile in all manner of things; it is defended on one side by a good Cittadel, on the other, with a strong Castle, and is environed with Ditches, strong Walls, and many Bastions and Half-Moons. The Castle has four great Towers, and as many Half-Moons which cover the Flanks, with a large Ditch, a Counterscarp and a Coridor lin'd with Bricks; besides this the Lodgings are very convenient and fine. The Cittadel consists of six Bastions. The Town it self is pleasant enough, and has several fine Churches. The Spaniards be∣sieg'd it under Goncales in the beginning of 1629. but the approach of Lewis XIII's Army made them retire in the Night. The next year they lay Siege to it under Spinola,
but it was vigorously defended by Mareschal Toiras. The Spaniards besieged again under the Marquiss of Leganez in 1640. but the Count of Harcourt drave them from before it, took their Colours, Artillery, and all their Baggage; kill'd 2000 Men, and made as many Prisoners. They were more successful during the disorders of France, for they made themselves Masters of this important Place in 1652. but it was afterwards rendered to the Duke of Mantua, of whom the King of France bought it in 1681. in this late War the Duke of Savoy block'd it up from March to October 1693. when he wanted the Troops employed at the Blockade to rein∣force his Army after the Battel of Marseillane. Casal stands 38 Miles E. of Turin, Long. 28 d. 17 m. Lat. 44 d. 40 m. Article II. Monferrat Savoyard, or under the Duke of Savoy. THE Places of Monferrat belonging to the Duke of Savoy are, Albe. Bish. Cap. Trin. Bianza. Salugia. Verolongo. I. Albe. Albe Lat. Alba Pompeia, is upon the River Tanare with a Bishops See Suffragan of Milan; it has often been fortified, but to little purpose by reason of the Neighbouring Hills that command it, It has under gone many Vicissitudes in those latter times, and runs daily to decay for want of Inha∣bitants. It stands 23 Miles S. E. of Turin, Long. 27 d. 52 m. Lat. 44 d. 17 m.
II. Trin. Trin or Trino is a small Town nigh the River Po, 8 Miles N. W. of Casal and as many S. W. of Verceil. Article III. Monferrat belonging to the Duke of Mantua. The Places of Monferrat belonging to the Duke of Mantua are, Acqui. Bish. Cap. Ripalta. Occimiano. Balzola. I. Acqui. Acqui Lat. Aquae Statellae or Statiellae, is upon the River Bormia near the Appennine with a Bishoprick under the Arch∣bishop of Milan. It is famous for its hot Baths, frequented in May and September. The Romans made here fine Stairs and Tables of Free-stone. This Town suffered much in the late Wars of Monferrat, and is now but a miserable place 22 Miles S. E. of Asti, 30 N. W. of Genoa and 27 S. of Casal Long 28 d. 22 m. Lat. 44 d. 13 m. The other Places are not remarkable.
THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE SECT. IV. Catalonia Lat. Catalannia. CAtalonia is a Province of Spain with the Ti∣tle of Principality;Name. its thought that this Name is come from the Goths and Alains that lived there. The Pyrenees,Bounds. Gascogne and Languedoc two Provinces of France, border it to the North; the Kingdoms of Arragon and Valence, to the West; and the Mediterranean Sea to the East and South. Its Extent North and South is about 120 Miles and about 160 East and West.Extent. The Air is here hot in Summer, yet wholesom, mild and agreeable in the other seasons.Quality. The Soil is rough and Mountainous; yet fertile in Corn, Wine, Oyl, Flax, and Fruits: There are also Cork-Trees, Chesnut-Trees, and good Timber. There grows the Plant called Escorzonera of a marvellous Virtue against Venom, and for sore Eyes. This Province has several Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Alum, Vitriol and Salt. There are also to be found in the Mountains, Amethists, Alabaster, Azur, Cristal and Jasper; and Coral upon the most Western Coast.
This Country is Rich by reason of the Trade of it's Sea-Towns.Riches. Religion. The only Religion suffered there is the Roman Catholick. The Principal Rivers here are, 1. Ebro Lat. Iberus, which rises in old Ca∣stile,Rivers. crosses Old Castile, part of Navarre, Arragon and Catalonia and here Washes Flix, Mora, Torto∣sa and runs into the Mediterranean Sea. 2. Segro, which rises in the most Northern part of this Province, washes Puicerda, Balaguer, Lerida and falls into the Ebro near Mequinenca. 3. Alagas which on the one side seperates Arragon from Catalonia and falls into the Ebro a little below the meeting of that River with the Segro. 4. Noguera Kibagorzana, and la Noguera Palloresa which fall both into the Segro. 5. Lobregat which rises toward the North of this Pro∣vinces and discharges it self into the Sea eight Miles E. of Barcelona. 6. The Ter which rises towards the middle of this Province, washes Girona and falls into the Sea. 7. Tech which rises in the most South-Western parts of the County of Roussillon, and there washes Es Bola and Elna, and falls into the Sea. 8. Tet rises in the most Western parts of Roussillon, washes Perpignan and discharges it self into the Sea. Catalonia has the Dutchy of Cardona and the two Counties of Cerdagna and Roussillon.Division. The whole Province is divided into 17 Viguerys or Viguiers Jurisdictions, viz.   The Viguerys of Cities of Note in the Viguerys. To the South, 1. Barcelona Barcelona. Bish. Cap. 2. Villa Franca de Panades. Villa-Franca de Pa∣nades. 3. Tarragona Terragona. Archbp.
To the West, 4. Tortosa Tortosa. Bish. Flix. 5. Balaguer Balaguer. 6. Lerida Lerida. Bish. In the Middle. 7. Monblancq Monblancq. 8. Tarrega Tarrega. 9. Agramunt Agramunt. 10. Cervera Salsona. Bish. Cardona. Dutchy. 11. Manresa Manresa. Monserrat. Monast. 12. Vich Vich. Bish. 13. Campredon Campredon. To the North, 14. Puicerda Puicerda. La seu d'Ʋrgel. Bish. 15. Villa Franca de Con∣flent. Villa Franca de Con∣flent. To the East. 16. Perpignan Perpignan. Elna. Collioure. 17. Girone Girone. Bish. Roses. Charles Martel King of France assisted the Cata∣lonians against the Moors,History. who had established their Empires in Spain. Lewis the Meek took Barcelona from these Infidels, and Catalonia had its particular Princes until it was united to Arragon. Some pretend that it was made a County in 873. by Charles the Bald, and others think Charles the Burley erected it into a County in 884. Godfrey or Wilfred the Hairy, first Hereditary Count of Cata∣lonia, is a Branch of the Princes who possessed that Country, as was said before. The Catalonians put themselves under the French in 1640. Joseph Margaret a Gentleman of that Country, being a great instrument of the Revolution, in shaking the Spanish Yoke and submitting to the French Kings,
who kept their Viceroys and Governours there; but this Province became the Theatre and Seat of War for almost 20 years, until it was order'd by the 42 and 43 Articles of the Treatise of Peace concluded between the Crowns of Spain and France in 1659. That the Pyrenean Mountains should part both the Kingdoms, by which agreement Cata∣lonia and the greatest part of the County of Cerdagne that are beyond the Mountains were adjudged to the Spaniards; and the County of Roussillon, a little of that of Cerdagne, with the whole Conflent, which are of this side, left to the French. Article I. Description of the Places of Note belonging to the King of Spain in Catalonia. I. Barcelona. BArcelona, the Capital City of Catalonia belonging to the King of Spain, is a Sea-Port of the Mediterranean, bears the Title of a County, has a Sovereign Court and University, a Court of Inquisition, and a Bishoprick under the Archbi∣shop of Taragona. It is a great rich, fair and well fortified City. There is a great Trade especially in Cloths and Blan∣kets called Castelognes. Some Authors are of opinion that it was built by Amilcar Barca a Carthaginian Captain about 300 years before the Birth of our Saviour. It is the Town Pto∣lomy calls ; Saint Paulinus, Barcinus; Jornandes, Bar∣celona; and others, Barcina and Barcelona; and think it is the place Plinius calls Faventia. It is situated in a Plain by the Sea-side; there is the Old and New Town, parted by a Wall, and round both is a strong Rampart, with Towers and some Bastions, and a very deep Ditch. At this time the King of Spain is about raising new Fortifications to oppose the French in case they should have in this Campaign any Design upon this City. The Cathedral is a stately Building, as are most of the other Churches; the Streets are Great and very Clean, and the Key is very convenient and safe, being sheltered from the Winds of one side by Mount Ii, and by another lesser
Hill on the other side; at the end of the Key is the Light-House and a little Fort. This City was under the Romans, but in the year of Christ 412. During the Reign of the Empe∣ror Honorius, it was taken by Athaulphus King of the Visigoths or West-Goths, the Husband of Placidia Honorius's Sister, and from thence forward it was the Seat of the Kings of that Na∣tion, whence comes the Name of Gottalonia, and Cattalonia. In time they conquered the rest of Spain, and then Toledo be∣came the Royal City till it was taken by the Saracens. King Athaulphus was murthered at Barcelona in 415. in the VIIIth. Century: when the Saracens setled themselves in Spain, they became Masters of Barcelona; the Spaniards endeavoured to retake it but in vain. The French took it in 801. Afterwards it was subject to the Princes of Catalonia, till this Province was annexed to Arragon. Its Governors had the Title of Counts. It stands 52 Miles E. of Tarragona, 60 N. of the Isle Majorca; 134 almost S. of Narbonne; and 300 E. of Ma∣drid. Long. 20 d. 33 m. Lat. 40 d. 34 m. II. Villa Franca de Panades. Villa Franca de Panades is a pretty large Town in Cata∣lonia, the Head of a Viguery 24 Miles N. W. of Barcelona, and 26 N. E. of Tarragona. III. Tarragona. Tarragona Lat. Tarraco is a Sea-Town with an Archbishop∣rick and University. It was built and fortified by the Scipio's upon the descent of a Hill near the Sea, where it has a Port fit for no other Vessels but Barks. The Spaniards brag that it was never taken. The Moors surrounded it with Walls and it has since their time been very regularly fortified. As for its Trade and Riches they are nothing near so considera∣ble as formerly. The Province of Tarragona; called Tarraconensis by the Ancients comprehended the Country of the Celti∣berians, Vascones, Coserani, Lasetani, Indigetes, Cerretani, Castellani, Jaccetani, Hergetes, Carpentani, Edetani. Now all the Province of Tarragona contains Murcia, Valencia, Ca∣talonia, Aragon, Navarra, Biscay the Asturies, Galicia, the Kingdom of Leon, and almost both the Castiles. This City stands 54 Miles W. of Barcelona, Long. 19 d. 26 m. Lat. 40 d. 36 m.
IV. Tortosa. Tortosa Lat. Dertosa, or Dertossa or Dertuse, stands near the Mediterranean on the River Ebro 44 Miles W. of Tarragona and 34 of Barcelona, Long. 18 d. 27 m. Lat. 40 d. 32 m. It is a small but a strong and ancient City and Castle. The French took it in 1649. but they lost it again the next year after. V. Flix. Flix is a very strong Castle on the River Ebro 26 Miles N. of Tortosa, subject to the King of Spain. VI. Balaguer. Balaguer or Balaguier Lat. Bellagurium, and Valaguaria, and according to some Bergusia, stands at the foot of a steep Hill on the River Segre, 19 Miles N. E. of Lerida, and 60 almost N. of Tarragona. Long. 18 d. 52 m. Lat. 41 d. 30 m. This City was taken by the French under the Command of the Count of Harcourt, in 1645. after he had defeated the Spa∣nish Army which came to relieve it. VII. Lerida. Lerida, or Lelida Lat. Ilerda, in the Roman Times was the Capital of that part of Spain, they called Tarraconensis. It is a strong place built upon a rising ground, but declining to the River Segre, taken from the Moors in 1143. and made a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Tarragona. It is fa∣mous for the many Sieges it has suffered, and the Battels fought under its Walls, during the Wars between Spain and France. In 1644, 46, and 47. In an Attack the French made upon it in 1646. they were beaten off and lost all their Canon. Near this place Julius Caesar gain'd the Victory over Afranius and Petreius that sided with Pompey. Here is an University which has been famous heretofore, and where Pope Calixt III. and St. Vincent Ferrier took their Degrees. This City lies 18 Miles S. W. of Balaguer, 60 almost N. of Tarragona, and 100 N. W. of Barcelona, Long. 18 d. 36 m. Lat. 41 d. 22 m.
VIII. Monblancq. Monblancq, is a small Town on the River Francoli, the Head of a Territory of the same Name, 19 Miles almost N. of Tarragona. IX. Tarrega. Tarrega, is another small Town, on the River Cervera, 18 Miles almost N. of Monblancq, the Head of a Viguary. X. Agramunt. Agramunt, is a Borough 45 Miles N. of Tarragona, on the Rivulet Sio, the Head of a Viguary. XI. Salsona. Salsona, or Solsona, is seated at the foot of the Mountains, on the small River Cardoner, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Tarragona. It is thinly peopled, but pretty strong, and now under the French. It stands 56 Miles almost N. of Tarrago∣na, and 68 almost N. of Barcelona. Long. 19 d. 52 m. Lat. 41 d. 30 m. XII. Cardona. Cardona, is a small Town with the Title of a Dutchy, si∣tuated upon a River of this Name, about two Leagues from Solsona, and seven or eight from Montferrat. It is Renowned for giving its Name to Lords of the House of Folch, who rais'd themselves by their proper Merit, and whereof there have been many Cardinals and other Prelates, and some who have had very Illustrious Alliances with the Royal House of Ar∣ragon, and with the greatest Families of Spain. It is also fa∣mous for its Salt-Mines, which yield a yearly Revenue of 30000 Pieces of Eight. The Dukedom of Cardona contains
three or four Villages besides the Town: The Duke being one of the Richest Grandees of Spain, and possessing besides it three Dukedoms, four Marquisates, and two Earldoms: He lives mostly at Madrid, but sends hither every three years a new Governour, the King of Spain having nothing to do with this City. It is the freest in Spain, and besides the Tenth of the Corn and Wine paid to the Duke, it never payeth any Tribute to him or the King. It is governed by a Council and Four Consuls chosen every Year by Lot; so that no Man of the Council can serve again till three years are expired. This Town stands 52 Miles N. E. of Tarragona. Long. 20 d. Lat. 41 d. 22 m. XIII. Manresa. Manresa, is a small City upon the River Cardoner, once a Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Tarragona. It stands 42 Miles N. E. of Tarragona. XIV. Montserrat. Montserrat, is a Monastery six Miles S. W. from Manresa, famous for the great number of Pilgrims that come thither out of most parts of the World. XV. Vich. Vich, or Vigue, Lat. Aula Nova, Corbio Vicus, and Aquae Vo∣coniae, is a small City upon the Ter with a Bishoprick Suffra∣gan of Tarragona. It stands 26 Miles almost W. of Girona, and 42 Miles N. of Barcelona. XVI. Campredon. Campredon, is a small inconsiderable Place, about 30 Miles almost N. of Vich.
XVI. Puicerda. Puicerda, or Puy-Cerda, is a small City, the Capital of the County of Cerdagne, on the River Segra in the Pyrenaean Hills, 48 Miles W. of Perpignan, and 92 N. of Barcelona. Long: 20 d. 22 m. Lat. 42 d. 3 m. XVII. La seu de Urgel. Ʋrgel, called by the Inhabitants la seu de Ʋrgel, Lat. Orge∣lum, Orgia or Orgella, is seated on the River Segra, with a Bi∣shoprick Suffragan of Tarragona; it had Counts of great Power under the second Line of the Kings of Arragon. The French made themselves Masters of it in 1691. It stands five Leagues from the Borders of France, and 96 Miles almost N. of Bar∣celona. Long. 19 d. 46 m. Lat. 42 d. 3 m. XVIII. Girona. Girona, Lat. Gerunda, is a very Ancient City upon the River Ter, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Tarragona, indiffe∣rently well fortified. There is one broad Street that runs the whole length of the City, with several good Suburbs. In 1684. the French under the Command of Mareschal Bellefond lay Siege to it, and endeavouring to take it by Storm, were shamefully beaten off with Loss of 6000 Men. Girona stands 20 Miles off the Mediterranean Sea, 50 Miles S. of Perpignan, and 58 N. E. of Barcelona. Long. 21 d. 20 m. Lat. 41 d. 25 m. XIX. Roses. Roses, Lat. Rodopolis, once a City, now only a Castle, and a small Town, with a large Harbour on the Mediterranean Sea, very strong and regularly fortified. It stands 30 Miles South of Perpignan, and 90 S. W. of Barcelona. This Place was first fortified by Charles V. before which it was only a Monastery. Tho' in the Time of the Romans it had been
one of the most considerable Cities in Spain, supposed to have been Built by the Rhodians, before the Romans were Masters of this Kingdom, and from them to have taken its Name. It was taken by the French in 1645. restored by the Pyrenaean Treaty to Spain, but retaken the last Year 1693. and now in the Possession of the French. Article II. Catalonia belonging to the French. THat part of Catalonia yielded to the French by the Trea∣ty of the Pyrenees, is Rousillon, and the Territory of Conflent. Rousillon, is an Earldom in the Pyrenean Moun∣tains,Bounds. having part of the Higher Languedoc to the North, the Sea to the East, and Catalonia to the West and South. Quality.This Country has good Pastures, and is watered by three considerable Rivers, viz. Egly, Tet, Tech. It was formerly united to Spain, and made part of Catalo∣nia. John King of Arragon sold to Lewis II. of France, and King Charles VIII. gave it up to Ferdinand upon condition he would grant no Succours to those of Naples; but he kept not his Promise, and yet detained Rousillon, which was ever since subject to Spain, till Lewis XIV. has retaken it from the Spaniards, and has reunited it to France by the Peace of the Py∣renees. Conflent, Lat. Confluentes, is a small Country on the West of Roussillon, yielded to France by the same Treaty. The Principal Places here are, In Roussillon, Perpignan, Bish. Cap. Canet, Elna, Salses, Colliure.
In Conflent, Villa Franca de Conflent. I. Perpignan. Perpignan, Lat. Perpinianum, and Paperianum, stands upon the River Tet, three Leagues from the Sea, and is the See of the Bishop of Elna, under the Archbishop of Narbone since 1684. It is said to have been Built out of the Ruins of Rous∣sillon, that was a Roman Colony. The Arragonese took this Ci∣ty from the French about 1473. but they retook it in 1642. and have since that time so well fortified it with a Cittadel and other Works, that it is accounted one of the strongest Places in Europe. It lyes 35 Miles S. of Narbone, and 104 al∣most N. of Barcelona. Long. 21 d. 22 m. Lat. 42 d. 14 m. II. Canet. Canet, is a small Town on the right side of the River Tet two Miles W. of the Sea, and about seven E. of Perpignan. III. Elna. Elna, is also a small Town on the River Tech, about a League from the Mediterranean, eight Miles S. E. of Perpig∣nan, formerly a Bishop's See. IV. Salses. Salses, or Sauses, Lat. Salsulae, is a little Town with a ve∣ry strong Castle Built on a Hill near a Lake of the same Name. It was first Built by the Spaniards to Bridle the Castle of Leu∣cate, which lyes within two Miles of it, but taken by the French in 1640. and yielded to them by the Treaty of the Pyrenees, with the County of Roussillon. It is 12 Miles N. of Perpignan, and six W. of the Sea.
V. Colliure. Colliure, or Collioure, Lat. Camoliberis is a small Town upon the Mediterranean Sea, with a very good Port. It stands 15 Miles S. E. of Perpignan.
THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE SECT. V. Hungary. UNder the Name of Hungary, I comprehend here not the Kingdom of Hungary only, but also those Provinces and States adjoining to it, which make part of European Turky, and which for these many Years have been, and are still, as well as Hungary, the Thea∣tre of War. And therefore the Places I design to describe in this Section, are the 12 following. 1. Hungary, 2. Transilvania, 3. Podolia, 4. Moldavia, 5. Walachia, 6. Bulgaria, 7. Servia, 8. Rascia, 9. Bosnia, 10. Sclavonia, 11. Croatia, 12. Dalmatia.
Article I. Hungary, Lat. Hungaria. HƲngary, is an Elective Kingdom, now partly under the Turks, and partly under the House of Austria, that has made it almost Hereditary. It lyes betwixt the 39 and 47 degrees of Longitude,Situation. and be∣twixt the 45 and the 49 degrees of Northern La∣titude. This Kingdom, part of the Ancient Pannonia, is called Magiar by the Turks,Name. Wiergieskas by the Sclavonians, Hungarland by the Germans, Onheriae by the Italians and Spaniards, Hongrie by the French, and Hun∣gary by the English. It is bounded by Transilvania on the East, by Russia and Poland on the North,Bounds. by Moravia, Austria and Styria on the West, and by Servia and Bosnia on the South.Form. It is square, and its four Corners front the four parts of the World. The Air is here unhealthful chiefly to Stran∣gers,Air. and it breeds abundance of Vermin, so that it is not safe to Encamp in one Place above a Month.Waters. The Waters except that of the Da∣nube, are not good; there are some Springs whose Water is Mortal, increasing and decreasing with the Moon, and is quite dried up when the Moon is full. There are also some Springs which change Wood to Stone, and I∣ron to Mud, whence is afterwards made the best Copper; hot in Winter, frozen in Summer. Others whose Water is sourish and salt. They have also Baths and Medicinal Wa∣ters. In the Country of Zolien there is also a Gulph, whose Pestilential Vapours kill the very Birds that fly over it. The Soil is very fruitful, so that 'tis thought Hungary could supply all Europe with Corn.Soil. The Pasture-grounds are wonderfully good; and there is such a plenty of Fowls,Venison. Fowls. Fish. Fishes, Venison and Cattel, that Country People live commonly on wild Boars and Stags, and sometimes feed their Hogs
with Fish; a Thousand Carps have been sold under eight Shillings,Cattel. Horses. Mines. and more than 80000 Oxen have been driven in one Year out of Hunga∣ry to Vienna. There are also good Warlike Horses, and many Salt, Gold, Silver Copper and Tin Mines; the richest are in the Mountains betwixt Buda and Strigonia. The highest Mountains here are Crepach or Carpathian Mountains towards Poland and Tran∣sylvania.Mountains. Earldoms. There were formerly about 77 Earl∣doms, which are now reduced to 50. The chief Rivers are, 1. The Danube, or Danaw, Lat. Danubius, the greatest River of Europe,Rivers. which rises in Ger∣many, at the foot of a Mountain called Abnuba in the Black Forest in Suabia. It runs through Suabia, Bava∣ria, Austria, and Hungary, and here washes Presburg, Komo∣ra, Gran, Buda, Belgrade, Semendria, and some other places of less note, and so goes into Walachia, Servia, and Bulgaria, and disburthens it self into the Black Sea, by six or seven great Streams, with so much rapidity, that its Water continues fresh for 20 Leagues. From the Source to the Mouth are reckoned above 700 Leagues, and all the way a very fine Country. The upper part is called Danube, and the lower Ister; which latter name it is by most Authors said to take, at its Cataracts near Axiopolis, It receives 60 other Rivers, 30 of which are Navi∣gable. The chief are Inne, Iller, Leck, Ens, Morau, Vag, Drave, Save, Tibisc or Teiss; the four last are in Hungary. Tho' this River rise from a very small Fountain, yet there is none in Europe comparable to it, for length, breadth, and deepness; of its length we have heard; it is called broad by way of eminence above all other Rivers; for its depth, Jor∣nandes writes, that it is 200 Foot deep in many places. Then as to the quality of the River, it is for the most part coloured like Whey, and very wholesom both to Drink and Bathe in. It has many sorts of excellent Fishes, and some poysonous. It is very often frozen in the Winter. The number of its Mouths, which is seven in all, is controverted, because two of them are dead and marshy, but Five great Streams all a∣gree on, of which two only are Navigable. This River has had many Naval Fights upon it, between the Turks and Christians; at one time were 20 Galliots 80 small Pinnaces, and little less than 100 Ships of Burthen imployed upon it in
a Siege of Buda. At the Siege of Belgrade, Mahomet the Great brought 200 Ships and Gallies up the Stream; the Hun∣garians sent a like number from Buda, which after a sharp En∣counter, took many of the Turkish Ships, and forc'd the rest on Shore, and burn'd them. In this present War also, great Fleets have been fitted out on both sides on the Danube, some of the Ships carrying 30 Guns. 2. The Drave, or Drau, Lat. Dravus, has its Source in the Alps, runs through Carinthia, Stiria, and Hungary, and here falls into the Danube. 3. The Save, or Saw, Lat. Sava, has its rise in Germany, in the Ʋpper Carniola, near to Carinthia, and then running Eastward through both the Carniola's, and separating Sclavo∣nia from Croatia, Bosnia and Servia, after a Course of 300 Miles falls into the Danube a little above Belgrade. 4. The Teiss or Tibisk, of which 'tis commonly said that two parts are Water, and the third Fish. The other Rivers here of less note are the Raab which forms an Island of the same Name. The Marisch, the Vag, the Gran,Lakes. and the Sarvithze which comes out of the Lake Balaton, besides which there are also the Lakes of Newdsiler and Beczkerk. The Hungarians are more inclined to War, than to Arts or Trading,Manners. they are Cruel, Proud, Revengeful, and so divided among themselves, that it is no wonder if they be exposed to the Barbarians. They speak several Languages, and chiefly Latin, which is familiar to them. They eat and drink with excess, and live very nasty in their Houses; yet the Gentlemen live nobly, and are great Lovers of Horses, Hunting and Feasting. They are only stately in their Gardens and Baths, and provided their Palaces be large, they care not how ill furnished they be. They hate the Germans, though the Nobles seem to stick to the House of Austria, to save themselves from the Oppressions of the Turks, who value a Peasant as much as a Gentleman. The greatest strength of this Kingdom consists in light Horse called Hussars;Strength. their Foot Souldi∣ers are called Heiduques. The Clergy, the Barons, the Nobles, and the Royal and Free Towns,Govern∣ment. make Four Bodies or States. The States are to meet once in three Years, according to the Laws of the Country; and they have Right to Elect the Palatine, who by the Laws
of the Land, is to be a Hungarian, and has the whole directi∣on of the War, and Judicature. Nevertheless Croatia, de∣pendent of Hungary, has a Viceroy who has as much Autho∣rity as the Palatine. There are in Hungary two Archbishopricks, viz. Strigonia and Colonitz; and 16 Bishopricks,Archbishop∣ricks. Bishopricks. five under the Archbishop of Strigonia, eight under that of Colonitz, and three Suffragan of Spalato in Dalmatia. The Hungarians were Converted to Christia∣nity by Gisle, St. Henry's Sister,Religion. Married to their King Stephen, about the Year 1000. In the XVIth Century, the generality embraced the Protestant Re∣ligion, some the Lutheran; and only a few Noble Families kept to the Romish, but since the late Conquests of the Em∣peror of Germany, the Romish has got the upper Hand, and the Protestants there have been cruelly persecuted. There is also a mixture of Jews, Mahometans, Anabaptists, Arrians, and Ʋ∣nitarians or Socinians. Julius Caesar was the first Roman that attack'd Hungary, and Tiberius subdued it.History. The Goths af∣terwards took it, and this Kingdom became a prey to the Huns and Lombards, who were turned out of it by the Hongres, a People of Scythia, who lived mostly on Blood; those that speak of Hungary, reckon Balamer or Ba∣lamber amongst its Kings. They reckon also Aptar, and the two Brothers Bleda killed in 444, and Attila named the Plague of God, who died in 453. having left many Vestiges of his Expeditions in the other parts of the World, with his Huns (who were Scythians mixt with Turks, Tartars, Ava∣res and Alans) as Huningen, Hunaldstein, and many other places of Germany, beginning with the word Hun. Attila's Children by their Divisions lost their Father's Conquests. A∣bout 744. the Huns made another Incursion into Pannonia, now Hungary, under one Alme, who had Arphad for Successor. These gave the Name to Hungary. Zultan descended from Arphad, is said to have been Toxis's Father, who begot Geiza, Father to St. Stephen, Crowned in 1000. or 1020. by whom begins the Chronological Succession of the Kings of Hungary. Since that, they were peaceably govern'd by their own Kings, until Lewis the Great's Death, whose Daughter and Heiress Married Sigismund of Luxemburg Emperor of Germany; but his Government being not liked, they called in Charles Duras
King of Naples, and Stephen Vayvode of Transylvania, combi∣ned with Bajazet I. Emperor of the Turks. Thus Hungary's Misfortunes began, and since 1394. it has almost all along been the Seat of War, and became a prey to the Turks chief∣ly under Amurath and Soliman. But in this present War the Emperor of Germany has retaken most of those places the Turks did possess in Hungary. This Elective Kingdom is al∣most made Hereditary, since the Death of Lewis the Young killed at the Battel of Mohach's in 1526. at which time the Turks rifled Buda, and burn'd the Library of Matthias. John de Zapol, Earl of Scepus, was saluted King by part of the Hun∣garians, and Ferdinand of Austria, by the other part, but the last carried it. Since that time the Emperor of Germany takes the Title of King of Hungary. In the Year 1687. Joseph the Emperor's Son, was Crown∣ed King of Hungary; and in case the House of Austria should fail, the Branch of Spain is to succeed to the Crown.Ceremonies of Coronati∣on in Hun∣gary. The most remarkable things at the Co∣ronation, were that Ten Hungarian Lords went before him, each carrying a Standard represen∣ting the Ten Provinces which depend on that Crown. The Arch-Duke made an open Profes∣sion of the Christian Faith, then was covered with St. Ste∣phen's Royal Cloak, and had the Crown put on his Head, he taking an Oath to preserve the Priviledges of the Kingdom. Mounting his Horse afterwards, he rode full Career to ano∣ther Theatre, where, taking his Cimiter in his Hand, he made four Crosses therewith, toward the four Corners of the World, to signifie that he would defend the Kingdom of Hungary against all its Enemies. Chronological Succession of the Forty Nine Kings of Hungary.   Begun in Reigned Y. 1. St. Stephen 1000 or 1020 died in 1031. 2. Peter the German Deposed 1038 4 3. Ovon or Aban 1042 2 4. Peter the German Restored 1044 2 5. Andrew I. 1046 15
6. Bela I. 1061 2 7. Solomon 1063 11 8. Geiza or Geycza I. 1074 3 9. Ladislaus I. 1077 7 10. Coloman or Colan 1095 19 11. Stephen II. 1114 18 12. Bela II. 1132 9 13. Geiza II. 1141 20 14. Stephen III. 1161 11 15. Ladislaus an Usurper 1172 00 6 M. 16. Stephen IV. 1172 00 5 M. 17. Bela III. 1173 23 18. Emeryck 1195 8 19. Ladislaus II. 1204 00 6 M. 20. Andrew II. the Hiero-Solimitan 1205 30 21. Bela IV. 1235 25 22. Stephen V. 1260 12 23. Ladislaus III. 1272 18 24. Andrew III. the Venetian 1290 11 Charles I. Martel.     25. Veneslaus 1301 00 26. Otho 1305 00 27. Charles II. Robert or Charobert 1310 32 28. Lewis I. 1342 40 29. Mary 1382 00 30. Charles III. the Small 1383 3 31. Sigismund 1387 51 32. Albertus of Austria 1438 2 33. Ladislaus IV. 1440 4 34. John Corvinus Huniades 1445 8 35. Ladislaus V. 1452 6 36. Matthias Corvinus 1458 2 37. Ladislaus VI. 1460 25 38. Lewis II. the Young 1486 11 Interruption.     39. John of Zapol 1526 00 40. John Stephen or Sigismund 1540 00 41. Ferdinand I. 1527 37
42. Maximilian I. 1564 12 43. Rodolphus 1576 36 44. Matthias 1612 7 45. Ferdinand II. 1619 18 46. Ferdinand III. 1637 20 47. Ferdinand Francis, Elected in 1657 00 48. Leopold-Ignatius 1657 now Reigns 49. Joseph his Son elected in 1687   Hungary is generally divided into two, viz. Ʋpper and Lower Hungary.Division. The first is beyond the Danube towards Poland and Transylvania, and the other this side the Danube. I. Upper Hungary. The most Remarkable Places here are, Presburg, Cap. Newhausel, Nitracht, Bish. Tyrnaw, Cassovia, or Caschaw, Agria, Colocza, Archb. Zolnock, Waradin, Bish. Segedin, Temeswar, Giula, Montgatz, Zatmar, Ʋngwar, Novigrad, Pest, Esperie, Scaros or Saros, Tokay, Bodrogh, Chonad, Jeno, Kallo, Zemlin. II. Lower Hungary. The Places of Note here are, Buda, Cap. Strigonia, or Gran, Archb. Alba Regalis, Komorrea, Javarin, or Raab, Bish. Vesprin, Bish. Kanisa, Zygeth,
Ginq-Eglises, Mohach, Astenburg, or Owar, Baboisca, Bataseck, or Bachia, Bish. Darda, Palota. Description of the Remarkable Places in Upper Hun∣gary. I. Presburg. PResburg, called by those of that Country Poson, Lat. Poso∣nium, or Pisonium and Flexum, is seated upon the left side of the Danube. It is the Capital of Ʋpper Hungary, and gives its Name to a Province, which lyes between Moravia and Austria, and the Danube. This was the Place of Conventi∣on for the Estates, since the loss of Strigonium, the Metropo∣litan. This City is pleasant, the Castle stately, beautiful and well situate on the top of a Hill, and all built of white Stone. Herein is kept the so highly esteem'd Crown of Hungary, commonly said to have been brought by an Angel from Hea∣ven to St. Stephen, their King, and of a different Figure from other Crowns. The Garden of the Archbishop is very fine, the Walks, the Grotto's, the Figure of Jeronymo, the La∣byrinth, Fish-Ponds and Fountains are Noble, and worth taking notice of. In the Dome or Cathedral Church lyeth the Body of St. Joannes Eleemosynarius, Bishop of Alexandria. The Jesuits have a part of the same Church, and a Noble Apothe∣caries Shop full of Rarities. The Lutherans have also a Noble Church here. Presburg stands by the Borders of Austria, 34 Miles N. W. of Raab, 46 E. of Vienna, and 95 almost N. W. of Buda. Long. 38 d. 14 m. Lat. 48 d. 25 m. II. Newhausel. Newhausel, Lat. Neofolium, called Owar by the Hungarians, stands upon the little River Neutra or Nitrach; it is little but strong, and Capital of a large Country. It is Built in a Moor∣ish Plain, which is hard at the bottom, so that it is passable
every where; Its Fortifications are in form of a Star, with six Rays, having at each point a high raised Bastion. The place is surrounded with a Ditch full of Water, of a Rod and a half deep, and eighteen in breadth. It has only two Gates, and before each of them there is a Half-moon, without any other Outworks but a covered Way. The Turks made them∣selves Masters of this Place in 1663. And on the ninth of Ju∣ly 1685. Prince Charles of Lorrain, with the general Officers of his Army having reviewed it, resolved to attack it. On the 16th of August he defeated the Serasquier that marched to relieve it, took twenty pieces of Cannon, some Mortars with Bombs, and four Standards; three days after, the Town was carried by Assault after a Siege of 40 days and all the Garri∣son put to the Sword. There were 100 Brass Cannons found in it, with Plate and other Booty, to above the value of two Millions. This Town lies 36 Miles E. of Presburg 12 N. of Komora, and 64 N. W. of Buda, Long. 39 d. 10 m. Lat. 48 d. 23 m. IV. Tyrnaw. Tyrnaw, or Dyrn, or Tyrn, is upon a River of the same name in the County of Transchin: The Archbishops of Strigo∣nium used to make here their Residence when Strigonium was in the possession of the Turks. In 1414. twelve Jews and two Women exercised in this Town an unheard of Cruelty upon a Christian Child; for having entic'd him into their House, they opened his Veins, and receiving the Blood, drank some and laid the rest up for some other uses; then cut the Body in pieces, and buried it in a Cellar. Yet Notwithstand∣ing this precaution they were discovered, apprehended and condemned to be burn'd alive. When they were put to the Torture, they were ask'd what put them upon such a horri∣ble Cruelty. They answered, it was because they were taught by their Ancestors, that the Blood of a Christian was a powerful Remedy to stop the Blood in Circumcision; Second∣ly, because it was a Philtre which created Love in those that eat Meat steep'd in it, Thirdly, That it did stop the over∣flowing of the Months and the Hemorrhoids; Fourthly, That it was to observe their ancient Custom of offering the Blood of a Christian to God yearly, adding that the Inhabi∣tants of that City, were enjoyned to perform their Sacrifice
about that time. This Town stands 28 Miles North East of Presburg, and 72 almost N. W. of Newhausel, Long. 38 d. 44 m. Lat. 48 d. 44 m. V. Cassovia Cassovia or Casehaw, Lat. Cassovia is seated upon the little River Tareza which empties it self into the Teys. It is the Capital of the County of Abamwivar, and is very well forti∣fied; and tho' one at the Royal Free-Towns, owns the Em∣peror as King of Hungary, to whom it was subjected in 1685. It has the best Arsenal in Hungary, and stands 86 Miles N. E. of Buda, Long. 41 d. 50 m. Lat. 48 d. 40 m. VI. Agria. Agria, by the Germans called Eger, by the Hungarians, Eclaw, is seated upon a River of the same name, which about three Leagues farther falls into the Tibisc, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Strigonia. This City is small, but so well forti∣fied that it is accounted one of the strongest Holds of Hungary. It was besieged by Soliman in 1552. without effect. This Siege is so memorable that 'twill not be amiss to relate some particulars of it. When Soliman came before this Place with 70000 Men, it was neither strong by Nature or Art, but the Courage of the Garrison supplied that defect. There were in it 2000 Hungarians and 60 of the chief Nobility, with all their Wives, Children and Moveables. They bound them∣selves by Oath to hold to the last extremity, and put all their Provisions into publick Magazines, when the Turks summon'd them, they shewed them a Coffin from the Battlements, sig∣nifying that they would rather dye than surrender. The Town was battered 40 days with 50 Pieces of Cannon, and the Turks making three Assaults in one Day, were repulsed with the loss of 8000 Men. The instances of the Courage of Women during this Siege, are almost incredible. The Turks being so terrified with such Prodigies of undauntedness in both Sexes raised the Siege, and the Garrison Sallying out, kill'd a great number of them, and took all their Baggage. In 1596. Mahomet III. made himself Master of this Place, after having defeated the Forces sent to relieve it; and the Infi∣dels,
contrary to the Capitulation, Murthered the Garrison. From that time Agria continued in the Hands of the Turks, till it was retaken by the Imperialists in 1687. after a Block∣ade of three years; during which there died of Hunger and Diseases above 10000 Turks. When the Garrison was forced to Capitulate, The Governour fearing lest the Imperialists should retaliate, what had been done in 1596, would not surrender till the Emperor sign'd the Articles. Four thou∣sand Inhabitants went out with the Garrison, 300 staid and demanded Baptism, and abundance of Christian Slaves were released. They left 150 Canons, seven Mortars, and some Provisions behind them. This City stands 38 Miles N. E. of Buda and 50 S. W. of Cassovia, Long. 41 d. 5 m. Lat. 48 d. 2 m. VII. Colozsa. Colozsa, is a declining City on the Danube, the head of the County of Bath, with an Archbishoprick taken from the Turk by the Imperialists in 1686. It stands 54 Miles S. E. of Buda, and 44 S. W. of Zolnock. Long. 40 d. 50 m. Lat. 46 d. 54 m. VIII. Zolnock. Zolnock Lat. Zolnochium is a considerable City of Upper Hungary, situate upon the Tibisc or Teys, and Capital of a County that bears its own Name. It was taken by the Turks in 1552. and retaken by the Imperialists in 1685. It stands 44 Miles N. E. of Colocza, between Buda and Great Wara∣din, 56 Miles of each, Long. 41 d. 43 m. Lat. 47 d. 25 m. IX. Waradin. Waradin or Great Waradin, or Wardin, is situate upon the River Kerez, in the borders of Transilvania, to which Princi∣pality of latter times it belong'd. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Colozsa, defended by a strong Castle, that stands on the East, and good Ramparts, with 5 royal Bastions,
and a good regular Ditch, which may be fill'd upon occasion, with the River-Water. Within, there is another inclosure of five Bastions, and an high Wall, which may serve instead of a Cittadel. This City was taken by the Crim-Tartars in 1642. who left it soon after. In 1290. Ladislaus King of Hungary built here the Cathedral Church. In 1660. it was taken by the Turks, and recovered by the Imperialists in 1692. after a memorable Siege and Blockade. Waradin stands 75 Miles almost N. of Temeswar, 90 Nigh W. of Weissenburg, 114 N. of Belgrade, and as many E. of Buda, Long. 42 d. 55. m. Lat. 47 d. 15 m. X. Segedin. Segedin or Seged Lat. Segodunum, is the Capital of the Coun∣try of Bodroch, on the River Teys or Tibisc, near the Mouth of the River Merish, 55 Miles E. of Colocza, 64 S. W. of Wa∣radin, and 104 S. E. of Buda, Long. 42 d. Lat. 46 d. 26 m. It was taken by the Turks in 1552. and retaken by the Impe∣rialists in 1686. without much resistance, after the taking of Buda. XI. Temeswar. Temeswar is a large and very strong City upon the River Temes, whence it has its Name, towards the borders of Tran∣silvania. The Turks took it in 1552. and have fortified it since to that degree, that they now esteem it impregnable. Its in∣deed the strongest place they have. It is the Seat of a Bassa, and the Capital o a Beglerbegtick or Government something like a County, bounded on the North by Chaunad and Tran∣sylvania; on the West by the Tibisc; on the South, by the Danube; and on the East by Moldavia. This City stands 54 Miles N. E. of Belgrade. 75 S. of Great Waradin and 160 S. E. of Buda, Long. 43 d. 24 m. Lat. 46 d. 6 m. XII. Giulia. Giulia or Gula Lat. Julia is a small but fortified City seated on the Lake Zarkad by the River Feketekerez, and upon the
Frontiers of Transylvania. It was taken by the Turks in 1566. and by them afterwards Mortgaged to the Prince of Transylva∣nia; from whom they have taken it of late. It stands 28 Miles S. of Great Waradin, and 52 N. W. of Temeswar. XIII. Montgatz. Montgatz or, Munkatz is a Fortress in the Earldom of Pe∣reczas, situated on a steep Rock with a Borough at the Foot of it, well shut up and surrounded with a Ditch full of Water. A great Marsh is about this Place, so that it seems Nature has made it impregnable. The Fortress contains three Castles, the first and highest commanding the second, and the second above the third; all three surrounded with a Ditch wrought in the Rock, and the passages from one to another is over three Bridges. The Princess Ragotski, Count Tekely's Wife, defended this place against a powerful Army, which was for∣ced to raise the Siege, but after a Blockade of many years, being not able to pay her Troops, she Capitulated in 1688. and surrendred the Town to the Emperor, and was conduct∣ed to Vienna with her Children, where she was to live quietly without corresponding with her Husband. Montgatz stands 126 Miles nigh E. of Buda Long. 43 d. 8 m. Lat. 48 d. 28 m. XIV. Zatmar. Zatmar is a little but well Fortified Town in the Moun∣tains of Ʋpper-Hungary upon the Frontiers of Transylvania. It is Capital of a Country, lately erected into a County, and belongs to the Emperor. Teckely made himself Master of it in 1680. but the Emperor has regained it since. This Town stands incircled with the River Samosch 25 Miles almost S. of Montgatz. XV. Ungwar. Ʋngwar or Ʋnghuar lies at the foot of Mount Crapach, in∣circled with the River Ʋngh upon the Frontiers of Red-Russia. It is the Capital of a County of the same name, more consi∣derable
for its situation and strength than for any other ad∣vantage. The Hungarian Historians pretend that this Town or River gave its Name to their Kingdom. Count Teckely was master of this place, and kept there his treasures, with the best things he had, because he thought it impregnable by its situation; but in 1685. the Imperialists made themselves Masters of it. This Town stands 42 Miles N. W. of Zat∣mar. XVI. Novigrad. Novigrad is a small but very strong Town in the County of the same name. It is defended by a Castle built upon a Rock, and encompassed with a Ditch four and thirty foot deep, cut in the same Rock, which makes it almost Impreg∣nable. In 1594. the Germans took it from the Turks, who re-took it in 1663. but it is now again under the Emperor. It stands 16 Miles almost E. of Gran, and 22 N. of Buda. XVII.. Pest. Pest Lat. Pestum is a great and fine Town situate upon the Danube, over against Buda, from whence it yields a delightful prospect by reason of its Walls, Towers and Mosques. There is a fine Bridge of Boats of half a Mile long betwixt them. It has often been taken both by the Turks and Christians, and is now under the Emperor of Germany, since 1686. XVIII. Esperie. Esperie is a strong Town on the River Tarkzal; It is the Capital of the County of Saros, and is famous for its Fairs and Salt Mines. It is subject to the Emperor, and stands 14 Miles off the borders of Poland, and 15 N. of Cassovia, Long. 41 d. 57 m. Lat. 48 d. 54 m.
XIX. Saros or Scaros. Saros, is a strong Castle, in a County of the same name, subject to the Emperor. It stands upon a Hill two or three Miles almost N. of Esperie. XX. Tokay. Tokay is a very strong Town and Cittadel, seated in an Island made by the River Teys and Bodroch. It is the Capi∣tal of the County of Semlin. Count Teckely made himself Ma∣ster of it in 1683. but the Emperors Forces retook it in 1685. It stands 66 Miles almost N. of Great Waradin, and 74 E. of Buda. XXI. Brodrogh. Bodrogh or Bodroch is seated on the Danube, and was for∣merly the Capital of a County of the same name. It is in the possession of the Imperialists since the Conquest of Buda and Segedin, in 1686. and stands 90 Miles S. E. of the former, and 30 W. of the latter. XXII. Chonad. Chonad Lat. Canadis is situated on the River Mericz, not far from the Place where it empties it self into the Teys, upon the Frontiers of Transylvania. It is a Capital of a County of the same name subject heretofore to the Grand Signior, but in the possession of the Imperialists since 1685. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Colocza, and stands 15 Miles E. of Segedin. XXIII. Jeno. Jeno or Geno, is a strong Castle in the County of Waradin subject to the Turks. It stands on the River Feketekerez 17 Miles S. of Great Waradin.
XXIV. Kallo. Kallo is a Town of Ʋpper-Hungary seated in a kind of a Lake, on the River Kello. It is subject to the Emperor, and stands 24 Miles S. E. of Tokay, and 48 almost N. of Great Waradin. XXV. Zemlin. Zemlin is the Capital of a County of the same name, seated on the River Bodrach among several Branches, 24 Miles N. E. of Tokay and 32 W. of Mongatz. It is subject to the Empe∣ror. Description of the Remarkable Places in Lower-Hungary. I. Buda. BƲDA or Offen is the Capital City of Hungary, and for∣merly the ordinary residence of its Kings, because of its pleasant situation. Sigismund, King of Hungary, who was Crowned in 1387. and was afterwards Emperor, beautified it with several sumptuous Palaces, and caused the Castle to be built, where afterwards his Successors kept their Court. This City passed for one of the Beautifullest of the King∣dom, before the Turks had it; but whilst it was in their possession, they suffered the finest Buildings to fall to ruin. It is built on the right side of the Danube, upon a Mountain which makes its situation very advantagious. Pest is on the other side, a little below it, and there is commonly a Bridge of 60 Boats, which serves for a Communication from the one to the other. The lower City, called Wasserstadt, or Town of the Jews, which is like a suburb, reacheth from the Up∣per City to the Danube, on the same side. The Upper City takes up all the Declivity of the Mountain, and is Fortified with good Walls, which have Towers at certain distances af∣ter
the ancient manner. The Castle is at the extremity of the City Eastward, upon a Hill which commands the greatest part of it. It is surrounded with a very deep Ditch, and defended with old fashioned Towers, and some modern For∣tifications which take up all the Hill from the Wall of the Upper City to the Danube. This City was taken by Soliman. In 1526. Ferdinand the Arch-Duke of Austria, retook it the next year after. In 1529. Soliman made himself Master of it again, after the Garrison had stood eleven Assaults, and restored it to the Vayvode of Transylvania, who had lost it before. Ferdinand in 1540, and 1541. Attack d it again, when Soliman coming the third time to relieve it, raised the Siege and made himself master of the Place by Stratagem and Surprise, and so took it from the Queen, whom he came to assist. Matthias the Arch-Duke besieged it again in 1598. and after in 1601. but with no success. The Duke of Lorrain sat down before it in 1684. from July 14. to November 1. but was forced to raise the Siege and leave it. He reinvested it the 15 of June 1686. and made himself Master of it, after a Siege of two Months and a half. Buda stands 135 almost S. E. of Vienna 140 S. of Cracovia, 165 N. W. of Belgrade, and 675 almost N. W. of Constantiplr. Long. 40 d. 15 m. Lat. 47 d. 38 m. The last Siege of this City has been so fa∣mous, not only for the importance of the Place, but also for the vigorous resistance of the Besieged, and the great Courage of the Imperialists, and of a vast number of Noble Voluntiers, that resorted thither from all parts of Christian Europe, that I hope, I shall oblige most Readers to give here the Particu∣lars of it, and as for those that are already acquainted with them, they may skip this Paragraph if they please. Relation of the Siege of Buda from June 15. 1686. to September 2. in the same year. THE 15th of June the two Bodies of the Imperial Army advanced equally; Prince Charles of Lorrain with the Ca∣valry encamped at Dotkamp, and the Elector of Bavaria at Mo∣hatz, opposite to one another, the Danube lying betwixt them. The same day the Count of Staremberg arrived at Moratz with the Infantry and part of the Baggage of the Army. The 16th Prince Charles went to incamp with the Horse at St. Andrew, the Earl of Staremberg with the Foot at Dostkam, and the
Elector of Bavaria at Wailan, so that the Infidels, from the Ramparts could see the Christians on both sides the Danube. The 18th all the Infantry having joined the Army, the whole Army marched, and invested the Place on all sides. They began the same day to make a Bridge of Boats, as well for the Passage of the Troops of Bavaria, as for Communication with the other side of the Danube, and afterwards resolved to Attack the Town in four different Places. The first at∣tack, on the side of the lower Town was commanded by Prince Charles, and carried on the by the Imperial Troops. The second on the side of the Castle, by the Elector of Ba∣varia; The third was carried on by the Troops of Saxony; and the fourth by those of Brandenburg, under General Scho∣ning. The 19th Prince Charles causd the Army to approch to the Baths, and there fixed the General Quarter, with some Regiments of Foot, within a quarter of a Mile of the City. On the 21st the Elector of Bavaria marched his Troops over the Bridge, and came to incamp at the foot of the Mount St. Gerard. The 22d the Prince of Newburg, Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, arrived in the Camp with Count Dunevald. The next day the Christians began to batter the Wasserstadt, and having made a sufficient breach they entred it, whilst the Infidels retired into the Upper City. On the 30th the Marquess of Turlac arrived in the Camp with the Troops of Swedeland, and at the same day arrived also the Auxiliary Troops of Franconia and Suabia, and two Compa∣nies of Passau and Ratisbonne. The 2d of July the Troops of Brandenburg arrived under the Command of the Marshal Ge∣neral Schoning. The 13th the Christians mounted and made themselves Masters of the Breach; but the Turks setting Fire to a Furnace, several Voluntiers of great Note, with a great Number of Soldiers, were killed or wounded. The 23d it was thought fit to summon the Besieged. The Count of Koningseck, Ayde de Camp General, was sent with an In∣terpreter and a Drummer to make the Summons. The Turks came to meet him, and took the Letter which they present∣ed to the Commander. There was a Truce of two Hours made on both sides. The Turks brought a Letter wrapped in Scarlet, written by the Governour, in answer to that of Prince Charles; wherein he declared that he was resolved to make a vigorous defence. After this answer there was great firing made on both sides. The 27th the Christians gave a General Assault and became Masters of three Towers, at the
three Quarters of Prince Charles, of the Marshal of Schoning, and of the Elector of Bavaria. The 1st of August the Besieg∣ed sent two Agas, who offered in the name of the Visier of Buda, to remit this Place, with all its Dependencies, and what other two Towns the Emperor should make choice of, if he would make Peace; but as Prince Charles was informed, that the Emperor would do nothing but with the consent of his Allies, he dismissed the Agas. On the 14th the Turks who came to the relief of Buda appeared in Battel Ar∣ray; Prince Charles fought them, defeated them, took eight Pieces of Canon, and forty Standards with the loss of 200 Men. The next day, there were found in the Field 2200 dead Bodies of the Infidels. The 22d the Bavarians seized on one of the Towers of the Castle. The 29th the Succours of the Turks made another attempt to enter into the City, but they were repulsed by the Christians. The 31st they got advice that the Grand Visier was extreamly disatisfied with the two Bassa's who commanded the Troops which the Christians had defeated the 29th, and that his Army was but of about 30000 Men. Lastly, The 2d of September was the General Assault given: The Elector of Bavaria accompanied with the Prince of Baden began it, attacking the Castle. A little while after, Prince Charles of Lorrain attended by the Prince of Croy, Newbourg and Commerci, the Generals Souches, Diepenthal, Scherssemberg, and the chief Voluntiers of the Ar∣my, marched to the Assault. After a fierce Combat which lasted an hour, the Governour being killed upon the breach, the Turks lost Courage, and retired in disorder to the foot of a Wall of the Castle. The Imperialists being entered the City made a terrible Slaughter. The Elector of Bavaria found a stronger resistance at the Castle; for the Turks who were therein their Retrenchments, not knowing that the City was taken, defended themselves with a great deal of Courage; at last, being overpowered, they set fire through despair, to several places of the City. After a great Massacre, the Elector of Bavaria caused Quarter to be given to near 2000 Men, who were retired into the Castle, whilst the Earl of Coningseck carried the same orders to the Imperialists from Prince Charles of Lorrain. This they did, because the Infi∣dels might have defended themselves yet a great while, for they had at their Head, the Aga of the Janissaries with the Bassa's Lieutenant, the Mufti, and several other Officers, who were made Prisoners by the Bavarians. Most of the
Women and Children were also saved. The Infidels being disarmed some were conducted to a Mosque, and the rest left in the Castle, whilst the Fire they had kindled in the City raged so far, that the Walls of the Houses hardly es∣cap'd its fury. The next Day the two Generals visited the Place, and found in it above 400 Pieces of Artillery, four of which of an extraordinary bigness, they call the four Evan∣gelists. There was Ammunitions also found in it for more than a Month. The Christians did not lose above 100 Men in this Action, and as they were preparing to go to attack the Grand Vizier in his Camp, they were informed that he had abandon'd it. A Treasure of 300000 Ducats discovered in the City, was given to the Bassa to use as he should see occasion. There were also 60000 Sequins found, with other sums, buried in the Ground in divers places. The Library of the Ancient Kings of Hungary, so much augmented by Matthias Corvin, being not in the least damnified, was trans∣ported to Vienna. II. Strigonia or Gran. Strigonia or Gran Lat. Strigonium, is seated in a Plain upon the Danube above Buda, and commanded by a Neighbour Mountain, on the Top of which is a good Castle. The Arch∣bishop of this City is Primate, Chancellor and President of the Council of the Kingdom of Hungary; the Cathedral stands in the Castle. Soliman II. took this City in 1543. The Arch-Duke Matthias besieg'd it in 1574. with 50000 Men, but was forced to raise the Siege. Count Mansfeld general of the Imperial Forces besieged it again in 1595. and defeated 14000 Turks, but died soon after before this City. The Archduke Matthias continued the Siege, and forced the City to surren∣der upon Terms, after having been 52 years under the Do∣minion of the Turks. After this Mahomet III. besieg'd it in 1606. and took it again. The Imperialists retook it in 1683. after having raised the Siege of Vienna, and after an obsti∣nate Combat maintained by the Turks, against the Imperialists and Polanders, near the Village Barkan, where the King of Poland and his Son were in great danger of their Lives. Last∣ly, in 1685. The Turks, having again besieg'd it, the Duke of Lorrain with the Elector of Bavaria forced them to raise the Siege and totally defeated their Army. Strigonia stands 28 Miles N. E. of Buda 35 E. of Raab, and 115 E. of Vienna, Long. 39 d. 42 m. Lat. 47 d. 50 m.
III. Alba Regalis. Alba Regalis, or Stul Weissenburg, by the Sclavonians called Stolni Biograd, and Eeis Feierwa by the Hungarians, is seat∣ed upon the River Switze near the Lake Calaton. It has been famous heretofore for the Coronations and Sepulchres of the Kings of Hungary, and was taken by the Turks in 1543. but retaken by the Duke of Mercoeur in 1601. but the Infidels took it again the next Year after, and impal'd 40 of the In∣habitants for a design to hve betray'd it again. On the 18th of May 1688. it surrendred to the Imperialists, and one of the Gates was put into the Hands of the Christians, till the Emperor Ratified the Treaty under the Great Seal of the Empire, and having spent three days in providing for their departure, on the 20th of May, they march'd out about 4000 Souls in all, but not above 700 bearing Arms. The Im∣perialists found in it 34 Pieces of Cannon, great quantities of small Arms, and an incredible store of Ammunition, but no Provision. The Germans found it fortified with three Basti∣ons, and two other Works on one side, the rest of the Town being covered by the Morass in which it stands, 40 Miles S. W. of Buda, 110 S. E. of Vienna, and 180 N. W. of Bel∣grade. Long. 39 d. 24 m. Lat. 47 d. 23 m. IV. Komorra. Komorre, or Komare, or Komorra, Lat. Komorra, is a very strong Town, situate on the S. side of the Isle of Schut, where the Danube reunites into one Stream. This Town was well fortified by Mtthias Corvinus King of Hungary in 1472. and it became the Bulwark of Christendo against the Turks, after they took Strigonia in 1543. It is populous, and rich as well as strong. It has a Line drawn from the Southern to the Northern Branch of the Danube, defended with four Ba∣stions. The Emperor kept always here a great Garrison. After the taking of Raab (or Javarin) in 1591. Sinan Ba∣shaw Besieged this Town with 60 Ships, and a great number of Turks and Tartars, but without success; for his Treachery and Valour were equally baffled by Baron Braon the Governour, who cut off four of the five Turks Heads he sent to Suborn
him, and sent the fifth back to acquaint the Bashaw with their Doom, and that there were no more Traytors to be bought. The chief strength of this impregnable Place is its Fort called the Tortoise. It stands 12 Miles S. of Newhausel, 15 N. E. of Javarin, 38 almost E. of Presburg, 54 N. W. of Buda, and 74 almost E. of Vienna. Long. 39 d. 12 m. Lat. 48 d. 12 m. V. Javarin or Raab. Raab or Javarin, is a Town and Fortress at the Conflu∣ence of the Rivers Raab and Danube, with a Bishop's See Suffragan of Gran (or Strigonia) the French, call it Java∣rin; the Hungarians, Gewen; the Italians, Giovarin; and the Latin Authors Jaurinum, Arabo and Narabo. This City is small, but very strong; it was taken by the Turks in 1591. and retaken by Monsieur de Vaubecourt a Frenchman in 1606. and has ever since been under the Emperor of Germany. It stands 34 Miles W. of Strigonia, as many S. W. of Presburg, and 62 almost W. of Buda. Long. 38 d. 52 m. Lat. 48. d. 3 m. VI. Vesprin. Vesprin, in High Dutch, Weisbrun, Lat. Vesprinum, is a strong and populous City, the Capital of a pretty considera∣ble County, to which she has given her Name, and a Bi∣shop's See under the Archbishop of Strigonia. It was taken by the Turks in 1593. but was retaken since by the Emperor, and is still subject to him. It stands nigh the River Sarwitza, 13 Miles W. of Alba Regalis, and 53 almost W. of Buda. Long. 39 d. 6 m. Lat. 47 d. 22 m. VII. Kanisa. Kanisa, or Kanisca, Lat. Canisia, is seated upon the River Sala, in the Zalad, between the Lake Balaton and the River Drave, not above one Mile from the Confines of Stiria, to the East. It is one of the strongest Towns in these Parts. It was taken by the Turks in 1600. tho' the Imperialists did all that was possible to prevent it. The following Year the
Arch-Duke of Austria Besieged it, from the beginning of Sep∣tember, to the end of October, but without success. In 1604. Count Serini Besieged it, and had infallibly carried it, if he had been succoured in time. In 1688. June 30th the Count de Budiani blocked it up with a Body of 6000 Hungarians, and 2000 Heydukes, which continued till April 13. 1690. when in pursuance of a Capitulation that the Emperor had ratified, the Keys of the Gates, hanging upon a Chain of Gold, were delivered to the Count de Budiani by a Turk, with these words, I herewith consign into your Hands the strongest Fortress in the Ottoman Empire. The Imperialists found in it great store of large Artillery, taken heretofore from the Christians. This Town stands 68 Miles S. W. of Alba Regalis, 94 almost S. E. of Vienna, and 106 S. W. of Buda. Long. 37 d. 56 m. Lat. 46 d. 54 m. VIII. Sigeth. Sigeth, or Zygeth, Lat. Salinae, is a very strong Town, seated in a Morass near the River Alme. It has a very good Castle, and is fortified with three Ditches, and as many Walls. Solyman II. Emperor of the Turks, died at the Siege, and the Place was taken three days after in 1596. Ni∣cholas Esdrin Count of Serini, who was Governour of it, being slain in a Sally he made at the Head of his remaining Forces. The Imperialists retook this City from the Turks in January 1688. and found therein 85 Pieces of Cannon. It stands 44 Miles S. of Alba Regalis, 64 E. of Canisa, and 74 S. W. of Buda. Long. 39 d. 24 m. Lat. 46 d. 36 m. There is ano∣ther Town of the same Name in Transylvania, near the Foun∣tains of the Tibiscus. IX. Cinq Eglises, or Quinque Ecclesiae. Cinq Eglises, Lat. Quinque Ecclesiae, called by the Germans, Funff-kirken, is a place of no great strength, on the River Keoritz, 12 Miles off the River Drave, 32 Miles N. E. of Zi∣geth, and 49 almost N. of Posega. Long. 40 d. 6 m. Lat. 46 d. 26 m.
X. Mohatz. Mohatz, is a little Town between Colocza, and the Influx of the Drave into the Danube four German Miles from either, and 6 N. W. of Esseck. It is memorable for two great Bat∣tels fought near it; the first between Lewis King of Hungary, and Solyman the Magnificent in 1526. in which this Unfortu∣nate Prince Lewis with 25000 Men fought 300000 Turks, who killed 22000 of the Christian Army; the King in his flight over the Brook Curass, fell into a Quagmire, and was swallowed up. After this, Solyman took and slew 200000 Hungarians, and got such a footing in this Kingdom that he could never be expelled. The second, in some part, retrieves the Loss and Infamy of the former. On the 29th of July 1687. the Prime Visier having passed the Drave at Esseck, on purpose to Fight the Christian Army under the Command of the Duke of Lorrain, upon August 12. there followed a Bloody Battel, in which the Turks lost 100 Pieces of Cannon, 12 Mortars, and all their Ammunition and Baggage, and about 800 Men upon the Place of Battel, besides those that were Drowned in passing the River. After this Victory Dunewalt found Esseck deserted by the Enemy, and took possession of it. XI. Altenburg, or Owar. Altenburg, or Owar, Lat. Ovaria, is a very strong Town on the Danube, in the County of Muzon, the best Out-work to Vienna, subject to the Emperor. It stands 18 Miles almost S. of Presburg, and 50 E. of Vienna. XII. Baboisca. Baboisca, or Baboliza, called Mansuetinum in Antonin's Itine∣nary, is a Town and Castle, on the River Rynnia, in the County of Sigeth, from which it stands 19 Miles to the W.
XIII. Bataseck, or Bachia. Bataseck, or Bachia, is a small Town of Lower Hungary at the Confluence of the Danube and Sarwizze, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishoprick of Colocza; it was under the Turks until 1686. but after the taking of Quinque Ecclesiae it returned to the Obedience of the Emperor. It stands 20 Miles S. of Colocza, and 70 S. E, of Buda. XIV. Darda. Darda, is a strong Fort in the County of Caranywar, on the North end of Esseck's Bridge, about six Miles N. W. of Esseck. It was Built by the Turks in 1686. and taken by the Imperialists in 1687. XV. Palotta. Palotta, is a Town of no great Consideration in the Coun∣ty of Alba-Regalis. It was taken from the Turks by the Im∣perialists in October 1687. The Bassa that commanded there immediately desired to Capitulate, and marched out with 250 Men, and as much Baggage as every Souldier could car∣ry. There were found Eight Pieces of Cannon, divers Mor∣tars, and great quantity of Powder and Provision, with three Colours. Palotta stands five Miles almost N. of Alba Regalis. Article II. Transilvania. Bounds.TRansilvania is a Principality, and part of the Ancient Dacia having Hungary to the West; Mount Carpathus to the North; Moravia to the East, and Walachia to the South. Its length and breadth are four Days Journey each;Extent.
it had its Name from the Romans,Name. History. by reason of the Forrests and Mountains that environ'd it; the Hungarians called it Erdely, and the Germans Si∣benburgen, a Name derived from the Seven Towns Built there by the Banish'd Saxons. Several other Inhabitants setled in it, but the Saxons who best Cultivated the Country, had the firmest footing. The Romans afterwards under Trajan be∣came Masters of it. It was afterwards united to the Kingdom of Hungary, and now its Princes are subject sometimes to the Turk, sometimes to the Emperor of Germany. The Plains are very fruitful in Corn, the Hills covered with Vines,Quality. and the Mountains well stocked with Gold, Silver and Salt Mines. They have also Bitumen, whereof they make Torches, whose smoke is good to refresh the Brain. In their Woods they have great numbers of Deers, Bears, and extraordinary wild Horses. Their Water is unwholesom, because it passes through Mines of Alum and Mercury, but there are some that taste like Wine, others that petrifie, and form a hard Crust, round Wood, or any thing else thrown into them. This Principality is inhabited by three sorts of Nations, viz. Saxons,Inhabi∣tants. Bulgarians and Hungari∣ans; the first possess the Province called the Se∣ven Towns; the Bulgarians dwell on the Banks of Marise; the Hungarians possess the Frontiers of Walachia, and follow the Grecian Religion. These are divided into Counties, pay no Tribute to the Prince of Transilvania, but are obliged to serve at their own Expences when he goes to War. The Doctrine of Calvin and Luther were intro∣duced here in 1561. For George Brandrata,Religion. Phy∣sician to John Zapol, Count of Scepus, and Vay∣vode of Transilvania, made this young Prince embrace the Sen∣timents of Luther by means of Denis Alexis, but this Man not Executing his Orders with care enough, he substituted Fran∣cis David in his Place, who of a Lutheran made the Prince a Calvinist, and at last taught him the Doctrine of Arius. Ste∣phen Bathori Prince of Transilvania in 1571. afterwards chosen King of Poland, endeavoured to re-establish Popery; and to that end gave the Government of this Principality to his Bro∣ther Christopher Bathori, who cast David into Prison, where he died Mad. He founded a College of Jesuits at Colaswar; but dying in 1583. his Son Sigismund who succeeded him, to
comply with the Transilvanians, was forced to dismiss the Jesuits, but recalled them two years after. This Principality is now incorporated with the Kingdom of Hungary,Govern∣ment. under the protection of the Emperor; for Michael Abafti the 23d Prince from John Huniades, who succeeded John Kemani in 1661. by a solemn Act given at Hermanstadt, May 9. 1688. with the full consent of the States of Transilvania, made an entire submission of this Country to the Emperor and the King of Hungary to last for ever, and accordingly he received Imperial Garrisons into all the principal places. The said Prince dying in 1690. the States in a general Assembly re∣solved to adhere to the Interests of the Emperor against all the Pretences of Count Teckely, or the Ottoman Port, according to the Tenour of the said Treaty. The most considerable Places in the Principality of Transil∣vania are, Hermanstadt, Bish. Cap. Alba Julia, or Weissemburg, Bish. Brassow, or Cronstadt, Coloswar, or Clausenburg, Segeswar, Agnetlin, Altenberg, Bestercze, Newmark. I. Hermanstadt. Hermanstadt, Lat. Cibinum or Hermanopolis, called by the Inhabitants Zeben, the Capital of Transilvania, and Residence of the Prince, is a large, populous, strong and well built Ci∣ty. It has no Bishop at present, but is reckoned a Bishop's See Suffragan of the Archbishop of Colocza in Hungary. The Inhabitants of this City are Saxons, and five Jurisdictions de∣pend upon it. The Prince of this Country having formerly put himself under the Protection of the Grand Signior, the late Duke of Lorrain prevail'd with the Prince Abafti to put himself under the Protection of the Emperor, and to receive a Garrison of 3000 Germans in 1687. This City stands in a Plain, on the River Cibin, 160 Miles N. E. of Belgrade, and 235 almost E. of Buda. Long. 45 d. 48 m. Lat. 46 d. 46 m.
II. Weissemburg. Weissemburg, Lat. Alba Julia, which the Hungarians call Giula Fejerwar, is situate upon the River Marise, (which the Inhabitants call Marons, and the Germans Merisch) with a Bi∣shop's See under the Archbishop of Colocka. The ancient Kings and Princes of this Country made their ordinary resi∣dence in this City, which has been much greater than now it is, as may be seen by its rare Roman Medals, Coins and In∣scriptions, evident signs of Antiquity and Grandeur. It stands 34 Miles W. of Hermanstadt, 68 N. E. of Temeswar, 90 E. of Waradin and 196 E. of Buda. Long. 45 d. Lat. 46 d. 46 m. III. Cronstadt, or Brassaw. Brassaw, or Cronstadt, Lat. Patrovissa, is a strong City, and a Bishop's See situated near the Frontiers of Moldavia, and the Carpathian Mountains. Some take it for the Praeto∣ria Augusta of Ptolomy. and others call it Corona and Stephano∣polis; and pretend that it is one of the Seven Cities Built or Repaired by the Saxons. It stands 65 Miles almost N. E. of Hermanstadt. Long. 47 d. 20 m. Lat. 47 d. 5 m. IV. Clausemburg. Clausemburg, called Coloswar by those of the Country, and Claudiopolis in Latin, is a great and populous City, with the Title of a Bishoprick, and an old Cittadel, situated upon the little Brook Samos at the foot of the Mountains towards the Frontiers of Hungary, 34 Miles N. W. of Weissemburg, and 64 of Hermanstadt. Long. 44 d. 25 m. Lat. 47 d. 11 m. The States of Transilvania are kept in it. V. Segeswar. Segeswar, called Schezberg by the Germans, Lat. Segethusa, is seated on the River Cochel at the foot of the Carpathian
Mountains, subject to the Prince of Transilvania, under the Emperor. It stands 40 Miles N. of Hermanstadt. VI. Agnetlin, or Agnabat. Agnetlin, or Agnabat, is one of the Chief Towns in Tran∣silvania, tho' of no strength; it is seated on the River Har∣bach, 25 Miles almost N. of Hermanstadt, subject to the Prince of Transilvania, and protected by the Emperor. VII. Altemberg. Altemberg, is a small City seated upon a Hill, Built out of the Ruins of Zalnatra, 20 Miles S. W. of Weissemburg, or Al∣ba Julia, and 42 S. of Clausenburg. VIII. Bestercze, or Besteriza. Bestercza, or Besteriza, Lat. Bistricia, is a small but very neat City, which stands in a very large Plain upon a River of its own Name, 80 Miles N. W. of Hermanstadt. IX. Newmark. Newmark, Lat. Nova Marchia, called Waverhely by the Hungarians, is seated on the River Merish, at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains, 36 Miles N. E. of Clausenburg. The States of Transilvania usually meet here. Article III. Podolia. Bounds.POdolia, is a great Province of Poland, in Lithuania between Moldavia to the S. Black Russia to the W. Volhinia to the N. and the Tar∣tars of Oczakow to the E.
This Province is very fertile, but has been often wasted by the Inroads of the Tartars and Cossacks, and is now the Thea∣tre of the War between the Poles and the Turks. It's usually divided into the Higher Podolia that lyes to the West; where∣in are the Cities of Kaminieck and Bar, and into the Lower, which lyes to the East, and has in it the City of Bracklaw. I. Kaminieck, Bish. Cap. Kaminieck or Caminieck, Lat. Camenecia, Clepidava, or Camienicum, is a very strong Town, and the Capital of Podo∣lia. The Poles call it Kaminieck Podeleki. It is a Bishop's See under the Archbishoprick of Lemberg, and stands upon a Mountain by the River Smortzyck, which a little lower falls into the Niester. The Turks very often attempted this Place without success; but it having suffered much by Fire in 1669. and being thereupon Besieged by them in 1672. it was taken, the Poles being then Engaged in a Civil War amongst them∣selves, and the Town in an ill condition of Defence. The Cossacks under Motula blocked it up in April 1687. and the Polish Army designed to Attack it in September following, but upon the approach of the Ottoman Forces, they were both of them forced to retire. The Polish Army kept it in a man∣ner blocked up by their Incampment in 1688. And in 1689. the Forces of Lithuania and Poland setting down before it, began a formal Attack, Aug. 20. but crossed with ill success, raised the Siege in September following. This City stands 72 Miles N. W. of Soczow, 116 almost S. E. of Lemburg, 280 E. of Cracovia, and 290 S. E. of Warsovia. Long. 47 d. 46 m. Lat. 48 d. 50 m. II. Bar. Bar, is a very strong Town on the River Row, in the Pa∣latinate of Kaminieck, upon a Hill among Marshes, and now subject to the Turks. It stands 70 Miles N. E. of Kaminieck, and 54 N. W. of Braclaw. Long. 49 d. 22 m. Lat. 49 d. 14 m.
III. Braclaw. Braclaw, Lat. Braclovia, is a strong Town in Lower Podo∣lia, situated upon the River Bog, towards the middle of this Province, and Capital of the Palatinate of the same Name, it is subject to the King of Poland, but the Country has been strangely ruined by the Turks since the taking of Kaminieck, off which City it stands 110 Miles to the E. Long. 50 d. 52 m. Lat. 48 d. 53 m. Article IV. Moldavia. MOldavia, is a Principality of Europe, known also under the Name of Great Walachia,Name. or Walachia Cisalpina, formerly part of Dacia, and af∣terwards of the Great Kingdom of Hungary. It has its Modern Name from a River,Bounds. or from the Bo∣rough Moldavia. The Niester divides it from Podo∣tia, on the N. the Black Sea, and the Danube divide it from Bulgaria on the E. It has the Rivers Danube and Serethe, or Missovo on the South, and the Mount Hemus divides it from Walachia and Transilvania on the West. It is about 90 Leagues long from East to West,Extent. and 70 from N. to S. This Country is fruitful in Corn, Pulse, &c. the Air very good.Quality. There is such plenty of Wax and Honey, that their Tythes are worth above 200000 Crowns to the Prince.History. The Inhabitants are Christi∣ans under the Greek Patriarch, and the Tribute they paid formerly to the Turks, was formerly about 1400 Pound; but the Port increaseth it from time to time, not ca∣ring how poor they make them to keep them obedient. I 1686. the Poles over-ran all this Country, and took their principal Cities; they therefore since relinquished the Otto∣man Interest, and voluntarily put themselves under the Pro∣tection of the Emperor of Germany in 1688.
This Country is divided into Moldavia, properly so called, towards the West, and Bessarabia towards the East, where the Danube's Mouths are, and belongs to the Turks. Bessarabia, is inhabited by the Tartars Drobuces, or of Bud∣ziack, and the Tartars of Oczakow, both great Thieves. The Places of Note in Mol∣davia Proper are, Sockzow, or Czukaw, Jassy, or Jazy, Pudna, Targorod, or Trescort. In Bessarabia, Tekin, or Tigina, Akierman, or Bialogrod, Oczakow, Kilia nova. I. Sockzow. Sockzow, or Czukaw, is a great and strong City, the Ca∣pital of the Principality of Moldavia, and the ordinary Resi∣dence of the Prince called Vayvode. It stands on the River Serethe, 54 Miles N. E. of Cronstad, and 74 almost S. of Kami∣nieck. Long. 48 d. 30 m. Lat. 47 d. 44 m. II. Jassy. Jassy, or Jazy, is a great and populous City on the River Pruth, subject to its own Prince, under the protection of the Emperor. The Poles took it in 1686. and soon after left it again. It stands 60 Miles E. of Sockzow. I. Tekin. Tekin, or Tigina, is a great City, the Capital of Bessarabia on the River Niester towards the Borders of Podolia. It stands 100 Miles N. E. of Jazy. Long. 51 d. 20 m. Lat. 47 d. 30 m.
II. Bialogrod, or Akierman. Bialogrod, is a strong City upon the Niester near the Pont Euxine, and the Capital of the Principality of Budziack. It stands 42 Miles S. W. of Oczakow, and 270 N. of Constantino∣ple. Long. 54 d. 34 m. Lat. 47 d. 32 m. III. Oczakow. Oczakow, or Ocziakow, Lat. Axiace, is a strong Town seat∣ed at the Fall of the Borysthenes or Niester into the Euxine Sea. It has a Castle which is Garrison'd by the Turks, but the Citi∣zens are Precopensian Tartars; it was Built by Vitolaus Duke of Lithuania, and at first peopled by his Subjects. Near this City the Poles gave the Tartars a fatal overthrow in 1644. This Place gives Name to the Neighbouring Tartars, who are so troublesom to Podolia, Lithuania, and Poland, that the King of the latter pays them Tribute to prevent their Incursions. It stands 44 Miles N. E. of Bialogrod, and 290 N. of Constan∣tinople. Long. 55 d. 27 m. Lat. 47 d. 52 m. IV. Kilia Nova. Kilia Nova, is a strong Town of Bessarabia, subject to the Turks, upon the Danube 60 Miles S. W. of Bialogrod, and 230 N. of Constantinople. Long. 53 d. 28 m. Lat. 46 d. 44 m. Article V. Walachia. WAlachia, or Valaquia, a Principality of Europe,Bounds. was formerly part of the an∣cient Kingdom of Hungary. It lyes be∣tween Moldavia to the N. E. Transilvania to the N. W. Hun∣gary to the West, and Bulgaria to the South. It is not very long
since it was divided into great Valachia or Cisalpi∣na,Division (the present Moldavia) or little Valachia or Transalpina, (the which is now called Valachia.) It has Mines of Gold,Quality. Horses the most esteemed in Europe, and a great number of Rivers. The Turks call it Carabogdana, that is the Land of black Corn.Riches. This Province is divided into 13 Counties promis∣cuously Inhabited by Saxons, Hungarians, and Natives. The Vaivode or Prince has 100000 Crowns by his Tythes of Honey and Wax, a great Commodity in that Country; and his Customs upon the Malmsie of Candia,Govern∣ment. carri∣ed thro' his Lands into Germany, bring him a great Sum too. He is now Tributary to the Grand Sig∣nior, to whom he generally pays 70000 Ducats, but is some∣times obliged to pay 100000 to maintain himself in his Prin∣cipality. He can raise 10000 Horse, and 1000 Foot. The People here are inconstant, and wild;Strength Inhabi∣tants. their Tongue inclines somewhat to the Latin, which makes some think they are descended from the Romans. In the Ceremonies of their Religion, which is that of the Greeks,Religion they make use of the Lingua Franca, used almost over all the Orient. The places of Note in Wa∣lachia are, Tarvis, or Targovisco, Cap. Brascovia, Buchorist, Margozest. I. Tarvis, or Targovisco. This is a great and considerable City, the Metropolis of Walachia, and the ordinary Residence of the Vaivode. It stands on the River Launiza, 94 Miles S. E. of Hermanstat, 140 S. W. of Jazy, and 200 E. of Belgrade. Long. 47 d. 38 m. Lat. 48 d. 54 m. II. Brascovia. Brascovia, or Bracslow, or Brasgow, is a City towards the North Parts of Walachia, with a Bishop's See under the Arch∣bishop of Colocza, 47 Miles almost N. of Tarvis.
Article VI. Bulgaria. BƲlgary, Lat. Bulgaria, a Province of Europe be∣longing to the Turk,Bounds. had in times past the Title of Kingdom. It stretches from Servia, which it has on the W. along the Danube, which parts it from Mol∣davia and Walachia, unto the Mouths of this River in the Black Sea, which bounds it on the East; and on the South a long Chain of Mountains separates it from Macedonia and Ro∣mania, the old Thracia. Bulgaria, formerly made part of Lower-Moesia, Authors do vary about the Original and first Seat of its Inhabitants.Inhabi∣tants. There are several who think that they came from the Asiatick Sarmatia, and that they took their Name from the River Volga, which dis∣charges it self into the Sea of Hyrcania, having had their Seat upon its Banks before they passed into Europe. Others make them descend from the Ancient Getae or Gepids. However, they have often opposed the Emperors of Constantinople, and made Incursions into Italy and France, under the Kings of the Se∣cond Line. The most remarkable places in Bulgaria are, Sofia, Cap. Archb. Nicopolis, or Nigeboli, Archb. Guistandil, Panfalca, Ternovo, Hasgrad, Silistria, Prounda, or Proslavisa, Tomi, or Trosmi, Mesembria, or Mesevira.
I. Sofia. Sofia, or Sophia, is called by the Turks Triadizza, and is an Archbishop's See; it was of old called Sardicca, and belong∣ed then to the Lower Maesia. It is seated upon the River Ichar, at an equal distance from the Borders of Thracia E. Macedonia S. and Servia W. being now a great, populous, but unwalled City, and the Seat of the Bassa or Governour for the Beglerbeglicz of Romelia; it is supposed to have been Built by the Emperor Justinian in Honour of his Wife So∣phia: It is noted for one of the greatest General Councils in 307. that ever was held; wherein by the Artifice of Constan∣tius, the Council of Nice was condemned. Amurat II. took this City, and since that time all the Country of its depen∣dency has been subject to the Turks. It stands 150 Miles S. of Targovisco, and 315 W. of Constantinople. Long. 47 d. 12 m. Lat. 43 d. 25 m. II. Nicopolis. Nicopolis, or Nigeboli, which the Turks call Sciltaro, is seat∣ed upon the Danube, the Capital of a Sangiak, with an Arch∣bishop's See. It is famous for the Victory which Bazajet I. won there In 1396. It stands 74 Miles almost N. of Sofia. III. Silistria. Silistria, is a great City, the second of Bulgary (by some reckoned the Chief) and the Capital of a Sangiac. It stands 18 Miles S. of Nicopolis, and 70 N. of Sophia. Long. 47 d. 50 m. Lat. 44 d. 25 m. From Silistria to Tomi or Trosmi, (known in Antiquity by Ovid's Confinement) are seen the remains of a Wall Built by the Emperors of Constantinople against the Barbarians.
Article VII. Servia. SErvia, is a Province of the Turkish Empire, which by the Romans was called Moesia Supe∣rior,Bounds. and then esteemed a part of Thrace. It is of great Extent, being bounded on the North by the Danube, which separates it from Hungary and Walachia, on the West by Bosnia, on the South by Albania and Macedonia, and on the East by Bulgaria. This Country is very fruitful and rich,Quality. having several Mines of Gold and Silver. In the Year 1350. Ʋbsan or Dusan Reigned, and was the first King of Servia,History. and called himself also Emperor of Greece. He Conquered Bulgaria, Bos∣nia, and several other Nations in those parts. But his Family ended in Stephen in 1371. The Servians submitted to Amu∣rath I. after the taking of Nissa, but being provoked by his Cruelty revolted in 1376. and joined with the Despote of Bosnia. In 1388. Lazarus Despote of Servia fought Amu∣rath I. in the Plains of Cassovia, in which Battel fell 50000 Men; and Amurath was slain after the Fight as he was view∣ing the Field by a wounded Servian, who rose from the Dead Bodies, and stabb'd him to Revenge the Death of Lazarus his Master, who was slain here too. In 1420. Amurath Sultan of the Turks made an Invasion on George Despote of Servia, called the Rascian, took Nevomento, Scopia, and Sinderovia, with two of the Despote's Sons, put out their Eyes, and cut off their Genitals, and Married their Sister for her great Beauty. In 1427. the Servians were reduced by the same Prince; in 1454. they were again reduced, and have since that time been subject to the Ottoman Port. The Places of Note in Ser∣via are, Belgrade, Cap. Bish. Semendria, Bish. Nissa, Scopia, Archb.
I. Belgrade. Belgrade, or Grischish-Weissemburg, Lat. Alba Graeca, and Alba Bulgarica, is seated a little below the Confluence of the Save and Danube, very considerable for its greatness, and for its situation upon a Hill, which renders it extraordinary strong. Some do take it for the old Taurinum, but that was too far from the Confluent of the Save and Danube, to be the same with Belgrade. There is more likelihood that the latter being increased by the Ruin of the other, its Neighbourhood made it to be taken for the same City. Belgrade is a Bishop's See under the Archbishoprick of Antivari. Amurath II. lost a Victorious Army before it in 1439. and Mahomet II. his Son lost another Army of 250000 Men before it in 1456. which the brave Huniades ruin'd by this Stratagem; he suf∣fered a Party of the Turks to enter the Town, and whilst they were plundering, sallied out, and took their Cannon, turned them against themselves, killed 40000 of them, and forc'd the rest to an inglorious flight, leaving all their Baggage and Ammunition behind. In 1521. Soliman the Magnificent took it after two Months Siege, Lewis King of Hungary being then but 15 Years of Age, and the other Christian Princes being ingaged in a Mutual War. It was for many Years after neg∣lected by the Turks, but in 1686. they begun to refortifie it after the loss of Buda. In 1688. the Emperor sent the Duke of Bavaria against it with a Potent Army, he forced his way over the Save, Aug. 8. and defeated 6000 of the best of the Turkish Troops, on the Tenth he March'd toward Belgrade, whereupon the Turks set Fire to the Lower Town, and aban∣don'd it, tho' they had 20000 Men Incamp'd, and a strong Work which reach'd from the Town to the Save. An old Bassa was left to Command the upper Town and Castle. On the 12th. the Christians begun their Approaches, the Turks making a Vigorous Defence; but Breaches being made, the Imperialists Storm'd it thrice successively at the 6th. of Sep∣tember, and at the third Assault, entred the Place, putting all to the Sword at first, so that there were about 7000 kill'd and thrown into the Save; but the Bassa and about 3000 more obtained Quarter, having Chain'd 200 Christian Slaves, whom they set betwixt them and the Imperialists. There were 70 Pieces of Cannon, with a vast deal of Plunder, tho'
the Inhabitants had been removing their Effects a long tsme, and a 1000 Boats went down the River the Day before the lower Town was Burnt. The Christians had about 4000 killed and wounded in this Siege. In 1690. the Emperor being Attack'd by the French King upon the Rhine, the prime Visier sat down before Belgrade, Octob. 3. with 60000 Men. The Garrison consisted of 6000 Men well provided, who made a Gallant Defence, and killed abundance of Turks; but on the 8th. a Bomb falling into the Magazine, blew it up, with 1700 Germans going to Mount the Guard, and set Fire to the other Magazines, blew up part of the Walls, and filled the Ditches, so that the Enemy entred by whole Squadrons, and put all to the Sword. The Fire destroyed the Town and Ca∣stle, and only the Governour with 300 of the Garrison esca∣ped. He was afterwards brought to his Tryal for not having done his part, but acquitted. Since that time the Turks have refortified this City. It stands 165 Miles S. E. of Buda, 160 S. W. of Hermanstadt, 230 N. W. of Sofia, 280 S. E. of Vienna, and 540 almost W. of Constantinople. Long. 42 d. 24 m. Lat. 45 d. 20 m. II. Semenbria. Semenbria, is a City and Bishoprick on the Danube, 24 Miles E. of Belgrade. The Turks took it in 1690. from the Imperialists. III. Nissa. Nissa, is a very considerable City upon the River Nichawa It is strong by its situation, capable of being improved, and has five Mosques. The Country round it is very fruitful and pleasant. This City is memorable for the defeat of the Turks by the Imperialists, on the 24th▪ of September in 1689. under Prince Lewis of Baden, whereupon all Servia and Alba∣nia submitted to the Emperor, as did also the Town nextday after the Victory; but it was retaken by the Turks in 1690. after a Siege of three Weeks. It stands 140 Miles S. E. of Belgrade. Long. 45 d. 5 m. Lat. 43 d. 53 m.
IV. Scopia, or Uscopia▪ Scopia, or Ʋscopia, (which Sanson places in Bulgaria) is a large City at the foot of Mount Orbelus, on the River Vera∣tazar near the Borders of Macedonia, partly on Hills, partly on Plains, in a pleasant Country. It was at first a Bishop's See, but is now an Archbishop's, and is a pleasant, populous, and trading City. There are in it 700 Tanners, many fair Houses, and some handsom Sepulchral Monuments. The best Houses are richly furnished with Carpets to tread on, finely painted. This City in the Year 1689. was taken by Picolomini for the Emperor of Germany, it being deserted by the Bassa and its Inhabitants: The Germans said it was as big as Prague in Bohemia, and had 60000 Inhabitants, and 400 Jews, but being open, and only walled, and taken late in the Year, the Imperialists plunder'd it, and burnt it down to the Ground. It stands 60 Miles S. E. of Nissa, 66 almost W. of Sofia, and nigh 200 S. E. of Belgrade. Long. 45 d. 48 m. Lat. 43 d. Article VIII. Rascia. SOme Geographers include Rascia in the Kingdom of Hun∣gary, others in Servia, and others in Sclavonia; I shall follow neither of them, but make it a distinct Province, ac∣cording to Sanson's Maps. Rascia, is a Principality bounded on the N. by the River Drave, that separates it from the Kingdom of Hungary, on the E. by the Danube, on the S. by the Save, that divides it from Servia and Bosnia, and on the W. by Sclavonia. The Places of Note in Ras∣cia are, Peter Waradin, Esseck, Swernick.
I. Peter-Waradin. Peter-Waradin or Petro-Waradin called by the Inhabitants Petrowar Lat. Acuminium, or Petro-Varadin, is situate on the Danube between the Save and the Drave, and has been very famous during the present War. The Turks made it their common passage into upper Hungary, after the Emperors Forces had made themselves Masters of Buda, and for that purpose kept a Bridge of Boats over the Danube here: the Revolt and Mutiny against the prime Visier, after the Battel of Mohats, happened here, whereby that General was forc'd to fly for his Life to Belgrade, and thence to Constantinople. It has since been taken and retaken by both Parties. Its Fortifications were blown up by the Imperialists in 1688. and the Town quite burnt down a little after. But the Empe∣ror in 1691. begun to refortify it, and intends to make it a place of great strength. It stands 32 Miles N. W. of Bel∣grade, and 36 S. E. of Esseck, Long. 41 d. 55 m. Lat. 45 d. 38 m. II. Esseck. Esseck is a Town upon the Drave which has been very fa∣mous in the Present Wars betwixt the Turks and Imperialists; The Town stands low and the Streets are plank'd with Trees. Upon one side of the Gate, is a part of a Roman Inscription M. Aelian, &c. on the other a Man's head in Stone. In or near this Place Constantius defeated Magnentius the Usurper and Murtherer of Constantine II. in 359. The Town is great and populous, by reason of the Trade and Commerce, but not strong; and therefore the Turks have of late bestowed much cost and pains in fortifying it. But that which is the great wonder is the Wooden Bridge, 8585 Geometrical paces long, and 17. broad; running over the Drave, over a long Marsh and the River Fenns, from the City to the Fort of Darda, which is on the other side in the lower Hungary. It was built by Soliman the Magnificent in 1521. as soon as he had taken Belgrade, and has Rails on both sides, with Towers of Wood at every quarter of a Mile. Count Nicholas Serini burnt part of it in 1664. which necessitated the Turks to
build that part a little nearer the Danube, because they could not without great charges and difficulty, pluck up the re∣mainder of the Trees which the Water had preserved from the Fire. By this Bridge the Turkish Armies used to pass between Hungary and Constantinople. Near this Place the Un∣fortunate Lewis King of Hungary, was defeated in 1526. in attempting to stop Soliman's passage into his Kingdom. Count Lessy burnt this Bridge a second time in 1685. and possess'd himself of the Town of Esseck; but the Castle holding out he blew up their Magazines, plunder'd the Town and left it. In 1686. The Turks began to build it after another manner, by driving rows of Trees into the Earth, and filling up the space with Earth, that it might not be subject to be ruin'd by Fire. But the Duke of Lorrain destroyed it in 1687. drove the Turks over the Drave, and in a few days entirely ruined, what 8000 men had been many Months a Building. After the taking of Belgrade, the Turks sat down with an Army of 15000 Men before this place, but retired without success in 1690. It stands 65 Miles N. W. of Belgrade, and 100 S. E. of Buda, Long. 41 d. 25 m. Lat. 46 d. 4 m. III. Swernick. Swernick is a great City with a considerable Pass on the Ri∣ver Trina, near the Confines of Bosnia, 28 Miles E. of Sarai. It was taken by the Imperialists Octob. 15. 1688. Article IX. Bosnia. BOsnia or Bossina is a Province of Europe formerly a Kingdom.Bounds. It is situated betwixt the Rivers Ʋnna, Save and Drina, and took its name from the River Bosna. It Borders Servia on the East;Dalmatia, on the South; Croatia on the West, and Sclavonia and Rascia on the North.History. This Country was an∣ciently part of Pannonia, conquered since by the Goths, and at last by the Sclavonians,Tribu∣taries who becoming Tribu∣taries
and subjects to the Hungarians, Bosnia had the same Fate. It consisted then only of one Province, which has since had Princes of its own. Mahomet II. seized it in 1463. and Flead Stephen the last King of Bosnia. In 1688. at the same time that the Duke of Bavaria marched to the Siege of Belgrade, Prince Lewis of Baden went with a strong Detach∣ment of Germans and Hungarians to the Conquest of Bosnia. The Croatians having Orders to join with him, the 14th of August his Army passed the River Ʋnna, tho' the Bassa oppo∣sed him with 15000 Men, after which he took Castanovitza, which is a Castle of three strong Towers, and a Wall accor∣ding to the ancient way of Fortification, and seated on the Ʋnna, between Croatia and Bosnia, which yielded without resistance. The 15th the Army went towards Gradisca, which was set on fire and deserted, as was also Debitza and Jassenovitz, and 3000 Turks were intercepted and cut off near the former. The 25th he marched toward Brod, (the Croats being sent home) in order to reinforce the Siege of Belgrade, but finding the Bassa had still a considerable Body of Men he resolved to disperse them before he went. The Bassa lay then at Terwent five Hungarian Miles from Brod, and the 4th of September he marched towards him in the Night with a Body of 3000 German Horse without any Foot. The 5th by break of Day, they fell upon the Enemies Camp 15000 strong, and defeated their Horse, and of 7000 Foot, which could not so well shift, 5000 were slain and 2000 taken, with the loss of 150 Christians, upon which Bagnaluca the last Town yielded to Prince Lewis, and since that the Germans are become Masters of all the other Places, and have reconquered the whole Province. The Principal places of this Pro∣vince are, Sari or Bosna, Saray Cap. Iswornick. Ternovitza. Bagnialuck or Bagnaluca. Kretno. Jaickza or Yetze. Debitza, or Dobicza. Jassenovitz. Tina.
I. Sari. Sari or Bosna-Saray is seated upon the River Miglazza, and is accounted now the principal City of Bosnia, (which ho∣nour belong'd formerly to Jaitza, and then to Warbosaum,) and stands 50 Miles S. W. of Peter-Waradin, and 175 S. of Buda, Long. 40 d. 15 m. Lat. 45 d. 10 m. II. Jaykza. Jaycza, Gieza or Gaitia, formerly the Capital City of Bos∣nia, is a mighty strong City and Castle, seated on the River Plena. This City was recovered by the King of Hungary in 1463. from the Turks, who endeavoured to retake it the same year, without success; but they took it afterwards, and made it the seat of a Sangiack or Governour. It stands 42 Miles E. of Wihitz, 60 almost N. of Bagnialuck, 82 Miles N. E. of Zara, and 154 almost S. of Buda. Long. 39 d. 15 m. Lat. 45 d. 22 m. Article X. Sclavonia. UNder the name of Sclavonia, the ancients com∣prehended Hungary, Sclavonia propria, Croatia,Ancient. Extent. Dalmatia, Bosnia, Servia, Rascia and Bulgaria, reaching from the River Drave to the Gulph of Ve∣nice.Modern. Bounds. But by Sclavonia at present is only meant that part of the ancient Pannonia, which is bound∣ed by the Drave on the North; Rascia, on the East; the Save, on the South; and Germany,Extent. on the West. It is 32 German Miles in length, and 12 in breadth. It is said to have had its name from the Slavi an ancient People who came from Scythia in the timeName.
of the Emperor Justinian,History. and having seized Istria and all Grecia, founded the Kingdom of Poland un∣der Lechus, and that of Moravia, under Zechus, Anno 550. they were beat out of Greece by Constantine. And in 783. they were kept under by Lewis the Pious. In 807. they em∣braced Christianity by the Preaching of one Methodius. The Emperor Lewis II. had War with them, about 858. as also the Emperor Otho in 960. They infested Canute and Sueno Kings of the Danes in the Xth Century, but Walduner over∣came them in 1161. Anno 1200. Canute the Dane overcame the Marquess of Brandenburg, who had possest himself of Scla∣vonia, and after this the Sclavonians became Tributaries to the Hungarians. They were most of them of the Roman Church,Religion. Language. but performed their Wor∣ship in their own Language, which was formerly very extensive, and spoken in more places than any other living Tongue in Europe, and is yet, tho' in diffe∣rent Dialects, from the Adriatick Gulf to the Northern Ocean, by the Istrians, Dalmatians, Bosnians, Moravians, Bohemians, Lusatians, Silesians, Poles, Lithuanians, Prussians, Scandina∣vians and Russians almost as far as Constantinople, and much used among the Turks. In 1504. this Country was subdued by Soly∣man the Magnificent.Government. in 1687. after the Turks were defeated, at Mohatz, their Army Mutiny'd against the Grand Visier, and the Turks deserting it, the whole Country, except Gradisca, submitted to the Empe∣ror. This Country is very fruitful, and has many Mines;Quality. Manners. the People are so enamoured with War, that they often pray they may die with their Swords in their Hands. The most remarkable Places here are, Posega. Gradisca. Sopia. Novigrad. Kopranitz. Warasdin. Brodt.
I. Posega. Posega, the Capital City of Sclavonia, is a Place of an indif∣ferent strength, but of great Commerce. It has 400 Villages depending upon it, and consists of about 1000 Houses. The Country about it is very fruitful, producing fruits of all sorts of an extraordinary size. It was taken from the Turks by the Imperialists in 1687. The Bey made at first some resist∣ance, but after having fired some Cannon, he abandoned the Place; part of the Garrison retired to the Mountains, and the rest into different places upon the Save. The Germans found in it a great quantity of Ammunition and Provision, with five Pieces of Cannon. This City stands on the River Oriana 120 Miles S. of Buda, 126 W. of Belgrade, and 185 S. E. of Vienna, Long. 39 d. 42 m. Lat. 45 d. 46 m. II. Gradisca. Gradiska is a strong Town seated upon the River Save, toward the Frontiers of Croatia. It was taken from the Turks by the Imperialists under the Command of the Duke of Croy in 1691. It stands 30 Miles almost W. of Posega, Long. 39 d. Lat. 45 d. 39 m. III. Brodt. Brodt is a small Town 15 Miles S. of Posega famous for a Victory Prince Lewis of Baden gained over the Turks in 1688.
Article XI. Croatia. CRoatia has the Title of a Kingdom, and com∣prehended formerly all between the Drave and the Sea of Dalmatia,Bounds. and was divided into three parts, but now that is called Croatia that lies between Bosnia on the East, the Gulf of Venice, on the South; Germany, on the West; and Sclavonia on the North; Croatia is called Krabatin by the Germans,Name. Manners and Corbavia in Latin. The People of this Province are good War∣riors, and take much after the Germans, Hunga∣rians and Sclavonians for their Customs and Manners, so that their Gentlemen are said to share with the first in their Drun∣kenness; to imitate the second in their Pride; and to be eve∣ry whit as importunate as the last. The Croates, especially those called Ʋscokes, are very swift, and run up and down Mountains like Bucks, with Shoes made of Cord on purpose. Croatia is commonly divided into the Austrial and the Otto∣man, because the House of Austria and the Turks are Sove∣reigns thereof. To the Emperor. Segna. Bish. Sangrad. To the Turks. Wihitz or Pighiton. Sissaken, or Sisseg. Velay. Castanovitz. I. Segna or Zeng. Segna or Zeng, is a strong City on the Bay, anciently called Flanaticum now Quarnaro or Carnaro, from the Moun∣tain de Carnia, and has over against it the Island of Veglia. This is the Capital City of the Principality of Morlachia, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Spalatro. It is strong
both by Art and Nature, having vast Woods and Mountains behind it to the Land-ward, so that an Army can hardly get to it, and the Port is not capable of a great Fleet. About the year 1539. It was in the possession of the Count de Frangipani, and was claimed by Solyman, the Grand Seignior as a part of Hungary, which he had then conquered in great part. This forced Ferdinand the Emperor to take it into his own hands, after which he entertained the Ʋschochi a set of Robbers like our Buccaneers, who had like to have kindled a War betwixt the Turks and the Venetians. The Coast about this Bay is full of small Islands, Rocks and Creeks, so that it has ever been a Receptacle for Pyrates. Those Pyrates in time became 500 or 600 Men, and did great damage to the Turks and to the Christian Merchants. The Turks provok'd by the Injuries of these Buccaneers in the year 1592. began a War against the Austrian Dominions, which lasted till the year 1602. In the year 1613. Fadre Paolo, in his continua∣tion of the History of the Ʋschochi tells us, that this City con∣sisted of three sorts of Men, the Stipendarii or Listed Men, which were 200 under four Captains; the Casalini, or Citi∣zens, which were then about 100 Families; And the Ventu∣rini, who were Fugitives from Turkey, Dalmatia and Apulia; their whole number not above 2000. Yet this handful of Men, plagued the State of Venice from 1537, to 1616. The War I last mentioned lost the Empire of Germany, Agria in 1596. and Canisa in 1602. In the year 1615. the Arch-Duke of Austria declared a War against the Venetians, on the score of these Pyrates, which drew the Dutch to assist them; and this forced the Arch-Duke the next year to suppress this Nest of Pyrates, so that they were never heard of since. Segna stands 46 Miles nigh S. of Carolstad, as many N. W. of Zara, and 52 W. of Wihitz. Long. 36 d. 39 m. Lat. 45 d. 1 m. II. Wihitz. Wihitz or Pighiton, is a very strong City, seated on a small Lake by the River Ʋnna reckoned the Capital of Croatia. It stands 44 Miles S. E. of Carolstat, 52 almost N. of Zara, and 84 nigh W. of Posega. Long. 37 d. 44 m. Lat. 45 d. 18 m.
III. Castanovitz. Castanovitz is a good Castle on the River Ʋnna, near the Borders of Bosnia 34 Miles W. of Gradisca. It belonged to the Turks, but was taken by Prince Lewis of Baden, and sub∣mitted to the Emperor of Germany in 1688. Article XII. Dalmatia. DAlmatia, is a Province lying on the Gulf of Venice,Bounds. part of the ancient Illyria. It was anciently very large, but is now more con∣tracted. It has Istria, on the West; Croatia and part of Bos∣nia, on the North; Servia and Albania, on the East; and the Gulph of Venice on the South. Their Lan∣guage is Sclavonick,Language. Religion. Manners. and their Religion for the most part Popery. The People are Martial, but ridiculous in their Divertisements. History.The Pope at a Council held by two of his Le∣gates, at Salone, erected this Province into a Kingdom, and invested Demetrius their Duke, with Sword, Scepter and Crown, Anno 1076. Dioclesian the Persecuting Emperor, was a Native of this Country; whether he retired after his Abdication. It was added to Hungary in 1310. to∣gether with some adjacent Provinces. Dalmatia is divided into three parts, as followeth. The first belongs to the Venetians and compre∣hends. Zara. Archbp. Cap. Nona. Bish. Zemonico. Sebenico. Bish. Traw. Bish. Spalatro. Archbp. Salone. Clissa.
The second belongs to the Turks, and compre∣prehends these opposite Places, but the Venetians have of late conquered most of them. Scardona. Bish. Narenca or Narenza. Bish. Trebigna. Bish. Castel-Nuovo. Cattaro. Bish. Budoa. Bish. Antivari. Archbp. Dulcigno. Bish. Scutari. The third is the Re∣publick of Ragusi, in which are, Ragusi or Dobronika. Archbp. Stagno. I. Zara. Zara Lat. Jadera is a very considerable Town and Port, Capital of Dalmatia, and an Archbishop's See. It is envi∣roned by the Sea, being joined to land only by a Draw-Bridg: Besides this, it is defended with six strong Bastions, La∣dislaus King of Naples, who also took the quality of King of Hungary, sold it with the depending Islands to the Venetians in 1409. to whom it belong'd before, for they being assisted by Baldwin Count of Flanders, and other Princes that were going to the Conquest of the Holy-Land, after Saladin's Death, made themselves Masters of it in 1200. This City stands 116 Miles N. E. of Ancona, 184 almost S. E. of Venice, and 165 N. W. of Ragusa. Long. 37 d. 20 m. Lat. 44 d. 34 m. II. Nona. Nona Lat. Aenona is a well-fortified Town and Port of Dal∣matia, with a Bishoprick under the Archbishoprick of Za∣ra. It stands 35 Miles N. of Zara. III. Zemonico. Zemonico was a strong hold of Dalmatia, about seven Miles
from Zara. The Venetians yielded it to the Turks in 1573. but in 1647. The Proveditor Foscoli observing how the Turks of that Garrison did annoy the Country all about, resolved to beat them out of it, which he did and then demolished the Fort. In 1682. The Turks designed to establish them∣selves there, but were cut off by the Morlaques. IV. Sebenico. Sebenico Lat. Sebenicum Sicum, is a small, but strong City up∣on the Adriatick Sea, with a Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Spalatro. It has been under the Venetians since the year 1412. before which time it was a Sea-Port Town of Croatia. It has a Castle and Fort built upon a Rock, which has four times baffled the Ottoman Forces, and is situate at the Mouth of the River Kerka, 30 Miles N. W. of Spalatro, and 44 S. E. of Zara, Long. 38 d. 18 m. Lat. 44 d. 16 m. V. Traw. Traw is a very strong and populous City, a Sea-Port and a Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Spalatro. It stands in a small Island of the same name, but joined to the Conti∣nent by a Bridge, it is subject to the Republick of Venice since 1420. and lies 24 Miles S. E of Sebenico. VI. Spalatro. Spalatro Lat. Spalatum, or Palatium Dioclesiani, and Salona Nova, is very Strong, Rich and Populous, and an Archbi∣shops See. Its name seems to be a Corruption of Palatium, because it was in former times, the Palace of Dioclesian, who was born at Salona, about a League from Spalatro. This City is well-fortified, and about a Musquet shot from the East Gate there is a Fort built upon high Ground, which commands the City. Here is also a very spacious and convenient Har∣bour. The Venetians have but a small Garrison there, as trusting in their Fort of Clissa, there being no passage from Turkey to this City, but under the Cannon of that Place. The Cathedral of this City was of old a Temple that stood
in the midst of Dioclesian's Palace. Since this Temple was changed into a Church, they have broken through the Wall to make a Quire to it, and made several Windows in it, for before it received light only by the Gate or Door, according to the Custom of the Heathens, who commonly made their Temples all dark, to render their Mysteries the more vene∣rable, by the borrowed light of many Torches and Lamps. The Walls of Dioclesian's Palace, which contain the two thirds of the City, are in a manner whole and intire, and make an exact square, with a Gate in the midst of each side. The Country round this Place is very fruitful, and all Provisions very Cheap. It stands 30 Miles S. E. of Sebenico 74 S. E. of Zara and 92 N. W. of Ragusi. Long. 38 d. 50 m. Lat. 44 d. VII. Salona. Salona is a City on the Gulph of Venice, now ruined by the Sclavonians, but formerly was a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Spalatro, and much mentioned in ancient Writers, and more particularly famous for the Retreat of the Emperor Dioclesian. The Venetians have built a Castle, near its ruins, which stands five Miles N. of Spalatro. VIII. Clissa. Clissa is a strong Fort 10 Miles N. E. of Spalatro, and 34 almost W. of Sebenico. IX. Scardona. Scardona is seated upon the River Kerka, in Latin Tilius, which compasseth a great part of it so as to make it a kind of Peninsula. It is about seven Miles from the Adriatick Sea, with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Spalatro. It was formerly a famous City, and the Capital of the Turkish Dal∣matia. It is still considerable. In the year 1683. the Mor∣lacks of Croatia took it from the Turks, and General Valier put a good Garrison into it for the Venetians, after that he had put the place into a condition of being a Bulwark against
the Incursions of the Infidels. It is about 30 Miles almost N. of Sebenico. X. Narenza. Narenza, or Narenca, Lat. Naro, is seated on the Gulf at Venice, and belongs to the Turks; it was formerly very con∣siderable, and the Capital of Dalmatia, but at present it is in a manner wholly ruined. It has a Bishop Suffragan of Ra∣gusi. The Venetians took it in 987. and the Turks in 1479. It stands 44 Miles N. of Ragusa. XI. Trebigni, or Trebigna. Trebigna, is a small and inconsiderable, but very Ancient City, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishoprick of Ragu∣sa, subject to the Turks. It stands 20 Miles almost N. of Ragusi. Long. 41 d. 2 m. Lat. 43 d. 10 m. XII. Castel-Nuovo. Castel-Nuovo, is a Town of the Dutchy of St. Saba, or of the Province of Herzegovine, seated upon the Canal of Catta∣ro, three Leagues from its Mouth, and over-against the Ea∣stern Sea. The Castle of Salimanega, which is joined to the place on the North-side is built upon a very rocky place, and is commanded by the Mountain of St. Veneranda, whence also the Tower of Fastagick, which is partly built upon the Rock, and partly upon the joining Ground, can be batter'd. This great Tower was used by the Turks as a Magazine for Powder. The high Fortress called Goringrad is 650. paces from the Town, on the Northern side, and this may be bat∣ter'd to pieces from the top of Mont-slichi, which is nigh it. This place was Attacked in 1538. by the Pope, the Empe∣ror's, and Venetian Army, and taken by them, and Garrison∣ed with Spaniards, but they put three Colours into it, one for the Pope, one for the Emperor, and a third for the Repub∣lick. They did not enjoy it long, for the very next Year Barbarossa came into the Channel with 90 Galleys, and 30 Fustes, and having landed 80 Pieces of Cannon, and some
Men, that were joined by the Sangiac of the Province, he Battered the Place, and carried it by Assault. The Spani∣ards sustained a great Loss on this occasion, for there were 4000 of them either killed, or put to Irons. The Venetians endeavoured to retake it in 1572. but were forc'd to give over the Enterprize, yet have at last made themselves Masters of it in 1687. jointly with the Pope's Troops, and those of the Order of Malta, which fell out thus; Count Herbestein Great Prior of Hungary, and General of the Gallies of Malta, and Commander of the Pope's Seven Gallies, received Orders from the Pope to join the Venetian Army in the Morea, com∣manded by the Generalissimo Morosini, to undertake some considerable Enterprize in Dalmatia, which he did upon the 7th of August 1687. and with the General Cornaro resolved upon the Siege of Castel-Nuovo; this Resolution was put in Execution the 2d of September; the 29th the Turks quitted the Town, and the next Morning those of the Castle yielded upon condition, that they might have with them what they could carry upon their Backs, with Vessels to Transport them into Albania, all which was executed the 2d of October, the Turks came out, being 9000 well-arm'd, and about a 1000 Women and Children. Castel-Nuovo stands 12 Miles W. of Cattaro. Long. 41 d. 26 m. Lat. 42 d. 38 m. XIII. Cattaro. Cattaro, or Catarro, called by Latin Authors Catharum, or Cathara, (which Le Noir takes to be the Ascrivium of Ptolo∣my and Pliny) is seated upon a Gulf to which it gives its name, and is defended by a Castle Built upon a Hill, with a Bishop∣rick Suffragan of Ragusi. This City belongs to the Venetians; the Turks have often attempted it, but to no purpose. It stands 50 Miles S. E. of Ragusi. Long. 41 d. 40 m. Lat. 42 d. 36 m. XIV. Budoa. Budoa, is situated upon the Sea, betwixt the Gulph of Cattaro, and the City of Dulcigno. Pliny, Ptolomy, and Ste∣phanus of Byzantium have made mention of it under the Name of Butua, Bulua, Buthaer. Alexandro Donato having Coward∣ly
yielded Antivari to the Turks in 1571. Augustin Pasqualigo surrendred Budoa, whereof he was Governour, but was not blamed because of the weakness of the Place. Zacharias Salo∣moni Governour of Cattano, having retook it soon after with the Land ana Sea Forces, the Republick of Venice took care to fortifie it, so that though it is a small Place, yet it is very Regular. It suffered much in 1667. by an Earthquake, but great care was taken to Repair the Ruins caused by this Ac∣cident. This Town is a Bishop's See Suffragan of Antivari, and stands 8 Miles N. W. of that City. Long. 41 d. 44 m. Lat. 48 d. 54 m. XV. Antivari. Antivari, Lat. Antibarum, which some take to be the An∣cient Doclea, is seated upon the Adriatick Sea, or Gulph of Venice; of a Bishoprick created into a Archbishoprick by Pope Alexander II. with 10 Suffragans in 1062. It has since fallen under the Tyranny of the Turks. It stands 60 Miles S. E. of Ragusi. Long. 41 d. 42 m. Lat. 43 d. 15 m. XVI. Dolcigna, Scutari. Dolcigno, or Dulcigno, and Scutari, or Scodra, were former∣ly reckoned in Dalmatia, but belong now-a-days to the Kingdom of Albania, of which we shall Treat in the next Section. Of the Republick of Ragusi. RAgusi, or Ragusa, is a City and Republick upon the Gulf of Venice, with an Archbishop's See. Some Authors esteem it to be the same with the Ancient Epidaurus, but others will have the Ruins of that City to be on the other side, in a place called Ragusi Vecchio. However it be, this City which the Selavonians call Dobronich, is very well Built. Its situation is upon a Rock, so high on one side and craggy, that 'tis a Covert to it, and on the other side it stretches
along a little Tongue of Land where 'tis washed by the Sea. Near this City is the Fort of St. Lawrence, and a Port. It's Inhabited by many Merchants, and the best peopled place in Dalmatia. The Government of it is almost like unto that of the Republick of Venice. It's true, that the fear of losing their Liberty is so great, that it obliges them to change their Duke or Governour every Month, and to continue their Offi∣cers in their Posts but for six Weeks; wherefore Gentlemen cannot wear a Sword, nor lye abroad without informing the Senate therewith; and in the Night time, Strangers, and especially Turks, are lock'd up in their Lodgings by them. Moreover, the Gates of the City are never open but for three or four Hours by Day in Summer time, and not above an Hour and a half in Winter. The Ragusians pay Tribute to the Turks, whom they fear; to the Venetians, whom they hate; to the Pope, Emperor, and King of Spain, upon considera∣tion. Ragusia, or the Country of Ragusa is but inconsidera∣ble, comprehending no more than the Town of that Name, Stagno, and two or three Villages. This City is very much subject to Earthquakes, and had terrible shocks in 1637. and 1667. The Senate of Ragusa is composed of Sixty Senators, whereof Forty at least, must meet together when they as∣semble for Judgment. Civil Matters, at the Commencement of the Suit, are brought before Six of the Senate, from whom there is an Appeal to the College of Thirty, who are no Senators, and if the Decrees be for Sums exceeding 500 Crowns, the Appeals are finally determin'd by the Senate. Their Judicial Proceedings are in Latin, but they plead in Italian, or the Language of the Country. Criminal Affairs are judged by an Officer, from whom there is an Appeal to a Jurisdiction composed of Six Senators, and if the Sentence be confirm'd there, the Affair is terminated; but if other∣wise, the Senate takes Cognizance thereof, and Judges it. As to Politick Affairs of lesser Importance, the Governour with Six of the Senate decides them, and these Six Senators exercise that Charge a Year. Ragusa stands 82 Miles N. W. of Scutari, 160 S. E. of Jaicza, 165 S. E. of Zara, and 168 S. W. of Belgrade. Long. 40 d. 40 m. Lat. 43 d. 3 m.
Stagno. Stagno, Lat. Stagnum, is a small City and Sea-Port belong∣ing to the Commonwealth of Ragusa, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of that City, from which it stands 18 Miles almost N. W. Long. 40. d. 40 m. Lat. 43 d. 18 m.
THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE SECT. VI. Greece Lat. Graecia. THIS Country which the Turks now a days call Rumelia,Name. derives its ancient Name of Greece from a certain King call'd Graecus. Another King whose name was Hellen, gave it the name of Hellas, and its People that of Hel∣lenes. But the name of Greece is taken variously: for at first it comprehended only two little Countries, of which the one was called Thessalia; and the other Hellas, or Greece pro∣perly so called. Afterwards Epirus, Macedon, Achaia, the Peloponnesus, as also the Islands round about that extremity of the Continent, received the name of Greece. Besides that, the name of Great Greece was given to Sicily, and the lower part of Italy. And lastly, the name spread it self into the Continent of Neighbouring Asia, which was called Asiatick Greece. Greece, properly so called, which we are now to describe, is bounded on the North by a long Chain of the Mountains Mariani,Bounds. which separate it from Romania, Bulgaria and Servia; on the West, by the Adriatick and Jonian Seas; on the South, by the Mediterranean Sea; and on the East by the Archipelago or
White-Sea, formerly Mare Aegeum. It stretches from the 42 d.Situation. 30 m. to the 49 d. 30 m. of Lon∣gitude and from the 34 d. 40 m. to the 43 d. of Northern Latitude;Extent. so that its Extent W. and E. is about 420 Miles; and about 500 S. and N. Ancient Division.Greece was formerly divided into six part, viz. 1. Peloponnesus. 2. Epirus. 3. Greece Proper. 4. Thessaly. 5. Macedon. 6. The Islands. Greece, properly so called, or Hellas was subdivided into Aetolia, Doris, Phocis, Attica, Megaria, Baeotia,, and the Country of the Locri. Modern Division.Greece at this Day is divided into seven parts, viz. six large Provinces, and the Islands. 1. Albania on the Adriatick Sea or Gulph of Venice. 2. Epirus, on the Jonian Sea. 3. Macedon. On the Aegean Sea, or Archipel, or White Sea. 4. Thessaly. On the Aegean Sea, or Archipel, or White Sea. 5. Achaia. 6. Morea, a Peninsule on the South of Achaia environ'd with the Jonian, Cretian (or of Sapienza,) and Aegean Seas. 7. The Islands. The six first have preserved their ancient Names, except Morea formerly called Peloponnesus and Albania, formerly part of Epirus. The Air is here generally mild, temperate and wholesom.Quality. The Soil extreamly fruitful in all necessaries, as Corn, excellent Wine, and Fruits the most exquisite in the whole World. There are also very good Pastures that feed abundance of Cattel; and the Woods are stock'd with Fowl and Deer. The Ancient Greeks had the advantage over all other Nations for Learning,Ancient In∣habitants. Their Wit. Bravery and Wis∣dom. They were the Inventors of Arts and Im∣provers of Sciences, and as they were renown∣ed
for Learning, so were they no less fam'd for their Military Prowess,Courage. extending their Arms into several Kingdoms of the Universe, so that People resorted to 'em from most parts of the World, either to be instructed in the Liberal Sciences, or else to learn the Art of War. The Countrey was so fertile in Men of Learning, that the time was once when there were found to be above three hundred Authors, who had made the Description of one Battel.Wisdom. The Greeks were also the People, who first of all submitted to Laws,Laws. and who found out the way to govern themselves and rule others. Their most famous Law-givers were Cecrops, Draco and Solon in Athens; Lycurgus in in Lacedaemon or Sparta; Zeleucus among the Locri; and Mi∣nos in Creta or Candy. Their Laws were so famed throughout all the World that about the year of Rome 303. and of the World 3533. the Decemvirs of Rome sent three of their Col∣leagues, Spurius Posthumus, Aulus Manlius, and Publius Sul∣pitius to copy them out, from which they framed the Laws of the XII. Tables, so much celebrated in Roman Antiquity. As Greece was the School of all other Nations, so was Athens the School of all Greece; and the Athenians distinguished themselves from the rest by the Curiosity of their Genius, and the Elegancy of their style. Nevertheless if they sur∣passed the rest in Politeness and Delicacy of Wit, yet they were great admirers of Tales and Fictions. Almost all their Authors were addicted to Superstition, and their Poets were the Fathers of their false Deities and the Inventors of the Pagan Theology.Religion. Nor were the Greek Historians any more addicted to Truth, than their Poets.Histories. Their ancient Histo∣ries especially those of Herodotus, and Diodorus Siculus are full of Fables and Romances; and their Modern Historians had re∣course to Visions and extraordinary Adventures to satisfy their Genius's, which is the reason we have nothing of exact or certain knowledge of what passed toward the latter end of the Constantinopolitan Empire. At present the Greeks are so far degenerated from what they anciently were,Modern In∣habitants. so cowed by the Turks, both Priests and People so miserably Ig∣norant, and so frequently abjure the Christian Religion to embrace Mahumetism for the more quiet en∣joyment of the conveniencies of this Life, that were it not
for those Christian Festivals and Fasts which are in such ve∣neration among them, the Christian Religion would e're this, in all probability have been eradicated out of the Country.Religion. But by means of those solemni∣ties wherein their Holy Performances continue five Hours together, and sometimes seven they still preserve a Face of the Christian Religion under a Patriach, Bishops and Priests, of which the Learned Dr. Smith of Magdalen Col∣lege in Oxford, has given us an exactDe Graecae Ec∣clesiae hodi∣erno statu Epistola. Printed in 1678. account. The Greek Priests and Prelates wear their Hair long, like the Layety of Europe. Their Ponti∣fical and Priestly Habits are different also from those of the Roman Church. The Patriarch wears a Dalmatic or long Gown with Sleeves all Embroidered, and upon his Head a Royal Crown instead of a Mitre. The Bishops wear a certain Cap down to their Ears, like the Hollow of a Hat without Brims. Nor do they bear crosses in their hands, but only a little crutch of Ebony, tipped with Ivory or Mo∣ther of Pearl. In the Sacrament they make use of leaven'd Bread, and administer the Sacrament in both kinds. They admit of no Images in Base Relief, or emboss'd work, but only Paintings or Sculptures in Copper and Silver, nor do they make use of Musick in their Churches. Their Monks or Caloyers, which are generally of the Orders either of St. Basil or St. Chrysostom lead very austere lives, especially those of Mount Athos. Greece comprehended formerly several King∣doms as that of Epirus,Govern∣ment. Thessaly, Macedon, &c. there were also many Republicks, of which A∣thens and Lacedaemon were the most renowned. She fought a long time in defence of her Liberty, but was at length subjected to the Romans; afterwards she buckled to the Emperors of Constantinople, and now groans under the Yoak of the Turks; under whose Government all her Cities lie utterly ruined. 'Tis true Morea and some Places in the other Provinces seem to breath again under the Protection of the Venetians, who have of late, wrested them from those Infidels.
CHAP. I. Albania. ALbania, is a large Province or Kingdom, formerly a part of Epirus,Bounds. bounded on the North by Dalmatia and Servia, on the East by Macedonia, on the South by Epirus, and on the West by the Adriatick Sea. This Country was a Celebrated part of Ancient Greece,History. it has been subject to the Turks for these 200 Years last past, that is, ever since Mahomet II. won it from the Successors of the Renowned George Castriote, alias Scanderbeg, he that beat the Turks in 22 different Bat∣tels, but at present the Inhabitants, (who are about 70000 Souls, for the most part Christians or Renegado's) seem much disposed to shake off the Turkish Yoke, and to put themselves der the protection of the Venetians This Province was ever famous for the Courage, Swiftness and Dexterity of its Ca∣valry, to whom the Turks have been beholden for many a Victory. The most Remarkable Cities and Towns of Albania are, Scutari, Bish. Cap. Antivari, Archb. Dulcigno, Bish. Ducagini, Bish. Alessio, Croya, Bish. Durazzo, Archb. Elbassan, Ocrida, Archb. Albanopoli, Pollina, Arch. Vallona. I. Scutari. Scutari, Lat. Scodra, was formerly a City of Dalmatia, and the Seat of the Kings of Illyricum. It is now the Capital of
Albania, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Antiva∣ri, and stands upon the River Bocano, 24 Miles from the A∣driatick Sea. The Inhabitants call it Scadar, the Turks Isco∣dar, and the Italians Scutari: It was twice Besieged by Maho∣met II. without success, and in 1487. resigned by the Veneti∣ans for a Peace. This City lyes by a Lake, 80 Miles S. E. of Ragusa, 178 S. of Belgrade, and 210 W. of Thessalonica or Salonichi. Long. 42 d. 20 m. Lat. 42 d. 26 m. II.. Antivari. Antivari, Lat. Doclea, was also formerly a Town of Dal∣matia, but is accounted in Albania since the Turks are Ma∣sters of it. Pope Alexander II. of a Bishop's See erected it into an Archbishoprick in 1062. and gave it Ten Suffragans. It stands on a rising Ground upon the Adriatick Sea, 18 Miles N. W. of Dolcigno, and 60 S. E. of Ragusi. Long. 41 d, 32 m. Lat. 42 d. 13 m. III. Dolcigno: Dolcigno, or Dulcigno, is an Episcopal City under the Arch∣bishop of Antivari, seated near the Adriatick Sea, 18 Miles S. E. of Antivari, and 27 S. W. of Scutari. IV. Ducagini. Ducagini. or Dagno, is the Head of a Territory of the same Name, with a Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Antivari. It stands on the River Drin, or Drino, 24 Miles E. of Scu∣turi. V. Alessio. Alessio, or Alesso, or Alesco, Lat. Lissas, is seated upon the River Drin 8 Miles from its Mouth, and 12 S. of Ducagini. It is famous for the Tomb of the Renowned Scanderbeg, who died there in 1467. and for whose Memory the Turks have so great a Veneration, that happy are they who can approach
his Monument, and carry away some of the Earth, or a piece of the Sepulchre, which they tye to their Elbows, as a pre∣cious Relick that raises their Courage in Battel. VI. Croya. Croya, or Croie, or Crua, is a strong and considerable City on the River Lizane, reckoned by some the Capital of Alba∣nia. Volteran says that it was called Troy; however, it has been a long time the Residence of the Brave George Castriot, called Scanderbeg Prince of Albania. But after his Death Ma∣homet II. took it in 1477. It was formerly an Episcopal City under the Archbishop of Durazzo, and stands 52 Miles almost S. of Scutari. VII. Durazzo. Durazzo, or Drazzi, is a strong and celebrated Town and Sea-Port at the Mouth of the River Argentaro, Built by those of Corfu in the 130th Year of Rome. Its Ancient Name of Epidamus was changed by the Romans into that of Dirrachi∣um, which was the Name of the Harbour. In the Year of Rome 315. this City being Besieged by a Company of Out-Laws and Banditto's, the Inhabitants implored the Assistance of the Corinthians, which were defeated by those of Corfu. The Athenians Espoused the Party of the latter; and a small Quarrel was the Rise of the War called Corinthiacum, and as it were the Leaven of the Great Peloponnesian War, so famous in the Greek History. Durazzo was formerly an Archbishop's See under the Patriarch of Constantinople. Bajazet took it from the Venetians in the XVth Century. It has a good Haven, but the insalubrity of its Air, makes it to be but thinly Inhabi∣ted. It stands 58 Miles S. of Scutari, and 18 S. W. of Croia. 42 d. 26 m. Lat. 41 d. 28 m. VIII. Pollina. Pollina, the Ancient Apollonia, is but a small City, with the Title of an Archbishoprick, 46 Miles almost S. E. of Durazzo.
IX. Vallona. Vallona, is a pretty strong Town, seated on the Sea, 54 Miles S. of Durazzo. The Venetians took it in 1690. and found in it 130 Pieces of Cannon. X. Elbassan. Elbassan, is a small Town on the River Arzenga, 44 Miles S. E. of Croia, and 42 of Durazzo. XI. Ochrida. Ochrida, or Lochria, is a great and populous City on the Borders of Macedon, seated on a high Hill, by the Lake Pelto∣um, with an Archbishoprick. It stands 80 Miles almost S. E. of Durazzo, and 135 W. of Salonichi. Long. 44 d. 8 m. Lat. 41 d. 4 m. X.I. Albanopoli. Albanopoli, is a small Town, yet formerly accounted by some the Capital of Albania. It stands 60 Miles E. of Durazzo. Article II. Epirus. BY Epirus, is meant now that part of Greece which some call Lower-Albany, bounded on the North by Albany, on the East by Macedon and Thessaly, on the South by Livadia or Achaia, and on the West by the Jonian Sea. Epirus comprehended formerly both the Higher or Proper Albany, and the Lower or the Modern Epirus: The most famous
People of this Country were the Molossi, the Dryopes, Chaoni∣ans, Dolopes, &c. It fell under the Power of the Turk in the XIVth Century, all but the Island of Corfu, which remained in the Hands of the Venetians; but the latter have recon∣quered some Places in this late Wars. The Principal Cities in Ep¦rus are, Preveza, Panormo, Larta, astia, or Bastick, Chimera. I. Preveza. Preveza, is a Fortress standing at the Mouth of the Gulf of Larta, upon the Ruins of the Ancient Nicopolis, Built by the Emperor Augustus, to preserve the Memory of the famous Battel of Actium, won by him from Mark Anthony. Marco Gri∣mani, Patriarch of Aquileia, General of the Popes Gallies, accompanied with Andrew Doria, General of the League in 1539. endeavoured to surprize this Place, which was in the Possession of the Turks; but they were constrained to retire. But Captain General Morosini made himself Master of in 1684. This Place stands 90 Miles N. W. of Lepanto, and 150 S. W. of Larissa. Long. 44 d. Lat. 38 d. 24 m. II. Panormo. Panormo, is but a small Town upon the Sea, which has no∣thing considerable besides the Haven. III. Larta. Larta, is another small City, on a Bay of the same Name, 24 Miles N. E. of Preveza. It is still subject to the Turks. IV. Bastia, or Bastick. Bastia, is another small Sea-port Town, nigh the Isle of Corfu.
V. Chimera. Chimera, is a very strong City, built upon a Rock by the Sea-side, 30 Miles N. of the Isle of Corfu. It is the Head of a Territory of the same Name, and is partly free, and partly subject to the Turks. CHAP. III. Macedon. MAcedon, Lat. Macedonia, is a vast Province of Greece,Bounds. bounded on the East by the Archipel or White Sea, on the North by Bulgary, on the W. by Albania, and on the S. by Thessaly. It was formerly a Kingdom under which was Thessaly, Epirus, and even Thracia.History. According to Titus Livius, it went by the Name of Paeonia, Mygdonia, and Emonia. Solinus gives it the Name of Edonia, Precia, and Emathia. This Kingdom is said to have con∣tained 50 several sorts of People in former Times. Caranus descended from Hercules founded this Monarchy about Anno Mundi 3240. which endured about 500 Years, became very samous under Philip and Alexander the Great, his Son, and continued till the Reign of Perseus, whom the Romans Con∣quered An. Rom. 586. and reduced the Kingdom into a Pro∣vince 256 Years after the Death of Alexander the Great, and after the Succession of 41 Kings. There are in this Province Mines of Gold and Silver, The famous Mount Athos, now called Monte Santo, that shoots in∣to the Sea, is also to be seen there. Macedon is divided into three Parts, viz. Macedonia Proper, Jamboli and Comeno∣litari. The most remarkable Places there are, Saloniki, Cap. Arch. Zuchria, or Jeniza, Emboli, or Amphipolis, Siderocapsa, Xilopolis, Contessa, Lita, or Lissa.
I. Saloniki. Saloniki, or Salonichi, formerly Thessalonica, is the Capital City of Macedonia, with an Archbishoprick and a fair Haven. It stands at the foot of an Hill upon a small River, and at the bottom of a Gulf or Bay bearing its own Name. On the West side of it is the great River Vardar, which is almost half a League over, and whose Banks are planted with very tall and thick standing Trees. The Walls are Built after the old Fashion with Turrets or Towers at certain Intervals, and are about four Leagues in Circuit. It is strengthned with three Forts, the least of which is the furthest from the Walls of the City, and stands at the Landing place, mounted with twenty Pieces of Cannon; the other two are larger, and are joined to the City Wall, the Sea beating upon them, each of them planted with 40 Pieces of Cannon. To Land∣wards it has a Fortress like that of Constantinople, and bears the same Name, viz. the Seven Towers, which commands all the City, as standing upon an high Hill, at the bottom whereof there is a great Suburb, which also has its particular enclo∣sure. The City is well peopled by reason of the Trade of Silk, Wooll, all sorts of Leather, Cotton, Grain, Powder and Iron. The principal Trade of the City is in the Jews Hands, who are exempt from Tribute, in consideration whereof they are to furnish the Janisaries of the City with Cloth for their Cloathing. William King of Sicily Conquered this City in 1180. but afterwards the Emperor of Constantinople reduced it to his Obedience again. Andronicus Palaeologus gave it to the Venetians in 1313. but two Years after the Turks drove them thence, and have been Masters of it ever since. The Greek Christians have 30 Churches in this City, the Chiefest where∣of is the Archbishop's See, Dedicated to St. Demetrius. This Church has three Bodies, supported by very fair Pillars, and was formerly honoured with the Preaching of St. Paul. There are also five Convents of the Order of St. Basilicus, in every one of which are about an Hundred young Women, who may, if they please, quit the Habit and Marry. The most Magnificent Turkish Mosques are those Buildings that for∣merly were the Churches of St. Sophia, the Blessed Virgin, St. Gabriel, and St. Demetrius, Mahomet IV. who was Dethroned in 1687. changed the Church of the Blessed Virgin into a
Mosque; on each side of this Building are twelve great Pillars of Jasper-stone, whose Chapiters or Tops support so many Crosses which the Turks have not defaced. The Jews also have 36 Synagogues in this City, the most considerable of which are that of Castille, of Portugal, and of Italy. They have also two Colleges, which contain above Ten Thousand Scholars, who come to study there from all parts of the Otto∣man Empire. Of all the stately Pieces of Architecture that were of old in this City, there remains nothing very remark∣able at present, save only a Triumphal Arch of Brick-work, supported by two Marble Pillars, full of Trophies, and abun∣dance of other Figures, but so much shattered and defaced by Time, that it cannot well be guest what it was erected for. The City is Governed by a Mousselin, Justice is Administred by a Molla, and a Mufti Orders all Matters relating to Religion. This City stands 108 Miles S. of Sophia, 300 S. E. of Bel∣grade, and 330 W. of Constantinople. Long. 47 d. Lat. 41 d. 37 m. II. Zuchria. Zuchria, or Jeniza, is a small City Built by the Turks out of the Ruins of Pella, formerly the Capital of Macedonia, and the Birth-place of Alexander the Great, upon the Bay of Salonichi, between the Rivers Bevola, and Castora, 27 Miles S. W. of Salonichi. I. Amphipolis, or Emboli. Amphipolis, is a City of Macedonia, on the Borders of Thra∣cia, with an Archbishoprick under the Patriarch of Constanti∣nople. The Greeks call'd it Christopoli since, and its Modern Name is Emboli. It is situated on the River Strymon, which washes it on every side, 60 Miles almost E. of Salonichi. This City is very famous in the Ancient History of Greece. IV. Siderocapsa. Siderocapsa, is a small Town, only remarkable for the Gold Mines that are about it; Philip the Father of Alexander the
Great, caused a Gold Coin to be Coin'd, called Golden-Philips, after that Crenidas had discovered the Gold Mines there, and wrought them; which Mines afforded King Philip a 1000 Talents of Gold a Year, and do still yield the Grand Seignior 9 or 10000 Ducats a Month. There are no less than five or six Hundred Furnaces for the melting of Gold in the Mountains near this City. CHAP. IV. Janna, or Thessaly, Lat. Thessalia. THessaly, is bounded on the East by the Archi∣pel, on the North by Macedon,Bounds. on the West by Epirus, and on the South by Achaia. This Country has had different Names, deri∣ved from divers Princes who have lived therein,Name. and was divided into five parts, viz. Thessaly Proper, the Country of the Pelasgi, Estiosia, Magnesia, and Phtiotide: Its Modern Name is Janna, from a Town of this Name. The Air is here very good, the Soil fruitful, producing delicious Figs, Water Melons,Quality. Pome∣granates, Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, excellent Grapes, Almonds, Olives, and all sorts of Corn. The Ancient Inhabitants were well-bred, civil, but somewhat too voluptuous,Inhabi∣tants. yet they did not want Courage: They were also noted for Ma∣gick and Drunkenness; were the first that Mint∣ed Gold and Silver, tam'd Horses, and put Ships to Sea. They are still Warlike, and are a handsom Race of People, having black Hair, black Eyes, and their Faces of a Beau∣tiful, Sanguine, Fresh Colour, and are for the most part Christians. This Country is encompass'd with four great Mountains, viz. Olympus, Pindus, Ossa, and Aeta,Mountains. famous in the Greek and Latin Poets. It had for along time its particular Kings, until it was subjected to the Macedonians,History. and after∣wards to the Romans. Deucalion was one of the
most Ancient and Celebrated Kings. He Reigned in the same Age with Cecrops first King of Athens, 349 Years before the Ruin of Troy. Hellen his Son gave Name to a great part of Greece; Dorus his second Son left his Name to the Dortans near Mount Parnassus. Xuthus the third was Father of Achae∣us, Founder of the Peleponnesian Achaeans. Ion his second Son, was the Chief of the Inhabitants of Attica. This Coun∣try is very famous for the remarkable Defeat of Pompey by Ju∣lius Caesar in the Plains of Pharsalus. Sultan Amurath Con∣quered the greatest part of it, and his Posterity still en∣joys it. The most remarkable Places in Thessaly are, Larissa, Archb. Cap. Armiro, Volo, Pharsalus, or Farsa, Archb. Scotusa, Bish. Voidenor, Demetriada. I. Larissa. Larissa, is the Principal City of Thessalia, (the Country of Achilles) upon the River Peneus, 25 Miles from the Bay of Salonichi to the West. It is an Archbishop's See, and one of the most flourishing Cities of Greece, by reason the late Grand Seignior being disgusted with Constantinople, almost 20 Years together, kept his Court here. It is pleasantly seated on a Rising Ground, in the upper part whereof stands the Grand Seignior's Palace, upon the North the famous Mountain of Olympus, and on the South a Plain Inhabited by Christians, Turks and Jews. There is a handsom Stone-bridge over the River, consisting of Nine Arches. This City stands 90 Miles S. of Salonichi, 160 N. W. of Setines, or Athens, and 380 S. W. of Constantinople. Long. 46 d. 55 m. Lat. 39 d. 45 m. II. Armiro. Armiro, Lat. Eretria, is a City and Sea-port, mentioned by Thucydides, Strabo, Livy, and several other Ancient Wri∣ters; it lyes upon the Sinus Pelasgicus, which from it now is
called the Gulf of Armiro, about 17 Miles from Larissa to the South. Out of this Gulf the Argonauts loosed when they went to Colchis for the Golden-Fleece, and in it the Navy of Xerxes was sorely shattered by a Tempest, which then saved Greece. In the same Bay lyes Pagase, in which the Ship Argo was Built. III. Volo. Volo, is a Fortress that gives its Name to a Gulf of Thessaly to the North of Negrepont. The Ancients called this Town Pagasa, and the Gulf Pagasicus Sinus, (or Pelasgicus Sinus, and Gulf of Armiro). The Fortress has a good and spacious Port, and was defended with good Towers, after the Anci∣ent way of Fortification. It was here the Turks kept the Magazines, which they gathered in the Neighbouring fruitful Provinces. General Morosini resolv'd in 1683. to pass to Volo, to possess himself of the Provisions the Turks had laid up there; he Battered the Place, and then Mounted the As∣sault. The Bassa that Commanded in the Place retired to a Corner of the Town, that was pretty well retrenched, but at last quitted that Post, and Surrendred to the Venetian General. He found above Four Millions of Pounds weight of Bisket, with other Provisions, and 27 Pieces of Cannon, which when he had Shipped, he set Fire to the Magazines, Houses, and Mosques; and before he parted, beat down all the Walls to the Ground. II. Pharsalus. Pharsalus, or Pharsalia, is very famous in the Roman Histo∣ry for the Battel won by Julius Caesar against Pompey the Great in the Neighbouring Plains. It has since been called Farsa, being a Bishop's See under Larissa, and afterwards an Arch∣bishoprick under the Patriarch of Constantinople. V. Scotusa. Scotusa, is a small City with a Bishoprick under the Arch∣bishop of Larissa, from which it stands about 18 Miles to the West.
VI. Voidenor. Voidenor, is another small Town, seated upon the River Atrax, 54 Miles W. of Larissa. VII. Demetriada. Demetriada, is a very Ancient, tho' inconsiderable City, upon the Gulf of Armiro, or of Volo. CHAP. V. Achaia; or Livadia. A Chaia, formerly called Hellas, and Graecia, now Livadia,Name. Bounds. and Rumelia, is bounded on the North by Thessaly, on the East by the Aegean Sea, on the South by the Gulf of Engia, the Isthmus of Corinth, and the Gulf of Lepanto; and on the West by the Jonian Sea, and part of Epirus. It had formerly Seven Pro∣vinces, viz. Aetolia, Baeotia, Attica, Locris, Doris, Phocis, and Megaris. Pliny says, That the Wine of this Country made Women Miscarry;History. and Pausanias says, That such as washed in one of its Rivers Slemnos for∣got their Amours. The Apostle St. Andrew is thought by many to have suffered in this Country. Parnassus and Helicon, two Mountains so famous among the Poets,Mountains. are in this Coun∣try. Achaia, is sometimes taken for a small part of the Pelopon∣nesus, or Morea, now called Romania Alta. and Ducatus Cla∣rentiae; and sometimes for the whole Peleponnesus.
The Principal Places in A∣chaia, or Livadia are, Setines, or Athens, Archb. Cap. Stives, or Thebes, Archb. Aulis, Marathon, Livadia, Megara, Delphos, Lepanto, Archb. The Dardanells of Lepanto. I. Setines or Athens. Setines anciently called Athens, was one of the most famous and flourishing Cities in the World, the Capital of At∣tica, formerly a Kingdom, and the chief seat of Learn∣ing and Valour, taking its rise An. Mun. 2496. and continuing 487 years, under 17 Kings, the first whereof was Cecrops and the last Codrus Son of Melanthus. After that they were govern'd by 10 Archontes, or Rulers, during life; than by Archontes for 10 years; and at last by annual Praetors. Draco first gave 'em Laws, which were too severe, then So∣lon instituted Milder introducing Democratical Government, 594 years before our Saviour. Athens sustained many great Wars against the Persians, Lacedaemonians, Thebans, Rhodians and Macedonians. It suffered much under Alexander the Great, and after his Death yet more under Antipater, Craterus and Cassander. Demetrius made it free again, but be∣ing refus'd shelter there after his defeat in Phrygia, he invest∣ed and made himself Master of the Town after a years Siege. Sometime after it shook off the Macedonian yoke, and put it self under the Protection of Rome, until Ariston making him∣self Tyrant thereof, irritated the Romans, who took and plun∣der'd it under Sylla 87 years before Christ. After this, Pom∣pey the Great permitted it the use of its Laws, for which kind∣ness it declared for him against Caesar, who after the Battel of Pharsale, when he had power to punish his Enemies, said, Truly the Athenians deserve to be chastis'd, yet in consideration of the merit of the Dead, I pardon the Living. All was Magnifi∣cent in Athens, and worth the admiration of Posterity. The Areopage, the Lycaeum, the Academy, Portique, Temple, and o∣ther fine Buildings are well described in the Works of ancient
Authors. St. Paul Preached here, and several Persons of Note embraced Christianism, as Dionysius the Areopagite, and a Noble Lady called Damaris. After that the Church of Athens became very considerable, for in the II. Century a great num∣ber of the Athenians suffered Martyrdom, animated by the Ex∣ample of their Bishop Publius. This happen'd in 123. un∣der Adrian, who came to Athens in 126. This City was after∣wards erected into an Archbishoprick. It is defended by a Cittadel called Acropolis, inaccessible on every side, save the West, seated in the Middle between two Hills; the one call'd Musaeum, within Cannon Shot, the other Anchesmus, which has no place to Mount Great Guns on, being Spired like a Sugar-Loaf, and having no more compass on the top, save that in which St. George's Chappel is built, the place where formerly the Statue of Jupiter was Worshiped. The City is North of the Cittadel, and so covered by it, that it can hardly be seen on that side next the Sea, well situated and wealthy, tho' in a hot Climate, which is tempered by the North Winds. The Inhabitants are about 10000 Greeks and Turks, the latter have four Mosques in the City, and one in the Castle. The Citizens are reckoned Treacherous and Cun∣ning, whence comes the Proverb, From a Jew of Salonica, a Greek of Athens, and a Turk of Negropont, Good Lord De∣liver us. They speak Greek and Turkish promiscuously, and differ only in Habit, which the Greeks wear closer on their Bodies. Their Women seldom stir abroad, when they do, they cover their Heads with a Veil of Calico, and throw over 'em a large Crimson Velvet or Violet colour'd Mantle with their Silver Clasps. The Maids never go abroad till their Wedding-Day, being courted by Proxies. Upon their Nup∣tials they wear a large Crown of Filigram and Pearls, and are led from Church to the Bridegrooms House, with Hautboys, Drums and other Musical Instruments playing before them. The Archbishoprick of Athens is not worth above 4000 Crowns a year; wherefore most of the Jesuits are retired to Negro∣pont. But the Consuls of France and England keep each of 'em a Chappel here. The Soil about this City is fruitful in Wine and Olives, especially those called Colymbades, reserved for the Grand Signior's own eating, being large and well-tast∣ed. The Castle stands on the North, on a descent from the City, in which is a magnificent, large white Marble Temple, supported with beautiful Pillars of black Marble, and Por∣phyry. On the Frontispiece are the Figures of Horse-men,
as big as the life, prepared for Combat. Round about it are to be seen the noble Atchievements of the ancient Greeks in Basso Relievo, every Figure almost two Foot and a half high. Close by this Temple is a beautiful White Marble Palace much decay'd. At the Foot of the Castle are 17. Co∣lums 18 Foot in circumference, and proportionable in height the remainder of 300, which they say, formerly belong'd to the Palace of Theseus. Over the Portal, yet intire, is this Inscription in Greek. This ancient City of Athens is certainly the City of Theseus. And another within thus, The City of Athens is the City of Adrian and not of Theseus. Here is also the Fanari or Lantern of Demosthenes, whether he retired to study in privacy. It is a small Marble Tower, with six Columns round it, and a Lamp with branches over the Duomo which covers it, whence perhaps it was called the Lantern supposed to have been dedicated to Hercules by the several Figures set in the Frises thereof combating in Lions Skins. Here are also the Ruins of the Areopagus, whose Gla∣cis, or Senate-House, 40 paces long, is supported by vast pieces cut out of the Rock, and pointed like a Diamond. In the midst thereof is a kind of Speakers Chair cut out of the Rock, with Seats round it for the Senators. Add to these the Remains of the Temple of Victory, built after the Jonick Order, where the Turks lay their Powder. The Arsenal of Lycurgus and the Temple of Minerva, both of the Dorick Or∣der. Setines was taken by Mahomet II. in 1455. but re∣gain'd by the Venetians in 1687. It stands nigh the Gulph of Engia, about 120 Miles almost N. of Misitra, 160 S. E. of Larissa and 420 S. W. of Constantinople. Long. 48 d. 20 m. Lat. 37 d. 25 m. II. Stives, or Thebes. Stives anciently called Thebes, was once one of the most celebrated Cities of Greece, the Capital of Baeotia the Birth place of Pindar (who calls it Heptapyle by reason of its seven Gates,) and of the renowned General Epaminondas.
This City sustained great Wars against the Athenians, Lace∣daemonians and Macedonians, it submitted to the last with re∣luctancy, so that upon the report of Alexander the Great be∣ing Dead, they revolted and sollicited their Neighbours to do the same: but the Town being taken a second time, it was quite destroyed, not one House being left standing, but that of Pindarus. Cassander, Antipater's Son repair'd it 20 years after, and it had afterwards the Title of Archbishoprick, but is now an inconsiderable Borough subject to the Turks. The Venetians took it in 1687. and soon after left it again, it stands 40 Miles N. W. of Setines or Athens. III. Aulis. Aulis is a City of Baeotia upon the Streight of Negropont, fa∣mous for the Harbour that belongs to it, where Agamemnon and all the Grecian Captains rendezvouz'd before they set Sail for Troy. IV. Marathon. Marathon called at this Day Marathona, or Marason, is a small Town in Attica. It is famous for the Victory which 12000 Athenians under the Command of Miltiades, obtained over the Persian Army of above 500000 Men Anno Rom. 264. towards the end of September. V. Livadia. Livadia is a Town and Castle of Achaia, from which all that Principality is now called Livadia. It is subject to the Turks, and stands 70 Miles W. of Athens or Setines. VI. Megara. Megara called by the Turks Megra (the Birth-place of Eu∣clides) was anciently a famous City, built upon two Rocks, but now one is Desolate, and the other has but about 3 or 400 pitiful Cottages built one story high, and close toge∣ther,
the Walls of which are but the Ruins of the former Houses, or a few Fagots covered with Clay. A place at first Capital of a Monarchy, under the Reign of 12 Kings, than a Republick, which maintained divers Wars with the Athe∣nians and others, and established a Colony in the Island of Sicily. VII. Delphos. Delphos or Delphes is a little Village of Phocis, under Mount Parnassus, famous in ancient History for the Temple of A∣pollo, whence he pronounced his Oracles. VIII. Lepanto. Lepanto Lat. Naupactus, is a City of Aetolia, (now Livadia) a Country of Achaia, called by the Turks, Einebachri, seated near the entrance of the Western Bay of Corinth, now called the Gulph of Lepanto. This City is built on the South-side of a Mountain formed like a Sugar Loaf, on the top of which is a strong Castle, surrounded with four strong Walls set at some distance one above the other; between which Walls the Inhabitants have their Houses, and by them the City is divided into four Parts. The Port is very handsome and beautiful, and may be secured by a Chain. The Mouth of it is so strait, it will hold but a few Ships, and those cannot go out and in at sometimes neither for want of Water. The Country round this City is pleasant and full of delightful Gar∣dens. The Wine of Lepanto is the best of all Greece; but they pitch their Vessels as they do generally over all Morea, and at Athens, to preserve the Wine (as the Germans and Hollan∣ders are wont to Sulphurate them for the same purpose) which renders the Taste, at first, somewhat disagreeable to Strangers. The Turks have five or six Mosques here, and the Greeks have two Churches, one in each Suburb, tho' but very small, and they but few in number, and ill treated, for which reason their Archbishop kept his residence at Marta. The Jews have three Synagogues there. The Chiefest Com∣modities of the Place are, Leather, Oyl, Wheat, Tobacco, Rice and Barley; but the most considerable of all the rest is Turkey Leather. In 1408. this City was under the Empire of
Greece, but Emanuel then Emperor assigned it to the Vene∣tians who took care to fortifie it as it is now. In 1475. Ma∣homet the Great, the same that took Constantinople having gain∣ed Corinth, besieged it with an Army of 30000 Men, but was forced to raise the Siege, but in 1498. Bajazet II. attack'd it with an 150000 Men, and took it by the Treachery of the Venetian Governour, whom he had corrupted with Money. In 1687. The Venetians having in the foregoing years almost beat the Turks out of all the Morea, their General Morosini landed near Patras, notwithstanding all the opposition of the Seraskier, whom he fought and defeated on the 24th of July, and having taken Patras and the Dardanel Castle on that side; he crossed to the other to Lepanto, where he found the Turks making haste to empty the Place for him, whereup∣on he took possession of it with out striking a blow, and found in it 120 Pieces of Brass Cannon. Lepanto stands 100 Miles S. E. of Prevesa 140 W. of Setines, and 480 S. W. of Constan∣tinople, Long. 45 d. 30 m. Lat. 37 d. 25 m. IX. Dardanels of Lepanto. At the Entrance of the Gulph of Lepanto are two Capes, about 13 or 14 Miles S. W. of Lepanto; that which joins to Morea is called by the Ancients, Anthirium Promontorium, now adays Cape Antirio, and has a little Fortress called the Castle of Morea or of Patras; The other that joins to Achaia, is called by Strabo, Rhium Promontorium, vulgarly Cape Rio, and has also a little Fort called Castle of Romelia. These two Castles are also called Dardanels of Lepanto, in allusion to those of the Hellespont. Their Figure is square, environed with strong Walls, mounted with good Cannon even with the Water. All the Commodities that go out of the Gulph of Lepanto, pay here a Toll, which comes to about 3 per Cent. The Famous Sea-Fight of Lepanto in 1571. It was near the Gulph of Lepanto that a famous Sea-Fight was fought against the Turks, Octob. 2. 1571. in which they lost above 30000 Men, being the most bloody defeat they ever met with since the first establishment of their Empire.
Besides the slaughter, the Christians took 5000 Prisoners, amongst whom, were the two Sons of Haly, General of the Turkish Fleet. They took also 130 Galleys, stranded, burnt, or sunk 90. and redeemed near 20000 Christian-Slaves. Nei∣ther was the Booty less considerable, for their Fleet pillaged all the Isles thereabouts, and took many Merchant-Men. This Battel was fought in the same Gulph were Augustus de∣feated Marck-Anthony: and it is hard to say which of both was the most Glorious Victory. The Christians lost 8000 Men, the most considerable whereof was Barbarigo, Com∣mander of the left Wing. The Christian Commander in chief in this Signal Combat was Don-John of Austria, natural Bro∣ther to Philip II. King of Spain. CHAP. VI. Morea. MOrea is a Peninsule (in vulgar English, a De∣mi-Island) boundedBounds. on the North by the Isthmus, or neck of land of Corinth, that joins it to Achaia, and by the Gulph of Lepanto; and on the other sides by the Mediterranean Sea, called Mare d' Jonia on the West; Mare de Sapienza or of Candia on the South; and Mare Egeo on the East. It lies betwixt the 34 d. 40 m. and the 37 d. 30 m. of Northern Latitude,Situation. and betwixt the 44 d. 50 m. and the 48 d. 30 m. of Longitude, being in length about 170 Miles from Castel-TorneseTornese. to the Cape of Schili; about 160 in breadth from Corinth to Cape Matapan; and in circumference about 550. This Country has had several Names;Name. it was anciently called first Argo or Argos from one of its Principal Cities; afterwards Aegialeia from Aegialus a King of the Sicyonians; afterwards Apia, from Apis third King of Argos; Then Peloponnesus, from Pelops Son of Tantalus King of the Phrygians, and at last Morea. Authors differ much about the derivation of this name, some think that it's shape like a Mulberry-Trees Leaf (Lat. Morus
and in Greek ) made the last Emperours of Constantino∣ple, call it Morea. Others derive it from the Word Romea, which by a transposition of Letters was changed into that of Morea; It being certain that as long as Constantinople was subject to the Roman Emperors, that City was called New Rome, and those of that Country Romeans, as much to say, Romans. Doglioni is of another opinion and thinks the Moors gave their name to this Peninsula, when they made Incursions into it. There is no Country in Europe, that can be parallell'd to this Peninsula.Quality. Its Air is clear wholesome, and temperate; It Soil Fertile and abounding with Corn, Wine, Olives and all manner of Fruits, the most exquisite in the World, and its Mountains full of Game, and Medicinal Plants. The In∣habitantsInhabitants. are accounted Witty and Coura∣gious. There are in this Peninsula several famous Mountains,Mountains. viz. Foloe (now Dimizana) Cyllene, Liceus, Parthenius, Meralus, Sepia, Cronia (now Grevenos) Mintia or Mente, (now Olonos) Neris, Nonacris, Taigetus (now Orta) Of all these Mountains Cyllene, is accounted the highest, and Taigetus, the most considerable, as being full of Deer, Bears, Wild-Boars, &c. All these Mountains have been celebrated by the ancient Greek, and Latin Poets. The Principal RiversRivers. in this beautiful Country are, 1. The River Carbon (formerly called Orsea, Alpheus, or Alpehius, and Strimphalus or Nyctymus Fluvius) so much famed for its Virtue of taking away the spots and blemishes of the Skin, which besides 140 Torrents or Brooks receives the Rivers Celadon, Erimanthus, and Amarinthe. The Poets feigned that it ran under the Sea into Sicily, to be joined with the Waters of the Spring Arethusa, because it goes often un∣der the Ground, and comes out always with more strength. 2. Vasili Potamos, formerly Eurotas, Iris, Hemerus, and Marthaton) which rises at the same place where the River Carbon has its Source, and washing Misitra, discharges it self in the Gulf of Colchine. 3. Planizza, formerly Inachus, Haliaemon, and Cravamor. 4. Spirnazza, (formerly Stomius, Pomylus, and Panysus) discharges it self into the Gulf of Coron near Calamata.
There are also the Rivers Linceus, Astoria, or Stella, and Erasin, which run with rapidity all along the Mount Stympha∣lus. As also the Styx that flows at the foot of Mount Nona∣cris, and which the Poets have feign'd to be a River of Hell, because its Water, tho' clear and agreeable to the sight, is most fatal to those that drink it. Peloponnesus, after several Revolutions, fell into the Hands of Emanuel a Greek Emperor about 1150. who at his Death, having divided his Empire among his Seven Sons, was thereby the Cause of its Ruin. These Princes were called Despotes, that is, Lords or Governours; they depended upon the Em∣peror, both as to their Government and Election; otherwise they were absolute, and their Dignity almost Hereditary, for it seldom hapned that the Emperor chused any Successor to the late Despote, but his Son, Brother, or near Relation. Constantine sirnamed Dragares Brother of Theodorus II. was Despote, when Amurat made an Irruption into Morea. The Greek Emperor stopt his fury by the Promise of a yearly Tri∣bute. Some time after, Constantine being Crowned Emperor at Constantinople, divided Morea between his two Brothers Demetrius and Thomas. The Turks under Mahomet II. under the pretence of assisting Demetrius against Thomas, took oc∣casion of their Divisions to Invade their Estates, and the Places the Venetians possessed in Morea, which they accom∣plished without much Resistance after the Death of General Bertoldo d'Este, whom the Republick had sent with a good Army to oppose them. Since that, the Turks kept here a Governour, with the Title of Sangiac or Morabegi (that is Lord of Morea) under the Beglerbey of Greece. This Sangiac made his ordinary Residence at Modon. Morea is now under the Venetians since 1687. General Mo∣rosini having Reconquered the best Places in it, viz. Patras, Lepanto, Castel-Tornese, Corinth, Misitra, Napoli di Romania, &c. (as you shall see in the particular Articles of each of those Towns) he caused all the Churches that were Mosques be∣fore, to be reconsecrated; so that many Greek Families have left Achaia, to settle in Morea, and more than 12000 Inhabi∣tants have resorted thither. This Peninsule has at different times been vari∣ously divided.Division. In Pausanias's time it had but three Regions, viz. 1. That of the Arcadians. 2. That of the Achaians; and, 3. Lastly, That of the Dorians. After this Ptolomy and others divided it into Eight Parts, viz.
1. Achaia Proper, 2. Arcadia, 3. Argia, 4. Corinthia, 5. Elis, or Elea, or Cauconia, 6. Laconia, 7. Messenia, 8. Sicyonis. Now-a-days Morea (according to Baudrand, Moreri, and all Modern Geographers) is divided into four Provinces, viz. I. The Dutchy of Chiarenza—Chiarenza, Archb. II. Belvedere— Modon, Bish. III. Zaconia, or Braccio di Maina—Malvasia, Archb. IV. Saccania, or Romania Minor—Napoli di Romania, Archb. Article I. The Dutchy of Chiarenza. THIS Dutchy Borders the Gulph of Lepanto on the North,Bounds. Sacconia on the East, Zaco∣nia and Belvedere on the South, and the Jonian Sea on the West; it contains the old Achaia Proper, Sicyonis and Corinthia. The most famous CapesCapes. here are, 1. Cape Rio. 2. Cape Chiarenza, formerly Araxus Promontorium. 3. Cape Torneso, formerly Chelonates Promontorium. The most Remarkable Towns here are, Patras, Archb. Cap. Chiarenza, or Clarence, Caminitza, Bish. Castel-Torneso. I. Patras. Patras, is a very Ancient and Flourishing City, called by the Turks Badra and Balabutra; it is seated near Cape Rio on
the North side of a Mountain, on the top of which stands a good Fortress, 18 Miles almost S. of Lepanto, and 120 N. W. of Misitra. Long. 45 d. 40 m. Lat. 37 d. 20 m. It is the Capital of the Dutchy of Chiarenza, and an Archbishoprick. Towards the beginning of the Roman Monarchy, this City had a great number of Inhabitants, by reason both of its commodious Situation for Trade, and of the Fer∣tility of its Soil. It is about five Miles distant from the Gulf that bears its Name, where it has a good Sea-port called Panormus, which the Emperor Augustus chused for the Retreat of his Navy; and for that Reason made the In∣habitants of Patras, Citizens of Rome, and granted them several Immunities and Priviledges, which gave occasion to the Ro∣mans to call this City, Augusta Aroe Patrensis. The Goddess Diana was worshipped here under the Name of Diana Latria, and had a yearly Sacrifice offered her of a young Man, and a Maid pickt out of the handsomest in all the City. This Su∣perstitious and Bloody Sacrifice continued till Euripiles came to Patras, and was made a Christian Convert by the Apostle St. Andrew. Patras is now very well peopled, especially with Jews, who drive a great Trade there with the Grecians of the Neighbouring Islands, and the English and French Mer∣chants. Its Air is none of the wholesomest, by reason of the Neighbouring Mountains covered with Snow, almost all the Year round, and of the Waters that surround it. This City, with the Territory belonging to it, was formerly in the Pos∣session of the Despotes of Greece, the last of which not being able to keep it against the Turks, sold it in 1408. to the Re∣publick of Venice. The Turks took it from the Venetians in 1463. but in 1533. they retook it from the Turks under the Command of General Doria. The next Year after the Turks expelled the Venetians, who took it again in 1687. after their General Morosini had given the Turks a considerable overthrow in its Neighbourhood. II. Chiarenza. Chiarenza, which is thought to be the Ancient Cyllene, stands on the right side of the River Inachus, called by Ptolo∣my, Penaeus Fluvius, upon a Hill near the Gulph of Patras. It has been a famous City, and the Capital of the Dukedom of the same Name, under its own Princes. The Venetians
made themselves Masters of it, when it was still in a pretty good condition. But it is now so extreamly changed, that there is scarce any thing to be seen besides its Ditches, and some miserable Vestiges of what it has been. Its Port which was capable of many good Ships, is now filled up with Sands. It stands about 25 Miles S. W. of Patras. III. Caminitza. Caminitza, called by Strabo, and Ptolomy, Olenus, and by Pliny, Olenum, stands three Miles from the Gulph of Patras, on the right Bank of the little River Pirus, betwixt the Cape of Chiarenza and Patras, at an equal distance from each. It owes its Foundation to Olenus Son of Vulcan; but tho' it has been a great City with a Bishop's See Suffragan of the Arch∣bishoprick of Patras; it is now reduced to a small inconside∣rable Borough. IV. Castel-Tornese. Castel-Tornese, called by the Turks, Clemontzi is a little Town, near the Cape of Tornese, in the Dutchy of Chiarenza, (or according to others in the Province of Belvedere) Built upon a heighth that overlooks a great Countrey round about, betwixt the Gulf of Chiarenza, and that of Arcadia, called be∣fore Chelonates, about three Miles from the Sea. After the taking of Patras in 1687. Morosini summoned this Place, which the Aga delivered presently. Article II. Belvedere. THIS Province Borders the River Carbon on the North,Bounds. which separates it from Chiarenza; Zaconia, or Braccio di Maina on the East, the Sea of Sapienza on the South, and that of Ionia on
the West. It contains the old Provinces of Elis, and Mes∣senia. The most famous CapesCapes. here are, 1. Cape Jardan formerly Ichctus Promontorium. 2. Cape di Sapienza, or Cape Gallo, antiently Acritas Pro∣montorium. The Places of Note in this Province are, Modon, Bish. Cap. Coron, Calamata, Navarin. I. Modon. MOdon, called by the Turks, Mutum, anciently Methone, is in that part of Peloponnesus, formerly called Messenia: It is a strong, rich and trading City, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Patras. Its Seat is very advantagious, being upon a Cape of the Sea of Sapienza, at the Foot of which is a fair and good Port. This City was the ordinary Residence of the Sangiac or Governour of Morea for the Grand Seignior. It has at several times undergone several Revolu∣tions. The Emperor Trajanus granted it great Priviledges, which were confirmed upon it by Constantine the Great. In 1124. the Venetians made themselves Masters of it, under the Doge Domenico Michiole, but the Emperor of Constantinople retook it the next Year after. In 1204. upon the Division of the Em∣pire it fell again into the Possession of the Venetians, from whom it was taken by Leo Veteran a famous Pyrate of Genoa. This Usurper did not enjoy it long, for being taken in the Hellespont, he was brought to Corfu, where he suffered an Ignominious Death, which so frighted his Party, that the Captains Dandolo and Promalino made themselves Masters of Modon without any opposition. In 1498. Bajazet II. laid Siege to it with an Army of 150000 Men, and took it after a sharp Battel with the Army of the Venetians. which came to relieve it. In 1659. Morosini the Venetian General took it from the Turks, but they regained it in the end of the Candi∣an War. In 1686. the Venetian Arms again prevailed to de∣liver this noble and strong City out of the Hands of the Infi∣dels.
They found in it 90 Pieces of Cannon. Modon stand 15 Miles S. W. of Coron, and 70 almost W. of Cape Matapan. Long. 40 d. Lat. 34 d. 58 m. II. Coron. Coron, has a strong and commodious situation on the left side of Cape Gallo, called by Ptolomy, Acritas Promontorium, once a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Patras. It was anciently accounted a Colony of the Thebans called Pedasus by the Poets; Epea by Pausanias, and Corone by Strabo and Pliny. The Figure of this City is an irregular Triangle. At one of the Angles there is a great Tower built in 1463. by the Venetians for a Magazine; the two other sides that are not washed by the Gulph that bears its Name, leave a space wide enough to go round the Fortress, which is environ'd with an old Wall, of an unequal thickness, flank'd with great Towers; and a little way further towards the East, there is a Suburb with 500 Houses. This City has had several Masters. Baudrand thinks that it was yielded to the Venetians by the Despotes Princes of Morea; but Verdizzotti assures us that they never had it before the Division of the Eastern Empire. In 1204. it was surprized by Leo Veteran a Genoese Pyrate; but after he had been Executed at Corfu, Coron returned to its Lawful Masters the Venetians, from whom it was taken by the formidable Army of Bajazet II. in 1498. The Spaniards under General Doria took it from the Turks in 1533. and soon after were forced to leave it. In 1685. Ge∣neral Francisco Morosini made himself Master of Coron not∣withstanding the Vigorous Defence of the Besieged, and the Succours that came to their Relief. Several Men of Note lost their Lives during the Siege, which lasted 49 days; and among the others the Commandeur La Tour, General of the Land Forces of Maltha, the Prince of Brunswic, the Prince of Savoy, and Captain Ravagnin. All the Turkish Garrison was put to the Sword. This Town stands 15 Miles N. E. of Modon. Long. 46 d. 20 m. 35 d.
III. Calamata. Calamata, called by Baudrand, Thelame, Theramme, Thu∣ria, and Abia, is an unwalled Town of the left side of the Ri∣ver Spirnazza, or Pamissus. It is seated in an open Country of the Province of Belvedere, is pretty well peopled, and had a good strong Castle of a Regular Fabrick. In 1659. Gene∣ral Morosini made himself Master of it by a Stratagem, and a∣bandon'd it, after he had burn'd it, and the Country round it. The same General took this Castle again in 1685. and soon after caused it to be razed. IV. Navarin. Navarin, or Zunchio, Lat. Navarinum, Nelea, Pylus Mes∣seniaca, the Birth-place of the famous Nestor, is called Ja∣varin by the Turks. It is divided into the new and old City. The old is built upon a steep Rock, which runs into the Sea, and makes its situation very strong, besides what Art has done to render it, as it were, impregnable. On the left side thereof is the new City on the side of a Hill, fortified with good Walls, and a Cittadel with six Bastions, built by the Turks in 1572. at the bottom whereof is a Haven, the best and most capacious of all the Morea. The entrance of this Harbour is commanded by the Cannon of the old Navarin. In 1644. Sultan Ibrahim chose this Haven for the Rendezvouz of his Fleet, consisting of 200 Sail, design'd against Candia. In 1498. the Turks after the Surrender of Modon, took Navarin from the Venetians and kept it till 1686. when General Mo∣rosini appearing before old Navarin with 200 Sail, Command∣ed by General Coningsmark, forced the Garrison to a Surren∣der: But the New Town made a stout Defence, in hopes of being Relieved by the Serasquier of Morea, then upon his March. General Coningsmark leaving the Management of the Siege to Chevalier Alcenago, fought and defeated the Seras∣quier, upon which the Town Surrendred. It stands 13 Miles N. of Modon, and 28 almost W. of Coron.
Article III. Zaconia, or Braccio Di Maina. THIS Province is the largest of the four in∣to which Morea is divided:Bounds. It Borders Chiarenza on the North, Saccania on the East, the Sea of Sapienza, or of Candia on the South, and Belvedere on the West. It was formerly called Lelegia, Aebalia,Name. Argia, and Laconia. There are many huge Rocks, Caves and Precipices, which ren∣der this Country subject to frequent Earthquakes. The Principal CapesCapes. here are, 1. Cape Matapan, of which we shall make a particular De∣scription. 2. Cape Onugato. 3. Cape Maleo, or Ale di san Michiel. The Places of Note in this Province are, Malvasia, Archb. Cap. Misitra, Zarnata, Chielefa, Passava, Maina. I. Malvasia. Malvasia, or Napoli di Malvasia, anciently called Epidau∣rus, or Epidaurus Limera, and sometimes Monembusia, is seated near the farthest South-Eastern Cape called Cape Ma∣leo, with an Archbishoprick under the Patriarch of Constan∣tinople. Is is built upon a Rock, whence it has a pleasant Prospect, both into the Sea, and the adjacent Country. It is also surrounded with the Sea, and joined to the Continent by a Timber-bridge, yet it has Springs of good fresh Water, sufficient both to serve the City and their Gardens. This
City is of a very great strength, being only approachable on the South side, and there it is defended by a good Tripple Wall. Next to this Wall there is a Suburb with a good num∣ber of Houses, walled about with a strong Rampart. There is also a very convenient Harbour defended by the Fortress. Its Soil is very fruitful in Grapes, of which is made the most exquisite Wine in all Greece, and so much fam'd through all the World: It yields also as much Corn as serves to maintain 60 Persons, which considering the natural strength of the Place, are enough for a Garrison. This City owes its Foundation to a Colony of Argos; and was anciently famous, and much frequented, on account of Aesculapius's Temple. Tho' this place seem impregnable, yet it was taken in 1204. from the Emperor of the East, by the French and Venetians under the Command of Baldwin Count of Flanders, (the same that was Crowned Emperor of Constantinople) and retaken again from William a French Baron, to whom it was given by Baldwin. Whereupon he resigned his Right to the Venetians, who at∣tacked it with a powerful Fleet, and kept it till 1537. that they Surrendred it to Soliman to Purchase a Peace. In the Candian War they took it again by Storm, plundered, burnt it, put most of the Inhabitants ro the Sword, carried away the Cannon, and then left it. The Turks afterwards re∣builded it. In 1689. the Venetians Besieged it again, under the Command of the Doge Morosini, who being called home by the Senate on Septemb. 14. left it block'd up by three Forts, and a Squadron of light Frigats. On the 10th of Au∣gust 1690. it was Surrendred to the Venetians, being the last Town in the Morea that withstood them. It stands 50 Miles almost E. of Misitra, and 100 S. of Setines. Long. 48 d. 5 m. Lat. 35 d. 40 m. II. Misitra. This City was first called Sparta, then Lacedaemon, and now Misitra: It is one of the Antientest of the World, and the most famous of Greece. Authors vary much about its Foundation; some ascribe it to Spartus, Son to King Amicla, others to Sparta, Wife to a King of Lacedemon; others to Ce∣crops, who also founded Athens; and others assure us, that it was founded by Spartus Son to Phoroneus King of Argos, in Patriarch Jacob's time, 1763. Years before our Saviour. In
Polybius's time it was of a round Figure five or six Miles about, being Commanded by Mount Taigetus on the West. This City now has but the Miserable Ruins of its former Greatness: It is divided into four Quarters separated from each other. The Castle makes one, the Land another, and two Suburbs, called Melokorion (or the middle Suburb) and Exokorion (or the outward Suburb). The Exokorion is seperated from the other three by the River Vasoli Potamos, but has Communica∣tion with them by a Stone-bridge. The Castle called To Ca∣stron has very good Walls, and is so advantagiously seated on a rising Ground, that some Historians assure it was never ta∣ken by open force, either by the Turks or Venetians, Never∣theless General Morosini made himself Master of it in 1687. It stands 120 Miles almost S. of Setines, 150 S. E. of Lepanto, and 526 S. W. of Constantinople. Long. 47 d. 32 m. Lat. 35 d. 26m. III. Zarnata. Zarnata, is a Fortress which both Art and Nature have conspired to make strong, being seated on a very pleasant rising Ground, and defended with Towers and other For∣tifications. In 1685. the Garrison frighted at the approach of the Venetian Army Surrendred to General Morosini upon Articles. It stands 25 Miles almost W. of Misitra. IV. Chielefa. Chielefa, is a considerable Fortress seated on a steep Rock, of a square Figure, environ'd with good Walls, flank'd with five huge Towers: It is a Mile in circumference, and stands about two Miles off the Sea, and 17 N. of Cape Matapan, near the place where Vitulo a famous trading City stood formerly, which has given its Name to Port Vitulo, now little frequented, because it is neither safe nor commodious. In 1685. Chielefa Surrendred to General Morosini. The next Year after the Turks endeavouring to regain this Place, were routed and put to flight by the Venetians.
V. Passava. Passava, is an inconsiderable Fortress in the Province of Maina, near the Gulph of Colochine, on the Cape Mapatan, over-against Chielefa and Port Vitulo; it is built upon a rising Ground, but very irregular, and of no strength. In 1685. General Morosini took it without any opposition, and caused it to be razed. VI. Cape Matapan and Maina. To the S. of Morea is Cape Matapan, which runs further in∣to the Sea, than any other Cape of this Peninsula. It was anciently called Promontorium Taenarium, from the Cave Tena∣ro, whose vast spacious Gap gave occasion to Poets to feign it the Mouth of Hell. The Sea round this Cape is very deep, and has there two good Ports; the first is called the Port of Quails, by reason of the prodigious number of Quails that fly thither; the other is called the Port of Maina. Be∣twixt these two Ports, and upon the Ruins of the Ancient Cersapolis, the Turks built formerly a Fortress which they called Turcotigi, Oliminias add Monige, which the Greeks In∣terpret Castro di Maini. In 1570. the Venetians took this Fort and razed it. Article IV. Saccania, or Romania Minor. THIS Province which comprehends the old Argia, borders the Gulf of Lepanto,Bounds. the Isthmus of Corinth, and the Gulf of Engia, on the North. The Mare Egeo on the East, Zaconia and the Gulf of Napoli di Romania on the South, and Zaconia and Chiarenza on the West. The Palus, or Marsh of Lerna, where Hercules is said to have kill'd the Hydra with Seven Heads, is in this Pro∣vince.
The only Cape here is Cape Schili, Lat. Scy∣laeum or Plethon,Cape. or Scillium, or Damala, or Sy∣gillo Promontorium. The Cities of Note here are, Napoli di Romania, Archb. Cap. Argos, Bish. Corinth, Archb. I. Napoli di Romania. Of all those famous Cities which were formerly the Orna∣ment of Argia, called now Saccania, or Romania Minor, none but Napoli keeps to this day some remains of its former Beauty and Grandeur. It is called by Ptolomy Nauplia, by Sophianus Napli, and Anaplia by the Greeks. It is a strong and trading City Built by Nauplio, Son to Neptunus in the far∣thest part of the Gulf commonly called of Napoli anciently Argolicus Simus upon a little Cape that divides itself into two different parts; that towards the Sea forms a good, safe, and spacious Haven; the other towards the Land, renders the passage to the Town almost inaccessible, there being no o∣ther but a narrow, stony, steep, way to come to it, between Mount Palamida and the Sea-shore. Besides the advantages of the situation, which render this City one of the strongest in Europe, it is defended by a Cittadel Built on a Rock in the Sea, a hundred Yards off the City, which consequently cannot be Attack'd by Land. Napoli was formerly a Bishop∣rick Suffragan ef Corinth, but now it is an Archbishop's See, and the ordinary Residence of the Governour of the Province, which is Inhabited by 60000 Greeks, besides a vast number of Strangers of several Nations. It stands 78 Miles S. W. of A∣thens, and 60 N. of Misitra. Napoli, as most Cities, has undergone many Changes of Go∣vernment; in 1205. the French and Venetians together made themselves Masters of it. In 1388. King Giovanissa took it by Storm, put all the Garrison to the Sword, and blew up the City. Napoli came into the Hands of Mary Erigana (or Anguien by corruption) Widow of Peter Son to Frederick Cornaro Piscopia, who being unable to keep it against so pow∣erful an Enemy as Bajazet, sold it to the Republick of Venice, to which it was subject till 1539. when it was yielded to Ma∣homet II. to procure a Peace. In 1686. General Morosini or∣dered
General Coningsmark to possess himself of Mount Pala∣mida, which is within Musket-shot of the Town, and com∣mands it; and whilst he battered it from this Place, Morosini gave Battel to the Serasquier that came to relieve it, defeated him, and took Argos, their Fleet at the same time taking Ter∣nis. Aug. the 29th the Serasquier advanced again with a 1000 Men, and fell upon the Venetians in their Trenches, where the Battel was dubious for three Hours, but at last the Turks fled. After the Battel the Siege was pusht on with vigour, and the Turks Capitulated to Surrender, on the usual Terms, and were conducted to Tenedos. II. Argos. There have been three Cities called by this Name, the first is Argos Amphilochium in Epirus; the second Argos Pelas∣gicum in Macedon; and lastly Argos Peloponnesiacum, of which we are now to Treat. It has been anciently called Phoronia, Hippobote, Jasia, Diposia, Jappia, and lastly, Argos. It was formerly the Capital of the famous Province of Argia or Argo∣lis, and one of the most Celebrated Cities of Peloponnesus. It is seated on the River Planissa, Lat. Inachus Fluvius 7 Miles almost W. of Napoli di Romania. It was first a Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Corinth, and then erected into a Metropolitan it self. It has the Mount Cronia on the West, and the Ruins of old Mycene on the South. This City has undergone so many Vicissitudes, that it has now but the bare Name left as a Memorial of its Ancient Greatness and Splendor; the Magnificence of its Buildings being reduced to some pitiful paltry Houses, and a Cittadel. This City was sold to the Venetians in 1388. by Mary Erigana, or Anguien, in whose Hands it remained till Mahomet II's time. The Venetians took it from the Turks in 1463. and lost it again a little while after. But in the Year 1686. Ge∣neral Morosini recovered it again from the Tarks. III. Corinth. The City of Corinth, vulgarly called Coranto; Gerame by the Turks, and Ephyro by Lauremberg, is seated in the middle of the Isthmus, to which it gives its Name. It has the Title
of an Archbishoprick, and stands 85 Miles E. of Patras, and 54 S. W. of Athens. It is commanded by the famous Fortress called Acrocorinth, which is near it. Its Situation is so ad∣vantageous, that it is called by some the Eye, and the Bulwark of Peloponnesus. The Romans upon pretence of an affront offered to their Ambassadors, sent the Consul L. Mamius who burn'd and pillaged this City Anno Mundi 3818. but by the Care and Magnificence of Augustus it recovered its former Beauty and Riches. Since that time it has often felt the fury of War, especially under Amurath II. and Mahomet his Son, so that it has now but the miserable ruins of its former Great∣ness, and 20 or 30 Houses or rather Cottages, it is subject to the Venetias since 1687. The Isthmus of Corinth. The Isthmus of Corinth, Lat. Isthmus Argolicus and Corinthia∣cus, is a neck of land about six or seven Miles broad betwixt the Gulph of Lepanto and that of Engia which joins Morea to Achaia. It was anciently very famous for the Ludi Isthmii or Isthmian Games, instituted here by Theseus, as also for its Theater, Stadium, Neptunes Temple and the Forest of Pine∣Trees, whose Leaves served to Crown the Combatants. Se∣veral Princes as, Alexander the Great, Pitia, Demetrius, Ju∣lius Caesar, Caligula, Nero and Herod the Athenian, either to advance Navigation and Trade, or meerly to raise a Monu∣ment to their Fame, have at different times attempted the digging through of this Isthmus; but whether interrupted by more important business, or wearied with the tediousness of the Work, they have all of them left it unfinished. Whence came the Latin Proverb, Istmum fodere, against those who undertake things beyond their strength. Afterwards on this neck of Land a Wall was built, which was called Hexa∣milon because it contained six Miles, which is the whole breadth of the Isthmus. This Wall was demolished by Amu∣rath II. and being rebuilt and fortified by the Venetians, was a second time pulled down by Mahomet II. in 1443.
Article V. The Boundaries of Morea. THE Bounds of this Peninsule, as we have already hinted, are the Isthmus of Corinth, of which we have already treated, and the Seas of Jonia, Sapienza and of Candia and Aegeo, in which we shall consider the Gulphs. I. Gulphs of the Jonian Sea. There are in this Sea five considerable Gulphs, viz. 1. The Gulph of Lepanto, called Crisaeus, by the Ancients; Helcyo∣nius, by Strabo; Gulph of Pedras, by Sophianus; and Corin∣thiacus Sinus by others its length West and East is about 80 Miles washing on the North the Coasts of Achaia and on the South those of Morea. 2. The Gulph of Patras so called from a Sea Town of Chiarenza; which being environ'd partly by the Continent and partly by the opposite Islands resembles a spacious Lake, in length about 200 Miles and about as many in breadth. 3. The Gulph of Chiarenza so called from an ancient Sea Town, extends it self from Cape Chiarenza to Castel Tor∣nese. 4. The Gulph of Arcadia, called Chelonates or Chelonites, Sinus, by Ptolomy, and Locardian by others; stretches from Cape Tornese to Cape Jordan. 5. The Gulph of Zanchio, called formerly Cyparisius Sinus, reaches from Cape Jardan to Cape Sapienza. II. Gulphs of the Sea of Sapienza or of Candia. Here are but two remarkable Gulphs, viz. 1. The Gulph of Coron, which washes the City, whence it derives its name, called Meseniacus Sinus, by Ptolomy and Pliny; Messenius, by Strabo; Coroneus and Asineus Sinus by some, and Gulph of Calamata by others. It is betwixt Cape Gallo, and Cape Matapan.
2. The Gulph of Colochina or of Castel Rampani or of Fleos, called Laconicus Sinus by Strabo and Ptolomy, washes Laconia, and extends it self from Cape Matapan, to Cape Malio III. Gulphs of the Mare Aegeo, towards Morea. Here are two remarkable Gulphs, viz. 1. The Gulph of Napoli di Komania, so called from the Ci∣ty of the same name, and formerly Argolicus Sinus, because it washed old Argïa; its extent is from Cape Angelo to Cape Schilli. 2. The Gulph of Engia is separated from that of Lepanto by the Isthmus of Corinth, it comprehends a great many lit∣tle Islands and Rocks. It was formerly called Saronicus Sinus, from the River Saron; Salaminiacus, by Pliny and Ptolomy from the Island Salamis; Eleusinus, by Strabo, Hermonicus Si∣nus, by some; and lastly Gulph of Egena, from the Island so called which is in the middle of it. CHAP. VII. Of the Islands about Greece. Article I. Islands in the Jonian Sea. The Islands of Note in this Sea may be reduced to Corfu. Curzolaires Islands. Santa Maura. Cephalonia. Teacchi. Zante. Strivales Islands.
I. Corfu. This is one of the most considerable Islands under the Ve∣netians. It has had several Names some call it Scheria, others Drepano, Ephira, Corintoa, Effiso, Cassiopea, Argos, Ceraunia, Cercira, and Corcyra, from which lost its present Name of Corfu is derived. It is 70 Italian Miles long W. and E. and 20 Miles broad in some Places, 12 in others, and 120 in com∣pass; its Soil is very fruitful, abounding with Corn, Honey, Wine, and very good Oyl. The Air is serene, mild and tem∣perate, which may be easily believed, if we consider the Forests of Cedar and Orange Trees, that grow there. There are 100 Villages or Castles and a Town that bears the name of the Island, in all which they reckon about 41000 Inhabitants. The City of Corfu is seated in the middle of the Island with a very strong Fortress, built upon a steep Rock whose foot is washed by the Sea. It is an Archbishops See, and is governed by six Nobles, which are sent thieher every other year by the Republick of Venice, who is in pos∣session of this Island, since 1327. Before that time it was subject to the Kings of Naples. II. Curzolaires Islands. The Curzolaires Islands are five in number, they were known to the Ancients, under the name of Echinades or E∣chinae; the greatest of them are Same and Dulichio, about a Mile from the Continent, and 31 Miles W. of Lepanto. III. Santa Maura. The Island of Santa Maura or Lefcade was called by the An∣cients Leucus, or Leucadia. It was formerly a Peninsule, joined to the Continent of Achaia, but the People of that Country digged it into an Island. It is 70 Italian Miles in Compass; abounds with Corn, Wine, Oyl, Tobacco, and all manner of Fruits. This Island has 30 Villages, and the City of Santa Maura which is environ'd by the Sea, betwixt Lef∣cade and the Continent, and is joined to this, by several lit∣tle
Islands, which communicate to one another by Bridges, and by an Aqueduct supported by 360 Arches. Its Walls are of an Eptogonal irregular figure flank'd with five great Towers: to the East, it has an Harbour called Damata. General Morosini made himself Master of it in July 1684. IV. Cefalonia. The Island of Cesalonia, was formerly called Melena by some, Samo, or Same, Dulichio, Tilebi, Casso and Chieffali by others. It lies on the S. of Corfu, and is 170 Italian Miles in compass. It is very fruitful in Corn and Fruits; The Trees bear twice in the year, and the Wheat they sow in the spring, is reap'd in June. There grow also Lemons of an extraordi∣nary bigness; and great quantities of Raisins which are trans∣ported into England. Besides several Villages and Boroughs, there is a City that has the same name with the Island, and the Fortress of Asso. The CIty of Cephalonia is a Bishop's See, its Cathedral is an Annex of that of Zanteg, it is the Seat of the Governour who is a Noble Venetian, with the Title of Proveditor. The Fortress of Asso was built by the Venetians in 1595. on a very high steep Rock, surrounded with the Sea, so that it is accounted inaccessible. The Fortifications are raised ac∣cording to its Situation which is very Irregular, this Fortress is joined to the Island of Cefalonia by a Neck of Land about 20 Paces broad. This Island was freely given to the Venetians in 1224 by one ajus its Lord and Governour. V. Teacchi. Teacchi, called Itaca by Strabo and Pliny, Nericia, Val di Compagno, Val di Compare, Cephalonia Picciola, by others, Tiachi by the Greeks and Phiacchi by the Turks, lies on the N. E. of Cefalonia, from which it is separated by a Channel 20 Italian Miles long, and five broad. This Island is famous in Antiquity for being the Country of Ʋlysses, and the Re∣sidence of the Chast Penelope during the Siege of Troy. The Inhabitants are 15000 in number, which are Governed by
one of the Citizens of Cefalonia, sent thither every year with the Title of Capitan of Teacchi. VI. Zante. Zante was called Zacyn thus by the Ancients. The North of this Island is full of Craggy steep Rocks, but to the South it has fine, delightful Plains covered with Fruit-Trees of all sorts. Besides a great number of Villages, there is a Town and Castle that bears the name of the Island, with the Title of a Bishoprick, and the ordinary residence of the Governour or Proveditor of the Island, who is a Noble Venetian. He has two Counsellors under him, and the Place of all three, lasts two years. The Castle is built on a Hill that commands all the Island; at the foot of the Town, which stretches along the Sea side the space of two Miles. They make there vast quantities of Raisins, strong racy Wines, and most excellent Oyls, to the value of 50000 Ducats per An. Most of the Inhabitants are Grecians, who profess the Greek Religion; the Latins, including the Soldiers, make but an inconfiderable number. There are about 3000 Jews, who have there three Synagogue, and thrive a very great Trade. There are also some English Merchants, most of them, Pro∣testant. This Island is subject to frequent Earth-quakes which is the reason, why they built their Houses generally but one Story high. There are in this Island several Greek Churches and Religious Houses to the number of 44. under the Government of a Bishop, who is to be chosen by the Greek Curates of all the Island. None are admitted to that Dignity, but those who have profest the Monastical Life of St. Basil, which is the reason, why there are here, so many Houses of that Order. The Bishop has no Revenue besides the free Gifts of the People, and his Fees for Ordination both which, amount to a considerable sum of Money. This Island was sold to the Republick of Venice by Robert Tarente in 1350. with several other Islands. VII. Strivales Islands. The Strivales are two little Islands, called by Seamen Stamfane, and by the Ancients Strophades, Strivali, Strom∣phides,
and Calydnes. They stand low, and almost reach to the Water; their Haven is 50 Italian Miles distant from Cefalonia. They are very small, the greatest of the two not being above four Miles in Compass: Yet they yield great quantity of Grapes, out of which extraordinary good Wine is made. There are no other Inhabitants but a sort of Monks called Caloyers, who have Built their Convent like a Fortress defended with good Cannon to secure them∣selves from the Assaults of the Turks. These Islands are fa∣mous in the Ancient Poets, who feign'd them to be the Dwelling-place of the Harpies. Article II. Islands in the Sea of Sapienza, and Candia. THere are in these Seas but three little Islands, and two great ones, called Cerigo and Candia. The first of the three is called Sphagia, or Sphateria, or Sfragia, vulgarly of Sapienza. The second is called Cabrera, or Fuschella, or Teganuse, and Cauriera. The third is called Venetico. Near these Islands are many Rocks, where the Pyrates of Barbary use to watch the Mer∣chant-Men which come out of the Gulf of Venice, or from Sicily. I. Cerigo. Cerigo, is an Island of the Sea of Sapienza in the Gulf of Colochina, about six Miles distant from the Continent. It was formerly called Cytherea, Porphyrusa, and Schothera. It is 60 Italian Miles in Compass. The City that bears the Name of the Island, has the Title of a Bishoprick. Both Art and Nature have contributed to make it strong. It is Built upon a high craggy Rock, on the Sea-side, with good Bastions (tho' irregular) defended with Cannon. At the foot of this Fortress there is a Haven not much frequented, because it is narrow, and exposed to the Winds: But 12 Miles from this
Port, there is another, large, commodious, and safe. This Island abounds with Fowl, but yields but little Corn, Wine and Oyl, so that Provisions are here extraordinary dear. Here are many Villages, but of little or no considera∣tion. There are also some Monasteries of Hiero-Monachi, and Caloyers. Amongst the others, there is one Built upon a ve∣ry high steep Rock, on the right side, and pretty near the Fortress, for which the Inhabitants have a great Veneration, by the perswasion they have, that St. John began there his Book of Revelations. This Island is also famous in the Fa∣bles of the Ancients, for being either the Birth-place, or the Residence of Venus during her Youth; to whom they had De∣dicated a Temple in the Eastern part of the Island, under the Name of Citherea. This Island is subject to the Venetians, who send thither every other Year one of their Nobles, with the Title of Castellain, and Proveditor. II. Candia. Candia, anciently called Crete, is an Island and Kingdom situated at the entry of the Archi∣pelago,Situation. stretching from East to West one side towards Asia, and the other towards Africa.Extent. It's greatest length is from Cape Salomon to Cape Cor∣nico. The Country is good and fertile,Quality. and has di∣vers small RiversRivers. and Mountains,Mountains Inhabi∣tanta. whereof Mount Ida (different from Mount-Ida in Phrygia) now called Psiloriti is the highest, from the top of which both Seas may be seen. It's assured that towards the Sources of the Brook called Lene, which is to the North of Mount-Ida; there is a Grotto wrought into a Rock, which is said to be the Laby∣rinth of Minos, made according to Dedalus's Directions. Its Inhabitants of this Island were the first that made them∣selves powerful at Sea by Navigation, and on Land by the use of Arrows. The sides their Experience at Sea, they taught the way of taming and managing Horses; they first of all in∣vented Musick, and were also the first that recorded their Laws. Yet they have always had the Repute of being Vicious, Lyars, and Pyrates.
This Island was very famous for the Labyrinth of Minos,History. Invented by Dedalus, and for the Ship called the Bull, wherein Europa was carried away; for the Amours of Pasiphae, and by the Birth of Jupiter to whom this Island was Consecrated. The Ancients reckoned above 100 Towns in it, and called it Hecatompolis. The La∣cedemonians took Candia, in Darius's Name, in the 422 Year of Rome; but L. Celius Metellus Consul of Rome made him∣self Master of it in 686 of Rom. Afterwards this Island was Subject to the Emperors of Rome, and those of Constantinople until 823. that it was taken by the Saracens, who Built the Town of Candia, that gave its Name to the Island. Nice∣phorus Phocas retook it in 962. Boniface, Marquiss of Mont∣ferrat was Master of it, and after Constantinople was taken by the French and Venetians, he sold it to the latter in 1204. The Venetians fortified this Island in some places to curb the Inhabitants which were very subject to Rebel; for in 1364. they had a mind to bring in the Genoeses, but they were di∣verted by the wise Politicks of the Republick. The Turks un∣der pretence of Besieging Maltha in 1645. to be Revenged for the great Prize that the Knights under the Command of Bois-Baudran had taken in 1644. with a Sultan and an Otto∣man Prince, fell into Candia, where they continued the War until 1669. They made themselves Masters of Canea in 1645. and then laid Siege to the Town of Candia, which notwithstanding the endeavours of the French to rescue it from the Hands of the Infidels, after a desperate War of 24 Years was forced to yield to the Turks, but made honour∣able Conditions. After the taking of this Important Place, the Turks made themselves Masters of the greatest part of the Island, which they have kept ever since. The Chief For∣tresses which were left to the Venetians by their last Treaty with the Port, are Grabusa, the Suda, and Spina Longa. As for their Religion,Religion. the Venetians are Roman Ca∣tholicks, but the other Inhabitants of the Island are of the Greek Church. This Island is now divided into Four Territo∣ries,Division. which bear the Names of so many Principal Towns, which are,
1. Candia, Archb. Cap. 2. Canea, Bish. 3. Rettimo, Bish. 4. Sittia. On the Northern Shore. I.. Candia. Candia, is situated in the most Northern part and about the middle of the Island, to which it gives its Name, over∣against the Isle of Standia, with the Seat of an Archbishop who had Nine Suffragants. It is both by Art and Nature one of the strongest Places in Europe. Long. 50 d. 25 m. Lat. 34 d. 55 m. The Turks laid Siege to it in 1645. after the Battel of Carvaca, but were forced to raise it, after they had lost the best of their Army, but left it Block'd up very close until 1667. and then they renewed the Siege again in the Month of May, and took it by Composition in 1669. It is generally thought that the Turks lost 5 or 600000 Men at that Siege, which exposed their Government to Rebellions often begun at Constantinople. In 1692. the Venetians endea∣voured to regain Candia, but were forced to abandon the En∣terprize with considerable loss. II. Canea. Canea, was formerly called the Mother of Towns by the Gre∣cians. It is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Candia, and was taken by the Turks in 1645. III. Rettimo. Rettimo, is another small City and Bishoprick, subject to the Turks. IV. Sittia. Sittia, is another City, Capital of a Territory of the same Name in the Northern Shore of the Island.
Article III. Islands in the Mare Egeo, or Archipelago. THere are in this Sea a great many Islands, of which there are but three worth taking notice of, viz. Egena, Culu∣ri, and Negropont. I. Egena. Egena, lyes about 15 Italian Miles from the Sea-coast of Athens, 10 of Culuri, and 12 of Morea. It is called Egina by Strabo, Aenone by Baudrand, Myrmidonia by Brietius, and Engi by the Mariners. It is 30 Miles in Compass, but has no Harbour for Ships. Partridges multiply here to that degree that the Inhabitants are used to search their Nests, and de∣stroy their Eggs in the Spring, to prevent the prejudice so great a quantity of Fowl might cause to their Seeds. There are here two fine Monuments of Antiquity; the first is a Temple of Venus towards the North of the Island; the second is another Temple Dedicated to Jupiter by Aeacus first King of this Island. The Town which bears the Name of the Island, was for∣merly dignify'd with the Title of a Bishoprick Suffragan of the Archbishop of Athens, and famous for the Birth of Paul of Medicis; but it is now reduced to a Miserable Borough joined to the Fortress, which is only remarkable for the Advantages of its situation, upon a high craggy Rock, which over-looks several Islands of the Archipelago. This Island was formerly subject to the Venetians, but since the time that Frederick Barberossa took it from them, it was become a Receptacle of Banditto's and Pyrates. In 1674. Morosini forced them to Surrender at Discretion, and having pillag'd and demolished the Town, he caused 300 Greeks, and 40 Turks to be Chain'd in order to Row upon the Gal∣lies of the Republick of Venice.
II. Culuri. This Island was called by the Ancients Salamis, and is known to the Mariners under the Name of Santa Bursia, and under that of Cychria, Scyrar, and Pityussa to Baudrand. It has a Village which bears its Name, seated on the most Sou∣thern part of this Island, with about 200 Houses in it, and an Harbour, which according to Mr. Spon's Travels, is one of the largest in the World, being Seven Miles long, and Two broad. This Island lyes about 10 Italian Miles from Egena, 2 from Attica, and is about 35 in Compass. It has about a Thousand Inhabitants; and abounds with Corn, Rosin, Pit∣coal, and Spunges, which the Inhabitants Transport to A∣thens. Over-against the Coast of Athens, there is a small Bo∣rough of 20 Houses, called Ambelachi, with a little Harbour; four or five Miles from this Village, was the Ancient City of Salimene, a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Athens. III. Negropont. Negropont, is an Island of the Archipelago, separated from Achaia by Euripus. It was of old called Eubaea and Chalcis; the Turks call it Egribos, and the Inhabitants Egripos. Some Authors tell us, that this Island formerly was part of Baeotia, a Province of Achaia, from whence it was separated by an Earthquake. It is 365 Miles in Compass, 90 in length from S. to N. and 40 in breadth. Its two most noted Capes are Cabo Figera, or Cabo d'Oro, (formerly called Caphareus) and Cabo Lithar. This Island is very fruitful, and abounds in all Provisions. There is the Mountain of Caristo, famous for its excellent Marble, and the Stone Amiantos or Asbestos, whereof they make a kind of Linnen, which is made clean by casting it in∣to the Fire, as being incombustible. This Island produces Cotton enough to furnish Sails for a whole Fleet. There are two Rivers in it, Similio and Cereo; the first of which makes the Fleeces of the Sheep white, and the other makes them black, if the Poets may be credited. The Governour of this Isle is now a Captain Bassa, who has the Command also of Achaia. During the Government of
Doge Pietro Ziani, the Emperor of Constantinople bestowed this Island upon the Republick of Venice, but they lost it in 1469. The Capital City has the same Name with the Isle, and is sometimes called Euripont from Euripus, on whose Banks it is seated, towards the Continent of Achaia, 45 N. of Setines, 130 almost S. E. of Larissa, and 380 S. W. of Constantinople. Long. 48 d. 25 m. Lat. 38 d. 20 m. It is joined to A∣chaia by a Draw-bridge, which leads to a great Tower, for∣merly Built by the Venetians in the Euripus, from whence they pass to the Continent by a Stone-bridge of five little Arches. This City is about two Miles in compass, but the Suburbs, which are Inhabited by Greek Christians, are more populous than the City, where none but Turks and Jews dwell. All the Inhabitants are said to amount to the number of 15000, of which 10000 are Christians. There are four Mosques, one whereof was formerly the Cathedral Church Dedicated to St. Mark, and was under the Archbishop of Athens. The Jesuits have a House in the Suburbs where they teach Youth. The Turks Attack'd this Place in June 1469. with a Fleet of 300 Sail, and an Army of 120000 Men, Mahomet II. being present; the Besieged over-powered by numbers, were fain to give way after a Gallant Defence. The Proveditor Erizzo, upon the Turks entring the City, retrenched himself, and did not Surrender till the Sultan had promised him his Life, but he broke his Promise, and caused him to be Sawed through in the midst. He had a Daughter called Anne, who beeause of her Beauty was presented to Mahomet, but she disdaining his Caresses, incensed him to that degree that he cut off her Head with his own Hand. Afterwards the Turks exer∣cised all manner of Cruelties upon the Garrison, and the In∣habitants of the City, putting all to the Sword above 20 Years old. In 1688. the Venetians Besieged this City with 24000 Men, and Storm'd it twice, but without Success. Of Euripus. EƲripus, is an Arm of the Sea, between Achaia and Ne∣gropont, so narrow just over-against the Capital City of the Island, that a single Galley can hardly pass between the
Cittadel and Tower of the Venetians: The Ancients called it Euripus Euboicus, the Natives call it Egripos, and the Italians, Stretto di Negroponte. This Channel has its Ebbs and Flows, like the Ocean, but still with some particular Differences. Aristotle was so puzzled to find out the Reason of the Flux and Reflux of the Euripus, that he is said to have cast him∣self headlong into it; tho' others affirm that he Poyson'd him∣self, and others still that he died of a Cholick. AN Alphabetical TABLE OF All the Cities, Towns, Castles, &c. Described in this Book. A. ABarino, or Navarino Pag. 253 Acqui Pag. 152 Aelst, or Alost Pag. 14 Aerschot Pag. 39 Agnetlin, or Agnabat Pag. 194 Agramunt Pag. 159 Agria Pag. 175 Aire, or Arien Pag. 69 Aix Pag. 127 Aix la Chapelle Pag. 114 Alba Giulia, or Weissemburg Pag. 193 Alba Regalis Pag. 186 Albe Pag. 151 Alesco, or Alessio Pag. 228 Albanopoli Pag. 230 Alost, or Aelst Pag. 14 Altemburg Pag. 194 Altemburg, or Owar Pag. 189 St. Amand Pag. 20 Amphipolis, or Emboli Pag. 234 Andernach Pag. 108 Annecy Pag. 132 Antivari Pag. 220 & 228 Antwerp Pag. 35 Aoust, or Aost Pag. 134 Ardenburg Pag. 22 Argos Pag. 259 Arien, or Aire Pag. 69 Arlon Pag. 55 Armentiers Pag. 20 Armiro Pag. 236 Arras Pag. 66 Arschot, or Aerschot Pag. 39 Ast, or Asti Pag. 137 Ath Pag. 67
Athens, or Setines Pag. 239 Avesnes Pag. 60 Avesnes le Comte Pag. 70 Aulis Pag. 242 B. BAboisca, or Baboliza Pag. 189 Bacharach Pag. 90 Baden Pag. 84 Balaguer Pag. 158 Bapaume Pag. 68 Bar Pag. 195 Barcelona Pag. 156 Barcelonnete Pag. 146 Bastia, or Bastick Pag. 231 Bastoigne Pag. 55 Bataseck Pag. 190 Bavay Pag. 60 Beaumont Pag. 60 Beila Pag. 135 Belgrade in Servia Pag. 203 Bergen-op-Zoom Pag. 26 Berg St. Winoch Pag. 17 Bestercze, or Bistricia Pag. 194 Bethune Pag. 69 Bialogrod Pag. 198 Binch Pag. 8 Bingen Pag. 97 Birkenfeld Pag. 95 Bistricia Pag. 194 Boisleduc Pag. 24 Bonneville Pag. 129 Bonn Pag. 106 Boppart Pag. 101 Bouchain Pag. 59 Bouillon Pag. 45 Bovines Pag. 50 Braine le Comte Pag. 62 Braclaw Pag. 196 Brasgow Pag. 199 Breda Pag. 25 Brey Pag. 47 Brisac Pag. 82 Brodt Pag. 211 Brodrogh Pag. 180 Bruges Pag. 11 Brussels Pag. 30 Buda, or Offen Pag. 181 Budoa Pag. 219 Burich Pag. 112 C. CAlamata Pag. 253 Calcar Pag. 112 Caminitza Pag. 250 Cambray Pag. 63 Caminieck, or Kaminieck Pag. 195 Campredon Pag. 160 Caet Pag. 163 Candia Pag. 269 Canisa, or Kanisca Pag. 187 Cardona Pag. 159 Carignan Pag. 139 Carmagnola Pag. 143 Casal Pag. 150 Caschaw, or Cassovia Pag. 175 Caseloutre, or Keiserslautern Pag. 90 Cassel Pag. 19 Castanovitza Pag. 214 Castel-Nuovo Pag. 218 Castel-Tornese Pag. 250 Cattaro Pag. 219 Caub Pag. 90 Ceva Pag. 139 Chambery Pag. 126 Charlemont Pag. 50 Charleroy Pag. 50 Chasteau-Cambresis Pag. 65 Cefalonia Pag. 264 Chiarenza Pag. 249 Chiery, or Quiers Pag. 140 Chilafa, or Chielafa Pag. 256
Chimay Pag. 60 Chimera Pag. 232 Chiney Pag. 45 Chonad Pag. 180 Cinq. Eglises Pag. 188 Clausenburg Pag. 193 Cleves Pag. 110 Clissa Pag. 217 Coblentz Pag. 100 Collioure Pag. 164 Colmar Pag. 80 Colocza Pag. 176 Cologne Pag. 103 Conde Pag. 58 Coni Pag. 140 Corfu Pag. 263 Corinth, or Gerame Pag. 259 Coron Pag. 252 Courtray Pag. 18 Crevecoeur Pag. 65 Creutznach Pag. 90 Croia Pag. 229 Cronstadt, or Brassaw Pag. 193 D. DAgno, or Ducagini Pag. 228 Dalem Pag. 41 Dampvilliers Pag. 54 Darda Pag. 190 Darmstadt Pag. 93 Demetriada Pag. 238 Delphos Pag. 243 Deux-Ponts, or Zweybruck Pag. 94 Diest Pag. 34 Dinant Pag. 46 Dixmude, oa Dixmuyde Pag. 19 Dolcigno, or Dulcigno Pag. 228 Dortmund Pag. 116 Doway, or Douay Pag. 18 Dunkirk Pag. 16 Durazzo Pag. 229 Durbuy Pag. 55 Duren, or Dueren Pag. 114 Durlach Pag. 84 Dusseldorp Pag. 116 Duysburg Pag. 112 E. ELbassan Pag. 230 Elna Pag. 163 Emboli, or Amphipolis Pag. 234 Emmerick Pag. 110 Enghien Pag. 62 Ensisheim Pag. 81 Esche Pag. 53 Escluse, or Sluys Pag. 21 Esperie Pag. 179 Esseck, or Osseck Pag. 206 Eyndenhoven Pag. 28 F. FArsa, or Pharsalus Fauquemont, or Falkem∣burg. Pag. 42 Ferette, or Pfirt Pag. 81 Flerus Pag. 51 Flix Pag. 158 Florennes Pag. 46 Fountaine L'Eveque Pag. 62 Fort de Schenck Pag. 113 Fossano Pag. 139 Franckendal Pag. 89 Friburg Pag. 83 Furnes Pag. 19 G. GAnd, or Ghent Pag. 10 Gelders Pag. 39
Gemblours Pag. 54 Geneva Pag. 130 Gengenbach Pag. 84 Gennep Pag. 111 Girona Pag. 161 Giula Pag. 177 Gradisca Pag. 211 Gran, or Strigonium Pag. 185 Grave Pag. 27 Gravelines Pag. 17 Grimberg Pag. 101 H. HAguenaw Pag. 80 Halle Pag. 62 Hamont Pag. 47 Heilderberg Pag. 88 Helmont Pag. 28 Herk Pag. 47 Hermanstadt Pag. 192 Hsdin Pag. 68 Hermanstein Pag. 100 Hrne Pag. 46 Hunningen Pag. 81 Huy Pag. 45 I. IAieza Pag. 209 Javarin, or Raab Pag. 187 Jazy, or Jassy Pag. 197 St. Jean de Maurienne Pag. 128 Jeniza, or Zuchria Pag. 234 Jeno, or Geno Pag. 180 Ingelheim Pag. 91 Ipres, or Ypres Pag. 15 Judoigne Pag. 33 Juliers Pag. 114 Ivrea Pag. 136 K. KAllo Pag. 181 Kaminieck Pag. 195 Kanisca, or Canisa Pag. 187 Keisers-Lautern Pag. 90 Keiserswerd Pag. 107 Kilia Nova Pag. 198 Komare, or Comorra Pag. 186 L. Landaw Pag. 79 Landrechies Pag. 60 Larissa Pag. 236 Larta Pag. 231 Lens Pag. 70 Lepanto Pag. 243 Lerida Pag. 158 Lessines Pag. 61 Leuwe Pag. 32 Leige or Luyck Pag. 44 Liere Pag. 34 Lille or l'Isle Pag. 15 Lillo Pag. 29 Limburg Pag. 41 Liques Pag. 70 Livadia Pag. 242 Louvain Pag. 31 Luxemburg Pag. 52 M. Maesyck Pag. 47 Maestricht Pag. 28 Maina Pag. 257 Maisiers or Massieres Pag. 54 Malines or Mechlin Pag. 37 Malvasia or Nopoli di Malva∣sia Pag. 254 Manheim Pag. 89 Manresa Pag. 160
Marathen Pag. 242 Marienbourg Pag. 61 Masserano Pag. 134 Maubeuge Pag. 60 St. Maura Pag. 263 Mayence or Mentz Pag. 97 Megara Pag. 242 Meurs Pag. 111 Misitra or Lacedemon Pag. 255 Modon Pag. 251 Mohachz Pag. 189 Molsheim Pag. 79 Monaco Pag. 148 Moncalier Pag. 141 Mondovi Pag. 138 Mons Pag. 57 Monstiers or Moustiers Pag. 128 Monblancq Pag. 159 Montgatz Pag. 178 Montmedy Pag. 54 Montmelian Pag. 127 Mont-Royal Pag. 95 Mulhausen Pag. 82 N. Namur Pag. 49 Napoli de Malvasia Pag. 254 Narenza or Narenta Pag. 218 Navarin Pag. 253 Negropont Pag. 271 Newenburg Pag. 83 Newhausel Pag. 173 Nk Pag. 194 Newport Pag. 13 Newstadt Pag. 90 Nice or Nizza Pag. 147 Nigepoli or Nicopolis Pag. 201 Ninove Pag. 14 Nissa Pag. 204 Nivelle Pag. 32 Nona Pag. 215 Novigrad in Hungary Pag. 179 Nuys Pag. 107 O. Oberwesel Pag. 101 Ochrida Pag. 230 Oczakow Pag. 198 Offenburg Pag. 83 St. Omers Pag. 67 Oneglia Pag. 148 Oppenheim Pag. 80 Orchias Pag. 20 Ostend Pag. 13 Orsoy Pag. 112 Orbassan Pag. 141 Ostend Pag. 30 Oudenard Pag. 14 Owar Pag. 189 P. Palota Pag. 190 Panormo Pag. 231 Passava Pag. 257 Patras Pag. 248 Pernes Pag. 71 Perpignan Pag. 163 Pest Pag. 179 Peter-Waradin Pag. 206 Pfortzheim Pag. 85 Pharsalus Pag. 237 Philipville Pag. 61 Philipsburg Pag. 93 Pignerol Pag. 145 Pollind Pag. 229 Posega Pag. 211 Presbourg or Posan Pag. 173 Prevesa Pag. 231 Pruym Pag. 101 Puicerda Pag. 161 Q. Quesnoy Pag. 59 Queyras Pag. 140
Quiers or Chieri Pag. 140 Quinque-Ecclesiae, or Funff-Kirken Pag. 188 R. Raab, or Javarin Pag. 187 Ragusa Pag. 220 Ravesteyn Pag. 27 and 118 Rees Pag. 111 Remborg Pag. 42 Rhinberg Pag. 107 Rivoli Pag. 139 Roccles Pag. 59 Roermond or Ruremond Pag. 39 Rolduc Pag. 42 Roses Pag. 161 Ruffach Pag. 81 S. Salona Pag. 217 Salonichi Pag. 233 Salses Pag. 163 Salsona Pag. 159 Saluces or Saluzzo Pag. 142 Sarai Pag. 209 Sarbrugh Pag. 100 Sas-van-Ghent Pag. 22 Saverne Pag. 80 Savigliano Pag. 140 Scaros or Saros Pag. 180 Selestad Pag. 79 Scardona Pag. 217 Scorusa Pag. 237 Scutari Pag. 227 Sebenico Pag. 216 Seged or Segedin Pag. 177 Segeswar Pag. 193 Segna or Zeng Pag. 212 Semenbria Pag. 204 Siderocapsa Pag. 234 Setines or Athens Pag. 230 La Seu d'Ʋrgel Pag. 161 Sigeth or Zygeth Pag. 188 Silistria Pag. 201 Simmeren Pag. 91 Sluys Pag. 21 Soczow Pag. 197 Sophia or Sofia Pag. 201 Soignes Pag. 59 Spalatro Pag. 216 Spires Pag. 91 Stafarda Pag. 143 Stagno Pag. 222 Steenkirk Pag. 62 Stenay Pag. 54 Stives or Thebes Pag. 241 Strasburg Pag. 77 Strigonium or Gran Pag. 185 Susa Pag. 141 Swernick Pag. 207 T. Targovischo Pag. 199 Tarragona Pag. 157 Tarrega Pag. 159 Tekin Pag. 197 Teina Temeswar Pag. 177 Teina Pag. 148 Terouanne Pag. 70 Thienen, or Tillemont Pag. 32 Thionville Pag. 53 Thonon Pag. 130 Thuin Pag. 45 Tokay Pag. 180 Tongres Pag. 48 Tortosa Pag. 158 Tournay Pag. 16 Traw Pag. 216 Trebigni Pag. 218 Treves or Triers Pag. 99 Trino Pag. 152 St. Truyen Pag. 47
Turin Pag. 138 Tyrnaw Pag. 174 V. VAlenciennes Pag. 58 Valkenburg or Fauque∣mont Pag. 42 Vallona Pag. 230 St. Venant Pag. 69 Venlo Pag. 39 Verceil Pag. 135 Verua Pag. 137 Vesprin or Weisbrun Pag. 187 Vianden Pag. 55 Vich Pag. 160 Vigon Pag. 140 Vihitz or Wihitz Pag. 213 Villa Franca Pag. 148 Villa Franca de Panades Pag. 157 Villa Franca de Conflent Pag. 163 Vynoxberg, or Winoxberge Pag. 17 Virson Pag. 53 Ʋlmen Pag. 10 Ʋngwar Pag. 178 Ʋnna, R. Pag. 237 Volo Pag. 237 Voidenor Pag. 238 Ʋscopia or Scopia Pag. 205 W. WAlcourt Pag. 46 Great-Waradin Pag. 176 Weissemburg or Alba-Julia Pag. 193 Weissemburg or Cron Weissemburg Pag. 79 Wesel Pag. 111 Wihitz or Vihitz Pag. 213 Worms Pag. 92 Wynoxberg Pag. 17 Y. YPres Pag. 15 Yseghem or Isenghien, F. Yvoix Pag. 54 Z. ZAbern or Sabern Pag. 80 Zante Pag. 265 Zara Pag. 215 Zatmar Pag. 178 Zarnata Pag. 256 Zemlin Pag. 181 Zemonico Pag. 215 Zeng, or Segna Pag. 212 Zolnock Pag. 176 Zulch or Zulptch Pag. 116 Zuchria Pag. 234 FINIS.
Books newly Printed for Tho. Salusbury, at the Kings Arms near St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet∣street. AN Essay against Ʋnequal Marriages, in four Chapters, 1. The Introduction. 2. Against Old Persons Marry∣ing with Young. 3. Against Persons Marrying without Pa∣rents or Friends Consent. 4. Against Persons Marrying without their Consent. By S. Bufford, Gent. in 12. bound price 1 s. Eachards Gazetteers, or Newsmans Interpreters, being a Geographical Index of all Cities, Towns, &c. in Europe, with their distances from each other, and to what Prince they are now subject; very necessary for the right understanding of all Forreign and Domestick News Letters and Gazetts. 12. bound, price 2 s. A most Compleat Compendium of Geography, General and Spe∣cial, describing all the Empires, Kingdoms and Dominions in the whole World, collected according to the latest Disco∣veries, and agreeing with the choicest and newest Maps, 12. bound, price 1 s. 6 d. Exact Description of Ireland, Surveying all its Provinces and Counties; shewing the exact state of that Kingdom, and all the principal Things that are necessary to be known; Illu∣strated with five Maps, one of the whole Kingdom, the other of each particular Province, 12. bound, price 1 s. 6 d. Flanders or the Spanish Netherlands, most accurately de∣scribed, shewing the several Provinces, their Bounds, Di∣mensions, Rivers, Riches and Strength; with an exact de∣scription of the Cities, and who they are at present subject to; very necessary for the understanding the Wars in those Countries, 12. bound, 1 s. The Duke of Savoy's Dominions most accurately described, with some adjacent parts, shewing all that is necessary to be known, and very useful for the understanding of the present War in those parts. Price 3 d. The five last all done by Lau∣rance Eachard, A. B. of Christ's Colledge in Cambridge. The Royal Cuckold; or, Great Bastard. Giving an Ac∣count of the Birrh and Pedigree of Lewis Le Grand, the First French King of that Name and Race; A Tragy-Comedy, as it is Acted by his Imperial Majesty's Servants, at the Amphi∣theater in Vienna. Translated out of the German Language, by Paul Vergerius.
