C2415 E340_5* 99861494 159734
THE KINGS LETTER To the Marquesse of ORMOND: AND The Marquesse of ORMONDS LETTER to MONROE. RELATING The Kings whole Design, concerning all the three Kingdoms. LONDON: Printed, by I. C. Iune 8. 1646.
TO MAJOR GENERALL MONRO. SIR, HAving this Morning re∣ceived a dispatch from His Majestie, and Com∣mand to impart it not onely to His Councell, but to all His Loyall Subjects: I am confident you have so good title to a
knowledge thereof, that I have held it my part instantly to dispatch it unto you by an Expresse, and so Sir, wishing you all hap∣pinesse, Frest Your assured humble Servant, ORMOND. Dublin Castle, May 21. 1646. The Kings Letter to the Marquesse of ORMOND. CHARLES REX. RIght Trusty and entirely beloved Co∣sen and Councellor, we greete you well, having used all possible meanes
by sending many gracious Messages to the two Houses of Parliament, wherein we have offered all they have heretofore desi∣red from them nothing but what them∣selves since these unhappy Warres have of∣fered to procur a personall Treaty with them for a safe and and well grounded Peace, and having instead of a dutifull and peaceable returne to our said Messages, re∣received either no answer at all, or such as argues nothing will satisfie them but the ruine; not only of us, our Posterity and friends, but even of Monarchy it selfe. And having lately received very good Security, that we and all that do or shall adhere to us, shall be safe in our Person, Ho∣nour, and Consciences in the Soo ch Army, and that they shall really and effectually joyne with us, and with such as will come in unto us, and joyne with them for our preservation and shall imply their Armies and forces to assist us to the procuring of an happy and well grounded Peace for the good of us, and our Kingdomes in the recovery of Our just right.
We have resolved before Newark, And if it shall please God that we come safe thither, we are resolved to use our best indeavours with their assistance, and with the con∣junction of the forces under the marquesse of Montrosse, and such of our well affected Subjects of England as shall rise for us to procure, if it may be an honourable and speedy Peace with those who have hitherto refused to give eare to any meanes tending thereunto. Of which our resolution we hould it ne∣cessary to give you this advertizement as well to satisfie you and all our Councell, and loyall Subjects with you to whom we will that you communicate these our Let∣ters, that failing in our dearest and sinceer endeavours by Treaty, to put an end to the miseries of this our Kingdome, we esteemed Our selfe obliged to leave no probable expe∣dient unattempted to preserve Our Crown and Friends from the usurpation and tyran∣nie of those whose Actions declare so mani∣festly their Design to overthrow the Lawes
and happy established Government of this Kingdome. And now We have made known unto you Our Resolution, VVe re∣commend to your special Care the disposing and managing of Our Af∣faires on that side, as you shall con∣ceive most for Our Honour and Ser∣vice, being confident the course VVe have taken (though with some haz∣zard to Our Person) will have a good influence on that Our King∣dome, and Defence, if not altogether prevent the Rebels transporting of Forces from those Parts into that Kingdom. And Wee desire you to satisfie all Our wel-affected Subjects on that side, of Our Princely Care of them; whereof they shall receive the effect, as soone as God shal
enable Vs: Wee desire you to use some meanes to let Us and Our Councell at  Oxon: here frequently from you, and of your Actions and Conditions there. And soGOD prosper your Loyall Endea∣vours. Given at Our Court at Oxon: the Thirteenth of April, 1646. By His Majesties Command. EDWARD NICHOLAS. FINIS.
