C2503 E458_11 99864474 116704
His Maiesties Most gratious ANSWER TO THE VOTES Of the two Houses OF PARLIAMENT: Presented to Him at Carisbrook Castle, by the Right Honourable the Earle of Middlesex; Sir Io. Hipsley Knight; and John Bulkley Esquier, on Munday the 7th of this present, August. 1648. In order to a Personall Treaty for the settling a safe and a well grounded Peace. LONDON, Printed August 14. 1648.
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
The Kings most gratious Answer to the Votes of both Houses of Parliament; In order to a Personall Treaty, for the setling of a safe and a well grounded Peace. Carisbrook Castle 10 August 1648. IF the Peace of my Dominions were not much dearer to mee, then any particular Interest whatsoever; I had too much reason to take notice of the se∣verall Votes which passed against me, and the sad condition I have been in now above these seven Moneths. But since you my two Houses of Parliament have opened (as it seemes to me) a faire beginning to a hap∣py Peace, I shall heartily apply my selfe thereunto; and to that end, I will as clearly and shortly as I may, set you downe those things which I conceive necessary to this
blessed Worke, so that we together may re∣move all impediments, that may hinder a happy conclusion of this Treaty, which with all cheerfulnesse I do embrace. And to this wished end, your selves have laid most excellent grounds: for what can I reasonably expect more, then to Treat with Honour, Freedome, and Safety, upon such Propositions as you have or shall present unto me, and such as I shall make to you? But withall remember, that it is the definiti∣on, not names of things which make them rightly known; And that without means to perform, no Proposition can take effect; And truly my present condition is such, that I can no more Treat, then a blind man judge of colours, or one run a race who hath both his feet fast tide together; wherefore my first necessary demand is, That you will recall all such Votes and Orders, by which people are frighted from comming, writing, or speaking freely to me. Next, that such men of all Professions, whom I shall fend for, as of necessary use to me in this Treaty, may bee admitted to
wayt upon me; In a word, that I may be in the same state of freedom I was in when I was last at Hampton Court. And in deed lesse cannot in any reasonable measure make good those offers which you have made me by your Votes; for how can I treat with ho∣nour so long as people are terrifi'd with Votes and Orders against coming to speak, or write to mee; And am I honourably treated, so long as there is none about mee (except a Barber who came now with the Commissio∣ners) that ever I named to wayt upon mee, Or with freedome, (untill I may call such un∣to me of whose services I shall have use in so great and difficult a work) And for safety (I speake not of my Person, having no ap∣prehension that way) how can I judge to make a safe and well grounded Peace, un∣till I may know (without disguise) the true present State of all my Dominions, and par∣ticularly of all those whose Interests are ne∣cessarily concern'd in the Peace of these Kingdomes? which leads me naturally to the last necessary demand I shall make for the bringing of this Treaty to a happy end, which is,
That you alone, or you and I joyntly, do in∣vite the Scots to send some Persons authorised by them to Treat upon such Propositions, as they shall make; for certainly the pulique and necessary Interesse they have in this great Settlement, is so clearly plain to all the world, that I believe no body will deny the necessity of their concurrence in this Treaty, in Order to a durable Peace. Where∣fore I will onely say, that as I am King of both Nations, so will I yeild to none in either Kingdom for being truly and zealously affected for the Good and Honour of both; my resolution being never to be partiall for either, to the prejudice of the o∣ther. Now as to the Place (because I conceive it to be rather a circumstanstiall then reall part of this Treaty, I shall not much insist upon it) I name Newport in this Isle, yet the fervent zeale I have that a speedy end be put to these unhappy distra∣ctions, doth force me earnestly to desire you to consider what a great losse of time it will be to Treat so farre from the Body of my two Houses, when every small debate (of which doublesse there will be many) must be transmitted to Westminster be∣fore it be concluded: And really I think (though to some it may seeme a paradox) that peoples minds will be much more apt to settle, seeing mee Treat in or neare London, then in this Isle, because so long as I am here, it will never be believed by many, that I am really so free, as before this Treaty begin I expect to be: And so I leave and recommend this
point to your serious consideration; And thus I have not only fully accepted of the Treaty, which you have proposed to mee by your Votes of the third of this Month; but also given it all the fur∣therance that lies in me, by demanding the necessary meanes, for the effectuall performance thereof: All which are so necessarily employed by, though not particularly mentioned in your Votes, as I can no wayes doubt of your ready complyance with me herein; I have now no more to say, but to conjure you, by all that is deare to Christians, Honest men, or good Patriots: that yee will make all the expe∣dition possible to begin this happy work, by hasting down your Commissioners fully Authorized and well instructed, and by enabling mee (as I have shewed you) to Treat; Praying the God of peace so to blesse our endeavors, that all my Domini∣ons may speedily enjoy a safe and well-grounded Peace. CHARLES R. To the Speaker of the Lords House pro tempore, to be com∣municated to the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England at Westminster.
HIS MAIESTIES Message To both Houses of Parliament; Brought from the Isle of WIGHT upon Mouday the fourteenth of August 1648. By the Right Honourable, the Earle of Middlesex, Sir Iohn Hipsley, and Master Bunckley concerning the Personall Treaty. C R DIV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y royal blazon or coat of arms Printed in the Yeare. 1648.
CARISBROOKE Aug. 10. 1648. IF the peace of my Domini∣ons were not much dearer to me than any particular interest whatsoever, I had too much reason to take notice of the severall Votes which passed against Me, and the sad condition I have bin in now above these seven moneths; But since you, my two Houses of Par∣liament, have opened (as it seemes to me) a faire beginning to a happy Peace, I shall heartily apply my selfe thereun∣to, and to that end I will as clearly and shortly as I may, set you downe those things which I conceive necessary to this blessed worke; so that we together
may remove all impediments that may hinder a happy conclusion of this Trea∣ty, which with all cheerfulnesse I em∣brace. And to this wished end your selves have laid most excellent grounds; for what can I reasonably expect more than to treat with Honour, Freedom & Safety, upon such propositions as you have, or shall present unto Me, and such as I shall make to you. But withall remember that it is the definition not names of things, which make them rightly knowne; and that without means to performe no pro∣position can take effect: and truly my present condition is such, that I can no more treat, than a blinde man judge of colours, or one run a race who hath both his feet fast tyed together; wherefore my first necessary demand is, That yee would recall all such Votes and Orders by which people are frighted from com∣ming, writing, or speaking freely to Me; next, that such men of all professions whom I shall send for as of necessary use
to me in this Treaty may be admitted to wait upon me. In a word, that I may be in the same state of freedome I was in when I was last at Hampton-Court, and in∣deed lesse cannot in any reasonable measure make good those offers which you have made me by your Votes; for how can I treat with Honour as long as people are terrified by Votes, and order to come, speak, or write to me, and am I honorably treated so long as there is none about me except a Barber, who now came with the Commissioners that I ever named to wait upon me: or with freedom untill I may call such unto me, of whose services I shall have use in so great and difficult worke: and for Safety (I speake not of my Person having no apprehension that way,) how can I judge to make a safe and well grounded Peace, untill I may know without disguise the true present state of all my Dominions, and particularly of all those whose interests are necessarily concerned in the Peace of these King∣domes
which leades me naturally to the last necessary demand, I shall make for the bringing of this Treatie to a happy end, which is. That I alone, or you and I joyntly; doe invite the Scots to send some per∣sons authorized by them, to Treat upon such Propositions as they shall make, for certainly, the publique and neces∣sary interest they have in this great set∣telement, is so clearely plaine to all the world that I beleeve no body will de∣ny the necessity of their concurrence in order to a durable Peace, wherefore I will onely say, that as I am a King of both Nations, so I will yeeld to none in either Kingdome for being truly and zealously affected, for the good and ho∣nour of both, my resolution being ne∣ver to be partiall for either, to the preju∣dice of the other. Now as to the place, because I conceive it to be rather a cir∣cumstantiall then reall part of this Treatie, I shall not much insist upon it, I name Newport in this Isle, yet the fer∣vent
zeale I have that a speedy end be put to these unhappy distractions, doth move me earnesty to desire you to con∣fider what a great losse of time it will be to Treat so farre from the body of my two Houses, when every small debate of which, doubtlesse there will be may ny, must be transmitted to Westminster before it be concluded. And really I thinke, though to some it may seeme a Parodox, that peoples minds will be much more apt to settle, seeing me Treat in or neare London, then in this Isle, because so long as I am here, it will never be believed by many, that I am so really free, as be∣fore this Treatie begin I expect to be: and so I leave and recommend this point to your serious consideration. And thus I have not onely fully accepted of the Treatie, which you have proposed to me, by your votes of the third of this moneth; but also given it all the fur∣therance that lyes in me, by demanding the necessary meanes for the effectuall
performance thereof, all which is so ne∣cessarily implyed by, though not par∣ticulary mentioned in your Votes, as I can no waies doubt of your ready complyance with me herein, I have now no more to say but to conjure you by all that is deare to Christians, honest menor good Patriots, that yee will make all the expedition possible to be∣gin this happy worke, by hasting down your Commissioners, fully authorized and well instructed, and by inabling me (as I have shewed you) to Treat pray∣ing the God of Peace so to blesse our in∣deavours, that all my Dominions may speedily enjoy a safe well grounded Peace. Charles R. For the Speaker of the Lords House pro tem∣pore, to be communicated to the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England at Westminster. FINIS.
