C3874A 45504421 171727
Charles II wearing crown C R God Save the King.
THE CHILDS BOOK AND YOUTHS BOOK In two Parts. The First teaching an easie and de∣lightful way to read true English, with several things necessary for Children to be instructed in: As Prayers, Graces, Be∣havior, & choice places of Scripture, &c. The Second Containing a Method for Spelling, A Catechism, A confession of Faith, A Copy Book, A perpetual Almanack, A Chronology, Rules for Arithmetick, A form of Inditing Letters, and choice of Trades: With other useful things. The Eighth Edition by S. T. LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most sacred Ma∣jesty, and are to be sold at the Angel in S. Pauls Church-yard. 1672
To all Parents and Teachers of Children. THis small Book you will find fitted to a Childs capacity, full of delight, and very easie, containing such matters needful for children and Youths to be in∣structed in. The childish passages pass over: I hope they will be to children, as milk to babes; And there is not only milk for babes, but also meat for stronger Capa∣cities. That it may please all, and offend none, is the desire of S. T.
THE CHILD'S BOOK. The Capital Letters. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V U W X Y Z. The small Roman Letters. a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z. The Vowels. a c i o u y. The Consonants. b c d f g h k l m n p q r s s t v w x y z. The double Letters. ct ff ss fi si fl sl st sh ffi ssi ffl.
The great Italick Letters. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V Ʋ W X Y Z. The small Italick Letters. a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z. The great English Letters. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T Ʋ W X Y Z. The small English Letters. a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r r s s t v u w x y z. ab eb ib ob ub ac ec ic oc uc ad ed id od ud
af ef if of uf ag eg ig og ug ak ek ik ok uk al el il ol ul am em im om um an en in on un ap ep ip op up ar er ir or ur as es is os us at et it ot ut ax ex ix ox ux Sorts of Vowels. A E I O U Y A E I O Ʋ Y a e i o u y a e i o u y a e i o u y
Syllables. Ba Be bi bo bu by Ca Ce ci co cu cy Da De di do du dy Fa Fe fi fo fu fy Ga Ge gi go gu gy Ha He hi ho hu hy Ka Ke ki ko ku ky La Le li lo lu ly Ma Me mi mo mu my Na Ne ni no nu ny Pa Pe pi po pu py Qua Que qui quo quu quy Ra Re ri ro ru ry Sa Se si so su sy Ta Te ti to tu ty Wa We wi wo wu wy
depiction of book I will love to look, And read my Book. dog The Dog will fight, And the Dog will bite. cat The Cat will A Mouse kill. sun The Sun will shine, And make the Fields fine. moon The Moon will give light, In the darkest night.
The Childs resolution. I will to my power be a good child. I will love to look upon my book. I shall read well if I learn to spel. I shall read well, if I read much. The way to read well is to read often. I will love and obey my Parents. I will love my Teacher. I will live to go to School. I will not dirty my clothes. I will not tell a lie. I will not swear. I will not curse. I will behave my self mannerly towards my Betters.
depiction of book Good Books teach wisdom, and he that readeth much increa∣seth in knowledge. dog A living Dog is better than a dead Lion; and a dogged disposition is not good. cat Play not with a Cat too much, for the Cats breath will do thee much harm. sun Let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath. moon God appointeth the Moon for season and the Sun knowet hi going down.
seated teacher facing standing pupil, in front of children seated (on risers?) in four rows of six, each holding a letter of the alphabet THE SCHOOL.
An useful Catalogue of Names. 1 A for A-dam, or Anne 2 B for Ben-ja-min, or Be-a-trice 3 C for Charls, or Chri-sti-a-na 4 D for Da-vid, or Di-nah 5 E for Ed-ward, or E-li-za-beth 6 F for Fran-cis, or Fran-ces 7 G for George or Grace 8 H for Hen-ry, or Han-nah 9 I for I-sa-ac, or I-sa-bel 10 K for Ke-nelm, or Ka-the-rine 11 L for Luke, or Ly-di-a 12 M for Matthew, or Ma-ry 14 O for O-li-ver, or O-lym-pi-a 15 P for Pe-ter, or Pa-ti-ence 16 R for Robert, or Rose
17 S for So-lo-mon, or Sa-rah. 18 T for Tho-mas, or Tho-ma-sin 19 W for Wil-li-am, or Win-ni∣tride. adult in cap and gown pointing finger toward child in knee britches The Masters Correction, Is the Childs Protection.
THE Childs Catechism. Question. CHilde, who made you? Answer. God. Qu. What is God? Answ. God is a spirit, most strong, wise, holy, and good. Qu. How did God make man? An. God made man of dust and earth, and breathed life into him, and he became a living soul. Qu. Did man sin against God at the beginning, as men do now? An. No truly: God made man good, but he sinned, and did fall.
Qu. Who did redeem fallen man? An. Jesus Christ the Son of God. Qu. How did Christ Jesus redeem Man? An. He died upon the Cross. Qu. If Christ died for us, what must we do for Christ? An. We must do his will, and live to his glory and praise. Qu. What is Christ's will? An. That we must not sin. Qu. What is sin? An. It is a sin to take Gods Name in vain: it is a sin to swear, to curse, or tell a lie: it is a sin to be undutiful to Parents, or to disobey their lawful commands:
it is a sin not to keep Gods Com∣mands, or the Ten Command∣ments. If I learn apace, I shall come to them. Qu. Can you live in this world, and not sin? An. No indeed. Qu. Who was the first man li∣ving? An. Adam. Qu. Who was the most faithful man? An. Abraham. Qu. Who was the meekest man? An. Moses. Qu. Who was the first High-Priest. An. Melchisedeck.
Qu. Who was the best man? An. David. Qu. Who was the wisest man? An. Solomon. Qu. Who was the strongest man? An. Sampson. Qu. Who was the most patient man? An. Job. Qu. Who was the comliest man? An. Absalom. Qu. Who was the most loving a∣mong men? An. Jonathan. Qu. Who was the oldest man? An. Methusalem. Qu. Who was the worst of men? An. Judas.
Qu. Who are the best Children? An. Those that are most duti∣ful to their Parents, and delight to read the word of God. Qu. What is the word of God? An. The word of God is the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, written for our in∣struction, where the whole mind of God is revealed unto man∣kind, as a rule for all men to walk by. Qu. Canst thou say the Lords Payer, which our Saviour Christ taught his Disciples? An. yes. Master. Let me hear it.
person kneeling in prayer; rays extending downward from clouds The Prayer of the faithful avail∣eth much.
The Lords Prayer, which our Sa∣viour taught his Disciples; good for children to learn within book, and without book. OƲr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our dayly bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptati∣on, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
Child, learn this prayer by heart, that you may say it without book; and every morning, before you go to School, kneel and pray to God to bless thee, and that God would give thee thy daily bread, and teach thee wisdom. The Apostles Creed, or Articles of our Faith, which every man, woman, and Child ought to believe, and say of a truth. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth: And in Iesus Christ his only Son, our Lord: which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary,
suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried. He descended into hell: The third day be rose again from the dead: He ascended into Heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty: From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost: The holy Catholick Church: The communion of Saints: The forgiveness of sins: The resur∣rection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen. Child, learn these Articles of your Faith, and the Lord increase thy faith in his Son Christ Jesus.
Moses holding a staff and the tablets of the ten commandments The Two Tables. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. I II III IIII V VI VII VIII IX X
The Ten Commandments, which God hath commanded every man, woman, and child, to keep. Exod. 20. GOD spake these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God which hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. 1. THou shalt have no other Gods but me. 2. Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above or in the earth be∣neath, or in the water under the earth; thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous
God, and visit the sins of the fa∣thers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my com∣mandments. 3. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain. 4. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, Six days shalt thou labour and do all that thou hast to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it thou shalt do no
manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man∣servant, and thy maid-servant, thy cattel, and the stranger, that is within thy gates: For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it. 5. Honour thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. 6. Thou shalt do no murther. 7. Thou shalt not commit a∣dultery. 8. Thou shalt not steal.
9 Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy Neighbour. 10. Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours house, thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his. To give thanks before Meat. GOD bless the KING, and guide his ways, And send us peace in these our days. To give thanks after Meat. GOD be praised, the Church preserved, the KING de∣fended, Peace maintained.
To give thanks before meat. GLorious God, I pray thee to bless all thy Mercies unto me, and make me a thankful Child. Teach me, O Lord, to live worthy of them for Christ his sake. Amen. To give thanks after meat: BLessed and praised be thy ho∣ly Name, O Lord God, for all thy mercies, for feeding my body; O Lord, feed my soul with the Bread of life, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.
Thanksgiving before Meat. OUR gracious God and mer∣ciful Father, in and by our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, we have cause to praise thy great Name for all thy fatherly Mer∣cies, O Lord, sanctifie them unto us, that we may grow in wisdom, holiness, and true thankfulness, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake. Amen. Thansgiving after Meat. HOly God, we have every day experience of thy in nume∣rable mercies: In thee we live,
move and have our being, we praise thy Name for feeding our bodies at this time. We bless thy Name for our Creation, Redem∣ption, and Sanctification: Prepare us O Lord, for Glorification, that we may praise thy Name for ever and ever. Amen. A Prayer for Sunday morning. MOst holy God and merciful Father, I desire to praise thy holy name for all thy mercies bestowed upon me: for Christ his sake, continue thy love and mercy towards me. Teach me, O Lord, to serve thee this day with fear: Help me, O God, to worship and
serve thee in the power of thy ho∣ly spirit; let this day be a day of comfort to my poor empty soul. Teach me, O Lord Jesus, to hear and to profit; send thou the Com∣forter thy holy Spirit to teach and guide me in the way of truth. O my God, sanctifie my soul, and body, my mind, thoughts, deeds, and words, that I may be free to keep holy thy Sabbath. These things O Lord, and what else is needful for me, I beg at thy Fa∣therly hands, in the Name and Mediation of thy only Son, and my alone Saviour, Jesus Christ our Lord.
A prayer to be used before you go to bed. HOly God & merciful Father, in and through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, for his sake pardon all my idle thoughts, words and deeds, which I have committed against thee: teach me to weep for my sins, teach me to repent for my sins: cause me to be ashamed for my sins, let not my sins, O Lord, be any hindrance of thy mercies: bless me this night, O Lord, keep me from all evil, and raise me in the morning following, and help me to walk before thee in all holiness, for Jesus Christ his sake.
A Prayer to be said in the Morning, or at any time. O Lord God of Heaven and Earth, by thee alone we are preserved: O good God, we have nothing but we have it from thee. O Lord bless me this day, O Lord keep me that I do not sin against thee: O my God, keep my mouth that I may not offend with my lips. O Lord, keep my feet, that I do not run in the way of the wicked. O my Creator, create in me a delight to do thy will. O my God and Maker, make me such a creature as thou hast com∣manded me to be. O my God
and Saviour, save me from my sins. O Lord, pardon the sins of this day. O Lord, pardon my unknown sins. O glorious God, fill me with wisdom. O my Saviour, fill me with thy good Spirit. O thou that art the Saviour of the world, send the Comforter thy Holy Spirit, which shall teach and guide me in the ways of Truth and Holiness: O thou that art the King of Hea∣ven, make me heavenly-minded. O Lord, teach me to hate lying∣vanities. O Lord, teach me to fear to fin against thy Holy Name. Teach me, O Lord, to love thee, to obey thee, to serve thee. O Lord, help me to delight to
keep thy commandments. O Lord do more abundantly for me than I am able to ask or think, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake; to whom with thy holy Majesty, and ever blessed Spirit, be given all honour, glory, and power, both now and for ever. Amen. Psal. 67. GOd be merciful unto us and bless us, and shew us the light of thy countenance, and be merciful unto us. That thy way may be known upon the earth: thy saving health among all nations. Let the people praise thee, O
God; yea, let all the people praise thee. O let the Nations rejoyce and be glad: for thou shalt judge the folk righteously, and govern the Nations upon the earth. Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee. Then shall the Earth bring forth her increase, and God even our own God, shall give us his blessing. God shall bless us, and all the ends of the world shall fear him.
three figures walking: one man wearing hat, followed by another holding hat, followed by short woman or girl Courteous behaviour is the bodys grace, And sweet Expressions shew a grace∣ful mind. Learn then betimes to run in Ver∣tues Race, Strive to be formost, and leave all behind.
Childrens Behaviour when they rise, and at School. 1. FIrst, Child, I advise thee, not to sleep over much; for it will dull thy wit, and hurt thy brain. 2. Secondly, Let thy first work in the morning be, to praise the Lord for his protecting thee the night past, and crave his heavenly Blessing upon thee for the day following. 3. Thirdly, Put on thy cloths handsomely, and wash thy face and hands, comb thy head, and brush thy cloths. 4. Fourthly, be dutiful, and shew reverence to thy Parents in
bowing the body towards them, & craving their prayers for thee. 5. Fifthly, See that thy cloaths be not torn; if they are, tell the servans, or thy parents of it. 6. Sixthly, See that your shoes and stockings be clean; either make them clean your self, or cause some other to do it for you. 7. Seventhly, Have a care that you blow not your Nose unman∣nerly, but keep a Pocket-hand∣cherchief for that purpose. 8. Eighthly, Be careful to keep your hands always clean, and your nails cut short, that so you may not gather dirt in them. 9. Ninthly, when you come
into the School, put off your Hat, and bow your body to your Ma∣ster or Mistriss; go then to your place, and sit mannerly: be always looking upon, and learning your Book. 10. Tenthly, I would have you to give heed, and carefully observe these Lessons, and I hope what is wanting, your Master or Mistress will supply it, and teach thee, that thou must not fight nor quarrel, nor kick nor spit upon each o∣ther, nor any other unseemly acti∣on, too often used with Chil∣dren, both in the Schools, and elsewhere.
Childrens behaviour walking in the streets. 11. Child, when you walk in the street, shew reverence to those you meet, and put off your Hat, and bow your body, saying solidly and mannerly, A good morning to you: or, A good evening to you, God be with you, The Lord keep you, or such like civil greeting. 12. When you are going in the street, do not cry, nor bawl, nor sing, nor kick at any thing, nor give evil words to any. 13. I would have you take no∣tice of men, and act as wisely as
you can, as if your father and Mo∣ther did see you: or, as if all mens eyes were upon you: If you do so, every body will speak well of you, and say, There is a pretty child; that child is a comfort to his Pa∣rents, he doth deserve to be be∣loved. Childrens behaviour at Table. 14. Child, when thou art going to the Table, let thy Betters sit down before thou dost seat thy self. 15. If thou dost give thanks or any other; let thy countenance be very grave and graceful; so that every one be covered before
thou puttest on thy Hat, and then bow thy body. 16. Let every one be served be∣fore thee, and then eat not greedi∣ly, or unmannerly. 17. Let not thy tongue run be∣fore thy wit, but be silent; hear diligently what others say, and learn wisdom. 18. See that you spill no Pot∣tage upon the Table: Cut your Bread, and keep the bones of your Meat upon the corner of your Trencher. 19. I would have you not to blow your Nose, if possible you can avoid it, nor spit much, nor play at the Table by no means,
and when Grace is said, rise, and take your Trencher and stool a∣way, and bow your body to the Company; and what ever else is needful for you to learn, that is here wanting, I hope your Pa∣rents will instruct you. Childrens behaviour at Church. 20. Child, when thou comest into the Church, think with thy self that thou comest into the special presence of God, and de∣sire his heavenly assistance to en∣lighten thy understanding, and make thee willing to be guided by his word. 21. When thou art in the
Church, take heed that thou dost not offend with thy mouth: take a convenient place to sit where you may hear the Minister, and be attentive to carry away with you as much as you can of the Sermon. 22. See that you do not play in the Church, or talk, or cry, or laugh, or walk about in the time of the Sermon. These Lessons I have collected for thy instructions; praying that God will give thee grace to ob∣serve them, and that he will teach thee in those things that belong to his glory, and thy souls com∣fort.
A short and brief way to find seve∣ral places of Scripture. THe Creation of the world, and all things therein, Genesis 1. The Lord drowned the world with a great Flood, only Noah and his family saved, and the creatures with him in the Ark, chap 7, 8. The Ten Commandements, Exodus 30. The sin of Ignorance, Levit. 5. Aaron dieth, Numbers 20. A stubborn son is to be stoned to death, Deut. 21. Moses his age and death, Deut. 34. Samuel annointeth David, 1 Sam. 16.
Solomons Petition to be wise, 1 Kings 3. David exhorteth to fear God, 1 Chron. 28. Satans malice to Job, Job 2. The Kingdom, Priesthood, Conquest, and passion of Christ, Psalm 110. Christ the Saviour of the world is promised, Isaiah 7. 14. St. Matthew's Gospel. Christ is born of the Virgin Mary, Chap. 1. Christ is tempted of the devil, Chap. 3. Christ preacheth a Sermon in the mount, Chap. 5.
The winds and sea obey Christ, Chap. 8. Children brought to Christ to bless, and to lay his hands upon them, Chap. 19. Judas betrayeth Christ, Chap. 27. Christs death and burial, Chap. 27. His Resurrection, Chap. 28. The Gospel according to St. Mark. The Office of John Baptist: Je∣sus Christ is baptized, Chap. 1. Christ feedeth five thousand with five loaves and two fishes, and walketh upon the Sea, Chap∣ter 6.
Christ falsely accused, mocked, and crucified, chap. 15. An Angel declareth the Resur∣rection of Christ, chap. 16. The Gospel according to St. Luke. The Nativity of Jesus Christ: many sing praises to God for it, chap. 2. Christ fasteth forty days, chap∣ter 4. Christ calleth and chooseth his twelve Disciples, chap. 6. He teacheth them to pray, chap. 11. The Lords Supper instituted; and he confesseth himself to be the Son of God, chap. 22.
Christ condemned, his death, and burial, Chap. 23. Christs Resurrection is decla∣red, and he appeareth to his two Disciples, Chap. 24. The Gospel according to St. John. The Divinity, Humanity, and Office of Jesus Christ, Chap. 1. Christ turned water into wine, Chap. 2. Lazarus his sickness and death, whom Christ raised being four dayes buried, chap. 11. Christ washeth his Disciples feet, chap. 13. Christ is betrayed by Judas, de∣nied by Peter, chap. 18.
Christs death and burial, Chap∣ter 19. Christs Resurrection and Ap∣pearing to Mary Magdalen, and to his Disciples, Chap. 20. The Acts of the Apostles writ∣ten by St. Luke. Christ prepareth his Apostles to the beholding of his Ascensi∣on, who saw Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Saviour of the world, ascend up into Heaven, and now intercedeth to God his Father for poor sinful souls, who ought to turn from their evil ways, & wait for his second coming to Judg∣ment, according to the Scripture.
Several places of Scripture neces∣sary to be known and practised by children. CHildren, obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right, Ephes. 6. 1. Come ye children, hearken un∣to me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord, Psal. 34. 12. Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing to the Lord, Col. 3. 20. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it, Prov. 22. 6. Hearken unto thy father that
begat thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old, Proverbs 23. 22. When I was a Child, I spake as a child, I understood as a chlid, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put a way childish things, 1 Cor. 13. 11. Brethren, be not children in understanding, howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understand∣ing be men, 1 Cor. 14. 20. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleights of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to de∣ceive,
Ephesians 4. 14. Honour thy father and mother, which is the first Commandment with promise, Ephes. 6. 1. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his shoulders, and his Name shall be called wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Esay 9. 6. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil, whosoever doth not righ∣teousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother, 1 John 3. 10.
More Scriptures necessary for Children to read. Psalm. 131. Proverbs 22. 11. and 23. 24. Isaiah 3. 5. Deut. 4. 10. Job 27. 24. Matth. 10. 13. Acts 2. 39. Rom. 8. 16, 17. 2 Cor. 12. 14. Gal. 3. 26. Col. 3. 21. Gen. 1. 1. Gen. 1. 26. Gen. 3. 6. Matth. 2. 1. Mark 15. 2, 17. Luke 2. 7. Luke 23. 33. Luke 24. 6. John 1. 1. John 3. 5. John 3. 16. John 3. 19. 1 Peter 3. 10, 11.
The Names and Order of all the Books of the Old and New Testa∣ment, good for children to learn. GEnesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy Joshua Judges Ruth 1 Samuel 2 Samuel 1 Kings 2 Kings 1 Chronicles 2 Chronicles Ezrah Nehemiah Esther Job Psalms Proverbs Ecclesiastes The song of Solomon Isaiah Jeremiah Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel
Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi. The Names of the Books of the New Testament. MAtthew Mark Luke John The Acts Romans 1 Corinthians 2 Corinthians Galatians Ephesians Philippians Colossians 1 Thessalonians 2 Thessalonians 1 Timothy 2 Timothy Titus Philemon
Hebrews James 1 Peter 2 Peter 1 John 2 John 3 John Jude The Revelati∣on. Figures and Numeral Letters. One 1 I Ten 10 X Twenty 20 XX Thirty 30 XXX Forty 40 XL Fifty 50 L Sixty 60 LX Seventy 70 LXX Eighty 80 LXXX Ninty 90 XC Hundred 100 C
Two hundred 200 CC Three hundred 300 CCC Four hundred 400 CCCC Five hundred 500 D Thirty five 35 XXXV Forty three 43 XLIII Fifty two 52 LII Sixty one 61 LXI Seventy seven 77 LXXVII Eighty nine 89 LXXXIX Ninety eight 98 XCVIII Hundred and three 103 CIII One thousand 1000 M Five hundred 500 D One hundred 100 C Fifty 50 L Ten 10 X One thousand, six hundred, sixty one.   MDCLXI.
Abbreviations often used. Qu. for Question. An. for Answer. Mr. for Master. Mris. for Mistress. Chap. for Chapter. v. for verse. & for and. &c. for, and so forth. Stops to be observed in reading. A Comma, A Colon: A Semicolon; A Period. Interrogation? Admiration! A Parenthesis () FINIS.
seated teacher facing standing pupil, in front of children seated (on risers?) in four rows of six, each holding a letter of the alphabet THE SCHOOL.
THE Youths Book. Consonants ending with a Vowel. bla ble bli blo blu bly bra che cli cro dru fly fra gle gri kno phu phy pra pse sci scho scru shy shra ske skri slo smu sly spa sphe spli squo stu stry swa wre wri wro wru wry Add all the vowels to every of the consonants, and they will run as the first to the last.
able eble ible oble uble yble aps ecke icle ocre ucre ycre act edde idge orte ufle yft afth eight igne ogle ugs ygs alch elch idle ofle ulke ylke alme elne ilde ols ulch ylch alre embe imme onip umph ymph amble empse impti once uncle anct end indle ong unge yngel angst ength inke oune uns yns ant enth intle ople ups yps apt epth irb orble urcre ycre art erdle irf orge urgle yrgle ark erdle irle orme urne yrgle arp erple irre orse urs yrne arsh erst irt ortle urth yrth arne esh isk osle usume yarne asse est istle otle uts yzle.
Of Diphthongs. A Diphthong is two Vowels giving a sound as, ai, ei, ou, oi, au, eu, ay, oy, ea, ee, oo, you meet with them often; as faith, hea∣ven, heir, loud, voice, graunt, eud, say, boy, read, bleed, blood. Of a Syllable. A Syllable is a perfect sound, made of several letters, which are spelled together: As r example, in Con-dem-na-ti-on, ere are five syllables: or, Di-vi∣▪on, four syllables. A vowel and consonant make a syllable: as, at, a-ny, i-dol, e-ver, &c.
Of different Spelling. IT is a very hard thing to write good English, or to spell well, I have therefore thought good to shew the young Learner, how near many words are in letter and sound: As for example, The winds did blow, and ca the ship of wines away. Give me advice; and advise m for the best. To trust to a broken reed; t read in a Book. Pontius Pilate: a skilful Pilot  guide a ship. They whetted their Sythe▪
with grief they did sigh. A man of low stature: the Ox did lowe. A man in a Jirking was jerking his horse. He took a Farm, a form of wholsome words, a fourm to sit upon. Leave coughing, or you shall be put in a Coffin. I did him a good chare, to set him in a chair, and give him good cheer. A Bowe made of Yew: you and I are good Friends. It is a vain thing to let blood in a wrong vein. It is too much for two men to
to write in one day. Philip will give a fillip. Sweet flowers, Wheat-flour, the floor of the house: the Beer flow∣reth in the cup. I guest with you, though you are a welcome ghest, yet I guess'd right of the matter. A great gap: to gape wide. I did hide the Horse-hide with Mr. Hide. Here is a Tun of wine: let us sing a Tune. The Wheel-right cannot write right a Rite or Ceremony. A man of might did give a small mite.
THE Youths Catechism. Qu. HOw may a man come to learn true Wisdom? An. By reading and practising that which is in the Scripture, 2 Tim. 3. 15. Qu. What is the Scripture? An. The Scripture is the Old and New Testament. Qu. Who did write the Scripture? An. Holy men of God, given by inspiration of God, 2 Tim. 3. 16. Qu. What is God? An. God is a Spirit, infinite,
eternal and unchangeable in his Being, wisdom, power, holiness, goodness, justice, and truth, Joh. 4. 24. Job 11. 7, 8, 9. Psal. 90. 22. Qu. How many Gods be there? An. But one God, 1 Cor. 8. 6. Qu. How many Persons be there in the Godhead? An. Three, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 1 John 5. 7. Qu. What are Gods Decrees? An. Gods decrees are his eter∣nal purpose concerning all things and persons, Eph. 1. 11. Qu. What is the work of Crea∣tion? An. The making of all things of nothing, Heb. 11. 3.
Qu. How long was God making all things? An. Six days, Exod. 20. 21. Qu. How did God create man? An. God created man in his own image, male and female, in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness, with dominion over the Creation, Gen. 1. 26. Col. 3. 10. Qu. Did our first Parents continue in that good estate wherein they were created? An. No: they being left to the freedom of their own will, did fall by sinning against God, Gen. 3. 6, 7. Qu. What is sin? An. The transgression of the
Law of God, 1 John 3. 4. Qu. What was Adam's sin? An. Eating of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 2. 17. Qu. Did all mankind fall with Adam in his Transgression? An. The Covenant being made with Adam, and his posterity, he did fall in his first transgression, Gen. 2. 16. Rom. 5. 12. Qu. What are our estates now by nature? An. We are dead in sins and trespasses, Eph. 2. 1. Qu. Did God leave all mankind in this condition? An. No: God hath sent his Son Jesus Christ to save all those
that believe in him, Luke 1. 35. Qu. How did God send his Son Christ Jesus? An. He was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, and became man, and li∣ved among us, Luke 1. 27. 1 Tim. 2. 5. Qu. What hath Christ done for us? An. He hath given himself a sa∣crifice to God for us, Eph. 2. 5. Qu. Why did Christ come to die? An. That he might give life to Believers, John 2. 16. Qu. How did he give life? An. By being King, Priest, and Prophet, Acts 3. 36.
Qu. What did Christ as Priest? An. He bought us with him∣self, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Qu. From what did he redeem us? An. From the curse of the law, Gal. 3. 1. Qu. How did he buy us and re∣deem us? An. By tasting of death upon the Cross, Phil. 2. 8. Qu. What doth Christ as a pro∣phet? An. He reveals Gods will to us, Matth. 11. 27. Qu. What doth Christ as a King? An. He rules by his spirit and word, Isaiah 30. 21.
Qu. Wherein did Christs humi∣liation consist. An. In being born, and made under the law, undergoing the miseries of this life, dying the death of the Cross, & continuing dead for a time, Luke 2. 7. Heb. 12. 2, 3. 1 Cor. 15. 25. Acts 2. 26. Qu. Wherein consists Christs ex∣altation? An. It consists in his rising again from the dead the third day, in ascending up into heaven, in sit∣ting at the right hand of God the Father, and coming to judge the world, at the last day, 1 Cor. 15. 4. Mark 6. 19. Acts 1. 11. Qu. Whence is faith?
An. It is the gift of God, Eph. 2. 8. Qu. What is faith? An. It is a trusting to Christ for Salvation, Acts 16. 31. Qu. What is Repentance? An. The hatred of, and eschew∣ing all evil, and delighting to do good, Psalm 13. 14. Qu. What is justification? An. It is an Act of Gods free grace, in pardoning all our sins in Jesus Christ, through faith, Rom, 3. 14. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21. Qu. What is Sanctification? An. Sanctification is the work of Gods free grace, whereby we are renewed in the whole man,
after the Image of God, 2 Thess. 2. 13. Eph. 4. 23, 24. Qu: What is adoption? An. Adoption is an act of Gods free grace, whereby we are recei∣ved into the number, and have a right to all the priviledges of the Sons of God, 1 John 3. 1 John 1. 12. Rom. 8. 14. Qu. What is the duty which God requireth of man? An. To fear him and keep his Commandments, Micah 6. 8. Qu. How many Commandments are there? An. Ten. Qu. What is required in the first Commandment?
An. To worship God aright, and none but the true God, Exod. 20. 3. Qu. What is required in the se∣cond Commandment? An. The second Commandment requireth the receiving, obser∣ving, & keeping pure & entire all such Religion & worship as God hath appointed, Exod. 20. 4, 5. Deut. 32. 46. Qu. What is required in the third Commandment? An. The true manner of Gods worship, Exod. 20. 7. Qu. What is required in the Fourth Commandment? An. It is required that we
should keep holy to God such set times of worship, as one day in seven, Exod, 20. 9, 10, 11. Deut. 5. 12. Qu. What is required in the fifth Commandment? An. It requireth the preserving the good name, and performing the duty belonging to every one in their places, Exod. 20. 12. Qu. What is required in the sixth Commandment? An. The sixth Commandment requireth all lawful endeavours to preserve our own lives, and the lives of others, Ex. 20. 13. Eph. 5. 28. Qu. What is required in the
seventh Commandment? An. To preserve our own and neighbours chastity, Ex. 20. 14. Qu. What is required in the eighth Commandment? An. To regard our neighbours good, and furthering the wealth of our selves and others, Exodus 20. 15. Qu. What is required in the ninth Commandment? An. To speak truth betwixt man and man; and to regard our own, and our neighbours good name, Exod. 20. 16. Zach. 8. 16. Qu. What is required in the tenth Commandment? An. Inward content, not to
covet our neighbours goods, Exo∣dus 20. 17. Qu. Are we able to keep all the Commandments? An. No: but we do dayly break them in thought, word, and deed, Gen. 6. 5. Rom. 3. 9. Qu. Are we saved by works? An. No: by grace we are sa∣ved, and that without works, Eph. 2. 8. Qu. Why then are good works to he done? An. To glorifie God in hea∣ven, Matth. 5. 16. Qu. What is a Sacrament? An. A Sacrament is an holy Ordinance instituted by Christ,
whereby Christ and the New Co∣venant are represented, sealed, and applyed to Believers, Gen. 17. 7, 10. 1 Cor. 11. 23. Qu. What are the Sacraments of the New Testament? An. The Sacraments of the New Testament, are Baptism and the Lords Supper, Math. 26. 26, 27. Qu. What is Baptism? An. It is a Sacrament wherein by the washing of water in the Name of the Father, Son, and Ho∣ly Ghost, we are entered into the Church of Christ, Rom 6. 4. Qu. What is the Lords Supper? An. It is a Sacrament, wherein by giving and receiving bread &
wine, as Christ hath appointed, his death is shewed forth, and the worthy Receivers made parta∣kers of the body and blood, with all his benefits, 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24. Qu. What is Prayer? An. Prayer is an offering up of our desires to God for things a∣greeable unto his will, in the Name of Christ; confessing our sins, and giving thanks for mer∣cies, 1 John 5. 14. John 16. 43. Psalm 32. 5, 6. An. The Lords Prayer, and all the word of God, laid down in
Scripture, Matt. 6. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Luke 10. 2, 3, 4. Q. What doth the Preface of the Lords Prayer teach us? An. The Preface which is (Our Father which art in Heaven) teacheth us to draw near to God, with all holy reverence and con∣fidence, that he will answer our prayers, Rom. 8. 13. Luke 11. 13. Qu. What do we pray for in the first Petition? An. The first Petition is (Hal∣lowed be thy name:) we pray that we and others may glorifie Gods name, and that God would do all things to his own glory, Psal. 38. Matth. 6. 9.
Qu. What do we pray for, in the second Petition? An. The second Petition is (Thy Kingdom come) we pray that the Kingdom of Satan may be de∣stroyed, & the Kingdom of Grace may be hastened, and that he might reign as King, Matth. 6. 10. Psal. 68. 1, 18. Rev. 12. 10, 11. Qu. What do we pray for in the third Petition? An. In the third Petition, which is (Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven) we pray that God would teach us to submit to his will in all things, and that ho∣liness and righteousness might be in us, Psalm 67. Matth. 6. 10.
Qu. What do we pray for in the fourth Petition? An. In the fourth Petition, which is (Give us this day our day∣ly bread) we pray that God of his free will would give us things ne∣cessary in this life; and we ought to pray for no more, Mat. 6. 11. Prov. 30. 8, 9. Qu. What do we pray for in the fifth Petition? An. In the fifth Petition, which is (And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors) we pray that God for Christ his sake would forgive our sins, as we forgive o∣thers that offend us, Luke 11. 4. Matth. 18. 35.
Qu. What do we pray for, in the sixth Petition? An. In the sixth Petition, which is (And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil) we pray that God would keep us from being tempted to sin, and that God would deliver us when we are tempted, Matth. 6. 13. and 26. 4. 2 Cor. 12. 1, 8. Qu. What doth the conclusion of the Lords prayer teach us? An. The Conclusion (which is, For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, & the Glory, for ever, Amen) teacheth us to attribute to God all glory & power, as King of all, which doth encourage us to pray
to, and praise God for ever, Amen. which is (so be it) Matth. 6. 13. 1 Chron. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. Of God the Father. THere is but one living and true God everlasting, with∣out body, parts, passion, of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness; the Maker and Preserver of all things, both visible and invisible; and in unity of this God-head, there be three Persons of one sub∣stance, power and eternity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
Of God the Son, Christ the Savi∣our of the world. CHrist the Son of God, the Word of the Father, begot∣ten from everlasting of the Fa∣ther, and Eternal God, one Sub∣stance with the Father, took mans nature upon him in the Womb of he blessed Virgin, of her sub∣stance, so that two whole and perfect Natures, that is to say, the Godhead & Manhood, were joy∣ned together in one Person, never to be divided, who for our sakes ruly suffered most grievous tor∣ments, was crucified, dead, and uried to reconcile his Father to
us and to be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for actual sin. Of God the Holy Ghost. THe Holy Ghost is very and eternal God; of one sub∣stance, majesty and glory with the Father, and the Son proceeding from the Father and the Son. Of men after death. AFter death, the bodies of men return to dust, and see cor∣ruption, but their spirits return to God that gave them, and Gods disposes of their souls according to their works; the souls of th
righteous in to peace and joy, and the souls of the wicked into shame and misery. Of the resurrection of the dead. AT the last day such as are found alive shall not die, but be changed, and all the dead shall be raised up with the same bo∣dies, and be united to their souls, and the bodies of the righteous, by the power & merits of Christ, partake of that unspeakable glo∣ry; and the bodies of the wicked to everlasting shame and misery, where shall be weeping, & wail∣ing and gnashing of teeth.
Of Heaven. HEaven is the Seat of God, and of Christ the Lamb, the Habitation of Angels, the Rest∣ing-place of the Faithful, far be∣yond thought; of which none can give a full and true report. Of Hell. HEll is in all things contrary to Heaven: the devils, and wicked Angels and spirits are there; the place of reprobates, full of horror, distress, and misery; the land of darkness: it is every∣where where Heaven is not.
Of Angels. ANgels were created of God, immortal, innocent, beauti∣ful, and holy: their habitation is in Heaven, always beholding the face of our Heavenly Father; they are mens guides & keepers; they are Gods messengers to save or to destroy. Of Conscience. IT is a Witness which our Souls carry about with us, excu∣sing or accusing; it speaks peace when we do good, and horror when we do evil: it is a great misery to have a seared consci∣ence:
a good conscience is a con∣tinual feast, it will never leave us; it is a witness for God, and a good conscience is the best por∣tion. Of Prayer. PRayer is the lifting up of the voice, heart, and soul to God, petitioning either for necessary things of this life, or forgiveness of sins committed. Faith joined with Prayer, maketh it more ef∣fectual: when we read, God speaks to us; and when we pray, we speak to God Payer and Repen∣tance bring peace to the un∣quieted conscience.
Of Ignorance. IGnorance is a defect, a weak∣ness, a distemper in the mind, which causeth a man to judge a∣miss of things: it is a want of wit, it is one of the greatest enemies man hath, the wisest man is not able to declare the evil of Igno∣rance: Ignorance is the Mother of error and misfortune: Idle∣ness begets Ignorance: It is bet∣ter to be unborn than untaught. Ignorance is an enemy to bles∣sedness and eternal happiness. By the want of wit cometh much harm, & Ignorance leaves much good undone.
A man that is ignorant of the revealed Word of God, is lead a∣way with every wind of doctrine. Of Wisdom. THe fear of the Lord is the be∣ginning of wisdom. He that doth not know and fear the Lord, is a fool. He that feareth the Lord, and keepeth his commandments, is of a good understanding. That man, woman, or child which knows Jesus Christ to be their Saviour, is of the best under∣standing, and there will be light, and life and true wisdom. A wise son heareth his fathers instruction, but a scorner heareth not rebuke.
The simple believeth every word, but the prudent man look∣eth well to his going. A wise man feareth and depart∣eth from evil, but the fool rageth and is confident. He that is void of wisdom, de∣spiseth his neighbor: but a man of understanding holdeth his peace. This small Book will not con∣tain that which might compleat thee in the School of wisdom; therefore I shall mention such Books as may help thee in spiri∣tual wisdom, and temporal un∣derstanding, and the Lord give thee understanding to chuse good and eschew evil. Amen.
Psalm 119. verse 9. WHerewithall shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed to thy word. Verse. BY what means may a young man best his life learn to amend? If that he mark & keep thy word, and therein his time spend. Another. How can youths path-way clean∣sed be, but by thy word, O Lord? With all my heart I seek to thee, O guide me by thy word. Meditation. Suffer me not, O God, to de∣ferr the amendment of my life,
until I be decrepit with age; but let thy word reform me in my youth, yea from this present hour: Teach me, O Lord, to delight in thee, to seek thee, praise thee, speak of thee, meditate on thee, and keep in the way of thy Com∣mandments for ever. Amen. Psalm 25. verse 7. O Remember not the sins and offences of my youth, but ac∣cording to thy mercy think upon me for thy goodness sake. Verse. Remember not my faults, O Lord, and srailties of my youth, Remember not how ignorant I have been of thy truth.
Nor after my deserts, Let me thy mercy find: But of thy own benignity, Lord, have me in thy mind. Another. My sins of youth, and trespasses, to mind oh do not take: O mind me in thy tenderness, Lord, for thy goodness sake. Meditation. Remember not the sins of my youth, O Lord; Blot out my transgressions; let not the follies of my youth nor the greatness of any other sins, deprive me of thy loving kindness: Consider my weakness and have mercy upon me, for Christ his sake. Amen.
Psalm 128. BLessed art thou that fearest God, and walkest in his way: 2 For of thy labor thou shalt eat, happy art thou, I say. 3 Like fruitful vines on thy house side so doth thy wife spring out: Thy Children stand like Olive∣plants, thy 'table round about. 4 Thus art thou blest that fearest God and he shall let the see 5 The promised Jerusalem, and her felicitie. 6 Thou shalt thy childrens chil∣dren see, to thy great joyes encrease: And likewise grace on Israel, prosperity and peace.
Psalm. 138. BEhold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord, Which in his house by night do Watch, praise him with one accord: Lift up your hand on high, unto his holy place, And give the Lord his praises due, his benefits embrace. For why? The Lord who did both Earth and Heaven frame, Doth Sion bless, and will con∣serve for ever more the same.
Grounds of Grammar. Q. WHat is the Accidence? An. The first book which we use to learn the grounds of Grammar in. Qu. What doth the Grammar teach? An. The Grammar is an Art that teacheth to write, and the true order of speech. Qu. What is speech? An. Every word that men speak is Speech. Qu. What call ye Word? An. Every word is a part of Speech. Qu. How many parts of Speech be there?
An. Eight. Qu. Which be they? An. Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Participle: Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection. Qu. Why but eight Parts of speech, seeing that there are so many words? An. Every word that is spoken, is one of these eight. Qu. What is a Noun? An. All names of things are Nouns, as Manus, a Hand; or Franciscus, Francis. Qu. What is a Pronoun? An. A pronoun is a word put in stead of a Noun: as tu, thou; vos, ye.
Qu. What is a Verb? An. It is a word signifying to be be, as sum, I am: to do, as doceo, I teach: to suffer, as doceor, I am taught. Qu. What is a participle? An. It is a word declined with Case like a Noun, and signifies to do or suffer like a Verb: as doctus, taught. Qu. What is an adverb? An. An Adverb is a word joy∣ned to other words, to shew their meaning: as vivit honestè, he lives honestly. Qu. What is a conjunction? An. It is a word which joynes other words together, which be of divers sorts.
Qu. What is a Preposition? An. It is a word set besore o∣ther words serving to an Accusa∣tive Case, or an Ablative Case. Qu. What is an Interjection? An. It is a word which signifies some passion, as evax! oh brave! Twenty in Latin. 1 Unus 2 Duo 3 Tres 4 Quatuor 5 Quinque 6 Sex 7 Septem 8 Octo 9 Novem 10 Decem 11 Undecem 12 Duodecem 13 Tredecem 14 Quatuordecem 15 Quindecem 16 Sexdecem 17 Septendecem 18 Octodecem 19 Novendecem 20 Viginti
INSTRUCTIONS FOR WRITING. How to sit to write. THe Paper or Book you write in, must lie straight before you, and you must sit upright, with your breast from the board: you must bear your head the di∣stance of a span from your wri∣ting, and hold your right Elbow almost close to your body, and turn your hand outward, or from you.
Necessaries for Writing. BEsides a clean sheet of Paper or a Book to write in, you must have a waste Paper under your hand, whereon to try your Letters, and so keep that Paper clean on which you write: You must also have a small pair of Compasses to rule double Lines betwixt which you must write, and so keep the heads, and feet of your Letters even: Besides, you must have a little flat Ruler for that purpose.
Rules for Writing. 1 TAke your Ink up sparingly with the hollow side of your Pen downwards, and be sure it be free from hairs. 2. Imitate the small Letters first, and begin not to make an∣other before you can make one well. 3. Take care to give all Let∣ters having whites within them, the same compass: As the a b d e g o and p. 4. In Roman and Italian hands all the Letters, with stems, or long Letters, must be of one height. 5. All the tayls of Letters co∣ming
beneath the lines must be of one length. 6. The space of a small o and another, when you writ joy∣ning. 7. Take great care to give each Letter its true Full and Small, ac∣cording to the Copies. Transeend the Copies in this Book, and then You shall be honour'd with a Golden Pen. Here followeth the Copy-Book.
engraved heading Examples of Secretarie. Roman. and Italian Hands. Place this betwixt G & H
Secretary Hand. A a b c d d e f g h i k l m n o p p q r r s  t v u w x y z A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T U W X Y Z Our Enterprize will quickly fade, except ye Almighty bless it In ye race of vertu be exceeding quicke & win that most lovely prize
Roman Hand. A a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w w x y z & A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z 'Tis a brave thing to equalize workes excellently performed.
Italian Hand. A a b c d e e f g h i k l m n o p p q r r s s s t v u w x y z A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z Men will eternize their names by doing perfect & exquisite works.
Of Arithmetick: Or, Casting Account. ARithmetick is the Art of Numbring. You must learn many rules to attain it: as, Nu∣meration, Addition, Substraction, Multiplication, Division, Pro∣gression, the Rule of Three, with many more: But I shall only shew you some things of Numeration and Addition, that you may be able to cast up a Sum of pounds, shillings, and pence. Numeration is to know the true value of any Sum proposed. As for example. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0
These Figures I hope you know the value of already. To number more together, is thus. 10, a figure of 1 and a cypher, is ten. 15, a figure of 1 and 5, is fifteen. 20, a figure of 2 and a cypher, is twenty, and so on: 24 twenty four, 30 thirty: 33 thirty three: 40 forty: 41 forty one: 70 seven∣ty: 76 seventy six: 90 ninety: 99 ninty nine. The first figure is an Unit, the second figure is Ten, and the third Figure is an Hundred. Hundred. Ten. Unit. 3 4 2 Which is thus 342, three hun∣dred forty two; 563, is five hun∣dred
sixty three: 976, is nine hundred seventy six: 110, is one hundred and ten. Another Example. Thousand. Hundred. Ten. Unit. 1 6 5 9. Which is, one thousand six hun∣dred fifty and nine, 2762, is two thousand seven hundred sixty & two; and so it may continue on: As units, tens, hundreds, thou∣sands, ten thousands, hundred thousands, millions, ten millions, hundreds of millions, thousands of millions, millions of millions, As for example. millions thousands hundreds. 23 567 890
which is twenty three millions five hundred sixty seven thou∣sand eight hundred and ninety. So much for Numeration. Of Addition. ADdition is to bring together two, or more, sums into one. As for example.   l. s. d. Paid for six quire of Paper 0 2 0 Paid for Quills 0 0 6 Paid for a cyphering-Book 0 0 6 The sum is 0 3 0 You must in this manner cast it up, saying; 6 pence and 6 pence is 12 pence, that is one shilling; I take that shilling and add to the 2 shillings, & it makes 3 shillings:
Another Example.   l. s. d. Receiv'd of my father 0 16 0 Receiv'd more 0 10 0 Receiv'd more 1 00 0 Receiv'd more 0 10 4 The Sum is 2 16 4 I would know how much I have received in all; It is thus. In the place of pence, there is but 4 pence; it being less than a shilling, put it under pence, 4: next you come to shillings, and find 16 shillings, and ten shil∣lings, and ten shillings, which is one pound 16 shillings: carry
one pound, and put sixteen shil∣lings under the place of shillings; and that one pound that you car∣ried, and the other pound in the place of pounds, make 2 pounds 16 shilling 4 pence, which you received of your father. More Examples. l. s. d. 5 6 4 3 2 9 6 6 2 14 15 3 2 17 3 5 18 9 6 05 2 2 06 9 6 00 0 23 07 11
Several Receipts very use∣ful and delightful to youth. How to make a Childe learn the 24 letters of the Alphabet with ease and delight. TAke a Sugar-Plumb (or such like) which is six square, and upon every square, put one; and make fast a Letter, six letters, as a b c d e f, on the six squares, and so to be cast like Dice, and when the Child knows the Let∣ters perfectly, let him eat the Plumb for his pains: This way of encouraging Children is appro∣ved: there are also small Books
full of Pictures to teach children to know the 24 letters of the Al∣phabet containing 24 Pictures: As, A for Ape; B for Bear; D for Dog, very delightful for Children: You may be furnished with both at the Anchor and Mariner in Tower-street. To stanch bleeding at the Nose. Take a piece of Bread and sop it in Vinegar, and eat it. To stanch blood and heal a Cut. Take the shavings of Parch∣ment, and lay it in the wound; it will stanch the blood, and heal the place.
To help a stinking breath. Take a handful of Cummin∣seed, and seethe it in good white∣wine, from a quart to a pint; and drink of it for eight or nine days both morning and evening. For a Cough, or Cold. Take a quart of Ale or Milk, and boyl it with Rosemary; then put in a spoonful of Sugar, and brew them together; then go to bed and drink it off, keeping your self very warm. For the Head-ach. Take Betany dried, and rub it, or Tobacco made small, and put it in the Nose, and snuff it up, keeping your head very warm.
To help a Burning. If you chance to burn your fin∣ger, or any other part of the bo∣dy, hold the burnt place imme∣diatly as near the fire as you can possibly endure it, and the heat of the one fire will draw out the other fire. To heal a Burning, or a Scald. Take the fat of dryed Bacon, and hold it between a pair of Tongs red-hot, and let it drop in a pot of fair water, of which dropping make a Plaister. Snow∣water and Oyle of Cream is like∣wise very good. A Medicine for the Itch. Take half a pint of Borus, two
peny-worth of Quick-silver, and four peny-worth of Frankincense, put them together, and anoint all your joynts. How to make good Ink. Take a gallon of Rain-water, and put in a pound of Gauls bea∣ten, a pound of Gum, and half a pound of Copperis, and stir them together every morning till it be fit for use. How to write with Gold. Take a shell of Gold of 4 pence or 6 pence price, and put in 3 or 4 drops of Gum-water, and stir it together, then write as with Ink: when it is dry, put a clean paper upon it, and rub it over with a
smooth tooth, and it will give it a gloss. Gum dissolved in water, is Gum-water. To keep Ink from freezing. Take Aquavitae, and put into your Ink, and it will preserve it from freezing. To write so that it shall not be read till it be holden to the fire. Take milk, or the juice of a Lemmon or Onion, and write upon fair Paper, and it will never be seen till you hold it, and warm it before the fire. A ready way to catch Moles. Take Onions, Garlick and Leeks, and put them into the mouths of their holes, and they will run out amazed.
A Letter of Counsel from a Father to a Son. SON, My prayers to God for thee, and my love to thee. Let this letter of counsel be accepted by thee: above all things know and fear God thy Creator, and Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Saviour of the world: keep a good Conscience void of offence to∣wards God and man. Let not, I pray thee, idle thoughts, words and actions prevail: bridle thy tongue, and thou wilt find much peace and content: keep not com∣pany with the wicked, shun folly and idleness, give thy mind to
those Books you have, I have sent you a Bible, which I would have you to read, study, and practise, and the Lord increase thy under∣standing: I shall be glad to hear from thee, and let me know what Books you want. If you love to read, you shall not want Books; and so learn to be a dutiful child, and you will engage me to remain, London June 18. 1672. Your loving Father E. Masson.
The Answer from a dutiful Son. HOnoured and dear Father, my duty presented to you, I hope God hath and doth hear your prayers for me, for I do delight to read the holy Scripture, and therein I learn to know and fear my God and Saviour. I do love those that are good, & delight my self in their companies, because they are good, so always learning wisdom and goodness: also it is my desire to live to your comfort, my good Father. Sir, I have re∣ceived a good token from you, a Bible, which the Lord give me grace to read and practise: I be∣seech
you to send me a Grammar, and Wits-Common-wealth, a Book called Youths Behaviour, an Eng∣lish School-Master, the Crums of Cumfort; and I will in duty pro∣mise to read them, and learn wis∣dom to the Glory of God, and your comfort; which shall ever be the desire of July 10. 1659 Your dutiful Son, Tho. Masson. The Superscription. To my Honoured Father, Mr. E. Masson, London.
To my honoured Father, Mr. Free∣man in Tower-street, London. MY honored & good Father and Mother, my duty pre∣sented to you, hoping that these few lines will find you in good and perfect health; as I was at the writing, praised be God. I am every day more and more sensible of your Fatherly and Motherly love to me, and care over me: I am also sensible of my unthank∣fulness and unprofitableness to you these ten years, (I being so old:) I am very sorry for it, and now with the help of my God, as I grow in years, I will grow in
grace and good manners, to the honour of God, and comfort of you my good parents; I have lear∣ned-out my Youths Book: And be pleased, good father, so that I may not want such helps, as Books and keeping at School, so that I may persevere in knowledge and wis∣dom. Sir, I want a Bible, a spel∣ling Book, and a Copy book. My Master doth take great care and pains with me, that your Cost and my time may not be lost: But that it may tend to the glory of God, and your comfort, is the desire of Warwick, 20. July, 1660. Your dutiful Son, John Freeman.
A Letter from the Son to the Father. To my Honoured Father, Master Brouton, Merchant in London. Honoured Sir, YOur Letter I have received, and Fatherly Counsel I joy∣fully embrace; for to serve God is the duty of a Christian, and no longer do I desire to live, than in the care of that comfort: To con∣tinue at School is my delight and desire; learning is no burthen, and knowledge is profitable; the Scri∣pture I do daily read, knowing it is sufficient to make me wise
unto Salvation, through faith in Jesus Christ. I find my self as yet weak in the understanding of the Scripture, having neither Latin, Greek, nor Hebrew: Sir, I most humbly entreat you upon my bended knees, to let me continue at School till I learn Latine and Greek at least: for I know and am perswaded that where Learning i wanting, Ignorance aboundeth▪ Learning I know is a handmaid to wisdom and vertue, which are the things my soul desireth: to that end I crave your prayers, and remain Sept 22. 1659. Your dutiful So T. B.
An Obligation. BE it known unto all men by these presents that I William Jones of Keinton in the County of Kent, Butcher, do owe and am indebted unto Henry Fox, of Rumford in the County of Essex, Yeoman, the sum of Ten pounds of good and lawful money of England, to be paid to the above∣said Henry, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in and upon the first day of July next en∣suing the date hereof; for the which payment well and truly to be paid I bind my Heirs, Execu∣tors, and Administrators in the sum of twenty pounds of like mo∣ney
of England, in witness where∣of I have hereunto set my hand and seal the twentieth day of Fe∣bruary, One thousand, six hun∣dred, fifty and nine. W. J. Sealed and delivered in the presence of J. D: H. F. A Bond with Condition. KNow all men by these Pre∣sents, That I John Day of Rochester in the County of Kent, Carpenter, am holden and firmly bound unto Francis Goodman of Gravesend, in the same county, Gentleman, in the sum of twenty pounds of good and lawful mo∣ney of England, to be paid to the
above-said Francis Goodman, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns; for the which pay∣ment well and truly to be paid, I binde my Heirs, Executors, and Administrators firmly to these Presents. Sealed with my seal. Da∣ted the fifth of July, one thousand six hundred fifty nine. The Condition of this Obliga∣tion is such, That if the above bounden John day, his heirs, Exe∣cutors, Administrators, or Assigns shall pay or cause to be paid, to the above-named Francis Good∣man, his Heirs, Executors, Admi∣nistrators, or Assigns, the sum of Ten pounds of good and lawful
money of England, in, and upon the second day of November next ensuing the date hereof; that then this present Obligation shall be void and of no effect, or else to remain in full power, force, and vertue. E. D. Sealed eod. in the pre∣sence of G. H: W. L. A short Acquittance or Receipt. REceived the 29 of June 1659. of Joseph Meriman, the sum of ten pounds in full of all Debts, Dues, Demands, Contracts, Bar∣gains, &c. In witness whereof I have put to my hand the day and year above written. By me Stephen Pits.
Of the year. IN a year there is 365 Days, there is 52 weeks, there is 12 Moneths: the moneths are called by their names as followeth: Ja∣nuary hath 31 days, February 28 days, and every Leap-year 29 days, March hath 31 days, April 30, May 31, June 30, July 31, August 31, September 30, October 31, No∣vember 30, December 31. The Year is also divided into four parts; as Spring, Summer, Au∣tumn and Winter.
A Perpetual Almanack. Marc 1 Augu 6 May 3 Oct 8 April 2 Sept 7 Iune 4 Nou 9 O Ian 11 O Iuly 5 des 10 Feb 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 O O O O
The Contents of the Almanack. IN the the two uppermost Lines or Columns, are the 12 Moneths, beginning with March, so that the Figure of 1 is March, the Figure of 2 is April, the Figure of 3 is May, the Figure of 4 is June, the Figure of 5 July, and so on. Secondly, know, the 31 Figures under, are the dayes of every Moneth. The third thing that you must know, is, what day of the week the first day of March begins, as in the year 1661, the first day of March falls upon a Friday; in the year 1662 it falls on a Satur∣days,
so that the days of the month which are under the month in the same Column, are tuesdays or wednesdays, or satur∣days as the first day of March is of. As for Example. In the year 1662 look for No∣vember, which is nine, and under it you will find, 1, 8, 15, 22, 29. which are all saturdays in Novem∣ber and March, and so counting on you will find 22 to be upon a Saturday: And the more you use it, the better you will know the use of it. Another Example. In the year 1661, the first of March is on a Friday, look
for July, which is 5, and under it you will see, 5, 12, 19, 26, which are all Fridays in July and April, being the Figure 2 over it, and if the fifth day is Friday, the sixth is Saturday, the seventh is Sunday, the eighth Munday, the ninth Tuesday, the tenth Wednesday, and so on. Of the World. THe world is round like a ball, and is divided into four parts. 1. Europe, 2. Asia, 3. Africa, 4. America. In Europe, is England, Scot∣land, Ireland, France, Spain, Italy,
Germany and many other Coun∣tries. In Asia is China, Tartaria, and Persia: in this part of the world was Paradise, and the Land of Promise. In Africa is Ethiopia, Egypt, and Barbaria, with many more considerable Countries. In America is Hispaniola, Cuba, Brasilia, Margarite, Insule, and many more Provinces and Islands in that part of the World. Of the five senses. The five Senses are, Smelling, Tasting, Hearing, Seeing and Feeling.
Of the Seven Liberal Sciences or Arts. THe seven liberal Sciences are 1 Grammar. 2 Logick. 3 Rhe∣torick. 4 Musick. 5. Arithme∣tick. 6 Geometry. 7 Astronomy. A Brief Chronology of things memo∣rable to the year 1665. SInce the Creation of the world, with Adam and Eve, and all things therein. 3668 Since the world was destroyed with water, called Noah's Flood. 3974
Since the Israelites departed out of Egypt. 3165 Since the Birth of our Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ. 1665 Since the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. 3583 Since London was built. 2774 Since Paul's Conversion. 1633 Since John wrote the Revelation. 1682 Since England received the Chri∣stian Faith. 1491 Since Printing was first used in England. 208 Since the first Lord Mayor of London. 476 Since Guns were first used in Eng∣land. 287
Since the Earthquake in Engl. 88 Tobacco first used in England. 89 Since the Gunpowder-treason. 61 Since the great Blazing star. 50 Since the last great plague in Lon∣don. 43 Since K. Charles was murther'd. 16 Since the Birth of King Charles the Second. 35 Since the last great Frost. 61 Since the Fire on London-Bridge. 34. Since Edge-hill Fight. 23 Since Naseby Fight. 20 Since Oliver the Tyrant was pro∣claimed Protector. 9 Since his Majesties Restoration. 5
The Youths choice of Trades. A A Pothecary, Attourney, Ar∣morer, Anchor-smith. B Baker, Barber, Black-smith, Book∣seller, Book-binder, Box-maker, Brasier, Brick-maker, Butcher. C Carpenter, Cardmaker, Car∣man, Carver, Chandler, Chees∣monger, Chirurgeon, Clasp-ma∣ker, Clock-maker, Clothier, Coo∣per, Cloth-worker, Coach-ma∣ker, Comb-maker, Confectioner, Currier, Cutler, Cook.
D Draper of Linnen and Woollen Cloth, Draper of Cloth, Dyer. F Farrier, Fel-monger, Felt-ma∣ker, Fish-monger, Fishook-ma∣ker, Fringe-maker, Furrier. G Glasier, Glass-maker, Glass∣seller, Globe-maker, Goldsmith, Glover, Grocer, Graver, Guilder, Gunsmith. H Haberdasher of small Wares and Hats, Hemp-beater, Hosier, Hot-presser. I Jeweller, Imbroderer, Ink-horn∣maker,
Instrument-maker, Iron∣monger. L Leather-seller, Leather-dresser, Locksmith. M Merchant, Mercer, Millinor, Musician, Maulster, Mariner, Ma∣son, Meal-man. N Needle-maker, Netmaker. O Oylman. P Printer, Painter, Past-board∣maker, Pavier, Perfumer, Perry∣wig-maker, Pewterer, Plummer, Plaisterer, Potter, Poulterer. R. Rope-maker, Rope-seller.
S Sadler, Salter, Scrivener, Saw∣yer, Ship-Carpenter, Shoe-maker, Silk-dyer, Silk-man, Silk-weaver, Silversmith, Soap-boyler, Statio∣ner, Spurrier, Stone-cutter. T Tanner, Tallow-chandler, To∣baco-pipe-maker, Throster of silk, Trunk-maker, Turner, Taylor. V Vintner, Virginal-maker, Up∣holsterer. W Watch-maker, Woodmonger, Wax-chandler, Weaver, Wyre∣drawer, Wine-cooper, Wheel∣wright, Water-man.
The form of an Apprentice his In∣denture in London. THis Indenture witnesseth, that Joseph Goodson, son of Jacob Goodman, Yeoman, in the County of Kent, doth put himself an Ap∣prentice, to John Goodmaster, Ci∣tizen and Mercer of London, to learn his Art: and with him af∣ter the manner of an Apprentice, to serve him from the day of the Date hereof, unto the full end and term of seven years, from thence next following, to be be ful∣ly compleat and ended. During which term, the said Apprentice his said Master faithfully shall
serve, his secrets keep, his lawful commands very gladly do: He shall do no dammage to his said Master, nor see to be done of o∣thers, but that he to his power shall let, or forthwith give notice to his said Master: He shall not waste the goods of his said Ma∣ster, nor lend them unlawfully to any: He shall not commit forni∣cation, nor contract Matrimony within the said term: He shall not play at Cards, Dice, Tables, or any other unlawful Games, whereby his said Master may have any loss with his own goods or o∣thers, during the said term; with∣out his Masters licence, he shall
neither buy nor sell: He shall not haunt Taverns nor Play-houses, nor absent himself from his said Masters service, day nor night un∣lawfully; but in all things as a faithful Apprentice, he shall be∣have himself towards his said Ma∣ster and all his, during the said term. And the said Master his said Apprentice in the same Art which he useth, by the best means that he can, shall teach and in∣struct, or cause to be taught and instructed; finding unto his said Apprentice meat, drink, apparel, lodging and all other necessaries, according to the custom of the City of London, during the said
term, and for the true perform∣ance of all and every the said Covenants and agreements, ei∣ther of the said parties bindeth himself unto each other by these presents: In witness whereof the parties above-named, to this In∣denture interchangeably, have put their hands and seals, the first day of May, in the year of our Lord, 1660. Joseph Goodservant.
A Prayer for the King. O Most mighty & ever-living Lord God, Creator of all men, Governour of Empires, and Establisher of all Kingdoms, who out of the loyns of our Father Abraham didst choose a King that became the Saviour of all Kings and Nations of the earth; Bless, we beseech thee, thy faithful Ser∣vant, and our dread Sovereign Lord King Charles, with the rich∣est blessings of thy Grace; Esta∣blish him in the Throne of His Kingdom by thy mighty power and protection: visit him, as thou didst visit Moses in the Bush, Jo∣shua
in the Battel, Gideon in the Field, and Samuel in the Temple: Let the Dew of thine abundant mercies fall upon his head, and give unto him the blessing of Da∣vid and Solomon: Be unto him an Helmet of Salvation against the face of his enemies, and a strong Tower of Defence in the time of Adversity: Let his Reign be pros∣perous, and his days many. Let Peace, and Love, and Holiness; let Justice and Truth, and all Christian vertues, flourish in his time: let his people serve him with honour and obedience, and let him so duly serve thee here on earth, that he may hereafter
everlastingly raign with thee in heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Saviour. Amen. Another Prayer for the King. O Almighty and everlasting God, Creator & Lord of all things, give ear, we beseech thee, unto our humble Prayers, & mul∣tiply thy blessings upon thy ser∣vant our Sovereign King Charles, whom in all lowly devotion we commend unto thy high Majesty; that he being strengthened with the faith of Abraham, endued with the mildness of Moses, arm∣ed with the magnanimity of Jo∣shua, exalted with the humility of
David, beautified with the wis∣dom of Solomon, and replenished with the goodness and holiness of them all, he may walk uprightly before thee in the way of righte∣ousness, and like a mighty King may be powerful over his ene∣mies, governing his people with equity, and preserving thy Church with Truth and Peace; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Another. GRant we beseech thee, al∣mighty God, that our Sove∣reign Lord the King may be a most mighty Protector of his people, a Religious Defender of
thy sacred Faith, a bountiful Com∣forter of thy holy Church, a glo∣rious Triumpher over all his E∣nemies, a gracious Governour unto all his Subjects, and a happy Father of many children, to rule this Nation by succession in all Ages, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. FINIS.
Royal Oak coat of arms: three crowns across an oak tree with two faces peeking out from the upper branches The Royall Oak
