c5215 e1081_3 99866934 119223
A COLLECTION Out of the Book called Liber Regalis, Remaining in the TREASURY Of the Church of WESTMINSTER. TOUCHING THE CORONATION OF THE KING and QUEEN together, According to the usual Form. London, Printed by R. D. for Charls Adams, at the Talbot in Fleetstreet, over against Fetter-Lane. 1660.
The Manner and Form of the King's Coronation. THE place where the King is to be Crowned, is the Church of Westminster, granted to it by divers Charters to be Locus In∣stitutionis & Coronationis Re∣giae, & Repositorum Regalium insignium imperpetuum. The Person that is to annoint and crown the King, is the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Against the Solemnity a square Stage is to be set up close to the four high pillars, between the Queer and the Altar with Railes about it. The Stage is to be covered with Tapistry, and the Raile also to be covered richly, There must be two pair of Stairs from the Stages, one to the Queer westward, and the other to the Altar eastward. Upon the Stage are two Thrones of Estate to be set up; one for the King, and another for the Queen, set out richly.
The King's Throne to be higher than the Queens. On the south side of the Altar is a Chaire to be set for the King, and another not so high on the north side for the Queen, with two stools and cushi∣ons for either of them to pray at. In St. Edward's Chappel a Traverse is to be set up, wherein the King disrobeth himself after the Coronation is done. Where also a Stool and Cushions (to pray at) and a Chair for the Queen to repose her self in the mean time, are to be made ready. The Arch-bishop is to put the King in mind the evening before the Coronation, to give himself to contemplation and prayer, as in the book, pag. 6. The Arch-bishop is to deliver to his Majesty the Tunica, or shirt of red silk, which he is to wear over his shirt, to which tunica his Majesties shirt and other wearing apparrell is to be fitted because of the annointing. There are to be delivered also these Regalia to whom his Majesty shall appoint. viz. For the King. The Regalia. The Patten. The Scepter with the Crosse. The long Scepter. For the Queen. The Rod with the Dove and Spurs. The Ivory Rod, with the Dove, The Scepter. The Crown. All the other Regalia together with the Ampull, wherein is the Oyl wherewith the Kings and Queens have been annointed must be laid ready on the Altar.
That the Crown, and other Robes which the King putteth on after the Coronation, must be laid ready in the Traverse in St. Edward's Chappell. The Heir of the Lord Beauchamp of Bedford, Al∣moner for the Coronation is to have care that clo∣thes be spread on the ground from the Pallace Hall door to the Stage in the Church. Decanus Westm. semper Lateri. Regis adhaerendo praesens debet esse prodicti Regis informatione in hiis quae dicta Coronationis concer∣unt Solemnitatem. The Arch-bishops and Bishops of this Kingdom present; with the Church and Queer of Westminster are to meet the King at the Pallace gate. Two Bishops appointed by the King are to carry 1. the Regall Crown. 2. the Patten. Then three Peers Duces sive comites Regni ex∣cellentiores, &c. are to bear, 1. The Scepter with the Cross. 2. The long Scepter. 3. The Rod with the Dove. After whom 3 Swords born by three Earls, name∣ly, of Chester, Huntingdon, Warwick. Then unus de Magnatibus ad hoc per Regem assig∣natus is to carry the Spurres. The King goeth next, under a Canopy born by the Barons of the Cinque-Ports, four of them at a staff, supported by the Bishops of Durham and Bathe. After the King doe follow three Peers, carrying, 1. The Ivory Rod. 2. The Queen's Scepter. 3. The Queen's Crown.
Then the Queen under a Canopy, born likewise by the Barons of the Cinque Ports, supported likewise by two Bishops, her Gown and habit described in the book. The King and Queen are received into the Church with an Anthemn or Hymn. They passe up the body of the Church to their seats of Estate, and they repose themselves in sede sibi apta, and not in the Thrones. The King being seated as aforesaid, the Arch-bishop, (praeeunte Marescallo Regni) goeth to all the sides of the Stage, speaking to the people, ipsorum inquirens voluntatem. During which time the King standeth up and tur∣neth himself as the Arch-bishop speaketh to the people. An Anthem is sung. The Arch-bishop whilst it is singing goeth to the Altar. The Queen also supported by two Bishops goeth after the King to the Altar to a place provided for them. The King offereth Pallium unum et unum librum auri, and then kneeleth, and then the Arch-bishop sayeth a Prayer. A Bishop then beginneth a Sermon, which the King and Queen hear by the Altar. After the Sermon the Arch-bishop asketh the King whether he be pleased to take the Oath which his Predecessors usually took. The King willing thereunto, goeth to the Altar to take it.
The Arch-bishop asketh the three first questions, and the King severally answereth unto them. Then another Bishop asketh the last question, and the King answereth to it in the words as they are set down. Arch-bish: Sir; will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the people of England the Laws and Customes to them granted by the Kings of England, your lawful and religious Predecessors; and namely, the Laws, Customs and Franchises granted to the Clergie, and to the people by the glo∣rious King St. Edward your Predecessor according, and conformable to the Laws of God, and profes∣sion of the Gospell, established in this Kingdom, and agreeing to the Prerogatives of the Kings there∣of, and to the antient Customs of this Realm. The King answereth, I grant and promise to keep them. Then the Metropollitane shall declare unto the King what the things are that he shall swear unto. Metrop: Sir, will you keep peace entirely accor∣ding to your power, both to God, the holy Church, and the people. King. I will keep it. Metrop: Sir, will you to your power cause Law, Justice, and discretion in mercy and truth to be ex∣ecuted in all your Judgements? King. I will. Metrop: Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightfull Customes which the Com∣monaltie of your Kingdom have, and to defend and uphold them to the honour of God so much as in you lieth.
King. I grant and promise so to doe. Legatur admonitio sequent ab uno Episcopo coram omnibus clara voce sic dicendo. Domine Rex a vobis per donare petimus ut uni∣cuique de nobis et ecclesiis nobis commissis Canonicum privilegium et debitam legem atque Justitiam con∣cervetis et defentionem exhibeatis sicut Rex in suo regno debet unicuique Episcopo et Ecclesiis sibi com∣missis. Respondet Rex. Animo libenti et devoto, promitto vobis et perdono quia unicuique de vobis commissis canonicum privi∣legium et debitam legem atque justitiam servabo et defensionem quantum potuero adjuvam te Domino exhibebo. Sicut Rex in suo Regno unicuique Episcopo et ecclesiis sibi commissis per rectum defendere debet. This being done, the King cometh to the Altar, and laying his right hand on the Bible, sayeth these words. Those things which I have before promised I shall observe and keep, so God me help, and by the contents of this book. The King returneth to his seat of Estate again, and the Arch-Bishop beginneth the Himnes. Veni creator spiritus, &c. and the Queer singing it. The King and Queen kneel down, and the Arch-Bishop sayeth a Prayer. After which the Letanie is sung, at the end where∣of are Prayers proper for the solemnity. The Letany ended, the Arch-Bishop sayeth aloud clara voce. Lift up your hearts. It is very meet and right.
Then the King ariseth and goeth to the Altar, and then putteth off his other Garments, and the Arch-bishop opening the places to be annointed, first an∣nointeth his hands, saying, Ʋnguantur manus, &c. The Queere singeth an Anthem, and after it the Archbishop saieth a prayer. Then he annointeth his brest, and between the shoulders, and both his shoulders, the bending of his arm to the Crown of his head. Then the Dean of Westminster closeth his Robes again. The Queer in the mean time singing an Anthem after the Arch-bishop sayeth two prayers. St. Edward's Ivory Comb is to be used, if the Kings hair after annointing lie not smooth. Then the Colobium or Dalmatica is put on his Ma∣jesty by the Dean of Westminster. After which done the Arch-bishop sayeth a praier. Then the Dean putteth on the King The super tunica. Tinsill hose Sandalls. The Spurrs are put on by a Noble man. Then the Arch-bishop, after he hath laid the Sword on the Altar, and said a prayer, he delivereth it to the King, saying, Accipe Gladium. A Peer girteth it about the King. Then the Armill is put about the King's neck, the Arch-bishop saying, Accipe Armillas. Then the Mantle or open Pall is put on by the Dean, the Arbh-bishop saying, Accipe Pallium. Then the Arch-bishop taketh the Crown, and sai∣eth two prayers, then Crowneth the King, saying,
Coronet te Deus. The Queer singing an Anthem. Then the Arch-bishop taketh the Ring, saying two prayers and putteth it on the Kings finger, say∣ing, Accipe Regiae dignitatis annulum. And then saieth a prayer. Then the King putteth on the Linnen Gloves, which are part of the Regalia. Then the King taketh off his Sword wherewith he was girt before, and goeth to the Altar and offers it, which the chief Nobleman there present by offering, redeemeth, draweth out, and carrieth naked be∣fore the King during the Solemnity. The Arch-bishop then delivereth to the King the Scepter with the Crosse, saying, Accipe Sceptrum. And sayeth a prayer. Then he delivereth the Rod with the Dove into the Kings left hand, saying, Aceipe Virgam virtutis. And then blesseth the King, saying, Benedicat tibi Dominus. The King kisseth the Arch-bishop, and the other Bishops that assist. After this the King goeth from the Altar up to the Stage, all the Peers attending. The Queene singing Te Deum. Which being done, the Arch-bishop inthroneth the King in his Throne, saying, Sta, et retine a modo locum. Which done, all the Peers do their homage to his Majesty, and then put their hands and touch the Crown together.
Then the King, for his ease, delivereth the Scepter and Rod to whom he pleaseth. These things done, the Arch-bishop goeth to the Altar, and the Queen goeth thither likewise, and kneeleth down. The Arch-bishop sayeth a prayer. The Queen ariseth, then the chiefest Lady present taketh off the Crown, and then openeth her breast, and then kneeleth again. The Arch-bishop powreth the Oile on the Crown of her head, saying, In nomine. Then he saith a prayer. The chief Lady then closeth her Robes at her brest, and putteth on her head a linnen quoif. Then the Arch-bishop putteth on the Queens Ring, saying, Accipe Annulum. And then sayeth a Prayer. Then he taketh the Crown, and layeth it on the Altar, saying a Prayer. The Queen ariseth, and the Arch-bishop taketh the Crown, and layeth it on the Altar, saying a Prayer. Then he putteth the Crown on her head, saying, Accipe Coronam. After that sayeth a Prayer. The prayer being done, the Arch-bishop delive∣reth the Scepter into her right hand, and the Ivory Rod with the Dove into her left hand, and sayeth a prayer. Then the Queen ariseth and goeth forth from the Altar, supported by two Bishops, up to the Stage, and passing by the King doth
Inclinare Regi, ejus Majestatem ut decet adorando. After which she is led to the Throne, and is pla∣ced in it without further Ceremony. Then the Arch-bishop goeth to the Altar, and beginneth a Communion, first saying a prayer. The Epistle and Gospell are read by a Bishop. Then the Nicene Creed. That done, the Queere singeth, in the while the King and Queen come down to offer; the King goeth first to the Altar, and offereth bread and wine for the Communion. Then returning to his Chair, goeth again and of∣fereth a Mark of Gold. Then the Queen goeth to the Altar and offereth. Then the Arch-bishop pronounceth over them a blessing. Which being done, they are brought back to their Chairs hard by the Altar. The Arch-bishop proceedeth with the prayer, and then with the Confession. After the Arch-bishop hath Communicated him∣self and those that assist him, the King and Queen cometh to the steps of the Altar and receive the Communion. The Archbishop ministreth the Bread, and the Dean of Westminster the Cup. That done, the King and Queen are brought back again to their Thrones, and there stay until Service be ended. After which the King and Queen come down from their Thrones in State, and goe to King Edward's Chappell.
There the King taketh off the Crown, and deli∣vereth it to the Arch-bishop. The Queen doth the like. He layeth them on the Altar there. The King withdraweth himself into the Traverse there prepared, and the Queen reposeth her self untill the Kings return. In the Traverse the great Chamberlain taketh off King Edward's Robes and delivereth them to the Dean of Westminster. The King putteth on his own Robes Royal which were prepared for him to wear that day. He goeth forth of the Traverse to King Edward's Altar, where the Arch-bishop putteth on the King and Queens heads the Imperiall Crowns they are to wear that day. The train is set in order, and the King and Queen go back in most solemn manner to the Pallace gate the same way they came. The King and Queen withdrawing themselves, after dinner the Scepter and the Rod, part of the Regalia, are to be delivered to the Dean of West∣minster. FINIS.
