C7107 E609_7 R205939 99865159 117396
A LETTER Sent to the Generall Assembly OF THE KIRKE of SCOTLAND: BY Oliver Cromvvell Lord Generall of the ARMY of the Common-wealth of ENGLAND now in SCOTLAND &c. Aug. 9 LONDON Printed for Hanna Allen at the signe of the Crown in Popes-head-Alley, MDCL
TO THE Generall Assembly of the KIRKE of SCOTLAND: OR, In case of their not Sitting, To the Commissioners of the KIRKE of SCOTLAND. SIRS, YOur Answer to the Declaration of the Army wee have seen; Some godly Ministers with us, did at Barwicke compose this reply, which I thought fit to send you. That you or we, in these great transactions, answer the will and mind of God: it is only from his grace and mercy to us, and therefore having said (as in our papers) we commit the issue thereof to him who disposeth
all things; assuring you that we have light and comfort increasing upon us day by day, and are perswaded, that before it be long, the Lord will manifest his good pleasure, so that all shall see him, and his people shall say, This is the Lords work, and it is marvellous in our eyes: This is the day that the Lord hath made, we will be glad and rejoyce therein Onely give me leave to say in a word, you take upon you to judge us in the things of our God, though you know us not; though in the things we have said unto you (in that which is intituled the Armies Declaration) we have spo∣ken our hearts, as in the sight of the Lord who hath tryed us▪ and by your hard and subtle words you have begotten prejudice in those who do too much (in matters of conscience, wherein every soule is to answer for it selfe to God) depend upon you, so that some have al∣ready followed you to the breathing out of their soules, others continue still in the way wherein they are lead by you (we fear) to their owne ruine: and no marvell, if you deale thus with us, when indeed you can finde in your hearts to conceale the papers we have sent you,
from your own people, who might see and un∣derstand the bowels of our affections to them, especially such among them as fear the Lord. Send as many of your papers as you please a∣mongst ours, they have free passage, I feare them not; what is of God in them would it might be imbraced and received. One of them lately sent, directed to the un∣der Officers and Souldiers in the English Army, hath begotten from them this inclosed Answer, which they desired me to send you, not a crafty politique one, but a plaine simple spirituall one; such as it is God knoweth, and God also will in due time make manifest, and do we multi∣ply these things as men? or doe we them for the Lord Christ and his peoples sakes? Indeed we are not, through the grace of God, affraid of your numbers, nor confident in our selves We could (I pray God you do not think we boast) meet your Army, or what you have to bring against us. We have given (humbly we speak it before our God, in whom all our hope is some proof, that thoughts of that kind prevaile not upon us. The Lord hath not hid his face from us since our approach so near un∣to
you, your own guilt is too much for you to beare, bring not upon your selves the blood of Innocent men, deceived with pretences of King and Covenant, from whose eyes you hide a better knowledge I am perswaded that di∣vers of you, who lead the people have laboured to build your selves in these things, wherein you have censured others and established your selves upon the Word of God. Is it therefore infallibly agreeable to the Word of God all that you say? I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, think it possible you may be mistaken: Precept may be upon Precept, Line may be upon line, & yet the Word of the Lord may be to some a word of Judgement, that they may fall backward & be broken, and be snared, and be taken: There may be a spirituall fullnesse, which the world may call drunkennesse as in the second of the Acts; there may be as well a carnall confidence, upon mis-understood, and mis-applyed Precepts, which may be called Spirituall Drunkennesse, There may be a Covenant made with Death and Hell, (I will not say yours was so) but judge if such things have a politick aime, to avoide
the overflowing scourge, or to accomplish worldly interests, and if therein we have con∣federated with wicked and carnall men, and have respect, or otherwise drawn in to associ∣ate with us, whither this be a Covenant of God and spirituall bethink your selves, we hope we do. I pray you read the 28th of Esaiah from the 5th, to the 15th. and do not scorn to know that it is the Spirit that quickens and giveth life, and the Lord give you and us understanding to do that which is well-pleasing in his sight, com∣mitting you to the Grace of God I rest, Your humble Servant, O. CROMWELL. Muscleborough 3 Aug. 1650. FINIS.
