D1280 99895669 153174
A TRVE PROPHECIE OF THE Mighty DAY of the LORD. Which is coming, and is appeared in the North of England, and is rising toward the South; and shall over∣spread this Nation, and all Nations of the World. WHEREIN The Lord is redeeming Sion forth of her long inthral'd Cap∣tivity in Babylons Kingdom, where she hath been scattered in the cloudy and dark day, into Forms and Observations, and there kept by the Priests, and Teachers of the World, who ranne when God never sent them. Now is the Lord appearing in this day of his mighty power, to gather His elect together, out of all Forms and Observations, Kinreds, Tongues and Nations; and is making up his Iewels, his mighty hoast, and exalting Iesus Christ to be the King of Kings, to lead his Army He hath raised up in the North of England; and is marched towards the South, in the mighty power of the living Word of God, which is sharp as a two edged Sword, to cut down High and Low, Rich and Poor, Priests and People: and the all Powers of the Land, and all the World over, that are fruitless trees that cumbers the ground, defiles the flesh, and walks in disobedi∣ence to the righteous law of God, the pure light in the Conscience; For who falls on this Stone shall be broken, but on whom it falls shall be ground to powder: So shall this Nation, and all the Nations of the World be conquered; and the victory witnessed, neither by Sword nor Spear, but by the Spirit of the Lord. A WORD from the LORD to all the Inhabitants of England, Rulers, Priests and people, to haste to meet the Lord with speedy Repentance, and turning within, to hearken diligently to His Counsel, the pure light of Christ in your Conscience, to be guided by His Power: else you shall perish in your gain sayings; For if his anger be kindled a-little, blessed are all they that trust in him. From the Spirit of the Lord, written by one whose name in the flesh is William Dewsbury, called Quaker with the people of the World, who live in their perishing nature. London, Printed for Giles Clavert, at the Black-spread Eagle at the West end of Pauls, 1655.
A true Prophecy of the mighty Day of the Lord, &c. O England, who lies in the faln and lost estate, separated from the true and living God, by thine iniquities, notwithstanding Hos. 1. all thy profession of his Name, in outward forms and obser∣vations; Repent, repent, and turn unto the Lord God Al∣mighty, who waits on thee to be gracious unto thee, and to make thee the glory of all the Nations of the world, if thou wilt dili∣gently Isa. 30 hearken to his counsel, the light that is in the Conscience of every one, to wait in it upon the Lord God, that he may guide thee by his power. Iohn. . And this I have to declare unto thee from the Lord, which he hath made known unto me, concerning thee O England, certain years ago, when the everlasting Covenant of Life was csionrmed unto my Soul in the Lord Jesus Isa.  Christ, that I should go with the ransomed of the Lord unto Sion: I en∣quired of my God, to manifest unto me where Sion was, that I might re∣turn cap. 35 Ioh.  thither & worship him inspirit & in truth; there being so many con∣fused cries in thee O England, who professes to worship the only true God; some saying, Lo here is Christ in the Presbyterian practice so called: and the Independent so called, cries, Lo he is here: and the Anabaptists so called saying, Lo he is here: and others in outward forms saying, He is here, accor∣ding as Christ forerold, that the time should come when they shall say, Lo here is Christ and to there, as it is fulfilled in thee: but Christ faith, Believe them not, look not forth, for the Kingdom of Heaven is within: And as the light∣ning Luk. 7 23. 2 that shineth out of the one part under Heaven, and shineth unto the other part under Heaven, even so shall the Son of man in his day: And this I witness; and while I was waiting on my God, to make known unto me where Sion was, the Word of the Lord came unto me with witness to my spirit, that Christ was not divided, and that there was no rent in his gar∣ment, for the Lord is one and his people one; and that all thy outward forms 1 Cor.  Zech.  of Worship O England, where thou art waiting for Christ in observations, is contrary to his Will; for Christ saith, The Kingdom of God is not in ob∣servations; neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there, for behold the Kingdom Luke. 20, 21 of God is within you: And that all thy strict observing of thy outward forms, is but imitating the Saints practices, in thy Babylonish and Heathenish Wisdom, for there is nothing but confusion in thee; and that all thy out∣ward
Forms is the outward Court, which is without the Temple, that the  1. 11, Angel was not to measure, for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under foot: and this was made known unto me from the Lord my God, to be the estate and condition thou stoodst, and dost stand in, O England, in all thy outward Forms and Observations; having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof: For under all thy professi∣on, . 2. 3. 5. is most cruel oppression, every one oppressing one another, according unto their power, from the highest unto the lowest; so that the cry of the oppressed Seed within the hearts of thy Inhabiters, O England, and those that are oppressed in outward oppressions in thee, hath entred into the . 5. 5. ears of the Lord God of Sabboth, and he is coming in power to set the op∣pressed free, and to bring them to Sion; which in the eternall Riches of  58. 6. . 14. his Love he made known to me where Sion was, according unto the de∣sires he had raised up in my heart; and the Word of the Lord came unto me saying, I will gather my people out of all forms and observations, and out  5. 9.  7. 9. . 34. of all kindreds, tongues, and Nations; and I will pour my Spirit upon them, and purge away their filth with the Spirit of Iudgment and of burning; and I will write my Law in their hearts, and put my Spirit in their inward parts, and they shall not depart from me; but shall be bound up in union with me, in the free  1. 33.  14. 9. Covenant of Life in the Lord Jesus, and one with another, in the one Spi∣rit, So shall the Lord be one, and his people one: and this is Sion, the City of the living God, to whom all the promises of the Lord are: n accordig unto  10. the Scripture of Truth, wherein they need not to teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know me from the least unto the greatest, for I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness, and  8. 10. 2. their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. And this is the holy City, the New Ierusalem, which Iohn bare witness of, wherein there is no Temple, for the Lord God Almighty and the  1. 2.  Lamb are the Temple of it: And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God doth lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof: And the Nations of them that are saved, shall walk in the light of it; and the Kings of the Earth do bring their glory and honour unto it. And the Gates of it are not shut at all by day, for there shall be no Night there: There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth nei∣ther that works abomination, or makes a lye, but they that are written in the Lambs Books of Life, and all that walk in the light of Christ within: which light exerciseth the Conseience, and leads into the holy City, the New  24. Ierusalem, where the true worshippers of the Father are, who worship him in spirit and in truth, and are come out of the night, and need no candle, nei∣ther  2. 5. light of the Sun, for the Lord God giveth them light, and they shall raign for ever and ever: and this is the true Church in God, Sion, which shall . 1. become the praise of the whole Earth, and from whence the Law shall go forth, according unto the promise of the Lord, and the Word of the Lord from Ierusalem; Then shall Righteousness run up and down with a mighty stream  and Oppression shall cease. And this glory of the Lord was by the Lord made known unto me, which
shall be made manifest to the Inhabiters of England, if you will hearken dili∣gently to the counsel of the Lord, which is the light in your Consciences, and in it, waite on the Lord to be guided by his power: I waited in the Counsel of my God, in the Calling where I was placed, until the year 1652. and in the eight Month of the Year, as it is accompted of men, The Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, The Leaders of my people causes Isa. 9. 36. them to err, in drawing them from the light in their Consciences, which leads to the anointing within, which the Father hath sent to be their 1 Iohn 2. 27. Luk 17. 20. Teacher, which would lead them into all truth, to seek the Kingdom of God in observations, where it is not to be found: so my people perish for want of bread: Freely thou hast received, freely give, and minister; and what I have made known unto thee in secret, declare openly. Which Word constrain∣ed me by the power of it to leave my wife and children, and to run to and Hos. 4. 6. fro, to declare to Souls where their Teacher is, the light in their Con∣sciences, which the Lord hath given unto every one a measure to profit withall, for the exercise of the Conscience towards God and men, and Dan. 10. .Ren. 7. 1. waiting in the light for the power of Christ; He would lead them up to the living Fountains of Water, where their Souls would find refreshment in the presence of the Lord, and their bread should be sure, and their wa∣ter Isai. 35. 1. Rev. 5. 1. never fail, as the Lord hath made manifest to my Soul; and to worship him in truth at New Ierusalem, to sing Hallelujahs and Praises among the redeemed Sons and Daughters of God, in the beauty of holiness unto the Lord God that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore. To you Rulers of England, whose names will be honorable, if you will honour the Lord in obeying his Counsel, which is the light in your Con∣sciences, that he may guide you in all your waies, to you I am moved to write: Thus saith the Lord God Almighty, I will overturn, overturn, o∣rerturn Eze. 21. until I have given it unto him whose right it is, and he will give it me. As you have seen the power of the Lord manifest on many that are in the place where you are, a cloud of witnesses, the Bishops, and the King, the Lords, and the late Parliment, who all professed the name of Christ, but Ier. 1. 1. 1. they would not obey his Counsel, the light in their Consciences, but walk∣ed after the counsel of their own hearts, and improved their power for their own ends, and would have dissembled with God and the Country, but Dan. 12. . our righteous God hath overturned them, to their everlasting shame and contempt. Isai. 58. . Now if you will not obey the light in your Consciences to rule in the power of the spirit, to break every yoak of unrighteousness, and put every filthy and abominable thing out of the sight of the Lord, that the oppres∣sed Rev. 13. . may be set free; but you will cause both smal and great to worship the image of the beast, in forcing them to obey the heathenish and unrgihte∣ous Laws made by Nebuchadnezzar's nature, proud flesh who set up himself a King, to oppress all under his power, and set up whom he would to rule and ranig with him over others in Tyranny, cruelty and oppression in all unrighteousness; which Beast received a deadly wound with a sword, by the little horn spoken of in Daniel, before whom three horns fell, which Dan. 7
was the Kings power in these three Nations; and the horn had eyes to see what they should do, the Light in their Conscience, and a mouth which speaketh great things, what they should do for the Glory of God, whose look was more stout then their fellows: I beheld the same horn made war with the Saints of the most high God, and prevailed against them, as it is ful∣filled. Terr 20. 21. Many of them have been persecuted, and some cast into prison, by their power: and this is the Beast that had power to give life to the image, that the Image of the Beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not Rev. 12. 15. worship the image of the Beast should be killed; And this is fulfilled, that when the Beast received his deadly wound, with the sword of the righteous Ju∣stice of God, in cutting down the Kings power, then did the other Beast which was the power that reigned after him, give life to the image of the Beast, that the image of the Beast spoke; and this was fulfilled in giving power to the unrighteous Laws, made by the Kings, where the Priests, and unrighteous Lawyers and Iudges, that judg for rewards, that as many Mica. 3. 11. as would not worship the Beast, in obeying the will of proud flesh, which is the image of the Kings power; he must be killed, cast into prison, and there starve, and be broken to pieces, with Daniel; and by the power of proud Nebuchadnezz's nature, must be cast into places, some into close prison by the wrath of proud flesh, and must neither buy nor sell, nor have Rev. 13. 17. any benefit of the Law, but he that hath the mark of the Beast, and the number Dan. 12. 9. 1. Rev. 13. 18 Dan. 3. 3. of his Name; Here is the patience and Faith of the Saints. And you Saints of the most high God, stand in his Will; for these words are sealed up, until the time of the End; and you shall stand in the lot at the end of the dayes, Here is wisdome: Let him that hath understanding, count the number of the Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundered threscore and six. Now if you hold up this glorious Image, which was set up by Nebuchadnezzar's nature, proud flesh, in humane wis∣dom, which that Image spoken of in Daniel, was but a type and figure of this, which now shines gloriously in Forms and Observations, and denies the life and power of Jesus Christ; you will be found to be the strength and glory of this great Image: And this I declare unto you from the eternal God of Power, You shall be overturned, as all that have gone before you which have set up this great Image, and caused all both smal and great Dan. 2. 40. to bow down and worship it: The Stone cut out of the mountains without ev. 14. 26. hands, shall smite this glorious Image, and break it to pieces, and it shall become like the chaff of the summer threshing floor, and the wind shall carry it away, and no place shall be found for it; and the Stone that smites the Image Dan. 2. 34. . Mica. 3 0. 11. shall become a great Mountain, and shall fill the whole Earth. O be Valigilant for the Truth upon Earth, ye Rulers of England, and give over building up Sion with Blood, and Ierusalem with inquity, as it hath been in this Nati∣on, by all that upheld this Image, which the Lord had overturned, cast out before you, and is still held up by you: The Heads thereof judge for re∣wards, and the Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for mony: Mic. 3. 11. yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? no evil can come upon us. O prize your time, and stand stedfast in the counsell of the
Lord, the light in your Conscience, hearken unto it, let it alone guide you in all your Counsel, that Christ may be Head in you all; then will the glory of God be the end of all your undertakings, and you will remove this filthy and abominable thing out of the fight of the Lord, the Iudges that judg for rewards, and the Lawyers that plead for mony, and the Priests that teach for hire: and set over the people, to judge their Causes, Exod.  men fearing God, and hating Covetousness, to judg their Causes without re∣wards, and that the people may be taught freely, without mony or price, Isa. 55. Mat.  by the free Spirit of Christ in the hearts of his Saints, who cannot but de∣clare freely, as they have freely received: Then will the mighty power of God go along with you in all your wayes, if you will stand in his counsel, Pro. 8.  Pro, 1,  and walk in his Fear to depart from all evil, which is the beginning of wisdom, and your names will become a sweet favour through the power of the Lord among his Saints, as all the names of the righteous are; and you shall partake of the glory of the Lord, which is manifesting to his chosen people in this Nation, which he hath chosen to make known his Power, in exalting the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and he will make it the glo∣ry of all the Nations in the world, and the mighty God of Power will be Isa, 26, unto us Salvation for walls and bulworks, and we shall sit under our vines and figtrecs, and none shall make us affraid: And this shall be the portion of your Mica.  Cup, if you will deny your selves, and diligently hearken to the counsel of the Lord, the Light in your consciencs, to which I speak, which shall e∣ternally witness me the Truth declared unto you for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it, who hath raised up his own seed in his people in this Nation, which cannot cleave to this great Image, which was set up by those Dan. 2.  that were in the place where you are, which the Lord hath overturned, and cast out in his indignation, and is not yet taken away by you: and while you uphold it, the anger of the Lord is kindled against you. There is no peace to the wicked, saith my God. Thisis the day that the God of Heaven will set up his own kingdom, Dan. 2.  which shall never be destroyed; and the Kingdom shall not be left unto other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever and ever. Here I have declared my Conscience, in declaring unto you what my God hath made known unto me concerning you and the Nation, which shall shortly come to pass: He that hath an eye to see, let him see; and he that hath an ear to hear, let him hear. To all you unrighteous Iudges, that judg for rewards, and Lawyers Mic. 3.  that plead for mony, who devour the Creation, and set people at variance, destroy many families, and delight in unrighteousness; and to all Op∣pressrs, Pro. 6. 1  2. Thes  12. Iam. 5. 5 high and low, who grinde the faces of the poor, and cause them to groan under your Cruelty and Oppression, hear the Word of the Lord. Thus saith the Lord God, Howl and weep for the misery which is coming upon you, for the cry of the oppressed hath entered into the ears of the Lord and he is coming to render vengeance upon you and to set the oppressed free. For the trust of your mony and gold shall eat your flesh, as it were fire, for you have heaped Isa. 5. 8
up treasures for the last day; and ye shall be cut down, ye fruitless trees, that cumber the ground, & be cast into the lake, for it is the place prepared for you, and for all fearful and unbeleeving; And the abominable, and mur∣therers, am. 5. 3. and whoremongers, and Sorcerers, Idolaters, and all lyers shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second Luk. 13. 7. Rev. 21. 8. sa. 55. 3. death. Repent, repent, now while you have time, put away the evil of your doings, turn to the Lord, and hearken diligently unto his counsel, the light in your Consciences, which lets you see the evil of your doings. Loving the light, and giving your selves up to be guided by it, it will lead you to ohn 3. 19. life: hating it, and disobeying it, it is your Condemnation: This is the day of your visitation, prise it, lest you perish in the mighty day of the Lords anger, which will speedily come upon the children of disobedience oel 2. 1. To the pure light in your Consciences I speak, which witnesses against the evil of your doings, and will witness me eternally, when the Book of Con∣science is opened. Howl and weep all you that live in pride, and pleasures, and drunken∣ness, gluttony, lust and uncleanness, lightness and vanity, idle communi∣cation, foolish jesting and laughter, which is madness and folly; cursed speaking, lying, cozening, cheating, swearing: for which cause the land mourns: You live without the fear of God, eating and drinking and ri∣sing up to play, to please your selves; your belly is your God, your end is destruction, who mind earthly things; Hear the Word of the Lord and fear, ye fruitless trees, which cumber the ground and desile the flesh: the Lord will cut you down and cast you into hell, for the wicked shall be tur∣ned uke 13. 7. into hell and all that forget God, and this is your portion in the estate that you are in; own it, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it; With∣out are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and Idola∣ters and whosoever loves and makes a lye, shall have their part in the Lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. ev. 22. 15 Repent, repent, and prize your time, and turn unto the Lord, and mind the pure light in your Consciences which lets you see the evil of your hearts; loving it, and obeying it, it will lead you forth out of all unrigh∣teousness to eternal life; hating it, and disobeying it, it is your condem∣nation: t. 2. 11 This is the day of your visitation, prize it, lest you perish in the day of the Lords anger, which is coming upon the childern of disobedience hn 3. 19. in this Nation and else where; for the Lord will make the Earth as the garden of Eden, and hath begun His great and strange Work in this Na∣tion, l. 51. 3. and is making up His jewels, and gathering His Wheat into His garner, sons and daughters up unto himself; and will bundle up you tares, l. 3. 17. and cut down you fruitless trees, and cast you into the place prepared for you, who defile the flesh, cumber the ground, and walk contrary to k. 13. 7. the righteous Law of God, the pure light in your Consciences, to which light I speak, which will eternally witness me, when the Book of Consci∣ence is opened,
To all you who have professed your selves to be the ministers of Christ, and walk contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, in having the chief∣est places in the Assemblies, standing praying in the Synagogues and having Mat. 23. 5. 6, 7. Isa. 56. 10, 11. upper most rooms at Feasts, greetings in the Markets, and of men called Masters, as the Scribes and Pharisees did, which Christ cryed Wo a∣gainst; and every one of you seeking your gain from your quarters, as the false Prophets did, when the Lord sent Isaiah the true Prophet to cry against them. And you hold up the horrible filthy thing committed in the Land, Jer. 5, 30. 31. in bearing rule by your means, as the false Prophets did, when the Lord sent Jeremiah the true Prophet to cry against them. And you seek for the Fleece, and clothe your selves with the Wool, and feed with the fat, and make a prey of the people, as the false Pro∣phets did, which the Lord sent Ezekiel the true Prophet to cry against, Ezek. 34. 2. 3. Thus saith the Lord, I will require my flock at their hands, and cause them to cease from feeding my flock; neither shall the Shepheards feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my flock from their mouths, that they may not be meat for them. Now is the Lord gathering his people from under your power, which you have made a prey of: and you make the people Mic. 3. 5. to err, and bite with your teeth, as the false Prophets did, when the Lord sent Micah the true Prophet to cry out against them; and you cry peace, as they did, and he that puts not into your mouths, you even prepare War against him; and this is fulfilled by your going to Law with poor people for your wages, and others in raising persecution against every one that will not obey you in your vain Traditions, Ier. 23. 30. wherein you steal every one the Word of the Lord from his neighbour, in taking a part of Scripture, and adding unto it your wisdom, and so speak of the Saints conditions, which you cannot witnesse fulfilled in your selves; a false vision, a divination and deceit of our own heart, Ier. 1. 14. and so causes the people to err by your lies, and by your lightnesse, as the false Prophets did, when the Lord sent Jeremiah the true Prophet, who knew the Word of the Lord to be as a fire and hammer, to cry a∣gainst them: and all the Saints that know the Word of the Lord, Ier. 23. 20. knows it to be a fire and a hammer in them, in transforming them by its power from under the powers of darknesse, into the glorious light and li∣berty of the Sons of God. See you, how you dawb up the people with untempered morter, seeing vanities, and divining lies unto them, saying, Ezek. 13. 10. 11. Thus saith the Lord, as you may find it written in such a place of Scripture, which was spoken by the Lord in them which gave it forth: And thus you steal the Saints words to speak of, when as the Lord never spoke by you: as the false Prophets did, when the Lord sent Ezekiel to cry a∣gainst them; and now he hath raised up his sons and daughters, who o∣bey Ier. 23. 31. His Counsel, to cry against you: And this I declare unto you from the Lord, Night shall be upon you, that you shall have no vision, but
shall be ashamed and confounded; yea, you shall all cover your lips, for there shall be no answer of God. Wo, wo unto you, you Murtherers of Souls, whose blood hath cryed unto the Lord God Almighty, and he is coming in power to require their blood at your hands, who have shut the Kingdom of Heaven a∣gainst men, as the Scribes and Pharisees your forefathers did, in telling Mat. 22. 13. Ioh. 1. 9. people, the light of Christ, (which inlghteneth every mans conscience; in which light he is to wait for the power of Christ to guide him out of every evil way, to walk in purity and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. You tell them) it is the light o a natural Conci∣ence; Heb. 12. 14 and you will not enter into the Kingdom your selves, to be guid∣ed by the light in your Consciences, which would lead you into the Kingdom, nor suffer them that are entering in, to enter in, and Mat. 23. 13 here you shut all from the Kingdom of Heaven, which is within them in drawing them from the light in their Consciences, which would lead them unto the Word of Faith, which is in their hearts, the anointing 1 Iohu 2. 20. 27. of the Father, wherein they need not to teach one another, but as the Anointing teaches, which is in truth, and is no lie, which all the Chil∣dren of the Lord are witnesses of, in their measures, who walk in the light, and see your deceits, how you murder and destroy Souls for mony to maintain you in pride and pleasure, though the light in you Consci∣ences cry against you for your practices, but you hate it, and will not o∣bey it: but to it I speak, which will witness me eternally, when the Book of Conscience is opened to your condemnation, who shut all peo∣ple Iohu 3. 19. 20. 21. out of the Kingdom of God (which is within them) in turning them aside from the light in their Consciences, which the Lord hath given unto every one a measure, to guide them into the Kingdom: And then you make a prey of them, in telling them they must wait for the King∣dom Mat. 25. 15 of God in Observations, which you call Ordinances, which you have set up in our imaginations, of the Saints Conditions, which is re∣corded in the Scripture of Truth: Some of you say, Lo here is Christ, in Dan. 10. 21 the Presbyterian practice; and, saith another, Lo he is here, in the Inde∣pendent practice; and the Anabaptist saith, Lo he is here, and others that walk in outward Observations, say, Lo he is here; according as Mat. 24. 23. Christ foretold, that such should come that would say, Lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ, as it is fulfilled in you, who draw people to seek the Kingdom of God in outward Observations; but saith Christ, Beleeve them not, for the Kingdom of God comes not with observations; for as the Mat. 24. 27. lighening cometh out of the East, and shineth unto the West, so shall the com∣ing of the Son of man be: And this I witness; but you turn them from the light in the Conscience, which would lead them into the Kingdom to look forth at the glorious Image you have set up in outward Obser∣vations, and they must pay you so much a year for it, as will maintain you in pride and pleasures, to be Masters among the sons of men; And so you worship the works of your own hands, offering up Sacrifice to an unknown God, whom you ignorantly worship having no Scripture for many things you do.
There is no Scripture for your Call into the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ, by humane wisdom; nor for your making bargains with the 1 Cor. 1. 26. 27. Acts 20. 33 Mat. 10. 8. people for so much a year. There is no Scripture for your sprinkling water on the face of a child calling it Baptism. There is no Scripture for your stealing the Saints words in taking a part of Scripture, and adding to it your wisdom, tearing it in sunder, in Ier. 23. 30. Dectrines, Reasons, Uses, Helps, Motives, according unto the fancies of your brains. There is no Scripture for your particular houses that you have to creep into, where none must come but your selves and whom you please to declare your Sermon as you call it, which is a divination of your own hearts, one day after another, and one year after another. There is no Scripture for your putting Davids words into the mouths of poor ignorant people, to sing praises unto the Lord, as, O Lord, I Psa. 131. 1 Psa. 6. 6. Psal, 119. 120. am not puff'd in mind; I have no scornfull eye; I water my couch with my tears, all the night make I my bed to swim; all my bones do tremble, when they cannot witness these Conditions; and so cause them to blaspheme the Name of God. And when the light in their Consciences cries against them, for lying in the presence of God, and blaspheming his great and glorious Name; you tell them, It is the light of a natural Conscience, Mat. 23. 13. and so murders their Souls in shutting them out of the Kingdom of God as the Scribes and Pharisees, and all the false Prophets did, that deny∣ed Christ to be the light, who enlightens every one that comes into the Iohn 1. 9. world: And here you are found to be among the false Prophets, Scribes and Pharises, walking in their ways, and every tree is known by its fruits, which all the Prophets who walked in the light, & Christ that Mat.. 7. 20 was the light, cryed Wo against: and you are all turned out of the way, in rejecting the corner Stone, Christ, which enlightens the conscience of every one to guide them unto him, as the false Builders did; And go Iohn 1. 9. Iude 11. in the way of Cain, to murder, and greedily run after the error of Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness: So that, as a Troop of Robbers wait for a man, so do you a-company of Priests murder in the way by consent, as the Priests did when the Lord sent Hosea the true Pro∣phet Hos. 6. 9. Mat. 25. 15 to cry against them; for you commit lewdness, in turning every one from the light in their consciences, which the Lord hath given unto every one a measure, according unto their ability, to guide them up into the Kingdom of God: and you turn them aside to seek the Kingdom in Observations, harkening unto the dark inventions of your Rev. 22. 18 brains, in adding your wisdom unto the testimony of Christ; and this is your portion, the plagues written in the Book will be added unto you. Here I have cleared my conscience, dealing plainly with you, declaring
unto you whence you are, as the Lord hath made known unto me, that you may be without excuse in the mighty day of the Lord, which will speedily come upon you, wherein you shall give account for the blood of Souls that have been shut out of the Kingdom, and destroyed by you: To the light in every one of your Consciences I speak, which shall eternally witnesse me, when the Book of Conscience is opened. Repent, repent, and give over deceiving the people, and destroying their Souls: and haste, haste to meet the Lord, in returning within, to be guided by his counsel, the light in your consciences, which you have Psal. 2. 12. rejected, lest ye perish in your gainsayings: Kiss the Son, in obeying his counsel, the light in your conscience, that let's you see the evil of your doings, lest you perish in the way; for if his anger be kindled a little, blessed are all they that trust in him. To all you who have set up a finer Image in Gospel Ordinances as you call them under the forms of Independent and Anabaptists, and say you are the Saints whom the Lord hath chosen, and have only a right to the best of the creatures, to eat of the fat, and be clothed with the finest of the wool, and make merry with the creatures, and live in plea∣sures: Ezek. 34. 2. 3. Gal. 5. 13. Mat. 5. 48. and when the light in your Conscience cries against you, to use your liberty but not as an occasion to the flesh; to make no provision for the flesh, to satisfie it, and the lusts thereof; but you must be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect; You regard it not, but hearken unto the counsel of your own hearts, which draws you to look at the words of Rom. 7. 23. Paul, where he saith, I find a law in my members warring against the Law of my mind; so ye wrest the Scripture to your own destruction, for your en∣couragement to live in the flesh, and say, None must be free from the body of sin while he is here in the body: and thus you deceive your selves, and all whom you draw from the light in your Conscience, which cries for a perfect fulfilling of the Law of God; for the Soul that Ezek. 18. 20. sinneth, it shall dye: Though Paul did complain of a body of sin, it was in his growth, and it was his burden, which made him cry, O wretched man, who shall deliver me? And he witnessed it put off, the Law of the Rom. 7. 24. Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the Law of sin and death; for Christ is made manifest to destroy the works of the Devil, and not to destroy the Law; to save man from the condemning power of Rom. 8. 2. the Law, while he lives in transgression of it; for the Law hath power over the fleshly man, so long as he lives: But be came to fulfil the Law, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. and all the Saints beare witness of it in their measures; some witness it Rom, 7. 1. fulfilled, others wait, following the Lambe daily in the Cross, till they come to the fulfilling of it, that the righteousness of the Law may be ful∣filled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Rom. 8. 3. 4. Therefore mind the light in your Consciences, diligently hearken unto it, and it will smite your glorious Image of Forms and Observati∣ons,
and break it to pieces, and will rend off all your glorious coverings of your outward profession, & will let you see, the Wo is unto them that are covered, and not with the Spirit of the Lord. To the light in Isa. 30. 1. your Consciences I speak, which will eternally witnesse me, if you hear∣ken unto it, to be guided by it, you will never find rest in outward Rom. 6. 6. Forms and Observations, but in putting off the body of sin, through the obedience of the Spirit, that the righteousness of the Law may be Rom. 8. 4. fulfilled in you, in walking no more after the flesh, but after the Spirit for they that are Christs, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts; Gal. 5. 24. and the body is dead in regard of sin, but the spirit is alive unto righteousness And this you must witnesse, or else all your Religion is vain, and your Rom. 8. 10. Souls will perish. To all you Inhabiters of England, How long will you drink of the Rev. 17. 4. Cup of Abominations, the wine of the wrath of the Whore, which hath made you drunk, and all Nations, to lay out your mony for Isa. 5 5. 2. that which is not bread to the Merchants of Babylon, who fill unto you the Cup of Abominations, in drawing you from the light in your Luk. 17. 20. 21. Consciences, which is given unto every one of you a measure, to guide you up to God, to seek for the Kingdom of God in Observations, and Christ saith it is not in Observations, but within: so they keep you in Captivity, in Babylons Kingdom, under the power of sin, hell, and death. To every particular Inhabiter of England I write: Come out of Ba∣bylon, Rev. 18. 4. all Forms, and Observations, and Traditions, which are set up by the will of man: Now is Babylon come in remembrance before God, and the vials of wrath must be poured upon her, and upon h Revel. 18. 23, 24. Merchants, for by their Sorceries are you Inhabitants of England, and all Nations deceived; and in her is found the blood of the Pro∣phets and Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth: Haste, Rev. 18. 4. haste, come out of her, lest you partake with her in her sins, and so partake with her in her punishment. which will speedily come upon her, for the mouth of the Lord of Hoasts hath spoken it: Return within every one in particular; examine your hearts, and mind the light in your Conscience, and it will alwaies let you see where your hearts are, and what they delight in, for it is the heart the Lord requires; He will no longer be worshipped in Words, Forms, and Observations, but in Spirit and in truth, and in sincerity in the in∣ward Iohn 4. 24. parts: therefore every one be faithfull in taking heed to the light in your Consciences, which the Lord hath given to every one a measure to profit withall, for the exercise of the Conscience towards Mat. 25. 15. God and men; in minding your watch to wait in the light in measure, it will bring to Judgment all the powers of darkness in you; and the righteous Law of God will cry through your earthly and carnall Isa, 42. 2. hearts, till judgment be brought forth into victory, and your wills will be brought in subiection unto the Will or God, to wait on him for refreshment from his presence, who satisfieth the hungry with good Luk. 1. 53.
things: And take heed of consulting with flesh and blood, for that leads into pride and disobedience, into Hell and destruction: mind the light in your Conscience, which is the sure word of prophecy, that you cannot be deceived, taking heed unto it, as unto a light 2 Pet. 1. 19 that shines in a dark place, untill the day dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts; diligently hearken unto it, and you shall eat Isa. 55. 2. 3 that which is good, and your Soul shall delight it self in fatnesse: there is your teacher within you, the light in your Consciences; loving it Iohn 3. 19. and obeying it, is your life; hating it and disobeying it, is your con∣demnation: To that pure light in your Consciences I speak which will eternally witness me, when the Book of Conscience is opened in you: Now you have time, prize it, in waiting on the Lord in the light, to make your calling and Election sure, in putting off the old man and his deeds, and putting on the Lord Jesus Christ in righteousness and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord; in so doing you shall 2 Pet. 1. 10 escape the wrath of God, which is coming upon the Children of diso∣bedience in this Nation and elsewhere; for the Lord will make the Isa. 51. 3. Ioel. 2. 3. 1 Sam. 3. 11. Dan. 2. 35. Earth as the Garden of Eden, and hath begun His great and strange Work in this Nation, which shall make the ears of them that hear to tingle, wherein He is exalting the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, which Kingdom shall break down all the Kingdoms of the world, and shall fill the whole Earth; for the mighty day of the Lord is coming that shall burn as an Oven, and all you that are proud, and all you that do wickedly shall Mal. 4. 3. be stubble, and the day that cometh shall burn you up, saith the Lord of Hosts, and it shall leave of you neither Root nor Branch. But unto you that fear the Name of the Lord shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his Verse 4. wings, and ye shall go forth and grow as Calves of the stall, and ye shall tread down the wicked, and they shall be as ashes under the soies of your Verse 3. feet, in the day that I do this saith the Lord: wherein He is now gather∣ing His Elect together, His scattered sheep, that have been scattered Mat. 24. 31 Ezek. 34. 12. in the cloudy and dark day, and will bring them from the people, and gather them from the Countries, and will bring them to their own Land, and I wil feed them upon a good pasture, and upon the high Mountains of Israel shall their fold be, and there shall they lie in a good fold, and in fat verse 13. pasture shall they feed upon the Mountains of Israel; and I will raise up for them a plant of renown, and they shall no more be consumed with hunger, in the Land, neither bear the shame of the Heathen any more, but they shall Verse 29. dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid: Thus shall you know that I the Lord your God am with you, and that the house of Israel is my people, saith the Lord God. Verse 30. England, here I have cleared my Conscience, in declaring to thee what the Lord hath made known to me of His love and mercy. He will manifest it to thee, if thou wilt hearken diligently to His Counsel, the Isa. 33. 2. light which is in the Conscience of every one, and wait upon Him to be guided by His Power: and all you that disobey the righteous Law
of God, the light in your Conscience, you shall be swept away with the beesom of His wrath, and your place shall be no more, for the Iohn 3. 20. mouth of the Lord of Hosts hath spoken it: And whether you hear or forbear, I am clear of the blood of all men, in making known to you what the Lord hath revealed to me: he that can receive it, let him. Acts 20. 26 W. D. A WORD from the LORD. TO all Saints and Children of the most high God, whom He hath called and chosen out of the World, and all their Customs, Fashions, Worships, Forms, Ob∣servations 1 Pet. 2, 9. and Traditions, which are set up by the will of man, to wait upon him in the light, the Counsel of Iesus Christ, the Captain of our Salvation; Every one Isa. 55. 2. in your measure stand valiant Souldiers, and be not dis∣couraged, neither at the enemy within, nor without; lift up your heads, and behold your King Iesus Christ, who is present with you, to dash in pieces and destroy all your enemies for you: Stand faithful in His Counsel, Isa. 13. 9. and walk in His Power, every one in your measure; and be bold in the Lord, for you are the Army of the Lord God Ioel 2. 2, 3. Almighty, His mighty Hoast, whom he hath chosen out of the World to make known His eternall Power in, to sound out His eternal and powerful Word, which shall make the ears of all the Inhabitants of the Earth that hear, to tingle; and at the sound and hearing thereof shall their 1 Sam. 3. 11. Ioel. 2. 4. 6, 7, 8, 10, 11. Rev. 17. 14. hearts fail, and paleness shall gather into all faces in the mighty Day of the Lords Power, which is begun in this Nation, wherein he is exalting the Kingdom of Iesus Christ our King, who is riding on in his Majesty and mighty Power, conquering all the powers of the Earth in the hearts of His Saints, and will overturn and dash in pieces all the Powers in this Nation, and all the world over, that will not submit to His Scepter, to be guided
by His Counsel, the pure Law of God, which is the light in the Conscience: Now is He coming with ten thousands of His Saints to Iudge the World, and to give to every one according to their deeds: and the Kingdoms Iud. 14. 15. and Dominions, and the greatness of the Kingdoms un∣der the whole Heavens, shall be given to the Saints of the most high God, and all Nations shall serve and obey Dan. 7. 27. him: Rejoyce, rejoyce, ye Saints and Children of the most high God, stand fast in the Counsel of Iesus Christ, the light in you, and walk in His Power, and you shall walk as Kings upon Earth, and shall sing the new song that none can sing, but the hundred forty four thousand whose minds are redeemed from the Earth, who stand before the Throne of God day and night, singing Hallelu∣jahs Rev. 5. 9. Cap. 14. 3. Cap. 19. 6. Cap. 5. 13. and Praises to the Lord God omnipetent, who is taking to Him His great Power to sit upon His Throne and to the Lamb for evermore. William Dewsbury.
FINIS.
