D1636 E176_12 99860265 157095
A DISCOVERY of a horrible and Bloody TREASON AND Conspiracie: Against the Protestants of this Kingdome in generall, but especially against divers of the Nobility, and many of the honourable House of Commons in Parliament, and also against some of the Citizens of LONDON. Which Discovery was brought to the House of COMMONS on Munday Novemb. the 15. th 1641. VVith a Plot by the Earle of VVorcester in VVales. As also a Relation of a Search at Worcester-house in the Strand. Together with an Order made by the Lords, for the Apprehending of all Priests and Iesuites, wthin this City and Kingdome. LONDON, Printed for IOHN THOMAS. 1641.
TREASON discovered: OR An ample and reall Relation of a late horrible Plot and Conspiracie against the Protestants of England, and in generall the Citizens of London in particular. BEing intended to murther divers of the Nobility and many others of the Hono∣rable House of Commons in Parliament, taken by confession, and examined by the Parliament, the 15. of Novemb. 1641. being Munday. The Jnformation of Thomas Beale a Tay∣lour living in VVhite-crosse-street in Good∣man VVarners house, delivered in Parlia∣ment on Munday and Tuesday November 15, 16. 1641.
On the Sabbath day last the said young man, late at night passing through Moore-Fields neere the City of London did over∣heare certaine fellowes talking and whispe∣ring together about their intended plot and machinations, the one of them saying that he had received 40. shillings in hand to murther divers persons eminent in the house of Parliament, which he would short∣ly accomplish, and another of them also made report that he had also received a lar∣ger sum me to doe the like enterprise upon some great persons of the higher House, wch pretended Plot of theirs, they verily ex∣pected should have taken effect on ye Thurs∣day night following, had not the Providence of Almighty God miraculously prevented the bloody designs of those cruell and mer∣cilesse Papists: For it happened that those miscreant Traytors espying the said young man in the darke, and fearing by him to be discovered made at him with their weapons and grievously wounded him, intending to deprive him of his sweet life, which they had effected, had not the Divine Providence of God prevented in his good time by his escaping from them. In which Conference of theirs hee also over-heard them to whisper about some great plots or treacheries in VVales now in∣tended against England, and that the three
next shires adioyning to Ragland Castle, were lately come in with all their forces to the assistance of the Earle of Worcester. And the sayd young man cōming before the Parliament house, really and trulie did relate the said former passages with great modesty and honest Confidence, moreover alledging that they intended the murther of many protestant Lords, with many other Gentlemen such as Mr. Pym and the like, & that the Papists in Wales intended to seaze into their hands all the strong holds of Che∣shire and Lancashire with the adjacent parts, and that in that hurly burly and Combustion the plot was so layd and contriued, that by the Papists at the same Jnstant, the Cittie of London should haue been surprised, and all the Protestants throats cut, Upon which Relation the Houses of Par∣liament sate very late on Munday night last, and the Lords and others of both Houses were conducted to their Lodgings and hou∣ses by most of the trained Bands in Middle∣sex the same night. On the morrow very early, both Houses met, where upon serious deliberation, it was immediately concluded that the House of the said Earle of Worcester scituate in the Strand in the liberties of Westminster, should bee by strong watch guarded both by land and water, and that strickt search
should be made in the said house for the ap∣prehending of the persons of Father An∣drewes and father Iones in the house of the Lord Herberts, Sonne and heire to the fore∣said Lord of VVorcester and divers other su∣spicious persons, supposed to be Confede∣rate in that wicked and most Diabolicall designe, who are thought also to be lur∣king in the said house, which search was ac∣cordingly performed the same day about eleven a clock in the fore-noone. The said Father Iones escaped out of a back doore into the Savoy, and father An∣drewes was taken in the French Ordinary over against the Lord Herberts house and is now in custody. There are divers warrants gone out to the Lord Major of the City of London, for the apprehending of divers other suspitious persons.
Die Lune 15. Novemb. 1641. An Order of the Lords for the Apprehending of Priests and Iesuites. IT is this day Orde∣red by the Lords in Parliament; That Father Iones, and Father Andrewes, and all other Ro∣mish Priests and Jesuites shall bee forthwith taken and apprehended by his Majesties Justices of Peace and others his Majesties Officers, and put into safe custody untill the pleasure of this House be further known, and then the in names shall be returned unto the Lords in Parliament, and that any man that shall dis∣cover any Popish Priests or Jesuites and procure them to be apprehended; shall bee rewarded by the Parliament. Io. Browne Cler. Parliament. FINIS.
