d618 e809_15 99866612 167915
A DECLARATION Of several of the Churches of Christ, AND GODLY PEOPLE In and about the Citie of LONDON; Concerning The Kingly Interest OF CHRIST, AND The present Suffrings OF His Cause and Saints in England. LONDON, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1654.
A DECLARATION Of several of the Churches of Christ, And Godly people: Being a few of the despised Remnant in and about the City of London, that yet cleave close to the Cause and Interest of our Lord Jesus, so much disowned and rejected in these times of Apostacie, and in this hour of our great Tribulation and Temptation. IN the Name of Jehovah-Nissi, (Exod. 17.15.) our Lord Christ, Protector of his People, King of Saints and Nations: To all that are sanctified in Jesus Christ, whether in Churches, or out, that partake of the same Faith (with us) of our Lord Jesus, especially the sealed number now upon their watch, that have not defiled their garments, whose robes are washed with the blood of the Lamb, that are redeemed from among men, and fellow
the Lamb whither soever he goeth, in these three Nations, or elsewhere. We their unworthy Brethren, one with them in the present Sufferings of our Lord Jesus, and his Saints, in the behalf of our selves, and many others, Do from the bottom of our hearts, wish like Faith, Grace, Zeal, Light, Joy, and Peace, which we enjoy from God the Father, and Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. FOrasmuch as we believe many godly people in these three Nations and elsewhere, are deceived (and therefore unsatisfied) concerning us in the matters of our faith, relating to the most precious Cause, Interest, and Monarchy of the Lord Christ, (which we cleave unto) through misrepresentations and false reports made of us and our Principles, by persons, and Letters posted about the Nations for that purpose, full of er∣rors, mistakes, unchristian censures, uncharitable reproa∣ches and invectives, wherein the Adversaries have all the advantage against us, that worldly power can pos∣sess them with: but now, that we may no longer (by a forced silence) be a dissatisfaction to our Friends, grie∣vance to the Truth, offence to the Saints, a trouble to our own Consciences, and advantage to the Adversa∣ries, or be so much the subject (as we have been) of our Enemies malice, to forge their lyes, jealousies, or evil reports upon, nor yet be suspicious to many, and for signes and wonders to most in the Common∣wealth; as if we were monsters, and not men; infidels, and not believers; enemies to Government, and not orators for it day and night, as God hath appointed it; We shall therefore (in the behalf of thousands more (we hope) one with us herein) in all faithfulness, meek∣ness,
and clearness, declare unto you, (and to all the world) how far we are engaged in this most glorious (though crucified) cause of Christ, (maugre all oppo∣sition of Men or Devils) in as little room as this short Narrative will allow us; being awakened thereunto every day. Yet it cannot be expected, that in this Paper we should relate all our Grievances, lay down all our Grounds, or answer all Objections, (which we hope to do hereafter) but onely so far as may make obvious to any unbyassed eye or understanding, the just rise of our Discontents, Troubles, and Dissatisfacti∣ons, and as may exonerate our souls in the sight of Heaven and Earth. O our bowels, our bowels! our hearts even ake, and are pained within us, to hear the doleful and daily groans of Gods people, crying out, O where are our Deliverers and Saviours! The Reeds that we leaned upon, have pierced our hands, and we bleed! And af∣ter our eyes fail with looking for Freedom, Peace, and Light, behold Darkness, Oppression, and Distraction! and what hope is left us? And all this, through the declension of the Armies first Principles, and former Declarations, extant to the view of the world: wit∣ness p. 14, 15 of the Remonstr. Albans, & p. 66. They urge it upon the grounds of Common Right, Freedom, and Safety, that Parliaments be by a certain succession, Annually, or Biennially. And in their Declar. June 14. 1647. p. 8, 9. they declare this so essential and fun∣damental to Freedom, as that it cannot, nor ought it to be denied or withholden from us: and that arbitrary or absolute power in any person or per∣sons during life, doth not render that State any bet∣ter then Tyranny, nor the People subjected thereto
any better then Vassals. And therefore they say, p. 9. We are so far from designing or complying to have an absolute or arbitrary power signed or setled for continuance in any persons whatsoever, as that (if we might be sure to obtain it) we cannot wish to have it so in the persons of any whom we could most confide in, or who should appear most of our own opinions or principles, or whom we might have most personal assurance of, or interest in; but that the Authority of this Kingdom in Parliament may ever stand, and have its course. Yet for all this, were not the last Parliament dissolved, for that they would rule as Saints, (or part of the fifth Monar∣chy, for Christ) and for doing that the former Par∣liament neglected, & therefore were dissolved? and for doing that which the Army and good people had many yeers declared to be their duty to do? viz. Remonstr. p. 20. And have not some by Printing opprobriously and injuriously abused those precious members that stood for the Magistracie and Ministery of the Gospel, or Unction, as if they would have had no Government, no Ministers, nor Propriety at all? and, after all their integrity, cast an Odium upon them, and upon the name of Saints, yea, and upon the Interest of Christ, against which they have opened the mouthes of many thou∣sands to blaspheme? O these are the swords which pierce our hearts! Besides, doth not this Personal In∣terest now up, look too much alike that which God hath confounded and stamped upon before our eyes? in the same predicament of Pride, Profaness, Persecution of Saints, and Oppression, with them that went before? Oh! are not the Wicked exalted on every side, and such taken up again, (Malignants and others) as not
long since they most declaim'd against? and are not the Saints (and them onely, or mostly) afflicted, cast out of their Assemblies from praying and preaching? and some of the faithfullest of them in all these Wars, now closely imprisoned (for their Consciences and this Cause of Christ) from the common air, yea, cast among Malefactors condemned; threatned, re∣proached, and trampled on? Oh! can we have hearts so hard, as to mention these, and (many more) such like effects, without yerning and mourning? Besides, are not the new Court of Tryers at White∣hall for Ministers, of like make with the Bishops High-Commission-Court? The Graven image of the worldly power, creating a worldly Clergie, for worldly ends, highly scandalous, and against the Rule of the Gospel, and Faith of Christ, and as much to be ex∣ploded as the Pope and Prelate? notwithstanding they assume the title of Orthodox, and soundness of opinion to themselves, and upon that account charge others (that are not one with them in their Carnal and Anti∣christian Interest) with Errours and Rashness. But, as the Declaration of the Army to Scotland, (p. 15) saith,  This hath been found in all ages of high advantage to them that assumed it, that it were strange if those (Civil Tryers) should not have used it to smite them withal, whom they would render odious, and destroy. And is not This against their own Declar. to Scotland, p. 16. where they say, That that Church-Government which is of God, Gods own means, viZ. his Word, must establish, without a busie medling with, or engaging of the authorities of the world? And the Lo. General CROMWEL, in his Letter to the Kirk-assembly from Dunbar, p. 11.
saith, It is worth considering, how those Ministers take into their hands the instruments of a foolish shepherd, that meddle with worldly policies, or earthly powers, to set up that which they call The Kingdom of Christ; which indeed is neither it, nor, if it were, would such means be found effectual for that end; and neglect, and not trust to the Word of God, the Sword of the Spirit, &c. Is not this all true in the Tryers? And is not this also against their own Remonstr. Albans, pag. 20. where they de∣clare it the Parliaments part, to protect religous men, and take away all the corrupted Forms of outside-Religion, and (National) Church-stare, whether imposed without Law, or rooted in Law in times of Popish ignorance or idolatry, or of Go∣spels dimmer light; and also to take away the de∣pendence of the (National) Clergie in Civil Laws and Ecclesiastical affairs, which they had upon the King; or that interest of the Clergie in Civil Laws and Affairs, which the craft of both in length of time had wrought for each other: But that the King's part was to discountenance the Godly, or a∣ny conscience obliging above or against humane or outward Constitutions, & to uphold and maintain the Civil dependence of the Clergie, and their Church-matters, under him. Our bowels are so moved at these things, that we cannot refrain from bewailing our condition, after so vast a stream and treasure of the blood, tears, prayers, lives, and spoils of our dearest relations. O did we ever think to see so many hopeful Instruments in the Army, Churches, and elsewhere, to be so fully gorged with the flesh of Kings, Captains, and Nobles, &c. (i. e. with their
Lands, Mannors, Estates, Parks, and Palaces) so as to sit at ease, and comply with Antichrist, the World, Worldly Church and Clergie. Oh! how hath the Cup of the Whore foxt and inchanted men! viz. with the wine of the wrath of her fornication, to commit sin with her daily, (which the sober blush to see) and to paint her over afresh, for New Lovers to lie down with, to their utter ruine! O the Mystery of Ini∣quity works apace! This subtil spirit and soul of An∣tichristianism (in a new body) hath bewitched many of the Common sort, and is wonderful cunning to de∣ceive; although by this universal falling away a∣mongst us, the Man of sin is (blessed be Jehovah) more discovered then ever, who must be destroyed with the breath of Christ's mouth, and the brightness of his coming. Yet under a sad sense of so many fresh assaults which the Saints meet with daily by outward Violence, and Ecclesiastical Tyranny, and in a clear apprehension of that heavie Doom and Precipice hard by (we verily believe) upon all those Powers and Interests of men, which keep warm the Seat of the bloody Beast for the Mother of harlots: And after many Solemn Meetings, and seekings of God for a special presence, rolling our selves onely on his Arm, having no carnal confidence, (blessed be our wise God) now left us to look upon, we are fully perswaded in our souls, that he who hath hitherto most eminently appeared, and plainly owned this blessed Cause (which the Apostates of the times have cast aside, and we yet cleave unto) in England, Ireland, Scotland, and else-where, according to the faith and prayers of his poor despised people, that he will yet appear, and that more eminently, (and terribly too) to save, then ever, and
witness to the righteousness of his own Cause, and the innocencie of his servants that suffer therein, in great mercy and pity, passing by the failings and infirmi∣ties of us his poor creatures. Therefore though we are sure that God will vindicate his own Name to pur∣pose, ere long, under so much reproach; yet, in the dread of that Name, we appeal unto the LORD, who will be a swift witness against us, if we utter these things in hypocrisie, or for base ends, or for any carnal Personal Interest whatsoever, if we are not in the sin∣cerity and simplicity of our hearts (so far as we have one grain of true grace in us) for Christ alone, and his poor rejected Cause and People, that we may ease and exonerate our selves in the sense we have of our duty herein, and be withdrawn (to the eye of all) from partaking in the crying sins and Apostacie of the Times; with all faithfulness, holy awe, and humility, we profess and declare, 1. For this Cause and Kingly Interest of our Lord Jesus, in England, Ireland, and Scotland, or elswhere, according to the several Declarations of the Army, sealed to with the blood of thousands of the precious Saints, the cry of whose blood is for Christ, accord∣ing to the Declaration of the Army to Scotland, p. 36, 37, 38, 39. who declare, They were stirred up by the Lord to assist the Parliament against the King, for this end, To bring about the destruction of Antichrist, and the deliverance of his true Church and people; & upon this simple account was it, that they engaged in the Wars of the three Nations, a∣gainst all Opposers of this work of Jesus Christ; having these things singly in their eye, viz. the de∣struction of Antichrist, and advancement of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and deliverance and reformation of his Church, and the establish∣ment of Christs Ordinances according to his Word, and the just Civil Liberties of English∣men. And this, they declare, with the loss of many precious Saints, p. 38. That they en∣gaged against the late King and his Monarchy, as one of the ten horns of the Beast, guilty of the blood of the Saints: which act (they say) they are confident God will own against all Kingdoms or Nations that will oppose them, and that will not suffer Jesus Christ to be King. So page 39. they declare, they value the Churches Then owning the Congregated Churches, as appears by Letters written to Mr. Feak, and Mr. Simpson, and the Churches that walk in fellowship with them, and others. of Christ, who are the lot of Gods inheritance, a thousand times beyond their own lives; and that it is their duty to persevere therein to the utmost hazard of their lives: and that the Lord made them instruments to vex all in his sore displeasure, that take counsel against Christ, whom the Lord hath anointed and decreed King: and that they were not meerly the servants of man; and that they were not meerly the servants of man; and that they not onely proclaimed Jesus Christ, King of Saints, to be King, but that they would submit to him (alone) upon his own terms, and admit him (onely) to the exercise of his Royal authority. Therefore say they, in pag. 40. We beseech you, in the fear of God, look about you: for our Lord Jesus is coming, &c. Now accordingly we have and do declare for this Royal Interest of
Christ, which ought to be set up, which so much blood hath been poured out for, like water, in the three Nations.) This Cause of Christ was magni∣fied by God, in answering the Dunbar-Appeal against the King of Scots: The English Army appealing to God, according to the Act of Parliament, 1648. de∣claring it High treason to set up Charles Stuart, or Any other person, Chief Magistrate in England, or Ireland, or any of the Dominions thereunto belonging. And as our Appeal was for No King but Jesus, (by which were the greatest Victories obtained that we had) the Scots Appeal, on the other side, was for A King, or Personal Interest of Man, &c. God's answer was so full and wonderful on the No King's side but Jesus, and according to the Act of Parliament, (upon which the Army marched against the King of Scots) that all Scotland was given in in few months, and their armies destroyed: and, to use the very words of the Act of Parliament, Die Martis, 17 Septemb. 1650. This answer was enriched with so many remarkable cir∣cumstances, as is to be admired at by succeeding generations; evidencing such a divine presence, as the Commonwealth can never be thankful enough for: and that it was given in as a Seal or Confir∣mation from heaven, of the justness of this Cause, after solemn appeals made on both sides to God himself, the righteous Judge in this War between England and Scotland: and that God did so de∣cide the Controversie, (himself) was of such value and high consequence, that Generations to come may taste the sweet of it &c. Besides all this, much more we might mention (of their own) for this Cause and Kingly Interest of Christ; which
we are resolved to adhere to, and (if the Lord will enable us) never to recede from, but to live and die in it. Neither is it a Resisting of Government, (as some say of us) but a Reforming of it (which our Principles lead us to) according to the Word. And seeing the Army and Parliament have often declared, as pag. 7. of Declar. June 14. 1647. No resisting of Magistra∣cie, to side with just Principles; upon which Ma∣xime they assisted the Parliament against the King: and that it is one witness of God in the world, to carry on a testimony against the injustice and un∣righteousness of men, and against the miscarriages of Governments, when corrupted, or declining from their primitive and original glory. We use their own words. 'Tis true, Every soul must be sub∣ject to the higher powers; and it is in obedience thereunto, that we are subject to Christ, and stand by this his Cause (as we do) so long as the Controversie is not now (with us) between Man and Man, (as was wont to be in other ages) but it is between Christ and Man. Which of these two then shall have the absolute power of Government in the Nations? and who are the resisters of the higher powers which are of God, those that own, or those that oppose Christ's claim? Judge ye! 2. Because the Boutefeu's of the Times are ever blowing up the flames upon us, and incensing the pre∣sent worldly powers and others against us, with their lying accusations, and evil surmisings, as the adver∣saries did, Ezra 4. and Nehem. 6. against Iudah and Ie∣rusalem, (to render them odious to Artaxerxes) that they intended to rebel when they had done their buil∣ding; and that if he suffered them to go on, it would
hinder his Revenue, &c. and so Sanballat sent Nehe∣miah word, that he and the Jews intended to rebel, when they had done with the walls they were about: and all this, to weaken the hands of them that had a minde to work. Therefore, to avoid such Jea∣lousies and Fears, We do freely declare against all Carnal Plots, Devilish Designes, or Ungodly Com∣binations of men whatsoever, as inconsistent with those gracious Principles which have (we hope) car∣ried us (and yet do daily) into a spiritual warfare and hot contest for this Cause of Christ, by the Word, Faith, Prayer, and Solemn appeals unto our God, the righteous Judge of heaven and earth. And in∣deed, being (thus) armed with the whole armour of God, we dare (as before) wrestle with Principalities and Powers; and, through the grace of our God, we are not afraid of their Armies or Numbers, but (al∣though we have not the least reliance on any arm of flesh, yet) we can bid defiance unto all the enemies of this glorious Cause of Christ contended for by the Saints, with those means that God's Word leads us unto; for which, our dear brethren are imprisoned, and suffer persecution at this day. Therefore, in a just and ne∣cessary defence of what is dearer to us then our lives, (bought with the price of the blood of Christ, and thousands of his dearest Saints) we call heaven and earth to witness between us and our brethren that have denied us and this Cause! For in Cases not clearly or properly under mans judgment, or where it is not easie for man to give a certain judgment, the engaged, upon sure Principles and Pretences, do centre in appeals to God for judgement: and so did the two tribes and a half, Josh. 22. for that it is then
the proper work of God to bear witness, and give righteous judgment: which as he hath always done, sooner or later, clearer or darker, after the Appeal is made to him; so in this last age and part of the world he hath made more haste then formerly to judgement, and given it more quickly, speedily, and terribly, and made his own Arm so bare therein, as all men might see it: witness the aforesad Appeal at Dunbar. In the same Cause the Appeal is now made (by us) a∣gain. All which hath induced us to take up the Word of God, Faith, and Prayer (by Solemn Ap∣peals to the just Judge of Heaven and Earth) in the like and the same Cause. A few particulars of the Matter whereof, take as followeth. 1. About their Vows, Declarations, Promises, Engage∣ments, made unto God for Christ and his Interest,Psal. 66.13, 14. Deut. 23.21. Eccles. 5.3, 4. 5.6. in time of their great distress: all which, are they not broken, both as to Magistracie, Mi∣nistery, Churches, Liberty, and the Right of the Saints of the most High? We appeal to God. 2. Whether an espousing of the same or a like in∣terest with that which God hath destroyed before our eyes, and rejecting this blessed Cause of Christ, King of the Nations, for a Personal Cause of Man, as we now conceive, Jer. 3.1, Mal. 2.11. be not a provocation of God in the highest degree, and too full a testimony of the foulest hypocrisie and selfish∣ness in them, whose former Profession and Declara∣tions obliged them to the contrary? 3. Whether a persecuting and imprisoning some of of the choicest and holiest servants of Christ, in the present light, and work of this Generation, whilst the
Wicked are exalted on every side, and such as were cast by, taken up again, Isa 49.24, 25. Ier. 13.17. be of God, or no? 4. Whether the violence and force, flattery, or any other wayes which are used to compel any of us, a∣gainst our Consciences, to prostrate to mens carnal interests, and to sin against the light, be according to their former pretended Principles, or the Word of God? 5. Whether their unjust and unchristian accusations of us in the face of the world, are not full of loath∣some and cruel lyes, whiles they spread about, That we are against Magistracie, Ministery, Propriety, Ordi∣nances, and the like? Whether it be so or no, we ap∣peal to him that judgeth righteously. 6. Their vexing and rising up against the Spirit of God, which they call an Impostor, and the false, de∣vilish, fanatick spirit of Black-Fryers, or Alhallows-meeting; speaking blasphemously against it, and that frequently: wherein we appeal to the Lord to judge, Whether that Spirit that is among them, leading to Pride, Pomp, Worldliness, Carnallity, Lying, Persecution, and Blaspheming; or that Spi∣rit which leads us day and night to the duty of Faith, Assembling, Praying, Preaching; Exhorting, and Building up in the present Truth contested against by them, and to Comforting Counselling, and Quicking up one another every day, to hold fast our profession without wavering; to Self-denying and Morification, that we may not minde the pre∣sent World, nor the vanities thereof: Whether this Spirit, our infirmities excepted, or theirs, which acts them, be of God; and which is the devilish,
wordly, and deluding spirit. Isa. 63.10. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. 7. Is not pomp, pride, and vanity in Court and else∣where, now up again, (in some respects more then ever) so much contested and inveighed against for so many yeers together, by themselves and others? Whether by these (amongst other things) they have not opened the mouthes of the Enemies to blaspheme Christ and his Spirit? to reproach his Cause, and to harden their hearts? And whether they have not given advantage to Charles Stuart or some others, to invade us, our lives, our relations, afresh, by open Wars, Inundation of blood and Mischief, so as seems to make void and uneffectual many yeers Wars, with vast treasure, expence and blood? 8. Whereas they say, we are all for Wars, and would have no Peace with the Nations round about; we appeal to God therein, whether we are not for the best, safest, and lasting (godly) Peace? and, were it God's will, could wish no more blood might be shed! Although we would not willingly see a peace (worse then War) made with the nations, against the Word of God, Safety and Liberties of the good peo∣ple, (for which so many have bled both by Land and Sea) and upon such terms too, as makes more for the interest of some men, then for the Publick; or upon such Articles, (as might make us blush for shame, at this time of the Day, and after so many out-goings of God in the midst of us) as have not so much as one Article for the Lord Jesus, or his Saints, that are in the present work of this generation, concerning Christs Kingdom or Interest, to subscribe unto, Numb. 33.52, 53. to the end. Exod. 23.32, 33, and 34. chap. 12.13.
Upon these (and many other) grounds, we are in∣duced (and are resolved in the strength of Christ) to keep up the Altar Iosh. 22.34.ED, and continue our Appeal until the Lord doth answer in ju∣stice, and yet in much mercy, to his poor little remnant, (which we are perswaded will be speedily) as Luke 18.7, 8. And if men will (yet) needs blinde their eyes, and harden their hearts (we could wish it be not to their destruction) yet we do bless our heavenly Fa∣ther that hath opened our eyes, and kept our feet from fal∣ling, (with them) that we can so comfortably see the things that concern our (best) Peace, according to the Law and the Testimony, in the sure Word of Pro∣phecie. Blessed be JEHOVAH. Amen, A∣men. 3. But thirdly and lastly, for that we finde much Misunderstanding among some, and Misrepresentations among most, of the Fifth Monarchy, or Kingdom of Christ in the Nations, which the holy Scriptures, both in the Old and New Testament, do clearly and plen∣tifully declare, with a positive period to the Worldly, Heathenish Laws, Ordinances and Constitutions of men, as they are now executed in the Nations of the world: And whereas it is also upon the hearts of many of the choice servants of God, that in this present Age the Lord JEHOVAH is setting up the fifth King∣dom, (as Dan. 2.44. & 7.22, 26, 27. Zech. 21.) which shall not be left to other people, but shall break in pieces all the four kingdoms, and remain for ever and ever; and that (at this time) whenas the fourth Monarchy is partly broken in these Nations, that Christ may be the onely Potentate, the King of kings, and of all Na∣tions, 1 Tim. 6.15. Micah 4.7. Zech. 9.9, 10. Col. 1.16.
Heb. 2.8. Rev. 11.15. & 17. Chap. 14 & 19. Chap. 15.16. Now finding this (the present Truth) so much opposed by the National Rulers and their Clergie, yea, and by some godly people and Church-members, ac∣counted Orthodox, who cannot endure the day of Christs coming; We therefore are resolved, ac∣cording to the presence and assistance of the Lord with us, to entertain a serious Censideration and Debate for the benefit of all others, touching the premises, viz. of the Laws, Subjects, Extent, Rise, Time, Place, Offices and Officers of the fifth Monarchy, or Kingdom, whereby the World must be governed according to the Word of God, without the mixture (as now is) of Mens Laws and Inventions, whether in respect of Magistracy or Ministery, Church or Civil affairs: which Debate we intend to hold once a week in this City of London: and we desire our beloved brethren which are one with us in the present Truth and suf∣ferings, whether in Churches or out, whether in City or Country, (that are enlightned) to take special notice of it, for this end, that they may enjoy the like fredom with us in those Meetings and Debates, as often as they please to come. And if the Lord give us the liberty, we do purpose to proceed with the De∣bate of it from this day onward, until we have taken up a full and clear Narrative thereof (so far as shall appear to us) out of the Scriptures, fit to publish to the view of all men, that our Principles in that point of the fifth Monarchy, may be fully known; with desire to know what any of our Adversaries (now against us) shall have to say to us or to our prin∣ciples therein; who are contented with all our souls (the Lord knows) to be convinced of any Errour
or Mistakes by the Word of Truth: But we think not Imprisoning or Persecuting us, a competent or fit way to convince our Consciences; if we were in errours, as they pretend. And although we need no Law of men to allow us this Liberty, it being our Birth-right in Christ a∣mong Christians, and so fully warranted by the Word of God, and practice of Primitive Saints; yet if we should condescend to the Captious of our times, we could tell them, The Instrument, intituled, The Government of the Common-wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, in the five and twentieth Arti∣cle declares, That Liberty shall be given to disco∣ver and confute Errour and Heresie, and whatsoe∣ver is contrary to sound doctrine. All which the Engager, fol. 46. hath promised in the presence of God to observe, and cause to be observed to his power; subscribed, O. CROMWEL. In the mean time, men would do well to take heed of Blaspheming, Re∣proaching Christ, his Spirit, and his Monarchy, as they do daily, (for which our hearts are grieved within us) and to search the Scriptures whether these things be so or no. For as the Lord Cromwel writes, in his own Letter to the Kirk of Scotland, The Word of the Lord may be to some a word of judgement, that they may fall backward and be broken, and snared and taken; there may be a spiri∣tual fulness, which the world may call drunken∣ness, (or giddiness) Act. 2. O that we might beseech such in the bleeding Bowels of Christ, (crucified be∣fore our eyes) to think it possible they may be mista∣ken! Though the Great Ones, and Wise Ones, Priests and Rulers, Scribes and Pharisees, and Orthodox
Professors (so accounted of the times) were all on their side; yet a little handful of the weak ones may have the Truth (though but the despised persecuted Truth) on their side. And we do in the tenderness of our hearts and affections to all that are faithful, beg of them in the Name of the Lord Jesus (who is com∣ing to raign righteously and gloriously) that they will have nothing to do with them that are guilty of so great sins, lest partaking of their sins, they partake also of their plagues. And we hope the Lord will enable us to undergo the sharpness of this day, for our dear Christ and his Cause, through the Reproaches, Imprisonments, Persecutions, unjust Charges, unci∣vil Railings, or un-Gospel Carriages, which we have, or are like to meet with, whether less or more, so we may drink out of Christ's Cup, and pledge our Master, who first drank to us the bitter Potion. We shall close at present with our heartiest prayers and supplications, That God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ would in his due time cast down all those carnal, earthly, cruel and political combinati∣ous of men (of all sorts) that would not have him to Reign over us, but set up themselves, and their own corrupted interests, in the room of that Scepter of righteousness which he hath given into the hands of his dear Son; that he would by his Spirit (resting and abiding upon you and us) keep up all our hearts in a constant and patient waiting for his coming till he comes: Even so come quickly, Lord Iesus come quickly.
ORDERED by this Assembly, (mentioned in the last branch of the Declaration) That 150 (and no more) of the Names subscribed to the Declaration, be transcribed out of the Origi∣nal Copie, and published in the name of the rest: And that a short Word to the Reader be drawn up and printed, to signifie so much. The 30 day of the sixth month. 1654. Of the Church that walks with M. Feak, now close priso∣ner for this caus of Christ at Winsor-Castle. EManuel Runwel Will. Bathoe John Jones Philip Hieron Miles Petty John Greene Tho. Cartwright Robert Shepherd Peter Kirby Peter Chamberlain In the name of the whol Church that walks with Dr. Chamber∣lain. John Light John Spittlehouse John Davies Richard Ellis Richard Smith Robert Feak John Rogers In the name of the whole Body that walks with Mr. Rogers, now prisoner for this Cause of Christ at Lam∣beth-prison. Henry Bridges Glid. Beaumont Gregory Garth Hur Horton William Medley Christoph. Crayle Samuel Rutter Edward Grove John Saunders Gregory Kirby William Russel Benjamin Rutter Francis Young Abel Wescot Humphrey Talbot James Gresham John Fuller Nicolas Spencer Thomas Ridel Joseph Jefferies Thomas Bernard James Hicks William Righton John Palmer David Morris
Of the Church that walks with Mr. Raworth. Richard Bland James Wilson George Rickets Thomas Selbie Thomas Waltham Daniel Rosier John Swetnam Robert Aske Philip Rickards Robert Young George Lawson Josiah Carsewel John More With M. Knowls John Withinbrook Thomas Franklin John Perkins John Dunton Robert Mason David Towler Ioseph Heather Simon Wyld Iohn Hewet Nathaniel Aske Thomas Harrison Iohn Webber Daniel Ingold Thomas Wilkes Of the Church that walks with Mr. Simson. Ieremy Wright Iohn Sealy Iohn Turner Will. Shrewsbury Iohn Coombe Arthur Jones Peter Kidd Daniel Hackman Ioseph Cleaver Of the Church that walks with Mr. Jesse. George Barret Iohn Clarke Thomas Pierson William Minchin Nathaniel Hewet Ioshua Rickards Iames Allen Iohn Berry Iames Rich Iohn Iones Ioseph Makreth George Ewbanck Of the Church that walks with Mr. Barbone. William Morris Iohn Thorne Peter Soone Iohn Green Iohn Iackson Thomas Trouer Iohn Richardson Thomas Raymond Iohn Luxford Iames Willow Christopher Cope Iohn Tufnel Hugh Griffen Samuel Bradleigh Iohn Young Caleb Nicolas Robert Smith Thomas Crundal
Iohn Franklin William Lucas Iames Mason William Mort Of the Church that walks with L. Col. Fenton. William Seale Edward Farmer Humphrey Bache Samuel Gilbert Ferdinando Adam William Smart Thomas Wheeler Lawrence Ranson. Thomas Hill Matthew Turner Robert Steele William Iohnson Mihil Miles Thomas Baker Iohn Hayward Will. Burrowston Iohn Glover Of the Church that walks with Justice High∣land. Lewis Honyburne Iohn Allen Philip Thomas Ralph Willis Iohn Nicks Iohn Low Iohn Read Anthony Cooper Robert Woodard Nich. Waterson Ieremy Wright William Bate Iohn Marlow &c.
To the Reader. Christian Reader, THou art desired to take notice, that the End of this DECLARATION being to witness to the blessed Truth, with the persecuted Cause & servants of the Lord Jesus, these NAMES published are thought sufficient. Fewer, might have render'd it an inconsiderable Testimony, and given Men ad∣vantage against us (and Christ's Cause) on that side. The Multitude, or More (either those which we have, or the which we might have hereto) might probably represent it far more evil, formidable, or dangerous to them, (that are too ready, the Lord knows, to receive any Charge against us for our Faith and Consciences, in these matters of Christs Kingly Interest.) Now to obviate this Ad∣vantage, also, which men might have taken, Order is taken for these Names onely, and no
more, to be published herewith; and that se∣veral other Churches beside, whom we might mention, be forborn. And for subscriptions out of the Countries (notwithstanding the hundreds out of Kent) they are also all omit∣ted, on purpose, to leave it to the Churches in their several Counties to bear their own Testimony to this suffering Cause of Christ and his Saints, as in discharge of our Duty (with the comfort of our Consciences, bles∣sed be our heavenly Father) we (who are judg'd to be in the first place concern'd) have done, and DO this DAY, in the sight of hea∣ven and earth; and GOD IS OUR RECORD. FINIS.
