E1656 E378_20 99861907 114053
A MESSAGE Of the LORDS and COMMONS of the Parliament of England, Assembled at Westminster, To his Majesty, now at his Court, at Holmby-House; For a firme and well grounded Peace in England, and prosecution of the affaires in Ireland. Die Jovis 1647. It is this day Ordered, that this Message for a firme and well grounded Peace for England, and for the prosecution of the affaires in Ireland, be forthwith Printed and Published according to Or∣der of Parliament. LONDON, Printed for George Duglasse. March 4. 1647.
A Message of the Lords and Com∣mons, of the Parliament of England, Assembled at Westminster, Sent to his Majesty, for a safe and well grounded Peace. May it please your Majesty; WE the Lords and Commons As∣sembled in the Parliament of England, in the name and on the behalfe of the Kingdomes of England and Ireland, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, in the name, and on the behalfe of the Kingdome of Scotland, Doe humbly present unto your Majesty the humble desires and Propositions for a safe and well grounded Peace, agreed upon by the Parliaments of both Kingdomes respectively: Ʋnto which we doe pray your Majesties Assent:
And that they and all such Bils as shall be tendred to your Majesty in pursuance of them, or any of them, may be Estaeblished and Enacted for Statutes and Acts of Parliament, by your Majesties Royall Assent in the Parliaments of both Kingdomes re∣spectively. THat Reformation of Religion, according to the Covenant, be setled by Act of Parliament, in such maner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon, after consultation had with the Assembly of Divines. That the King do give his Royall Assent to an Act for the due observation of the Lords day. And to the Bill for the suppression of Innovations in Churches, and Chappels, in and about the Worship of God &c. And for the better advancement of the preaching of Gods holy Word in all parts of this Kingdome. And to such Act or Acts for raising of monies for the paiment and satisfying of the Publique Debts and Dam∣mages of the Kingdome, and other publique uses, as shall hereafter be agreed on by both Houses of Parliament; And if the King doe not give his Assent thereunto, then it being done by both houses of Parliament, the same shall be as valid to all intents and purposes, as if the Roy∣all Assent had been given thereunto.
That his Majesty, according to the laudable example of His Royall Father, of happy memory, may be pleased to sweare and signe the late solemne League and Cove∣nant; And that an Act of Parliament be passed in both Kingdomes respectively, for enjoyning the taking therof by all the Subjects of the three Kingdoms; and the Or∣dinances concerning the manner of taking the same in both Kingdomes, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament respectively, with such penalties, as by mutuall advice of both Kingdomes shall be agreed upon. That His Majesty give assurance of His consenting in the Parliament of Scotland, to an Act, acknowledging and ratifying the Acts of the Convention of Estates of Scotland, called by the Counsell and Conservers of the Peace, and the Commissioners for the common burthens, and assembled the 22 day of June 1643. and severall times continued since; and of the Parliament of that Kingdome since convened. That the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England assembled, shall during the space of twenty yeeres from the first of July 1646. Arme, Traine, and Discipline, or cause to be Armed, Trained, and Discipli∣ned, all the forces of the Kingdomes of England and Ire∣land, and Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Guernsey, and Iersey, and the Towne of Barwick upon Tweed, already raised both for Sea and Land service, and shall from time to time during the said space of twenty years, Ralse, Levy, Arme, Train, and Discipline, or cause to be Raised,
Levied, Armed, Trained, Disciplined, or any other Forces for Land or Sea service in the Kingdomes, Do∣minions, and places aforesaid, as in their judgements they shall from time to time during the said space of twenty yeares thinke fit, and appoint; and neither the King, his Heires, or Successors, nor any other but such as shall Act by the Authority or approbation of the said Lords and Commons, shall during the said space of twenty yeares, exercise any of the powers aforesaid. And if any Person shall be gathered or Assembled to∣gether in warlike manner, or otherwise to the number of 30 persons, and shall not forthwith disband themselves being required thereto by the said Lords and Com∣mons, or any Command from them, or any of them, es∣pecially. Authorised for that purpose: then such person and persons not so disbanding themselves, shall be guil∣ty and incurre the paines of High Treason, being first declared guilty of such offence, by the said Lords and Commons; any Commission under the Great Seal or o∣ther warrant to the contrary notwithstanding. That Algernon Earle of Northumberland, Iohn Earle Rutland, Philip Earle of Pembroke and Mountgomery, Thenphilus Earle of Lincolne, Iames Earle of Suffolk, Ro∣bert Earle of Warwick, Edward Earle of Manchester, Hen∣ry Earle of Stanford, Francis Lord Dacres, Philip Lord Wharton, Francis Lord Willoughby, Dualy Lord North, Iohn Lord Hunsdon, William Lord Gray, Edward Lord Howard of Estrisk, Thomas Lord Bruce, Ferdinando Lord Fairefax, Mr. Nathaniel Fients, Sir Philip Stapil∣ton,
Sir Henry Vane senior, Master William Pierpoint, Sir Edward Aiscough, Sir William Strickland, Sir Arthur Hesilrig, Sir Iohn Fennick, Sir William Brereton, Sir Tho∣mas Widdrinton, Master Iohn Toll, Master Gilbert Milling∣ton, Sir William Constable, Sir Iohn Wray, Sir Henry Vane junior, Master Henry Darley, Oliver Saint Iohn Esquire, His Majesties Solicitor Generall, Master Alexander Rig∣by, Master Cornelus Holland, Master Samuel Vassel, Ma∣ster Peregrin Pelham, Iohn Glyn Esquire, Recorder of London, Master Henry Marten, Master Alderman Hoyle, Master Iohn Blakiston, Master Serjeant Wilde, Master Richard Barwis, Sir Anthony Irby, Master Ashurst, Master Bellingham, and Master Tolson; Members of both Houses of the Parliament of England, shall be the Commissio∣oners for the Kingdome of England for conservation of the Peace between the two Kingdoms to act according to the Powers in that behalfe exprest in the Articles of the large Treaty, and not otherwise. That by Act of Parliament, all Peers made since the day, that Edward Lord Littleton, then Lord Keeper of the great Seale, was serruptitionsly conveyed away from the Parliament; being the 21. day of May, 1642: And who shall be hereafter made, shall not fit or vote in the Parlia∣ment of England, without consent of both Houses of Parliament: since the 20 of May 1642. being the day that both Houses declared: That the King seduced by e∣vill counsell, intended to raise War against the Parlia∣ment, be declared Null and Void.
That the late Members, or any who pretended them∣selves late Members of either House of Parliament, who have not only deserted the Parliament, but have also sate in the unlawfull Assembly at Oxford, called or pre∣rended by some to be a Parliament, and Voted both Kingdomes Traytours, and have not voluntarily ren∣dred themselves before the last of October, 1644. be re∣mooved from His Majesties Counsells, and be restrai∣ned from comming within the Verge of the Court. And that they may not without advice and consent of both Kingdomes, beare any Office, or have any imploy∣ment concerning the State or Common-Wealth: And in case any of them shall offend therein, to bee guilty of high Treason, and incapable of any Pardon by his Majesty, and their estates to be disposed as both Houses of Parliament in England, or the Estates of the Parlia∣ment of Scotland respectively, shall thinke fit. That two full parts in three, to be divided of all the Estates of the Members of either House of Parliament, who have not only deserted the Parliament, but have al∣so Voted both Kingdomes Traytors, and have not ren∣dred themselves before the first of December 1645. shall be taken and employed for the paiment of the pub∣lique debts and damages of the Kingdome. These Persons of all others, to befree of all personall censure, notwithstanding any Act, or thing done in, or concerning this War, they taking the Covenant.
That the Persons, and Estates of all com∣mon Souldiers, and others of the Kingdome of England, who in Lands or Goods be not worth two hundred pounds sterling: And the Per∣sons and Estates of all common Souldiers and others, of the Kingdome of Scotland, who in Lands or Goods bee nor worth one hundred pounds sterling, be at liberty and discharged. That an Act of Parliament be passed, to de∣clare and make voyd the cessation of Ireland, and all treaties & conclusions of Peace, or any Articles thereupon with the Rebels, without consent of both Houses of Parliament. And to settle the prosecution of the Warre of Ireland in both Houses of the Parliament of England, to be managed by them; and the King to assist, and to do no act to discountenance or molest them therein. That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant, be serled in the Kingdome of Ire∣land, by Act of Parliament, in such maner as both Houses of the Parliament of England have agreed or shall agree upon, after consultation had with the Assembly of Divines heere.
That no Citizen of the City of London, nor any of the Forces of the said City, shalbe drawn forth or compelled to goe out of the sayd City or Liberties thereof, for military service, with∣out their owne free consent. That an Act be passed for the granting and confirming of the Charters, Customes, Liber∣ties, and Franchises of the City of London, not∣withstanding any Nonuser, Misuser, or Abuser. That all grants of Offices, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments made, or passed under the great Seale of Ireland, unto any person or per∣sons, Bodies politique or Corporate, since the cessation made in Ireland, the 15 day of Septem∣ber 1643, shall be Null, and void, And that all Honours and Titles conferred upon any Person or Persons in the said Kingdome of Ireland, since the said Cessation, shall be null and voyd. That by Act of Parliament in each Kingdome respectively, all Oathes, Declarations, and Pro∣clamations heretosore had, or hereafter to be had against both or either of the Houses of Par∣liament of England, the Parliament of the King∣dome of Scotland, and the late Convention of E∣states
in Scotland, or Committees flowing from the Parliament or Convention in Scotland, or their Ordinances and proceedings; or against any for adhering unto them; or for doing or executing any Office, Place, or Charge, by any Authority derived from them. And all Iudg∣ments, Indictments, Outlawries, Attainers, and Inquisitions, in any of the said Causes; and all Graunts thereupon made or had, or to be made or had, be declared Null, suppressed, and forbidden. And that this be publiquely inti∣mated in all Parish Churches within His Ma∣jesties Dominions, and all other Places need∣full. FINIS.
