E2125 E683_1 99865909 166366
THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLANDS MESSAGE To the Queen of SWEDEN; To be presented by Mr. Atturney-General Prideaux; in the Name of Themselves, and the Common-wealth of England. ALSO, Their sending of a Letter to the King of Denmark; With a Narrative of the proceed∣ings of the States of Holland; And the Embassie of the King of Scots, sent by the Lord Digby. Likewise the concluding of a peace between the King of France, and the King of Spain; and a Golden Staff presented to the said King of Scots, for his composing the differences between both Crowns. Imprinted at London for James Nichols, 1652.
IF ever there were a Season of Observation (or rather admiration) certainly it is the present; wherein we have been eye-wit∣nesses of so many out-goings of God; presence among Us, and the many miraculous turns of Gods providence within a short Revolution. One memorable hint be pleased to take notice of, that is, the same day that the late King Charles set up his Standard-Royal at Nottingham, being the 22 of August, the same day did his Son Charles set up his Standard at Worcester, where he received the total Rout; and the same day of the Month did M. Love receive his fatal Blow at Tower-Hill, accounting it the Day of his Glorification. But now observe, from whence came the rise of these Distractions; Of which we may truly say, according to the old Pro∣verb used by our Fathers, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum. All our evils have been derived from the corrupti∣on
of the Clergy, and such as the Laity that have been wedded to their Faction. The end therefore of this observation is, to shew, That it concerns the peace of every Common-wealth, to see that the Ci∣vil Interest be secured out of the reach of any Cle∣rical Encroachments or Pretences. But to Intelli∣gence. The Copy of a Letter from Holland. SIR, OUr Designes here run high and resolved; and since so unhappy a difference has broken out, we are deter∣min'd to second our enterprizes, with all the intention of spirit and prosecution, that either our estates or lives can reach; At present it is the publike care in dispaching Am∣bassadors to Germany and Sweden, to heighten the Cause by all possible assistance, that either Money or Rhetorick can ingage. Van Trump has mustered our Mariners, and feasted the Captains aboard with all variety of entertain∣ment and language; great promises are made of vast sums, to incourage the Instruments of the Design, and nothing so little doubted of, as the infallible successe of Victory: what disparagements we can fasten either upon your Cause or Navy, we cannot fail to brand you with. Great hopes we whisper to our selves of Mountains in the Moon, which we seem confident of, in the Expedition to the Summer-Ilands; and to that purpose a fleet is dispatching out.
The main businesse of the State now in agitation, is the election of a Captain General, much strugling there is to renew the house of Orange, and much more to confer the honour upon the King of Scots, for whom the Zealanders press hard, and very many of our swaying Statesmen; so that it is conceived by the wisest heads, he is the most like∣ly, though the most dangerous to carry the Vote. Our English prizes are now upon sale, both Goods and Barks, and nothing is wanting to expresse our spleen and hatred to your Common wealth. We hear that the King of Scots has concluded a Peace between France and Spain for three years; for which office of Reconciliation, he has received the Golden Staff from the Kings hand, which is as neer an admtance into the bo∣some of the Crown, as the dearest affection of the State can possibly express; and for the support of his Majesty, he is granted and allowed the honour of a Guard of Gentlemen to attend him, and whatsoever souldiers he shall entertain they are involved within the community of the French pay. The Lord Wilmot is gone for Germany to the Dyet, to excite the free Princes for the advancement of his Masters Interest in the new Ingagement; in the mean time, the Lo: Digby (by the assignation of his Majesty of France) has leave given him for two months to negotiate for the King of Scots in Holland, till such time he can provide to go o∣ver thither himself. By my next you may expect an account of the great fleets putting to sea: in the mean time, I am as by duty of affection ever bound, Amsterdam Novemb. 17. 1652. Your humble and obliged servant, T. Smith.
Sir George Carteret is very active at sea for his young Master Charles, and doth ex∣tremely infest the Western Channel; so that small Vessels dare not venture forth, but are fain to make Holyday against their wills, to the great prejudice of many poor families. Thus Mars changes his element, and brings The Seas in disputation for their Kings: The Ark can take no rest, but tossing lies Drench'd in the Waves and Tydes of Miseries: Haven calm these waters, that the mountain tops May once more rise in glory, and the crops Of plenty, peace, religion, and content, May crown th'obedient vallies by consent. A Letter from the Queen of Bohemiahs Court at the Hague. SIR, NOthing but fire and sword will serve to allay the burning Choler of the
Princely party, who are grown to such an extreme height of arrogancy, That down with your Parliament now they cry, and say this is the time to set their poor distres∣sed Lord and Master in his Royal Saddle, and restore him to his dis-joynted Throne. But alas, it is not their high Rants, nor their quaffing of full bowls, that can bring to pass such mighty Revolutions, though they give out, that all Emperours, Kings, and Princes in Europe, will be instrumen∣tal for his Restauration; but indeed by the Eye of Reason, we must conclude this to be incredible, if we seriously weigh and con∣sider the several Links of his infinite mercy, towards your Parliament and Army, and how he hath sufficiently manifested his own will and pleasure, with that loud Declarati∣on from Heaven, so mightily set forth in the late sudden Revolutions and Actions,
before, and at Worcester; whereby he un∣questionably appeares to have given a full and final Decision of the Controversie, and seemes as it were with his own finger, to point out to all the World his Resoluti∣ons for England. Utrech Novemb. 22. stilo novo. The Parliament of England are sending a Message to the Queen of Sweden, by At∣turney General Prideaux, for the conclu∣ding of a Truce, and entring into a League of Amity, Offensive and Defensive be∣tween both States. An Ambassador is like∣wise appointed for Denmark, to see what Truce or League may be made with that fluttering Kingdom. FINIS.
