E2435A 45097739 171332
THE VOTES AGREED ON BY The LORDS and COMMONS Concerning a Treaty; AND Their desire of a safe Conduct for a Committee named by them, contained in a Letter of the 28. of February from the Earle of Manchester to the Lord Viscount of Falkland. WITH HIS MAIESTIES Gratious Answer thereunto, and a Copy of His safe Conduct. ALSO The Articles concerning a Cessation proposed by both Houses of PARLIAMEMT, and a Letter of the 28. of Feb. from the said Earle of Manchester, to the said L. of Falkland, in which they were inclosed. With His MAJESTIES gratious Answer to the Same. Printed, by His MAJESTIES Command, AT OXFORD, March 7. By LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the Vniversity. 1642.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE the Lord Viscount FALKLAND, Principall Secretary to His MAJESTY. Manchester. My Lord, I Am commanded by the Lords in Parliament, to desire your Lordship to acquaint His Ma∣jesty, that both Houses of Par∣liament, having appoynted a Committee to treat with His Majesty, they desire that a safe Conduct may be granted unto them by His Majesty. The num∣ber and the Names of the Committee Your
Lordship shall receive here inclosed. My Lord I am Your Lordships humble servant MANCHESTER, Speaker of the House of Peeres pro tempore. Feb. 28. The Number and Names of the Committee. Earle of Northumberland. Lord Vic. Say and Seale. Mr William Perpoint. Sir William Ermyne. Sir John Holland. Mr Bulstrode Whitlocke.
AGREED ON BY THE LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament. THat there shall be a Treaty upon the Propositions, before the disbanding. In which Treaty, so much of His Majesties Proposition as concerneth the Maga∣zines, Forts and Ships, and the Proposition of both Houses for the disbanding of the Armies, shall be first Treated of, and concluded on, before the proceeding to Treat upon any of the other Propositions. And that this Treaty shall begin the fourth of March, or sooner if it may be. And that from the beginning of the Treaty, the time may not exceed Twenty dayes. Jo. BROWNE, Cleric. Parliamentorum.
HIS MAIESTIES ANSWER TO THE VOTES OF BOTH HOUSES, and to their desire of a safe Conduct. HIS Majesty hath sent a safe Con∣duct for the Earle of Northumber∣land, Mr Perpoint, Sir William Er∣mine, Sir John Holland, and Mr Whit∣locke, but hath not admitted the Lord Say to at∣tend Him, as being excepted against by name in His Proclamation at Oxford, of the third of No∣vember, and by Writ to the Sheriffe Proclaimed then in that County, in which His Majesties in∣tention is declared, to proceed against him as a Person guilty of high Treason, and so falling to be within the case of Sir Iohn Evelin, who upon the same exception was not admitted to attend His Majesty with the rest of the Committee at Colebroke, in November last. But His Majesty doth
signify, that in case the House shall think fit to send any other Person in the place of the Lord Say, that is not included in the like exception, His Majesty hath commanded all His Officers, Souldiers and other Subjects, to suffer him as freely to passe and repasse, as if his name had been particularly comprised in this safe. Con∣duct. His Majesty is content that His Propositi∣on concerning the Magazines, Forts, Ships, and Revenue, and the Proposition of both Houses for the disbanding of the Armies, shall be first Treated of, and agreed of, before the Pro∣ceeding to Treat upon any of the other Proposi∣tions. And that after the second of His Majesties, and the second of theirs be treated on, and a∣greed of, and so on in the same order. And that from the beginning of the Treaty, the time may not exceed twenty daies, in which He hopes a full peace and right understanding may be esta∣blished throughout the Kingdom.
His Majesties safe Conduct. OUR Will and Pleasure is, And We doe hereby straitly Charge and Command all the Officers and Souldiers of Our pre∣sent Army, and all Our Ministers and Sub∣jects whatsoever, to permit and suffer Our Right trusty and Right wellbeloved Couzin and Coun∣sellor Algernon Earle of Northumberland, and Our Tru∣sty and Welbeloved William Perpoint Esq Sir William Ermyne, and Sir Iohn Holland Knights, and Bulstrode Whitlock Esq (together with their Servants) to passe and repasse to and from Us, without any Let or Hinde∣rance, they being now sent to attend Vs from Our two Houses of Parliament. This Our safe Conduct under Our Signe Manuall and Royall Signet, We Charge and Command them, and every of them, punctually to observe and obey, as they will answer the contrary at their uttermost perills. Given at Our Court at OXFORD, the third of MARCH. 1642.
