E2834 669.f.9[82] 99870954 161180
An Order of the Lords assembled in Parlia∣ment for the due putting in execution of the severall Statutes made against counterfeiting of the Kings Coyne, or the Coyne of any other Kingdome, made currant within this Realme: And also against clipping, fileing, rounding, washing, or litening any of the severall Coynes aforesaid. Die Sabbathi, 13. Martii, 1646. WHereas by the common Law of England, it is High Treason to counterfeit the proper Coyne of this King∣dome, and is so declared by the Statute of the 25. of Edward the third: And whereas also the forging of any Coyne of any Forraigne Nation, made currant by Pro∣clamation within this Kingdome, is made High Trea∣son by a Statute made in the first yeare of Queene Mary: And whereas also the clipping, washing, rounding, or file∣ing of any the Moneyes currant in this Kingdome, for wicked lucre or gaines sake, is also made High Treason, by a Statute made in the fifth yeer of the Reign of Queene Elizabeth: And whereas the diminishing, falsifying, scaling or liten∣ing, of any the Money currant within this Kingdome, for wicked lucre or gaine sake, is also made High Treason by a Statute made in the eighteenth yeare of Queene Elizabeth: Notwithstanding all which severall Acts of Parliament, and the penalties therein comprized, many and severall persons within the King∣dome of England, and Dominion of Wales, and especially in the Northerne parts of this Kingdome, have of late yeares, and do daily offend and commit with great boldnesse, all and every the said offences, to the great losse of His Ma∣jesties Subjects, and the scandall and reproach of this Kingdome, in the Sub∣jects Commerce and Traffique among themselves, and people of other Nations and Countries. For remedy whereof, It is Ordered by the Lords in this present Parlia∣ment Assembled, That all Judges and Justices of the Assize, and Commission∣ers of Oyer and Terminer, and of generall Goale-Delivery, in their severall Circuits, do straitly and carefully put in execution all and every the said seve∣rall Acts of Parliament, against all offenders against the said Acts, or any breach thereof, according to the Lawes and Statutes of this Realme. Die Sabbathi, 13. Martii. 1646. ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forth∣with printed and published. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. Printed at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Baily. 1646.
