e3621 e173_30 99860047 157068
An Exact and true Relation of the late Plots which were con∣trived and hatched in Ireland. 1. A Coppy of a Letter sent from the Lord chiefe Iustices and Privy Councell in Ireland, to our parliament here in England. 2. Their last Proclamation which they published concerning those Traytors. 3. The whole Discourse of the Plot revealed by Owen Ockanellee who is now in Englond. 4. The dangerous and extraordinary deliverance of the party who narrowly escaped with his life. 5. The reward the Parliament hath confirmed upon him. 6. The true Relation of the whole Treason related by the Lord Keeper, to the Honourable House of Commons the first of November. 1641. group of men standing in front of courtyard London Printed for Francis Coules. 1641.
The true Coppy of a Letter written from a Gentleman in Ireland, to his friend in England SIR, I Could not omit to write unto you, to give you to understand of a miraculous deliverance, which the Lord in mercy hath vouchsafed unto the poore Protestants in this Kingdome, which you may perceive by the Proclamation enclosed; for I have not time to relate the whole story, or bloudy Tragedy, which was intended against us: The execution should have bin on the Satur∣day, which was discovered on Friday night, by a man of Sir Iohn Clatworthy, an Irish Knight, but one of your House of Com∣mons, and this day being the Sabboth, hath bin the troublesomest day that ever I saw in all my daies, mixt with joy and sorrow; joy for our our gracious deliverance, and much perplexed by feares of our approaching enemies, expecting every houre when the City should be surprized, that for my part and many others, haue had but little rest day and night for these two dayes, but how many more it is onely knowne to God; the Enemy hath in the North parts of this Kingdome, taken two Lords Castles, and two Townes, one of them of great strength and much munition in it, and as it is verily beleeved, they doe still encrease in great multitudes: here is taken a Lord, and divers others of note, and others the number of forty, which are safe in Prison, and hope of many more: the Lord is called the Lord Maguere, and the Pa∣pists make it a Religious Warre which they they had no cause to doe, for they have had a long time as much liberty as wee have had, if not more; but their father the Divell hath set them upon this damnable act I hope to their utter ruine in this Kingdome, if the Lord in mercy open our Kings eyes, and your Parliaments hearts to take pitty upon us, for no hope of Reformation is to bee had here, for they are ten for one of us through this Kingdome as is verily beleeved▪ I have bin so employed Day and Night these two daies, that I can hardly write thus much unto you, but desire your prayers and all good people for us, and when more is disco∣vered, if the Lord preserve me with life, you shall beare farther from me, in the meane time pray for us all. Your loving friend W. B.
A Proclamation, by the Lords Iusti∣ces and Counsell. W. Parsons. Io. Borlase. THese are to make knowne, and publish to all His Majesties good Subjects in this King∣dome of Ireland, that there is a discovery made by us the Lords Iustices and Councell, of a most disloyall and detestable Conspiracie ntended by some affected Irish Papists a∣gainst the lives of Vs, the Lords Iustices and Counsell, and many other of his Majesties faithfull Subjects, uni∣versally throughout this Kingdome▪ for the seizing not onely of his Majesties Castle of Dublin, his Majesties principall Fort here, but also of the other Fortifications in the Kingdome: And seeing by the great goodnesse and abundant mercy of Almighty God to his Majesty, and this State and Kingdome, those wicked Conspi∣racies are brought to light, and some of the Conspirators commit∣ted to the Castle of Dublin, by Vs, by his Majesties Authority, so as those wicked and damnable Plots are now dissapointed in the chiefe parts thereof, We therefore have thought fit hereby not onely to make it publikely known, for the comfort of his Majesties good and loyall Subjects in all parts of the Kingdome, but also hereby to equire them that they doe with all confidence and cheerefulnesse betake themselves to their owne defence, and stand upon their own guard, so to render the more safety to themselves, and all the King∣dome besides, and that they advertise Vs with all possible speed of all Occurrents which may concerne the Peace and safety of the Kingdome: and now to shew fully that Faith and Loyalty which they have alwaies showne for the publike services of the Crowne and Kingdome, which We will value to his Majesty accordingly, and a speciall memory thereof will be retained for their advantage in due time. And We require that▪ great care be taken that no Le∣vies of mon be made for forraine service, nor any men suffered to march upon any such pretence, Given as his Majesties Castle at Dublin. 23. October. 1641. R. Dillon. Ro. Digby. Ad. Loftus. J. Temple. Tho. Rother∣ham. Fr. Willoughby. Ja. Ware. Rob. Meredith. God save the King.
The whole relation of the hellish treason in Ireland, as it was related by my Lord Keeper in the house of Commons November the first, 1641. THe Lord Keeper declared unto the House of Commons, that the Lord Deputy of Ireland had received a letter from the two Lord Chief Iustices and Privie Counsell in Ireland, of the discovery of an Horrible plot by the Iesuites, popish priests and other Papists in the King∣dome of Ireland, for the murdering of the two Chiefe Iustices and all the Privie Counsel and Protestants of Ireland, as also to seaze on all the Kings Forts, Ca∣stles, and Magasens whatsoever, and moreover, that they would murder all persons that should oppose them in any of their intenti∣ons and desires, which were these. First, to have their Crowne not to be dependant upon England, nor to be a conquered Nation. Secondly, to have their Irish Lawes established, and such as shold be made hereafter. Thirdly, to have free liberty of the exercise of their Religion. The Earl of Leicester declared the same also, adding that he had the originall of a proclamation which was made there, and had caused the same to be copyed out. The Letter bears date the 23. of October, 1641. declaring that Hugh Ocoret went to Dublin unto the lodging of Hugh Maymubawne his very good friend, and hee and his friend going to the lodging of the Lord Marques, under∣stood great store of Noble men and strangers had beene there, but they were all gone abroad, and they could not find them; whrfore they returned back again to his friends lodging, where his friend revealed unto him the whole Plot; but swore unto him he should not stir til it was put into execution, and therefore his friend com∣manded his servants to looke narrowly to him: but after a while he fained some excuse of necessity for his going downe, which his friend gave way too, but sent his servants with him: when he was come downe, the servants not being so carefull to watch him as they might have been, he leaped over a wall in the yard, and made an escape, and went to Sir Iohn Burlacy, and discovered to him the
whole plot which was this, as I will truely relate it. That at 9 of the clocke the next morning, the Irish Rebels (a∣mongst whom the Lord Marques was on of the chiefest) intended at one houre and moment of time, to massacre and murder all the English and protestant in the Kingdom of Ireland, likewise to mur∣der the two Lord chiefe Iustices, and al the privie counsel at Dub∣lin, and at the same time to seaze upon al the Kings Castles, Ports, and Magazens throughout the whole Kingdome of Ireland, as also the Castle of Dublin, and that if they should finde any of the Citie that would not submit to them, then they would shoot down from the Castle, the tops of the chimnys to affright them, and if that did not prevail, they would then batter down their houses about their cars. Hereupon the Lord chief Iustice and the privy Counsel of Ire∣land, sat al night in consultation, and took the best course they could imagin of for the safeguard & security of themselves; together with the Castle & City of Dublin. The next morning they apprehended great store of these Traitors and rebels, together with the L. Mar∣quise, who was gone from his lodging before day and hid in a cock loft, and at his lodging they found great store of skains, hammers, and hatchets without halves. The same day they had notice of seve∣rall places and Forts seazed upon in Conno and Monno and other places, together with severall villages plundered by the rebels; but they wrote word that they did not beleeve that distemper was so generall as was reported to bee, and then they made no question but they should with care and pains bring all to a good issue; to to that end they had sent for 500. of the Horse to come and guard them at Dublin, and had likewise raised 500. English for the suc∣couring of themselues and the City, and that out of those 500. the had chosen an 100. to be put into the Castle under the command of Sir Francis Willoughby, who they hoped would give a good ac∣compt to his Majesty of the place fees two monthes: And in the meane time for feare least there should be some further and wor∣ser plots then they knew of, they did desire that the Parliament in England would send them down their Lord Lieftenant with men, money and Amunition. They further gave us to understand, that they had taken order for their army of old Souldiers, to be in a rea∣dinesse and to march in opposition to any of the rebels that should draw to a head.
The Coppy of a Letter from the Lord chiefe Iustices, and privy Counsellours in Ireland. to the Lords now assembled in Parliament here in England. ONe Friday the 22. of October, Owen Ockanellee, servant to Iohn Clotworthy, at nine of the Clock in the night, came and discovered a Plot for the seizing of the Castle of Dublin, and making themselves Masters of the whole King∣dome; We sate all night in debate, and the next morning we searcht the whole City of Dublin and found many of the Conspirators there, and amongst the rest one Hugh Mackmoen, and severall others of the Family of Oneale. The Lords of the Councell caused all the parts of the City to bee strongly guarded; And in the morning we went to search for the Lord of Mackquere at his Lodging from whence (when wee came there) we found he was departed in the morning before day (as was reported) but searching narrowly into his Lodgings and roomes, we found severall Skaynes, headlesse Hatchets, and Hammers in abun∣dance, and in the end found him secretly hid in a Cock-loft; and af∣ter he was taken, being examined hee denyed all, but that hee had heard of it before. Great store of people were observed to bee in the City that Night more then usuall, and the Suburbs was so throng'd with people and strangers, that they put the City in a fright, where∣fore wee were forced to draw up a Proclamation for all men and strangers whatsoever to depart the City, or else to shew good cause for their stay there; And that all men whatsoever that had any hand in the Plot should have a generall Pardon, if now they would come in and confesse their faults, and make any further discovery then was yet knowne. The Discovery. OWen Ockanellee, who is servant to Sir Iohn Clatworthy, came to Dublin to the Lodging of Hugh Ogmackmahawne his very loving friend, and Ockanellee with his friend going to the Lodging of the Earle of Mackquere, understood there had bin great store os Noble men and strangers, but they were all gone abroad
whereupon they returned backe againe to the Lodging of the said Og∣mackmahawne where Ockanellee had not bin any long space, but Ogmackmahawne declares to him a Plot which was intended, swea∣ring that Ockanellee should not goe out of his house till it had bin ex∣ecuted (which was) that the Iesuits, popish Priests, and other Papists, together with two Sects of Irish, and amongst the rest the said Hugh Ogmackmahawne and Bryan Oneale with others should have come and seized upon the Castle at Dublin, and the Earle of Macquere should be Governour thereof, which when they had attained unto, they should have shot at the Chimnies, and by that meanes have tryed if they could have brought the City in subjection; but if shooting at Chimneys could not prevaile, then they should have shot downe their Houses about their eares, and at one houre, and one moment of time to have murthered all the English and Protestants in the Kingdome Ireland; and to have murthered the two Lord chiefe Iustices, and all the Privy Councell of Dublin, and at the same time to have seized on all his Majesties Castles, Forts, and Magazins throughout the whole Kingdome, and all persons that should be refractory to have de∣stroyed with the sword, which Ockanellee hearing, feigned an excuse to goe into the yard to nutrusse a point, to which his friend Ogmac∣mahawne consented unto, but withall commanded his servants to goe along with him, and bee carefull of him, that hee did not slip from them, but Ockanellee finding his opportunity leaped over the pales in the yard, and made an escape and went to Sir Iohn Burlacy, and Sir William Parsons, and discovered the whole matter. The Contents of another let∣ter.NOw Courteous Reader, amongst many other remarkable deliverances of divers and sundry persons from time to time, by the power of the Almightie, let this take your serious thoughts for one, not of the meanest, but among the greatest, this partie Owen Ockanelle, who was servant to Sir Iohn Clatworthy being suspected by some of the Conspirators who were sworne to secresie therein, to have discovered this plot, by his divers times perswading them to desist from their divellish and diabo∣licall intentions, telling them what a hainous matter it was to cause rebellion in their native Countrie, and the dangerous e∣vills that might happen to their owne persons, and their present estates, and their posterity after them. These Conspirators fin∣ding this party cold in the businesse, one amongst the rest breaks out in a passion, and swore to the rest of the company, that the aforesaid partie had revealed their plot, and without any more advice pulls forth a Pistoll (for all of them had swords and pi∣stols) which was charged with a brace of Bullets, and
set to this Owens breast, intending to shoot him thorow at that instant; which was prevented by the divine power, in that the flint did not strike fire, some of the Company being much affrighted at this suddaine assault, be∣gan to be angrie, and to aske this partie Randal Mac-Donell that would have shot him, how hee could prove that Owen had spoken of it to any partie or parties, or in any forn or kind betrayed their cause? to which Mac-Donel could give no certain answer, but only this, that he did surmise, and his heart did thinke so, nay then said the rest you are too blame to offer this as you have done: this no sooner appeased, but another in the same passion, and of the afore said company, seconds the formers motion, whose name was Ni∣cholas Cusock, who uged Owen Ockanelle, that he was the man, and onely he that the cause was betrayed; which the afore-said Owen denying with ma∣ny protestations, and with man-like courage, which was by Gods provi∣dence in giving him spirit at that time, neverthelesse the said Cusock made at him with another Pistoll charged with a brace of bullets also; but whe∣ther the powder in the pan was damp, or the flint not good, thanks be given to God he missed his intent, this was the second deliverance: now being stil in the aforesaid house, and not suffered to stirre, but watched and guarded, for feare of his escape; words grew, insomuch that a partie amongst them run a tilt at him with his naked sword, which was put aside by meanes of one in the company who was behind him, and staid his arme. To be short, 10. or 12. hours being thus spent, about ten or eleven of clock at night this Owen had occasion to ease himself and his body, and would have beene gone, which they denyed him; at last by much perswasion, they gave consent that he should goe downe the staires into the yard, and foure others of the com∣pany to guard him, and bring him back againe; but Owen having this oppor∣tunitie, it being dark, and the yard spacious at a convenient place leaps upon the pale, being twice his heighth, and over he gets, then over a brick wal as high, and so into the high way, and runs to the Citie, which was halfe a mile distant from the house, and there reveales the whole plot to Sir Iohn Burlacy and other Iustices of the peace who forthwith rais'd the Citie, and came to the place, and found some of these Conspirators, which they aprehended, o∣thers of them run away and hid themselves: some of them being examined, partly through feare, others to get favour▪ confessed they were to have an ar∣my of 17000. from severall parts of Ireland, which should be all papists & Iesuites that should surprise all the Castles & Forts, but especially the Castle of Dublin, cut the throats of the chiefest Noble-men, Gentry, and others of that Kingdome that were there present. And this being thus discovered by Owen Ockanelle, he was dispatched with letters into England to make known to the Lords now present in Parlament what he had discovered: who for his good service and fidelity therein, the Honourable House hath thought fit to give the said Owen 500. pounds, and 200. a yeare for ever: and to be pre∣ferred to one of the chiefe places under the Deputy in Jreland. FINIS.
