E3612 E117_20 99860139 156078
An exact and true RELATION OF A most cruell and horrid Murther committed by one of the CAVALIERS, ON A Woman in LEICESTER, Billetted in her House: Who was shot into the back, being within five Weeks of the time of her delivery. REad in the house of Commons, and Ordered to be forth∣with Printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for E. Husbands and I. Franck, and are to be sold at their shops, in the middle Temple, and text door to the Kings-head in Fleetstreet. Sept. 17. 1641.
An Exact and true Relation of a most cruell and horrid Murther, com∣mitted by one of the Cavaliers, on a wo∣man in Leicester, &c. Sept: 13. 1642. FRancis Coltman of the Parish of St. Martins in the Town of Leice∣ster Maulster, being one of the Coroners Inquest, for the inquiry upon the death of goodwife Woodlane, wife of Henry VVoodlane of the said Town of Leicester Chandler, taken before Thomas Blunt, and William Spichley, Coroners of the said town,
who being examined, doth volun∣tarily protest, as he shall answer before Almightie god, that what he shall deliver upon this examina∣tion in this busines is the truth, and saith, first, that he being summoned to serve upon this Inquest at the Guild-Hall of the said Town of Le∣cester, and having received the charge given by the Coroners with the rest of the Iury, was thereupon with the rest of the Jury required to go and view the body of the said party diseased which he did accor∣dingly, and did find her to be shot under the back into the belly, being very great with child, and within a Month or five weeks of the time of her delivery (as the women there present did verily believe)
And he further saith, that it was given in evidence to the said Jury, that this cruell fact was committed by one Chumley a Cavalier Trooper in the Kings sarvice, who had for∣merly faln out with her husband, beaten him, and threatned to be re∣venged upon his wife, being billi∣ted in the said Woodlands house. Thomas Todd of the said Towne of Leicester Taylor, being likewise examined upon the same businesse, and being one of the same Jury, up∣on the like Protestation doth af∣firme, that what the said Francis Coltman hath delivered upon his examination (being now read unto him) is the truth, and in witnesse of the truth hereof, these parties examined have Subscribed their
names, the day and Yeere first a∣bove written. Francis Coltman: Thomas Todd.
MEmorandum, these Examinations were taken by me Robert Cham∣bers, Secretary to the Army, under the Command of the Right Honoura∣ble Robert Earl of Essex his Excel∣lency, the said 13th day of September, 1642. And in the presence of Jo: Meyrick. William Strode. Ph: Stapleton. William Purefoy. FINIS
