E778 669.f.14[90] 99897905 135461
Instructions to be observed by the several Iustices of Peace in the several Counties within this Commonwealth, for the better prevention of Rob∣beries, Burglaries and other Outrages. VVHereas great Robberies, Burglaries and other Outrages are daily com∣mitted, to the exceeding great damage and danger of the Commonwealth, s therefore, in pursuance of the special Order of Parliament to us directed, Or∣red for the future, That the ensuing Directions be forthwith put in execution by Justices of Peace in their several Counties; viz. YOu are to cause all Laws in force against Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars, to be duly and effectually executed. II. You are to cause sufficient Watch and Ward to be kept by rsons able in body, with Bills, Guns, or other weapons, in all fit aces and Towns adjoyning to any great Road; and that you give rder to the Constables of every such Town, That Posts, Rails and ates be set up in every such place and Town, to the end to examine  Passengers, as also thereby to stop the speedy flight of all Thieves d Robbers. III. And in order to their more speedy apprehension, you shall give rder, That they have in readiness in every such Town, an expert rson and an able Horse, to be a Guide to such as at any time shall  in pursuit of Thieves and Robbers. IV. You shall give Order, That as they shall meet with, or ap∣hend any such, or any whatever suspitious persons, that they thwith carry them before the next Justice of the Peace, to be by  proceeded withal according to Law. V. You shall take care effectually to suppress all unlicensed ehouses, and all such Alehouses and houses whatsoever, usually ertaining Travellers and Strangers, which do stand in blinde orners out of the view of Towns or houses. VI. That to all such as shall necessarily be continued, and all and ery the Innholders within their Counties, You shall give Order  give in writing every night, viz. by six of the clock in Winter, and  eight of the clock in Summer, to the Justices of the Peace, or to such her as shall be by them deputed, of the number of all Travellers dging within their respective houses, and whither they are tra∣lling: with a full description of their Apparel, of their Horses, eldings and Mares: And in case of default herein by any Inn∣lder or Alehousekeeper, he or they so offending are to be suppres∣d, and not suffered after to hold or keep any Inn or Alehouse: And ou are to give Order to the several Constables, to return you a eekly account of their proceedings herein: And you are every Moneth to give an account of your proceedings to this Councel. Signed in the Name, and by Order of the Councel of State appointed by Authority of Parliament.
