F143A R225946 99895650 153209
A DECLARATION Of His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax and his Councel of WAR, In obedience to several Ordinances of PARLIAMENT, For Disbanding the Supernumerary Forces, and drawing the ARMY into several Garisons, And for taking off Free-quarter. BY the Appointment of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and His Councel of War, Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH Secr' London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons, Jan. 4. 1647.
A DECLARATION OF His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Councel of War, In obedience to several Ordinances of Parliament, For Disbanding the Supernumerary forces, and draw∣ing the Army into several Gari∣sons, and for taking off Free-quarter. WHereas the Houses of Parliament, for easing the present Burthens of the Kingdom, Have Ordained, That all the Supernumerary Forces of the Kingdom, above the esta∣blished
Army, shall be forthwith Disbanded; And for that purpose, and to the end that the established Army for the future may be con∣stantly paid, and the Countreys delivered from Free-quarter, Have likewise Ordained the present rai∣sing of great sums of Money, and the Army is appointed by the Fif∣teenth of Ianuary, to draw into Towns, Cities and Garisons; VVe have thought fit to Declare, and do hereby Declare and assure, That the Army by the said Fif∣teenth day of Ianuary, shall ac∣cording to the said Directions, be drawn into Towns, Cities and Garisons: And do further De∣clare and assure, That (the Par∣liament
supplying the Souldiery with (pay as aforesaid) no Free-quarter, after the said Fifteenth day of Ianuary, shall be taken by the Soldiery upon any persons (duly paying their Assessments) nor any enforcement for Meat, Drink, Vi∣ctual for Man, or Horse-meat for the quartering of any, after the said supply of pay begun, and so long as it shall continue; but all Offi∣cers and Soldiers shall maintain themselves with their pay, at such Rates as they can agree upon with any Inhabitant (except onely up∣on a March, where they shall stay not above two nights in a place) and in that case also the Soldiery shall pay for their quarters at the
Rates set down for the Army: And that no Officer or Soldier (upon pain of Death) shall do to the contrary hereof. Windsor, Decem. 31. 1647. By the appointment of His Ex∣cellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Councel of War, Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH Secr' FINIS.
