F395 669.f.24[11] 99870917 163742
A Phanatique LEAGUE and COVENANT, Solemnly enter'd into by the Assertors of the GOOD OLD CAUSE. WE Ignoble men, Barbers, Coblers, Colliers, Draymen, Grocers, Hucksters, Malsters, Pedlers, Sowgauters, Tinkers, Taylors, and Mechanicks of all sorts, being of the Fanatick party within the Kingdomes, (formerly so called) of England, Scotland, and Ireland, living under, and Submitting to onely the Government of one Prince, Belzebub Emperor of the Infernal Region, and having laid before us the advancement of his Scepter, with the utter destruction of all Earthly Kings, and National Powers whatsoever, calling to mind the many coutrivances, and earnest indeavors of the most of the people of these Na∣tions, to reduce that strife and confusion, which we have been so many years in working, into Order and Vnity again, we do now at last (after many in successeful plots and fruitless attempts, for the preservation of our Good Old Cause, and the destruction of our enemies) resolve and determine, after the example of our dear brethren in Germany, under Muntzer, Hof∣man and Knipperdoling, to enter into a mutual confederacy by a solemne Protestation and Engagement, whereto we all subscribe, and each with hands poynting downwards, and a heart devoted to his Infernal Majesty, doth swear: I. THat we shall from the very root of our corrupt hearts and consciences, endeavour by all means possible, in our several capacities, to ob∣struct and abolish all Decency, Order, and Form whatsoever, in the Government of Church or State, in the three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Territories thereunto belonging; and that we will with all vigor possibly contend for the utter extir∣pation of all Magistracy, Ministry, Universities, Schools of Learning, and all civil Decorum and Disciplines, whereby we may be in any thing restrained from our ambitious, malevolent, and most pestilent Designes and Undertakings; or whereby the world may be so far undeceived, as to discover what Mischief and Confusion we aim at, by the Pretence of Spiritual Gifts, and New Lights: And furthermore do, Declare, That there is nothing more Hatefull and Abominable in our sights, than that our Designes should become manifest to Malignants, and the wicked of the World. II. That (as we do in general hate all Reformation and Oder in all Affairs, either civil or Ecclesiastical, so) most especially do we from the very sink of our souls detest, and abominate that Mistris of Iniquity, Prelacy, as that whereby all our damnable projects are most in danger to be frustrated, the thing called the ancient Church in all ages, and Nations of the world, having been thereby, and thereby only (as to outward means) preser∣ved inviolate from the Sacriledge and glorious attempts, of the most renowned Hereticks, and servants of our good Lord, who alwayes rul'd in the hearts of the disobedient. III. We shall with a most perverse obstinacy, to the hazard of our lives and fortunes, assert our own interests and right of conquest, we had usurpt over the three Nations, against all pretended Priviledges of Parliament, Liberties of the People, and any general good whatsoever, that shall seem to obstruct our designs of Liberty, to domineer over the three Nations, by virtue of that Text, The Saints shall possess the earth. And we do most inveterately devote our selves to the destruction of King Charles, and the whole family of the Stuarts, by whose introduction we are in so much danger of that damnably abhor'd composure of all differencies, both in Church and State. And we will by all means posible, contrive the con∣fusion of that potent enemy, General Monk and his Army. IV. We shall with all sincerity to the hazard of our Estates and lives, endeavour the mutual support of one another, whether under the Notion of Quakers, Anabaptists, Fift Monarchists, Ranters, &c. And notwithstanding we differ in judgement from our selves, as well as from all Or∣thodox Christians, yet we will make it appear to the world, and to the Author of that model of a Commonwealth, call'd the Rota, that we are a Wheel, whose Spokes, though divided in the circumference, yet concenter in this, viz. A total extirpation and subversion of all Government, both Ec∣clesiastical and Civil. V. We do declare, promise, and protest against a thing, called, A Solemn League and Covenant, hatcht in Scotland, and brought over into England, taken and subscribed by many thousands, but hitherto kept by few, which Covenant is now again revived by the present Parliament, and Ordered to be published and placed in all Parish Churches and Chappels, as a main hinderance of our Schismatical designes, and prevention of the building of that Babel of Confusion, which we so earnestly labour to accomplish: And that we will to the utmost of our abilities, endeavour with all violence to exe∣cute Justice, right or wrong, upon all those who shall oppose our interest, by endeavouring to bring about that so much talkt-of Union in the three Na∣tions, between Prince and People, or the People with one another. Luke Robinson John Lambert Col. Overton Hugh Peters St. Feake Edmond Waring Will. Lilly Will. Kiffin Jeremy Ives Praise God Barebones John Huson John Ireton Tho. Harrison Edw. Whaley Will. L. Mounson Hen. Martin John Barkstead Robert Tichbourn John Okey John Harrison Miles Corbet Charls Fleetwood Thomas Scott Hen. Vane Phil. L. Herbert Isaac Pennington Humphrey Saloway John Berry Arthur Haslerig Cornelius Holland Vavasor Powell John Fox Michael Ouldsworth Nathaniel Fiennes Bulstrod Whitlock William Brereton John Rogers John Desborow James Nayler Henry Hagar Mar. Needham Printed for G. H. the Rumps Pamphleteer-General.
