h1082 E407_9 99862422 114581
LONDONS LAWLES LIBERTY: OR A Gozmonian partie licensed. Being a true discoverie of a pack of prodigious knaves, who have under pretence of an Act of Common Councell of the City of London, seized (as they tearme it) and taken away from divers free-men of the same City, their true and proper goods, and that in such a horrid and unci∣vil manner, as no heathens whatsoever, could with more cruelty have exercised the same. Together with a particular of the names of some of those persons which have had their goods illegally taken away, as the same was attested under their hands, and presented to the Adjurators of the Army, un∣der the Command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Captaine Generall of all the forces in England and Wales, the 27, of August, 1647. Published by Iohn Harvey Gentleman. Isaiah, 1.23.24. Thy Princes are rebellious and Companions of Theeves, every one loving gifts, and followeth after rewards, they judge not the father∣lesse, neither doth the cause of the Widow come unto them, therefore saith the Lord, the Lord of Host, the mighty one of Israel: Ah I will ease me of my adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. Zachariah 5.4. J will bring it forth saith the Lord of Host, so that it shall come to the house of him that falsely sweareth by my name, and shall remaine in his house, and consume it with the timber and stones thereof. Zephaniah 3.3. Her Rulers within her, are as roaring Lyons, her Iudges are as Wolves in the evening, which leave not the bones till the morrow. London, Printed, for the good of all free-men, who desire to maintaine their own priviledges in their calling, in the yeare, 1647.
LONDONS LAVVLES LIBERTY. ORGozm or the Spanish Rogue. A Gozmonian Party licenced. YOu worthy Citizens, Freemen, and Apprentizes of the City of London, and all others who have taken the late Nationall Covenant. I doubt not but you well remember that you thereby solemnly ingaged your selves to maintaine, preserve, and defend the fundamentall lawes of this kingdome, and to square your actions accordingly, imprecating the wrath and vengeance of the great God of heaven and earth to fall upon you, when you cease to performe what you then swore to and de∣clared. Now therefore Gentlemen, that you may the better performe what you then vowed and protested to maintaine, I shall hereby acquaint you with a most illegall, (and as the same is executed) a tyrannicall Act of Common Councell of the City of London, the Contents whereof is as follow∣eth. Commune Concil tent in Communia Guihald Ciuitat London, Sexto die Iulii, 1602. WHereas by the priveledges and Franchises of the City of London, confirmed by Parliament, every Ware-House, shop and other place within the City of London and the liberties of the same, having o∣pen shew into any of the streets or laines of this City, hath time out of mind been reputed, and known to be, and so ought, and hath been accusto∣med to be, and in very deed is an open and publique market place for shew and sale of wares, and Merchandise within the said City, and the
liberties of the same. And whereas in antient time, the open streets and laines of the said City, have been only used and accustomed, and so ought to be used and accustomed for open passage, as the common high way only, and not for Huxters, Pedlers and Haglers to stand and sit to sel their wares in, and to passe from street, and place to place, hawking and offering their wares to sel; other then certain places of the said City, which have been of ancient time accustomed to be specially used for country people to stand and sit to fell victuals in, and that only upon certaine dayes in the weeke, and certaine houres of the day. And whereas now of late yeares, there be two sorts of people which are greatly increased and doe greatly hinder the ordinary and honest trades men, being shop∣keepers in their severall trades, within the City and the liberties of the same, and impoversh others, and utterly undoe many of them, the one of which two sorts be Fattiners, and others which wake up and down the streets, hawking with waes, and offering the same to be sold openly to all sorts of people as they stand, sit or passe, and likewise come to men or womens doores, and into their houses or roomes and offereth the said wares to sell. And the other of the two sorts be for the most part wo∣men, and some others also sitting or standing at mens doors or stalls with their wares lying or hanging for shew and sale there, and some of them standing or sitting with their wares upon tables or stooles in the open streets, laines on high wayes of the said City, ordained and appointed for passage and not for sale or wares, by reason whereof very many house∣houlders who have been in great trade, and raised great profit by retai∣ling in their shops, are very much hindred and some forced to set Hag∣lers and Hawkers at worke, to carrie abroad their wares up and down the streets, to the end to take some mony to hlpe to relieve themselves and their families, which inconveniences, if due remedie be not in time pro∣vided, are like to gow in a very short time to doe very much hurt, not only in abating or her Maiesties profit in her subsidies and other services, but also in weakning the Citizens in such sort, as they shall not be able to yeeld their aid in baring Scor and Lo; and other charges ordinarie and extraordinary for the maintenance of the good estate of the said City, and very many of them only by meanes of the said inconveniences made utterly unable to maintaine their own housholds and families. For remedy therefore of the said inconveniences: Be it inacted, ordained and establish∣ed, by the right honourable the Lord Major of the City of London, and his right worshipfull Brethren, the Aldermen of the said City, and the
Commons in this present Common Councell assembled, and by autho∣ritie of the same, that no person or persons whatsoever inhabiting, or which hereafter shall inhabite within the City of London, or the liberties of the same, shall at any time hereafter by any collour, wayes or meanes whatsoever, let or willingly suffer to be used any stall, incroachment or purprestures scituat or being before his, her, or their house, shop or o∣ther place whatsoever, in any open street or laine of this City whatsoe∣ver, to or by any person or persons whatsoever, which shall there sell, ut∣ter or put to sale any Linnen cloath, or any ware made of Linnen cloath, or any Starch or other wares or merchandize whatsoever, nor shall wil∣lingly suffer any person or persons whatsoever, to sell, shew, offer or put to sale any Linnen cloath, Starch, wares or merchandize whatsoever, upon any stoole, seat or other thing before his her, or their house or stall, upon paine to forfeit the sum of 20 s. of lawfull money of England, for every time wherein he, she or they, shall offend contrary to the true meaning hereof. And be it further inacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person or persons whatsoever, shall at any time hereafter, by any colour, wayes or meanes whatsoever, directly or indirectly, sell, utter, or put to sale by way of hawking, or as a Hawket, any Linnen cloth or a∣ny other ware made of Linnen cloth, Starch or any other wares or mer∣chandizes whatsoever, in any open street or laine, within the said City or the liberties thereof (victuall in the market place, and in market time on∣ly excepted) otherwise then upon the stall of his, her, or their own shop or dwelling house, or in his, her, or their ware house, shop or dwelling house, upon paine to forfeit for every time he, she or they shall so offend, all the Linnen cloath, or other ware whatsoever to be sold, uttered or put to sale, contrary to the true meaning hereof, and to forfeit also the sum of 20 s of lawful money of England. And be it further enacted, ordai∣ned and established by the authority aforesaid, that the one motie or halse part of all the paines, penalties and forfeitures to be forfeited by ver∣tue of this Act, shall be to the Chamberlin of the City of London for the time being, to the use of the Major and Commonalty and Citizens of the same City. And the other moity thereof to him or them that will there∣fore sue by Action of debt Bill or information, to be affirmed, exhibited or commonsed and prosecuted in the Queens Majesties Court to be hos∣den before the Major and Aldermen of the said City, in the chamber of Guild Hall of the same City, wherein no wager of Law shall be admitted for the Defendant. And that it shall and may be lawfull, to all and every
person or persons whatsoever thereunto authorized by the Lord Major, and Court of Aldermen of the City aforesaid, for the time being, who shall see or know any Linnen cloath, wares made of Linnen cloath, Starch or other wares or merchandizes whatsoever, which shall bee bought, sold, uttered or offered to be put to sale, contrary to the true meaning of this present Act. And thereby shall be forfeited by vertue of this Act, to seize the same, and to carrie and convey the same to the Guild Hall of the said City, or to some place neer unto the same, there to remaine in safe custodie, untill the same shall be disposed of according to the true meaning of this present Act. This Act of Common Counsel,City of Londons ase. Devinets ase. an 2. hil. and ary. 7 2. Edw. . 1, o. Hen. .14. is utterly void and against law, for that no Citizen or free man of London can be restrained by an act of Common Councell to sell or proffer his wares in the street upon pain of forfeiture. Secondly, This Act of Common Councell is void, for that every act of Common Councell ought to have these quallifications. First, it ought to be agreeable to law. Secondly, it ought to be moderate, imposing a pe∣cunary, and not a corporall paine, and no forfeiture of goods. Thirdly, for suppressing of evill things. Fourthly agreeable to reason. Fifthly, for common profit. This Act is void of all these, It is not agreeable to law, neither is there any moderation, but extremitie by penall, paine, and forfeiture, here is no evill suppressed, for there is no evill done by a Citizen of London to sell his goods in London, London is an open market every day in the yeare, but Sunday, for a free man to sell his goods in open marker is no evill. It is not agreeable to reason to debarre a free man of a City, to trade freely therein, reason being the fountaine of honest lawes, gives to every man propriety and liberty, property of interest, freedom of enjoyment, and improvement to his best advantage. It is not for the common profit, the sellers being manufactors and free∣men of the City, pay taxes and tallages. This Act is in effect to raise pri∣ces, for the manufactor selleth cheaper then the shop keeper, who en∣deavouring to bring all the custome to their shops, is only to advance a kind of a monopolie, which the law abhorteth. For as Sir Edward Cooke in the third part of his Institutions, fol. 181. commenting upon the Statute of the 21 Iames 3. which Statute is abso∣lutely against Monopolists, and Monopolizers, he there possitively saith,
that they are against the antient and fundamentall lawes of this King∣dom, and that he may be the better understood what he means by Mo∣nopolie, he thus defines it. A Monopolie, is an institution or allowance by the Kings grant, Commission or otherwise, to any person or persons, bodies politique or corporate o, or for the sole buying, selling, making or useing of any thing whereby any person or person, bodies politique or corporate are sought to be restrained of any freedome or libertie, that they had before, or hindred in their lawfull trades.Deut. 24 6. And he there saith, that the law of this Realm against Monopolies, is grounded upon the law of God, No man shal take the nether or upper milstone to pledge, for he taketh a mans life to pledge. Whereby it appeareth that a mans trade is counted his life, the Monopo∣list or shop keeper which taketh away a mans trade taketh away his life, and therefore he is so much the more odious, because he is Vir san∣guinis, a man of blood against those inventors and propounders of evill, the holy Ghost hath spoken,Rom. 1.30. Inventoris, malorum, &c. digni sunt morti, the Inventors of evill, &c. ate worthy of death. This Act of Common Councell, is also contrary to the light of nature, which teacheth men to walk by congruety and equallity, not to oppresse because they would not be oppressed, nor to take away another mans right, because they would not have another to use the same measure to them, which principle of nature is ingravn upon the hearts of Heathens, who certainly wil one day rise up in judgment against them, which would make us slaves in our own land, contrary to the honour of nation, be∣cause by it the people are put into a condition of vassalage in their owne country. This Act of Common Councell being also against the common right and profit of the people, and not approved before the execution thereof, by the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, both the chiefe Iustices, or three of them, the partie which put the Act in execution for∣feit 40. l.19. Hen. 7.7. Neverthelesse although it be the knowne freedome of every free man of London, handicrafts man, shop keeper or merchant, to sell his goods Manufactors wares or commoditie either to free man or Farriner, Eng∣lish man or stranger, in ware house, shop, private house or Inn: yet the shop keepers have and doe unconscionably repine at the use of this li∣bertie in the Manufacterors: and as time have favoured, injustice have ac∣customed to struggle against this their lawfull libertie, to the great op∣pression
and hindrance of multittudes of the poorer sort of trades men and to the extream miserie and affliction of their families, for that, if in vacations and dead times, necessit us people, had not this libertie but were in effect bound up to the shop keeper, or to sell to fee men they would so frequently be put either upon pawning their goods to Userers, or selling them to extream losse for money to buy their food that they would be thereby undone an brought to beggery. All which the Shopkepers well knowing, the better to accomplish their unjust, unlawfull and unconscionable design petitioned Mr. Alder∣man Adams, when he was Major, for a warrant to seize and take away such goods and commodities as the Manufacture should conveigh or send to his Merchant or Chapman, upon which petition they obtained a warrant, the contents whereof is as followeth. (viz) Adam, Major Martis 16 Die Junii. 1646. Anno 2. Regis. Carrol 2 This day upon the humble petition of divers Citizens, for redresse of abuses and inconveniences by Huxiers, Pediets and Hgers, hawking and offering their wares to sell in the o∣pen streets of this City, this Court doth hereby appoint and authorize that Edward Hancock, Robert Petly, John Copson, Nicholas Wainewight and Perigrin Stevenson, Free men of this City, according to an Act of Com∣mon Counsell, made the sixt day of July 1602 joyntly and severally to see that one said Act for the future, be duly executed in its particular branch, according to the tenor and true meaning thereof. Which Act (albeit the same was never put in execution against Free∣men; in above fortie years before) the patties authorized being persons of a meane condon but of cruel and malicious spirits, have according to their unconscionable and unchristianlike will and pleasures cruelly and maliciously put the same in execution, and have taken from divers wea∣vers & other Manufacturors, being free men of London severall parcells of wares, to a  the same tending to the utter ruin and undoing of them and their families, and in particular from the persons here after men∣tioned, (viz,) Vpon the second day of September 1646. they by force and violence took from the person of William Smith at Besomes  in Lwtence laine, London, a parcell of Silke Ribbns (being his own Manufactory) to the value of 20 l or thereabouts and upon the 12 day of January following,
Iohn Crown Merchant, bought of him the said Smith, another parcell of Silke Ribbins, to the value of 70. l or thereabouts, some of which parcell, he the said Mr. Crown carried a vay with him, and the residue Smiths wife carried to Rude laine, London, to a place where the said Merchant appointed, at which place the above named parties, did by force and violence take the same rom her, together with her basket and cloath in which the warn was to the value of 5. s more, putting her in great feare and danger of her life , she being then great with child. That upon or about the second day of September, 1646. Iohn Williams bought of Thomas Poole a parcell of Silke Ribbins, being his own Manufa∣ctory to the value of 30 l the same being by the direction of the said Mer∣chant to be carried to Bosoms Jn in Lawrence laine, London, Poole sent the same by —his wife, and Elizabeth his daughter to the place so appointed, where the said Petly, Hancock Compson, Wainright and Stevenson, by force and violence took the same parcell of Rbbins from Elizabeth, the daughter of the said Poole, most inhumainly and barbarously abusing both her and her mother, so that they were by them inforced to cry out murther. That upon the 8 day of June last, Richard Russell sold unto Thomas Hind Merchant a parcell of Silke Lace, to the value of 5. l 10. s being his own Manufactory, and according to the direction of the said Hind, he the said Russell delivered the same to him at his lodging at the bare in Basing shaw∣street, London, where the said Petly, Hancock, Compson, Wain Wright and Ste∣venson did by force and violence take the said parcell of Lace from the said Hinde, under pretence of their warrant aforesaid. That upon the 23 day of June last, one Mr. Ogliby a Merchant bought of Roger Rockly Cutler a parcell of Swords to the value of 3.l being his owne manufactury, which comodities were by Rocklyes wife carried to Mr. Coles in Rude laine London, where the said Compson, Hancock, Petly, Wainwright and Stevenson by force and violence took the same from her, and inhumain∣ly beat thrust, and abused her, she being great with child cryed out to them to have pittie upon her, to which Compson answered, that he neither cared for her or her child, upon which fright and abuse she presently sell in labour and the child dyed, and with in 7 dayes after she also dyed, all the time she lived crying our for justice against the murtherer, but as yet none can be had. They also took from the wife of Nicholas Govers, a parcell of Silke Ribbins being his own Manufactury, to the value of 7. l which parcell of wares was sold to Andrew Dove Merchant. They the said Hancock, Petly, Compson, Wain Wright, and Stevenson also
took from George Persons a parcell of Silke Ribbins, being his own Manu∣factury to the value of three pounds. Which said wrongs and oppressions were by the parties above mentio∣ned presented unto the Adjutators of the army, under the Command of his Excellencie, Sir Thomas Fairfax, Captaine Generall of all the forces raised in England and Wales, the 27 of August, 1647. All which said, and divers other such illegall and unwarrantable seizures, since the making of the said warrant, by Mc. Alderman Adams as aforesaid, have so cuely, and with such rigor and unchristian like demeaner been act∣ed by them, the said Edward Hancock Robert Petly, Iohn Compson, Nich. Wainwright, and Perigin Stevenson, as no Heathens, or Infidels whatso∣ever could with more cruelty have exercised the same. But should I parti∣cularly mention all the free men of London, from whom they have by force and violence taken away their crue and proper goods, together with the manner of their uncivill and inhumaine carriage towards them, a quire of paper would not be sufficient to containe the same. And further to make their sufferings more grievous, the parties thus wronged and abused, can neither have Law nor justice against their oppressors. For when Roger Rockly complained against Compson for murthering his wife, to Sir Iohn Woollaston Knight, and desired him to bind Compson over to answer the same at the Sessions, he refused so to do. And when divers free men complained to Mr. Alderman Geares now Lord Major of London, for reliefe against the said Hancock. Compson and their confederates, for ta∣king away their goods, the same have been denyed & the parties offending countenanced in their actions, approving the same to be good and warran∣table, willing them to persist therein. By reason whereof the parties thus wronged being denyed justice, they have sought their reliefe at common law, and Smith and Poole have brough their severall Actions in his Maie∣sties Court of Kings Bench, against the said Wainwright, and his confede∣rated consorts, whereby the potencie of the City, and pollicie of their Re∣corder, they have been delayed these foure rearmes, and can by no meanes bring their actions to a try all, contrary to that clause in the grand Charter of England expressed in these words.en. 3. No free man shall be taken or impri∣sonned, or be disseazed of his free hold or liberties, free customes, or bee outlawed or exiled, or any other wayes destroyed, nor will we passe upon him, nor condemne him, but by the lawfull judgement of his Peers, or by the Law of the lands, we will sell to no man, we will not deny or defer to any man either justice, or right. That forasmuch as the said Hancock, Compson, and Wainwright and
the rest of their Competitors, perceiving themselves to be thus countenan∣ced, and maintained in their unlawfull actions, they most impudently and audatiously give out in speeches, that they will ruinate and utterly undoe Smith, and Poole, and make them run away, further saying that they have collected of the shop keepers who imployed them about taking away the wares and commodities which they so unlawfully seized, as aforesaid 500l in two dayes, which they will expend but they will accomplish the same, Accordingly they have caused Smith and Poole to be arrested upon great Actions for saying (as they pretend) that they stole the commodities from them, Wainewright in two Tearmes brought his action to a try all, did Smith what he could, and procured only Petly his fellow taker (or rather fellow) to prove the words, and he according to his unlimitted con∣science swore he heard the same, whereupon the Jury gave Wainewright 20. l dammage, upon which Smith was cast in prison, where he remained until he had made satisfaction. The parties thus wronged and their true and proper goods so illegally ta∣ken away by the said Compson, Wainwright and their conferated consorts by the Monopolizing shop keepers, which contrary to the Statute disbur∣sed money to maintain law against them, have been threatned, that if they take any course against the said Compson, Wainwright,32.8. and the rest of them, for the recovering of the goods which they so illegally took a com∣pany of elboe fellowes, as they be which lke drones doe, but live upon their labours, I would not value one penny, although the Sly'st shop-keeper of them should say it. But would take my lawful remedy (if I might have it) both against them for taking away my goods, and against such of the prou∣dest of the shopkeepers, as I could prove, did uphold them in law against me. You honest Citizens, Apprentices and others, which Esan like will not be contented to sell (or which is worse) to give away out Birth rights and in∣heritance, the fundamentall lawes or the Kingdome, which the meanest of you, as he is a freeman of England, may as lawfully claime as the greatest, Gentleman, or Nobleman in the Kingdome. Doe not therefore any of you countenance, maintain or suffer either Compson, Hancock or any of their said confederates, so unlawfully to seize (as they tearme it) to take away free mens goods in execution of their pretended warrant, granted unto them, for the putting of that illegall and unwarrantable Act of Common-Counsell in execurion—Which Act being against the fundamentall lawes of this Kingdome, the parties which made their warrant, and they which execute it, and also those which assist them, may be the knowne
and declared lawes of the kingdome, be indited as accessories for taking a∣way such goods as they shall so seize, or rather steale) from any freeman of the City in persuance of the said Act of Common Councell, Accursed be he that is afraid of man that shall dy, & of the son of man which shal be made as grasse. If the late Earle of Staffod, and the Bishop of Canter∣bury had so hevie a doom for endeavouring only to subvert the lawes and liberties of England, what doe these men deserve which have seen their punishment before their eyes, and yet have subverted the lawes and liberties of the kingdome, and endeavour to make us slaves by a law after we have spent the blood of so many thousand gallant Englishmen for the preservati∣on of our freedoms, for saith the Parliament in their Declaration, pag. 694. Slavery would be our condition, if we should goe about to overthrow the lawes of the land, and the propriety of every mans estate, and the liberty of his person All which three divers of the Grandees of the City of Lon∣don, and the monopolizing shop keepers and their adherents have done, without any remorse or conscience, and their latter practises are worse then their beginning. It would be great honour benefit and profit to the com∣mon wealth, that guilty persons should be punished, lest by the omission of the punishment of one, many men by that evill example should be incoura∣ged to commit more hainous offences. And excellent to this purpose is that saying of the Parliament which I desire may never by any true hearted Englishman, be forgotten, Book Decl. pag 39. "Which is, that they are very sensible that it equally imports them, as well to see justice done against them which are criminous, as to defend the just rights and liberties of the subjects and Parliament of England, and therefore pag. 656. they call the execution of the law, the very life and soule of the law, as indeed it is, with∣out which it is but a dead letter and a senselesse block. But woe unto you Citizens of London, and to your competitors and agents, if the law should be executed against you, for that you would be in a worse condition then you were, when some of you with a joynt fraternity like brethren in ini∣quity gave above 60. thusand pounds ot one time for a bribe, in the dayes of the Councell table to preserve you from law and justice, and to destroy the law, and to buy and rob your fellow Citizens, as free as your selves, of their liberties, franchises, trades and lively hoods. Read the discourse for free trade. And know yee further, you Free men and Apprentices of London, that they which now give warrant and authority to seize, and take away the true and proper goods of any free-man of London in the the streets, may if he please by as good a principle, and as warrantable give power and authority to take his or any of your goods out of his or any of your houses, which without all doubt (if speedy justice be not done against them) they will hereafter doe. FINIS.
