H137 E309_33 99861186 113314
THE LAMENTABLE COMPLAINT OF THE NORTH-WEST COUNTREY-MAN. By T. H. Published according to Order. LONDON, Printed in the yeare, 1645.
THE COMPLAINT OF THE NORTH-WEST COUTREY-MAN. YOu are well over-taken good Neighbour, Whether agoo this way, O how do you good John, I am very much discontented
At these times, and at my losses, Tis no matter which way ich go: Why man, be contented? A be on the strongest side, And thou mayst do well enough: How? do wel enough say you neybour, Why do you say so? whether ich am Roundhead or Cavaleer, the soldiers Will be shure to drink up all my Beer, My Hens, Ducks and Geese, They will be shure to have a fleece: In my chimney ich was wont to have Eight stitches of bacon fat and brave, But now at night it may be well hung, But in the morning it will be gon, Such doings makes my heart to ake: And I for feare do sometimes shake, A-pies take them all. My horses I in field have fed
In former time where they were bred, And I road on them in peace, But now my troubles do increase, Altho for them I paid full deare, Yet I have left me the smallest share: A-goodieer take them all. My Butter, Cheese, Milk Curds, and whay, They take my very spoon-meat away: What a life is this? Last week ich chad seven score sheep, And ich made account them to keep, Good profit for to make: But now, alas, God wot: They are all gone unto the pot, Shuch havock now a-days they make, My corn God Almighty blest upon the ground, Into my Barn I brought it sound, Thinking therby to increase my estate,
And to make me and my honshold for∣tunate: But now I must think of another fate, Alack, what shall I do: My woollen, linnen, and shuch stuff: Ye my verie Ruff in danger to be lost, My brass and pewter & shuch things: I and my wifes rings now must al-ago, Mony I had but little store: But yet they say, they will have more: But wher do think ich should have it. Ich have some religion as well as they, Surely some men have gone astray, That maketh such a quille: But our sins (alas) it was the way▪ That brought upon us all this fray: God knoweth when toull end, Our pride, securitie, oppression it was great: When the Christian World was in a fret: And toild with bloudie War: But now our share is come in haste,
And daily make us for to waste, The like was never known: So many bloudy battels in four Yeers, The like storie you did never heare In any Christian age, our land, Now full well is known to be in wars: And jars, ish bloudie ones in all the Christian World: This is the land, say they, That lived in wealth and store, But nowtheir sorrows are grown more denie, Then any Land besides: This is Gods true Church wee cannot But Christ abundance there will justi∣fie, God send them well to end. God bless our King & Parlament, And grant at last they may consent, To have a godly peace: Lord blesse this people great & small,
And grant that we on him may call In truth and righteousnesse, That he may send us a godly peace, That so our joys they may increase: And we may praise Gods Name there∣fore: AMEN. FINIS.
