H2759 E602_26 99865595 165646
A MESSAGE SENT FROM The Lord HOPTON, and Sir Richard Greenvill to the PRINCE, and a fight in the Isle of GUERNSEY. ALSO, The King of Portugals Answer to a Message sent unto him by Generall BLAKE. WITH A Speech made to the Lord CROMWEL in be∣half of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councel of the City of LONDON. AND The last transactions in Scotland, With a Letter from their declared King, their preparations for his coming to Edenburgh, and se∣veral Acts made in that Parliament, viz. 1. An Act for re-enforcing the Covenant. 2. An Act touching what hath been done at Breda. 3. An Act for levying of men. 4. An Act for levying 20000 l. Scots out of the L. Lauderdales Estate. 5. An Act for setling Officrs about their King. 6. An Act appointing Officers of their Army. LONDON, Printed for J. C. and are to be sold near the Royall-Exchange in Cornhill. 1650
The last proceedings of the Parliament of Scotland, and their preperation for his coming to Edenburgh, &c. Edenburgh 28. May, 1650. GReat listning after newes, both from the North and South, that expected from the North is, that the King (as they call him) should arrive there, and come post to Eden∣burgh, that which they expect from the South is inteli∣genc what the State postur and condition of the Eng∣lish Army is, which they call sectaries, and were they under the sensure of the Clargy, they would excom∣municat them both out of the Church and Kingdom, for those Cleargy have gotten so much the upper hand that if any one should presume but to dispute uppon what they decree it is sufficent to cause him to be pro∣nounced heritick, and some of them doe so terify the people with the Curse of the Kirk, that the ignorant sort are perswaided into a belief that if they be exco∣municated either their corne will not grow, or if it grow that it wil be blasted before harvest, or if they are not blest before it is cut, it wil miscarry er'e they get it into their barn. In the Pulpit the Alarum is al∣ready taken, and therefore its time for the lay-power,
to hasten recruits for their Army: In order whereun∣to the Committee at Tindall have listed their Officers, and given out Warrants for listing of 10000. men. It is reported they will make up them Regiments of Foot, none are more active in Parliament, and bitter in expressions against England, then the Marquess of Argile, but England needes not fear all the force and malice of Scotland, one Regiment of the English horse being able to fight six Regiments of these, and there is no doubt but the North of England will assist if need were, in defence of their Countrey; for if when they came as Friends, many of them ravished women, de∣floured Maydens, and dispoyled men of their goods: what can be thought on them, that they wil not do, if they should come as enemies. There is a Report here of great losses lately in Ireland, sustained by the Eng∣lish, before a place called Clonmel; yet that and some other Garisons are said to be surrendred to the English, they attribute the losse of Clonmel to the want of pow∣der and not strength or resolution in the Defendants. Hurry and the rest of the Officers taken with him who were kept in prison, are now brought to tryal, senten∣ced, and condemned to dye; he sollicits hard for his life, and promiseth to be a conformable Covenantor for the future, if he may be spared, the likelier to be harkened to, for that although Montross was taken a∣way on the suddain, yet if the King comes, old grudges must be forgotten between the malignant party, and one must not be known or distinguished from the o∣ther. A Letter is come to the Parliament of Scotland from the King, wherein he takes notice of their proceeding against Montross, and desires to be a moderator in the
business; whereby it doth appear, that he had not re∣ceived the express from hence which gave him an ac∣count thereof, neither had he intelligence that he was executed; this express will have but a short answer, and less satisfactory, the Parliament taking little no∣tice thereof; yet are preparations formally made (as they say) for his Majesties coming, and much debate hath been in the house about settleing his houshold, a List whereof was read two days since. They have also passed several Acts, viz. 1. An Act for re-enforcing the Covenant on all. 2. An Act touching what hath been done by their Com∣missioners at Breda; yet do we not hear that all things are ratified, so as that something may not remain to be debated on. 3. An Act for levying of men which (they say) are for defence of their Country only against any invasion. 4. An Act for levying the sum of 20000 li. Scots out of the estate of the Lord Lauderdale, if he depart not the Kingdom at, or before the tenth of June. 5. An Act of for settling of Officers about their King. 6. An Act appointing Officers of the Army is brought in, and hath been read, with diverse others which are not yet past. Exeter 1. June 1650. SIR, YEsterday came into this City three Companies more of foot, to continue there for desence and safety of this place, the like provision is made for all other Garrisons in these parts which is a thing very needful at this time, for Hopton, Greenvil, and some others of greatest esteem amongst the Royal party, and those they say that have the
best heads and the stoutest hearts are in the adjacent Islands of Scilly and Jersey, waiting for an opportunity to get sooting in England, where they hope to find many friends, and have thir immissaries filled with such a spirit of sedition that there is nothing so good and profitable for a Common-wealth, which do not contatanimate and subvert; but I trust such a prudent care will be had that these infusers of poyson shall not have power to molest the Common-wealth. Some Letters were intercepted this week going for Holland written in figures and cyphers, which I hope to send by the next when they are uncloaked. Hopton and Greenvil haue lent to the Prince, advising him to take heed how he trusts himself in Scotland, encouraging him in the affairs of Ireland, &c. But let them know that notwithstanving the L. Crumwel is come over into En∣gland, yet is there one left behind (with many other very deserving Commanders) that is able to give better Coun∣sel to the wisest Prince in Christendome. There be two strong Garrisons delivered to the English since the Lord Crumwel came thence, the cheif that remain to be taken in, is Limbrick, VVaterford and Galloway. A ship is lately come into this harbour which brings us news, that General Blake hath sent to the King of Portugal, desiring to know whether his Majesty doth own the protecting of P. Rupert within his harbour, and if so, then some reasons are given to convince him of the unreasonableness of such an act, and how far it is inconsistent with the honor and re∣putation of Kings to shelter Rebels and Traytors; There∣fore his request to that King is, that a day may be prefixed at which time P. Rupert and his Fleet may be forced out to Sea. To which the said King gave answer, that he would take some time to consider thereof, and to consult with his Councell about it. General Popham is now joyned with
General Blake, and our men want nothing but opportuni∣ty to fight with the enemy; they were at the first going out victualled for seven months, and have had supplies of mo∣ny and fresh victual since they were out, a small Vessel be∣longing to Jersey Island, was lately taken by one of our Frigots, the prise is worth little in it self, but great by way of prevention of mischeif, of which she had a great share. The report goes that the Governor of Gernsey hath laid siege against the Castle in that Isle, which hath long stood out against the Parliament; the enemy within made one salley forth, and were gallantly repulsed and beaten in a∣gaine, withe the loss of 5. men; the Castle is very strong and well victualled, many breaches are made in the walls, and it is thought we shall storm it within few days, I pray let me hear from you by the next, and send me what news you have. A gentleman which came from London, tells me us that you are listing Auxillaries, and that the City will raise a Brigarde of horse for defence thereof; which if so will be good for their own safety, and excel in the example. Your assured friend, T. S. A Letter from a Gentleman in London, to his Friend in the Countrey. SIR, ACcording to my promise I shall send you what newes is stirring here. This week the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, visited the Lord Cromwel at his Lodgings near White-Hall, and the Recorder not being well in health, Mr. Sad∣ler
the Town-Clark of the City, made a Speech, acknowledging Gods great mercy in carrying his Excellency through so many difficulties in Ireland, and bringing him victoriously hither again, &c. Vnto which his Lordship made a modest reply, returning the praise and glory thereof to God alone; after which his Excellency and the Lord Mayor had some short discourse in private, and so parted with many sweet expressions of mutual love to the great grief and sorrow of the common Enemy, who loving innovation, dare interpriss any thing to make them owners of their desires, and resting in that mind they con∣spire against the prosperity of good men, cloaking their vice with the vashness and fury of the people, of which flame if it should not be quenched in time, might come great mischief. The Parliament hath spent some time in debating the way and time for bringing in a new and equal Representative, as likewise a∣bout an additional and more effectual Act then the former, for the relief of Creditors and Prisoners, in which there will be strong provi∣sion made, that he that hath wherewith to pay, shall not by yielding his Body, save his Estate, nor he that hath not any goods to satisfie, suffer perpetual imprisonment, which hath been the utter ruine of many a man and his whole Family, which is an excellent work, and no alteration of Law, but the restoring of it to its original or first in∣stitution. And what can be required more of them, then that the Common-wealth may be preserved in safety and happiness: and surely every State is happy which hath good Lawes, and doth abound in all good things as England doth, which is the happy fruit of the late peace we have enjoyed under the present Government. FINIS.
