J1137 E177_9 R17936 99860305 157105
JOYFƲLL NEWS FROM IRELAND, BEING A RELATION OF a Battell which was fought between the Protestants, and the Rebels of IRELAND, where the Protestants got the victory, giving the Rebels a great overthrow. Also how the Earle of Mackquere was taken prisoner. Also the Copy of a Proclamation set forth by the Rebels. With the warrantable and true discovery of the last Plot in IRELAND. LONDON: Printed for John Greensmith. 1641.
VPon the 30th. day of October, being Saturday, did certain of the Rebels in Ireland remove out of Armagh privately into the City of Dublin; but the day be∣fore a Proclamation was set forth by the chief of the Rebels to this effect. The Proclamation set forth by the Rebels. Patricke Oneale chief Commander of the Ca∣tholicke Forces in Ireland, doth publish and de∣clare, That Irish Catholicks are a Nation not conquered, nor ought they to live under the Laws, that of late have been enacted: they ought to have a free use of their Religion, with∣out interruption, which they had now cause to fear would be restrained, if not utterly taken away: therefore we which are constant friends to the Catholike faith, proclaim to all our loving brethren, that it is high time to stir, since it is of so great a consequence, therefore all that wish well to the Catholike faith, let them now be∣take, them to their Armes, and come now and assist us, who are now in the Field to defend the
Religion with our Swords, which hath been established in this kingdome by our worthy An∣cestors: and hereby we shall put honour upon our Religion, and make our names famous tho∣rowout the Christian world; and if any of the Catholique Religion shall refuse to assist us in this our just defence, let them know they will be kept under like slaves, and draw upon them a curse from all the Catholiques in the world, and the curse of us Priests, and Friers, and Soul∣diers. Given at the Councell held the 29th. of Octob. in the County of Monn. Patricke Oneale. Hugh Maymaduse. Father Patrick. Frier Dennis. 31. of Octob. Vpon the 31. of Octob. was a hard skirmish betweene the Protestants and Rebels of Ire∣land, the Rebels being two thousand strong, Protestants but a thousand, but yet of the Re∣bels were slain five hundred, of the Protestants fourtie. 1. of November. Vpon the first day of Novemb: the Earle of Mackquere with certain other Rebels were viewing of the chiefest Church in Dublin, where the Lord chiefe Justices and Privie Councell use upon Sabbath dayes to hear Sermons, cer∣tain Protestants discovered the Earle, and pre∣sently
got a strong guard, and tooke him with the rest which were with him, and in stead of making him (as he intended to be) Governour of Dublin Castle, they made him a Prisoner thereof, which is a great discomfort unto the Rebels, some already have runne away from their Commanders, and are fled out of the Country, and the rest have very little courage to stand in Rebellion any longer. The Discovery of the Gun-pow∣der-Plot. After that the Earle of Mackquer was taken prisoner, fearing least any Trechery should lye hidden in the Church, privy search was made, but a long space it was before any thing could be discovered, at length they perceaved in a hollow Place, smoake ascending up; anon they discovered a Fire, and an old man setting by it, as if hee were warming of his hands by it, which sight did strike the searchers into great amazement, they went very softly, and the old man not hearing of them, they caught fast hold of him, and binding of him fast, they searched farther, and found out an Engine which was charged with two hundred Bullets, but being discharged, it would have burned out into a flame, which flame should have fired the Barrels of Powder and faggots which were
adjoyning unto it, and the old man being fast aound, did confesse unto them how that hee should have discharged the Engine himselfe, and should have been destroyed with the rest, but as many Heretickes as were blowne up in the Church, so many soules for his sake should have beene released out of Purgatory, as the Priests, Jesuits, and Fryers did promise him; from whose subtle and bloody Plots, good Lord for ever defend us. FJNIS.
a city (Dublin?) under seige
