L377A 99896355 154243
Momus Triumphans: OR, THE PLAGIARIES OF THE English Stage; Expos'd in a CATALOGUE OF ALL THE Comedies, Tragi-Comedies, Masques, Tragedies, Opera's, Pastorals, Interludes, &c. Both Ancient and Modern, that were ever yet Printed in Eng∣lish. The Names of their Known and Supposed Authors. Their several Volumes and Editions: With an Account of the various Originals, as well English, French, and Italian, as Greek and Latine; from whence most of them have Stole their Plots. By GERARD LANGBAINE Esq Indice non opus est nostris, nec vindice Libris: Stat contra dicit{que} tibi tua Pagina, Fures. Mart. LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Cox, and are to be Sold by him in Oxford. MDCLXXXVIII.
The Preface. IF it be true, what AristotlePoet. c. 10. that great Philosopher, and Father of Criticism, has own'd, that the Stage might in∣struct Mankind better than Philosophy it self. If Homer was thought by HoraceErist. 2. ad Lol∣lium. to exceed Crantor and Chry∣stippus, in the Precepts of Morality; and if Sophocles and Euripides, obtained the title of Wise, for their Dramatich Writing, certainly it can be no discredit for any man to own himself a lover of that sort of Poetry, which has been stiled, The School of Vertue and good Manners? I know there have been many severe Cato's who have endeavoured all they could, to decry the use of the Stage; but those who please to consult the Writings of the Learned Dr. Ga∣ger, Albericus Gentiles, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Richard Baker, Heywood, the Poet and Actor both in one; not to mention several o∣thers, as the famous Scaliger, Monsieur Hedelin, Rapin, &c. will find their Objections fully answered, and the Diversion of the Theatre sufficiently vindicated. I shall therefore without any Apology, pub∣lickly own, that my inclination to this kind of Poetry in particular, has lead me not onely to the view of most of our Modern Represen∣tations on the Stage, but also to the purchase of all the Plays I could meet with, in the English Tongue; and indeed I have been Master of above Nine Hundred and Fourscore English Plays and Masques, besides Drolls and Interludes; and having read most of them, I think am able to give some tollerable account of the greatest part of our Dramatick Writers, and their Productions. The general Use of Catalogues, and the esteem they are in at pre∣sent, is so well known, that it were to waste Paper to expatiate on it: I shall therefore onely acquaint my Reader, that I designed this Catalogue for their use, who may have the same relish of the Dram∣ma with my self; and may possibly be desirous, either to make a Collection, or at least have the curiosity to know in general, what
has been Publish't in our Language, as likewise to receive some Re∣marks on the Writings of particular Men. The Reasons that induc'd me to the publishing this Catalogue, were these: First, That the former Catalogues were out of Print. Secondly, That they were all of them full of gross Errours. Third∣ly, That they were not, as I thought, so Methodical as this which I have now made; wherein the Reader will find the Imperfections I observed in the former Catalogues, amended; all the Plays which have been Printed since 1680, to this present time, added; with several Remarks, which whether or no observed, I cannot tell, but never pub∣lished by any Author till now. To begin then first with the Errours of former Catalogues, they are chiefly Five: First, There were Plays inserted in all of them, which were never in Print; as for Brevity's sake, to give one instance for many, The Amorous Widow, and Wanton Wife, a Comedy. This is a Stock-Play, and was written (if not Translated from Mollieres George Dandin) by Mr. Batterton. Secondly, Some Plays were omitted, which had been Printed ve∣ry long ago; as, Cola's Fury, and Lirenda's Misery. Written by Henry Burkhead. The Religious Rebel; and several others. Thirdly, Two Titles which belong'd to one and the same Play, were frequently printed, as if they had been two distinct Plays; as The Constant Maid, or Love will find out the Way. Written by Shirly. Ferex and Porex, or the Tragedy of Gorboduc. Written by Sacvile and Norton; with many others. Fourthly, The same Title was often times printed twice, and that seperately, as if writ by two several persons; and sometimes ascrib'd to different Authors likewise; when it was onely a new Edition of the same Play; as for Example, Patient Grissel was again re∣peated under the Title of Patient Grissel Old. And Appius and Virginia, written by Webster, is afterwards ascrib'd to T. B. though as the deceased Comedian Mr. Carthwright, a Bookseller by Profession, told me, 'twas onely the old Play Reprinted, and Corrected by the above-mentioned Mr. Batterton; with several others. Fifthly, Some Plays are ascribed to one Author which were writ by another; as Celum Britanicum, a Masque, is to Sir William Davenant, though it was written by Carew and Jones. Which fault is rather to be imputed to the Publishers of Sir William Dave∣nant's Workes, 1673, in Folio, than to the Compilers of the former
Catalogue; who are more excusable than Mr. Phillips in his Ca∣talogue of Poets, called, Theatrum Poetarum; and his Tran∣scriber Winstanley, who has follow'd him at a venture in his Cha∣racters of the Drammatick Writers, even to a word, in his Lives of the English Poets. Both these Authors through a mistake of the Method of former Catalogues, and their Ignorance in what Pieces each Drammatick Author had published, have fallen into very great Er∣rours, as I am going to shew. The first Catalogue that was printed of any worth, was that Col∣lected by Kirkman, a London Bookseller, whose chief dealing was in Plays; which was published 1671, at the end of Nicomede, a Tragi-comedy, Translated from the French of Monsieur Corneille. This Catalogue was printed Alphabetically, as to the Names of the Plays, but promiscuously as to those of the Authors, (Shakspeare, Fletcher, Johnson, and some others of the most voluminous Authors excepted) each Authors Name being placed over against each Play that he writ, and still repeated with every several Play, till a new Author came on. About Nine Years after, the Publisher of this Ca∣talogue, Reprinted Kirkman's with emendations, but in the same Form. Notwithstanding the Anonimous Plays, one would think easily distinguishable by the want of an Authors Name before them, yet have both these charitable kind Gentlemen found Fathers for them, by ranking each under the Authors Name that preceded them in the former Catalogues. Thus Charles the First is placed by them both to Nabbs; because in both the former Catalogues it followed his Co∣vent-Garden: and for the same reason Cupid's Whirligig is ascri∣bed by both of them to Goff; because it follow'd his Careless Shep∣heardess; and so of many others, too tedious to repeat. To prevent the like mistake for the future, and to make the Cata∣logue more useful, I wholly altered the form: And yet that I might please those who delight in old Paths, I have Transcribed the same as a Second Part, after the former way of Alphabet, though more Me∣thodically than formerly, as I shall shew presently. In this New Catalogue the Reader will find the whole to be di∣vided into Three distinct Classes. In the first I have placed the Declared Authours, Alphabetically, according to their Sirnames, in Italick Characters: and placed the Plays each Authour has written, underneath in Roman Letters, which are rank'd Alphabetically like∣wise; so that the Reader may at one glance view each Authours La∣bours. Over against each Play, is plac'd as formerly a Letter to in∣dicate
the nature of the Dramma: as C. for Comedy. T. for Tra∣gedy. T. C. for Tragi-comedy. P. for Pastoral. O. for Opera. I. for Interlude. F. for Farce. And for the better use of those who may design a Collection, I have added to the Letter the Volume also, (according to the best Edition) as Fol. 4o. 8o. against each Play that I have seen. And for their further help; where a Play is not printed single, the Reader will be directed by a Letter or Figure to the bottom of the Colume, where he will meet with Instructions how it is to be found; I mean, with what Poems or other Plays it is printed, the Year when, the Place where, and the best Edition of each Book so mentioned. This may seem superfluous at first sight, but may possibly be no longer thought so, when I shall have acquainted my Reader, that when I was making my Collection, I found several Plays and Masks, bound up with other Poems, which by the name were scarce known to the generality of Booksellers: as for instance, Sir Robert Howard's Blind Lady; Daniel's Philotas; Carew's Coelum Britanicum; Shirley's Triumph of Beauty; with infinite o∣thers. But two Plays I might particularly mention, both taken no∣tice of in former Catalogues, to wit, Gripus and Hegio, a Pasto∣ral; and Deorum Dona, a Masque; both which were written by Baron, and were wholly unknown to all the Booksellers of whom I happened to enquire, and which I could never have found but by chance; they being printed in a Romance called, The Cyprian Academy, in 8o. The same I might add of The Clouds, (a Play which was never in any Catalogue before, and was translated from Aristophanes's Nubes by Stanley, and printed with his History of Philosophy, Fol. Lond. 1655. and now newly re∣printed; and of several others) but that I must hasten back to give an Account of the two other Divisions of my Catalogue. The one of which contains those Plays whose Authors discover themselves but by halves, and that to their intimate Friends, by two Letters only in the Title-Page, or the bottom of their Epistle; and in the last Degree are plac'd all Anonemous Plays; and this compleats the First Part. The Second Part contains the Catalogue Reprinted in an exact Alphabetical manner, according to the forms of Dictionaries, the Authors Names being here left out as superfluous; and against each Play is a Figure to direct you to the Page where you may find it in the First Part.
Thus much as to the Method and Alterations of this Catalogue: Now as to the Remarks, which are of three sorts; the first of use, and the other two conducing to Pleasure at least, if not to Profit likewise. The First is to prevent my Readers being impos'd on by crafty Book∣sellers, whose custom it is as frequently to vent old Plays with new Titles, as it has been the use of the Theatres to dupe the Town, by act∣ing old Plays under new Names, as if newly writ, and never acted before; as, The Counterfeit Bridegroom, an old Play of Middle∣ton's; The Debauchee, another of Brome's; The Match in Newgate, another of Marston's; with many more, too tedious to repeat. By these Remarks the Reader will find The Fond Lady, to be only the Amorous Old Woman, with a new Title, The Eu∣nuch, to be The Fatal Contract, a Play printed above thirty years ago; with many the like. The Second is an Essay towards a more large Account of the Ba∣sis on which each Play is built, whether it be founded on any Story or Passage either in History, Chronicle, Romance, or Novel. By this means the curious Reader may be able to form a Judgment of the Poets ability in working up a Dramma, by comparing his Play with the Original Story. I have not been so large and full in this as I intend hereafter, not having by me several Chronicles and Novels, which might have been subservient to my Design, as the Chronicles of particular Countries, and the Novels of Cynthio Geraldi, Loredano, Bandello, Sansorino Belleforreste, &c. For this reason, in the Notes on several Plays which I have taken notice of, I have been forc'd to refer to the Chronicles of a Country in general, not have had time or opportunity to make an exact search what Historian the Author has chiefly follow'd, or what Author has most largely treated on that particular Action which is the subject of the Dramma. So in Novels I have been forc'd through Necessity to quote some which have been printed since the Plays were written to which they are referred: because I knew that they were extracted and collected from the Originals, whence the Plot was taken, though I had them not by me: of which I could produce many instances, were it material. I would desire my Readers leave to make this Observation by the by, that a Drammatick Poet is not ty'd up to the Rules of Chrono∣logy, or History, but is at liberty to new model a Story at his plea∣sure, and to change not only the Circumstances of a true Story, but e∣ven the principal Action it self. Of this opinion are most of our mo∣dern
Criticks; and Scaliger observes, not only that 'tis the priviledge of Epick Poets,Poetices. Lib. 1. c. 2. but also of Tragedians. Quis nescit omnibus E∣picis Poetis Historiam esse pro argumento? quam illi aut ad∣umbratam, aut illustratam certe alia facie quam ostendunt ex Historia conficiunt, Poema. Nam quid alius Homerus? Quid Tragicis ipsis faciemus. Sic multa Lucano ficta. Patriae Imago quae sese offerat Caesari:Pref. to Gondibert, p. 2. excitam ab Interis animam, at{que} alia talia. This instance of Lucan, makes me call to mind what Sir William Davenant says on account of the same Author, whom he blames for making choice of an Argument so near his own time, that such an Enterprize rather beseem'd an Historian, than a Poet. For (says he) wise Poets think it more worthy to seek out truth in the Passions, than to record the truth of Actions; and practise to describe mankind just as we are perswaded or guided by in∣stinct, not particular persons, as they are lifted, or levelled by the force of Fate, it being nobler to contemplate the general History of Nature, than a selected Diary of Fortune. So that we see the business of a Poet is to refine upon History; and Reforma∣tion of Manners is so much his business, that he is not to represent things on the Stage, as he finds them recorded in History, but as they ought to have been: and therefore we are not to make History so much the Standard and Rule of our Judgment, as Decency and Probability. For indeed, provided the Author shew Judgment in the heightning and working up of his Story, it matters not whether the Play be founded on History, or Romance, or whether the Story be his own, or another's Invention. The last sort of Remarks, relate to Thefts: for having read most of our English Plays, as well ancient as those of latter date, I found that our modern Writers had made Incursions into the deceas'd Authors Labours, and robb'd them of their Fame. I am not a sufficient Ca∣suist to determine whether that severe Sentance of Synesius be true, Magis impium Mortuorum Lucubrationes quam vestes furari; That 'tis a worse sin to steal dead mens Writings, than their Clothes: but I know that I cannot do a better service to their memory, than by taking notice of the Plagiaries, who have been so free to borrow, and to endeavour to vindicate the Fame of these ancient Authors from whom they took their Spoiles. For this reason I have observ'd what Thefts I have met with throughout the Catalogue, and have endea∣vour'd a restitution to their right Owners, and a prevention of the Readers being impos'd on by the Plagiary, as the Patrons of several
of our Plays have been by our Modern Poets. But none certainly has attempted it with greater confidence, than he that stiles himself the Author of The Country Innocence, or The Chambermaid turn'd Quaker: a Play which was acted and printed in the year 1677. but first publish'd many years before by its genuine Author Ant. Brewer. It is not to those of our own Nation only, but to Forreigners also, that I have endeavour'd to do Justice. For that reason I have re∣mark'd (as far as my knowledge would permit me) what has been translated or stollen from Tasso, Guarini, Bonarelli, Garnier, Scar∣ron, both the Corneilles, Molliere, Rucine, Quinault, and others both French and Italians. Neither have I omitted, to my power, to do right likewise to the ancient Greek and Latin Poets, that have written in this way, as Sophocles, Euripides, Aeschylus, Aristo∣phanes, Seneca, Plautus, Terence, &c. I must acknowledge, with regret, that these are not so well known to me as I could wish; but yet as far as my power, I have endeavour'd to do right to their Me∣mories. But I dare assure my Reader, that for the future it shall be more my business to obtain a more intimate acquaintance with all worthy Strangers, as well as with my own Countrymen, so that if this Trifle should have the fortune to appear abroad a second time, it shall be more compleat and correct, than the shortness of the time, and my small acquaintance with Authors at present allow; the Catalogue be∣ing in the Press, and the first sheet of it set, before I thought of adding these Remarks. But before I quit this Paper, I desire my Readers leave to take a View of Plagiaries in general, and that we may observe the diffe∣rent proceedings between the Ancients and our Modern Writers. This Art has reign'd in all Ages, and is as ancient almost as Learn∣ing it self. If we take it in its general Acceptation, and according to the extent of the word we shall find the most Eminent Poets (not to move excentrically and out of our present Sphere) are liable to the charge and imputation of Plagiary. Homer himself is not free from it, if we will give credit to Suidas, Aelian, and others: and that the in∣vention of the Iliad is not wholly due to him, seems to be confirm'd by the Testimony of Aristotle, who mentions a small Iliad,Poet. c. 23. which was written before his was produced. But whether there be any ground, for this Opinion, or no, certain it is that the most eminent Poets amongst the Romans, I mean Virgil and Ovid, made use of the Grecian Magazines, to supply their Inventions. To prove this, let us first
consider Virgil,Poet. l. 3. cap. 15. stil'd the King of Poets by Scaliger, and to the opi∣nion of Propertius exceeding Homer himself, as appears by the fol∣lowing Lines so well known amongst all learned men. Cedite Romani Scriptores, cedite Graii, Nescio, quid majus nascitur Aeneade. Yet even this great man has borrow'd in all his Works; from Theo∣critus; in his Eclogues; from Hesiod and Aratus, in his Geor∣gicks; and from Homor and Pisander, in his Aeneads: besides what he has borrow'd from Parthenius Nicaeus, his Tutor in the Greek Tongue, and from Q. Ennius an ancient Latin Poet; as you may read more at large in Macrobius.Saturnalia, l. 5. c. 11. l. 6. c. 1. If we consider Ovid, the Flower of the Roman Wit, we shall find him imitating at least, if not borrowing from, the forementioned Parthonius: his Metamor∣phosis,Vol. 2. O∣rat. 3. that Divine Poem, (as Ant. Muretus stiles it in his Orati∣ons) being built upon that Poem writ in the Greek Tongue, which bore the same Name; and handled the same Subject, as we are told by Plutarch and Eustathius. And if to these we add that worthy Carthaginian Terence, who by the kindness of the generous Lucan, was at once made a free man and Citizen of Rome, and whom on the account of his Comedies written in the Latin Tongue, we may number among the Roman Writers: we shall find him likewise be∣holding; for his Productions, to that eminent Athenian Poet Menan∣der. But let us now observe how these Eminent Men manage what they borrow'd; and then compare them with those of our times. First, They propos'd to themselves those Authors whose Works they borrow'd from, for their Model. Secondly, They were cautious to borrow only what they found beautiful in them, and rejected the rest. This is prov'd by Virgil's Answer concerning Ennius his Works, when he was ask'd by one who saw him reading, what he was about, reply'd, Aurum se ex Enii stercore colligere. Thirdly, They plainly confess'd what they borrow'd, and modestly ascrib'd the credit of it to the Author whence 'twas originally taken. Thus Terence owns his Translations in his Prologue to Euntichus. Qui bono vertendo, & eas discribendo ma Ex Graecis bonis, Latinas fecit non bonas.
This behaviour Pliny commends in these words:Epist. ad Tit. Ve∣spar. Est enim beni∣gnum & plenum ingenium Pudoris, fateri perquos profeceris: and after having blam'd the Plagiaries of his time, he commends Cicero for making mention of Plato, Crantor, and Pariaetius, whom he made use of in his Works: and let it be observ'd by our Modern Poets, that though our modest Carthaginian own'd his Translations, yet was he not the less esteem'd by the Romans, or his Poems less va∣lu'd for it. Nay, even in this Age he is universally commended by learned men, and the judicious Rapin gives him a Character, which I doubt few of our Age will deserve.Reflect. 26. part 2. Terence a ecrit d'une Mani∣ere, & si naturelle, & si judicieuse, que de Copie qu'il estoit il est devenu original: car jamais Auteur n'a eu un goust plus par de la Nature. Lastly, Whatsoever these ancient Poets (particularly Virgil) copyed from any Author, they took care not only to alter it for their purpose; but to add to the beauty of it: and afterwards to insert it so handsomly into their Poems, (the body and Oeconomy of which was generally their own) that what they borrow'd, seem'd of the same Contexture with what was originally theirs. So that it might be truly said of them; Apparet unde sumptum sit, aliud tamen quàm unde sit, apparet. If we now on the other side examine the proceedings of our late English Writers, we shall find them diametrically opposite in all things. Shakspear and Johnson indeed imitated these Illustrious Men I have cited; the one having borrow'd the Comedy of Errours from the Menechmi of Plautus; the other has made use not only of him, but of Horace, Ovid, Juvenal, Salust, and several others, according to his occasions: for which he is commended by Mr. Dryden,Epist. to Mock A∣strologer. as having thereby beautified our Language: and Mr. Rymer, whose Judgment of him is this; I cannot (says he) be displeas'd with honest Ben,Tragedies of the last Age, p. 143 when he chuses rather to borrow a Melon of his Neighbour, than to treat us with a Pumpion of his own growth. But for the most part we are treated far otherwise; not with sound Roman Wit, as in Ben's time, but with empty French Kickshaws, which yet our Poetical Hosts serve up to us for Re∣gales of their own Cookery; and yet they themselves undervalue that very Nation to whom they are oblig'd for the best share of their Treat. Thus our Laureat himself runs down the French Wit in his Marriage a la Mode, and steals from Molliere in his Mock A∣strologer; and which makes it more observable, at the same time he does so, pretends in his Epistle to justifie himself from the impu∣tation
of Theft: Not unlike the Cunning of a Jugler (to apply his own Simile to him) [Epistle to the Spanish Fryer] who is al∣ways staring us in the Face,Ep. to the Spanish Fryer. and overwhelming us with Gib∣berish, only that he may gain the opportunity of making the cleanlier conveyance of his Trick. I will wave the Epistle to this Play, which seems to be the Picture of Bays in little, yet I can∣not omit one Observation more, which is, that our Laureat should borrow from Old Flecknoe, whom be so much despises: and yet whoever pleases to read Flecknoe's Damoyselles a la Mode, will find that they have furnisht Mr. Dryden with those refin'd Expres∣sions which his Retrenching Lady Donna Aurelea makes use of, as the Counsellor of the Graces, and that furious indigence of Ri∣bons. But possibly he will own that he borrow'd them as Father Flecknoe did, from Mollieres Les Precieuses Ridicules: howe∣ver, I hope he will allow that these Expressions better suit with the Spiritual Temper of those French Damsels, than with the known Gravity of the Spanish Ladies. I hope Mr. Dryden will pardon me this Discovery, it being absolutely necessary to my design of Resto∣ring what I could to the true Authors: and this Maxim I learnt from his own Father Aldo,Kind Kee∣per. Every one must have their Own. Fiat Justitia, aut ruat Mundus. In pursuance to which, I own that Mr. Dryden has many Excellencies which far out-weigh his Faults; he is an excellent Critick, and a good Poet, his Stile is smooth and fluent, and he has written well, both in Verse and Prose. I own that I admire him, as much as any man; or. Sat. 10. l. 1.—Neque ego illi detrahere ausim, Haerentem Capiti multâ cum Laude Coronam. But at the same time I cannot but blame him for taxing others with stealing Characters from him, (as he does Settle in his Notes on Mo∣rocco) when he himself does the same, almost in all the Plays he writes; and for arraigning his Predecessours for stealing from the Ancients, as he does Johnson; which 'tis evident that he himself is guilty of the same. I would therefore desire our Laureat, that he would follow that good Advice which the modest History Professor Mr. Wheare gives to the young Academick in his Antelogium, to shun this, Confidence and Self-love, as the worst of Plagues; and to consider that Modesty is it which becomes every Age,Mr. Bohun's Translat. and leads all that follow her in the streight, and right Path to solid
Glory; without it we are hurld down Precepices, and instead of acquiring Honour, become the scorn of Men, and instead of a good Fame, we return loaden with Ignominy and Con∣tempt. I have not time to examine the Thefts of other Plagiaries in parti∣cular, both from the French and our own Language, and therefore shall onely desire them to consider this Sentence of Pliny:Ep. ad T.V. Obnoxii profecto animi, & infelicis ingenii est, deprehendere infurto malle, quam mutuum reddere cum presertim sors fiat ex ufu∣râ. Althô I condemn Plagiaries, yet I would not be thought to reckon as such either Translators, or those who own what they borrow from other Authors: for as 'tis commendable in any man to advantage the Publick; so it is manifest, that those Authors have done so, who have contributed to the Knowledge of the Unlearned, by their excel∣lent Versions: Yet at the same time I cannot but esteem them as the worst of Plagiaries, who steal from the Writings of those of our own Nation. Because he that borrows from the worst Forreign Author, may possibly import, even amongst a great deal of trash, somewhat of value: whereas the former makes us pay extortion for that which was our own before. For this reason I must distinguish one of our best Comick-Writers, from the common Herd of Translators;Mr. Shad∣well. since though proportionate to his Writings, none of our modern Poets have borrow'd less; yet has he dealt ingenuously with the World, and if I mistake not, has publickly own'd, either in his Prefaces, or Prologues, all that he has borrow'd; which I the rather take notice of, because it is so lit∣tle practised in this Age. 'Tis true indeed, what is borrow'd from Shakspeare or Fletcher, is usually own'd by our Poets, because every one would be able to convict them of Theft, should they endeavour to conceal it. But in what has been stolen from Authors not so gene∣rally known, as Murston, Middleton, Massenger, &c. we find our Poets playing the parts of Bathyllus to Virgil, and robbing them of that Fame, which is as justly their due, as the Reward the Em∣perour Augustus had promised to the Author of that known Distich affixed on the Court Gate, was to Virgil. Neither can this Imputation be laid at the doors of such who are onely Imitators of the Works of others, amongst which, are admired Sir Charles Sidley, and the inimitable M. Wytcherley: The last of which, if I mistake not, has Copied Mollieres le Misanthrope, in
his Character of the Plain Dealer; and his Celimene, in that of Olivia: but so well, that though the Character of the Misan∣thrope be accounted by Rapin,Reflect. 26. part. 2. Te Caractere le plus achevee; The compleatest Character, and the most singular that ever appeared on the Stage: yet certainly our Poet has equaled, if not exceeded his Copy. Imitation which Longinus commends in Stesichorus, Ar∣chilochus, and Herodotus, all of them being imitators of Homer; but particularly he says of Plato: Sect. 11. . Sed omnium hujus Poetae studiosissimus imitator fuit Plato, ab illis Homericis Laticibus ad se seductos vivos quam∣plurimos transferens. But to put an end to these Observations, which may prove alike troublesome to the Reader, as well as to the Poets: I must say this for our Country-men, That notwithstanding our Modern Authors have borrow'd much from the French, and other Nations, yet have we several Pieces, if I may so say, of our own Manefacture, which equal at least, any of our Neighbours productions. This is a truth so generally known, that I need not bring instances to prove, that in the humour of our Comedies, and in the characters of our Trage∣dies, we do not yeild to any other Nation. 'Tis true the unities of Time, Place, and Action, which are generally allowed to be the Beauties of a Play, and which the French are so careful to observe, add all lusture to their Plays; nevertheless, several of our Poets have given proof, that did our Nation more regard them, they could pra∣ctice them with equal success: But as a correct Play is not so much understood, or at least regarded by the generality of Spectators; and that few of our Poets now-a-days write so much for Honour as Pro∣fit: they are therefore content to please at an easier rate. But would some great Man appear here in the defence of Poetry, and for the support of good Poets, as the great Cardinal Richlieu, that Noble Patron of Arts and Sciences, did in France; I doubt not but we should find several Authors, who would quickly evince, that neither the Writings of Aristotle, or the practice of those admirable Rules laid down by that Father of Criticism, and his best Commentator, Horace; with the rest of those eminent Men, that have written on the Art of the Stage, are unknown to them. But in the mean time, would our Nobility and Gentry, who de∣light in Plays, but allow themselves so much time as to read over what is extant on this Subject in English, as, Ben. Johnson's Dis∣coveries;
Roscommon's Translation of Horace's Art of Poetry; Ra∣pin's Reflections on Aristotle's Treatise of Poetry; Longinus of the loftiness of Speech; Boyleau's Art of Poetry; Hedelin's Art of the Stage; Euremont's Essays; Rimer's Tragedies of the last Age con∣sidered; Dryden's Drammatick Essay; and several others; though they understood none but their native Language, and consequently could not read what Vossius, Heinsius, Scaliger, Plutarch, Athe∣naeus, Titius Giraldus, Castelvetro, Lope de Vega, Corneille, Menardiere, and others which have written to the same purpose in several Languages; yet those which are to be met with in English, are sufficient to inform them, both in the excellency of the Poetick Art, and the Rules which Poets follow, with the Reasons of them: They would then find their Pleasure encrease with their Knowledge; and they would have the greater satisfaction in seeing a correct Play, by how much they were capable (by the help of these Rules) to discern the Beauties of it; and the greater value for a good Poet, by how much they were sensible of the Pains and Study requisite to bring such a Poem to perfection. This would advance the fame of good Poets, and procure them Patrons amongst the Nobility and Gentry, and through their Emulation to exceed each other, Poetry might in a few Tears be advanced to the same Perfection that it was in former∣ly, at Rome and Athens. GERARD LANGBAINE.
ERRATA. BY reason of my great distance from the Press, several considerable Errata's are to be met with throughout; but the most material are these which follow: Which the Reader is desired to Pardon and Correct. In the Catalogue it self. PAge 6. The Wits is left out, a Play of Sir W. Davenant. p. 10. Courageous Turk, &c. for 4o read 8o p. 11. Play of Love, &c. dele 4o, for I never saw but the first Play. p. 13. for Hymenes read Hymenaei. p. 16 for Antiqua∣rary read Antiquary. p. 17. Heyre for 8o read 4o. p. 25. for Loyal Brother read Revengers Tragedy. In the Notes. PAge 7. and so throughout, for in vitam read in vitâ, and in vitas read in vitis. p. 9. Note (c) for Procopis read Procopii. p. 10. N. (n) add the Line of the next Page, viz. Plot from Guiciardine's History of Italy, p. 11. dele and from Poetical History, ibid. to N. (*) instead of what is Printed, read, These three Plays are Translated from Seneca, and Printed with the rest, Lond. 1581. p. 13. N. (b) for Book the Ninth, Satyr the first Part, read, Book the First, Satyr 9. p. 17. N. (d) for du Bec, read du Bec. p. 18. N. (†) for Fourteen, read Thirteen, and for Three, read Five. p. 19. N. (l) belongs to Cambyses. p. 20. N. (h) for Mons read Monsieur. p. 21. N. (k) for Maenectrini, read Mae∣nechmi. p. 22. N. (i) for 1581, read 1653. ibid. to Triumph of Beauty, add (k) with this Note, Printed with his Poems, Lond. 1646. p. 25. N. (b) for Publish'd, read Reprinted. ibid. N. (d) for Musaee Erotoprgnion, read Musaei Erotopagnion. p. 24. N. (s) for K. read Prince. p. 25. N. (n) to Observationum, add Medicarum Volumen. p. 27. N. (d) for Poem, read Play. ibid. N. (g) belongs to French Conjurer, and N. (h) to Witty Combat. p. 28. N. (h) belongs to Thornby-Abby: N. (i) to Marriage Broker, and the last Line to Menechmus. p. 31. N. (r) belongs to Rivals.
A Catalogue of Plays. WITH THEIR Known or Supposed AUTHORS, &c. Will. Alexander, Lord Sterline. These of the Lord Sterline are all Bound with his Works (in Folio) called, Re∣creations with the Muses. Printed at London, 1637. Plot from Justin's Hist. Lib. 14. Alexandrian Trag. Tr. Fol. Plot from Herodotus, Lib. 1. Plutarch in Solon's Life. Croesus T. Fol. Plot from Justin's Hist. Lib. 11. Darius T. Fol. Plot from Suetonius and Plutarch. Julius Caesar T. Fol. Robert Armin. Maids of Moorclack H. Barnaby Barnes. Plot from Guiciardine's Hist. of Italy. Devil's Charter. T. 4o. Samuel Brandon. Plot from Plutarch's Lives. Virtuous Octavia T. C. 8o. Henry Burkhead. Colas Fury, or Lyrindas Misery. T. 4o Robert Baron. These two of R. Baron are mentioned in former Catalogues, but are part of a Romance writ by him, and called the Cy∣prian Academy. Printed at London, 1647. Gripus & Hegio P. 8o Deorum Dona M. 8o Plot from Herbert's Travels, Fol. Mirza T. 8o Anthony Brewer. Country Girle Com. 4o From an old English Chronicle, Fol. Love-sick King T. C. 4o Nicholas Breton. Old mans Lesson, and Young mans Love I. 4o Dabridgecourt Belchier. See me, and see me not C. 4o
Francis Beaumont. Vide Fletcher. Richard Bernard. Terences Comedies, viz. Andraea. 4o. Adelphi. 4o. Evnuchus. 4o. Heautontimorumenos. 4o. Hecyra. 4o. Phormio. 4o. Lodow. Barrey. Ram-Alley, or Merry Tricks. C. 4o Richard Brome. These five of Richard Brome, are Printed in one Volume, Octavo, London, 1635. Court Beggar C. 8o. City Wit C. 8o. Damoyselle C. 8o. Mad couple well matcht. 8o. Novella C. 8o. These five of Brome, are Printed in another Volume in Octavo, London, 1659. Covent Garden weeded. C. 8o English Moor C. 8o Love-sick Court C. 8o New Exchange C. 8o Queen and Concubine C. 8o Antipodes C. 4o Reprinted, Lond. 1686. Jovial Crew C. 4o Lately Reprinted. Northern Lass C. 4o Queens Exchange C. 4o Sparagus Garden C. 4o Alexander Brome. Cunning Lover C. 4o Fulk, Lord Brook. These two of the Lord Brook's are Printed with his Poetical Works in Folio. London, 1633. Alaham T. Fo. Plot from the Turkish Chronicle. Mustapha T. Fo. Abraham Baily. Spightful Sister C. 4o Mrs. Frances Boothby. Marcelia T. C. 4o John Bancroft. Sertorius T. 4o Mrs. Astraea Behn. Amorous Prince T. C. 4o This is a Play of Christopher Marlo's, call'd Lusts Dominion, Printed in Octa∣vo, London, 1661. Abdellazar, or the Moors. Revenge T. 4o Part of the City Heiress, from a Play of Middleton's, call'd, A Mad World my Masters, Quarto; and part from a∣nother of Massenger's, called, The Guar∣dian, Octavo. City Heiress C. 4o
Plot from Don Fenise, Octavo. Dutch Lover C. 4o Stollen from Harlequin, Emperur dans le Monde de la Lune. Emperour of the Moon F. 4o Forc'd Marriage T. C. 4o False Count C. 4o Feign'd Courtezans C. 4o Lucky Chance C. 4o Taken from Tho. Killegrew's Don Thomaso, or The Wanderer, Folio. Rover, two Parts C. 4o A Play of John Tateham's, called, The Rump, altered, Quarto. Roundheads C. 4o Part of this Play taken from Richard Brome's Damoyselle, Octa. and Le malade imaginaire. Sir Patient Fancy C. 4o A great part of this Play borrowed from a Play, called, The Miseries of forc'd Marriage, Written by George Wilkins, Quarto. Town-Fopp, or Sir Ti∣mothy Tawdry C. 4o Plot from Alcamenes and Menalippa, in Cleopatra, Folio. Young King T. C. 4o Capt. William Bedloe. Excommunicated Prince. T.C. Fo. John Banks. Plot from the old Story so called. Destruction of Troy T. 4o Plot from Cassandra, Folio. Rival Kings T. 4o Plot from E. of Essex and Q. E. a Nov. Unhappy Favourite-Essex T. 4o Plot from Causin's Holy Court, Folio. Mary; Queen of Scotland T. 4o Plot Q. Eliz. Novel, first Part 8o. Virtue Betray'd-An. Bullen. T. 4o George Chapman. All Fools C. 4o Plot from Chron. de Rebus Germanicis. Alphonsus, Emperor of Germany T. 4o Blind Beggar of Alexandria C. 4o Plot from the French Chron. Hen. 3. Bussy D' Amboys T. 4o —His Revenge T. 4o Plot from the French Chronicles. Byron's Conspiracy T. 4o —His Tragedy T. 4o Plot from Lucan's Pharsalia, Suetoni∣us, in the Life of Julius Caesar. Caesar and Pompey T. 4o Gentleman Usher C. 4o Humorous Days Mirth C. 4o May Day C. 4o Monsieur D' Olive C. 4o Masque of the Middle Temple. M. 4o Revenge for Honour T. 4o Temple M. 4o Two Wise Men, and all the rest Fools C. 4o Plot from Petronius Arbyter. Widows Tears C. 4o Written by Chapman, Johnson, and Marston. Eastward Hoe C. 4o Robert Cox. Plot from Ovid's Metamorph. Actaeon and Diana I. 4o John Cook. Green's Tu Quoque C. 4o
Edward Cook. Plot from Cassandra, Fol. Loves Triumph T. C. 4o Thomas Carew, and Inigo Jones. Printed with Carew's Poems. Lon∣don, 1670. Coelum Britannicum M. 8o Lady Eliz. Carew. Plot from Josephus, Folio. Mariam T. 4o Robert Chamberlain. Swaggering Damoyselle C. 4o William Chamberlain. Loves Victory C. 4o The first of Carlell's Plays, (viz.) in two Parts, Bound in one Volume, Twelves. The three next Printed in another Volume, Octavo. London, 1657. And the next in Octavo. Printed 1659. Lodowick Carlell. Arviragus and Philicia, two Parts T. C. 12o Fool would be a Favourite T.C. 8o Deserving Favourite T. C. 8o Plot from Knolls's Turkish History, in the Reign of Mahomet the First. Osmond the Great Turk. T. 8o Passionate Lovers, two Parts. T.C. 8o From Corneille. Heraclius Emperour of the East T. 4o Abraham Cowley. This Play is the Guardian, Corrected and Enlarged. Cutter of Coleman street C. 4o Guardian C. 4o Bound with his Second Volume, Folio, London, 1681. Loves Riddle P. Fol. All Printed with his Poems, Lon. 1651. William Carthwright. Lady Errant T. C. 8o Ordinary C. 8o Royal Slave T. C. 8o Occasion in Plutarch's Life of Cymon, and Part from Boccaces Novels, the Ninth Day, Novel the First. Siege T. C. 8o All Printed with his Poems. Lon. 1669. Sir Aston Cockain. Obstinate Lady C. 8o Plot from his Elegies. Ovid T. 8o Plot from Trapolen creduto Principe. Trappolin suppos'd a Prince. T.C. 8o Richard Carpenter. Pragmatical Jesuit C. 4o Charles Cotton. From Corneille. Horrace T. 4o
John Corey. Part of this Play is borrowed from Sir William Dower's Noble Ingratitude. Generous Enemies C. 4o John Crown. Translated from the French. Andromache T. 4o Ambitious States-man T. 4o City Politiques C. 4o Part from Molliere's Le Sicilien. Country Wit C. 4o Plot from Guiciardine's Hist. and the French Chron. in the Reign of Charles 8. Charles the Eighth T. 4o The Foundation from Ovidil Metam. Lib. 2. Calisto M. 4o Plot from Josephus's Hist. Book 6. 7. Destruct. of Jerusal. 2 pts. T. 4o From English Chronicles, and part of the Language, from Shakespear. Henry the sixth T. 4o — The second Part, or the Miseries of Civil War T. 4o Juliana, Princess of Poland. T.C. 4o Plot, and part of the Play from a Spanish Play, called No Puedeser. Sir Courtly Nice C. 4o Plot from Poetical History. Thiestes T. 4o John Day. Blind Beggar of Bednal Green. C. 4o Humour out of Breath C. Plot from Sir Phil. Sidney's Arcadia. Isle of Gulls C. 4o Law Tricks C. 4o Parliament of Bees M. 4o Writ by him, Rowly, and Wilkins. Travels of three English Brothers H. 4o Robert Dawbourn. Christian turn'd Turk T. 4o Poor Mans Comfort C. 4o All Printed in one Volume, London, 1623. Samuel Daniel. Plot from Appian of Alexandria. Cleopatra T. 4o Hymens Triumph P. 4o Plot from Plutarch's Life of Alexan∣der, and Quintus Curtius, Book the 6th. Philotas T. 4o Queens Arcadia P. 4o Vision of the twelve Goddesses. M. 4o Robert Davenport. Plot from Don Quixot's Novel, of the Curious Impertinent, and Boccaces No∣vels, Day the 7th, Novel 7th. City Night-Cap C. 4o English Chronicle. John and Matilda T. 4o Thomas Decker. Fortunatus C. 4o Honest Whore, two Parts C. 4o If this be'nt a good Play, the Devil's in't C. 4o Match me in London C. 4o Writ by him and Webster. Northward Hoe C. 4o Westward Hoe H. 4o Wyat's History H. 4o
Untrussing of the Humorous Poet C. 4o Whore of Babylon C. 4o Wonder of a Kingdom C. 4o Writ by him, Rowly, and Ford. Witch of Edmonton T. 4o All, except the last, Printed with his Works, in Folio. Lond. 1673. The last writ by him, and Inigo Jones, the late King's Surveyor. Sir Will. D'Avenant. Plot from Heylin's Cosmographie, Book the First. Chronicle of Italy. Albovine T. Fol. Cruel Brother T. Fol. Distresses C. Fol. Fair Favourite T. C. Fol. Just Italian T. C. Fol. Love and Honour T. C. Fol. From Measure for Measure, and Much adoe about Nothing. Law against Lovers T. C. Fol. From Mollieres's Joddelet  le Mai∣tre valet. Man's the Master C. Fol. Platonick Lovers C. Fol. Part from Mollieres Sganarelle. Play-House to be Lett C. Fol. Siege T. C. Fol. Siege of Rhodes, two Parts. T.C. Fo. Temple of Love M. Fol. Triumph of the Prince D'Amour M. Fol. Unfortunate Lovers T. Fol. Not his, but Carew's, and Printed with his Poems, Octavo. Coelum Britannicum. M. Fol. News from Plymouth C. Fol. Britannia Triumphans M. 4o Dr. Charles D'Avenant. Circe O. 4o Tho. Denham. Plot from Herbert's Travels, Life of Abbas. Printed with his Poems. London, 1670. Sophy T. 8o John Dancer. Translated from the Italian of Tasso, and Printed with Dancer's Poems, Lon∣don, 1660. Aminta P. 8o Translated from Monsieur Quinault. Agrippa King of Alba. T.C. 4o Translated from Corneille. Nicomede T.C. 4o John Dryden. Sanderson's Hist. of K. James p. 577. Amboyna T. 4o Plot of the serious Part, from the An∣nals of Love: In the Story of Constance the Fair Nun. The Part of Aureleo, from Scarron's Comical Romance: In the Story of Destiny and Madam Star. Assignation C. 4o Plot from Tavernier's Voyages into In∣dia, Volume the First, Part the Second, Book the Second. —Auringzebe T.C. 4o Plutarch's Life of Marcus Antonius, and other Roman Historians. All for Love T. 4o Albion and Albanius O. Fol.
Plot, Almanzor and Almahide, from Cleopatra in the Story of Artaban: and Almahide the Romance. Ozmyn and Benzaida, from Osman and Alibech, in Ibrahim. Abdalla, Abdelmelech, Lyn∣daraxa, from Prince Ariantes, Agathir∣ses, and Elibesis, in the First Book of the Ninth Part of Cyrus. Conquest of Granada, two Parts T.C. 4o Part from Corneilles De Pit Amoreuse, part from Le-feinte Astrologue, and part from the Illustrious Bassa, a Ro∣mance.Evenings Love, or Mock-Astrologer C. 4o Plot, Heylin's Cosmography, Book the Fourth. Hen. Bonzonus rerum ab Hi∣spanis in India Occidentali gestarum, Lib. 3. Octavo. Indian Emperour T.C. 4o Kind Keeper, or Mr. Lymber∣ham C. 4o Plot, from Cleobuline, Queen of Co∣rinth, in the Second Book of the Seventh Part of Cyrus: and the Character of Ce∣ladon and Florimel, from Pisistrate and Cerinthe in Cyrus, Part Ninth, Book Third; and from the French Marquess in Ibrahim, Part Second, Book the First. Maiden Queen T.C. 4o Plot of the serious Part, and the Cha∣racters from Sesostris and Timareta in Cyrus, Part the Sixth, Book the Second: and Palamedes from the Prince of Sala∣mis, in the Story of Timantes and Par∣thenia, Part Sixth, Book First, of Cy∣rus; and from Nagaret, in the Annals of Love, Octavo. Marriage Al-a-mode C. 4o Founded on Plautus's Amphytruo. Mistaken Husband C. 4o Rival Ladies T. C. 4o Part from Molliere's L' Etourdy. Sir Martin Mar-all C. 4o Plot from Milton's Paradise lost. O∣ctavo. State of Innocence C. 4o Plot of the Comical Part from the Pil∣grim, a Novel, Twelves. Spanish Fryar T.C. 4o Originally Shakespear's. Tempest C. 4o Plot from Jul. Capitolinus in vitam Maximini. Tyrannick Love, or Royal Martyr T. 4o Part Shakespear. Troylus and Cressida T. 4o Wild Gallant C. 4o Joyn'd in these two last with Nath. Lee. From D'Avila's History of France. Duke of Guise T. 4o From Sophocles, and the Poetical Histories. Oedipus T. 4o John Dover. Roman Generals T. C. 4o Thomas Durfey. Plot from Don Fenise, Octavo. Banditti C. 4o Borrow'd from Fletcher's Sea-Voyage. Common-wealth of Women T.C. 4o Fool turn'd Critick C. 4o Fond Husband C. 4o The Foundation Shakespear's. Injured Princess T. C. 4o
Part from the Antiquary. Quarto. Madam Fickle C. 4o Siege of Memphis T. 4o Plot from Francion's Romance, Fol. Squire Old Sapp C. 4o Royallist C. 4o Part of it from the Fine Companion, Quarto. And Ploe from the Double-Cuckold, a Novel, Octavo. Sir Barnaby Whigg C. 4o From Monsieur Thomas. Trick for Trick C. 4o Virtuous Wife C. 4o Tho. Duffet. Mock-Tempest F. 4o Spanish Rogue C. 4o Sir George Etheridge. Love in a Tub C. 4o Man of Mode, or Sir Fopling Flutter C. 4o She wou'd if she cou'd C. 4o Edward Eccleston. Foundation on Sacred Writ. Noah's Flood O. 4o All Beaumont and Fletcher's Plays Printed together in one Volume, Folio, London, 1679. John Fletcher, and Francis Beaumont. Beggars Bush C. Fol. Plot from Tacitus's Annals, Book 14. Bonduca T. Fol. Plot from Harodiani Historiae. Bloody Brother, or Rollo D. of Normandy. T. Fol. Custom of the Country T. C. Fol. Altered by the Duke of Buckingham, and Printed in Quarto. Lond. 1682. The Plot from Lady Cornelia, in Exem∣plary Novels, Folio. Chances C. Fol. Captain C. Fol. Coxcomb C. Fol. Cupid's Revenge C. Fol. Coronation T. C. Fol. Double Marriage T. C. Fol. Elder Brother C. Fol. False One T. Fol. Four Plays in One T. C. Fol. Faithful Shepherdess P. Fol. Fair Maid of the Inn C. Fol. Honest Man's Fortune C. Fol. Humerous Lieutenant T. C. Fol. Lately Reprinted with Alterations, by Nat. Tate. Lond. 1687. Island Princess T. C. Fol. King and no King T. C. Fol. Knight of the Burning Pestle. C. Fol. Knight of Malta T. C. Fol. Plot from Gusman's Don Lewis de Castro, and Don Roderigo de Montalvo. Little French Lawyer C. Fol. Loyal Subject T. C. Fol. Laws of Candy C. Fol. Plot, Lysander and Calista. Lovers Progress T. C. Fol. Loves Cure C. Fol. Part of it from Johnson's New Inn, Octavo, and the Plot from Exemplary Novels, Two Damsels. Loves Pilgrimage C. Fol. Mad Lover C. Fol. Serious Plot from Gerardo, p. 350. 8o. Maid in the Mill C. Fol. Masque of Grays-Inn Gent. M. Fol. Monsieur Thomas C. Fol.
Maids Tragedy T. Fol. Noble Gentleman C. Fol. Nice Valour T. C. Fol. Night Walker C. Fol. Prophetess T. C. Fol. Pilgrim T. C. Fol. Philaster T. C. Fol. Queen of Corinth T.C. Fol. Rule a Wife, and have a Wife C. Fol. From Gerardo's Leandro. p. 214. 8o. Spanish Curate C. Fol. Sea Voyage T. C. Fol. Scornful Lady C. Fol. Plot from the French Chronicles, in the Reign of Clotaire the Second. Imper∣fect in the Folio Edition, but right in the Quarto. Thierry and Theodoret T. Fol. & 4o Two Noble Kinsmen T. C. Fol. Plot, Procopis Caesariensis Historiae: Altered by the Lord Rochester. Printed Quarto, 1686. Valentinian T. Fol. & 4o Womans Prize C. Fol. Women pleas'd C. Fol. Wife for a Month C. Fol. Wit at several Weapons C. Fol. Wild-goose Chase C. Fol. Woman Hater C. Fol. Wit without Money C. Fol. Nathaniel Field. Amends for Ladies C. 4o Womans a Weather-cock C. 4o John Ford. v. Decker. Broken Heart T. 4o Fancies C. 4o Lovers Melancholy T. 4o Loves Sacrifice T. 4o Ladies Tryal T. 4o Plot from Gainsford's History, 4o. Perkin Warbeck H. 4o Pity she's a Whore T. 4o Ford and Decker. Suns Darling C. 4o Thomas Ford. Printed with his Works, Octavo. Lon∣don, 1661. Loves Labyrinth T. C. 4o Abraham Fraunce. Countess of Pembroke's Ivy Church, 2 Parts P. 4o Richard Flecknoe. Borrowed from Molliere's Preceeuses Redicules. Octavo. Damoyselles a-la-mode C. 8o Erminia T. C. 8o These two almost the same. Loves Kingdom T. C. 8o Loves Dominion P. 8o Marriage of Oceanus and Britannia M. Ʋlpian Fulwell. Like will to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier C. 4o J. Fountain. Reward of Virtue C. 4o
Sir Ralph Freeman. Imperiale T. 4o Lord Viscount Faulkland. Marriage Night T. 4o Sir Richard Fanshaw. Translated from Guarini's Italian, and Printed with his Poems, London, 8o. Pastor Fido P. 8o Sir Francis Fane, Jun. Plot from the Invisible Mistress, in Scarron's Novels, 8o. Love in the Dark T. C. 4o Sacrifice T. 4o Henry Glapthorn. Albertus Wallenstine T. 4o Plot from Sir Philip Sidney's Arca∣dia, Folio. Argalus and Parthenia P. 4o Hollander C. 4o Ladies Priviledge C. 4o Wit in a Constable C. 4o Tho. Goff. Careless Shepherdess. P. 4o Plot from the Turkish History. Selimus T. 4o Printed in one Volume. Plot from the same. Courageous Turk. T. 4o From Euripides. Orestes. T. 4o Plot from the Turkish History. Raging Turk. T. 4o Robert Green. Plot from the English Chronicle. Fryer Bacon C. 4o Plot, Story of Jonas in the Holy Scri∣pture. Looking-glass for London H. 4o George Gerbyer. False Favourite disgrac'd T. C. 8o † George Gascoign. Glass of Government T. C. 4o From Euripides. Jocasta T. 4o From Ariosto. Supposes C. 4o Pleasure at Kenelworth-Ca∣stle. M. Francis Gouldsmith. From Hugo Grotius's Sophompaneas, Latin. Joseph T. C. 8o Robert Gomersall. Printed with his Poems, Lond. 1633. Sforza Duke of Millain T. 8o Alexander Green. Politician Cheated C. 4o
John Heywood. Four P P. I. 4o Play of Love I. 4o Play of the Weather I. 4o Play between John the Hus∣band, and Tib his Wife. I. 4o Play between the Pardoner, Fryar, Gurate, and Neigh∣bour Pratt. I. 4o Play of Gentileness and Nobi∣lity, 2 Parts. I. 4o Plot from Guiciardine's History of Italy, Folio, and from Poetical History. Jasper Heywood. Hercules Furiens T. 4o Thyestes T. 4o Troas T. 4o Tho. Heywood, vide Ford. These are usually Bound together. Plot from Poetical History. Golden Age H. 4o Silver Age H. 4o Brazen Age C. 4o Plot from Virgil's Aeneids, Second Book, and Homer's Iliads. Iron Age, 2 Parts H. 4o Challenge for Beauty C. 4o Plot from English Chronicle, and Clark's Martyrology. Dutchess of Suffolk H. 4o English Traveller C. 4o Edward the Fourth, 2 Parts H. 4o Plot from English Chronicle. Elizabeth's Troubles, 2 Pts. H. 4o Plot, English Lovers, 8o. Fair Maid of the West, Two Parts. C. 4o Four London-Prentices H. 4o Fair Maid of the Exchange C. 4o By him and Rowley. Fortune by Land and Sea. H. 4o By him and Brome. Lancashire Witches C. 4o Plot from Apuleius's Golden Ass, 4o. Loves Mistress M. 4o Maidenhead well lost C. 4o Plot from Titus Livius. Rape of Lucrece T. 4o Plot, Stow and Speed's Chronicle. Robert Earl of Hun∣tingdon's Downfall. H. 4o —His Death T. 4o Woman kill'd with Kindness C. 4o Wise Woman of Hogsden C. 4o William Habington. Queen of Arragon Folio. Charles Hool. Castrated Latin, English. Terrences Comedies C. 8o Peter Hausted. Rival Friends C. 4o Barton Holiday. Marriage of the Arts C. 4o
William Hemings. Plot, French Chronicles. Fatal Contract T. 4o Plot from Josephus's History of the Jews, Book Sixth and Seventh. Jews Tragedy T. 4o Richard Head. Hic & ubique C. 4o The four first of Sir Robert Howard's Plays, are usually Bound together. Sir Robert Howard. Indian Queen T. Fol. Committee C. Fol. Surprisal T. C. Fol. Vestal Virgins T. C. Fol. Printed with his Poems in 8o. Blind Lady C. 8o Duke of Lerma T. 4o James Howard. All Mistaken, or the Mad Couple. C. 4o English Monsieur C. 4o Edward Howard. Man of Newmarket C. 4o Six Days Adventure C. 4o Usurper T. 4o Womans Conquest T. C. 4o James Howel. Translated from the French. Peleus and Thetis M. 4o All Ben. Johnson's except the four last, are Printed with other Poems in two Volumes, Folio, London, 1640. Benj. Johnson. Alchymist C. Fol. Bartholemew-Fair. C. Fol. Christmas's Masque M. Fol. Cloridia M. Fol. Cynthia's Revels C. Fol. Challenge at Tilt M. Fol. Plot from Salust's History. Cataline's Conspiracy T. Fol. Devil's an Ass C. Fol. Every Man in his Humour C. Fo. Every Man out of his Hu∣mour. C. Fo. From several Authours quoted in the Margin throughout. Entertainment at K. James's Coronation. E. Fol. Entertainments of the Q. and Prince, at Althrop. E. Fol. Entertainments of the King of England, and the King of Denmark, at Theo∣balds. F. Fol. Entertainment of K. James, and Q. Ann, at Theobalds. F. Fol. Entertainment of the King and Queen, on May Day, at Sir Wil. Cornwallis's House, at High-gate. E. Fol. Fortunate Isles M. Fol. Fox C. Fol. Golden Age restored M. Fol. Honour of Wales M. Fol.
All marked with this * are in the first Volume, and Quotations are Cited by the Authour in the Margin throughout. Hymenes M. Fol. Irish Masque M. Fol. King's Entertainment at Welbeck. M. Fol. Loves Triumph M. Fol. Love's Welcome M. Fol. Love Restored M. Fol. Magnetick Lady C. Fol. Masque of Auguurs M. Fol. Masque at the Lord Hayes's House. M. Fol. Masque at the Lord Had∣dington's Marriage. M. Fol. Masque of Owls M. Fol. All marked with this * are in the first Volume, and Quotations are Cited by the Authour in the Margin throughout. Masque of Queens M. Fol. Mercury Vindicated M. Fol. Metamorphosed Gipsies M. Fol. An Imperfect Piece just begun. Mortimer's Fall T. Fol. News from the New World in the Moon. M. Fol. Neptune's Triumph M. Fol. All marked with this * are in the first Volume, and Quotations are Cited by the Authour in the Margin throughout. Oberon the Fairy-Queen M. Fol. Pleasure reconciled to Virtue M. Fol. Pan's Anniversary M. Fol. From Ovid's Elegies; and from Hor∣race's Satyrs, Book the Ninth, Satyr the first Part. Poetaster C. Fol. All marked with this * are in the first Volume, and Quotations are Cited by the Authour in the Margin throughout. Queen's Masque of Black∣ness. M. Fol. All marked with this * are in the first Volume, and Quotations are Cited by the Authour in the Margin throughout. —Her Masque of Beauty M. Fol. Speeches at Pr. H. Barriers M. Fol. Staple of News C. Fol. Borrowed part of it from Ovid de Ar∣te Amandi, and Juvenal's Sixth Satyr. Silent Woman C. Fol. This Play left Imperfect. Sad Shepherd T. Fol. Plot, Tacitus, Suetonius, Seneca, &c. There is an Edition of this Play, 4o, Print∣ed Lond. 1605, by the Authour's own Or∣ders, with all the Quotations from whence he borrowed any thing of his Play. Sejanus T. Fol. Tale of a Tub C. Fol. Time Vindicated M. Fol. Vision of Delight M. Fol. Case is altered C. 4o New-Inn C. 4o Joyn'd in this with Chapman. Eastward Hoe C. 4o Joyn'd in this with Fletcher and Mid∣dleton. Widow C. 4o John Jones. Adrasta C. 4o Tho. Ingeland. Disobedient Child I. 4o Tho. Jordain. Fancies Festivals M. 4o Mony's an Ass C. 4o Walks of Islington and Hogs∣den C. 4o William Joyner. Plot, Zosimi Historiae. Roman Empress T. 4o
Tho. Jevorn. Devil of a Wife F. 4o Tho. Kyd. Translated from the French of Robert Garnier. Cornelia T. 4o Tho. Kirk. Plot, History of the Seven Champions of Christendom. Seven Champions of Christendom. H. 4o Ralph Knevet. Rhodon & Iris P. 4o All Printed in one Volume Folio, Oxon. 1666. Sir William Killegrew. Ormasdes T.C. Fol. Pandora T. C. Fol. Selindra T. C. Fol. Siege of Urbin T.C. Fol. Henry Killegrew. These two in a manner the same. Conspiracy T. 4o Pallantus and Eudora T. Fol. These all Printed in one Volume, Folio, London, 1664. Tho. Killegrew. Bellamira her Dream, 2 Parts. T. Fol. Claracilla T.C. Fol. Cicilia and Clorinda, 2 Parts. T.C. Fol. Parsons Wedding C. Fol. Prisoners T.C. Fol. Princess T.C. Fol. Pilgrim T. Fol. Thomaso, or the Wander∣er, 2 Parts. C. Fol. The first Six Printed together in Octavo London, 1632. John Lilly. Plot, Pliny's Natural History, Lib. 35. Cap. 10. Alexander and Campaspe C. 8o Plot, Lucian's Dialogue between Ve∣nus and the Moon. Endimion C. 8o Galathaea C. 8o Plot, Ovid's Metamorph. Lib. 11. Mydas C. 8o Mother Bomby C. 8o Plot, Ovidii Epistolae. Sapho and Phaon C. 8o Loves Metamorphosis C. 4o Maids Metamorphosis C. 4o Woman in the Moon C. 4o The three first of Sir Wil. Lower's Plays, Printed together in 12o London, 1661. Sir William Lower. Amorous Phantasm P. 12o
Enchanted Lovers P. 12o From the French. Noble Ingratitude T.C. 12o From Corneille. Horatius T. 4o From Corneille's Polyeucte. Martyr T. 4o Tho. Lupon. All for Mony T. 4o Tho. Lodge. Plot from Plutarch in Vitas C. Marii & Syllae. Marius and Scylla T. 4o By him and Green. Looking-glass for London H.4o John Lacey. Plot and Language from Molliere's Le Medicine Malyre luy. Dumb Lady C. 4o Old Troop C. 4o Sir Hercules Buffoon C. 4o Nat. Lee, v. Dryden. Plot from Matchiavel. Caesar Borgia T. 4o Plot, Eusebius de vitâ Constantini. Constantine the Great T. 4o Plot from Cleopatra. Gloriana T. 4o Plot, Clelia, and Livy's History. Lucius Junius Brutus T. 4o Plot, Historical Dictionary, Appian, Alexand. Romanae, Historiae. Mithridates T. 4o Plot from Suetonius, in Vitam Ne∣ronis. Nero T. 4o Plot, Quintus Curtius. Rival Queens T. 4o Plot, Sir Walter Rawleigh's Histo∣ry of the World, Book 5th, Chap. 3d. Sect. 18th. Sophonisba T. 4o Plot from Pharamond, Book 3d. Part 3d. Page 282, and Eusebii Histor. Ec∣clesiastica. Theodosius T. 4o J. Leanard. Taken from a Play called The Coun∣try Girl. C. 4o. Country Innocence C. 4o Part from More Dissemblers besides Women. C. 4o. Rambling Justice C. 4o Tho. Middleton, v. Fletcher. Any thing for a quiet Life C. 4o Blurt Mr Constable C. 4o Chast Maid in Cheapside C. 4o Family of Love C. 4o Game at Chess C. 4o Inner-Temple Masque M. 4o Mad World my Masters C. 4o Plot frrom Ranulph. Cestrensis Poly∣chronicon. Mayor of Quinborough C. 4o Michaelmas-Term C. 4o Phoenix C. 4o Roaring Girl C. 4o Trick to catch the old one C. 4o Triumphs of Love and An∣tiquity. M. 4o
World toss'd at Tennis M. 4o Your Five Gallants C. 4o These three in one Volume, 8o, Lon. 1657. More Dissemblers be∣sides Women C. 8o Plot from Hippolito and Isabella, a No∣vel, 8o. Women beware Women T. 8o No Wit Help like a Womans C. 8o These four were Writ by Middleton and Rowley. Plot from God's Revenge against Mur∣ther, in Alsemero and Beatrice Joanna, Folio. Changeling T. 4o Plot from Complaisant Companion, 8o, Page 280. Fair Quarrel T. C. 4o Old Law C. 4o Plot, Cervantes's Exemplary No∣vels, Folio. Force of Blood. Spanish Gipsies C. 4o Philip Massenger. Bondman C. 4o City Madam C. 4o Duke of Millain T. 4o Plot, Eusebii Hist. Emperour of the East T. C. 4o Fatal Dowry T. 4o Great Duke of Florence C. 4o Maid of Honour C. 4o New way to Pay old Debts C. 4o Plot from Fortunate, Deceiv'd, and Unfortunate Lovers, 8o: Novel the 4th of the Deceived Lovers. Picture C. 4o Roman Actor T. 4o Renegado C. 4o Unnatural Combat T. 4o Plot, Eusebii Hist. Lib. 8. Cap. 17. Virgin Martyr T. 4o These three are Printed in one Volume, 8o. Lond. 1655. Bashful Lady C. 8o Plot from the Cimmerian Matron, 8o. Guardian C. 8o Very Woman T. 8o All except the two last are in one Volume, 8o. Lond. 1633. John Marston. Antonio & Mellida, 2 Parts T. 8o Plot from Palace of Pleasure, the last Novel. Dutch Courtezan C. 8o Fawn C. 8o Plot from Sir Walter Raleigh's Hi∣story, and Livy's History. Sophonisba T. 8o What you will C. 8o Plot from Montius's History of Naples, in The Life of Joan Queen of Naples. Insatiate Countess T. 4o Male-Content T.C. 4o Shakerly Marmion. Antiquarary C. 4o Fine Companion C. 4o Holland's Leaguer C. 4o Christopher Marloe. Plot, Camerarii Opera Subsc. Cent. 1. Cap. 70. Dr. Faustus T. 4o
Writ by him and Nash, Plot, Virgil's Aeneids, Book 4. Dido Q. of Carthage T. 4o Plot, English Chronicles. Edward the 2d T. 4o Jew of Malta T.C. 4o Lusts Dominion T. 8o Plot, French Chronicles. Massacree at Paris T. 8o Plot, Jean du Bee L' Histoire de Tamerlane, 8o, and his Life in English, 8o. Tamberlain the Great, two Parts T. 8o Thomas May. These two Printed together, 8o, London, 1639. Plot, Taciti Annales, Lib. 12. Agrippina T. 8o Plot, Plutarchus in vitam, M. Antonii. Cleopatra T. 8o Plot from Sophocles. Antigone T. 8o Heyre T.C. 8o Old Couple T. 4o Tho. Meriton. Love and War T. 4o Wandring Lover T. C. 4o Lewis Machin. Dumb Knight C. 4o Cosmo Manuch. Just General T. 4o Loyal Lovers T. C. 4o Gervase Markham. Writ by him and Sampson. Plot from Josephus's History, Book 17. Herod and Antipater T. 4o J. Milton. Sampson Agonestes T. 8o John Mason. Mulcasses the Turk T. 4o Walter Montague. Shepherds Paradice P. 8o Robert Mead. Combat of Love and Friend∣ship C. 4o Jasper Main. These two Printed together, and may be had either in 4o or 8o. Amorous War C. 4o & 8o City Match C. 4o & 8o Mathew Medbourn. Translated from Molliere. Tartuff C. 4o L. Maidwel. Loving Enemies C. 4o
Thomas Nabbs. Bride C. 4o Covent-Garden C. 4o Entertainment on the Prince's Birth-Day F. 4o Plot from Corn. Nepos in vitam An∣nibalis. Hannibal and Scipio T. 4o Microcosmus M. 4o Springs Glory M. 4o Tottenham Court C. 4o Unfortunate Mother T. 4o Tho. Nash, v. Marloe. Summers last Will and Testa∣ment C. 4o Tho Norton, and Sackvile. Plot from Old Brittish Chronicles. Ferex & Porex, or Gorboduc T. 4o Thomas Nuce. Translated from Seneca's Tragedies. Octavia T. 4o Tho. Newton. Translated from the same. Thebais T. 4o Alex. Nevile. Translated from the same. Oedipus T. 4o Robert Nevile. Poor Schollar C. 4o Duke of Newcastle. Humerous Lovers C. 4o Triumphant Widow C. 4o The first Fourteen of her Plays, are Print∣ed together in one Volume, Folio. The o∣ther Three are in another Volume, with o∣ther Scenes, Printed London 1668. Dutchess of Newcastle. Apocryphal Ladies C. Fol. Bell in Campo, 2 Parts C. Fol. Female Academy C. Fol. Loves Adventures, 2 Parts C. Fol. Lady Contemplation, 2 Parts C. Fol. Matrimonial Trouble, 2 Parts C. Fol. Natures 3 Daughters, 2 Pts. C. Fol. Publick Woing C. Fol. Religions C. Fol. Several Wits C. Fol. Unnatural Tragedy T. Fol. Wits Cabal, 2 Parts C. Fol. Youth's Glory, and Death's Banquet C. Fol. Blazing World C. Fol. Bridals C. Fol. Covent of Pleasure C. Fol. Presence C. Fol. Sociable Companions C. Fol.
Earl of Orrery. Plot, English Chronicle in K. Edward the Third. Black Prince H. Fol. Tryphon T. Fol. Plot, Turkish Chronicles. Mustapha T. Fol. Plot, English Chronicles. Henry the Fifth H. Fol. Tho. Otway. Athiest, or the Second Part of the Soldiers Fortune C. 4o Plot from Plutarch, and Corn. Nepos both in the Life of Alcibiades. Alcibiades T. 4o Plot from Ravenscroft's Scaramouch. Cheats of Seapin F. 4o Stollen part from Shakespear's Romeo & Juliet, Plot from Plutarch, in his Life of C. Marius, and Lucan's Pharsalia, Book 2d. Caius Marius T. 4o Plot from the Novel so called, 12o. Don Carlos T. 4o Friendship in Fashion C. 4o Plot, English Adventures, a Novel, 8o. Orphan T. 4o Soldiers Fortune C. 4o From Monsieur Racine. Titus and Berenice T. 4o Venice preserv'd T. 4o George Peele. Plot from Holy Scripture. David and Bethshabe T. C. 4o From English Chronicles. Edward the First H. 4o Henry Porter. Two angry Women of A∣bingdon C. 4o Tho. Porter. Carnival C. 4o Villain T. 4o Lady Pembrock. Antonius T. 4o Tho. Preston. Cambyses King of Persia T. C. 4o Edward Prestwick. Hectors C. 4o Plot Justin. Hist. Lib. 1. Cap. 9. Hippolitus T. 8o Mrs. Katherine Phillips. Plot from Livy, Translated from Corneille. Horrace T. Fol. Plot from Lucan's Pharsalia, Transla∣ted from Corneille. Pompey T. Fol. Samuel Pordage. Plot from Joseph. Hist. and Cleopa∣tra a Romance, in the Story of Tyridates. Herod and Meriamne T. 4o Plot from Cassandra, a Romance, Fol. Siege of Babylon T. 4o
—Peaps. Love in its Extasie P. 4o John Palsgrave. Acolastus C. 4o Francis Quarles. Virgin Widow C. 4o William Rowley, v. Webster, Middleton, Day, and Shakespear. Lipsii Monita, Lib. 1. Cap. 5. All's lost by Lust T. 4o Match at Midnight T. 4o Plot, History of the Gentle Craft. Shoemakers a Gentleman C. 4o Wonder a Woman never vex'd C. 4o Spanish Gipsies C. 4o Samuel Rowley. Plot from English Chron. Hen. 8th. &c. When you see me you know me C. 4o Joseph Rutter. Translated from Corneille. Cid, 2 Parts T. C. 8o Shepherds Holyday Nath. Richards. Plot, Suetonius, in Claudio and Ta∣citus, Lib. 11. Messalina T. 8o Tho. Rawlins. Rebellion T. 4o Tho. Randolph. These Four Printed with his Poems, 8o. Aristippus T. 8o Aminta T. C. 8o Jealous Lover T. C. 8o Muses Looking-glass P. 8o Translated from Aristophanes's Plutus. Hey for Honesty, down with Knavery C. 4o William Rider. Twins C. 4o Edward Revett. Town Shifts C. 4o Edward Ravenscroft. Borrowed part from De Molliere's Monsieur de Pourceaugnac, 8o. Careless Lovers C. 4o Translated from Molliere's Le Bour∣geois Gentlehome, & Mons de Pource∣augnac. Citizen turn'd Gentle∣man C. 4o
Translated from La Divineresse. Dame Dobson C. 4o Translated from the Latin Ignoramus. English Lawyer C. 4o Plot from English Chronicles. King Edgar and Alfreda T. 4o Plot, part from Scarron's Novels, 8o, Novel first, The Fruitless Precaution, part from Les-Contes Du-Sieur D' Ouvil∣le, 8o, 2de. pte. page 121. And part from Boccace's Novels, Day 7th, Novel 6 and 7 of the 7th Day. London Cuckolds C. 4o Part from Molliere's le Bourgeois Gentlehomme, & la Mariage Forcee, 8o. Scaramouch, &c. F. 4o Plot from Deceptio visus: or, Seeing and Believing are two Things, a Ro∣mance in 8o. Wrangling Lovers C. 4o Tho. Rymer. Plot, English Chronicles. Edgar T 4o All except the last, are Printed in one Volume, Fol. Lond. 1685.William Shakespear. Plot from Boccace's Novels, 3d. Day, 9th Novel. Juliet of Narbona. All's well that ends well C. Fol. Plot from Plutarch, in Vitam Antonii. Anthony and Cleopatra T. Fol. As you like it C. Fol. The Ground from Plautus's Ampitruo, and Maenectrini. Comedy of Errours C. Fol. Plot, Plutarchus in vitam Coriolan: and from Livy's History. Coriolanus T. Fol. Plot from English Chronicle. Cromwell's History H. Fol. Plot from Boccace's Novels, 2d. Day, Ninth Novel. Cymbeline T. Fol. Gentleman of Verona C. Fol. All so mark'd had their Plots from En∣glish Chronicles. Henry the 4th, 2 Parts H. Fol. All so mark'd had their Plots from En∣glish Chronicles. Henry the 5th H. Fol. All so mark'd had their Plots from En∣glish Chronicles. Henry the 6th 3 Parts H. Fol. All so mark'd had their Plots from En∣glish Chronicles. Henry the 8th H. Fol. Hamlet Prince of Denmark T. Fol. All so mark'd had their Plots from En∣glish Chronicles. John K. of England, 2 Pts. H. Fol. Plot, Livy's History. Julius Caesar T. Fol. All so mark'd had their Plots from En∣glish Chronicles. Lears Tragedy T. Fol. All so mark'd had their Plots from En∣glish Chronicles. Locrine's Tragedy C. Fol. London Prodigal C. Fol. Love's Labour lost C. Fol. Merry Wives of Windsor C. Fol. Measure for Measure C. Fol. Merchant of Venice T. C. Fol. Plot from Scotch Chronicles, and Heylin's Cosmography. Mackbeth T. Fol. Midsummers Nights-Dream C. Fol. Much ado about nothing C. Fol. Plot from English Chronicle. Old-Castle, Lord Cob∣ham's Life and Death T. Fol. Plot from Cynthio's Novels. Othello Moor of Venice T. Fol. Pericles Prince of Tyre H. Fol. Puritan Widow C. Fol. All so mark'd had their Plots from En∣glish Chronicles. Richard the Second H. Fol. All so mark'd had their Plots from En∣glish Chronicles. Richard the Third H. Fol. Plot from Cynthio's Novels. Romeo & Juliett T. Fol.
Taming of the Shrew C. Fol. Tempest C. Fol. Titus Andronicus T. Fol. Plot from Lucian's Dialogue. Timon of Athens T. Fol. Troylus and Cressida T. Fol. Twelfth Night C. Fol. Plot from Dorastus and Fawnia, 4o. Winter's Tale C. Fol. Yorkshire Tragedy T. Fol. Birth of Merlin P. 4o J. Studley, v. Jaspar Heywood. All Translated from Seneca's Tragedies. Agamemnon T. 4o Hippolitus T. 4o Hercules Oetus T. 4o Medea T. 4o James Shirley. Plot from Sir Philip Sidney's Arca∣dia, Folio. Arcadia P. 4o Bird in a Cage C. 4o Ball C. 4o Changes, or Love in a Maze C. 4o Plot from the French Chronicles. Chabott, Admiral of France T. 4o Constant Maid, or Love will find out the way C. 4o Cupid and Death M. 4o Contention for Honour and Riches M. 4o Duke's Mistress T. C. 4o Example T. 4o Plot from The Unlucky Citizen, 8o. Gamester C. 4o Plot, Part from Gayton's Notes on Don Quixot, Book 4th, Chap. 6th. Gentleman of Venice T.C. 4o Grateful Servant C. 4o Hyde-Park C. 4o Humerous Courtier C. 4o Loves Cruelty T. 4o Lady of Pleasure C. 4o Plot from Reynolds's God's Revenge against Murther, Folio, Book 2d. Hist. 7th. Maids Revenge T. 4o Opportunity C. 4o Politician C. 4o Patrick for Ireland H. 4o Royal Master C. 4o School of Complements C. 4o Traytor T. 4o Triumph of Peace M. 4o Wedding C. 4o Witty Fair One C. 4o Young Admiral C. 4o These Printed together in Octavo, Lon. 1658. Honoria and Mammon C. 8o Plot from Ovid's Metamorphosis, Book 13th. Contention of Ajax and Ulysses, for A∣chilles's Armour M. 8o These are Printed together in 8o, Lond. 1581. Brothers C. 8o Sisters C. 8o Doubtful Heir T. C. 8o Imposture T. C. 8o Cardinal T. C. 8o Court Secret T. C. 8o Triumph of Beauty M. 8o
Henry Shirley. Martyr'd Soldier T. 4o Edward Sherbourn. Translated from Seneca's Tragedy. Medea T. 8o Troades T. 8o —Sheppard. Committee-man Curryed C. George Sandys. Translated from Hugo Grotius. Christ's Passion T. 8o J. Swallow. Cynthia's Revenge T. 4o Edward Sharpham. Fleir C. 4o William Sampson, v. Markham. Vow Breaker T. 4o Tho. Stanley. Translated from Aristophanes, Print∣ed with his History of Philosophy, new∣ly Publish'd, Folio. Clouds Fol. William Smyth. Hector of Germany H. 4o William Strode. Floating Island C. 4o Gilbert Swinhoe. Plot from Bandello's Novels, Turkish Chronicles, Life of Mahomet the First. Fair Irene T. 4o All Printed with his Poems, 8o Lond. 1648. Sir John Suckling. Aglaura T. C. 8o Brenoralt T. 8o Goblins T. 8o Sad one T. 8o Lewis Sharp. Noble Stranger C. 4o John Smyth. Cytherea C. 4o Sir Robert Stapleton. From Ovid's Epistles, and Muses E∣rotopegnion Gr. Lat. Hero and Leander T. 4o Slighted Maid C. 4o
Tho. St. Serf. Tarugoes Wiles C. 4o Tho. Shadwel. Epsom Wells C. 4o Humorists C. 4o Lancashire Witches C. 4o Plot from Molliere's L'Athee Fou∣droye. Libertine C. 4o Plot from Molliere's L'Avaree. Miser C. 4o Plot, Apuleii Aureus Asrinus. Psiche O. 4o From Reward of Virtue, 4o. Royal Shepherdess C. 4o Plot from Molliere's Les Facheaux. Sullen Lovers C. 4o Part from Shakspear. Timon of Athens T. 4o True Widow C. 4o Virtuoso C. 4o Woman Captain C. 4o Elkanah Settle. Plot, Justin's Hist. Lib. 1. Cap. 9. Amianus Marcellinus, Lib. 23. Cambyses K. of Persia T. 4o Plot, Heylin's Cosmography, Book 3d. and Conquest of China, By Senior Palafax, Englished, 8o. Conquest of China T. 4o Empress of Morocco T. 4o Plot, Achilles Tatius's Clitophon and Leucippe, 8o Book 5th. Fatal Love T. 4o Plot from Platina, &c. Life and Death of Pope Joan, 8o. Female Prelate T. 4o Heir of Morocco T. 4o Plot from The Illustrious Bassa, Fol. Ibrahim T. 4o From Fatal Contract, 4o. Love and Revenge T. C. 4o From Fanshaw's Translation of Gua∣rini. Pastor Fido P. 4o Sir Charles Sidley. Plot, Plutarch's Life of M. Antho∣ny. Anthony and Cleopatra T. 4o The Ground from Terence's Eunu∣chus. Bellamira C. 4o Mulberry-Garden C. 4o Tho. Shipman. From the French Chronicles. Henry the 3d. of France T. 4o Charles Saunders. Plot, Asteria and Tamerlain, a No∣vel, 8o. Tamerlane the Great T. 4o Tho. Southern. Disappointment C. 4o Plot, Tachmas K. of Persia, a No∣vel, 8o. Loyal Brother T. C. 4o
Cyril Turneur. Athiests Tragedy T. 4o Loyal Brother T. C. 4o John Tateham. Distracted State T. 4o Plot from English Chronicles. Rump C. 4o Scotts Vagaries C. 4o Printed with his Poems, London, 1651. Love Crowns the end C. 8o Nich. Trott. Arthur T. Robert Taylor. Hog has lost his Pearl Tho. Thompson. English Rogue C. 4o Part of the Language from the City Madam; and Plot from a Book so called in Prose, 4o. Mother Shipton's Life and Death C. 4o Nat. Tate. Plot, Virgil's Aeneiads, Book 4th. Brutus of Alba T. 4o From Eastward Hoe. Cuckolds Haven C. 4o From Trapolin suppos'd a Prince, 8o. Duke and no Duke F. 4o Part from Shakspear's Coriolanus. Ingratitude of a Common-wealth T.C. 4o Reviv'd from Shakspear. Island Princess T.C. 4o Loyal General T. 4o Reviv'd from Shakspear. Lear and his 3 Daughters T. 4o Reviv'd from Shakspear. Richard the Second H. 4o S. Tuke. Adventures of 5 Hours C. 4o Richard Tuke. Divine Comedian C. 4o John Tutchin. Printed with his Poems, Lond. 1686. Unfortunate Shepherd P. 8o John Webster, v. Decker. Plot, Livy's History. Appius and Virginia T. 4o Part of the Plot in Schenchii Rario∣rum Observationum. Devil's Law-Case T. C. 4o Dutchess of Malsey T. 4o White Devil T. 4o By Webster and Rowley. Thracian Wonder H. 4o Cure for a Cuckold C. 4o
Lewis Wager. Mary Magdalen's Repentance I. 4o William Wayer. The longer thou liv'st the more Fool thou art C. George Wapul. Tyde tarryeth for no man C. Nat. Woods. Conflict of Conscience P. R. Weaver. Lusty Juventus I. Robert Wilson. Coblers Prophecie C. 4o John Wilson. Plot from Heylin's Cosmography in the Description of Greece. Andronicus Comenius T. 4o Cheats C. 4o Projectors C. 4o J. Weston. Plot from Strabo, Lib. 11. Quintus Curtius, Lib. 6. Amazon Queen T. C. 4o Robert Wilmot. Plot from Boccace's Novels, 1st. No∣vel, 4th Day. Tancred and Grismond T. 4o George Wilkins, v. Day. Miseries of inforc'd Marriage T.C. 4o John Wright. Both in one Volume, 8o, Lond. 1674. the former from Seneca. Thyestes T. 8o Thyestes F. 8o Leonard Willan. Plot from a Romance so called. Astraea P. 8o Edmund Waller. From Corneille. Pompey T. 4o William Wycherly. Country Wife C. 4o Gentleman Dancing Master C. 4o Love in a Wood C. 4o Plain Dealer C. 4o —Whitaker. Conspiracy T. 4o Robert Yarrington. Two Tragedies in One T. 4o
Supposed AUTHOURS. R. A. Plot from Brittish Chronicles. Valiant Welchman T.C. 4o H. B. Written by Henry Burnell. Landagartha C. 4o H. H. B. Translated from Aristophanes. Plutus C. 8o Supposed to be Peter Bellon. P. B. Mock-Duellest C. 4o J. C. Merry Milkmaids C. 4o R. C. Alphonsus K. of Arragon C. 4o Translated from the Latin Poem so called. Ignoramus C. 4o J. D. Hell's higher Court of Justice I. 4o Mall C. 4o T. D. Bloody Banquet T. 4o Ascrib'd to Tho. Dursey. Fool turn'd Critick C. 4o Said to be Writ by Tho. Duffet. Psiche Debauch'd F. 4o S. H. Sicily and Naples T. 4o B. J. Guy of Warwick T. Supposed to be Mathew Medbourn. E. M. St. Cecily, or the Converted Twins T. 4o T. P. Plot, part of it from Gusman's Fol. in the Story of Dorido and Cloridia. Witty Combat T.C. 4o Plot from the German Princess, a No∣vel, 8o. French Conjurer C. 4o Monsieur P. P. Put into Musick, by Monsieur Grabutt. Ariadne O. 4o
S. P. Supposed to be Writ by Samuel Por∣dage, being Printed with his Poems, 8o Lond. 1660. Troades T. 8o T. R. Translated from Corneille. Extravagant Shepherd P. 8o W. R. Three Lords and Ladies of Lond. C. Mr. S. Master of Arts. Gammer Gurton's Needle C. 4o J. S. Masquerade Du Cel M. Translated from the Italian of C. Gui∣dubaldo di Bonarelli. Phillis of Syros P. 8o Plot from Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia, in the Story of Plangus, p. 155. Andromana T.4o S. S. Honest Lawyer C. 4o J. T. In a Book call'd The Ternory of Plays, 8o Lond. 1662. Plot from Mat∣chiavil's Marriage of Belphegor, a No∣vel, Folio: The same is Printed with Quevedo's Novels, 8o. Grim the Collier of Croyden C. 8o Translated from Seneca. Troas T. 4o C. W. From Sophocles by Christoph. Wase. Electra T. 8o E. W. Apollo Shroving C. 8o L. W. Orgula, or the Fatal Errour T. 4o M. W. Master of Arts. In the Ternary of Plays, and Plot from English Chronicles, in the Reign of Sebert, King of the West-Saxons. Marriage Broker C. 8o T. W. In the same Ternary of Plays, and Translated from Plautus. Thornby-Abby H. 8o W. W. Menechmus C. 4o
Ʋnknown AUTHOURS. A. Abraham's Sacrifice Plot from the Tragical History of the City of Antwerp, 4o. Alarm for London H. 4o Albion I. Albion's Triumph M. 4o Albumazar C. 4o Translated from Tasso, Italian. Aminta P. 4o Amorous Gallant C. 4o Amorous old Woman C. 4o Plot from English Chronicles. Arden of Feversham T. 4o Arraignment of Paris P. B. Plot from Heylin's Cosmography, in the History of Spain. De Rebus Lusitan: By Andr. Schottum, Folio. Battle of Alcazar T. 4o Band-Ruff and Cuff I. Bastard T. 4o C. Caesar's Revenge T. Plot from English Chronicles. Charles the First T. 4o Combat of Gaps M. Commons Conditions C. Constant Nymph P. 4o Costly Whore C. 4o Plot from the Second Part of Shak∣spear's Henry 6th, Folio. Contention between York and Lancaster, 2 Parts Counterfeits C. 4o From No Wit like a Womans, By Middleton. Counterfeit Bridegroom C. 4o Bound with the Varieties, 8o. Country Captain C. 8o Cromwell's Conspiracy T. C. Cruel Debtor Cupid's Whirligig C. 4o Cyrus King of Persia T. D. Damon and Pythias H. From Brome's Mad Couple well Matcht. Debauchee C. 4o Destruction of Jerusalem Dick Scorner Plot from Holy Scripture, Jeroboam, &c. Divine Masque M. 4o Doctor Dodipol C. 4o E. Plot from English Chronicles. Edward the Third H. 4o Ascrib'd to the Lord Digby. Elvira T. C. 4o Plot from Baker, and other English Chronicles.
Said to be Writ by Tho. Duffet. Empress of Morocco F. 4o Ascrib'd to J. Carell. English Princess T. 4o Enough's as good as a Feast C. Every Woman in her Humour C. 4o F. From Guarini's Il Pastor Fido. Faithful Shepherd P. 4o Fair Em C. 4o Fair Maid of Bristol H. 4o Factious Citizen C. 4o Fatal Jealousie T. 4o Fidele and Fortunatus Translated from the French of Mon∣sieur Corneille, Junior. Feign'd Astrologer C. 8o Free-Will Ascrib'd to Rhodes. Flora's Vagaries C. 4o The same with the Amorous old Wo∣man, only a different Title. Fond Lady Fulgius and Lucrelle G. Gentile-Craft C. 4o Ghost C. 4o H. Plot from English Chronicles. Henry the Fifth, with the Battle of Agencourt H. 4o Ascrib'd to Edm. Prestwith. Hectors C. 4o Histriomastix C. 4o Hoffman T. 4o How to chuse a good Wife from a bad one C. 4o J. Jacob and Esau C. Jack Drum's Entertainment C. 4o Jack Juggler Plots from English Chronicles. Jack Straw's Life and Death H. 4o James the Fourth H. Jeronimo, 2 Parts T. 4o Impatient Poverty Ascrib'd to Sir William Killegrew, and Translated from the Latin. Imperial Tragedy T. Fol. Interlude of Youth I. 4o John the Evangelist Joseph's Afflictions Jovial Crew I. 4o K. Plots from English Chronicles. King Edgar and Alfreda H. 4o King and Queen's Entertain∣ment at Richmond M. 4o Knave in Grain C. 4o Knack how to know an honest Man Plots from English Chronicles. Knack how to know a Knave. C. 4o Knavery in all Trades C. 4o Knight of the Golden Shield H. 4o L. Lady Alimony C. 4o Laws of Nature C. Levellers levell'd I. Liberality and Prodigality C. Lingua C. 4o London Canticleers F. 4o Look about you C. 4o
Lost Lady T. C. Fol. Love A-la-mode C. Fol. Loves Loadstone C. 4o Lumenalia M. 4o From Corneille's Le Menteur. Lyer C. 4o M. Manhood and Wisdom Plot from Plutarch. in vitam Cicero∣nis. Marcus Tullius Cicero T. 4o Marriage of Wit and Science I. Masque of Flowers M. 4o Ascrib'd to J. Milton. Masque at Ludlow Castle M. 4o Plot from Giraffi's History of Naples, English'd by James Howel. Massianello T. 8o Mercurius Britannicus C. 4o Merry Devil of Edmonton C. 4o Said to be Writ by Mr. Pane. Morning Ramble C. 4o Mucedorus C. 4o Three Drolls stollen from several Plays. Muse of Newmarket F. 4o N. Plot from Suetonius. Nero's Life and Death T. 4o New Custom I. 4o New-market Fair F. 4o New Trick to cheat the Devil C. 4o Nice Wanton C. No-Body and Some-Body H. 4o O. Oldwives Tale Play from Ariosto's Poem so call'd, Fol. Englished by Sir J. Harrington. Orlando Furioso H. 4o P. Plot from Boccace's Novels, Day 10, Novel 10. Folio. Patient Grissle C. Pedler's Prophecie C. Philotus Scotch C. 4o Pinder of Wakefield C. 4o Plot from Suetonius, in Vitam Nero∣nis. Piso's Conspiracy T. 4o Presbyterian Lash T.C. Plot from Hyne's Pranks, 8o. Prince of Priggs C. 4o Promises of God manifested Promus and Cassandra, 2 Parts Q. Queen T.C. 4o R. Ascrib'd to J. Lenard. Part from Middleton's More Dissemblers besides Women, 8o. Rambling Justice C. 4 From the Fine Companion, and o∣ther Plays. Rampant Alderman F. 4o Ascrib'd to Mrs. Behn, but Borrowed all from Marston's Dutch Courtezan. Revenge C. 4o Said to be Writ by the late Duke of Buckingham. Rehearsal F. 4o By Mr. Arrowsmith. Reformation C. 4o Religious Rebel T.C. 4o Ascrib'd to Sir William D'Avenant. Return from Parnassus C. 4o
Rivals T.C. 4o Robin Conscience Robin Hood's Pastoral May-games Rob. Hood and his Crew of Soldiers Royal Masque at Hampton-Court M. 4o Plot from Livius, Lib 1: Ovidii Me∣tamorph. Lib. 14. Romulus and Hersilia T. 4o S. Salmacida Spolia M. 4o Plot from Heylin's Cosmography, Book 2d. in the Description of Greece, and Con∣stantinopolis à Mahammada, 2da. ex∣pugnata, Fol. Siege of Constantinople T. 4o Sicillides a Piscatory Drama P. 4o Sir Gyles Goosecap C. 4o Ascrib'd to John Carrel, from Corne∣ille's L'Escote des Femmes, 8o. Sir Solomon C. 4o Solimon and Perseda T. 4o Sophister C. 4o A Collection of Drolls taken from Plays, Printed in 8o Lond. 1673. Sport upon Sport.—Drolls Spanish Baud T. C. 4o Step-mother T. C. 4o Plot from Heliodorus Emissenus Ae∣thiopicorum, Lib. 10. The same is in English, 8o 1687. Strange Discovery T. C. 4o Susanna's Tears Swetnam the Woman-hater Arraigned C. 4o T. Tempe Restored M. 4o Thersytes I. Part from Molliere's Le Cocu Imagi∣narie. C. 8o. Tom Essence C. 4o Tom Tyler and his Wife I. 4o Traytor to himself I. 4o Plot from Liv. Lib. 5. Caesaris Coment. Lib. 4 & 5. Galfridus ap Ar∣thur Monumetensis. De Gestis Regum Brittanniae, Lib. 4. True Trojans H. 4o Tryal of Chivalry Tryal of Treasure That and Tom Essence ascrib'd to Mr. Rawlins. Tunbride-Wells C. 4o Tyrannical Government V. Valiant Scot T. 4o Bound with the Country Captain, 8o. Varieties C. 8o Plot from Heylin's Cosmogrophy, in the Description of Greece. Unfortunate Usurper T. 4o Ungrateful Favourite T. 4o W. Warning for Fair Women T. 4o Wealth and Health Weakest goes to the Wall C. 4o Wily beguil'd C. 4o Wine Beer Ale and Tobaco I. 4o Part of it taken from Chamberlain's Love's Victory. Wits led by the Nose C. 4o Wit of a Woman C. 4o Woman turn'd Bully C. 4o Woman will have her Will C. 4o
The Alphabetical INDEX of PLAYS, Referring to their AƲTHOƲRS, &c. A. Abdelazar Page 2 Abraham's Sacrifice Page 29 Acolastus Page 20 Actaeon and Diana Page 3 Adelphi Page 2 Adrasta Page 13 Adventures of 5 Hours Page 25 Agamemnon Page 22 Aglavra Page 23 Agrippa King of Alba Page 6 Agrippina Page 17 All for Love Page 6 All mistaken Page 12 All Fools Page 3 All for Mony Page 15 All's lost by Lust Page 20 All's well that ends well Page 21 Alaham Page 2 Alarum for London Page 29 Albion ib. Albion's Triumph ib. Albion and Albanius Page 6 Albertus Wallenstine Page 10 Albovine Page 6 Albumazar Page 29 Alcibiades Page 19 Alchimist Page 12 Alexander and Campaspe Page 14 Alexandrian Tragedy Page 1 Alphonsus K. of Arragon Page 27 Alphonsus Emp. of Germ. Page 30 Amazon Queen Page 26 Ambitious Statesman Page 4 Amboyna Page 5 Amends for Ladies Page 9 Amorous Gallant Page 29 Amorous old Woman Page 29 Amorous War Page 17 Amorous Prince Page 2 Amorous Fantasm Page 15 Amynta Page 6. 20. 29. Andraea Page 2 Andromache Page 5 Andromana Page 28 Andronicus Commenius Page 26 Anthony and Cleopatra, Page 21. 24. Antigone Page 17 Antipodes Page 2 Antiquary Page 16 Antonio and Mellida Page 16 Antonius Page 19 Any thing for a quiet Life Page 15 Appius and Virginia Page 25 Apocryphal Ladies Page 18 Apollo Shroving Page 28 Arcadia Page 22 Arden of Feversham Page 29 Argalus and Parthenia Page 10 Ariadne Page 27 Aristippus Page 20 Arraignment of Paris Page 29 Arthur Page 25 Arviragus and Philitia, two Parts Page 4 As you like it Page 21 Assignation Page 6 Astrea Page 26 Athiests Tragedy Page 25 Auringzebe Page 6 B. Ball Page 22 Band-Ruff and Cuff Page 29 Banditti Page 7 Bartholomew-Fair Page 12 Bashful Lover Bashful Lady Page 16 Bastard Page 29 Battle of Alcazar Page 29 Beggars Bush Page 8 Bell in Campo Page 18 Bellamira, her Dream Page 14 Bellamira, the Mistress Page 24 Bird in a Cage Page 22 Birth of Merlin Page 22 Black Prince Page 19 Blazing World Page 18 Blind Beggar of Alexandria Page 3 —of Bednal Green Page 5 Blind Lady Page 12 Blurt Mr. Constable Page 15 Bloody Brother, vide Rollo Page 8 Bloody Banquet Page 27 Bondman Page 16 Bonduca Page 8 Brazen Age Page 11 Brenoralt Page 23 Bridals Page 18 Bride Page 18 Britannia Triumphans Page 6 Broken Heart Page 9 Brothers Page 22 Brutus of Alba Page 25 Bussy D' Amboys's Revenge Page 3 —His Tragedy ib. Byron's Conspiracy ib. — His Tragedy ib. C. Calisto Page 5 Caius Marius's History and Fall Page 19 Cambyses K. of Persia Page 19. 24. Captain Page 8 Cardinal Page 22 Careless Lovers Page 20 Careless Shepherdess Page 10 Carnival Page 19 Case is altered Page 13 Cataline's Conspiracy Page 12 Caesar Borgia Page 15
Caesar and Pompey Page 3 Caesar's Revenge Page 29 Chabot Admiral of France Page 22 Challenge at Tilt Page 12 Challenge for Beauty Page 11 Champions of Christendom Page 14 Chances Page 8 Changes Page 22 Changling Page 16 Charles the First Page 29 Charles the 8th of France Page 5 Chast Maid in Cheapside Page 15 Cheats Page 26 Cheats of Scapin Page 19 Christmas Masque Page 12 Christ's Passion Page 23 Christian turn'd Turk Page 5 Cicilia and Clorinda Page 14 Cid Page 20 Circe Page 5 City Heiress Page 2 Citizen turn'd Gentleman Page 20 City Madam Page 16 City Match Page 17 City Night-Cap Page 5 City Politiques Page 5 City Wit Page 2 Claricilla Page 14 Cleopatra Page 5. 17 Cloridia Page 12 Clouds Page 23 Cobler's Prophecy Page 26 Caelum Britannicum Page 4. 6 Colas Fury Page 1 Combat of Caps Page 29 Combat of Love and Friend∣ship Page 17 Comedy of Errours Page 21 Commonwealth of Women Page 7 Committe-man Curried Page 23 Commons Conditions Page 29 Conflict of Conscience Page 26 Conquest of China Page 24 — of Granada Page 7 Conspiracy Page 14. 26 Constant Maid Page 22 Constant Nymph Page 29 Constantine the Great Page 15 Contention of Ajax and U∣lisses Page 22 Contention for Honour and Riches Page 22 Contention between York and Lancaster Page 29 Coriolanus Page 21 Cornelia Page 14 Coronation Page 8 Costly Whore Page 29 Covent-Garden Page 18 Covent-Garden Weeded Page 2 Covent of Pleasure Page 18 Counterfeits Page 29 Counterfeit Bridegroom Page 29 Countess of Pembrook's I∣vy-Church Page 9 Country Captain Page 29 Country Innocence Page 15 Country Girl Page 5 Country Wife Page 26 Country Wit Page 5 Couragious Turk Page 10 Court Beggar Page 2 Court Secret Page 22 Coxcomb Page 8 Cruel Brother Page 6 Custome of the Country Page 8 Cromwell's History Page 21 Cunning Lover Page 2 Cuckolds Haven Page 25 Cupid and Death Page 22 Cruel Debtor Page 29 Craesus Page 1 Cupid's Whirligig Page 29 Cupid's Revenge Page 8 Cure for a Cuckold Page 25 Cutter of Coleman-street Page 4 Cymbeline Page 21 Cynthia's Revels Page 12 Cynthia's Revenge Page 23 Cytherea Page 23 Cyrus King of Persia Page 29 D. Dame Dobson Page 21 Damoiselle Page 2 Damoiselle A-la-mode Page 9 Damon and Pythias Page 22 Darius's Tragedy Page 1 David and Bethsabe Page 19 Debaucheé Page 29 Deorum Dona Page 1 Deserving Favourite Page 4 Destruction of Jerusalem Page 29. 5 Destruction of Troy Page 3 Devil's an Ass Page 12 Devil's Charter Page 1 Devil's Law-Case Page 25 Devil of a Wife Page 14 Dick Scorner Page 29 Dido Q. of Carthage Page 17 Disappointment Page 24 Disobedient Child Page 13 Distresses Page 6 Distracted State Page 25 Divine Comedian Page 25 Divine Masque Page 29 Doctor Dodipole Page 29 Doctor Faustus Page 16 Don Carlos Prince of Spain Page 19 Double Marriage Page 8 Doubtful Heir Page 22 Duke and no Duke Page 25 Duke of Guise Page 7 Duke of Lerma Page 12 Duke of Millain Page 16 Duke's Mistress Page 22 Dumb Knight Page 17 Dumb Lady Page 15 Dutch Courtezan Page 16 Dutch Lover Page 3 Dutchess of Malfey Page 25 Dutchess of Suffolk Page 11 E. Eastward Hoe Page 3. 13 Edgar Page 21 Edward the First Page 19 Edward the Second Page 17 Edward the Third Page 29 Edward the Fourth Page 11
Elder Brother Page 8 Electra Page 28 Elizabeth's Troubles Page 11 Elvira Page 29 Emperour of the East Page 16 Emperour of the Moon Page 3 Empress of Morocco T. & F. Page 24. 30. Enchanted Lovers Page 15 Endimion Page 14 English Lawyer Page 2 English Monsieur Page 12 English Moor Page 2 English Princess Page 33 English Rogue Page 25 English Traveller Page 11 Enough's as good as a Feast Entertainment at K. James's Coronation Page 12 —of K. James, and Q. Ann, at Theobalds Page 12 —of the K. of England, and the King of Den∣mark, at Theobalds Page 12 —on the Prince's Birth-Day Page 17 —of the Q. and Prince at Althrop Page 12 —of King and Queen at High-gate Page 12 Epsom Wells Page 24 Erminia Page 9 Evening Love Page 7 Every Man in his Humour Page 12 Every Man out of his Hu∣mour Page 12 Every Woman in her Hu∣mour Page 30 Eunuchus Page 2 Example Page 22 Excommunicated Prince Page 3 Extravagant Shepherd Page 28 F. Factious Citizen Page 30 Fair Em Page 30 Fair Favourite Page 6 Fair Irene Page 23 Fair Maid of Bristol Page 30 —Maid of the West Page 11 —of the Exchange Page 11 —of the Inn Page 8 Fair Quarrel Page 16 Faithful Shepherd Page 30 Faithful Shepherdess Page 8 False Favourite disgrac'd Page 10 False Count Page 3 False One Page 8 Family of Love Page 15 Fancies Page 9 Fancies Festivals Page 13 Fatal Contract Page 12 Fatal Dowry Page 16 Fatal Love Page 24 Fatal Jealousie Page 30 Fawn Page 16 Feign'd Astrologer Page 30 Feign'd Courtezans Page 3 Ferex and Porex Page 18 Female Prelate Page 24 Female Academy Page 18 Fidele and Fortunatus Page 36 Fine Companion Page 16 Fleir Page 23 Floating Island Page 23 Flora's Vagaries Page 30 Fond Lady Page 33 Fond Husband Page 7 Fool turn'd Critick Page 7 Fool would be a Favorite Page 4 Forc'd Marriage Page 3 Fortunate Isles Page 12 Fortune by Land and Sea Page 11 Fortunatus Page 5 Four P P. Page 11 Four London Prentices Page 11 Four Plays in One Page 8 Fox Page 12 Free Will Page 30 Friendship in Fashion Page 19 French Conjurer Page 27 Fryer Bacon Page 10 Fulgius and Lucrelle Page 30 G. Gallathea Page 14 Game at Chess Page 15 Gamester Page 22 Gamer Gurton's Needle Page 28 Generous Enemies Page 5 Gentle Craft Page 30 Gentleman Dancing-Master Page 26 —of Venice Page 22 —Usher Page 13 —of Verona Page 21 Ghost Page 30 Glass of Government Page 10 Gloriana Page 15 Goblins Page 23 Golden Age Page 11 Golden Age restored Page 12 Grateful Servant Page 22 Great Duke of Florence Page 16 Green's Tu Quoque Page 3 Grim the Collier of Croy∣den Page 28 Gripus and Hegio Page Guardian Page 4. 16 Guy of Warwick Page 27 H. Hamlet Pr. of Denmark Page 21 Hannibal and Scipio Page 18 Heautontimorumenos Page 2 Hector of Germany Page 23 Hectors Page 19 Hecyra Page 2 Heir of Morocco Page 24 Heir Page 17 Hell's higher Court of Ju∣stice Page 27 Henry the 3d of France Page 24 Henry the 4th Page 21 Henry the 5th Page 21. 19 —Item, with the Battle of Agencourt Page 30 Henry the 6th, 3 Parts Shak∣spear Page 21 Henry the 8th, 2 Pts. Crown Page 5 Heraclius Emp. of the East Page 4 Hercules Furiens Page 11 Hercules Oetus Page 22
Hero and Leander Page 23 Herod and Antipater Page 17 Herod and Mariamne Page 19 Hey for Honesty down with Knavery Page 20 Hic & Ubique Page 12 Hippolitus Page 19. 22 Histrioma stix Page 30 Hoffman Page 30 Hog hath lost his Pearl Page 25 Hollander Page 10 Holland's Leaguer Page 16 Honest Lawyer Page 28 Honoria and Mamon Page 22 Honest Man's Fortune Page 8 Honest Whore Page 5 Honour of Wales Page 12 Horace Page 4. 19 Horatius Page 15 How to chuse a good Wife from a bad Page 30 Humerous Lovers Page 18 Humerous Courtier Page 22 Humerous Days-Mirth Page 3 Humerous Lieutenant Page 8 Humorists Page 24 Humour out of Breath Page 5 Hyde Park Page 22 Hymenaei Page 13 Hymens Triumph Page 5 J. Jack Drum's Entertainment Page 30 Jack Jugler ib. Jack Straw's Life and Death ib. Jacob and Esau ib. James the 4th ib. Ibrahim Page 24 Jealous Lovers Page 20 Jeronymo Page 30 Jew of Malta Page 17 Jews Tragedy Page 12 If this be'nt a good Play the Devil's in't. Page 5 Ignoramus Page 27 Impatient Poverty Page 30 Imperiale Page 10 Imperial Tragedy Page 30 Imposture Page 22 Indian Emperour Page 7 Indian Queen Page 12 Ingratitude of a Common∣wealth Page 25 Injured Princess Page 7 Inner-Temple Masque Page 15 Insatiate Countess Page 16 Interlude of Youth Page 30 Jocasta Page 10 John the Evangelist Page 30 John King of England Page 21 John and Matilda Page 5 Joseph Page 10 Joseph's Afflictions Page 30 Jovial Crew Page 2. 30 Irish Masque Page 13 Iron Age Page 11 Isle of Gulls Page 5 Island Princess Page 8 Juliana Princess of Poland Page 5 Julius Caesar Page 1. 21 Just General Page 17 Just Italian Page 6 K. Kind Keeper Page 7 King and no King Page 8 K. Edgar and Alfreda Page 21. 3 King's Entertainment at Welbeck Page 13 King and Queen's Entertain∣ment at Richmond Page 3 K. Lear, and his 3 Daughters Page 25 Knack to know an honest Man Page 30 Knack to know a Knave Page 30 Knave in Grain Page 30 Knavery in all Trades Page 3 Knight of the Burning Pe∣stle Page 8 Knight of the Golden Shield Page 30 Knight of Malta Page 8 L. Lady Alimony Page 30 Lady Contemplation Page 18 Lady Errant Page 4 Lady of Pleasure Page 22 Ladies Tryal Page 9 Ladies Priviledge Page 10 Lancashire Witches Page 24. 11 Landgartha Page 27 Laws of Candy Page 8 Law against Lovers Page 6 Laws of Nature Page 30 Law Tricks Page 5 Levellers Levell'd Page 30 Lears Tragedy Page 21 Liberality & Prodigality Page 30 Libertine Page 24 Like Will to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier Page 9 Lingua Page 30 Little French Lawyer Page 8 Locrine Page 21 London Canticlers Page 30 London Prodigal Page 21 Look about you Page 30 Looking-Glass for Lond. Page 10 London Cuckolds Page 21 Lost Lady Page 31 Love A-la-mode Page 31 Love Crowns the End Page 25 Love in its Extasie Page 20 Love freed from Ignorance, By B. J. Omitted Love and Honour Page 6 Love in the Dark Page 10 Love lost in the Dark, Omit- Love restored Page 13 Love and Revenge Page 24 Love-sick King Page 1 Love-sick Court Page 2 Love in a Tub Page 8 Love and War Page 17 Love in a Wood Page 26 Loves Adventures Page 18 Loves Cure Page 8 Loves Cruelty Page 22 Loves Dominion Page 9 Loves Kingdom Page 9
Loves labour lost Page 21 Loves Labyrinth Page 9 Loves Loadstone Page 31 Lovers Melancholy Page 9 Loves Metamorphosis Page 14 Loves Mistress Page 11 Loves Pilgrimage Page 8 Lovers Progress Page 8 Loves Riddle Page 4 Loves Sacrifice Page 9 Loves Triumph Page 4. 13 Loves Victory Page 4 Loves Welcome Page 13 Love will find out the way Loving Enemies Page 17 Lucius Junius Brutus Page 15 Luminalia Page 31 Lusts Dominion Page 17 Lusty Juventus Page 26 Loyal Brother Page 25 Loyal Gentleman Page 25 Loyal Lovers Page 17 Loyal Subject Page 8 Lucky Chance Page 3 Lyer Page 31 M. Mackbeth Page 21 Mad Couple well Matcht Page 2 Madam Fickle Page 8 Mad Lover Page 8 Mad World my Masters Page 15 Magnetick Lady Page 13 Maid of Honour Page 16 Maid in the Mill Page 8 Maids Metamorphosis Page 14 Maids of Moor-clack Page 1 Maids Revenge Page 22 Maiden Queen Page 7 Maids Tragedy Page 9 Maidenhead well lost Page 11 Male-Content Page 16 Mall Page 27 Man of Mode Page 8 Manhood and Wisdom Page 31 Man's the Master Page 6 Man of Newmarket Page 12 Marriage A-la-mode Page 7 Marriage Broker Page 28 Marriage Night Page 10 Marriage of the Arts Page 11 Marriage of Oceanus and Britannica Page 9 —of Wit and Science Page 31 Mariam Page 4 Marcelia Page 2 Marcus Tull. Cicero Page 31 Marius and Scylla Page 15 Martyr Page 15 Martyr'd Soldier Page 23 Mary Q. of Scotland Page 3 Mary Magdalen's Repent. Page 2 Masque of Augurs Page 13 Masque at the L. Hadding∣ton's House Page 13 Masque of Greys-Inn Gent. Page 8 Masque at Ludlow-Castle Page 3 Masque of the Middle-Temp. and Lincolns-Inn Gent. Page 3 Masquerade Du Ciel Page 28 Massacree at Paris Page 17 Massianello Page 31 Masque of Owls Page 13 Masque of Flowers Page 31 Masque of Queens Page 13 Match me in London Page 5 Match at Midnight Page 20 Matrimonial Trouble Page 18 May-Day Page 3 Mayor of Quinborough Page 15 Measure for Measure Page 21 Medea Page 21. 23 Menechmus Page 28 Merchant of Venice Page 21 Mercurius Britannicus Page 31 Mercury Vindicated Page 13 Merry Devil of Edmonton Page 31 Merry Milkmaids Page 27 Merry Wives of Windsor Page 21 Messalina Page 20 Metamorphosed Gipsses Page 13 Michaelmas-Term Page 15 Microcosmus Page 17 Midas Page 14 Midsumer Nights Dream Page 21 Mirza Page 1 Miser Page 24 Miseries of Civil War Page 5 Miseries of inforc'd Marr. Page 29 Mistaken Husband Page 7 Mithridates Page 15 Mock Tempest Page 8 Mock Duellest Page 27 Mony is an Ass Page 13 Monsieur Thomas Page 8 Morning Ramble Page 31 More Dissemblers besides Women Page 16 Mortimer's Fall Page 13 Monsieur D'Olive Page 3 Mother Bomby Page 14 Mother Shipton's L. & D. Page 25 Mucedorus Page 31 Much adoe about nothing Page 21 Mulberry Garden Page 24 Muleasses the Turk Page 17 Muses Looking-glass Page 20 Muse of Newmarket Page 31 Mustapha Page 2. 19 N. Natures 3 Daughters Page 18 Neptune's Triumph Page 13 Nero, newly Written Page 15 Nero's Life and Death Page 31 New Custom Page 31 New Exchange Page 2 New Inn Page 13 Newmarket Fair Page 3 New Trick to cheat the De∣vil Page 31 New way to pay old debts Page 16 News from the World in the Moon Page 13 News from Plymouth Page 6 Nice Valour Page 9 Nice Wanton Page 31 Nicomede Page 5 Night-Walker Page 9 Noah's Flood Page 8 No-Body and Some-Body Page 31 Noble Gentleman Page 9 Noble Ingratitude Page 15 Noble Spanish Soldier, By S. R. Omitted. Noble Stranger Page 23
Northern Lass Page 2 Northward Hoe Page 5 Novella Page 2 No Wit like a Wom. Page 16 No Help like a Wom. Page 16 O. Oberon, the Fairy Prince Page 13 Obstinate Lady Page 4 Octavia Page 18 Oedipus Page 7. 18 Old-Castle Page 21 Old Couple Page 17 Old Law Page 16 Old Man's Lesson, and a young Man's Love Page 1 Old Troop Page 15 Old Wives Tale Page 31 Opportunity Page 22 Ordinary Page 4 Orestes Page 10 Orlando Furioso Page 31 Orgula Page 28 Ormazdes Page 14 Orphan Page 19 Othello, the Moor of Ven. Page 21 Ovid Page 4 Osmond the Great Turk ib. P. Pallantus and Eudora Page 14 Pandora Page 14 Pan's Anniversary Page 13 Parliament of Bees Page 5 Parson's Wedding Page 14 Passionate Lovers Page 4 Pastor Fido Page 10. 24 Patient Grissle Page 31 Patrick for Ireland Page 22 Pedler's Prophesie Page 31 Peleus and Thetis Page 12 Perkin Warbeck Page 9 Pericles Prince of Tyre Page 21 Philaster Page 9 Phillis of Scyros Page 28 Phoenix Page 15 Phoenix in her Flames Philotus, Scotch Page 31 Philotas Page 5 Phormio Page 2 Picture Page 16 Pilgrim Page 9. 14 Pinder of Wakefield Page 31 Piso's Conspiracy ib. Pity she's a Whore Page 9 Platonick Lovers Page 6 Play-House to be Lett ib. Play of Gentileness and No∣bility Page 11 Play of Love ib. Play between John the Hus∣band, and Tib his Wife ib. Play between the Pardoner, and the Fryer, the Cu∣rate, and Neighb. Prat ib. Play of the Weather ib. Plain Dealer Page 26 Pleasure at Kenelworth-Ca∣stle Page 10 Pleasure reconcil'd to Vir. Page 13 Plutus Page 27 Poetaster Page 13 Politician Page 22 Politician Cheated Page 10 Pompey Page 19. 26 Pope Joan, vide Fem. Prel. Poor Man's Comfort Page 5 Poor Schollar Page 18 Pragmatical Jesuit Page 4 Presbiterian Lash Page 31 Presence Page 18 Princess Page 14 Prince of Priggs Page 31 Prisoners Page 14 Projectors Page 26 Prophetess Page 9 Promus and Cassandra Page 31 Promises of God manifested ib. Psiche Page 27 Psiche Debauch'd Page 27 Publick Woing Page 18 Puritan Widow Page 21 Q. Queen Page 31 Queen's Arcadia Page 5 Queen of Arragon Page 11 Queen and Concubine Page 2 Queen of Corinth Page 9. Queen's Exchange Page 2 —Masque of Blackness Page 13 —Masque of Beauty Page 13 R. Raging Turk Page 10 Ram-Alley Page 2 Rambling Justice Page 15 Rampant Alderman Page 31 Rape of Lucrece Page 11 Rebellion Page 20 Reformation Page 31 Rehearsal Page 31 Religions Page 18 Religious Rebel Page 31 Renegado Page 16 Return from Parnassus Page 31 Revenge ib. Revenge for Honour Page 3 Revenger's Tragedy, By C. T. Omitted. Reward of Virtue Page 9 Rhodon and Iris Page 14 Richard the Second Page 21. 25 Richard the Third Page 21 Rival Friends Page 11 Rival Kings Page 3 Rival Ladies Page 7 Rival Queens Page 15 Rivals Page 32 Roaring Girl Page 15 Robert Earl of Hunting∣don's Downfall Page 11 —His Death ib. Robin Hood's Pastoral May-games Page 32 —and his Crew of Sold. ib. Robin Conscience ib. Rollo D. of Normandy Page 8 Roman Actor Page 16 Roman Empress Page 13 Roman Generals Page 7 Romeo & Juliet Page 21 Romulus and Hersilia Page 32 Round-heads Page 3 Rover Page 3 Royallist Page 8
Royal Master Page 22 Royal Masq. at Hampt. Court Royal Slave Page 4 Royal Shepherdess Page 24 Rule a Wife and have a Wife Page 9 Rump Page 25 S. Sacrifice Page 10 Sad One Page 23 Sad Shepherd Page 13 St. Cicily Page 27 Salmacida Spolia Page 32 Sampson Agonestes Page 17 Sapho and Phao Page 14 Scaramouch, &c. Page 21 School of Complements Page 22 Scornful Lady Page 9 Scot's Figgaries Page 25 Sea Voyage Page 9 Seven Cham. of Christen. Page 14 See me and see me not Page 1 Sejanus Page 13 Selimus Page 10 Selindra Page 14 Sertorius Page 2 Several Wits Page 18 Sforza Duke of Millain Page 10 She wou'd if she cou'd Page 8 Shepherds Paradice Page 17 Shepherds Holyday Page 20 Shoomaker a Gentleman Page 20 Sicelides Page 32 Sicily and Naples Page 27 Siege Page 4. 6 —of Babylon Page 19 —of Constantinople Page 32 —of Memphis Page 8 —of Rhodes Page 6 —of Urbin Page 14 Silent Woman Page 13 Silver Age Page 11 Sir Courtly Nice Page 5 Sir Barnaby Whigg Page 8 Sir Giles Goose-cap Page 32 Sir Hercules Buffoon Page 15 Sir Martin Marr-all Page 7 Sir Patient Fancy Page 3 Sir Solomon Page 32 Sisters Page 22 Six Days Adventure Page 12 Slighted Maid Page 23 Sociable Companions Page 18 Soliman and Perseda Page 32 Sophister ib. Sophonisba Page 15. 16 Sophy Page 6 Souldier's Fortune Page 19 Spanish Bawd Page 32 —Curate Page 9 —Friar Page 7 —Gipsies Page 16. 20. —Rogue Page 8 Sparagus Garden Page 2 Speeches at Pr. H. Barriers Page 13 Spightful Sister Page 2 Sport upon Sport Page 32 Spring's Glory Page 18 Squire Old-sap Page 8 Staple of News Page 13 Step-Mother Page 2 State of Innocence Page 7 Strange Discovery Page 32 Stukeley's Life and Death, vide Battle of Alcazar Sullen Lovers Page 24 Summers last Will and Te∣stament Page 18 Sun's Darling Page 9 Supposes Page 10 Surprizal Page 12 Susanna's Tears Page 32 Swaggering Damoysel Page 4 Swetnam the Woman-hater arraigned Page 32 T. Tale of a Tub Page 13 Tamberlain the Great Page 17 Tamerlain the Great Page 24 Tancred and Gismond Page 26 Taming of the Shrew Page 22 Tartuff Page 17 Tarugo's Wiles Page 24 Tempe restored Page 32 Temple Page 3 Temple of Love Page 6 Tempest Page 7. 22 The longer thou livest, the more Fool thou art Page 25 Thebais Page 18 Theodosius Page 15 Thersytes Page 32 Thomaso Page 14 Thornby-Abby Page 21 Thracian Wonder Page 25 Three Lords and Ladies of London Page 28 Thyestes T. & F. Page 5. 11. 20 Thyerry, and Theodoret Page 9 Time Vindicated to himself, and to his Honour Page 13 Timon of Athens Page 22. 24 Titus Andronicus Page 22 Titus and Berenice Page 19 Tom Essence Page 32 Tom Tyler, and his Wife ib. Tottenham-Court Page 18 Town Fop Page 3 Town Shift Page 20 Trapolin suppos'd a Prince Page 4 Travels of 3 Eng. Broth. Page 5 Traytor Page 22 Traytor to himself Page 32 Trick to catch the old One Page 15 Trick for Trick Page 8 Triumph of Beauty Page 22 —of Love and Antiq. Page 15 —of Peace Page 22 —of the Pr. D'Amour Page 5 Triumphant Widow Troades Page 23. 28 Troas Page 28. 11 Troylus and Cressida Page 7. 22 True Trojans Page 32 True Widow Page 24 Tunbridge Wells Page 32 Tryal of Chivalry Page 32 Tryal of Treasure Tryphon Page 19 Twelfth-Night Page 22 Twins Page 20 Two Noble Kinsmen Page 9
Two Tragedies in one Page 26 Two angry Wom. of Ab. Page 19 Tyde tarryeth for no man Page 26 Tyrannical Government Page 32 Tyrannick Love Page 7 Two wise Men, and all the rest Fools Page 3 V. Valentinian Page 9 Valiant Scot Page 32 Valiant Welchman Page 27 Varieties Page 32 Very Woman Page 16 Unfortunate Lovers Page 6 Unfortunate Shepheard Page 25 Unfortunate Mother Page 18 Unfortunate Usurper Page 32 Ungrateful Favourite Page 32 Unhappy Favourite, Essex Page 3 Unnatural Combat Page 16 Unnatural Tragedy Page 18 Usurper Page 12 Untrussing the humerous Po∣et Page 5 Venice preserved Page 19 Virtue Betray'd Page 3 Vestal Virgin Page 12 Villain Page 19 Virgin Martyr Page 16 Virgin Widdow Page 20 Virtuous Octavia Page 1 Virtuous Wife Page 8 Virtuoso Page 24 Vision of Delight Page 13 Vision of the 12 Goddesses Page 5 Vow Breaker Page 23 W. Walks of Islington & Hogs∣don Page 13 Wandring Lover Page 17 Warning for fair Women Page 32 Weakest goes to the Wall ib. Wealth and Health ib. Wedding Page 32 Westward Hoe Page 5 What you will Page 16 When you see me, you know me Page 20 White Devil Page 25 Whore of Babylon Page 5 Wiat's History ib. Widow Page 13 Widow's Tears Page 3 Wife for a Month Page 9 Wild Gallant Page 7 Wild-Goose Chase Page 9 Wily beguil'd Page 32 Wine, Beer, Ale, & Tobac. ib. Winter's Tale Page 22 Wise Woman of Hogsdon Page 11 Witch of Edmonton Page 5 Wit in a Constable Page 10 Wit without Mony Page 9 Wit of a Woman Page 32 Wit at several Weapons Page 9 Wits, By Sir W. D. Omitted Wits Cabal Page 18 Wits led by the Nose Page 32 Witty Combat Page 27 Witty Fair One Page 22 Woman turn'd Bully Page 32 —Captain Page 24 —'s Conquest Page 12 —kill'd with kindness Page 11 —Hater Page 9 —in the Moon Page 14 —'s Prize Page 9 —will have her Will Page 32 —'s a Weather-Cock Page 9 Women pleas'd ib. Women beware Women Page 16 Wonder, a Woman never vex'd Page 20 Wonder of a Kingdom Page 5 World toss'd at Tennis Page 16 Wrangling Lovers Page 21 Y. Yorkshire Tragedy Page 22 Young Admiral ib. Your five Gallants Page 16 Youth's Glory, and Death's Banquet Page 18 Young King Page 3 ADVERTISEMENT. C. Stands for Comedy, T. Tragedy, T. C. Tragy-Comedy, O. Opera, H. History, P. Pastoral, I. Interlude, and E. Entertainment. FINIS.
