M1845A 42475116 151250
CATASTROPHE GALLIAE: OR THE FRENCH KING's Fatal Downfal, Predicted to happen in or about the Years 1691. or 92. TOGETHER With his Nativity, Calculated according to the Rules of Astrology. As likewise That of the Present EMPEROR of Germany and the GRAND SIGNIOR. WITH Probable Conjectures upon the Turks new Eruptions into EƲROPE. All Humbly Submitted to the Candid and Ingenuous Sons of Art. By J. P. Student in Astrology. London, Printed for Rowland Reynolds, next the Middle Exchange in the Strand, 1691.
To the Honourable and ever Loyal, Sir Edward Dering of Sharsted, in the County of Kent, Knight, one of His Majesties Justices of the Peace for the said County. SIR, AStrology, as it is a Noble Science, (and therefore fit for the Study of the Noblest of Persons) hath this Misfortune commonly attends it, viz. to sink and suffer for want of Noble Advocates and Pro∣tectors. Therefore it is (Learned Sir) that I am thus presumptuous to shelter my mean Endeavours in that worthy Science, (in opposition to one that hath abu∣sed it) under your gentle Patronage, being assured that both Mine & the Adversaries Arguments will be justly weighed and considered by your more curious Judgment, under which I am most willing to stand or fall. Your exquisite Skill in this Learning is such, that thereby, like the thrice Excellent Knight Sir Christopher Hey∣don, (who defended Astrology so happily in the last Age) you are able to judge and distinguish between Mr. Holwel's bold and fallacious dealing, under pre∣tence of explaining the meaning of the triple Conjun∣ction of Saturn, and Jupiter in Leo, wherewith he hath encouraged Mahomet, and crucified our Saviour afresh, and my humble Pains and Apology for the promotion of Christian Courage, and imbasing of Turkish Pow∣er, in expounding the same Conjunction.
Be not offended, (I pray Sir) if I am bold to tell  the World, and your Honoured Self together, that you are the only Person of Loyalty, (that I know of) fit to be my Judge in this Matter, as having for many years, among other Nobler Employments, diverted your self also with this abstruse Science, even before the hap∣py Restauration of his most Sacred Majesty, and all the Royal Party, and by your well-grounded Confidence therein, you kept many of Them (when beyond Sea) from desponding, with your , and an Assu∣rance of the Return of Monarchy into England again; which more than common Presage was (to Yours and Astrologies Honour) happily verified in the year 1660. and for the Hopes you conceived of that happy Year, you affirmed your Loyalty, even in the worst of Times, thereby hazarding your Self to become a Victim for the Truth you had so happily avowed. Nay, so ob∣liging a Patron and Maecenas have You been, to the Glories of Urania, that to your Pains and Search all the Sons of Art owe the Knowledge of that Illustri∣ous Geniture of the Great Carolus Gustavus, late King of Sweden, which you, Sir, first transmitted out of Ger∣many into England, at that time when the victorious Arms of that King were the Astonishment of almost all Christendom: Which hapning into the Hands of my worhy Friend, Mr. John Gadbury, by making some Remarks upon, and printing it, (as I have heard Him say) was one of the principal Causes of His (as he was pleased to call it, Little but envied) Fame in the World; so happy have You been to Art and Artists, even
then unknown to You, as if You were born to befriend not only Astrology it self, but all its honest Professors too. Neither let me forget to mention it; That You (Honoured Sir) in our now later Times of Confusion and Disorder, have stood firm to your Principles, in adhe∣ring and paying Homage to that Monarchy, whose Re∣turn, by this Art, you had happily encouraged; and are also the only Person of your Name and Family, that have shew'd your Loyalty by Addressing, when it was little less than Treason against that Monster the Republican, and Antimonarchical Interest, so to do, and you have dared to own and to teach the World this Maxim, That Loyalty to the King, and a dutiful Regard to His Royal Highness, are inseparable. Pardon (good Sir) my Freedom in mentioning these Things, (for loyal Actions no more than loyal Persons, ought never to be forgotten) and ex∣cuse my humble Boldness, in making use of your No∣ble Name, and give me leave to end all with this cordial Vote, viz. That Monarchy may have more such Friends, and Astrology more such Defenders: So prayeth, (ever Ho∣noured Sir) Your humblest Servant and Votary, John Merrifield.
To the Impartial READER. Courteous Reader, IT having been my Chance, (amongst the rest of my manifold Studies) to light of a small Book, entitled, An Appendix to Holwel's Catastrophe Mundi, on which carelesly casting mine Eye, I beheld all Christendom, or at least the greatest part of it, over-run, or speedily to be over-run with Turks, which put me into a very great Amazement, to behold the Hand of the Lord so sorely stretched out against those Nations which do pro∣fess the Name of Christ, and do acknowledge him to be the Son of God, and Saviour of the World: and doubting in my self, the Author of the said Book might have any divine Revelation of Prophesie against those Nations, as Jonah had against Nine∣veh, and as the other Prophets had before Christ came in the Flesh; but considering that Christ came to fulfil the Law, I thought whether this Holwel might be a Prophet of Mahomet, to encourage the Turks, and to dishearten the Christians, as all Ahab's Prophets did, Micaiah excepted, encourage Ahab to go to Ramoth gilead, which were in comparison no more than Mahometal Prophets possess'd with lying Spirits, which caused Ahab to go to Ramoth-gilead there to be slain, as the Turks fell at Vienna. But taking a more serious View of it, I found it to be predicted Astrologically, and then I was resolved to peruse it more carefully, whereby to see if such Judgements were determi∣nate by the celestial Influences, according to secondary Causes, not doubting of a divine Providence of God over Christendom, against the tyrannical Turks, and Power of Mahomet. And also I soon procured Holwel's Catastrophe Mundi it self, and with a careful and judicial Eye I thorowly perused them both, and found it judged not really from Astrology, but rather from Fancy; I also found many Mistakes, both in the time of the Nativities of those magnanimous Princes there mentioned, and in many other places, which I shall hereafter make appear, and give you
the true Nativities, with an Astrological Discourse thereon shewing you how that the Turks shall not over-run Christendom, neither shall the French King come to be the poorest Prince in the World, as Mr. Holwel in his Appendix saith he shall. But I shall shew Astrologically, what may be the Fate of those Nati∣ons, both by the true Nativities of their Emperours, Kings, &c. and by the Effects of Conjunctions, Comets, and other Configurati∣ons; shewing my Reader a more fafe and rational way of Judge∣ment of the Effects of these Configurations, than Mr. Holwel sheweth, in either his Catastrophe Mundi, or his Appendix, which he hath written, to make ignorant People believe that the World should be turned immediately upside down, by means of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, 1682. and of the Comet that appeared in 1680. But let Mr. Holwel as well as my Reader know, that there have been such Conjunctions and Co∣mets before these, which have had Effects bad enough, but far different from what Mr. Holwel writes of these, and therefore unlike to be true; but I will shew you what hath hapned upon such Configurations already past, and my Judgement on those lately hapned for the time to come. The Scheam of the Nativity of the French King, is the same that Morinus his own Physician published in his Astrologia Gal∣lica, and since printed in Mr. Gadbury's Defence of Scorpio; that of the Grand Seignior is taken out of Mr. Gadbury's Book de Cometis, but the Scheams of the Nativity of Mahomet, Author of the Turks Faith, and that of the German Emperour, I had of my very good Friend Mr. John Gadbury's own Hand, which he affirms to be the true ones, for which I return him my hearty thanks.
And thus, courteous Reader, I have shewed thee, according to the perfect Rules of Astrology, the Fate that Europe will be like to undergo for near this twenty years yet to come, both by the Nativities of some of her most Noble Princes, the amazing Co∣met, in 1680, and the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, 1682, which I do not question but Time will manifest to be true: And in the mean time I crave nothing but thy kind accep∣tance,  judicial perusing, careful observation of the Effects for the future, and thy judgement of it according to its merits, and this will encourage me to present thee with something of greater Consequence; till then farewel. John Merrifield. From my House at the Hand and Pen at the lower end of Horsly∣down, near the Dock∣head in Southwark, London, ♀ Feb. 22. 1683/4. ERRATA. PAge 4. line 13. for Ascendent read second. p. 6. l. 25. for thing r. think. p. 9. l. 33. r. Religion (excepting that of christ against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. p. 12. for 60. r. Co-Anticians. p. 16. l. 1. dele by. p. 20. l. 32. r. St. Stephen. p. 25. l. 1. for heart r. hearts. p. 26. l. 3. dele Christ. p. 27. l. for too r. to. p. 11. l. 11. for Joseph r. Josephus, for Falicimus r. Ferdinandus.
CATASTASIS MƲNDI: OR, The true STATE, VIGOR, and growing Greatness of Christendom, under the Influences of the last triple Conjunction of Saturn and Ju∣piter in Leo, the late Comet, &c. CHAP. I. Treating of the Rise of the Ottoman Family, which is accounted to be the Foundation of the Turks Empire. IF we take the Original, or Beginning of the Turks Empire, to be from the Ottoman Family, as I suppose we justly may (al∣though they had many Risings and Fallings, after they left their Native Countrey, Anno Dom. 844. and were then called Scythians) for Ottoman taking upon him the Government of the Turks, he first founded this great Empire, in the year of Christ, 1289. at which time, Saturn was in Pisces; and Authors tell us, that Turky, or the greatest part of it, lies under Capricorn, and therefore governed by Saturn. And according to the Rules of Astrology, Saturns greatest years are 465. which added to 1289. will make 1754. therefore this Monarchy seemeth to stand firm and stable no longer then unto the year of Christ, 1754. but as it hath hitherto had at some times Risings, and at other times Dimi∣nishings, so it will be like to continue; and had not Saturn at his Conjunction with Jupiter, been in Aquarius his own House, and a fixed Sign, a little before the beginning of this Empire, it
had not continued so long: But to take the time of this Con∣junction, and to work by directions from the New Moon prece∣ding, to find the Time of the good or evil Events of this Empire, I think it frivolous and vain, and an Abuse to Astrology (as Mr. Holwel hath done) for would not any rational man think it great Folly or Madness in an Artist, to calculate a Childs Nativity, and take the time thereof, four months before it was born, or first drew breath in the World? but Mr. Holwel hath taken the Nativi∣ty of the Turks Empire, four years before it began, as he himself hath written; but neither the Day nor Hour being (as I suppose) known, nor attainable, when this Empire was first established by a Law; therefore to know when this Empire shall be most Ho∣nourable and Successful, or most miserable and unsuccessful, con∣sider carefully the Nativities of the Emperors, and chief Com∣manders thereof, and an able Artist may give a good Astrologi∣cal Judgment of the Success of that Empire, during his Reign; for as a King or Emperor is the Head, and his People the Mem∣bers, so the Head cannot suffer Affliction, but the Members must partake with it; and what Increasing, Decreasing, Ebbing and Flowing have happened in this Empire in times past, History relates at large; and therefore I shall not here mention it, lest my Book swell beyond my Expectation; for I intend not to write a large-Folio, but a few Sheets, to shew the World that there is a more certain way of judging the State of a Nation, than Mr. Holwel hath used in his Catastrophe Mundi, or in his Appendix there∣to. The future state of an Empire or Kingdom, may also be judg∣ed, from the Conjunctions of the superior Planets, Comets, E∣clipses, and Solar Ingresses; all which I shall give a hint at, which I hope I may do without offence. And first, I will here insert the true Nativity of the Grand Seignior, the present Emperor of the Turks; and it is the same which Mr. Gadbury hath in his Book de Cometis; which I alter only three Degrees on the Medium Coeli, and dare affirm it to be the truest that is attainable, as I shall prove by several Accidents. The Nativity that Mr. Holwel hath taken, cannot be the true time, because the Accidents which have already happened will not admit of Sagittary to ascend in the Nativity of that Illustrious Prince.
CHAP. II. Treating on the Nativity of Sultan Mahomet, the Turks Grand Seignior. astrological chart Sultan Mahomet Ham, was born January the 1st. 7h. 26′ A. M. Lat. 43 deg. ☾. ☌. ☉ add V. Cour. SUltan Mahomet Ham, the present Empe∣ror of the Turks, was born at Constantinople, on the first day of Ja∣nuary, 1641/2;. 26 minutes past 7 in the Morning. That this is a most Illustrious Nativity, here are many eminent Testimonies, as may be seen by the Position of Jupiter, the Sun, Moon, and part of Fortune in the Ascen∣dent, and other Testi∣monies, which I will here omit, and proceed to the general fate of the Native; this Scheme was taken out of the Book de Cometis, written by my ve∣ry good Friend Mr. John Gadbury. The Sun, Jupiter and the Moon, in the Ascendent, are sure Testimonies of Honour, both from great and eminent Persons, as also from the vulgar People, it makes him extreamly proud, so that he will esteem none so good as himself, but will be apt to quarrel with those of his neighbouring Nations; but the Moon in this Nativity, applies to void of Course, shewing most of his Un∣dertakings to be unfortunate; in this Nativity, Saturn, Lord of the Ascendent, is in square of Mars, Lord of the tenth House, the House of Honour, so will he himself act something that will be prejudicial to his own Honour.
Mars, Lord of the Tenth, is in the Eleventh, the House of Friendship, and there in Conjuncti∣on of Venus; shewing the Native will have many Friends, that will procure Honour to him by their means, which will be Lea∣ders  and Generals of his Armies, the rather, because Mars is Lord of the eleventh House, the House of Friendship; but Jupiter Lord of the Twelfth, is in the Ascendent, shewing that he will have se∣cret Enemies about his own House or Palace, and that there will be many Seditions and Tumults raised against him, by his own Sub∣jects, but they will not prevail against him, but will be defeated in their Designs. The Lord of the Eleventh, is in square to the Lord of the As∣cendent, which will cause the Friends of the Native to prove de∣ceitful to him. Saturn, Lord of the Ascendent, posited in the Second, shews the Native to use industry to increase his Sub∣stance, and to inlarge his Territories; but Saturn is an Infortune by Nature, and by being posited in the Ascendent, will rather de∣stroy the Natives Substance, and diminish his Empire; the Dra∣gons Tail, in the Third, makes his Inland Journies not to be very Fortunate, therefore not much like to inlarge his Dominions by Land-Armies; but Saturn must be spiteful, though he be defeated of his Enterprise; as the Moon is Combust, so hath he been all his Life-time in Combustions and Troubles, even from his Mino∣rity; his Sea-Affairs seem more successful than his Land-Affairs do, yet he hath had his Affairs by Sea often defeated by the Venetians, which have taken, sunk and burned, many of his Ships and Galleys. The Moon, Lady of the seventh House, the House of publick Enemies, is stronger then Saturn, Lord of the Ascendent, shewing that he shall not prevail against them, neither will his Enemies be apt to quarrel with him, seeing the Moon, Lady of the Seventh, is in Sextile to Saturn, Lord of the Ascendent; but he disposing of the Moon in the Ascendent, and in the Sign of the Ascendent, makes him think that he can over-power the whole World, and especially Christendom; not considering the Moon is in her own Triplicity, and in an Angle, and therefore not to be prevailed a∣gainst; for though Mr. Holwel, in his Appendix, page the 25th: saith, that the Turk is ordained within a few years, to gain a great part of Christendom, yet I do aver, that according to the Rules of Astrology, they shall not gain one foot of Land in Christen∣dom, but what they shall pay dear Sawce for (let them have a care they lose none of their own) for I would have Mr. Holwel, as well as my Reader know, that the influences of the Stars, have not limited so short a continuance for the Christian Religion.
But the main thing that provoked this Emperor to give such an Alarm, against Christendom in general, and Vienna in particular, are, because about this time, he had the Sun, Moon and Ascen∣dent directed to the Square of Mars, and Germany being under A∣ries, drew him with a vast Host that way, supposing that Germa∣ny had been his own with little or no Resistance, and so his Ambi∣tion was against Rome, Italy, France, Spain, and all Christendom; but let not him boast that putteth on his Armour, but he that puts it off. But had Mr. Holwel rightly understood the Grounds of Astro∣logy, he might have rectified his Scheme by Accidents, and he might easily have seen, that there had been but little hope, that the Sultan should gain Honour, or enlarge his Territories about this time by the Sword, nor need he have judged Vienna to be ta∣ken upon such Directions; but that is like the rest of his nonsensi∣cal stuff. I have wrought out the Directions of this Nativity, and will acquaint you with some of them, to shew thereby the truth of the Scheme, and others, what Fate the Grand Seignior is yet like to undergo. In the year 1648. on the 17th. of August, Ibrim, Father of this present Emperor of the Turks, was strangled in Prison, and his Son Mahomet being not full seven years of age, was proclaimed Emperor in his Fathers stead; but he being in his Minority, the Government was wholly left to his Mother, who, by the Advice of the Councel, took on her the Regency; he had then the Mid∣heaven directed to the Sextile of the Sun and Moon; when he was about nine years of age, he had his Mid-heaven to the square of Mars, then were Domestick Troubles, as well as Loss by the Ve∣netian War; he was for the most part of his Life healthful of body, but he hath often been unfortunate in War, although he have had many good Directions of both the Sun, Moon and Ascendent; but the general fate of his Nativity, and the many ill Directions of the Mid-heaven, hath made him often unsuccesful in War. At seventeen years of Age, he took on him the Regency, about which time he had his Ascendent, Sun and Moon, directed to the Anticians of Mars. About twenty one years of age, he had the Ascendent, Sun and Moon, to the Sextile of Mars; then was great care taken for the carrying on the War, both against Transilvania, Hungary and Venice.
About the year 1669. came the Ascendent, Sun and Moon, to the Sextile of Venus, and soon after, to the body of Jupiter; then was concluded Peace with the Venetians, and he prevailed in War against the Polanders, and he much delighted himself in Pleasures and Recreations; but about the same time, he had his Mid-hea∣ven to the Conjunction of Mars, and see the effects of it; for in the year 1673. the Poles deny paying to the Turk their promised Tribute; General Sobieski, now King of Poland, fell upon the Turks Camp, then under the Command of Chusalin and other Ba∣shaws, killed about twenty five thousand of their Men, with most of their Officers; this was very considerable; for besides the or∣dinary Baggage, they took two thousand Purses of Money, that were brought to pay the Souldiers, and twenty five thousand Wag∣gons of Provision and Ammunition; and about this time, he had the Mid-heaven to the square of Saturn, Lord of his own Ascendent. But since that time, he hath had the Mid-heaven directed to the Conjunction of Venus, and to the Sextile of Jupiter, also the Sun, Moon and Ascendent to the Sextile of Mercury, which hath lifted up his heart with Pride; but to abate his haughtiness, in this year 1683. he hath the Sun, Moon, and Ascendent, directed to the square of Mars, Lord of both his House of Honour and Friends; Mars is also Lord of the third House, shewing that his professed Friends will be at variance, and break their Leagues with him, and so will some of his neighbouring Nations, to his great Loss. Surely a great Oversight in Mr. Holwel, to thing the Grand Seignior should over∣run Christendom, upon such Directions, yet he will certainly come against Christendom again. About the year, 1687. he hath the Sun, Moon and Ascendent, directed to the Body of Saturn; I cannot positively say that he will lose his Life then about; but I am certain he will undergo Afflicti∣ons of body, and all his Affairs go unsuccessful for some consi∣derable time; he hath also about the same time, the Mid-heaven directed to the Co-Antiscians of the Sun; sure, under these Di∣rections, the Christians may regain what the Turks formerly took from them; and thus much of the Nativity of this great Prince. I will in the next place, insert the Nativity of that grand Impostor Mahomet, the Author of the Turks Faith, shewing thereby, how some men are born to make and forge Lies, as he did, and others born to believe them.
CHAP. III. astrological chart Mahomet, Author of the Turks Faith, born April the 24th. 6h. 30′ P. M. Anno Christi, 569. Latitude 41d. ☾ △ ♄ add □ ☿ THis Scheme of the Nativity of Ma∣homet, the Author of the Turks Faith or Religion, accords to the time gi∣ven by the learned Do∣ctor Addison, and is very like to be true, because it was ever (by Astrolo∣gers) concluded that the Turkish Faith, first rose under Scorpio and Mars, as the Christian Reli∣gion did under the Sun and Jupiter. I was pre∣sented with this Scheme by my Friend and Tu∣tor, Mr. John Gadbury, who also believes it true. Most Writers accord, that Mahomet was born in Mecca, a City in Arabia the happy, and Son of Abdalla, a Merchant, his Mother Hemina, a Jew: his Parents died when he was young, and after their Decease, he was brought up by his Uncle; at sixteen years old, he was bound to a Merchant, named Abdalmutalif, who find∣ing him a witty Lad, made him his Factor; afterwards his Master dying, he married his Mistress, and until thirty eight years of age, he followed his Merchandise, travelling into many Countries, where being satisfied with Wealth, he began to think of high things, for he was a curious searcher into both the Jews and
Chri∣stian Religion, being himself brought up a Pagan; but Pride en∣flamed his heart, and wrought in him a desire to be taken for a Prophet; and to make men believe that he was a real Prophet, he made use of his Disease which he was often troubled withal, that was the Falling-sickness; for he gave out, that when he fell in those Fits, that he then conferred with the Angel Gabriel, by whom the pleasure of God was revealed to him; and thus by his Delusions, he perswaded the People, so that they believed him to  be a real Prophet (or rather a God) and do ever since honour and esteem him so to be. Now that this Mahomet should be so much honoured and esteemed, may be thought strange; but if we do but consider the ignorance of People in those days, and in those Countries, we need not much scruple at it; for the Heathens worshipped the Sun, Moon and Stars, esteeming them to be Gods, because they knew not the true God; nay, some were more ignorant, and worshipped Stocks and Stones, also Images which their own hands had wrought, esteem∣ing them to be Gods; also the Israelites, unto whom God manifest∣ed himself by many Miracles, Signs and Wonders, and titled them his own People, they believed not in him, but made to themselves a Molten Calf, and worshipped it; saying, these be thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the Land of Aegypt, al∣though they knew that they came out of Aegypt a long time be∣fore they made it; therefore, no wonder that the Turks, which were of the Seed of Ham, that wicked Son of Noah, whom his Fa∣ther cursed, should esteem such a lying Impostor as Mahomet was, for a God or Saviour; for History plainly saith, that after the Death of Noah, Ham went into Africa, and there setled his A∣bode, and from his Posterity sprang the Turks, a sort of People, much of his own nature; and here in the Nativity of this Im∣postor Mahomet, we find the Regal Sign Leo, on the Medium Coeli, and Jupiter, the greater Fortune, therein posited, a most emi∣nent token of Honour; and that he might seem to be a setter up of a Religion, contrary to that of Christ, or rather the Author and Forger of malicious Lies, we may consider, that he hath Sa∣turn in Libra, the Horoscope of our blessed Saviour, as Mr. Butler hath it in his Christologia, and hath wilfully made himself an op∣poser of the Truth, and hath established Christianity his Enemy, as may be seen by Libra on the twelfth House, and Saturn therein posited, and Mars Lord of his Ascendent in Gemini, the House of Mercury, and the Moon, Lady of the ninth House; that being the House of Religion, applying to a quadrat of Mercury, and to an opposition of Jupiter, might very well shew him to be both the Author of a false Religion, and promoter of Lies, and the Turks, that accursed Generation of Ham, addicted to believe them; and that he should be an Enemy to the Christian Religion, may well be observed from this Nativity, the Moon being in Aquarius, in op∣position to Leo, and Jupiter therein posited, and in square of the Sun, the Sign and Planets representing the Christian Religion.
The opinion of Mahomet, or rather the Original of the Turks Religion, may be said, to take its beginning at the flight of Ma∣homet, which was in the year Anno Christi 591. for in that year, the Saracens drove him from Mecca, at which time, the Turks first began to settle their Religion; and most Astrologers do conclude, that the Turks Faith arose under Mars and the Moon, and good reason may be shewed for it, for in this Nativity, Scorpio ascends, and Mars is Lord thereof, Cancer is on the Cusp of the ninth House, the House of Religion, and the Moon is Lady of it, and may very well signifie a Rude and Savage Religion, as well as People, given to many Vices and lascivious Actions. And to speak something of the continuance and desolation of their Faith, if we take 264. the greatest years of Mars, and 320. the greatest years of the Moon, and add to the year of Christ 591. the year that Mahomet took his Flight, it will make but 1175. (a great mistake of Mr. Holwel, who takes 480. for the greatest years of Mars, and 260. for the Moons greatest years; I wonder from what Author he had them, but I suppose, this is one of his own new Inventions, and like his Directions of the Othoman Fa∣mily being taken four years before it began, as may be seen in his Appendix, page the fifth) and about the year 1175. this Faith was at the highest, for then the Othoman Family were much increased, and setled their Religion by a Law, which I confess, was before this time done, or else this had been but a birth of this Religion, and because God hath said in the Holy Scriptures, that all Nati∣ons shall be converted to the Christian Faith, before the Day of Judgment, therefore we will consider, about what time this Faith may have a Dissolution, which according to the Rules of Astro∣logy, and secondary Causes, if we add 584. the greater years of Mars, and the Moon, to 1175. it will make 1759. so that about the year, Anno Christi 1759. we may expect the Dissolution of the Turks Faith, for I would have (Mr. Holwel as well as) my Reader know, that as any Religion hath a rising, and increasing, before it comes to its full height, so it will have the like time of Diminish∣ing, before it can have its full Dissolution.
CHAP. IV. Treating of the Nativity of the present Emperor of Germany. IN this Chapter, I will first shew you, how that Mr. Holwel, in his Appendix tells us, that this present Emperor of Germany, was born on the thirtieth Day of May, in the year 1640. at nine hours three minutes post Meridiem, or after Noon, in the Latitude of 48 Degrees, and that he had seven Degrees, and forty five Mi∣nutes of Scorpio on the Mid-heaven, and Jupiter in four Degrees and fifty four Minutes of Capricorn, as may be seen in his Scheme, which he affirms to be the true one; because, saith he, it was rectified by the Mid-heaven, to the Square of Saturn and Jupiter, and the Square of the Moon, at which time, saith he, the Em∣peror and Empire had much Suffering, for the Turks did invade him; but behold his grand Mistake, for I will appeal to all Ar∣tists, how the Mid-heaven can come to the Square of Jupiter (as he is posited) in less than 150 years, whereas it was directed to the Square of Saturn and the Moon, about the twenty fourth year of his Age, and therefore in the year 1664. but any thing will serve with such Artists, to fill a Book good enough for ignorant People to read and admire; for it is nothing with too many now a days, of our Godly Traitors, Sanctified Hypocrites, Religious Atheists, and Protestant Turks (as Mr. Pelling titles the Fanaticks in the twelfth page of his Sermon, preached on the ninth of Septem∣ber, 1683. being a day of Thanks-giving, for deliverance from the Fanatick Conspiracy) to blast the Honour of Christian Kings and Potentates, especially those of other Nations, when they can scarce forbear our own; but I will forbear to speak any more of this Mistake, and proceed to a greater. This Nativity, published by Mr. Holwel, is taken out of Mr. Gadburies Book of Comets, only the time a little altered, and it is the true Day, but not the true Hour, as hath been proved by Mr. Gadbury, since he wrote that Book; for any one that hath had any Discourse with any man that hath seen him, or hath but seen his Effigie, may very easily conjecture, that this noble Emperor hath not Capricorn ascending on his Ho∣roscope, but rather Gemini, and therefore I will insert a Scheme, of
the true time of this Emperors Birth, which is as followeth, and given me also by Mr. Gadbury himself. astrological chart Leopoldus the pre∣sent Emperor of Germany, was born May the 30th. 4h. Ante Mer. Lat. 48. ☽ ☌ ♂ add ☌ ♄ This present Emperor of Germany, was born the thirtieth day of May, in the year of our Lord 1640. at four a Clock in the Morning, and christened Leopoldus, Ig∣natius, Franciscus, Baltha∣zer, Joseph Falicimus, in the City of Vienna. At the birth of this Magnanimous Prince, Gemini was on the Ho∣roscope, and the Sun in the Ascendent, and Mercury Lord of the Ascendent in his own House, and in the Sign of the Ascendent, which are testimonies of the greatest Honour, Dignity and Soveraignty, and though Sa∣turn, Mars and the Moon, be in the Mid-heaven, yet will they not destroy the Natives Honour and Grandeur, because they are not afflicted; for Saturn is Lord of the tenth House, and Mars and the Moon are in trine to the Sun in the Ascendent, from the Mid-heaven, which are rather testimonies of Honour than Dis∣grace, and here we have
Mercury, Lord of the Ascendent, stron∣ger than Jupiter, Lord of the Seventh, the House of publick Ene∣mies, which is an eminent token that his publick Enemies shall not prevail against him, yet his Position in the twelfth House, may shew the Native to have many Enemies, the rather, being in square to Saturn, but Mercury is strongest in the Figure, therefore, as aforesaid, his Enemies can never prevail against him, for the Lord of the Seventh is weak, and in his fall; neither can I suppose the Native to die in Battle, as Mr. Holwel awards, be∣cause the Lord of the Eighth doth not afflict either the Ascen∣dent or the Moon, nor is there any signification of a violent Death he hath about this time; the Mid-heaven directed to the Sextile of Venus, Lady of the sixth House, a glorious Direction, shewing that his Servants and Subjects will be faithful to him, so that he need not, neither will he fear either Turk or Tartar, nor  yet the power of Mahomet, the Treachery of Count Teckely, or Mr. Holwels idle Predictions, nor yet any other of Mahomets lying Prophets, whatsoever they shall write or predict against Christen∣dom; but let such Predictors know, that God hath a Divine Providence over Christendom, and will not suffer the name of Christ to be destroyed; but this Emperor hath had many ill Di∣rections in his Life past, and he hath also had many Controver∣sies and Troubles, answerable to them, but the main cause of this his present trouble is, that he hath Lately had the Sun and Ascen∣dent, both directed to the 60 Anticians of Jupiter, the Significator of the Christian Religion, and I think he hath not been free from trouble, since he had the Mid-heaven directed to the Square of the Sun, and the Moon to the Square of Jupiter, which was about ten years since, and it is much to be feared, he will not be free from trouble until he hath passed the Mid-heaven to the Square of Jupiter, which will be about the year 1688. yet before that time, he hath good Directions, for about the year 1685. he hath the Moon to the Sextile of the Sun, and the Sun to the Sextile of Ve∣nus, Directions good enough in a mean Nativity, to raise a Beg∣gar to good Preferment, much more in a Regal Nativity, to give a King or Emperor Victory over his Enemies, to a great degree of Worship and Adoration from all kinds of People. The Moon directed to the Sextile of the Sun, is held by all A∣strologers, to produce unto the Native honourable Acquaintance, and Familiarity with some of great Rank and Quality, whose Friendship he will make use of to his great advantage, more esteemed and beloved of People than formerly, both enriched and honoured by means of his Prudence and good Nature; sometimes it produceth honourable Marriage, also Travel, both by Sea and Land, whereby Honour is attained; to Kings and Emperors, it shews the Renovation of Leagues and Friendship, and the compo∣sing of Differences with their Neighbours. And the Sun, directed to the Sextile of Venus, doth import the Native to have a good Name, also some more than former ad∣vance to Dignity and Preferment, from whence he shall acquire great store of Wealth, and be highly esteemed of all sorts of Peo∣ple in general, he shall perform all his Affairs with much facility, and obtain all his just desires, with much love and content, it most commonly produceth a Child unto the Native; both these Di∣rections happen about the year 1685. and what advantage he now gaineth, he need not fear losing again, as long as he liveth.
And about the year of our Lord 1688. this Native hath the Mid∣heaven directed to the Square of Jupiter, intimating Kings and Princes to gain the Displeasure of their Nobility and Gentry, by abridging their Priviledges, so that Judges and Lawyers will be at Controversie with him, and many of them he will turn out of their Places; also Ecclesiastical Persons, and those of the highest degree offensive against him, whereby will arise much Controver∣sie, Contention and Mutations, also some of his Kindred will be disaffected to him, but at last they will be forced to comply with him, and that upon his own terms, and they will be glad if they can regain their lost Favour. But to mitigate these Troubles, he hath at the same time, the Ascendent directed to the Sextile of Venus, which will make the Native delight himself in all manner of Pleasures and Recreations, and that he will gain the Love of the Commonalty, and Familiarity with Women of great Rank and Quality, it often produceth hono∣rable Marriages, and Issue soon after, and from henceforth for many years, he hath no ill Directions, so that according to the Rules of Astrology (from which Rules I would not willingly va∣ry) this Emperor is like to have a long and prosperous Reign, and I know not, but that he may attain to eighty two years of age, which God grant he may, to the Honour of Christendom; about which time, it seemeth to be somewhat mortal; but I will forbear any further Judgment thereof, as having a Veneration for the Per∣sons of Emperors and Kings, who are Gods Vicegerents on Earth.
CHAP V. Treating of the Nativity of the most Christian King of France, LEWIS the Fourteenth. astrological chart September 5. 11 h. 11 A M 1638. Sub Lat. 49 d. ☾ ☌ ♀ ad △ ♂ THis Scheme of the Nativity of the most Christian King of France, is the same which Morinus, Physician to the King of France, af∣firms to be the true one; and I suppose nearer the truth than that which Mr. Holwel inserts in his Appendix: This Scheme may be seen in Morinus's Astrologia Gal∣lica, fol. 555. as Mr. Gadbury hath assured me, and also printed it in defence of Scorpio. In Mr. Holwels Appendix in the King of France's Nativity, he predicteth that most Christian King to become one of the mise∣rablest Princes in the world, because, saith he, he hath many ill Directions. But we will first consider the general Fate, (which is most to be regarded) and then proceed to particulars: but here I will shew you how there is some small difference between Mr. Holwels Judgment and mine of the time; for I, with Morinus affirm, that he hath 14. degrees and 45. Minutes of Scorpio on the Horo∣scope, and Mr. Holwel saith 22 degrees; no great difference in the general fate, but in the particular it will in some directions differ ten years of time: so that the Accidents which are produ∣ced by either the Ascendent or Mid-heaven, by Mr. Holwels Scheme, will not come by Morinus until ten years after, which is a great difference in time.
But we have here in our Scheme the Regal Sign Leo on the Medium Coeli, and the Sun Lord thereof posited in the Mid-heaven;  also Mercury in his own house in the Mid-heaven, which are ab∣solute testimonies of durable Honour: he hath also the part of Fortune in the eleventh house, declaring that he shall be much advantaged by his professed Friends, and that he shall have many Friends: likewise the Moon is in Conjunction of Venus, Lady of the Eleventh House, the House of Friendship, but Venus is Lady of the Twelfth House, also the House of private Enemies; so she is likewise Lady of the Seventh House, the House of publick Ene∣mies: but inasmuch as Mars Lord of the Ascendent, is stronger than Venus Lady of the Seventh and Twelfth, it is an eminent token that his Enemies either publick or private shall not prevail against him, neither will they be very apt to quarrel with him; but those that will contend with him, let them be sure to look to come off with loss and damage, for they will not be able to withstand him. But I suppose the main thing that caused Mr. Holwel to predict of the miserable poverty of this great Monarch, might proceed from the position of Mars, and the Dragons Tail in the Second House of his Scheme; for these are commonly testimonies of waste of substance: but Mr. Holwel doth mistake, the Dragons Tail is not in the Second House, as he hath placed him in his Figure, but in the Eighth House, and the Dragons Head is in the Second House. And if we consider that Mars is Lord of the Ascendent, we need not judge him a testimony of Poverty, but rather of Riches; which is much augmented by the position of the Dragons Head in the second House; for Authors say, the Lord of the Ascendent posited in the second House, shews a great increase of Riches by the Natives own labour and industry, the rather being in Recep∣tion with the Lord of the second. And pray what Prince in the World now living, hath laboured more, and used greater industry to increase his Riches, and to enlarge his Territories, than the pre∣sent King of France hath done? neither hath any Prince had grea∣ter success than he. And thus I shall leave the general, and pro∣ceed to the particulars. Whereas Mr. Holwel desireth any one that will, to run down the Directions of this Mighty Monarch, I have taken his advice, and have run down the Directions of his Figure, and I find that the Sun came not to the square of Mars until Twelve years of age, (but Mr.
Helwel saith at Nine) therefore unlike the Sun to the Square of Mars should give the Small Pox at Nine years of age: Neither do I hold any Direction of either the Sun or Moon a safe Rule  whereby to prove any Nativity by, but rather by the Ascendent or Mid-heaven; yet I do not say but the Directions of the Sun or Moon may operate as forcibly as the other, according to their nature, though not to prove the time of birth by. But according to Morinus's Figure, which I suppose to be near∣est the truth, he had between three and four years of age the Mid∣heaven to the Sextile of Jupiter, about which time the French Kings Father died, and he stiled King of France: about twelve years of age, he had the Mid-heaven directed to the Conjunction of the Sun; under this Direction he received his Crown; about thirteen or fourteen he had the Sun to the Square of Mars, and then he had troubles in France; and at Paris they shut the Gates against him. About two or three and twenty, he had the Sun directed to the Sextil of both Venus and the Moon; under these Di∣rections he was married to Maria Tiresia d'Austria, Infanta of Spain, which was on the Ninth of September 1660. And Mr. Hol∣wel saith, the French King hath lately had the Midheaven to the Sextil of Mars, and that caused him to be prosperous in Arms; but I say he hath not yet had that Direction; but he hath lately had the Sun to the Sextil of Mars, and the Ascendent to the Cusp of the second House, this caused him to be prosperous in Arms, and thereby to increase his Substance and Territories. And Mr. Holwel also saith, that the French King in August 1683. shall have many Miseries, both in Body, Mind, and Fortune, and that then his own Subjects will rebel against him; and that he would be in danger of Fire and Gunshot, also Stabbing and Im∣prisonment; and that he should be in danger of being cheated of his Life; and then, saith he, if this happen, one may say there is some truth in Art. But I am assured, that as this hath not yet hapned, and though it never do (as I am perswaded it never will) yet there is more Truth in Art than there is honesty in Mr. Hol∣wel, or truth in such Artists; for such nonsensical boasters of Art are but abusers of Art, and therefore not worthy to bear the Name or Title of an Artist. He saith moreover about the same time, the French King should lose all his former Honour both by Sea and Land, (but sure he meaneth this of himself) and that all he takes in hand for seven years space will prosper ill, if he lives so long, and that he will soon come to be imprisoned or Banished, and be one of the mise∣rablest Princes in the World.
But none of these things have yet hapned, neither can I find according to the Rules of Astrology, that such Calamities will at all happen to this most Christian Prince; for certainly he is not a Prince born to Misfortune, Disgrace nor Poverty, as an inge∣nious Artist may well perceive by his Nativity, but to be the Glory of his Nation, and a Terror to his Enemies: and as for those Di∣rections which Mr. Holwel pretends should bring such afflictions on this most Christian King, are not yet come, neither will they for many years; and when they do come, they will not be so vi∣olent as he speaketh of; for he considereth not that about the same time that there happeneth evil Directions, there also happeneth good ones; for about the year of our Lord Christ 1690. the As∣cendent comes to the Square of Mercury, Lord of the eighth and tenth Houses, which might shew some danger both of Life and Honour; but at the same time the Sun comes to the body of Ju∣piter, Lord of the seventh and eleventh Houses, thereby raising Friends unto the Native, and bringing even his Enemies to be at peace with him, and thus abating the evil threatned by Mercury. And about the year 1692. the Ascendent will be directed to the body of Mars, Lord of the sixth House, which may give some afflictions of body, and at the same time the Mid-heaven comes to the Sextile of Mars, mitigating the evil influence of Mars to the Ascendent; yet I suppose about the year 1690. or between that and the year 1693. he may have some affliction of body that will be very violent, which if he escape, he may (favente Deo) live ma∣ny years. Mr. Holwel also saith, that in a short time the Commons of France will be in Arms against their present King, and that if he should live but two years (that would be but to the year 1685,) he would be driven from his Throne by his own Subjects, and if he die before, then the next King will be served so: but what reason he hath for any of this, I think that neither himself, nor any rational man can tell; but especially whereby he judgeth the fate of the next King, by this present Kings Nativity; nay he is not content therewith, but he addeth more nonsensical stuff; for in the same Nativity he saith, the Turks shall over-run France, Spain, Italy, Rome, Venice, Muscovia and Poland, destroying it with Fire and Sword; and that the Key of Christendom shall be lost; (but it were better a thousand such Predictors were served as
Baals Prophets were, that we might have no more such Christian Turks amongst us to dishearten us with lies) but I shall forbear to men∣tion  any more of these fooleries, and certifie my Readers, that the ruine of these Kingdoms and Countries cannot by the Rules of Astrology be predicted of from this Nativity; therefore this is like the rest of his false nonsensical stuff, and Time will manifest it so to be; and then let Mr. Holwel be sure that he will be deri∣ded, not only by Artists, but by every one wholly ignorant of Art, that hath, or shall chance to read his Books, which will be to him a greater Disgrace, than ever his Books procured him Fame or Profit; thus he hath used his endeavour to dishearten all Chri∣stendom, and to incourage the Turks and Heathens with false Predictions. But I will advise Mr. Holwel, not to disoblige the King of England, nor the Laws of our Land, for he hath disobli∣ged almost all Christendom, and belied the Turks; and if he should have a fansie, or be forced to travel, I would have him well con∣sider, into what Kingdom or Country, he may be the most wel∣come; if to the Turks he go, let him have a care of strangling, for he hath been to them an abominable lying Prophet, if to the Kingdom of France, the Bastile is the way to the Wheel, on which they break all impudent Impostors, for he hath frighted that Country (if at least any among them be so senseless, to be fright∣ed with his absurd Crudities) with false Fears, more than enow. If to any other Country of Christendom, they'l quickly smell out an Ass under the Skin of a Lyon, and bait him accordingly; my Advice therefore is, that he keep himself at home, with the Catastrophe Mundi, and Appendix of his own addle Writing, there being no∣thing in them, but what is become most notorious and loathsome to all sober men. CHAP. VI. Treating of the Conjunction of the Superior Planets, and more particularly, of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in Leo, in the year 1682. EVery Planet contributeth in some measure or other to the Go∣vernment of this World, but some more forcibly than others, as the Superiours, being forerunners of great and strange Acci∣dents, War, Slaughter, and Mutations.
I come now to speak something of the Conjunctions of Saturn, and Jupiter; and as for Mr. Holwels method of direction to that purpose, in a Figure of the new or full Moon, either next before or after it, I think it not a safe way, there to find the time of their Effects, for by this way of direction round and round the Zodiac, the Effects of a Conjunction would last to the end of the World; and if all the Conjunctions which have been since the Creation, should to this day work their Effects, as they did at or soon after they happened, what a miserable time should we now live in? but they are not to last always, for they are appointed for Signs and for Seasons, for days and years; and as he hath directed Sa∣turn and Jupiter in their Conjunction in Sagitary, Anno Dom. 1603. to the new Star, which was in the year 1572. and the Ascen∣dent and Midheaven of the new Moon, before the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, 1682. directed to the same new Star, is to no more effect (comparatively) than a man being very cold, should fit by a great Fire till he had warmed and refreshed him∣self, and many years after, he being in the same Extremity with Cold, and coming to the same House, expecting there again to warm and refresh himself, but finds neither Fire nor Inhabi∣tants there at present, nor had any been there for many years past, only there remained the House empty; so by this direction, the House or Sign of the Zodiac may be found, but the new Star long time past, quite out and extinguished; so are the directions to the other Promitters as erroneous and frivolous. But I having been atleast twenty years a Student in Astrology (and other parts of the Mathematicks) I have read many Authors, and discoursed with Doctor Reason, and Doctor Experience, and they tell me, that the time of the Events of Conjunctions of the superior Pla∣nets are taken two ways, that is generally and particularly; first generally, as to the time of the whole duration of their effects; take this for a general Rule, that the effects of the Conjunction of any of the superior Planets continue in force, but until another Con∣junction of them happen (which is in about twenty years) and then their effects will alter, according to the nature of the Sign in which it happens, consideration being had to their Position and other Configurations; so that the effects of that Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Sagitary, in the year 1603. (so much spoken of by Mr. Holwel, in his Catastrophe Mundi) ended in the year 1623. for at that time there was a Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, whose effects also ended in the year 1643. and the more fully,  there then happening a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Pisces, a Sign of the watry Triplicity, whose effects lasted but to the year 1663. for then hapned another Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Sagitary, whose effects were not different from that in 1603. I mean, in their own Nature, and not as the many Eclipses, solar Ingresses and other Configurations, altered them, and their effects ceased, when the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter hapned in Octo∣ber 1682. and was the first of the Triple Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, which hapned then and in the following year, under whose effects we now are, and shall so be, until the year 1702, and their effects in their own nature are not like to be much different from that which hapned in the year 1623, only this in 1682. is of far greater force, it being a Triple Conjunction, and therefore its effects will be more powerful. The effects of the Conjunctions of the Superior Planets, are commonly Seditions, Troubles, Mutations, Wars, Subversions of Monarchies, Kingdoms, States, alterations of Laws, Customs, Priviledges, Treacheries, Treasons, and sometimes the Death of Emperors, Kings, Princes, Potentates and Powers; and thus much of the general Operation: now we come to the parti∣cular. And the better to judge of the future effects of the Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, in the years 1682. and 1683. let us look back into History, and see what hath hapned under such Conjunctions already past, and thereby we shall be the better able to judge of their following significations. In the year Anno Christi 35. (being but one year after the Death and Passion of our Saviour Jesus Christ) there was a Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupi∣ter in Leo, and then the Jews waxed bitter cruel against the Disci∣ples of our Saviour; for after the death of Christ, the Holy Spirit falling on them, they boldly profess what they had seen and heard, and that openly; and Stephen being chosen to perform Ho∣ly Service, in the Company of the Christians, because he fer∣vently imployed himself in publishing the Glory of Christ, being laid hold on by envious Persons, was stoned to death, and from that time, the chief of the Jews endeavoured all they could, to blot out the name of the Christians by what means they could; but especially Saul breathed out threatnings against them, who having the largest Power made over to him from the high-Priest, he then bended toward Damascus, that he might oppress them, but in his Journey he was affrighted, and being struck to the Earth,  he is converted, and suddenly applied himself wholly to the Wor∣ship of Christ. This hapned in the third year after the death of Christ, and the first after the Conjunction. And this is a very good Example of what is now coming on af∣ter the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, 1682. for Jupiter being a Significator of the Christian Religion, and afflicted by the body of Saturn in Leo, the House of the Sun, another Significator of the Christian Religion, and Saturn being Significator of the Turks, may well stir them up against Christendom; Saturn being the most superiour Planet, put great and haughty thoughts of conquering the Christians into the Turks malicious minds: But I suppose that neither the Turk nor Mr. Holwel thought of, nor considered, that Saturn was weak in Leo, and disposed of by the Sun, Significator of both the Christians and their Religion; for all that Saturn can do in Leo, is but to stir up Christian Emperours, Kings, Princes, and Governours, to purge out all the dangerous dregs of obstinate Dissenters and Fanaticism, and those of every wicked principle contrary to the well-being of Government; and that in all parts of Christendom, but especially in those places un∣der the Sign Leo, also to those in Sextile or Trine to it, which are Aries, Gemini, Libra and Sagitarius; so that all Countries and Cities under those Signs will in some way or other receive benefit by the means of this Conjunction, rendring the Regal power like the Sun, glorious and splendid; but I doubt of the Conversion of the Turks under such a Conjunction, though Saint Paul had his under the like. In the year of Christ 94. was a Conjunction of Saturn and Ju∣piter in Leo, and soon after Ulpius Trajanus took the Roman Em∣pire, being two and forty years of age: he was strong and expert in Military affairs; he was also wise, moderate and courteous, so that by the general consent of all he deserved the name of very good: he was prosperous in War; he added to the Roman Em∣pire Dacia of Scythia; in the year of Christ 102. he subdued the Armenians, Ibrians, Colchians, the Sermats, Arabians, and the Baby∣lonians; he brought under his power Seleucia, Ctesiphon and Babylon, and several other Cities; but while he sailed in the Red-Sea, they rebelled against him; but he in person, with his Army, soon sub∣dued them again; he also smote the Cyrenian Jews and Parthians with great slaughters, which rebelled against him; he fell sick and died naturally in Cilicia, in August, Anno Dom. 117.
Sure, had Mr. Holwel compared History with his Astrology, he might have judged more charitably of Rome, Italy and Christen∣dom; for never yet did Christendom under any Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, suffer Detriment, but came off Victori∣ously over their Enemies, neither can either Turk, Tartar, or a∣ny other Enemy to Christendom, under this Conjunction, pre∣prevail against them; yet I suppose, the Turk will have another attempt against Christendom, though he come off with as great or greater loss, than he did last at Vienna. In the year of Christ 153, there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, and at the same time, Antonius Pius was Emperor of Rome, and with such virtue and goodness governed he that Em∣pire, that he excelled all others, the whole World was at Peace with him, all the time of his Empire, foraign Princes did dread him, so that they would make him the Arbitrator of their differences, because of his Wisdom; he died naturally, Anno Dom. 161. Antonius Varus succeeded him, and reigned prosperously; he was succesful in War against the Parthians, also in the Marcoman Wars; he died of an Apoplexy, Anno Dom. 171. Surely, if Christian Princes were under this Conjunction, so wise and successful in War against their Enemies, I know no rea∣son Astrologically, why they should not be so now, for the Con∣junctions are the same, and therefore must work the same effects; let Mr. Holwel, or any of Mahomets Prophets say what they will, for the Celestial Powers have not changed their former In∣fluences. Anno Dom. 829. there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, and then Lodovick governed the Roman Empire: but in the year following, Pepin King of France conspired against him, with the chief Governours, and lays hold on the Empire, but in the following year, through the help of the Germans, Lodowick re∣gains the Empire, and in the year 833. he is driven from the Em∣pire, by the Conspiracy of his three Sons, and advice of the Bi∣shops; but in the following year,
Lodowick is wholly restored to Empire, and so governed it to the day of his death, which was in the year 840. after his decease, his three Sons fall at difference for the Empire▪ Lotharius the eldest, against Lodowick and Charles the two youngest, and joyn Battle, so that many men were slain on both sides; but in the year 844. they agree, and divide their Fa∣thers Inheritance thus amongst themselves; unto Lotharius the Ro∣man  Empire, that is, Rome and Italy, also Lorain, which took its Name from Lotharius, and also the Province of Burgany, and to Ludovick, all Germany, Mentzspiras, and Worms, and to Charles, the West Country of France. In the year 888. there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupi∣ter in Leo; about this time, was great War between the Normans and the French; for in the year 890. the Normans lay Siege against Paris, but took it not, though (as some say) the Siege lasted se∣ven years, and in the year 898. the French slew of the Normans 18000, upon the Hill Faulcon, near the City. Anno Dom. 948. there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, about this time, Berengarius usurps the Kingdom of Italy from Lotharius, but the Italians disliking his Tyrannical Government (which he held for the space of twelve years) fled to Otho King of Germany, who being gone into Italy, in the year 962. received the Imperial Crown of Pope John, and was saluted the first Empe∣ror of Germany; he two years after led away Berengarius into Ba∣varia, and there he died; so Otho governed the German Empire prosperously and victoriously all his days, so that the German Em∣pire had its rise under the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, a fixed Masculine Regal Sign, which relates to Diuturnity, and the long continuance of all things begun under it. Thus you may see, that under these three Conjunctions, the Christians have had War one against another, an Error too much practised amongst some Christian Princes. And indeed at this time, amongst those that profess the Christian Religion, there are so many animosities and divers ways of Worship, that I think, most of our Dissenters had rather chuse to kiss the Turks Alchoran, then to submit to our Lawful Regal Authority; but let such know, that under this Conjunction, and all other Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, there hath been, and will be a cleansing and purging by Regal Authority, all the dangerous dregs of Fanati∣cism, and of every wicked Principle, repugnant to the well-being of Government. There hath also been under those Conjunctions, Treachery, Treason and Rebellion; the Son hath conspired a∣gainst the Father, and driven him from his Throne; the Subjects have conspired against their Prince, and Brethren have made War one against another for their Fathers Inheritance; God grant that no such Conspiracy happen in any part of Christendom under this Conjunction.
In the year of Christ 1623. there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, just at which time Mustapha the Turks Grand Signior was deposed from his Imperial Throne the second time, and Morat the rightful Heir proclaimed Emperour in his room, be∣ing but fourteen years of age. In this year the Turks had War with the Hungarians, Persians and Transilvanians; and the Persians took the Province and City of Babylon from the Turks, slew many of them, took Mosul (formerly called Nineve) Mecha, and great part of the Turks Territories. The following year was much in effect like unto this. In 1625. a Rebellion broke out in Asia against the Grand Signior, and a great Plague in Constantinople. In 1626. the Turks besiege Babylon, but came off by the loss of 70000 Turks and Tartars; and in the following year no peace could be conclu∣ded. 1628. the War continued, and the Persians took several Towns from the Turks. This War continued till the year 1638. at which time the Persians had War with the Indians, and then the Grand Signior taking advantage of the Persians, went himself in person with a mighty Army against Babylon, and with much ado, and the loss of a great many men, took it from the Persians on promise of quarter; but contrary to his promise he caused all Men, Women, and Children to be barbarously massacred: and by this you may see the faith of a Turk. And thus much of the signification of this Conjunction, and of what is past; I proceed now to what is yet to come. I come now to speak of the Triple Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, in the year of our Lord 1682. And it is a Maxim according to that of Cardan, Segm. 5. Aphor. 63. Operationes Pla∣netarum nunquam cessant, donec contraria à Planeta, vel Stella fixa, aut signi parte contrariae qualitatis impedimentur, vel in Solis radios in∣cidant; The operation of the Planets never cease until they are impedited by a contrary Planet or fixed Star, or from part of the Sign of contrary quality, or when they fall into combustion, viz. into the rayes of the Sun. In this Conjunction those Planets are not in evil aspects of ei∣ther the Sun or Mars, therefore no great matter of their effects could operate at the time of this Conjunction; but about the be∣ginning of November 1682. the Sun came to the Square of both
Saturn and Jupiter, and also of the place of the Conjunction; at which time the effects began to operate, though but slowly; but about the latter end of January following, the Sun came to the Opposition of both Saturn and Jupiter, and the place of the Con∣junction;  this insinuated mischief into the heart of the Turks, to proclaim open War against Germany; and in the latter end of Au∣gust, and beginning of September, when Mars came to the Square of Saturn, and the place of the Conjunction, the effects began to operate to purpose, as we know about Vienna, and had not Jupi∣ter been stronger than Saturn, Christendom might have had too great a cause to have remembred it, for Mars is an Enemy to both Saturn and Jupiter; but a little after, Jupiter met with the Con∣junction of Venus, governess of Libra (and thereby raised the Siege) being the Sign under which Vienna lieth. And whereas this Conjunction hapned in Leo, we may consider by what hath been already said, that Christendom never suffered much under such Conjunctions, but hath come off either with honour or victory, although they have had many Troubles and Afflictions; for under such Conjunctions they have beaten the Turks, and almost all that have opposed them. Now if I should be asked the reason why the Christians have been so fortunate under the Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo? Consider that Jupiter in Leo is stronger than Saturn there, and disposeth of Saturn in his own Triplicity; for Saturn being Perigrine, and in his Detriment, he is as a man in custody of his Enemy, forsaken of his Friend, and not able to work the evil ef∣fects he might do if he were strong, either in his own House or Exaltation; for what hurt can an envious man do, when he is bound in Prison, and forsaken of his Friends? Saturn can do no more in this Conjunction (neither can Kingdoms nor People un∣der Saturn) but envy the happiness of Religions, Countreys and Persons under Leo, and not under Leo only, but those that be un∣der any Sign that is in Sextile or Trine to Leo, which are Libra, Sagitary, Aries, and Gemini. But here, peradventure I may be asked the Question, why Vienna in Austria, being under Libra sped so ill? To that I answer, Had it not been for this Conjunction, it might have sped worse; for the Besieging of Vienna, was not wholly occasioned by the Conjunction, but rather by the last Co∣met that appeared in 1682, and passed through Libra, and the Conjunction may well be reputed the Raising of the Siege at Vien∣na; or if any one will have it to proceed from the Conjunction only, it matters not, for it is no more than I told you before, that Saturn or the Turks by him represented, would shew their Envy to Religion, Countries, Cities and Persons under Leo, and under Signs in Sextile or Trine to Leo, but would want strength and power to destroy them; for if we compute the Loss that the Turks
have sustained by that Siege, both in Substance and People, and compare it with the Loss of the Christians, we may say, that the Conjunction was not prejudicial, but rather beneficial to Chri∣stendom, and prejudicial to the Turks. Yet I do not say, but these Places under Leo, and in Sextile, and Trine to it, may have Troubles, but their Enemies shall not have power to prevail against them to overcome them; for though Sa∣turn be the most superior, yet being out of all his essential Digni∣ties, he shall be forced to seek to, and comply with the Sun and Jupiter, and that upon their terms, and not upon his own. But these Regions, Countries, and Cities under Aquarius, being in opposition to Leo, and those in square, which are Taurus and Scorpio, will be like to be most sufferers (under this Conjunction) by one means or other; either by War, Famine, Sickness, or In∣undations of Waters, &c. for certainly, if those under the Sextiles and Trines partake of Evil, much more those under the Squares and Oppositions will be Sufferers by their effects, as may be seen by this following example, being yet in the memory of many thousands now living in England. In the year 1663. there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Sagitary, and Gemini is the opposite Sign, London being under it, what sad fates did London under∣go soon after? for in the year 1665, there was a lamentable Plague, and in 1666. the City almost consumed with Fire; many more sad Accidents I could instance, but let this suffice at this time. And because that every one that may happen to read this Book, may not be an Artist good enough to know what places are under the Signs before mentioned, I will here insert the Names of some Countries and Cities under Leo, and under the Signs in Oppositi∣on and Square to it, which are as followeth. Under Leo, are, Italy, Sicily, Bohemia, the Alps, Gallia, Togata, Apuleia, Phoenicia, and part of Turky: Cities, Damascus, Syracuse, Rome, Ravinna, Cremona, Ulms, Prague, Lints, Confluentia, Bri∣stol, &c. Under Aquarius, are, Samaria, Amazonia, Tartaria, Muscovia, Westphalia, Mosel, Aethiopia, Media, Arabia, the desart: Cities, Hamborough, Breme, Montserat, Pisarum, Ingoldstad and Trent, &c. Under Taurus, are Russia, Polonia major, Lorrain, Campagnia, Helve∣tia, Switzerland, Persia, Cyprus, Parthia, Ireland: Cities, Parma, Nants, Bononia, Sena, Mantua, Sicila, Tigur, Tarentum, Lucern, Lipsic, &c.
Under Scorpio, are, Norway the Higher, Bavaria, Campagena, Cappadocia, Idumea, Catalonia, Barbary, Fez: Cities, Gaunt, Alge∣ra, Messina in Italy, Frankfort upon Odar, Valentia, and Catalonia in Spain. Thus I have shewed some of the Places under the Signs, in which the effects of this Conjunction is like to be most powerful; and for the time of the future effects, it is most like to be, when the Sun or Mars shall behold Saturn, Jupiter, or the place of the Conjunction by an evil Aspect; that is, by Square or Opposition. I do not say that all the places aforesaid shall be afflicted at one time, neither that all the Calamities aforesaid shall happen to any one place; it is enough (nay and too much too) if any one of them happen in any Country or City in Christendom. Thus have I given an Astrological account of the effects of this Conjunction, and I hope I have not varied from the Rules of Art; and here I shall speak a little more of the effects of this Conjunction be∣tween the Turks and Christians, in what may be the event of their present War. In April 1684. Saturn will be again in Leo, and in square to Mars; in May following, Saturn meets with a Square of the Sun; Jupiter also meets with the Square of both the Sun and Mars, intimating that about that time, the Turks will be active against the Christians, and then great preparation will be making on both sides; but both Saturn and Jupiter are weak, and there∣fore no great Actions will yet be performed; but rather about Au∣gust, when the Sun comes to the place of the Conjunction, or la∣ter in the year, when Saturn and Jupiter meets with the body of both the Sun and Mars, and then the Turks suppose to do great matters against the Christians: but I find no reason in Art, why he should have any more Victory in this year, than he had in the last against the Christians; neither do I suppose, that their Diffe∣rences will be reconciled until the year 1687. which if it be not, then let the Turk look to be beaten to purpose, for then Jupiter comes into Sagitary, his own house, and then, when it is too late, the Turk may repent of his Enterprises.
CHAP. VII. Treating of Comets and their effects, and particularly of the Comet that appeared in the year 1680. What a Comet is. MOst Arologers of ancient times have told us, that a Comet or Blazing-Star, is a dry exhalation, viscous and slimy, drawn up into the upper Region of the Air by the Sun, and there being set on fire by its Heat, breaks forth into a Flame, of which, there be divers sorts, as Pliny writeth in Lib. 2. Cap. 25. de Nat. some whereof move Direct, some Retrograde, and some not at all, but are fixed as the other Stars. But my Judgment of them is, that they proceed not from natu∣ral Causes (as before mentioned) but from Divine Providence, and sent by Almighty God, as tokens of his wrath against man∣kind for their sins, thereby threatning them with his Wrath and just Judgment, thereby to try if their obstinate Hearts will relent and turn to the Lord, that he might turn his Judgments away from them; or else to be the forerunners of some more than ordi∣nary Birth; whom God is pleased to honour with a new Light from Heaven; as he hath done, not only at the Birth of Christ, but also at the Birth of several Emperors, Kings and Poten∣tates. Histories, ancient Writers, and common Experience in former Ages testifie to us, that these signs in the Heavens, or appearance of Comets, are the assured forerunners of sterility of the Earth; Famine, Pestilence, War, Alteration of Empires, Kingdoms, Statutes, Laws and Customs; Winds, Earth-quakes, Inundations, extream Heat and Drought, with grievous Diseases, and such like horrid evils; also the Birth of some great Emperor, King, Gover∣nor, or Learned Man. That they are the cause of inordinate heat, it appears by their burning in the Air, as appears visible to the eye of the beholders. Of Sterility, by reason the fatness of the Earth, is by them drawn out, and the Earth left dry and lean, and so the Moisture
and convenient Humidity whereby it fructifieth, all things grow∣ing thereon is extinguished; whence there must needs follow Fa∣mine and Sterility in those Regions and Places, from whence the Matter and Substance is drawn. And of Pestilence and Diseases, in that the Air is by them in∣fected, through hot cloudy Exhalations, the which being drawn in at the Mouth of living Creatures, infecteth and killeth them; also by excessive Heat the radical Moisture of living Creatures, whereby they subsist, is dried up, so they become no other than dead Carkasses. Of War, Alterations in Kingdoms, States, Laws and Customs, in that when a Comet or Blazing-Star appears, there are many Exhalations in the Air, and those of nature hot and dry, the which do so dry up the Humors in Men, and move Choler, that they are easily excited to Quarrels, after which, follows War and Bloodshed; and so consequently alterations in Kingdoms, States, Governments, Laws and Customs. Also of Winds, for that they are of the same matter (supposed) whereof Comets are, and when any Comet or Blazing-Star ap∣pears, many such Vapors are exhaled, and when they vanish, they become windly Vapors. Of Earth-quakes for the same reason, for they are occasioned of Winds, and Winds are the occasion of Earth-quakes. So of Inundations for the same reason also, for the Comets cause wind, and wind causes the Sea to roar and rage, whence follows Inundations. Authors give a description of several sorts of Comets both in name and form, which I shall here omit, and proceed to their Effects; and particularly to the Effects of that most amazing Co∣met or Blazing-star, which appeared not only to us, but to almost the whole World, in 1680. and it is credibly reported that this Comet was seen in Jamaica about the
12th of November, in five degrees of Libra to rise in the East, in the Morning, and moved direct as the Planets do, and so ran through Libra, Scorpio, and Sagitary very swiftly, it ran five or six degrees in one day; but I am not certain whether it were seen in England until the eleventh of December, and then my self saw the stream of it in the West, of at least 40 degrees in length, but the Star I could not see, it being under the Earth; but on the sixteenth day of the same month I beheld it about the middle of Capricorn, and from thence I had the sight of it every night when the Element was clear, un∣til  the 27th of January following; it was then in twelve degrees of Taurus, and by observation I sometimes found the stream of it full sixty degrees and upward, which is 3600 miles, so that after it appeared to us in the Evening, it ran through half Capricorn, all Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, and half Taurus; so that accounting from the first appearing to its disappearing, it did run through two Thirds of the Zodiac, so that almost two Thirds of the World will be partakers of its Effects. When it appeared first in the Morning, it was said to appear very red, therefore supposed to be of the nature of Mars; but when it appeared to us in the Even∣ing, it was of a pale colour like unto the Planet Saturn, and there∣fore of his nature; and as it was a Saturnine Comet, we must ex∣pect Saturnine Effects; and to discover what a Saturnine Comet Effects are, both in its own nature, and in the nature of the Signs it passed through, let us peruse the ancient Writings of the Chalde∣ans and Hebrews, which were very expert in these matters in for∣mer Ages; and we shall find Comets of the nature of Saturn to denote many Evils, as Wants, Anxieties, Famine, Destruction of the Fruits of the Earth by Caterpillars, Locusts, and such like vermine; Wars, Treacheries, and Troubles; Chronick Diseases, and Melancholy Distempers, as Quartan Agues, Falling-sickness, Leprosie, Palsies, Consumptions, and all Diseases which are of long continuance; Destruction of Beasts appertaining to the use of Man, Excessive cold weather in Winter, and of long conti∣nuance, Clouds, Frost and Snow more than usually; strong and high Winds, Tempests, Shipwrecks, with destruction both of Men and Fish, great Inundations, and Storms, to the annoyance of Cattel and of all things; Men and Kingdoms under the Dominion of Saturn will suffer detriment, and be in danger of destruction. Is not the most part of Turky under Saturn? then let them be sure to suffer much by the Effects of this Comet. And as it first appeared in Libra, it denotes Thefes and Robbe∣ries, excessive Cold, the Death of some great Man, great Slaugh∣ters, secret Plots and Treacheries, a scarcity of Rain, a Drought of Fountains, and other Waters, a want of the Fruits of the Earth, and Provision for the use of Man; great Winds, horrible Earth∣quakes: and as it appeared in the East, these effects seem to ope∣rate within few years after its Apparition, and places under Libra, will be the greatest partakers of its effects.
Places under Libra are, Austria, Alsatia, Livonia, Sabandia, Sa∣voy, Dalphinate: Cities, Lisbon, Francfort, Vienna, Arles, Spire, Pla∣tentia,  Heilbarn, Landshute and Antwerp, and some of these Places have already felt too much of the effects of this Comet. And as this Comet passed through Scorpio, it signifies War and Rebellion against Kings, change and alterations in Governments, Contentions amongst great Men, great Perils and Dangers, the death of some eminent Person, Detriment and Damage to Souldiers, Labour and Travel to all kind of Men, Mischief to Wo∣men with Child, a scarcity of Water, and of the Fruits of the Earth; especially on Countries, Cities and Persons under the Sign Scorpio. Places under Scorpio, I have shewed in the last Conjunction, and therefore omit them here. Its going through Sagitary, denotes many Misfortunes to befal great Lords and Noble-men, Bishops, Clergy-men, Scribes and Lawyers; much evil and Tribulation to be fall wise and Learned Men; sometimes War and Captivity of Princes. Places under Sagitary, are Spain, Dalmatia, Sclavonia, Hungary, Moravia, Misnia, Celtica, Arabia Foelix; Cities, Toletum, Vo∣lateras, Malinum, Narbonne, Avignion, Colonia, Agrippina, Buda, Collen. As this Comet passed through Capricorn, it signifies Fornication and Adultery, more than usually committed amongst Men and Wo∣men; War, Danger to Kings and Princes by Poysoning, or by other Violent ways; Cutting by the High-ways, Quarrels, Misfortunes and Calamities amongst the vulgar People; it also denotes Perse∣cution and contempt of Religion, and Religious men; but its ap∣pearing in the West, may defer its operation until some years af∣ter its apparition. Places under Capricorn, are Thrace, Macedonia in Greece, now part of Turky, Albany, Bulgary, Saxony, Stiria, India, Orcades Isles, Hassia: Cities, Meklin, Cleves, Vilna, Constance, Augusta, Branden∣burg, Oxford. As it passed through Aquarius, it denotes War of long continu∣ance, the death of some eminent Prince, or illustrious Person, and also of the common People; an obscuration of the Air, much Thun∣der and lightning, Pestilence also, and other epidemical Diseases. Places under Aquarius, I have also shewed in the late Conjuncti∣on, and thither I refer my Reader
As the Comet passed through Pisces, it foreshews, that Kings shall war one against another, also Kindred, and such as are alli∣ed one to another; the Father against the Son, the Son a∣gainst the Father, and Brethren one against another, and there shall be much slaughter among men; great Contentions also  touching matters of Faith, Priviledges and Customs in Religion, and antient Traditions, with destruction of Fish, and dangerous Navigation. Places under Pisces are Cilicia, Calabria, Galatia, Lycia, Garoman∣tes, Pamphilia, and the higher Egypt. Cities, Alexandria, Compo∣stella, Hispalis, Rhemes, Worms, Ratisbone, &c. As the Comet passed through Aries, it signifies Evil and Detri∣ment to Noblemen, and the Grandees of the Earth, with abun∣dance of sadness to the common sort of people; a dejecting or unthroning of some King or Emperor in the Eastern parts of the World, and the promoting of some Ignoble man; also great trou∣bles in the Eastern parts of the Earth, much War and Blood-shed, with the death of some Eminent Prince, and slaughter among men; much troubles, violent pain in the Head, Eyes and Brain, a Rot of Sheep, and detriment to all sorts of small Cattel. Under Aries are Palestina, Syria, Swevia, Polonia minor, Denmark, Germany, France and England. Cities, Naples, Capua, Fararia, Flo∣rence, Lyndavia, Padua, Brunswick, Cracovia, Utretch, Marcelles. And as this Comet took his course in Taurus, it foreshews the death of some Great man, mischief and injuries to the meaner sort of people, with captivity and diminishing of their Goods, detriment to great Cattel, great and tempestuous Winds, corrup∣tion of Fruit, destruction of Corn, cold Winters, also diseases proceeding from corruption of blood, as Scabs, Itch, &c. Places under Taurus have been already shewed in the late Con∣junction, to which I refer you. And thus I have shewed you the nature of this Comet, and its Signification in the Signs through which it passed; also some of the Countries and Cities under those Signs, in which the effects will be most manifest in some sort or other. Note, that if a Comet appear in the Ascendent of any King∣dom, City, Town, or Family, or in the Ascendent of the Revo∣lution of the World, it signifies Detriment or Destruction of the thing by the Ascendent signified, and the Sign thereof: And if it appear in the Mid-heaven, or in the Sign thereof of any of these aforefaid, it will bring danger to their Honour and Reputations in one way or other.
I come next to treat of the time when these Events will happen; and herein we ought to consider, whether the Comet were Ori∣ental or Occidental; for Oriental Comets soon shew their Effects, but Occidental Comets shew their Effects more slowly: this Co∣met  was both Oriental and Occidental; Oriental at the begin¦ning, while it passed through Libra, Scorpio and Sagitary; where¦fore the effects in those signs would quickly appear; but in Capri∣corn, it became Occidental, and so continued until it disappeared, whose effects will be deferred until a longer time. And for the time of the duration of their effects, Origanus ad∣mits, for every day a Comet appears, one years effect, and after this account, the effects of this Comet should continue seventy six years, for it appeared from first to last seventy six days or more; but I will not presume to affirm that it shall be exactly so; but if we take for every Sign that it passeth through, one years ef∣fects, which I suppose we justly may, we shall not have much less than eight years expired, before its effects be fully over, and I think, this will prove the exactest measure of time, in the ef∣fects of this Comet, and thus much of Comets in general, and of the Comet in 1680. in particular, with their significations. But what Mr. Holwel hath written of Comets, is nonsensical, and the most part of it much varying from the Rules of Astrolo∣gy, especially what he mentioneth of this Comet, in his Judg∣ment of the year 1683, which was one great cause of my wri∣ting, to shew the World the true signification of Comets, accord∣ing to what Authors (more experienced than Mr. Holwel) and daily experience have shewed. CHAP. VIII. Treating of, and Confuting most of Mr. Holwels Judgments on the State of the years from 1683. unto the year 1700. mentioned in his Catastrophe Mundi. MR. Holwel in his Catastrophe Mundi, speaking of the Con∣junction of Saturn and Jupiter, saith, according to natural causes, Persons signified by the Sun should be afflicted in Person with Horror and Amazement, and shall be in danger of their Lives, Honour and Estate, and be forced to fly for Safeguard; for by bad advice, they shall attempt to do that which they shall never attain to, by which means, they shall bring themselves and
Fame to destruction for ever; and therefore he adviseth Persons to beware, that have ten or eleven Degrees of Leo ascending. And in his judgment of the year 1683. he saith, that a very great Person of Europe that hath Leo ascending, will be afflicted and flung into a great many Troubles, with the death of some of his Children, Loss of Honour and esteem in the World. Sure Mr. Holwel hath forgotten that he himself hath Leo ascending, that he judgeth so hard of persons born under it; but I could wish that he had named what great Persons of Europe he meaneth, that we might have observed the Event; but I shall here (as I have already) shew them, that great Persons born under Leo, shall not by the effect of this Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, receive Detri∣ment or Loss, either of Honour or Estate; but on the contrary, they shall gain both Riches and Honour, by the effects of this Conjunction, though Mr. Holwel gained the displeasure of the Honourable E. A. Esquire, to whom he confidently dedicated his Book; although he never knew him, which nonsensical Stuff be disliking, made the Epistle Dedicatory to be taken out again; this was done when Saturn transited Leo, Mr. Holwels Ascendant, as also Saturn did, when the said Book was written. Neither do I judge of the death of any Prince in Europe, that hath about thirteen degrees of Virgo ascending, though it be said in Catastrophe Mundi, if there be a Prince in Europe, that hath about thirteen degrees of Virgo ascending, he should in the year 1684. return to the ground from whence he was taken; for I find no such matter by the Rules of Astrology, as may sig∣nifie the death of any such Prince; but I pray for all Christian Princes, and particularly for such as have Virgo or Leo ascending on their Horoscope. And whereas Mr. Holwel saith in his judgment of the year 1698. that Saturn, in opposition to the place of the Conjunction 1682. and Jupiter in square thereto, threatens
Italy with no less than Confusion, and utter Subversion of the triple Crown; and although it may not be fully compleated in this year, yet, saith he, this year sets a great say to it, and in the following year its full destruction. And that then the power of France shall be brought low, and many thousands of his Subjects destroyed, through the pride of an insulting King, and envy of the Roman Clergy. But if this Opposition and Square be the cause of all this, why had not Rome been destroyed in the year 1639. when Sa∣turn  was in opposition to the place of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, which was in the year 1623. I have searched into History, and found that there was War at that time between the Swedes and the Germans, and between the French and the Ita∣lians, but not any thing to the Destruction of any Nation or People, yet many eminent Persons died about that time, some in War, and some in Peace, and many strange Accidents hapned; and I suppose, near the like may happen now; but little or no∣thing of what Mr. Holwel writes in all his judgment on his seve∣ral years will prove true, there being no grounds in Astrology for them, but what his own fantastical Pate hath imagined, to raise himself a Fame in the World, by predicting Lyes, and to deceive the World by Delusions; for I will appeal to all Artists what Rules there are in Astrology, whereby to predict (as Mr Holwel hath) that in the Eastern part of the World, a whole Army should be destroyed with fire from Heaven, with their Wealth and Treasure; or that there should be War and Plagues over the face of the whole Earth, and that there should be so many men destroyed that there should not be men enough left to get in Har∣vest, as he predicteth in his judgment of the year 1699. therefore I aver all that he speaks of that year and the next, to be absolutely false, nonsensical and erroneous; in the next year (with which he concludeth his Book) he saith, that Rome is now destroyed, and Peters Seat thrown down, and the Conversion of the Turks and Jews soon follows, and Religion (but what Religion he knows not) truly preached universally over all the World, sure this must not be Astrology, but Prophecy; and if Prophecy, then Mahometal, and if Mahometal, then lying like Baal's Pro∣phets, and so deserving the reward that they received from Elijah. ADVERTISEMENT. THe Author hereof calculateth Nativities exactly, by knowing the Hour of any ones Birth; shewing thereby the general Fate of the Native, and the greatest Accidents that will happen to any one through the whole course of his Life, and the time when they will happen; whereby one may withstand much evil, and augment the good. He also teacheth the whole Art of Astrology; and by Astrology, resolveth all Lawful Questions.
This for Mr. John Gadbury, at his House in Brick-Court in Westminster. SIR, HAve you seen Saunder's Apollo Anglicanus for the year 1683? Written (as I suppose) by Mr. Henry Coley, which if you have, I question not, but that you have seen therein, how he unworthily derides both you and me, about your Calculation of your ten and twenty-years E∣phemerides; which I dare presume, himself is no way able to com∣pose the like, or any that shall have so much truth in it as those have; as for the Ephemerides of ten years, which you calculated your self; he saith it was handsomly Transcribed from Hecker, which that I suppose to be a very great Mistake in Mr. Coley, and therefore unworthily taxed by him in an Almanack; for I have heard you say, when you wrote the ten years Ephemerides, you had not Heckers Ephemerides in your House, until six years thereof was performed, which I dare believe you had not; for I have been acquainted with you many years before that time, and I never had seen Heckers Ephemerides in your Study, though I have perused many of your Books there, nor yet did I ever hear you say you had it, till since; and as for the twenty years Ephemerides, which was by me calculated by your Directions, it is his (the said Coleys) pleasure to say, that it is an inartificial Calculation, and done by adding one mi∣nute 56 Seconds, or 50 Seconds, or 48 Seconds, (or rather he knows not what) to the Suns place four years before, and so the Moons place to be taken on the first of January, from her place the 27th. of February, twelve years before, by adding some Signs, Degrees and Minutes thereto, and the Places of the rest of the Planets, much after the same method, with the help of Argol, and so imposed upon the World, under very plausible pretentions; because, saith he, the Author is ashamed to shew his Tables. But I would have Mr. Coley, and all others know, that he is mistaken in his judgment, for there was much more labour bestowed on the Calcu∣lation thereof, and many of the Calculations I have yet by me to be seen. But by what Tables I proceeded, I will not yet oblige Mr. Coley so much as to tell him; but I would have him bestow the like pains, and to calculate the Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, and tell me whose Ta∣bles will come nearer to the observed Truth, than that Ephemerides did; and also in the Conjunction of Mars and Venus, which was on the 28th. of February 1684. for I did with mine own eyes behold that Conjunction, and it was so nigh, that
Venus did eclipse part of the body  of Mars; now had the said Ephemerides been calculated by the Rules that he prescribed, or otherwise transcribed from Argol, it would have differed very much; but I could wish Mr. Coley would present the World with a better Ephemerides, and then I might have no cause to mention this following Verse. Some are quick-sighted faults to find, But to perform, drowzie and blind. He also saith that neither the Author, nor his Pupil (meaning me) hath yet learned to calculate the Eclipses of the Luminaries, or else that Task was too hard for them (as for being your Pupil, I own it) and indeed, I should think my time ill bestowed (and my self unworthy of being your Pu∣pil) if I could not calculate an Eclipse as well as he; but I shall at present say no more of him, but conclude with this Aphorism: No wonder if some through Ignorance or Envy discommend, those Performances which those more learned as highly commend. Sir, I desire your Answer, by the first opportunity, and you will very much oblige Sir, your Real Friend and Humble Servant JOHN MERRIFIELD. From my House at the Hand and Pen at the Lower end of Hors∣lydown, near Dock-head Southwark, London. ☽ March the 3d. 1683/4. These for Mr. John Merrifield, at the Hand and Pen near Dock-head in Horslydown, Southwark. Good Mr. Merrifield, YOurs of the third Instant I received, wherein you have invited me to a View of what I had (long since) willingly passed over in silence. I was never good at quarrelling in my more active and pregnant years, and now, my long acquaintance with the accustomed Scandals of
Invidious  Persons, hath made Contests even hateful to me. Not but that my Sence of things is as quick and distinguishing as ever, but my Reason being bet∣ter informed, I can with patience suffer an Ass causelesly to kick at me, rather than transform my self into his Fellow Ass, and fall a kicking for company. Your Guess at the Author of Apollo Anglicanus, 1683. is not only happy, but true, viz. that it is not R. Sanders, but H. Coley, and therefore it had been better dated from Baldwins Gardens, than from Ouston in Leicestershire; for if Cambden may be credited, there is no such place in all that County, and consequently no such man as R. San∣ders (honestly) to be found to own himself the Author of that simple scan∣dalous Almanack. As for H. Coley (the rightful Dad of that mishapen Brat) if after the several Civilities I have afforded him, in using him courteously, when at any time he came unto me for Instruction, and answering sundry of his Letters for his information in Art; I say, if after these, and my many Friendships to him, he, in requital, revile me, I cannot help that. It was in my power to teach him something of Astrology, but he hath another Master which instructs him to be Ungrateful, and tutors him to Calumniate his Benefactors. For the good Opinion the Man hath of himself, and his own (supposed) Abilities, I wonder nothing at it; that being a peculiar Vertue, and only to be found among the Sons of In∣gratitude. The Man, as you well observed, hath boldly attacked us both, and Me in particular, he hath been Pickeering at a dozen years together; but why he should make You to share in the Scandals of his scurrilous Pen, I understand not, nor yet do I justy know wherefore he is so impu∣pudent and daring with Me, from the Benefit of whose Labours he hath eaten his Bread many years; and the very Books he now quarrels at (I mean the two Ephemerides, which you take notice of) are the Foun∣dation of his daily Dole and Drinking. But now, Sir, since you have by your obliging Letter rouzed me up to a Consideration of the Malice of this impertinent Fellow (which I had so long overlooked, and designed ever so to have done; but for this your Notice of these his continued Scomma's and Scurrilities) I shall here in∣form you, as briefly and as fully as I can, of the ground of this envious Mans Prejudice to Me (for every Action hath either a real or pretended Reason from which it derives) which is this, [and let him say the contrary if he can or dare.]
viz.—When he was upon publishing his Clavis Astrolo∣giae (as he calls it) he very confidently sent to me to give him an Enco∣mium thereunto, without letting me see what he had written, that I  might know what I ; which begat in Me a desire to peruse his said Clavis, the better Me to serve him. This was so reasona∣ble that he could not deny it, accordingly he sent me (by an ingenious Apothecary, and Neighbour ) several of his Printed Sheets, which when once I had viewed, and my forward Author to have taken much out of my Doctrine o ativities to furnish his said Clavis withal, and never so much as mentioned from whom, or whence he had it. And not content to play the ungrateful Plagiary thus with me; he also had stolen my Title too, and affixed it to the second part of his said Clavis, calling it Genethlialogia. Seeing my self thus unworthily abused, I did deny to give him an En∣comium, unless he would new Print his said Title.—This (Sir) is the real Ground and Foundation of this Mans many years Quarrels against me, and nothing else that I know of. The Answer which you have made to his present Cavils in the English Apollo 1683. is enough, if not too much; I am sure, more than your causeless Adversary can justly reply to, without confessing his Error. And to deal sincerely with you, I did not esteem him worthy of either your Notice or Animadversion. Non Obstante, the great Flattery with which his Friend J. Kendal hath blown him up, even to a degree near bursting; he being of himself, naturally, like the Toad in the Fable, aiming to swell into an Ox. And since my Hand is entred upon this unpleasant Subject let me not tire your Patience, I pray you, if I observe further to you, a Pact or Confederacy between this Kendal and Coley, to scratch and claw each other, as if they had both come out of some loathsome Lazaretto, full of the Itch and Scurvy. Mr. Coley is made the Hannibal of A∣strology; but Mr. Kendal (in modesty) refuses to be the Phormio (for∣sooth! for fear of being a Fool) yet he reads Lectures aloud in his admired Hannibal's Praise. Mr. Coley on the other side (following the Adage of Mulus Mulum Scabit) no∣tably reveres Mr. Kendal for his great Parts; particularly for his new Discovery of the Measure of time in Nativities, the ground whereof, he acknowledgeth to have ta∣ken from Mr. Coley's Clavis; and in the strength of this Discovery of our new Colum∣bus, the Almagest and Quadripartite are made (between them) to Bow and do Ho∣mage to the ones , and the others Clavis. The Fam'd Sir C. Heydon, and excellent Valentine Naybode, are both voted useless, and allowed only to have been Good in their time, but now, like an old Almanack, out of Date. Thus these Sons of Ipudence and Folly have boldly taken upon them not only to bespatter those Artists to whom they are beholding, of this present Age; but cast Dirt also in the Faces of those Anti∣quated Luminaries of Elder times; in comparison of whom, these Scioli are scarce worthy to be accounted so much as Nebulose Stars. Further, were it proper for a Letter, I would demand of this Coley, in case he be so great an Artist, as Mr.
Kendal pretends him to be (1.) Where he finds Cardan saying, Nemo particularia predicit? as he hath more then once affixed upon him in Print, Car∣dan  being the most particular in his judgment of rologer whatever. (2.) Out of what Astrological Author it is, that he undert to  and Tutor Princes, as in his Apollo Anglicanus 1682. saying—It is  for Princes to fortifie them∣selves with the Love of their People. And That (in that year 1682.) many Dissembling Political Stratagems among , to keep up their Prerogatives, &c.—The Epistle to Oates's Narrative (but neither Ptolemy, Haly or Bo∣natus) teach such like Astrology; but of this in this place. (3.) Wherefore doth he take such Pains in his (Foolish) Merlyn of this year, to scratch and claw Hol∣wel, taking him roughly by the Hair and Ears with one Hand, and gently leading him, for fear of falling, with the other. (4.) What Authority He hath (and from whom he de∣rives it) to sit and Censure whom he pleases, Voting what is, and what is not fit to be Printed upon the great Triple Conjunction of ♄. and ♃. in ♌. thereby prejudging not only my promised Pains upon that noble Subject, but anothers designed Endeavours also as useless; Mr. Lilly and Mr. Edlin (he says) having done enough upon the like already. And I believe they have so indeed, for his Understanding, and too much for Mine, or any other Honest Mans. There being plain Treason to be found in one of them, and nearly the same in the other. Behold the Authors that this our triumphant Hannibal trades in! I might have noted many more ridiculous, vain and trifling things that this Coley is guilty of, and render you an Account of the many slovenly Artifices which he hath made use of (besides what you complain of in your Letter) to vilify and scandalize me; but these things cannot easily be brought into a Letter, wherefore, I presume, you will not now expect it from me. Sir, to conclude (for 'tis time now to release you) I return you my thanks for the justice you have done both to me and your self also, in retorting those brutish and ungrateful Reproaches (brought against my thirty years Ephemerides (in the latter whereof, you were eminently assisting to me) upon the Head of the malicious Author of them: And perceiving its your design to print this Letter of mine, together with your own to me, as an Appendix to your ingenious Catastasis Mundi, I leave it wholly to you to do therein what you please; the matters here mentioned being most punctually and religiously true. So wishing you success in all your worthy and Lawful Attempts for the Promotion of Art, and detection of Cheats and Impostors, I remain, (SIR) Yours and Astrologies Servant, JOHN GADBURY. ♃ March 6. 1683/4. Brick-Court, by the Deans-yard, West∣minster. ADNERTISEMENT. THe first Volume of Collection of Letters for Improvement of Husbandry and Trade, being finished, the second is carrying on, and will be endeavoured to be made useful for all sorts of People, by John Houghton, Fellow of the Royal Society. To be sold by John Lawrence at the Angel in Cornhill, and several other Booksellers. FINIS.
