S4793A 99897690 137666
A SURVEY of the MICROCOSME. OR THE ANATOMIE Of the BODIES of MAN and WOMAN Wherein the SKIN, VEINS, NERVES, MUSCLES, BONES, SINEWS and LIGAMENTS thereof are accurately delineated, and so disposed by Pasting, as that each PART of the said BODIES both inward and outward are Exactly Represented. Useful for all DOCTORS, CHYRURGEONS, STATUA∣RIES, PAINTERS, &c. By MICHAEL SPAHER of TYROL, and REMILINUS. Englished by JOHN IRETON Chyrurgeon. LONDON. Printed by Joseph Moxon, and are to be Sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Atlas on Ludgate-hill, MDCLXXV.
Front and rear anatomical illustration of the human circulatory system. A B
A View of Humane Bodies. And first the Figures B A on the left hand, Representing the Skin with its Vessels or Veins under it. FIGURE A. a The outward ingular Veins climbing outwardly the hin∣der part of the head, and in∣wardly entring the mouth. b A branch hereof to the cheek and nose. c The Forhead vein joyned to the other of the other side. d The veins of the Temples. e The vein of the Ear. f g Branches from the Axillary. f The Head vein. g The Liver vein. h The middle vein, made of the branches of the head and li∣ver veins. i Branches of the liver vein, dispersed through the palm of the hand. k k The Muscle vein. ll Veins reaching to the Breasts m m Smal veins coming from the branches of the hollow vein. m Branches climbing from the Epigastrique vein. opr The inward Crural vein, or the Saphena. o Branches from the aforesaid veins, reaching unto the Lesk. p Branches of the same vein, running on the inside of the Thigh. q The inner Leg vein, called Ti∣bialis or Poplaris. r The Saphena. s The head vein by the Thumb t The Spleen vein by the little finger. u The outward branch of the Crural vein. x The Calf vein. y The Hip vein. FIGURE. B. a The vein of the hinder part of the Head: or Vena puppis. b The mediane, as in Fig. A c The division of the same, where its branches are min∣gled with others in the back of the hand. d The Head vein, as in Fig. A f e Its branches by the Wrist which irrigate the whole back of the hand. f Its branch in the thumb, often times opened for the Head vein. g The Milt vein. n The outward Crural vein, made of the branch of the middle and Liver veins. h h Circles of the muscle-vein i The veins of the Sholders. k A branch on the side of the Breast. l Divers branches from the Loin veins. m Veins comming from the outter branch of the hol∣low veins to the muscles and skin of the Buttocks. A branch from the out∣ter Crural vein to the Hipps. o Branches rising upwards by the hinder part of the thigh. p The inward Crural vein, as in Fig. A. q. q The inward Ham vein; as in Fig. A. q. FINIS. A Dissection of Humane Bodies. Visio Prima. Te first Table in the first Vision, Fig. A. represents a The Head, a c b The hairy scalp. a The sore part of the Head. The Crown of the Head. The hinder part of the Head. d The Temples. e The Ear. * The Forehead. * fgi The Face. f The Cheek-ball. g The Cheek-puf. The upper lip. i The Chin k The neck. l The hollow of the neck. mm The Patel bones. n The Chest or pit in the Chest. The Fingers. o The Thumb. p The Fore finger. q The middle finger. r The Ring finger. The Little finger: The bending of the Arm. u The Truck of the Body. The whole Chest. The breast. xx The Ribbs. The breast or Papps. z The Duggs or Nipples of the Breasts. The Trench of the Heart. Tis prt is anointed for the th f the Stomach. The lower belly. The right Hypocondria; or podia, The outward Li∣ver. Remedies applyed to this . The left Hypocondria. The Epigtre or upper part of the lower Blly. The Navil, or oot of the lly. The sides. The Water-course. The Flancks. h h The esk The region of Mans and Wo∣mens privities. The fore part of the Thigh e Cpping Glasses are ap∣ied to bring down Womens . The Whril-bone of the Knee. The Knee. n The lg The instep. p The instp q The utter A. stx The , or sing  of the FIGURE. B. The Navl. a The white line Th oblique muscles des¦cending to the lower belly. cc The Fibres of those descen∣ding muscles. ** The production of the rim of the belly. dd Muscles descending obli∣quely. ee The right muscles. fff The right Interfections. gg The piramidal muscles. hh The transversal muscles. ii The Glandules cal'd Prostatis. a The second muscle of the Leg b The 8th. muscle of the thigh. c Part of the sixth muscle of the thigh. These 3 on the other side are marked with kkk. o The first or longest bender of the Leg. Also e d. m The 4th extender of the Leg, or the right muscle Also i. The first extender of the Leg called Membranosus, Also f g. p The 3d extender of the Leg, called Vastus internus. Also m. q The second extender of the Leg, or the muscle cal'd Va∣stus externus. Also k. r The first extender of the foot called Gastroenemius internis Also p. s The second extender of the Foot called Gastronemias ex∣ternus. Also q. t y y The extender of the toes. u The first bender of the Foot called Tibeus antius. x The 2d. bender of the Foot, called Peronaes 1. y y The tendons of the toes. z A transverse ligament above the Foot. h The second extender of the thigh, called Glutaeus medius. l Part of the first muscle ex∣tending the thigh, called Gus major. n o The extender of the instep. r The first bender of the toes. The 2d. bender of the Leg, called Graias. s The second bender of the toes called Flexor magnus. t The third bender of the foot, called Pontus secundus. The head of the thigh. The first Circunactor, or the muscle leading the thigh a∣bout cald Olturator internas y The muscl called Crurialis. z The thigh bone. a The sore part of the Leg. b The fore part of the Brace. c A ligament placed between the bone of the Leg and the Brace. l d Bone-bound muscles, a a The Pectoral muscles. a The lesser Saw muscle. c The greater Saw muscle. dd The Intercostal muscles out∣wards to which the inward are joyned e The bare Ribs with ut flesh. k n q The broad mule, under which lyeth f The fourth muscle of the bone Hols. h The first muscle of the bone Hoi. The first muscle of the Jaw. The muscle of the bone H∣d under the Chin. T nding muscle, or se∣cond of the Jaw. l The muscle of the upper Lip. m The temporal muscle. The Forehead-muscle. The Almons of the Ears q T beginnings of the se∣venth muscle of the Head. s The second muscle of the Arm, called Deltoides. t The second muscle of the Cu∣bit called Brachialis. u The first muscle of the Cubit called Bicps. u y The first muscle bending the neck, called Longas. z The 2d incliner of the wand a The second muscle bending the Wrst. b The first incliner of the wand. The muscle in the palm of the hand. d Its Tendon divided. e The transverse Ligament of the Hand or Wrist. † The first bender of the four Fingers. † † The Tendons of the same, separated from the muscle. e The second bender of the four Fingers. * The tendons of the same, per∣torating the rest. f f The implantation of those Tendons. h The bender of the thumb. i The bone of the Sholder bared. k The Short muscle of the cubit. or the second extender. l The 5th extender of the cubit. m The round incliner of the wand. n Benders of the Wrist. o A Ligament in the midst be∣twixt the elbo and the wand. p The first supinator of the wand. r The first Pronator of the wand, called Quadratus. s The wormy muscles. t Certain benders of the thumb. Of the veins. Fig. C 1. o a * p r The hollow vein. o a * The ascending trunck of the hollow Vein. b p o The descending trunck of the same. c c Roots of the Port vein. d The trunck of the port vein cut asunder. Roots of the hollow vein in the Liver. The midrif veins cut asunder. a The orifice of the hollow vein gaping into the Heart. b The Crown vein of the Heart. iiii The vein Azygos, or Non-paril. m m m The latercostal veins by the Azgos. n The division of the hollow vein into a ubelavian trunk ner the Jugulum under the Breast-bone. o The upper Intercostal vein by the sides. oq The subelavian branch tend∣ing unto the Arm, called by some Axillaris. p p The descending Mammary vein into the right muscle of the Abdomen, a x in this Fi∣gure out asunder to avoid entangling. The upper Chest vein. The lower Chest vein. * The external vein of the arm, called Cepaica. * The upper muscle descending Ascending, called by some Humraia. The Basilica in the right hand called Hepatia. x x Branches whereof the first coming from the head vein, and the 2d. from the Liver, joyning together make the middle vein, or Median. z A branch of the head vein by the little finger. a a A branch of the Liver vein, divided somewhat deeper. b A branch of the Liver vein to the thumb. c c The inner Jugular vein. d d The external Jugular vein divided, whereof certain bran∣ches are imployed to the face. e The Fore-head vein. f The branch of the Jugular, reaching to the Face. g The 2d. and 3d. union of the inner Jugulars, with the sinus of the Brain. h The first sinus of the brain. i The fourth sinus or hollow∣ness of the Brain. k The subdivision of the outter Jugular. l The third sinus of the brain. † The second sinus of the brain. f f The fatty veins Adposa. g m The kidny veins Emulgent. h i k The loyn vein. Lom∣l baris. The upper muscle vein. n n Circles of the Emulgent, by the kidneys. o The Ureter proceding from the kidney. pp The right and left Sperma∣tick vein. † The middle muscle vein. r The division of the trunk of the hollow vein, descending at the 4th rack-bone of the loins into the Iliac branches. The holy veines. The Iliack bifurcated into an outer marked t u, and an inner marked t. * u A propagation of the Illiack unites, with its branch in the progress or going forward. xxxx The Epigastriques cut a∣sunder. y y The small Sciatique vein. z The Crural vein here also the inward and outward muscle vein joyns. a The Trunk of the Calf vein, and its division. b The outer branch of the Calf vein, whose under propagation goeth towards the brace and its upper, to the Leg bone, and so mingleth it self with the circles of the Ham vein. c A branch of the Ham-vein, which watereth the whole foot. d The great Sciatique vein, (sprouting from the inward trunk of the Call vein) a∣bout the muscle of the Calf of the Leg. e The Saphena spread over the top of the Foot, and is in its passage to the great Toe di∣versly divided. f The inward branch of the calf vein by the back part of the Leg. g The conjunction of the Ham-vein with the Calf vein. Of the Arteries. Fig. C. 2. o l r The great Arterie. n The orifice of the great Ar∣terie with the crown arte∣rie gaping into the left Ventricle of the Heart. n o The ascending trunk. o The division of this trunk in∣to subelavian branches. * * The upper Chest arterie from which the upper inter∣costal Arteries proceed. o p p The Mammary descending unto the Navil. q q Muscula, or a branch attain∣ing to the backward muscles of the neck. * The Scapular Arteries. d The lower Chest Artery be∣tween * and l, its inward bran∣ches reaching to the arm-pits but its outward is the shoul∣der-artery. * u The Axillary artery. aa Two branches of the axilary artery These branches go to the hand c The neck artery which attain∣eth the skull through the pro∣cesses of the rack-bone. b The Carotis, or sleepy artery s g The division of the sleepy arteries. k k The wonderful net in the formest ventricles of the brain. k t The trunk of the great ar∣tery descending. m m m The lower intercostal arteries. l The original of the Caeliacal branches which is divided into right and left branches n Certain Circles of the left branches, chiefly about the upper part of the Stomack o Circles of the same branch to the Milt. 4 Circles of the right branch to the hollow part of the Liver and the neighbouring parts. p r r The right and left Sto∣mack and Kall artery. s s s The mesenterical arteries. * The arteries of the midrif. ss The fatty arteries. gm The arteries of the kidnies n n Certain branches of arte∣ries in the Kidnies. o The Sperma r The bifurcation of the great artery into two ilck trunks s The arteries called Sacra, or Holy. t t The subdivision of the iliack trunk, where the les∣ser inner branch makes the Muscula inferiour: but the outward runneth towards the foot and sprinkleth its branches therein. x x The Epigastrick arterie climbing upward joynt it branches about the region of the Navil, with the ar∣terie of the papps. zag The utter iliack or crural branch &c. The other bran∣ches not marked in this Fig. retain the names of the veins set out in the former figure. Figure D. This figure D is by the Graver unadvisedly cut fromwards, except the roots of the hollow and port veins sprinckled through the Liver, which are plac'd as they ought Further, This figure represents the Veins and Arteries as they are joyned together throughout the whole Body. a * p the hollow vein. a The ascending trunk of the hollow vein. * The midrif veins. b The descending trunk of the hollow Vein. ccc Branches of the Gate-vein dispersed through the Pa∣renchyma of the Liver. d The trunk of the Gate-vein cut asunder. e e e e Branches of the hollow vein in the Liver. f The fatty veins and arteries. g The Emulgent veins and arteries. h i k l The Loyn veins and ar∣teries. l m The Ureter cut asunder. m The dilatation of the vessels in the Kidney. n The distribution of the ves∣sels through the Kidney. o The Spermatical arteries and their original. p The Spermatical vein, which ariseth from the Emulgent at the letter g. q The orginal of the arteries which are led to the Inte∣stines by the Misenterie. Here cut asunder. r The division of the great ar∣terie and hollow vein into branches. s The holy Veins and arteries. Or Sacrae. t The division of the right I∣liack branch into an out∣ward and inward branch. u Muscula superiour, or the upper muscle vein. x The Epigastrick vein and arterie; here cut asunder which about the Navil meets with the pap veins and arteries. y Muscula inferiour, or the lower muscle, z The Calf vein divided into three branches, with its arterie descending even to the end of the Foot. a The distribution of the Calf vein. b The great Scitique. c Bra  the great Sci∣atick vein.  The Ham vein. e The Saphana, which is ope∣ned by the Ankle. f A production of the Calf vein. g The conjunction and union of the Ham and Calf veins. h The mouth of the hollow vein gaping into the H i i i i i Branches from t vein Non paril. The hole of the great Arte∣ry divided from the Heart l l The descending trunk of the great arterie. mmm The intercostal bran∣ches. n the ascendidg trunk of the great arterie. o The ascending hollow ein. p The Mammary, above which the outward Jugular is. o q The subclavian branch at q. Some call it Axillaris. r The chest veins and arte s A branch along the side of the Chest spent chiefly into the broad muscle. tt The Head vein, or Cephalia u The Basilica, or Liver vein. x x Branches forming the Median, whereof one is o∣pened for the Head vein, the other for the Liver vein y The middle vein or medin. z z A branch to the lttle fin∣ger. a a The division of the Liver branch or Basilica. b A branch nourishing the skin. The inward Jugular, with the sleepy arterie. d  The outward Jugular vein. e The meeting together of the Jugulars. f g Propagations to the hin∣der most part of the Head. h The sinus of the Dura mater. i The fourth sinus of the Dura mater. k The wonderful net out of the sleepy arteries. Of the Bones and Sinews. Fig. E E The forehead bone. a The Yoak bone. b The upper Jaw bone. c The lower Jaw bone. 1 2 3, &c. The Rack bones of the Spine, 28. which are 7 of the neck, 12 of the Chest. 5 of the Loyns, the Holy bone 4 or 6. d The Coller bones. e The sholder blades. f The top of the sholder, and upper process of the shol∣der blade. g The bone of the arm, or Hu∣merus. h The lower bone of the cu∣bit, or the Ell. i The upper bone of the Cu∣bit or Wand. k The Wrest. l The after-wrest or Palm of the hand. m The fingers. † The Breast bone. * The Cartilage, cal'd Ensi∣faunis. p p p p The 7 true Ribs in the upper Rack bones of the Chest. q q q q The 5 false Ribs in the lower 5 Spondils of the back r The Holy bone, made of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 Bones. s The extremity of the Holy bone, called Coccyx or Rump, with its Cartilage. t u x Bones opposite to the Holy bone. t The Haunch bone or Ilim. u The Hip bone, or Coxendix. x The Shre bone or Ospbis y The thigh. z The great process of the thigh. a The lesser process of the thigh. b The Whirl bone of the Knee c The inward greater bone of the Leg. d The outward lesser bone of the Leg or the Brace. The Ancles or processes of the Leg, the innermost at e the oermost at  below these the Heel. g The Boat bone, or Os Navi∣culare: h The oes of the Foot. i The after Wrest, or sole of the Foot. l The wrest made of 7 bones. hereof 4 have names in the joynts of the Fingers and toes. Nature hath placed dive small bones ke as here may b seen) called Sesa, mois, or Seed bones. Of the Nerves. a Sheeth the Nerves pro∣duce from the marrow in the Skull, with the brain and after-brn. c b The length o the marrow (included within e skull, the rack bones, and th ho∣ly bone) covered with  membrane. o n n c e Nerves produced from thence, and passing through the bones; comming out are cut off. d The marrow within its coat as it is divided into filaments. e A Nerve boring its mem∣brane, and coming out with others, makes the Crural Nerve. f The membrane (investing the marrow) opened and laid on the sides. m n o p q r Nerves out of the rck bones of the Neck and first Spondils of the Chest attaining the Hand, and are called Brachiales. m The first Nerve of the Arm, n The 2d. o The third Nerve of the Arm. p the 4th q 5th r 6th. o o the Intercostal nerves from the rack-bone of the chest cut asunder▪ n n Nerves out of the Rack
bones of the loins to the mu∣scles of the paunch, out of which the 1st, second and 3d nerves of the knee. s The fourth and thickest cru∣ral nerve, proceeding from the coalition of the nerves out of the holy bone. t The division of the 4th Crural nerve into the ham nerves. u The branches of its outward trunk. x The inward branch of the same trunk under the skin, replenishing the Calf of the leg. y Another inward branch under the skin, creeping along the inside of the leg. z The remainders of the nerves spent in the fore part of the ot. e second Table, or Facio, in e first Vision. Figure A. represents the Woman. a The forehead. b The ey. c The nose. d The mouth shut with the up∣per and lower lip. The neck f The throat. g g The top of the shoulder. h The Arm. i The elbow. The Cubit.  The ell. The Wrist. The after-wrist or palm of  The shoulder ppp  of the Back. r The The loyns or region of the kidneys. The place of the hipps where we apply remedies for the Sciatica. The place of the holy bone. The place of the rump. The buttocks. The back part of the thigh. The ham. The calf of the leg. The foot. The utter ankle and heel, the hollow of the foot. d The heel. The sole of the foot. these two following Figures the skarf-skin, the skin, the fatt, the fleshy pannicle are all removed. Figure B. The skul bared. a The two pair of the mus∣cles of the head, or the two complexi. b The first muscle of the head called Splenius. c The second muscle of the shoulder bla called Cuculla∣is, or the Monks d, or Trapezius the table muscle. d The second muscle of the arm, called Delt e The 4th mus  or the gr f The un  cle. g The  of the Cubit . he arm, called Su∣ pularis inferior. art of the muscle called ceps. k The extender, Longus. The third muscle of the Cu∣bit, or short muscle. m The fourth muscle of the Cubit. n The long muscle of the wand. o The first bender of the wrist. p The upper extender of the wrist composed of a double tendon. q The lower extender of the wrist. * The transverse ligament of the hand. 1 The first extender of the four fingers. 2 The third extender of the four fingers. 3, 3 Their tendons. † The second extender of the four fingers. 4 Its tendons. 5 The first extender of the thumb. 6 The fourth etxender of the our fingers. ss The third muscle of the shoulder blades, called Rhom∣boides. t The seventh muscle of the head, called Mastoides. u The fourth muscle of the shoulder blade, or the heaver. x The back saw, or the fourth muscle of the chest. y The third muscle of the neck or transversal. z z The muscles of the back, a little bunching out. a a b b The fourth muscle of the arm, or Latissimus. c c The first muscle of the thigh, or the first author of the buttocks. d The third bender of the leg, called Semi-nervss. e The fourth bender of the leg, called Biceps. f The fifth muscle of the leg, called Semi-membrs g The second ex ender of the leg, or Vasts h Te third extender of the leg, called Vasts exter The cavity in wh ch the Crual vessels pss throug. k Gastroenemius internus, also in the figure C k. l Gastrocnemius externus also in the figure C . m The heel, also in the fi∣ C r. toes, Figure C. CC The back saw, or the 4th muscle of the chest. a a The lower back saw, or 1st muscle of the chest. b b b b The first muscle of the head, or the splinters. c The upper oblique muscles or fifth pair of the head. ee The lower oblique muscles, or the sixth pair. d d The greater rihgt muscles or the third pair. f f The transverse process of the first rack bone of the neck. g g The process of the second rackbone of the neck. h The fourth muscle of the neck, called Spinatus. i The second muscle of the back, called Longissimus. k The sixth muscle of the chest called Sacrolumbaris. l The outward intercostal mu∣scles. m m The ribs naked. n n Part of the oblique muscle of the paunch descending. o o Part of the muscles of the paunch. p p Part of the overthwart mus∣ which lies the third of the back, called Sacer, or holy. r The 4th muscle of the back, or Semi-spinatus. s s Te extender of the thigh, called Guteus minor. t The back of the haunch bone bared. u A membranous ligament oc∣cuping the perforaion of the share bone. x The fleshy pouch adhering the compassing muscle of the thigh. y The muscle leading the thigh about, or the Obturator ex∣ternus. z Part of the third extender of the thigh. a The second up-lifter of the thigh. b The first bender of the thigh, called Lumbalis. c Vastus externus, or the second extender of the of the leg. d The fifth extender of the thigh, called Triceps. e The fifth bender of the leg, called Semi-membranosus. f Part o thes cond exten∣ders o the leg g The seat of the bone of the thigh bared. h The muscles moving the leg obliquely, called Po∣plitaris. i The first brace muscle, or second bender of the foot. n The four wormy muscles. o The backsid of the shoul∣der blade bared. p p The four muscles of the blade, or heaver. q The third ligament of the shoulder joynt. r Part of the Monks hood. s The upper Supscapular. t The greater round. u The shorter incliner of the wand. x The second extender of the thumb. y A ligament betwixt the ell and the wand. zz The bone-bound muscles. Figure D. Te skul. Te temple bone, called Samiformis. b The fore part of the head. c h space between the no∣strils. lower jaw bone. T rb of the ey. f The o rack bones of the p nes. g g The shoulder blades. h The bone of the arm, called Brachies. i The wand. m The wrist, or brac. n n n The true and false ris. o The holy bone. p p q q The hip bones. p p The haunch bones. q q The huckle bones of the share bones, which cannot here be demonstrated. r The thigh bone. s The shin bone, or bone of the leg. t The brace bone. u The metapedium or after-wrist of the foot. The third Table, or F, in the first Vision. Fi∣gure A. represent, A The belly of a woman great with child, near about the time of her deliverance. a The nipples or breasts. b b fg The privities opened. b The womans yard. d e The skiy cruncles. o The orifice of the womb or hole of the cleft. s s The mount of Venus. Hymen, a membrane, the ock of Virginity. Figure B. a The breast. B The breast flayed. c The greater glandule to the breasts. c c Diverse lesser glandules d Veins through these glan∣dules. Figure C. a The spoon of the heart. b b The ribs bared. c The stomach. d The liver. e The guts. s s The share bones. g A cartillage growing be∣tween the shares bones. h The bladder of urine. i i i i The umbilick vessels. k The navil. C The womb great with child, with the after birth which we have opened or dissected. l The fore part of the neck of the womb. m m m m The thickness of the womb. n n o o The hollowness of the womb. p That part of the womb o which the cake liver  growing. q q A line distinguishing the bosom of the womb. rst The after-birth of the in∣fant. s The membrane Chorion en∣compassing the infant. ttt Vessels dispersed in this membrane. u The liver of the womb. x x The humors detained in the membranes of the infant. y y The conjunction of the umbilical vessels as they are compassed with their coat ressembling a gut. zz The membrane Amnios, or innermost coat. a The infant ready almost to be born, demonstrated in its posture. The fourth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. a The cake of the womb in the Chorion. b The outside of the Chorion. c The inside of the Chorion. d The collection of the um∣bilical vessels. ee The outside of the Amnios. ff The inside of the Amnios. g g The umbilical vessels. h The knot in the umbili vessels. i i The infant bowed toge∣ther, and sitting in the womb. a An Embryo of twelve daies. b The umbilical vessels cut asunder. c Their entrance at the navil. Of the ey. The sixth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. Figure A. represent, a b b i The ey. b The greater or inner cor∣ner of the ey, where are the weeping caruncles, and the two holes, or passages. y The lesser or external angle of the ey. c The white of the ey. The moveable ey lid, or the upper ey lid. The immoveable ey lid, or the lower ey lid. f The apple of the ey, with the rainbow. gg Tarsi, or the comb. h h The hairs of the ey lids. The hollowness of the up∣per ey lid. k The ey brows. The hollowness of the un∣der ey lid. A m m The right muscles of the eys. n n The fat between these muscles. n o o o The optick nerves cut asunder. p The meeting together of the optick nerves. The other letters are explained in the first Table. Figure B. B The utmost coat, called A∣napa. aaa The vessels of this coat. bb The hairy processes. Figure C. C The horny coat, called Cornea. aa The several vessels disper∣sed through the coat. bb The apple, the black, or window of the ey. cc The rainbow, or crown in the ey. Figure D. D The grapy coat, called Uvea. a The hole in the grapy coat, where the apple is. Figure E. E The upper optick nerve stretched out. E The under optick nerve cloathed in his membranes. Figure F. F The thin Meninx clothing the nerv. a The Christalline humor. b The ciliar ligament. c The glassy humor. Figure G. What the former Figures have shewed each part, this explaineth and set∣eth down together. G The Christalline humor. a The glassy humor. b The watry humor. c c The utmost coat, called Adnata. d The shady part of the horny coat. e The brighter part of the horny coat. f The grapy coat. g The netaipe coat, called Retina. hh The fat between the mu∣scle. i The optick nerve clothed with both the membranes. k k The two right muscles. l l The other two right mu∣scles. m The oblique muscles. Of the Ear. The seventh Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. Figure A. represents, A The Ear. a a f g The outward Ear. a a The circumference of of the ear, Ca . c The bo of the outward ear. d The  goat, in this part there grow hairs. e The cavity of the ear, which is next unto the hole of hearing called Alvearium. g The lap of the ear. s The part opposite hereto. Figure B. Bhd The stony bone. a The appendix of the tem∣ple bone, called Styloides. c The hole of hearing. e f g The drum head. e The small membrane of the drum head, unto which the three bones of the or∣gan of hearing, as the ham∣mer, the anvil, the stirrop and the bony ring are set about. f The cavity of the tympane or drum head. g A muscle in the tympane or drum head. h Three little burrows, or holes of the two cavities. i i The labyrinth, in which are divers chambers. k The snailshel in the stony bone. ll The cavities dissected of the stony bone. The eighth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. The snailshel with the laby∣rinth. The ninth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. The three bones of the or∣gan of hearing joyned to∣gether, and shewed on the the contrary side. The tenth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. The three bones of hearing taken asunder, the first called the hammer, the se∣cond the Anvil, the third the stirrop. The eleventh Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. a c c e The mesentery. a The center of the mesen∣tery, where the vessels are tyed to the rim of the belly. bb A glandulous body set for security under the distri∣bution of the vessels. ccc Divers glandules placed in the mesentery. d The lower membrane of the kall. e A part of the mesentery tying the right guts to the back. The twelfth Table or Facio; in the first Vision. Figure A. represents, AA ab The mouth spad open that the inward cavity and chops may be seen. AA The cheek puff. a The nose. b The palate. c c c c The teeth. d The Gargareon. e The after tongue. f f The gullet. g The tongue, beneath which may farther be seen. * The bone Hyoides on the foreside. † The cavity of the foreteeth where under the tongue lies the notable veins cal∣led Ranivae. h The chin. ii The cartilage of the rough artery. k k The recurrent nerves. l l Strings of the sixth pair, which joyning together, make the recurrent nerve m m Nerves of the sixt pair. n The venal arterie. o The arterial vein. p A pasage from he arterial vein and the great arterie. b The ascending trunck of the great arterie, ut of which the subelavian branches do arise. The descending trunck of the great arterie. r r The slepy arterie. s s Branches of the rough ar∣terie cut asunder. t t The hollow vein. u The great arterie, or Aorta magna. x The hole of the hollow vein into the arterie. y The right ear of the heart. z The . a y b o The right side of the heart. a a a The crown vein and arterie. * The inward cavity of the right ventricle of the heart, in which the three-pointed flood gates tied to the fleshly parts with their tye, as also the flood gates Sigmoides are to be seen. c The point of the heart. dd The purse of the heart cut asunder and turned aside. Figure B. E The heart cut overthwart. a a The lest ventricle of the heart. bc The right ventricle of the heart. cc The internal sub∣stance of the heart. Figure C. C The heart cut according to its length. a The right ventricle. b The left ventricle. Figure D. D The left side of the heart. * * Vessels from the crown vessels. a The great arterie. b The arterial vein. c The venal arterie. d The hollow vein. Here a part of the substance of the heart being taken away the left ventricle of the heart appeareth: these following letters signi∣fying. a The three pointed flood gates placed about the great arterie. b Fleshy portions to which the ties of the floodgates are bound. c The ties of the floodgates. d The internal cavity of the heart. e The floodgates Signoides added to the venal arterie. Figure F. E The inside of the purse the heart. a The veins of the purse  the heart. The thirteenth Table, or Facio; the first Vision. acs The overthwart partici or the midriff. aa The membrane or nervou part of the midriff. bbb The fleshy part of the mid¦riff. c The perforation of the mid∣rif, where through the g arterie and the branch A¦zygos are transmitted. a The right perforation through which the hollow vein asc∣deth. e The lest perforation giving way to the gullet. f Two fleshing originals. g g Vessels through the Di¦phragma. The fourteenth Table, or Facio;  the first Vision. aaa The tongue. b The cartilage of the after tongue, c The upper hole  the gullet dissected. d The ligament encompassing the throat. Of the Throttle. The fifteenth Table, or Facio;  the first Vision. a b b The bone Hyoides. b b The process of the bone y∣oides. c c c A cartilagnous height whereto the bone Hyoides and the shield grsl are fastned. d The carrilage of the after tongue. The ¦side of the shield gristle. f f The gristle. g The hinder part of the ring∣gristle. h Membranes like t'es, filling and shutting together the ring of the muscles of the throttle. i. The muscles of the Lay, or throttle. The sixteenth Table, or Facio; i the first Vision. of the  of the Larynx. b The lower side thereof. The seventeneth Table, o  in the first Vision. abc The ring gristle. a The circular region be the ring gristle. b The ring gristle on the c The internal cavity of th ring gristle. The eighteenth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. a b The ewregristle. a O part thereof. b The other part thereof. The nineteenth Table, or Facio the first Vision. abcd The shield gristle. a a His upper process. b b His lower process. c His bosome, into which the ∣tertongue is joyned. d His outward face. The twentieth Table, or Facio,  the first Vision. a The face of the after tongue regarding the palate. b The tip of the aftertongue. The one and twintyeth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. a The benders of the four fin∣gers. b The prunicendons of the benders of the four fin∣gers cut asunder. c c The commixion of those. d The first bender of the wrist. The two and twentieth Table, or Facio, in the first Vision. a The first bender of the toes. b The tendon of the great ben∣der of the toes divided. cc The commixion of the ten∣dons. d The second bender of the toes. FINIS.
Anatomical illustration of the human body from the front and rear, along with illustrations of various appendages and organs. Accuratissima CORPORIS HUMANI. Descriptio. Visio Prima Inventione Michaelis Spaher, Remelini, at{que} aliorum Anatomiae peritissimorum. LONDINI Sumptibus J. Moxon. Fac. 1 Fac. 2 Fac. 3 Fac. 4 Fac. 5 Fac. 6 Fac. 7 Fac. 8 Fac. 9 Fac. 10 Fac. 11 Fac. 12 Fac. 13 Fac. 14 Fac. 15 Fac. 16 Fac. 17 Fac. 18 Fac. 19 Fac. 20 Fac. 21 Fac. 22 HONORATISSIMO SCIENTIARUM Mecaenati SAMUELI PEPYS Armigero. Admiralitati ANGS a Secretis. Regiae Societatis. Sanctaeque. Trinitatis apud Deptford Socio. D.D.D. Josephus Moxon.
A Dissection of the Body of Man. Visio Secunda. The first Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Figure A. represents, a The forehead vein. b The vein of the temples. A The head vein, or uttermost of the Cubit. c d The Basilick, or liver vein. * The middle vein. Observe that this vein c, is oftentimes (but unrightly) opened for the middle vein: also ordaining to open the lower branch Salvatella, from the vein d here, and at the little finger. e The Salvatella, or milt vein. f The head vein in the hand. * The utter vein, called Tibialis. g The inner leg vein. Also †. h The Sciatick veins. i The vein of the ankle, called Saphena. Also A. k The vein upon the great toe commonly called the head vein. l The vein of the little finger. The valves growing to the sides of the veins, make those knots here to be observed. m p q The mans member, or Priapus. r. The hair of the privities. n The mans yard. o The prepuce or upper skin of the yard. p The nut of the yard. q q The testicles in their purse. Figure B. a B b c d The rim of the belly. a a a The upper part of the membrane of the rim dis∣sected. b b The white line. B The navil. c c The productions of the rim of the belly. d d Veins and arteries from the mammaries. and arteries from the ns sprinkled  he rim. Figure C. C The midriff. Figure D. D The sorepart of the stomack. a The gut Diodenam. b The common passage of the gall. See more in the third Vision and the tenth Table. Figure E. E The liver. a a a a a a The body of the liver. b b The bladder of gall. † A portion of the umbilick vein. Figure F. F The navil. f f f The surface of the midriff, compassed with the Pla. † The umbilick or vein of the navil. a a The umbilick arteries. b A ligament of the bladder, called Urachus. c The bladder of urin. The bladder of seed, or glan∣dulous body which retains the laboured seed. Figure G. G The upper membrane of the kell. a a a a Vessels covered with fat. Figure H. H The guts. a The seat, here the muscles of the fundament. b The gut Ileu, or small gut. c The empty gut, or Jejnam. d The blind gut, or Caeum. e H e The collick gut, or Colon. f The right gut, or elum. See more in the third Vision. Table five, and Table thir∣teen. Figure I. I The trunck of the gate-vein. a The splenick branch. b The mesenterick branch. c c The milt. d d The sweet-bread, or Pan∣creas. e e The mesentery with his veins freed from the guts, and what else is joyned to him in the body. Figure K. K The cavity of the lower belly. a The descending trunck of the hollow vein. b The descending trunck of the great artery. c The fatty veins out of the trunck. d The kidny vein and artery. e The fatty vein out of the kid∣ny vein. f The keens or kidnies. g The ureters. h The loyn veins and arteries. i The upper muscle vein and artery. k The division of that vein and artery, into the iliac bran∣ches. l The holy veins and arteries. m A division of the iliac branch into an outward, and an inward. n The right Spermatic veins, out of the trunck of the hollow vein. o The left Spermatic veins, out of the Emulgent. p p The Spermatic arteries. q s The contiguity of the Sper∣matic veins, and arteries, so sliding by the productions of the rim into the purse of the testicles. r The muscles of the testicles, called Cremasteres. s The Spiry bodden vessel, cal∣led Varicosum, made of the wonderful implication of the veins and arteries. t t The testicles. u The Parostatae, or Epididymis, a crumpled vessel. x A leading vessel of the seed. y The reflexion of this vessel. z The Mans yard. See more in the Table of the second Vision; these parts exempted from the body. Figure L. L The purse of the heart, called Pericardium. a The mediastinum torn from the breast bone, and lying upon the purse of the heart. b The ascending hollow vein. The ascending great artery. d The descending great artery. e The division of the ascending truncks at the Jugulum. f The original of the vein Ay∣gos, out of the hollow vein. g The left subclavian branch. h The right subclavian branch: here it beginneth to be call'd the Axillary, or vein of the arm-holes i i The jugular with the sleepy arteries. k The upper Axillary branch. l The lower Axillary branch. m The arterial vein and his be∣ginning out of the heart. n The venal artery coming from the heart. o o o The spreading of these through the lungs. p. The descending trunck of the great artery. q The implantation and en∣trance of the hollow vein in∣to the heart. r The descending branch of the hollow vein. Figure M. M The rough artery. Or wea∣zon pipe. a b b c g h i The head of the rough artery, or top of the throttle. a g The after-tongue, at g, his cleft. b b The shield gristle. d M l k The pipe of the rough artery. c c The glandules, or almonds. d l l The semi-circular gri∣stle, between which the membranous ligaments. e e The division of the rough artery, and its branches unto the loes of the lungs. f f Circles of the rough ar∣teries through the lungs. g The back side of the ater-tongue shutteth the cleft. g h i The hinder part of the throttle. h h The cavity of the shield gristle. i The ring gristle. k k A membranous ligament, filling the circle of the crop. l l The muscles of the crop. x x m The upper right lobe of the lungs. y † n The lower left lobe of the lungs. z z The space between the globe, where they seem to be disjoyned. Figure N. N The great artery going out of the heart aloft, cut a The vein Azygos cut off. b The hollow vein aloft cut off, which passing through the midriff, is marked in the lower belly with e, and about the liver (from which it is here fed with some root torn out marked with i e , which letters betoken as followeth. e e The roots of the hollow vein torn out, which otherwise grow in the Parenchyma of the liver. f The same hollow vein separa∣ted from the liver, whose one trunck climbeth, the other descendeth. c c A branch of the Azygos in the left side. d d d Branches of the Azygos, resected, which are led to the rib. Figuri O. O The rack-bones. a a a a a a The ribs. b b The trench of the heart, or pit, or spoon. c c c c c c The intercostal mus∣cles. d The upper part of the breast bone, to which the collar bones are brought and fast∣ned, or articulated. e e The glandules placed at the hollow of the neck higher. f f The surface of the midriff, compassed with the Pleura. g g A portion of the Mediasti∣num torn away, by which you may see the cavity of the breast within. See further in the first Vision, Table 12. The second Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Figure A represents, a d g The outward surface of the skul, and the upper. A The bone of the forehead. a a The temple bones with the skaly appendices. b The nowle bone. c c The coronal future. d The sagittal future. e e The landal future. f f The bones of the sinciput. g g The yoak bone. Figure B. a a s BB The upper part of the brain bare from the skull, and covered with the Dura mater: a The first sinus of the brain, or Rillet. b The second sinus of the brain. c The third sinus; in the con∣course of these three is the fourth, which is hidden within. d The place of the after-brain. e e Certain small veins and ar∣teries, running through the Dura mater, or hard mem∣brane. f A line of the hard membrane made by the coronal future. g h The skull, from which the upper part is taken away, by the help of a saw. i Vessels through the soft mem∣brane. k k The upper part of the brain, (still covered with the soft membrane) with its anfra∣ctuousness. ll The brain turned to the sides. m The callous body. n The process of the Dura ma∣ter, ressembling a sythe. l m m The after-brain. Figure C. C C The inward marrow, the substance of the brain, from which the upper part, so well on the right as on the left side is taken away. a a The bark of the brain inve∣sting its marrow b The callous body. c c The arch, in the middle of which a partition distin∣guishing the former ventri∣cles of the brain. d d f f The former ventricles of the brain. d d The upper part of the for∣mer ventricles of the brain. e A vessel from the 4th rillet, lying under the Arch, which goet into the 3d ventricle. ff The lower part of the former ventricles of the brain. g g Arteries from the sleepy ar∣teries making the thumb, or Pl  ides. h h Small veins through the ven∣tricles of the brain. i Yet a part of the former right ventricle. k The third ventricle of the brain, of which the former passage goeth to the bason, the hindermost into the fourth ventricle. l l The sides at the third ventri∣cle of the brain. m m The testicles of the brain. n The pinal glandule, or the yard of the brain. oo The buttocks of the brain. p The fourth ventricle of the brain. q q The spinal marrow. rr Portions of the marrow from which the after-brain is cut off. Figure D. D a c f h The inner and lower surface of the skull. D The greatest hole of the nowle-bone, by which the spinal marrow descendeth. a a The two hindermost rillets of the skull. bb Divers futures in the base of the skull. c c Divers holes in the base of the skull, for the ascent and descent of the vessels. e The cavity in the wedge-bone, in which the flegmatick glandule resteth. ff The wedge-bone. g h h The spungy bone, or five. g The partition of the spungy bone. h h Small holes and cavities in the spungy bone. The third Table, or Facio; in the the second Vision. Explicateth the wonderful net. a b c d e The wonderful net. a The flegmatick glandule. b c The arteries going under the the brain, making the wonderful net. c c Other branches, unto which propagations of the net are committed. The fourth Table, or Facio, in the second Vision. Of the head veins and arteries. a The internal Jugular. b The sleepy artery arising with the Jugular. a h The first vein in the first bosome, from which bran∣ches to the neighbouring parts. b h The first artery in the first bosome. c The forward second vein in the sinus. c The backward third vein in the sinus. d d A distribution of the third vein and artery. e A branch of the first vein and artery, (into the muscles of the neck) cut off. f The second artery in the si∣nus, or bosome. g The hird artery, here entring the scull, and is divided. h The first sinus of the hard membrane. i The second sinus of the hard membrane. k The 4th sinus, (being made of the concourse of the other three) hidden. lll The third sinus of the hard membrane. m m Branches scattered to the left part of the membrane, here cut off. n n Branches sprinckled to the right part of the membrane. o o o The fourth sinus led along by the sythe. p p Circles from this leading, going upwards. q r The upper branch of the fourth sinus, the lower also about k, which being parted in two, sendeth the one sprout fore out to the thumb, the other after out, to the after-brain. s A notable vessel, into which the fourth sinus endeth. t The parting of this vessel in two. u Branches of the d artery, which on the left side goe to the soft membrane, and on the right side, to the right ventricle of the brain. x The wonderful net, y A branch of the 3d artery to the buttocks of the brain. z A branch to the eys. The fifth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Sheweth the Liver. A The hollow part of the liver. a a The bladder of the gall opened. b Three valves of the neck of the bladder. c The passage of gall opened. dd The concurrence of the neck of the bladder, with the passage of gall, making one chanale. eee Small branches, leading the purer gall into the bladder. f The umbilick vein. g The trunck of the gate-vein asunder. h h Part of the hollow vein. kkk The inner substance of the liver, being out in the mid∣dle, where likewise are the holes of the roots of the hollow and gate-vein cut open. l The flat side of the liver. m m A portion of the hollow vein. n n The midriff veins. o A ligament by which the liver is fastned unto the midriff. The sixth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. a The bladder of gall like as it is scituated in the hollow part of the liver. b A cavity, unto which the valves do cleave. c The neck of the bladder of gall. c The passage of gall. e The common way of the pas∣sage of gall, and the neck of the bladder. f The gate of the stomack, Or Pylorus. g The gut Duodenum. h The same opened that the insertion of the common passage of gall might ap∣pear. i The artery through the li∣ver and bladder. k A nerve for the liver and bladder. ll The Cystique twins. m m Branches or ways of the gall. The seventh Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. a The mammary veins and arteries descending. b The Epigastick veins and arteries ascending. c c The concurrence of the extremities of these vessels The eighth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. a The Balon lifted up. b The flegmatick glandule. c c c c Four passages to the letting out o flegme. The ninth Tae, or Fa io;  the second Vision. a b d f g  l  o p q t    Are expressed in the same man∣ner, as aforesaid, in the first Table and Figure K. e The  of urine. The see bladders opned. h The  of the u∣ters. i The vees of the yard. m The common passage to the seed and urine ope∣ned. The tenth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Exhibiteth the Womb, with its neck turned upwards. a The whole womb. b b The neck of the womb folded in it self, and drawn upwards. c A part of the bottom womb, like unto the nut of the yard, sweling into the up∣per part of the neck of the womb, in the midst where∣of the orifice appeareth. d The neck of the womb. The eleventh Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Setteth out the Ramification of the hollow and ga-vein through the liver. a b c The hollow vein. a b The ascending trunck. b c The descending trunck. d d d d Roots of the hollow vein, through the substance of the liver. e e e e Roots of the gate-vein, through the hollow part of the liver. f f f An inocculation of the roots of both the veins. g The trunck of the gate-vein cut asunder, which in the third Vision, and the fourth Table, is marked with a, and is there far∣ther described. The twelfth Table, or Faio; in the second Vision. Exhibiteth the bladder with its Ligaments. a The navil. b The backside of the blad∣der of urin. c The concurrence of the leading vessels. d The ureters, or pipes of the urin. e The Glandule prostatae. f The two bodies of the yard. g The Sphincter muscle of the bladder. The thirteenth Table, or Fa in the second Vision. Sheweth the left vent of the heart opened above  great artery. a The great artery ut asun¦der, beneath the which t arterial vein, and by t which the crown arteri The rifice of the great ar∣tery, or its original  the heart. c c Three valves in the ar∣tery, called Sigmoides. d The partition of the heart. e Two oodgates of the ven arteries. g The left ear turned in∣wards h f     The cavity of the left ventricle. i The fibres of the valves here resected. kk The external substance  the heart, shuting up the left ventricle. The foteenth Table, or Faio, in the second Vision. Sw the right ventricle of the heart,  by the a Portion of the great ar∣tery. b Portion of the holow vein. c The valves of the hollow vein. d. The fres or filaments. f g  e  The orifice of the ar∣terial vein opened. f g Smal holes of the br n∣ches into the arterial vein. e e e The three valves, called Sigoide. h h The partition of the heart. The fifteenth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Sheweth the heart freed from its purse, and dissected in the middle. a The ascending trunck of the great artery. b The left axillary artery. c The ascending trunck of the great artery, above which lies the hollow vein. d The right ear. e f The arterial vein opened. e A hole gaping into the hollow vein, with its valve: in Infants it is open, but in Men grown to years 'tis grown together. g g The outside of the heart. h i k Peeces of the heart. hh The insides of the heart. i i k k The cavity of the ven∣tricles of the heart. FINIS.
Anatomical illustration of the male human body, and various internal organs. Visio Secunda. Fac. 1 Fac. 2 Fac. 3 Fac. 4 Fac. 5 Fac. 6 Fac. 7 Fac. 8 Fac. 9 Fac. 10 Fac. 11 Fac. 12
A Dissection of the Body of a Woman. Visio Tertia. The first Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. Fi∣gure A. represents. a The forehead vein. b The vein of the temples. A The head vein. c d The liver vein. * The common middle vein, or heart vein. Observe that this vein c, is of∣ten times, (but that untru∣ly) opened for the middle vein, also ordaining to o∣pen the lower branch Sal∣vatelle, from the vein d, here and at the little fin∣ger. e The Salvatelle, or vein of the milt. f The head vein in the hand. * The utter leg vein, called Tibae. g The inner vein of the leg, Tibaea interior. h The Sciatick veins. i The vein of the ankle, cal∣led Saphaena, also A. k The vein upon the great toe, commoly the head vein. l The vein of the little finger. The oodgates of the veins growing to their sides, make that these knots here are to be cared for. m The hair of the privities. p m p The orifice of the womb, or privities. n The slit. o The Womans yard, or Cli∣toris. p p The little hillocks on both sides the slit. Fi  Tm of the Belly. ddriff. k. Fig. G. The Gall. Fig. H. The Gs. Fig. I. The Gate-vein. Fig. K. The cavity of the lower Belly Fig. L. The Heart. Fig. M. The rough Arterie. Fig. N. The great Artery. Fig. O. The rack Bones. R The cavity of the lower Belly. p q The Womb. p The bottom of the Womb. q The neck of the Womb. m m The Spermatick veins and arteries. n A branch of the Sperma∣tick, attaining the rim of the belly. r r The lower branches of the Womb creeping to its neck. s s Vessels from the Sperma∣ticks to the neck of the Womb. t The trumpet, or leading vessel of the seed. u Vessels unto this trumpet or leading vessel. x x The stones, or testicles. y y The lower ties of the Womb, or hanging muscles of the Womb ending in the privities. The other letters have the same signification with these: expressed in the first Table, or Facio; in the se∣cond Vision Figure K. The second Table, or Facio; in the third Vision, Fi∣gure A. represents. b f k The outward and low∣er surface of the Skul. a The hole of the Occiput or hinder part of the head. b The heads of the nowle bone articulated, with the two first rack-bones of the neck. c c The process Styloides, or bodkin. d The cavity of the temples for the articulation of the lower jaw. e The Prominence of the up∣per jaw by the temples. f The yoak bone. g The nowl bone. A b The processes like unto Bats wings. i The Pallate. k k The teeth of the upper jaw. Figure B. A a b The brain turned in∣ward and covered with the Dura mater. A The residence of the fleg∣matick glandule, under the Turky saddle. i a a The Dura mater, or hard membrane. b b b Vessels sprinckled through the Dura mater. Figure C. C a c k o The brain turn'd in∣ward, freed from the Dura mater. C The meeting together of the optick nerves. a a a The brain with his Con∣volutions as yet whole. b b The coats of the Eye from the membranes, into which the optick nerve is displayed. c c The Mammillary processes. d d d The original of the optick nerves out of the spinal marrow. e e e The spinal marrow. f A branch or nervous tye seeming to be a peculiar nerve, and haply taken for the 8th nerve of the brain. g The motive nerves of the Ey. h The three pair of nerves, or the lesser root of the three pair. i A little branch of the fourth pair into the coat of the Palate, or rather rising from the third nerve. k The fourth pair of nerves, or the greater root of the third pair. l The nerve of hearing stretched out in the cavity of the stony bone, or the fifth nerve, or the fifth pair. m The sixth pair of nerves. n The seventh pair of nerves. o o The after-brain. p The Plexus Choroides or complication of vessels in the forward ventricles of the brain. qq q q The cavity of the right ventricle, which is there∣fore opened that his mag∣nitude might appear, but on the other side the left ventricle is shut up. r r r The breaches of the brain which shut up the lower ventricle. s s The substance of the brain under the marrow. Figure D. D i l m The inward and out∣ward surface of the Skul. D i i The cavity of the bone of the Sinciput. k The cavity of the nowle bone. l The sinus or bosome, of which there are divers, and in which the veins do slow. m The cavity of the fore∣head bone. n n n The skaly cavities as it were between the bones of the skul. o o o The thickness of the bone of the skull. The third Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. a b The inside of the Womb dissected. The right bosome. c The left bosome. c c The thickness of the coat of the womb. d The inward orifice of the womb. e e A portion of the binding membranes of the womb. f The neck of the womb. g The neck of the bladder. The fourth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. a The trunk of the gate vein. b The Cystique twins. c The right Stomach vein. d The Bifurcation of the gate-vein's trunck. g The great Gastrick-vein from this. h The crown vein of the stomach. i The right Kell vein. k The hinder Kell vein, whose branches are l The right. m The left. n n n The Splenick branches distributed through the milt. o The short or venal vessel. p The left stomach and Kell vein. q The middriff branch. r The right stomach and Kell vein. s The gut-vein. t The divarication of the mesenterical branch, from which u u u The Meseraick veins; and from x His left, or the left Mesen∣terick vein. y y z z The inward Emrod vein, which runneth by the end of the Colick gut, un∣der the right gut to the fundament. The fifth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. a The end of the small guts, here cut asunder and bound. b The blind gut. Or Caecum. ccc The collick gut. Or Colon. d e The right gut. Or Rectum. e Here the Mans yard and the womb of the Woman are bound or fastned. f The Sphincter muscle. g The fundament with the muscles of the yard. The sixth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. a b c d f The after-brain ly∣ing upward, from which the marrow is separated. a The right part of the Cere∣bel, or after-brain. b The left part of the after-brain. c d The middle of the after-brain. e e Portions of the after-brain, unto which the mar∣row alike groweth. f The sinck of the after∣brain, which with the sinus of the marrow make the fourth ventricle. The seventh Table, or Fa∣cio; in the third Vision. a The brain. b The risings of the brain, or swelling. c The after-brain. d The marrow cut asunder, where it beginneth to fall into the rack bones, and is called Spinal. e The Mammillary proces∣ses serving the sence of smelling. fg The optick nerves, or first pair of nerves. g The coat in which this nerve is dilated. h The two pair of moovers of the Eys. i k l m * The third pair, or the lesser root of the third pair. k A propagation of the third pair serving the skin and muscles. l Another propagation in the upper jaw. m Another propagation spending it self into the temporal muscle. n Another propagation to the coat of the nostrils. o i The fourth pair, or the lesser root of the third pair. p A propagation of this some∣what written. q A propagation of the same to the gums, and another to the upper teeth. r Another to the under jaw whose circles reach unto the teeth. s s The spending of the nerves of the fourth pair into the coats of the tongue and pallat. t u The fifth pair or the au∣ditory nerve. 1 2 3 Branches of the fifth pair. 1 Attaining the face, may here rightly be taken for the eight pair. 2 The second upper branch joyning with the first nerve. 3 The third lower branch joyning with the first nerve. x The sixth pair of nerves; here a propagation of the seventh pair (which at∣taineth the upper part of the throttle) cut asunder. y y The progress of the sixth and seventh nerve. z The branch of the sixth pair unto the neck. a A branch from the seventh pair unto the chops. b The seventh pair of nerves c The union of the sixth and seventh pair. d A branch of the sixth pair to the throttle. e The bifurcation of the same nerve. e f l The inward branch at∣taining the rack-bones. g The upper branch to the collar bones and breast bone. g g Branches beneath to the coat of the lungs. h Little branches of the right nerve, which make the recurrent. i The left recurrent nerve. k k The stomach nerves. m m m The distribution of the sixth nerve through the lower belly and all therein contained. The eight Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. The former wormy process The ninth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. The hinder wormy process. The tenth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. A The backside of the sto∣mack toward the back. a The gullet or orifice of the gullet in the chops. a c d The length of the gul∣let or Osophage. b b The tonsils, or glandules, or the sides of the gullet. c The glandulous body at the fifth rack-bone. d The right or upper orifice of the stomack, where the gullet is inserted or con∣nected. e e Nerves from the sixth pair unto the stomack. f The left or second orifice of the stomack, called Py∣lus. g The gut, called Duodnum. h The passage of the bladder of gall into the Duodnum. i i i i The vessels of the sto∣mack cut asunder. k k m m The inmost coat of the stomack. l The middle-most part of the stomack, torn off. e e The cavity of the sto∣mack. a a A round swelling or the right orifice. b b The inside of the Duode∣num. c The left orifice, or Pylo∣rus. d d A round swelling of the Pylous is circle. The eeventh Table, or Fa∣cio; of the third Vision. a A portion of the hollow vein whence ariseth the Azygo b g g The vein Non-paril, or Azygos. c A division of the branch Azygos unto the seventh and eighth rib. d d The right intercostal veins. e f The left intercostal veins. The twelfth Table, or Fa∣cio; in the third Vision. a a a Part of the skul cove∣red with the thick mem∣brane. b b Portions of the optick nerves. c c The sleepy arteries. d The bason hanging down∣wards. e The flegmatick glandule. f Portions of the second pair of nerves. The thirteenth Table, or Facio; in the third Vi∣sion. * A portion of the guts cut out near the blind gut and laid open, where may be seen the floodgates hin∣dring the return of the ex∣crements into the smaller guts. The fourteenth Table, or Facio; in the third Vi∣sion. a The descending trunck of the hollow vein. b The descending trunck of the great artery. c A branch from the sper∣maticks to the rain of the belly. d The emulgent vein and artery. e The bladder opened. f The reins. g The ureters. h The trumpet or leading vessel of the seed. i The vessels to the trum∣pet from the sperma∣ticks. k The division of the vein and arterie into iliack branches. l Vessels from the sperma∣ticks creeping by the bot∣tom and neck of the womb. m The womb. n The right spermatick vein out of the trunck of the hollow vein. o The left spermatick vein out of the kidney vein. p p The spermatick arte∣ries. q The contiguity of the sper∣matick veins, and arteries, in which agreement they slide into the purse of the testicles by the producti∣on of the rim of the bel∣ly. r The neck of the womb. s The lower vessels of the womb embracing the neck of the same. t t The testicles or stones. u u The ligament or ty, cal∣led Cremasteres. x The privities. The fifteenth Table, or Facio; in the third Vi¦sion. Sheweth the Ventricles of the Heart divided in their length. a The descending trunck of the great arterie. b The Axillary arterie. c The ascending trunk of the great arterie. d The venal arterie. e The hollow vein. f i The right ventricle of the heart. h The left ventricle of the heart. g g g The fleshy substance of the heart dissected. The sixteenth Table, or Fa∣cio; in the third Vision. Sheweth the Heart laid o∣pen by the venal Arte∣ry of the left Ventricle. a The great arterie resected. b The arterial vein resected. c c The orifice of the arte∣rial vein opened. d The left ar of the heart inverted. e e The two floodgates of the venal arterie. f The outward substance of the heart shuting the ven∣tricle. g g Certain filaments grow∣ing as well to the heart, as to the valves, and marked with . h The wall or partition be∣twixt the ventricles. k The point of the heart, cal∣led Cone and Mucro. The seventeenth Table, or Facio; in the third Vi∣sion. Sheweth the Heart opened by the right Ventricle and hollow Vein. a b f The hollow vein. b c d e The hollow vein o∣pened. b The place where the hol∣low vein gapeth into the right ventricle of the heart. c A circle benching out in the orifice of the hollow vein. d The orifice of the descen∣ding trunck of the hollow vein. e The orifice of the ascen∣ding trunck of the hollow vein. g h Two valves of the hol∣low vein, but the third on the side is not here disco∣vered. i Certain fleshy portions un∣to which grots. k k The filaments of the floodgates or valves. l The point of the heart, or Apex cordis. FINIS.
Anatomical illustration of the female human body, and various internal organs. Visio Tertia. Fac. 1 Fac. 2 Fac. 3 Fac. 4 Fac. 5 Fac. 6 Fac. 7 Fac. 8 Fac. 9 Fac. 10 Fac. 11 Fac. 12 Fac. 13 Fac. 14 Fac. 15 Fac. 16 Fac. 17
