S5195 99899311 153007
Spiritual Infatuation, The Principal Cause of our Past and Present Distempers. Or a serious CAVEATE to the many Seducers and Sedu∣ced, who under the specious pre∣tences of Reformation and Conscience en∣deavour the subversion of Church and State. In several Sermons on Isa. 9, 10, 11, 12. By W. Stamp D.D. late Minister of the Word at Stepny near London. LONDON, rinted for Tho. Johnson at the Golden Key in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1662.
To the Right Honourable, THOMAS EARL OF CLEAVLAND, Baron of NETTLESTEAD, Lord WENTWORTH, My ever Honoured Lord and Patron. My LORD, THe ample experience I have had of your Favour and Benignity, both at home and abroad, com∣mands me to put these Pape nder the shelter of your Lordships pro∣ection: Which I do not so much to let he world see my gratitude, as to satise y self in point of judgement and disre∣tion.
For were I altogether a stranger t your Person, or to that place which wa once my Home by your Lordships good∣ness; yet the Rarity of your unblemishe Honour in this ignoble age, and the Emi∣nency of your Heroick Spirit, would in vite me to cast my anchor on the firmes bottom. The truth is (as these totteri times are) there are few of your Lord ships Quality, that dare be Patrons, an there are fewer then those that can b Patrons. Truth never stood in more need never met with less power to protect i The wildness and severity of the Time enforce those of our Coat, and persever∣ance in our duties to God and the King to seek for Patronage, not to the greates Book-man, but to the best Sword-man, Fo Pens, Presses, and Pulpits, are now awe and governed as the Sword shall pease t dictate and determine. So that, what wit the terrors of an exorbitant Milita Power, and what with the attractives Advantages, arising from the prese changes: unwary and ungrounded p∣sons
of all Ranks and Qualities, deserting themselves and their own Consciences, have followed their pernicious Leader such a Wild-goose chase, as will make posterity at once admire, and blush to derive from such a degenerate and mer∣cenary Generatio. In which general defection, it cannot but very much cor∣rect the severity of your low and exiled condition, that (however it shall please God to dispose of Publike Affairs) you are yet secured in the felicity of your Memory, in that in the worst of Times you have obtained Mercy to be found faithful and couragious in the defence of your Soveraign's power; and in that, the Churches, your own, and all honest mens Interests. My Lord, You shall meet with nothing in this Treatise that may preserve it from contempt and scorn, more then the plain∣ness and sincerity of it; which being directed to your Tenants (in discharge of my faithfulness to them) owes it self in the first place unto your Lordship, which
I shall follow with my prayers, that God would make it unto them a Glass wherein they may see the error of their doings in these rebellious times; and that he would preserve your Lordship to be yet a more glorious Instrument of his justice, upon a Blood-thirsty and Decitful Generation of Hypocrites. This shall be the constant and sincere Devotion of Your Lordships Most humble, faithful, and obliged servant, William Stampe.
To the Master, Wardens, Assistants, and Brothers of the Trinity house in Rat∣cliff, and to all other Inhabitants with in the Parish of Stepney. My Dear Friends and Parishioners. IT is not for any other Satisfaction so important, as the discharge of my Con∣science towards God and your souls, that puts me upon this dangerous adventure of writing unto you at this time. Wherein I do apparently hazard more, as to all secu∣lar respects and aimes, then any byassed advantage can compensate. But as it was S. Paul's pious care to write Epistles unto those places where he had formerly Preached; so it shall be mine, chusing rather to speak unto you by my Pen, then not at all. It is now almost eight yeers since I had the freedom of speaking unto you as your Spiritual Embassador from Christ. The sufferings, hazards, and extremities I
have undergone since that time, for the preservation of my heart from a deliberate wound (though it be the matter of much Spiritual joy and thanksgiving, as the highest honour that poor flesh and blood is capable of in this vale of misery) yet to waste any of this Paper in a particular Narrative thereof, would savour more of a mendicant designe, then of that sincere advice I intend unto you. 'Tis enough ye know, that God hath hitherto preserved and supported me by his unspeakable mercy and goodness; and I hope (in his secret wisdom) hath reserved me for his further service, in the place where he once set me. In the mean time, I hope a well meaning man, who hath been peaceable and faithful in our Israel, 1 Sam. 20. 19. may have leave to publish those serious Conceptions which are within his heart, like wine that hath no vent, Job 32. 19. and can no long∣er with duty and Conscience be suppressed. To pass by the Controversies of these sad times so unsuccessively disputed both in Ink and Blood; I shall only represent
unto you the Map of your Native Country in its present blindness, iniquity, and con∣fusion; which is (doubtless) so much the greater, by how much the less we are sen∣sible of the severe hand of God upon us. For that which makes our wonnds so despe∣rate (if not incurable) is our averseness to have them searched by a faithful hand. He that shall enter into the sad contem∣plation of Englands present estate and condition, and compare it with what it was of late yeers, shall discern a very strange and visible Eclipse of Gods fa∣vour towards it, and (notwithstanding all pretenses of Reformation, or new lights, or glorious days) shall have reason t suspect that the Candle of the Gospel is either in danger to be quite extinguished, or at least burns very dimnly amongst us, and does apparently dwindle. For to begin with that which should be most dear unto a Nation (the establishmnt of Religion in its Purity and Luster) who is not sensible how far the Ark of God (namely our Religion, the glory of our
Israel, and the Christian world) hath been surprized by profane and sacrilegiou hands, whilst the name of the Gospel an Reformation hath been used as a stalking horse, to disguise and palliate the blackest designs the Sun ever lookt upon; insomuch that the Church of England may complain and cry out, as once the Church of Israel did,, Isa. 24. 16. My leaness, my leaness, wo unto me; the trecherous dealers have dealt trecherously; yea the trecherous dealers have dealt very trecherously. Cer∣tainly there is no Divel so improved and compleat as the white Divel; the Prince of Darkness is never so perniciously fortu∣nate in his mischief, as when he transforms himself into an Angel of light; and our Religion could never have received so deep a wound from any infernal stratagem as from the plausible pretensions of refining and securing it unto u. How welt it is refined and secured, your selves may judge by the present Complexion of our Dear Mother, stript and mangled, and wound∣ed to death by the sons of her own bowels.
Her Government dissolved; Her Feasts (the Religious Commemorations of the great mysterie of salvation) abolished; Her sacred Forms of Prayer (the sweet har∣mony and agreement of hearts and voices) vilified and scorned; Her Prophets (the Ambassadours of Christ for Peace and Reconciliation) imprisoned, impoverished, and reputed as the filth and off-scouring of the world. Her Champions (that should maintain her Doctrine against the frauds and fallacies of her subtle and malicious Adversaries) expell'd and banished the School of the Prophets. Her Doctrine (extracted purely from the Fountain of living water) invaded, and trampled into a muddy puddle. Her Discipline discharg∣ed and treatned, not daring to appear against avouched, and professed Heresies and Blasphemies. Her Temples either de∣faced and demolished, or else locked up by the Military Power; Insomuch that in one of her Cities (as I have been credibly informed) viz. Lincoln, the Sacramental Bread and Wine hath not been communi∣cated
for three years together. And lastly the True Protestant Religion (which b solemn Protestation we were obliged t maintain) is now squeezed into such  narrow room, that few or none dare ow the Profssion of it, unless it be upon th scaffold, where innocence is secured from any future blow of malice. So that as when a mirrour is broken in pieces, it represents the same object divi∣ded and deformed, which before was entir and amiable; so the Bond and Composur of Religion, when it is once broken an dissolved, is apt to splinter it self into  thousand Heresies and Schismes, which nothing less then a miracle can piece and redintegrate. Thus (by sad experience) we see our just and angry God hath forsaken his House, deserted his Heritage, given the dearly beloved of his soul into the hands of her enemies; Jer. 12. 7. And now, how do our enemies round about us, th Jesuite abroad, and the Schismatick a home, I and the infernal spirits under us clap their malicious hands, saying, There,
There, so would we have it! not knowing, that the severest Persecution is not the weakest Argument of the Gospels Professi∣on, in its greatest candor and sincerity. In the second place, if you shall cast your eyes upon the Civil Government, you cannot but discern the goodliest Fabrick of the Christian world demolished, and dissolved into nothing else but rubbish and confusion. Certainly God was not well pleas'd with your disputing the rights of King and Parliament by Tumults and Arms, and secret fallacies; who hath suf∣fered you to wade into that difpute so far, and with such ill success, as to have nei∣ther King nor Parliament left you for your shelter and protection, unless it be such a Parliament as God in his justice hath design'd to be the general grievance and disease of the Kingdom. Not to expatiate far in describing the excellency of the Regal, beyond all other kinds of Government whatsoever, as ha∣ving its foundation first in Nature, and afterwards its establishment over that
People, where God himself was the Le∣gislative Power. 'T will be enough to satisfie all dis-interessed Persons to know, that it was propounded unto the Israelites not only as the best form of Government, but as a reward of Ʋprighteousness and Integrity, and a particular expression of Gods mrcy and favour towards them, as appears, Jer. 22. 34. Thus saith the Lord, Execute ye Judgement and righteousness, and deliver the spoyled out of the hand of the Oppressor, and do no wrong no violence to the stranger, fatherless, and widdow; and then shall there enter in by the gates of this House, Kings sitting upon the Throne of David, riding on Chariots, and Horses, he and his servants, and his people. And when that people should sin themselves out of that blessing, See how God threatens them with a con∣trary punishment, Isa. 3. 5. The people shall be oppressed every one by another, and every one by his neighbour; the child shal behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the ho∣nourable.
And for that Text which is so much insisted on to prove the evil of this Government, be that shall look upon it with a single eye, as men ought to look up∣on those sacred Oracles; shall find, that the people were not reproved for asking a King (for that kind of Government was determined unto them long before, as ap∣pears, Deut. 17. 15.) but for rejecting their God; They have not rejected thee, but me they have rejected. 1 Sam. 8. 7. Sure I am, the Scripture cannot contradict it self, which says; For the Transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof. Prov. 28. 2. And Balaam being enlight∣ned from God, and prophecying of the fu∣ture prosperity of Israel, contracts the cha∣racter of a peoples felicity into a very few words; saying, The Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them. Numb. 23. 21. And if these Texts be looked upon as Old Testament, and so of Jewish concernment only▪ see hat was prophesied many hundred years before, upon the accession of the Gentiles, wherein
we uo selves are included. Behold, I will lift up mine hand unto the Gentiles; and set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters upon their shoulders, and king shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queen thy nursing Mothers. Isa. 49. 22, 23. If it be yet objected, that the forecited Text speaks only of some favours which the Church was to receive from the indul∣gence and benignity of some Heathen Kings and Emperours; and that Christs Kingdom is spiritual, and the subjects there of discharged of their obedience to any Temporal Monarch: Such may know, that they have borrowed an Argument from the Jesuits, that savours more of subtility and ends, then any true solidity, and is sufficiently answered; 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as supreme; or unto Go∣vernours, as unto them that are sent by him; &c. and if you would know who they are who are thus commanded to sub∣mit
they are described v. 9, to be a cho∣sen generation, a royal Priesthood, an ho∣ly Nation, a peculiar People: Terms of as high sanctity and priviledge, as any can pretend to within the Christian Pale. All which I have mentioned, only to lay be∣fore your eyes that ancient and glorious form of Government which our blessed Reformers (by your concurrence and en∣gagement) would pluck up by the roots, and abure for ever; as if it were some monstrous or accursed thing. To this may be added, the experience we have had of this Government for so many generations; and the dismal change we have tasted from the want of it, for these last seven yeers; enough to write that counfel of Solomon upon our hearts with a pen of iron: My son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change; for their calamity shall rise suddenly and who knoweth the ruine of them both? Prov. 24 21, 22. That is (as Deodatus on that place) who can foresee or avoid these
two sudden thunders, of divine vengeance, and a Kings wrath? And sure, if there were neither of these Terrors to aw us in to our duty, yet the love of that peace an prosperity which is infallibly annexed to the observation of the fift Commandment; is inducement enough, Honour thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long; or, as it is in another place, Deut. 5. 16. that thou mayst have many, and good days, &c. where by Father, the Ci∣vil Parent is (by all Expositors) as well in∣cluded as the Natural. Now if we shall enquire how it comes to pass that our ma∣ny and good days (which heretofore w enjoyed in peace and plenty) are changed into few and evil days; the sacred Ora∣cle will resolve us, because we have had very little or no respect at all to the obser∣vation of this Commandment. Plutarch tells a story of a Serpent, whose tayl was discontented that the head should have the power to govern, and carry it which way so or it pleased; and there∣fore ptitioned, that the same Power
might reside in the tayl another while; Which being unwarily granted, upon great importunity; the tayl (a member very active, but withal blinde) carries the head and body through many holes and crevises, till at last it brought it self into such streights, that it could not stir, but head, body, tayl and all were destroyed. This story (though but a Fable in it self) has yet a moral truth in it, which we have seen and felt by direful experience. To these high injuries and affronts done to our common Mother (the Church) and to our common Parent (the King) I might remember ye of our Laws, Liberties, Privi∣ledges, Properties, Peace, Prosperity; which ly trampled under foot before your eyes, as so many heaps of rubbish and con∣fusion; to proclaim to all the world the impudent and ungodly frauds of those that pretended to be Guardians of these Com∣mon Jewels; and the infatuation of the to credulous world, that would believe them all this while. But if those m have thus notoriously
betrayed their trust; you will reply per∣haps (with the chief Priests and Elders) Mat. 27. 4. What is that to us? Let them look to that: ever man is responsible for his own, but not anothers guilt. 'Tis tru indeed, these grand Troublers of our Is∣rael shall bear the guilt of Principals, i the great and general day of account, when Inquisition shall be made for blood; bu every inferiour wheel by which they have moved shall bear the guilt of an Accessory. Judas, and Pilate, and Caiphas, had th chief hands in the Treason and murther of our blessed Saviour; and yet the guilt of tht blood extended to the whole Na∣tion of the Jews, and to their posterity after them In the case of blood, where the mur∣therer was concealed, so that no man would acknowledge the fact, the Law commanded the Judges of those times, to measure unto that City which was nearest unto him that was slain; and the Elders of that City, though they were innocent, and not so much as privie to the murther, were yet commanded to Sacrifice an Hei∣fer
and to pray in this form: Be merciful O Lord unto thy People Israel, whom thou hat redeemed; and lay not inno∣cent blood unto thy People Israels charge. Deut. 21. 8. So precious in those days was the blood of any private person. It would be a sad contemplation, to lay before your eyes that red sea of blood which hath been shed like water on every side of our Jerusalem, by those who dare not so much as pretend to have (of themselves) a power over the lives of their fellow Subjects: But, as if all this were not guilt enough to weigh them down to the bottomless pit, there hath been added to that scarlet sin, the blood of one Sacred Person, of more value then 10000. of the best of his Subjects, by the Scriptures own computation, 2 Sam. 18. 3. namely, the light of our eyes, and the breath of our nostrills. Lam. 4. 20. In whose life and go∣vernment all the thousands that reside within his three Kingdoms, are really and nearly concerned, as in the life of their common Parent. An act so horrid and pro∣digious, that as no language can express it,
so no history can parallel it. And yet, tho the guilt of this blood be as visible to  world, as it's clamorous in the ears of G yet so far are men removed out of the  of their repentance, that no man will  it; not so much for the guilts sake, as f the ignominy and merit that belong to s transcendent Traitors. And if we (who  to deal impartially with all men) charge t guilt of this blood, where by the law of G and man we find it lye; the Councel ( rather the Conspiracy) is presently as high enraged against us, as was that of the Ph∣rises against S. Peter, and proclaim us m∣lignants and delinquents, that our design  to fill Jerusalem with our Doctrine, a intend to bring this mans blood upon the Act. 5. 28. Well, what shall we do then, f the clearing our selves? Why, we will m sure to the next City; and see if Ezeki w belongs not to it. Wo to the blood City, to the pot whose scum is not gone o of it, bring it out piece by piece, let no l fall upon it; for hr blood is in the mid of her, she set it upon the top of a rock,
which is all one, upon the top of a Scaffold, she poured it not upon the ground to co∣ver it with dust; that it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; therefore saith the Lord, I also have set her blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered, Ezek. 24. 6, 7, 8. The meaning of the Prophet is very plain; The bloody City is Jerusalem, arraigned here by the Prophet, for the bold justification of her murthers and oppressions; and therefore her blood (saith God) shall be alwaies in my sight, as a remembrancer of vengeance, which shall be so certain and general, that o lt, no casualty or exemption shall pre∣vent the utter ruine and destruction of that City. And truly (my beloved friends) when I enter into a serious contemplation of the guilty condition of our bloody Jerusalem, for her boldness in murther, sacriledge, and oppression, I am heartily sorry that you (my Parishioners) are so nerly allyed unto her in your neighborhood and relations; but f more sorry you are so nearly allyed unto her
sins, as I fear you are; for if I am not m∣staken in the history of these sad times;  is no slight contribution that you have gi∣ven to the miseries we complain of, b know not how to remedy. A man may be ac∣cessory to the guilt of blood-shedding, more ways then perhaps you are aware of: T only I shall nam; first, in contributing assi∣stance to the fact before it is committed 2ly, by approbation and justification of th fact after it is committed. For (to borrow  resemblance from the learned Salmasius upon another reflection) what think ye? Sup∣pose a Gentleman who is peaceably psses∣sed of his house and estate, shall be assaulted and surprized by a combination of theeves▪ receiving strength & encouragement from the neighbours, tenants, and servants of that Gentleman: This man, by this con∣spiracy, is robbed, stripped, and dispossessed of his estate, bound hand and foot, and tyed unto a tree, and there left, tll a wild beast comes and destroys him: when inquisition shall be made for the blood of this man, it will be very easie to determne at whose
dore the guilt will be found (namely) at the tenants and servants in some degree, as well as at the grand Conspirators. Or sup∣pose these theeves shall be so impudent and pleasant in their wickedness, as in a mock∣ery of justice, to erect a Court among them∣selves; and execute their own votes and conclusions in a form of Law, upon pretence the Gentleman was none of the best hus∣bands of his estate: will this extenuate the murder, or palliate the violence, or clear the adherents? I trow not; but will prove rather an high aggravation of the wicked∣ness. I shall leave every man to make his own application, with this assertion only; That he that is not ashamed to draw up a charge against himself in this particular, is in the hopefullest way to obtain his pardon. It was our Saviours change against the Scribes and Pharisees, that his Fathers house (which was wont to be called the house of prayer) was by them made a den of theeves Mat. 21. 13. I would to God it were in the power either of my Pen or Prayers, to cleer those that sit at Westmin∣ster
(once the house of God) of this deep guilt; or You of your assistance or aherence to them in contracting it; for they who at first (with Absolom) stole away the hearts of our Israel, upon pretence of a zealous care of Religion and Judicature; have since thrived so well in their dsign (by the strong contribution of our sins) as hath en∣abled them to rob God himself of his truth and honour, the King of his revenue and life, and the Church of its patrimony, the Kingdom of its peace, and all peaceable and faithful men of their secular iterests; and while they please themselves with the sad execution of some petty robbers (who their injuries have driven into extrem want) these sit undaunted and unconroul' upon the throne of iniquity; like the grea whore upon the many headed Beast, carv∣ing to themselves the satisfactions of their own pride, ambition, and covetousness, b vertue of their unjust and byassed Ordi∣nances, imposed (as so many snares) upo the tame, infatuated, and abused people. But you'l say, what we have done hi
therto in twisting with these men, we have done either out of ignorance or compulsion, not suspecting their ways would have been so bloody and abominable, or their ayms so vast and particular to themselves. Well, if this plea of yours be as sincere as it is plau∣sible; you have the less to answer for. But yet give me leave (with an Apostle) to pro∣fess the fears and jealousies I have of you, and to tell you, that when you went to Whitehal in your long boats, with the mouth of your Canon toward your Soveraign, in∣structing the whole Kingdom to follow you in that loud clamour, I am sure you were not prest into that strange service. Or ad∣mit that unhappy officiousnes of yours want∣ed eys to guide it unto its right object and that you mistook Whitehal for the black house of Commons, by the direction and per∣swasion of those Prophets, who put light for darkness, and darkness for light, Is. 5. 20. Yet it seems very strange to me, that you, whose judgements are presumed to be above the ordinary pitch of other mens, by the advantage you have of forrain obser∣vation,
you, who have found the high repu∣tation you had formerly with all Nations, where you were employed, changed int contempt and scorn, for your unnatural an barbarous deportment toward your King You, who were (many of you) obliged by pa∣ticular Trusts and endearments. You, w have bin eaten up to bare bone by the ca∣terpillars of the Land; who have felt th little finger of your severe masters, heavi then the loyns of your late pious Soveraig (to the honour and approbation of the ship mony-tax by all posterity) You that hav served an apprentiship of more then 7. yee to these Egyptian Taskmasters, seen the jugling Arts, found your selves cheated often in your expectations, that you (wh all the world beside, look upon them as th prodigious monsters of this age) should be far bwitched with their sorceries, as to b still their servants (or slaves) and no Pilat wife among you to suggest a Christian ca∣tion, is a sad and sur fate, which I not  much admire as condole, and which indee hath commanded this plain dealing Tre∣tise into publike view.
So that what before (by the eye of God and man) might be lookt upon as a sin of Ignorance (like that of the 200. men, who by smooth perswasions were induced to fol∣low Absolom in Rebllion, in simplicity of heart, not knowing whither they went, 2 Sam. 15, 11. will now be found (if ye per∣sist longer therein) a sin of choise and deli∣berate resolution; wherein ye declare to the world (pretend what you will) that you high∣ly approve of the unparalleld iniquities of these men; and not only do the same things your selves, but take pleasure in them that do them, as well as take pay from them, and contract their guilt unto your own souls in a deeper measure by your Approbation, then you have done by Acting with them. For, give me leave to argue and conclude no otherwise then the Scripture does. Was Saul found guilty of the blood of the Pro∣tomartyr Stephen, only for consenting to his death, and keeping the rayment of them that slew him? Act. 8. and are not those men guilty of their Soveraigns blood, who by their clamorous Petitions cried aloud; first, for no Treaty with him, and afterward
no mercy on him? and since have seized, not his rayment only, but also his revenue; and are resolv'd to do as much by the heyr (if God preserve him not) that the inheri∣tance may be setled in themselves? What difference was there (in point of guilt) be∣tween the hands that drave the nails in our Saviours crucifixion, and the bold Soul∣diers that stood by to maintain the execu∣tion? What difference between the Souldi∣ers that were upon the scaffold where our Soveraign was murthered, and those which stood under the scaffold, and drew their swords in approbation of that fatal stroke, which at once cut off the head of our King, and dismantled the Peace and felicity of his three Kingdoms? Or what difference between those that then drew their swords in approbation of that horrid fact; and those that now draw their swords in de∣fence of those visible betrayers and mur∣therers? sure if there be any difference, the last are by much the deeper delinquents; for Non semper corrupta est mens male ope∣rantis, at semper corrupta est male defen∣dentis. The mind of him that worketh evil
is not alwaies corrupt, but the mind of him that defendeth evil, is alwaies corrupt. And the reason why this sin is so fearful and desparate, is, because when a man com∣mends and justifies a wickedness (knowing it to be such) its a certain signe that his judgement and conscience are both corru∣pted; insomuch, that he hath neither eys to se it, nor heart to be touched with the guilt and horror of it. But youl say perhaps, our hearts did ever abhor the taking away the last Kings life, (for I instance in that only as the most notorious addition to all other evils) and were our hearts legible at present, it would be seen how zealous we are for setling the present King in his just power and autho∣rity. But alas, we are under the grasp of an Arbytrarie power, and if we were not, what can single endeavors do? These, I presume, are the thoughts of some of you, for I have heard them from your own mouths: Truly, you have great reason to do somthing extraordinary for your King, if for no other reason, but to out do what you have done; but I have great
reason to suspect your minds do but faintly incline this way; for quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? what do you speak of plausible intendments and desires, wrapt up in smooth words, when your actions look clean another way? If you have executed the Lords command (saith Samuel to Saul) what meaneth the bleating of sheep, and lowing of oxen in mine ears? If your hearts are as you pretend, what means the noise of your drums, and thunder of Cannon at Sea, in opposition and defiance of your Kings Commissions? what means the changing your Flags, and razing your So∣veraigns Arms out of your Sterns, in de∣tstation of his government? These (to my apprehension) are strange characters of loyalty in Subjects: And such as speak more devotion to Cesars picture in his Coyn, then to his Person or Power. Ado∣ring that new minted Mammon of your new masters, in which were the cross (once a mark of the Beast) changed into a pair of Gallows, or into the Divels cloven foot, would yet (I fear) find too warm a recepti∣n in too many of you. It is thought by ma∣ny
wise men, that had not you been the first and fiercest of the Kings enemies, the Royal Throne had been established, and the Kingdom setled long ere this; And I beseech you look well to it; for if the king∣doms miseries increase for want of its na∣tural Shepherd, which is more then proba∣ble; 'tis because you have taken away the wooden bridge that should convey him in∣to his Dominions: and certainly, the guilt of all the sad consequents which shall arise upon the want of him will one day be laid at your Cabbin dores. But men must live in that calling where∣in God hath placed them, and provide for their families, or be concluded worse then Infidels▪ 1 Tim. We cannot (with all our endeavours sayl against wind and Tide; the current of the Times is strong, and he that spits against the wind, spits in his own face. Well, let all this be granted, and what else can be alledged to this purpose, and yet that maxime and conclusion of Solomon shall stand in force; He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just,
even they both are an abomination to the Lord, Prov. 17. 15. And that Precept of Moses shall out-live all the changes of the world, Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil, Exod. 23. 2. It was never good world, since things have been carried all by Votes; and they that pretend to act what they do by vertue of a Power derived from the People, do most of all abuse the People; making them speak as the Divel did the Heathen Oracies, or as Friar Bacons bra∣zen head (i. e.) what is most serviceable to their own ends. In an Age so miserably corrupted and depraved, the major part is seldom found to be the melior. And he that designs himself always to the strongest side, will certainly be involved in the broad way, which leadeth to destruction, Mat. 7. When you sayl together in a fleet, your Art instructs you (as you are Sea men) not to sayl as others do, at random, but that eve∣ry man steer according to his own Compass; and sure, as you are Christians, and in your voyge toward the Haven of eternal hap∣piness, Religion obligeth you to steer, not as ohers do, but according to the direction of
your own Consciences, guided by the infalli∣ble compass of Gods Word; he that does otherwise, runs an irrecoverable hazard, and it is not by choice, but by chance, if he get safe to shore. And as touching the support of your fa∣milies; as he is worse then an Infidel that provides not for those of his own house; by his lawful and honest endeavours; so he is no better then an Insidel, that stands in such aw of the Divel, as (with the In∣dians) to worship him, ne noceat, that he may not hurt him; and out of a secret dis∣belief of the divine Providence and good∣ness, puts himself upon hellish and unwar∣rantable ways for support and advantage. You know who it was that said, all these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me; And though the times should prove so severe and particular as to some mens designs; that S. Johns Prediction should be verifi'd among us, viz. that no man might be allowed to buy or sell (orto have the benefit of the Law) save he that had the mark of the Beast in his right hand; and that as many as would
not worship the image of the Beast, should be killed, Rev. 13. 15. &c. yet those who are not irrecoverably sold to their secular respects and interests, shal do well to remem∣ber that serious expostulation of our Sa∣viour; What shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or, what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? And therefore the rule is fixed in the next verse, Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful ge∣neration; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father, with his holy Angels, Mat. 8. 36. Sure I am, that (notwithstanding all our bustling after the trash of this world) we shall carry nothing beyond the grave but our Consciences, unless some certain woes and curses, contracted by the voluntary de∣serion of our dearest friends (our Consci∣enes) Among which, those of the Prophet Habbakc will certainly have their share; Wo to him that coveteth an evil covetous∣ness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the
Power of evil. Thou hast consulted shame to thy house, by cutting off many people, and hast sinned against thy soul. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the Beam out of the Timber shall answer it. Wo unto him that buildeth a Town with blood, and stablisheth a City by iniquity. They that will be rich, will as certainly fal into Temptation, and a snare, and into ma∣ny foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. 1 Tim. 6. 9. And they that love to fish in troubled waters, or trouble the waters that they may fish for profit, seldom think of the ma∣lignity of those Curses, that are wrapt up in their ill gotten wealth; The wealth is winged, and will soon take its flight, Prov. 23. 5. But the curses are of a longer du∣rance, and stay behind. That which was a snare to the soul in the acquisition, is ve∣ry likely to prove a curse to the family in the designation. It is a snare (saith Solomon) to the man, who devoureth that which is holy, and after vows to make enquiry. Alas (my dear friends) what comfort can you take on your death beds, in bequeathing
things unto friends or posterity, that stand before your trembling eys, but as so many witnesses and remembrancers of guilt and iniquity? with what comfort or Conscience can you dispose of your Estates, when you know not what to do with your immortal souls? how is it possible you should set your house in order, when your better part (your mind, which should do it) is in the greatest disorder and distraction? when all that you have grasped by the hand of Power and op∣pression, shall not be able (in the least mea∣sure) to release you of the horror and amase∣ment wherewith your mercenary souls will be surprised. Therefore if any accursed gain stick to your fingers, my advice is very short, but withal safe, and I hope, not unseasona∣ble; Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, ye may be received into everlasting habitations. Matth. 16. 9. The last objection I foresee, is very ge∣neral, and very desperate, and runs parallel with that of Cain and Judas; Mine iniqui∣ty is greater then can be forgiven. 'Tis true indeed, if you set your selves before the
glass of Gods law, and look upon your selves with an impartial ey (as God looks on you) you have reason enough to be highly disple∣sed with your ugliness and deformity. Or if you suffer your actions to be scanned and try∣ed by the Municipal Laws you were born under, which are the best security you have for any propriety, you cannot but discern your Persons and Estates (in justice) to lie at the mercy of Confiscation and Censure. But yet, for you to stand so much in your own light, as to turn your backs upon all of∣fers of Grace and Mercy, and to prefer your own guilty fears before your Princes fa∣vour, is to add more weight to the afflicti∣ons of your injured Soveraign. To conclude him severe, because you are pre-resolv'd not to tast of his benignity, is an high breach of Charity and Gratitude; But to say with∣in your selves, Nolumus hunc regnare, for no other reason, but because you adhere to those who killed his servants, murdered his royal Father, and seized on his inheritance, is cleerly and undoubtedly to rebel, not only against his Prerogative (the means of your Protection) but against the Gospel it self,
the means of your salvation; and insteed of giving God and Cesar their due; you do at once dny King and your Christ together. I rather wish and pray, that you may learn of Benhadads servants, a safer way to peace and reconciliation; Behold (say those hea∣thens) we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings; and therefore they resolve to address themselves to the king in a posture of humiliation. And so will you (I hope) if you are not bewitch'd into your own ruine. You have a merciful king to deal withal; one, who is bone of your bone, and flesh of your flesh; One, in whom the heroick spirit of his Grandfather Henry 4th of France; the peaceable mind of his Grandfather K. James, and the merci∣ful inclinations of his martyr'd father, do all concur to make up an incomparable king: who (when we are tyred and jaded with disputes) must at last be trusted, or can be no king; and is not in a capacity to shew mercy, till he hath power to do otherwise. For, where the word of a King is, there is power saith Solomon; and without that power, mercy is not mercy, but servile and slavish compliance.
So that if there were nothing to be al∣ledged in defence of the Regal power, or in demand of the Subjects duty, yet judge within your selves whether it is better for you that all the sons of Jerubbaal (which are more then 70. raign over you; or else, that the natural head be restored to the body, for the preservation and rest auration of our languishing gasping Church & State? Whether it be better to return to our former Laws and Government, or remainunder a perpetual fluctuation of Arbytrarie Power, which rowls from one faction to another, & the wisest among us cannot imagine where it will settle? Whether one form of doctrine and Discipline, or a thousand Heresies and Schisms be the better Religion? Whether one King or fifty Colonels is like to produce the more safe and quiet Government? It is said of some who adhered to Saul (who was none of the best kings) that they were a band of men whose hearts God had touched; but for those that despised him, and brought him no presents, they are branded with the name of children of Be∣lial. And in another place, we read of a
fierce contestation between the men of Is∣rael, and the men of Judah, who should ex∣press the greatest zeal in bringing the king to his royal Throne; oh, that it might please the God of Peace and Order, to close all our unnatural and bloody differences in such a sweet emulation and agreement, that the last contestation among us, might be that of outvying one another in the seasonable expressions of duty and allegiance; that our Absoloms, and Sheba's, and Achitophels, & which are worse then these, our sins, being supprest; we would be as zealous and active in restoring the Throne of Gods Anointed, as we have been fatal and unfortunate in the demolishing of it; without which I fear the youngest amongst us will never live to see the settlement of Truth and Peace up∣on any firm and assured foundation. And though his Majesties present condition will not enable him to give you fields and vin∣yards, and to make you Captains of thou∣sands, and of hundreds; yet the villany of these times hath not stript him of all power and capacity to reward; for he hath a re∣ward of Pardon, for such as shall submit
themselves, and return to their allegiance; which perhaps, may be worth the looking after once in seven yeers, as things may fall out. And he hath a reward of Bounty and Benignity, a reward of Merit, for such as shall act remarkably in his ser∣vice; which if any man believe not, I shall suspect him haunted and pursued into a de∣spair of mercy, by the clamouring horrors of his own guilty Conscience. And when any of you (my Parishioners) shall desire to make tryal of, I doubt not but I am so well un∣derstood at Court, as to procure you an expe∣riment of the Kings mercy, whensoever you shall look after it in the way of duty and allegiance. But if you shall say, That all is well done which hath been done of late yeers; that the foundation of those glorious days which some of you dream of, is well & safely laid in Perjury and Sacriledge, and the blood of your Soveraign, that you can∣not, nor will not deny the right hand of fel∣lowship and assistance to those whom you take to be the Patriots and Protectors of your new form'd Commonwealth. And that I might very well have spared my pains in
disquieting your thoughts with strange do∣ctrines, hard sayings, and sad reflections on what is past; being resolved aforehand, not to be diverted out of the way you are in. To such, I have no more to say, but to signi∣fie my grief and sorrow of heart, for the strong Delusion and Infatuation wherein they are involved; My soul shall weep in secret for them; and God forbid I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for them, while they are on this side te grave; only thus much I would beg of them for charity and christianity sake; that no pre∣judice or byassed respect whatsoever, may alienate their hearts from me their Mini∣ster, or divert their eys from looking upon this following Treatise, which (for the do∣ctrinal part) I dare avouch to be no other then a sincere extract of sacred Scripture (what black mark soever may be set upon it by those who now sit at stern) which I have published, meerly out of tenderness to those many thousands in my Parish, who in times of tryal have not known their right hand from their left, nor the right way from the wrong; and not without some se∣cret
hopes (under the mercy of the most high) to recover some of those many, who I fear, are yet in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; wherein, if I have been over bold or severe in any expressions, I have been instructed into this roughness by my Saviours example, who was never so invective against any, as the Scribes, Pha∣rises, and Hypocrites of that age. And truly my reprehensions have not been so sharp & prssing out f any other satisfaction, but to shew you your own guilt in order to your re∣pentance and conversion. Those diseases which fester inwardly, require a faithful, though rough hand to search them; men that are fallen into a deep sleep, must have loud cries to awaken them, and a rude band may very well be born withal, to recover a man that is fallen into a swooning fit. And for those of my own Coat, if I have dealt unseemly with them, in discovering the na∣kedness of the spiritual Parent; let them know, I have borrowed this sharpness from S. Paul, who, as he was a person of extra∣ordinary meeknes and condescention where he met with weak brethren, as appears by
the Circumcision of Timothy, and his own character of himself, in being all things un∣to all men, that by all means he might save some; So there were three sorts of per∣sons with whom he would never twist and comply, namely, proud, ambitious, and aspi∣ring persons, such as loved to have the pre∣heminence in all thing, of whom he fore∣warns Timothy. 2. Covetous persons, who subverted whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, only for filthy lu∣cres sake. 3. Cowards and dissemblers in Religion, such as durst not profess Christ for fear of persecution; Truly, I shall ever declare an versness to quarrel with any of my fellow labourers, neither do I (from my present low condition) envie them in any of their Promotions; I love their Per∣sons, but I hate from my soul those foul & scandalous sins of Pride, Cowardise, and Covetousness, which have rendred them both at home and abroad so odious and un∣evangelical. I wish they may ever have be∣fore their eys, the grand consideration of a watchmans charge, who is to be faithful in his warning, and constant to his station in
all weathers; otherwise the people may pe∣rish in their sins (for the merit of their ini∣quity) but their blood will be required at their hands. And now I beseech you, my dear friends, and Parishioners, to entertain these poor labours of mine, as they are sent to you, from the tender bowels of your spiritual shepherd, which may be followed with more, accord∣ing to the candour and benignity of their reception. What may be the consequent of this my adventure, as to my self, I know not, I have tasted of the house of Jonadab (the prison) for your sakes already; which may be prosecuted (for ought I know) with per∣petual banishment out of a ruinated Vin∣yard, wherein there is sueb a visible want of faithful labourers, as a sutable addition to the injuries and extremities I have en∣dured for these last seven yeers. I have sate down and considered the extent of human power and malice; and God hath made me a fenced brazen wall, as once he did his Prophet Jeremy, nor shall I think my self a loser by this piece of devotion, should it be written with my own blood, provided I may
be offer'd up on the sacrifice and service of your faith and conversion, accounting it a most fatal & accursed choise, to hazard so many thousand souls, for the saving of a sin∣gle fortune, or a bubble life. And if I never return to my own Country and Cure, to Preach the Gospel, as I ought to speak, Gods will be done; 'twill be a fixed comfort both in life and death, that I have discharged my self to you in the fidelity of a spiritual watchman; so that having nothing else wherin to express my care of you, my friends, and my charity to my enemies and oppres∣sors; I thought it agreeable to Christian duty, to recommend these Papers, which I shall follow with my Prayers. That the God of all grace, and Father of lights, would give you a ght o the error of your doings in these irregular and rebellious times; and withaa give you grace to turn away from it, that you may return to him by true repentance; and to your Sove∣raign Lord, the King, by true faith and allegiance; that God may return in mercy to you, and dive those heavie judgement which seem to gather like a black cloud over you; and clense your souls of all presumptuous sins, and guide your feet into the way of Peace; Thus Prays Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ, W Stampe.
Isaiah 6. 9. 10. 11. 12. 9.Go, and tell this people, Hear ye in∣deed, but understand not: and see ye indeed, but perceive not. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their eares heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their eares, and understand with their heart, and con∣vert, and be healed. 11. Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, untill the Cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate. 12. And the Lord have removed men farre away, and there be a great for∣saking in the midst of the Land. GOD, at sundry times, and in di∣vers manners, spake in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets. Heb. 1. 1. Somtimes viva voce, by his own immediate audible voice, as Exo. 19. 19. Somtimes by Consultations, by Vrim, according as was directed Numb 27. 21. Somtimes by manifesting
his will and pleasure in a dream, as to Pharaoh, and to Joseph the Patrirch Gen. 41. Somtimes by visions, as here in this Chapter. The whole Prophesie in general, is called the vision of Isaiah the Son of Amoz. Isa. 1. 1. and this in the Text is like Ezechiels wheel within a wheel, Eze. 1. 16. a vision within a vision. These words of the Prophet are of a very sad and gloomy aspect; as full of threatning, as these times wherein we live; and let this be observed from them in general, That there is not in the whole booke of God a Text that Christ and his Apostles made so much use of for the convincement of obsti∣nate and rebellious Hypocrites, as thi of this Prophet Isaiah: So that however it may seeme to be an old, stale, obso∣lete threatning, directed only u the Jews many hundred yeers ago yet if we consult the Evangelical Histo∣ry, we shall find it owned and adop by Christ, and by S. Paul, as  when he preach'd to the Saints  Rome, as when he wrote unto t Romans from Corinthus: Mat. 13. 14. Mark. 4. 12. Luke 8. 10. Ioh. 12. 41. Acts 28. 26. Rom. 11. 8. nay or∣ginally to be the language of Chr himself, and dictated unto this Pphet long before his incarnation,  will appear if we look well upon th
of John 12. 41. These things said Esias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him. That is, spake of him prophetically; and saw his glory (as S. Stephen did Act. 7. 55. as the glory of the eternal Son of God. So that I could have taken my Text out of either of the Evangelists, out of the Acts of the Apostles, or the Epistle to the Romans, as well as out of this Prophet, (but that I desired to fetch my water as neer the spring head as might be); It is but the language of the same holy Spirit in all these; and sure, the holy Ghost hath fixed a particular mark of observation upon that Text; which he hath so frequently recorded, and inserted in the Sacred volume. To this may be added, the near Relation and Correspondency between the Text and these times; what was then but in minis, is with us in poenis. Isaiahs threatnings unto Israel, are Gods visible executions in England. (To say nothing of the admirable State and Majesty, wherein God ap∣peared, when he delivered this Message to his Prophet; not much inferiour to that which was observed in the promul∣gation of the Law; as appears v. 1. 2. 3. 4.) 'tis enough to startle, and awaken us, that it is.
First, Of Judgement; not of Mer∣cy and Judgement, as once the Psal∣mist sung. Psal. 101. 1. But solely, and entire∣ly of Judgement, not a syllabe of mercy that I can find in it; a sad (I confesse) but no unsafe Theam, to awe and regulate a man into obe∣dience and submission; The Gospel it self stands surest upon this foundation and the seed ofGods word never thrives and prospers so well, as where the surrows have been made by the terrors of the Law. Secondly. Of Judgement, not upon the Nations of the earth at large, upon Edom, or Moab, or Egypt, or Caldea; (which elswhere have their several burdens denounced, and by this pro∣phet too) but here the sad message is directed unto Judah, the most selected Tribe of all his own people, a people that God had ever dandled upon the lap of his mercy, and distinguished from all the world by his visible care and protection over them. Go and tell Th people, &c. and if Judgement begin a Judah, at the house of God, what shall b the end of those that obey not the Gosp of God? 1. Pet. 4. 17. Thirdly, The Judgement here threat∣ned is not like those which were on
propounded by God to Davids choise; 2. Sam. 24. 13. a Judgement of a day, or a moneth, or a yeer; but a more lasting Iudge∣ment, which was not to be removed, till the Cities were wasted without inhabi∣tant, and the houses without man, and the Land were utterly desolate. vers. 11. Fourthly, With the Continuance, we have here a very dangerous Quali∣ty in the Iudgement; A Iudgement not of blasting, or mildew upon the fields or of murrain upon the flocks; not upon the goodly pillars of the land, Religion, and Iudicature, by removing them out of their places, not upon the person of their King, (the joy of their hearts, and the breath of their nostrils) Lam. 4. 20. all which, are sore and heavie Iudgements; but a judgement beyond all these, a judgement upon the Heart; In∣fatuation of Mind; A judgement that hath no sense of judgement; Make the heart of his people fat, &c. There is no plague like unto that of the heart. Fiftly, This infatuation is made by Prophets, partly by false Prophets; (na∣mely) by the seduction of their false and byassed visions, and partly, by true Prophets; namely by the hardning power of the divine Oracles, on those, that rebel against the convincement of that sacred light.
And lastly. We may observe the Time, when this sad message was deli∣vered to the Prophet, and by him de∣nounced unto the people; and that was, In the same yeer that good King Vzziah died, v. 1. A King, that had deserved well of his people, and of whose go∣vernment none had cause to complain, unlesse it were the Priest in one parti∣cular; which is more then our Clergy could complain of in all the raign of our blessed Hezekiah, who fell not so much the peoples martyr, as the Priests. In all which particulars, the Vision of Isaiah is so visible a character of these times, that any man that is not involved in this Iudgement of Infatua∣tion, may run and read it: Which I mention for no other end, but to ala∣rum and awake the sensless and secure of our Age and Nation, who never think themselves in danger, till the are surprized past all recovery; and like men in a Consumption, never think themselves sick, till they find them∣selves dead. The Text is a Commission given from the mouth of God himself; Go, and till this people, &c. wherein we have two general parts.
1. A prepatative to Iudgement, Make the heart of this people fat; A Resem∣blance borrowed from such as seed cattel, not for store, or service, but only for the slaughtering shambles. 2. The Iudge∣ment it self, and that is of severall kinds. 1. Devastation and Desolation, and that general, v. 11. 2. Banishment, and Desertion, v. 12. All this was threatned many yeers be∣fore it was executed, as a means of grace held out unto the people, to pre∣vent the dreadful executions of Gods Iustice upon them; And so it is in∣tended by me, to prevent (if possible) the remainder of Iudgement, not yet executed upon our sinful Land and Nation. But before I proceed to my main in∣tendment, it will not be amiss (by way of Preface or Introduction) to touch a little upon such general observa∣tions as do naturally arise from these words of the Prophet; wherein we shall find great variety of considerable mat∣ter; as first, from the Prophets Com∣mission [Go, and tell this people, &c.] we have this clear Truth hinted unto us. Obs. 1. 1. That Spiritual Ambassadors, are
to receive both their business and instru∣ctions how to proceed in their errand and Embassy, only from God. The Prophets of old time spake as they were inspired; 2. Pet. 1. 21. S. Paul delivered to the Corinthians, no other Doctrine, or Tradition, then what he received of the Lord; 1. Cor. 11 23. and if he should have done otherwise for any humane itch or satisfaction, he could not have been the servant of Christ. Gal. 1. 10. So that if any man speak as from Christ, Let him speak as the Oracles of God. 1. Pet 4. 11. Divinity is of a sub∣limer nature then to incorporate with secular and particular ends and ayms; like Quicksilver, that will not mix with any inferiour nature. Gods Truth must not be formed like Nebuchadnez∣zars Image, partly of Iron, and partly of Clay. Din. 2. 33. 'Tis a foul scandal to Re∣ligion, when Doctrines savour not so much of the Bible, as the Diurnal; when the pulpit is made the servant, or rather slave to Policy, and the Preachers Sermon awed into a Narra∣tive or Declaration. Secondly, The Prophet is com∣manded both to Go, and speak, &c, though he were secretly assured afore hand from the prevision of God, that his message should have no other effect
upon the people, more then to make them more obstinate and obdurate. From whence it is evident in the second place, that Obs. 2. God will have his Ministers discharge themselves in the duty of their places, what ever the success be. The obstina∣cy or malice of the people, must not hinder or deter the Prophet in the de∣livery of Gods Message. Son of man (saith God to his Prophet Ezekiel) I send thee to a rebellious Nation, but be not afraid of them, nor of their words; though briers, and thorns be with thee, and thou doest dwell among Scorpions; & Thou shalt speak my words unto them; whether they will hear, or whether they will for bear; for they are most rebellious. Ezok. 2. 3. 6. 7. And S Paul, who was not ignorant that the Gospel of Christ would cerainly prove a stumbling block, and a rock of offence to many in Israel; and that his own sermons, would prove a savour of death unto death, unto many of his Auditors, doth yet declare a dreadful wo to be his portion, if he did not preach the Gospel of Christ. 1. Cor. 9. 16. The Ministers of the Go∣spel, how ever vilified, abused, and re∣puted as the off scouring of the world, are equally and indiferently a sweet
Savour of Christ unto God, as well in those that perish, as in those that are saved. 2. Cor. 2. 15. God doth not proportion the reward of his servants according to success and event; what ever the har∣vest prove, whether wheat, or tares, Our labour shall not bee in vain in the Lord. 1. Cor. 15. 58. Thirdly, Hear ye indeed, but under∣stand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Here was hearing, but no under∣standing; and seeing, but no perception; Hearing, and not hearing; Seeing, and not seeing. The sense and meaning whereof I take to be this. Since by your wilful and constant opposing of my word, you have most justly provo∣ked me to withdraw my spirit, whereby it might have been effectual unto your Conversion; hereafter, I will not send my word unto you, to convert and save you, but to convince and condemn you, the sound whereof hereafter, shall but astonish you, and the glorious rayes of its light shall be of no other use unto you, but to dazle your eyes into a greater degree of Blindnesse; from whence it is evident in the third place, that. Obs. 3. It is not barely the Hearing of Gods word, but the gracious disposition of the
heart, to be guided and governed by it, that makes it effectual unto regeneration. S. Paul speaks of one that may give all his goods to feed the poor, and yet have no charity. 1. Cor. 13. 3. S. James makes mention of a great Hearer, and a small Doer. Iam. 1. 23. A man may have Angelical knowledge, without Evan∣gelical faith and sincerity. There is a great deale of difference between Hear∣ing, and Hearing; between S Stephens Hearers, and S Peters Hearers; In both. the word was quick, and powerful, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit. Heb. 4. 12. But with this diffe∣rence; S. Peters Hearers were said to be pricked in their hearts; and the con∣sequent of that, was an humble and en∣tire resignation of themselves to be go∣verned by the Preacher and his Do∣ctrine: as appears Act 2. 37. Men, and Brethren, what shall we do, &c. S. Ste∣phens Hearers were also cut to the heart, but they were not penetrated; for the consequent of their Hearing, was the stoning and muthering of their Prea∣cher. First they gnashed on him with their teeth, and afterwards cast him out of the City, and stoned him; as appears. Act 7. 54. From whence it is evident in the fourth place: that,
Obs. 4. The means of grace, when they are vi∣lified and opposed, become the greater means of sin and Condemnation. This is very clear in the se and condition of Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, according to our Saviours own do∣ctrine and determination. Mat. 11. 22. 24. The great measure of light the Scribes and Pharisees so confidently boasted of, served for no other purpose, but to be an aggravaton of their wil∣ful blindnesse: If ye were blind (saith our Saviour of those Hypocrites) ye should have no sin (not no sin simply, but no sin so wilful and inexcusable) but now ye say we see: therefore your sin remaineth; Ioh. 9. 41. These I take to be the natural doctrines observable in the first verse of my Text. The second presents us with three more, the first whereof is this. Obs. 5. That Spiritual Infatuation is ordina∣rily the harbinger and forerunner of Iudgement. It is given somtimes to stan∣ders by, to discern not only the cer∣tainty, but the neerness and propinquity of Iudgement, from the senslesness and stupidity of those who are most con∣cerned in it First make the heart of this people fat, &c. and thn, let their Cities be desolate, &c. This is Gods method
in punishing, and it concerns us to look to it. Obs. 7. The second is this: When God de∣nounceth Iudgement against a people, if they were not infatuated, they would rtainly repent, and be converted unto God. The charm of Infatuation is so powerful and bewitching, that could some men know precisely the time of the Bridegrooms coming, yet they would not be provided of oyl in their lamps; and if Moses, and the Prophets, prevail not with them, neither will they be per∣swaded, though one should rise from the dead. Luc. 6. 31. The third is this That Repentance and Conversion unto God, is a certain and in∣fallible expedient for the reversing, and removing of his Iudgements. This I ga∣ther by that limitation and exception, Lest they should see with their eys, and hear, &c. and convert, and be healed. We may guess at the power of a sincere Conversion unto God, by an Indulgence granted unto Ahab, only for his frmal and external humiliation; which (in∣deed) would not hold weight in the ballance of sincerity, and yet had power to suspend a Iudgement till his sons days: as appears, 1. King. 21. 29. Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself? because
he humbleth himself; therefore I will not bring the evil in his days, but in his sons days. The devastation of Ierusalem by Ti∣tus the Roman Emperour, was foretold many hundred yeers before it was exe∣cuted; and yet observe how our Sa∣viour bespeaks that bloody City. If thou hadst known at least in this thy day, &c. Luc 19. 42. 'Tis the ey-water of Repentance, that alone hath power to extinguish the flames of Gods wrath∣ful indignation; and see how passionat∣ly God complains when he cannot gain this reasonable atonement on our part; O that my people would have harkned unto me, for if Israel would have walked in my ways, I should soon have put down their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries, &c. Psal. 81. 13. 14. In the third verse, we find the Pro∣phet interposing, and as it were, standing in the gap between God, and his peo∣ple, with a question full of tendeness and compassion. Ʋsque quo Domine? Lord how long shall this Calamity be upon thy people? Where, from the Prophets question, we have this obser∣vation. Obs. 8. That, in times of Iudgement and ex∣treme
Calamity, it belongs especially unto those whose function renders them near∣er unto God then other men; to mediate and intercede between God and his peo∣ple, as being many times most powerfull with God, when but vile, and contempti∣ble in the cys of men. Thus faithful A∣braham intercedes for wicked Sodom and Gomorrah, not by one question (as here the Prophet Esay) but by six se∣veral addresses and proposals; by which he had brought it to this favourable issue, that if but ten righteous persons had been found therein, the Iudgement had been reversed, and those Cities spared. Gen 18. 32. Thus was Moses in the gap, to stop the incursions of Gods wrath upon his people; In one place, he seems to lay hold on Gods hand, by a holy Violence, insomuch that God seems to intreat for the use of his arm for the vindicating of his honour upon a Stubborn and rebellious Generation, in the language of a Supplicant. Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot; and that I may consume them, &c. Exod. 32. 10. And in the same chapter, he intercedes for the people with so great earnestness, as if the zeal sor their pre∣servation had eaten out the care of his own eternal condition; his language
seems to import no less, v. 32. And now, if thou wilt, forgive their sin; and if not; blot me I pray thee out of the book which thou hast written. And the Prophet Samuel, who (to his grief) lived to be a witness of many daring provocations in his time, would notwithstanding never cease to be their Advocate; God forbid (saith he) that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you. 1. Sam. 12. 23. Nothing but the Prophet Ieremies express inhibition (pray not for this people) Ier. 7. 16. ought to abate the strength of a Prophets devo∣tion and intercession for Gods people in the time of their extremity. Lastly from Gods answer, we have three remarkables of sad and serious observation: The first is this. Obs. 9. That the patience and long suffering of Gods mercy, doth neither abate nor divert the proceedings of his Iustice. God is not as man, that threatens many times far beyond his intendments; though his hand be lifed up, and his sword brandished a long time before he strike, yet when he does strike, he strikes home. There be spirits, that are created for vengeance, which in their fury lay on sore strokes, in the time of destru∣ction they pour out their forces, and ap∣pease
the wrath of him that made them. Eccles 39. 28. And though that be A∣pocryphal, I'm sure this is not, God will wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy scalp of every one that goeth on still in his wickdness. Psal. 68. 21. The longer his bow lies unbent, the stronger will the draught be, whensoever he shal take it into his hand. The deluge upon Gen. 6. 3. the old world was suspended an hun∣dred and twenty yeers, but when it came, it swept clean; but eight persons preserved in that universal destruction. So the Judgement in the Text was sus∣pended for many Generatons, but when the day of Gods visitation came, it proved a sweeping Iudgement; a be∣som of destruction, was employed to make clean work. The Cities to be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the Land to be utterly desolate, or as it is in the ori∣ginal (signified in the margent) Deso∣late with desolatio. Obs. 10. Secondly, We are here to observe; That Gods Judgements are neither all of a size, nor all of a sort. Here is Deso∣lation at home, and Banishment abroad, and Gods orsaking, which is worse then either; Fear, and the pit, and the snare Esa. 24. 17. 18. are upon thee, O inhabitant of the arth,
saith this Prophet in another place: and it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of the fear, shall fall into the pit, and he that cometh out of the pit, shall be taken in the snare. The meaning is, that God will never want a plague to find out those, that find out ways to provoke the eys of his glory. But admt there be certain desolation in Iudea, may not the Iews take sheter in Egypt? No, The Prophet shews them the consequent of that fruitless designe, Isa. 30. They shall carry their riches, and their treasures upon the bunches of Camels, to a people that shal not profit them; for the Egyptian shall help in vain, and to no purpose, Egypt hath been a sufficient instance of Gods prosecuting one Iudgement with another, for the manifestation of his power, and wrath upon that King, and people. God hath his quiver full of arrows, the magazine of his Iudgements is in∣exhaustible. What a black roll of Iud∣gements do we read of Levit. 26. and Deut. 26. and though we might suppose the spirit of a man able to undergo all that is there threatned: yet there is Deut. 28, 61. mention made of unwritten plagues; So that, what S. Paul speaks of the prepa∣rations
of Iustice; Ey hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entred into the heart of man, what God hath pre∣pard, as well of woe, for those that hate, as of blessedness, for those that love him. There is no avoiding the Di∣vine wrath, but by patience, and sub∣mission, and an humble acceptation of the punishment of their iniquity. Lev. 26. 43. So that Coelum, non animum, mutat non vindictam Divinam. For alas, what com∣fort can it be unto Cain to have his life allowed him, and to spin it out in a su∣gitive condition, with a burthen of hor∣ror upon him, greater then he is able to bear? What pleasure can a man take to live upon Earth, with Hell in his bo∣some? What satisfaction to be taken, in forsaking our Country, whilst the not forsaking of our sins, gives us too much cause to suspect we are forsaken of God? Which leads me to the last gene∣ral observation of the Text: and it is this. Obs. 11. That when a people are so wilfully wedded to their own rebellious ways, that they are neither warned by Gods word, nor won by his mercies, nor re∣claimed by his Iudgements; God will certainly forsake that people; which is the highest expression of his severity
and justice. In the book of the Revela∣tion, we have represented unto us by way of vision, many dreadful executions of Gods wrath, intimated unto us by the Sounding of several Trumpets, the ope∣ning of several Seas, the pouring out of several Vialls, &c. and then after all this (as a sad preparative to the grand account, which every man must give at the Tribunal of Iudgement) we read of this fatal and final determination, He that is unjust, et him be uujust still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still; Rev. 22. 11. (that is) He that will not be reclaimed by any gracious applica∣tion; shall be lest impenetrable to his own ruine, and destruction. It was a sore, and a grievous servitude which th Israelites sustained under the unrea∣sonable, and (indeed) impossible com∣mands of Pharaoh and his Officers, for 400. yeers together; and it is very pro∣bable that Iacob understood what would befal his posterity in Egypt, long before he went down thither, God having communicated the same to his Grandfather Abraham, as appears Gen. 15 13. Know of a surety, that thy seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them 400, yeers. And yet
Iacob is commanded to lay aside all fear of going down into Egypt, not∣withstanding this prediction; and the reason is, because God promised to go along with him; as appears Gen 46. 34. The promise of Gods presence extin∣guisheth the fear of 400. yeers certain Affliction. And when upon an high provocation, God threatned the same people to withdraw his presence, and to substitute an Angel in his room for their conduct into Canaan, see with what bitterness of spirit they entertain the message; Tis said, that when the peo∣ple heard these tidings; They mourned, and no man did put on his ornaments, Exod. 33. 4. How far we have forfeited the condct of a gracious God in our former designes and engagements, I take no pleasure to remember. Tis well if (together with our possessions and estates, and many other blessings) we have not lost the favour of the Donor also; Sure I am, The safety and preser∣vation of a people, of a City, of a soul, consists intirely and immediatly in the gracious presence of Almighty God; And it is most certain, That God never forsakes a people, till they first forsake him; Isa. 50. 1. and as certain, that when a people forsake their God, God will
also forsake and estrange himself from that people. 2. Chron 15. 2. So that, when it comes to this fatal Breach and Divorcement; that God begins to with∣draw from his Sanctuary (the place where he had fixed the marks of his favour in his Name and Worship, when he is so highly provoked, as to hate, where he loved, in so much that he can∣not look upon his people with any pleasing aspect, nor speak unto them, but in thunder and lightning, nor call them by that ancient name of favour Israel. by which he had distinguished them from all the world; But whe Israel (that is) a people prevailing Gen. 32. 28, Hos. 1. 6. 9. with God, shall be turned into Loami; Not the people of God; into Lorbamah, a people that hath not obtained mercy When that of the Prophet Ier∣my shall be fulfilled; I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine Heritage, I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hands of her Enemies; Ier. 12. 7. Then every thing shall twist and conspire to the ruine and destru∣ction of that people. The Schoolmen distinguishing of poena Sensus, and poena Damni; conclude the loss of heaven, and the want of Gods presence, a far heavier judgement the
the pains of Hell, sustained in ever∣lasting chains of darkness. And the rea∣son is, because the memory and contem∣plation of a better, doubleth the misery of a worse estate, and condition. Sure I am, the Scripture evidently concludes Apostacy of far nearer relation and al∣liance to the bottomless pit, then A∣theisme: and that it had been better men had never known the way of righ∣teousness, then after the knowledge, Taste and Experience of that way of 2. Pet. 2. 21. life, to turn away, and forsake it, begin∣ning in the Spirit and concluding in the flesh. For if we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the Truth; there remaineth no more sacri∣fice for sin; but a certain fearful looking for of Iudgement, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. Heb. 10. 26. 27. The sum of all these general Consi∣derations, is but this; Whensoever God forsakes a people, he leaves them insa∣tuated and betwitch'd to their own ruine and destruction; and whensoever a people is so far infatuated; their hearts so fat, their ears so heavie, their eyes so wilfully shut, that they will neither discern the threatnings of an angry God, not be awakened by the visible execu∣tions
of his Iudgements; It is an evident token, that God hth forsaken them. So that whether we take Spiritual Infatua∣tion for the procuring Cause of Desola∣tion and misery; or for the Effect of Gods Iustice upon the heart of a peo∣ple forsaken of him, or for the signe and Symptom of his certain visitation, we are to look upon it as a fatal Iudgement upon the soul, where ere we find it. Quos perdere vult Deus, dementa prius Applica∣tion. Not to dismisse these generals without some shrt Application. You have heard your Prophet, and seen his Commission. Only the Scene is changed. What was threatned unto Iudea, hath been the dismal Tragedy in England. Desolation and Devastation at home: Banishment, and I fear, too general a Desertion of  that are abroad. God hath spent a whole quiver of his arrows, poured out a whole volley of his Iudgements, neither unlike, nor inferiour to the Egyptian plagues He hath smitten us in the in∣creas of the earth, by blasting and mildews; insomuch, that we may take up th Prophet Isaiah's complaint, that Isai. 5. 10. an Omer of seed hath not (in many pla∣ces) yeilded an Ephah of fruit; (tha is) not the tenth part of what was sown▪
and our Land, which was wont to be a lender unto other Nations, hath been cursed into a blasted and borrowing condition: He hath smitten us in our flocks and herds, by a strange kind of murrain and rottenness in all sorts of Catrel. He hath smitten us in our purs∣es, by reducing us unto extreme penury; and smitten us in our posterity, by cut∣ting off our yong men with the sword. How hath the storm of war (like an E∣gyptian Hail) broken down our goodly Cedar trees? How have the people been eaten up by Locusts, and Caterpillers, and all manner of Egyptian Vermine? What swarms of frogs (from the bot∣tomless pit) have crept into our houses, croking out their own frauds, and per∣nicious fallacies, to the seduction of 2. Tim. 3. 6. men, and women, laden with sins, led about with divers lusts? What palpa∣ble (and more then Egyptian) darkness hath followed hereupon in all places? and sure, if our waters have not been turned into blood; our earth hath been miserably drenched and soaked with Christian, Protstant, English, Noble, Royall blod; and (which is beyond all this.) The plague of Pharaohs impe∣nitent and obdurate Spirit, hath so far seized upon our souls, that though we are brought into the red sea of affli∣ction,
and surrounded on every side with hovering destruction, yet we have not in all this time, returned unto him that Isa. 9. 13. hath smitten us. Me thinks I hear the God of the Spirits of all flesh complain of us, as once he did of his own peopl Israel; Why should ye be stricken any more? Ye will revolt more, and more; the whole head is fick, and the whole heart is faint; from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, there  no foundness, but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores; and therefore your Country is desolate, and your City burn with fire, &c. Isa, 1. 5. 6. 7. And certainly, our recovery out of this fatal Distemper, belongs alone to the Redeemer of our Israel; for the wi∣sest of men cannot discern by any hu∣mane perspective, how it should be ef∣fected. Psal. 46. 9. 'Ti only the great Generalisi∣mo of heaven, and earth, that maketh wars to cease in all the world, and ma∣keth men in an house to be of one mind; That breaketh down, and buildeth up; that moveth a Land, and divideth it; and at another time, healeth the sores, and fastneth the pillars thereof; and de∣livereh Israel out of all his troubles. What secular arm he will use in this work whensoever his mercy shall take it in hand; or who shall live to see our
breaches repaired, and our present rub∣bish chang'd into the structure of a (more then pretended) reformation; I know not. The Scripture tells us, that of those many thousands to whom the good Land of Canaan was promised, two only survived o be invested in the possession, all the rest were cut off in the wilderness, by the iniquity of their own sinful provocations. Sure I am, that God in his own time will bring the way of every wilful transgressor upon his own head; and the crying raigning sins of our Land, are (many of them) such as go aforehand to Iudgement, 1. Tim. 24. (that is) such as shall certainly find the severe hand of God in their punishment on this side the grave: but I am not sure; that God will punish Hypocrites, by Atheists; or honour those with the glorious employment of suppressing Rebels and Regicides; who themselves refuse to have him raign over them, and re-crucifie their Redeemer daily, by a perpetual backssiding. Our Enemies have thriv'd and prospered hitherto, no otherwise then Leeks and Sparagus, by the dung and putrifaction of our sin∣fulness. Let us but withdraw this abo∣minable contribution of our superfluity of naughtiness, and I dare be your Pro∣phet; you shall see your Enemies power
wither like grass upon the house top; and their persons grow as contemptible, as dung upon the earth. To effect these our greedy desires, the ways of Policy and divided Applications to divers parties and factions, is very intricate, unsafe, and hard to hit. The ways of true Honour, Religion, and Iustice, are far more easie, succesful, and assured. But no expedient (for the healing of a Land wasted with wo, and misery) like unto that of the Text, (Repentance and a sincere Conversion unto God.) Let this be don first, and in all our difficulties, God will not b wanting to us in the safe conduct of his Holy Spirit. The truth is, most wounds will heal and close of themselves, if they may be but kept from filth and putrifaction; and the main of our Cure lies in Naamans Prescription; and is of no more diffi∣culty, but to wash, and be clean. Oh then, let your Prayers, and Trs, and improved Conversations, be now more fortunate and successful in the ser∣vice of your Soveraign: then all your former riotousness and debauchery hath been fruitful only in mischiefs, and miscryings. Who would not dis∣card a Contestation, an animosity,  bosom and beloved sin, to qualif himself for so glorious an Employment,
as the restauration of a Glorious Church, and a Flourishing Kingdom, invaded, and trampled upon by Rebellious Hypocri∣tes? What pity it is to see men so da∣rig, and resolved, as to hazard and for∣sake their neerest Interests and Rela∣tions, rather thn deliberately to make Shipwrack of their faith and Alle∣geance; and yet to see the same men, as weak and unstable as water in bearing up against a petty paultry lust, and in denying themselves in their own vi∣cious sensualities? Which gives occa∣sion to many men to doubt, whether in their particular engagements, they do not seek themselves more then the com∣mon service. Our task (I must confess) is not un∣like that of the poor oppressed Israe∣lites, under the severe Egyptian task masters; w have much work to do, but little or no straw wherewithal to do it. Our perils, not unlike those S. Paul met withal in his great masters service. Perils of waters, perils of robbers, perils in the sea, perils among false brethren; but the perils of all perils, are the pe∣rils by our own Country men. 2. Cot. 11. 26. Our Condition, not unlike that which is described by the same Apostle in another place. Troubled we are on 1. Cor. 4. 8. 9. every side, yet not distressed; Cast
down, but not destroyed; Perplexed, but not in despair; Persecuted, but (we hope in Christ, not under the Doom in the Text) not forsaken of our God In these prils and perplexities, our securest way will be, to betake our selves unto his sheler and Protecton, who is the Psal. 65. 5. confidence of all the end of the earth, and of them, that are a far off upon the sea. To thee therefore O merciful and gracious God, do we resigne and recom∣mend, our selves, our souls, and bodies, out Cause, and all our Councels and de∣signs; beseeching thee to remove our sins as far from us, as they have removed us out of thy favour; O thou that sparedst Ninive in compassion to those many thousand innocents that were therein; be pleased out of thine infinite mercy, to spare those sinful Nations from whence we are, and give not up thine heritage therein to such Confusion; but turn us O God, at the last, and be gracious unto thy servants; Oh satisfie us with thy mercies, and that soon, and do not suffer thy whole displeasure to arise upon us; but do thou arise, and have mercy upon Sion, build thou the walls of our de∣cayed Ierusalem, and cause thy face a∣gain to shine upon thy Sanctuary among us; So we, that be thy people, and sheep
of thy pasture shall give thee thankes for ever, and declare thy loving kind∣ness from generation, to generation. Thus I have shewed the several ker∣nels of this Pomgranate; but to have in∣ssted particularly upon every one of them, would have swelled this Treatise beyond its intended Bulk; The main thing I shall fix upon for my subject, is the Doctrine of Spiritual Infatuation, the epidemical disease and infection of these Times; reserving the other con∣siderations, to be inserted, and inter∣weaved, as subservient handmaids to this grand purpose, or to be used as so many slight dashes, in the pourtraicure of this ugly and deformed monster of this Age. Incrassa cor populi hujus. Make the heart of this people fat. The disease we have to do withal, lies not in the Head; it is not a vertigo, or whimsey in the brain, an error in opinion; But 'tis a desperate malignant humour tha flies to the Heart, the seat of the vital Spirits, and the principal part of the whole body. In that black roll of curses we read of Deut. 28. the greatest (to my ap∣prhension) is that which is set down v. 28. The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blidness, and astonishment of heart. And Salomon in that excellent
prayer which he made at the Dedica∣tion of the Temple, makes the know∣ledge and removal of this plague of the heart, to be the characteristick note of true repentance, and acceptation with God, 1. King 8. 38. 'Tis this part that is primum vivens, and ultimum moriens, as well in Grace, as Nature. And therefore, since the Act of the Spiritual Physitian is so much concern'd in the preserva∣tion and recovery of this principal part; that I may proceed with the more hopeful successe therein; It will not be amisse to proceed after this method; namely, to shew 1. The disease it self. 2. The Causes of it. 3. The Symptomes of it. 4. The most hopeful way of Cure of it. First of the Disease. We say in Phy∣sick, that a disease is more then halfe cured, when it is certainly known and disovered; and more grand errors are committed by unwary assurances, then by illiterate applications. This of the heart is mentioned in Scripture with great variety of expressions. That which we read so frequently in Scrip∣ture of the Sons of Belial, men that lived (in their generations) Absque jugo, without any yoke of Religion, or Go∣vernment upon them. That which the
Psalmist speaks of a people, whose hearts were as fat as grease, (or as brawn, according to the vulgar transla∣tion) Psal. 119. 70. That which the Pro∣phet Ezekiel speaks of an Impudent, & stif hearted people, Ezek. 2. 4. That, which the Protomartyr Stephen speaks, of a stiffnecked people, and uncircum∣cised in heart and ears. Act. 7. 51. That which S. Paul mentions of some, whose consciences were cauterized and seared, as with an hot iron. 1. Tim. 4. 2. That, which he calls elsewhere, Blindness of heart, in those who (being past feeling) have given themselves over unto licen∣tiousness, to work all uncleaness with greediness, Eph. 4. 18. 19. That which he calls a strong delusion in those who are designed to believe a lie to their own destruction. 2. Thess. 2. 11. That which he calls the darkness and defile∣ment of the mind and Conscience. Tit. 1. 15. The same is the desperate disease of the fat heart in the Text. All these are but so many expressions of the same Malignitie in the Soul. So that by the fat heart, we are to understand such a Brawny, obstinate, and obdurate heart, as no admonitions can reclaim, or mer∣cies move, or threatnings regulate, or motions mollifie; an heart that hates to Psal. 30. 17. be reformed, that is wilfully resolved
to subscribe to o command, but to pur∣sue with greediness and delight, the full swinge of its own sensual and depraved inclinations. We say in Philosophy; Qualitates in∣tenduntur, & remittuntur. All Quali∣ties admit of intensions and degrees. For as in Artificial Contrivances, one wheel insers the motion of another; and one colour is a preparative to an∣other; till the cloth be dyed in Grain; As in Matters Military, a small defeat at first, may be the occasion of a total Rout: So in Matters Spiritual, per selera ad scelus, one iniquity is ordinarily the dore and preparative to another, till at last the sin becoms of a scarlet dye; and one Judgemnt (if not entertaind as coming from the just hand of God;) be∣comes a fatal preparative to another, till at last the soul becoms palsey∣stricken, and hath no sense at all of the hand that smiteth it. Thus it fares with this Porosis tes Kardias. This In∣fatuation, or Obduration of the Heart s of several Kinds or Degrees; I shall speak only of three of them, unto which all ma be reduced. First. There is an obduration which is natural, and common to the whole lump and masse of mankind. The Pro∣pht Jeremy spaks of a foreskin gro∣ing
upon the heart, which must be ta∣ken off. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the foreskins of your hearts. Ier. 4. 4. Of which Spiri∣tual Circumision. the egal, in the flesh, was but a Type and figure, the true Circucision being that of the heart; in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not of man, but of God, Rom. 2. 29. With this foreskin about the heart, is every man born into the world; and 'tis no shame for us to acknowledge the vilenesse of our natural pollution, according as Ezechiel describes it. E∣zech. 16. 4. 5. 6. For till we are clened of this filthinesse, and this foreskin be taken away, the heart of man is abomi∣nable, and disobedient, and to every good work avse, and reprobae. Of this speaks the same Prophet also in an∣other place, A new heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh, Eech. 36. 26. So that, when God is said to harden any mans heart, it is not to be understood of any positive act, or operation upon the heart, making that had and impenetra∣ble, which before, was soft and pliable; but (according to the Consel of hs most just, and holy will) by way of
Ngation, or rathr preterition; he pas∣seth by the vessels of wrath, and leaves them as he found them, with their natu∣ral hardnesse and drynesse upon them. No otherwise then as the earth is som∣times parched and made fruitlesse, (not by any positive curse, bu) as it was in Eliahs time, when the clouds were withheld from pouring their rain upon it. Thus we read of Sihon King of the Amorites, that when the Israelites would have passed peaceably through his ter∣ritory, paying not only for their meat, but for their water, and pawning their Deut. 2. 2. faith only to passe along the high way, without turning ether to the right hand or to the let: It is said, that God hardned his Spirit, and made his heart obstinate, Deut 2. 30. (that is) he lest him to be ruined by his own natural peevish, and unfriendly disposition; in opposing that people which he saw God Almighty owned by his visible power and protection. God hardned his heart, non induendo malitiam, sed pro∣pter peccata praecedentia, subtrahendo∣gratiam; saith Aequinas. 2. There is a second kind of Obdu∣ration, which is Casual and Volntary, the work of a mans own wilful and pernicious industry; A kind of poison extracted out of many venomous and
destructive simples; A custom contra∣cted by the iteration and repetition of many vitious and ungodly actions. Now though hardnesse be the quality of all iron in general; yet there is an appa∣rent difference between the hardness of iron in the Ore, and the hardness of iron in the Anvil; That in the Ore is hard by nature; That in the Anvil, is hardned by designe, and growes harder every day, by a constant multiplication of strokes upon it. That in the Ore, is malleable, and easily broken in pieces; That in the Anvil is so obdurate, that it resisteth all the strokes that are made upon it. Just so is it with a mans heart: That, which by nature was but Pollu∣tion; by indugence and improvement becomes poison. That, which by nature was but a skin about the heart; by cu∣stom, becoms a stone in the heart. Hu∣mors when they are tough and com∣pacted, are purged out of the body with greater difficulty; and a complication of sins is not easily dissolved in the soul. For as in the Natural Constitution, that which is but a slim visious hu∣mour, in the stomack, is by the heat of the body compacted into gravel, and (by the continual accssion of this gre substance) is digested into a stone in the reins or in the bladder,
which grows there to such a magitude, that it becomes a disease, which is sel∣dome cured but with extreme paine and hazard of the patient: Just so is it with the Spiritual Costitution; That which by nature was but a pronesse, and propensitie unto evil; by the strength of Custom, and encouragement of Delight, becoms a second nature, a Necessitie, whereby a man is so far ensnared and fettered with the cords of his own twi∣sting, that he becoms prisoner and slave unto himself, and his own corrupt affe∣ctions; and without great grace, and mr∣cy, is never redeemed into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. I shall instance only in that cheap and daring provo∣cation, (the sin of rsing and swearing) which makes up a great part of some mens Language; Were it certainly re∣vealed from heaven to the common swearer, that the next oath he swore he should incur the sentence of Dathan and Abiram, and be carried away quick to Hell, I perswade my selfe he were not able to forbear; so powerful and predo∣minant is the strength of a depraved custom in the soul. And truly, though custom in some cases may be a good plea in Law; yet I am sure, 'tis a very bad one in Divinity. A man that should be arraigned at the bar of Iustice for
taking a purse upon the high wey, or for picking a pocket at a sermo; and should plead at the bar under this form: My Lord, I pray be good to me, 'tis a Custom I have gotten, and would leave, but I canno; Would not all the world cry shame on him, away with him to Execution? Certainly the case is the same between God and us. Are we born down with the strength of custom? The more our guilt and shame; that (to the high dishonour and provocation of a merciful God,) could be contet to sin over the same sins for ten, twenty, thirty yeers together; without ever taking no∣tice that we were in the gall of bit∣terness, and bond of iniquity. And truly, he that shall favour himself in any wic∣ked way, and indulge unto any pleasing transgression, with a purpose to perse∣vere therein: Does apparently strength∣en himself in his wickednesse; delivers up the possession of himself to that De∣vil, whose name is Legion; and makes Mar. 5 9. way for a third kind of obduration, which follows in the next place to be spoken of. 3. There is a third kind of Obdura∣tion; and that is Divine, and Iudicial; the just reward of the former obstinacy. For when the Donor of every good and Ezech. . 16. 17. perfect gift, finds his Talets absed.
his silver, and gold, and the fair jewels of his mercy, made the fuel and matter of more licentious provocation; his Grace turned into wantnnesse, the motions of his good Spirit, vilified and rejected; no abatement of sin, no improvement in Grace, notwithstanding all his stripes and Fatherly Corrections: When he sees the heart of a man so wedded unto his own way, that with Ahab, he sets 1. King. 21. 25. himself to work wickednesse in the sight of the Lord; And with Absolom, is not ashamed to commit a barbarous and horrid wickednesse in the sight of 2. Sam. 16. 22. all Israel, and the Sun; When a man is grown so strangely habituated unto wickednesse, that he can as well forbear to eate, or drink, or sleep, as the con∣trivance and prosecution of his mali∣cious designs; And so desperately re∣solved, as to make a Covenant with Esay. 28. 15. Death; and to be at an agreement with Hell; cannot endure to think of being reformed, and therefore declines and hates any thing that may tend to his Conversion: Then (as a just reward and punishment of this wilfulness) God delivers up such a man unto himself, withdraws the sweet influence of his grace, suffers him to take his full swinge in wickednesse, and to run head-long (without any restraint) to his own ruin and destruction.
This I take to be the obduration of Pharaohs heart, so frequently mentioned in the book of Exodus. For it is said Exod. 8. 15. When Pharaoh saw, that there was respite, he hardned his heart, and harkned not, &c. and v. 32. Pharaoh hardned his heart this time also; &c. and then Exod. 9. 12. it's said God hardned the heart of Pharaoh. And 'tis obser∣vable how he is threatned v. 14. I will at this time; send all my plagues upon thy heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, &c. So that first Pha∣raoh hardens, and then God hardens. Pharaoh hardens himself, and God leaves him to himself. Pharaoh hardens wilfully; and God hardens judicially. This I take to be the doom of the ac∣cursed fig-tree in the Gospel, under which is comprised every barren Chri∣stian. Le no fruit grow on thee hence∣forward Mat. 21. 19. Iude 12. for ever. These are th trees Saint Iude speaks of, whose fruit wi∣thereth, without fruit, twise dead, pluck'd up by the roots. Where the Method of Gods Iustice is very obser∣vable upon an obstinate and Apostate sinner. First, His fruit withereth, he de∣serts his station, grows weary of well doing, and puts off the yoke of Christia∣nity, as if it were an intolerable burden; Then, without fruit, The sap of grace
is withdrawn, and the soul becoms im∣mediately barren; Then, twise dead, dead naturally, and dead spiritually; For as the soul is the life of the body, so is the Grace of God the life of the soul. And lastly, pluck'd up by the root; not presently cast into the fire; They may continue in the garden of Gods Church a long time after, may participate of the dew of heaven, of the holy Ordinances of God, and external communion with his people. But as never fruit comes of a tree that is pluck'd up by the rots, and so left; So never any thing capable of Divine acceptation, comes from a man thus miserably deserted. The ground, and foundation of this doctrine; I conceive, may be safely laid upon that maxime of our Saviour. Habenti dabi∣tur. To him that hath, shall be given, and he shall have more abundance; But whosoever hath not, (that is hath not improved his talent) from him shall be taken away, even that which he Mat. 13. 12. seemeth to have. These are the several kinds, or degrees of Obduration; and this last I take to be the disease in its full height, and malignity. Secondly, We are in the next place to look upon the cause of this disease, and what is particularly instrumental unto it. We say in Philosophy, Anim
sequitur temperamentum corporis. The soul hath its operation according to the temper, organs, and disposition of the Body. As there is no disease in the body, so there is no distemper or depravity in the mind, but is the effect and product of a certain particular cause. So that as Infatuation of mind is a certain prepa∣rative unto judgement: so there are certain preparatives and predisposi∣tions to Infatuation of mind. Two sorts of evils there are n the world, the evil of sin, and the evil of punishment; this of Infatuation is both: it is hard to say whether hath the greater share in the composition. This twisted evil, as it arises from several causes, so it is compounded of several ingredients. In the general; God himself may be said to harden, according to that of the Apostle, Rom. 9. 8. Whom he will, he hardneth; Not by any positive operation upon the mind (as was said before) but by a privative withdrawing or with∣holding of Grace. No oherwise, then as wax being taken from the fire, from being soft and pliable, returns to its na∣tural hardnesse, and inflexibility. And this is the just permission of Almighty God, that such as will not conform unto him, and walk in his ways; should be
left unto themselves, to take their own precipitate and destructive courses. For Instrumental Causes, there are many. To instance in some few, for all the rest. The first Medium unto Obdura∣tion I shall propound, is, The misunder∣standing and abuse of secular prosperity and successe. Thus Senacharibs best argu∣ment to perswade Ierusalem to revolt from good King Hezechiah, is drawn from the successe of his sword, upon the men and gods of Hamah, Arpad, and and Sepheruaim; and from thence he 2 King 18. 34. 35. inferr'd, that therefore the Lord of hosts should not deliver Ierusalem out of his hand; And never undertood the guilt of his Blasphemy, nor the falacy of his argument, nor the vanity of Nisrock his Idol, till he felt the power of his maker, and the stroke of Divine vengeance, in the swords of his own Sons, sheathed in his own bowels, in the very Act and posture of his Idolatrous worship. When the greatnesse of Nebuchadnez∣zars power and conquest lifted him up so high, that he forgot he was a man; God brought him down and humbled him into the very nature and condition of a beast. There was a time when Dan. 4. Babylon was grown fat, as the heyfer at grasse, by eating up the inheritance of the Lord;
but it lasted not long, for within a short time after, Every one that went by Ba∣bylon, Ier. 50. 11. was astonished, and hissed at the sight of all her plagues. And the same Prophet takes notice of some of Gods own people, that were waxen fat, and shined, that overpassed the deeds of the wicked, that did not Iudge the cause of the Fatherlesse, &c. and yet they prospe∣red until the day of Gods visitation came Ier. 5. 28. 29. upon them. Thus was Egypt gron as a fair heyfer, and her men in the midst of her, as so many fatted bullocks, and all to their own destruction; as appears Ier. 46. 20. Thus was Isurun grown fat, and kicked, he was grown thick, and cove∣red with fatnesse; and mark what fol∣lowed hereupon, he presently forsook the God that made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation. Deut. 32. 15. And therefore the Divine Omniscience foreseeing this evil conse∣quent arising from blessings abused, en∣ters a caveat against it: Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his Commandments; lest when thou hast eaten, and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt therein; and when thy herds, and thy flockes multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplyed, and all that thou hast is multiplyed: then thine heart be lifted
up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, &c. Deut. 8. 11. 12. 13 14. The Psalmist speaks very home and close to our pur∣pose, who (describing the wickeds day of Sunshine) saith, Their eys stand out with fatnsse, they have more then heart coud wish, they are not in trou∣ble, as other men, neither are they pla∣gued as other men; pray observe the cosequet, Therefore pride compasseth them about like a chain, violence co∣vereth them as a garment; thou doest set them in slippery places, thou castest them down to destruction, how are they brought into desolation in a moment They are utterly consumed with tr∣rors. Psal. 73. 5. 6. 7. 18. 19. Impunity is no good evidence to prove Integrity; it is very often the instrument of sottish and secure stupidity. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily; therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully se in them to do evil. Eccl. 8. 11. Where, though sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily; yet ('tis worth the observing) every evil work, (how plausibly soever disgused and palliated) is immediately sentenced. There is an obligation unto punishment belongs to every worker of Iniquiy, which nothing but repentance can rverse and cancel. Salomon saith,
There is a just man that perisheth in his righteousnesse, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in wicked∣nesse. Eccl. 7. 15. and S. Paul saith, If in this life only we had hope in Christ, (speaking there of the Saints and ser∣vants of God) we were of all men the most miserable. 1. Cor. 15. 19. I have produced all these Text d Instances for no other purpose, but to shew the vanity and imposture of these times, which have built so much upon so false and rotten a foundation, as if thy had borrowed light rather from the Turkish Alcoro, then from any Scripture given by Inspiration. So that, however ignorant and un∣grounded men, and somtimes Gods own select and peculiar servants, (as Iob, and David,) may stumble at the prosperity of fools and wicked men; and look up∣on their secular advantages, as so many marks of the Divine odnesse and Be∣nignity; yet let them but approach the Sanctuary of God, and there consult his Sacred Oracles; they shall find, that the stations of these men are set in dark and slippery places; That their Damnation 2. Pet. 2. 3. slubreth nt, but is rather so much the nearer, by how much the farther they think themselves removed out of the reach of it. And for those of our Age
and Nation, who have built their great∣nesse upon the ruines and rubbish of a glorious Church, and a flourishing King∣dom; that have fatted themselves with the blood of their brethren, and from the Tayl of the people, have advanced themselves to such a pitch, as to be able to trample upon the head and throne of Majesty it self, however these men may flatter and applaud themselves in the successe of their own Councels and Contrivances; and by an Hysteron Pro∣teron, conclude and infer Godliness from Gain, and not Gain from Godliness▪ Sanctity from Success, and not Success from Sanctity; I could wish they would be advised to suspend their Iudgement of Gods secret decree upon our Nation, till they have seen the last Act upon the stage. There is a Tragical Scene will one day shew it self, whensoever God shall draw the curtain, it shall then ap∣pear to all the world, that their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works, their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands. Isa. 59. 6. Then shall be fulfilled that say∣ing of Eliphaz, A dreadful sound is in their ears; in prosperity, the destroyer shall come upon them; Iob 15. 21. In the mean time, I shall only recommend unto
them two Texts of Scripture, which I wish may be well studied and digested of Them. The one is Isa. 30. 12. 13. Thus saith the holy one of Israel; Be∣cause ye despise my word, and trust in op∣pression and perversness, and stay thereon; therefore this iniquity shall be to you,  a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh sudden∣ly, at an instant. The other is Isa. 50. 11▪ Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that com∣pass about your selves with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall e down in sorrow. I shall dismiss this point with two Cautions only, the one concerns the right stating of our Iudgement; and that is, That we would not think the worse but the better of our Religion, for the cruel persecution which the Devil by these infernal instruments, hath raised against it. There wer some in the Psal∣mists time, that irreligiously demanded, saying, where is now the God of the Hebrews? And there are, (even of those that have laid the train to our Destru∣ction) that demand with as much inso∣lence as absurdity; where is now the Protestant Religion in England? Not, where was it before Luthers time, but where is it now? To whom we answer,
That it is now where it was before Lu∣thers time, that is, under the Eclipse of Persecution. They may with as much reason demand (with those useful in∣struments of theirs, the Sectaries) where is the Kings power now in England? Since it is not exercised a present by any persons deputed by his Majesty, nor in any part of that Isand, that I know of, which if they do; In promptu est responsio; Every true hearted English∣man hth his answer ready, (though he dare not speak it out) namely, That the Kings power (however trampled upon by Rebels and Regicides) lives still, (and long may it) in the hearts, of all his faithful and loyal subjects. And as for our Religion; I doubt not but (like the late martyred defender of it) it will improve by sufferings, and appear more glorious and celestial, when these black clouds and foggs shall be dissol∣ved and scattered into nothings; we are neither Millenaries, nor Papists; We pretend not to be members of a glorious visible triumphant Churh; We esteem it mercy enogh to be of the despised members of a Church Militant; to be of the posterity of the woman persecu∣ted by the great red dragon into the wil∣derness; who, when he coud not reach her person by those water of persecu∣tin
he cast after her; was wroth with the woman, and resolves to make war with the remnaut of her seed for ever. Rev. 12. 17. The other Caution concerns our Conversations; That as we would not think the worse of our faith: so we would think the worse of our Lives, for the growth of our enemies power and success: and that our wilful and resol∣ved wickednesses, are of a more fatal and pernicious influence, then our highest courages, or most active perfor∣mances can compensate. Let that Mili∣tary Caution of Moses be set seriously before our eys. When the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every wickned thing. Deut. 23. 9. For however we sit here, warm and disinga∣ged; yet how far our friends in other places are About the time of that merci∣lesse slaughter at Droge∣da in Ireland. at this instant, exposed to the cruel mercies of our Enemies; How far our Soveraign may be endan∣gered by snares, and treacheries, and close conspiracies; How far we are con∣cerned in the final issue of the war; and how far we may wound our friends and their designs at any distance, would be seriously thought on by all that wish us good luck, and that we may prosper in the name of Lord. That as we are hungry and greedy enquirers after
news and transactions; so we would be as zealous in abstaining from that which will certainly render our intelli∣gence more welcom and desired. That after a long and sad experience of the severe hand of God against us; God may at last have the onou, and our selves the comfort of a final victory over our selves, and sinful enormities, as well as Enemies. 2. Somtimes God suffers the hearts of such as hate to be reformed, to be hard∣ned and infatuated perinisterium Dia∣boli, by the service and ministry of our grand enemy the Divel. For the Angels which kept not their first estate, are not so reserved in chains under darkness; but that they have leave to walk the world, to promote the Kingdom of darkness. S. John tells us, The great dragon was cast out of heaven, that old serpent called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world, he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him, Rev. 12. 9. And our Saviour compares the Kingdom of heaven, to a man who sowed good seed in his fild, but while men slept, his ene∣my came, and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way; Mat. 13. 24. 25. Almighty God hath four principal fields, Heaven, Paradise, the Church, and
mans heart. In heaven, Lucifer sowed pride; In Paradise, Satan sowed disobe∣dience; In the Church he soweth Schismes and Heresies; and in mans heart he sows all manner of unlawful sects. And for the great harvest he gains by his unwaried industry in sowing, he is called the God of this world, the Eph. 2. 2. prince of the ayr, who ruleth in the hearts of the children of disobedience. It is said of Judas Iscariot, that after he had recived the sop from his ma∣sters hand (which was the signal disco∣very which of the twelve should prove the Traitor:) that Satan entrd into him, Ioh. 13. 27. What advis this in∣fernal tutor dictated unto him, is st down V. 2. He put into his heart to betray his master; which was prophe∣sied long besore, that Satan should stand at his right hand, Psal. 109. 6. It was very proper and natural, that the Divel should have the sole conduct of Iudas, who was to be the guide unto them who were to take Jesus. All Trason, though never so peciously guilded and disguised, we know from whence it comes, it is neither beter nor worse then the Divels whisper. And indeed there is no reconciling Christ and Belial; no middle path between oedience and disobedience; no neutrality between
God, and his enemies. They that will not have the one of raign over them, do ipso facto, subscribe unto the others Govenment. Saul is no sooner deserted by a good Spirit, but immediatly pos∣sessed of an evil one. And this is most agreeable to the Iustice of God, that 1. Sam 16. 14. such as will not be led by the saving conduct of his good Spirit; should be left to the mercy of a Spirit so full of malice, that (when he cannot have his full blow a man) receives some satis∣faction in the destruction of an herd of swine; Mar. 3. 12. We read of Ahab, that being de∣signed (by the Iustice of God) to fall at Ramoth Gilead; a lying Spirit comes and offers his service to be the instru∣ment of his destruction; and propound∣ing a very plausible way to effect his designe (namely by being a lying Spi∣rit in the mouth of all his Prophers) he gains a Commission (or rather a Permission) to go and act accordingly: Where we may pause a little, and en∣quire, what was the reason the Divel was so active and officious in this ser∣vice? Was it to befriend the Syrian army with a glorious victory? 'Tis not likely he should be friend to any party, who is the irreconciliable enemy of all mankind: Or was it for the accom∣plishment
of Eliahs Prophecy concer∣ning Ahabs fall? Doubtlesse, the pro∣moting and accomplishing Gods Truth, (quatenus his Truth) is no very plea∣sing employment to a lying Spirit: He that was a Lyar from the beginning, and the arch Patron of all imposture, would certainly change Gods Truth in∣to a lye, if the thing were possible, and his power proportionable to his ma∣lice. No; his malice strikes at the King of Israel, that in that one blow he mght ound all the thousands of Isael: He knew well, that if the sheperd were once but smitten, the sheep would im∣mediatly b scattered into misery and confusion enough. Which as Micaiah saw in a vision, so the Divel by the ad∣vantage of long experience knew, would be the certain consequent of the Kings fall. And therefore for this grand pur∣pose he whers all his endeavours, for this he Councels the King of Assiri to issue out a Command, saying, Fight 1. King 22. 31. neither with small nor great, save only with the King of Israel. For this he sends his Emissaries among all the Prophets; For this he raiseth persecu∣tion against single, but faithful Micaiah, because he would not follow his false suggestions: And at the accomplish∣ment of this designe, how do the hellish
and infernal suries clp their black hands; in a tryumphant acclamation, saying, There, there, so would we have it. I have insisted the longer on this story, for the near affinitie and cor∣respondence it hath with these times. For let us but set a good King in the place of a bad; and sure we have much of Micaiahs vision accomplished in our Israel. Sure I am, we are scattered on all hands, as sheep that have no shep∣herd (at least no shepherd where he should be) and in this our sad confu∣sion, we are not without good store of Foxes, and Tygers, and wolves in sheeps clothing preying upon us: And no won∣der, for was the lying Spirit so active and busie in Ahabs time, and hath he been lesse active and busie in ours? Was he so active and busie in cutting of an Ahab from the Throne of Israel; and hath he been lesse active and busie in cutting of an Hezechiah from the Throne of England? Was it the language of the lying Spirit in th Prophets of those times, Go up and prsper: and is it not the language of the same Spirit in the b'ack mouthes of our Prophets, Go on and prosper in the most prodigious ways that ever he Sun beheld? Was Michaiah smitten, and imprisoned, and reduced to bread and water for speak∣ing
in the name of the Lord; And are not our Micaiahs, our Prophets, as vile∣ly and villanously intreated by our Pashurs and Zedechias among the Pro∣phets, and by our Ammons and Gover∣nours among the people? I would to God that many of us, (the Lords Pro∣phets) had but so much as bread and water, that we could call our own, till our Soveraign Lord the King were setled in his Throne in peace. But alas, what can either Priest or people expect, whilst the goodly pillars of our Land, Religion, and Iudicature are quite overturned and laid aside? Whilst all Law is resolved into the bloody sen∣tence of the sword; and all Gospel into the private whisper of a seducing and destructive spirit? And all power (un∣der the permission of the supreme wheel) receives its Commission from Eph. 2. 2. the Prince of the ayr, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience? He that in the bginning seduced the first woman in the form of a Serpent (and by that imposture introduced a general inundation of iniquity upon the world) is now grown so wise, as to transform himself into an Angel of light: 2. Cor. 11, 14. And in this white and Saintlike dis∣guise, has leave from a just God, to whisper to the Consciences of wilful
and unstable men, such strange delu∣sions, under the pretence of new light, as fils the Christian world with wonder and amazement. 'Twere easie to set down a list of these new light, but that I look upon them as too many, and in∣deed too scandlous to be inserted in a Protestant Treatise: And therefore to wave a particular Narration of the whimseys and phrensies which the bold∣nesse and madnesse of these times hath thrust out into the world, together with the absurdities, defects, ad haesitations in prayer, which have been pinned upon the Sacred Spirit of God, and all by vertue of Excitations, Incitations, and Inspirations extraordinary; as if the same Holy Ghost declared one thing by his pen, and suggested the clean contra∣ry by his whisper. He that shall take up his stand in his Sanctuary of God, and from the pillar of truth (established upon the clear word of God) shall take a survey of the Doctrines and Princi∣ples which have commenced of late yeers, together with the general belief and adherence which hath been given unto them: The wild and intemperate Zeal of the promoting them; and the Bnishment (or rather Burial) of Meeknesse, Patience, Peace, Charity, and all Evangelical graces, in the mangery
of their designs so full of gloriou pre∣tenses; must either resolve aforehand to wink and blind himself by partiality and designe, or els be enforced to con∣clude from the fruits we have reaped, that the seed was never taken out of Gods granary; but that it hath been te Businesse and Industry of our envious Adversary, to sow his tares, to the great encrease of his peculiar harvest, whilst we have slept and snorted in our sin and security. So that, as when God opened the eys of Elishas servant, he saw then visibly the protection of that heavenly host, which before he was not able to discern; so (on the contrary) would the same God be pleased to do the like Spiri∣tual Cure upon the eys of our minds; We should soon discern those Legions of Infernal Spirits, by whose seduction and deluson we have been cheated of the favour of God, and abused and en∣snared into so much misery and ruine. Thus, Deus deficit, gratiam detrahendo. Diabolus afficit, maliciam apponendo; homo seipsum inficit duritiem contra∣hendo. Nor is this al, The Divel has not per∣sected his design, when he has instilled his poyson, unlesse he give his Opium too, and lay the soul asleep upon the
pillow of security; Those diseases of the body are of greatest danger, and of nearest affnity with our dissoluton, that take away all sense of pain and anguish; as the Palsie, Lthagie, &c. And the fattst parts of the body are ever observed to be the least sensible, as having in them the fewest fibers and nrves, which are the instruments of Sensation. So that, when the Divel is said to make the heart fat; he makes it Secure and senslesse of any danger, ari∣sing from our own sin, or Gods Iudge∣ments. And indeed, the Divel can never call a man his own, till he hath him at this lock; For so long as there is any sense of sin, any touches or twitches of Conscience; there is some hopes of re∣covery, a possibility there is, he may see with his eys, and hear with his ears, and understand with his heart, and convert, and be healed, But when a man hath sinned himself out of all sense of sin; when there is no Mnitor in the school of the soul, no check of Consciece to remember him of a Quid feci? what have I done against God, my neighbour, and my on soul? sure such a man is in salva custodia Diaboli; there is very litle hope of such a mans reco∣very. The Psalmist speaks very partiu∣larly to this point, where, speaking of
desperae rebels and opprssors, he saith: They are inclosed in their own fat, and therefore their mouth speaketh great swelling words, Psal. 17. 10. But more of this when I shall speak of the Symp∣tomes of Infatuation. In the mean time, the Consideration of what hath been delivered on this point, may be enough, I hope, to promp us unto these lessons. First, To try and examine all spirits and suggestions whatsoever; especially in an age so miserably haunted, and in∣fested with evil spirits, as this wherein we live. There is a spirit that difers very litle from flesh and blood in its corruption, and pravity; and this spirit the Prophet Ezehiel calls our own Spi∣rit, a blind guide within us. There is a perswasion wich S. Paul gives Caution against; a perswasion that cometh not of him that calleth us. There is a piece of wisdom which S. Iames calls wisdom mistaken; which is not from above; for that wisdom is always pure and peace∣able, &c. but a wisdom in contending and quarrelling, in managing strife and bitternesse, with most advantage to our selves; Achitopels wisdom, to put dife∣rences our of all possibility of reconci∣liation; and this, in whomsoever it is, Iam. 3. 15. is earhly, snsual, and diellish. It shal
be our wisdom to enquire carefully in∣to all these, and above all these to be alwayes awake to the danger and de∣ception of our own false heart, which is very prone to entertain and swallow what is most pallatable unto flesh ad blood. Latet anguis in herba; he old Serpent lurkes commonly under the fairest flower. Secondly, having discovered the im∣postor; That we would conceive our Christian reputation very much con∣cerned, in bidding defiance to this Ene∣my, Most men are bold only in bragging they have great courage; when indeed they have none at all in opposing the enemies of God, and their own salva∣tion. And let no man think the engage∣ment of his Christian warfare, a diffi∣cult, tedious, or unreasonable service; There is Armour of proof provided for us from head to foot. And the Apostle requires no more of the Christian sol∣dier, but only to keep his station. When Eph. 6. Eph. 6. 13. the Israelites (having the Sea before them, and the Egyptian Army behind them) begin to suspect Moses his Con∣duct, and Gods protection: Moses re∣quires no more of hem, but only to stand still, and they should see the Sal∣vation of God A man would thnk it no Exod. 13 13. small encouragement to men of Mili∣tary
employment, to be assured before they went out to battel, that their ene∣mie would certainly fly, if they did but keep their stations. And yet S. Iames assures us infallibly, that this shall be the certain issue; If we will but resist, the Iam. 4. 7. Divel will flee; He doth not say if ye overcome, the Divel will flee; but if ye do but resist, the day is your own; and yet how few are o be found of s much resolution as belongs to the bare resi∣sting of evil. It i not in the power of Beelzebub, or all the Divels in Hell, to compel a man to subscrbe to a tempta∣tion. And therefore let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted, neither tem∣pteth he any man, but every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts, and enticed. Iam. 1. 13. 14. What the vis formativa is to the Em∣brio in the womb; the same is compliance to the production of that ugly monster sin. Consent forms it, Desire gives it birth, Delight nurfeth it, and practise and perseverance brings it to its full grouth and perfection; and when it is fi∣nished, ye know what it brings forth; Death and somthing worse then death, after death: (namely) a worm that nevr die but wil ly gnawing upon the Con∣science unto all eternity.
Thirdly, That since the Divel is so instrumental to our Insatuation, that we would warily decline whatsoever is in∣strumental to the Divels purposes, to the growth of his power either in us, or over us. That we would look upon Idleness, as the Devils pillow, whereon the soul sleeps it self into a fatnesse and in∣disposition unto any motion tha is praise worthy. He that hath nothing to do, is at leisure to do any thing; and he that will not give himself an employment, shall be sure to have one provided for him by his severest enemy. That we would look upon Drunken∣nesse, as a sin, wherin we degenerate from men, into th nature and condi∣tion of very Beasts, Certainly, did that sin write its deformities externally in the face, in a Wry mouth, or a Squint Ey; with what warinesse and circumspe∣ction would we abstain from it? where∣as it leaves far greater blemishes upon the soul, and yet behold men daily vo∣miting out their own shame, and daily returning with greedinesse to their own drunken vomit. A sin which as we have learnt of other Nations; So I would to God we had not learned to go beyond them in it. A sin wherein,
we diseard our Reason, our Religion, and all that is of God in us, and put our selves entirely under the power, con∣duct, and possession of the Divel. And how far he will make us act in his ser∣vice ere we are sober, we know not (we know not, did I say?) I fear, if we well recollect our selve, we know too much; enough to fill our eys with tears, and our hearts with sorrow and com∣punction. That we would look upon Fornica∣tion and Adultery as upon sins that take the members of Christ, and employ them in the service of an unclean spi∣rit. And sure if Mary Magdalene for her loosenesse this way, was possessed with seven Divels; it may be feared that if Mary Magdelens sin be not washed in Mary Magdalens tears, the same unclean spirit will reside with the same unclean works; I and take unto him seven other more wicked then himself, and multiply at last into a Le∣gion of Divels. Lastly; That we would look upon Oaths and Blasphemies, and cursed Exe∣crations; Not only as so many Grievan∣ces Eph 4. 30. of the Holy Ghost, (that would fain seal us unto the day of our Redemption:) But as it is the very language of the Damned Spirits, who the more they
Blaspheme, the more they are tormen∣ted, and that to all eternity. Certainly, this cheap and daring provocation, is not the soft Ventriloquie of some mo∣dest whispering Divel within us; but the language of a bold, daring, roaring Divel; that takes delight to rave in pu∣blike, and spits defiance in the face of God. In th history of our Saviours miraculous Cures, we read of divers that were corporally possessed by the Devil; and certainly, the contem∣plation of his power and malice, exer∣cised with so much cruelty and Ty∣ranny in those Demoniaks, cannot but affct us with much pity and Compas∣sion. Who would not grive to see his Christian brother, that is bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, vexed and disqueted by an Infernal spirit? to see him cast somtimes into the fire, somtimes into the water, somtimes fo∣ming at the mouth, somtimes cutting his own flesh, at the will, and pleasure of his cruel Master? And yet how few are there among us that have ei∣ther eys to see; or hearts to grieve at the danger and reality of Spiritual Possession? Do we not daily see our friends, and acquaintance cast into the fire, and into the water, I, and by the power and instigation of the Divel oo?
Are they not cast into the water? The deep drowning waters of Ateisme, Apo∣stacy, and despair; the extreme cold wa∣ters of senslesnesse, and stupidity? Are they not cast into the fire? The hot burning fire of Lust and Concupiscence; the wild fire of Sedition and rebellions, the scorching fire of Anger and Revenge? And yet so far are we from pitying these men in their deplorable condition, that we make their misery the matter of our Mirth and Iollity; and play with their destruction, as if the souls Tragedy were but a Farce, designed only for sport and recreation. We read of witches, that (in that solemne Covenant, and Contract they make with the Divel) they do se∣riously and expresly renounce their Baptisme, with all the interest they have in Christ. Though many are strangely given now a dayes, to renounce and re∣voke the vowes and promises they made in Baptism: Yet I will not conclude so desperately of any auditory; Only this I must say, that till they bid defiance to these, and the like workes of the Di∣vel, though they are not witches by solemn agreement; yet I have too much reason to suspect they are bewitched and charmed with the Spiritual Infa∣uation in the Text; and I should suspect
my self possessed of a dumb Divel, if I should not let them know so much. Thirdly, the soul is somtimes be∣witcht into infatuation, per Ministerium pseudoprophetarum. By the ministry and agency of false Prophets; For the divel does not gain all his ends by the influ∣ence of his own immediate suggestions. As he may have leave to assume the ve∣ry flesh and bones of a deceased person; so he may have leave also to employ the brains, and lungs, and organs of a li∣ving agent; and so he hath done in all ages (the most notorious Heretiks be∣ing not more infamous for their heresie, then eminent for their part.) And if any man suspect this truth, I can pro∣duce no fewer then 450. Prophets of Baal, and of the groves, 400. more to witnesse it; 1 King. 18. 19. These factors for the kingdom of darknes are so clear∣ly described by the pen of the holy Ghost, and with such particular marks upon them, for caution and discovery, that (notwithstanding all their fine spun arts) I should wonder my self into an astonishment to see (in a Church where the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles are so often read and preached) a peo∣ple so strangely cosened and ensnared as we have been; but that I read, that Rebellion is a the sin of witchcraft.
These must give me leave (notwith∣standing all their power and influence to do mischief) to enter a little into their discovery; and though they are very changeable in their shape and complexion; yet by the help of that light, that searcheth even between the joynts and marrow, I shall shew you these wandring stars, that so all men tht would not make shipwrack of faith & a good conscience; may know their danger, and larn at last to fear God, and honour their King, and to meddle no more with those men, who are thus wan∣tonly and desperately given to change. Prov. 24, 21. And this I take to be no digression at all from the Text, since it was the fate of this people (to whom the Prophet addresses himself) to be ruined by the frauds of their false Prophets, who by preaching smooth things unto them, laid them fast asleep in their own secu∣rity; and would never suffer them to Ier: 14. 15. hear of sword or fmine, till they were surprised by these judgements past all recovery. We read in Scripture of three sorts of false Prophets; there were some whose predictions were very true, and yet themselves were false Prophets, because their hearts and affections were very
false and nsincere. Such a one was Ba∣laam, of whose propheses we read Num. 24. Its said of him, that he heard the words of God and saw the visions of the Almighty, v. 4. and by verrue of this il∣lumination, he prophefied of Edom, A∣maleck, and the Kenite, of the future prosperity of Israel, spake partie ularly of Iacobs star, which was to rise many hundred yers after. And yet we find this unerring Prophet in his visions, brande by two Apostles, S. Iude, and S. Peter, for loving the wages of unrigh∣teousnss, and was rebuked for his ini∣quity, Iude 2. 2 Pet. 2. 15, 16. the dumb Ass speaking with mans voice, forbidding the madness of that Prophet. Thus Caiphas the Iewish high Priest was a Prophet; He prophesied in Ioh. 11. 50, 51. the general, that it was expedient that one mn should dy for the people; and particularly, that Jesus should dy for that Nation; and this was most true, otherwise, not ha Nation only, but all the Nations in the world had perished everlastingly. And yet the Evangelical history tels us, that Caiaphas was noto∣rious conspitator against that innocent Lam of God, who was slain for the whole wold. Baam and Caiphas spake both well, but did extremely ill; both spake as they were inspired, only with this difference between them, Balaam knew
what he spake, but Caiphas did not; God opened his mouth as he did the mouth of Balaams Asse, which spake true; but (in the mean time) knew not what she spake. There is another sort of false Pro∣phets, who have been ever employed by the father of lies, for the promoting and dispersing of delusions and impostures. Thus 400. Prophets are employed and governed by one lying spirit, to seduce Ahab to fall at Ramoth Gilead, 1 Kin. 22 6. Thus Hananiah prophesied falsly of the Israelites return out of Babylon, and strengthned his prophesie, by break¦ing Ier. 28. 10. 11. a yoke from off the prophet Ieremiahs neck; and all this, for no other purpose, but to make the people trust in a ly; Jer. 28. 15. And that these Prophets might have the greater credit with the people, it was somtimes permitted unto them (as unto the Egyptian sorcerers to do miracles) to give signes and wonders; otherwise that caution of Moses had been in vain, Deut. 13. 1, 2. If there a∣rise among you a propbet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a signe, or a won∣der, and the sign or wonder come to pass, &c. by which it appear, that the Pro∣phet might be a false Prophet, and yet the wonder, the sign, might have an ex∣act accomplishment; only to try the
people, whether they did love the Lord their God with all their heart, and with all their soul, Dut. 13. 3. The third sort of false Prophets, were such, as whether they spake True, or false, were (out of question) false Pro∣phets, and false in their prophesyings too, and that on anoher ground; name∣ly. Because they intruded themselves into tht Sacred employment without Commission, saying thus saith the Lord; when the Lord never spake at all by them. Of such as these, God himself seems to complain of; The Prophets pro∣phesie lyes in my name, I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spake unto them, they prophesie unto ou a false vision, and Divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their heart, Jer. 14. 14. These were a kind of over active Prophets, that make more hast, then good speed; They were not sent, yet they ran) saith another text) tey were not spoken unto; yet they prophe∣sied. Ier. 23. 21. Of this sort especially are those swarms of Locusts which have so miserably, and perniciously invaded our Coasts. And therefore to wipe off any scandalous aspersion which may fall upon our Church or Religion, by rea∣son of these Boutefeus, and firebands; we must professe with S. ohn, E nobis
egressi sunt, sed non erant ex nobis. These ntoous Antichrists went out from us, 1 Ioh 2. 19. Math. 12 22. and have been seen among us, but they were never of us. A man may demand of these, as of him in the Gospel, friend how canest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? So frieds, how came ye into the Church of England without Ordination, and Orders? Iesus we know, Act. 19. 15. and Paul we know, and all their lawful successors we know; but who ye are we know not. We know you pretend to have a Commission from Iesus Christ, with so much intemperate boldnesse, as if you were the only persons employed and entrusted by him; But, pretend you what you will, we know what Iesus Christ hath concluded of such as you are, Ioh. 10. 1. He that entreth not by the dore into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief, and a robber. Our Saviour himself was the dore to his Apostles, and his Apostles and their Successors, the dore to all that ever were admitted shepherds in a regu∣lar and Aposto'ique manner. The Mini∣stes of the Gospel are called Stewards, 1 Cor. 4. 1 and Ambassadours, 2. Cor. 5. 20 Now for an Ambassadour to move in an employment withot a Commis∣son, is a presumption of so high a na∣ture, that (I think) the Law makes it
Treason. I' me sure Reason declares it a Contradiction. For an Ambassadour is not an Ambassadour, till he hath his Commission sealed; nor a steward, a stew∣ard, till entrusted by the Master of the Family; neither may any man assume unto himself the honour and employ∣ment of a Priest, but he that is lawfully and externally called and designed unto the function, as was Aaron. Heb. 5. 4. As I shall not think the worse of my own coat, for that these boisterous times have worn it thred-bare, so God forbid I should be so strongly opinionated of it, as not to believe a secular man may have more gifts, and those more emi∣nent, then ordinarily reside in an Eccle∣siastical person, I know well, that every Christian (quatenus a Chriian) is obli∣ged to pray for, reprove, exhort, and in∣struct his Christian brother; & that who∣soever shall convert a sinner from the error of his way (whether he be Laick or Ecclesistick) shall hide a multitude of sins, and shall shine as the stars in Iam. 5. 20. Dan. 12. 3. the Firmament: and yet, though one star may differ from another in glory, light, and magnitude; ver every star is confined to its proper Sphere; other∣wise they may fall under the censure of those wandering stars S. lude speaks of, to who is reserved the blacknesse
of darknesse for ever. Iude 13. Every man by natural pity is obliged to help a sheep out of a ditch, and yet every man is not by profession a shepherd. Uriah may be a good King, and yet but a bad Priest. There is an apparent diffe∣rence 2. Chro. 26. 19. between a good man, and a good Citizen, Ari∣stotle. between a good Christian; and a good Minister of holy things The Apostles rule is safe and good. Let every man abide in the same calling, wherein he is called; 1. Cor. 7. 20. In an Honourable Oeconomy, there may be divers servants o great eminen∣cy for their parts, and yet the steward (perhaps) may have the greatest Trust. And in a Court Royal, there is no neces∣sity that he who keeps the Seal, should alwayes write the fairest Character. The gifts, and administrations of the same holy Ghost are divers, and all given to 1. Cor. 12. 29. profit withal; and yet all are not Apo∣stles, all are not Prophets, Abana, and Parphar; rivers of Damascus might (questionlesse) have cured Naamans Leprosie, as well as lordn, had the Pro∣phet Elisha sent him thither; It was not the water, but the Prophets benediction did the Cure; which was not the lesse Divine and miraculous, because of no more difficulty, but barely to wash and be clean. We have many now a dais
of Naamans blind perswasion, that are highly oftended if their spiritual cure be not effected their own way; They think nothing can be well done in the mana∣gery or Gods Ordinances, that is not per∣formed with a great deal of difficulty and straining, which enclines them very frequently to look more upon the weak instrument, then upon the Supreme A∣gent, in the work of Regeneration; and so far admire and dore upon the prea∣chers gifts, that they forget they ever come from any Donor. Whereas the Honour and Excellency of our Ministry, consisteth not so much 1. Cor. 3. 6. in our gifts and endowments (For Paul may plant, and Apollo may water; and yet no increase, unlesse God give it:) as in the mercy of God eniled upon our function, by vertue of certain peculiar promises and concessions, as Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Mat. 18. 18. And Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Mat. 28. 20. Which promises, do no extend to all Christians at large, but only uno those whose commission runs in this form and or, Go, and Teach all Na∣tions, and Baptize them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
So that those shepherds that come not into the sheepfold, those Labourers that come not into the Vinyard by the dore of Ordination, but climbe up, or creep in some other way: May justly be suspected to have ends and aimes as private and particular, as the way they run in is irregular and un Apostolical. And sure they come within the number of those seducers te Apostle speaks of that creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sins, led away with divers lusts; ever learning, and never abe to come to the knowledge of the Truth. 2. Tim. 3. 6. 7. So that ha∣ving layd a false foundation, it is no wonder if their superstructure prove nothing else but ottenes, & Hypocrise. Nor is my charge brought only against these wandring and irrgular stars; but against other waverig and Apostate stars: such as (deserting Rev. 8. 11. their Orbe, like that star in the Rve∣lation called wormwood,) have excee∣dingly bittered our waters of affli∣ction. These I must confesse (not with∣out sme bitternesse of spirit) came fair∣ly in by the dore into the sheepfold, though afterwards they proved hire∣lings, and cowards. And let no man won∣der at it, for it is our Saviors own predi∣ction, that immediatly before his second
coming the stars should fall from hea∣ven, Math. 24. 29. and the powers of heaven should be shaken, and S. Iohn saw cleerly in a vision, that a time would come when the tail of the dragon should draw the third part of the stars from heaven, and cast them unto the earth. Rev 12. 4. The Church will never be without her De∣ma-like Apostates, who cary more of Mammon, then of Christ in their bo∣soms; 1. Tim. 1. 20. and with Hymaeneus and Alexan∣der, wil sooner make shipwrack of their faith then their ortunes; as if those many Text o self Denial, and forsaking all for Christs sake, and his Gospel, were meer Apocryphal, or to be expun∣ged at pleasure, and there were no such thing as persecution in the Church mi∣litant. Certainly, these men never sate down and considered before ther Or∣dination, what that sacred engagement might cost them, as the times might prove; and may justly be suspected to have waned much of that inward cal∣ling, which they outwardly professed to have; and to have had their eyes more upon the wages, then upon the work of the Ministry. But as our Saviour will one day have a Nescio Vos, for such as shall plead, aying; Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? And in thy name have cast our Divels? And in thy
name done many wonderful works? So Math. 7. 22. will cr dear (though deserted) mother the Church of England, have a Nescio Vos sor that viperous brood, who in these Apostate times, have eaten their own way (or the way to their own ends) through that womb that bare them. In the mean time, however these men may esteem of themselves, or be esteemed of by others, they are not like to be reckned among the Lords Pro∣phets; their lot, at best, will fall out to be but among the peoples Prophets; because they forge and forme their visions, (as some men do their prognostications) ac∣cording to the humour, palate, and un∣stedinesse of these times: Now if the trumpet give an uncertain sound; who shall prepare himself unto the battel? If the Prophets steer according to the peo∣ple, 1. Cor. 14. 8. who shall be the peoples guides? If the blind lead the blind, both must cer∣tainly fall into the ditch. God comman∣ded the Prophet Isaiah, to record it unto ll posterity, That his people were a re∣bellious people, lying children, and such as would not hear the law of the Lord; Why; What was the reason? because they took upon them to prescribe unto the Prophets; saying unto the Seers, see not; ad to the Prophets, prophesie not unto us right things, speak unto us
smooth things, prophesie deceipt. The people were therefore said to be incor∣gible, because they were resolved to en∣tertain no Prophets but such as should varnish over their foul spots with fair pretenses, and scratch the itch of their rebelliou humour. In the Prophet Iere∣mies time, there was the same combina∣tion & agreement between the Prophets and the people; and that this was no slight provocation, observe what a black mark the holy Ghost sets upon it. A wonderful and horrible thng is commit∣ted in the and; The Prophet prophesie falsly, and the Priests bear rule by their Ier. 5. 30. 31. means, and my people love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end thereof? And as this evil regned under the Law, so that it should regne also under the ospel, we have S. Pauls expresse pre∣diction. The time will come (saith he) that men wil not endure sound doctrine, but 2. Tim. 4. 3. after their own lusts wil heap unto them∣selves teachers, having itching ears. All Scripture is written for our Instruction, These smooth Prophets are the great Lwinaries, or rather Idols of our Age and Nation, adored and magnified by the blind unsteddy multitude, for no other reason that I can imagine, but for their sympathizing correspondency in blind∣ness and inconstancy. And truly, if there
be any light at all in them, 'tis certain∣ly, the light of the glo-worm, or rotten∣wood; rather seems, then is so, by reason of the great darknesse wherein we are involved; O rather, like those perni∣cious and misguiding lights, that cause a man to wander out of his way, which we call Ignis Fatuus, and Ignis Lambens, one of which you may fan and drive before you which way you please, and the oher will follow ou which way soever you part the ayr: Both are du∣ctible, and pliant unto your will; and both will lead you out of your way, and cary you you know not where. These I call the peoples Prophets, whose do∣ctrines are so loose and Independent; that you know not where to have them, and yet you have them at every turn; That steer in their prophesyings, somtimes ac∣cording to the sense and dictate of a se∣cular Councel or Committee; somtimes according to the face and Aspect of a Cyfer Assembly, somtimes according to the successe and atchievements of a trai∣terous and bloody Military Combina∣tion, somtimes according to the Itch and enclinations of their blind olowers, by whom they subsist. Thus instead of squa∣ring the Christians practise by the pre∣cepts of Gods word (which every wise, and regular builder ought to do) they
have borrowed a trick from Rome, to mint their doctrines, and cases of con∣science, as may be most serviceable to their particular designs and Interests. And I could wish they had borrowed only their fine spun Artifices from that Conclave; their Sophismes and distin∣ctions from the leute; and not (by their wilde and confused principles) have invited the very persons of Priests and Iesuites to incorporate and co-ope∣rate with them in their pernicious and destructive designs. For it is most cer∣tain, that these subtile and busie factors, have not only plowed with our heifers in their private Assemblies, bur with the Calves of the people also; those Bulls of Basan, or rather Buls of Belial; whom pride, Ambition, and Covetousnesse, have rendered impatient of any yoke of Go∣vernment, or of being confined to any Inoure. The phrase is not inollera∣ble, since it is the Holy Ghosts own Dia∣lect; the one is Sampsons, Iudg. 14 18. The other the Psalmists, Psal. 68 30. But to return to the Peoples Prophets. To say nothing of the unmesurable Coveeousnesse, and notorious Non∣residence of those men, who in other times, were the fiercest declamers against these foul sins: Nor of their bottomlesse malice against their fellow Labourers;
Making a man a Delinquent for a word, and laying snares for him, that impar∣tially Isa. 29. 21. reproveth in the gates. I shall passe by their injuries unto men, and only take notice of their injurious deal∣ing and prevarication with the word of God, and consequently with God him∣self; and that in two respects: First, in their misnterpreting of Scripture, and secondly in their misapplying of Scri∣pture; in both which respects, they have added much to the boldnesse, and pre∣sumption of the Hereticks of old, and the present Church of Rome they so much declame against. To produce some few instances of many, and first concerning their, misin∣terpreting of Scripture. If Barack were the supreme Magi∣strate in Israel and Meroz were Cursed for not coming in to his assistance, in a day of great extremity and hazard; I wonder with what fae our Prophets could so unanimously concur in making use of that Text, Iudg. 5. 23. to incite subjects to take arms against their Soveraign? If Peter were reprehended by Christ for drawing a sword in defence of the most innocent cause, and person, tht ever appeared in the world; it is very strange that (of all other instances) that should be made use of, to strengtn
the doctrine of resisting the lawful Ma∣gistrate. It was a strange piece of confi∣dence (to my apprehnsion) in the Presbyterian party, to turn those Can∣nons, (or Cannonical Texts) upon the Army, and their adherents, See the letter subscri∣bed by some of the London Mi∣nisters. (not long before the Kings murther) which they would never take notice of, whilst they were planted against themselves. I my self have heard out of the pulpit a pas∣sionae Declamation Ma∣ster Grenhil, at Step∣ney. against all Ce∣remonies whatsoever, and the Textal∣ledged to prove the damnablenesse of them hath been only that Rev. 22 18. For I testifie unto every man that heareth the words of the prophesie of this book, if any man shall add unto these sayings, God shall at unto him the plagues that are written in this book. As if the in∣stitution of a Ceremone, r Circum∣stance, (without which, no external wor∣ship can be performed; without which, no Church on earth ever dd, or any as∣sembly of men can appear in the Pu∣blike worship and srvice of God) were an Addition to the prophesie of that Book, or to the Doctrinal part of the Holy Scriptures. I wish from my heart, these men were (n this particular) as innocent, as the Ceren onies established in th Church of Eland; But he that shall seriously de∣bate,
within his  rstanding, The unara erpraton, the  glosses, the unreasoble Iferences, which they have forced from ome Text of Scripture, only in favour of their own degnes, shall have reason to suspect, they are very neerly allied unto those, who interpret psce oves, seed my sheep, (that is) Depose, and murther Christian Kings And Quod unque solve∣ritis, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, &c. signifies the Popes power to dispence with all srts of Oathes, Vowes, Penalties, Censures Lawes, even with the obedience of Subjects, to their Soveraign Lord and King. From such squeizings, and pressures of the Sacred Oracles, (God help us) I'me sure we have tasted a bitter potion, and if this be not to add unto Scripture, and consequntly to incurre those plagues, which S Iohn de∣clares to belong to so bold a sin; I know not what is. Secondly, for their Misapplying of Scripture, or (rather) prevaricating with it. And here the field is so large, that I should exspatiate much beyond myIn∣tendments, should I acquaint you; what horrid, and prodigious suggestions have been hinted unto the people, from some abused Texts: as particularly from that, Eccles. 4. 13. Better is a
poor and wise child, then an old and fool∣ish king, who will no more be admonished &c. from that Isa. 30. 31. Tophet is pre∣pared of old yea for the king it is prepar∣ed; from that Psal. 149 8. To bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in links of iron; from that Ier. 46. Cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood. In all which, our prophets have been as grosly and unsoberly mistaken, as was that gentleman (who preaching to a great Congregation upon a day of humiliation, for unseasonable and rainy weather) The summer 1648. made use of that Text, 1 Sam 12. 17. Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the Lord, and he shall send thunder, and rain, that you may per∣ceive and see, that your wickedness is great, which you have done in the sight of the Lord, in asking you a king, And from thence concluded, that that unsea∣sonable weather, which at that time threatned the wheat harvest, was sent for the peoples great wickednesse in petitioning a Treaty with his Majesty. Quere, Whether it were not M. Greenhill in Stepny Church? Sure it might have been a meditation more genuine, and agreeable to the day, to have remembred his Auditory; That God had justly sent an excessive moi∣sture upon that earth which (out of Spiritual drunkennes and madnesse) we had moistned our selves for some yeers
before, with our own Christian, Prote∣stant, English blood. For those that have been ths noto∣riously guilty of handling the word of God deceitsully: I wish them seriously to consider, that these pious frauds (for such perhaps they may believe them) are not only arguments of great Igno∣rance and unsteddinesse in the pofessi∣on of the Gospel, but of a very deep degree of hypocrisie and impiety; And that the reward and doom of such des∣perate dissembling is certain ruine and destruction, and for the proof of this, I shall only produce two Texts, the one is 2 Pet. 3. 16. Some things (n S. Pauls Epistles) are hard to be under∣stood, which they, that are unlearned, and unstable, wrst (as they do also the other Scriptures) unto their own destruction. The other is 2 Tim. 3. 13. But evil men and seducers, shall wax worse and worse, deceiving: & being deceived. The frauds of an Impostor (how ever they may fail of their ends upon other men) shall be sure to return with mischief enough upon the head of him that practiseth them, and the final close of the seducer i his own cetin seduction. They shall do well to consider, that the great red Dragon, and the old serpent, the di∣vel, and the Beast (Antichrist) and the
false Prophet, are all of a piece, and all of a chain, Rev. 16. 13. The bottomlesse pit is all their homes, their spirits are all unclean spirits, and indeed, they have very little reason to pretend to the spi∣rit of truth and holines, who thus noto∣riously abuse his sacred oracles, to their own particular ends and aims, as if the word of God (which ought to be the rule of faith, & a good life) were a rule of lead, to be bowed at pleasure, to our own licentious humors & inclinations. But all this perhaps, may be thought to be a declamation as full of bitterness as boldnesse. The false Prophets will declame against false prophets as fast as any; and if the appeal be made unto the people, 'tis more then probable, that Zedechiah the false prophet, will have 1 Kin 22 Jer. 28. the better of Micaiah the true; Hana∣niah the false, will prevail over Iere∣miah the true: The false prophets, as they carry the greatest confidence, so commonly the greatest plausibility with the people. We read in sacred Hystorie, that a man of God hath been mistaken in a man of God; The man of God that was sent to prophesie against the Altar at Bethel, was deceived and 1 King. 13. 18. 1 Cor. 14 32. abused by the old prophet that dwelt at Bethel. And although the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets;
that is, subject to their examination and censure; yet we do not in these days, pretend to such a spirit of discerning, but that one prophet may be easily mi∣staken in another; And therefore it will concern us to look out for some kriteri∣on, a character or mark, whereby we may receive satisfaction in this particular. And certainly, we cannot have a bet∣ter, then that which our Saviour hath left upon record, Mat. 7. 15. Beware of false Propbets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravning wolves. Hypocrisie, and cruelty or covetousnesse (for both are implyed in the wolvish disposition) are shrewd symptoms of a false prophet; but this description is not concluding enough, and therefore its added v. 20. By their fruits ye shall know them But it may fal under a quere, what is here meant by fruits? for if by fruits in this place, we shall understand mens actions and man∣ners, as they are exprest in the outward conversation, then this can be no good kriterion: for the lives of many ortho∣dox and able preachers, may possibly be blemish'd with divers frailties, impu∣rities, and inadvertencies; The truth of our doctrine doth not depend upon the integrity of our conversation: there may be Iacobs voice in the pulpit, and the
rough hands of Esau elsewhere; 'tis pos∣sible men may be exquisite instrument of other mes conversion, and yet whe all is done, prove cast aways them∣selves, like Noahs Carpenters, that la∣bour'd with him in building of the Ark and yet had not faith enough to go i and be saved. And so on the contrary the frads and fallacies of false Pro∣phets and seducers, are very frequentl varnished over with alms and austerity and exact strictnesse in the outwar conversaion; damnable doctrines ma have a saint-like holinesse attending o them. The Prophet Zachary tels us  some Prophets (not unlike the Romi Ecclesiasticks) that wore a rough gar∣ment to deciv; and yet in th day  tryal, every one of these Prophets shoul be ashamed of their visions, Zach 13. 4 The Scribes and harisees were nto∣riously precise n their prayers, and fast∣ings, and tything of mint, annis, & cum∣mn; and yet our Saviour els his di∣sciples, that, except their righteousnes exceed the righteousness of the Scribe Mat. 5. 20. and Pharisees, they should not enter int the kingdom of heaven. Tis no strang thing for subtle merchants to put the fairest glosses upon their falsest wares and if we shal take our aym at the out∣ward conversation, the greatest Artist i
hypocrisie may passe for the holiest man of God; so that ye shall know them by thir fruits, is not to be under∣stood thus, ye shall know them by their works, or ye shal judge of their sayings by their doings; but ye shall know them by their fruits, that is, by their doctrines; ye shall know them by such fruits as their doctrines shall produce. And indeed, this was the infallible mark of a false Prophet under the Law, as appears Deut. 13. 1, 2. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams and giveth thee a sign, or a won∣der, and the sign and the onder cometh to pass, whereof he spake unto thee saying let us go after other gods and let us serve them, &c. where the sgn of the fals Prophet is not in the sgn, or the won∣der, but in the perswasion to Idolatry; So that whensoever we meet with a Pro∣phet perswading and enclining a peo∣ple unto any appaet corruption in Religion or good manners; or whenso∣ever we meet with a doctrine, the design or application wherof is the promoting of sedition and rebellion, to the preju∣dice of the peace and safety of any Church or Kingdom, we shall need no further witnesse to conclude the deceit and imposture of that false Prophet. To come then to the touchstone; do
we meet with prophets that take away the touchstone from us, whereby all do∣ctrines should be tryed and concluded? Do they cloyster up the Scripture (the certain rule of faith and a good life) & put the salvation of our souls upon an implicite faith, and a blind obedience? Do they assure us, that ignorance is the mother of devotion, and so consequently open a gap to all sad consequences, which commonly ensue upon the want of the knowledge of God in a land? Do we meet with prophets, that tell us, that no faith is to be kept with hereticks, and so apparently introduce that foul sin of perjury & prevarication both with God and man? Do they discharge children of the duty they ow unto their parents, by vertue of some Corban, or perhaps some monastick vow, or Romish compli∣ance? Do they discharge subjects of their duty of allegiance to their Soveraigne, by vertue of some popish dispensation, making the fift commandment of God of none effect, through their own Tra∣ditions? Do we meet with prophets that dissolve Lawsul Matrimony in some persons, and forbid it in others; when the Scripture expresly concludes it ho∣nourable in all? Heb. 13. 4. And do they in the mean time allow and tolerate abomina∣ble Stews and Brothels (those sinks of
uncleannesse;) not for conveniency, or necessity (as is pretended) but in truth and reality, for filthy lucre sake? We know what those Prophets are, by the accursed fruit tht spring from these and the like doctrines; it shall be no breach of charity in us, to conclude them in the number of false prophets; and of these Prophets, we know where there are good store, tha walk the world in sheeps clothing, with no small power and plausibility. But to look nearer homewards; Do we meet with Prophets (highly honou∣red in their own Country) that tell us, we may do evil at some times, that good may come thereon, in order to a refor∣mation; and so by consequence, resolve all christian practise into good intend∣ment, wherewith hell it self is said to be paved? Do they tell us, that God sees no sin in his elct; and then (by a ni∣ble & dextrous way they have of Saint∣ing themselves, and their own prose∣ytes) conclude and infer their Forni∣cations and Adulteries to have no un∣cleannesse in them; their sacriledge and plunder, to be without theft: their jug∣ing and dissembling, pious frads; and heir horrid and bloody muers, to have the sweet smelling savour of ac∣ceptable peace oerings? Do we meet
with Prophets tht inform the people, that Kings (as well a Bshops) are an∣tichristian; that the kingdom of Iesus Christ, is a spiritual Government, and that no temporal monarch hath any thing o do with it; That Kings insteed of being prayed for (as Defenders of the faith, and protectors of the publike peace) may (without being deposed by the Pop) be murdered by their own subjects. That the design of the Gospel is divisio and a sword. That the best Patriots and preserves of the publike peace and liberty, are those men who are deeest perjured. That treason and rebellion is good service to God & the Commnweath. That it ought to be acted upon the publike faith of the kingdo, and when it is acted, that i ought to be rewarded with publike thank and acknowledgemnt in print. In a word, do we meet with prophets that tell the people, that the moral law is of no use or obligation under the Go∣spel; that there is an Evangelical ne∣cessity of weedng up the Tares, before the general harvest; that themselves are the ood wheat, and that all men else are ares, and the seed of the divel, that go about to hinder and obstruct so good a wrk; tat the liberty of the Gospel may be stretched and extended to the
acting of any dictate arising from any private perswasion of spirit (how blind and abominable soever) and that the banishment, imprisonmnt, and murder of Christs own Ambassadors, is the best way to promote his service. By these, and the like doctrines (which I would not have exposed to publike view, had not a necessity eforced it) we may guesse what these prophets are. And that I do not injure them by traducing their doctrine, their own sermons and discourses, together with the peoples practise grounded thereupon, is a clear and ample declaration of their preach∣ers principles. And now let all the world judge by the fruits we have rea∣ped of late yeers from these mens Do∣ctrines; whether these are the servants of Iesus Christ, and the way they have gone, be agreeable to his Gospel or not. Or rather, whether these are not those wolves in sheeps clothing he hath fore∣warn'd us of; whether these are not the peoples prophets, nay the divels pro∣phets, whose tongues have been set on fire of hell, t set the world all in a conflagration. And 'tis very observable, how God hath brought the way of hese juglers and dissemblers upon their own head; Before, they would not preah, or pray, according to duty and
cnsciene; but as the current of the times enclined them; nd now they can∣not, at least, I'm sure they dare not. For as it was decreed in our Saiours time, That if any man shuld consess Christ, e should be put out of the Synagogue; so if any man shall now preach or pray for K. Chs II. a his undoubted lawful Soveragn, he shall not b put out of the Synagogue or Assembly, but out of the wold too, if he look not the better to it. So tht ur desolte and decayed Jerusal (having drunk at the hand of the Lor the cup of his fury. & the dregs of the cp of trembling) may justly com∣plain wih the Prophet Isaiah, That there is none, or at least very few, to Isa. 51. 17, 18. guide er among all the sons that she hath brougt fort; neither is there any tha taket her by the hand, of all the sons that sh hath brought up; But instead of minitring any comfrt or advice in the day of her calamity, the leaders of the peope have caused them to err, and they Isa. 9. 16. that are led of them are destroyed. Th truth is, the unparallld mischief which these blind leaders of the blind hav done; he strange boldnesse where∣in tey have proceeded; together with the general belief and adherence of the peole, hah enforced me to dwell so lon upon so roten and corrupted a
suject. But I shall now leave these pro∣phets to their repentance, and a sincere detestation of their deep impiety, only I shall make some short use of it, in re∣ference and relation to our selves. And now (having given you an am∣ple discovery of the flse prophets of these irregular times) I suppose you are highly enraged and incensed against them, you look upon them as the fire∣brands of hell, the causers of all our mi∣series, that no punishment can be sever enough for such pernicious instruments, and what would you not do to bring them to condigne punishment? but foft Jam. 1. 20. and fair, The wrath of man worketh not the righteousnes of God, Though I have not spared them in painting them out in their proper colours, yet so far am I from incensing the people, or any kind of authority against them, that I shal de∣sire & conjure both the one and the o∣ther, to quarrel with themselves, & the corruptions of their own bosoms, as with the just and natural cause of the insin∣cerity and depravity of their prophets. Two ways God was wont to expresse his displeasure against his people, in re∣spect of prophets. Somtimes by sending them no Prophets: This was the ground of the Psalmists complaint, concerning the desolation of the Snctuary. They
have burnt up all the houses of God in the land; we see not our tokens, there is not one Prophet more among us Ps. 74. 8, 9. Somtimes by suffering them to be abused and deluded by false Prophets: For as (in the Civil Government) in the multitude of Councellors, and laws, Prov. 11. 14. there may be peace ad safety, so in the multitude of Councellor and laws, there may be a snare, and a curse upon a people; for they may be mercenary Councellors, such as Ezra speaks of; & Ezr. 4. 5. they may be Sttuta insalubria, such as Ezekiel speaks of. So is it in the church Ezek. 20. 25. in respect of her Prophts, it is not the number, but the quality of them that is to be looked after; It was a promise of great mercy which God made unto his people by the Prophet Jeremy, I will give you Pastors according to mine heart which shall feed you with knowledge & Jer. 3. 15. understanding Not Pastors according to to your heart, that had been a judge∣ment; but Pastors according o my heart. As good no Pastors, as no good Pastors; nay, better no labourers, then pernicious labourers in the Lords vinyard. The paucity and insincerity of Prophets, are both alike the judgement of God upon a people. Now this is to be laid for a grund, That the corruption and insincerity of
the Prophets (under the just anger of God) takes it rise from the corruption and insincerity of the people. So that (to come to the root of our errors and mis∣carriages) it is most certain, that before ever the seducer got into the pulpit, or to the table end, there was a more dan∣gerous seducer gotten into the heart. In one man avarice was a concealed prea∣cher to the soul; in another ambitio, in a third, discontent; in a fourth, revenge; in a fist, pride, and a desire of goverment, in a sixt, novelty, and a desire of change of government; in some one, in some more, in some all of these, in some more then all of these (like the seven divels in Mary Magdalen) kept the intire pos∣session of the soul; so that our hearts being seasoned and prepard by these and the like corrupt and vile affections; it was very agreeable to the justice of God, to give way, that such Prophets should be sent among us, as were most sutable to these particular itching hu∣mors and predispositions. So that as (in the natural constituti∣on) when the stomack is burdned with any noxious and offensive humor, that is there predominant over other hu∣mors; the Appetite being governed by that predominancy, declines those meats which are most wholsom and nutritive,
and longs after those which are more unhealthy and destructive; Just so is it with the spiritual appetite, if that be wanton, or corrupted by the malignity of any deliberate and resolved wicked∣nesse, it does neither approve nor digest the sincere milk of Gods word, but (loa∣thing that Divine Manna) it looks out for new devised meats and sauces, that is, in the Apostles phrase, new fangled doctrines and opinions; such as for their novelty or complyance, are most pala∣table and pleasing to our corrupt and licentious enclinations. Aeger animus falsa pro ver is videt. This is that dangerous evil which the Sripture calls the setting up a stumbling block of iniquity in the heart, whereof we have a clear and ncontroulable instance, Ezek. 14. 3 Son of man, these men have set up their idols in their heart and put the stumbling block of their ini∣quity before their faces, should I be en∣quired of at all by them? These men, & who were these men? The Elders of Is∣rael, v. 1. Therefore the rule is set, v. 4. Every man of the house of Israel that set∣teth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the Prophet; I the Lord will answer him that cometh, according to the multitude of his Idols.
And if the Prophet be deceived (at any time) when he hath spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet, v. 9. nd wherefore is all this? see v. 5 That I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, that is, in the snare of their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their Idols. Let the Saint-like ruling Elders therefore of our Israel look well to it. For if they resolve before hand, to de∣cree unrighteous decrees, to write grie∣vousness, Isa. 10. 1. which themselves have pre∣scribed; and to deal trecherously with God and man (which I need not speak by supposition) They do but set up a pernicious Idol in their own bosoms, a fatal stumbling block before their own faces; and notwithstanding their dayly preparatives by prayer and preaching, for assistance in councel (wherein they would seem to the world, to be very careful to enqire at Gods mouth) yet the Prophet Isaiah is positive, if they will chuse their own ways, their own counsels, God will chuse their delusions, Isa 66 4. will bring their fears upon them, and will answer them according to the snares and prevarications of their own false hearts. And then what will becom of all their pretended sanctity and de∣votion? Truly, their many Invocations
will prove but as so many provocations, nay as so many abominations in the Isa 66. 3. sight of God. Their many prayers and sermons will but stand as a cloud of witnesses one day to condemn them of their secret Atheism and Hypocrise. So that if our Prophets have been like fox∣es in the desarts, as they were in Ezeki∣ls time; it is because our Elders have been like wolves in sheeps clothing, as were the Scribes and Pharisees in our Saviours time. If the prophets have kindled the fire, the people have con∣tributed the fuel and matter, to so great and miserable a conflagration. And indeed, this rottennesse at the core, is that pestilent corruption, which hath so visibly ensnared the Church of Rome into so many grosse delusions; because, notwithstanding all pretenses of infallibility, borrowed from a mista∣ken Matth: 16. 18. promise of our Saviour; notwith∣standing all their solemn addresses, and preparatives by prayer ad fasting; the Conclave assemblies, fill'd with select∣ed agents, whose business there, is not so much the discovery of divine Truth, as the Pre-resolved design of minting and venting such adulterate coyn under that stamp of authority, as may be most ser∣viceable to the establishment and en∣largement of the dominion and tyranny of that See.
This insincerity of spirit (the secret breath of antichrist) when it gets into the representatives of the Church (as it may do, because we are sure it hath done) puts a foul cheat upon God and the world, in that language of Visum est Spiritui sancto, & nb is. It seemeth good Act. 15. 25. to the holy host, & to us, &c. when the truth is, 'tis Visum est interesse nostro, & non Spiritui sancto; It seemeth good to us and not to the holy Ghost. And for the foul spots and blemishes of particular interest and advantage, the Councels of after ages never arrived to that reputa∣tion and honour; which the whole Ca∣tholick Church acknowledg'd to be due to the first four general Councels, for that candour and intgrity which was so visibly wanting in that famous strata∣gm of Rome, the Councel of Trent. For the promise of the holy Ghosts as∣sstance, is confined neither to S. Peters chair in Rome, nor to any assembly of men whatsoever, any otherwise, then the sincerity of their hearts in seeking after truth, puts them into a capacity to re∣ceive it. So that that hypocrise, which is of the finest spinning, and disguised with the fairest glosses upon it, is ever the most serviceable expedient to the designs and ayms of our grand Advet∣sary the Divel: and that glistering piety
which is only plausible in appearance, & design'd only to dazle mns eys; is ugly & abominabe in the sight of God. And because our times are fouly sus∣pected to savour strongly of this secret leven of hypocrisie; I shall present ye with one of the most remarkable piecs of a painted Sepulcher, and well co∣loured rottennesse, that I find mention'd in sacred Scripture, and that is Isa. 58. 1, 2. where the Prophet is commanded, saying, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, & shew my peo∣ple their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins; Yet they seek me dai∣ly, saith God, and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousnes, and forsook not the ordinance of their God; they ask of me the ordinance of justice and take delight in approching to God. And yet this goodly pile of external piety, was laid upon no other, but the rotten foundation of a dissem∣bling heart; and therefore required the loudest and most Trumpet-like voice of a Prophet, to reprove it. And as the sin was of a strange complexion, that so much rottennes should lodg under such a specious disgise, so the God of truth & sincerity, appears against this sin in a very remarkable way of threatning, as appears Is. 29. 13. Forasmuch as this peo∣ple
draw neer to me with their mouth, & with their lips honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, & their fear toward me, is taught by the precept of men. Therefore behold I wil proceed to a marvellous work amongst this people, e∣ven a marvellous work, and a wondr; For the wisdom of their wise men shal perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shal be hid: and then follows, Wo to them that seek deep to hide their councel from the Lord, & their works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us and who knows us? Surely your turning of things upside down, shal be esteemed as the pot∣ters clay, &c. But if these texts shall be thought only to be of lewish concern∣ment, and to be lookt on only as an Al∣manack of a yeer, that is come & gone; we have a parallel to these in S. Pauls prediction, directed to Timothy, 2 Tim. 3. 1. &c. This know also, that in the last days, perilous times shal come. For men shal be lovers of their own selves, cove∣tous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobe∣dient to parents, unthankful, unoly, with out natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good. Traytors, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God; having a form of godli∣ness, but denying the power thereos, &c.
What a world of wickedness does here march under the garb and disguise of the most saint-like godliness. So that, if God (out of his just indi∣gnation against a stbborn and falshear∣red people) hath suffered contempt to be poured out upon his anoynted, and hath Iob 12. 21. weakned the strength of the mighty; which was once the condition of a man after his on heart. If he hath ta∣ken v. 20. away the understanding of the aged, and removed the speech of the trusty. If he hath taken away from our Ierusalem the mighty men, and the honourable, the the Iudge, & the Prophet the prudent & the ancient, and insteed of these, given children for Princes, and babes to rule Isa. 3. 3, 4, 5. over us. If he hath suffered the child to behave himsel proudly against the anci∣ent, the base against the honourable, and the people to be oppressed every one by another (which is an accursed conditi∣on, as full of torment and vexation to an ingniou spirit, as of absurdity & con∣fusion. If he hath mingled a perverse spi∣rit in the midst of us, delivered us up to spiritual drunkenness and madness, and blasted all our Treaties, perhaps for the secret insincerity of our specious dis∣guises. Isa. 15. 14. Ier. 13. 13. If he hath suffered our people to be eaten up like bread, our blood to be made as cheap as water, our metropolis
to become a portion for sozes, our state∣ly pallaces and Temples, to be a quar∣ter for horses, or a receptacle for thieves and rebels, and the overflowings of un∣godlines to proceed so far, as to quench the light of our Israel, by taking away the joy of our hearts, and the breath of our nostrils, in the life of our Soveraign. And notwithstanding all this, hath closed Isa. 29. 10. the eys of our Prophets and rulers, with the spirit of a deep sleep of senslesness & security (which is the map of our pre∣sent misery and confusion) sure there is great wrath gone out from the Lord against us, it concerns every man to en∣quire after the secret Achan of his own bosom, there is great reason to suspect we are under the immediate power and enchantment of a general Infatuation. And therefore, since the first ground and bottom of infatuation is from a stumbling block of our own laying, in the secret depravities and reservations of the heart; Let the people no longer charge the errors and infelicities of the times on the prophets, nor the prophets on the people; but let all look well into our selves, and we shall find matter of high provocation, both in the prophets and in the people. And therefore lay∣ing a side all bitternesse and evil speak∣ings against each other; Let us turn
our charges and clamours into prayers for each other; the people sor the pro∣phets, that they may be more faithful & sincere in the administration and execu∣tion of their sacred function; and the prophets for the people, that they may be more diligent in knowing, and more conscionable in practising what is deli∣vered unto them out of the sacred Ora∣cles; the people for the prophets, that they may be burning and shining lamps in the sanctuary of God; and the pro∣phets for the people, that they may be translated from the kingdom of darknes into the glorious light and liberty of the sons of God. That so both people and prophets may twist and concr in their utmost endeavours, to work out their own salvation with fear and trem∣bling; Phil. 2. 12. and both be brought nearer to God, to serve him acceptably, with reve∣rence and godly fear. To all these instruments of Infatua∣tion, I shall add but one more, and that I take to be expresly set down in the Text; namely, The sincere preaching of the good word of God. Go first, and tell this people; and afterwards, make the heart of this people fat; that is, deliver my message sincerely unto this people, though I know before-hand they will grow more obstinate and obdurate upon
the hearing of it. The prophet Isaiah compares the word of God to Rain and Snow; As the rain cometh down, and Isa. 55. 10. 11. the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither; but watereth the earth, and ma∣keth it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: So shall my word be, that goeth out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void, &c. And yet, as the same frosty, snowy weather, that is health to the sound; is a burthen to the weak and crazy Constitution, As the same re∣freshing shower which bringeth up the grasse and corn, bringeth up the weeds and tares also: So the same good word 1. Cor. 15. 15. 1. of God never returns in vain; our La∣bour cannot be in vain in the Lord; It may be in vain, in respect of your con∣version; It will not be in vain, in respect of your Conviction. It may be in vain, in respect of your humiliation; It will not be in vain, in respect of your Obdura∣tion. It may be in vain, in respect of your Regeneration, and Salvation; It will not be in vain, in respect of your Iudgement and Cndemnation. Moses was assured before-hand from the mouth of God himself, that all his em∣bassies and transactions with Pharaoh should produce no other effect but to render him more obstnate and resolved
not to subscribe to the command of God, in the dismission of his people; yet Moses is sent unto him, that the hardnesse of Pharaohs heart, as well as the greatness of Gods power, might be known unto the world. There was message upon message, (and if these were not enough,) there was miracle upon miracle, and (if these concerned him not,) there was plague upon plague; like wave upon wave, beating upon himself, his servants, and the whole Na∣tion of the Egyptians; and yet (not∣withstanding all this) we find the heart of Pharaoh hardned into a proverb, and an instance of an obdurate spirit unto all posterity. What shall we say then? Is there un∣righteousnesse with God in sending Pro∣phets to the ruin of a people? Is there mors in olla? Is there death in the Pro∣phets pot? Is there poyson in the sincere milk of Gods word? I shewed before, that corruption in the hearts of the peo∣ple, might occasion corruption in the prophets, but can the stench and infe∣ction of that corruption, extend it self so far as to aint the good word of God? No certainly; Let God be true, though every man a Lyar; and let his word be ever sacred and immutable, though all the world should be convicted and
condemned by it Heaven and earth shall passe away, but his word shall not passe away; that is (accordng as the Rev. 6. 14. scripture comment else where) The heavens shall passe away as a scroul when it is rouled together, and the Elements 2. Pet. 3. 10. shall melt with fervent heat; This goodly Ball of Earth shall be crumbled into nothing, and all the gaudy vanities we so much dote on) shall passe away like a smoke: But not one jot or tittle of that word which may save, and must judge us, shall passe away or be chan∣ged. And therefore to prevent any mi∣stake that may arise in a businesse of so great concernment; It may not be im∣pertinent to shew, first, the innocent Quality of Gods word in its own na∣ture. Secondly, The different operation of this word per accidens, in some hear∣ers. Thirdly, The Reason of this different operation. Fourthly, what Cautions and Counsels may be needful to prevent its hardning quality in our selves. First, that we may have no quarrel against the preaching of the word, (what ever exception lies against the preachers) we must know; The word of Mark. 4. 1. Pet. 22. God is alwaies good seed; what ever the ground be where in it is sown. The Do∣ctrine of the scripture is alwaies sin ere Heb. 5. 14. milk, what ever the stomack be where∣in
it is received. The mysteries of the Gospel are alwaies strong meat, what ever the constitution be that should di∣gest it; and what ever may be inferred, either from the doctrine and practise of the Church of Rome, to draw contempt upon that Sacred ordinance of preach∣ing; or from the vilany and infelicity of these times, wherein all Religion seems to be resolved into hearing, and our English Nation (without the hands of a Bishop) turned all into Ecclesia∣sticks; Yet I dare affirm, the natural life may as well be sustained without the supply of our daily bread; as that Grace (the life of the soul) can (with∣out a miracle) either increase, or be preserved without the constant nou∣rishment of this Heavenly manna. S. Paul makes the preaching of the word one of the main hinges whereupon our Salvation depends; First, he lays this down for a ground (which he derives from the Prophet Ioel. Whosoever shall Call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved: And from thence he argues thus; How then shall they call on him, i whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe on him, of whom they Ioel 2, 32. Rom 10. 13. 14. have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be sent? (that is)
lawfully and Ecclesiastically ordained and appointed thereunto. The Gospel of Christ is the great Eph. 1. 13. power of God unto Salvation; The busi∣nesse of our ministry is nothing else but a spiritual negotiation for your peace and atonement; and the word we preach (when we speak as we ought to speak) is a word of truth, wherein you cannot be deceived; in us you may, in it you Eph. 1. 13. Act. 14. 3. cannot: It is a word of Grace, not only Originaliter, as descending unto you from the fountain of all Grace; but Effe∣ctive, a fruitful word, in begetting Grace in the heart: It is a word of promise; Rom 9. 9 wherein you have the richs of Gods mercy, like unto a cabinet of invaluable jewels, laid open and presented to your own choise and acceptation; and it is a word of faith too; that helps you to an hand, whereby you are able to lay hold on those precious and soul saving promises. It is a word of Reconcilia∣tion, 2. Cor. 5. 19. when you are at variance with God; when you have sinned your selves out of his favour and protection; and want an expedient to take up the diffe∣rence. It is a word of Salvation; when Act. 13. 26. you are ready to sink under the burden of your own guilt and desperation: It is a word of comfort and assurance of Gods favour in the most tempestuous
and stormy weather of affliction;  word of Consolation, in the houre o death; and when this bubble life shal expire, you shall then find it by exp rine, to be a word of Eternal life. So that as S Paul reasons in anothe Ioh. 6. 68 case, concerning the Law; That thoug the law might be the Instrument of sin and of Death, and Condemnation; ye God forbid (saith he) that I should conclude any otherwise, but that th law is blamelesse, and the Commandme holy, and just, and good: so, God forbid Rom. 7. 12. we should complain of the good word of God, as of a killing letter; becaus some hearts are already dead in tres∣passes and sins. God forbid we should complain of the light of the sun, be∣cause some mens sore eyes are ofsended at its brightnesse and luster, God forbid we should complain of the wholson favour of this Celestial salt, because some mens wounds and galled Con. sciences cannot endure the sharp and searching quality of it. But as it fared with the Christians in some persecutions, when ever the Hea∣thens were oppressed with any calami∣ty, the general clamour and vogue o the people was presently, Christiano ad Leones; away with the Christians to the Lyons; or, as it was the blind and
Bedlam clamour of the bewitched mul∣titude at Westminster, to cry out for Iu∣stice and Execution against his Sacred Majesty of incomparable memory; as if his innocent and pious life, which now too late they see, was under the Divine goodnesse, the life of the Kingdoms peace and felicity; had been the ob∣struction of it. So, is it very usual with Tom fool, and Tom a Bedlam, being smitten or angred by another; to strike him that stands next to him, or like peevish and crazy patients, who are wont to cry out upon the physitian, and medicaments; because they themselves are perverse, and will not take them; or their stomacks crude and corrupt, that they cannot digest them. Thus we have seen a wicked and adulterous Genera∣tion, (from some errors in some Bishops) conclude that excellent and Apostolique order to be Antichristian. Thus we see men daylie rave in their mad fits, and cry out (with the priest and the Iesuite,) ye see what comes of so much preach∣ing; as if the errors and exorbitancies of some preachers, could with any rea∣son or Iustice be fastned upon that Sa∣cred ordinance of preaching. Certainly, there could be no religion left remain∣ing in the world if the bare abuse of what is Sacred and Salubrious, should
take away the lawful use of it; then mu we discard our Sacraments, as well  Sermons; and our Bible, as well as both for these (God help us) are day lie muc abused by Hypocrites and profane per∣sons. No, let us evr blesse God for this and all other means of Grace and spiri∣tual advantage; and let it be our wis∣dom and care to make such use of them whilst we have them, as that we nev provoke him to deprive us of them; & how severly soever the word of God, or his ministers may deal with us, o our dearest sins; yet let us ever give  old Elys esteem and entettainment, Goo is the word which the Lord hath spoke though it should bring a Curse upo our selves or families. We are now in the next place, to look upon the different operation, a effect which the good word of God pro∣duceth in the hearts of men. We read in Ezra 3. that when the Iews returned from Babylon, by the favour and per∣mission of Cyrus, to build again th Temp'e at Ierusalem; it is said, tha many of the standers by, wept with  loud voyce, when the foundation w layd: and many shouted aloud for joy. Th Ezra 3. 12. act of Building was the same, and th persons were all equally concerned i it, as in the restauration of their religion;
and yet see what contrary passions in their extremities are derived from the same object. The Crucifixion of our blessed Saviour was so sad a spectacle, that the Sun in the Firmament seemed to turn away from beholding it; and yet its observable, what a strange and diffe∣rent operation this dismal object wrought in the minds of the two thievs. The one rayls on him, as if he had been a murtherer; the other adores and con∣fesseth him to be the strong God of his Salvation. It was the same body of ayr that was cleer and serene in Go∣shen, and condensed into palpable dark∣nesse over all the land of Egypt It was the same bulk of water, that was a wall of protection and preservation unto the Israelites; and a grave and destruction unto the Egyptians. It was the same Identical fire that warmed Shadrach Meshak and Abednego, and that burnt up those instruments of Cruelty that cast them into the furnace. The Truth is, the peaching of the word doth not only harden, but declare & discover the despisers of those Sacred messages to be already hardned. For as it is the same glasse that shews deformities, as well as good features; the same touchstone, that discernes the pure gold, from what is false and counterfeit; So it is the same
peircing word of God that distingui∣sheth the sound and sincere christian from the hollow, rotten, and dissem∣bling hypocrite. Herodias might hav passed all her life long for an Eminen and glorious professor of the saith, had not Iohn the Baptist declared her mat∣ching with Herod to be incestuous and abominable. The Scribes and Pharisees (what wth their long prayers, and what with their specious pretences) might have devoured widows house to the worlds end, had not our Saviour by his doctrine detected their fine spun frauds an Artifices. We read Act. 13. that immdiatly after the preaching of the word at Antioch; the Iewes stirred up the devout and honourable women of that lace, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them o of their Coast Act. 13. 50. How? Paul and Barnabas persecuted, and expelled the y by devout and ho∣nourable women? It seems the women of those times were as unhappily busie in medling with Clergy matters, as they have been in ours. But sure, it was not hono, much lesse devotion, to perse∣cute and expel Christs own Ambassa∣dours, who ad no other businesse with them, more then to make their peace and rconcilition with God.
And therefore let no man wonder, if the world rave, and rayl at us, and our ministry; if they make every blot in our lives, every mistake in our words, the matter of their mirth, and an encou∣ragement unto licentiousnesse; nay, if they slander and traduce us, only to make us vile and contemptible in the eys of those we would preserve from the bottomlesse pit. He that was with∣out the least spot or defilement of sin in himself, yet when he came to reprove the sins of the times, was called  Glut∣ton, a winebibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners, a Samaritan, a Divel, a Beel∣zebub Matt. 17. 19. and Prince of the Divels. He that spake as never man spake, (his enemies themselves bing judges,) had a Iudas, a Traytor, a Divel trained up in his own school and family. And he that from a poor fisherman, was made a fisher of men; and that thrived so well in that sacred employment that he gained 3000. souls to the Christian faith at Act. 2. 41 Act. 4. 4. one sermon, and 5000. at another; after all his pains, had his thanks given him in a threatning, and his payment made him in a prison. Act. 4. 3. So that, as it is the warmth and influence of the same sun, that cherisheth and produceth the good fruits of the Earth; and at the same time, hatcheth the Cockatrices
eggs, and poduceth a generation of vi∣pers; as it is the same sun, that at the same time, melts the wax, and hardens the clay: So the same holy ordinance of preaching, may at the same time, be a coming together for the better unto some; and to others a coming togethe for the worse. The same Sacramental bread ad wine, which is the spiritual nourishment of one man; may be the bane and poyson of anothers soul; and the same good word of God, which is to one man, the savour of life unto life; may be unto another, the savour of death unto death. I know this is durus sermo; an hard saying; and may seem very strange to some mens apprehensions. That the glo∣rious light of the Gospel (instead of being the medium of Illumination) should become the fatal instrument of the grossest darknesse; and those means of grace, which by the wisdom and goodnesse of God are appointed for edification; should becom the means of irrecoerable ruine and destruction; and therefoe in the third place, we are to ene into the ground and reason os s strange and difrent an opera∣tion arising from the sacred oracles. It hath bn laid as a ground alrea∣dy, that we cannot (without apparent
injury and blasphemy) impute any noxious or offensive quality to the good word of God. The fault is not in the word, that's most certain; if it be any where, it must be in the hearers. And truly, the Apostle Paul does very clear∣ly set forth the ground of this doctrine 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid (saith he) it is hid unto those that are lost; In whom the God of this world hath blind∣ed the minds of thm which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them. And this the Apostle knew by his own experience; for hav∣ing preach'd to a congregation in Rome from morning until evening, it is said, that some believed the things that were spoken, and some believed them not, Act. 28. 24. And therefore he there urgeth this very text of the prophe Isaiah, a∣ganst the unbelievers of his Congrega∣on. Well spake the holy Ghost by Isaiah the Act. 21. 26. Prophet unto our fathers, saying, Go unto this people and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand, &c. So that the result is no more but this; the want of faith excludes hearing; and the God of this world (being prepossessed of the heart) excludes faith. What the God of this world is, S. John tels us in express 1 Iohn 2. 1. terms. All that is in the world, the lusts
of the flesh, and the lusts of the eys, and the pride of life, is not of the father, but is of the world. And how the God of this world may be overcom, he tels us also. Whatsoever is born of God, overcometh 1 John 5. 4. the world; and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith So that if fath be predominant, the God of this world is excluded; and if the God of this world be predominant in the soul faith, and all other saving gra∣ce are excluded. I have said before, that corruption & depravity in the poples hearts, had very srequently an unwholsom influ∣ence upon the prophets tongues; but such is the corruption and perversness of these times, that were Moses, and Samuel, and Elijah, and all the unerring prophets of God among us; they would not work some mens hearts into any reasonable obedience. What's the rea∣son? because the hearts are already pre∣possed. There is mammon, a covetous worldly divel; and there is Bcchusa swish drunken divel; and there is Ve∣nus, a lalciviu unclen divel; & there is revenge, a raging foming divel. These and many more, have taken possession of the soul, insomuch that there is no room for any Evangelical guest; so that would you know the reason why our
sermons are duri sermones, hard sayings? i is from dura corda, because your hearts are hard heart: Totum durum est, quiquid imperatur invitis. Every thing is hard and severe to a man that hath no inclination to obey; Quot ge∣nera preceptorum, tot adversariorium. So many precepts as we find in the Deca∣logue; so many enemies hath the car∣nal and licentious liver. Such is the power and predominancy of deliberate and resolved wickedness, that men had rather deny the Gospel it self, thn themselves, and their own destuctive lusts. Malunt execrari legem, quam emen∣dari mentem. they had rather the Law it self were abolish & accursed; then their own ungodly minds reformed; & bear a greater hatred to the clear com∣mands of God, then to their own vile∣nesse; so that Cui anius perversus est; nec Moses, nec Prophetaenec unus e mor∣tuis prodest Nor is this all the damage or misca∣riage, That our peaching is in vain to such men, and the good seed lost, because the stony ground will not suffer it to take root; no, the mischief of all mis∣chiefs is, the good seed is lost and the stony ground becoms more stony: not hearing, ad no undrstaning, as in the text; but here is hearing turned into
hardning; not stones chang'd ino bread (as was once expected from our Savi∣our) but here is bread changed into stones; the bread of life, and the food of the soul, changed into putrefaction, and obdurtenesse of spirit, And now if any man shal ask me, Sir, I pray resolve me, what do you think is the reason why my heart is so refractory and im∣penetrable after the hearing of so many good sermons, after so many solemn ap∣plications to the means of grace, &c. Truly Sir, my answer must be, because you have heard so much, to so little purpose. Every sermon you have heard, every convincement you have checkt & repulsed, is one blow more upon the Anvil of your heart; and the oftner or the longer you have been in the fur∣nace of affliction, without refining and reforming the error of your mind, the the more you are hardned to your own destruction. And that I do not speak this of my self, I shall give you authori∣ty for it; & I shall make my instance in those Gentils S Paul speaks of, Rom. 1. who (certainly) were not without the knowledge of God, sor it is said, v. 21. Because when they knew God, they glori∣fied him not as God, but held the truth of God in unrighteousness, v. 18. therefore God gave them up unto uncleanes, v. 24.
and even, as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, so God gave them over to a reprobate mind, v. 28. how far their mind was reprobate, we learn v. ult. Who knowing the judge∣ment of God (that they which commit such thngs are worthy of death) not on∣ly do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. The Scribes & Pha∣risees had so great a prejudice against our Saviours doctrine, and such a mali∣cious hatred against his person, & the growth of his Gospel; that they resol∣ved beforehand, if any man should con∣fesse him to be the Christ, he should Iohn 12. 11. be put out of the Synagogue. And this they execute upon a poor man, who (being born blind) was guilty of no o∣ther crime, but of having the eys of his body, and of his mind, both opened to∣gether by a miracle. And so far were they from being converted by his gra∣cious words and miracles; that tey resolve to put Lazarus to death (who had been an instance of his power and mercy) for no other reason, but that be∣cause of him, many of the Iews went a∣way, & believed on Iesus. I cannot ima∣gine what should be the reason that men are grown so liberal of their ex∣communications & executions both in England & Scotland, unlesse it be upon
some Ieish principle, because they ei∣ther will not, or cannot see their own blindnesse and seduction. Of such as these doubtless our Savi∣our speaks, Ioh 2. 39. for judgement am I come ito this world,  they which see no might see; and they which see, might be made blind. Thee is a strange sirit of slumber fallen upon this age; a deep slep from the Lord (I fear) hath seized those, who brag of nothing more then of strange visions and revelations from God. And most justly, for when men are resolved afochand to reel a∣gainst the light, as Iob speaks, Iob 24. 13. & with the Pharisees and Lawyers, to reject the counsel of God against themselves, Luk. 7 30. It is just with God to seal up their eys, that they shall never receive the benefit of another convincement, to bow down their backs alway, that they shall never look up to heaven more, with any comfortable as∣surance of mercy; & to make that word of his; which is a piercing word, divi∣ding asunder between the joynts & mar∣row, to be a hardning word, making the heart of flesh as hard & impenerable, as the Admant it self. So that a twofold design there is in the Gospel of Christ; one whereof is proper and natural, that is, to propound the way of life and sal∣vation,
the other is unnatural and acci∣dental; which is to be the occason of greater blindnesse & condemnation, by the wilfulnesse & obstinacy of unbelie∣vers. Thus ye see, what the god of this world cannot effect by the baits and snares of abused prosperity; what the tempter canno bring about by his se∣cret instigations and illusions; nor Si∣mon Magus and his prophets by their spells and sorceries; is at last completed by the profanig of an holy ordinance. This drives the nail to the head, and without a miracle of mercy, fastens the obstinate and obdurate hearer, to his eternal lost condition. And therefore some short counsel and caution in a businesse of so much con∣cernment, cannot be thought super fluous or unnecessary. I do not know any ad∣monition so of en insisted on by our Sa∣viour as this, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear But beside this general, two cautions we have from him in particu∣lar concerning hearing. The one Mat. 4, 24. Take heed what ye hear; The oher Luk. 8. 18. Take heed how ye hear. Take heed what, for the matter; Take heed how, for the manner. The first concerns my self as well as you, and all those of our function. For if ye must take heed what ye hear, we must also take heed
what we preach. But this being beside my Text, I shall no insit upon it, only I shall say thus much, That he that shall satr (from the Pulpir) chaf and tars, and wild gourds, insteed of wheat, may e suspected to receive hi em∣ploynt 1 Cor. 3. 12. from the envious man, men∣tioned Mat. 13. 28. and he that shall build hay, and wood, and stubble, upon an Evangelical foundation, shall cer∣tainly expose his work unto the fire; though perhaps his person may be pre∣served. For the manner of your hearing, three cantios may be necessary, to re-inforce and explain our Saviours cousel; Take heed how ye hear. That is, Take heed 1. How ye are prepar'd before ye hear. 2. How ye are disposed when ye hear. 3. How ye are resolved and reformed when ye hear. First, How prepared. The word of God is compared to seed; and mans heart to ground; now the husbandman will tell ye, there goes more to the reap¦ing of an Harvest, then the bare sowing of the seed. There must be plowing, and dunging, and fallowing, and gathering our the stones, and much more, bore the corn comes into the barn. And this the prophet Jeremy knew well, when he bespake the men of Iudah and Ieru∣salem
from the Lord, saving; Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns; that is, as he explains himself in the next verse, Circumcise your selves to the Lord & take away the soreskin from off your heart. Ier. 4. 3, 4. And upon this ground Iohn the Baptist was lent to prepare the way of the Lord, by preach∣ing Mat. 3. 3. repentance and amendment of life, that so the people might be in a capa∣city to receive the benefit of Evangeli∣cal grace Elihu tells us, when he expo∣stulated a businesse with Iob three friends, he had a certain matter within Iob 32. 19. him, which was like wine which hath no vent, but is ready to burst the new botles that contain it; and our Savi∣our tels us for certain, hat if men put new wine into old bottles, they shall quickly have an end of their wine, and the bottles too; for the wine will be spilled, and the bottles will be marred. There are cetain seasonings of grace, Math 9 17. which are very necessary to a Christian before the wine of Gods word be reei∣ved into the soul. Two things especially the heart must be seasoned withal, First, it must be seasoned with humi∣lity. We have an experiment in I hylo∣sophy, that from the bottom of a deep well, a man may see the stars at noon day, whch he that walks abroad in the
Sunshne cannot do The ground of best advntage from whence a Christian may look into divine mysteries, is from the valley of humiliy; namely, from an humble sense of his own wants, and an humble esteem of his best perform∣ances I dwell in the high and holy place, saith God Almighty, & not only there, but with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit; to revive the spirit of the humble, & the heart of the con∣trit ones, Isa. 57. 15. The world is so ul of pride & prejudice, that what between Athenians (that digest no doctrine that savours not of novelty and strangenesse) and Scribes and Pharisees, that reject a dorine that makes against themselvs: there is little hope of any reasonable proportion of fruit to be reaped from all our pains: what hough the preach∣er be none of the greatest Rabbins; what if unelquen,  indiscreet? yet 'tis Gods word, not his, hen faithfully deliver'd, and where the cler word of God does no preva without eloquence, I shall very much suspect it will not prevail with it. I shall close this point with S. Pau cat, Let no man deceive him∣self. if any man among yu seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a 1 . . 18.  r. 8. 2. sool that he may be wise. And if any man think that he knows any thing, he knows
nothing yet as be ought to know. Them Psa. 28. 9. that be meek, God wi guide in their judgement; and such as are humble, them will he learn his way. Secondly, the heart must be seasoned by prayer. Gods word is spiritual, & we are carnal; & there is so great a distance between these two, that the carnal (or natural) man, cannot discern the things 1 Cor. 2. 14. of the spirit. And we that are spiritual fishermen, may toyl all night, and catch nothing except Christ be with us in the ship. Faith (the great hinge whereon our salvation doth so much depend) is not a flower that grows in our own gar∣den. We read of Lydia, that as Paul Act. 16. 14. preached, God opened her heart, that she attended to the things that were spoken of Paul. God keeps the key of every mans hear, he openeth, and no man shut∣teth, Rev. 3. 7. & shutteth, & no man openeth But let me tell ye, there is no use of a Key. where the doe is fast boted and barr'd within. I grant, Christ can nter into the soul, as he did into the Assembly of hs disciples (the dores being sut, wher they were assembled sor fear of the Iews) Iohn 20. 19. Or he cn force those iron dores of our hearts, at his own pleasure. But we have no assurance that he will do all he can do, for our humour and satis∣faction. He could have commanded
stones into bread, or he could have done a miracle bfore. Hod, and yet we know he would not. What may be expected from him, e may clearly un∣derstand from ha Text, Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the dore and knock: If any man hear my voice, and open the dore, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Christ will never exclude himself, if we do not exclude him. And therefore, since the way of man is not in himself; and since the prepara∣tions of the heart in man, are cleerly and entirely from the Lord, what we Ier. 10. 20. Prov. 16. 1. cannot attain unto by hearing, let us en∣deavour to gain by praying. That as a man lights a candle to find the snuffers, and then ss the candle, that it may u cleae; that as my body first warms my clothes, and afterward my clothes keep warm my body; so let our prayers contribute an advantage to our heaing; and our hearing unto our pray∣ing. First, let us so pray, that we may ea; and aterwards so hear, as that we may pray, and live, and walk, and serve our God in truth and sincerity, with re∣verence and godly fear. 2. As we must be prepared before, o we must be rightly disposed when we hear. To a ight disposition, there is somthing to be disposed of, before we
come to he; and S. Peter will tel ye what t is, namely the ang aside all malice, and all gu, and Hypocrisies, 1. Pet. 2 1. 2. and envies, and evil speking, that so as new born babes, ye may desire the sin∣cere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. To these incongruities and in∣consistences with religious Hearing; give me leave to remember ye of that irre∣verence and scandalous deportment which is notoriously visible in some men, even in the time of Hearing; who by their irreligious glances, their whis∣pering comments, and their impudent aronts to Christs Ambassadors, even in the delivery of their sacred messages, do evidently declare, that they do not only secretly bolt the dores of their hearts against the preaching of Gods word; but that they set up a Bill of defiance a∣gainst it, even in their countenances I know I may be thought by some to be too severe (if not Pedantick) in this particular; but publick scandals, must have publick reprehensions. Nor do I presse thi, out of any design to advance our esteem; but to prevent yor ruin. My Zeal and indination shll ever express it self both ways as well agaist those that give scandal out of the pul∣pit, as against those that take scandal and exception, where none is given. Non
est ludendum cu sacris; Holy duties must be performed after an holy man∣ner; God is very jealous of his honour, especially in his Name and Worship; And though his patience and long∣surtering be highly provoked every day in other things; yet in this he is quick∣ly stirred up to an expression of anger; as appears by the sad histories of vz∣zah; the Bethshemites; Nadab & Abihu, the sons of Aaron; and the 250. princes that oered incense, Num. 16. God will be sanctified in all those that draw 2. Sam. 6. 7. 1. Sam. 6. 19. Lev. 10. 2 near unto him in his worship, and be∣fore all the people will he be glorified. Lev. 10. 3. And therefore, keep thy foot, when Eccl. 5 1. thou goest to the house of God (that is) look carefully to thy affections; see that thy heart be tender, and disposed aright to receive the impressions of Grace. Two properties there are of a under heart, 1. it is always sensible, & moved at what is propounded out of the word of God. If any thing be propounded from the promises of grace and mercy; a Tender heart is presently enflamed, and warmed with the comfort of it; like the hearts of the two disciples our saviour overtook as they were going to Emaus. Luc. 24 32. If any thing be propounded from the Threatnings of Gods Iustice; there is
presently a sense of terror in th tender heart. This tero or trembling of eart; when it ariseth from an apprehension of Gods anger and discountenance; is of great esteem and acceptation in the sight of God. Heaven is my throne Isa. 66. 1. 2. (saith God) and earh my footstool, but to this man wil I look (or have respect) even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembleth at my words And we read of good King Iosiah, that he received an answer of peace from Huldah the prophetesse up∣on this very ground. Because thine heart was tender, and thou didst hum∣ble thy self before God, when thou heardest his words against this place, and agains the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thy self before me, and didst rend thy clothes, &c. Thou shall be ga∣thered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eys see all the evil that I will bring upon this place, 4. Chron 34. 27. my heart standeth in aw of thy word, said he, that was a man after Gods, Psal. 119. 101. own heart In aw of thy word; because the word of an omniscient God, that knoweth every secret cranny and revise of my soul. In aw of thy word; because the word of an omniporent God, who is able in a moment of time, to blast a thousand worlds with the breath of his
displeasure, In aw of thy word; because the word of a just, and a sin-revenging God; and in aw of thy word; because that word by which I must be judged at the last day. Secondly, A tender heart, as it is a sensible; so it is alwayes a pliable and yeilding heart: Like wax, it may be moulded into any form, will receive any impression. It is said of some Iewish converts, that upon the hearing of Pe∣ters sermon, they were pricked in their hearts, and they said to Peter, and to the Act. 2 37 rest of the Apostles; Men, and brethren, what shall we do? They were ready to do any thing the Apostles would ad∣vise them for the recovery and preser∣vation of their own souls. And the first evidence we have of S. Pauls Conver∣sion, was in his readinesse to be com∣manded. Domine quid me vis facere? Act 22. 10. Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? we are then Auditores idonei, candid, and Christian-like auditors; when the word of God hath a kind of operation on our soules, when it works such a ready obe∣dience in our hearts, that we throw away those arms by which we have rebelled against our Lord and maker; dismantle the strong holds which sin hath made in us; when it subdues every raigning and rebellious lust; and we are
contented to resigne up our selves, to be governed and regulated according to its wisdom and direction. Lastly, we must be reformed, and well resolved after Hearing. First we must resolve to keep the word, as well as hear it; not receive it in at one ear, and suffer it to passe out at the oher; S. Iames Iam. 1. 25. condemns such a one, for a very fruit∣lesse and unworthy Hearer; wo comes to the word, as to a looking glasse, wherein he sees his ugly spots and de∣formites; but immediatly goth away, and forgetteth what manner of person he was. No, the good seed in good ground is expounded to be those, who in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. Thy word have I hid within my heart, that I might not sin against thee, saith David, Psal. 119. 11. Luc 8. 15. Better no Hearing at all, then no retaining of what we hear; Habendum and Tenendum, To have and to hold, is the best title in the law; and to Hear, and to retain is the best possession of the Gospel Secondly we must resolve to Apply the word; Gods word is a Rule, and his Church a spiritual building; There can be no Building or squaring with∣out a Constant application of the Rule;
I like not those scandalous and parti∣cular applications, which srike at mens persons from the pulpit (which some unwise builders make the greatest pan of their usnee,) our Saviour would not speak in expresse terms, no, not to the Traytor Iuds; but cast the Treason among hi Disciples, and lest every man to enquire into himself, to find out the Traytor. Though we aym at no man person from the pulpit, yet wee must level at every mans sins; and he that finds himself guilty of those sns we preach against; shall have my leave to conclude the preacher meant him. So∣lomon tells us, The words of the wise, are as goads, and ayls fastned by th Eccl. 12. 11. masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd. Not only as goads, to prick men forward unto Christian du∣ties; but as nayls also to fasten, and keep them where they should continue; now, though the driving of the nayl belongs to us, yet the clinching and fastning of the nayl belongs to you; I grant, that preaching witout Application, is like a nayl without a point; but when we have sharpned and driven our nayl to the head; yet if it be not clinched on your parts, our peaching, and your Hearing, may be both in vain Thirdly, we must resolve, as to keep
and Apply the word; so in the last place, to obey it. Not to play fast and loose with it, as we please; to respect it when it serves our turns; and to crosse it, whn it crosseth us; but to entertain it always as our governour and guide; and to embrace it as our sweet familiar friend; to make it a lanhorn unto our Psal. 119. 105. feet, and a light unto our aths; and to give it the sole and entire conduct of our selves and all our aairs. We say, the meat is well besowed on thoe, that not only eae it with a good sto∣mack, but such as thrive and encrease in health and strength by it. There were Math 13. 21. that heard the word with joy (in the parable of the sower) and yet their heats were no better then stony ground and their fui  away assoon as it was sprung up. The best commen∣dation of our pains at any time, must be taken from your practise: A Sermon is well heard, when there follows some abatement of sin; some improvement of Grace, some increase of spiritual strength and nourishment in the soul. Such as are truly planted in the house of the Lord; are said to flourish and Psal. 92. 13. spread like a Cedar in Lebanon; to bring forth still more fruit in their old age, and to be fat and well liking, In Luc, 12, 48. brief. To whomsoever much is given, of
them shall much be required. God ex∣pects our fruit should be proportiona∣ble to the seed sown, to his pains and Husbandry about us; and if it be not so; I tremble to think how unsatisfactory our account wll be at the general Au∣dit. I shall therefore conclude my coun∣sel with that of S. Iames; Let every man be swift to heart, slow to speak, slow to wrath; let us lay apart all filthinesse, and superfluity of naughtinesse; and re∣ceive with meenesse the ingrasted word, which is able to save our souls. And let us be Doers of the word, & n Hearers only, deceiving our own selves. And thus having shewed the nature, & degrees of spiritual Ifatuation, toge∣ther wih its instrumental causes; I am now to proceed to the Signes & Symp∣tomes of this dangerous disease. Physi∣tians say, a disease is more then half cu∣red, when it is certany known. And sure, of all other, there ought to be a particular care used in the discovery of this disease; because, the persons infected with it, have the least sense of it. Our Saviour hath long since foretold what shall be the signes of his second coming to Judgement; and they are set down for our warning and instruction, Mat. 24. and Luc. 21. And we find him reproving the Pharisees and the Sad∣duces,
in that they could discover fair or foul weather from the face of the sky; but were not able to discern the signs of those Times. As there are Signa Mat 16. 13. Temporum; certain Signes, belonging to certain Times: so there are Signa Morborum, certain Signs, belonging to certain Diseases. The plague of Lepro∣sie, under the Law, was discerned by two Signes; Namely, i the hayr within the plague were turned white; and the spot were deeper then the skin. It was evi∣dence Lev. 13. 3 enough for the priest to conclude it a Leprosie, & to pronounce the person so infected, to be unclean. The plague of pestilence, (wherewith our land hath been so often visited) hath certain spots, and swellings, which the common peo∣ple call Gods marks, or Tokns; which when he Searchers perceive they pre∣sently shut up the house, & make a red crosse, or write, Lord have mercy upon us upon the dore. Those Root hat ly concealed in the earth all the Winter, are easiy discerned in the Spring by such sprouts and suckers as arise from thence. There is a Root of bitternesse in the false heart of man, which though it ly close & concealed from the e of the world; yet there are certain sprout and sprigs, that at some season or other shew themselves, from whence a man may
conclude, that such a root there is not far from thence. I shall think it disco∣very enough on my part, to shew such evidence as appears above ground, lea∣ving every an to look farther into himself, hen is possble for me to do; since the power of discerning spirits is long since expired. So that, as many Lines are drawn from the same Center, and many poy∣sonous threds concur to make up the same spirs webb: so, this Bond of ini∣quity is  chain of divers links, a Cord of diver twists; and though the Divel appear not in any ugly, sormidable shape; yt it will be no hard matter to discern the track of his cloven foot all along the path of spiritual Insatuation. Th irst evidence then, which I shal produe a a Symptome of Infatuation, is, Te strange adherence and belief which is very ordinarily given to noto∣rious and apparent Lyes and Delu∣sions. For a it is the policy of men (having to do with wild and resracto beast) to make it their first care to blin ther eys, that by that means they may ne their hearts, and bring them to thr bek and lure; So it is the po∣licy of that grand Artist, the Divel, first, to cst a mist before the eys of those he intends to abuse with his jug∣ling
frauds; that so he may carry them oodwinkd to their own destruction. Was it not a strange Delusion in the Israelites, after so long, and so remarka∣ble experience of Gods visible power and protection over them to mistake a Golden Calf, for the Great Ihovah? To Psal. 107. 20. change the glory of their invisible and incorruptible Creator; into the simili∣tude of an ox that eareth Grasse? To Apostatize and fall away from the true God; and to worship and fall down to the stock of a tree? and yet this is the best account we have of that infatuated people in the prophet Isaiahs time, who thus complaineth of them. They have not known, nor understood, for he hth shut their eys, that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand. And none considereth in his Isa. 44. 18. 19. 20. heart, neher is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burnt part of my God in the fre, I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; and shall I make the rsidue thereof an Abomi∣nation? shall I fall down to the stock of a tree? He feedeth of ashes, a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his foul; nor say: Is there no a ly in my right hand? And from hence, the Psalmist makes the Idol∣maker, and the Idol-worshipper, and the
blockish Idl it self, to be all of the same senselesnesse and stupidity, they have all es alike, and see not; ears, and Ps. 115. 8. hear not; feet, and walk not; They that make Idols, are like unto them; and so are all such us put their trust in them. Had not this charm of Infatuation, a strange power upon the mnds of the English Nation, when that notorious cheat of King and Parliament began to commens and walk the world with such genral reception and entertain∣ment? ad did not the juglers of this age beliee as much? when men did not blush to reach, and print; That the op∣posing the Kings power, was the justest way of efending it; That the fyring ofCano at his Royal person, was to be underst sor his defence and preser∣vation; hat an Army was necessary t bring hm to his Parliament, when e was there before (as was pretended) in his est capacity: and that an Army was as necessary to keep him from his Parliaent; when he would have been there personally, for the just satisfaction of hi people? And now, that men have seen how well his power and his per∣son hth been defended; now, that they have seen the rine of Religion and goo laws in the murther of their So∣veraign; and the Liberty of the subject,
resolved into the arbytrarie pleasure of the Souldier; is not the delusion as strong at this day as ever? Is not our Infatuation (together with our mise∣ries) encreased almost into a miracle? Is there any man almost, that for fear of himself, dares thus expostulate with himself, what have I been doing now these 7. or 8. yeers? what contributions have I given to the present miseries and confuon of my Nation? Gods Truth is still the same; but is not my under∣standing strangely changed from what it was; Is there not a ly in my right hand? To say there are none in this hope∣ful way of recovery, were durus sermo, an hard saying, which I dare not own: But yet let me tell ye, the paucity of those who own their errors as they ould be owned, that is, with repen∣tance and satissaction, is enough to pro∣claim to all the world; that the blind∣nesse o these times, is not much unlike to that of Sodom; all, old and young, all Gen. 18. 4 from evry quarter almost involved; and for ought I know, may be as nigh destruction too, though not by a judge∣ment sent immediately from heaven. And now I am speaking of Insatuati∣on; it may fall under a question; whe∣ther the most violent and virulent part of the English Rebels, do at this day
discern the error of their way, or not. I know much may be said on the affirma∣tive, and most men believe, that how. ever they pretend Gods cause, and the like, yet they have many a secret check within themselves for what they do. But I am clearly for the Negative, and I think I have Scripture grounds for my opinon. I shall easily grant, there was a time when they did see their error; though now I believe they do not. For men are no longer masters of their own eyes, when once the hand of God hath closed them; such as rebel against the light of Gods word (knowing it to be so) it is most just with God to ob∣struct the way of his truth, and to close up their senses for ever, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and be convert, &c. And that this is not a private guesse of my own, vouched with as little warrant, as charity; you shall hear S. Paul speak to it. Now the spirit speakth expresly, that in the latter times 1 Tim 4. 1, 2. some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrine of divels; speaking lies in hypocrisie, ha∣ving their Consciences seared with an hot iron. Where 'tis easie to observe the method and progresse of Gods ju∣stice upon such as do see, and will not
First, they shall depart from the faith which they have once professed. Se∣condly, they shall give heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of divels. Thirdly they shall speak lyes in hypocrisie, speak sor truth what they know to be lyes, there's the wilfulness of their sin; and then sollows (as a just reward) their consciences shall be seared, and there's the irrecoverablenesse of the judge∣ment. And from the strength of this delusion it comes to passe, that men shall think they do God good service, when they shall murther his own Am∣bassadours, Ioh. 16. 2 according to our Saviours own predictio. So that as we read (in the hystory of Henry 7. of that famous impostor Perkin Warbeck, that he co∣sened the world so long by personating a King, that (from his accustomed Ma∣jestick garb and deportment) he began at length to believe himself to be so in∣deed; till his high thoughts of him∣self, were confuted by the base service of the Kings kitchin: And as it fares with some melancholy constitutions, who by dwelling over long upon their own thoughts and Phantasmes, have be∣lieved themselves to be beasts, and be∣haved themselves accordingly; so the inuring of a mans self to speak lies meerly in hypocrisie, to promote impo∣sture;
is the high way (at long run∣ning) to believe in earnest that to be a truth, which at first ws known to be but a lie For it is not enough that the intellect be acquainted with Divine Truth; but that the heart be warmed also with love of that truth; the want of which, is the cause of the grossest er∣ror and deception. This is cleared al∣so by an express assertion of the same Apostle, Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be s∣ved, sor this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believea∣ly, 2 Thes. 2. 10, 11, 12. that they all might be damned, who be∣lieved not the truth, but had pleasure i unrighteousness. So that if these men of whom I speak, have adventured upon so bold a sin, as to hold the truth of God in unrighteousness; that is, by their own phariaical malice and perversness, have manacled and chained up Gods truth from having any dominion over them∣selves or actins; if their eys have bee fixed more upon the spoyl and advan∣tage that mght be gain'd by a war, then upon any true Evangelical grounds in commencing a war; if their hearts have been preresolved to expnge or abuse any Text of Scripture that might stand in their way; and to imprison any pro∣phet that shall seasonably admonish
them of the error of it (al which I speak by way of suppositiō, leaving the world to determine of the truth of my sugge∣stions) I say, it is no wonder at all, if these men (having sorfeited the benefit of al the fair warnings & convincements they have had, by their wilfulnesse and obstinacy) at this time of day, mistake darkness for light, Belial for Christ, and their own whimseys & delusions, sor the secret inspiration of the holy Ghost. But leaving these men (with the So∣domites) to grope at noon day, and to reflect a little on our selves in this par∣ticular I could wish the strong delusions I speak of, dwelt only on the other side the salt water; I do not intend to med∣dle with our Councels, and publike Transactions (which by many men are thought to savour somthing of insatua∣tion) I shall ever pray for Gods bles∣sing upon them, but otherwise under∣stand them to be both without & above the sphere of my profession. But let us reflect upon our selves, as we are christi∣ans, and upon our conversations, as they are exposed to every eys not the world strangely cheated and abused by false ghosts, when light is so ordinarily put for darknes, and darkness for light? Good for evil, and evil for good? When that which is highly esteemed
among men, is an abomination in the sig of God; and that which is most vile & abominable in the sight of God, is m acceptable & plausible in the steem men; To give you an instance or two. The murther of Abel by Cain his brother, was an act so soul and horrid; that God thought fit to punish it imme∣diately, with no less then an hell of hor∣ror and trembling. And to prevent the imitation & insection of so soul a crime a law was presenty enacted, Gen. 96. Who so sheddeth mans blood by man shal his blood be shed, and the reason is there added, or in the image of God made b man. The shedding of innocent blood in Manasses, was a sin that the Scripture declares God would not pardon. And 2 King. 24. 4. yet the Divel hath put so fair a glos upon this soul sin; that the world plead a necessity that this scarlet si be wo with the Buff coat; and that man that is not preresolved to chalege the field,  there attempt the butchering of his Christian brother, and perhaps, his la friend (and in that stab at God himsel in his own image) upon the least drun∣ken or passionate provocation, is no thought fit to associate with any gentle∣man. Thus by vertue of a wild notion honour (which is no more honour th the mire in the streets is gold) m
are sent away many times to Gods Tri∣bunal of Justice, with their blood about their ears, and all their murtherous in∣tendments in their hearts, without the allowance of ne hours time to make up their accounts with God Thus are men hurried away to their eternal ruine, by the power of a strong deluon, without ever considering or expostulating with themselves. Have not I put my self out of the protection of my heavenly fa∣ther? have not I put my self into the pofsession of the divel? Am I not going about a most desperate and horrid em∣ployment? am I able to pray, or be∣lieve, or perform any act of Christian duty, as becoms a Christian? Is there not a ly in my right hand? So that ac∣cording to this wild principle of ho∣nour, That man must lie under the brand of a Coward, that will not be damned for company; or at least, that will not run a desparate hazard to dare his own damnation. Again, The Treason of Judas was so desperate and abominable, that the trai∣tor himself was thought t to be his own Executioner; and without trou∣bling either Judge or Jury, or witness in his condemnation Idas conveys him self to his own place, Act. 1. 25. and yet this Traytor Divel is now grown so
plausible both in the Court, and in the Camp, that a man is thought a weak brain'd sool, that hath not so much of Judas in him, as to betray his Lord and Master. Quid dabitis, & ego tra∣dam? what will ye give me, and I will beray a Fort, a Garison, an Army into your hands? may well be the motto of this false age, sor its foul Treasons and Conspiracies. Nay so strong is the delu∣sion grown, that we begin to disclaim the very principles of Religion, Justice, and Honour; and think those prophets little lesse then mad men, that would hold us to those safe, easie, and unerring rules; as if we were possessed with that profane and desperate spirit of Jehoram the son of Ahab, who (in the extremity of siege & famine) rejected the Lord, and the counsel of his prophet, saying, behold this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? 2 Kin. 6. To come yet closer unto our selves, Have we not reason to suspect we are under the power of an infatuation, or delusion, when those sins which at first we committed not without great trem∣bling and hrror, are now by custome and acquaintance, grow so plausible and familiar, that we can hug them in our bosoms, and ly down upon our pil∣lows, without the least disturbance ari∣sing
from the thought of them? is there not an apparent witchcraft in the plea∣sures of sin, when our very judgements become changed and perverted, by the vileness and loosness of our afsections? and notwithstanding all the curses and threatnings of Gods word, denounced against our beloved sins, yet we can bless our selves in our own apprehensions, and say, we shall have peace, though we walk on in the imaginations of our own deluded sprits? is it not a strange va∣nity Deut. 29. 19. of mind, to believe that God will un-God himself, and lay aside that glo∣rious attribute of his Justice (which is essential to his nature) to indulge and comply wih us in our sinful enormi∣ties? I will not rashly or severely con∣clude of any mans condition, I shall ra∣ther entreat you all to be your own pri∣vate conessors, and ask your selves, whether these, and such like perswasi∣ons are not lodged in your booms. What? may I not be Christian enough with some few secret sins reserved? or, s there not time enough hereafter to lay them aside, when the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eys, and the pride of life have had their seasonable satissactions; must I account with God for tose oaths that slip from me unawares, as in∣sensibly as my breath passeth from me?
or for that deliberate Perjurie, without which I cannot save my Estate, my Wife, and children from extreme misery? shall I deprive my self of the benefit of my Saviours death; for living a litle, or a litle longer to my self? To my proud, envious, and ambitious self; To my vain, sensual, and vitious self? I am not so wicked, and debauched, as many others; and there are many that passe for eminent, and wise men, that are as wicked as my self. These I take, to be the pleasing dreams, and delusions of our Corrupt and seduced hearts. In answer where-unto, you must know; that the Generality of iniquity, doth not lessen, or abate the guilt of it. Leprosie, is not lesse Leprosie, because it hath overspred the whole body, nor is the Pestilence of lesse danger, and infection; because every house in the street is infe∣cted wth it. These thoughts, if they were searched to the bottom (I believe,) would be found to arise from no lesse then secret Atheisme. And if men would speak out; their language would differ little from him that said, Tush, God hath forgotten mine iniquity, he hideth away, Psal. 10. 11. his face, and will never see it. For let men pretend never so much▪ to faith, & a good conscience; whilst their works are opera tenebrarum, the works of darkness,
I cannot believe they do seriously de∣sire to be acquainted with the light; and whilst mens conversations are so Athe∣istical & Divellish, I cannot think they believe either the Iustice of God, or the truth of his word, or the vileness of their sins, or the immortality of their souls. They are certainly under the power of some strong delusion. And this I take to be one symptom of infatuation; for the mind to be bewitched with blindness & error. And if the light that is in us, is Mat. 6. 23. darkness, oh how great is that darkness? A second symptom of Infatuation, I take to be a bold and daring kind of impudence in sinning, when men care neither what they do, nor before whom when there is not only a want of sight in the understanding to look upon sin in its ugly nature and complexion, a want of sorrow in the heart, to grieve for it; but a want of shame in the face, to blush for it. I joyn both these together, be∣cause an unrelenting heart, and a bra∣zen brow, impudence and impenitence are birds of the same hatch and feather. I find both charg'd upon the house of Israel, by the Prophet Ezekiel, All the Ezek. 3. 3. 7. house of Israel are impudent and hard∣hearted. We read Num. 5. of a water of a very strange, but certain operation. In those times it was in the power of the jealous
husband, to bring his wife to a certain tryal, whether she had abused his bed, & transressed the coenant of her God by adultery, or not. The manner thus, he summond hs wife before the Priest, & there compelled her to drink of a bitter water, which if he were guiltlesse, pro∣duced no ill effect at all, but was the occasion of fruitfulnes (which was ever thought a great honour to that Sex) but if guilty of that foul sin of Adul∣tery, then it would crtanly make her thigh to rot, and her belly to swell, and that woman became a proverb, and a curse unto her people. It ws the same water, how came it then to have such a different operation? certainly, it was not from the water, but from the guilt and delinquency of th woman; wherein I do not so much ad∣mire the foulness of her sin, as the bold∣ness of her obstinacy; who knowing the dreadful curse that would certainly fol∣lo that bitter potion, rather then con∣fess her guilt, would stand out in a pub∣like and professed defiance of Gods ju∣stice It is no otherwise with bold and refractory sinners; who (though they har the curses of God denounced a∣gainst their dearest sins) o yet stand out in an open defiance of their Lord and Maker, making every sermon they har
a witnesse unto their rebellion, and a seal unto thei Condemnation, So that how∣ever men may carry their countenanes in the Sanctuary of God, wth such a smooth confidence; as if they were no way concened in those accursed sins w prech against; yet God knows, and we know, and we tremble to think, what secret operation our despised messages have upon their bold and refractory spirits. There were many fol abomina∣tions committed in Israel in the time of the Prophet Jeremy; and yet behold with what impudence they carried themselves in al their wickednesse Were they ashamed when they had Committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush; Jer. 6. 15. But instead of blushing, see how they behve themselves in the next chapter; They stole, they murthered, they Com∣mitted Adultery, they sware falsly, they burned incens unto Baal, they walked after other Gods, whom they knew not, Ier. 7. 9. 10. and yet (not with standing all this) they came, and stood before God, in his house which was called by his name; I, and said too, that they were delivered to do all these abominations. But see the doom of his infatuated people; they had sinned themselves so far out of God faour; that the Prophet is inhibi∣ted
so much as to pray for them. There∣fore Ier. 7. 15. pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry, nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee. It was a foul aggravation of Iudas Iscariots treason, in that he had the im∣pudence to come before his master and kisse him, when he meant to betray him, Luc. 22. 48. What Judas? betrayest thou the son of man with a kisse? Is it not wickednesse enough, that from a disciple thou pro∣vest a Traytor; a Traytor to me thy master; Thy master whom thou knowest to be innocent; a master, whom thou knowest not to be ignorant of this base conspiracy; but must all this wicked∣nesse be disguised amoris pignore? must the seal of Love be made the signal of thy Treason? betrayest thou the son of man with a kisse? Was it not wicked∣nesse enough in subjects to betray and falsify the Trust reposed in them, when they were called to the great Councel of England, and from Councellors, to grow up to be controulers; To perse∣cute with Tongues, and penns, and Ar∣mies, their Royal Lord and master: To strip him of his estate, and the nearest comforts of his life; To imprison, ar∣raign, condemn, and execute the best of mortal Monarches, before his own
Royal pallace? But must all this be done under a pretence of Iustice, and Law, and the general good of the Kingdom? Certainly, This was such a transcendent piece of impudence, as fills the world with amazement; and (which I fear) will never find the way to repentance. And for this, and the like bold vilanies and insolencies; I know not whether I shall call the present; The iron-hearted or the Brazen foreheaded Generation: for certainly; al the bold vilanies which have been acted since the world began, (even among the most barbarous and savage kind of people) may be thought but petty-Lareenyes, compared with what this Age hath produced within our own Nation. And now, with what confidence do these men triumph in the chains and snares, they have made for their own unwary souls? How do they brave it upon those slippery pinaes of advantage, which the madnesse of the people, the casuaties of war, and their own base ribery and Corruption have set them? with what Impudence do they addresse themselves to fortain Princes, and States? how do they threa∣ten if they are not assisted? as if all the world were obliged to strike sayl to their present power; or, as if they were masters of the whole world in their own imaginations.
In 1 King. 20. we have a remarka∣ble story of Benhadad King of Syria; who (being ifred up with the thoughts of hs own power, and Ahabs weak∣ns) ends a peremptory messe to the King of Israel, sayng; Ty silver, and thy gold is mine; thy wives also, and thy children, even the goodliest, are mine. Vers. 3. And understanding by his servants that Ahab was contn to pay hm this H∣mage; Vrs. 6. He sends a second message, saying; I will send my servants unto thee to morrow about this time; and they shall search thine house, and the houses of thy servants; and it shall be, that what∣soever is pleasant in thine eys, they shal put it in their had, and take it away. (That is, in short) they must be ad∣mitted, to come into the City, and plunder what they pleased to lay their hands on. Benhadad being refused in Vers. 10. this unreasonable demand, breaks out into a rage, saying, The Gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of Sama∣ria shall suffice for hndfuls, for all the Vers. 11. people that follow me. Well (saith Ahab) let not him that girdeth on his harnesse, boast himself as he that put∣teth it off. The matter comes to be dis∣puted by the sword, where in two bat∣tels the King of Syria is worsted, and reduced to so low a condition; that he
sends his servants unto Ahab, with sackcloth upon their loyns, and ropes Vers. 3. 2. about their necks, to beg for life. I have produced this story, only for the refle∣ction it hath upon the Boldnesse of these Times; in imposing upon Kings according to their presnt extremities; And although I do not expect that any successe whatsoever shall ever bring the Kings enemies to him upon their knees, with opes about their necks; nd though I dare not (as a Prophet) fretel the issues of war: Yet I look upon the Boldnesse, and Tyranny of those at Westminster, as more then pro∣bable preparatives to the fall of their power; The wings by which they have flown to this height, I take to be unna∣tural, like those of larus; Their motion so violent and unsteddy, that their fall, when ere it comes (I believe) will be as sudden, as irrecoverable. And I am the rather induced to be∣lieve the present power and greatnesse of these men not to be long lived; be∣cause of their great Boldnesse in profa∣ning Gods holy ordnances; begining at Gods house every day with peach∣ing and Praying, that so they may with the better colour and disguise, state and conclude their Thefts, and Murthrs, & prjuries throughout the Kingdom:
Nay, they do not stick to say too, in ex∣presse terms, that they are delivered and prospered to do all their abominations. Certainly, if our sins do not perpetually obstruct the way of Gods lustice, he is highly concerned in honour, to put a hook in the nostrils, and a bridle in the mouth of these impudent sinners; that all the world may know, that the rage and fiercenesse of man, shall turn to his own praise? That the Hope of the Hy∣pocrte Psal. 76. 10. Job 11. 20. lob 8. 14. shall passe away like a puff of breath; and all his finespun confiden∣ces, shall be but like a spiders web be∣fore the besom of destruction. And truly I know not in what language to ex∣presse this daring wickednesse, unlesse I shall call it professed Atheisine; nor where to find a parallel unto this. A∣theisme, unlesse it be Psal. 50. 21. There God expostulates with some, who con∣cluded from his patience and long suf∣fering, that he was even as wicked as themselves; or themselves as just and upright as himself, These things hast thou done (saith God) and I kept si∣lence; and thou thoughtest that I was al∣together such a one as thy self; but I will reproove thee, and set in order before thine eys the things that thou hast done. Consider this all ye that forget God: lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver you; Consider this, all ye that (under gaudy pretenses) flatter your selves in your own wickednesse, until your abominable sin be found out; Con∣sider whether you are brought (at long running) even to down-right Atheisme; not only to deny, or disbelieve the Iu∣stice of God; but his Purity and holi∣nesse; and to conclude him to be like one of the Heathen Gods, or (which is worse) to be as unclean and filthy as your selves. Nor is it any great wonder, that men (having acted all their bold wickednesse against Gods Anoy ted,) if a last they appear in Blasphemy & defiance of God himself And this I take to be another Symptom of Infatuation, when the soul hath sinned it self out of the shame and blushes which belongs to notorious sins. A Third symptom of Infatuation, is, when the mind of man is uncounsella∣ble; When a man is wilfully and in∣corrigibly resolved to walk contrary unto God; not only when a man is not reformed; but when he hates to be re∣formed. It is said of Ahab, that he sold himself to work wickednesse in the sight Lev. 26. 23. Psal. 50. 17. 1 King. 21. 20. of the Lord. That is, his heart was so set upon it, that he takes Elijah for his enemy, for no other reason, but because he would repove him for his wicked∣nesse;
and hates Micajah, sor no other reason, but because he knew he would speak Tuth. This incorrigiblenesse of mind was so hainous and intolerable under the Law of Moses, that it was pu∣nished with death; as appears Deut. 21. 18. If a man have a stubborn and re∣bellious son; which will not obey the voice of his Father, and Mother; and when they have chastned him, will not hearken unto them; then shall his Fa∣ther and Mother lay hold on him, and bring him unto the Elders of his City, and unto the gate of his place; and they shall say unto the Elders of his City, this our son is stubborn, and rebellious; he will not obey our voice: he is a glutton, and a drunkard. Then all the men of the City shall stone him with stones, that he dy, &c He was not stoned for his Gluttny and drunkennesse (which might be thought but petty ve∣nial sns, compared with the licentious∣nesse of these times) but for his incor∣rigiblenesse, in that he would not be re∣claimed. And indeed, It is not always the greatnesse of the sin, but the wilful∣nesse of the sinner that aggravates the crime, and exposeth a man to the severe wrath of God. We read of one that was stoned to death by Gods own im∣mediate determination, only for gathe∣ring
a few sticks on the Sabbath day. Num. 15. 32. What might be the reason of so much severity toward so slight a transgression? It was, because God had precisely com∣manded, Exod. 16. 29. that no man should go out of his place on the seventh day. And therefore whether the transgression were great or small; the law of those times was. That the soul that did ought presuptuouly, whether he were born in the land, or a stranger; the same reproched the Lord: and that soul was to be cut off from his people, a appeas, Num. 15. 30. This I take to be the only true Evan∣gelical ground of Excommunication and Censure; as appears by those instru∣ctions, given by our Saviour Mat. 18. Mat. 18. 15. 16. 17 If thy brother shall make a respasse, go and tell him his ault between thee and him alone; If he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more; and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church, but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heatn, &c▪ And thn follows, verily I say unto you; Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, &c. The thunder of the Churches censures, was not wont to be discharged at every dis∣agreement in doctrine, every dissnment in matters (pethps) meerly indiffe∣rent (I fear our modern reformers
have learned of the Iesuite, to reduce all matters ad Spiritualia, out of parti∣cular aym and satisfactions; making their censures as cheap as contempti∣ble, and as scandalous as themselves.) That fulnen Ecclesiae was wont to be used only in cases of extreme necessity, and with great deliberation and can∣dour; as when the matter was funda∣mental to the faith; or when the person scandalo is by his contumacy, and all other meins had been used to reclaime him; In such cases, Tutius est ut pereat unus, qu un unitas; better a Hand or a Leg be cut ot, rather then the whole body should be endangered by a Gan∣grene. It is said of S. Stephens murtherers, Act. 7. 57 That they stopped their ears, and ran upon hm all at once, and cast him out of the City, and stoned him. When men stop their ears against the voice of their reprovers, it is no wonder if they in∣volve themselves in desperate & horrid consequences. It was a custome among the Hathens, and afterwards (in imita∣tion of them) among the Israelites; 1 King. 23. 10. when they sacrificed their children un∣to Mlock, to make use of drums, & such like instruments, to deaf the ears, and dull the senses of the spectators, let they should be moved to compassionate
the pitiful Cries of the poor sacrificed children. From whence the valley of Hinnom is thought by some to receive the name of Tophet; from Toph, which signifies a Drn. And we read Mat. 8. 29. Of two Demoniacks, that were ex∣ceedingly tormented at our Saviours presence, and therefore they cry out, Quid nos tecum? what have wee to do with thee, thou Iesus, son of the living God? art thou come to torment us before our time? of the same hellish and infer∣nal constitution, is the stubborn and in∣corrigible spirit; He is enraged and dis∣quieted at the thought of any thing that may tend to his conversion; and there∣fore he stops his ears against all pious and sober Councels; He will not go to church, for fear of being awakened out of his beloved sleep; will not hear such a man preach, for fear of being pricked in conscience, which will put him to more pain then he is willing to endure; He is resolved upon his course, from which hee will not be diverted by any seasonable warnings, no, though one should be sent unto him from the dead, on purpose to reclaim him. And as is the Sin, so is the punishment; The sin wilful, and the punishment in∣evitable. For when men are resolved that nothing shall divert them in their
sin; God is resolved, that nothing shall divert their Iudgement. When men stop their ears from Hearing, God will not only stop the mouthes of his Prophets from reproving; but his own gracious ears from Hearing, They stop their ears at his calls, and he will stop his ears at their Cries, in the day of their Extremity. And for this we have a very cleer Text, Prov. 1. 24. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have et at nought all my Counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also wil laugh at your calamity, I wil mock when your fear cometh; when your fear cometh as a desolation, and your de∣struction as whirl-wind, when distresse and anguish cometh upon you; then shall hey call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. And certainly, it is a sd condition to perish, and to have none to pity us. For what pity can we expet fro men or Angels; when the father of mercies, and the God of all consolation will laugh at our destru∣ctio? He that at one time wept over Ierusalem, because shee would not re∣pet, Luc. 19. 41. and foresee the day of her visita∣tio was at another time pleased with the destruction of that incorrigible
City, when there was no way left for repen∣tance. So that this desperate wilfulnesse of mind, as it is the natural effect and consequent of infatuation; so it is the cerain forerunner of ruine and destructon. For the proof of this, I shall only produe two instances. The one is in the sons of Ely, of whom it is said, They harkned not unto the voice of their father, be∣cause the ord would slay them. The other is in Amaziah king of Judah, who (having gain∣ed a victory over the Edomites, & taken their gods to be his gods) the Lord sent a prophet to reprove him for it; who answered the pro∣phet, saving, Art thou made of the Kings Counsel▪ forbear; why shouldest thou be smit∣ten? Then the prophet forbare, and said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, be∣cause thou hast done this, and hast not harkned unto my counsel. And so it fell out within a short time after And therefore, Go to now, all ye that despise and reject the seasonable warnings of your prophets. That dae the day of your visitation, and say (with those in the prophet Isaiah) Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it; and let the counsel o the holy one of Israel draw nigh, that we may know it Ye, that walk after your own lusts; and yet are of the number of those scoffers S. Peter speaks of, saying, where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep; all things continue
as they were from the beginning of the creation. Ye, that glory in your shame, and boast of your wickedness, and say, our Tongues are our own, we are they that ought to speak; we will not subject our Consciences to any yoke. Look to it, and be assured, that there is evil before you, though you discern it not; we can see (from the sacred oracles) that four star that governs, and that sad fate that attends you, without calculating your Nativities. And (without the help of a prognostication) discern at a distance that black cloud of judgement which is ga∣thering over you, wherein the thunder and lightning of the fierce wrath of God is reser∣ved for you. And the ground of this confident assertion, we derive from that of Solomon, Pro. 29. 1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. Fourthly, This incurable evil of Incorrigi∣bleness, is ever attended with another evil as desperate and pernicious to the soul. And that is senslesness and security, especially in the time of the greatest danger. And herein ap∣pears the strength and witchcraft of Infatuati∣on, in that men are never so joly and unap∣prehensive of danger, as when they are dancing upon the very brink of the botomless pt, & (with Jona, though a rebel and a fugitive from his Lord and maker) their sleep is then soundest upon the pillow of security, when they are in the most eminent danger to be cast
away, Of such as these (doubtless) doth the Prophet Isaiah complain In that day, did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, & to mourn∣ing, and to baldness, and to girding with sack∣cloth; and behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, & drinking wine; Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dy. And it was revealed in mine ears, by the Lord of hosts, surely this inquity shal not be purged from you till you dy. That is, it shall never be purged from you, but you shall dy in it. And certainly, this cannot but be taken as an high provocation and affront to Gods ju∣stice, when not only his threatnings, but his immediate extensions are scorn'd and despised. Shall the Lyon roar, and shall not the beasts of the forrest tremble? Shall the most high God thunder out of heaven, and not sinful guilty man be afraid? Will Zimi and Cozbi be shameless at their uncleaness, just at the same time the fierce anger of the Lord breaks out against Israel, when the Congregation is weeping before the dore of the Tabernacle? Certainly, this is that madness of heart Solo∣mon speaks of, when men have no knowledge or sense of the time of their vistation, but, as the Fishes that are taken in an evil net▪ and as the birds are caught in the sare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon them. And therefore our Saviour foreseeing that his Disciples would be found sleeping even in
that very hour when he was to be betrayed, gives them a caution, which can never be un∣seasonable to any Christian. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overchar∣ged with sursetting, and drankenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you una∣wares. For, as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth. But wherefore as a snare? But because it shall surprize men when they are unprepared, and unprovided of any thing to resist the evil of that day; like an armed man, that rusheh suddenly upon a man that hath nothing in his hand to defend himself. Thus came the De∣luge upon the old world, as a snare; not but that they had an hundred and twenty yeers warning; in all which time, the Patriarck Noah was their Chaplain, a preacher of righ∣teousness unto them; but it came as a snare, because they were spirits shut up in prison (as S. Peter cals them) that is, captived and en∣snared in their own blindness and security. Would you know the time when the people of Laish were destroyed? It was then, when they dwelt caeless, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet, and secure; when there was no Magistrate in the land, that might put them to shame in any thing. Would you know the time when the Philistins received their greatest blow from the hand of Sampson? It was then, when they had eaten and drunken to the full, when their hearts were merry, then they called
for Sampson to make them sport in the house of Dagon their God; Then a sudden destruction came upon them unawares, and their sport and jollitie ended in their common ruine, would you know the Time, when the Israelites, were destroyed by the severe hand of God? It was just then, when the Quailes were between their teeth; when they were not estranged from their lust; Then the wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and so down the chosen men that were in Israel. Would you know the Time, when Ieusalem was threatnd to be searched as with candles and visited? The Prophet Zephany will resolve you; 't was, when the Inhabitants thereof were setled on their Lees, when they said in their hearts, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil. So that, if you shall demand of me▪ when the Time, or when the Day of our aviours second coming to judgement shall oe: I dare not adventure to resolve you, s some have done, from the meer Dicta of their own phrensies, and delusions; since that day and hour knoweth no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven: Bu I shall tell you when in the general; it sha be in the night, if not in the natural nighto darknesse and ob∣scurity; yet in the black nght of persecution and trouble; and it sha be in that hour of night, in which thethie useth to come, that is in the dead time of the night, when men are
fast a sleep in sin and security. It shall be in an age when Antichrist shall be revealed. When the world shall be haunted with many false Christs, and seduing spirits. When the Go. spel shall be preached to all the world, & yet so little credit shall be given unto it, that faith shall scarce be found upon the earth. It shall e in an Age, when men shall be as sensual & sinful, and as secure in those sins, as they were in Noahs time; and for this I have expresse warrant from our Saviour. But as the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be, for as in the days that were before the flood; they were eating, and drinking, marry∣ing, and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entred into the Ark; and knew not until the stood came, and took them all away; so shall  coming of the Son of man be. And if the sensual and secure oppressor would know the particular time of his visitation, I can punctu∣ally resolve him; namely, at that very time when he think h least of it; his evil day is then nearest, whn he puts it fardest from him. And for this to I have warrant out of the forecited chapter; But, and if that evil servant shall say in his hear my Lord delayeth his com∣ing, and shall begin t sinite his fellow servants, and to eat, and drink' with the drunken; the lord of that servant shal come in a day when he loaketh not for him, and in an hour he is not a∣ware of, and shall cut n asunder; and appoint him his partion with t Hyporites, &c. So
that however the Tabernacles of robbers may prosper for a time, and they tha hate God may seem secure, yet weigh their condition truly in the ballance of the Sanctuary, and you shall cleerly understand, that their pro∣sperity is their greatest cuse; and their securi∣ty their greatest Judgement. To all these, I shall add but one more sym∣ptome of the infatuated spirit; and that is, A resolution to maintain and justifie the errors and iniquities of his evil doings. And truly, as perseverance in the duties of Christian Reli∣gion, is that golden clasp that unites grace with glory; so perseverance in rebellion and wickednesse, is the very portal of hell, the nearest Border I can name to the bottomlesse pit. There is a time and state in sin, when the dregs of sin are frozen and congealed; when sin is out of measure sinful, and the sinner be∣yond measure desperate & stupid Thus when Catiline had fired the City of Rome with his horrid plots and conspiracies, he had nothing else to say for himself, but this, Incndium me∣um, ruina extinguam, I will quench the fire I have kindled, with a final ruine; or (with the help of a Poet) The ills that I have done can∣not be safe, but by attempting greater, I wil add worse unto evil, thirst unto drunkennesse, and leave the successe of my ungracious actions, to the extremest adventures. And certainly, had the Catilines and Ma∣chiavels of our age and Nation, steer'd in their
black desgns, by any other principle, but that of a necessty of defending themselves, and mainaining their own actions (how horrid and unconscionable soever) we might have seen their repentance, & our peace and agree∣ment long ere this day; But the witchcrast o Rbllion is, that it dares not look back∣ward, and knows not how to retreat from what it hath once dared to attempt. He that once draws his sword in a rebellion, is obliged (by an Infernal principle) to throw away the scabbard; for, where the doctrine of repen∣tance is admitted, the rules of policy and self preservation are presently plucked up by the roots. As I have not so little charity, as to be∣lieve these men at first intended the third part of the wickednesse which they have acted, by falling from one wickednesse to another, So I have not so much charity, as to believe they will be ever reclaimed into the duty of good subjects, but by the hand of power. And this belief of mine, takes its rise from the bold de∣fence they make, in maintaining themselves in their abominable vilanies, and the bold de∣fiance they bid the whole world to bring them unto condigne punishment. Thus have they cast behind their backs, the wholsom rules of, Religion and Conscience, steering desperately by that divellish principle, Per scelera ad sce∣lus tutum iter. Making one wickednesse, the rise, and advantage, and battery unto another, and their unblessed prosperity, an affront and
defiance to the Divine vengeance; and will rather put themselves, and the conduct of their aairs, into the hands of the Divel, then kneel either to God or the King for mercy. A man would think those Romanists in a very sad condition, who having embarqued themselves in som noorious Treason or con∣spiracy (perhaps against the See of Rome, as for other Treaon, here may be a Dispensati∣on) insomuch that they durst not trust their holy father with their confession; for if they did confesse, they were in dager to be hang∣ed; and if they confessed not (by the princi∣ples of ther own Religion) they were sure to be damned; and upon this extremity, should resolve to prosecute their wicked contrivances as far as power should enable them: In the like straights and extremities have these wretched men involved themselves (by some of their own confessons) They have waded so far in sacriledge and blood, that they know not how to retire; They dare not confesse their wickednesse unto men, for fear of the people; lest that peope which they have so long abused and ensnared, should rise up in a rage, and stone them. They dare not con∣fesse unto God, for then they are immediately obliged to lay down their Arms and to dis∣claim their error, by Repentance and Satis∣faction. So far are they removed out of the way of Repentance, that if they find any of those who have twisted with them, to repent
and abhor their former wickednesse, and to dese to redeem their former reputtions by any future services, they presently look up∣on them as delinquent, and malignants, and the most dangerous of all their enemies; like the Jewish Lawyers, They shut up the King∣dom of heaven against men; for they will nei∣ther go in themselves, nor suffer others that would go in; So these, they will neither Re∣pent themselves, nor suffer others that would repent. They have made their condition so desperate, that they dare not repent; and fol∣lowed Achitophels counsel so long in wide∣ning differences, that like Pyrats, they will chuse rather to perish at sea, then put them∣selves to account with any suspected Ptt. Nay rather then own the guilt of their own osoms (which I am sure they cannot stifle) they will lay all their wickedness upon the shoulders of their pious Soveraign, and he must be sacrificed and murdered, because their sanctity (for sooth) must not be blemished. Thus it shall cost them no more but a little breath, to Vote themselves the Saints of the Kingdom, and all men else Delinquents, but themselves and their adherents; and the Ju∣stification of their bold mischiefs (by an in∣vincible law of necessity) must be the accusa∣tion of all that oppose or dissent from them. But that which (beyond all this) adds in∣nitely to the weight of their wickednesse i this, That (notwithstanding the world
hath had sufficient Testimony of their preva∣rication with God and man, by falsifying their oaths, and several engagements, by the boldness and bloodiness of their actions, to promote the English Interest (as they call it, that is, their own) yet they think it no stale fraud, still to make Piety their pretense, and Reformation their designe; as if they aymed at nohing else, but that the Lords day may be better observed, the Gospel better planted, the Kingdom better governed. Thus with the help of their fine spun Arts and Hypocrisies, they have made Christ, and his Gospel, the Patron of all their horrid undertakings. And here, I do not so much declaim, as grieve and tremble to think, what a desperate progress these men have made toward their eternal ruine. We read of Beltashazzar, that he made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand; and not content with this vain-glorious ex∣cesse; he send (in his drunken humour) for the vessels of Gold and Silver, which Nebu∣chadnezzar his Father had taken out of the Sanctuary of God, and makes those holy Utensils, instrumental to his pride and luxu∣ry; and this was so high a provocation, that God sent a hand out of the inanimate wall, to write in his presence, his certain Doom and judgement. Is it not wickednesse enough in these men, to feast themselves wih the blood and miseries of their fellow subject, whom
they have made their slaves; To inebriate themselves with pde and power, unless they make the Sacred▪ Oracles of God instru∣mental to mainain them in their luxury? Was it not wickedness enough in cursed Je∣zabel, to dispatch Naboth for his Inheritance sake, unless she proclaim a Fast to disguise and cover that her bloody Designe? Is there not guilt enough in the murther of an incom∣parable King, in the robbing of a glorious Church, in the deliberat breaking of so many sacred Oaths and Engagements, in the ruine of so many thousand families, in the nsnaring so many thousand souls by irreligious en∣gagements, to maintain these men in their wickedness; but must all this be disguised with pretensions of piety and reformation? Can they find no other answer for themselves, when they are pressed with arguments drawn from Reason, Law, & Scripture, but must they father all their wickedness upon God himself, y deriving it from the direction of his sacred Spirit? Mst the Dove of peace and love be entitled to their  erciless & bloody executi∣ons? Must the Sprit of meekness and conde∣scertion be made the Patron of their Tyran∣nie and Ambton? The spirit that worketh sorrow and reluctancy for sin, be brought to countenance their justification and persever∣ane in sin? Oh let it never be told in Gath, nor published in the streets of Ascalon; Let ot the unbelieving Jews, nor the sons
of Mahoer, nor the Savage Indians ever come to hear, what a generation of vipers, and prodigious monsters hath been hatched, and fomented under the sunshine of the Gospel. How will our Enemies abroad reproach and Blasphem our Religion, when these shall be underood to be the fruits of it, in its (fasly pretended) puritie and Reformation? Whether that Blasphemy which the scribes that came from Ierusalem were guilty of, in attributing the dispossession of unclean spi∣rits (which they saw our Saviour did by the finger of God) to be done by Beelzebub, were specifically that irremisible Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, I will not determine. But this I will say; That to Attribute the works of the most high God, to Beelzebub; and to attribute the works of Beelzebub, to the most highGod: are Blasphemies of the same Parallel; if any thing make the difference, its the Quo animo of the iniquity. For men to say, when they have nothing else to say, (in defence of their Enormities) that what they do, they do by the dictate and direction of Gods holy spirit, is so bold and fearful a Blasphemy; that I am ready to tremble at the naming of it; But whether these pretences derive from malice, or obstinacy, or a dissembled Iustification, of what they know to be Guilt of an high nature, I cannot possibly determine. I shall from hence admire only the power, and prevalency of this charm of Infatuation; that will neither
suffer men to look upwards towards their God nor inwardly upon themselves, nor back∣wards upon their guilty actions; but hurries them on, (with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,) into a Justification of their Rebellion, against Moses, and Aaron, and God himself, so long: till they are swallowed up quick of Death & Desperaion. And therefore my advise shall be the same, that Moses gave the rest of the people that were not of that Conspiracy; Depart I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, (or touch not with them) lest yee be Consumed in their sins. And let eve∣ry man that would preserve the life of his Happinesse, in the comfort and cleernesse of his conscience, say with good old Jacob, O m soul, come not thou into their secret, mine honor, be not thou engaged, (or do not subscribe their engagement;) lest thou eate of such things as please them, and thy mind and thy Conscience be defiled, and ensnared to thine inevitable ruin. And (this I conceive) may not be pro∣pounded unseasonably unto such, as either have twisted with these men, without repen∣ting all this time, of the error of their doings; or such, as are at present their secret friends and Agents; or such as may hereafter be tempted into a Compliance, either for fear of their present power, or (which is worse) for filthy Lucre sake. And for our brethren, and friends of the
Scottish Naton; I could wish, they would se∣riously consider of this one thing. That the best way to satify the fears and jealousies, which are at present upon them, and their councel; and the best assurance they can give his Majesty of their sincerity unto him in all respects; must be taken from the sight, and the Sorrow, and the humble owning of those errors wherein they were unfortunatly engaged a∣gainst his Royal Father. I shall not hunger after any of their Confessions; whether Pu∣blike, or private; nor will I adventure to Cen∣sure their intendments. Only I hope, I may have leave to entertain some fears, that they will not set this King upon his Fathers Throne, till themselves have set themselves in the stool of repentance, on another score then what hath been lately practised in Scotland. The best way I can proound, for them to set a Crown of gold on this Kings head: is to have their hearts thoroughly pricked with those thornes they platted in his Fathers Crown; & if they are really ambitious of the honour, of restoring the rights of the Crown, and reveng∣ing the blood of their martyred Soveraign upon his cruel enemies; they need not be ashamed (in some measure) to begin with themselves. But if a professed Recantation, be too se∣vere a pennance for men that would be thought they cannot err, yet let their hearts e but affected with such a close and inward
sorrow, as that The searcher of all hearts may accept of it; and let their resolutions for the time to come be such, as that the God of Truth and mercy may blesse, and prosper them into on ample, ripe harvest of true Christian Ho∣nour; and that the world may read the disa∣vowing of their former errors, (if in no other character) yet in the sincerity and gallantry of their future actions, and atchievements. Having shewed the Nature, Causes, and Symptomes of Spiritual Infatuation; and with a faithful, and impartial hand searched this wound unto the bottom: shall I now (with the Priest and the Levite,) passe by, and leave a soul stript, and robbed, and wounded unto death, and take no care, no Compassion upon so sad a spectacle? What; Is there no Balme in Gilead, for this deadly wound? Is there no oyl of mercy, to be applyed to the obstinate and obdurate sinner? Doubtlesse, so long as there is life, there is Hope; and so long as thee is Hope, the Physitian cannot fairely desert his Patient. And because it is safer erring with too much Charity, then with too little; Because it is an inconsiderate Temerity, to confine the boundlesse Ocean of Gods mercy, to the nar∣row mouthed bottles, of our own uncertain, & fallible Conception: I shall open a door of Hope, as far as the unerring Oracles of God shall authorize me; and the first thing I shall popound to the Inatuated spirit is, That
there is a possibility of being Cured. I know well, there is a Iudcial kind of Hardnesse, when God withdrawes the sweet influence of his Grace, and delivers a man up unto himself, without ever looking more after him. That there is a sin unto Death; hat strikes the Church, with Dumbnesse, that se cannot pray for it; and strikes the Soule with Num∣nesse, that she cannot feel the comfort of Gods mercy There is a Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, that shall never be forgiven, because there shall never any place be sound for re∣pentance. But yet, though we may conclude that such a sn there is; yet we cannot without great rashnesse, and uncharitablenesse con∣clude tha This, or That man is that irreco∣verable sinner. It is (for the most part) agreed, that The sin against the Holy Ghost is a Total Apostacy from the Gospel of Christ formerly acknow∣ledged, and professed; together with a verbal Calumniating, and a real persecuting of the same; with a deliberate purpose so to conti∣nue, and persevere unto the Death, and then to passe away in that disposition. But suppo∣sing his Definition to be rightly stated; can any man say, that this mans Apostacy is To∣tal; that it is malicious; that it is Deliberate; and that it shall be final? Saint Peter was a Blasphemer, but he did not persecute the Church; Saint Paul was a Blasphemer, and a Persecuter, but he did not persevere; There
was a perhaps left for Symon Magus his re∣covery, even at the same time, when he was in the Gall of bitternesse, and in the bond of Iniquity; when his overture was so profane, and Blasphemous, that he attempted to pur∣chase the gift of the Holy Ghost with mony: Repentance, and prayer were prescribed unto him by Saint Peter. The schoolmen tell us, that there are six sins, that are dangerous In∣troductions into this irrecoverable gulf; na∣mely Presumption, and Desperation; Impeni∣tency, and Hardnesse of heart; The resisting of a Truth after Convincement; and the En∣vying Gods grace in other men. But no man can conclude a man to be Totally, and finally surprized with thee, unlesse he be perfectly acquainted with the close of his life. We read in the History of our Saviours Cures, that he cured one woman that had an issue of blood running upon her twelve yeers; another woman, whom Satan had bound, and bowed together eighteen yeers; That he cured a Cripple at the pool of Bethesda that had been there thirty and eight yeers. And if these were bodily infirmities only, and so no fit pre∣sidents, for any spiritual Cure; we read of Mary Magdalene, who had been a notorious sinner, and possessed along time by seven Di∣vels; and yet by the mercy of her Saviour, was recovered into a more Evangelical temper, then many of the Apostles themselves, as ap∣pears Luc. 7. 44. We read also of witches
that (having renounced their Baptisme, con∣tracted with the Divel, and resigned up them∣selves to his entire possession, and Command for many yeers;) have yet been recovered into the Christian faith, and a Salvable condition. That madmen should be poysoned, because Physitians know not how to cure them; That menshould take away teir lives, because God hath taken away their understanding, is a pro∣ceeding, that savours ore of Convenince, then Conscience; for this is to put no dife∣rence at all, between Christians, and Dogs, and Cats in times of Infection. I know it is impossi∣ble in nature, for a Camel to passe through the ey of a needle, and yet we read that this and all things els are posble unto God; (I say) all things, that imply not Contradiction, or repugnancy to his nature. We must grant, (saith Augustine) that God is able to do som∣thing, which we are not able to find out; in such works, the whole reason of the doing, is the power of the doer; It is God that hath done them, consider the author, and all doubts will cease. And since the scripure assures us, that neither The incestuous Corinthian for the hay∣nousnesse of his sin, nor the Theise upon the crosse, for his perseverance in sin unto the last hour, were excluded Heaven; There is little Reason, and lesse Grace, for any man to con∣clude himself Damned, on this side the grave. But let not any mn mistake me, or deceive himself, by deriving an Encouragement unto
presumption from that, which I intend only for an Antidoe against Despaire. So that, a possibility of Cure being granted, our next businesse is, to propound what is most proba∣ble, and instrumental to the same. The fat heart, (I have shewed,) is called in scripture a stony heart; if it were a brazen Heart, it might be melted; or if it were an Iron heart, it might be malleable; but the fur∣nace has no power over the stone; the Ham∣mer of Gods Iudgement is the fittest instru∣ment to deale with it. Now, as the Stone in the kidney, or the Blader, is a disease of great pain, and of no small difficulty in the Cure; so is it with that disease which Divines call the stone in the Heart, or stoninesse of heart. Some Analogie, or proportion there is in the Cure of both diseases, which may serve only to il∣lustrate one another. Two ways Physitians have found out for the Curing of the Stone in the blader, namely, either by cutting and drawing it out of the blader, which is a work of pain; or els by dis∣solving it within the blader, which is a work of Art. Two ways likewise Divines are dire∣cted, in the Cure of the Stone in the Heart, namely, to Break it, by the terrors of the Law, which is a Cure of pain; or els to Dissolve it by the mercies of the Gospel, whch is a Cure of great Art, and Excellency. And though for the most part▪ Plures sunt ques Timor Corri∣git, They are the greater number that are dri∣ven
home to God by fear: yet meliores sunt quos Amor dirrigit. They are of a better Con∣stittion that are won by Love. We read in in Scripture, of a Broken Heart, and a Burning Heart. A Broken Heart, when he watered his Couch with his Teares, when he roared day, and night for the very disquietnesse of his heart, upon the sad apprehension of Gods an∣ger, and discountenance; and a Buring Heart in the two disciples that went to Emmaus, whose hearts are said to burn withn them, whilst Iesus expounded unto them the My∣steries of their Salvation. Some mens hardnesse is like that of the flint, which is easier broken upon a Cushion, then an Anvil; But most mens hearts are like cracken bels: they must be broken all in pieces, and new cast by the Belfounder, ere ever they will be made to ring in Tune. The first potion then, I would prescribe for the recovery of an Infatuared Spirit, is an Ex∣ceeding bitter one, and yet it must be taken; what it wants in sweetnesse, it hath in Salu∣brity. It is compounded of little else but the Terros of the Law; The weight of Gods Ju∣stice; The separation of the soul from the body by the blow of Death, The Separation of both from the presence of God, by the Doom of Iudgement; and the view of those torments, which are Endlesse, Easelesse, Remedilesse. For the disease being Lethargick, and parali∣tick, (that is,) a disease that is attended with
much drousinesse, and stupidity; It is necessa∣ry the soul be first awakened to its own dan∣ger, by the smart, and anguish of some sever application. I have known a very good Phi∣sitian, that when he could not cure the palsie any other way, would cast his Patient into a Burning Fever; and then he knew what he had to do with him. It is necessary, that the whole man be distempered, and disordered; that the mind may be the better brought into an Evangelical frame and teper. Agreeable to this method, sure was S. Pe∣ters practise in the recovery of the 3000. souls we read of Act 2 41, Ye men of Israel, hear these words. Jss of Nazareth, a man approv'd of God among ou, by miracles, wonders, and signes, which Gd did by him in the middest of you as ye your selves also know; him ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain; whom God hath raised up, &c. Here was a word of no small terror, a word able to break a Jewih heart in piees; The blood of the Son of God is brought home unto them, and laid at their own doors. And see what a kind and piercing operation this bitter potion had upon their minds; it is said, when they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and they said unto Peter, and the rest of the A∣postles, Men, and Brethren, What shall we do? And what oes S. Peter prescribe unto them in such a affrighted trembling condition, whilst this Ague fit was on them? No more
but Repentance and Baptisme, and then imme∣diatly applies an Evangelical Cordial. Repent and be Baptized, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost; for the promise is unto you, and to your children, &c. Thus the converted Jay∣lour being first awakened by an Earthquake, that shook the very foundation of the prison, and being at his wits end, as well as at his swords point, upon a supposition his prisoners were escaped; he came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them out and said. Quid faciam ad Salutem? Sirs; what must I do to be saved? I refuse not to do any thing that may bring me into a Salvable Condition. Certainly, those hearts are wisely, and sea∣sonably broken; that are moulded into a pre∣sent Complyance with any thing, that may tend to their comfort, and Conversion; and the way to have a cleer, and a Saving Interest in Christ, is to see our selves irrecoverably lost without him. There are some dseases in the body, (contractd with no lesse guilt of con∣science, then blemish of reputation;) wherein the patient must be brought as low in his con∣stitution, as possibly can be, and yet Live; his spirits must be exhausted, his blood evacuated and changed, and the nearer he is brought to the gates of Death; the better hopes there is of life, and a safe recovery. And there are some diseases in the Soul, wherein the unseasonable application of Cordials strengthens the pec∣cant
humour, making it mortal, and irrecove∣rable, We read of a sort of Divels, that were not to be cast out but by prayer, and fasting. And there are sins which (for their long pos∣session in the soul,) are not to be ejected, but by strong cries, and teares, by much self de∣nyal, and great maceration of Spirit. Cordials are then seasonable, when the malignity of the disease is killed. Healing plaisters are then to be applied, when thy wound hath been throughly searched, and clensed. The Apo∣stles rule is, that the old Leven be so purged out, that the regenerate man may become a new Lump. There were some in the Prophet Jere∣mies time, that thought themselves perfectly clensed and cured, when there was no such matter; for God tels them, that though they washed themselves with nitre, and much Sope, yet their iniquity was marked out before him, Ier. 2. 22. Where let us pause a little, and enquire what these spots might be, that were so hard to be gotten out, and they are expresly set down vers. 34. In thy skirts is found the blood of the Souls of the poor Innocents, yet thou sayest, because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me. Behold I will plead with thee, because thou sayest, I have not sinned. Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? So that the Spots which nitre and much Sope will not get out are these Three (which I sha leave our Ierusalem to enquire after with
her own walls.) There is first, the deep scarlet spot of Blood-guiltiness (especially if it be Sanguis Animarum, the blood of souls that perish for want of sharp and sincere reproofs) Secondly, there is the white spot of pretended sanctity and impunity (notwithstanding all their guilt) and Thirdly, there is the change∣able spot of gadding Inconstancy; when men reel too and fro, and stagger from one extream into another, and (without fixing upon any certain principles) Act, and drive on furi∣ously (like Jehu) according as necessity or advantage shall direct them. And would you know the reason how the disease in this peo∣ple came to be thus desperate; the same Prophet will inform ye, Jer. 6. 14. They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace. They skinned the wound, without searching it to the quick, and lest the corru∣ption in the bottom, which made the wound to fester inwardly, and to grow desperate and incurable. So that, the first step to the cure of the infatuated spirit, is, to deal impartially with the disease; The best expedient to bring a man to believe and rely on Christ for life and salvation; is, to represent cleerly his condition out of Christ, to be an estate of death and damnation, And the more we are ashamed and confounded at the sight of our own ugly selves, the more amiable and acce∣ptable we shall appear in the sight of our Re∣deemer.
God hath erected two Tribunals, unto which all men living are summoned to appear, there to give an account of themselves; The one is within our own wals, (as I may so speak,) within our own Souls, and that is the Tribunal of Conscience; In which Tribunal, there is an undoubted power of acquitting, and condemn∣ing, as the Delinquent shall be found more or lesse guilty. Which I take to be very cleer from that of S. John. If our Heart Condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and knoweth all things; (that is) he knoweth more by us, then we do, or can know by our selves. But if our Heart condemn us not, then have we confidence towards God. 1 Ioh 20. 21. The other is that grand Tribunal of Iudge∣ment, whereunto all the world shall be sum∣mnd at the General Resurrection, which shal be in that place which God shall chuse for the manifestation of his mercy and Justice, upon all men according as their works shall be Now in secular and Iudicial Proceedings, for a man to have leave to make choice of his own Iudicatory, his own Iudge, his own Iury, & witnesses, is so high an Indulgence, & advan∣tage; that it cannot be expected from any earthly power; & yet the great Iudge of Heaven and Earth, men & Angels, hath given this pri∣viledge unto mn; He may take his choise whether he will be judged Here, or Hereafter: by himself, or by another; God hath made us all Chncelours n our own Causes, with
this proviso; That if we will deal truly and impartialy with our selves, that is, if we will Summon our selves to ppear before our selves, arraign our selves before the Tribunal of our own Consciences, and there Examine, Indite, convict, and condemn our selves; we shall not come into any further condemna∣tion. If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. But if we will not judge our selves, we must stand or fall accor∣ding to the Sentence of another. Most Cer∣tain it is, that we must all appear before the Iudgement seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good, or bad. S Iohn in a vision, saw the dead small and great, stand before God, and the books were opened, and another book was opened, which was the book of life, and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books. according to their works. They are Books in the plural, that shall be opened. The Book o Nature, The Book of the scripture, The Book of Conscience. And out of these books several accuons will be framed. The Divel, that Grand acuse will sand soth and plead against us, The abused Crea∣ture will accuse us of excesse, and luxurie; The souls of the holy martyrs. will  us. with oppression and blood guie, The Sacred Oracles of God will  s with infidelty, ad Contempt; and our
own guilty Consciences, instead of pleading for us, will give up a verdict against us. The only way thn to supersede the judge∣ment of that day, is, to call our selves to an account beforehand, To agree with our adver∣sary quickly, whilst we are in the way, lest we be delivered up unto the Iudge, and the Iudge send us to that prison, from whence there is no Redemption. To rile every cranny and coner of our hearts. To bring sorth our mur∣thering lusts, our bosom Traytors; and to use them as Ioshua did the five Kings that were hid in the cave of Makkedah; that is, set our feet upon their necks, and slay them in the sight of all the world. And this if we do, we shall not fail of such a part in the first Re∣surrection, as will secure us from the blow both of the second death, and second judge∣ment also. So that it is in our own choise who shall pass sentence upon us; whether our own selves, or else some other person. And what shall we be able to say for our selves, in that great and terrible day of the Lord, why the sentence of eternal death should not pass upon us, when God hath given us the space of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 years for the performance of so easie a task, so reasonable a service, and we have not done it. We see with what malicious dexterity and boldness, blood-thirsty and deceitful men manage the Tryals, and desgn the executions of persons of the highest quality and merit,
but how cold, how dull, and indisposed in enquiring after the guilt of their own wretch∣ed souls? Certainly, such men as they may be thought to be strongly infected with this disease of Infatuation; so it may be feared they are very far removed out of the way of their recovery, who have so much of other arens, so little of their own guilt before their eyes. A Cure then (ye see) there is for the Infa∣uated soul, and the first step to that Bethesda pool which cureth all diseases, is by a descent of humiliation, But do not mistake your selves, It is not every sgh, or sad look, no, nor every tear, that concludes a solid humiliation for sin. There is a great difference between an humble man, and a man that is humbled; there are many of us (God help us) that are hum∣bled, and driven into great straits and extre∣mities, persons that have lived in their own Countries with great charity and hospitality towards others, that have neither what to eat, nor wherewithal to be clothed themselves. And yet, I fear, were our purses as full of sil∣ver, as our hearts are full of sin, we should soon find the way to our former pride and luxury. Physitians are wont to cure vomiting by a vomit; and bleeding, by letting of blood; And truly, the best cure I can prescribe for all our secular sorrows; is by adding more sor∣row and compunction for our sins, then I fear resides in our dejected spirits.
I have dwelt long enough upon the severe part of the Cue; & it may be demanded of me, what? are the messages of the Gospel to be de∣livered by Boanerges, the sons of thunder? Sure, the world has ore then enow of such, that take a great deal of pains to bring men unto Hell gae, by representing unto them the hor∣rors of a damned Condition, and the ireo∣verable Estate of all the world besides them∣selves, but then their Art fails them in bring∣ing them back again; They can bring the soul into a deep dejection, but they know not how to raise it again; They are good at the Corra∣sive, but to seek in the application of the Cor∣dial. Like our Refomers in England, they are deerous in pling down, but they know not how, or what to build in the place of it. These are ignorant (if not ll natured) Physi∣tians, that please themselves with wounding, when they know not how to heal, & make work for their own mercinary and adulterate Art to practise on; shaping their Cures too often accordng to their incouragements, and though they will not sell the gifts, yet they can find a way to sell the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, for mony and advantage. Now in the Samaritans Cure of the woun∣ded man that fell among heves, as he journied from Ierusalem to Iericho, we find two ingre∣dients; wine, and oyle; not wine alone, or oyle alone, but both; first wine to search, & after∣wards oyl to supple. Thus when S. Peter sound
his auditory pricked in their hearts, he pre∣sently applies an Evangelical Cordial, and tells them, that the promise was made unto them, and unto their children, even as mny as the Lord should call. Thus S. Paul directs the Church at Corinth, to deliver up the incestu∣ous person to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh; but it was for no other end, but that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus For the Churches censure having hum∣bled him, he writes a second Epistle to the same Church, both to forgive him and to com∣fort him, lest perhaps he be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. And indeed, the more we are broken with sorrow and contrition, the more firm and com∣pacted shall we find our confidence and assu∣rance in Gods mercy. For though self-hum∣bling be the certain fruit and effect of faith; yet faith is not so clear and conspicuous, till repentance hath scoured off the rust, but lies like a coal raked up in an heap of ashes, or like fire in a flint, which is there before, but is not discernable before the stroke of the steel hath made it so. Without doubt, the light of faih burns cleerest in the dark and solitary chamber of our saddest retirement, and the be∣lieving ey hath never so cleer a prospect into heaven as when it is full of penitent tears. An instance whereof we have in the di∣stressed condition of the Church of Israel in the Prophet Miahs time; When good
men were perished out of the earth, and evil and corrupt men were multiplyed, and twist∣ed in mischievous designs, when the best man was as irksom as a briar; and she most up∣right, sharper then a thorn-hedge; when a friend might not be trusted, nor confidence re∣posed in a guide nor a secret committed to her that lay in the bosom; when the son dishonou∣red the father, & the daughter rose up against her mother, and a mans enemies were the men of his own house And yet in this dark & dismal night of affliction, see with what an humble confidence the Church addresseth her self to the strong God of her salvation. Therefore will I look unto the Lord. I will wait or the God of my salvation, my God will hear me. Rejoyce not against me, O mine nemy, when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cuse, and exe∣cute judgement for me; he will bring me forth to light, and I shall behold his righteousness. Now though in chastning, or sorrow, or what∣soever, for the present seemeth joyous, but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yeildeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them that are exercised thereby The Law (saith S. Paul) is our schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith; but after that faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. Prop▪ and Supporters we
know, are necessary in the building of an Arch, and scaffolds are necessary in the build∣ing of a Spie, but when once these fabricks are finished, these helps and advantages are laid aside; The heyr, as long as he is a childe, differeth nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all, but is under Tutors and Governours, until the time appointed of the father. But when he comes to full age, he understands his Title to his estate, and is understood to be Sui juris, at his own liberty in the disposing of it. There is a time when the Christian is dis∣charged from the Terrors of the Law, from the Bondage of sin and Satan; and restored  the glorious liberty of the sons of God. Which is nor such a liberty as our Anaba∣prists dream of, a liberty to live as they list, a liberty to deny all manner of obedience to spiritual and temporal Governours. As there is an Evangelical liberty, so there is an Evan∣gelical yoke, and no man can pretend to the one, that does not subject himself to the other. Omnia sunt libera nob is per fidem, & tamen omnibus servi sumus per charitatem; ut simul consistat servitus libertatis, & libertas servi∣tutis. The Gospel gives me an exemption from the Curse of the Law, For there is no condem∣nation to them that are in Christ Jesus, provi∣ded always, that they walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. It gives me the liberty of my person, notwithstanding all my debts, be∣cause
they have been satisfied by my surety; but then I must understand my person to be a consecrated Temple, which I may not defile or dispose of at my pleasure. It gives me liber∣ty and ree access unto my Creat, a liberty to present my suits unto him, whensoever I am in want or extremity; a liberty to serve him without the bondage of fear; but it must be according to good old Zachariahs rule in ho∣liness & righteousness all the days of my life. It gives me a liberty to ue his good creatures, (a priviledge which was lost in Adam, and is restored by Christ) but then it must be wise∣ly, soberly, justly, charitably, thankfully, and contentedly. Nay, I shall ever think it agreeable to Chri∣stian wisdom, to have my cancelled obligati∣ons still before mine eys, that I may know my greater obligatons of duty and gratitude to my Redeemer. And if from a changeling, or brat of hell, I am regenerated and formed a∣new, according to the glorious image of my maker, yet I will still have an humble ey up∣on my former ugliness and deformity; if from a crooked, bruised, and decrepid Cripple, I am restored to prfect strength and soundness, I will hang up my crutches in the Temple, not only as memorials of my gratitude, but as mo∣nitors against any future relapse. And though I know my sins are forgiven and forgottn of my Redeemer, when I have my patdon under sal; yet I will ever retain the memory of
them, to aw, and humble me into an holy fear, into a constant warines & circumspection how I becoin again entangled in those snares out of which by the mercy of God I have escaped. Thus ye see, The Law, and the Gospel, Moses and Christ, are not opposite and divi∣ded, but subordinate and serviceable one to the other. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. The Law was delivered with thunders, and light∣nings, and earthquakes: The Gospel de∣scends into the soul, lke rain into a fleece of wool; like Elijahs small still voice that suc∣ceeded the whirlwind and the earthquake; like the voice of the Turtle, and the singing of birds, after the winter is past, and the rain is over and gone. Moses takes his stand upon mount Ebal, and from thence proclaims the curses of God; Christ takes his stand upon mount Gerezim, and from thence proclaims his beatitudes, as appears, Mat 5. 3. &c▪ The first solemn sermon that ever he peached to his disciples, was a sermon of mercy. The first Text that ever he preached upon, was a Text of mercy; which he did not light upon by chance (as S. Austin did upon that of S Paul, Rom. 13. 13) but (the book of the Prophet Isaiah being delivered to him) it is said, that he opened the book, and found (that is turned to) the place where it was written, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath Anoynted me to Preach the Gospel
to the poor, he ath sent me to heale the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recoveing of sight to the blind▪ to st at li∣berty them that are bruised, to preach the ac∣ceptable yeer of the Lord And sure we that are employed as his Embassadours for peace and Reconciliation, ought to follow him in this choise; to understand it our main businesse to Heal, and to recover, and to set at liberty, and to preach the acceptable yeer of the Lord. And if at any time wee fall upon severer theames, it is but in order unto this end, which is the grand designe of our profession And therefore, if there be here any drooping or dejected Soul, that groanes and labours un∣der the weight of any burthen either of Guilt, or misery; I shall say unto that Soul, as was said to blind Bar timeus; Be of good Comfort, rise, Iesus thy Saviour calleth thee. His invita∣tion is most Gracious and Pathetical Come unto me all yee that are weary, and heavy laden and I will refresh yee. Come unto me all yee that have hitherto rejected my messages of peace and Love, minding your fames, your oxen, your wives, (that is) your pleasure, and your profit more then my seasonable invita∣tions. Yee, that have forgotten me in the day of your peace and prosperity; and denyed, and abjured me, and my Gospel in the day of your Tryal and persection Come unto me, all yee, that have wearied me with your Iniquities, & de me to serve with your sins, yee that
have peirced, and scourged, and crucified me again afresh by your backiding and impeni∣tency; yee that have so often grieved my good spirit, that would have sealed you unto the day of your Redemption. Come unto mee all yee, that have mangled and torn the seamlesse coate of my Church, to carve unto your selves your own base ends and advantages; yee that have made my house of pray'r a den of thievs, yee that have persecuted, and wounded me in my poor members; yee that have imprisoned; and impoverished my Embassadours; and de∣throned, and murthered mine own Anointed; yet come unto me however, you shall not be upbraided with the foulnesse of your sins, only come with broken hearts, with bleeding Souls, with the sighs, and groanes of Labour∣ing and heavy laden Consciences, and I will refresh you. If you shall still obscure and ju∣stify your sins, you shall not prosper; but if you shall Confesse, and for sake them you shall find mercy. Are you stung with the guilt you have Con∣tracted by your voluntary, presumptuous sins? Behold, I am that brazen Serpent that healeth all that look up unto me. He that believeth in me, shall not perish; but have life everlasting. Are your souls full of Leprosy, and uncleaness? your vital spirits surprized by the plague of the Heart? your Consciences stabbed to death, by your own deliberate wounds? Behold, I am that Lamb of God that taketh away the
sins of the world. My blood is that fountain which was opened purposly for sin, and for uncleanesse; That Bethesda pool that cureth all diseaes whatsoever. Are your hearts as hard as the nether milstone, or as the Ada∣mant? It is said that the Adamant it self is broken th goates blood, Behold I am that Scape Goate, that ear on my head alone the iniquites and transgressions of the whole world. I never did reject any that came to be healed of their bodily infirmities; and I never will reject any that shall come to me for any Spiritual Cure. But the wounded spirit will perhaps re∣ply, Tistrue, I know, I am fairely Invited by my Saviour, but with this proviso, that I bring a true saith, a sincere repentance along with me; And these jewels are not lodged within my Cabinet; These flowers grow not within the garden of my Soul. I desire to repent with all my heart, but I cannot; and I would gladly believe, but I find I am not able. Well; however be not discouraged. There is some life even in this deadnesse of spirit; There is some secret sparke of Grace even in this smoaking flaxe, which hath a promise it shall not be quenched. He that hath promised to accept of a willing mind according to what a man hath, and not according to what he hath not; will entertain and reward even a cup of cold water given in the name of a disci∣ple He that had respect unto the short prayer
of the poor dejected Publican, will have re∣spect ao unto thee, if thou be but as humble as that Publican. He that raiseth in the Soul a blessed hunger and thirst after righteousness, hath also  sed, that Hunger and Thirst shal not be , but that he will give to him that is a thirst, to drink of the water of life freely. He that gveth both to will, and to perform, according to his own good pleasure; will in his own good time, fulfil the desire of those that fear him. So that let this be layd for a solid ground, and foundation of Chri∣stian Comfort: That the Desire of mercy, in the want of mercy, is a real mercy, and the de∣sire of Grace, in the want of Grace, is Grace it self. And if thou do not quench these inchoa∣tions of Grace, and obstruct its operation, and progresse; whensoever the spirit of God shall blow upon these little sparks, thou shalt find them grow and increase into a Coale, into a flame, enough to chear and warm the soul with Celestial Comfort. Hence it is that the Kingdom of God is compaed to a grain of mustard seed, which is reputed to be one of the least of all seeds, and yet the Kingdom of God is entirely contained in this single Grain. Hence it is that Grace is compared to a little leven in three masures of meal, which in time will leven the whole lump There is a time when Holy purposes are taken and accepted for good performan∣ces; I wll go unto my father saith the prodi∣gal;
and behold his father comes out to meet his son, I said, I will confesse my sin unto the Lord, (said David,) and so thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. And the same good▪ King did but purpose in his heart to build God an House; and it was accepted as well as if it had been done; and in acknowledgement here∣of God promised to establish his house, and his Kingdom upon his posterity for ever. God accepts of such payment as we are able to make, though it be in small pieces, or perhaps in coyn that is cracked, or clipped, and wants its full weight; yet if it be not false and coun∣terfeit, it shall not be turned back upon us. And truly, he that grieves, and bemoanes himself because he cannot grieve for his sins, or because he cannot grieve so much as he dsires; is in a Certain way unto that repen∣tnce, which is never to be repented of. Nay; give me leave to go one degree far∣ther. Doest thou find thy soul ensnared with the Cords, and Customes of thine own twi∣sting, or art thou so much a stranger to thy self, that thou darest not look into thy dange∣rous and suspected Condition? doest thou feel the throbs and horrors of a wounded Con∣science, the pangs of Hell and Despair grow∣ing upon thy Soul? yet give me leave to aske thee this one Question Doest thou notwith∣standing thy present fear, and horror, Love thy Lord and maker? or if thou canst not cleerly reply to that; Canst thou but resolve me of
thy Love to thy neighbour, not because he is thy neighbour, or thy friend, or perhaps thy Companion in evil wayes; but because he is a Christian, a Child of God, a member of Christ, one that makes Conscience of his wayes? Doest thou love him for the pious and gra∣cious Enclinations thou findest in him? if thou doest; Be of good Comfort. Here is a Comfor∣table testimony, that God hath set his Love upon thee; though thou discern it not. Hereby (saith S. John,) do we know, that we are tran∣slated from death to life; because we love the Brethren. Where, Love is not the cause, but the Evidence, and reflection of Gods favour, and Benignity towards us. And Certainly this tribute of Love whe∣ther it be to God, or our neighbour, is but Leve onus facile jugum. There is nothing more easie then Love; nothing more acceptable then love; nothing more ample & difusive, in its di∣lating and spreading Quality then Love. It wil obscure and hide, a multitude of sins, from the severe wrath of God. It is the fulfilling of the Law. It beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, Endureth all things. It hath a flame that neither men nor Divels: nei∣ther Sin, nor Death, is able to extinguish. A wicked world may strip me of my Estate; Im∣prison, & Confine my person; Take away my Life; It cannot take away my Love. Without Love, were I furnished with Angelical know∣ledge, and expression; Had I faith enough
to remove mountaines, & Compassion enough to sell all I had to feed the poor, and Con∣stancy enough to endure the flames of Mar∣tyrdome▪ yet without Love, all this would pro∣fit me nothing. Nay; when other Graces shall expire, and be no longer serviceable unto me; my Love, shall last and abide wth me for ever. For when my saith shall be resolved into vision; my Hope into fruition; my Love shall follow me beyond the gates of Death, and be my Companion unto all Eternity. So that Love being the pulse that repre∣sent us spiritually alive or dead; The Crisis, that determines of our diseases, whether they be Curable or not; let us ever have a wary eye upon all such things, as eject and destroy Love, and therefore (as grievances unto the Holy spirit of Love) Let all bitternesse, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speak∣ing be put away with all malice. Eph. 4. 31. For sins of Ignorance, or sins of Infirmity, a pardon of Course may be easily obtained from the Throne of mercy; but for sins of malice and perversnesse, mercy is restrained, and shut up; God will not e mercifull unto such as ofend of malicious wickednesse. He that will not pay so easie a Tribute as that of Love, is an irrecoverable rebel, and not fit to be owned for a subject of Christs King∣dom. Secondly, whilst the soul is upon its reco∣very from a disease of Senslesnesse, and stupi∣dity;
let us ever have an especial care to a∣void those sins which do Devastare Conscien∣tiam, demolish, dismante, and make Shipwrack of Conscience. For Conscience is both the eye and the Awe of the Soul, the Monitor in the School of the inward man, the Superintendent, or supervisor of thoughts, words, and actions, without which the Soul is like a Ship with∣out its Rudder, that cannot put to Sea with∣out ineviable losse and hazard; Great sins (like Davids murther, and Adultery) cast a man into a deep sleep, or rather into a Swoon; They deprive a man of all sense and motion. There is nothing so penicious as a Relapse, to a mn that is in a hopeful way of recovery. Thirdly, being recovered into some reaso∣nable degree of Health and strength; Let us be sure to have a constnt recourse & appli∣cation to those meanes of Grace, whereby the inward man receives his dayly growth, and nourishment. We read Mark. 5. That when our Saviour had recovered the ruler of the Synagogues daughter from death to Life he Commanded that somthing should be given her to eate. Sure I am, he oul that is once recove∣red from the death of sin to the life of Grace, hath great need of Spiritual nourishment of Sermos, and Sacraments, of Ministerial Aso∣lution, and all Evangelical hepes, and com∣forts, that may promote the assurance o our Election, and may enable us to work out our Salvation with fear and Trembling.
Lastly. To these, give me leave to recom∣mend to your Care and practise, those grand helpes, ad assistances of Prayer, and Almes giving, which are as the props and buttresses whereon the Soul stands firme and unshaken, in the day of her visitation. It is said of Za∣cheus the Publican, that he stood forth, and said unto Christ, Behold Lord, the halfe of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man, by false accusation; I restore him soure fold A resolution (doublesse) of one that had entertained Christ in his Heart, as well as in his House. And upon the growth of the Gospel in the Apostles Times, we read of divers which formerly used Curious Arts, that brought their books together, and burned them before all men, to the value of fifty thousand pieces of Silver, When the Artists of this jugling Age will diclaime before all men, the Curious and fine spun Arts they have used for the gaining of their ends, and advantages; I know not. Or when the Pu∣blicans and notorious Sinners of our Nation, will have so much Charity, as to give the halfe of their goods, to those poor which themselves have made; or so much Honesty to restore in any proportion, what they have taken from their brethren by false acousation, I cannot say. Sure I am, a day will come, when they shall not carry all things by vo∣ting, as they please; when all their usurped power and greatnesse, will but encrease the
stink and nastinesse of their unsavory Me∣mory; when the Spirits which these Chymists have extracted from Sacriledge, Rapine, and Innocent blood; will serve only to put them into a Condition to be more Capable, and sensible of Torment. In the prevention of which all that can be done by them, or further advised by me is but this. That they would seasonably entertain that councel which the prophet Daniel gave to King Nebuchadnez∣zar, when a judgement was gone out against him, namely, To break of their sins by right∣eousnesse, and their Iniquities, by shewing mercy to the poor. That they would according to our Saviours advice, make themselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousnesse. That they would not think it a piece of Popery, to de∣monstrate their Repentance, by Restitution, and Satisfaction, as farre as may be. And if a Compensation cannot be made in Specie, as to particular injuries, and oppressions; yet they have an object large enough if they please to look upon it; Indeed, I know not well how they should be able to look of it. Sure they cannot but understand, their bre∣thren whom they have driven into exilement and extremities abroad, are ready to starve in the streets of strangers. They cannot remove themselves (I me sure) from the Cries and Complaints of the fatherlesse and widdow at home; The Sorrowful sighing of poor prisoners cannot but come before them. And
if all these could he obscured; yet I shall de∣sire them to believe; That I do not remember them of these objects, and inducements unto Charity, out of any other respect, more then out of pitty, and Charity to their immortal Souls. Let them therefore render unto Cesar, the things that are Cesars; and unto God, the things that are Gods; and unto themselves and their own Conscences, the Care that belongs to their eterna peservaton. I shall Close up this discourse with the ob∣servation of a Command which I find in the Levitical law. And it is th Whatsoever un∣cleanesse it be that a man is defiled withal, and it be hid from him when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty. Or if a soul swear, pronoun∣cing with his lips to do evil, or to do good; whatsoever it be that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of , thn he shall be guilty in one of these. And it shall be when he shall be guilty in one of the things, that he shall Confesse that he hath sinned in that thing. What pollution, and defilement of mi and Conscience, the world is guilty  in its present General Defection from the Gospel, or how far, mens souls are ained with this Dia of spiriual Infatua∣tion. I know ▪ What Othes and engage∣nts, n ha ke  God, and their King, and ith  Conscience and Intgrity, they have  shall  all men to know from themselves, into whose ans thse
papers of mine shall come. Is this Treatise (by the good blessing of God,) shall be so fortunate, as to shew unto any the errors, and iniquities of their Blind and Bedlam wayes: I shall humbly and earnestly desire, that I may reape the benefit of their prayers, and God the Honour of their Conversion. FINIS. Soli Deo Gloria.
