V446C R43945 42476394 151431
The only DELIVERER FROM Wrath to Come: OR, The Way to escape the horrible and Eternal Burnings of HELL. By Thomas Vincent, Sometime Minister of Maudlins Milk-street, London. LONDON, Printed for George Calvert, and Samuel Sprint, and are to be Sold at the Golden Ball in Duck-lane. 1671.
1 Thes. 1. Part of the 10th. Vers. Even Jesus which delivered us from the Wrath to Come. PAst pains may easily be forgotten, future pains are not easily believed, present pains in ex∣tremity are so grievous and afflictive, that all the Wealth and Honour in the World cannot countervail them; and O how welcome is such a Physitian, who can give ease and remove them! But did people believingly apprehend what horrible pains and torments the wicked must endure, in the un∣quenchable Flames of Hell-fire, where they can have no ease, and their misery shall have no end; did they apprehend how fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the Living God, and to be swallowed up by his Wrath, which hath all such, who are out of Christ, in the pursuit; and which will certainly come, and may quickly seize upon them, surely they would use their uttermost diligence now to escape, surely they would with the greatest inquisitiveness seek out now for a place of refuge, from the fiery Tempest of Gods Vengeance; and this Text which maketh a discovery of the only Deliverer from the Wrath to Come, would found with most transcendent sweet∣ness in their ears, and the glad tidings thereof, con∣cerning what Jesus hath done for his People, would above all things be most welcome unto their Hearts. Even Jesus who delivered us from the Wrath to Come.
In the former Verse, the Apostle tells the Thessa∣lonians what manner of entrance he had at first a∣mongst them, and what the great effect of his Ministry was upon them; namely, that they were converted thereby; which conversion of their's he sets forth: First, By the nature of it, they were turned from dead Idols, the lying Vanities which they worship∣ped and served before, unto the Living and true God to worship and serve him. Secondly, By the consequent of it, which was their waiting for the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ from Heaven; and he shows 1. The evidence of this second coming, that it will certainly be namely Gods raising him from the dead, and receiving him to Heaven. 2. The ground of their Hope and comfortable expectation, and waiting for this coming in the Text, because this Jesus had delivered them from the Wrath to come. The wicked (if awakened) do look for Christ's second coming with dread and fear∣full expectation, because of the wrath which he will bring with him, because he will come in flaming fire to take vengeance upon them; the righteous (if assured of their interst in Christ) do look for Christ's second coming with gladness and joyful expectation, because he hath delivered them from the wrath to come. E∣ven Jesus who hath delivered us from the wrath to come. This Doctrine then is plain in the words. Doct. That it is Jesus who doth deliver from the Wrath to come. In handling of which point I shall show, First, What this wrath is which is to come.
Secondly, That this wrath is to come. Thirdly, Upon whom this wrath is to come. Fourthly, When this wrath will come. Fifthly, Who this Jesus is that doth deliver from wrath to come. Sixthly, How Jesus doth deliver from wrath to come. Seventhly, How any do or may have a share in this deliverance by Jesus from wrath to come. Eighthly, Make some use and application. First; What this Wrath is which is to come; It is not the finite wrath of the most furious and feirce Creatures, not the wrath of Lions, or Bears, or Ti∣gers, or evening Wolves, or wild Bulls; nor the wrath of the most Potent and Tyrannical men, who may exceed all these in feirceness and cruelty; nei∣ther is it the wrath of the Devil, whose wrath is great here on Earth, when let loose to tempt and deceive, but most furiously will it express it self hereafter in Hell, when he is let loose as Gods Exe∣cutioner to torment the wicked: But by the wrath to come, we are to understand the Infinite wrath of the Sin-revenging God, in comparison with which the wrath of all other Creatures in the World is mildness, and not in the least to be regarded. We read in the Scripture of the Wine of God's wrath, Rev. 14. 10, That this Wine is Red, Psal. 75. 8. We read of the Viols of Gods wrath, Rev. 16. 1. Of the Cup of Gods wrath, Rev. 14. 10. Of the Wine-press of Gods wrath, Rev. 14. 19. We read of the Treasures of God's wrath, Rom. 2. 5. Of the Vesels of Gods wrath, Rom. 9. 22. By the Wine of God's wrath, we are to understand those plagues and punishments which God doth and will
inflict upon the wicked for their sins: By the Red∣ness of the Wine is meant the dreadfulness of those plagues; By the viols of Gods wrath, some smaller plagues and temporal punishment on Earth; By the the Cup of Gods wrath, especially the dregs and bottom of it, the greater plagues and eternal punish∣ment of Hell; By the Wine-press of Gods wrath, we are to understand the place where the wicked shall be punished; By the Treasures of Gods wrath the abun∣dance of Plagues; By the Vessels of wrath, the damned who are appointed to undergo these plagues and tor∣ments; these Vessels God will fill with the Treasures of his wrath, he will fill them to the Brim in Hell with most exquisite torments; And this is the wrath which is to come, which will be most bitter beyond any gall or Worm-wood unto the tast; which will be most pure without any allay or mixture of any comforta∣ble ingredients; which will be most plentiful, the Treasures of which will be opened in Hell, and all the damned be filled with it abundantly; which will be most weighty beyond any Mountain of Lead, to sink Sinners down into the bottemless pit; which will be most feirce, and withal so powerful, that all the powers of Men and Devils shall not be able to make the least resistance; which will be intollerable and yet must be bourn; which will be unplacable, so as never to be appeased, and which will be eter∣nal, so as never to be ended. Plainly the wrath to come, is of the same significa∣tion as the punishment of Hell, the great effect of the wrath of God; which punishment hath two parts, the Paena damni, and the Paena sensus, the punish∣ment of losse, and the punishment of sense. 1. The punishment of losse, this will consist in
the losse of the Crown and Glory, and happiness of Heaven, where the righteous shall be admitted to the immediate Vision, and full fruition of God the chiefe good, which will fill them with Soul-ravish∣ing unconceivable and eternal joy; but from whence all the wicked shall be eternally shut out, and wholly be denied any share in the least of that happiness, which when they come to understand the worth and excellency of, will above all things be most vexatious unto them. 2. The punishment of sense, this will consist in the horrible pains and tortures, which shall in extre∣mity be inflicted upon every part of the bodies of all the wicked, by the most dreadful and unquenchable Fire, which they shall be thrown into; and the more horrible anguish, which through the immediate im∣impressions of Gods wrath, shall be inflicted upon every faculty of their souls in Hell, where they shall have no ease nor release for ever, Matth. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepa∣red for the Devill and his Angels, Rev. 14. 10, 11. The same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his indignation, and shall be tormented with Fire and Brim∣stone in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in the pre∣sence of the Lamb: And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever, and they have no rest Day nor Night, &c. See more of this in my Book of Christ's certain and sudden Appearance to Judgement, and in my Book of Fire and Brimstone, &c. Secondly, That this Wrath of God is to come, this im∣plyseth two things: 1. That this Wrath is not yet come 2. That it will certainly come.
1. This wrath of God is not yet come; were it come, who could stand before it? who could deliver from it? where it seiseth it crusheth, it burneth, and that worse than any fire; where it seiseth it holds, and never letteth go it's hold for ever; but as yet this is not come, some sparks of this fire may be let fall in temporal judgements upon sinners in this life, but what are temporal judgements in com∣parison with eternal? In this world God doth ex∣ercise his patience towards the wicked, he is angry with them, and his anger doth smoke against them, but he with-holds his wrath from breaking forth into a flame, which would quickly devour all the wicked of the Earth together, should he give way to it, and let it loose upon them: Indeed we read John 3. 36. That the wrath of God abideth upon unbelievers, that is, it shall abide upon them, who at last are found in a state of unbelief, as surely as if it did already abide upon them; or the wrath of God abideth up∣on unbelievers, that is the sentence of condemnation unto this wrath doth abide upon them, as John 3. 18. He that believeth not is condemned already. In∣deed it is said of the persecuting Jews, who had kil∣led the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and for∣bidden the Apostles to Preach unto the Gentils, that the wrath was come upon them to the uttermost, 1 Thes. 2. 15, 16. But this we are thus to understand: that the wrath of God was come upon them to the utter∣most, not in regard of eternal judgements, but in regard of spiritual judgements, it being the utter∣most expression of God's Wrath, here to give sinners up unto a persecuting spirit, which doth prepare them for the uttermost and most dreadful punish∣ment of Hell hereafter. But as yet the wrath of God
is not come, none in this world do or can know the power of God's anger. 2. The wrath of God is to come, that is, it will certainly come, there are some things which may come, such and such temporal judgements may come, such and such deliverances may come; but there are some things which will come, Death will come, and Christ will come, and as certainly as Death and Christ will come, so certainly this wrath of God will come; God hath foretold it, and Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot or tittle of what God hath foretold until it be fulfilled: God hath threatned it, and God is not more faithful in his promises to his people, than he is true in his threatnings to his enemies. God's justice doth en∣gage him to send it, which can be satisfyed no other way, by those which have no interest in the satisfa∣ction of Christ. The wicked are Vessels fitted by sin for destruction, and prepared for wrath, and therefore they shall be filled with it, even as the Ves∣sels of Mercy are fitted, and shall be filled with glo∣ry: God hath Treasured up wrath for the wicked, as they have Treasured up Sin, and God will give them that which they have so much deserved, and he hath prepared for them. However Sinners may escape this wrath for a while, and vainly hope to flee or hid themselves from the strokes of Gods vengeance, yet Gods Right hand will find out all those that hate him, and he will make them as a fiery Oven in the time of his anger, and swallow them up in his wrath, and devour them with the fire of his indignation, Psal. 21. 8, 9. Thirdly, Ʋpon whom will this wrah of God come? 1. This wrath of God will come upon all the chil∣dren
of disobedience, see Col. 3. 5, 6. Mortifie there∣fore your members, which are upon the Earth, Fornica∣tion, Ʋncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupi∣scense, and covetousness, which is Idolatry: for which things sake the wrath of God cometh on the children of disobedience. Such are children of disobedience, who are disobedient children, such who do nor yield obe∣dience unto the Law of God, but live and allow themselves in the practice of known sins, and in the neglect of known duties; such who are under the reigning power of sin, who are willing servants of sin, who yeild up their members as Instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, as Rom. 6. 13. Who serve divers lusts, Tit. 3. 3. Who make provision for the Flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof, Rom. 13. 14. Such who are Blasphemers, or Swearers, or Sabbath-brea∣kers, or Murderers, or Adulterers, or Drunkards, or Thieves, or Covetous, or Unrighteous, or Extor∣tioners, or Revilers, or Scoffers at Religion, or Per∣secutors of Gods people, or have an enmity to the power of Godliness; such as are Proud and Boasters, such as are disobedient to Parents without natural affection, such as are lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, such as are Lyars and unfaithful, such as are idle and slothful, such as live in envy and ma∣lice, and are given to revenge, and cannot forgive injuries, and the like sinners, these are Children of disobedience upon whom the wrath of God will come; see also Ephes. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience. Let none deceive you with vain words, neither deceive your selves with vain thoughts, as if you might escape the wrath of God, although you live in the practice
of such and such sins, see how vain and groundless the security of such persons is, Deut. 28. 19, 20. Lest there be among you a root that beareth Gall and Worm-wood; and it come to pass when he heareth the Words of this curse, that he blesseth himself in his heart: saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagina∣tion of my heart, to add Drunkenness to thirst: The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousie shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this Book shall lye upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under Heaven: Moreover we read, Gal. 3. 13. Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them. Such as are guilty of any transgression of the Law, (whilst out of Christ) are under the curse, and lyable unto Gods Wrath, and it is said, Heb. 3. 2. That every transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of reward. Hence it is that the children of disobe∣dience are called children of Wrath, Eph. 2. 2, 3. 2. The wrath of God will come upon all Hypo∣crites, it is more peculiarly appropriated unto them as their portion, Matth. 24. 51. He shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Who∣ever escape Gods wrath, hypocrites shall not escape, whoever are pardoned hypocrites shall be punished; such as have a form of Godliness, but deny the power thereof; such as make some show of outward reformation, but are without inward transforma∣tion, such as are like Painted Sepulchres, fair and beautiful without, but within full of rottenness; such who make it their great business to appear Re∣ligious, and take no care to be Religious, but are
rotten at heart and cover carnal designs with a cloke of profession; as their sin is most offensive unto God here, so his wrath will certainly come upon them, with the greatest severity hereafter. 3. The wrath of God will come upon all impeni∣tent and unbelieving persons, Luke 13. 3. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish, Mark. 16. 16. He that believeth not shall be damned, Repentance and Faith are two great duties of the Gospel, and wrath is particularly threatned to such as do not obey the Gospel: to such God will render indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, Rom. 2. 8, 9. And Christ will come in flaming Fire, to take vengeance upon them, 2 Thess. 1. 8. Such as are impenitent and unbelievers, neglect the Salvation of the Gospel which by Faith in Christ alone is attainable, and sin∣ning against the only remedy, they cannot escape, Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation. Fourthly, When this wrath of God will come. 1. The wrath of God will come in part upon the wicked immediately, after the separation of their Soul from the Body, the souls of the wicked assoon as they are loosned by death from the ruinous Habi∣tation of their bodies, they presently appear before God, and are condemned to Hell, and dragd by the Devil the Jaylor into that Prison, where they are bound in Chains of Darkness, filled with horrour and anguish, until the day of eternal Judgement. The Scripture tells us of disobedient Spirits thrown into Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. 2. The Wrath of God will come in full upon all the wicked together at the last day, called the day of Judgement and Perdition of the Ungodly, 2 Pet. 3.
7. When the Lord Jesus shall come to Judge the World, he will bring the Treasures of Gods wrath with him, and render unto all the wicked that wrath and vengeance which is their due, and therefore this day is called The day of Wrath and Revelation of the Righteous Judgement of God, Rom. 2. 5. This will be a dreadful day unto the wicked, when the Hea∣vens shall pass away with a great noise, and like a Stoll be rolled together, and the Elements shall melt with frevent heat and be dissolved; when the Sun shall become black as Sack-cloth of Hair, and the Moon become like Blood, when the powers of Hea∣ven shall be shaken, and the Stars shall fall from Heaven unto the Earth like Figgs from their Tree, when it is shaken with a mighty Wind; when there shall be Thunderings exceeding loud, and Lightnings and Tempest exceeding horrid, when the last Trumpet shall sound, and a mighty shout shall come down from above, and awaken all the Sinners that are asleep in the dust; when Christ the great Judge of the World shall come forth from his Fathers house, and make his appearance in the World with Millions of mighty Angels, and all the Saints at his right hand, clothed with Majesty and brightness of Glory; and when the wicked shall come forth of their Graves, and so soon as they shall open their eyes, shall see Heaven and Earth on Fire about their Ears, and the Lord Jesus coming towards them in flaming Fire to take vengeance upon them; so soon as they open their ears, shall hear the dreadful Trum∣pet and Shout in the Air, and the Howlings and La∣mentations of all their fellow Sinners about them upon the Earth, O the dread and confusion which the wicked then shall be filled with! when they are
summoned and dragged to the Tribunal Seat of Christ, and there have the Books opened before them, where all their fins are written, and which then will be made manifest unto the whole World, and when the Sentence Depart ye cursed into everlasting Fire, shall be passed upon them, and when the Lord shall open the Treasures of Wrath unto them, and give them that portion thereof which is their due; and when they shall see the mouth of Hell open beneath them, and an horrible flame issuing forth from thence, giving notice of a more horrible fire within, which is prepared for them; O the dread! O the shreeks! Who can dwell with such devouring Fire? Who can inhabit such everlasting burnings? How welcome would a great Rock or Mountain be, if they could find any that would fall upon them, and hid them from the wrath of the Lamb, and keep off the strokes of Gods vengeance, which then will be inflicted up∣on them? but the Sentence being pronounced, the Execution will follow, and none can escape it; from Christ's tribunal Seat the wicked will be rhrown into the fiery Prison of Hell, where they will be shut down, and shut in, and that for ever; there they will lye, there they will fry, and there they will cry, and though always dying, yet they will never dye; the fire there will burn most dreadfully and conti∣nually, and never be extinguished; and the wicked will be tormented there in every part and in extre∣mity, and their torment will never be ended. Fifthly, Who this Jesus is, that doth deliver from Wrath to come? In the Text he is called Jesus, and the reason of this name we shall find, Matth. 1. 21. Thou shalt call his Name Jesus, for he shall Save his People from their Sins. This Jesus is
God and Man in one Person; he is the Eternal Son of God of the same Essence with the Father, equal to him in Power and Glory, who before the world, was appointed in time to be the Redeemer of Man∣kind, and when the fulness of time was come, took to himself a true humane Body and Soul, was con∣ceived by the Holy Ghost, was Born of a mean Virgin, lived in a mean condition, was owned by a voice from Heaven to be the only begotten and beloved Son of God, who Preached the glad tidings of Salvation to Sinners, confirmed his Doctrine by many Miracles; who died for the Salvation of sin∣ners, and that the cursed death of the Cross, was raised up the third day, appeared to his Disciples after his Resurrection, and after forty day in the sight of many Ascended up into Heaven, where now he is at the Right Hand of God, making Intercession for us. Sixthly. How doth Jesus deliver from the Wrath of God which is to come? Jesus doth deliver from the wrath of God which is to come. 1. By his Death, hereby he hath purchased deli∣verance, having hereby satisfied Gods Justice; Jesus in his death did in our stead undergo that punishment which our sins deserved, his Body was nailed to the Cross, which was a cursed death, and his Soul was afflicted with the immediate impressions of Gods wrath, which was so weighty and grievous, that any meer creature would have sunk under it; but he being God-Man did bear up and break thorow, and got loose from under the burden of wrath, and the bands of death, and the dignity of his person put a merit upon his sufferings, especially the erernal compact or aggreement between him and his Father
being such, and so became a sufficient satisfaction to Justice, and that accepted as fully as if sinners had done it in their own persons. We read that Jesus himself bare our sins in his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. That he gave his life a ransom for many, Mat. 20. 28. That we are Redeemed with his Blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. That we are Reconciled through his Death, Rom. 5. 10. Jesus doth deliver from wrath by his death, having therein undergone it himself in the room of his People. 2. By his Intercession Christ doth deliver from wrath to come; having offered up himself a Sacrifice to satisfie Divine Justice for sin, he pleads the merit of it at the right hand of God, in the behalf of sin∣ners for their Redemption; he is called not only our Surety to satisfie for us, Heb. 7. 22. But also our Advocate to Plead for us, 1 John 2. 1. Our delive∣rance from Wrath to come, the damnation and pu∣nishment of Hell doth proceed not onely from Christ's death, whereby he hath purchased it, but al∣so from his Intercession, whereby he doth effectual∣ly impetrate and obtain it; and therefore the Apo∣stle doth join both together in the procurement of freedom from condemnation. Rom. 8. 34. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea, rather is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh incercession for us. And upon this account he is said to be able to Save unto the utter∣most, Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able to Save them to the uttermost; that to come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them. 3. By his Mission, or sending of his Spirit effectu∣ally to call People to himself Jesus doth bring them into a state of Salvation, and giveth them an actual
Interest in this deliverance, which he hath purchased for them, and this leads to the next particular, Seventhly, How any do or may have a share in this de∣liverance by Jesus, from wrath to come? this is by faith in Jesus Christ, which is wrought by his Spirit in effectual calling. When the Lord by his Spirit doth open the eyes of Sinners, and convinceth them of the guilt and evil of their sins; awakeneth their conscience, and worketh contrition, and a sense of their misery and danger; and when the Lord show∣eth and perswadeth them, how utterly unable they are to Save themselves, that no reformation or righ∣teousness of their own, which either they have or can attain unto, can procure deliverance from wrath for them; and withal, that no meer Creature in the World is able to help them in this case; and when the Lord by his Spirit doth discover himself, as the only Saviour and All-sufficient, and most willing to save and deliver them, and withal doth most power∣fully and irresistably, and yet most sweetly how their wills, and encline them to chuse him for their Savi∣our, and (grieving for sin and renouncing their own righteousness) to call themselves, and rest upon him alone for Salvation, and this accompained with a free, and resolved delivering themselves up to his Teaching and Government; this is effectual calling, wherein the Lord by his Spirit doth draw, and lay hold on Sinners, and enableth them by faith to lay hold on him, and hence ariseth their union to, and Interest in Christ, and they come to have a share in the deliverance by Christ from wrath to come. When the Jaylor cryed out with trembling to Paul and Silas; Sirs, what must I do to be saved; the di∣rection is, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be
Saved, Act. 16. 30, 31. It is Faith that giveth an Interest in Christ, and hereby an Interest in the de∣liverance, which he hath purchased. It is Faith doth unite us unto Christ, whereby we are said to be in him, and there is no condemnation to them, which are in Christ Jesus, Rom. 8. 1. We are justi∣fied by Faith, Rom. 5. 1, And so are absolved from the guilt of Sin, and all obligation unto punish∣ment; The Lord Jesus Christ having fully satisfied Gods justice for our sins by his death in our stead, and this being imputed unto us through Faith, and accounted as if we had done it our selves, (as a sure∣ty's paying our Debt, is accounted by the Creditor as if we had paid it,) we are acquitted, and no more exposed unto the wrath of God, and punishment of Hell, than if we had never committed any one sin to deserve it. Use 1. For Information. 1. See here the worth of Jesus, he is the Deliverer, and the only Deliverer from wrath to come; Jesus Christ is a person of the greatest worth in himself; the Divine and Humane Nature, being united in him, rendereth him infinitely glorious, altogether lovely, and hence it is that he is replinished with such transcendent excellencies and perfections, as are not to be found again in any. Creature, either in Earth or Heaven; and Jesus Christ is esteemed to be the most worthy person, by those that know him and understand what real worth is; especially, sin∣ners when awakened, and made sensible of the curse which lyeth upon them for sin, and the wrath of God which hangeth over them, and when they come to apprehend how fearful a thing it is to fall
under the strokes of Gods vengeance, and see no way of escape, but only by Jesus, the only Deliverer from future wrath, of all persons and things in the World, Jesus Christ is most precious unto them; never did there appear in the world a person of such high dignity, of such admirable beauty, and such wonderful Love as the Lord Jesus Christ, who came down from the Father, and clothed himself with our nature, for this end, that he might become our Savi∣our and Redeemer, our Surety and Advocat, and that he might deliver us from wrath to come. 2. See here the value of Christ's Death; without shedding of Blood there is no Remission, Heb. 9. 22. And if no remission, then no deliverance from wrath to come, if guilt doth remain, punishment will ensue, and that of God's eternal wrath in Hell; It was not the blood of Bulls and Goats, Sacrificed under the Law that could remove guilt, and procure remission of Sin. Heb. 10. 4. For it is not possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sin. But it was through Christ's Sacrifice of himself once for all, and shedding of his blood upon the Cross, that Remissi∣on of sins, and by consequence this deliverance from wrath to come was purchased; It was not thou∣sands of Rams, or ten thousand rivers of Oil, or all the Treasures of the Earth, that could have procu∣red remission of Sin, because all this would have been no satisfaction unto Gods Justice; but the Blood of Jesus, who is God-man, hath satisfied Gods Justice, by his death, Christ hath paid the full price, which was due for sin, surely then his death is of greater value, than the riches (were there so many) of ten thousand worlds. 3. Here see the excellency of Faith, we read in the
first Epistle of Peter, of a precious Christ, Chap. 2. 7. And of Christ's precious Blood, Chap. 1. 19. And of precious Faith also, Chap. 1. 7. Of all other graces, Faith is called precious, and it hath above other graces a peculiar excellency, not in respect of it self so much, but in regard of it's object, as it doth give Interest in the precious Christ, and make appli∣cation of his precious Blood, whereby we come to attain a share in this deliverance by Christ from wrath to come. Christ is most precious, as the Au∣thor of our deliverance; Christ death is most pre∣cious, as the merit of our deliverance; and Faith is most precious, as the instrument of our delive∣rance. 4. Here see what a Priviledge it is to have the Go∣spel Preached amongst us, which is a means to make discovery unto us of Jesus Christ, the only Delive∣rer from wrath to come; as also to work Faith in us (which cometh by hearing, Rom. 10. 17.) Where∣by alone we come to have Interest in Jesus Christ, and his deliverance. Such as are without the Gospel are in darkness and unbelief, and are hastening for∣ward, towards the regions of eternal darkness, and they know not whither they are going; It is of more use to have the Light of the Gospel, than to have the light of the Sun, and the total removal of this light is a greater judgement than any temporal cala∣mity, since it is the means to prevent eternal mi∣sery. Ʋse 2. For Examination. Is Jesus the only Deliverer from wrath to come? it concerneth all of you them to examine your selves, whether you have an Interest in this Jesus, and the deliverance from wrath, which he hath purchased,
and through him alone is to be obtain'd. All of you are Sinners, you were born in sin, and you have liv'd in sin, and should you dye in sin too, as certain∣ly as the guilt of sin doth lye upon you, so certainly will the wrath of God come upon you; without an Interest in Jesus Christ there can be no escaping for you; you may know whether you have an Interest in Jesus Christ by your Faith, by your Life, by your Love, by your Likeness, and by your Obedience. 1. If you have an Interest in Jesus Christ, then you have Faith, I don't mean an Historical Faith, only to believe the History and report, which the Gospel doth give of Jesus Christ, what he hath done and suf∣fered, nor a temporary Faith, which is the food pre∣sumption of some formal hypocrites, whereby they may seem to cleave unto Christ, when indeed their hearts cleave chiefly to sin, whereby through mis∣apprehension of Gospel Priviledges, and misapplica∣tion of Gospel promises, they may attain unto some kind of fleshly love and joy, which endures but a while, and they usually if put upon great tryals do end in open Apostacy: But if you have an Interest in Christ indeed, you have a true justifying Faith, whereby being first convinced of sin, humbled and emptied of your selves, resolvedly parting with all your sins as to affection, and sincerely renouncing all your own righteousness as to dependance, you cast your selves upon Christ, lean and depend upon him, expecting remission and Salvation, alone through his perfect righteousness made yours by imputation. Have you by Faith discerned Christ? have you by Faith applyed Christ? are you by Faith joyned unto Christ? have you been by Faith taken off your own bottoms, and built upon Christ the chief corner
stone? have you by Faith been cut off your old Stock, and engrossed into Christ the choice Vine? have you by Faith been divorsed from sin, and mar∣ried unto Christ the best Husband? are you indeed got unto, and into Christ by Faith? and have you received him into your hearts by Faith? without this true faith, there can be no true union to Christ, without union to Christ, there can be no Interest in Christ, without Interest in Christ, there can be no re∣mission of sin, no Salvation and deliverance from wrath to come. 2. If you have an Interest in Christ, you have Life, 1 John 5. 12. He that hath the Son hath Life, and he that hath not the Son hath not life. He that hath an Interest in Christ, the Son of God, hath life, he shall have Eternal life hereafter, and he hath Spi∣ritual life, which is eternal life begun here; such besides their natural life, which they receiv'd from their Parents in their generation, they have a prin∣ciple of spiritual life, which they receive from the Spirit of God, in their regeneration; they are the only persons that are quickned from their Spiritual death; but he that hath not the Son hath not life; such shall never see life hereafter, but the wrath of God abideth on them, John 3. 36. And they are spiritually dead here, they are dead in trespasses and sins, Eph. 2. 1. You may know whether you have an Interest in Jesus Christ by your spiritual Life, I do not say by your constant liveliness, this may be wanting at sometimes in true believers, but you may know it by your spiritual life; you were dead, but you are alive; and you may know your spiritual life, by your spiritual motion from sin and towards God, by your spiritual senses to discern between
good and evil, by your spiritual appetite after Christ and his righteousness, and communion with God in his ordinances, and the like; if these be no symp∣toms of this spiritual life in you, it is a sign that Christ is not in you, and if Christ be not in you, you have no Interest in him and his deliverance. 3. If you have an interest in Christ, you have Love; you love Christ in sincerity, Eph. 6. 24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus in sin∣cerity; and you love Christ with the supremacy of your love, Matth. 10. 37. He that loveth Father or Mother, Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. If any Man or Woman love any person or thing in the world more than Jesus Christ, they are unworthy of him, and they have no interest in him, or any of his benefits, and therefore a dreadful curse is pronounced upon such as do not love Christ, 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha; that is, let him be cursed until the Lord come, and when the Lord cometh, the wrath of God also will come upon him. If you have an interest in Christ, you have like∣ness, you are like unto Christ, you have his Image upon you, Jesus Christ is formed in you, Gal. 4. 19. You are like to Christ in your disposition, in humili∣ty, meekness, Heavenliness, and the like; you are not perfectly like to him, yet in some measure, and you imitate him more and more, and endeavour af∣ter more conformity unto his Image; where Pride Reigns instead of Humility, where inordidate anger reigns instead of meekness, where malice and revenge reigns instead of Love and forgiveness, where the love of the world reigns instead of Heavenly minded,
ness, where evil concupiscence reigns instead of mor∣tified affections, such are without likeness to Christ, and they are without interest in Christ, they that are graceless, are also Christless, and they cannot escape future wrath. 5. If you have an interest in Christ, you have Obe∣dience; your Faith showeth it self in your works, Sam. 2. 18. And your love sheweth it self in your keeping Christ's Commandments, John 14. 21. Such as do not obey Christ's, but cast his Command∣ments behinds their back, and will not that this Lord should rule over them, they have neither Faith, nor Love, nor Life, nor Likeness unto Christ, and there∣fore be sure no interest in him. Try your interest in Christ the only Deliverer from future wrath by these marks. Ʋse 3. For Reproof and Terrour. If upon search, you find you are without an inte∣rest in Christ; suffer the word of reproof. Sinners what do you think? is there no such thing as wrath to come? is there no such place as Hell, where the damned shall be eternally tormented? what black∣mouth is there that dareth to speak against this, which is so clearly revealed in the Word of God? surely none but such as are children of the Devil, the Father of lyes will impeach the Word of God with falsehood, and hereby make God a lyar, who hath foretold this so plainly in the Scripture; only such as are loose in their lives, and deficient in their mo∣rals, whose interest they think it is to do it, will de∣ny the punishment by eternal fire in Hell, that so they might sin with the less check and control; but when they come to feell the heat of this fire, as of all
others they are most like to be cast into everlasting burnings, then they will be of another mind. And if there be such dreadful wrath coming, such a hor∣rible fire preparing in Hell, for all disobedient per∣sons, for all impenitent persons, for all hypocrites and unbelievers, what do you do sinners? have ye not sinned, have ye not by your sins deserved? and are ye not by your sins exposed unto the vengeance of eternal fire? is there any way for you to escape, but only by Jesus Christ the only Deliverer from wrath to come? and yet do you neglect him? do you refuse and reject him? do you shut the door of your hearts against him? What! do you mind only your bodies what ye shall eat, what ye shall drink, and wherewithall ye shall be Clothed, and to provide for a short abode in this world, and in the mean time negect the Salvation of your Souls, and take no care to prevent your everlasting punishment? Are you not guilty of a great affront and indignity a∣gainst God, when he hath made such provision for your Salvation, as to send his Son into the World for you, and to proffer his Son with deliverance to you? don't you sin against his chief command, which is to believe in and accept of this Son? don't you sin against the greatest impression of his love unto man∣kind? don't you spurn at his bowles, and in effect say, God might have kept his Son to himself, for any thing you care? are you not guilty of the greatest ingratitude towards the Lord Jesus Christ? Never was there such a thing heard of, since the foundation of the world; never could such a thing have entred into your thoughts or desires, as the Lord Jesus hath freely, and of his own accord done for you; and it is a most stupendous thing, which me thinks
should fill you with astonishment and admiration, that the Lord of glory should take your flesh, and make himself of no reputation, and humble himself unto death, even the cursed death of the Cross; and all that he might deliver you from the curse of the Law, the wrath to come, and the pains of Hell for ever; now when Christ by his death hath fully sa∣tisfied God's justice for your sins, and purchased eternal life for your souls, and out of wonderful kindness hath caused the everlasting Gospel, and glad tidings of Salvation to be made known in this little nook of the Earth, and cast your lot in such a spot of ground, as the like is not to be found again under the whole Cop of Heaven, for the pure and powerful Preaching of the Gospel; I say, when Jesus Christ hath sent his faithful Ministers unto you, (whom you may find and hear if you will look after them) with this Embassage, to tell you what Christ hath done for you, and to make tenders of him with all his benefits to you; when Christ by them lets you know how able and willing he is to Save you, and knocks at the door of your hearts for entertainment; that, though you are such helpless and miserable Creatures without him, you should notwithstanding all thus refuse Christ or neglect him, that you should prefere some base lusts before him, and to serve the Devil, than to be saved by Christ; hereby you ex∣press great contempt of Christ, and are guilty of hor∣rid ingratitude; hereby you trample his Blood under your feet, and you do in effect say he might have spar'd his pains in coming down from Heaven, that he might have stai'd untill he had been sent for, that he might have carried his Gospel to any other place, for any thing you value it or him; thus you deal
with Christ, and thrust him away from you, though he come upon the most welcome errand, and ought to be received with all readiness and thankfulness. And think sinners moreover how injurious you are here∣by unto your selves, what folly and madness you are guilty of; Do you know what you are? if you do, you know that without Christ you are cursed wretches, and children of wrath; behold a wonder in Christ, everlasting burnings are become everlasting mercies, and he that will come at the last day as a Judge in flaming fire, to take vengeance upon you, if you be found without an interest in him, doth now profer to be your Saviour and Advocat, to deliver you from wrath to come; and is it not depth of fol∣ly and sottishness to slight and refuse such a per∣son, and by refusing him, to plunge your selves into unavoidable ruine and destruction? when you may have Christ, and with him all things needful in this world, and that with greater security, than by all your inordinate desires and endeavours; and more∣over such riches as do exceed all Earthly Treasures, and besides this a Crown of glory in the other world, and notwithstanding this to neglect Christ, and chuse rather the pleasures of sin for a season, the gratifying of some base lusts unto the everlasting damnation of your Souls and Bodies in Hell, to re∣fuse with Christ everlasting happiness, and head-long to run your selves into everlasting burnings; if this be not folly and madness, I don't know what is. You can't contrive or consult greater mischief and injury to your selves, for I am perswaded that such as go to Hell out of England, especially out of Lon∣don, where they have or might have such plentiful means of Grace, of all others will have the lowest
and hottest place; O how will it sting, and gnaw, and rack, and torture you for ever, to remember what seasons and opportunities, what calls and invita∣tions you have had; but by your right of getting an interest in the Lord Jesus, the Deliverer from wrath to come, you have brought ruine upon your selves. Think Sinners, how unavoidable the wrath to come, is without an interest in Christ, and think, O think, how intollerable this wrath will be when it is come, Who can dwell with devouring Fire? Think of the extremity of pain and anguish, which is pre∣pared for you; and think of the eternity of Hells torments, that when you have been there as many thousand Millions of years, as there are Stars or Sands, your torment will be but beginning, and Ne∣ver, Never, Never will it have any ending; me thinks this should certifie all Christless sinners, who are already condemned to his place of torment, John 3. 8. He that believeth not is condemned already, and you know not how soon execution may follow upon the Sentence, if you dye this night out of Christ, the wrath of God will seise upon you immediately, and you will be miserable, inrecoverably, and to eter∣nity. Ʋse 4. For Comfort, and that of all those who upon tryal find well-grounded evidence of their interest in this Jesus, the only Deliverer from wrath to come. You are the only persons in the world, who are in a safe condition, Rom. 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay thing unto your charge? If God do not charge you with guilt, who can charge you besides? through Christ God doth justifie you, he pardoneth all your sins as if they had never been, and accepteth of you as perfectly righteous, through the perfect righteous∣ness
of Christ made yours by Faith. Who is it that shall condemn you? the Law may condemn you, and Conscience may condemn you, but since Christ died for you, and in his death was condemned and suffered in your stead, you are freed from the con∣demnation of God, and the eternal damnation of Hell; and being out of all danger of future wrath, you may the better bear any evil of affliction, which in this world may be your portion; and you may comfortably wait for the coming of Christ from Heaven, whom God hath raised from the dead; even this Jesus who hath delivered you from wrath to come, and who will bring for you, and give to you everlasting glory and happiness at the day of his se∣cond appearance. Ʋse 5. For Exhortation. 1. Of such as are without an interest in Christ the Deliverer from wrath to come; O be perswaded without any further delay, to flee from this wrath of God, which hath you in the pursuit, and will over∣take you ere long, and that by fleing unto, and get∣ting an interest in this Jesus, who only can deliver you. O that I might be instrumental to bring some of you unto a closure with Jesus Christ! Sinners will you be perswaded at length to accept of Christ? you may have him, and you must have him, otherwise you are curst, you are lost, and you cannot escape eternal death and wrath. If you would be delivered from wrath to come by Jesus Christ, take these few directions. 1. Labour for a thorow sense of your absolute need of Christ, and that not only by reason of your guilt of sin and danger of Hell, but also that there is no Salvation nor deliverance attainable by any other
way but by Jesus Christ: Think not that your re∣pentance and reformation, though this be necessary and without which there can be no Salvation for you, yet that this can save you without Christ, if you should attain this, and rest in this, you will as certainly go to Hell, as the most wicked transgres∣sour; you cannot be saved by any of your own righteousness, because your righteousness is imperfect and therefore cannot satisfie Gods Justice for your sins, and therefore cannot deliver you from wrath to come; should you weep for your sins till your eyes were out, and sigh and grief for sin till your hearts did break, should your wear you knees to the bones with kneeling, and wear your Tongues to the roots with praying, and consume your flesh to nothing with fasting, should you be as just, and temperate, and charitable, and as strictly Religious as any breathing; yea, as holy for the future as any Angel in Heaven, all this would not wipe away the guilt of your sin, nor deliver you out of the hands of Gods Ju∣stice, which must be satisfied; one saith very well, if any would be saved by their own righteousness, they must first go to Hell, and there continue in torments to eternity, and if that could be supposed, which cannot be supposed to be done, because there is no ending of those torments which are eternal, and therefore no possibility of getting loose from them, yet supposing that any could do this, they must come back and fulfil the Law in every tittle, both which being impossible for you, who are guilty of sin, you have absolute need of Christ's perfect righteousness in order to your deliverance from wrath to come. It is this which damneth and sinketh many thou∣sands in Hell, the looking and seeking to be saved
by a rigteousness of their own; I know that most are damn'd for their unrighteousness, and go to Hell in the broader way of gross impiety and wickedness; yet if that be the broader way and have it's ten thou∣sands, this is too broad and hath it's thousands, be∣sides the more sober amongst the Heathens, who be∣lived a future state of happiness, and looked to ar∣rive to it by the moral Righteousness; besides the Papists, who assert justification by works, and that we are no otherwise justified than as we are made in∣ternally righteous, and this expressing it self in acts of obedience; and besides Socinians and other Sects together with the Quakers, who plainly affirms that we must be saved by a righteousness within, which the Quakers call Christ within, (all which do funda∣mentally erre in their judgements concerning the righteousness, which alone can save.) I say besides these, it is natural unto all to seek Salvation this way; all are born under a Covenant of works, they are under the Law, and not under Grace, and when any think how they shall be saved, they presently run to work, and seek after a righteousness of their own, and to fulfil the Law themselves, and hope if they repent and lead a new life, though they have sinned that God is merciful, and he will pardon and save them. It is an ordinary thing, even where the light of truth doth shine most clearly, and the Gospel is Preached most powerfully, when any are convinced of sin by the beams of this light, and awakened out of their security, by some powerful Sermon, discover∣ing their danger of eternal ruine, as the just desert of Sin, they will cry out with the Jaylor what shall we do to be saved? and however they be di∣rected as he was to believe, yet the most do rest in
doing and not believing; they fall presently upon confession of sin and sorrowing for it, they fall upon reforming, they will not now be drunk or swear, or commit Adultery, or break the Sabbath, or defraud in their dealings, now they begin to hear the Word, and Pray in their Families, and pray in their Closets, and keep days of Fasting, and conforms unto all the External acts of Devotion; and if they can at∣tain unto some kind of flashy affection, they think all is well; and if they find their hearts dull and cold and hard, they may also be troubled for it, not upon a right Gospel account, but because they feel they want such a righteousness to present God withall as they desire, or through some secret fear that their righteousness will not hold water; but all this while these persons seek after salvation through a self righ∣teousness, and Christ is left out and his righteous∣ness, either unknown or utterly disregarded and ne∣glected by them; and thus many go to Hell in a way of duty, their duties are the occasion of their dam∣nation, through their resting in them, and expecting Salvation by them; It may seem strange, that any should have hopes of Salvation by imperfect servings, but this I suppose may come to pass, either because they don't mind the imperfections of their services, for want of understanding the Law in the Spirituali∣ty of it, and examining themselves by it, or through apprehensions that Gods mercy revealed in his Word will Pardon them, not considering that all his special Mercy, in pardoning and saving is through Christ; not considering that God is infinitely just and righ∣teous as well as merciful, and that there is no room for the exercise of Mercy towards Sinners, until Justice be satisfied; that Gods justice requireth a
perfect righteousnes, otherwise there cannot be a per∣fect justification, that there must be full satisfaction to Gods justice, for the breach of Gods Law, other∣wise there can be no clear remission, and that there must be perfect righteousness made out some way, otherwise we cannot be accepted by God as righte∣ous. Since therefore this satisfaction to Gods ju∣stice cannot be by our selves, because being finite, we cannot make an infinite compensation, which in∣finite justice doth require, and since perfect righte∣ousness, which must include both original and actual cannot be in us, who are guilty both of original and actual sin, and the least sin rendering for ever a personal perfect righteousness impossible, and the Law curseth every one that continueth not in all things, which are written in the Book of the Law to do them, and therefore as many as are of the Law, that seeks justification and Salvation by the way of works, or righteousness of the Law, are under the curse, Gal. 3. 10. It is clear that whoever do ex∣pect to be saved from wrath to come, it must not be by their own righteousness, but by anothers righ∣teousness, namely the righteousness of Christ; If you would attain an interest in Christ, you must be sensible of your need of him and his righteousness upon this account. 2. Labour for a thorow acquaintance with the nature, intendment, and efficacy of the righteousness of Christ; The Apostle saith of the Jews, Rom. 10. 2, 3, 4. I bear them record, they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, for they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God, for Christ is the end of the Law
for righteouness unto every one that believeth. And as it was with the Jews of Old, so it is with many no∣minal Christians now, who may be led only by a blind zeal, to work out their own Salvation in a way of doing, and it is through their ignorance of the righteousness of Christ, (called here the righteous∣ness of God either, because it is the righteousness alone which God, will accept, or which God hath found out and provided for men, which sence it must have, Rom. 3. 21. 22. But now the righteousness of God without the Law is manifest, even the righteousness of God, which is by Faith in Jesus Christ, &c. That is the righteousness which God doth accept, and hath appointed for our justification; or it is called the righteousness of God, because it is the righteousness of Christ, who is God-man, no other righteousness than of such a person, being sufficient for man in his fallen estate;) I say through the ignorance of this righteousness of Christ, many Christians seeking af∣ter a righteousness in order to their Salvation, they go about to establish their own righteousness, that is a personal righteousness, and endeavour the gaining of Heaven in a way of doing, and so do not submit themselves to the righteousness of God; It is through Pride (so natural unto every one) that they are loth to be beholding wholly unto another, and therefore they would have something of their own to commend them unto God, and therefore they do not submit unto the righteousness of Christ, which God hath provided for them. Therefore you must labour to be clear in your un∣derstanding, what this righreousness of Christ is; there are two things requisite and absolutely necessa∣ry unto fallen man. The first is satisfaction unto
Gods Justice for his sins, and without this there can be no escape of eternal death and misery, because guilt doth oblige unto punishment, and this cannot be removed until Gods Justice be satisfied; the o∣ther is perfect actual obedience unto Gods Law, and without this there can be no attaining eternal Life and Glory: the first Covenant of works, (so Man in his fallen State) being still in force, Do this and Live, and the Soul that sinneth shall dye; now man being finite, cannot satisfie Gods justice for his sins, and being a Sinner, cannot yield perfect actual obe∣dience to Gods Law; but the Lord Jesus Christ hath done both for man. 1. Christ by his sufferings, and death upon the Cross did make satisfaction unto Gods justice, he being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. And un∣dergoing equivalent punishment, punishment unto the damned storment, and being God-man, though the humane nature only did suffer, yet the Divine nature in the same person did put an infinite value upon the sufferings of the humane, and so became a sufficient satisfaction unto Gods infinite justice, and hereby he hath purchased remission of sins and deliverance from wrath to come. 2. Christ hath yeilded perefect actual obedience unto the Law, he hath fulfilled all righteousness, that not having a righteousness perfect of our own, his might he made ours, and we might attain life thereby; this passive and active obedience of Christ which you should labour to understand, and that Christ had not this righteousness for himself, he had no sin of his own to suffer for, but it was in our stead, and as our surety, and this righteousness was intend∣ed for us, and being the righteousness of such a per∣son
is highly efficacious to attain, that for which it was designed, as will appear by the Covenant. 3. Labour for a thorow understanding of the Co∣venant, and that both the Covenant, which God made with Christ in the behalf of man, and the Cove∣nant which God hath made with man through Christ. 1. Acquaint your selves with the Covenant God made with Christ, in the behalf of man, whatever worth and value there was in the righteousness of Christ, yet God might have required a personal righteousness and satisfaction, and Christ's righ∣teousness might have stood us in no stead; but God did eternally Covenant and agree with Christ, that if he would take Humane nature and work out a righ∣teousness for fallen man, it should be accepted, that if he would take to him the body, he should prepare for him, and make his Soul an Offering for sin, that is, suffer what his justice did require for the sins of Man, that he should see his Seed, and justifie many, Isa. 53. 10, 11. It is through this Covenant with Christ that Christ righteousness is accepted in the behalf of Sinners, God having agreed before that, so it should be. 2. Acquaint your selves with the Covenant God hath made with Man through Christ, wherein upon the account of Christ God hath promised remission of sins, and eternal life, Heb. 10. 16, 17. This is my Covenant that I will make with them saith the Lord; I will put my Laws into their hearts, and their sins and iniquities I will remember no more. 1 John 2. 25. This is the promise which he hath promised, even eternal life. If ever you be saved from eternal wrath, and attain eternal life, it must be by vertue of this New Cove∣nant
of Grace, wherein God doth engage himself to give what his Son hath purchased. 3. Labour to be acquainted with the nature and use of faith, which is the Tenour of the Covenant of Grace; the Tenour of the Covenant of work was Do and Live, the Tenour, or that required to give an interest in the Covenant of grace is Believe and Life; Faith joyns the Soul unto Christ, the Mediatour of this Covenant; and giveth an actual interest in him and his purchase, and whatever is promised through him in the Covenant; Faith is a resting of the Soul alone upon Christ, and an application of the pro∣mises of Pardon and life unto the Soul; Faith is not only a discerning, but applying or laying hold on Christ's righteousness without us, whereby it is im∣puted to us, or accounted once by God, as if it had been our own personal righteousness; If ever you would be justified, that is, have your sins pardoned, and your persons accepted as perfectly righteous in the sight of God, it must be by Faith, renouncing your own righteousness as imperfect and insufficient, apprehending and applying, resting and trusting in Christ's perfect righteousness. 4. Apply your selves unto God in Prayer, that he having given his Son for you, would also him give to you, and that he would give you Faith to receive him, and apply him; beg this again and again, with confession of your sins and sense of your want of Christ, and never leave asking until you obtain; at∣tend also upon the Word where it is Preached most purely and powerfully for the working of Faith, which cometh by hearing, Rom. 10. 17. And then in the strength of the Lord put forth the hand to lay hold on Christ, and labour to cast your selves upon
him, resigning withall, your selves up unto him, not only to be saved, but also taught and ruled by him. Obj. I know it will be objected, that if we seek thus to be delivered from wrath to come by Jesus Christ, and Faith in his righteousness without us, and not by internal righteousness, and that of works, that this will open a door to Licentiousness. Ans. I Answer, That this is an old Objection a∣gainst the Doctrine of justification by Faith, even in the days of the Apostles, when the Doctrine was first Preached. But as then, so also now this Doctrine doth not give any liberty to sin, for however we cannot be saved by inherent righteousness, and any of our good works, yet we cannot be saved without them; none assert more highly that there must be Regeneration and Sanctification, a new heart and new life, otherwise there can be no admission into Heaven, no escaping of the damnation of Hell; Yea, further we say that the same Faith which is an instru∣ment of justification, is also a part of Sanctification, being a heart purifying grace, Act, 15. 9. That as Faith is a hand to lay hold on Christ's righteousness without us; so it is a hand to receive supplyes of grace and spirit from Christ for the quickning of us unto newness of Life; yea, I may say there can be no real inherent righteousness, withou an interest by Faith in Christ's imputed righteousness, there may be some thing like it, a righteousness of some kind there may be, but not of the right kind, not a righteousness which springs from the true principle, which is saith, and therefore not a righteousness that is pleasing unto God, for without Faith it is impos∣sible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. So that if you would have inherent righteousness, and walk so as to please
God, you must belive in the Lord Jesus, and fetch grace from him, in whom all fulness doth dwell, Col. 1. 19. If you would have lust mortified, the world crucified, and overcome the Devil, who endeavour∣eth by his temptations to draw you unto sin, you must by Faith draw vertue and strength to do it. In a word, if you would deny Ungodliness and World∣ly lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present evil world, you must do it by Faith. But how to attain the principle and practice of Godli∣ness, I may else where give direction. Had I room I might speak much by way of exhor∣tation, to such as have attained an interest in Christ, and the deliverance purchased by him; in a word, learn to admire free grace, to be very thankful and watchful, to endeavour the bringing others to Christ, to adorn your profession, to be blameless and harmless the Disciples of Christ, without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, among whom you should shine as Lights in the World here, that so you may shine like Stars, yea, like Suns in the Kingdom of your Father for ever. FINIS.
Books of this Author Printed. God's Terrible Voice in the City; being a Re-Plague and Fire in London. Christ's certain and sudden appearance to Judge∣ment. Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, in the Burning of Sodom formerly. From Earth, in the Burning of Aetna lately. In Hell, to Burn the wicked eternally. These Printed for George Calvert, and to be Sold at his Shop at the Golden Ball in Duck-lane. Words whereby we may be Saved, and Words of ad∣vice to young Men. Printed for T. Parkhurst, and to be Sold at his Shop, at the Golden Bible on Lon∣den-Bridge. The Foundation of God Standeth Sure, or an Answer to W. Pens Sandy Foundation Shaken.
