16864a 99892230 183023
The Lovers Dreame: Who sleeping, thought he did imbrace his Love, Which when he wak'd, did no such matter prove; Yet afterwards her Love he did enjoy, By sending a Letter by a trusty young Boy. To the tune of, I laid me downe to sleepe. AS I was walking all alone, and musing in my minde, With many a sigh and grone, I studied how to find, Some dainty pleasant Theame, to write unto my Love, And I fell in a dreame, and marke how it did prove. I laid me downe to sléepe, thinking my Love lay by, But when I did awake, my dreame it prou'd a lye: I sweat, and I am cold, I fréeze, and am a fire; I sée, and cannot behold the thing that I most desire. Thus dreaming as I lay, me thought she smil'd on me, Which did increase my joy, such happinesse to sée: I spake unto my Love, and she did answer make: But so it did not prove, when as I did awake. Me thought I saw my Love, and with her I did stray, Hard by a pleasant Grove, where we a while did stay. But time that swift doth goe, did run too suddenly: O time why didst thou so? thou mad'st my Love to cry: But when I saw her eyes, bedew'd with brinish teares, Then I did soone surmise her heart was struck with feares. And I did soone require some reason for to know: Her answer did admire my heart with joy and woe. Quoth she, I love thee deare, yet so I dare not say, Because I live in feare of my true Loves decay: My Father he is rich, and I his onely Heire, And he at me will grutch, to wed on's poore and bare. Me thought I answer made, that I was yong and faire, And having Art and Trade, I bade her not take care. With that me thought she smil'd, and to me she did say; My Love be reconcil'd, and Ile be thine for aye. My mind was thus imploy'd, and yet I nothing do; I thought I'd got a Bride, but yet it was not so: Me thought I had my will, according to my mind, But I do want it still, my Love proves not so kind;
The second Part, To the same Tune. THus sléeping still I lay, betwixt hope and despaire; But at the breake of day, O then began my care: When as I did awake, and found it nothing so, Then for my true Loves sake, I did lament with woe. I cannot come my Love, to the place where thou art; But I will write to thée, if thou wilt take my part, The complaint of my poore heart, receive it as you will: My Love may ease my smart, or she my heart may kill. My heart is not mine owne, nor I at liberty: All joyes are from me gone, alacke what remedy. I would I were in place, where my true Love doth rest, And then I would imbrace, the joyes that I like best. Would Jove would pleased be, for to transforme my shape, That I unknowne may see my Love, and so escape: And yet I would be seene of her, and none but she: And thus I would begin, Faire Lady, pitie me. But some perchance may say, that I my Love would fright, To those I answer, Nay, she is my hearts delight: Although I wish to change, my selfe in some mans hue, Yet I would not seeme strange, unto my Lover true. And if I find her coy, and grieved with vexation, Yet I with her will play, to gaine my expectation. Then happily she will consider of my woe: Thus I will use my skill, and glad to please her so. I would I had some Page, that would to me be true, In haste to run a voyage, that my true Love may view This Letter of my griefe, and send me some reply: If she yeeld no reliefe, alacke, then must I die. Then straight a Page he sent unto her hastily: At whose returne content was brought him speedily. When his true Love did view, his writing in such kind: Quoth she I will be true, and so my Loue shall find. O haste, thou little Page, make haste unto my Love, That death may cease his rage, and joyes may sorrowes move: And I my selfe will come, before the breake of day, When darknesse is begun, then Ile steale hence away. My Father must not know, what you about do come: For if he should be so, my Love were quite undone. Therefore make haste againe, and save my true Loves life: I will release his paine, and prove his loving wife. FINIS. Printed at London for I. W. dwelling in Gilt-spur street.
