20313 99884198 182955
A Compleate Gentle-woman Described by her feature, Her person slender, her beauty admirable, her wit excellent, her carriage modest, her behaviour chast, with her constancie in love. To the tune of Sabina. YOu Muses all your aide to mée assigne To speake in praise of the true loue of mine. Strike up with ioy Strike up with ioy Strike up with ioy your instruments of mirth Till piercing Ecchoes ring 'twixt heaven and earth. Let Pan with spéed prepare himselfe to play, And swéetly chaunt my loue a roundelay While Satyres péepe While Satyres peepe While Satyres péepe to sée her louely face, Let Citterne, harpe, and lute her meeting grace. Let all the Poets company combine Their wits in one for my swéet Rosaline, And say that shée And say that shée And say that shée Quéene Venus doth excell, For beauty, loue, and wit shée beares the bell. And to recite the substance of her feature That all may say shée is a comely creature, From head to foot From head to foot From head to foot I will unfold aright The shape of her which is my hearts delight. First is her haire like threds of golden wyre Vpon her head is set a seemly tyre, Which doth protect Which doth protect Which doth protect her crimson chéeks from wind From Titans heate and Boreas blasts unkinde. Her glistring eyes excell the diamond light, When I behold her countenance by night, I doe admire I doe admire I doe admire to sée her beauteous brow In whom Diana chastnesse doth allow.
The second part, To the same tune. HEr rubie lips which doth inclose the tongue From whence rare elegies are swéetly sung, That may amaze That may amaze That may amaze each rurall swaine to heare Her Siren songs with voice so shrill and cleare. Her Iuorie necke with golden gems compleate, Her armes and shoulders framed fine and neate, Her lilly hand Her lilly hand Her lilly hand and fingers long and small With slender wast and person some-what tall. And farther to devulge some other parts Wherein dame nature shewes her chiefest arts, I purpose to I purpose to I purpose to stoope downe unto the toe, And so speake of the rest as up I goe. Her pretty foot and nimble dapper héele Her shaking legge haue showne such actiue skill, Both Coridon Both Coridon Both Coridon and Phillis blush't to see Her amourous cariage when shée bends the knée. Not only this which nature in her plac't, But Ladie vertue hath her further grac't In all respects In all respects In all respects each creature doth her finde To passe the Pellican shée is to kinde. So constant in her actions still is shée Shée may compare with chast Penelope, Her minde once fix't Her minde once fix't Her minde once fix't it neuer will remoue, Shée'l rather die like to the Turtle doue. Her will to chastitie is so appli'd, Shée scornes ambition, lust, and hatefull pride, Whereby shée gaines Whereby shée gaines Whereby shée gaines good wil of great and smal Strōg weak, high low, rich poore, they loue her al skil But since my trembling hand and pen wants To write her fame compleate unto my will, I here conclude I here conclude I here conclude wishing each honest lad May haue so true a choice as I haue had. L. P: FINIS.
