6927 99891802 183080
A pretty new Ditty: OR A young Lasses Resolution, As her mind I truly scan, Who shews in conclusion, She loves a handsome young man. To the tune of I know what I know. YOung Maids and young Men I pray you giue eare, And with hand and pen Ile plainly declare, Of a Maids resolution which to loue is won, And in the conclusion, She'll have a handsome young man. Quoth shee, I am young, and now in my prime, Though some stay too long, yet Ile lose no time: I will haue some pleasure as soone as I can, What care I for treasure. Ile haue a handsome young man. Some Maidens are coy, and strange in their carriage, And scorne to enioy a neat young man in marriage: Some wed for money, and some wed for Land; But Ile chuse a honey, Shall be a handsome young man, I haue knowne some Maids that haue denied men, And afterwards glad to obtaine them agen: They will not, and will, thus will they withstand; But ile vse my skill To haue a handsome young man. Some happily will coniecture of mée, That I desire still to liue wantonly: No, I am a Lasse sure, that liue vnwedded can, And much will endure For a handsome young man. I would haue you know, that I am not so base, Nor shall our sex so by mee haue disgrace. No, I haue some treasure beside house and Land. Therefore ile haue pleasure With a handsome young man, The man that ile chuse Shall be of good size, Yet ile none refuse if that he be wise: With handsome complexion, neat foot, leg, and hand: This is my affection To haue such a man. If I wed a foole with great store of treasure, Then hee'l pine and whule, and debar me of pleasure: Hée'l tell mee of fine Gownes, Kertles, Maske and Fan; For a thousand pounds Ile not wed such a man.
The second part, To the same tune. ANd further than that, If I wed with a clowne, Hée'l answer me What, and with anger hee'l frowne: Then must I beware, perchance with his hand Hée'l strike me o'th eare: But ile haue no such man. And many there are, that are somewhat iealous, But ile haue a care, and match no such fellowes; Their wiues néere to men must not sit nor stand, But their heads ake then, oh hang up such a man. Loe thus I haue showne the conditions of some: But none can be knowne till to tryall they come; And I am inclined as soone as I can, For to be ioyned With a handsome young man. Some Maidens doe chuse for to haue Tradesmen. And some will refuse them as much agen. But for my owne part, as at first I began, I loue with my heart a handsome young man. Let him be a Taylor, or a neat Shoo-maker, A Weauer or Glouer, a Brewer or Baker: Be he neat or comely, my loue is soone won, For my mind is onely Of a handsome young man. If that he be gallant, or meane in apparell; If his looks be valiant, to maintaine his quarrell, Then shall he be welcome vnto pretty Nan, For I am delightsome To a handsome young man. I passe not what name hee is called by, If that I can frame to loue him truly, Either Dicke or Robin, Humphrey, Will, or Iohn, Any one me shall win That's a handsome young man, And thus I conclude, and here end my Song, Let none thinke me rude, nor large of my tongue: For I am intended as first I began, Then let me be friended With a handsome young man. FINIS. Printed at London for Henry Gosson.
