C4041B 53981489 180169
ARTICLES OF VISITATION & ENQUIRY Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical: EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Church-wardens, and Side-men of every Parish within the DIOCESE of EXETER. In the Second EPISCOPAL VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God SETH By Divine Permission Lord Bishop of EXETER. LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait, at the Kings-Head in S. Pauls Church-yard, M.DC.LXV.
The Tenour of the Oath to be Administred to the Church-wardens, and Side-men, of every Parish. YOu shall Swear diligently to en∣quire, and to make a true Answer unto every Article in this Book now given you in Charge; and to Present every Person that now is, or of late was inhabiting within your Pa∣rish, that hath done any Offence, or omitted any Duty therein mentioned. And this you shall do uprightly and truly, without Favour or Malice, Hope of Reward, or Fear of Dis∣pleasure, so far as by the Laws you are bound. So help you God.
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of EXETER. TITUL. I. Concerning Churches and Chappels, with the Ornaments, and Furniture thereunto belonging. IS your Parish Church or Chappel kept in good and sufficient repair? Are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile or Slate; the Windows well Glazed, the Floors well paved, the Seats well fastned, and conveniently placed; and all things so decently ordered, as becometh the House of God? II. HATH the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chappel, or any part thereof, been pulled down, or any of the Lead or Bells formerly belonging thereunto been imbezel∣led, sold, or made away? In whose hands or custody doth the same,
or any part thereof, remain? Declare what you know, or have heard therein. III. IS there a Font of Stone, with a good Cover thereunto, stand∣ing in a convenient place towards the lower part of your Church, for the Administration of Baptism? And is there in your Chancel a de∣cent Communion Table, for the Administration of the Lords Supper; with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine Woollen-Cloath, and another Co∣vering of white and pure Linnen, to spread thereupon? And have you a fair Communion-Cup, or Chalice, with a Cover of Silver, and one or more Flagons of Silver or Pewter thereunto belonging? IV. HAVE you in your said Church, or Chappel, a convenient Seat, or Pew, for your Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit, with a comely Cloth or Cushion for the same? A Bible of the last Transla∣tion, in a large Volume, and the Book of Common-Prayer, both well and substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority? A Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiasti∣cal? And a Printed Table of the Degrées wherein Marriage is prohi∣bited? V. HAVE you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his Publick Ministration in the Church, provided, and to be duly washed at the Charge of your Parish? VI. HAVE you a Register-Book of Parchment, wherein to Regi∣ster the Names and Sirnames of all such persons as are Married, Christened, or Buried, within your Parish; together with the Names and Sirnames of both the Parents of the Children so Christened, ex∣pressing the day, moneth, and year of all such Christenings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the transcript thereof yearly, within one Moneth next after the 25 of March, brought into the Bishops Registry? VII. HAVE you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to re∣cord the Names and Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to Preach in your Church or Chappel? As also a third Book wherein to write down the Church-wardens Accounts: together with a strong Chest, with Locks and Keys, wherein to kéep the aforesaid Books, and all other the afore-mentioned Furniture, in safe Custody? And lastly, have you a Bier, with a black Hearse-cloth, for the Burial of the Dead?
TIT. II. Concerning the Church-yard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes, belonging to the Church. I. IS your Church-yard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Rails, or Pales; and decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Cattel? Hath any person encroached upon the same? or made any door into it, out of his own ground or habitation, without allowance from the Ordinary? Have any Trees there growing been cut down? how long since, by whom, and to whose use and benefit? II. IS the house of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, (with all the out∣houses thereunto belonging) kept in good and sufficient repair? Or have any of the said Houses or Out-houses been defaced or pulled down without license from the Ordinary? and by whom? Hath any person encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or Close, belonging to your Par∣sonage or Vicarage house? or cut up any Trees growing thereon? or changed or removed the ancient Marks and Bounds of the same? III. HAVE you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages, belonging to your Par∣sonage, or Vicarage? As also a note of such Pensions, Rate-tithes, and Portions of Tithes, or other yearly Profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have any of the same been withheld from your Minister? and by whom, as you know, or have heard? IV. HAVE any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Par∣sonage or Vicarage, been taken away, or exchanged for other, with∣out the free consent of the Incumbent, and license from the Ordinary  by whom hath the same been made? and how many years since? and how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage damnified thereby in the yearly value thereof; as you know, believe, or have heard?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers. I. IS your Minister defamed, or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice or Orders by any Simonaical compact? II. HATH he been legally Inducted into his Benefice? III. DID he within two months after his Induction, publickly in the Church, upon some Sunday or Holy-day, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39 Articles of the Church of England established by Authority, and there publickly declare his assent thereunto? IV. HATH he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice? Is he constant∣ly resident upon his Benefice among you? How many weeks in any one year hath he been absent from it? V. HATH your Minister a Curate to assist him? Who is that Curate? Is he conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? and doth he serve in any other Church beside? and what year∣ly stipend doth your Minister allow him? VI. DOTH your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the daily Morning and Evening Service, Administration of the holy Sacra∣ments, celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women after Child∣birth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and pronouncing ods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use the form and ords prescribed in the Book of Common-Prayer, without any addi∣tion, omission, or alteration of the same? And doth he use all such Rites and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed  the said Book, so far as you have observed? VII. DOTH your Minister at the Reading or Celebrating the Di∣vine Offices in your Church or Chappel, wear the Surplice? VIII. DOTH he observe the Holy-days and Fasting-days, as also e Ember-weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, as  the Common-Prayer-book is appointed? giving notice to the Pa∣rishioners of every of the same in the Church, in the time of Divine service, upon the Sunday next before? IX. HATH your Minister been licensed to preach by the Bishop? if so, doth he then constantly (unless in case of Sickness, necessary ab∣nce, or other reasonable impediment) himself preach in your Church  Chappel, one Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be not a Licensed reacher, or being so Licensed be hindred by Sickness, or otherwise, as foresaid; doth he procure a Sermon to be so preached by some other
Minister, a Licensed Preacher? or one of the Homilies set forth by Au∣thority to be there read by a Priest or Deacon? X. DOTH your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Pa∣rish in the Church Catechism? and doth he prepare, and present them, being so instructed, to be Confirmed by the Bishop? And doth he endea∣vour to reclaim all Popish Recusants and other Sectaries (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion established in the Church of England, and to their bounden dutie in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Government thereof? XI. DOTH he neglect or refuse to visit the Sick, or delay the Bap∣tism of any Infant that is in danger of death? Is there any Child past Infancie, or other person of more years, through your Ministers default, yet remaining unbaptized in your Parish? Doth he use to baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers? or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children? XII. HATH he at any time (as you know, or have heard) preached any False, Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the people into parties and factions, to the disturbance of the pub∣lick peace and unity either of Church or State? XIII. HATH he presumed to Marrie any persons in private houses? or such as, being under age, have not the consent of their Parents? or without the Banes first published on three Sundays or Holy-days in the Church? or at any other hours then betwéen Eight and Twelve in the Morning, unless he had a License or Dispensation so to do? XIV. DOTH any person preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Hath he allowance from the Bishop for so doing? Doth he before his Lecture, read Divine Service, according to the Book of Common-Prayer? and is he in all respects conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? XV. HATH your Minister taken upon him to appoint any publick or private Fasts, Prophecyings, or Exercises, not appointed by Authori∣tie? or doth he, or any other, either Minister or Lay-person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in private houses within your Parish, for people of several Families to resort unto, under the pretence of Preach∣ing, Praying, Thanksgiving, or Humiliation, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided? XVI. IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, a man of a sober, unblameable, and exemplarie life? Doth he familiarly converse with ungodlie, vicious, and excommunicate persons? Is he a frequenter of Taverns, or Ale-houses? a common Gamester? a Swearer, Railer, or Quarreller? Doth he set Neighbours at variance one with another?
or encourage them to Suits and Contention? Is he noted to be an in∣temperate Drinker? or vehemently suspected of Incontinencie with any person, either within your Parish, or without? Is his apparel grave, and decent, as the Canons of the Church require? Or is his Carriage and Conversation, in any kind whatsoever, Disorderly or Scandalous, and unbeséeming a Minister of Iesus Christ? TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. I. IS there in your Parish any person a known or reputed Heretick or Schismatick? any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectarie, that refuse to come unto the publick Assemblies, Prayers, or Services of the Church? or that makes profession of any other Religion then what is established in the Church of England? and if there be any such, what are their Names? II. IS there any person in your Parish that lieth under a common fame, or vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards within your Parish? or common Swear∣ers, or blasphemers of Gods Name, or any that are noted to be rail∣ers, unclean or filthy talkers, or sowers of sedition, faction, and discord amongst their neighbours? III. DO any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holy-days, follow their bodily or ordinary labour? or permit their servants so to do? Are any shops kept open, or wares sold? or do any Vinteners, Inn-keepers, or other Victualers and sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon those days? IV. DOTH every person inhabiting, and sofourning within your Parish, duly resort unto your Church or Chappel, upon every Sunday and Holy-day appointed for Divine Service? Do they then and there a∣bide quietly, with reverence, order and decency, during all the whole time of Common-Prayer, Preaching, or other service of God there used? and are there any among you that come onely to the Preaching, and not to the Common-Prayers of the Church? V. DOTH every person reverently uncover his head, and so conti∣nue all the time of Divine Service in the Church? Do they all re∣verently kneel at the Prayers, and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are read, making due reverence when the Name of our Lord Iesus is mentioned?
VI. ARE there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-children to be baptized publickly in the Church, unless in case of ur∣gent danger; in which case the child may be baptized at home by a lawful Minister, after the form and rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them from their own Minister to be baptized in any other Parishes, or after other form then is appointed? Or do they keep them unbaptized any longer time then the Church alloweth? And are there any Infants, or more aged persons, in your Parish as yet unbaptized? VII. DOTH every Housholder in your Parish cause their children and servants to come to Church to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall require it of them open∣ly in the Church upon Sundays and Holy-days, as in the Book of Com∣mon-Prayer is appointed; that when they are well Instructed in the same, they may be confirmed by the Bishop? VIII. IS there any person in your Parish, who, being 16 years of age, doth not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one? Doth any in your Pa∣rish refuse to receive the same kneeling, or from the hands of your own Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad? Or are there any strangers, not of your Parish, that forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours for it? IX. HAVE you any among you that be denounced and declared ex∣communicate for any crime committed? How long have they béen so excommunicated? And do any of your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and absolved? X. ARE there any living in your Parish as man and wife who are within the degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully divorced have married again? Or any that being lawfully married, and not se∣parated, or divorced by course of Law, do not cohabit together? XI. ARE there any married-women in your Parish, who, after their delivery from the peril of Child-birth, refuse to make their publick thanksgiving to God in the Church? And when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and make their offerings according to custom? XII. ARE there any belonging to your Parish who refuse to pay their dutie for Easter. Offerings to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute and pay the rate assessed upon them for the repair of your Church or Chappel, and for the providing of such Books, Furniture, and Ornaments as be requisite for the performance of all Divine Offices there? XIII. DO any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the
Church of England? and are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish that be yet unproved? Or any Goods administred without a due grant from the Ordinary? Did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legary to your Church or Chappel? what were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed? XIV. IS there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in the Body of your Church or Chappel, without leave from the Ordinary? TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks, and Sextons. I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chappelry a Parish-Clerk, aged 21 years at the least? Is he of honest life and con∣versation? and sufficient or able to perform his duty in reading, writing, and singing? Is he chosen by your Minister, and doth he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are his wages duly paid unto him? or who withholdeth the same from him? II. DOTH he, or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish) diligently look to the doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at due time? And doth he keep your Church or Chappel clean from dust, cobwebs, and other annoyance? Doth he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours before the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the people may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of this life, doth he, upon notice given him thereof, toll a Bell, as hath been accustomed, that the neighbours may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favour of God? TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, School-masters, Physicians, Chirurgeons, and Midwives. I. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almes-house, or Free-School, not of the Kings Foundation or Patronage? Who was the Found∣er, or is now the Patron thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue, or
Stipend, belonging to the Governors or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every respect as it ought to be? and are the Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the intention of the Founder, and of such grants and ordinances as have been made con∣cerning the same? II. DOTH any man keep a publick or private School in your Pa∣rish, who is not allowed thereunto by the Bishop? Doth your School∣master teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion set forth by Au∣thority? Doth he cause them upon Sundays and Holy-days orderly to repair to your Church or Chappel? and see that they behave themselves there quietly and reverently, during the time of Divine Service and Sermon? III. DOTH any man in your Parish practice Physick, or Chirur∣gery, or any Woman take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without approbation and license from the Ordinary? TIT. VII. Quaeries to be put to the Minister, concerning the Church-wardens and Side-men. I. ARE the Church-wardens of your Parish yearly and duly cho∣sen by the joynt consent of the Minister and Parishioners; or one of them by the Minister, and the other by the Parishioners? II. HAVE the former and last Church-wardens given up their due Accompts to the Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Church-wardens the moneys remaining in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chappel? III. DO the Church-wardens and Side-men take diligent care, and see who of the Parishioners be absent from the Divine Service and Sermon in your Church or Chappel upon Sundays and Holy-days? And if they find any of them to have absented themselves without a sufficient cause, do they by warrant from some of the Iustices of Peace levy of them, by way of distress upon their goods, the sum of 12 pence for every such day of their absence, according to the Act of Parliament in that case provided? And do they distribute the several sums so levied among the poor of your Parish, according to the Law? IV. DO they present them that come late to Church after Divine
Service is begun, or depart before it be ended? Do they suffer none to stand idle, or talk together in the Church-porch, or to walk in the Church or Church-yard, during the time of Prayers, Preaching, or other Sacred Offices? V. DO they suffer no mis-behaviour or disorder to be done by men, women, or servants, or children, in your Church or Chappel? Are they careful that none of them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Commu∣nion-Table? Do they permit no Minstrels, no Morris-dancers, no Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds, to be brought or come into your Church, to the disturbance of the Congregation? VI. DO they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chappel, provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according to the number of Communicants? VII. DO they cause all Strangers that preach in your Church or Chappel to subscribe their Names the same day in a Book provided for that purpose, together with the name of the Bishop that licensed them to preach in this Diocese? And do they permit no other to preach? VIII. HAVE they (the Church-wardens and Side-men) now sworn to give in a true Answer unto all these Articles of Enquiry in all their several Titles, taken sufficient time to draw up their Present∣ments, and therein consulted with you their Minister for your faithful assistance? FOR know you assuredly, That as the true discharging of your Office is the chief means whereby publick Disorders, Sins and Offences in your Parish may be reformed and punished: So if you wilfully refuse to present such crimes and faults as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of by publick fame; That, in such cases, the Bishop and his Officers are to pro∣ceed against you, in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in Cases of wilful Omission and Perjury. SETH: EXON. THE Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the names of such of the younger sort in their several Parishes, as they judg fit to receive Con∣firmation from the Bishop, and to present them to be confirmed: especially such as having competently learned their Catechism, have not yet received the Holy Communion; and to present them to the Bishop to be confirm'd, as there shall be opportunity.
