e1074ac 52614643 175856
Anno Regni JACOBI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae, Primo. At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Nineteenth Day of May, Anno Dom. 1685. In the First Year of the Reign of Our Most Gracious Sovereign Lord JAMES, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c. I7 R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms EDINBƲRGH, Re-Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.
Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis An Act for Settling the Revenue on His Majesty for His Life; which was settled on His Late Majesty for His Life. WHereas by an Act of Parlia∣ment made in the Twelfth year of his late Majesties Reign of Blessed Memory, and Confirmed in the Thir∣teenth year of His said Ma∣jesties Reign, Entituled, A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage and Poundage, and other Sums of Money payable upon Merchandize Exported and Imported, A certain Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, according to the Rates therein men∣tioned, and Rules and Orders thereunto annexed, was given and granted unto His late Majesty for His Life: And whereas by an Act of Parliament made in the Twelfth year of his late Majesties Reign, and Confirmed in the Thirteenth Year of His said Ma∣jesties Reign, Entituled, A Grant of certain Impositi∣ons upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for the Increase of His Majesties Revenue during His Life, several Rates, Impositions, Duties and Charges upon Beer, Ale, Cyder, and other Liquors therein mentioned, were given & granted to His late Majesty for His Life: The Commons in Parliament Assembled, do
Give and Grant to Your most Excellent Majesty, the aforsaid Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, and the several Rates, Duties and Impositions upon Beer, Ale, Cyder, and other Liquors in the respective Acts aforsaid: And do most humbly be∣seech Your Majesty that it may be Enacted. And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice & Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this Your present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That the aforsaid Subsidy of Tonnage and Pondage, and the several Rates, Duties and Impositions upon Beer, Ale, Cyder, and other Liquors aforsaid, be Levied, Collected and Paid unto Your Majesty during Your Life: And that the aforesaid Acts, and every Article, Rule & Clause therein mentioned, from the Sixth day of February last past; And also that an Order of the Commons in Parliament Assembled, made in pursuance of the Rules and Orders annexed to the aforementioned Act of Tonnage and Poundage, for settling of Officers Fees, Dated the Seven∣teenth of May One thousand six hundred sixty two, & Signed by Sir Edward Turner then Speaker, shall be of full force and effect to all Intents and Pur∣poses, during Your Majesties Life, as if the same were particularly and at large Recited in the Body of this Act. And be it further Enacted by the Authority a∣foresaid, That one Act of Parliament made in the Twelfth Year of His late Majestiees Reign, Enti∣tuled, An act to prevent Frauds and Concealments of Cu∣stoms and Subsidies; As Also one Act made in the Fourteenth Year of His late Majesties Reign, En∣tituled, An Act for preventing Frauds, and Regulating Abuses in His Majesties Customs, be of full force and effect during His Majesties Life, which God long Preserve. FINIS.
