E3792A 47012433 174402
An Excellent Ballad of Patient Grissel. To the Tune of, The Brides Good-Morrow. A Noble Marquess As he did ride a hunting hard hy a forrest side, A fair and comely Maiden As she did sit a spinning his gentle eye espied, Most fair and lovely And of a coel grace was she, although in simple attire, She sung full sweetle VVith pleasant voyce melodiously, which set the Lords heart on fire: The more he lovd the more he might, Beauty bred his hearts delight And to this Damsel then he ent ith spéed, God spéed quoth he thou famous floer, Fair Mit is of this homely Bower, VVere Love and Vertue, ds i sweet content, VVith omel gesture And model mild behaviour, she bod him welcome then, She entertained him, aithu friendly manner, and all is Gentlemen: The Noble Marquess, In  heart felt such a flame, ch set his sences at strife, Quoth he fair Maiden, Shew me soon what is thy name, I mean to make thée my VVife, Grissel is my name quoth she, Far unfit for your degrée, A silly Maiden, and of Parents poor: Nay Grisel thou art rich he said, A vertuous, fair, and comely Maid, Grant me thy Love, and I will ask no more: At length she consented, And being both contented, they Married were with spéed: Her Country Russet VVas changed to silk and velvet, as to her state agréed; And when that she VVas trimly tired in the same, her beauty shined most bright, Far staining every Other fair and Princely Dame, that did appear in her ssht. Many envying her therefore, because she was of Parents poor, And twixt her Lord and she great  rife did raise: ome said this, and same said that, And some did call her bggers brt And to her Lord they would her oft dspise. O noble Marquess Quoth they why dost thou wrong us thus basely for to wed: VVho might have gotten, An Honourable Lady, into your Princely bed, VVho will not now, Your noble issue soon deride, which shall hereafter be born, That are of blood so base, Born by the mothers side, the which will bring them in scorn. Put her therefore quite away, And take to you a Lady gay, VVherein your Lineage may renowned be Thus every da they séemed to prate, That maliced Grissels good estate. VVho all this while took it most patiently. VVhen hat the Marquess Did sée that the were bent thus, against his frithful wife, VVhom he most dear, Tenderly and intirely, he loved as his life, Minding in secret for to prove her patient heart. Thereby her foes to disgrace, Thinking to shew her a hard discourteous part. That men might pitty her case, Great with child this Lady was, And at last it came to pass, Two goodly children, at one birth she had, A Son and a Daughter God had sent: VVhich did their Mother well content, And which id make their Fathers heart full glad. Great Royal eaing Was at these childrens Christening, and Princely tryumph made. Six weeks together All Nobles that came thither, were entertaind and staid, And when that all this pleasant Sporting quite was done, the Marquess a Messenger sent, For his young Daughter And his pretty smiling Son, declaring his full intent. How ha the babes must murdered be For so the Marquess did decrée. Come let me have the Children then he said, With that fair Grissel wept full sore, She wrung her hands & said no more, My Graious Lord and have his will obeyd.
The second part to the same Tune. SHe took the Babies, Even from the nursing Ladies, Betwéen her tender arms, She often wishes, With many sorrowful kisses, that she miht case their harms. Farwel, farwel, A thousand times my Children dear, never shall I sée you again, Tis long of me Your sad and woful Mother here, for whose sake both most be slain, Had I béen born of Royal race, You might have livd in happy case, But you must dye, for my unworthiness, Come Messenger of Death quoth she, Take my dearest babes to thee, And to their Father my complaints express, He took the children, And to his Noble master, he bore them then with spéed, Who in secret sent them, Vnto a Noble Lady, to be brought up in déed. Then to fair Grissel VVith a heavy heart he goes. where she sae mildly all alone, A pleasant gesture, And a lovely look she shows, as if no grief she had known. Quoth he my children now are slain, VVhat thinks air Grissel of the same, Séet Grissel now, declare thy mind to me, Sith you my Lord are pleasd with it, Poor Grissel thinks the action fit, Both I and mine at your command will be. My Nobles murmer, Fair Grissel at thy honour and I no ioy can have, Till thou be banisht Both from my court and presence as they uniusily crave, Thou must be script Out of thy stately garments all, and as thou camst to me. In homely gray, Instead of biss and purest pall, now all thy clothing must be My Lady thou must be no more, Nor I thy Lord which grieves mesore The poorest life must now content thy mind, A groat to thée I must not give, Thée to maintain whilst I do live, Against my Grissel such great foes I find. VVhen gentle Grissel Did hear these woful tydings, the tears stood in her eys, Nothing she answered, No words of discontentment, did from her lips arise, Her Velvet Gown Most patiently she stripped off, her kirtle of silk with the same, Her Russet Gown was brought again with many ascoff, to bear them her self she did frame; VVhen she was drest in this array, And ready was to part away, God send long life unto my Lord quoth she. Let no offence be found in this, To give me Lord a parting kiss VVith watry Eys farewel my Dear said she. From Princely Pallacs, Vnto her fathers Cottae, poor Grissel now is gone, Full xtéen winters, She lived there contented no wrong she thought upon, And at that time through All the Land the spéeches went the Marquess should married be. Vnto a Noble Lady great And of high Desceut and to the same all Parties did arée, The Marquess sent for Grissel fair The brides bed-chamber to prepare, That nothing therein might be found awry. The bride was with her brother come, VVhich was great ioy to all and some, But Grissel took all this most patiently, And in the morning VVhen as they should be wedded, her patience there was tryed, Grissel was charmed, Her sel in friendly manner for to attend the bride, Most willing She gave consent to do the same the bride in bravery was brest, And presently The Noble Marquess thither came with all his Lords at his request. O Grissel I will ask of thee, If to this match thou wilt agrée, Methinks thy looks, are waxed wondrous coy, VVith that they all began to smile, And Grissel she replyd the white God send Lord Marquess many years of ioy. The Marquess was moved, To see his best beloved thus patient in distress. He stept unto her And by the hand he took her these words he did express. Thou art the bride And all the brides I mean to have, these two thine own children be. The youthful Lady, On her knées did blessing crave, her brother as well as she, And you that envyed her estate, Whom I have made my chosen Mate, Now blush for shame, and honour vertuus life, The Chronicles of lasting Fame, Shall ever more extoll the name, Of patient Grissel my most constant wife: FINIS. London Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and W. Gibertson.
