j210 52211855 175708
A LETTER Written by KING JAMES To His HOLINESS The POPE, As 'tis Extracted out of the Registers taken at DUBLIN Most Holy Father. WE did by the Earle of Melfort, our principal Secretary of State, sig∣nify to your Holiness the joy we had in your promotion to the Sacred Chair. And those Letters which your Holiness did with your own handwrite to us, were such testimony of Fatherly love, and of your ten∣der compassion for what we suffer, that they have lessened the sense of our Calamity, and have proved of real consolation to us. The only Source of all these Re∣bellions against us is, that we embraced the Catholick Faith; and we do not disown, but that to spread the same not only in our three Kingdoms, but over all the dispersed Colonies of our Subjects in America, was our determination. To manifest this, there will need no other proof, then to see how lately we have proceeded in this Kingdom; for as we have frequent∣ly beaten the Rebels in small Parties, (which might have been one compleat Victory if they had not obstinately declined to give us Battle) so we have still turn'd all to the ad∣vantage of Religion, and hope very soon to see it here finally Established: Nor will it look hard, if but aided by some Subsidies, to compasse the same in our other Dominions, as soon as by Gods favour we shall be restored, seing our People do so ill bear the Usurpers Yoke, and so universally long for our Return. It would promote this Work if a gene∣ral peace were settled among the Catholick Princes, or a Truce at least, in case the time be too short for the other: For this would put an end to these Calamities begun in Ger∣many, and where the Hereticks ly now gnawing in the very bowels of the Church. But what need we speak on this Subject, where the things themselves are so Loud, and im∣plore your aid. The Apostolick Zeal of your Holiness must find out Remedies fit for these Evils; and in full confidence hereof, we beseech God to give your Holiness a long and Happy Reign. And we being, with all love and filial observance prostrate at your Feet. Do beg your Apostolick Benediction. Given at our Castle of Dublin, this 26. of November MDCLXXXIX. Printed at London, and Re-printed at Edinburgh, 1691.
