P3847 R182224 52614857 176044
THE Protestants Ave Mary, ON THE Arrival of Her most Gracious Majesty, MARY, Queen of England. HAIL all that's Great or Good! and let the Hail Oer spread Three Kingdoms, and like Truth prevail: Hail Mary! 'twas of old the Voice of Heaven; Nor are we Mortals of our share bereaven. Hail Mary full of Grace! speaks yet more clear, Since ev'ry Vertue is Constellate here. And all the Graces so entirely meet, That nothing less could such a Princess Greet. Nor rest we here: The LORD is with thee too: Or thy Great Lord could ne'er such Wonders do. Wonders! may well th' alarum'd World Surprize; It was of GOD, and marvellous in our Eyes! Wonders! as put its Motion to a stand, And not His Finger speaks, but Mighty Hand. Advance yet higher, and pursue the Hind; Blessed art thou amongst all Womankind: Since thou com'st cloath'd with Innocence and Peace, And bring'st the Charms, to make our Tempests cease: Since by thy Vertues we shall now Retreive Our gasping Laws, and gain them a Reprieve. Thy WILLIAM's maintain'd Ray will restore, England the Lustre it enjoy'd before; Our shatter'd Liberties and Laws maintain, And calmly Anchor Church and State again. But oh! We grieve, that yet, we can't apply, The last Division of that Rosary. We Wish, we Hope, we Pray, and will Pray on, Till we have gain'd Heaven's Favour in a SON: That then we may the whole Salute repeat, And make our Joys, as well as That compleat. Ye Miter'd Heads assist, call to Assize, Your strongest Zeals, and with them storm the Skies; We know, that fervent Prayer did never fail, And let Rome know, such Hereticks can prevail, And with a Holy Violence pluck down, A real Issue to support the Crown, Whilst their Addresses to Loretto made, Did only gain a Son in Masquerade. Thus we, to our Great MARY, pay our Hails, With Hearts as full, and swelling as her Sails; Thanks Winds, and Seas, and Ships, that wafted o'er, Our Blessed LADY to the British Shore. But above all, Thanks be to Heaven alone, That led Her from a State, unto a Throne;
Where She will hold (guided by th' Hand of GOD) The Dovelike Scepter, not an Iron Rod: So our late Model, She may them Reform, And with true English Interest perform, What James first promis'd; and advance our Glory, Beyond the Limits of Ancestral Story: For what can't England do, would she awake? Give Laws to Europe, and make Empires shake. Keep Mistress of the Undisputed Maine, And hold the Ballance Just, 'twixt France, and Spain; And once more make her useless Cannons Roar, Through both the Indies, and bring back their Ore. Search out new World, and Conquer old Ones too, Bomb Mexico, and Subjugate Peru: Beard the Proud Sophy, and the Grand Mogul; These are the Rays would make thy Glory full. Such mighty Acts, would make a Perfect Reign, And our Great WILLIAM Conquerour again. Shame, that our Lions should thus Dormant lye, And all our Spirits in a Lethargy; What have we done, but sought, what Saint's Day next? And our Care was, t' observe the Jesuits Text; To Court that Miss, to Proselyte this Fool, To see that Play, and to make this Man, Tool; To undermine, by Closet-work, the Brave, To awe the Vertuous, and advance the Knave; To hector little Masters of the Arts, To study how to lose the Peoples Hearts. These were our Works, when Lobs, and Pens, and Brents, Were to our Court the Mighty Ornaments; These were the Statesmen cull'd from all the rest, Yet, if once try'd, could never stand the Test; Since by these little Arts, they vilely made French Lillies flourish, and our English fade. But now the Scene is chang'd, the Cloud's dispers'd, And we reliev'd from all we were oppres'd; Our Angel comes, by whose Diviner Ray, Darkness is fled, and we salute the Day; Welcome, thrice Welcome, to the Old Whitehal, Thy Glorious Presence makes us happy all. To Providence, and Thee, we ought to raise Altars for Thanks, and Pyramids for Praise; The Church shall Triumph, and the State Rejoyce, And sing Te Deums with united Voice: So may'st thou be belov'd by Wholes, not Parts, And ever live the Regent Queen of Hearts: And with it gain all Purses, Arms, and Men, Proud to enforce the Treaty Nimeguen. Then Visit Monsieur with United Powers, See Paris too, and humble her high Towers; Storm the Bastile, possess the Louvre too; What can't Great WILLIAM and Bright MARY do! Revenge Aurange, and with Confederates call Such as shall make his Slaves poor Quakers all. Force Lofty Lowis Abdicate his Crown, Time bars no Prince's Right, 'tis still thy own; And when that Mighty Monarch's brought thus low, For Pitty's sake, allow him Fountainbleau. Thus may'st thou Conquer, and Amen all say, Thus may'st thou Reign, whiles we our Homage Pay, And make thy Entry, our Great Lady-Day. London: Printed for R. Baldin, near the Black-Bull in the Old-Baily. 1689.
