12483 S92777 [ocn]166384444 191561
LEVI HIS COMPLAINT: OR, THE MOANE OF THE POORE MINISTERIE. LAMENT. 3. vers. 59. O LORD, thou hast seene my wrong, judge thou my cause. By WILLIAM GVILD, Minister at KING-EDWARD. EDJNBƲRGH, Printed by Andro Hart, ANNO 1617 By Authoritie.
TO THE SACRED MAIESTIE OF THEIR dearest & dread Soueraigne GREAT BRITANS MONARCH, &c. Psalme 20. vers. 9. Saue Lord, and let the King heare vs in the day that wee call. IT was a grie∣uous wrong (Deare Lord and dread Soueraigne) done by the men of Gibeah, Iudg. 20. that made the Leuite to com∣plaine so to Israel in Mispeh: Nomb. 22. It was oft smiting and an ex∣traordinarie extremitie (as a secundarie cause) that made Baalam, the sonne of Peors Asse to speake: And doeth the wilde Asse bray
when hee hath grasse? Iob. 6.5. or loweth the Oxe when hee hath fodder? (saieth that mirrour of patience Iob) A grie∣uous increasing bōdage likewise made Israel to grone: Exod. 2.23. And a desperate-seeming-danger droue Mordecai to Esther, Esther. 5. and her againe venterouslie to the King. Euen so woefull desolation in most partes, and that of no small boundes of your Majesties Kingdome here, where the Kingdome of CHRIST by preaching thorow want of prouision with-holden, is not yet established, and the musseling of their mouthes who trea∣deth out the Lordes Corne, Deut. 25.4. 1. Tim. 5.18 where they are retained, but beggerlie intertained, and the ouer-loading of them with base contempt, forceth vs all to come to your Majestie at this time, with Peters wordes in our mouthes, Matth. 8.25. crying and crauing, Master helpe vs, else we perish. It was the will of the Supreame Lord of Heauen, if thou seest thine enemies asse lying vnder his burden, Exod. 23. helpe him vp againe: And a righteous man regardeth the life of his verie beast (saieth that wise Preacher.) Prov. 12.10 If pi∣tie & charitie then command helpe to the brute of an enemie; and if God commende care of the beast of the fielde, what may these then expect of their Su∣preame Lord on earth, beeing his owne Leuites, and his makers inheritance, fayling for weaknesse procee∣ding of want, and falling for wearinesse proceeding of contempt? As Hannah then answered to Eli, 1. Sam. 1.15. blame vs no to haue powred out our soules before our Lord, nor that wee come as the people did to our godlie Nehemiah Nehem. 5 5
(whose soule the Lord binde in the bundle of Life) complaining of our necessitie and wrong, that there is no power left in our handes: for others haue our li∣uinges, and wee are in subjection, Genes. 49. being like Issachars asse, couching downe betweene heauie burdens: but most vnlike to Iudah's, which was tyed to the best Vine. For it is th'estate of the poore Ministerie that wee moane, and would haue mended, who as if with the Capucian they had wowed pouertie, are so plumed vpon by these whose greede would haue neede, an in∣separable accident, quarto modo proprium to Mini∣sters, that as Beth-auens Priestes are depriued of their lawfull Matrimonie, so they thinke that Beth-els Prea∣chers should bee denuded of their lawfull patrimo∣nie: Exod. 36 2. Mac. 4. and therefore they haue turned Israels afferre to the Sanctuarie, to Lysimachus auferre from the same: beeing onelie skilfull to decline in the ablatiue case, their onelie Arithmeticke consisting in substraction from the Church, to make vp an addition to them∣selues, Psal. 69.9. Iohn. 2.17. and inverting that speach of David compe∣tent vnto CHRIST, for their zeale hath eaten vp the Lordes house. Shall Israel then fulfill their taske, Exod. 5.7. and haue their straw with-drawne, to gather short stubble to them∣selues? Shall Iaakob feede his masters flocke, Genes. 31. Nehem. 13. and haue his wages so changed and impaired? Shall the Le∣uite bee either forced to desert the worke, because of the portion with-holden, as in the time of captiuitie and desolation? Judg. 18. or else to turne in to Micahs pettie portion, as in the time when there was no King in
Israel, and a whole Tribe scarse cared for one Priest amongst them all? Shall Scotia bee rightlie construed darknesse, in re∣garde of manie places thereof, where that light which is the life of men neuer yet shined, nor that worde of glorious peace neuer yet sounded, but are a people sitting in the shadow of death, thorow want of the meanes of the Gospel of Life? And shall the Ambas∣sadoures of the King of Israel bee so vngratelie in∣treated by the Ammonites, Sam. 10. as to be so nearlie shauen, and their garmentes curtailed; and shall not this bee showne to our godlie David? Pouertie is now so seated where plentie was instal∣led, and contempt where honour had place, that where the Churches bread was sometime like Ashers, Genes. 49. fatte and abounding, nowe shee must bee content of Ruthes scattered glaininges, Ruth. 2. Lament. 1.2 Mal. 2.7 for all her friends haue dealt vnfaithfully with her, and are her enemies: And where many excellent thinges were spoken of her (as of the citie of God) and glorious were the feete of those that brought the gladde tydinges of peace, nowe shee may exclaime, saying, Lament. 1.11 See, O Lord, and consider, for I am become vile. Pastors, as if they were professed Poenitentiars, in manie places are kept at vnder in disciplinarie subie∣ction, 2. Sam. 13. nill they will they, like Amnon, looking leane from day to day, their Cottages more spacious than specious (albeit little of either:) a great part of their plenishing, 2. King. 4.10 beeing with Elisha, their stoole and bed, their table and candle-sticke: and forced in other thinges to goe in one categorie with Gibeons ambas∣sadours
sent vnto Ioshua: Ioshua. 9.13. beeing so farre vnable to vse hospitalitie (as th'Apostle requireth in such) to others, 1. Tim. 3. as they haue more neede to bee receiued (like Eliah, 1. King. 27. with the Widow of Sarepthah) in hospitalitie by others. People, who starue for the bread of Life, haue Zions dolorous threnodie put in their mouthes, Jerem. 4.31. and are moued to crie, Woe is mee nowe, for my soule fainteth be∣cause of the murtherers: So that justlie may the Lord expostulate by the Prophet, saying, Also in their winges is found the blood of the soules of poore Innocentes, Jerem. 2.34. I haue not found it in holes, but vpon the high places: pra∣ctising flatte contrary to that prayer, Matth. 6.10. Mat. 8.34. Let thy Kingdome come: and with the Gergesins for their filthie lucres sake, expelling CHRIST out of their coastes. The poore, by this sacrilegious robberie, who are our flesh and CHRISTS members, and whose crie, is his crauing, and their hand his treasurie, are cruellie bereft, and carelesselie troden vnder: So that where out of their hospitall oratories a consort of prayers and praises for their bene-factours should haue beene like incense offered vp to the Lord, they are forced in their feeble strayinges, and bed-fast staruinges, to poste such groanes to the Tribunall of Iustice, as may bee sittest complainers of their want, and pleaders for their wrong. The Schooles of the Prophets, and Seminaries of the Church, what interest they haue receiued, euen forrainers doe knowe, and home-bred doe regrate. As the Philistims filled Isaacs fountaines, Genes. 26. which his
fathers seruantes had digged; so stopping likewise by their earthlie auarice, those sacred conduites, which others had founded, from whence the pleasant streames of Sciences should flowe and fill the land, ut hinc etiam, & lucem & pocula sacra. O leaue then, Sir, such a sacred stampe of your Royall presence at this time, for the comfort of the mourners behinde you, that the happie relish thereof may delight the posteritie to recorde, & characterize in letters of loyall loue vpon the tables of rejoyced heartes, Basilic. dor. booke 2. pag. 44. that which your Majestie acknowledgeth to bee the fairest stile of a Christian Prince, to bee a nur∣sing father of the Church of IESVS. And as your Majesty hath caused restitution of the portions of the Prelates of the Church, thereby to abolish our paritie, so extende your gracious and like tender care to the Preachers of the Church, and ab∣rogate their pouertie, 1. King. 3. who with the poore woman that pleaded restitution of her fraudefullie-stollen childe from her, before you, our godlie and wise Sa∣lomon, claimeth equitie likewise, suum cuique. And as you are a Defender of the Faith, bee like∣wise of the maintainance of the meanes thereof, and so inlarge his Kingdome, who peaceablie hath inlar∣ged yours: and see that hee haue his right, who must keepe you and yours euer in your right Royall: coun∣ting euer (as your selfe saieth) the flourishing of the Church to bee one of the chiefest pointes of your earthlie glorie. Basil. dor. 2. booke, fol. 43. In some part then, Sir, let the pietie and prudence
of your selfe and your estates, amend at this time that former act of annexation: whereby not onlie landes, (which more tolerablie may be retained) but also be∣sides tithes, the very small gleanings of poore & petty Vicarages are monstrouslie metamorphized tempo∣rall, and made Lordes and Barons customes: so that the Patrons nowe are Parsons, and they fleece the sheepe who feede not the flocke. Or (as that reuerende Father affir∣med) if erections can not suffer further correction, & robberie restitution, that Salomons dimension at least of due sufficiencie, may be measured foorth, which may both vindicate from pride and contempt. Whome you loue, therefore, let them not keepe such an eating moth, and consuming canker, which howsoeuer for the present like stollen waters the same seeme sweet, yet in end it shall proue but like the accur∣sed water, whereof the guiltie woman did drink, cau∣sing swelling at first indeede, but consuming rotten∣nesse at last: And as Iaakob was to Esau, Genes. 25. the holie thing shall bee the supplanter of the vnholie vsurper: so that getting the pottage, and hunting their profite, they shall lose the birth-right, and misse the blessing. For Dans Serpent will so bite the horse-heeles once, Genes. 49. that assuredlie the ryder will in ende fall back∣wardes: Ioshua. 7. Genes. 41. and Achans theft will bring him and his whole house to a consuming fire at last: Pharaohs leane Kye and blasted Eares of Corne, when they haue deuoured the fatte and the full, shall bee still as leane and blasted as before: 1. King. 41. and Achabs robbing of
poore Naboths Vineyarde, will lose to him his life, and his rich Kingdome. Dan. 5 Nebuchadnezars spoyling of the Temple, will once bee seene on Belthazzar his successour: xod. 16.20. and Manna's residue kept against com∣mand, will but turne to vermine, prouoking God, and polluting the vessels, nas. 4.7. Ionas gourde must wither and decay, because of the hidden worme at the roote thereof: . King. 4. And if coloquintida bee gathered amongst the other herbes, death doubtlesse shalbe in the pot. Esops crow with her collop to the nest, shall carrie the cole with it: and assuredlie the execution of the threatned curse shall follow on the medling with the forbidden tree: Genes. 2.17 Mal. 3.9 Hab. 2.6 Deut. 27.17 nd 24, 15 So that Israels prouerbe shall bee ta∣ken vp against him that increaseth that which is not his, by inquiring, Ho, how long? And if he bee accur∣sed who incroacheth vpon his neighboures borders; or if the detaining of the wages of an hyred seruant cryeth for wrath: much more who doeth so on the Lordes limites, and shall that of the Lords imployed messengers shout aloude for vengeance. When the Starre shined which ledde vnto Christ, Math. 2.9 the Wise-men of the East following the direction thereof, came to Bethlehem, and gaue giftes to Christ. And shall it bee thought wisedome nowe, when the Starre of the Gospel hath re-appeared, against the di∣rection thereof to pull from Christ? Revel. 11 Shall the Lampe of the Sanctuarie bee kindled, and the Oyle thereof bee with-drawne? Isai. 7.2 Shall the Aramit-papist seeke the ouer-throwe of Hierusalems doctrine, and our Ephraemite-professoures joyne with them to seeke the
ouer-throw of the maintainance of doctrine? the one beeing like the Iewes, who sought Christes life: the other like the Romane Souldiours, who parted Christs garmentes. And shall Mount Sion, the Lords chosen, Isai. 1.8.30 remaine thus still as a cottage in a Vineyarde, like a lodge in a gar∣den of cucumers, and as a citie besieged of the enemies? Shall the ministerie of the worde, the foundation of this Countreyes peace, bee as a Widow left to the spoyle, as an cake whose leafe fadeth, and a garden that hath no water? And shall they still receiue onelie in their handes, that which the Souldioures put mockinglie in Christes, Such are many modi∣fied stipendes and assigna∣tions. Matt. 27.29. Jerem. 2.9. an emptie hollowe reede (to wit) to vp∣holde them. Goe to the Iles of Chittim, and beholde: and send vnto Kedar, and the Countreyes round about; and take diligent heede, and see, if there bee anie such thinges: Mal. 3.8 Isai. 5.7. or what nation there is that hath robbed their gods. Surelie, the Lordes expectation was otherwise, hee looked for judgement and zeale but beholde oppression, and robberie: for righteousnesse, but beholde a crying. And indeede (Sir) while they were catching all into their angle (beeing with the Prophetesse sonne, Hab. 1.15. Isai. 21. Genes. 49.21 as speedie robbers, and swift to the prey:) They were as Naphthali, like hindes let goe, giuing goodly wordes, and promising sufficient plantations: but they haue pro∣ued in ende as Benjamin, of whome it is saide, Genes. 49.27 Hee shall rauin as a wolfe, in the morning hee shall deuoure the prey, and at night hee shall diuide the spoyle. So that the Church may say as is saide, Lament. chap. 3. vers. 10.
They were to mee as Baires lying in waite, and as Lyons in secrete places. So they get the goods, leauing the good of the flocke altogether vncared for: for like skilfull aiming Benjamits, dg. 20. they haue hit the mark they would beene at, albeit sinistrouslie, with the left hand, and there they put a period, inuerting that speach of the King of Sodom to Abraham, Gen. 14.20. Da mihi animas, bona cape tibi: to giue vs the goods, and let others take the soules cure. And as Ieroboam to aduance his Idolatrie made Priestes of the lowest and skirtes of the people who were not of the sonnes of Leui: . King. 12.31 So manie named pa∣trons, so they may inhaunce their commoditie: and like Micah, udg. 18. by a priuate paction for a pettie por∣tion indent with the intrant, they care not whome they present: . Sam. 5. albeit Dagon should bee set vp anewe beside the Arke of God: counting no longer for the Preacher than hee can serue for their particulare, and so long onelie will sit by Cherith, . King. 17.7 onas. 4.7 or repose vnder the gourde, as the one flourisheth, or the other floweth. With good Nehemiah then, Nehem. 13 11.14. Nehem. 5.9. Sir, say to your Rulers and great men, Why is the house of God thus forsaken and neglected? That which you doe is not good: ought you not to walke in the feare of our God? for the reproach of those that are our enemies, and assemble your Le∣uites, reponing them in their places, that your God may remember you, and not wipe out your kindnesse that you haue shewed on the House of GOD, and Officers thereof. And as the Angel saide vnto Gideon, Iudg. 6.12. The Lord is
with thee, thou valiant man: goe then, Sir, in this your might, and purge your land of such hatefull robberie, And wee hope that the prosperous successe that fol∣lowed good Hezekiah, shall likewise attend your Ma∣jesties zeale heerein: whereof it is spoken, 2. Chron. 30.12. that the hand of God was vpon all Iudah, and hee gaue them one heart to obey the Kinges commandement according to the word of the Lord. And of whome it is recorded in the register of eternitie, that in all the workes that hee began for the seruice of the house of God, 2. Chron. 31.21. because hee did them with all his heart, therefore hee prospered (saieth the Scripture.) By doing whereof, wee hope also in the mightie GOD of IACOB, that your Majestie shall haue the greater assurance of securitie against all the enemies of your Royall person and estate: And Goureā or Powder treasons. Joshua. 3.6 blood-red, Genes. 25.25 or fire-red Esaus, that traiterouslie are hunted out against your sacred Majestie: and that the prayers of your relieued Leuites, sent vp vnto him whome they carrie on their shoulders before the people in the Arke of his eternall Couenant, shall bee a secrete guarde, like Elisha's, against both their Shimei-like malice, and Achitophel-like machinations. 2. Sam. 16. And if hee was pronounced blessed who enlarged Gad, much more shall you and your land bee, Deut. 33.20 who enlargeth GOD, his right whereof hee is robbed, and his Leuites inheritance. And if heathen Pharaoh was so carefull for his Priestes portions in the scarsitie of Aegypt, Genes. 47. that they should retaine their landes; much more are wee assu∣red,
that our Christian IACOB, and zealous Soue∣raign, wil haue a care of the Preachers of Iesus, in some sufficient measure to restore them their Liuinges. And seeing that Baals Priestes are so bountifullie dealt with by Achab in Israel, and sit at Iezabels table, that our godlie Iehosaphat will not suffer the Lordes Prophets in Iudah to bee vncared for likewise: 1. King. 18. or, as the glaininges of the grapes of Ephraim were better than the vintage of Abiezer; so that the smallest accidents of Popish shauelinges, Iudg. 8.2. should bee still better than paine∣full Preachers greatest allowance. And what woefull effectes, and fearefull fruites this damnable bramble of sacrilegious rapine and impouerishing of the Church produceth, is too well feene, but not so sorrowed. For first this impouerishing of the Ministerie ma∣keth both them and the calling contemptible, as if the curse of Ruben were brought vpon the same: the excellencie of dignitie, Genes. 49.4. and the excellencie of power is gone, and Ieremies threnodie put in their mouthes, saying, I am made as the off-scouringes of the worlde, Lamen. 3.45 and as the refuse in the midst of the people: So that Obadiahs reue∣rence to Eliah is forgotten: 1. King. 18. Acts 10. 2. King. 13. Cornelius honour to Pe∣ter, and Ioash estimation of Elisha, is buried in the graue with him. Wherefore the like judgement is to bee feared, as for the like cause was threatned by the Prophet, saying, The anger of the Lord hath scattered them, neither shall hee any more regarde them, for they reuerenced not the face of the Priestes, Lament. 4.16 nor had in estima∣tion the countenance of the Elders.
2. What abstraction it maketh from doing of the Lordes worke diligentlie, woefull experience too well declareth: for where that precept of Salomon, Prov. 27.23 1. Tim. 4.16 1. Pet. 5.2 Bee diligent to know th'estate of thy flocke, requireth a whole man, busilie occupied, this impouerishing rapine, (like that false mother, who desired the diui∣sion of the Childe) halfes manie men in such sorte, as thorowe Midians spoyling, Iudg. 6.11 Gideon must priuatelie goe to the threshing himselfe: So manie poore Prea∣chers, when with hand-griping giuing, and heart∣grieving getting, they haue receiued their short straw for their long taske: for necessitie of life, they are for∣ced besides to vse other shiftes: and as they are ser∣uantes to the flocke for CHRISTES sake, so to bee drudges, in a manner, to themselues, for maine ne∣cessities sake, beeing heerein often times forced to say with the Apostle, Acts 20.34 These handes haue ministred to my necessities, and these that are with mee. 3. It is a readie way heereby to make that feare∣full curse fall vpon the land, Like people, like Priest: Isai. 24.2 and 28.10 so that when the people shall bring him a booke, saying, Reade this wee pray thee: hee shall answere, I cannot, for it is sea∣led, and I am couered with the spirit of slumber. Thus shall not the Priestes lippes preserue knowledge: But when they shall seeke the lawe of God at his mouth, they shall come to the welles, and finde no water, and returne with their ves∣sels emptie: the holie Vrim thus being darkened, Isai. 56.10 Deut. 22.10 & the Lordes people perishing for want of knowledge. So that the best estate of the Ministerie shall bee but plowing with an Oxe and an ignorant Asse together, their
right arme being cleane dryed vp, Zech. 11.17 and their right eye woe∣fullie darkened. 4. It greatlie hindereth the sinceritie of Gods worde, 1. Sam. 6. in the euidence and libertie thereof, so that rightly it may be called the musseling of their mouths who carrie the Lordes Arke from lowing freelie as they goe, neither turning to the right nor left hand: or as cleane beastes diuiding the hoofe: and disseca∣ting the worde aright, 2. Tim. 2.15 rebuke to whome rebuke be∣longeth. Iudg. 18. Therefore the Bethlemite Leuite must tole∣rate the Teraphim, and the Idoles that are in Mount Ephraim, for feare of the losse of his place found out, and of the want of Micah's pettie portion, and the Baptist must looke for no more fauour of Herod, Marke. 6. if hee once touch the hauing of his brothers wife: So that Dum medicas adhibere manus ad vulner a pastor Abnegat, Virg. Georg. vitium alitur viuitque tegendo. Christes Kingdome thus nowise increasing, but that of Sathans tyrannie ouer men altogether standing. 5. It wonderfullie discourageth Parentes to traine vp their Children at Schooles of Learning or Vniuersities: especiallie in that sacredest Science of Heauenlie Diuinitie, either within or without the Countrey, for their better inabling for the Holie Mi∣nisterie, as likewise the verie heartes of Youths them∣selues, when they see such beggerlie prouisions one∣lie to bee looked for, as the best rewarde of their pain∣full studies, Dat Gale∣nus opes, &c. and the richest recompence of their ex∣pensiue charges, † all other Sciences hauing better &
more assured hopes, and this onelie beeing depriued of that double honour, whereof Gods Spirite hath thought it worthie, 2. Cor. 4.2. 1. Tius. 5.17 Prov. 3.9 due reuerence (to wit) and debt∣bound recompence, the with-drawing of this one, being the vnhappie cause of the want of that other. 6. It exileth in a manner, the best and quickest spirites of our Nation to other Kingdomes, and so depriueth their owne Conntrey of their fruitfull la∣boures: Which otherwise to the great aduancement of both Church and Commonwealth at home, hap∣pilie it might injoye: And hath moued many to turne to the Idolatrie and plentie of Aegypt; leauing the sinceritie of Moyses, and societie of Israel. Genes. 26. and 46. Therefore it is, that as Isaac went to Gerar, and Iaakob to sojourne in Aegypt, where there was foode; Euen so they get themselues elsewhere, where Vertue and Learning haue their owne reward. And thus our Sunnes shine in others Firmamentes, and our best Trees fructi∣fie in other mens Gardens: Mat. 13.57 Luke 4.27 So that as Nazarethes in∣gratitude may bee our double dittie: so sic vos non vo∣bis, may bee our quadruple diton. 7. It is the speciall cause and occasion, both of the grouth and cōtinuance of ignorance & Poperie in the land, wherby ye language of Ashdod halfes with ye speach of Israel: Nehem. 13 And Sanballat with his conspiring associates, attendeth the hinderance of the building of the walles of Hierusalem: and Rehum with Tatnai, Nehem. 4 Esra. 4. and their companions the rearing of the Temple: and so long still, shall Dagon stande in such places, till by preaching the presence of Gods Arke make him to
fall, and the Leuites that carrie the same receiue their due portion. 8. Besides that, it maketh the Lord angrie with the Land, Aalach 3 9. & as Malachi saieth, bringeth his grieuous curse and visitation vpon the same. It is likewise the most poysonable plant, and perilous practise, against the good of the Ciuill estate of the Countrey, as ne∣uer anie Age did knowe the like before. For doeth not daylie experience manifestlie teach, that no greater yoke nor spurre of compulsion is, and hath beene vsed, to force Gentlemen sell & put away their auncientlie possessed Landes (which are to them as Naboths deare Vineyarde) for halfe value and leffe than the power and possession of the right of the tithe: for hence it is, that otherwise Landes haue lyen waste: By imposed oudge gir∣omes, which compare, and he Princes axations shall no wise quall them. for none so could labour them, and manie are vndone and ‡ wracked in the whole Kingdome, dis∣sention and grieuous grudging is founde amongst equalles, the heauie yoke of slauerie is laide vpon in∣ferioures, Land is the most commonmerchandize of anie: fewars are in no better condition nor farmers: Policie in building and planting is hindered: the la∣bourer is exacted on by his Lands owner: the owner is slaued againe by his Tithe-master: Tithes are the thing in all the Kingdome most griedilie gaped at: Preachers and the Poore are impiouslie robbed: and in a worde, both Church and Commonwealth woe∣fullie wronged. And what an aduantage for intestine troubles or vproares (which the Lord auert) this sacrilegious ra∣pine
is, or may bee, and ingrossing of the Tithes of sundrie Parishes, and of heritable proprieters Lands, into the hands of mightie men, and of the hinderance of the Princes seruice speedilie to suppresse the like, anie one may easilie gesse: for the power of the Tithe not only slaueth men vnto them in the time of peace, but So that men cannot bee said to be free lieges. also in time of commotion, if not onelie, not cōming against them bee, albeit in the seruice of ju∣stice, & of the supreme Magistrate: but also if ready ri∣sing, and cleauing vnto them bee not, to bee associate actors with them of their praesumptuous designes, no lesse to bee looked for than Summum jus thereaf∣ter, which heerein I am sure may bee called Summa injuria: and which vpon euerie other light discon∣tentment also, men are nowe menaced with, sundrie feeling likewise the stroke of their lightlie conceiued but heauilie executed, wrath. And yet manie of these, like the rauenous fowles, of all other are the leanest: they catch all, and can keepe nothing: for the Lord bloweth vpon it, and as Namans leprosie with his gift cleaued to Gehesi; Hagg ai. 1.7 so GODS curse with his portion adhaereth to them like∣wise. 2 King 5 Seeing therefore (SYR) that this hatefull Hydra doeth luxuriate and breake foorth into so manie dan∣gerous heads, bee to this Serpent as a valiant Hercu∣les; and suppresse in time, the feared grouth of such daylie and deadlie euilles, which assuredlie otherwise will bee found to ensue. And because likewise Iaakob hath an Esau with
him in the wombe, Genes. 25. and IESVS a Iudas going in his companie, & nos nostro jugulamus gladio, let your Ma∣jesties holie zeale take such order with these intestine cut-throates, and mothes of the Ministerie, who for their owne priuate gaine, by getting great girsomes, by subdolous assignations, and other vile and late in∣uented forgeries, 2. Tim. 4.10 with Demas hath forsaken CHRIST, and embraced the worlde, and so dilapidate the li∣uinges, which they in good estate, either of present possession, or certaine expectation, were presented and admitted vnto, and dealt without anie regarde of posteritie or successour: that it is a great hazarde if euer the Gospel flourish in these places, which most of them once occupied: who if they were mar∣ked with the like impression of Iudgement, as was before inflicted vpon their fellow Gehesi, I feare (Sir) there should neede more Leper-houses within the diocies of this your Majesties Kingdome: whose suc∣cessoures doubtlesse shall wish of them, ob. 3.11. as Iob did of himselfe in his impatiencie, that their Birth-day had beene their Buriall, and that the judgement of good Iosiah, King. 13 executed vpon the bones of Beth-els Priestes, were likewise so on theirs. SYR, For his sake therefore whose Faith you de∣fende, maintaine his cause in this also; and suffer not the Church to bee a denne of theeues: but whether he bee Prelate or Preacher whatsoeuer, that impaireth Leuies inheritance, and emptieth the Sancturie, with the whippe-coardes of your royall authoritie redresse such wrong, and driue them out of the Temple.
And albeit it bee too Serò, as Vlisses caused binde him to the mast, lest hee should indanger himselfe, and perill his followers by the intising voyce of the singing Syrens. So binde vp, SYR, the handes of all Ecclesiasticall persons, that seeing no vsufractuar nor life-renter of mans right can prejudge the lawfull heire or successour, or dispone but for their owne time by the Lawe: so that the same equitie in like manner in Gods right may stand. Otherwise Religion, the maine pillar of this Kingdome, at last assuredlie will ruinate and decay: and while anie thing shall re∣maine as yet to dilapidate, no stay shall bee, till like the play-fishes of Iordan, in the common speate of exemplare wickednesse, speedilie all hurle downe in∣to the dead Sea of generall defection, and desperate desolation. Whereby the fire which should warme the succes∣soures in their places, shall not onelie bee extingui∣shed, 1. Sam. 2. but men bee made (as by Eli's sonnes impietie) for the Preachers fault to disdaine the profession. They also who preach spirituall libertie, shall fasten the yoke of corporall bondage vpon their neckes, whose tithes they set to others. In Gods judgement likewise they make themselues contemptible for no longer are they respected than they haue done the turne: And last, they leaue the coale and fewell of such woefull variance amongst men, which often hath proued, and shall proue, a flaming fire when they lye in ashes. O let your sacred heart then, SYR, harbour our
regrate, and by the royall gates of your eye and eare let gratious accesse bee to that seate of pittie, that the bellowes bee not seene to bee brunt, Ierem. 6.26. the Lead con∣sumed in the fire, and the founder to haue melted in vaine: or that with the Prophete wee bee still made to mourne, that the haruest is past, the sommer is ended, and wee are not holpen: Ierem. 8 20. but with good Hezekiah, spea∣king comfortablie to your Leuites, & doing so, that they may bee incouraged in the Lawe of the Lord: 2 Chr. 30.22. & 31.4. and hauing our petition without neede of repetition gratiouslie regarded, supplying out of the store-house of your prudent heart, what wee meane and would speake: and mending with your powerfull hande, what wee moane and would haue done, with inflamed heartes, and enlarged mouthes, bearing Israels affection, and borrowing their wordes, wee may euer breath, and burst foorth in the like louing prayer to GOD, and loyall wish for our KING. TO GOD. PSAL. XXI. LORD, preuent thine anointed with liberall blessings, giue vnto him his heartes desire, Psal. 21. and denie him not the request of his lippes. Let his glorie bee great in thy saluation, and grant him a long life, euen for euer and euer. As thou hast set much honour and dignitie vpon him, so set him still as blessinges for euer, and make him glad with the joye of thy countenance.
TO THE KING. PSAL. XX. THE Name of the GOD of Iaakob defende thee, and sende thee helpe from his Sanctuarie, and streng∣then thee out of Zion. The LORD grant thee according to thine heart, Psal. 20. and fulfill all thy purpose; that wee may rejoyce in thy salua∣tion, and set vp the banner of praise in the Name of our GOD, when the LORD shall performe thy petitions. AMEN. AMEN. A H printer's device of Andro Hart
ON Caltha since that Phoebus deign's to blinke, Let others fauours joyntlie therewith linke. And since that Royall verdict doth allow, These limned Lines, let others judgements bow. A. D.
