L3271 R180180 [ocm]62369463 188008
Loves Master-Piece: OR, The Coy Lady Over-come at Last. She seemed coy, as other Ladies use, Who (that they like best) sometimes will refuse, But in conclusion, take them in the nick Of time, there's few that will refuse a P—eticoat. To the Tune of, With a ha, ha, ha, you will undo me, &c. stock woodcut busts A Gamester and a pretty Lady, went together for to play, Richly deckt, as fine as may be, on a pleasant Holly-day. With a pish, nay fie, you must not dally, pray leave off, where you begun; For if you touch my naked Belly, I am sham'd and quite undone. This gallant he had rich attire, with his fine Semarr, and Sash, Love had set his heart on fire, he was braver then Dick Swash; VVith a pish, nay fie, &c. With his Golden Hilted Rapier, and his Muff hung in a string, And his Wigg, how he did vapour, he was fine as any thing: With a pish, nay fie, &c. His Lady she was very splendant, both behind, and eke before, With her Bracelets, Peak, and Pendant, and her long strip't Iusticore; With a pish, nay fie, you must not dally, pray leave off, where you begun; For if you touch my naked belly, I am sham'd and quite undone.
The second part, to the same Tune. HEr Lipps more pure then any Amber and her Neck as white as Snow, I wish I had her in my Chamber, I would serve her I know how: with a pish, nay fie, you must not dally, pray leave off, where you begun, For if you touch my naked Belly, I am sham'd and quite undone. To speak truth, she was a beauty, of a rare vermilion hue, To admire her, was my duty, had you séen her, so would you: with a pish, nay fie, &c. Hand in hand they walk't together, glorious as the morning bright, Casting glances each at other, as fore-runners of delight. with a pish, nay fie, you must not dally, pray leave off, where you begun, For if you chance to raise my belly, I am sham'd and quite undone. Coy she was, as e're was creature, loath to yield to his desire, Viewing of each comely feaure, set this gallants heart on fire: with a pish, nay fie, &c. With Complements he courted highly, for to win her to his will, She reply'd to him as slil, making this her burden still; with a pish, nay fie, &c. Dearest Lady give attention, seal this motion if you can, For to my best apprehension, you were made to please a man: with a pish, nay fie, &c. Goddess Venus was the fairest, for lame Vulcan far unfit, Yet you see the choice and rarest, sometimes yeilds to take a bit: with a pish, nay fie, &c. As this Goddess was your pattern, prove a Votaress to her shrine, Let me only raise your Apron, and for ever you are mine: with a pish, nay fie, &c. Quoth she, though Venus was a wanton, and a Girl that lov'd the Game, Have you nothing else to vaunt on, thereby others to defame: with a pish, nay fie, &c. With such delays and scornful carriage, she would put him to a stand, Thinking so to cool his courage, but he would not be trappand: with a pish, nay fie, &c. Like bold Mars, he clipt his Venus, whilst his heart was on a flame, (Not regarding Vulcan jealous) hotly he pursu'd the game: with a pish, nay fie, &c. Little Cupid being playing, néer unto them in that field, Paid her home for her gain-saying, with one shoot he made her yeild. with a pish, nay fie, &c. This gallant finding her so plyant, and her coyness over-past, Stout and bold as any Gyant, thought it time for to make hast: with a pish, nay fie, &c. Vnto a private place he led her, where such lovers do resort, And judge you what he there did with her for I left them to their sport. with a pish, nay fie, you must not dally, pray leave off as you begun, For if you chance to raise my belly, I am sham'd and quite undone. FINIS. Printed for F. Coles. T. Vere. and J. Wright.
