5124 S117142 [ocm]22838896 23504
PIERS Plainnes seauen yeres Prentiship. By H. C. Nuda Ʋeritas. Printed at London by I. Danter for Thomas Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop by London bridge Gate. 1595.
PIERS PLAINNES seuen yeres Prentiship. THE Sunne no sooner entred Gemini, but Natures plentie and Earths pride, gaue the husbandman hope of gainefull Haruest, and the shepheard as∣surance of happie in∣crease; the first cheri∣shed with the liuely Spring of his deade sowne séede: The se∣conde cheared by the liuing presence of his late yeande Lambes. In that months prime, Menalcas (no meane shep∣heard of Thessalie) sate in a grone of Pines vnder the principall trée, pensiue inough, though not pining ei∣ther for loue or losse: His seruaunt (among other swaines) was the meane while vnfolding his shéep, the neighbring grounds to Tempe was their pasture, euen Tempe the pleasure of Thessalie, and Paradice of Greece. To Menalcas thus solitary, one day when the Sun had newly dried vp the Mornings balmy moysture, came a kinde companion of his, Coridon it was, no shephearde, but a plough-swaine: no lesse wealthy than the Heardsman, their credits equal, their wits not
different: viewing the shepheards heauinesse, the hus∣bandman thus said. I muse not a little Menalcas, nowe when euery creature takes delight in company, you shoulde desire this solitude: Did snow couer the mountains, or swel∣ling flouds ouercharge the valleyes: Did ysicles dan∣gle downe the dew laps of your Heard, or diseases in∣uade your flocks, somewhat it were you should be thus sorrowfull: But séeing on the hills your Goats brouse on swéete smelling Thyme, in the dales your shéepe chew no lesse delightfull grasse: those teaching their Kids to skip the hollowe places of the crag, these wan∣toning with their Lambes amonge the flowers of the meades: fields abounding with Floraes beauty, flouds not ouerchargde with Phoebes plenty: all yéelding you good, your selfe excéeding each neighboring shepheard in goods: woonder it is, euery of them froliking, you should alone sit thus disconsolate. Want which gréeues you I knowe it is not, that my last reason hath refuted: Wealth that lifts you vp, I am sure it cannot bee, that familiar conuersation hath refelled: for as yee are not poore, so were ye neuer proud: that you hate any deadly, your woonted mildnes forbids me to suppose, that you loue Lycoris alone, your vowes and her vertue, (beside your seauen yeares marriage) assures mee: so that sée∣ing neither from loue, nor hate, nor wealth, nor want in my conceit, these passions of solitarines are sprung, let Corydon your olde acquaintance intreat yee to vn∣fold your griefs, which if it be not in my power wholly to redresse, I will indeuour to procure some remedy, if either countenance, counsell, or coyne can giue ayde. Disclose it therefore Menalcas, I am prepard to heare, and will be as ready to adusse. Kindely offered Corydon, replyed Menalcas: and well hast thou gest mee frée from euery incommodity before named, and shalt be immediatly resolud whence
now my meditation arises: being free from sorrowe I protest, yet full of suspect, I trust causeles: but when thou hearest it, as thou shalt like, so counsaile me. A two daies since, when last Lycoris and I visited thée and thy Palma, in our return home we entertaind a new seruant, plaine in condition for any thing I can gesse, of body strong, of wit prompt, of spéech not al∣together rude, but excéeding Satyrical: his bringing vp I know not, thence arises my doubt, séeing last weeke Damon, last yeare Lycostes (both my neighhors, and thy familliars) had by entertaignement of straglers strange misfortunes. Coulde thy affaires Corydon permit thée so much leysure, I would require thy com∣pany to conferre with him: About this time hath hee vnfolded his shéepe, and thus haue I answered thy sus∣pect: what I doubted thou knowest, assist mee to be of this doubt resolude if thou maist. To this Corydon easily consented, Menalcas rose, they left the Groue and entred the plaine, where Piers Plainnes (for so was Menalcas mans name) hauing set his shéepe to féede, founde himselfe no little worke with platting wheate strawe for a summer bonnet, to to beare off the violence of the Sunnes beames: while his fingers went, his tonge lay not still, but thus to his shéepe and himselfe he sung: Feede on my flocke securely, Your shepheard watcheth surely; Runne about my little Lambs, Skipp and wanton with your Dams: Your louing Heard with care will tend yee. Sport on faire flocke at pleasure, Nip Vestaes flouring treasure; I my selfe will duely harke,
When my watchfull Dogg doth barke: From Woolfe and Foxe wee will defende yee. As he was going on, he spied his Master and Cory∣don at hand: wherewith leauing his song, he attended Corydons words that first saluted him in this sort: God morrow friend, well worthy the name of a shepheard, if thy seruice bee answerable to thy song. If it bee not said Piers, I doo but imitate the most, that whatsoeuer they say, liue as they list. Of them what thinkst thou said Corydon? As they doo of themselues replyed Piers, and you suspect of mée: I gesse them to be hypocrites, which they knowe true, you doubt to be an eye-seruant, wherein ye déeme vn∣truely. Thou art very plaine with mee quoth Cory∣don. I cannot choose saide Piers, for I am plaine by name and nature. Thou art too blunt quoth Menal∣cas, he is my honest friend, and kinde familiar. Master said Piers, how long hath he béene your familiar? This twenty winters answered Menalcas. And hath hee e∣uer since quoth Piers béene your assured friend? He hath said the other. Happy is Piers then to happen in such a seruice, for in Thrace and Creete haue I seuen yeares béene a prentice, howemany Masters in that time I haue serued, it were a story to tell, and were it worth the telling I would describe it in a Story: but in al that time could I neuer be acquainted with any man so hap∣pie, that had a true friend of tenne dayes standing. Me∣nalcas and Corydon hearing him so pleasantly offer, what they onely required, willed him to deliuer as hée thought best, the places of his seruice, the persons hée serude with, and manner of his vsage: He as ready to performe as they to demaunde, craude pardon to sit be∣cause the taske was long, which they willingly graun∣ted. Then in an artificiall seate formde out of a fresh
budding thorne, sate they all thrée downe, and Piers ha∣uing the preheminence of the middle place, beganne as followech. Hylenus now the second time gouerneth in Thrace: whose fortunes, his Childrens, and Aeliana the Cretan Quéens (ouring my seuen yeres seruice) I wil handle, that you may know both what I haue béene, and what the world is. Hylenus had two sonnes, Celinus and Aemilius, and one daughter, named Rhodope: the Daughters birth-day was her Mothers deaths-day, by the trea∣cherous complot of a Persian Hand-maid, that of pri∣uate grudge poysoned the new deliuered Quéene: and being apprehended, denide not the fact, for which shee suffered a deserued death. The sonnes were borne twinnes, about thrée yeres elder than their sister, Celinus so like Aemilius in con∣stitution of bodie, and so vnlike in disposition of mind, that it bred admiration in all that knew their bringing vp: Aemilius being no lesse loued for his vertue, than Celinus hated for his vice. In the Court (and in no meane account) swayed a Noble man, named Celydon: one of his mens men was my master, a master to his master so seruiceable, as no slaue could be more submisse. Celydon had the charge of Hylenus Name, hauing likewise charge of a Castle on the mouth of Hebrus, to defend the entrie from forren inuasion. Popular hee was and liberall, of King and people well beloued. The remisse dealing of Celinus drew from him his fathers heart, who by publike Edict proclaimed Aemi∣lius his heir apparant. Celydon vnder whose smoothe looks ambitions fire lay couered, thinking to take the fittest of opportunities, presently vpon this Edict sent for Celinus, and in priuate demaunds how he tooke so
publike an iniurie? Who minding more the fulfilling of his lust than anie regall dignitie: made answere, it was no wrong to him to liue at libertie. But with many reasons Celydon reprouing his remissenes, lay∣ing open the glorie of estate, the power to will anye thing vncontrould, and such like: Celinus began a lit∣tle to giue eare, protesting he would be Aemilius priest if his father immediately reuokd not the Edict. To calme this furie, yet kindle a more vnnaturall flame, Celydon thus slily practisde. It is in vaine (saith he) to purpose the ruine of Ce∣linus alone, sith your father (vtterly forgetting the fol∣lies of his owne youth, excéeding yours by infinite de∣grées) hath absolutely dispossest you of all claime to the Kingdom, naming your sister next in succession if Ae∣milius die: if both he and she depart islulesse, he hath bequeathed the Kingdome to the election of the State. To this his will haue all assented, and I durst not (bée∣ing alone, denie to giue consent: but how much against my will, shall well appeare by this that followes. To morrow intends the King priuatly to disport with me at my Castle builded on the banke of Hebrus, Aemi∣lius and Rhodope with some small traine shall beare him companie: when they are there, wold your Lord∣ship consent, Celydon would set the crowne of Thrace vpon your head, before the Sunne were twice set. Would I consent (saith Celinus)? Why Celydon, what will I not doo? Shall we there murder Hyle∣nus, no more of me meriting the name of father, bée∣ing so vnnaturall: Shall we strangle Aemilius my vsurping brother: commit Rhodope to the mercie of some rude mercenarie, that may crop the flower of her beautie, or drag her Polixena-like to sacrifice? What will not Celinus attempt that Celydon can set downe to reuenge an iniurie so notorious. Then said Celydon, let your Highnes sée this per∣formd,
Gather together against morning the despera∣test associates you can consort your selfe withall, rush violently into the Pallace, breake open the Treasurie, seaze on the diademe and kingly ornaments, while I make sure Hylenus, Aemilius and Rhodope: for ne∣uer shall Prince of Thrace of his birth-right be dispos∣sest, while Celidon hath power to lift a sword. With millions of thankes, and protestation of as manie rewards, Celinus embraces Celydon, giuing him the name of father, patrone and protector, promi∣sing the whole Realm shalbe at his direction, and thus this plot of conspiracie confirmd, Celinus and Celydon part. Thus went the matters of State: now to our houshold affaires, and yet no houshold affaires neither, for my master kept no house: but be it house or chamb∣er, thus it was. Being at my choyce of masters, of sundrie ages & occupations: I that had in my childhood bin experienst in trades, and found in few of them plaine dealing, de∣sperate to doo among them anie good, they had so small delight in goodnes, I left Gods blessing for the warme sunne: and wondring what braue life it was to bee a Courtier, I bound my selfe for seuen yere with one Thrasilio, as smooth a tongud Gentleman, as euer Te∣rences Gnatho was a Parasite. At my first entertain∣ment, hee told me hée was a retainer to Lord Celydon, whose verie name in all the Countrey was highly re∣uerenced: but the truth was as I afore said, he retayn∣ed to Flauius a wastfull Gentleman, belonging to Ce∣lidon: by attending on whose trencher, hee got bare maintenance for himselfe and me. This Flauius vsde him as a Iester: for if loud lyars be iesters, he was the excellentst I euer knewe. Hee was acquainted with none but Kings and great Cap∣taines of Armies, on whom he had bestowed infinite summes of money toward their expences: for he was
so well séene in the Philosophers stene, that gold was to him as drosse. In set Emperiall battells, on horse∣backe and on foote, he had serud some thirtie times, and alwaies on his part attended victorie: his wardrop & iewels were without number. These were his brags notoriouslie noted in Court and Citie. Yet trust mée I take it he had some skill in Alchymie, for hee helpt Flauius to connext much faire liuing into fine gold: for his valor, a purer coward knew I neuer, and for hys wealth, he hourely marched in the midst of it. In his diet he was verie sparing, because he had small store of spare money to buy meate: and had not the scullerie at the Court béen my best ambrie. I must either haue left my master, or lost my life. With this Braggart had I scarce béen two yeres, when the conspiracie of Celi∣nus and Celydon began. The night before it brake foorth, Flauius sent word to my master to prouide his weapons, for next day should be a desperate fray, Flauius being a yongster of Celi∣nus consort. But he that had séene the pitifull plight my master was in, whē these tidings of fighting came, might well haue gest his valour by his visage: yet he bragd it out, saying the palenes of his colour came frō the anger of his heart, and swore the quaking of hys ioynts onely presaged his impatience. All that night had I the office of an Armorer, but with his daily wea∣ring rapier had I most adoo, for it was almost two ho∣wers ere I could draw it: how well he vsde it when he had it, you shall heare when time serues. Let vs now returne to Celydon. Night the darke shrowd of euerie euill, had giuen courage to his desperate abhord consorts: who béeing placed in the way, & resolued to performe this insuing stratageme, Celydon with spéede postes to conduct the vnmisdéeming King and his innocent Children to the place appoynted for the perfection of his desperate
intent: while Celinus scattered troupes await in the Citie their time. That morning, no sooner did the Forrest Clearkes chaunt forth their variable noates, but Hylenus, Ae∣milius and Rhodope, slenderly accompanied, trustely relying on Celydon, set forward to his Castle: and ri∣ding through an edge of Hemus, on sodaine were vio∣lently assailed, their followers slaine, themselues sur∣prized, the intention by Celydons owne mouth vttred, death sharpe and hastie for them prepared. Hylenus at this sodaine conspiracie amazed, séeing the traitreus butchers prouided for Aemilius and Rhodopes slaugh∣ter, thus for a time stayed them from their desperate and diuelish resolution. Celydon (said he) the manie fauours Hylenus hath bestowed on thée and thy fathers house (were I silent) would plead my sorrow for this sinne of thine, beeing so much the greater, by reason of my excéeding loue to thée. Beeing in thy infancie lest fatherlesse, I of thy prince became thy fatherly protector: and in the increa∣sing of thy yeares of a priuate man I haue made shée a Prince, and Protectour of the chéefest strength of Thrace: and hast thou thus (false Celydon) requited all my good? But thou colourest thy vile treason, with Celinus charge: why (Celydon) when was he sworn thy King? what Nobles (with thée) haue giuen theyr oathes to him? His leaud life, and manners lasciui∣ous, (by thée most of anie other noated, and misliked) drew me to frustrate him of all hope to inherite. And is he now become thy King? wilt thou by him be so so∣dainly commanded? No, no Celydon, celinus onely is thy shadowe, thou the intruder, hee thy instrument. Why delayest thou false conspirer, seaze on me, & com∣mit both these sinnes in one, Licaon-like murder thy guest, so sinne against the Gods of hospitalitie, traitor∣like stab thy king, and expect the fit reward of treche∣rie:
but spare these innocents, least earth no longer beare thy vile impietie. Celydon (vending his browes) ruthlesly comman∣ded Aemilius and Rhodope to be strangled, giuing no other reply to Hylenus: who séeing reproofe of no po∣wer to preuaile, humbled his heroicke heart, and pro∣strating himselfe before Celydon, cryed out. Stay, stay, O let me once more speake to thée, be∣fore thou lop off two such braunches from my wythe∣red trunke. If not my kindnes, dignitie, and charge: yet let my age, humblenesse, and teares, intreate thée to shew pitie. Be not more ruthlesse than things sens∣lesse: drops of raine pierce rockie marble, let my sho∣wers of teares enter thy stonie heart. In this Wood Tereus rauisht and wrongd Philomele, he & his sonne did perish for her onely rape: if in this Wood thou kill these innocents, thinkest thou to escape for so great an outrage: he was a king thou but a subiect, his State sure, thine vnsetled. I sweare to thée by the immortal powers, and my children with like vow shall confirme my oath, if thou exile vs together, or seuerall, so thou preserue our liues, we will obscure our States, and ne∣uer returne to Thrace, except recalled by thée, Celinus, or both. Celydon at this relenting, knowing how religious∣ly Hylenus euer regarded an oath, gaue charge they should foorthwith be conuayed to Sea in thrée seuerall ships, and landed where the fortune of the wind should first driue them: which courtesie (though it included small kindnesse) all thrée accepted of him verie grate∣fully. They being dispatcht to sea, Celydon poasted to the Citie: where Celinus against his comming, had thus played his pageant. Scarce were the King and his Companie departed two miles from the Citie, when Celinus (hauing ga∣thered
together a multitude of desperate vnthrifts) sea∣sed violently on the ancient Nobles, slew some, forced other to flie: and possessing himselfe of the Regall orna∣ments, proclaimed himselfe King, and Celydon Pro∣tector of the Realme. The Citizens shut vp their houses, the better sort hidde their heads, onely the leaud and riotous Liuers flocked in bands, crying out, Long liue Celinus King of Thrace. To this vpshot came Celydon with a companie of approoued souldiers: and looking strangely at that Ce∣linus had done, pacified the tumult with milde perswa∣sions: and appoynted the fourth day following a time of hearing, when as Celinus should either answere, or yéelde reason for that hee had attempted: still making faire weather to the people, that Hylenus was onely withdrawen for feare of treason, not vttring the effec∣tiue working of their trecherie: for had the Kings mi∣serie béen knowne, the multitude could not haue béen appeasd. In the beginning of this broyle, Flauius had sent for Thrasilio my master: who hearing the Onset gi∣uen, leasurely armed himselfe, and by then the tumult was appeasd, marching in stately equipage with hys two hand sword on his shoulder, his rapier on one side his pistoll on the other, mounted the scaffolde (among other squaring cutters) where Celinus in viewe of all the people sate royally inuested in his Regall state and dignitie. Among other things, it is not to be omitted, how like a tall squire I attended my master, with an old Morian on my head, and a iauelin in my hand, which he a thou∣sand times swore was the same leading staffe that A∣lexander vsde in his last battell against Darius: & like inough it was of great antiquitie: for canker and rust had consumde both substance and beautie.
Ill weapond though we were, welcome wee were, and among our fellow Caualiers had the Bien venuto: for there euerie cobler was a captaine, and he that had but a bat on his necke, thought himselfe a commander. O had you séene the miserie in those few houres of In∣surrection, with what violence the giddie headed people were carried to ill, how easely disswaded from their al∣leagance, how willingly missed, no man scarcely know∣ing which part to take, the multitude were diuided in∣to so manie parts: you might haue thought such hap∣pie, which had perished by one mans sword, and not li∣ued the torment of so manie slaughterers: for in that broyle there perished sixe thousand persons, sonne, fa∣ther and kindred, each by other murdred, and mangled with manie wounds. As I earst said, with Celydons faire spéech the peo∣ple were satisfied. Euerie man withdrew him home, my master and I waiting at an inch on Flauius for re∣ward of our daies seruice and our supper: where my masters iests scarcely past currant, the companie were so busied about that bold attempt of Celinus, being in such disgrace, the easie shutting vp of the matter by Celydon, the absence of the King, and such other acci∣dents. That night it was my destinie to be deliuered from the seruice of Thrasilio that base Braggadoche: for wearied with my bluntnes (that could neither sooth his leaudnes nor smoothe his lying) he began to indent for some crownes with Flauius to sell my time. What mooud him to affect mee I knowe not well: this after∣ward he said caused it, that he saw me plaine, & among many soothers, he néeded one reprouer to acquaint him with their seuerall infirmities. In briefe, he bought my yeares, and I was rid from the bondage both of a foole and a flatterer, beeing my first master in Court, farre worse than euer anie I had in the Countrey:
he was euer begging, still beggarly, prying, complai∣ning, soothing, swearing, bold to accuse, fearefull to con∣tinue accusations: in fine he was as all flatterers are, the very tennis ball of them he soothed, to tosse and ban∣die with at pleasure. Of him to speake more I haue no pleasure: to sor∣rowfull Hylenus and his two children will I returne, seuered in thrée sundry Barkes, mindefull of all their vowes, mournefull at their infortunate aduenture: to imagine their seuerall passions passeth poore Piers his conceit, the course of the story onely will I continue: One winde breathed on each ships shrowdes wherein these infortunate Princes sailed: Before Crete they all anchored, where the Masters of either vessell com∣passionating their sorrows, to shew some kindnes thus deuised. Vnknowne to either of them they were all in Crete landed, Hylenus himselfe vpon a plaine sand, the Continent of the Ile next neighboring was a plea∣sant forrest: Aemilius was set on shore at Hydrutum, a Castle frontering the sea: and poore Rhodope solde for a bonde woman to an aged fisherman vppon the Coast: This done, they loosed toward Thrace againe to attend Celidon their ambitious Lord. In Crete at this time was Soueraigne, the vertu∣ous and famous virgin Aeliana, feared and loued not only in the Mediterranean Regions, but in the vtmost East admired. The managing of the Common∣wealths affaires were committed by her authoritie to Rhegius her naturall Vnckle: A man for bountie, vertue, and magnanimity, vnequalled with any neigh∣boring Prince. But as in earth there is no perfection without some impediment, no beauty without her ble∣mish, rust fretting the purest stéele, cancker the finest siluer: So this Noble man (otherwise for vertue ad∣mirable) had giuen the rayne to one vice, which vio∣lently hastned the disquiet of the Realme, and drue him
headlong to his destruction: and this was it, incestuous∣ly he loued vertuous Aēliana, drawen by the admira∣ble woonder of her beauty, yet durst not vtter his affe∣ction, he was so daunted with remembrance of hir ex∣celling vertue. Now would he begin to write his pas∣ons, imitating Phaedra when she affirmed, Dicere quae puduit, scribere iussit Amor. then rend those liues, as open scandals to his honour: Sometimes he intended to attempt by force, but that by reason of her Gard he feared: another while he practised to assay by charmes, but those meanes old ex∣ample had prooued vaine: For if neither Medea, cir∣ces, no not Apollo himselfe, were able by incantations, hearbes, or spels, to inforce liking where there was no loue, in vaine hee gest his indeuours that way imploy∣ed. Now lastly he determines sometime while shee is a hunting, (in which game Aeliana principally deligh∣ted) by some false cry to traine her from her traine, and then in disguise of a sauage seaze on her, and so satisfie his long desired lust and returne vnsuspected to Court. Resoulde on this, the very day of Hylenus and his chil∣drens landing, he had intreated the Quéene to a house of pleasure of his in the Forrest, assuring her hee had lodgde so Princelike game, as should bee highly to her Highnes contentment. Aeliana easily consented, and Diana-like shee furni∣sheth her selfe for that daies sport, on her head she wore a Coronet of orientall Peatle, on it a chaplet of varia∣ble flowers perfuming the Ayre with their diuers o∣dors, thence carelesly descended her amber coloured haire, with which the winde wantoning nowe some∣time vncouered her frocke of white tissue, anone suf∣fred the same to lye hidde, which then séemed like cleare Isis when Titan descending, casts his golden beames on her siluer coloured streames: her Buskins were
richly wrought like the Dolphins spangled Caba∣zines, her Quiuer was of Vnicornes horne, her Darts of yuorie, in one hand shee helde a Boare speare, the o∣ther guided her Barbary Iennet, proud by nature, but nowe more proude, in that he carried Natures fairest worke, the Easterne worlds chiefe woonder. O what oyle added these faire ornaments to wretched Rhegius kindled fire, euery minute hee countes a yeare, till they be in the wood, till he possesse his will: But for all his hast, heere fell an accident, that caused some time of more protraction. On a sodaine from the Forrest edge issued an olde man, his snowy heard couering his breast, his face re∣uerend, yet repleate with apparant signes of sorrowe, his eyes swolne with teares but lately shed, his coun∣tenance cast downe as one disconsolate. On him a∣boue all other Aeliana cast a gratious eye, and causing him to be called néere, askt if hee were a Cretan or a stranger in that Countrey: I was said he great Prin∣cesse, sometime a Samothracian, but now of no Coun∣trey, beeing wrongfully expeld my owne: In Crete and all Countreys a stranger I am to all good fortune, the mappe of discontent, and slaue of misery. Be not discouraged Father, said Aeliana, the goods of Fortune are as her self fickle, of their happines no man can glory till his ende: It is our vertues that in de∣spite of Fortune will make vs fortunate. Time now will not giue me leaue to make long questioning, but if in Court thou wilt content thée to leade a quiete and contented life, I will immediately prouide for thy ease and safety: If not, bethinke thée spéedily of any other course, and commaunde Aeliana, that vnder the Gods commaundeth Crete: Deny me thou shalt not one of these, for in reuerence of thy Age I will doo thée some good, therefore aske whatsoeuer thou wilt, and it shall be graunted.
To this Hylenus (for it was hee) replied: By this thy charitie, sacred and swéet Empresse, thou meritest a greater name than either by thy beauty, wisedome, or iustice, though for all and either of these thou art through Europe and Asia famoused: And if old Saga∣nes in this distresse should refuse grace offred from one of so high dignitie, hee were vnworthy to possesse any good: Pleaseth it therefore your Highnesse to appoint mee some solitary mansion, where I may meditate on my follies past, and quietly begge heauens fauour to bee powrde on you my Patronesse, I shall be farre hap∣pier than euer I was in Court, where I haue too long conuerst. Aeliana, condiscended to his sute, and sent him pre∣sently to a solitary Lodge néere Hydrutum, comman∣ding order to bee taken for his daily prouision. This déede of charity dispatcht, Aeliana, Rhegius, and all their traine enter the Forrest, some choose the Stagge, some the Boare, others the Beare, all as their occasion fitted at first sight of game. They that were appoin∣ted for rousing the game, hauing done their dilligence, the woods ecchoed with cry of houndes, sounding of horns, and hallowing of hunters. Rhegius was pro∣uided of his sauage sute, and still kept Aeliana compa∣ny till she had lost all other company, hauing a wilde Boare in chase, which he perceiuing, and knowing hir eagernes in pursute, followed so long till hee sawe the wrathfull Boare returne and mortally wounde her Stéede, so that Aeliana was forst to leaue him, and with her darts and speare, to offend him, and defend her selfe. While thus the Quéene stroue for victory, the Boare for life, raging, fretting, foming, whetting his tuskes on euery trée: Rhegius bestird him to play the counterfet sauage, and the incestuous adulterer: fitted in all points, his face discoloured, his head with shaggy haire couered, his body cloathed in a mossy sute, his
weapon being a yong Oake, he slily paced to the place where faire Aeliana fiercely contended against this or∣ped and ouergrowne swine. There did he vnnaturally beholde his néece, and vndutifully refuse to ayde his Princesse, néere hand surprised by a mertall and mer∣ciles enemy. Her darts were all spent, yet not vain∣ly spent: But as her obiect enemy was no lesse fierce than the Erimanthian Boare, so her fortune was more lucky than the maids, that among so many vali∣ant hunters drewe first the blood of that beast, which Meleager too soone for himselfe and his Vnckles slewe. For Aeliana had firmed thrée dartes in her aduersary, one most annoying him in the groyne, which when hée offred to drawe foorth the Princesse with the poynt of her Boare speare (being nowe her last refuge) in the same place made a farre wyder wound: which follow∣ing with heroicke courage, she buried halfe her staffe i the body of the beast, who beating his wrathfull hea against the vnder earth, distained it with fome & blood, and finally gaue Aeliana the glory of the conquest: who sounded the fall, that her followers might heare, giuing heauens glory for her protection, and treading on that heade which lately assailed her with instrumentes of death and terror. Shee had scarce breathed in this new ioy, but fresh feare presented it selfe: For on a sodaine rushed forth this counterfet sauage, whose first sight the more af∣frighted her, for that shee was vtterly weaponlesse to make defence: yet when she saw no violence offred by the wilde man, but signs of duty, and manifest showes to conduct her forth of the Forrest, shee offred to drawe foorth her speare from the body of the deade Boare, which he espying, roughly laid hold of it himselfe. The Quéene thinking the sauage had before time bin chased with such staues, smiled at his feare and let him kéepe the same, and being of vndaunted courage, went
boldly whether he led her, being into the thickest of the wood. There was a spring shaded with trées, and cir∣cled with marble, in which artificially were seates framde, naturally furnished with hearbs and flowers: To this spring brought the sauage the Quéene, and eft soones casting himself therein, offered by signes to teach her to doo the like, but when he sawe she made no sem∣blance of perceiuing him, he roughly begins to disrobe her royall body, and menacing her with sterne lookes mingled with some strokes, he first puls of her Bugle, which shee had twice sounded, and casting her roughly on the earth, makes open his vile intent to her no little terror. Aeliana thus distrest, cried to heauen for helpe, often called for her followers, oftner on Diana, but most she cried on her Vnkle, inuocating his helpe, that sauagely attempted hir hurt. We left Aemilius landed at Hydrutum, who inqui∣ring toward the Court, was certified of that royal hun∣ting in the Forrest: who desirous to sée the Countreys fashion, got to the woode side with other of the people that went to haue a sight of Aeliana their Princesse. The time being long that the people attended, Aemili∣us walked alone into the woode, meditating on the trea∣cherie of Celinus & Celidon, the wrong his aged father himself & Rhodope suffred, inuocating reuenge of hea∣uens, & humbly desiring the destinies to fauour them in méeting either with other before their deaths: Being in this contemplation, hee was vnawares so far in the wood, that which way to returne hee knewe not. The better part of the day he strayed vp & downe, oft times a far off hearing the noyse of hunters, but nere them he had no power to come. Faint he was both with trauell & hunger, beside his sorrowe made him heauy. On the ground he durst not sléepe, lest some sauage beast should seaze on him, therefore he climed a trée, in whose toppe when he thought to rest, he scant had closed eyes when
he easily heard a small bugle twice sound very nere the place: & listning again where it should be, he in a while after heard the lamentable shréekes of Aeliana, where∣with descending the trée, he passed through the thickest of the couert, stil folowing the voice, till he came where Aeliana with striuing breathles, with wéeping sight∣les, with crying voyceles, and sorrowe senseles, lay at the mercy of an inhuman sauage, who shameles of sin, relentles at her intreats, & secure by reason of the place, was now ready to discouer that hidden beauty, which had so long béene desired by his beast-like appetite. Aemilius no sooner set eye on this shame-forgetting Monster, but he cryed out, Villaine attempt not to de∣floure the Nymph, but looke to defend thy selfe for thy barbarous assailement. Both Rhegius & Aeliana. wer at this sodaine voice seuerally passioned, he with feare, she with hope, he starts to his weighty staffe, shee lifts vp her weeping eyes, he furiously assails Aemilius, she féeble, yet feruently impetrates heauens aid for his de∣fence. Aemilius shunning sundry fierce blowes of Rhe∣gius, wounded him with his sword so déep in the arme, that not able to hold his club, & fearing to be discouered, he flung the trée from him with violence, the fury wher of while Aemilius sought to shun, Rhegius giuing a great cry, betook him to his féet: The wood being thick, the sight of him was soone lost, & being doubtful what other company hee had at hande, he left him to comfort the Quéen: who reuiued as it wer from a dedly trance, gazed on Aemilius, imagining him no mortal creature, but some celestiall power descended in her defence: he on the other side admired the excellence of her beauty, & by her Coronet of golde that lay not far off, he thought hir no meane personage: which instantly desiring to know she immediately resolude him off: and inquiring of his estate and name, he reported himselfe to be atraueller, borne in Italie, his name he changed not.
With such like parle, they come to the place where the Boare lay slaine, where Aeliana discoursed the manner of his death, which Aemilius heard with no small woonder. Piers saide Corydon, now thou hast ridde vs of this feare, & set Aeliana frée, I would wish thée to remem∣ber thy selfe, what of thy selfe thou promisedst: Thou hast yet tolde but of one Master, and thy newe enter∣taignement with another. Reach hither thy bottle that wee may drinke round, I am sure thou must néedes bee dry with talking, when I am so a thirst with hearing. I but said Piers will ye remember me where I leaue in Crete, els shall you finde me too obliuious. I warrant thée said Menalcas, let that bee Corydons charge, mine to put thée in minde where thou leftst in Thrace. celydon appointed the people within thrée daies to hear Celinus publikely: they wer thus pacified, & thou entertaind with Flauius the wastful gentleman. True, true, quoth Piers, now wil I procéed with that. During the thrée daies, the people were feasted, the Theaters were fild, Celydon and Celinus rid through the stréets, mony was cast in euery corner, the straight laws of Hylenus for execution of iustice repealed, & li∣berty proclaimed to the people. At the thrée daies ende, the people were assembled, there Celydon in an Orati∣on opened how sorrowful Hylenus was that he had at∣tempted to disinherit Celinus his son, & howe in satisfa∣ction, he had giuen him then liberty to take the possessiō therof, betaking himself to solitary life, and committing Aemilius & Rhodope to Celinus gouernement, & that it was Hylenus pleasure to haue them accept Celinus for their king, & himself his Protector, vnder whom they should liue in that liberty, as for the thrée daies before they had done: if not, & that they would againe inforce the olde king to receiue his estate, they should bee as of late, subiect to those strict lawes by Celinus abrogated.
Then was the choyce put foorth: and such desire had they to liue at libertie, that all the multitude with one voyce cryed out, Liue long Celinus King of Thrace, & honored be Celydon the King and Realmes Protector. This maygame thus past, Celidon swaied Thrace, celinus had the kings name, he the state: for that which Celinus coueted more than anie Kingdom, was to liue in licentious plesure, which now vncontrouled he grée∣dely followed: Celydon giuing him the reyne, in hope to raign himselfe when Celinus had ouer-run himself. But in this frolicke Common-wealth, who flaunt∣ed it if Flauius were not fine? and if he farde well, I must néedes say hee was no niggard to let others fast. My selfe was then mate with my olde master. Mate said I? nay I was quarter master with my new: for what I misliked I had libertie to reprooue, marry thys was one good helpe, it should be mended at leasure. Besides me (among other néedlesse seruaunts) my master kept a Baylie, as sure a card as euer man tru∣sted. He perswaded my master to be a non-resident on his lands, and a remainer at the Court: noting what he should spare in hous-kéeping, seruants and such like. He (easely induced to follow still the worst) courted it so long, and sparde it so fast, that the tenaunts, woont to be forborne sometime a whole yere, now were forst to pay their yeres rent afore hand. Well, how euer they sighd to part with it and swet to get it, my master and his merie companions swild it in and swore it out, til the cat able to yéeld no more than her skin, we were faine to follow a new course. Our honest Bailie (liuing Lord-like on my Masters liuing) found meanes to borrowe for him of a freend some foure thousand poundes woorth of ware, vppon plaine pawne of all his Euidences: and withall thys kindnes he receiued, he paid not a penie interest more than was allowable, and the money should be return∣ed
by two thousand a yere, each halfe yere a paiment, onely a little consideration to the Broker: who was a pretiepale faced squire, halfe brother to our Baylie, that some two moneths before had set vp a shop in the Cities suburbes, of olde shooes, stockings, and swords, the totall summe of his standing scarce worth sixe shil∣lings eight pence. This brogging Broker and broking Baily brought my master acquainted with the merchant forsooth (for so they called him) that had these commodities to sell. Hee was a man of meane stature, with a sulphurous face richly beset, his eyes sanguine, his breath strong, his gate stately: for he would scarcely haue gone his owne length in an hower he was so well timbered be∣neath. To this money merchant we come, (for other mer∣chandise vsed he none, but such as his Broker on a so∣daine tooke vp, to thrust into their hands that had néed of money) sitting he was with a yong woman by hys side: his daughter she was, faire inough though hir fa∣ther were ill fauoured, and proud inough I am sure she was, as I after prooued. At our first entrance we were entertained by the Broker, next saluted by hir, lastly by him, that after a score of rotten coughes, found leasure to bidde vs wel∣come. The matter was well knowen, the daughter was to deliuer her fathers minde, being to this effect: That he was verie sorie so worshipfull a Gentleman should want his helpe, and he not able to furnish him to his contentment wyth readie money: and so shut∣ting it vp in few words, the Scriuener was sent for, my master past ouer his Déedes, and thought himselfe ve∣rie highly beholding to the Baylie, that had holpe him away with his lands. On the lenders Daughter hee bestowed a carcanet of golde, crauing with her to bee more acquainted.
She that had often been the painted flie to angle for such trouts, gaue him kinde words, and offered hartie welcome, her father confirmd her spéech, and the yong nouice my master was by his Baylie and the Broker perswaded to get her for his wife, beeing her Fathers onely heire, a beauteous Gentlewoman, and so forth. That verie day the principall of our ware was solde, some eight hundred pounds of monie made, and then my master was no small fellow agen: we had maskes reuels, and costly deuices, to frolike with his frends, & court mistres Vrsula (for so was the Vsurers daugh∣ter named). Besides, Celinus was not then of my ma∣ster altogether vnmindfull, but bestowed vpon him an Office of Customage, to sée to the transporting of for∣bidden commodities: which he likewise tourned into Angels, and to Petrusio his Baylie made sodaine sale of it. While this money lasted, my master neuer minded the remnant of his ware, till the first daye of paiment drew on, and by that time the most part of it was wel∣nigh worth nothing. Our figs (for we had some) were readie to runne about the fraile, our silkes had lost co∣lour, yet had we by silkes small losse, for we had small store, our pins were rustie, the tags of our laces can∣kered, all our pedlerie ware being in a pitifull plight. On our negligence the Broker layde all the fault, hee could not vtter it (as by all his honestie he protested) to halfe so much as the tenth partes profite: and now to bolster vp Flauius prodigalitie, Piers Plainnes must be a Packman. Should I spend time to tell my trauels from faire to faire, my manie short meales, my shorter markets, my care to get, my willingnes to saue, my weekly ac∣count to my master, his slender reckoning at the quar∣ter, you would thinke I went about to praise my selfe, and therefore I let it passe.
But how euer my market went, as it came he spent i, so that at the extreamest day, of a thousand pounds he had scarce ten to pay. Faire words of the father he had, fairer of the daughter: but all was nothing, when paiment failed, Flauius was as sure iandlesse, as mo∣nilesse. Celinus was sude vnto, but he spent so fast, that now his treasurie was drawen drie: and Celydon by degrées grswing greater than hée, curbd him from that wast which he was wont to vse. My master séeing such cold comfort, sued to Vlpians daughter to stand his frend, but shee was deafe on that side, she could not, nay she would not for al his intrea∣tye, pitie one so wastfull. I was sent to Petrusio the old Bailie & new Customer: where I had good words my selfe, and praise for my honest care of him, that for himselfe tooke no care: offer to serue him if I wold, but for my master, no poynt pennie could be got. With this wofull newes returning backe, Flauius exclaimd against ingratitude, curst euerie cause of hys prodigalitie, cryde out on Fortune, and accusde her sicklenes. Comfort him I could not, bee pacified hee would not: to tel him of his passed riot, was but to ag∣grauate his gréefe: to put him in hope of after good, was past hope, for he had no meanes left for reléefe: only a few vaine sutes of apparell, with which I was sent to the Brokers, that scarce serued to satisfie a monthes bare commons. All pawnd and morgagde, I perswaded my master to trust to his pen, and bereme some Lawiers Clearke: that was too base, hee swore no small oathes, hee could neither beg nor worke, and longer want he would not. Such aduice as I could I gaue him, but all auailed not: for the Broker he sent, and selling him all his odde fur∣niture, onely furnished himselfe with weapons, and to the wide world he would. The Broker mindfull of my paines when I was a
chapman, earnestly desired him to part with my yeres: of which he intending neuer to make profit, easely con∣sented. A new Master, a new, for thus Piers Plainnes hath parted with Prodigalitie, and meanes to learne thrift of Brokerie: a shrewd fall, from a Courtly waiter to be a Brokers booke-kéeper. Well, what remedie? necessitie they say hath no law: and so it séemd by mée, for my néede droue mee to liue without lawe, if I had said with an outlaw, I had kept within compasse: for besides my master, a number of his mysterie, did not onely deale vnconscionably without law, but were in∣déed verie outlawes, banquerupts, what call ye them, or Brokers still let vs call them, for a fitter name I haue not for them. I saw Menalcas smile euen now, when I cald Bro∣cage a mysterie: the terme was not much a misse, for there are more mysts vsed therein, than in anie Trade beside. They couer their craft with charitie, pietie, pi∣tie, neighborhood, frendship, equitie, and what not that good is, although in it there be no one poynt of goodnes. But to the purpose, I proued a quick searcher into this mysterie, and made my master misse manie of his grée∣die prayes. Being set to his Book, and séeing the manner of his Bills, I had no other charge but to deale plainly. O tis a iuel to vse plain dealing among men of that trade. To note the deceit I saw there, as changing of pawns, letting other mens garments out to hyre, receiuing of goods by night closely, by day secretly, were a world to tell, and hardly to bee thought, there should bee in the world people liuing by pilfrie so publikely, and scape vnpunished. Came they with anie thing woorth mo∣ney, why they were welcome men: welcome, I & en∣couraged to come againe, with promise of such secrete conueyance, as no suspition should arise.
Once a day we likely had some poore wretches curse or other, for pawnes abuse, or forfets vnly taken: one notable condition had my good master, among ma∣nie bad, and that was this, he pitied poore fellowes de∣stitute of bayle, hee was cheefe pillar to the knights of the post for common bayle and euidence, a notable ho∣nest mate in those matters: he would haue suted a thred bare slaue in a frocke of damaske, his welted gowne, a seald ring on his thumbe, and euerie appendix able to make a bankrupt both of welth and honestie seeme like a Burgesse of twelue yeares standing. Neuer was Feates the Iugler like the iugling Broker my master, for he had legions of Familiars to commaund. What craft would ye haue that he had not? Wanted ye good fellowes to goe among Merchaunts and Gentlemen of account, that (for their pleasures) frequented game? Why he was excellent. Not so few as a dozen Dice-makers had he at his reuersion, that he would furnish in diuers fashions: some in the long stocke & little ruffe like Brabanters, some with standing capes and slyced bréeches like Danes, some with their beards cut Alla Turquesa, theit hose hanging loose (like an emptie gut) after the Portugall manner, others Italionate in talk, others in all behauiours Courtlike, striuing to imitate the French. All these instructed by him, and strengthned by olde Vlpian, essence of Vsurie it selfe, would haue seuered themselues into sundrie companies: and where euer they fell, they made manie light purses and heauye hearts: they had their barres, their flats, their fulm∣ers, their hy-men, their low-men, themselues playing euen the hang-men among those men, whose idle time and hard misfortune made them their lucklesse compa∣nions. Lackt ye a smooth tungd hypocrite to intrap young Gentlemen newly come from the Vniuersitie? Hee
was for ye. Hee had a swarme of ye companions, that shuld haue béen attyred secundum formam, and not a word out of their mouths but pure Priscian. Were they merrie, were they sad, were they wise, were they wanton, he would be sure to fit their humors: and for I could not sweare, forsweare, lye deceiue, and cog, I lost my seruice in manner and forme folowing, and ex∣alted my master to a high degrée, as shall appeare by the sequele. The communitie of the bad indures neuer any long time: so betwéene my broking master, and Vlpian the Vsurer it fortuned, that he (like an ill Crowe, hauing hatcht a worse egge) compacted with a notable vnthrift the debter of Vlpian, to cousen the Vsurer of foure thousand crownes, due vpon bonds, by what extorti∣on I know not raisd, but sure I am approoued at that time a true debt. This Ruffler was arrested, first by my masters dili∣gent paines, and at last released by his double dealing practise. For the youth beeing moneyed, (the onely meane to compasse matters aboue meane) gaue a hun∣dred crownes to my master to procure him bayle. His odde shauers were so well knowen before the Iudge, that hardly in a matter of such import was he perswa∣ded of their acceptance: therefore was he very earnest to put me in a sute of satten, compasse my necke with a chaine of golde, and giue mee a name I neuer knewe. being indéed the name of a worshipfull Gentleman: and with another confederate of the forenamed stamp, attyred and trimmed as a Merchant of good worth, we two forsooth must set a good face on it, and be this Vn∣thrifts bayle. I desirde them to vncase me again, protesting I was vtterly out of league with the pillorie: and whether they would or no I dischargde my selfe of that decey∣uing charge.
But all was one with them, my refusall damped not their deceiptfull: and damned resolutions: for they were within an houre of another fitted: scape-thrift sapde out of prison, Vlpian followd the sute, the Gentleman and Merchant (whose names the craftye hyrelings had vsed) by my masters euidence were in law conuicted. Which iniurie comming to my eare, I plainly vttered, discouered the shifters, the innocent were releast, the periurde Broker and his forsworne companions promoted to the pillorie, their eares pared off, their heads crownd with paper, condemnd besides to restitution and imprisonment, their goods solde at o∣pen outcrie before all the people that openly cried out against their bad life and diuelish practises. Then scat∣tered all those ill got goods abroad, that by collusion hée had raked together: there was not an old boot left (got∣ten by brocage) but it was solde to answere for his per∣iurie and cousenage: nay my yeres were sold to satisfie old Vlpian, that commended my plaine dealing in ope∣ning his deceipt, to whom he had so manie waies béen a déere frend. And now Piers hauing parted with Flatterie, Pro∣digalitie and Brokerie, is worshipfully entertained with Vsurie. A seruice of good credite I assure ye, yet such was my destinie, that thinking to hold God by the hand, I tooke the diuell by the héele: & where before I euer serud one master, I was now made slaue vnto a mistres and a master, as farre different in nature as in yeares, he so miserable, that he could scarcely affoorde himselfe a meales meate: shee on the other side so deli∣cate, that her curious taste could with no common diet be contented: small birds in precious gellyes concocted were hir ordinarie fare, Partridge was too grose, ma∣rie of a Pheasant (if intreated) shee would sometimes féede. Of her, him, and my selfe Plura sequuntur: but
in this psace lay a straw, all being scant worth a straw, and passing our estates, deale we with State matters. I remember wee left Aeliana rescude from the sauage: her Rescuer and she returnd to her traine, her Vnckle sought and not yet founde, Hylenus in a Hermitage, Rhodope with a Fisher-man, whom we meddle not with till it be my desteny to be her fellow prentice: Ce∣linus and his conspiring associate are equall Rulers in Thrace. The Cretan Quéene, hauing recouered fight of Rhegius her Vnckle (who after long search for, at last came with his arme wounded) caused him spéedily to be drest, and then discoursed her daungers, her rescue by Aemilius, and euery such perticular, willing her Vn∣kle to doe Aemilius all due honour for a seruice so ex∣cellent. As he was commaunded, he gaue him kind entertainement, though his thoughts farre differed from his words, enuying him as well for deliuerie of Aeliana from his hands, as the fresh wounds he then felt, giuen him by Aemilius: But he hid his hate with a smooth looke, making semblance of honourable vsage, and so toward the Court they ride. Aeliana noting the séemelines of Aemilius beeing mounted, and remem∣bring his valour on foote, entertained newe fires in her vntainted thoughtes which neither moysture nor charmes nor prayers had power to quench: Aemilius on the other side, noting the beauty of the Princesse, her valour, vnwoonted in her sexe: her affabilitie not common in personages of such Estate, made fuell of his heart for the selfe same fier that inflamed her. Rhe∣gius burning in wrath and lust, serued for a trouble betwéene these twaine: and hauing giuen raynes to his desires, séeing his last intention tooke no effect, de∣termined to be as desperate in his sute as he was disso∣lute in his desire: And thus these thrée seuerally passio∣ned, helde on their iourney with small conference, till
comming to the Court where a sumptuous feast was prouided, Aeliana before she intended any pleasure, ei∣ther priuate or publike, in the presence of hir Nobles, gaue Aemilius the order of Knighthode, with offer of entertaignement into her seruice, if hee pleased to re∣maine in Crete: Which for a time e vwed. Their with  sounds of musique the Pallace resounded and the tables were furnished with Prince∣ly seruice: to describe the feasts and bankets, were but to present ye with Tantalus foode, making show of that you féele no substance, inough to famish one that were fasting, or cause a full stomacke to surfet. Well suppose it such as beseemes a Princes State, the most table talke being of Aeliana hir Combate with the Boare, hir danger by the Sauage, and Aemilius fortunate res∣cue. Of Aemilius, Aeliana neuer heard inough. Sup∣per ended, Maskes, playes, and other pastimes passed, the Princesse in hir priuate Closet, thus complaines of loue and praiseth Fortune. Aeliana what newe fires are these kindled in thy bo∣some? What sodaine changes, what vnwoonted passi∣ons? Hast thou thus long offered oliue boughs to Pal∣las, and wilt thou nowe present Venus with myrtle branches? Hast thou followed Diana ouer the Launds with exercise, and wilt thou prooue the follower of hir aduersary by idlenes? No Aeliana, extinguish these fond loues with minds labour, and nip thy affections in the bloome, that they may neuer bee of power to budde. I but Aeliana it is Aemilius thou likest, louely as A∣donis, couragious as Peleus, vertuous (if the ey be the mindes true glasse) as Admetus, then why should not Aeliana desire to be his Venus, delight to be his Thetis, and die to doo him good as did Alceste? Tush Aeliana, bridle these affections, remember thy estate and his staylesse course: suppose hee had infinite more perfecti∣ons
than possibly thou canst yet perceiue: yet hee is a stranger, to thee vnknowne, and as one ounce of An∣timonium, corrupteth a vessell of the purest wine, so one defect may dimme the glory of all other his perfe∣ctions: Aeneas was wise, Iason valiant; Demopho∣on louely, but thrée infortunate Queenes of Carthage, Thessaly, and Thrace, sounde them as thou maist doo this, bereauers of their Honours, deceiuers of their hopes, and betrayers of their liues: But Aenilius is young, and hath not yet learned to deceiue▪ But hée is an Italian Aeliana, who sucke pollicie from the feate and learne beeing little ones to loue. Fie on this oyle that doth increase my fire. Aeliana loueth Aemilius woone by his desart, and cannot ende this affection but by hir owne death. But what will Rhegius and the Nobles of Crete say? that Aeliana shoulde so forget hir selfe, to affect a stranger, his parentage vnknown, vnacquainted with his behauiour, perhaps for some crime banished? Why if they shoulde, am not I sole Soueraigne of Crete, able to make him Lord of the free-borne, allye him to my kindred, and wype out the blemish of any conceited crime. But if they oppose themselues what then? Banni∣shing Aemilius from Crete, from Aelianaes company? Well may they bannish him from Crete, but woulde he vouchsafe of Aelianaes company, him would she fol∣low to the vtmost India, to the burning Zone, to the frozen Pole, to the depth of death. But what if hee prooue Theseus, and leaue thée as Ariadne in some vnhaunted desert? Away with thse fond doubts, Aemilius is not so obdurate, hee that in a a desert deliuered me from death, will neuer in a desert leaue mee desolate: The aforenamed forsakers neuer made show of affect but in wordes onely, this discoue∣red his affection first by workes.
Fie Aeliana, what madding passion possesseth thée? Suppose he were constant, Noble, and a Cretan, that thy Péeres and people loude him as thy selfe: what rea∣son hast thou of his affection to bee perswaded? Per∣chaunce thou imaginest, séeing thy beauty hath caused the Rhodian Gouernour, the Kings of Sicilie and Cy∣prus to sollicite thée of loue, Aemilius will be easily in∣tangled or in regard of thy Princely seate, thinke him∣selfe happy to be thy kingly husband: No fond Prin∣cesse, the middle earth Iles séeme not so rich to Aemili∣us, for true vertue holdeth Kingdomes contemptible. Well, how euer loue deale tyrant-like, I will honour Fortune, that left not Aeliana in distresse, but sent Ae∣milius to be my deliuerer: Of whose loue were I assu∣red, than were I more than fortunate. With such speeches passed Aeliana ouer her passion, resoluing to loue or not to liue. Aemilius likewise being solitary, thus participated his sorrowe to the silent night: Blacke shrowde of griefe (sayth he) the Outlawes day, Nurse of silence, secure shadow for the fearefull, let me acquaint thy stil∣nes with my hearts sting, being otherwise so haples as I haue no friend els, in whose bosome I may vnloade my griefe. Froward change onely to me, in ill chan∣ging forward, hindrer of my rest, bereauer of my hopes, when wilt thou leaue to obserue truth in my torment, and falshood in my felicitie? If my euill starres vrge these euents, swéete Night bee thou intreated ne∣uer to giue place to day, till my vnlucky lights be pourd as gelly on the earth. Poore Aemilius, exilde from Thrace, in Crete captitude, my brother forcing the one, beauty constraining the other: By the first thou wert seperated from thy father and sister, by the last be∣reft of thy woonted senses. Winde, seas, saylers, con∣spirators of my sorrow, that haue brought Aemilius to this haplesharbor, where hee beholdes with desperate
soules the felicitie of Angels, and is desperate of the fruition. Aeliana center of all my ioy, diuinest beauties essence, light of my soule, my liues load-starre, how miserable am I to sée thée placed in so high a spheare, my selfe de∣iected in so lowe a clyme: Thou most happy, I most haples, I a slaue, thou a soueraigne. Why exclaimst thou Aemillus thus against For∣tune and Desteny? It is loue that makes thy case des∣perate: that robber of rest, bereauer of sense, hee hath conspired in thy extreamity to make thy misery more than extreame. What foole painted thee blinde, that art thus sharpe sighted, able to wound concealed harts? or rather what foole am I that confirme thée not blinde both of sense and sight, séeing thou séekst to vnite harts so farre different? So dealtst thou with thy mother, with Sapho, with Cornelia: But some comfort were it knewe I thou hadst assailed Aeliana so. Immortall powers why doate I so? Shée that hath refused all the Princes in the Ilands of the middle earth, can I thinke loue hath any such power to enforce hir to fancie mée. It is vnlikely, for thee Diana like leades loue fettered, and placing him as her vassaile where she please, darts from her eyes his fire. But comfort thy selfe Aemilius, she hath vouchsafed to be thy Princely Mistris, namde thée her Knight, enioind thée seruice in hir Court: these presumptions of farther fauour. I, that rises from hir Princely bounty to requite thy trauell in hir rescue, no colour of hope that as a louer shee will regard thée: but as shee hath beautified thy poore estate with rich orna∣ments and Honorable tytles, so for thy ouerdaring she wil cause thy Plumes to be puld, and thou maist appear naked like Aesops Crow. Therefore Aemilius be circumspect, thou art here a stranger, and on thy behauiour will each eye be fixt. Follow a while thy fortunes, if destenies haue ordai∣ned
thee happines, nowe hope the best, if markt thée to miserie, ineuitable are their doomes, and better thou wert to dye where thou louest, than liue where thou art loathed. This while Rhegius tooke small rest, but was sun∣dry waies perplexed in his minde, sometimes blaming his vnlawfull lust, another while exclaiming against his euill lucke: sometimes intreating heauens to giue him power to desist his sute, againe impetrating ayde of hell to persist in his enterprise. The last determination and the worst continued longest, and furnishing himselfe with sundry exam∣ples of most vnnaturall and prepostereus loues, he left his chamber, and euen when day beganne to chase nights cloudes from hindering the morninges beauty, Rhegius vnder colour of most vrgent and serious af∣faires, came towarde Aelianaes Chamber, that then was singing a Dittie whilst thrée of hir Ladies with rare musique both of voyce and Instrument, kept true time with their Empresse, Carroling an vndersong at each stanzoes ende. Rhegius rauished with this Angelique Harmonie, staide at the Chamber doore to heare the remaine of Aelianaes Dittie, for euen then all their voyces were like a Quiere of Nightingales chanting on this foote: Quickly striue the Boy to binde, Feare him not for hee is blinde: If hee get loose hee showes no pittie. Aeliana then beganne the last Stanzo alone (as shée had done all the rest) in this sort.
Trust not his wanton teares, lest they beguile yee: Trust not his childish sight, he breatheth slilie. Trust not his tutch, his feeling may defile yee, Trust nothing that hee doth, the Wagge is wilie. If you suffer him to prate, You will rue it ouer late: Beware of him for hee is wittie. Quickly striue the Boy to binde, Feare him not for hee is blinde: If hee get loose hee showes no pittie. With this the musique ceast, and Aeliana was a∣bout to discourse somewhat of that subiect whereon her song was grounded; when sodainely Rhegius desi∣red to enter the Chamber, whether when hee was ad∣mitted, hee certified the Quéene that hee had serious af∣faires to conferre with her of, whereupon shee com∣maunded hir Ladies to auoyde: Attending when hir Vnckle would beginne to speake, who thrée times of∣fered, and thrée times was stroken silent, standing as it were in a traunce: vntill Aeliana had thus reuiued him. Déere Vnckle, on whose weale consistes the wel∣fare of our Person: and by whose wisedome our E∣state is warely guided, tell me (for I long to knowe) what great important cause concerning the State or other affaires, vrgeth this early approach, and sodaine alteration.
Why are ye thus silent, your looks deiected, your face bloodles? Are there confederacies towarde of forren Princes, or conspiracies of home-bred Traytors? Haue the Gods showen intentions of wrath by some prodigious signe, or haue our Priests opened any in∣suing euills by vnluckie Augurie: If either of the first, let power bee gathered to preuent, if any of the last, doubt not by prayer wee shall preuaile: Onely let your Honour showe the cause, and our dilligence shall indeuour for some good course. Rhegius reuiued by her swéete voyce, beganne to gather his spirites together, when shame companion of sinne tainted his pale cheekes with vermillion co∣lour. Offring to speake hee sighd, and windy sighes giuing way to words, hee mingled his stormy speech with showres of teares, that fell not fruitles, but en∣forst from Aeliana such compassion, that when againe shee woulde haue vrgde him to procéede, the vttrance of hir wordes were stopped with the aboundant wa∣ter that fell from hir eyes, vntill Rhegius thus brake foorth. Cease Princely Cousin these sadde teares, and sor∣rowe not for my lament, no way by griefe able to be lessened. Onely cleare this heauen of beauty, and let no dimme clowds of discontent obseure that bright∣nes, wherein consortes no small portion of the diuine essence, and abides the chiefe part of my earthly being. Aeliana, Cretes Empresse, Goddesse of my hart, if e∣uer Rhegius merited of thée kinde fauour for his faith∣full seruice, grant him one boone easie for thée to grant, which grant will giue thy wretched Vnckle life, thy deniall marke him for the sonne of death. Woonder not faire Quéene to sée my countenance thus often chaunged, for nowe pale feare benummeth my féeble heart, anone redde shame tainteth my blu∣shing chéekes: Lastly, Loue forces me thus to answere.
Beasts entrailes haue shown our Priests no vnluckie signe, the heauens no prodigies, the Cretans are not rebellious, neither are the neighbring Kingdomes en∣uious: onely Rhegius inward soule is staind with con∣ceipt of sinne, his thoughts prodigious, his hart rebel∣lious, his minde enuious. Of which enuie, rebellion, preposterous and impure sinne, Loue is onely origi∣nall: whose fires haue kindled contrarie thoughts in wretched Rhegius, such as himselfe shames to vtter, such as I see your Highnes blush to conceiue. Herewith Aeliana stepped backe, and Phoebe-like (when Cadmus nephew behold her naked in the fount∣aine) shee frownd on Rhegius, who taking her by the hand, intreated her a while to heare patiently, what Loue compeld him vtter. Cease, cease said Aeliana, let not the glorie of thy worthie gouernment, be dimd with this lustfull & ince∣stuous practise. Thy change of passion assures me this is not done to trie me: but too-too surely I perceiue by thy troubled lookes, thou hast giuen libertie to vnbride∣led appetite: which on thy alleageaunce I charge thée to desist, or I will exterminate thy lawles loue, by vn∣timely death. At the name of death, Rhegius smiled, and saide, that is the period indéed of my lament. More haplesse is this life to me than anie death can be Curst be those lawes that binde men from that which Nature deny∣eth not to beasts. The lightfoote Roe is conuersaunt with his Damme, the Birde billeth with those of the same neast, the Dolphin wantonneth with fish of the same spawne: but men haue imposed burthens on men which neither they themselues, nor their fathers before them could kéepe. Myrrha loued hir father, Byblis hir brother: this in the worlds eye was preposterous, to Nature not abhorring, to loue agréeing: why shoulde not Loue and Nature then commaund Lawe, séeing
from them Law onely holdes hir chéefe positions. Sup∣pose it were not thus, but these bounds of Law, were from pure Loue, and vnspotted Nature deriued: what then? Affection blindly iudgeth, and will neyther bee by reason restrained, nor by extremitie bridled. Your Highnes threatens me with death: heere is my naked breast, make me blessed by that doome, I beséech you. Pierce this bosome, and let foorth my conspiring spirit: pull out these lasciuious eyes, betrayers of my yéelded heart: and sacrifice my lust-burning bodie, before the altare of your diuine beautie: other restraint for Rhe∣gius or rest for your Excellence can none be found, my passions are so ouer-daring fond. Aeliana pitying his extreames, and séeing that her sharpe deniall made him almost desperate, shee tooke him vp from the ground (whereon he knéeled) and thus comforted him. Noble Vnckle, séeing outragious lust hath clowded the precious vertues of your minde: and that I sée yee so giuen ouer to your loose desires, that you neglect re∣gard of honour, and feare of death, séeking to violate chastitie, whose royaltie you should defend: that I may giue some ease to your gréefe, (standing with the plea∣sure of the heauens, our dignitie, and your account) I first pardon what in these cases hath passed, and vowe my selfe euer readie to minister you Princely comfort. My selfe will daylie visite you, walke with ye, conferre with ye, reason against your vnreasonable loue, per∣swade yee to honourable thoughts, disswade yee from these dissolute determinations. If you be sicke, I will be your Phisition: if faynt your comforter: if froward (as at this time ye séeme) your counseller: onely learne by degrées to cutbe these humours, that (suffered) will with a head-long furie obscure the former brightnes of your vertues, and sub∣uert our estate.
Time will change (I doubt not) your dissolute in∣tent, and make you (as of old) resolute in dooing well. Come swéete Vnckle, be comforted, and in all things that modestie will permit, Aeliana that is borne thy Souereigne, will endeuour herselfe to bee thy Hand∣maid. Rhegius (ouercome with these swéete spéeches) be∣gan to be more ashamed of his loose attempt, than hee was before earnest to prosecute it: but soone that moti∣on fayled, and he returning to his vomit, tooke aduan∣tage of the Princes offer, and intended if he once seazd on her againe, not to be preuented, resoluing that vi si non verbis she should be wonne. But he couered his hatefull intention with a smooth∣ed brow, awayting his time till he could drawe the in∣nocent Princesse within his power. And so with infi∣nite thankes, promising to endeuour himselfe to bridle his passions, and crauing pardon for his vndecent pre∣sumption, they parted, she to her meditation of Aemi∣lius perfections, hee to practise some plot for their de∣structions. All this while we haue forgot the old King, liuing in his solitarie cell, whose proportion of rest to him was more pleasing in that solitude, than in the frequent cō∣panies at his Court. And because we will not disturb his contemplation, we only cursorily passe by, for that we are forst to poast by, and séeke for passage ouer into Thrace, where all things (like an vnmundified vlcer) festred inwardly, though outwardly there appeared a cloaked shaddow and painted show of ciuill and honest gouernment. Celinus onely attends lasciuious companie, Cely∣don intends to appropriate to himselfe the dignitie and become seale Souereigne, awayting onely opportu∣nitie to effect in act what he had long conceiud, euen the last scene of Celinus Tragedie.
While thus the one priuely practised to win, the o∣ther publiquely endeuoured to lose, euerie mans feare foretold insuing mischiefe. And as the Ocean ceaseth not to boyle against a tempest, till high billowes make rough smooth waters: so the disturbed imaginations of mens brains, produced variable mutterings: some vttering their feares, others their affectation: euerie one like a Sphinx deliuering his opinion doubtfullye, fearfull least some Oedipus would expound it too plain∣ly. During the time the Court and Common-wealth were thus troubled, I trust ye thinke not Piers Plain∣nes so ill a husband to be idle: for in my masters house we kept the essence of the one, and image of the other. For as in the Court were two Kings, so had wee two commaunders: videlicet Vlpian my miserable master, and Vrsula my lasciuious mistres. Wonder not to heare, that riot should kéepe house with wretchednes: for such is the pleasure of the heauens, that one iniqui∣tie should consume another, commonly ill-getting fa∣thers hauing loose spending children, verifiing the olde approoued prouerbe, Male partae male dilibuntur. If when I serud Flatterie my soule were afflicted to hear his foothing lyes: when Prodigalitie, my hart gréeued to sée his lasciuious waste: when Brokerie, my eyes mourned to be witnes to extreame extortion: here had I occasion all at once of eyes mouing, harts gréeuing, and soules affliction. O miserable condition of coue∣tous parents, and desperate resolution of riotous chil∣dren: the first wearying out it selfe immoderately to get: the last tyring out it selfe with insatiate desire to spend. But why digresse I▪ The Swines declining bounds me in a limit: for with the day intend I to end my discourse. Vlpian my master (whose sparing lyfe not Niggardize herselfe can well expresse) albeit he v∣sed Vrsula his daughter as a propertie to inthrall yong
Gentlemen, as hee had earst done Flauius: yet would grudge at anie money he parted with to maintaine her in fit estate, either for diet or apparell to entertain such, as in hope to bee heires of Vlpians treasure, dailye re∣paired to their destruction. She on the other side, I must néedes say, (as such kinde creatures be) was kind harted inough, and when she could haue met wyth his coffers, she was no lesse lauish of his bags, than loose of her behauiour. For her part, shee was a right Ana∣baptist, all things were with her, and shee with euerie one in common. When first she thus attempted by pilfrie to breake into his ill purchase, and hee espied the decrease of hys beloued crownes: Furie it selfe was not so furious. Me hee tormented to acknowledge my selfe an accessa∣rie, and for her part (Ile be her witnes) she was hand∣led as a principall. For when at my handes nothing could bee gotten, (because I was ignorant of all) hee tooke vpon him to disple his Daughter, and neuer left scourging till she plaid one part of a true penitenciary, and made open confession, marrie restitution she could not otherwise make, but with promise to cousen for him as manie Gentlemen as she might. For want of other securitie, he was glad to take her word for a bond, and so for a month or two the case was wondrously altred, for while her woundes were healing, wee kept a long Lent. To describe our diet, were inough to fill all the Countrie with a dearth: with remembraunce thereof, Famine it self hath seazed on me, and except I here féed I can procéed no farther. Pitie it were (quoth Corydon) thou shouldest now faint. Menalcas, reach hether thy scrip, my bag is emp∣tie: heres wine inough, and theres a part of a roasted kid, either of power to reuiue thy fainting spirites, and refresh thy tyred senses. Menalcas drinke to him, and proue a better master than this vlpian, of whose seruice
thy seruant now intreates. Here Piers said Menalcas drinke well, and after thy refreshing, goe forward. I marry quoth Piers, the Sailer and Souldier are happie, that in the quiet hauen or other secure harbour may discourse the escaped daungers on sea and in field: therefore (with a full stomacke) I will (as merely as I may) describe the daylie proportion of our hungrie face. The day no sooner appeared, but Piers poasted to the Poticaries for oyntment to recouer Vrsulas sore skin to the wonted soundnes: and by then I returned, olde Vlpian my master was readie to rise, and read a lecture of thrift to me and her: other breakfast had wee none. At dinner my allowaunce was two Anchoues, shéere water my drinke: and at night drie ryce (or rather rye bread) my best repast: my master pretending a solemn Fast, till Vrsula were recouered, without whose helth he assured me our commons must néedes faile, for that she was the common vpholder of the house: for praier indéede we had no Iniunction, yet made he daylie exe∣erable Orizons honouring gold as the chéefest good, and one day it was my chance to heare the ground of his deuotion. Béeing entred his studie, and opening his coffers, he vttered the intention of his soule in these tearmes. O gold, adored gold, my soules chéefe soueraigne, my liues best Genius, for whom the néedy vassaile toyles, the Souldier fightes, the Scholler studieth, howe doth thy diuine essence comfort my troubled spirite, against whose opulencie the enuious beggers of the earth re∣pine. O bee thou resident with me in spite of all their rage: for where thou art there enuy cannot hurt. Close vp my senses from all other thoughts than of thy exe∣lence: A little Grammer learning I haue, and were it no more than to holde thée fast it were sufficient: for what account are Schollers made of, or Friendes or
Gods, without golden Oratorie, giuing frendship, or all-yéelding Deitie. Then my religion, frend, Art, all I haue, to thée I sacrifice my selfe: without whose presence I am not my selfe: in thée alone remaines Beatitude, without thée know I no blessednes. These and the like were my Masters daylie inno∣cations, his exercise was turning ouer money, and searching euerie corner of the house least some thinge wer hid. During Vrsulas sicknes, or rather sorenes we had no great resort, but vpon her recouerie wee had o∣pen proclimation for dayes of Iubile. She like a gra∣tious Childe remembring her late gréefe, in stéede of sorrowe for her Fathers wrong, practisde of her owne iniurie to be wreakt: & mee she makes the instrument of her reuenge being altogether ignorant of hir course; My old Master Flauius driuen to the extreamest exi∣gent of want she sends me too, protesting she would in some measure onely reléeue his néed, not accquaint∣ing me with any other intent. To be bréefe they met, and thus conspirde, that Flauius should to Celinus, and accuse her Father for clipping of gold, which according to the law of Thrace was hie treason, her onely desire was to bee the happie possessor of his possessions and goods, of all which she would put Flauius in possession by her marriage. The first parte of her deuice tooke ef∣fect, Flauius accused Vlpian, our house was searcht, the clippings found, his iudgment followed, and Vl∣pians execution was not farre behinde, whereto with notable acclamation of the people he was brought. In stéede of penitence hee died desperate hauing liued de∣testablie, cursing his daughter execrablie, and blessing the beholders with his goutie héeles, deliuered him∣selfe ouer to the hangmans mercie. Here ends the tra∣gedie of true Auarice, a worde or two of Vrsula and Flauius.
Contrarie to their expectation, the goods of Vlpian were seazd on to Celinus vse, and she nakedly tourned forth as the betraier of her father: whom (in distresse) Flauius refusde, the Court scorned, the Citie iested at. Being ioly brought vp, she could no way indeuour her selfe to helpe her selfe, and so in fine miserably died. My selfe (as a moueable) was solde, and Flauius quondam Baylie the Customer became my master. A bodie would think I had béen where deceit inough before had béen: but to this all my passed life was sanc∣timonie. In euerie other place I saw deceipt, & shund it: but here I was a daily deceiuer, & could scarce sée it. Well, ere I goe forward with what I there did, let vs sée what hapned at Court. Celydon (as I before said) onely awaited occasion to quarrell with Celinus, and now vppon partition of olde Vlpians goods, the long hid fier brake into flame. Celinus had the goods in possession, and because they were of great worth was loath to leaue them. Cely∣don (on the other side) pretended to haue them deliue∣red into the Common Treasurie: but that was by Ce∣linus to the publique officers denied. Whereupon Ce∣lydon armed himselfe, and with a multitude of souldi∣ers beset the Pallaice and Counsell-house: whereinto entring, he thus inueighed against Celinus. Lords of Thrace, dismay not that Celydon enters armed amongst these reuerend Senators: for no slight cause hath hethertoo vrged me, but the preseruation of your ancient Honors, and the good of this wealpublike. I know it is not vnknowen to all of you, with what zealous care I haue laboured to vphold this misgouer∣ned estate, of which Celinus hath endeuoured to work the downfall. If I should be silent, your selues are to me testimonies, hauing giuen me more honor, than ei∣ther I deserue or expect. But neyther may my cares nor your endeuours
preuaile, so long as this vnbrideled Gentleman Celi∣nus is suffered to ouerrule what we determine. Should I but vrge a secrete long from your knowledge concea∣led, howe euer by your wisedomes suspected, I should giue you more occasion to detest his vnnaturall euill, than yet you haue had to inueigh against his vnbride∣led life, wherein what ill hath not béene prosecuted, that corruption could inuent, or wickednes enact. I meane the trecherous exile of our Lord Hylenus and his chil∣dren, whose vertues by how much they were greatly to our auaile, Celinus vices are to be held more vile: sée∣ing the vertuous father by the vicious sonne, the harm∣les brother and sister by their hatefull and hurtfull bro∣ther, are banished we knowe not whether, or murdred we know not howe? But here it may bee to my selfe it will bee obiected, that long since Celinus had for vsur∣ping béen punished, had not Celydon supported him. I graunt graue fathers this is true, whereby it may be, some will inferre, I was a principall in this conspira∣cie. But that part I deny. For vtterly without my knowledge was our King and his children exiled, Ce∣linus backt with riotous companies, the people tumul∣tuously gathred on heapes, when fearefull of ciuill mu∣teny, I yéelded to the times as likewise you all did, and swore to vphold Celinus lest in the contentiō the whole people shoulde haue perished. Nowe that wee are of power, requisit it is to reuenge royall Hylenus wrōgs, our owne wrongs, the peoples iniuries: séeing he hath not onely expulsed his father from his estate, but in a manner ruined the whole State. For which of your wiues or daughters are priuiledged from his lust? who of you are owners of your owne wealth, but subiect to his lasciuious deuastation? Now is the time, and here is the effect of the prescription drawne. Bee not abasht graue fathers, Nero, Phalaris, diuers Kings and Em∣perours, haue for misgouernement not onely béene de∣posed
but also put to death: they beeing true Princes, Celinus an vsurper. He is now carowsing among his riotous Caualiers, or wantoning with his Concu∣bines, if you will shew your selues worthy the name of Thracians, of Senators, of men, subscribe to this pre∣scription, my bands of armed souldiers are ready to ex∣ecute the vsurper: if you delay, my selfe will take vpon me the glory of this action to your perpetuall reproofe, and immortall indignities. When hee had thus spo∣ken, with a frowning countenance hee awayted their answere: Who séeing into the drift of Celydon, and noting the power he had at that time, suppressed the ful∣nes of their conceite, and consented to subscribe to the prescription. Whereto they had no sooner signed, but Celydon with his power went into the market place, and there in the publique iudgement seate accused Celinus of the foresaid crimes, exasperating against him all malitious indignities done vnto his father, his brother, and sister, and all other his misdemeanors: Wherewith he drew forth the prescription signed with the Senates handes, and demaunded of them if they woulde giue their voyce. The people confusedly cryed out, let Celinus the traytor be drawen forth to death: Then ran the mul∣titude hedlongly to Celinus Pallace, who being taken at vnawares, made head against them with such pow∣er as he had, but being a troup of loose persons, for no other attended his traine, hee and they were soone dis∣comfited. The Assistaunts were in a manner number∣lesse, theyr cryes confused and tumultuous, so that Ce∣linus could neither speake to make excuse, nor had pow∣er to make resist. Wherefore withdrawing himselfe hee escaped thorough a vault into the wood ioyning to the Pallace,
who was no sooner mist, but his followers yéelded to the mercie of Celydon, who caused diuers to bee tor∣mented, to confesse where Celinus was: what was become of him there coulde not any tell, so the moates were dragde, thinking hee had desperately cast him∣selfe in, and then the secrete vaultes were founde, but Celinus could not be found, neither shall yee heare a∣nie more of him, till it bee my owne good hap to finde him. Returne to Celydon, who with the furious multi∣tude vtterly raced the pallace of Celinus, and with∣out pittie cruelly murdered and inhumanely massacred his concubine sand associates, among whom fell both Thrasilio and Flauius: the one for an vnthrift, the o∣ther for a fletterer that had not their fellowes in all Thrace. While in this manner Celydon insulted ouer Ce∣linus miserable estate, and breathed threatenings a∣gainst all his other vntaken Fauourites, proclay∣ming high méede to anie one that brought Celinus either quicke or dead, and threatning sharpe death, and confiscation of goods, to euerie one that succoured him: the Senatours by aduise of an eloquent Oratour, and reuerent Counseller named Licostenes, had thus de∣créed, that séeing Celydon was culpable of selfe trea∣son with Celinus, as soone as his handes of Souldi∣ers were dissolued, he should bee publiquely executed in such manner as for Celinus himselfe ordained, and that they would presently dispatch messengers to all neighbryng Nations, if happely they might heare of Hylenus and his children. This they determined with all possible spéede to effect, while Celydon (nothing of their intent sus∣pecting) left not the ruinating of Celinus Pallayce, and tormenting his seruants, till nightes darknesse denied them meanes to execute farther their mallice.
But Celydon thinking himselfe nothing safe till Celinus wer surprised, dischargde not as yet his bands of soldiers, but sent speedy messengers to lay the Ports about Hebrus, and companies to search the forrest of Hemus and the waies to the next Prouinces adioy∣ning: but especially the Ports hee suspected, and to the Hauen where my Master was Customer, at once came Proclamation and commission, that who so euer harbored Celinus shoulde immediately as traytors bee executed, and he that brought him foorth should receiue a thousand Crownes. Celinus destiny was such to hap∣pen to that Port, and for that he presumed he had some interest in my Master, as well for helping him to he Office, as also for smoothering many of his offences, in transporting forbidden commodities: and séeing wee are here, touch the faults we wil a litle that my Master the Customer vsed, and let slip the matter a while of Celinus handling. First, in the first part of this dis∣course you vnderstood he was Flauius Baily, a deceiuer of his Master, and now is Baily for the King, and dooth his best to vndoo the Countrey. Hee was a Vsurer, a Broker, a Farmer, and what not in that place: Corne, leather, mettall, any forbidden commodities, might passe if he were paid, spices vngarbled, letters close pac∣ked, fugitiues, outlawes, any thing, powder, ordinance, artillery, so they paide him priuy custome. A sort of bankerupt Brokers wer his retainers, that at the lan∣ding of any merchant stranger, confedered either to cōmende others credite, thereby to take into their handes their whole commodities: And when daies of payment comes, the merchant hath no other helpe of them, but we are sory, and would haue sworne their credits had béene such and such. When like deceiuing cousoners they share quarters, and my Master for countenancing their knaueries had his halfe part. Among other de∣ceites, for transporting of vittels, this plaine guile hee
suffered, when vesls were bound foorth, thrée times more than due proportion hee let passe, vnder colour to serue the voyage: but without hee were paid nothing could passe, and then they might passe and repasse with∣out controll. What though the garbler cryed out, his vailes were wasted, the Commons the corne was transported, euery one of wrong, so he had the right he lookt for, all was well: for in all these wrongs Celi∣nus was his supporter. Now came the time of triall, whether the ill seruant wold proue true to his bad ma∣ster. Celinus (in the dead of night) gets to our house, tells my master his estate, and requires to be transpor∣ted. He was no sooner entred, but the towne was pri∣uily raisd: yet Petrusio vsed great protestations for his assurance. Celinus (notwithstanding their manye oathes) liked not his lookes, and in the end by priuie whisprings, and rustling of armed men without, was sure of his deceit: but remembring Petrusio to be no∣tably couetous, he thus dallyed with him. Petrusio, how I haue preferd thée thou knowst, and how thou louest me I am assured: yet that I may make thee more beholding, I will vtter one secrete ere I take shipping, that shall bind thée to me aboue all other kind∣nesses. How euer I haue séemed to liue secure, yet a∣gainst this expected daye of my downefall haue I not béen altogether improuident, but secretely haue hiddn two hundred thousand crownes: one half I make thée master of, the other I intreate thée (as thou hast found me louing) to conuay me when I shall write to thée frō anie forren coast. Doo this Petrusio, and be now more enriched, and if againe Fortune fauour me, looke to bee most fortunate. Vnworthie am I (quoth Petrusio) to obtaine this fauor, and as I proue to your Highnes faithfull, let my fortunes bee succesfull: onely resolue your seruant where the treasure is. First said Celinus bring me to Ship, I am els in this case resolued to bee
euer silent. Petrusio not willing to loose this pray, pre∣tended to goe cléere the Key, and leauing him, went to the Officers, assuring them the prisner was safe, & for speciall matter concerning the State, must bee carried secretly aboord a Barke, that anchored before the Har∣bor: to bring him thether himself vndertooke the charge, and appointed a hundred well armed to goe before vn∣to the Barke, giuing them a watch-woord when they should apprehend Celinus: the rest of the People to a∣uoyd tumult he discharged. They counting him the forman of the parish, brake vp the Watch, and obeyed his words: and Petrusio returning to Celinus, brought him to a Cocke boate, and me he appointed for the wa∣terman. But here the case begins to alter. Wee were no soo∣ner in the midst of the Riuer, but Celinus taking my master by the throate, vsed these terames. Petrusio, I know thée for a villaine, and am assured of thy notable intention to betray me. What thou hast, my gift hath holpe thée too, thy goods are mine borrowed, thy life to my seruice vowed: yet for all this, my misgiuing heart compels me to mistrust thy constancie. Vse no words, for they are false like thy faultie life: no oathes, for they are more deceiuing than thy wordes: no teares, for they haue learned trecherie of either: only in death will I beleeue thée: and with that giuing him a mortal wound, he heaude him ouer boord, and stept to me say∣ing, Pesant exclaime not, for if thou doo thy life is lost, and with this miserable wretch thou shalt in death con∣sort. Be firme to me, and as I am a Gentleman, I wil preserue thy life, and vse thée well. I that was acquainted with Petrusioes trecherie, pitying his youth, remembring his royall progenie, & in plaine tearmes fearing my owne tragedie, quicklie resolud to prouide for his escape, and embracing certain danger to auoyd present feare, we put out into the dée∣pest
of the maine, yet not so secretly but they in the Barke espied vs, and setting out their owne and other vessells boates to bring vs vnder their lée, had surely ta∣ken vs, had not the Guider of the Windes (further∣ing our flight) let loose their ragefull breathings, that scattred the Men of warre, whose boates pursued vs: the billowes prowdly mounting their vpper deckes, made them more carefull to attend their owne safetie, than intend our pursute. And if they in vessels of great burden were distressed, we then that had onely a boate could not but be greatly endangered. Let vs shift with the storme awhile, and sée what sor∣ted that night to Celydon. Licosthenes (before named) hauing assembled al the chiefe Senators, sent for the Praetor of the Citie & hys Brethren: before whom he laid open the whole trea∣sons of Celydon. As, that raised from meane estate to high dignitie by Hylenus their lawfull Souereign, he had consented to so great a treason, as the exile of him, Aemilius his Heire, and Rhodope their beauteous Princesse. In this he vrged reasons to proue Celydon principall: first the remisse life of Celinus (an argument in him of small ambition) by Celydon soothed in ill, by his counsell disinherited, then to this vnnaturall reson animated, and now at last either brought to desperate flight, or assured confusion. To this he added, the re∣membrance of those Citizens slaine the first day of the conspiracie, the feasting of the multitude for thrée daies following, the light passing ouer of Hylenus absence & his children, the abusing of Celinus youth, his owne ambition to be sole Protector, concluding with the bar∣barous murder of Celinus seruants. This he laid open with such effectiue woordes, mingling his spéech with teares, and filling their harts with terror, aswell by old example of Vsurpers tyrannies, as present instance of late performed Tragedies, that the Magistrates with
one voice desired him not onely to aduise what should be done: but also to lead them, and what hee enioyned they would performe. Licosthenes then caused foure thousand to be armed, and with them went to the Pallace, where Celydon all fearlesse of that accident, was plotting which of the Senators first to murder after Celinus death: hauing sent the greatest number of his souldiers towards Pe∣truosis house, wherein he heard he was kept prisoner. Licosthenes causing the Companies to bee placed on each side of the stréete leading to the Pallace gate, was by the Captain of Celydons Gard demanded a reason for his armed approach? Who answered, it was onely to defend the Pallace and Treasurie: séeing a number of the Commons (by some turbulent person stirred vp) were gathered in the Market place, and would by no reasons bee allayed, till Celinus were deliuered them: wishing him to informe Celydon, that his Princelye presence was the only meane to allay the people, being gracious in their eyes: and therefore had he armed the better sort of citizens to be his strong gard, if he vouch∣safed in person to prouide for the Cities safetie. Cely∣don hearing of this, hasted toward the Market place, of all other least fearing Licosthenes: who by the way arrested him of high treason, to which resisting, a smal sairmish began: which with Celydons death soone en∣ded, who suppressed with many wounds, breathd forth his aspiring spirite from his blood-defiled trunke. Much adoo there was next morning to allay mute∣nies, but by the diligence of the Magistrates the Peo∣ple were appeased: and messengers were dispatched to euerie neighboring Kingdome, to enquire of Hylenus or his children: and the sea-bankes were all about the coast searched for the bodie of Celinus, whome of cer∣taintie they thought the storme had wracked. It is long since I was in Crete, but when we come
there, we will ende there. In the meane time, I will forward with the storme, wherein the Prince Celinus and I wer miserably distrest: for some while the moun∣ting waues heavd vs to the clouds, another while sunk vs to the depth, which euerie moment wee accounted should be our sepulcher. Beside this sea-storme, hea∣uens windows were opened, powring another sea vp∣pon our heads: our oares were borne ouer boord, and we poore wretches (like condemned persons in the Ser∣geants hands) hurried whether violence it selfe would driue vs. Our chiefest powers were imployed, either to hold other fast, least the mercilesse waters shuld haue washt vs from the boate. And while we lay thus infol∣ded, I yéelding my selfe to death, he lamenting his des∣perate life: I was not a little comforted, that these mi∣series made him remember his mischieuous courses, and séeke reconciliation with God, being vtterly hope∣les to enioy anie more the companie of men. Nothing violent can bee permanent. This storme ere morning ceased, and some ease was giuen to our af∣flictions: the cloudie vapors were chased to the South, and the gray Morning blushingly saluted the Sunne, whose orient beames wantonned on the quiet waters. But these pleasures little comforted vs, who fainting with extreame labor, had no meanes to obtaine foode. He that had heard the penitent Prince exclaime on Ce∣lydons perswasion to that vnnaturall treason, ask par∣don of his wronged father, iniurde brother, harmlesse sister: would haue relented into teares, in compassio∣nating his gréefe. Thrée nights and two daies we huld along the Me∣diterrane sea, oarelesse, foodlesse, and strengthlesse. A∣bout the mid-watch of the last night, a storme more fu∣rious than the first assailed vs, driuing our smal boate against a rocke, where splitting in sunder our wether∣beaten bodies were with the parted sides of the boate
seperated. My happie chance was such, euen when my vitall powers were past all sense, to bee preserued by a fisherman, with whom Rhodope the Thracian Prin∣cesse (calling her selfe Serena) dwelt, of him and all the neighbors derely beloued. At his house (with warme broaths and other helpes) my benummed limbs found féeling of life: Serena more carefully attending me for that I was of Thrace, whose turmoyled estate when she heard of, teares fell from hir eyes: but when I dis∣coursed my wretched parting with Celinus, shee sunke to the ground. The Fisherman, his wife, my selfe with much adoo recouered hir, who weakely lifting vp hir head, cryed, A haples brother, haue heauens so little pit∣tie of thy life, that they permitted not thy penitent soule to be reconciled to thy exiled father? With that the Fi∣sherman askt if shée were daughter to a king? No said shée, but I was a handmaid to that haples Princes, and Celinus often woulde in Courtlike discourses account me for his sister. The Fisherman replied that to Aeli∣ana shee shoulde bee presented, if she were of so high a byrth. But Serena on hir knées besought shee might liue still in that meane estate, wherein as she had béene duetifull to him and hir, so she would continue: And fur∣ther besought they woulde giue entertainement to hir sea-wrackt countriman. Both hir requests were gran∣ted, and I in a small boate was set to fish in the riuer, on which riuer about two miles from the sea, Rhegius had a sumptuous Castle, for pleasure and strength vn∣matcheable in all Crete. And since we are in Crete: let vs sée how the affaires goe there. Rhegius vnable to quench his vnnaturall lust to Aeliana his kinswoman and soueraigne: grew enuiously impatient at Aemilius fauour, for Aeliana the Quéene graced him with all ho∣nors, and he by his demeanor obtained the frendship of each Courtier. A wicked Counsellour seruant to Rhegius, soother of
his lust-burning loue, was one day drawen by Rhe∣gius abroade, to whom in a groue not far from the sea, in a thicket seldome frequented, Rhegius discouered his grefe, and desired his aduise. There leaue we him a while, and sée what shift Celinus made to get the shore: being immediately after the splitting of the Boate cast into the hollowe of a rocke, in which by degrées ascen∣ding, he obtained the top of the crag, and the tyde going out continued there til morning, whose light gaue him no small comfort, for that he soone discouered the shore: being a thicke wood within two furlongs of the rocks discent. Faint though hee were, the sight of land gaue him vigor, what Coast it was he knew not, but inten∣ded to try, and casting himself into the calme water (for betwéene the woode and the rocke there was a good lée, in short space he attained the shoare, entered the Wood, and finding certaine wilde fruit, refresht therewith his fainting lims. And tooke some small rest vppon the ground, hauing had no sléepe in thrée daies before. Hée was but newly awaked, when Rhegius with his wic∣ked counseller were hard at hand conferring about the practise touching Aemilius and Aeliana: His seruant thus aduising; Aemilius said he, is this day a hunting néere your Castle, and as I vnderstand, intendeth in your absence to sée the beautye thereof. There your Honorable custome giueth entertaignment as well to straungers as frée-borne Cretans, and thither if you please will I poast, inuite him all night to stay, assure him and his company, the Quéene within two daies will be there, and hath commanded him there to abide hir Graces comming: which graunted, in his bedde I will either murther him, or commit him prisoner (since I know your Honorable nature hateth murder) into the déepe vault of your Castle, where hee shall be kept till the Quéene bee woon to yéeld to your intent. Her Grace you shall inuite to the same Castle, and in the
dead of night enter hir chamber, be resolute, let not hir teares intreate ye, feare not we will attende ye, if once you senze on hir, suffer hir not to escape, for though maydenly bashfulnes cause hir to be ouer-coy, yet once entred she will euer yeelde. I, this is somewhat saide Rhegius, murder Aemiius I will not, but gladly would I remooue him, therefore his inthralment I con∣sent vnto: For Aeliana my kinswoman, my soueraign, my soules chiefe health, faine would I vse her forcea∣bly, whome faire meanes cannot intreate, but that my feare to offend is almost equall to my loue. Ah tell me should she exclaime, in what case then were Rhegius? dishonored, pointed at, not only held a traytor, but estée∣med incestuous? My Lord said Dolon, (for so was hée named) be not precise, if euer ye intend to effect the per∣fect fulnes of your affection. To you more than her is Crete beholding: she being lawfull heire hath onelie the title of Quéene, you hold the Souereignitie: and would she not consent, I would compell her. If your affections bee setled as you say, you must vse force: if not, you may resolue otherwise as you please. Then as thou hast said (quoth Rhegius) let vs conclude: my ouer-mastred reason hath no reason to resist thy aduice. Herewith they heard a heauie groane sent by Celinus, that now knew himselfe in Crete by the name of Aeli∣ana, and had hope to finde his Brother when hee heard mention of Aemilius. With his sigh, Rhegius & Do∣lon looked backe, and sawe him faintly sitting vnder a Palme trée, neere the place they stood, and demaunded what he was? I am quoth he a miserable man, late sea-wrackt on this shore, pined welnere with famine, gréeued to talke, yet destrous to aduise one of you, that of his owne nature séemeth not ill inclinde, to shun the perswasions of the other: for by like counsell & self con∣spiracie, a I cast downe from Princely dignitie vnto this extremitie.
Hadst thou said Dolon béen Monarch of the earth, yet thus shouldst thou perish for playing the eauesdropper: and therewith doubling wound on wound, left hym with his out-stretcht limmes all senseles on the earth. Rhegius reprooued his bloodines, yet slightly past it, & leauing him without sepulcher, set forward with their detestable resolution. Dolon at Rhegius Castle finds Aemilius, intertains him, stayes him, betrayes him, and in a déepe dungeon imprisons him, where day equalled the night in darke∣nes, only a small glimmering through a cranny in the wall descended. Aemilius that knew no reson for this wrong, doubtlesse of Aelianaes fauor, assured of Rhe∣gius honorable thoughts, could not but complaine in that disconsolate place. Often he remembers his Fa∣ther, meanes his sister, blames his brother, exclaymes on destinie, that had reserued him to such distresse. This night it was my hap to be placing wéeles in sundrie places of the riuer, and from a small loope hole to whose barre I fastned my boate, I heard the wofull accents of his sorrowfull voyce, and at my returne cer∣tified Serena of the accident: who with me deuised, that next night I should take a number of canes, that being hollow and ioynted, I might from my mouth question him, and he to the hollow of my eare returne answere. By which meanes being ascertained it was hée, I fur∣nisht me with a long ladder of roapes, and engines to loosen the stone for his escape, which the third night wée effected. I suppose you thinke there was some ioy when hys sister and he met: thrée daies he there continued couert∣ly, intending to heare the vulgar report about his ab∣sence, all which time hardly scrud them for conference. We left Celinus mortally wounded in the Wood: whom olde Hylenus (as hee was walking to gather hearbes) found: who powring balme into his wounds
and pretious wine into his mouth, began a little o re∣turne red blood to his ashie-coloured chéekes, and some weake moouing to his benumbed limmes. At length he opened the heauie windowes of his dimmed eyes, and staring Hylenus in the face, with a féeble voyce thus questiond him: O what art thou that recalst from death, the sonne of all mischaunce and miserie? Why should thy age be pittifull to my yong yeares, that haue to kingly age béen cruell, and on Princely youth shew∣ed no compassion? Hylenus better marking this disco∣loured man, knew him at these words to bee Celinus: wherewith abundance of teares dewed his siluer hair, and true compassion toucht his princely heart: indeuo∣ring both to recure him, and knowe what accident had brought him into that place and plight? Celinus as he was lead to the Hermitage, vttered the conspiracie be∣twéene Rhegius and Dolon, referring his owne wret∣chednesse till hee were more refresht. As soone as Hy∣lenus had dressed Celinus wounds, and giuen him pre∣cious restoratiues, with what spéed he might hee went to the Court, and to the Quéene vttred the whole con∣spiracie of Rhegius. Who obseruing his importunate loue, the Sauages assailment, the absence of Aemili∣us, and withall that next day she was inuited to hir vn∣kles Castle, called a Counsell, before whom the Her∣mit againe opened the whole plot: whereat Rhegius confounded, confessed the fault. The Castle was sercht, but Aemilius could not be found: wherupon Rhegius & Dolon wer condemned of traitrous conspiracie & mur∣der, the third day following appointed for their execu∣tion. Aemilius hearing of this tooke Rhodope, my ma∣ster, and my proper selfe with him, appointing to bee at Court against the day of execution. Hylenus the daye before had brought thether his reconciled Sonne, who opened before the Quéene and States Rhegius vnwil∣lingnes, and Dolons often tempting him: yet nothing
could alter Aelianaes iudgement, till Amilius leading Rhodope by the hand, shewed himselfe aliue. His on∣ly sight pleaded her Vnckles pardon: and Rhodopes first view sodainly changed Rhegius lawles affections. Short tale to make (for now the Sunne is setled in the West) Dolon was sent to bannishment, Celinus and Rhegius were to either Souereigne reconciled, Aemi∣lius by marriage with Aeliana was crowned King of Crete, Rhodope giuen to Rhegius, the Fisher-man & my selfe richly rewarded. While feasts and triumphs continued in Crete, messengers were sent into Thrace, whence sundrie Nobles came to attend Hylenus in his returne: where being ioyfully receiued, Licosthenes was honored with Celydons offices, and Celinus pro∣claimed heir apparant. My selfe might in either Court haue serued, but for my plaine condition I found them too curious: therefore hetherward I bent my course, intending to liue Menalcas man if he accept it, or kéepe my owne Heard, when I can get it. Godamercie Piers (said Corydon) for thy good ende. The Euening Starre is vp, and ruddie Thetis wel∣commeth the Sunne. After long troubles I like thy de∣sire of rest: for in a shepheards life is both repose & re∣creation. I quoth Menalcas, Young DAPHNIS hath giuen his verdict of The Shepheards Content: due∣ly praising it, as it meriteth. My bleating Lambes (said Piers) tell me it is time to folde, my Dogge hath brought my Heard into a head: you that haue hindred me all day helpe me a little at night, that I may in this kinde hereafter the willinger await your will. Here∣to they both yéelded: and Corydon supping that Night with Menalcas, enioyned him to bring Piers to theyr Plough-mans Holidaye. Where what happened, if Piers Plainnes please, shall peraduenture be published. FINIS.
