A3116AB 551.a.32[183] R232741 99889054 196174
PANOPLIA MEDICA, OR A Medicinal Armour FOR THE WHOLE BODY. PROOF Against the Invasion of Sickness, and Assault of destroying Diseases: Being Composed of the greatest Arcana, and select Medicines in the whole Practical part of Physick, whose Vertues are not to be Exceeded by any, of safe use, and easy Purchase: Always ready to give Relief to Persons of all Con∣ditions, in the greatest Emergencies, and even Extreams of Sickness. Carefully and Faithfully Prepared, By Ed. Andrews, M. D. THE first of these, is our Great Stomach Pill, whose Primary intention, is the Relief and Support of that Noble Part; And this it do's effectually, by carrying off from it, all such gross, foul, Putrid Humours, as Clog and Choke the Genuine Ferment of it; Pervert and destroy the Concoctive Faculty; vitiate the whole Mass of Blood, and Nutricious Juices, and cause innumerable Diseases, uneasy Life, and untimely Death. Now to prevent and Remedy all these, this noble Medecine is prepared, which caries off such supervacaneous Mat∣ter; Rectifies the Ferment of the Stomach and Con∣coction, and Raiseth the very Foundation of Di∣seases,
in order to a firm and lasting state of Health, and is therefore call'd the Stomach Pill. Notwith∣standing which; the Vertue of these Pills are not confind to the Stomach alone, for, being of fine and subtile Parts, They in their working through the Intestines, penetrate and open the obstructions of those obscure passages of the Bowells subservient to the Stomach, which are call'd by Anatomists, the first Ways, the Meseraic Veins, and those of the Me∣sentery, &c. through which the Chyle and whole Mass of Nourishment passeth, in order to the form∣ing the Blood, and nourishing Juices, upon which the whole Body subsisteth; most of which are of so fine a fabrick, that they are scarce discernable to the most curious Eye, and therefore obnoxious to such obstructions or stoppings, as cause a multitude of fatal Diseases, which would afford Matter for a Volume; should I under take to write a History of them, which in truth, derive their original from the Stomach and ways so vitiated and perverted: For the Remedy and Rectifying of which, this excellent Pill is pri∣marily adapted or fitted, with the utmost Industry and Art that can possibly be used: The operation of these Pills is after this maner, viz. If the Sto∣mack be full and foul, they first unload it by a gentle Vomit or two, and then by easie and plentiful stools according to the Emergency of the Occasion: Thence in their passage they take along with them all gross matter that doth in any wise Obstruct or Stop up those Exile passages aforesaid, of the Lacteals, Mesentery, Liver, Spleen, &c. and leave them open and free for the Current of an untainted Chyle, pure Mass of Blood and Nourishing nervous Juice, which produce a firm and sound Constitution, and consequently an Easie and Healthy Life: Which as it is the just and proper Office of a good Medicine, so, it is of these Ad∣mirable
Pills. The use of them is as followeth. The common Dose to an Ordinary or Midle constitution is six Pills, of which take two at Night going to Bed, and four the next Morning; after the first Stool or vo∣mit (when they work that way) drink a small draught of Posset drink or thin Broth, or other warm draught as you have convenience, and the like after every second or third Stool, eat nothing till noon, and then that which is of easy digestion. Strong Bodies may take Three at Night and Four or Five the next Mor∣ning: They who are of weaker Bodies may take One at Night and Three or Four the Morning following. Children of eight, ten or twelve years of age may take One at night and Two next day; And you are to observe this rule: To begin with a smaller dose and increase the Number, as you find them most agre∣able to your sterength, and keep to That, which an easie observation will make familiar. I advise the first use of these Pills may be for three or four days, then twice a Week, and afterward once in a Week or Ten days, as you find occasion. Price 1 s. the Box. The next Medicine is my Grand Antiscorbutick call'd Anima Cochleariae, or the Soul of Scurvy Grass: Being a Spirituous water drawn by Distillation from Scurvy Grass; (whence it hath its Name,) and from other Hearbs and Materials, which in their Nature are most properly Apposite to the Cure of the Scur∣vy in all its Degrees and Symytoms. The Prepara∣tion of this Medicine is such, as, that all the In∣gredients contain'd in It, are by a previous Fermentation, and other necessary Processes separated from all their Gross and Earthy substances, and there∣by made very Subtile, Searching, Cleansing, Open∣ing, Sweeting, and Strengthning. It powerfully Assails and Totally Vanquisheth this Reigning Di∣sease, which Affects more or less, all Families, if not
Persons. It entirely subdues its most Violent and Mor∣tifying Symptoms, and renders the Whole Man, Ve∣gete, Lively, and Active, which was before-Incum∣bered with a listless Heaviness, flying Pains, Aches, Soreness, and Universal indisposition of Body, sore Mouth and Gums, loose Teeth and Spots in divers Parts, and many other, which are so well known to all People of This and other Northern Nations, that I need not be larger in the Description of It. The use hereof is Easy and Pleasant: Drink an ordinary Wine Glass of It in the Morning fasting, use moderate Exercise, either Walking, Riding, or following accustomed business at home or abroad, or other that may warm the Blood in order to a Quick Motion and Coopera∣tion with the Medicine: Take another Glass, about Four or Five of the clock in the Afternoon, or Three or Four hours distant from Dinner, after the same Order, and another, an hour or two after a Light Supper, or before Bed time. Purge once a Week with the Stomach Pills before mentioned, and I will con∣fidently assure any Scorbutick Patients, that by the use hereof, after this order prescribed, or a few Weeks, that they shall find themselves wholy steed and deli∣ver'd from that Uneasy and Troublesome companion the Scurvy. Price 1 s. the Bottle of half a pint. Our third Remedy particularly respects the Breast and Lungs, and is of two Sorts, the One our Pulmo∣niack Lozenge the Other is our Alexiterial Balsamick Syrup. These in their Respective Operations doe effectually help all Infirmities of the Lungs, and Brea∣thing Organs, which are Coughs, Phthysick, Asthma or dificult breathing, Wheasing, Inflation (com∣monly call'd Rising of the Lights) as also Excoria∣tion or Soreness of the Trachaea Arteria or Wine-pipe, which often proceeds to Ulceration and Consumption, properly so call'd (for every wasting of the Body is not
properly call'd a Consumption, but that only which proceeds from the Lungs, the other is an Atrophie, as being the Effect of other Causes:) As also Orthop∣naea, or Streight Breathing, and Pertpneumonia, or Inflamation of the Lungs, which is still attended with a Feaver, and often a Pleurisie, which generally proves Faral. These with divers others which come under no denomination, are Diseases of the Lungs and Organs of Respiration, caused either by Sharp de∣fluctions o Rheum, or a Salt serous Catarh falling upon the Breast as aforesaid; or else Cold, Stiff, Vis∣cous Phlegm impacted in the Lobes of the Lung which doe variously affect Them, according to the Quantity or Quality of the Matter Offending, and also accor∣ding to the Nature or Condition of the Parts Recei∣ving and Containing such present Matter fallen up∣on Them; which being Graduated and Exaspera∣ted, by neglect of timely Remedies, cause a Weak and Languid Body, and generally a fatal Conclusion. Now for a seasonable Remedy, for These and all o∣ther dire affects of the Breast and Lungs; You have these Excellent Medicines, properly Adapted, and faith∣fully Prepared, and always at Hand to give Relief in time of need, which are to be used as followeth. The Lozenges are your Companion in the day, of which take about the weight of a large Shilling or more, in the Morning fasting, the like at 3 or 4 of the clock in the Afternoon, and last at Night: These are times to be certainly Observed, at other times, as your Condition requires it; let them dissolve in your Mouth, and swallow them by degrees, and the Effect will answer your desire. The Balsamick Syr∣rup, is your Guard in the Night when your Sleep (the great Refreshment of Nature) hath been inter∣rupted by Coughing, Ratling, or otherwise troubled; This takes off the sharp destillation, sweetens the Hu∣mours,
opens the Stopping, and gives you a Comforta∣ble Repose, which mightily conduceth to your Re∣covery. These Excellent Medicines thus used, will infallibly give Relief, and fully answer the Ends to which they are design'd, abating those violent Sym∣ptoms, and soon repair the decayes which Nature hath suffered, and strength will ensue to your abun∣dant satisfaction. Take two Spoonfuls at night going to Bed, in a small draught of burn'd Wine, Mace Ale, or Posset Drink. Young Children may take half a Spoonful, those of more years, viz. about 10 or 12, a whole one or more as you see occasion. Note: That this Exellent Alexiterial Syrup is yet endued with more Vertues then are hither to mentioned, for beside it's singular operation upon the Breast and Lungs; It hath it's Alexiterial Vertues in a high degree. It takes off the Violent Symptoms of the Small Pox, and Meazles, and being given before, or upon their coming out. It hugely assists Nature in this work, and makes them come out kindly. So also in all sorts of Feavers it is of Admirable use, throwing off the Malignity and Fury thereof, keeps off a Delirium, or Altenation of Mind, causeth moderate sweat abates thirst, and carries off by the Easiest operation iginable, the whole Febrile Matter, and brings the Body to  Pristine Temper. It also is a certain Cure for Aues taken according to direction, which in Acute Diseases shall be particularly given to such as shall make use of this Excellent Medicine. Furthermore, It is a present Remedy in the Griping of the Gutts, whether with, or without a Flux, as also in the most severe fitts of the Cholick, in these two you may depend upon this single Medicine for a certain Cure, never failing: Take it thus, First, take a Clyster, of a Pint of Posset drink, wherin a handful of Mallows and as much Camomile flowrs have been boyled and strain'd, to which put a quarter of a Pound of course Sugar, when it hath wrought, take two or three Spoonfuls of this Alexiterial Balsamick Syrop, in a small draught of clear Posset Drink go to Bed and lie still in a gentle breathing Sweat (if it offers it self,) and you will soon find Ease, and soon after Cure; which, if it be not finished at the first dose (as it seldom or never misseth) take it again about
six or eight hours after, and it will surely perfect it: The Price of the Lozenges is, a shilling the Paper of two ounces. The Ale∣xiterial Balsamick Syrup, two shillings the Glass of four ounces. Our fourth Medicine, is the Tincture of Mars, or Steel, a Medicine indeed! which never till now made its Publique entry; Though in my private Practise I have, in the tract of many Years; had such high proofs, and demonstrations of its Ver∣tues, that I never mett with or heard of, any that exceeded it. It doth Wonders in Diseases of Melancholy, and Hypochondriack Passions, tho to the degree of Madness. It gives a certain Cure in Convulsions, Fitts of the Mother, Spleen, and all Flatuosi∣ties, or Windiness, it is a Soveraign Remedy, and takes away the Original Cause of these Distempers. In all Female Sicknesses It hath scarce its Equal, for it opens all Obstructions of the Womb, and Hypogastrick Vessels, and both in Women and Vir∣gins, it works such Essects, as where Nature is either too libe∣ral, or too frugal in its benefits to the tender Sex, it reduceth those Extreams to Moderation; after a singular maner: The use hereof is thus. After three or four times Purging with our great Stomach Pill, and Bleeding where it is requisite, take fifteen or twenty Drops of our Tincture of Mars, aforesaid, in a Glass of White or Rhe∣nish Wine in a Morning fasting, they who cannor afford them∣selves Wine, may take it in Beer, Ale, or other such Liquor that may be had, that is not too thin and small, use Exercise after it, Then about four or five, after Noon, repeat the same quantity, as in the Morning, use moderate Exercise, and take it again an hour or two before you go to Bed. Purge once a Week with our Pills, and by continuance of this Course for a few Weeks, you will find such Effects as shall answer your utmost desires. These Medicines are but few (four in all) But; their Ver∣tues are so large and extensive, that they take in the whole series of Diseases (generally speaking) that infest Mankind, answering in all respects the whole Design of Medicine. And indeed, the whole Method of Practise used among the Physi∣cians at this day, is comprehended within this narrow Circuit; Whil'st that numerous and pompous Train of Waters, Electua∣ries, Apozems, Potions, Pills, Powders, Species, Extracts, In∣fusions, Decoctions, Elixyrs, Tincture, and Legions of others, have still but a tendency to the said end, and are at best but (according to the usual Cant) succedaneous, or rather cir∣cumstantial in respect of these, or of this kind; and I may justly say Nauseous and Incongruous.
Wherefore, in order to the regular use, and application of these Medicines I shall only add this Precaution. That all Diseases are of these two kinds; Chronical and Acute; Chronical, are those of long growth, and long duration, or continuance, such as have their foundation secretly laid by a foregoing intemperate, or inconvenient way of living, and by slow degrees come to their state, and continue for Months and Years to annoy and destroy the Body. Acute Diseases are such as are of sudain Rise, and soon determined, either in Life or Death, and those are continual Feavers Malignant or Pestilen∣tial, Small-Pox, Meazles, &c. Now, these later (Acute Di∣seases) will require more particular Advise and Direction, (which I am alway ready to give,) in the menagement and conduct of their cure, and application of these Medieines, in order thereunto, which are of sufficient Vertue and Power to performe it. The former, I mean those Chronical Diseases are immediatly in the Power of the Parient, by the due and timely application of the aforesaid Medicines, according to the Rules and Orders here prescribed; To which I beseech God to give his Blessing, I have only this one thing to add by way of, Advertisement. That in the Venereal Disease, in all the Branches and Degrees, from the first beginings thereof (commonly known by the name of a Clap) to the highest & most Malignant Symptoms when grown to a confirmed and inveterate Pox. These my Stomach Pills, together with a Diet Drink which I make for this use, are Prepared fully and entirely to Effect and absolve the whole Cure. Though perhaps some external applications may be useful in Case of Inererate Ulcers, which must be presently cheked where a Part is in danger to be lost, or spoiled, before the Disease can be Radicaly exterminated. And these are still at hand to be had as occasion requires. And if any shall desire to have their Names or Persons con∣ceal'd, they may (upon giving an account of their Case in Writing, have them sent with that desired secrecy. These things (Reader) which are here Candidly offered to your Help and Succour in all the Accidents and Emergencies of Sickness, shall be with all Faithfulness and Integrity performed at my abode, at the second House on the right hand in Bolt and Tun Court in Fleet-street. Where are several Excellent Cordial Waters to be had, Par∣ticularly that most Deliclous and Rich Citron Water, as Cordial and Comfortable in Vertues, as delightful in Tast.
