A4098cA 551.a.32[206] R223025 R232780 99889081 196197
At the Blue-Ball, the upper-end of Cow-Lane, near the Sheep-Pens in West-Smithfield, are to be Sold the following Medicaments, Viz. A Most Excellent Powder that cures Con∣vulsions, Epilepsy, and Falling-sickness, in Children and grown People, at thrice taking, though never so inveterate. Price the 3 Doses for Children, 2s. 6d. for Elder People, 4s. As also for Deafness, thick or dull Hearing, Pain or Noise in the Ears, a Cephalick Tincture that takes away all heterogenious Matters lodged in the Cavities thereof that may obstruct and hinder that Noble Sense. Price per Glass, 1s. Likewise a most prevalent Astringent Powder against the Hemorrhagia, or Bleeding at Nose, which not only stops the Flux at the first appli∣cation, but prevents the Return thereof, which brings many People to a very low degree, and frequently terminates in a Consumption, if not timely prevented. Price per Box, 1S. And an incomparable Antiscorbutick Mixture against the Mouth Scurvey, curing the Blackness or Rottenness of the Teeth, Erosion or eating away, and Exulceration of the Gums, and Tooth-Ache. Price per Pot, 2 s. Likewise a most powerful Stomachick Elixir for want of Appetite, loathing of Meat, pain or gnawing in the Stomach, and Indigestion; a∣mending the ill affections of the Stomach, causing a merry and cheerful Countenance, a good Ap∣petite, and Digestion. Price per Glass, 2s. 6d.
A Never-failing Carminative Spirit that cures the Cholick and Griping in the Guts, when all other Remedies fail, and prove ineffectual. Price, 1s. 6d. All sorts of Worms, whether Stomach, or other, destroyed in Children, and drove out by siege, by a Powder and Plaster. The 3 doses of worm-Powder and Plaster, Price, 2s. 6d. He hath 2 Universal Remedies against the most intollerable and wracking pain of the Stone or Gravel in the Bladder or Kidnies, being an Ele∣ctuary and a Spirit, subduing those insupportable Pangs, breaking the Stone if concreted or ingen∣dred, bringing it away by Urine. Electuary per Pot, Price, 2s. Spirit per Glass, 2s. As also against the Gout, Sciatica, and Rheu∣matism, or any pain in the Joynts, tho' never so raging, or of how long continuance soever, being a Balsam far exceeding any thing of that kind, or any Medicament yet made publick. Price, 2s. 6d. To avoid Counterfeits, the Medicines herein specified are Sold by none but Mr. Reuben Seal, at his House aforesaid. At the same Place is also Sold an infallible Remedy for the Green-sickness, being as Electu∣ary, whose worth and excellency hath gain'd it a great Applause and Acceptance in the World. Price, 2s. Likewise a great Secret to help Barrenness, and procure Child-bearing: As also, to prevent Abortion, or Miscarriage in Women with Child, to facilitate Child-birth in hard Travail, and cause a speedy and safe Delivery.
