L2930 99827776 197998
Londons Glory, and Whittingtons Renown OR, A Looking-Glass for Citizens of LONDON. Being a Remarkable Story, how Sir Richard Whittington (a poor Boy bred up in Lancashire) came to be three times Lord Mayor of London in three several Kings Reigns, and how his rise was by a Cat, which he sent for a Venture be∣yond Sea. Together with his Bountiful Gifts and Liberality given to this Honourable City: And the vast Sums of Money he lent the King to maintain the VVars in France. And how at a great Feast to which he invited the King, the Queen, and the Nobility, He Generously Burnt the Writings, and freely forgave his Majesty the whole Debt. Tune of, Dainty come thou to me. man on a horse marching in procession BRave London Prentices, come listen to my Song, Tis for your glory all, and to you doth belong, And you poor Country Lads, though born of low degrée Sée by gods providence, what you in time may bée, Hear must I tell the praise, of worthy whittington, Known to be in his dayes, thrice Lord Mayor of London, But of poore parentage, born was he as we heare, And in his tender age, bred up in Lancashire. Prooly to London, then, came up this Simple lad, Where with a Marchant-man, soon he a dwelling had, And in a Kitchen plac'd a Scullion for to be, Where a long time he past, in drudging slavery,
a ship with an S on the sail portrait of a woman wearing a crown, and of a smaller figure, also wearing a crown His dayly service was, turning Spitts at the fire, And to scour potts of Brass, for a poore Scullions hire, A sharp Cook Maid there was, that eat him day by day, Which made him in his mind. think for to run away. So from the Marchant-man, Whittington secretly, Towards his Country ran, to gaine his liberty, But as he went along, in a faire Summers morn, Londons Bells swéetly rung, Whittington back return. Evermore soundiry so, turn again Whittington, And thou in time shall be, Lord Mayor of London Whore vpon badk againe, Whittington came with spéed, A prentice to remaine as the Lord had decréed. Still blessed be the Bells, this was his daily Song, Which my good fortune tells, most swéetly have they rung. If God so favur me, I will not prove unkind; London my Love shall sée, and my large bounties find. But sée this happy chanc, Whittington had a Cat, Which he a venture sent and got his wealth by that. For from Forreign Land where Rats & Mice abound. Thy brought him for his Cat many a fair thousand pound. When as they home were come with their Ship Laden so, Whittington's wealth began, by this Cat thus to grow: Scullions life he forsook; to be a Merchant good, And soon he began to look, how well his credit stood. Soon after he was chose Sheriff of the City here, And then he quickly rose higher as did appear. For to this City's praise, Sir Richard VVhittington, Came to be in his days, thrice Lord Mayor of London. More his fame to advance, thousands he lent his King. To maintain Wars in France honour from thence to bring. And after at a Feast, which he the King did make Burnt the Bonds as a jest and would no mney take. Ten thousand pound he gave, to his Prince willingly, And would no penny have for his kind courtesie: As God thus made him great, so he would daily sée, Poor people fed with meat, to shew his Charity. Prisoners poor, Cherisht were, widows swéet, comfort found, Good déeds both far and near of him do still resound: VVhittingtons Colledge is one of his Charities; And a fair Church he built to lasting memories. New-gate he builded fair, for Prisoners to lye in; Christs Church he did repair, Christian love for to win. Many more such like déeds, were done by Whittington, Which joy and comfort bréeds to all that look thereon. Let all brave Citizens who do this story read, By his example learn, always the poor to féed, What is lent to the Poor, the Lord will sure repay, And Blessings kéep in store until the latter day. Lancashire thou hast bred, this flower of Charity, Though he be dead and gone, yet lives his Memory. Those Bells that call'd him so, turn again Whittington, Would they call many ma such men to fair LONDON. London, Printed for R. Burton. at the Horse-shoe in West Smithfield.
