W2461 21.h.3[170] R228072 99887623 190892
By the King, A PROCLAMATION, For Apprehending and Securing the Person of Monsieur John Robart. WILLIAM R. WHereas We have been Informed, That by the Examinations and Informa∣tions upon Oath of Several Persons, lately taken before a Committeé of both Our Houses of Parliament, touching the Vnlawful and Indirect Giving, Receiving and Disposing of Great Sums of Money, for Procuring Charters for the East India Company, and otherwise relating to that Com∣pany, it appeared that Monsieur John Robart was not only Concerned in the Receipt, but was also able to give Evidence, and make Proof of the Dis∣posal and Application of Part of the said Money; yet to avoid Iustice, and the Manifestation of the Truth, and (as much as in him lies) to Render all Iust and Proper Methods of Prosecution in the Premisses ineffectual, he, the said John Robart hath withdrawn himself from his usual Place of Habitation, and Absconds, intending, as may reasonably be supposed, to make his Escape into Parts beyond the Seas. And whereas the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, did lately make an Humble Address unto Vs, That We would Issue Our Royal Proclamation for Securing the Person of the said John Robart, and in Order thereunto, that the Ports might be stopped: We have thought fit, by the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation, hereby Requiring and Commanding all Our Loving Subjects whatso∣ever to Discover and Apprehend, and Cause the said Monsieur John Robart to be Discovered and Appre∣hended, and to Carry him before some of Our Iustices of the Peace, or Chief Magistrates of the County, Town or Place where he shall be Apprehended; who are respectively Required to Secure him, and thereof to give speedy Notice unto Our Privy Council, or One of Our Principal Secretaries of State, to the end he may be forth coming to be dealt withal, and proceeded against according to Law. And for the Prevention of the said Robarts Escape into Parts beyond the Seas, We do Require and Command all Our Officers of the Customs, and other Our Officers and Subjects of and in Our Respective Ports and Maritine Towns and Places within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, That they, and every of them, in their respective Places and Stations, be careful and diligent in the Examination of all Persons that shall Pass, or endeavour to Pass beyond the Seas; And if they shall Discover the said Robart, then to Cause him to be Apprehended and Se∣cured, and to give Notice thereof, as aforesad. And We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects (as they will Answer the contrary at their Perils) that they do not any ways Conceal, but do Discover the said John Robart, to the end he may be Secured and Proceeded against accord∣ing to Law. Given at Our Court at Kensington the Ninth Day of May, 1695. In the Seventh Year of Our Reign. God save the King. London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceas'd; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. MDCXCV.
