1103 99855444 20938
A Discourse of that which happened in the battell fought betweene the two Nauies of Spaine and Por∣tugall, at the Ilands of Azores. Anno Dom. 1582. ¶ Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sould at his shop ouer-against Saint Sepulchers Church without Newgate.
The successe which did hap∣pen vnto the Nauie of the king of Spaine, whereof was generall Captaine the Mar∣quis of Santa Cruse, in the battell which was fought with the Nauie that Don An∣tonie brought to the Ilands of Asores. The Lord Marquesse went out of the riuer of Lishborne, the tenth daye of Julie 1582▪ with 28. shippes, and with fiue small pin∣nesses, (for that other three shippes which should haue gone with him, could not come foorth till the next day,) bicause he had order from his Maiestie, to depart with the said Nauie, without tarying for the 19 shippes, 2. galians, 12▪ gallies, and 2. pinesses, which were prepared in Andlzia. And following his voiage, had three dayes of ill weather, at the ende whereof he found him-selfe 55▪ leagues from Lishborne, about the height of the Cape of Saint Vincent, 50. leagues from him. And so the foule weather was the cause that he fell from the height of his pretended course. From whence returned one ship be∣ing an Aragoze, in the which were three companies of old souldiers of Flanders, and the Phisitians, Surgians, and other offi∣cers
of the Hospitall, with their prouision of all things necessarie for that purpose: which ship returned without anie order, they alled∣ging that she was in a leeke. In the 13. day it pleased God to send faire weather, by meanes whereof they got in one day & night that which they had before lost. And being in it, and the fayre weather continuing still, he did follow his voiage, till the 21. at which time they had the sight of the Ile of S. Mi∣chaeel. And the 22. day being Sunday, they approched neere vnto Ʋilla Franca, which is a towne of the said Iland, containing about 500. housholds. The day before they ariued at the Iland, the Marquis dispatched two Pinesses, vnder the charge of Capteine Aguirrei, who was capteine ouer the fiue aforesaid, and did send in euery one sixe souldiers with Caleuers, giuing them warning to go warilie, and if they should chance to meete with their ene∣mies Nauie, that they should not come a∣bord anie of their shippes▪ neither suffer any of them to come aborde of their pinesses. And by the said Capteine the Marquis did write vnto Ambrose Aguier gouernour of the said Iland, certifying him how his Maiesties Nauie which he brought was verie strong, conteining 5500. souldiers, in which num∣ber
was Don Lopus de Figueroa, with a 1800 of them of Flanders, ouer and aboue 200. Gentlemen and perticular persons en∣tertained with their aduantages, who came to serue his Maiestie. And that the Nauie which was made readie in Calis, (for the which they did looke euery houre) was of the number and quantitie aforesaid, with other 5000. souldiers, wherof was fiue ensignes of old Tersua of Flaunders. And the Marquis did desire the said Ambrosio de Aguier to send him such newes as he had of the French Na∣uie, & whether they had passed by that waies or not, and the number of their ships: because he was determined to go seeke them, and fight with them. And that he should say vnto Peter Pishoto, if he shoulde chaunce to bee there, that he should make himselfe readie to follow him with the shippes of his charge. Whiles the Marquis was at an anker in the road of Villa Franca, there did ariue vnto the Admirals ship, one Caruaile of the three which were left in Lishborne, for to bring the horses, who gaue them to vnderstand, that the day before were ariued to the saide Ʋilla Franca, the three shippes which were left in Lishborne, who departed from thence the next day after the Marquis, in companie with the saide three Carnailes. They reported
likewise, that the three ships, after they had fallen with Ʋilla Franca, were forced backe againe to the sea, and that the two carueils were taken by the enemie, the other with the horses belonging to the generall of the field, and others, went to the sea, beeing chased by a French ship. The Marquis did send some perticular men to vnderstand somewhat of them of the Iland, who would not suffer them to come aland, but discharged their peeces at them. And there was a Preist that tolde them that the Iland was for his Maiestie, and that he knewe nothing of the french Armie, others willed them to goe to the Citie. The Mar∣quesse vnderstanding what had passed, and perceiuing by one of the two Pinesses which hee had sent with Captain Aguirre, that the other Pinasse with Captain Aguirre was ta∣ken prisoner by a French Shippe and other Barks that came from the land, hee did then suspect that the Iland had rebelled, and ha∣uing sent for Don Lopo de Figueroa Gene∣rall of the Feeld, to conferre with him about the landing of some quantitie of men to haue spech with them of Villa Franca, and likewise to take freshe water, and hauing sent to the Captains Michel de Oquendo and Rodrigo de Vargas, to take notice in what place they
were best to anker: in the meane time they that were in the top of the Admirall Gallion espied certain ships neere vnto Ponta Delga∣aa, about which place is the principall place of the Iland and the Castle: and seeming to the Marques that those shippes should be of the enemies, he altered his determination and went straightway neere vnto Ponta Del∣gada, and by & by they discouered o ships, & then they perceiued that it was the armie of Don Anthonio. So our armie approching vnto the enimie, and hauing now certaine knowledge of them, for that they prepared them selues towards the sea, and perceiuing them to be aboue 60. ships of smal and great, the Marquis called a councell, and with the aduice of Don Pedro de Tolledo, the Master generall of the Campe, the Marquis de la Fauora, Don Pedro de Tassis generall Comp∣troler, Don Francisco de Bouadilla master of the Campe, and other Capteins & Knights beeing called therevnto, they determined to present the battell, and to fight with the enimie: who did the like, and put themselues in order, and so they discharged a peece of ordinance towards vs in token of battaile. With that the Marquis commanded to put foorth a baner of defiance, and shot off one peece of ordinance, and sent Capteine Ma∣roline,
and capteine Rodrigo de Vergas, to aduertise the whole armie to set them selues in order of battaile, which was done in this maner: In the forefront was a rowe of ships and galions, and of the right hand of the Admirall was placed the galion Saint Mat∣theo, wherein was the master Generall of the field, and the generall Comptroller: and of the left hand was the ship, wherein went Don Francisco de Bouadilla great master of the field, and foure ships more to be assi∣stants: the ten Biscains, with the other ships, wherein was the capteines Michel de Ouan∣do, and Vilia Visiosa, were placed in the re∣reward. And by reason the ship wherin Don Christopher de Erasso went, had strained the head of hir maine mast, by meanes whereof she could not beare hir top saile, she was for∣ced to staie behind, and could not therefore take hir place accordinglie. Which was a great greefe to the Marquis, to want the companie of Don Christopher in such a time of occasion. The Marquis him selfe went in the galian Saint Marten, whiche was Admerall of the same Nauie. He gaue this order for the battell, that in the uppermost sight vpon the poope should be 20. gentlemen and pistolets, & 20. caleuers: and belowe the Portiugal gentlemen (except Syr Iames de
Castro, which was vpon the poope) and 20. pistolets, and 6. caliuers: and lowest of all should be for helpe and succour Syr Anthonie Pessoua, Syr Lewes Osorio, Syr Goston Ron∣kelio, the coronell Mondonario, captaine Quessatha, and other foure pistolets: and vpon the hatches of the galion 40. pistolets vpon either side, vnder the charge of cap∣taine Gamboa: neere to the chamber of the poope, was the body of the gard, with 40. souldiers, most of them particuler men, which had bene in office before, vnder the charge of capteine Augustin Deherrara, for to helpe and succor where should be most need. In the starne of the ship was Iohn Bap∣tist Sauffone gentleman of Milan, with the serieants of the capteines Augustine Deher∣rera, and Gamboa, with 15. pistolets, and 10. caliuers: in the great top was the serieant Syr Frances Galeio with 8. caliuers, and in the top of the Trinket sixe, besides those that were in the small tops. Vnder the hat∣ches where the great ordinance dooth lie, were the capteins Syr Christopher Deacco∣uia, and Scouetho, and Iohn Alter, and the serieant Tauste, and Esquiuel, and with euerie peece of ordinance one gunner, and six men to helpe him. And euerie one had an instrument called hanspiks. With the mu∣nition
which was vpon the hatches, was Marcelus Carraceolus: and like seruice was vnderneath. And in keeping of the gunne powder was capteine Grimaldo, with foure mariners. He commanded also, that there should stand hard by the sterne of the galion, the great bote called the Salua, and foure small ones, for to carrie directions, and fill tubbes of water and hogsheads in diuers places of the said galion, and deuide in their places diuers pikes, and that the Mariners should be in the ships apparell, and the cap∣teines Marolin and Roger Deuargas (as sea∣men and of great experience) should attend vnto the ordinance and other necessaries. All this was executed verie shortlie, and with a great good will. For all this was prouided before they approched vnto the Iland. This beeing doone, with great noise of wifflers and drums, and their baners open, went our nauie for to inuade the enimies: the which made the like in good order. But bicause the wind was calme, they could not fight that day, but went seaward. And yet the Marquis could not vnderstand of the state of the Iland. Afterward foure owers within night ariued vnto the admirall Ga∣lion, in a Pinesse, wherin was Domingo de Adurriaga, master of a ship called the Ca∣teline,
with other fiue mariners Biscaines, and brought a letter from Don Iohn de Ca∣stilio, conteining as followeth. In the army of Don Anthonio there is 58. ships, wherof 28. be great ships, and the rest small, and in them is 6000. Frenchmen. If our armie be not strong enough to fight with them, then it may drawe nigh the Ca∣stle, which is for the king. And I would wish you to haue a great regarde to it, for if you should loose the victory, great inconuenience would ensue. Furthermore the Maister and his company declared, that Don Antho∣nio with his armie came to the Iland of S. Michael the 15. day of Julie, and the 16. he set 3000. men a land, with whome Don Lorenco Noguera with iiii. ensigens of foot∣men did meete, being in number about 500. men, and with 150. Harquebushiers taken out of the Byskaine shippes, who a litle from the citie did skirmish with the french armie, but being ouerpressed with nomber, were forced to retire to the Castle to Peter Piso∣to, with the losse of 10. Castellions, and 12. Byscaynes, Don Lorenco being hurt, wherof after he dyed: and in the Castle with Peter Pisoto is the sonne of the gouernour Ambro∣sio de Aguiar, and the Bishop, the Corigedor, and other two or three Gentlemen, and all
the rest went out of the citie, calling some of Don Anthonio, and the souldiours of the Frenche armie sacked the Citie: and that Don Anthonio sent to the Captaine Don Iohn de Castillio, willing him to yeeld vnto him the castle, knowing it to be his, and that he would giue him free passage for him and his company: the which thing if he refused, that then he would bring aland 7. peeces of Ordinance from the ships, and would bat∣ter the Castle: & moreouer he gaue him to vn∣derstand that the armie of Spaine woulde not come this yeere. To whom Don Iohn, the gouernours sonne, the Bishop, and the Cori∣gedor made answere, that the Castle was the king of Spaines, and that they woulde not yeeld it to him. The Marquis did likewise vnderstande by the saide Maister, that the Frenche men the next daye (hauing know∣ledge of the approching of our armie) did imbarke themselues in all hast, and that the 2. Gallions and 3. great Caruelles of Peter Pisoto, were ouerthrowne neere vnto the Castle, and the 4. Byskaine ships the French men tooke, after that the men were gone a∣land and withdrawen themselues into the Castle. The Marquis being informed of all things, wrote vnto the Captaine and Gouer∣nour, & others in the Castle, by the said Mai∣ster,
incouraging them, and certifying them of the force of the kings army, not doubting but the next day to giue battell, and to haue the victorye, and that therewith they should holde them selues contented, as he him selfe was much ioyful of the seruice which they had alredy done to the king, which he knew should not remain vnrecompensed. And with this answere they returned with the Pinasse to the Iland. The next day being Munday, & the 23. of Julie, ye two Armies came to present battel: the french Armie hauing both the vantage of the wind and also of the Sun, came to assalt our Armie being deuided in three quadrons, and made three seuerall attempts, and yet could put nothing in execution. And toward night the Spanish Army making towardes the sea, the french Armie placed ten shippes alongst the Iland, thinking that night to haue got the winde of vs: but by reason it was calme, they could not preuaile. The 24. day of July the Marquis retur∣ned, approching nerer the French army, who hauing the vantage of the winde, gaue two seuerall attempts, and yet put neither in ex∣ecution. Then the Marquis perceiuing that the course towardes the land was not conue∣nient for him, he caused the armie to take the
course towardes the Sea, thinking with himselfe that whiles his shippes were trim∣ming of their sayles, that the enemie woulde assault him hauing the winde for their pur∣pose: which fell out accordingly. For one of the Frenche Captaines with 7. Galleons came to assault the Captaine of the Spani∣ardes, and the Galleon Saint Matteo, but ap∣proching neere vnto them, did not board them, but discharged great quantitiae of Or∣dinance against them, and likewise did the rest of the ships against ours: of whom they were receiued accordingly, in so much that our Captaine did shoote of at them aboue 40. peeces, and also the Galleon Saint Matteo shotte of many peeces, also the shippe of Don Christopher de Erasso (who was now ioyned with the armie) and also the shippe of Don Francisco de Bouadilla, and Myguell de O∣quendo, and others, which was a pleasaunt sight to beholde what Ordenance was shotte off, they did hit our Captaine with 4. shotte, one in the foresaile, another in the shrouds, another vpon an Anker, and the fourth in the shippes side, without doing any harme: they hit the Galleon Saint Matteo with 3 shotte, without doing any harme, no more did many their peeces which did hit many of our ships. And in the Galleons of the Frenchmen wee
might perceiue many shot to light, but speci∣ally 4. out of our Captaine, which made them to retire, whereby it appeared they receiued some harme. There came in the Frenche armie two Captaines & two Admirals, and there was a small Galleon like a Patacha, being excel∣lent good of sayle, wherein it shoulde seeme Don Anthonio was, carying a standarde in the Poope, which did not approch the fight, but kept a farre off to beholde what passed. There came to the number of 40, gret ships, and amongst them some very fine Galleons, the rest were small shippes, but fit for the ar∣mie in respect of the lightnes, and there came diuers other small Pinesses all about the ar∣mie about 2. or 3. leagues of to discouer and vnderstand of all things, and also 2. Saities of Mercelles, very good shippes of sayle, and many other light Boates with owres, wher∣with they did put in order the battaile, and direct things as time serued. The same day at night the two armies did separate them∣selues. The Marquis determined that at the going downe of the Moone to procure to get the wind of the French armie, and in the morning to assault them againe, which hee did, so that the 25. day of July he found him selfe to windward of the enemy, & so sought
to board them, but bicause his shippes were great and heauie of saile, he could not put in effect that which he purposed, but was for∣ced to returne to the rescue of Don Christo∣pher de Erasso, who was in some distresse in following the enemie, and by defaulte of his maine mast, gaue him a toe with his Cap∣taine. This day there was discried a great shippe of the enemies which wanted her fore∣mast, and other 2. ships which did helpe her, and they being not able to helpe her, she was forced to sinke: it is iudged shee had some harme with some shot the day before. Of the 10. Hulkes of the Spanish armie there did want two which caryed Almaines, and there wanted likewise the three shippes that departed from Lishborne after the army departed, so that ye Marques had in his Na∣uie no more but 25. shippes with the two gal∣lions. The 26 of Julie the Frenche armie came againe to assault the Spanish armie, in very good order and with a fauourable wind. The Marques did cause his ships to be placed in order, although the galleon Saint Matteo was somewhat asterne, which was some greefe to the Marquis, doubting that the enimy might board hir, before she could conueniently be re∣scued: and so it fell out, for she was borded
by two galleons, a captaine and an admirall, against whom she did defend her self very va∣liantly, being likewise assalted by other two shippes, who after they had discharged cer∣taine ordinance at her, passed forwards. At the same time came other two French ships vppon the Captaine, who beginning to fight with her, she gaue them two such welcomes with her ordinance and arquebushe shotte, that the one of them was euill to passe and al∣most sonke: and so they retyred, hauing shot many peeces at the Captaine, and the Cap∣taine at them. At which time came the ship of Don Francisco de Bouadilla, who was nere the Capteine, who did likewise annoie the Frenchmen greatlie with hir shot. All this while did the Admirall, and the Viceadmirall of the French army fight with the galion Saint Mattheo, who did defend hir selfe, and offend the others valiantlie: the generall master of the Campe, Don Lopo de Figueroa, Don Pedro de Tassis ouerseer ge∣nerall, with the rest of the gentlemen and souldiers that were in hir, valiantlie shoo∣ting at the enimies bath with great shot, arquebushot, and musket shot. The Marquis perceiuing that the Spanish nauie was to the windward of the French nauie, & seeing the distresse that the galleon S. Mattheo was
in by reason of the two French men, he com∣maunded the Captaine to turne towards the enemie, & so did Don Christopher de Erasso, and the rest of the shippes of the Spanish ar∣mie: and the shippes of Michael de Oquendo, Vilia Viciosa, and another Biskain, which were before the sternemost, by changing the wind were then the foremost, who came and borded the Admirall of the French nauie, who fought with the galeon Saint Mattheo, and afterward came the ship, wherein went Michael de Venesa, who fought with the capteine of France like a good Capteine, and so in like sort did the souldiers that were with him, and bicause his ship was betwene, the Marquis could not at that time board the Capteine of France, but passed forward. In this meane time the Admirall of France was in sight with the galeon Saint Mattheo, and three ships more, who borded hir, Villia Viciosa being one of the three, and hauing borded the French Admirall at the prowe, was slaine, with manie of his companie, as shall be declared. The ship of Oquendo did board hir asterne, and did enter his men into hir, and began to sacke, and tooke foure priso∣ners and the ensignes. The battell began now to encrease: with that came two other French ships to reskew their Capitaine, and
putting aboard hir aboue 300. fresh men, she got from them. In this meane while the Marquis gaue an other assault vpon the enimie with much shot, and at the last borded with the French Capteine prowe to prowe, and so grapened togither, where was a cruell fight of both sides, shooting the one at the other both with great shot and smal, for the space of an houre, till she yeelded, where was beheaded aboue 300. Frenchmen, and the Gentlemen and souldiers that were in the two fights, did de∣fend them selues valiantlie: so likewise did the two capteins Augustine Deherrara, and Gamboa, and their Lieuetenants. The Marquis like a generall went through the fights, encouraging the people to the assaul∣ting of the enimie, foreseeing and ordering all things needfull to be doone. The artil∣terie both belowe and aloft did great good, through the great diligence of those capteins that had charge thereof. The battell be∣tweene the other ships did proceede, giuing and receiuing great chargings one vpon an other. The battell continued fiue houres, and at the last the enimie fled. Don Anthonio was departed in a small Pinesse, with another ship the night before the battell. Some ships were sonke, & some
spoiled, hauing beheaded the men that were found in them, and some fled to other ships. And for that we could not toe their ships, the Marquis commanded that we should burne them, and sinke such as we could, as we had begun to doo. The Caruaile with the hor∣ses which they had taken, was recouered. It is thought that there is of the enimies aboue 1200. slaine, drowned, and beheaded, besides manie that be hurt, of them that esca∣ped in the ships which fled. There might haue bene taken manie of their ships more, if we had had time and mariners sufficient for to haue towed them, but they were suffered to depart without men and spoiled: and it is certaine, that the Admirall which was left for halfe drowned, and other foure or siue ships more, were ouerthrowne in the Ile of Saint Michael, and it it thought others haue done the like in other places. The number of those that were slaine in the Nauie of the Spaniards, was 224 men: and of those that were hurt 553. which is in all 777. Besides some that were scalded with artificiall fire, amongst whom was the generall Comptroller Syr Peter de Tassis in the face.
¶The names of the principall men that came with Don Anthonio, of whom some were prisoners, some died, and some did runne awaie. Philip Strozzi Capteine generall was pri∣soner, and hurt with a shot of an harquebush, of the which shot he died so soone as he came in the presence of the Marquis. The Earle Devimioso was prisoner, and hurt with an harquebush, and a thrust with a sword, wherof he died in the generals shippe the day after the battell. The Countie Brisak liefetenant, some saie that he escaped in a boat of his ship: others saie, that he was slaine with a shot, the truth is not knowne. Mounsir de Piamount generall master of the Campe, was slaine in the battell. Of the eight principal capteins of the eight regiments that came in the armie, which was 6800 souldiers, accounting the aduen∣terers, some were slaine, & some fled away. The Lords of Townes and Castles, that were taken aliue. Mounsir de Bocamaior Lord of Rousola. Mounsir Iohn Delatus Lord of Heria. William de Sanclear Lord of Sanclear.
Lewes de Clen Lord of Bronnes. Peter de Oube Lord of Quenes. Gilbert de Louel Lord of Ʋuell. Peter de Bean. Mounsir de Gal Lord de Gal. Mounsir de Gifford Lord of Giffordel. Mounsir de la Onet eldest sonne vnto the Lord of Gresoul. Edward de Langert Lord of Piel. Fabio Gansete sonne to the lord of Gansete. Mounsir de Vda Lord of Vda. Mounsir Fransoius Lord of Montilla. Mounsir Laquesbai eldest sonne of the Lord of Biapolis. Mounsir Robert Debella eldest sonne of the Lord of Veosola. Mounsir Guillam Mason lord of Falla. Mounsir Bigart de Piloart lord of Manterie. Mounsir Beltram de Amigat lord of Stituias. Mounsir Petro Iailato lord of Sans. Mounsir Philip Mentado lord of Sabrussa. Mounsir Iohn de Bocamaior lord of Rosilla. Claudio de Pomoline Lord of Popalin. Iacobo Laserean Lord of Lasserian. Mounsir Demondoc Lord of Mondoc. The Gentlemen prisoners which were no Lords of Townes nor Castles, were in number 51. And of Mariners and common souldiers 303.
The Marquis seeing that there was peace and amitie betweene the king his Ma∣ster, and the French king, and knowing that these aduenturers came onlie in the fauour of Don Anthonio Prior de Crato, and with mind to robbe and spoile his Maiesties Fleet of both his Indians, and to make them selues lords of his Ilands and dominions, as they had begun in the Ile of Saint Michael, and that their meaning was to make other spoils and piracies: In punishing of their fault, and the common offence committed by them against the publike peace, sworne, maintei∣ned, and kept betweene these two Crownes, and their subiects, did declare all the priso∣ners to be enemies of the quietnes and com∣mon good, troublers of the intercourses, fa∣uorers of his Maiesties rebels: and as to such ones, and publike theeues, rouers and pyrats, the cheefe Justice of the Fleete did ordeine, that for the punishment of those, and ensample to others in like cases, that the no∣ble men should be beheaded, and that the rest should be hanged from 17. yeeres vpwards. And this sentence being giuen, it was put in execution the first day of August, of this present yeere 1582.
This relation was sent by the Lord Marquis de Sainta-cruse vnto his Maiestie, by Syr Peter Poncei of Lyon, his nephew: who departed from Ʋilla Franca which is in the Ile of Saint Michael, the fourth day of the moneth of August, and ariued at Lishborne the 24. day of the same, being S. Barthol∣mews day, in the morning.
