11369 99852506 17831
IMPERIALE. A TRAGEDIE. Ovid. 2. Trist. ad Caes, August. Omne genus scripti gravitate Tragoedia vincit. LONDON, ¶ Printed by Thomas Harper. M.DC.XXXIX.
The Argument. IMperiale and Spinola Noblemen of Genua having bin ancient enemies, and lately reconciled by the mediation of Iustiniano, a friend to both; Spinola endeavoured to marry his Sonne Fran∣cisco to Angelica daughter of Imperiale; but finding his Sonne rejected, and Doria entertained, by that con∣ceived affront, accompanied with other jealousies, suspects the old enmitie not fully eradicated from the brest of Im∣periale, and moved with indignation, hireth a Brave to kill him in a crowd at a Festivall: this being acciden∣tally discovered by Sango the slave of Spinola, he re∣veales it to Molosso the slave of Imperiale, as accepta∣ble newes to him, who had waited an opportunity to be re∣venged on his Patron for severe and unusuall punishmēt, inflicted upon him. Molosso to ingratiate himselfe with his Lord, thereby to worke a greater mischief, not only re∣veales the plot to him, but diverts the same upon Spino∣la's owne Son, at which unexpected encounter Spinola through rage fall's into a strange kinde of Phrensy, but at length being an ey-witnes of the miserie which through the cruelty of the slaves befell Imperiale, his wife Ho∣noria, Angelica, and Doria, he recovers his sences and turnes his fury into compassion.
Plutarchus de glori Atheniensium. , &c. . Tragedy slourished and was in high este eme, the hearing and sight whereof did wonderfully delight the men of those times. For if the accounts be made of the charge the Athenians were at in adorning their dramatick Poems, it will appeare that the Bacchae, Phaenissae, Oedipi, Antigona, the cruelties of Medaea and Electra, consumed more treasure, than their wars undertaken against Barbarians for liberty and Empire. Idem de vita x. Orat. . Licurgus ordained that statues of brasse should be erected to the memory of the Poets, Aesculus, Sophocles, and Eucipides, and that their Tragedies should be carefully preserved, and of∣ten publikely read by the Notary of the City, when Stage-players were not admitted to act them. Delrius in praefatione ad Senecae Tragedias. Non Marcum Varronem, non duos Iulios Caesares, non Au∣gustum Octavium, non Scaurum, non Thraseam, quibus nihil  vidit orbis Romanus, huic Scriptioni subsecivas horas .
Dramatis Personae. SAngo 2 slaves. Molosso Imperiale, a Senator of Genua. Spinola, a Noble man of Genua, and a souldier. Iustiniano a Noble man of Genua, and a scholler. Verdugo a Bra Doria a Prince  Genua. Francisco, Spla his sonne. Iudge. Doctor. Witnesses 2. Evagrio, kinsmen of Spinola. Fidele, Officers. Friends 2. Honoria, Imperiale his wife. Angelica, her daughter. Nugella, the waiting woman. Cooke. Cater. Porter. Chorus.
Actus Primus. Scena Prima. Sango, Molosso. Sang. TIs true Molosso, fortune hath prepar'd A full revenge for thee, without thy hazar'd, And ere the rising Sun shall yet decline Imperiale thy proud Lord shall fall As low as hell; one unexpected blow Shall recompence those many he gave thee; When imitating forraigne cruelty, He bound thee fast, and made thy feet an Anvill. Molos. Sango, if thou contemplating our friendship, Begotten first by consanguinity, And since confirm'd by our joynt sufferings here, Hast undertaken some bold stratagem Against my Patron to revenge my wrongs, Thy great affection may but ruine me; Delay not then to make me understand Thy full intent: beleeve it will be vaine, Our sword once drawn, to think to sheath again. Sang. Then know, the plot is more securely laid, Than my weake meanes (although my will be strong) Could ever reach, without my certain death; And by strange chance I did discover it, Without the Actors knowledge; thou hast heard Of the old deadly fewd between our Lords, Which wound although it were in shew heal'd up, Is broken out afresh; 't was not well search't; For the last night, at setting of the Sunne, A houshold businesse cal'd me to the Garden, ere in the thicket, neere the Arbor, lying my selfe, I quickly fell asleepe.
Into which Arbor in the meane time came My Patron, with a Brave accompanied, A Fellow expert in that Mysterie: At their first entrance to the place I wak'd, But durst not stir, for had I, death had seaz'd me; There was I privie to their whole discourse, Which was in briefe but this, that for the summe Of fifteene hundred crownes, thy Patrons life Is sold, and must ere noone be snatch't away. Mol. Sure thou did'st dreame, thou wert not throughly a∣wake, For though our Lords were lately reconcil'd, Myne keepes a carefull watch, and never stirs Out of the Citie, where he knowes he's safe. Sang. He'le be deceiv'd, the rarenes of the plot Did please beyond the deare and long'd for Act; Heer's the designe, this being a solemne day Annuallie observed by the State, In memory of a publique benefit Received by the private care of one Of thy Lords Ancestors, will draw all sorts Of People to the Temple, where the Cloth'd like a filly Pesant, is resolv'd To watch Imperiale, and keepe neere him, And when the usuall Ceremonies are done, In the confused Crowd his cunning hand Shall guide a poison'd dagger to his heart, And in an instant, letting fall his cloake, Which shall belarge to hide his rustick habit, He, with the rest, will stand about the body And wring his hands at th'horror of the fact, And thus the Brave shall thy part bravely act, What? silent? not affected with a joy Should ravish thee? and swell thy veines with pleasure, Like to the Estrich in the act of lust? Mol. Light joyes are eas'ly vented; such as this Is entertained with an extasie, And by degrees exprest: but as the full Fruition of a thing we most delight in
Is checkt with daily feare of losing it, So finde I now my rising heart kept downe With doubt of such a wished happinesse, Sang. Had'st thou, as I beheld the Actors looks When he declar'd his resolution, To my attentive Patron, thou wouldst rest, Assur'd of the event, and sweare he needed No other weapon to distroy a man; His eies would have outstar'd a Basiliske, They were two Comets that are surely fatall. Mol. May they portend more mischeife to this House, Then those that blasted ours and our whole Country; But in this strong desire of a revenge Discretion must direct our passion; And therefore let it bee thy cheifest care Neither in word, nor gesture, to disclose Thy fortunate discoverie, till the end Shall crowne the worke, and banish all our feares; My taske shalbe to make it profitable No lesse then pleasant, by his foreknown fall Weel rayse our selves to wealth and libertie, The great allurements of those bold attempts, Wherein the Vassall dares affront his Lord, And quite shake off the yoke of his subjection. Sang. Our Magnificos think us flegmatick rascalls Created but for blowes, and scorne, soe far In love with servitude as scarce to wish Revenge or fredome. Mol. They shall finde at length Patience opprest will into fury turne; Nature, in spite of fortune gave us minds That cannot like our bodies be enthral'd; But soft, I doubt our earlie privacie May render vs suspected; leave to me The mannage of th'affaire; only let thy Vertue be now the dumbe mans secrecy.
Actus Primus. Scena Secunda. Spinola, Iustiniano. Spin. THe hatefull sound of Imperiale's name Would strike me deafe, my deare Iustinian, Were it not temper'd by thy gentle tongue, That had the art to make m'embrace and trust A reconciled foe, who hath rejected With scorne my hopefull sonne, as if his birth, Fortune, and parts, had not deserv'd that flirt His gilded daughter; but I taxe not thee, Whose friendship is a gem without a foile, And hardly can be valu'd, never matcht: I know thy milder studies chiefly bent To weed out Rancor from the minds of men, Smoothing rough nature with morality, And this becomes Philosophers: but I That doe professe the art of killing men, Encourag'd by all States, impos'd by some Must follow other precepts: he is sure Of many wrongs, that will but one endure. Iust. Thy Character of me, lov'd Spinola, Thus farre I may without vaine glory owne, Truely to love my friend, yet hate no man, And since mine own experience finds how well Thou do'st the one, I would perswade the other; Nor would I now convert thee to a Stoicke, To make thee thinke there are no injuries, Or if there be, that wise men cannot feele'm, These, I confesse, are not compatible With thy condition; on th'other side, I can encourage none, much lesse my friend To take a scandall, when there is none given, To call that injury, which is in truth A liberty that every man may challenge; Or if Imperial ought t' have wav'd the same,
Yet since the will is free, thou could'st expect But Fatherly perswasion, to incline Th' affections of his daughter, all the rest Is ravishment, or tyranny at best. Spin. I know not how the rigid schooles define A fathers power, in their beg'd principles, As if the freedome of the will extended To silly wenches, to restraine the power Of them that gave them first and second being; No, it was onely his inveterate malice That closely lurk't under a new fein'd freindship That stuck on me and mine this contumely, Which ought to be resented farre above An injury, by any generous spirit; Iust. Let it be what thy fancy apprehends, Which scarce appeares in the least circumstance, Yet generous spirits at poore contumelies, As seldome stoope as Eagles doe to Flyes. Spin. What is there that should wound an active spirit, Like base contempt? Iust. The guilt of one base act. Spin. Should we not then be jealous of our fame? Iust. If we within finde cause of jealousie. Spi. Reports may brand, although they be untrue. Iust. Yes, those that take their honour upon trust. Spi. Our honour by opinion must subsist, Iust. Then every puffe of winde will scatter it. How can we call that ours, which must depend On the rash will, and vainer voyce of others? But herein thou most slightst thy selfe to doubt Thou canst be undervalued by any, Much more contemn'd by him that dares not thinke Himselfe to be the worthier, but that thou Suggests it for him, in thy vaine suspition: They that beleeve themselves despis'd, confesse An inward doubt of their owne worthinesse. Spi. I am not for my part ambitious Of the dull fame of stupid patience,
To be admir'd for wanting common sense, Like Cato, that could let one spit in's face, And when he should have wip'd off the disgrace With his sharpe Sword, he did it with a Iest And his soft handcarcheife: This was that spirit Thou lift'st above great Alexanders merit. Iust. I, and above the glory of Hercules, Or what bold Greece hath left in histories Of her great Captaines, to their endles fame, They Monsters, Kingdomes, and their Iusts orecame: Cato fought not with Beasts, nor did live when T'was thought that Heaven might be borne up by men, But in an age when (barbarisme being fled) All industry and learning flourished; And in that time did bravely set upon That Monster, in many shapes, Ambition, With all the crimes of Rome, and when the State Was ready ev'n to sinke with its owne weight He it supported with his onlie hand; And did (as much as one man could) withstand Romes instant fate, till forc't to let her goe He became partner in her overthrowe; And soe one ruine did them both oppresse; Whom to have severd had bin wickednesse; For was it fit that liberty should dye And Cato live? that had bin contumely, Not the purgation of a mouth that might As well have don the Sun or Moone dispight: But I will leave thee to thy thoughts a while, For wholsome counsell like safe Physick is Vnpleasant in the taste, and must have time To worke upon the humor; thou that art master Of so much worth, wilt master in the end Those passions that with reason now contend.
Actus Primus. Scena Tertia. Spinola. Spi. I Must needs make a strong pretence to worth, That dare pretend, Iustinian, to thy love; But when I find how much I violate The sacred Iawes of friendship, that refuse T'anatomize my very Soule to thee; I am compled ta'cknowledge myne owne shame Or to suspect thy knowne fidelitie: The plot, wherewith I labour, can admit No Councell, but a necessarie faith In the bold Actor, whose subsistence binds him To resolution, and to secrecie; All friendly trust is folly, every man H'as one, to whome hee will commit as much As is to him committed: our designes When once they creepe from our owne private breasts Doe in a moment through the Citie flie, Who tells his secret sells his libertie: But shall I suffer this black treachery To boile within my doubtfull brest? mischeife Though it be safe, can never be secure, Or shall I ease my thoughts, and giue it vent? Yes; prick a full swolne bladder to relax it, Or bore a hole 'ith bottome of the ship To coole a Calenture? dull foole thy life Is with thy fame concern'd: besides the base Rejection of thy Sonne (lodg'd deepely here) He wrought the Senate to confer the charge Of our late ayde lent Savoy against France, On rash Marinò, so to blast thy merit, Be confident, he that durst often venter Taffront thee, meant to prosecute thy ruine; And t'is no greater hazard to attempt Death, than disgrace, that makes his life contemptible:
On then, be bold and secret, Spinola, So shalt thou reape the double benefit Of safety and revenge: all wickednesse Is counted vertue, when 'tis prosperous; Be not by any reconcilement led To trust thy soe, th'art safe when he is dead. Actus Primus. Scena Quarta▪ Imperiale, Honoria, Angelica, Nugella attending. Impe. HOw comes it, deare, that the clear sky, thy looks, Is suddenly o're-cast? what misty vapour Hath rais'd those stormy clouds? can bright Aurora Rise cheerfully from shrivel'd Tythons bed? And thou so discontentedly from mine? But I'le not doubt the cause to spring from me, Rather from feare of yong Prince Doria's safety, Whose great affaires perhaps have made him stretch His promise to the utmost, not to breake it, Though he could not prevent our expectation, He'l not deceive't, but like th'approaching Sunne, Will soone expell these mists, and cheere our hearts. Hon. I am solicitous, I must confesse Of his returne, whom we have long expected, To whom we have design'd our onely daughter, And with her both our fortunes and our loves: But the true cause of all these perturbations Which you discover in my countenance, Is a strange dreame (heaven make it but a dreame) And I perhaps should but have thought it so, Had not my daughter, ev'n this very night, And the same houre, as neere as we can guesse, With the like vision been disquieted: Me thought we harbour'd in our house a Wolfe, Bred up so tame, that all did handle him,
Which like a dogge would fawne on them that beat him, Til on a time, accompanied with another Of his owne race, he rush't into the chamber Where I together with my Daughter sate, There they resum'd their native crueltie: The one assaulted her, the other me, And tearing first our Iewells from our necks, They made us both at length their farall prey: Ang. Oh, how the terrour of that dreadfull vision Affrights my Soule! I tremble when I thinke on'c? Me thought the heartstrings of Prince Doria crack'r At the direnewes, it prov'd the overthrowe Of our whole Family: we differ but in this, The Savadge executioners to me Seem'd to be Beares, creatures as bloody as wolves. Imp. It is no wonder that your dreames concurr'd, Since there is that relation in your blood: I must beleeve, you had the day before Communicated some sad thoughts together, Which in the night your wakefull fantasies From a like temperature of braine reduc't Into like formes, suggesting that for truth Which is at best but fond imagination; What can be vainer then a womans dreame? T'is lesse to be regarded then her teares, Which are prepar'd to flow at her command. Hon. Cassandra's true predictions were dispis'd. Imp. And well they might, had Troy bin provident. Hon. Many at length deplore their unbeleife. Imp. But more lament their rash credulitie. Hon. Future events by dreames have bin reveal'd. Imp. So did old wisards doubtfull things vnfould By flights of birds, such witchcrafts now are seas'd, And we from those darke errours are releas'd: To talke of visions is an indiscretion, Practis'd by Children, and distemperd persons: Go then; prepare your selves for solid joyes, On this day the Republick yearly paies
A retribution to our Familie, And as I heare (the time being Carnivall) Some mirth shall season our solemnitie; If Doria come to day, as we expect, To morow nothing shall be heard of us But songs of Hymen and Thalassius. Hon. Never could any wretches be more glad To be deceiv'd. Ang. My heart continues sad. Actus primus. Scena quinta. Imperiale. O Wretched state of man, to whom the time: By nature made for ease, is found unquiet; Sleepe, properly cald rest, who can expresse How restles it becomes through various dreames? Which are so strongly formed by the fancy That though they be most false, and when we wake Should wholly vanish, yet even then they leave A deepe Impression in the troubled mind; Nor doth this onely happen to weake women, But unto men of speciall eminence, Working vpon their hopes aswell as feares, Who many times to their confusion Have by such drowsie errors bin seduc'd; Hence did Amilcar venture to assault Strong racuse deluded by a dreame; But though it be a folly beyond pardon To venture life or fortune in pursuit Of such a vanitie, yet in all things Abundant warines can never hurt: My slaue may not unfitlie be compar'd▪ To a tame Wolfe, or Beare, who may perchance Resent his late sharpe castigation; Him will I send to my owne Galley, where He shalbe chain'd from mischeife, and to me Not prove unusefull, when the smallest boudt
May eas'ly be remov'd, who would omit it? Let others lose themselves in laborinthes Of hidden superstition, and beleeve The ayre to be replenished with spirits, Who by a naturall and inherent virtue Foreseeing things to come, and taking pity Vpon improvident man, reveale by visions The dangers that approach, to th'end he may By timely care prevent his misery; I'le not depend on such intelligence T'informe me whether Spinola hath buried▪ Or only hid, his long continued malice, I'le fetch my preservation neerer; hence, That shall conserve this individuall; No man can suffer ill but from himselfe, Fate only awes the slothfull; wisdom barres The powerfull operation of the starres. Chorus of two. 1 THose men that mischiefe do devise, Had need to borrow Argus eyes To looke about; a poore slave may By chance lie hid, and then betray. 2 Within the house they may suspect That walles and bedds may them detect, And in the feild they must provide, That not a bush a spie may hide. 1 And albeit they shut the doore, Having well searcht the house before, Yet they may be betray'd; for proofe, Iove in a shower did peirce the roofe. 2 Though in the feild no tree, nor bush, Nor bird be neere, nor winde doth rush, Yet undiscern'd a fairy drab Their whole discourse may heare and blab.
1 Then since that neither house, nor field, To our black crumes can safety yield, Let us be virtious, and not feare What all the world can see or heare. 2 Our dreames are often found to bee Fruits of a wandring phantasie; Yet many times they likewise are Sure pledges of Caelestiall care. 1 Some men beleeve too much, and some Conceive no truths by dreames can come; It is a knowledge given to fewe To finde if they be false or true. 2 Then as it is a rash misprision To count each idle dreame a vision; So it's an error at the least To thinke all visions are quite ceast. Actus Secundus. Scena prima. Francisco. CAn no advice of friends? nor mine owne reason Hold me from strong pursuite of what I finde Can never be obtaind? am I so stupid After so many scornes not to desist? An arrow shot sooner may be recal'd Then her affection; th'Apenine, the Alpes Will eas'lier be removed then her Father: Feed not thy selfe, fond foole, with desperate hopes: But shall I, arm'd with powerfull love, consult With timerous discretion? the weake Child Of feeble age? the towring Eagle may More eas'ly be confin'd within high walls Then that wing'd boy, that hover'd over Chaos
Be ty'd to humane possibilities: What transformations did the Antique Poets Affirme to have bin wrought on men and Gods By his sole deity? which Iove himselfe His frequent sport had found; what guards, what spies, He hath deceiv'd and fore't; the fiery Bull, The wakefull dragon, and gaz'd Argus witnes. Though shee that's truly nam'd Angelica Should now abhor thy person; love can lend thee The shape of him she loves; were she averse From all mankind, if she like any thing Shee may at length be brought to dote on thee: But may I not be tax'd of too much sloth? Neglecting active industry, t'expect To be assisted by such miracles? I yet have only trod the beaten path Of vowed service, friends good will, and Ioynture; The elder Brothers formall evidence: I am so farr from practising the art Of spells and philters, I have quite omitted Corruption of her confidents and servants: I am too cheape a lover and too tame, And hither to have taught her to deny By easie asking; I must let her know What I dare doe: my Father is incens'd At my repulse, his old suppressed hate Renewes it selfe; hee'l rather condiscend To match me with a fury, then with her: It will be wisdom to decline th'alliance Of him thy Father counts his enemy: It would be wretchednesse to make thy love Depend upon th'affections of another: He never lov'd that can for any cause Suspend his love: set then before thine eyes Valiant Achilles, who acquir'd more honor By constancie, even to his enemies Daughter, In spite of th'opposition of his friends, Then ere he did by Hectors overthrowe,
Redeeme the time Francisco, though't be short, And let this one day satisfie the losse Of weekes and monthes; her father keeps a slave A cunning Affrican, whose very soule For mony and hope of liberty i'le buy: Him will I strait imploy; love nere refuses The basest instruments, if they be usefull, A drudge may finde more corners in the house Than ere the master knew; and may discover A secret inlet to betray a City; There will I now begin, he shall advise Where I shall plant my golden batteries. Actus Secundus. Scena Secunda. Imperiale. Molosso. Imp. I Am with wonder strucken, not with feare, At thy relation of this barbarous plot, Contriv'd against my life, after faith given, Of firme attonement: but the Leopards spots Or staines of virgin honor may as soone Be wip't away, as hatred that hath seizd A cankred brest; this machination Is so inhumane, that to lend it credit Is a degree to inhumanity. Mol. To give slow faith to such a horrid plot Becomes a heart so full of piety; But in this black designe many presumptions Vnite themselves to fortifie beliefe; Nor is it to be thought, the wretch durst feine it Giving so short a time to be disproov'd; The heavens forbid your virtuous diffidence Should lead you to the hazard: I must count This blest discovery a large recompence, Of former ills fortune hath throwne on me: For I am bold to hope, it will by you Be gratiously accepted, though I finde
Some late unhappy errors have infore't Your patience to inflict just punishment On him that is your slave, and might expect The restles misery of the painfull are, With all the wants that ever were susteyin'd In a remorsles Galley; but your goodnes (In spite of fate that meant all this) is pleas'd To give me shelter under your owne roofe, And to the emulation of my fellowes To grant the favour of your houshold service; A bondage which I truely may prefer Above the common peoples liberty: These are the benifites, that invite my soule To meditate your preservation, Which ere I cease to doe, Tyber and Poe Shall quite abandon fruitefull Italy, And wash th'Arabian sands; though I am rude, I must abhor churlish ingratitude. Imp. Fortune and thy integrity have found A weighty occasion to confirme and fixe thee With rootes of adamant, in my good opinion: Nor doth it happen often to a servant T'injoy the happy meanes t'account himselfe The Saviour of his master: Kings are borne More frequently, then such examples found: But if to this unavlu'd benifit Thy pregnant industry can adde a second, The mischiefe to divert upon himselfe Thou having sav'd me now, shall crowne me then. Mol. Great sir, you owe the thanks of what's yet don To chance alone; I am ambitious Of somthing that might merit, if at least The diligence and industrie of one Of my condition, may deserue that title. Imp. It may, it may; great merit is in story Ascrib'd somtimes to bondmen; all our soules Are free and equall, thence our merits flow: Why should the person vilifie the worke,
And not the worke rather ennoble him? It is the benefit we looke upon, And not the givers meane condition. Mol. I have a ripe designe that shall both give Assurance of the truth of what I brought And powre the vengeance on your enemy; Nor can it ever be discovered To hurt your fame; it shall amaze the actor And shall be speedy too; things of long time Are ever doubtfull, lost in expectation, Propounded usuallie for private ends, Gain'd by degrees; an acceptable deede Hath double welcome when t'is don with speede. Imp. Noble Molosso, such thy virtues make thee, Proceed with Courage in thy enterprize, Which i'le not presse to know▪ till the event, But by implicit trust freelie declare What confidence I meane to place in thee; And take from me this iust incouragement To rest assur'd, thy service hath not met With an ungratefull master: I shall never Forgive my late credulitie, that meant T'have added to his former punishment. Actus Secundus. Scena Tertia. Molosso. Sango. Francisco. Mol. HE's now made sure, I must with speed find out Yong Spinola, and speake with Sango too, Behold'um both together, t'will succed; San. See where Molosso comes, sir. Fran. O t'is hee. How is't Moloss? thy face hath busines in't I would thou wert at leaure. Mol. My toil'd body Will not admit a cheerefull countenance; But I can throw of care if you command.
Fra. Wouldst thou embrace redemption? Mol. Aske me whether I would not wish some shade if I were broil'd Vpon the Libian Sands, where Cancer raignes: But Sir if I mistake not, you sustaine A greater servitude, yet seeke not freedome. Fra. Thou wouldst perswade me to shake off Loves fetters. Mol. Rather to change them into chaines of gold, To wealth and ornament; it may be done Without your Chimicall projection. Fra. Thou shouldst not stand in need of that t'inrich thee, Could this b'effected. Mol. Sir, I have no art, Nor leisure to discourse, but I have heard There is by fare an opportunity Allotted every man, to make him rich And happy too, provided he take hold, And I am confident that's offer'd you. Fra. What? to enjoy divine Angelica? No treasure else can make me rich or happy. Mol. When she is brought into your own possession, You can but blame your selfe, if she depart. Fra. I shall destroy my selfe if then she scape, But how? prithy convey thy joyfull newes Into me by a reverend secrecie, That I may be all eare, while thou art whispering. They whisper. San. What plot should this be now? I long to know, Molosso doubts some accident may happen Vpon his Masters death, and wisely seekes To gaine a friend, under whose safe protection He may be sheltred from a sudden storme; I have an equall share in the successe Of his designes; his preservation's mine, And therefore need not be inquisitive, Th' assured fate of his obdurate Lord May make that good hee promiseth; the daughter, If once the Father were remov'd▪ perhaps
Would entertaine new thoughts, me thinks she should Be sensible of Dorias neglects: Who can condemne this yong mans hot desire? Were I as free, as noble as himselfe, I should most willingly become her slave, And I doe hate my forc't condition For no one ill so much, as that it brings Despaire of such transcendent happinesse Fra. I'me ravisht with it, 'tis the sprightfull childe Of thine owne braine, and will not brook delay. Mol. That's true: I'le see that all things be prepar'd: If the least wheele be out of frame, the watch Is altogether uselesse. Fra. Winde it up, That I may observe each minute of the time That is the Crysis of my life or death: First take a taste of my ensuing bounty, It may relieve thee, should we be discover'd: If by this plot my present hopes succeed, All future Lovers shall thy story reade. Actus Secundus. Scena Quarta. Sango. Molosso. San. I See thou hast a golden plot in hand, Thou must impart. Mol. Halfe this is due to thee By our establisht law of equall fortunes. San. I would I might share with Francisco too▪ Mol. That riddle quickly will unfold it selfe: But Sango, I'me glad I met thee, I was forc't For some important reasons to reveale weighty secret to my Patron. San. how? Mol. I was compell'd to do't. San. What? to disclose it? And unto him? is this your dumb mans vertue? Canst thou so soone forget thine own vile wrongs?
Hath the dull ayre of Europe chil'd thy bloud? For thy sole cause I hardly could containe My present joy in the discovery, Though death stood gaping for me while I heard it, And would'st thou cowardly betray thy fortune? Mol. My obligation to my starres and thee, Their Mercury, can never be exprest; Which I have husbanded to my advantage. It is the ground from whence I'le take my rise, To leap, and fall like dreadfull thunder on him; It is not vengeance, but soft pietie To wish a foes death, when hee's fit to dye, To let him live, and feele himselfe so wretched, That he shall seeke and sue for absent death, Is a revenge becomes me, and I'le have it; Thou know'st my Patrons former trust was chang'd Into a sudden jealousie, which sprang From consciousnesse of his base injuries; This hath remov'd that doubt, and set me right In his lost good opinion, which I meane Still to confirme by my strict diligence, Till time and opportunity shall shew How far this petty-mischiefe I'le out-goe. San. Now are thy thoughts full plum'd, it pleases me To see thee mount, not flag in thy revenge: I must confesse, I love a present mischiefe, But, if it may conduce to thy brave ends, To make a feyn'd retrait, and then returne With greater violence; I must consent, And when th'art ready for thy great assault, But, this, and I shall joyne; in the meane time Let nothing be discover'd to my Patron; If that be, death's the best I can expect. Mol. Rest thou secure, and to expresse my thanks, It shall not be the least part of my plot, To give thee meanes to gaine the full fruition Of her that Genua so admires and strives for. San. Can there be hope of such a happinesse?
Mol. I, and a good assurance of successe. San. I shall embrac't with all the circumstance Of danger, that bold treason undergoes, Or what accompanies forbidden love In the most jealous climes: I should desire In the fruition of such blisse t'expire. Mol. Stoutly resolv'd, come, let us lay our ground, We shall build sure, when our foundation's sound. Actus Secundus. Scena Quinta. Verdugo. VNder a homely habit many times, Vertue lyes hid; this rusticke weed conceales An Engine that can frustrate providence: When I attempt the death of any man, No towne of Garrison, not his owne house, Nor any place of sanctuary can save him: Nor doth my praise consist in this alone, That I command the life of whom I list; A desperate wretch may claime that priviledge: He that is weary of his owne, may be Lord of anothers life; but such attempts Hatch't onely by a phrensie, seldome prosper: My actions are the fruits of a bold spirit, Temper'd with judgement, done with secrecy: Hence is our brave profession found to be Of speciall use to awe the insolent, And secure those that seeke to live in peace. What satisfaction is it to a man That receives wrong, to call his enemy forth, And then expose himselfe to equall hazard? Or in strict Common-wealths t'appeale to law, As if a feyn'd submission in set words Could cure the piercing sting of injury; No, 'tis assurance of a close revenge That plants civility, deters and keeps men
From giving, and from suffering affronts; This benefit we bring to every man, Yes, and the publicke States of Italy, How ere they censure our particular actions, Receive no small security from us; Treason would hardly finde just punishment Within their narrow territories, if we Should not, like eager hounds, pursue the traytors, And make them know, that in another Country The justice of their owne can overtake them; Let then the sloathfull taxe us, that our ends Are not the publicke good, but private gaine, Which we preferre above mankinde; this is But what's objected to the souldier; he Will fight against his brother for reward, Men ought to follow their vocation; The fountaine of our livelyhood is profit, Without which, honour challenging the skill To nourish arts, cannot provide us clothes, Nor vertue, noys'd to be the greatest good, Procure us bread. Nor yet is our profession More cruell then the gravest; I have heard Of Lawyers, that are priviledg'd to cut Their clyents throats, with a perplext Indenture, A parchment Saw. The learn'd Physitian Following the long and beneficiall way Of reverend Galen, by degrees will purge The humours of his Patient, till he leaves Nothing but boes for death, and hungry wormes To gnaw upon; as for his pliant skinne, That, while he lives, by pieces is pul'd off, Till he be wholly flea'd: the Vsurer, I'st not his use to binde men first in bonds, And bring 'um then to execution, Extending both their bodies and their lands Vpon a racke; we are more pitifull, And by an unexpected way dispatch Quicker then lightning, or a cunning heads-man,
For all the ill of death is apprehension; How's Imperiale wrong'd? if when he hath But newly said his prayers, I release him From the ensuing miseries of age; And when that work's perform'd, my charity May doe as much for Spinola himselfe, Provided I be offer'd like conditions: My hand of justice is not partiall. But soft, this pleasing contemplation May make m' omit the time of action, Which now drawes neere; my plot is so contriv'd, That being pursu'd with resolution, It cannot want successe; our best designes Are often crost, when through a fond remorse We change our counsels: few have learn'd the skill To be or wholly good, or wholly ill. Chorus of two. 1 FOnd youth to hope, where no hope is, And to be brought to place thy trust On him, that makes deceit his blisse, And counts it folly to be just: Goe wash an Ethiop white, and finde Faith harbour'd in a slavish minde. 2 Love wanting eyes, makes all men blinde, That to his power submit their wils; No counsell can acceptance finde, But such as their owne lust fulfils. To be in love, and to be wise, Apollo to himselfe denyes. 1 When he that hath received harme, Requites it with pretended love, We must beleeve 'tis but a charme, Quick-ey'd suspition to remove. Some may doe good for good, few will Be brought to render good for ill.
2 Is it not strange to finde a Trade? Will act what our Revenge devises? To see such formall bargaines made To kill, or wound at severall prises? At which those publique States connive That doe by private faction thrive. 1 But though some do commit these crimes, Yet let not us beleeve we may, Only cry out against the times, And be our selves as bad as they: But let our virtuous deedes prevent Both theirs, and our owne punishment. Actus Tertius. Scena Prima. Angelica, Nugella. Ang. ALthough my father hath resolv'd all doubts▪ My reason could obiect; yet still I feele A chilling vapor hover in my brest, Which many times breakes forth in suddaine sighes, For which I can assigne no other cause Than that the world cannot affoord a Ioy Vnmixt with reall or supposed sorrow; Hence is it that most Brides are found to weepe, Yet know not why upon their wedding day. Nug. Such follies are too common, I confesse, But should I have the happines to see Young Hymen in his yellow socks my guest, I'de entertaine him with no other teares Than such as from prest grapes in Autumne flowe, Werewith his drowsy head and wither'd garland I would bedewe; till to his twinkling eyes Each tapour should present a double light, While waggish Boyes should with their wanton Songs: Prepare our thoughts to our insuing pleasures.
Ang. Fie, fie, Nugolla, no laciviousnes Can ere become solemnities, that must Create us Matrons; there is cause to feare Their chastity, that unchafte songs can heare. Nug. It is a shame to lend our eares to that We are alow'd to do? Ang. Yes many things Are lawfull, and yet shamefull to be don Or spoken publikely. Nug. A woman may Be free in outward Gesture, yet preserve An inward chastity; and I know many Both rich and Noble Ladies so dispos'd. Ang. T'is not the glittering canopie of greatnes, But th'humble vaile of modesty must guard A womans fame; which being once throwne off Leaves her expos'd to every bould assault. Nug. But when she's found impregnable, twi'll stop Their vaine attempts. Ang. A fort cannot be thought Impregnable, that offers frequent parlies. Nug. Yet that (as I have heard) is often don To gaine advantage and delude the foe. Ang. Can it beseeme a Virgin or a Wife To play with all th' allurements of desire; And thinke her honour's safe, if she abstaine From the bare act, the duller part of lust. Nug. They do but imitate those Chariot drivers That you were wont to reade of, whose praise was To come as neere as might be, and not touch; Love hath ordainedby an antique lawe Newly reviv'd, that every place and roome In Ʋenus pallace, be alow'd for sport, Except her cabinet, that, must not be Open'd nor touch't, at least not willingly. Ang. Thou wilt be waggish still, But hark who knocks? This wench that never felt the fire of love Thinks like a wanton Child, it may be plaid with,
But she will one day finde it far more raging Than that which fierce Medaea did convey Into Creusas robe: how now? who is't? Nug. A stranger, with a letter, which he saies He must present to your owne hand. Ang. Admit him; If it be from my Doria, I feare Some unexpected accident, wherein His honour is concern'd, retards his comming; But I must likewise arme my selfe for wiles: Such love as ours, cannot want envious plots. Actus Tertius. Scena Secunda. Doria disguised. Angelica. Nugella. Dor. I Shall not be discover'd by my voyce, Italian Virgins are at distance woed, And more by fame, then verball courtship won: This speakes my errand, leaves no circumstance To be related by the messenger; See how her bloud retires, to ayde her heart, So lookes bright Phoebe, when Thessalian charmes Strike her with feare, or th'early Rose, whose beauty Nipt by a later frost, appeares like snow: Now it returnes, and settles in her cheekes, As if the newes tooke no impression: Such orient beames when youthfull day returnes, By the bedewed Shepheard are beheld. Ang. I may suppose you, sir, not ignorant Of what you bring; and may beleeve y'have heard Some thing of yong Prince Doria and me. Dor. Lady, I have; fame with her silver trumpet Hath blaz'd your constant loves. Ang. And are you not Strangely amaz'ed to see me reade these lines Without a shower of teares? Dor. If they relate
Any disaster, you then imitate Those ancient Worthies, that had bravely learn'd To conquer passion at the first assault. Nug. You think yong women very impatient To have their joyes defer'd: my Ladie's wise To beare it thus, so long as he is safe. Ang. Hee's dead, Nugella; the great. Generall Writes me, that he having the sole command Of an important place, forsooke the same, And in his swift retrait, receiv'd a shot I'th hinder part of's head. Nug. O dolefull accident! Ang. Canst thou be so ingratefull to my Doria, To lend it such a serious beliefe As may deserve a teare? Nug. I would I durst Suspect what comes so to our woe confirm'd. Ang. Were it confirm'd by the unerring seale Of this wise State, it should not merit faith. Nug. Alas, he was not to be thought immortall. Ang. But was he not to be acknowledg'd valiant? That attribute his foes did not deny him: Had these contrived lines contain'd but this, Brave Doria's slaine, a torrent, hence, had gusht, That like Alpheus, had through earth and sea Wander'd unmixt, till in the gulfe of death, It should have lost it selfe in seeking him. But when I finde impossibilities Basely obtruded, my true love disdaines To lend beliefe to any circumstance. Mars could as soone be frighted from his spheare, As he from any charge he undertooke: 'Tis a malitious scandall; and although My nature ev'n abhors to use a stranger With any incivility, yet I'm forc't To taxe the bearer with this vilde imposture. Dor. By great Saint George, the Patron of this State, Doria himselfe is not more innocent. Ang. That name is sacred, let me then conjure thee
To answer truely but to this one question. Dor. I shall. Ang. Was there before you left the Army. Any report of this sad newes you brought? Dor I dare not say there was. Ang. The Pallace cracks When such a pillar fals, the Generall One of those many which my fortune wood, Envious that Doria gain'd both that and me: And knowing well, that valour alwaies i The speciall obiect of a noble love, Attempted thus to shake my constancy: But if the fates should prove so cruell to me, To make me survive him; this is my vow, To stand for ever like sad Niobe, A weeping statue to his memory. Dor. Never did such a vertuous courage reft In the calme harbour of a Virgins brest. Actus Tertius. Scena Tertia. Spinola. AS the flye Fowler, having over night, Set cunningly his artificiall net, Early returnes, with an assured hope To finde the fowle insnar'd, so are my thoughts Wholly possest with present expectation Of the glad newes of my successefull plot; The mannaging whereof, I never can Within my selfe sufficiently applaud: I have not like rash Piso, foolishly Dispers't my trust, nor like the sonnes of Brutus, Disclos'd my secret, where a servant might Discover, and betray; my warinesse In a safe garden whisper'd my designe, And but to one, that if it should miscarry, And he through feare or punishment confesse, Yet I am sure to have but one accuser,
Whose testimony my power and bold denyall Would easily convince; but these mistrusts Are altogether needlesse: I may be As confident as those Sicilians, Who when their chiefe confederate was surpriz'd, So much relide upon his resolution, As that not any one of them would flie, And so conceale their bold conspiracy. Behold my kinsmen bringing joyfull newes. Actus Tertius. Scena Quarta. Evagrio. Fidele. Spinola. Eva. OH that I were snatcht up into the skye! And there transform'd into a cloud, that so I might dissolve into a shower of teares. Fid. Can the day see such mischiefe, and be seene? And not make haste to shrowd his guilty head Vnder the gloomy Canopy of night? Spin. What earthquake? what prodigious spectacle Hath strucke you both with horror? Eva. Oh he's dead! Spin. Why should that so amaze or you? or me? Since death must be the lot of every man. Fid. Alas your sonne. Spin. How does it concerne him? Eva. Great sir, your deare and onely sonne is slaine. Spi. How's this? Fid. He's murther'd sacrilegiously, Even in the Temple-porch, he was disguis'd, And thought of all t'have bin Imperiale. Spin. I am undone. Fid. The desperate actor was Clad in a country habit, and it seemes, Mistooke the person; when he saw his face, He tore his viperous haire; the Iudge was present, Who gave command to bring him instantly, To receive speedy judgement,
Spin. Over-reach't? In my owne plot? the sword of my revenge Turn'd on my selfe? and drown'd in mine owne bowels? I am betraid, yet cannot suspect how; It could not be by any mortall subtilty, It was some divell lurking in the ayre; How shall I be reveng'd? O that he would Assume a humane body, that I might Encounter him! but I have found the way, I'le study the blacke art, turne Conjurer, And then impose a labour on them all, Worse then Ixion, or the Belides Are said to undergoe. Eva. We have done ill, To rush upon him with such violence; The sudden griefe hath halfe distracted him; Wee'l strive to temper it with better hopes, Things may not be so bad as our affections Have made us feare; Francisco Spinola Was often nam'd. Fid. But neither of us both Can say we saw him dead. Spin. Nay then I see Y'are villaines hir'd, suborn'd to undermine me. First you confound me with your horrid newes, And then confesse ye may be both mistaken: But I am arm'd with patience, if Imperial Retaining still his late abjured malice, Hath by some hellish art contriv'd this mischiefe, I may in just resentment of my wrongs, Implore heavens vengeance, on his perjur'd head, And this is all y'are like to screw from me. Fid. Let not your troubled thoughts make you doubt us, Who for his life would sacrifice our own. Spi. I will devise a stratagem, shall need No other hand but this, which I'le conceale From my owne selfe, till th'instant time of action; For if I should disclose it in a place Where there are trees, or flowers, I am betraid:
I would not breathe it forth, unlesse it were After a dreadfull thunder, that had purg'd The ayre, and frighted thence those subtill spies, That to our foes by night betray our plots. Eva. You have a faithfull friend, to whom you may Safely powre out the secrets of your heart, The wise Iustinian. Spin. Oh that name is like A pretious balme to cure the wounds of fortune! Fid. Please you retire, I'le bring him presently. Spi. No wilde rebellion of my passions can Make me neglect the friendship of that man. Actus Tertius. Scena Quinta. Molosso, Imperiale. Mol. NOw you may see, sir, you were not abus'd In our discovery, and I hope you finde My undertakings and your trust made good; Imp. The Sunne at noone is not more cleerely seene; But may it not breed a suspition That he was clad like me? Mol. Why sir you know That it is now the time of Carnivall, When every man takes what disguise he pleases. Imp. But I much wonder how he was perswaded To put himselfe so soone into my habit. Mol. I brought him to a strong beliefe, that he By that device and my assistance should Convey away your daughter. Imp. I intended The Father should be punish't, not the sonne. Mol. By this your vengeance is more exquisite; Make your account that with the son y' have thrust The father through, who having found himselfe Ore-reach't by you, or by his owne just fare, In such a counterplot must needs at length
Become his owne dire executioner: In the meane time his life is worse then death. Imp. True, true, death is the end of misery: To die 's not wretched, but to live wretchedly, Vengeance is meere compassion when we kill, I feele a joy beyond expression; There is no pleasure like to sweete revenge; But I desire things should be carried so That I be still reputed innocent. Mol. That's my sole care, the Brave in th'act was taken, And by commandment of the present Iudge, Is brought already to receive his tryall. Imp. Thou shalt do well to harken a loofe off, I'le take no notice but in generall, And will proceed in our intended mirth. Mol. By all meanes sir. Imp. We must at this time shun Vnusuall privacie; keepe thou thy distance, But know, that both my life and fortunes are Most willingly committed to thy care. Actus Tertius. Scena sexta. Iudge, Doctòr, Witnesses, Ʋerdugo, Officers. Iud. SInce it hath bin the custome of this state To place a stranger on this high Tribunall Ordayning a professor of the Lawes, As his assistant (being the place you hold) It is our duty to discharge that trust With all integrity, and not to looke Vpon mens persons, but to weigh their crimes In equall ballance, to which purpose now Although a strange and horrid sacriledge Ha's cald us hither in unusuall haste; Yet it must be our cheife care to proceed With due deliberation; otherwise Though just our sentence be, we are unjust.
Doc. I have for some yeares had the happines To be a witnes of your constant session, In all which time I have not heard a sentence Pronounc't by you that envy could pervert. Iud. We must not thinke we deserve prayse for that Which to neglect would merit punishment. Doc. But yet there are degrees of good and ill, Wherein the actor takes a liberty. Iud. Yet where the lawe prescribes a certaine rule A iust Iudge cannot challenge liberty: But let us now pursue the worke in hand, Where is the pris'ner? Off. Heere. Doc. Let him draw neere. Iud. His name? Off. He calls himselfe Virdugo, sir. Iud. Then know, Virdugo, though thy haynous fact Be evident, yet the Iustice of this state Grants thee free leave to answer for thy selfe. Ver▪ I thanke the state for their set complement. Iud. Bring forth the witnesses that he may see them. Off. They are both heere an't please your excellence. Iud. Have they bin sworne? Doc. Yes both sir, before me. Iud. Then, by the oath you tooke, declare the truth Of what you know concerning this delinquent, Begin you first. Wit. 1. Aboute som three howres since Being in the Domo, I espi'd this man At his first entrance, and although I never To my remembrance saw his face before, Yet instantly I found a strange mislike Of his aspect, which did increase the more, Because I saw him often fix his eyes On him he slew, whom I conceiv'd to be Signior Imperiale, I reveal'd my thoughts To this yong man who then stood next me, who Concurring with me, did resolve as I To watch him narrowly; we both agreed
To keepe on either side of him, at length In midst of all the crowd, raising his arme To fetch his blow, he hit me with his elbow, At which I suddenly laid hold on him, Supposing he had snatcht at some mans purse, But then I saw drop from his hand the sheath Of that dire weapon, he had newly buried In the warme bowels of that Gentleman. Wit. 2. Most part of this I averre, I stood so neere him That I perceiv'd the motion of his arme, And looking down, spi'd bloud upon his hand. Ver. The Canker take your Phisiognomy That made you try conclusions upon me. Iud. There cannot be more cleere and pregnant proofe, What have you to alledge in your defence? Doc. He hath confest the fact. Iud. Hath he confest Who set him on? whether he meant to kill Signior Imperiale, or yong Spinola? Ver. The one had done me wrong, but destiny Made th'other take a Carnivall disguise Somewhat too soone. Iud. Such recreations Though in themselves they be in different, Yet in a sacred Temple th'are prophane, And draw downe vengeance. Ver. Had there bin but hope To have enervated their testimony: The racke, nor the Strapado, no nor yet The subtler torment both of fire and water Should have inforc't me to the least confession: But 'tis my fate, and therefore let me heare My passing bell, my doome quickly pronounc'd; For 't were ridiculous to expect favour, Since your integrity (as you confest) May not shew any, where the law condemnes. Doc. Dar'st thou deride the Iudge? Iud. Let him alone, He hath no sence of his owne misery,
His boldnesse moves not me, I shall proceed With the unchanged countenance of Law, And with a voyce not furious, but severe; When I condemne a guilty man, 'tis done, As if I strooke a Serpent, not with passion. Doc. His wicked acts have hardned him, he came No novice to this cruell enterprise. In Venice he climing a Ladder, shot Through the glasse window a Clarissimo Sitting at supper, flew a Count of Naples In his owne garden, having first observ'd A place where he might scale the wall t' escape; And that his wants may not obtrude the guilt Vpon his fortune, he but lately ravish't A yong and Noble Virgin in Siena, The onely daughter of Petruccio. Ver. Can that be thought to be a great offence? Doc. The harmelesse man thinks it no great offence, With hot and beastly lust to vitiate A Damzell, at the most but ten yeers old. Ver. Beleeve it, I have found um good at eight; Why there are many like Quartella, sir, Remember not that they were ever maids. Iud. He takes delight not onely in the act, But in the infamy of wickednesse; But I will rid the world of such a monster; And therefore now, Verdugo, I pronounce, Because th'hast heap'd up crimes, and drunk in vice, Which is dispersed into every limbe, Thy body shall be laid upon a wheele, And limb by limb be broken, till thou dyest; Nor shalt thou then finde any other grave, Then the blacke mawes of Vultures, and remaine In the meane time a spectacle to men: This sentence justice hath declar'd by me. Ver. Sir? Iud. Not to be revok't, take him away, And early in the morning see't be done. Ver. I'le beare it manfully, although I feele
Ixion▪like the torment of the wheele, Iud. Such malefactors in a State are like To putrified members in mans body, Which like a skilfull Surgeon, law findes best To cut off quite, lest they infect the rest. Chorus of two. 1 LOve built on vertue, cannot be Led by a rash credulitie, To entertaine reports that tend To the dishonour of a friend. True love is confident, a doubt That slakes loves fire will put out. 2 As they whose tongues are us'd to erre Are not beleev'd, when they averre That which is true, so when we know A story false in part, we grow Iealous of all; if truth once touch On falshood, it is render'd such. 1 When men in their revengefull hate Doe study others ruines, Fate Acts Iustice part, to let them see They plotted their owne misery. 'Tis just that they themselves should finde, What they to others have design'd. 2 But how are these amaz'd, when they Being about to seize their prey, Finde themselves caught, yet doe not know From whence they did receive the blow: Like him that hid his gold in hope To keepe it safe, but found a rope. 1 Though they could blinde and bribe the law, And keepe all witnesses in awe By their great power, though they could make By cunning the whole Stake mistake: Yet can they be so void of sense, To thinke to cozen Providence?
2 If mischiefe-workers would but bend Their guilty thoughts, to weigh the end Of their ill deeds, they would confesse, No safety found in wickednesse. How can those crimes that heaven doth see And so abhor, unpunish't be? Actus Quartus. Scena Prima. Evagrio; Iustiniane. Eva. BEleeve it sir, h'as all the signes of phrensie, His inflam'd bloud boyles in his swelling veynes, His eyes appeare like fire, his colour changes, He grates his teeth, and falters in his speech; Sometimes he folds his armes, and deeply sighes, Then strikes his angry foot againnst the ground. Iust. Doth he continue in such violence As at the first? Eva. Yes sir, by fits; sometimes A stupid silence seizeth him, and then He breaks againe into his former rage. Iust. These are, I must confesse, the noted symptomes Of a hurt fancy; he's of a high spirit Apt to resent a wrong (if it could be) From fate it selfe; but, where he takes, a friend, On whom a man may build, as on a rocke. Eva. True sir, his rising passions at your name, Like a tumultuous multitude, at sight Of a grave Iudge, were for the time appeas'd; See where he comes, I pray observe, he vents His passions often in poeticke rage. Actus Quartus. Scena secunda. Spinola, Iustiniano, Evagrio. Spi. YEe Furies, active ministers of hell, That have your heads invironed with Snakes,
And in your cruell hands be are fiery scourges, Lend me your bloudy torches to finde out, And punish th'author of my deare sonne murther, Assist Megaera with a new revenge, Such as even thou would'st feare to execute: Let a vast sea of bloud o're-flow his house, And never ebbe till I shall pitty him; Ease now th'infernall ghosts, remove the stone From th' Attick thiefe, and lay it on his shoulders, Let the swift streame deceive his endlesse thirst, And let his hands winde the unquiet wheele, That hourely tortures the Thessalian King: Let Vultures tire upon his growing Liver, But let'um ne're be tir'd; and fince there is One of the fifty Danaan sisters wanting, Let them admit that man into her roome, And with their Pitchers onely load his armes; How am Isure 'tis he? or if it be? It is the law of Retribution, And is but just, my conscience tels me so: Hence childish conscience, shall I live his scorne? And the whole Cities Pasquill? I abhor it, Were he protected by the thunderer, I'de snatch him from his bosome, and in spite Of his revengefull thunder, throw him quicke Into the throat of the infernall dog; Or if that monster be not yet releast, Since great Alcides drag'd him in a chaine, Through th' amaz'd townes of Greece, Enceladus That with his earth-bred flames affrighteth heaven, Rather then he shall scape, shall fire the world: But I delay, and weare away the time With empty words, why doe I call for Furies? That beare in mine owne breast a greater fury Then Acheron and night did ever hatch; I'le dart my selfe like winged lightning on him; Have I no friend? Iust. Yes, one that dares assist you In a more valiant act, to crush that Fury,
And to restore brave Spinola to himselfe. Spin. O faithfull soule, my deare Francisco's murder'd. Iust. A heavy fate, yet such as should be borne Without so strange a tumult, what you give T'unbridled rage, you take from your revenge. Spi. Wilt thou allow me to take vengeance, speake, But speake Iustinian with thy wonted faith. Iust. Yes, such as law and Iustice shall allow. Spi. I have no skill in Law, and as for Iustice, Your learned Stoickes make it but a foole, A very animal. Iust. 'Tis now not seasonable To tell you whether Iustice, Fortitude, And th'other vertues may be called creatures; But I must tell you, that no creature can Be happy, wanting them; whereof that man Deprives himselfe, that subjugates his reason, On which they all depend, to brutish passion; Could you but be perswaded to reflect Vpon your selfe, to see as in a glasse, What a deformity this vice hath brought Vpon your soule, although you hated me, You would embrace my counsell. Spi. Deare Iustinian, Fortune hath nothing left that's worth my hope, But thy affection; at thy sole command, I would attempt to swim the mid-land sea, When Aeolus and Neptune are at warres, Expose my selfe to the fierce Dragons jawes, Enraged by the theft of Hercules; At thy command I'le live; hark, hark, what's that? It is the voyce of my dead son, that cals For vengeance; see, see where he stands and points At his still-bleeding wound; he bids me thinke What he had done ere now, had we chang'd fates; Did you not see him? Iust. No, nor you your selfe, 'Twas nothing but a strong impression made In your disturb'd imagination.
Spi. Could both myne eyes and eares be so deceiv'd. Iust. That happens often to perplexed mindes. Spi. Alas, what shall I do? Iust. Let me perswade you But to retire, perhaps some milde repose May softly steale upon your troubled spirits, To give you ease. Spi. If you will have it so, My passions in my brest shall silence keepe, I'le be as tame, as (what you wish me) sleepe. Iust. Waite on him in, I'le follow presently. Actus Quartus. Scena Tertia. Iustiniano. THe vnexpected death of his deare sonne, So wounds his soule, that his distracted fancy Suggests beliefe, he saw and hard him speake, But that cannot seeme strange, if we consider How far imagination doth usurpe Vpon the power of Reason, though it be A faculty coincident to Bruites, Receiving objects from the common sence; But these his perturbations I suspect To flow from mixt affections, greife, and anger, The last of which, sinkes deepest in the hearts Of most of us Italians, and I doubt That he thereby having involv'd himselfe In that, which is our Nations crime, Revenge; Hath bin by th'other faction vndermin'd: If this be, his disease is cureable, Yet so, as every vertuous man must thinke The remedy as bad as the disease, Vnles strickt Iustice do becom th'avenger, Or that their owne sad fates appease his rage; O how it wounds my heart to see my freind And one that truly meriteth that name But for that vice, whereof not to be guilty
Is made a vice heere, by the Tyrant custome) Plung'd in distresse, that cannot receive counsell: But could he once with safety be restor'd To his owne native ingenuity, He would detest such crimes; his candid soule Appeares in this, that in the midst of fury, The sight or name of him he lov'd before Can Orpheus-like calme his enraged spirit: I therefore am oblig'd by sacred freindship Even to devote my selfe to all iust meanes Of his recovery, and I will performe it, To cure Orestes (If the Heavens so please) There shall not want a faithfull Pylades. Actus Quartus. Scena Quarta. Imperiale, Honoria, Angelica, Servants, Freinds, Doria, Maskers. Imp. ARe all things ready. Ser. Yes sir. Imp. Noble friends, Your presence gives addition to the honor Which some young Gentlemen are pleas'd to do me In the free presentation of their mirth Most seasonable in time of Carnivall, And fit to celebrate this joyfull feast Which we may challenge as our holy-day. Fri. 1 The honor of this day chiefely belongs To you and to your family, but yet The benefit redounds to the whole State, Which every yeare is thankfully acknowledged. Fri. 2 The State, by such acknowledgement invites All generous spirits beyond common duty To venture life and fortune for her safety. Imp. This common wealth that makes them truly happy That share the blessings of her government Disdaines not, like a tyranny, to owe A benefit to subiects; nor rewards
With banishment, in stead of Bayes, their merit: But hark, musicke proclaims the maskers comming, Be pleas'd to take your places, there are seats. Fri. 1. I must crave leave to place your daughter, sir, She that is once betrothed is a Bride. Imp. 'Twere incivility in her, or us, If you request it, not to be uncivill, Sit downe Angelica. Hon. Sit downe, sit downe, Our friends desires are in our house, commands. A boy, clad like a nuptiall Genius sings this song. COme Hymen, light thy full branch'd Pine, And let a rosie wreath intwine Thy reeking brow, let thy brave sire With liquid vertue thee inspire, While waggish boyes in witty rimes, Taxing the follies of the times, Spare not their masters, who are now Content this freedome to allow; Thus the chaste girdle of the Bride Must be by pleasant rites unti'd, But let darke silence bring to bed Such as want Hymen when they wed. The song ended, Hymen and his Fescennine youths ap∣peare clad in antique formes, dancing a wanton dance, at the end of which, Prince Doria representing Thalassius, en∣ters with other young gentlemen his friends, attired like Romans, with their swords drawne: at sight whereof Hymen and his company runne away confusedly: then they put up their swords, and dance a warlike dance, at the end whereof Doria suddenly embraceth Angelica, the Mas∣quers all crying out Mas. For Thalassius, for Thalassius. Imp. Though custome challengeth a liberty To take our wives and daughters forth to tread A measure without scandall, yet t'embrace, And whisper too, requires a better warrant
Then carnivall permission, it implyes Domesticke priviledge, or an affornt. Mas. For Thalassius, for Thalassius. Imp. That voyce was frequent at a publick rape, But sacred hospitality forbids All jealousie of any ill intent. Dor. Not, as the Romans when they had betraid The Sabine Virgins, do my glad friends make These acclamations of Thalassius, But rather as a more auspicious name Then that of drowsie and lascivious Hymen; Behold the late Ambassador himselfe Thus contradicts his owne seyn'd embasie. Aug. My Doria! Hon. O perfect happinesse! Fri. 2. See how Prince Doria hath surpriz'd us all, Transform'd into a nuptiall Deitie. Imp. My doubt is in the better sense resolv'd: You may perceive y'are welcome by the joy Exprest both by my daughter, and my wife, In no dry complement, but in a moist And silent Oratory. Dor. Which works more On my affections, then a golden tongue; But tell me my divine Angelica, How could'st thou at the tidings of my death, Put on a valiant incredulity? And when thou find'st me safe burst out in teares. Ang. To lend beliefe to any ill report Of a known friend, although aver'd with boldnes, In common friendship were unpardonable, Much more in such a love as mine, which finding In a mayne part a manifest untruth Was for your honour bound to slight the rest: And though there be a contrarietie In the true causes of our joy and griefe, Yet both are often times exprest with teares, Dor. I could not entertaine nor then nor now, The least suspition of thy constancy,
But truest love delights to please it selfe With such disguises, and to finde by trials Our owne assurance many wayes confirm'd: Nor had I ventur'd to disturb thy thoughts, Which thy discerning judgement did prevent, But that I had a present remedy. Ang. I might have safely tasted what the Mede, Or the fierce Parthian dips his arrows in, So long as there was such an antidote. Dor. Were I left helplesse by Machaons art, Thy presence hath a vertue would restore me, Pandora on whom each Deity bestow'd A severall gift, was not endow'd like thee. Imp. So soone at strife? if you will needs contend Who will love best, I'le put you both together. Dor. He whose ambition made him weep and sweat Within the narrow limits of one world, Did never thirst so much for fame and glory, As I for that encounter, in which combat, Whether I vanquish, or am vanquished, I shall not envy Pompey or Caesars triumphs: In the meane time I'le crave an houre or two For preparation of some necessaries, Whereof my absence makes me destitute. Imp. Troth my occasions have the like request, And therefore if this noble company Will honour us to morrow with their presence, We shall endeavour to requite their loves. 1 Fri. Most willingly. 2 Fri. And at your nuptiall feast, Wee'l wish that every grace may be your guest. Dor. I'le soon return, my heart with thee shal stay As a sure pawne. Ang. You carry mine away. Imp. You have some busines too must be dispatcht, Goe, loose no time; Molosso come thou hither, I leave thee in my absence to take care, That supper be prepar'd, and tell the Steward That great revenue, parcimony, now
Must be by us neglected: thriving men In charges that come seldome, are profuse. Actus Quartus. Scena Sexta. Molosso. I Shall sir, yes, by that time you returne, You shall confesse you have a skilfull Cater: Why should proud greatnesse undervalue us, And our condition? since all men are slaves; If we survey the greatest monarchies, What art their Courtiers else? with all the suits They either beg or weare? the rich Banquier Enthrals his debtor, and his money him: This Captaine is a captive to that wench; This Magistrate to bribes; that Lord to pride, This Statesman to ambition; all to feare: From whence we only that have nought to loose, Are free, and that shall instantly appeare; I'le send the servants forth, that Sango and I May act our part with more security. See how the fates themselves have help'd to bring The Beast into my toile, and made both him And his whole house the subject of my vengeance, My joy is such, I cannot temper it: As when the bloud-hound in a leash being led, Noseth the ground, and while the prey's far off, Spares both his mouth and feet, but drawing neer, Will open wide, and drag away his leader, So are my thoughts transported, I'le away, My fury cals for bloud, and I obey. Chorus of two. 1 VNdoubted friendship having made A strong impression in the minde,
Though wilde distempers doe invade Our reason can their fury binde. Love in distracted thoughts may beare As great a sway as servile feare. 2 He whose strong passions are his foes, Is happy in a faithfull friend, That will assist him to compose Those strifes that to his ruine tend. A true friend wishes not a cause, But when ther's need, he ne're withdrawes. 1 A Lover with no ill intent, Will Proteus-like, new formes devise, He feynes to be on errands sent, And then himselfe he will disguise Like to a god, Love loves to stray, And seldome keeps the beaten way. 2 But now the fatall time drawes neere, Wherein the errour and th' offence Of Imperiale will appeare, To trust the slave he did incense, And to encourage him to act What he once thought a heynous fact. 1 But may there not be some excuse? At least to mitigate his fault? That he could not expect a truce, And that he found his owne life sought: It hath bin counted Iustice still, Rather then to be kil'd, to kill. 2 Ther's no excuse can purge the guilt That murther brings; we must not take Our owne revenge, bloud by us spilt, Will our whole off-spring guilty make: Then let's not blame heavens justice, when Great plagues doe light on vertuous men.
Actus Quintus. Scena Prima. Fidele, Evagrio. Fid. VVEe see there is small hope that gentle sleepe Can find admittance to his troubled thoughts, While rage distracts them; he's no sooner laid To rest upon his couch, but up he starts. Eva. The wise Iustinian meanes this night to bring Some curious musicke, that may rocke his senses Into a slumber by sweet harmony, Working on his affections, we are all Eternally oblig'd to that good man; Who though he be with hearty sorrow mov'd To see his friend in such necessity, Ev'n of his helpe, yet is resolv'd t' employ His constant care, nor will he ever thinke His debt of friendship paid by my labour. Fid. What will become of us if he miscarry? We are his kinsmen, and have no subsistence But by his onely bounty; I receiv'd A deadly wound in the deplored death Of his deare son, who oft was pleas'd to bid me Throw all my care on him, and now I finde My hopefull venture sunke in that brave ship. Eva. To lose out friends and fortunes I confesse, Is that which needs must shake the firmest mindes, But when there is no hope for us t' encrease Our owne affliction, and to lose our spirits, Is an infirmity beneath a man: Why should we doubt his safe recovery? Since passion as we see, doth but disturbe His reason, not destroy't; when he's at worst, He'l hearken to the counfell of his friend. How earnestly he begs, that he may speake With Imperiale, and it seemes Iustinian Already condiscends to his request; Me thinks that should not be, since he suspects
Him to be privy to Franciscoes death; Eva. No doubt, Iustinian understands what's fit; Perchance if once he shall his mind unburden His passions may remit, or he may seeme To promise, cause he would not have him crost, These things we wholly must commit to him, Whose Iudgement's not inferior to his love: He wish'd us but withdraw awhile, we must Not be farre off, least he should chance to call, For what soe'r occasion they should have Ther's none but we t'assist: Sango the slave Hath taken liberty to go abroad, At his owne pleasure, who would thinke the Villain Durst venture to be absent at this time? Fid. I have observ'd a wondrous league of late Betweene him and his Cozen slave; how ere Their Lords are far asunder, they are neere. Eva. T'is ever best when such as they are kept To dayly labor, the least ease corrupts them. Fid. There might perchance be some discovery made If they were both examined apart, And made beleeve each other had confest. Eva. Som plot, t'is like to steale a silver spoone To purchase Opium, or the drug Tobacco; That is the height of their ambitious theft: But heark they knock I prethy go thou in, And i'le take order to have Sango sent for. Actus Quintus. Scena Secunda. Cater, Porter, Cooke. Cat. THou blow'st asmuch as he that carried An Oxe vpon his shoulders, set it downe, Ther's for thy paines, Port. Troth t'was a heavy burrhen. Cat Ther's two quatrines more. Por. I thanke you, sir. Cooke. Methinks Molosso might have sav'd this charge▪ And bin himselfe Porter. Cat. Who the Slave?
He's now our major Domo, our Lord told me He would deliver his commands by him. He gave me order to make this provision. Cooke. I like him he begins his governement With bounty, now the Cooke may shew his skill; Since I came hither, I have bin confin'd To severall sallets, porrage with scrapt cheese, And a few Vermicelle, such slight dishes: O when I serv'd the Grand-Dukes master Cooke How we were all employd! I can remember, What lectures of our Mystery hee'd read, Stiling the belly master of all arts, And by a modell of his owne invention Demonstrate how the antique Cookes were wont To dresse th'intire Boare; he was a Scholler And would discourse of the delicious Sumen And of the noble Patrons of the kitchin Both Greeks and Romaines; he was wont to speake Most reverently of one Apitius, Cat. Why what was he? Cooke. A man of a brave stomack, That spent upon his belly neere three millions, And having cast up his accounts, and found Only two hundred and od thousand crownes Remayning to support his appetite, Doubting he should be famisht, rather chose To live by fame, and end his life with poison: But prethy knock; there was another too, One Nomentanus, but far short of him: Will they not open? we shall all be shent, Knock harder. Cat. Sure they are a sleepe, perhaps The Slave being overleaven'd with his favour Hath made himselfe starke drunke; we shall disturbe Our Lady and her Daughter, I much wonder Mistris Nugella comes not to the doore. Noise within. Oh. Cooke. What noyse is that within? some body groanes,
Cat. I will goe seeke our Patron. Coo. Here he comes. Actus Quintus. Scena Tertia. Imperiale, Cater, Cooke. Imp. VVHat, no for warder? w'are like to sup to night At a fine houre? Cat. W'have bin a good while here sir, Have often knockt, but cannot be let in. Coo. We thought we heard a groaning in the house. Imp. How? knock againe, yet, this is very strange, Where should Molosso be; perhaps my wife And daughter with their maids may all be busie, For I suppose they were to take a bath; He certainly would not neglect my service: I know not what to thinke, my jealousie Suggests a thousand feares, goe presently, Desire the Engineer to lend m' an Engine, That I may force the doore. Actus Quintus. Scena Quarta. Molosso, Sango above, Imperiale below. Mol. SIr, here are they Meane to make good this Fort in spite of you, And all your Engineers. Imp. What's thy intent? Thou know'st how farre I trust thee deare Molosso. Mol. It is not your untimely trust or favour (That is to me but sun-shine after shipwrack) Can satisfie your former injuries: I would have spent an age in base observance, Onely to gaine this day, this happy houre That shall produce what no time shall forget. Imp. Iowe my life to thee and ever shall Make that acknowledgement, then doe not thou
Destroy thine owne great merit. Mol. Think not fond man, I sav'd thy life for any love of thee, But to reserve thee for a greater plague. Imp. O my deare wife and daughter, where are they? Mol. Both yet alive, the mischief's done already, But not the vengeance, thou shalt that behold, Till then there's nothing can be call'd revenge: Goe bring u'm Sango, thou hast had thy fill San. Of Nectar, sweeter far than that of Iove. Actus Quintus. Scena Quinta. Iustiniano, Spinola, Imperiale, below, Molosse, Sango, Honoria, Angelica above. Iust. THe best Physitians in extremities, Allow their Patients what they most desire, Though ne're so seeming hurtfull: when diseases Exceed their safe and usuall remedies, They many times are cur'd by contraries: What should this meane? Spi. I must exact your promise. Iust. Vpon condition you'l forbeare all out-rage. Spi. Set me my bounds, and see if I transgresse. Iust. Stand here then, and be silent. Spi. Like a Statue. Mol. Behold a paire of Brides, their haire displaied, Muse not to see u'm weep, the cause is light. Imp. What is the woe that these strange signs import? Speake my Honoria, my Angelica. Hon. That which no womans tongue is fit t' expresse, Nor any humane eare fit to receive. Imp. Mine eares may heare what such soft hearts can bear▪ I have a breast prepar'd for misery. Hon. Behold the Wolves, the Beares, that our sad dreams Fore-warn'd us of, which you did so despise. Mol. You heare how light the cause is, but a dreame. Hon. Our wretched story's told and understood, In the sole repetition of that vision; The jewels ravish't from our innocent necks.
When swords and direfull threats could not By cruell force assisting one another, Wrung from us both. Ang. Oh that heavens power had pleas'd According to my fervent invocation, To have transform'd me to some ugly monster, That horror might have frighted away lust, Or else converted it to sudden rage, Whereby my life had ransomed mine honour! Imp. Was there none neere to ayde? where was Nugella? Hon. Bound, and then strangled, all the rest were forth. Imp. What haste a wretched creature makes to heare His owne dire wretchednesse? but now Molosso, Since thou hast cloy'd thy furious appetite, Vnbinde their tender hands, and send them down, That wee may all condole their heavy fortunes. Mol. If my revenge could have bin satisfied With what's already done, it had done nothing; No, Beares and Wolves alway persist to death, And I lament to finde so narrow a Stage To act my vengeance on, as but two women: Sango prepare. San. Command, and I obey. Ang. Then there is hope to finde compassion In more then Scythian breasts, ther's but that left To expiate your former cruelty. Imp. O spare their lives, and all shall be forgiven! Mol. We are too farre embark't to hope or wish To be forgiven, mischief's upheld by mischiefe. Imp. Alas poor soules, what crime have they committed? Mol. They are both thine Imperial, that's their crime, And 'tis the height of our triumphant glory, That thou shalt see u'm dye, cast thine eyes up. Imp. Villaine, I will not, thus I snatch away That part of thy revengefull insolence, puls out his eyes. So shall the Sun and Moon, heavens rowling eyes, Drop from their spheres at the worlds generall ruine, T' avoyd the spectacle, 'tis fit my light Should be extinguish't with my dearest objects.
hat? hast thou so deluded us? thine eares ough thou want'st eyes to see, shall hear their groanes▪ Hon. Oh, oh! Ang. Oh, oh! Mol. I would have labour'd more for this revenge, Than those that search the bowels of the earth For Mynes, or dive into the Sea for pearles. Actus Quintus. Scena sexta. Doria, Imperiale, Molosso, Sango, Iustiniano, Spinola. Dor. VVHose fortune should I envy? that am going To take possession of a happinesse, Great, and (what crownes felicity) secure? Such constant joy proceeds from vertuous love: But soft, what unexpected change is here? Either mine eyes mistake, or my Imperial Is quite depriv'd of his; alas, 'tis so: I am amaz'd at this sad spectacle. Imp. There can be none but yong Prince Doria left, So apprehensive of my misery. Dor. What strange Eclipse? or dire Stymphalides With their prodigious wings obscure the sun? What cruell hand hath made us all thus wretched? Imp. What thou behold'st, is the least part of mine, And thine owne woe. Dor. Where's my Angelica? Imp. She and her mother both are visely murdered; And that's not all, they both were ravish't first By those two savage beasts. Mol. 'Tis thy fate Doria To be involv'd in that mans vow'd destruction. Dor. Where am I now, in fruitfull Italy, Or in Hircania, where there's nothing seene But horrid monsters, and perpetuall snow? O wickednesse! that no age will beleeve! And all Posterity deny! malitious fate, That to my boundlesse misery add'st this; To make me suffer barbarous wrongs from such As are not capable of my revenge.
Were the sole Monarch of the world, the actor, Or had he but conniv'd at the deed done By his lustfull sonne or minion; I might hope, Arm'd with the justice of my cause, to wrest The ill-sway'd scepter from him, and reduce Him and his race to unparrallel'd examples Of wofull pride, and miserable greatnesse. Then if abstracted spirits knowledge have Of humane vowes, look down deflowred Mayd, But yet no lesse a Virgin then a Vestall: Since honour cannot stoop to punish slaves, Whose vile condition sinks beneath that vengeance, 'Bove which no tyrants power could hope to clime. And since thy cruell sufferings (blest soule) Require strict satisfaction, loe, I turne My fury on my selfe, and punish thus Mine owne malignant fortune: who holds me? offers to kill himselfe. Forbeare, I may not be disarm'd. Iust. That man That is transported by a desperate rage, Disarmes himselfe, he that may hinder mischiefe, And yet permits it, is an accessary. Dor. Noble Iustinian, thou wert wont to be Full of compassion, shew it now, and end A loathed life. Iust. That which had bin a crime Not to prevent, were wickednesse to act. Dor. Restore me then my sword, it is not worse To kill him that unwilling is to dye, Than t' hinder him that's willing. Iust. If thou kil'st Thy selfe, thereby thou dost confesse a guilt. Dor. The guilty seldome inflict punishment Vpon themselves; what wretch can keep a life So full of misery? Iust. 'Tis wretchednesse, Not to be able to beare misery, It is not as thou think'st, renowned Doria,
A vertue to hate life, but to indure These weighty strokes of Fortune valiantly, And this becomes thy noble birth and spirit, On which th'afflictions of the world should fall, But as tempestuous showres into the sea. Dor. Thy counsell comes too late, sentence is given By me upon my selfe, nor canst thou save Or yet reprieve me, he that resolves to dye, Findes weapons every where, my minde could arme These hands without a sword, but it disdaines All borrowed ayde; my weapons are within: If sudden joy can speedy death command, Why should not griefe? and mine above all others? Then summon all thy forces mighty sorrow, Contract this stubborne heart and stifle it, Deny it the bold priviledge, to be The last that feeles the stroke of death: so, so, It shoots a vapour that will poyson it, And choke each passage of the vitall spirits, And now I feele it beat against my breast, As if it gave th'allarum unto all The organs of my life; O how it strugles, Disdaining to submit! proud rebell downe, Thy lygaments are shrunke, and I approach The place, where Lovers after death reside, Where I a ghost will yet enjoy my Bride: Wilt thou not yeeld? dost thou expect reliefe? Time, that releaseth sorrow, shall not joyne With refresht nature to repaire thy ruine: I to a broken heart will adde this doome, No substance within these lips shall come. Mol. Thy daughter Imperiale is canoniz'd: With contrite heart devout Prince Doria, Hath vow'd a fast to his Saint Angelica. Imp. I feele so great a weight of misery, That I can scarce be sensible of more, Although it be (what's harder to be borne Than my calamity) a villains scorne. Spi▪ Thus shall my silence breake, into remorse, Not into rage, that feaver of the soule
Is quite converted to an Apathie; Let me cry out to fate, as Hanniball At Canne, to his bloody Souldiers, spare; Imperial know'st thou the voyce of Spinola? By the most faithfull head of my Iustinian (Than which there cannot be a holier found) I truly am mov'd with pity, thy sad story Would melt a flinty leart into compassion; Procrustes, or the wilde Inhabitants Of horrid Caucasus are milde to these. Imp. know not, gentle Spinola how thou Cat accept thanks from me, that have from thee eserv'd so ill, It may not be suppos'd an dissemble now, that Villaine there Contriv'd thy deare sons death without my knowledge, Though I am guiltie of as great a crime, For I was willing, to my too late greife Vpon discovery made by thine owne Slave Of thy intent, to have the same retorted Vpon thy selfe, the rest that wretch did plot, In whom I plac'd a wicked confidence; And did at length too much applaud the fact, From whence our mutuall miseries result. Spi. Thy crime was but diversion of an evill, Whereof I hate the memory, and wish I could drinke deep of Lethe, to forget That impious designe, and for these villains, I'le study a new punishment, that shall Transcend Perillus Bull, and all the torments Invented by the fierce Sicilian tyrants. Mol. 'Tis wretchednesse to feare where ther's no hope, Could'st thou beleeve, vaine Spinola, that we Would undertake to act so bold a mischiefe, And not resolve upon as brave an end? We that have gained such a full revenge, Meane not to lose it by a poore submission To hopelesse mercy, or your new found torments; Though fortune made us wretched slaves to you, We both retaine some sparks of th'active fire, Which the
Did sometimes flame in our Numidean breasts, Not yet so quench thy servitude, but we Have will and power to free our selves, behold Out liberty; these shall restore us now To that equality that nature gave, In which blinde chance hath put a difference: One blow from these deliverers, can make An abject begger equall to a King: Sango keepe time. San. I'm ready. The slaves Mol. By consent We thus avoyd & mock your punishment. Spi. The Harpies are flown suddenly to hell, And hang already on that hideous rocke; Where dreadfull fiends lye gaping to receive 'm; But let me, sir, become your faithfull guide To leade you to my house, where you shall live, And want no comfort love or cost can give. Imp. The onely comfort of a wretched soule Is to despaire of comfort. I see not The mansion guilty of such wickednesse, But I am seene, a wretch, in Genua, Where all my ancestors stand wreath'd with honour: I'le wander to a desart, or else clime Some remote mountaine, where dark clouds that hung About his high erected head, shall hide me From all the eyes of men, there I'le lament My miseries in willing banishment. Iust. What need we care how powerfull our foes be? When slaves can bring us to such misery? Whose innate cruelties at length appeare, Though they the same may cunningly forbeare, For their owne ends; it is not wisedome then To place our trust in such condition'd men, Whom punishments, and wants, and feares prepare To hatred, to deceit, and to despaire: Yet these are but poore instruments, the cause That on our heads heavens indignation drawes, Springs from our selves, st which ther's no defence
