1191 99850476 15683
A BRIEFE DIS∣cours of certain Bathes or medicinall Waters in the Countie of Warwicke neere vnto a village called Newnam Regis. 1587
THE benefits no doubt are great and manifold which almightie God of his large bountie & exceeding goodnes of late yeeres hath plen∣tifully bestowed vppon this little soile of Eng∣land, since the prospe∣rous reigne of our most gratious Souereigne, wherein the Gospell hath sincerely and freely beene preached▪ in whose time many & strange euents haue happened, to the great benefit of this countrie. For who haue not in admiration our long continuance of peace and tranquillitie, our neighbours all round about vs being in continual wars? Who doth not maruell at our plentie and
abundance of all things? It is miraculous in the indgement of the world, that so manie strange stratagems practised by euill disposed persons, as well to subuert our quiet estate, as to take from vs our most Souereigne Ladie and Queene, far beyond the capacitie of man, as it were with Gods finger and power onely, haue beene from time to time ouerthrowen & brought to nought. Infinite more tokens may particularly be recited, by the which men may iustly gather arguments of Gods well pleased mind with the gouernment of our most gratious Queene; amongst the which the bathes and medicinall waters of late yeeres discouered in sundrie parts of England, are not of least moment: for most men yet li∣uing can witnes of many rare and strange cures done by sundrie wels heeretofore vnknowen: which may make manifest to the world that God is well pleased, and in that respect hath blessed this our countrie far more than other nations: and are as it were plaine arguments, to bring o∣ther princes to imbrace the Gospell, to roote out all superstition and idolatrie, to plant in their countries true religion out of Gods booke, and aboue all things, to seeke Gods glorie and his kingdome. And it is not altogither a vaine con∣iecture, to thinke that God in these daies mira∣culously reuealed wels and springs of medicinall waers neuer knowen before, to worke effects
strange and maruellous in our sights, thereby to induce all men to for sake such puddle pits which mans deuise hath digged, and drinke onely of the cleere fountaines of his word, thence onely to fetch remedy for our diseased soules. The bathes of Bathe and Buckstan for their antiquitie and long proofe in times past, are of great fame, and no doubt as of more efficacie than others, may iustly most be accounted of: neuertheles manie other waters in England of late yeeres discoue∣red, haue the testimonie of experience by sundry effects, and rare cures done by them, to haue no small medicinall power, as by the euents in sun∣drie diseased people receiuing remedie by them, hath beene made manifest. Amongst the which the wels in Warwickeshire nigh a village called Newnam Regis, haue had most credite, by the vse of which great numbers of people haue found helpe beyond their expectation, which yet liuing, do and will beare testimonie thereof: and no doubt many and rare vertues and qualities are in them far beyond common waters, as will ap∣peere by diligent search of their minerals. If any shall obiect or seeke cause, why so many and so strange euents supposed to be done at the first by these waters, the like are not now, nor haue not of late yeeres beene performed. Surely this came not by meanes of defects in the nature of the waters, but rather by the great abuse of them,
For at my being there, I found great concurse of alsorts of people affected with sundry and dissidēt diseases, which all in one maner vsed these wa∣ters, both inwardly and outwardly, without coun∣sell or any iust consideration, carried away with opinion, as it seemed, that the faculties and ver∣tues of them, were supernaturally giuen from God without any ordinarie meanes, and so the vse of the same not to depend of any order or ad∣uise of Physicke, but that it was sufficient by any means to vse them. Much like vnto the super∣stition of our forefathers, which in old time ac∣counted their pilgrimages, and the vowing of a penie to some one saint or other, or the dipping of a cloth in bathe waters, to be sufficient for the curing of any of their maladies. And by these means the natures and qualities of these bath waters not considered, nor the constitutions and temperaments of the parties weighed, many re∣ceiued more hurt than good. For in truth euerie medicinall water doth not cure euery infirmitie, nor euerie man is to vse euerie bathe: but these things are to be distinguished, and so considered of by the learned, that the bathe may be apted to the disease, and be agreeable to the partie disea∣sed. And amongst our countrimen, this is in truth a great fault: that when a thing is knowen to do good to many, we straightwaies generally proceede in the vse of it, without respect of diffe∣rence
of parties or of affects, as if one shoe might serue for euery mans foote, that we cease not from abusing of the same, vntill many bad succes∣ses haue bred discredit to the thing: as of late hath appeered by the abuse of Mechoacan and diuers other Indian and forren medicines. The consideration heerof occasioned me to thinke it not altogither a vaine labor, to write somewhat of the most famous bathes and medicinal waters in England, wherein I trauelled as well in those of Bathe & Buckstan, as in others. And haue an intent to publish the same, But vpon occasion of the maruellous effects a few yeeres past done by those wels in Warwickeshire, not only heard but also seene by my selfe, through persuasion of some of my friends, I spent more time in triall and ex∣amination of them, than in the others, and so did wholy put mine endeuors for the discouerie of their minerals, natures, and properties, and with∣all to set foorth in what diseases and bodies the same are most conuenient, not omitting the true vse of them, when they are either inwardly to be droonken, or outwardly to be applied. Which in very deed I did accomplish, euen when these wels were first reuealed, but I did forbeare to impart that I had done to any my friends, for that I was certainly informed, that an ancient learned man of my familiar acquaintance, intended to write and publish the same argument: who for his deep
learning graue iudgement, and long experience, would no doubt haue performed it in a far better sort, had not those his endeuors been preuented with vntimely death it herefore the expectation of that promised intent now void and made fru∣strate, I hauing of late occasion to peruse againe those my trauels, and notes of my meditation of the asore said wels in Warwickeshire, and impar∣ting the same to some of my friends learned in the art of physicke, was by them persuaded to di∣gest in order these my conceits, and greatly in∣couraged to communicate the same to many, whereby they which heerafter meane to vse these bathes, may the better be informed how with iudgement and discretion to proceed in the true vse of them, and the learned may be occasi∣oned further to examine the minerals and cau∣ses of their effects, whereby I doubt not but that the fame of them may be restored to their for∣mer credit. In regard and consideration heerof, and the rather that I may by this my enterprise be an occasion and means to stir vp the deuotion and liberalitie of such well disposed persons as are forward and zealous in furthering all such good intents and purposes, I thought it not amisse by publishing this briefe discourse, to signifie how good a deede it may be that some cost were be∣stowed about these welles, that the same may be more commodious to such as haue occasion to
vse them. For at the first, all medicinall foun∣taines are as naked springs, vnhandsome to vse, vntill some such personages haue by Gods proui∣dence been stirred vp charitably to adorne the same with all conueniencie. And as in other countreys, men are greatly to be commended for their diligent cares in making all things about the bathes conuenient for the bathers, so truely some defect heereof is and may iustly be found in this our realme of England. For they which haue trauelled, do find the bathes in Italy and in diuers parts of Germany farre better ordered, than any heere in England, and do find fault that euen these our auncient bathes of Bathe and Buckstan are so slenderly left without any great addressing of things necessary. Much more ther∣fore these new discouered springs which are yet vtterly vnfurnished, do require the helpe of some able and well disposed, for their ornament and good deuises meete for them which shall vse them. And for as much as the purpose of mine attempt in this little pamphlet, tendeth onely to the publike benefite of my countrey, I most humbly request, that as that mighty Per∣sian disdained not a cup of common water offe∣red to him by a meane person, so your L. will vouchsafe to accept as a testimonie of dutiful af∣fection this little treatise of medicinall waters, which I present to your L. at this time, inui∣ted
by the common vsage of all men, in token of a good and prosperous new yeere, resting a continuall begger to the almightie, to send you long and prosperous life, with increase of all honorable pre∣ferment. Your Honors most humble to be commanded WALTER BAYLY.
¶A briefe discourse of certaine Bathes or Medicinall waters, in the Countie of Warwicke, neer vnto a village called New∣nam Regis. IT is well and trulie said, and vpon very sufficient ground & reason, by Aristotle the chiefest learned of all the heathen Philosophers, that Philosophy procee∣ded and tooke his beginning from woonder and admirati∣on. For wheras in truth it is alwaies seene that we doubt, and are altogither igno∣rant of the hidden causes of such euents and things, which astonish and amaze vs, the wit of man being naturally indued with an vnsatiable desire of knowledge, bendeth all his force and industrie to at∣taine the perfect discouerie of all such se∣cret matters, neuer ceasing or surceasing painfull trauels with earnest search and inquirie, vntill he be fully satisfied and thoroughly resolued touching al causes & circumstances belonging to such effects
as seemed strange, whereunto when he hath attained, the woondring ceaseth, the minde being satisfied with the appre∣hēsion of the causes. Wherfore that asser∣tion of Pythagoras, that The beginning of Philosophie is to woonder at nothing, as Scheg∣kius reporteth, doth not carrie so good probabilitie: the veritie of that affirmati∣on rather taketh place after Philosophie is attained, than in the beginning. For we are not occasioned to search out the causes and grounds of things knowne which are not strange vnto vs. No mā la∣boreth about ordinary matters, ech man trauelleth to learne, heare, and know the causes of strange euents, and of haps vn∣vsual. So that we may iustly conclude with Aristotle, that admiration and wondring gaue occasion of Philosophy, without the which no man is stirred with desire of knowledge: and after the wit of man is satisfied with vnderstanding of the cau∣ses which breed astonishment, the woon∣dering ceaseth, and the minde is maruel∣louslie pleased and delighted with the knowledge thereof. And as the veritie of this position is aboundantly confirmed in great varietie of naturall effects, which by meanes of their strangenes haue been
occasion to the learned in all ages to ex∣ercise their wits for the vnderstanding & apprehension of them: so amongst all o∣ther things naturall bathes by meanes of their diuers operations and vertues in curing of sundrie maladies and diseases, haue vehemently incensed & stirred vp all diligēt students which bestow their times in inquirie and search of naturall causes, earnestly to pursue the knowledge of their mysteries, not ceasing vntill they haue thoroughly conceaued and apprehen∣ded all such intricate difficulties as vnto them appertaine. And of this very parti∣cular matter we haue had a domestical fa∣miliar example offered vnto vs within these fewe yeers heer in England. For it hapned not long since in Warwickshire, neer vnto a Village called Newnam Regis, that a certaine husbandman occupied in lopping of trees, chaunced to receiue a greeuous wound in his hand, whereupon he repaired presently to a fountain which was not far off: after he had washed and clensed the wound very well with the wa∣ter, he presently found al pains of his hurt asswaged, and in short time the wounde thoroughly closed & healed, that he nee∣ded no further helpe by the art of surge∣rie,
which effect he imparted to his neigh∣bors, as a strange successe: and it so ama∣zed the hearers, that after, another hauing a deepe wound in his heele with a sieth, came to the same fountaine & recouered & was made hole onely with the lotion of the same water. These and such rare cures done by these wels, astonished all the in∣habitants thereabout. And the fame here∣of occasioned great concourse and multi∣tudes of diseased people to run into those parts, and many receiued helpe of their infirmities, as is verefied by the testimo∣nies of the worshipfull. So that the fame heerof confirmed now by often experi∣ence, was at length so far spread, that such as were diseased, almost out of all parts of this land, came to those waters for reme∣die: wherupon all men hauing the nouel∣tie of the matter in admiration, many in that they had not obserued such strange things to be done by common water, sup∣posed some secret vertue to be imparted from God to these wels, whence such rare cures were miraculously performed farre beside and beyond the ordinary course of nature. The learneder and wiser sort in∣structed with the grounds of natural Phi∣losophie, after they vnderstood the re∣ports
to be indeed not altogither fabu∣lous and vaine, but to carrie much truth; to satisfie their woondering cogitations gaue themselues to a farther search, to finde out the true and naturall causes of these euents. For as it may be accounted meere impietie to detract any thing from the omnipotent power of God, to thinke his hand so shortened, that he is not as∣well able to produce things miraculously now in these our daies, without the mean of naturall causes, as he did often in times past: so without derogation of Gods po∣wer I trust, we may affirme, that in these our latter daies, God for the most part doth in his actions put natural meanes as instruments, of which the Philosophers do consider as naturall and inferior cau∣ses. For if we shall say that God without any naturall course, supernaturally doth produce all things, we shall subuert all the grounds of Philosophy and spoile nature of all actions. Rather in mine opinion we are to imbrace that saying in Genesis, that God doth cease from newe creation of things, hauing giuen to them a nature and power, by the which they stande and fall. For if these second causes, as barren in themselues, should continually receiue
facultie and power from the almightie, that otherwise they might not be meanes in Gods works: besides that, we shal take away all generation and corruption in this world, we must imagine that there is daily a new creation of things, from the which God long since hath ceased, as we reade in the holie scriptures, when he did put all things created vnder a lawe, gi∣uing them a vertue and facultie, that the same might increase and multiply. This considered, I hope it will not be accoun∣ted impietie, by reasonable discourse to search out the naturall means which God hath placed as causes of euents. Heerup∣on hauing heard the credible reports of rare and sundry cures done in diuers per∣sons by those Warwickshire wels, the strangenesse and woonder thereof cau∣sed me to repaire thither, the better to learne the veritie & truth of that I heard. And after I had a fewe daies obserued the successe and euent of things, and seene as much with mine eies as I had before hard with mine eares, I was in truth induced to beleeue that there was in those wels some more secret and hidden qualities than are found in common waters, and so was stirred vp to inquire and to find out
some naturall cause of such effects. Wher∣in surely I was at the first greatly discou∣raged, considering how hard a matter it hath alway been accounted amongst the learned, to finde out the minerals of me∣dicinall waters. For where many learned men haue written of Bathes, & bestowed much labor to finde out their secret na∣tures and misteries, they haue left in their monuments so dissident and diuers opi∣ons, that hardly two writers do deliuer like iudgement: such repugnancie of one matter, doth argue the hardnes and diffi∣cultie of the same. And indeed the begin∣nings of all fountaines, specially of those which are medicinall, are deepely seated and situated in the bowels of the earth, and the deepe caues of hils, that nature may seeme thereby to haue an intent to hide the mysteries of them frō the know∣ledge of man, which happily may be cause that after men haue much labored to vn∣derstand and explaine all causes and cir∣cumstances appertaining to Bathes, yet alwaies some thing happeneth, whereof sufficient cause was not giuen, whereby the authors haue daily added to that, which was first expounded, and after ma∣ny discourses, other euents haue fallen
out, wherein mans wit coulde not in all points be satisfied, which hath giuē cause to many of all ages to attribute the ope∣rations of bathe waters vnto the diuine powers. For we read much written of the Bathes of Iupiter in Lybia, & of the Baths dedicated to the sun as of a diuine nature amongst the Troglodites, the Bathes of Hercules accompted also a god, are much spoken of. The like superstition hath cre∣ped in amongst Christians, for in the late ignorant age, men haue dedicated some bathe waters to S. Anne, others to S. Gre∣gorie, others to S. Nicolas, others to S. Wynefride, others to S. Rumboll, and so others to diuers other saints, through ig∣norance vnskilfull of the causes of the fa∣culties of such waters, they supposing the effects doone by them to come by the grace of som saint, did yeeld diuine names vnto the bathes. Wherfore seeing it is ap∣parent that the serch of the secret natures of Bathes in all ages hath been found ve∣rie harde, and much hath troubled the learned, I trust men in this our time will not take occasion to carpe and reprehend my labors, if I now in this discourse hap to pronounce of these late inuented foun∣taines, assertions contrary to some others
opinions, or if I shall not now in this little pamphlet sufficiētly explane the true mi∣nerals of these bathes, or else shall with some shew of probabilitie establish some things which herafter may be foūd other wise. For we find that where many writers in ancient time haue largely discoursed of sundrie bathes in Italie, yet the natures and causes of the same do seeme not suffi∣ciently discussed, but that in this our time late writers do disallow of many positions of the former authors, and brag of better explanations found out, that a man may suppose it to bee an impossible matter throughly to discourse of the conditions & circumstances of bathe waters. There∣fore let it not be accounted strange if learned men do differ in opinion in con∣sideration of these Warwickshire so late knowen bathes: and the indeuors of men are to be allowed though many imper∣fections appeere in a thing not yet suffici∣ently tried, which happily heereafter in time may be better established. And vpon this ground trusting of the well accepta∣tion of my good meaning in this treatise, I haue taken incouragement to deliuer mine opinion and knowledge of these Warwickshire waters as followeth.
The Minerals from which the waters of these wels are supposed to draw their vertues. FOr the better discouerie of the secret faculties of these waters, I haue taken certaine quantities of them, and distilled them: I haue likewise examined them by filtrings and euaporations, and haue al∣waies obserued and found in the end, af∣ter perfect separation of all the waterish parts, that there remaineth a certaine re∣sidence, in color whitish, and in taste som∣what salt, which being put vpon a glow∣ing hote iron, doth foorthwith become cleerer and whiter. And although this be a propertie common to the Limestone, Plaister, and Alabaster, when they are min∣gled in bath waters, yet I am persuaded,Limestone that onely the Limestone, and neither of the other two, entreth the mixture of these waters, bicause neither Plaister, nei∣ther Alabaster are commonly found neer vnto these wels, but the Limestone is there frequent euery where. And furthermore Plaistrie waters are accounted vnwhole∣some to be droonken, but these are found healthfull, and very commodious in di∣uers
affects for them which oftē vse them. I haue also farther probabilitie heereof, for that there is in these waters som stone iuice: for it is ordinarily obserued, that if there be drowned, in them either wood, or any other such like solide substance, it is after a short time couered and ouer∣growne with a kinde of hard crust like a stone: for in very truth such things are not made stonie, but outwardly imbrued with a stonie crust. Moreouer, wheras the aforesaid residence or grounds is found in taste to be salt, it is to be surmised that either salt or Niter haue place in this mix∣ture. But bicause it is the propertie of salt, if it be put to the fire to crackle and leape, and this residence being so vsed, doth onely sparkle without any noise ma∣king, I would thinke it more probable, to refer it vnto Niter, than vnto salt, and forNiter. this cause the rather, for that I haue often noted it to haue greater acrimonie, & to pearce the toong deeper, than salt is com∣monly wont to do: so that it is euidant, that Limestone and Niter are in substance in these waters: The coniectures of other things supposed to be mingled are not so manifest, yet there is great probabilitie, that some portions of Allum are in these Allume.
waters: for that it is obserued, that if the water of these wels being heate, and cast vpon new pewter vessels, they will yeelde to them the colour or tincture of Allum. Moreouer, if you die common water with any blacke colour, and powre the same vpon the sediment of this bath, the darke colour of that water will waxe brighter and more cleere; and this effect by al wri∣ters is accounted proper to Allum. ThereIron. is no small suspicion, that some parts of iron also are mixed with these waters. For daily much iron ore is founde euery∣where in places neer adioining. And hard by these fountains, a kind of clay is found of colour like to rustie iron. Likewise if you cast strong vineger vpon the grounds of these waters, being separated by such meanes as is aforesaid, you shall see the drosse floting in the top to resemble iron. But besides all these probabilities I am the rather induced to credite, that this mettall hath place in these waters, for that the vse of them is daily seene to be very profitable in affects of the Splene, Reines, and Bladder: for I my selfe being there present, am an eie witnes, that one, which by long obstruction had a scirrous splene manie yeeres, by the vse of these
waters recouered his perfect health. Like∣wise I did see another, which being sub∣iect to a strangurie, by means of a stone in his bladder, when no other helpe could serue, the drinking of this water brake the stone, and the man was in short time hea∣led. The like successe haue I there seene in diuers other affects, as namely in womens whites, in the gonorrhaicall passion, and in all inward exulcerations, both of the reins and the bladder, so that I may bold∣ly conclude, that these baths are not vt∣terly void of iron: and I could hartily wish that they did more abound with this met∣tall, for manie excellent effects which were consequently to be expected heerof. The generall qualities and temperament of the water of these wels. FOrasmuch as the minerall which bea∣reth the chiefest swaie in these waters, is the Limestone, after the which we finde as ingredients of inferior sort, and lesse portions, Niter, Iron, and Allume: it eui∣dently appeereth that these waters haue great force and facultie to drie, and some∣what
to coole. For the Limestone (as A∣gricola writeth in his booke of minerals) hath a drieng qualitie, which is increased by the mixture of the Niter, Iron, and Al∣lume, which all haue force to drie, so that I may reasonably conclude, that this bath drieth to the farthest of the second de∣gree, how beit the cooling and refrigera∣tion extendeth not so far, for that the ex∣cesse of this qualitie is mitigated and re∣pressed by the heate of Niter. Allum also is supposed to haue in it some hot parts, notwithstanding the parts which heat, are not so many nor so great, that the same may be comparable or equall to the coo∣ling portions of all the rest, but that we may instly conclude, that these bathes do in facultie drie strongly, and somewhat coole. Touching the second faculties of the minerals of these waters, we find iron to haue an astringent and corroborating force, very conuenient in diseases of the liner and splene: Niter, to be abstersiue, resoluing, discussing, extenuating and cut∣ting of grosse and clammish humors: and Allume not only to be astringent, but also to haue force to absterge and clense: so that heereof the discreete physition may plainly see the causes why these waters do
manifestly cure wounds and vlcers as wel externall as internall, and do good in ma∣nie other infirmities. Neither is it to be marueled that these waters do heale sick∣nesses which are contrary and repugnant: for by this discourse it appeereth, that they stand of contrarie things differing in qualities, wherby they may produce con∣trarie and dissident actions. Particular diseases which may be cured by the vse of these waters. VVHereas the vse of these waters is generally conuenient in such ma∣ladies which are hot and moist: they must needs in special do good in inflammatiōs of the eies, in excessiue bleeding, and o∣uerlarge fluxe of womens termes, in their whites, in the gonorhaical passiō, in short∣nes of breathing, and in sundry pectorall diseases, in obstructions, and other af∣fects of the spleene, in gouts, in suffusions, and diuers like imperfections of the eies, in difficultie of hearing, in weakenes and loathing of the stomacke, and ouermuch laxitie of the gums, being vsed as a lotion, in the cholicke passion proceeding from
sharpe humors, in the bloody flixe, in the wormes, in the pissing euil, in the stone, in the hemorrhoides & egresse of the fun∣dament, in the headach, rheume, and in affects of the nerues and sinews, and like∣wise in such deformities as happen vnto the skin, as ringwoormes, scabs, and ex∣ternall vlcers. And the truth of the pre∣misses, common experience hath confir∣med vnto vs. The vse of these Wels. COncerning the vse of the waters of these wels, I do not doubt, but that in time, farther experience will best teach the true vse of them. In the meane, we haue sufficient proofe, that the same doe good both inwardly dronken, and also outwardly applied. Therfore it shal not be amisse to mention som conuenient rules and orders for the vse of these Bathes, ac∣cording to the precepts of our ancient writers, set downe to be obserued in all Bathes, which may easily be applied to these waters as occasion shall serue. First, therefore that we may the better knowe when, and in what diseases these Bathes
either inwardly are to be dronken, or out∣wardly to be vsed by lotion, it is to be vn∣derstood, that Bath waters do only good to these parts, by the which they do passe, and which they foment; as Fallop no∣teth in his booke de aquis medicatis. And bathe waters are said to foment the parts of the bodie, not onely such as they do in substance touch, but all others to whom they do impart their vapors, & faculties. So that outward parts of the affected, do receiue good, when by lotion they are washed with these waters, the inwarde parts take most comfort by drinking of them: so the bowels, and those mem∣bers are best cured, by which the waters do passe, or at the least do impart, their vapors and vertues: wherefore when the same are taken to cure the diseases of the lungs, liuer, spleene, reines, kidneies, bladder, &c. there must be singular heede taken, that the waters may be brought to passe through the body by these parts dis∣eased, and so may be auoided by the vrin, which will be done by adding some thing to the bathe water, according to the affect & the situation of the part affected, as shal be made more manifest heerafter. In the meane let vs consider what things are to
be obserued in the drinking of bathe wa∣ters. Certaine things to be obserued before the drinking of the water of these welles. WHen the drinking of medicinall waters is thought expedient, we are to obserue some things before we take them, some whilest we are drinking of them, and also some other things after they are fully receiued. Concerning the first, the discreet physition is to be cōfer∣red withall, whether the vse of these wa∣ters be conuenient for the present affect and disease or no: bicause euery bathe wa∣ter is not a remedie for euerie sicknes: but the learned physition will easily satisfie a∣ny man in these points, by comparing the nature and conditions of the disease, with the faculties of the water. The physition likewise is to be consulted, whether the partie himselfe which purposeth to vse these medicinall waters, be for other re∣spects in case apt to receiue them: for they are not without good consideration to be offered either vnto children, or vnto olde persons. The habite also and state of
the bodie is to be regarded, for it fortu∣neth sometimes that some one part may receiue good by the bathe, & others may be hurt: as if a man hath hot kidneies, to temper them with these waters may be thought conuenient, yet if the consti∣tution of his bodie togither with his sto∣macke be colde and weake, in such case these waters are not rashly to be mini∣stred. Likewise if the patient haue an a∣gue, we may not but with great warines coūsell these waters. And where it is need∣full that the partie which drinketh of them, do in reasonable sort exercise him∣himselfe, during the time hee drink∣eth, it is not conuenient to aduise the same to one which can by no meanes ex∣ercise his bodie. It is also diligently to be prouided, that suchas vse the Bathes be not inwardly subiect to obstructions, and that the veins be large, and the waies open. For if the veines be verie little, that the bathe water cannot passe, many incō∣ueniences therof may insue: therfore dili∣gent care is to be had, that the veines be large, and the passages open. The consi∣deration of the time to drinke bathe wa∣ters is not of lest moment. For albeit som are of opinion that medicinall waters
may at al times be dronken, notwithstan∣ding it is of the best learned concluded, that the winter season is altogither vnfit to drink any medicinal water. And where all such waters are found in their foun∣tains actually, either hot or cold, it is best to vse the springs actually hot in tempe∣rate seasons, as in the spring and the fall of the leafe. They which are actually cold are taken with best successe, in hotter weather. So experience hath taught vs that these Warwikshire wels, which are both actually and potentially colde, are dronken with most commoditie in the hottest time of the sommer, and that the hotter and drier the sommer time is, the more holesome, and of the better effecte these waters are. I am not ignorant that in consideration of the time to vse bathe waters, the learned do dispute whether the same may be ministred in the leape yeere, for that our authors heerin haue written diuersely, and pronounced con∣trary opinions, it seemeth to me not ne∣cessarie by long discourse heerof, to de∣taine the reader: onely this I say, as I do not thinke but medicinall waters may be vsed in leape yeares, when great occasion vrgeth, so for my part I would not rashly
counsel any to vse them in the leap yeers, vnlesse great cause do vrge the vse of thē. It is an olde obseruation that in rainie weather bath waters are not so wholsom: whereby we are to thinke that the consti∣tution of the ayre present for this our purpose is not to be neglected, wherin the Italian writers are so curious, that they do admonish that no man should drinke bath waters in moist seasons, nor in moist places: in which respect they do disswade the drinking of the waters of Aponum at the fountaines. Much more then, we ought to be carefull heerof, in taking of these Warwickshire waters, for that this our countrie is much more subiect to blustering winds, raine, and stormes, and also bicause these waters are actually cold in their fountaines. Wherefore I do in a∣nywise aduise my countrymē which haue in purpose to vse these wels, to forbeare them in wet and rainy seasons: for the rain water being compounded and mixt with the other, maketh them either altogither vnholsome, or at the least lesse profitable, and effectuall, than otherwise they would be. Last of all, this precept is general, that before the drinking of any medicinall waters, they which are to vse them, ought
to haue their bodies well prepared and purged: surely I thinke it most necessa∣rie, that we in England omit not the like practise vpon the like occasion. For wher∣as we do abound commonly with manie and corrupt humors in our first veines, we must diligently see that these be through∣ly remooued: and heer in this place I can∣not passe ouer with silence the ordinarie practise of some of our physitions, which think it sufficient to send their patients to the Bathes with some one sleight purga∣tion, where as in truth we are not to stand vpon, once, twise, or thrise purging of such which are to drinke medicinall wa∣ters, but to see that their bodies be exact∣ly purged. And where this precept is ac∣counted most necessarie in all Bathes and countries, we ought verie religiously to obserue the same heer in England, and the rather when these waters are dron∣ken, which do spring actually cold, and for that cause with more difficultie do passe thorough their bo∣dies which receiue them.
Of the maner of drinking medicinall waters, and what things are to be obserued whiles they are dronken. FIrst in the morning let the patient af∣ter he is risen, before he taketh this drinke, vse some light exercise, as wal∣king, or such like, vntill his inward heate be well stirred vp, and then let him dis∣charge himselfe of all excrements, as per∣fectly as he can▪ which being done, let him take his drinke, but in such sort, that he quaffeth not vp all the whole quantity which he is to take, at once: but let him diuide it into diuers draughts, & so drink it by little and little, walking somewhat betweene euery draught, and yet hauing this regarde, that within the space of an houre and a halfe, the whole quantitie which is prescribed vnto him be recei∣ued. For by these meanes his stomack wil not be ouercharged, but will be well able to digest the whole quantitie of water re∣ceiued in such sort, that it will be the soo∣ner perfectly dispatched through the bo∣die, and the partie apt and readie to take fresh at his ordinarie season. 2. Secondly it is meetest to drinke these
waters in the morning the stomacke be∣ing emptie. 3 Thirdly, I thinke it very necessarie, that after the water is all dronken, the sicke man haue good regard for the houre and time, when he is to take his meate. And whereas this cannot be certainly deter∣mined, and set downe, bicause of the se∣cret and vnknowne varietie of diuers bo∣dies, it is diligently to be considered, whe∣ther the greatest part of the water recei∣ued that morning be already past thorow him, for if either the whole or the grea∣test part of the water be rid out, he may securely take his meat. The like he may do also although neither of these two hap∣pen, if he finde his vrine which at the first came from him waterie and whitish, to be nowe somewhat citrin and of higher co∣lour, for this is an euident signe that na∣ture hath reserued the residue of these waters vnto certain vses, & that she wil ex∣pell them either the next night or the day following. In like maner if nature disbur∣dening hirselfe of these waters by siege, doth manifestly cease from so doing, the partie which receiueth them may safelie take meate. But besides these obseruati∣ons, commonly and for the most part, the
distance of foure houres is accounted to suffice betw̄eene the taking of the bath water and dinner. 4 Whereas diuers woulde not haue this drinke to be taken euery day, but euerie second day: I can not in any wise consent with them, for by meanes of a day of in∣termission, nature would prooue idle and remisse in discharging hirselfe of this bur∣den, whereas otherwise if she be daily stir∣red vp and prouoked by daily drinking of the water, she will be farre more painefull and diligent in ridding and auoiding the same out of the bodie, and therefore I do more commend the drinking of them e∣uery day, then euery other day. The quantitie of water which is to be dronken, and how in diuers ca∣ses it is diuersly to be vsed. IN drinking of medicinall waters no certaine quantitie can be set downe which may serue generally for al men, but the discreet physitiō which knoweth tho∣roughly the qualities of the bath, the constitution of the sicke partie, and the nature of the disease: may easily prescribe a fit and conuenient quantitie. After that
this is determined, ancient authors wold haue this to be obserued, that the sicke partie should begin his drinking in lesser quantitie, and so proceede increasing it daily vntill the first portion be doubled, at what time he is to diminish it againe, vntill he returne by little and little vnto the quantitie, which he receiued the first day: as for examples sake, if sixe pintes be appointed, the greatest quantitie to be drunken, they would haue the pati∣ent drinke the first day three pintes, the second day foure pints, the thirde daie fiue pints, and the fourth day, sixe pints, and to proceed no further, but to returne by detracting from this quantity daily by little and little, as by drinking the fift day fiue pints, the sixt day foure, the sea∣uenth day three, and so to giue ouer. Al∣though this was the custome among the ancient, yet in this our country & in these bathes, I thinke it not conuenient so reli∣giously to obserue this order. For where as we are not accustomed to drinke wa∣ter, we are not to charge our stomackes with such great quantities of the same: How beit our diseases oftentimes require such quantitie of it, that if we should sur∣cease to drinke of these waters, after we
haue risen to the doubling of the first dais quantitie, we should reape either litle cō∣moditie by the same, or none at al. Wher∣fore vse and experience hath taught vs to begin heerin, with a lesse quantitie, and to increase it daily, not only to the doub∣ling of the first portion, but far beyonde, vntill we come to that which the nature of the disease exacteth. For as I haue of∣tentimes obserued in the drinking of these Warwikshire waters, when the grea∣test quantitie which we purpose to giue for one day, is eight pints, so we begin not with foure: for almost no man is able at the first to brooke so much, but rather we begin with two pints, or at the most with three, and so go forwarde euery day, ad∣ding one pint, vntill we come to eight, (not standing vpon the proportion of doubling) beyond the which quantitie, I will not counsell any man to aduenture. If there be any man that hath so strong a stomacke, that he is able to receiue foure pints the first day: I do not dislike, but that he may begin the first daie with foure, and so following the maner of the ancient writers, proceede vntill he come to the double quantitie: but bicause I haue obserued that the most part of men
are not able to receiue so great quanti∣ties, my aduise is, rather that they take a lesse portion the first day: as namely two or three pints, and so from thence ascend vntill they come to eight. And this haue I found to be the safest kind of vsing these waters: which although it passeth slowly through the bodie, so that in many daies it is not rid out of diuers, before they come to the drinking of foure or fiue pints in a morning▪ yet do I find no great inconuenience to follow hereof, bicause those parties purging in the night season verie liberally by vrine, do no doubt dis∣charge great quantitie of this water with∣all. And for that I noted alwais, that these waters do easily pas thorough mans bo∣die, when they are dronken to the quan∣tities of foure or fiue pints in a morning: I haue oftentimes appointed such as haue had strong stomackes, to begin the first day with foure pints, and so according to the custome of the ancient, to double, vn∣till they come to eight, and from thence by little and little to descend, vntill they returne to foure. I must confesse, there haue been diuers, wherof I haue knowne some, to haue dronken ten pintes in a morning, and some twelue: but for my
part I can not in any wise either cōmend, or like of these excessiue quantities. For wheras these waters are both actually and potentially cold, such ouer liberall drin∣king of them hath brought many to such extreeme coldnes of stomacke, that they haue been driuen for a long time after to vse Aqua vitae and hot things to recouer their former heate and strength againe. Wherefore it is safest to consist in a medi∣ocritie, and neuer to aduenture to drink aboue sixe, or at the vttermost eight pintes: & when the diseased party is come to the greatest portion, it is not good to persist any time in the same, but straight, euen the next day, to descend to a lesser quantitie: and when by an orderly de∣scending he is come to foure, or to three pintes, let him by and by giue ouer, al∣though he began the first day with two pintes, for otherwise nature will hardly be able to auoid those lesse quantities which are last takē. Wheras Fallopius would haue vs to drinke all medicinall waters actual∣ly hote, and would haue such for that purpose to be heat, which in their foun∣taines are found cold, I can not in any wise like of this his aduise: for all men for the most part can better both receiue and
conteine these waters cold, then hote, e∣specially when any great quantity of the same is taken. Furthermore in heating of such bath waters, many of the minerall spirits are altered and euaporated. I do better therefore allow of drinking these waters actually cold as they are taken out of the springs. It shall not be amisse to mingle for di∣uers purposes, some things with these wa∣ters, when they are to be drunken: as for example, when we will haue them easily to passe through the liuer and the reines, the adding of sugar, or some conuenient iulep, by meanes of their sweetnes, will be occasion of their speedier conueyance vn∣to the farther distant places of the bodie. So likewise, when we will haue these wa∣ters to haue free passage thorough the guts, we may adde some little quantity of salt vnto them, for heereby they will the better loose the belly: heereof I haue had in these waters good experience. For at my being at these fountaines, a certayne man well knowne vnto me, comming to these welles for the cure of a Strangurie, caused by a stone in his bladder, where∣with he was long time troubled, and drinking dayly great quantities of this
water, he fell into a loosenes, auoiding the water by his belly: which when I vnder∣stood, I caused him to mingle sugar to e∣uery draught of the water, by which meanes, the water had passage by vrine, and so the partie receiued cure of his in∣firmitie. At the same time, it fortuned another man to drinke plentifully of this water, and auoiding the same by vrine onely, grew to be very costiue and much bound in his belly, who requiring of me remedie for the same, I aduised him to adde to euery draught, such a portion of salt, as might make the water a little brackish, whereby his belly was well loosed, with∣out the helpe of any other meanes. So that for these aforesaid respects, it shall be alwayes expedient to season this water with one or both of these two condi∣ments: and surely the stomacke doth bet∣ter like and endure these waters by these mixtures. Notwithstanding such men which haue their conduits so open, that they need no such helpe, for the easy con∣ueyance or passage of the water through their bodies, we may prescribe this water sincere and simple without any such mix∣ture, except either the party affected, or
the disease shall require the same. How long and how many dayes the diseased person is to continue the drinking of these waters, it is easily knowne by the quantitie which is prescribed: for so ma∣nie dayes onely are to be spent therein, as by increasing and diminishing the whole prescribed quantitie of the water (according to the manner aforesayd) may be receiued, which is accomplished for the most part in tenne or twelue dayes. There is no man so rude and ignorant, which knoweth not that those which minde to reape any benefite by these bathes, ought for the present time espe∣cially to feed vpon such meates as yeeld good iuice, and are of easy concoction, whereof there are diuers sorts in dayly vse, which to rehearse in this place were superfluous. But one precept of the lear∣ned Fallopius I can not but heere com∣mend, who aduiseth vs in this case to feed more liberally at dinner, then at supper, because (saith he) an ouerlarge supper of∣tentimes in the night following ouer∣chargeth the stomacke, and so the next morrow leaueth such crudities in that part, that the partie is vnreadie to receiue the water at his due houre: for those cru∣dites
must be cōcocted or auoided before the party may drinke the bathe water the day following: so necessary it is to make a light supper. Wherefore the vsage and manner of our countreymen in England is vtterly to be condemned, which whiles they are vsing the bathes, haue no re∣gard to frugality of diet, but both in their dinner and supper so farre exceed, and swarue from this former rule, that it is not to be maruelled at, that there be so few in our countrey, which ordinarily re∣ceyue any commoditie or health by meanes of the bathes. I admonish them therefore to be more sparefull in their dyet, and so they shall gayne health to their bodies, and comfort to their pursse. Things to be obserued after that the drin∣king of these medicinall waters is fully past. IT oftentimes falleth out that the disea∣sed persons which haue vsed medicinall waters, do not presently finde the profite and commoditie acquired by them, but long after when they haue left the vse of them, and are gone from the bathes; so that many times they go thence with sor∣rowfull
harts, supposing that they haue not receiued that goodnes which they hoped for, yet many daies after, perhaps not before the space of a moneth be expi∣red, they feele what good the bathes haue done to them: whereby we are to coniec∣ture, that the vertues and qualities, of the bath waters do remain a long time in the members and parts of the body, yeelding strength vnto them, by which meanes the commodities obtained by the bathes do appeere long time after the vse of them: in which consideration it is requisite, that they which haue vsed medicinall waters, do for a good season after, carefully and orderly gouerne themselues, that the ver∣tues and properties of the waters may be reserued in the body, vntil they haue don their effects and operations. Therefore it is to be wished, that all bathers, after the vse of the bathes, for a good season doe keepe a good diet in feeding vpon meats which are easie to be digested, & do breed a good iuice: as after the taking of the bathe waters the partie may not feed too sparefully, so he must beware of ouergor∣ging: let him therefore keepe a meane in his feeding, giue himselfe to pleasant dis∣ports, and not ouermuch to expose his
bodie to colde aier, but keepe himselfe reasonably warme. And aboue all things he must eschue lasciuious and venerious sports, which the learned do forbid af∣ter the vse of bathes by the space of a moneth, as a thing most pernitious. FINIS.
