11900 99838885 3275
THE Worthy tract of Paulus louius, contayning a Discourse of rare inuentions, both Militarie and Amorous called Imprese VVhereunto is added a Preface contay∣ning the Arte of composing them, with many other notable deuises. By Samuell Daniell late Student in Oxenforde. AT LONDON, Printed for Simon Waterson, 1585.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP FVL SIR EDWARD Dimmock, Champion to her Maiestie, SAMVEL DANIEL wishèth happie health with increase of Worship. He vnskilfull Statua∣rie wanting the twoo principall instruments of his science, iudge∣ment, and art: hauing rudely fashioned the forme of either some Apollo or Cupid, & waighing therewithal, the basenes of his simple worke: by good aduise e∣recteth the same on the sommitie of some high Pil∣ler, to the end that both the errors therein commit∣ted, may escape the narrow vewe of the captious, & likewise shadow all imperfections which might dis∣like the curious, both which he auoydeth by the di∣stance of his loftie mounted statue, escaping there∣by the staine of reproofe. In like maner right wor∣shipfull, haue I aduētured to place these my vnpoli∣shed labors on the Piller of your worthines, crauing the supportance of your fauorable protection. Whose
worthy name and Martial title being enstamped in their forehead, shal adorne them with a sufficiēt or∣namēt to passe the vewe without reprehension. And if herein I shall any way satisfie the delight of the studious Gentlemen, you alone are to receiue the guerdon of their fauorable voyces, whose offered courtesie hath enforced me to vndertake the tillage of so hard a soyle, to make you a present of the first fruites thereof: which if they are not such as your vertues deserue or my affection desires, yet spring they from the ground of a willing minde. Solon or∣dayned that the Sacrifices offered to the Goddes, should bee of as little cost as might bee, to the ende that great expences might not hinder religion, say∣ing: the Goddes did onely accept the willing heart respecting the pietie of the giuer, without waighing the largenesse of the gift. And I hope my small Sa∣crifice, proceeding from deuotion, shall be ac∣cepted on the Aulter of your courtesie. To whom he wisheth all happie felicitie, who remayneth al∣waies yours at com∣maunde. Samuel Daniell.
TO HIS GOOD FREND SAMVEL DANIEL, N. W. Wisheth health. I Knowe not whether to ex∣cuse your nature (good M. DANIEL) or blame your shamefastnesse, which so much laboreth (as the vt∣ter enemy of your good name) to defraude your la∣bors of their deserued Lawrell, & in despight of arte to depriue vs of so delicate inuētions, which the best wits in Europe haue dedicated to posteritie: wherein surely, you iniurie your countreymen publikely, vnnaturally your frends, and vnaduisedly your selfe. But what can you pretend? The seueritie of Censors, the nice delicatenes of Courtiers, or the gra∣uetie of Philosophers? What Philosophy taught you that? That which is currant may abyde the touch, the yong AEglets dare looke vpon the Sunne, and that which is eloquent∣ly polished may abyde the presse. Why then may not your Iouius looke any man in the face, hauing arte to direct him, authoritie to defend him, all humanitie to pleade for him. If you misdoubt his grace in the Vniuersitie,
the Muses will giue him their voyces, if the suffrages of the holy virgins in the Courte, they are Graces themselues. If onely the mul∣titude Odi profanum vulgus & arceo. For I sup∣pose you remember the olde prouerbs: that it is great trouble to make a Couche for a dogge, for that turning himselfe so variably, no man knoweth where to place the Pillowe: and so mutable and vnconstant is the multi∣tude, that it is not for a wise man to indeuour to feeede their humour or fit their fancies. Yet doe not thinke that euery prudent rea∣der is like to wanton Mistresse AEmilia, who would ordinarily flout the first line she read: or to curious Gonzaga, surnamed the Carper, who no sooner heard a pretie inuention, but would recompence it with his gentell girkes: Or to Theodorus scollers, which receiued eue∣ry thing with their left hand, which their ma∣ster gaue with the right, or to the Hidropicus, who hauing no iudgement of tastes, yet neuer liketh any sawce, and cōdemneth all Cookes. Therefore I would wish you as your frende, neuer to sinotther so sweete inuentions, for feare of Censors, who in words perhaps will debase it, which in deede they conceiue not, and controll that they cannot amende, ney∣ther following the counsell of the wise, nor the example of the vertuous. There is another point in your last letter, wherein you seeme to marre al that you haue
made, and dash that which so cunningly was deuised. For sooth you blush to open another mans shop, and sell Italian wares as though you were a Bankerupt in philosophie, and could not afforde any pritie conceipt without borowing or embeselling. I pray you Syr, shal Castilio be more reuerenced for his courtier, then D. Clarke admired for inuesting him with so courtlie robes? shall Menander be e∣ternized for his Comedies, and Terence forgot who gaue them credit: Shall Lambin, Cardan, and Scaliger, and the most excellent Secreta∣ries of nature, Plinie, Matthiolus & Tolet, shall they be lesse reueréced, for perfecting know∣ledge, thē the old Philosophers for a shadow∣ed inuention? shal the witte and capacitie of antiquitie sit in her throne, and disposition & iudgement of posteritie keepe the dore: no reason, the one deuised, the other disposed. Iouius therefore is bound vnto you, both for absoluting and blazing his inuetions abroad in this famous Iland, and wee are beholding vnto you for reuealing them to vs: wherein truely both arte in translating, & knowledge in iudging, iustly may chalēge their fees. You cannot forget that which Nolanus (that man of infinite titles among other phantasticall toyes) rruely noted by chaunce in our Schoo∣les, that by the helpe of translations, al Scien∣ces had their ofspring, and in my iudgement it is true. The Hebrewes hatched knowledge.
Greece did nourish it, Italie clothed and beau∣tified it, & the artes which were left as wards in their minoritie to the people of Rome, by Translators as most carefull Gardiners, are now deduced to perfect age and ripenesse. Cōcerning the nakednes of your stile (which troubleth you without the colours or florish of Rhetorique) Tullie commendeth it, al Tran∣slators approue it: and no man maketh so much accōpt of the glossoas of the substance: of the gay suie bush as of the wine: Neither could it preiudice you at all (if it were naked as in deede it is pure) because you haue not done it as the Sybaritae, that bad their guestes a whole yere before the feast, to make some expectation of a sumptuous banket. A toye would require all brauerie: Vanitie all orna∣ments, and an Asse had neede of all his trap∣pings. But your argument is such as can both moue and delight, tickle the eare and satisfie the minde. And our time also hath learned to lothe that od riming vaine, and to persecute the letter is cleane out of fashion, which be∣gon by a bad portraiture of wit, and is ended by a ripe direction of iudgement. But why doe I rather aunswere the capcious, then sa∣tisfie the graue and modest, who at the first vewe (I dare presume vpon their wisedome) will subscribe to the supremacie of the wit of your newe Science. For if Courtiers are in∣wardly rauished in vewing the Picture of Fia∣metta
which Boccacc limned. If Ladies enter∣taine Bandel or Ariosto in their Closets. If Lo∣uers imbrace their Phisition Ouid in extremi∣tie of their passion: then will Gentlemen of all tribes, much rather honor your Impresa, as a most rare Iewell, and delicate Enchiridion. For there is not published a florish vpon fan∣cie, or Tarletons toyes, or the sillie Enterlude of Diogenes: You prosesse not Artem iocandi or Potādi: You discourse not of Apuleius Asse: You trifle not as Cornelius the Brabantine, who Anno. 158. published an Encomion of Tuftmockados: But you present vs an order to frame Deuises, in shew glorious, in forme plain, in title straūge; the which is so much the more to bee estee∣med, being deriued frō the most pure springs Lucas Contile, and Rusoelli, whom I cannot name without some Preface to their commō∣dation. What should I recount Dominicus and Alciat, with whom you seeme to haue beene very familiarly acquainted, which addeth much credite to your woorke, and notably hath giuen light to your studies. But concer∣ning the arte of Imprese, I neede not draw the petigree of it, sith it is knowne that it descen∣ded from the auncient Algiptians, and Chal∣dcans, in the Schoole of Memphis: who deui∣sed meanes before Charecters were founde out, to vtter their conceiptes by formes of Beastes, Starres, Hearbes, (as you haue decla∣red) and these notes were called
.i. sacrae notae. This Philosophie was increased by Orus Niliacus, and Pythagoras: & was more plainely reuealed by Clcmeus, Pausanias, Athe∣neus: & in this last age reuiued by Pierius Va∣lerian. But to what end serued this? to shadow suerly their purposes and intents by figures. So counsayled Plaeto: So practised the first pa∣rents of Philosophie. As by the picture of a Stork they signified . By a Ser∣pent . pollicie. By an Oliue peace. By a Gote lust: drawing these Charecters frō the world, as from a volume wherein was written the wonders of nature. Thus was the first foun∣dations layd of Imprese: From hence were de∣riued by succession of pregnant wittes Stem∣mata Coates of Armes, Insignia Ensignes, and the olde Images which the Romaines vsed as witnesses of their Auncestors, Emblemes and Deuises. Then what was the intēt of these En∣signes and Deuises? What cause can bee pre∣tended for them? What did they import? Iam∣blicus saieth that they were conceiptes, by an externall forme representing an inward pur∣pose: So Fergusus the first Scottishe King did beare in his Standard a Lion geules, to bewray his courage testifie his stomacke, and dismaie his aduersarie, which being well marshalled, is borne for the atchiuement of the Kinges euer since. So did the Athenians beare their Owle: the Thebans their Sphinx: the Switzers their Beare. But among all inuentions, sur∣passe
for witt & art your Imprese: neither lesse renowmed then the Insegnes, nor lesse heroi∣call then the Armes called by Paradin Sym∣bola Heroica, by Simeon deuises illustra. Minoes a man otherwise excellently qualified in all humanitie, semeth neither perfectly to define Impreses, nor artificially to distinguishe them from Emblemes. The sole worde Symbolum e∣uery way is to large and generall a terme for them, , that note by which we know or cā cōiecture any thing, is Symbolum. Now in this scope and generallitie, how is it restrayned, how doth he measure and fit that word for Imprese? Su∣mitur hic Symbolum pro argumento seu nota qua quod piam occultatur, sed doctis auribus intelligē∣dum proponit ur. There is great ods (my good freend) betwixt this adumbration and your substantial definition. If we respect the forme it is lame, and why so? because there is no pro∣per difference to supporte it. And this is an infallible grounde: for seeing it comprehen∣deth all the former, Standards, Liurees & Armes, it is rather an vniuersall note then a spe∣ciall Idea: if we regarde the circumstaunces, it is very superficiall: if the final ende, confused. Now to come to the difference of Emblemes, and Impreses, what subtilitie doth he shewe in it? Symbolum est genus, Emblema species: This motion is to vniuersall, rather tending to de∣uide the genus then to define the species: but
the difference must bee borowed, from the properties: and because this is a case worthie to be demurred, let vs consult more curious∣ly with our artistes, let vs conferre with our professor, what distinction maketh Iouius? I must excuse him as Traian did a certain Poet, Plus est in arte quam in artifice. For as Minoes iudgeth of him, Artem hanc incheauit potius quam persicit. But in deed these two conceipts are allied by so greate affinitie, their intents and pictures so vniforme, and cōsonant: that without sharpe insight wee cannot discypher their difference. Emblema is deriued of  interponere, inserere: quicquid interseri∣tur ornatus gratia, whether the inuention bee embrodered in garmentes grauen in stone, enchased in golde, wrought in Arras: and in my opinion there is great imparitie betweene them, both in body and soule. They are disse∣uered by sondrie Cognisances, established by reason and confirmed by reading, and may bee authorised, by experience. The mot of an Impresa may not exceede three wordes. Em∣blems are interpreted by many verses. An Im∣presa is not garnished with many different I∣mages, Emblemes are not limited. In Deuises it is enacted that the figure without the mot or the mot without the figure should not in∣terprete the Authors meaning. In Emblems is more libertie and fewer lawes. Impreses mani∣fest the special purpose of Gentlemen in war∣like
combats or chamber tornaments. Em∣blems are generall conceiptes rather of moral matters then perticulare deliberations: ra∣ther to giue credit to the wit, then to reueale the secretes of the minde. What should I say more. This Impresa is that perfect Symbolum: for antiquitie to bee reuerenced: for worthi∣nesse admired: for pleasure embraced. Par∣don me (I pray you) if I rainge a little & chase a discourse in this so wide a Forrest: let me re∣corde some monument of the olde Registers of Greece. Agamemnon Soueraigne at the seige of Troy, bare in his sheild a Lion saliant, with this mot . Am∣phitruo being encamped against the Thebans, caused to be portrayed vpon his Target. Cum quadrigis sol exoriens, and breathed life into that body by this soule, In ardualaurus. Arte∣temesia to testifie her selfe a loyal wife to her Lorde and King wore in her Tablet an Elio∣tropium, rising and falling with the Sunne, ad∣ding this mot, Persoluet vota pictas, which was verified, for she enterred the ashes of her slain husband, in no other Tombe then in her owne body, so that death could scarse di∣uorse them. But let vs come nigher hande. Vascus Gama being diswaded from the Indian voyage (neuer before attempted) erected a globe elumined with Starres, vpon a piller of golde, with this sentence Vndique par: respe∣cting
the auncient verie. Vnaique ad superos tantundem est viae. Haue: not our Printers also of late honored this proffession? Haue they not bene at emulation for ingenious Deuises. Stephen glorieth in his tree, and moderateth those (that loue to moūt: by loftie witts) with this Posie: Noli altum sa pere. Plautin beareth The tree of good and ill. a compasse in a hande: stretched out of the cloudes which measureth all, Constantia & la∣bore. I will omit Griphin's Episcopus: I will for∣get all artificers, who commonly buy such in∣uentions at the second hand. I will not med∣dle with Courtiers, I will passe ouer the knowen Impreses of Moore and Cromwell, a payre royall of nobles. And now I will bring you to Church. A certain English Prelate, de∣uised a Lambe in a thorne bush, pitifully in∣flamed, yet casting his eyes cherefully vppon the Sunne with this mot. Ne cede. Tell me how you like this Heroycall Impresa of Curtius Gonzaga. An Egle flying on high against the Tune cede malis sed cō∣tra audētius. Sunne, with this word pur che, a parte of that verse of Petrarche. Pur che ne godan gli orchi, ar∣dan le piuine. For that which delighteth my eyes burneth my fethers. A frend of mine, whom you know, M. P. climing for an Egles nest, but defeated by the mallalent of fortune, limned in his studie a Pine tree striken with lightning, carying this mot. Il mio sperar, which was borowed also from Petrarch. Allor che fulminato e morto giaacque il mio sperar che
he deuised also a Pinnace or small Barke, tos∣sed with tempestious stormes, and in the saile was written expectanda dies, hoping as I think for one Sunne shine day to recompence so many glomy and winter monethes. Therfore now to conclude, seeing your argument is plausible, the arte a noueltie, your first fruites ripe what reason is there, why you should pri∣uatly bestowe them of some one gentleman: especially cósidering that you can please him no way better, then to pleasure his countrey mé. For who doth not know M. Dimmock, to be a gentleman by famely worshipfull, by loy∣altie vnspotted, by office the Princes Cham∣pion: so also by curtesie worthy the Chro∣nicle? what neede you thé to feare the mallice of the weakest enemy that may bee a carping tongue, hauing him for the Champió of your booke, whom her Maiestie hath vouchsafed the Champion of her person, or why feare you least our old Academicks improue your art for a toy, seeing that wisdome is not in∣corporated to Nightcaps, neither must wee depend vpon the verdite of some conceled Philosophers. Thus am I bold to animate and encourage you to your credite, which if I haue done to long, so vppon occasion did Tullio Plato, Sene∣ca: if rudely ascribe it to simplicitie, if sleight∣ly to the rarenes of your arte: if to copiously
to a feruent desire: for seeing that in verbis est aliquod praemium, I had rather shewe my selfe to prodigall to my frends, then a snudge: which when you haue read, fier it. From Oxenford the xx. of Nouember. Yours, N. W.
TO THE FREND∣LY READER. I Thought it good (right worshipfull and curte∣ous gentlemen) to com∣municate with you this delightsome tract of strange deuises, barcly clothed in an English habite, voyde of al such ornaments as are due vnto the worthines thereof: presuming vpon your wisdomes, who had rather gather a pleasant flower springing amongst the sharpe thornes, for the sweet sauour, then a gay colored weede for all the fayre semblance: esteeming the value of the precious treasure not by the outward shewe, but the inward substance, sith often we finde by triall meliora la∣tere, and faire shewes to proue often fond shadowes. The tree Caliestephenon in Palestine, hath a corrupt barke, but a pure body: And well may a gallant blossome fit the humour of a delicate eye, when the gaynfull fruite shall satisfie the sauour of a discreet taste. But the Diamant hath ingendred a naturall forme, so that it neede no artificiall frame, a gay glosse may better beseeme a course
Kersey, then a fine Skarlet. My weake commenda∣tions of these not able and rare inuentions, may ra∣ther eclipse their credit, then purchase their fame, therefore I referre them to the censure of your con∣siderate readers, for whose better vnderstand of the Imprese of Paulus Iouius (who in many pla∣ces haue erred from the common receiued precepts) I haue gathered into a certayne order the way of framing and composing all such kindes of deuises both militarie and amorous vsed at this day of the noble gentlemen of Europe, in adorning their glo∣rious triumphes, or declaring their inward preten∣ded purposes and enterprises, not by speach or any apparent maner, but shadowed vnder a certayle vayle of formes or figures in such sort as shall here∣after be declared. And although that to signifie our intentions by these formes or figures, of crea∣tures, be not a thing more notable then speach or writing, which perfectly doe manifest any operati∣on, whereas the other doth doubtfully discouer our pretences. Yet I say, that to represent vnto the sence of sight the forme or figure of any thing, is more natural in act, & more cōmon to al creatures then is hearing, and thereupon sayth Aristotle, that we loue the sence of seeing, for that by it we are taught and made to learne more then by any other of our senses, whereby we see that all men naturally take delight in pictures, and euen litle children as soone as they can vse their hands at libertie, goe with a Cole to the wall, indeuoring to drawe the forme of this thing or that. This naturall disposition hath
raigned generally euen from the beginning when the worde was but yet new, and induced nations first to figure beasts, plants, trees, celestiall signes, and such like, obseruing the nature and qualitie of euery creature represented by their figures, where∣by in time they became able to shewe their intent to their frends and others vayled vnder the forme of these creatures, in which facultie the AEgypti∣ans were most singulare as the first authors of this Hieroglyphicall art: as well do witnesse their sacred Colomnes dedicated to Mercurie, whereon were diuers formes and pictures wrought and en∣grauen, contayning great knowledge, which they called Hieroglyphi, To the which pillers Plato is sayde to haue gone and retourned with great profit. Yet notwithstanding, in my opinion their de∣uise was vnperfect, by reason of the diuersitie of the natures of beastes and other things which they fi∣gured. Whereupon they who drewe more neere vn∣to our time seemeth to haue brought this art to perfection, by adding mots or posies to their sigures whereby they couertly disclose their intent by a more perfect order. Moreouer besides the figuring of things corporall and of visible forme, men haue also represented things incorporal, which they could not doe more fitly then by colours, as representing sorowe by blacke, defire to shed bloud by red, puritie by white, &c. And now sith time hath brought to perfection many notable deuises, which rude anti∣quitie could not discerne: Let vs consider by howe many wayes we may discouer our secret intentions
by colours and figures, as first by Liurees, secondly by Ensignes, thirdly by mots, and lastly by Imprese, of which foure kindes of Deuises, I purpose to set downe distinctly in fewe words their significations and properties, according to the opinion of the best authors which euer haue written of this matter. This worde Liuree is borowed of the Spanishe, which they write with, b librea, but pronounce it as written with v. Some say it had his Etemolo∣giè of Libro, for that Liurees are as an opē booke where a man may reade the intent of him which weareth them. Some also will haue it deriued of Libero, and that for two reasons, the one, in that from the beginning it hath beene a profession onely of Gentlemen, and noble personages: and although that seruaunts do commonly weare these Liurees, yet are they not said to be their owne but their pa∣trones. For Plutarch in the life of Solon saieth, that seruauntes were forbidden any free exercise. The other reason may bce, for that the Authors setting them to the common vewe, being not alto∣gether apparent, commit them libero iudicio, to the free iudgement of the Interpreter. Some will haue it brought from the Latin, Liber eram, for that the principall purpose of Liurees haue been to shewe some amorous seruice, and for this onely in∣tent were they first inuented at the beginning, to shewe that they which did weare them, were no more free of them selues but subiect seruauntes to their Mistrisses: as who should say, Liber eram, I was free, but now bound: according to that of Vir∣gil,
fuimus Troes. It is said that Liurees of only colours, had their originall after this manner: that the Gentlemen which loued or rather (to speake after the Spanish or Neapolitan manner) which serued any Lady, with that amorous kinde of seruice, which is vsed in those places, were accustomed, to marke with what coloured robe their Mistrisse was inuested, to the end to decke them selues with apparell of the same colour & cut. But some supposing that to be to great a presumptiō, thought rather to addresse thē∣selues in a habite of the same colour, as did the do∣mesticall seruantes of their Ladie, to denouate hu∣militie, and shew them selues readic for any seruice commaunded by her soueranitie: Yet now, for di∣uers respectes, in this our time the discrete Gentle∣men bound to the performance of this strict Obli∣gation of faith and fecrecie, haue deuised a closer couert for their amorous conceiptes, by colours and figures in their Liurees, which are now more com∣monly called Deuises, in all the most florishing Countries of Christendome: which also is not for∣gottē of Ariosto, in these verses following, recoun∣ting the Deuise of Bradamante, whereby she ex∣pressed her dispayre, and desire to die. Era la soprauesta del colore Di ch' esser suol la foglia, che s'imbiansa, Quando dal ramo è tolta, è che l'humore Che facea uiuo l'arbore, le manca: Ricamata à tronconi, era di fuore
Di cipresso, che mai non si rin francae Poi ch' ha sentito la dura bipenne L' habito al suo dolor molto conucnne. Thus in effect in English. Her vpper robe of such like colour was, As is the fading leafe of palish hew Whē from the bowe the liuely fap doth passe Which nourish did the stock whereon it grew Embrodered al with braunches thick aboue, And fading bowes of dolefull Cipresse tree: Which cut with deadly axe doth neuer proue This habit with her griefe did well agree. There are first, diligently to be obserued in these Dcuises or Liurces three things: The time when: The place where: and the maner how they are to be vsed. Concerning the time: they are neuer worne but either in true or fained warre, or at Iusts, Tur∣neis, Maskes, or at such like extrauagant shewes. The place sit for them, are on armed men or Mas∣kers, worne in such place as they best like about their persons: albeit the Helmet, the Shiclde, the Bardes, the borders of the garment, or the breast, are the fittest places appointed for them. The ma∣ner of vsing them is diuers, according to their spe∣cies: but first generally you are to obserue this, that they bee not too intricate in greate number, nor so confused that they neede some Apollo to resolue them. Perticularly it behoueth to note the deuition
of their species which are of al kindes of Deuises or Liurees sixe. The first consisteth altogether of colours: The second of colours and figures: The third of colours and letters: The fourth of colours figures and letters: The fifth of figures onely: The sixth of figures and letters. Concerning the first colours alone, are now seldome vsed but of Mour∣ners, or such like. As for example, a certaine Gen∣tleman on a time, hauing ill successe in his amorous feruico, and spending his time in dolor and griefe, was aduertised that the wife of a certaine freende of his was departed this life, whereupon it behoued him to put on mourning apparell: and hauing occa∣sion to shewe himselfe at a feast, he clothed him in blacke Grogran drawne out with Taffatie, & both cut on blacke Damaske, in such sorte that the Da∣maske was best seene to bee blackest: which mour∣ning habite was no soner seene of such as knewe the historie of his loue, but they perceiued What it sig∣nisied, as well as if he himselfe bad declared it: and greatly did they commend the inuention. For with the vppermost blacke he represented sorowe for the dead: with that vnderneath he mourned for his freend: but his owne blacke appeared more and sig∣nified some greater griefe, and that of his frend see∣med lesse, and represented lesse in effect. For in his opinion lesse griefe was it to bee depriued of a wife, sith she is called to the heauens, then to stand seclu∣ded from the fauour of a proude disdainefull dame, whilest an other enioyes the fruite of his desirued affections. But to returne to our purpose, Liurees
of onely colours, and also with colours and figures are wont to serue in effect, but for the shewe of one day, either at Iusts, Maskes, or other solemne fe∣stiuall sportinges, where are commonly assembled a great multitude of people: and to the end that Gen∣tlemen and Gentlewomen (which giue the vew but as they passe by, among so great a companie) may not stande to muse about the intention of the sub∣iect, there is vsed a mot to declare the meaning, & these kinde of mots pertayning to Liurees, are to bee composed in the same language which is there vsed where they are presented: and it is requisite they bee shorte so that they exceede not two of our verses: very rarely are they made of foure, yet so they may be if neede require. These mots so com∣posed serue for colours alone, or els for colours ac∣companied with figures, or with figures alone: and when they shalbe ioyned with colours alone, yet are they called Liurces, when with colours, figures and the mot, which shall exceede three wordes being manifest of it selfe and seruing for no other purpose but to declare the signification of the colours and figures, they are likewise then called Liurees or Insegnes, and as I haue before sayd, they serue on∣ly for one day. These last properties rehearsed, that the mot may passe three wordes, and that it must be plaine and manifest, seruing onely to disclose the meaning of the colours and figures: note well, for therein consisteth the difference betweene Liurees and Impreses, which are altogether diuers. The ignoraunce of which distinction deceiued many in
the composing of Impreses. And also Iouius him self in his discourses following was greatly ouersene in putting no difference betweene Impreses, Liu∣rees, and Insegnes, as you may plainely perceiue. This worde Insegne is taken from the Latin, by the which is signified Standards, Banners, and also the Helmets of the chiefe Souldiers and Captaines, as may appeare in this verse of Virgil. Danaumque insignia nobis. Aptemus Clypeos, but chiefly it is now taken for Standards or Banners, which are capable of all such properties mentioned before in Liurees, as either of colours alone, as when they are all red, all white, all blacke, &c. Or when they are of seuerall colours, as white and red, or in like maner of any o∣ther. To them also may bee added mots, as many notable men haue vsed of late time: & also colours with figures, or figures alone: all in such maner as hath bene shewne in Deuises or Liurees. The En∣signe is also fit for Impreses, of the which I am hereafter to speake, and many therein set the Ar∣mes of their house: whereof to recite examples this shorte Preface will not afforde, sith ech of them se∣uerally require a whole volume. only suffice it, brief∣ly that we touch them, to the end we may the bet∣ter vnderstande the forme of Impreses: which be∣fore I come to hādle, it is necessary that I say some∣what of Mots, which truely are of great excellen∣cie if they bee gallantly composed. And first this word mot signifieth as much as Gnome, a shorte sentence or Posie, whose places are diuers. Some
vse to set them on gates, as that which (according to the fiction of the Poet) was set on Hell gate. Lasciate ogni speranza voi chi intrate. Lay a∣side all hope, all you which enter in. A ridiculous mot or posie is not to be vsed but in some occasion of maskes, or to quip an enemy, as for example, a certaine Cardinal in Rome for some offence being imprisoned, and after put to death, it was bruted abroade, that the Pope had done it to pleasure two of his Nephewes with his liuings, wherupon one liuely pictured the sayd Cardinall on the Crosse, and the two yong Cardinals preferred to his liuings, at his feet beholding him with this Po∣sie in their hands, Crucifixus etiā pro nobis. But the mots which are chiefly vsed, are either amorus or graue, & they beare a great grace if they be per∣fectly cōposed with their circūstances & properties, so that they be short, & exceede not if it be possible a verse in any tongue. Yet Latin & Greek verses of six feete are to long to be vsed whole, wherefore of thē it is better to take a part, as nullū scelus error habebat. And better are they esteemed being takē out of some famos autor. As out of Ouid, Horace, Catullus and other Latin Poets, out of Homer, Hesidus, Callimachus, or any good author of the Greekes out of Petrarch, Deuine Ariosto, Dāte Bembo, and other famous in the Italian tōgue, & aboue all, if it be possible, let them leaue some scruple whereon to meditate, to him who either readeth or heares them, and it is lawfull to vse them without figures, although that Paulus Iouius vainly ter∣meth
them so vsed, soules without bodies. There is also another kind of Deuise called in Italian, Cifre celate, which many haue hereto∣fore vsed being ignorant of Imprese, which inuen∣tion is onely for youth, and very vnfit for men of grauitie, seruing thē but to sport with their Ladies, by cōuaying their names into some Posie or figure, which they ware in tokē of their seruice, of this kind you shal find fit examples in Paulus Iouius, which I haue noted in the Margent. The inuention is al∣together barraine, and vtterly disliked of the wise. Thus hauing briefly touched the principall points of the former Deuises, it resteth that I say somewhat of Impreses, which is the most notable, ingenious and perfect king of all other. And first to declare the signification of the worde, with the dif∣finition, I say, that Impresa is vsed of the Italians for an enterprise, takē in hand with a firme & con∣stāt intēt to bring the same to effect. As if a Prince or Captaine taking in hand some enterprise of war, or any other perticulare affaire, desirous by some fi∣gure & mot to manifest to the world his intēt, this figure & mot together is called an Impresa, made to signifie an enterprise, wherat a noble mind leueling with the aime of a deepe desire, striues with a stedy intēt to gaine the prise of his purpose. For the valiāt & hautie gentlemen, disdayning to cōioine with the vile and base Plebeians in any rustique inuention, haue procured to thēselues this one most singulare, which time hath now at length perfited and rought into a more regulare order. And the chiefe places
whereō they vse to weare these their Impreses are their Standards, Shields, Helmets, Brooches, Tablets or such like. The time when, is either in Warres, Iusts, or amorous seruices. And you are to note, that Impreses are not Hereditarie, as are Armes, for the sonne may not vse the Impresa of father, nor the successors of their ancestors, and it behoueth that they be of no other colours, saue ono∣ly blacke and white, vnlesse it be rather to adorne them, then for any necessitie, and chiefly in the composing of them, are to be noted these fiue proper∣ties. First, that they haue not many kinds of diffe∣rent formes, for at the most there can be but three, in a perfect Impresa, vnlesse they be parts of the whole: as the Sunne, Moone and Starres repre∣sent onely the heauens, which may be the intent of the Impresa: or as many trees flowers and herbs, represent onely a Garden. As for example, a cer∣tayne gentleman figured a garden with Palmes, Bayes, Marigolds and Roses, with this mot. Tu haec omnia, to signifie that his mistresse deserued the Palme for her beautie, & that she was free frō the assalt of Loue as is the Lawrell frō the wrath of the heauens, that she drewe the eyes of his mind after her, as doth the Sunne the Marigolde, and that by the vertue of her comfortable lookes she re∣uiued his heart, as doe the ioyful beames the blow∣ming Rose. But now in any other case diuers formes are not to be vsed. Secondly, the mot or posie of an Impresa may not exceede three words, vnlesse it be composed of
some of these. Dum. Nec. Et. Non. In. Per. Aut∣si. Cum. Vt. and then may it haue foure, as Nec spe nec metu. Thirdly, that the mot be taken out of some fa∣mous author. This precept is good, but not alwayes necessarie. Fourthly, that it be not altogether manifest nor too too obscure, neither yet triuiall or com∣mon. Fifthly, that the figure without the mot, or the mot without the figure signifie nothing, in respect of the intent of the author, and this precept is of great importance, for many ignorant hereof, haue composed Imprese altogether vayne and voyde of all inuention. As when the figure of it selfe or the mot of it selfe, suffice to declare the meaning, wher∣fore either the one or the other is superfluous. As he which figured a Harte in the middest of fire, with this mot, Il cuore ho in fuoco. I haue my Harte in fire, or as he which depainted a Cupid, with his Bowe & shafts, & thereunto this verse. A gli strali d' amor son fatto segno. To Cupids shafts I am ornayned the Butte. Or not vnlike to that of him in Iouius, which figured a Chimney with a great fire and smoke, with this mot. Doue è gran fuoco è gran fumo. Where there is great fire, there is great smoke, in all which the mot without the figure, or the figure without the mot, might haue serued the purpose as well. But if vnto the fire & smoke had bene added this mot, Vtrū{que} simul, the Impresa had beene most perfect. The
like defect had that of Borgia, which likewise Io∣uius doth mention, which was the mountayne A∣croceraunii, wherunto, if in stede of feriunt sum∣mos fulgura montes had bene added Humilio∣ra minus, or humiliora nunquam, therein had wanted no perfection. Iouius also addeth for a pre∣cept in the rules of Imprese, that in them thcre ought to be no humayne forme, which precept is most true, if it be in the ordinarie and simple forme of a man, for that rarenes is rather delight som: but yet when the humaine forme shalbe in a strange & vnaccustomed maner, it beareth a great grace. As did that of Sinior Bernabo Adorno, being ina∣mored of a noble and vertuous Lady, wbo often certified him both by speach and writing, that the arrowes of loue could not enter or passe farther then her gowne. Whercupon the Gentleman composedan Impresa which was a Cupid, holding in one hand the vaile of his eyes, and in the other hand an Ar∣cobuze sttled to his brest, as if he were readie to discharge it, and thereunto this mot. Hoc pera∣get. To signifie that he had omitted no seruice, de∣uotion, or loyaltie in his pursute, which are the one∣ly maynshotte of Loue, and are able to batter the bulwarke of a rigorous breast, and make the most flintie heart to yeeld. Thus haue I in fewe words (gentlemen) declared the properties of a perfect Impresa, to the end your choyce therein may be currant, sith many deceiue themselues with a counterfeit. And so wisbing the happie successe of all your vertuous Impreses and
godly pretences. I referre you to the reading of Paulus Iouius, till time my studies shall yeeld you a better present of the like subiect. S. D.
HERE BEGIN THE DISCOVRSES OF PAVLVS IOVIVS BISHOP of Nocera, in the forme of a Dia∣logue had betweene him, and Lodouicus Dominicus. Dedicated to S. Cosimo Duke of Florence. SVch is the curtesy of your highnesse towards mee, that I hold my selfe boūd to render an accompt of the vacant leasure, which partly by your louely ex∣hortations I haue enioyed in these parching and noysome heates of the fierie moneth of August, the enemy of moyst∣les old age. And therefore hauing intermit∣ted my History as a burthen more pōderous, I resorted to take my pleasure in discourse & conference with that vertuous gētleman Ma∣ster Lodouico Dominico, (who also thereunto inuited mee) vpon the inuention of Imprese, borne at this day of great and Noble perso∣nages. Whereupon this litle tract being com∣posed, for that the subiect seemed delightsom and the varierie of the matter pleasant, I em∣boldened
my selfe to commend it vnto you, deeming it to bee a meete recreation for so noysome a season. Resembling herein your simple Gardiner, who on your Table repleni∣shed with sundry and costly cates, aduētureth to present you a bondle of his fresh flowres with Rosemary and Bourage, to serue among other meate for a sauorie Sallade. This tract may well be compared to the diuersitie of the foresayd flowers, both gratefull to the vewe, and pleasaunt to the taste: which also I hope shalbe the rather accepted of you, for that it was brought foorth in your house. And afrer this maner had the argument of our present discourse his beginning. Master Lodouicus Dominicus familarly accompanying mee in translating my History into the vulgar Tuscan tongue, he happely entred into conference of Inuentions and Imprese, which worthy gentle∣men and noble Knights of our time beare (in token of their gentlemanly minds) vpō their Vestments, Shields, Bards, or Ensignes, to whome I answered. Iou. The reasoning on such a subiect, may seeme as it were an entring into a vaste sea, from out the which there is no easie issue. Dom. Vnder correction my Lord, you be∣ing a man of a quicke memory, prompt and of a present witte, let it please you to record a summarie of them, being now vnbusied from writing your Historie in these vntemperate
dayes: wherein a man laboreth wel if he pre∣serue him self in health, neither can we better passe the time then in the delightsome reaso∣ning of such pleasant conceites, which agree with the forme of a Historie, renouating a sweete memory of the notable men of our time, which already haue departed this life, not without their singular commendations. And this shalbe the more easie to you, hauing as l vnderstand, your selfe in your fresh & flo∣rishing age composed many for such gentle∣men as requested them of you. Iou. This shal I willingly doe on this con∣dition, that you will euer now and then make interrogatiues, to which, I will willingly an∣swere, to the end our propose may cary the forme of a dialogue. Dom. I yeeld you infinite thankes for such The originall & beginning of Impreses. an offer, but first tell mee I pray you, whether the bearing of Imprese be an auncient vsage or not. There is no doubt but that the aūcients vsed to weare Crestes & Ornaments on their Shields and helmets: which Virgill plainly dis∣couereth when he reciteth the Catologue of the nations which came in fauour of Turnus against the Troians in the eight booke of his AEne. Amphiraus also as Pindar{us} reporteth, at the warre of Thebes bare a Dragon depainted on his shield. Statius writeth also of Capaneus & Polinices, whereof the one bare an Hidra, and the other a Sphinx. We reade also in Plutarch,
how at the battel of the Cimbri semed in shew very gallant, as well for their siluer shining ar∣mour, as for the decked Crests of their Hel∣mets, wherein were represented the effigies of diuers sauage beastes, depainted after di∣uers fashions. The same author reporteth that Pompey the great did beare for his Enseigne a Lyō with a sword clasped in his claw. We find also in the remaynes of old antiquities many to haue like signification to our moderne Impreses, as appeareth in that of Vespasianus, which was a Dolphin intangled with an An∣chore, with this posie: Festina lentè. A sentence Make soft speede. which Octauianus Augustus was wont often to vse. But leauing apart these examples of anti∣quitie: of this the famous Palladines of Frāce can yeld testimony, the which in trueth for the most part were not fayned, and we see, in that wherein the writers agree, that euery one of them had his peculiar Impresa or En∣seigne. As Orlando the chesse, Rinaldo a Lion, Denise a Ladder: Salomon of Bretaigne, the Es∣chequier: Oliuer a Griffon: Astolphe, a Leopard: Ganelon a Faulcon. The like wee reade of the Knights of the round Table, of Arthure that renoumed King of England. Those which are famosed in the Spanish histories, as in Amadis de Gaule, Primaleō, Palmerin, & Tirante vsed the like. And nowe in this later age, in the time of Federicke surnamed Readbeard, began the age of Ensignes of families, called Armes:
giuen by Princes, in guerdon of honorable exploytes atchieued in the field. Whereupon there grewe such singulare and fantasticall inuentions or Ensignes and Pictures vpon Helmets, to enhaunce the honour of valiant Knights, as may well bee seene by diuers Pic∣tures in the Church of newe Saint Maries at Florence. But now in our time, after the com∣ming of Charles the eight, and Lewes the twelft into Italie, euery one which followed the warre, imitating the French Captaynes, sought to adorne himselfe with goodly & po∣pous Imprese, wherewith the troupes of horse∣men being separated company frō company, made so resplendent shew, hauing their vpper garments embrodred with siluer, bossed with beaten gold, and in their breast and back the Imprese of their Captaines: in so much that the shewe of the men of Armes yeelded a very pōpouse & rich spectacle, & in the battel was tried the couragious force of their cōpanies. Dom. I perceiue my Lorde that your me∣mory is fresh, and therefore may it please you to recount vnto mee of all such as you your selfe haue seen, because I know that you haue knowne all these Captaines by sight, which are contained & made famous in your historie, and perfectly hold imprinted in your memorie the brauery of their ornaments. Iou. I will not faile to declare you all these things, and truely in delating hereof, I seeme
to my selfe to become a youth again, wherein thē so much I delighted that it seemed a pre∣sage that I should write their historie. But be∣fore I come to repeate the particulars, it is necessarie that I manifest the general proper∣ties which are required in making a perfect Impresa: which is a thing very difffcult, and proceedeth of a sharp wit and rich inuention, nourished by the worthy writings of aunci∣ent men. Knowe you then (Master Lodouico) In an abso∣lute Imprese are required these. that an iuention or Impresa, (if it be to be ac∣counted currant) ought to haue these fiue properties,  First iust proportion of body and soule.  Secondly, that it be not obscure, that it neede a Sibilla to enterprete it, nor so appa∣rant that euery rusticke may vnderstand it.  Thirdly, that it haue especially a beautifull shewe, which makes it become more gallant to the vew, interserting it with Starres, Sūnes, Moones, Fire, Water, greene trees, Mechani∣call instruments, fantasticall birds.  Fourthly, that it haue no humane forme.  Fifthly, it must haue a posie which is the soule of the body, which ought to differ in language from the Idioma of him which beareth the Impresa, to the ende the sence may bee the more couert.  It is requisite also it bee briefe, yet so that it may not breede scrupulous doubts, but that two or three words may fit the matter well, vnlesse it bee in the forme of a verse; either whole or maymed. And to make apparent
these properties, you shal vnderstand that the body and soule aboue mentioned, is meant either by the mot or by the subiect, and an Impresa is accounted vnperfect when the sub∣iect An Imprese imperfect, Duplex. 1. or body beare no proportiō of meaning to the soule, or the soule to the body. As Cesar Borgia Duke of Valentia vsed this soule with∣out a body, Aut Caesar aut nihil: Meaning A soule with∣out the body. hereby, that he would shewe his manhoode, and make trial of his fortune. Whereupon af∣ter he was vnfortunatly taken and beheaded in Nouara, Fausto Maddalena a Romaine sayd, that the posie was verefied, in the last part of his Distich: Borgia Caesar erat factis & nomine Caesar. Aut nihil, aut Caesar, dixit, vtrum{que} fuit. And truely in his greate and prosperous e∣state, the Posie was most wittie and worthie his Nobilitie, if it had bene applied to a pro∣portioned Subiect, as was that of his brother Don Francesco Duke of Candia, who had for his Impresa the Mountaine Chimera, or Acro∣ceraunes strikē with the lightning of heauen, with these words out of Horace: Feriunt sum∣mos The light∣ning hents the highest hilles. fulmina montes. Which likewise was veri∣fied in his vnhappie end, being strangled and throwne into Tiber by Caesar his brother. Contrariwise, a faire bodie or subiect is as ill beseeming if it bee without a soule, as was 2. A bodie without a soule. that of Charles of Bourbon Cōstable of Fran̄ce, who bare depainted a Hart with wings: mea∣ning
thereby that his naturall swift running was not sufficient, but that he would flye into euery difficult and daungerous hazarde. The which Impresa (albeit the beauty of the good∣lie beast, which was pompouse) seemed yet blinde wanting a Posie, which should giue it light, which ministred occasion of sondrie in∣terpretations: among which this one was most sharply giuen of a French Gentleman, called Motta Augruing, who attended on the Pope, when woful newes came of the discom∣fiture of the most Christian King at Pauia: & talking of the disloyaltie of Bourbon, sayd to Pope Clement: Bourbon, although he seemeth to be a betraier both of his King & Coūtrey, meriteth yet some excuse, in hauing shewen before what he ment to do by bearing in his Coate of Armes, a Hart with wings: meaning therby that he minded to flye into Bourgonie: which he could not doe with his feete, had he not had winges, and therefore this Posie was bestowed vpon him, Cursum intendimus alis. The like defect had the Impresa of the La∣die Hippolita Fioramonda Marquise of Scalda∣sole, at Pauia, who farre excelled all the Gal∣lants of our time both in beautie and amou∣rous curtesie, who often wore in her Sky co∣lored Sattin robes, Candleflyes all dispersed, wrought in embrodery of gold, but without a mot, warning thereby the amourous that they approach not too neere her fire, least it
happen to them as it doth to that flye which ventureth so nere the flame that it burneth itself. And being requested of the Lord of Lesui (beeing a braue and valiaunt Knight, and at that time a practiser in the arte of Ryding) to manifest vnto him the meaning of this miste∣rie: To whom she replied, It is conuenient for me to vse the like curtesie to Gentlemē which resorte to see me, as you doe to such as ride in your companie, being accustomed to put vn∣der the tayle of your Coursier a rattle or such like, to make him more fierce in yerking, to warne those which come nere you of the daū∣ger of his heeles, and to cause them keepe the more aloofe. Yet could not this caueat take place with my Lorde of Lesui, but that many yeares after he perseuered in his loue, and at the ende being deadly wounded in the fielde of Pauia, he was carried into the house of the Ladie Marquise: where he ended his life with great contentation, yeelding vp his last gaspe betweene the armes of his dearely loued Mi∣strisse and Patronesse, as he vsed to terme her. The contrary defect had the mot of the worthie Lawyer Master Iason di Maino, who had engrauen ouer the gate of his Pallace this Posie without a bodie, Uirtuti fortuna comes: signifying thereby that his vertue had happie fortune. An Impresa may also be gallant in shewe by Proportion required. reason of the ornaments and colours, of both
the body and soule, and yet by meanes of the weake proportion, that the soule hath to the subiect: it becommeth ridiculous & obscure, As that of the Duke Lorenzo of Medici, which was a Laurell tree betwixt two Lyons, with this mot: Ita & virtus. Signifying therby, that as the Laurell is euer florishing, so is vertue neuer fading: but none there were which could tell what the 2. Lyons imported. Some said it represented Fortitude and Clemencie, in that they seemed to parle, their heads be∣ing so closely ioyned together: Others con∣strued it an other waie. At length one Master Domitius da Cagli, Chaplaine to the Cardinall of Medici, (who was afterward Clement the seuenth, and comming to visite the Duke Lo∣renzo, who was sick of a disease wherof short∣ly after he died) aduentured to demaunde of one Master Philippo Strozzi, being desirous to vnderstand the secrete of the Impresa, inuited thereunto also by the Gentlemans courtesie, sayd: Master Philippo you which are so skilfull in learning, and also Cosine and companion of the Duke, shewe me I praie you what mea∣neth these Lyons vnder this Laurell tree. Ma∣ster Philippo looking askance on the Chap∣laine, who although he were a gowned man, yet not so well grounded in learning that his knowledge reached beyōd his portois, made him this sharpe and readie aunswere: Vnder∣stand you not (quoth he) that these Lyons do
garde this Laurel, and defende it from the fu∣rie of such Poets, which runne mad on a ru∣mor, hauing heard of the inuesting of the Abbot of Gaeta, solemnized in Rome, & flocke so fast to spoyle her of her braunches, to shew them selues Laureat? The Chaplaine replied (who delighted to make certaine Sonnets to runne in dogrell rime) saying, As God helpe me it is done of very enuious malice: seeing that the Pope Leo hath curteously made Lau∣reat the Abbot Baraballo, & that he hath cau∣sed him to triumph ouer the Elephant. Which thing came to the eares of the Cardinal, who greatly iested at Domitio as at a slender Poet, and an vnlearned Chaplaine. Moreouer, we must haue regarde that it in∣curre Not. not the suspition of any great pride or presumption, although both the soule & bo∣die bee sound and perfect: for it easely disco∣uereth the vanitie of the bearer. As did that of the great Cardinall of S. George, named Ra∣phael Riarió: who set in a thousande places a∣bout his Pallace depainted a sterne of a Ship, with this mot, Hoc opus. As who should saie, I should neede to be Pope or gouernour of the worlde, that makes such gorgeous and mag∣nificent buildings. Which deuise fel out most vaine, when Pope Leo was created, and after∣warde (being founde confederate in the con∣spiracie with the Cardinall Alphonso Betrucci) he was taken and conuicted, his goodes con∣fiscate,
& he himself banished to Naples where he ended his life. I tell you it were a greate point of folly to These three which follow are called of the Italians Cifre celate, and not Im∣prese, Com∣posed onely of youth vn∣fit for graui∣tie, as hath bene shewed in the Preface taxe the defects of Imprese which are vsed in this age, being composed of the vndiscrete, and borne of mad braines, as was that of the fierce Souldier, (I will not saie Ruffion) Seba∣stien del Mancino, (which name was accom∣ted at that time honorable among Fencers) who vsed to weare on his hat, a shoe sole, with the letter T. & a Pearle, which is called Marg∣herita, in the middest of the sole, thereby to discouer his affection, and his Mistrisse name after this maner: Margherita Te suola di cuor' amo. Margerit I onely loue thee with my heart. Margherit I soly loue thee. An other being his riuall called Panmolena, setting the same in beaten golde in steade of leather, therby seeming to inferre this Marg∣herita te adoro: Margherit I adore thee (you must Margherit I adore thee. vnderstande that adoro in the Italian tongue, signifieth to reuerence or worship, and also to beautifie and decke with golde) supposing there to be greater efficacie, in I adore, then in this threedbare word, I loue thee. The like inuention was that of Master Au∣gustine Porco of Pauia, inamoured of the Lady Biauca Paltiniera: who to shewe himself her faithfull seruaunt, vsed to weare fastened BIAVCA sig∣nifieth white. to his scarlet Bonet, a little Candle of white Waxe, to signifie, by deuiding this word Can∣dela, which is in Englishe a Candle, into three
fillables Can de la: Can, that is faithfull ser∣uaunt, CAN, a dog, a most faithfull seruaunt. de la Biauca, of the Biauca. But much more ridiculous was that of Ca∣ualier Casio the Bolognian Poet, both for bra∣uery and fine inuention, who wore in his hat, in a greate Agate the discention of the holie Ghost vpon the twelue Apostles: and beeing demaunded of Pope Clement, with whom he was very familiare, wherefore he wore this Doue, representing the holy Ghost, and the fierie tongues vppon the heades of the Apo∣stles, he answered, Not for any deuotion, but to expresse a conceipt of loue. For hauing bene of a long time inamored of a Ladie, and vngratfully handled of her, not able any lon∣ger to support her craftie delaies, nor the ex∣pences bestowed on presentes and giftes, I fi∣gured the Feast of Penticost: meaning, I repēt of the cost bestowed of my Ladie. Vpō which exposition the Pope (howbeit he were in o∣ther thinges seuere) laughed so vehemently that he rose from the table at the middest of supper. There were also in aūcient time, some wor∣thie Personages which wanting the inuētion of such like subiects supplied it with mots of their owne phantasies, which became very ri∣diculous, as when they were to long. As was the mot of Castruccio Lord of Luca, when Lo∣douico Bauaro was crowned Emperour, & he made Romaine Senator, which was then a ve∣ry
great dignitie, who wore openly in a Cre∣mosin Cloke this mot embrodered in his breast: Egli é come dio vuole: and aunswerable It is as God will. to that behind was another, Esara quel che dio And shalbe as God will. vorra. The like fault of length had that of the Prince of Salerua, who builded the sumptu∣ous Pallace in Naples, on a Pinnacle: whereof in the fore front he erected a paire of hornes with this mot: Porto le corna ch' ogui Huomo le vede, E qualch' Altro te porta che vol crede. In Englishe thus. I weare the hornes which each man sees by vewe: Aud some man weares them to, which scarce he thinks is true. Desirous thereby to quip a certaine Noble∣man, who talked dishonorably of a Ladie, ha∣uing himself a wife suspected of her honestie. The length of these mots are the rather con∣dēned, for that they are in the proper tōgue of him which weares thē. For that, as I haue said, they better square in a straūge language. Dom. My Lorde you haue euen reuiued me with the ridiculous follies of so many Im∣prese, as you haue recited vnto me. Iou. It shalbe now therfore time that we returne to our purpose, recompting onely such Imprese which sauour of magnanimitie, sharpe inuention, and generositie. And it see∣meth
vnto me, that these great Princes of the world (in hauing about their persons men of singulare wit, and learning) haue gotten vnto them selues, the honour of such inuentions: as amongst other the Emperour Charles the fift, the King of Spayne, and Pope Leo. For that of the Emperour exceeded farr the Im∣presa of his Grandfather by the mothers side the great Charles Duke of Bourgonie. And in my opiniō that of the Pillars of Hercules with the mot, Plus vltra, not onely excelled in gra∣uitie and braue inuention the Tinderbox of his sayde Grandfather, but also all other which either Kinges or Princes haue borne to this daie. Dom. In trueth these Pillars with their mot (considering the good fortune in the happie Conquest of the West Indies, which e∣clipseth the glory of the old Romaines) doth satisfie the vewe, with the goodly subiect, and delighteth the minde of the considerate re∣garder, with the perfection of the soule an∣nexed vnto it. Iou. Maruaile not thereat, for the inuen∣tor therof was an excellent man, named Ma∣ster Laigi Marliano of Millan, Phisition of the Emperour, and died Bishop of Tui. And be∣side other of his excellent qualities, he was a great Mathematician. For commonly these picked Imprese spring not of light braines, but of rare wittes.
Dom. The trueth you saie my Lorde, but tell me of fauour what you were about to saie touching the tinderbox of the Duke of Bour∣gonie: I praie you recompt vnto me the histo∣rie of this famous inuention, with the which the valerous troupes of worthie Knightes of this our age adorne them selues, who are of the honorable companie of the order of the Fleece, amplified by the inuincible Charles the fift. Iou. This which you demaund is very in∣tricate and of few knowne, yea hardly of ma∣ny, which weare it about their necke: because thereunto is hanged the Fleece, interpreted of some the golden Fleece of Iason gotten by the Argonautes. And some referre it to the holy scripture, that it is the Fleece of Gedcon, which signifieth vnbroken faith. But retur∣ning to our purpose concerning the tinder∣box of the valiaunt Duke of Bourgonie, who was fierce in armes, and vsed to weare the flint-stone with the steele and boxe, and two tronchions of wood thereby, to denotate, that he had power to kindle greate fires of Warre, (as the trueth is he did) but this his whole valure had a sorowfull successe. For ta∣king in hand the warre against Lorena & the Suissers, he was (after receiuing two discomfi∣tures) ouercome and slaine aboue Nansi, the Eauen of the Epiphany, and his Imprese was skorned of Renato Duke of Lorena, who was
triumpher in this conflict, to whom when his Ensigne was presented, Truely (quoth he) this vnfortunate man when he had neede to warme himself, had no leasure to vse his tin∣derbox. Which saying was the more pithie, for that the same day of the battel, the earth was couered with Snow all died with blood, and it was the greatest colde, that happened within the memorie of mā: In such sorte that it might be seene by the Duke, that the wa∣uering Goddesse dayned not to accompanie his deuine manhood in these three last enter∣prises. Dom. As farre as I perceiue my Lorde, you haue begun according to your promise, to enter into the chosen & picked Imprese, which the worthies of our age doe weare. Where∣vpon, I hope that as our inuētions are more subtile, & our knowledge purified, in respect of that of former time: euen so our moderne deuises and Imprese shall appere more gallāt, as proceeding of more flowing wittes. But before you prosecute your discourse of these late Imprese, I pray you sith you haue recited the order of the Fleece, to declare vnto me in a word or two, the posie which they of the Order in England doe weare. Iou. Touching your demaunde, for that it is an auncient custome commenced aboue two hundred yeres passed, this onely reporte remaineth: That the Order being instituted
by Edward the third (a magnanimous Prince) A plaine crosse geules in the fielde argent. vnder the protection of S. George on hors∣backe within a white Shielde, parted with a red crosse: the King by chaunce in gathering vp a garter from the ground, gaue occasion to a certaine Ladie whose garter it was, to murmur at it. Wherefore it pleased him in the honor of that Ladie, to ordaine that eue∣rie Knight of the Order, which were wont to be sixe and twentie, should weare for an En∣signe about their legge the Garter with this inscription, Honni soit qui mal y pense. But now returning to our time more enri∣ched with singulare wittes, I saie that those Kings which of late haue bene, haue aduaun∣ced them selues both in their warly enterpri∣ses, & also in the brauerie of their ornaments of Imprese, aboue the honour of their aunce∣stors. And to begin with that of Lewes the twelft, King of Fraunce, which seemeth to all men, both of singulare beautie in shewe, and also of excellent sharpnesse in sence, for that it fitted the noble nature of that Martiall Prince, whom no toyle of Warre could euer tire, who with an inuincible minde caused to bee worne on the vpper garments of the Ar∣chers of his Garde, a Hedghogge crowned, which pricketh those, that come neere to a∣noy it, & casteth most sharp thornes at those which stande farther of: signifying thereby that his forces were readie nere at hand and
also abroad. On which subiect I remember to haue seene this mot, Comminus & eminus. Nothing inferiour to that of Lewes, was the Impresa which his successor and Sonne in lawe Fraunces the first vsed to beare, who as his slipperie youth did leade him, chaunged the manly exploites of warre, with the weake pleasures and effeminate delights of his fond loue. And to signifie that he fried in these passionat flames, wherein so much he gloried that he shamed not to saie, that he nourished Inourishe my self. himselfe in them. Whereupon he wore the Salamander in the flaming fire, with this mot, Mi nutrisco: being the proper qualitie of this beast to purge all her cold humors amōg the burning coales: wherby it commeth to passe that she feareth not the force of the fire, but rather tēperateth the heate thereof, or put∣teth it out. And trueth it was that this he∣roicall and curteouse King was neuer with∣out a loue, being notwithstanding zelous in affecting, and liberall in rewarding the ver∣tuous, and of courage valiaunt, against all the iniquities of Fortune (as the Salamander, a∣gainst the force of the fire) in all chaūces, and warly euents: and this inuention was forged with the stampe of his owne braine. Also that of his Sonne and successor King Henry, is in all points comparable to the for∣mer, who cōtinued to beare the same Impresa, which whilome he made beeing Daulphin:
which was the Moone Cressant, with this braue mot carying great sence: Donec totum impleat orbem. Signifying thereby, that vntill he amounted to the inheritance of the king∣dome, he could not manifest his inward va∣lure, as the Moone cā not yeeld her full light, vntill she come to her perfect greatnes. And of this his noble mind the recouering of Bo∣logne, and many other whorthy acts (which I∣talie can witnes) doe yeeld sufficient testimo∣nie. Wherefore at the earnest request of Sir Mortier the French Embassadour, after the death of Frauncis his father, I figured a full Moone al round, with this mot: Cum plena est, sit Emula Solis, shewing that shee had so great brightnesse, that she equalled the sonne, ma∣king the nights as cleare as the dayes. The king also meant hereby to yeeld some thing to the honour of a Lady vnder the name of Diana, who was accounted of the Auncients, the same goddesse with the Moone. Dom. Without doubt these three Imprese of these three Frēch kings, haue in my iudge∣ment, all the excellencie required both in the subiect & outward shewe, as also in the soule. And I doubt whether the sharpe witted Spa∣nyard can come neere them. Iou. And truely therein you are not de∣ceiued, for it is a difficult thing any way to better them. But the King of Spaine quitteth him selfe
wel in bearing the Gordiā knot with the hād So much le excelleth. of Alexāder, who with his Faulchion cut it in sunder when hee could not vndoe it with his fingers: engrauing this mot aboue it, Tanto Monta. To the end you may vnderstand the meaning of this prudent king, you neede to reade Quintus Curtius, how that in Asia in the Citie of Gordius, there was in a Temple an inextricable knotte, & it was giuē out by the Oracle, that hee which could vntie the same, should be lord of all Asia. Whereupon Ale∣xander cōming thither, and finding no way to vnlose it, by fatall rashnes, and in despite, cut it in peeces, & by that meanes Oraculum impleuit aut elusit. The like hapened vnto the Catholique king: who hauing long strife and contention about the kingdome of Castile, finding no way to attaine to his right, with sworde in hand he aduentured, and gotte it, whereby this so worthy an Impresa got great fame, and was adiudged of equall witte and learning with those of Fraunce. Some men were of the opinion, that it sprung from the subtile inuention of Antonio Nibrissa, an ex∣cellent learned man, who is said to reuiue the latine tongue in Spayne. But to say the trueth (although that many notable Imprese haue sprung from the worthy witttes of the Spani∣ards, as was that which Don Diego of Men∣dozza, a valiant and honorable knight, did vse to weare in the warres of the great Capitaine
Consaluo Ferrante. Yet there haue bene some very vayne, and voyde of all such properties as they ought to haue, as was that of the knight of the house of Porres, who being ina∣mored of a Gentlewoman attendant on the Queene Isabell, whose name was Anna, and fearing that she should marry with a certaine other knight farre richer then himselfe, who fought to winne her from him: he therefore counsayling her that she should remayne con∣stant in her loue towards him, and not con∣descende in any case to the other, he wore on his Crest depainted a Ducke, which in Spa∣nish is called Annadino, which name deuided into sillables, is after this maner, Anna dino. As much to say, as Anne say no. Like vnto this also was that of Don Diego of Guzman, who hauing receiued a discourte∣ous countenance at the hands of his Mistres: wore in a triumphe at Iusts, a great bush of greene Mallowes: to denotate thereby that his loue went a crosse: for Malua in Spanishe is the herbe Mallowe, and beeing distinctly written, Mal va, is as much to say, as it goeth ill, the affayres of my loue haue no good fuc∣cesse. Dom. These here agree well with those ri∣diculous inuentions of the white Candle, and of Penticost. But I pray you shut vp these va∣nities with the worthy Impresa of Don Diego of Mendozza, which whylome you sayde to
be so commendable. Iou. Yea, and peraduenture the onely one among those which are exstant, not only in Spayne, but els where. And this it was, that hauing sounded the ford of his Mistris phan∣sie, and finding the wharfe of her good will very difficult to ariue at: being driuen into dolorous affections, and as it were desperate, inuented a wheele with buckets which draw vp water, and then cast it forth againe: And for that half the buckets are full receiuing in the water, & half are emptie casting it forth, he adioined this mot,* Los llenos de dolor y, Los vazios de speranza.Those that are full, carr sorrow, tho that are emtie, hope. This was esteemed an Im∣prese of subtile inuention, and almost singu∣lare in outward vewe, because the water and the wheele gaue to the beholders great light vnto the subiect, and seemed to inferre this, that his griefe was without hope of any re∣medie. Worthie of Commendation was also the Impresa of S. Antonio da leua: who beeing by reason of the Goute caried in his Chaire, cau∣sed this mot to be worne of his Captaine, set on the trappings and ornaments of his horse, Sic vos non vobis: at such time as Charles the fift was crowned in Bologna, and the Duke∣dome of Millan restored to Francesco Sforzae. And the mot was without a bodie, which if it had not, there could not haue bin a better. For that therby he seemed to shew, that how
by his vertue and manhood the state of Mi∣lan, was gotten and preserued, and after resto∣red to the Duke by the Emperour, being de∣sirous to retaine it to himself, contrary to the order of the league, as he had done before. And because I am to prosecute the order of the Nobilitie, I wil recite vnto you the Im∣prese of the fower last Kings of Aragona: and amongst other what the opened Booke doth signifie, being the Impresa of Alphonsus: which hauing no soule of any mot at all, caused ma∣ny to doubt of the signification. And for that the King was of incomparable knowledge, as well in feates of Armes as faculties of lear∣ning, and also excellēt in the practise of ciuile gouernment: some sayd one thing, and some another: but most mē thought he ment ther∣by, that libertie was the most precious thing that a man might haue, and therefore he him self as most prudent, neuer tooke any to wife, therby not to make him seruant to his owne choyce. Some sayd he bare the Booke to sig∣nifie that the perfection of the intelligence of man, cōsisted in the knowledge of the Sciē∣ces and liberall Arts, in the which he himself was very studious. But to let passe the signifi∣cations of this Booke, I saie that Ferrante his Sonne bare a worthie Impresa, which began vpon the rebellion of Marino di Marciano Duke of Sessa, and Prince of Rossana, who al∣though he were Cosin to the King, notwith∣standing
did confederate with Duke Iohn of Augio, to procure the death of his Lord and King being at Parliament: but by meane of his hardinesle and noble courage, the treche∣rous purpose could take no effect. The histo∣rie of this euēt remaineth engrauen in Brasse on the gate of Castel nuouo. And after a time Marino being taken & cast into prison, he re∣solued with himself not to put him to death: saying, that he would not embrue his handes in the blood of his owne kindred, (albeit he were vngratefull) contrary to the expectation & will of many his freends, and Counsailers: and in token of this his noble mynd and cle∣mencie, he figured an Armelui compassed a∣bout with a bancke of dung, with this mot, Malo mori quam foedari: being the proper na∣ture of the Armelui rather to perishe by hun∣ger and thirst, then by escaping through the mire to defile her self, and spot the polished white of her precious skin. That also of Alphonsus the second his Sonne was braue, but very extrauagant, as being composed of sillables of the Spanish tongue. And it was after this maner, that the daie drawing nere of the battell of Campo Merio, against the Velletri, to exhorte his Captaines & Souldiers, depainted in his Standard three diadems of Saincts ioyned together, with this worde Valer in the middest, to signifie that that day they ought to shewe their manhood
aboue all other: pronouncing it after the Spanish maner, Dia dc mas valer: a day of grea∣ter valure. Right notable in trueth was that of Feran∣dino his Sonne, who being induced with these noble and Princely qualities, liberalitie and clemencie, and to shewe that these qualities were of nature & not arte: he figured a moū∣taine of Dyamants, which growe all as natu∣rally of them selues, as if they were fashioned by workmanship and arte: hauing this mot, Naturae non artis opus. Neither was that lesse commendable of King Federicke Vncle to Ferandino, who suc∣ceeded him in his Kingdome (being by the spareles Parcae, depriued of life) & taking pos∣session of the Kingdome, beeing weakened with the late warres, & enfeeblished with the factions of those of Aniou, to assure the No∣bilitie of the contrary parte of his fauour, he did beare figured in forme, a Booke of ac∣comptes, with leather stringes and buckles, after the maner of the Bankers bookes, set∣ting for the title 1485. & represented flames of fire to arise by the margents of the Booke being closed, with a mot of the holy Scrip∣ture: which was this, Recedant vetera. To shew by this his worrhie inuention, that he pardo∣doned all men their misdeedes and offences for that yeare. And herein he immitated the auncient Athenians which made the lawe of
Amnestia: which signifieth obliuion or for∣getting all which is past. Yet this did little profite the good King Federicke. For within fiue yeres by the vnpreuented conspiracie of Ferdinando King of Spaine, with Lewes the 12. of Fraunce, he was enforced to abandon his Kingdome, and leaue it to these two Kinges, who deuided it amongst them. There were other Princes of Italie and fa∣mous Captaines, who delighted to shew their conceiptes in Imprese, & such deuises, amongst the which, was worthely esteemed that of Francesco Sforza Duke of Millan (at that time wherein these sharpe inuentions were not so rife) who hauing taken possession of the state, by meanes of the right of his wife, Madonna Biauca Viscont, and by force of Armes apeased all troubles, caused to be embrodered on his Coate armour, a Mastiffe or Greyhoūd crou∣ching on his hinder legges, & standing vp be∣fore, vnder a Pine tree, with this mot, Quietū nemo impune laccsset, to signifie that he would not molest any man, but that he was readie to offend, and defend himself, if any dared to oppose them selues against him: whereof he made triall against the Venetian Nobilitie, (whiles he held quiet the King Renato of Prouince) in repressing the greedie desire which they seemed to haue of that state. Very like vnto the former deuise in beau∣tie, was the obscure Impresa of Galeazzo his
Sonne and Successor, which was a Lyon with an Helmet on his head, sitting on a great fire. Very fayre was the picture to the vewe, but yet reputed without a good inuention, being without a mot, and hardly vnderstoode of the author himselfe: wherefore I will not straine me with the repeating of the diuers interpre∣tations which were giuen of many, whereof some were vayne and ridiculous. But yet very learned and of a gallant shew, was that of his brother Duke Lodouico (al∣though too too presumptuous) who was, for the opiniō men had of his wisdome, on a time chosen the Iudge and arbiter of the Peace & Warre of Italie, & thereupō he bare the Mul∣bery tree, (called in Italian Celso moro) for his Impresa: which as Plinie saith, is accounted sa∣pientissima omnium arborum, because it bloo∣meth late, to auoyde the pinching frosts, and ripeneth her fruit very soone. As who should say, he knewe by his wisdome, what fortune the future times would bring. But his wit fai∣led him when he called the French men into Italie, to warre against the King Alphonsus his deadly enemy, which were after the cause of ruine: and so became his great wisedome to derision, ending his life, imprisoned in the Towre of Loches in Fraunce, a fit example of the misery and vaine glory of man. Hee caused him selfe also to be surnamed Moro. And when he passed the streetes, a man
might here the voice of children and appren∣tices crying aloude, Moro, Moro: And conti∣nuing in his like vanities, he caused to be de∣paynted in the Castle, Italie in the forme of a Queene, inuested with a golden robe, where∣in were embrodered all the chiefe Cities of I∣talie, according to their right semblance: and before her standing a wayting blacke More, with a Brush in his hand. Whereat on a time the Ambassadour of Florence merueiling, de∣maunded of the Duke, to what ende serued this blacke Page which brushed the robe and the cities. To whome the Duke answered, To cleanse them from all filth, to giue him to vn∣derstand, that the More was iudge of Italie, to order her as he thought good. Nowe the sharp witted Florentine perceiuing his drift, sayd, Take heede Sir that this More brush not so long, that he brush al the dust on him selfe: wherein he foretold the trueth. And here you are to note that many thinke that this Lodo∣uico was called Moro, for his browne skinne and blacke face, but they are deceiued, for ra∣ther was he of a white & pale cōplexion, then in any part black as we our selues haue seene. But that excelleth not onely the Imprese of the Princes of Italy, but also those of the house of the Medici, his predecessors, which Iohn the Cardinal of Medicis inuēted, who af∣terward was Pope Leo being restored vnto Florence, by the force and power of the Spa∣nyards,
hauing bene before eightene yeres in exile. His Impresa was a yoke, which Oxen vse to beare, and the mot Suaue, signifying there∣by that he was not returned to tyrānise ouer his country, nor to reuenge the iniuries done him of his enemies, and factious citizens: But rather to shewe that his gouernment shoulde be gentle with al clemencie, with the mot out of the scripture answerable to his Priestly ha∣bit, taken out of this place: Iugum meum suaue est, & onus meum leue. And truely it was very congruent to his nature, and proceeded from the sharpnes of his own learned wit: although it seemed that the yoke came first from the great Cosimo, who whē he was recalled to his country from exile, figured the cittie Florence fitting on a Chayre, with a yoke vnder her feete: to shew thereby as it were that saying of Cicero, Roma patrem patriae Ciccronem libera dixit, and for the excellencie hereof, it conti∣nued to be worne vnto the time of Pope Leo, and merited to be instamped in the coyne of Florence. Dom. This Impresa doth greatly delite me, and in my iudgement is very notable: but of favour I pray you, let it please you to recount others of the most famous house of Medicis, & in thē to touch diffusedly, both the deuise and also the Historie, which shall notably ex∣plane them, and bring great delight to this your discourse.
Iou. I cānot go beyond the three Diamāts which the great Cosimo did beare, which you see engrauen in the chamber wherein I lye. But to tell you the trueth, although with all diligēce I haue searched, yet cānot I find pre∣cisely what they signifie, & thereof also doub∣ted Pope Clemēt, who in his meaner fortune, lay also in the selfe same chamber. And trueth it is that he sayd, the Magnifi∣co Lorenzo vsed one of them with greate bra∣uerie, inserting it betweene three feathers of three sundrie colours, greene, white, and red: which betokened three vertues, Faith, Hope, and Charitie, appropriate to those three co∣lours: Hope, greene: Faith, white: Charitie, red, with this worde, Semper, belowe it. Which Impresa hath bene vsed of all the successors of his house, yea, and of the Pope: who did beare it imbrodered on the vpper garments of the horsmen of his garde, vnder that of the yoke. The Magnifico Pietro, Sonne of Cosimo, did beare a Faulcō with a Diamond in her talent, And the same was vsed also of Pope Leo, and Pope Clement likewise, with this mot Semper, applied to the title of religiō, which the Popes professe, although it bee, as is aboue sayde, a foolish thing to compose mots of sillables, or single words. The Magnifico woulde haue to bee vnderstoode hereby, that euery thing ought to be done to the will and pleasure of God, and the better doth it fit this purpose,
for that the Diamant is of so inuincible forti∣titude both against the fire and stroke of the Hammer: as was most miraculously this Magnifico, against the conspiracies and tre∣cheries of M. Luca Pitti. The Magnifico Pietro, Sonne of Lorenzo, as a youth and inamored, vsed to beare for his Impresa, great Billets of greene wood, set one vpon the other, which seemed to cast forth flames and smoke from the fire within, signifying that his enflamed affection, was the more vehement, for that the wood wher∣with it burned, was yet greene. And this was the inuention of that learned man Angelus Politianus, who made thereunto a mot con∣tayning this latin verse: In viridi teneras exurit flamma medullas. The Magnifico Iulian his brother, a man of good nature and excellent witte, who was afterward Duke of Nemors, hauing taken to wife the Neece of the King of Fraunce, Sister to the Duke of Sauoi, to shewe that fortune which was so many yeres aduerse vnto him, now began to turne her fauour towards him, he caused to bee set in a shield of triangular forme, this word of sixe letters, GLOVIS: which turning backward, you may read SI∣VOLG. And because it was iudged obscure It turneth. and vayne in sence, many of his affectioned seruantes, interpreted euery letter seuerally by it selfe, whereby arose as many diuersities
of opinions, as did among them in the Coū∣cell of Basile, who interpreted the name of Pope Foelix: saying, Faelix id est salsus eremita lu∣dificator. And because we haue aboue spoken of the Imprese of Lorenzo, it shal not be amisse, to say somewhat of that of Pope Clement, which wee see depainted in euery place, and was inuen∣ted of Dominico Boninsegni Florentine his trea∣sorer, who searched the secrets of nature, and foūd that the Sunne beames passing through a peece of Christall, beeing so strengthened through their vniting, according to the na∣ture of the Prospectiue, that they burne euery obiect, sauing only things passing white. And Pope Clement willing to shewe to the worlde that the puritie of his minde, could not bee contamined, by the malicious, neither by any force, vsed this Imprese: when his Enemies in the time of Adrian, fought to bereaue him both of life and dignitie, which conspiracie thei brought to no effect. The Impresa became very notable and renowmed, because therein were all thinges which might make faire ap∣parance to adorne it, which were these: a roūd peece of Christall, the Sunne with his beames passing through, the flame proued by them, all set in a white hood, with this mot, Candor illesus. Yet for all this, was it very obscure to those-which knewe not the propertie aboue sayd. Wherefore it needed that wee his ser∣uaunts
should to each man desirous to know the same expoúded, and make manifest what Boninsegni and the Pope ment thereby: which obscuritie ought to be shunned in an Imprese, as is before declared. And it was the more intricate for that the mot was deuided by sil∣lables, as this, Can dor ille sus. One Master Si∣mon Schiauone Chaplaine to the Pope, who had no more learning then would serue him to mumble vp a Masse, all meruelling at the Posie, demaunded of me, what the deuill, the Pope ment thereby, which as he thought ser∣ued to no purpose: For (quoth he) ille sus sig∣nifies, that Sowe: and repeting it oftentimes, ille, is that, & sus, is sure a Sowe, as I haue lear∣ned in the Grammer Schoole at Sebenico, and therefore must it needes be that Sowe. Vpon this arose great laughter, & the matter came to the Popes eare, who gaue aduertisement not to deride it by letters to auoyde the like errors of Amphibologia, committed by such foolishe interpreters. That also of Hippolito Cardinall of Medi∣cis, although it was very goodly both in shew and substance, yet had it some defect: for that none could throughly vnderstand it saue on∣ly the learned, & such as were very well seene in the Poems of Horace: for being desirous to signifie that the Ladie Iulia Gonzaga, excelled in beautie all other women, (which is not vn∣knowne to our age, who for her chast condi∣tions,
and excellent vertues doth reuerence her) he figured a Comet, whereof saith Plinie, Augustus did write, that in the time of the Feastes, which he ordained to bee celebrated to Venus, a fewe daies after the death of Iulius Caesar, appeared in the Septentrionall parts of the heauens shining so bright the space of se∣uen daies to euery Region, that it began to appeare an howre before Sunne setting. The common people thought this Starre to sig∣nifie, that the soule of Iulius Caesar was recei∣ued into the cōpanie of the immortall Gods: which was the occasion that Augustus placed the signe of this Commet on the top of the Stale, which he had erected in the Forum for his adopted Father. Whervpon, Horace vseth these wordes to the honour of Iulius Caesar. Micat inter omnes Iulium sydus Velut inter ignes luna minores. So Hippolito taking out these verses onely Inter omnes, vouchsafed to vse it as a mot to honour this most vertuous and renoumed Lady. And in the Impresa being the figure of a Commet, it seemeth that it was to progno∣sticate the dolefull death of the Cardinall, which peraduenture the fearefull starre did threaten, who being constrained to passe frō Gaeta into Affrica to the Emperour, who lay then at Tunis, by the way to the great discom∣fiture and griefe of all his frends died at re Castle, which was then in the possesion of the
Lady Iulia Gonzaga. He had also before, another Impresa of the Eclipse, figuring the Moone in the shadowe, which happeneth by reason of the interposi∣tion of the earth betweene the sunne and it, with this mot, Hinc aliquando eluctabor. Signi∣fying thereby that he was placed in the dark∣nes of certayne obscure and troublesome thoughts and imaginations, from which hee striued to issue forth, but in shewing what they were, because they seeme impure, and scarce honest, and because I will not doe pre∣iudice to so worthy a mā, neither to the wor∣ship of his house, I leaue to explicate the mea∣ning of the Impresa, which shall notwitstan∣ding be vnderstoode of many which remem∣ber the man. After the death of the Cardinall the Duke Alexander, hauing maried Margherit of A∣frica, daughter to the Emperour, and gouer∣ning Florence with equale iustice agreeable to the citizens: seeing himselfe gallant and able of person, was desirous to make himselfe re∣noumed by the warres, saying, that to get glory and in taking the Emperours part, hee would couragiously enter into euery difficult and dangerous enterprise: resolute in this, ei∣ther to win honour with praise, or lose his life in perill. And hereupon on a day earnestly re∣quested mee to deuise him some notable Im∣presa to weare on his cote Armor. And I chose
him out the wild beast Rhinoceros, the deadly enemy of the Elephant, which being sent to Rome by Emanuel King of Portugals, who fought with it, comming by Prouince where it was seen being ariued on the land, and after∣ward drowned by hard fortune, amongst the rocks a litle aboue Porto Venere, (for it was not possible that such a beast could saue it self be∣ing chayned, albeit it swam miraculously a∣mong the sharp rocks, which are all alog that coste) yet notwithstāding there was brought to Rome, his true portrature, and greatnes in February 1515 with information of his na∣ture: the which as Plinie saith, and the Portu∣gals affirme, is to goe and finde the Elephant, and assaulting him, striketh him vnder the panch with a hard and sharpe horne which it hath growing on his snout, neither doth hee euer depart from his enemy. nor from sight, til he hath weried and slaine him, which most often falleth out: vnles the Elephant with his long snout doe take him by the throte, and in closing doe strangle him. The forme of this beast in goodly embrodery serued for the co∣uerture of his Barbarie horses: which ran in Rome for the price or masterie, with this mot in the Spanigh tongue: No buelle sin vincer: I I warre not but I won. retourne not without victory, according to this verse, Rhinoceros nunquam victus ab hoste cedit. This deuise pleased him so that he cau∣sed it to be engrauen in his brest plate.
Dom. Sith you haue rehearsed the Impresa of the noble Princes of the house of Medicis which are dead, let it please you to say some∣what of those, which the worthy Duke Cosimo was wont to weare, of the which we haue seen so many in the Pallace of the foresayde Me∣dicis. Iou. In trueth I sawe many the day of his mariage, which seemed to issue from worthy wittes, Whereof one aboue all pleased me, for that it was fitly applyed to his highnes, who hauing Capricornus for his Ascendent, as also Augustus Caesar, as witnesseth Suetonius. And therefore caused the Image thereof to be in∣stamped in his Coyne. This beast seen ed vn∣to me very congruent to the purpose, for that Charles the fifth, vnder whome the princely estate of this Noble Duke florished, had like∣wise the same ascendēt. And it seemed a thing fatall, that the Duke Cosimo the same day of the Calends of August, wherein Augustus Caesar obtayned the victory ouer Antontus and Cleo∣patra at the promontory Atticum, the same day he discomfited and tooke his enimyes on the mountayne Murlo. But this Capricornus hauing no Posie: I adioyned thereunto this mot: Fidem fati virtute sequemur. To this sence I wil striue with mine owne vertue, to archiue that, which the Horoscopus doth promise me. And so I figured the starres of that Constella∣tion in the Chamber ordeyned for the honor
of the Duke. Which Impresa you haue seene in my Study, where is also the Eagle which si∣gnifieth Iupiter and the Emperour, who hol∣deth out in her beake a triumphant Crowne, with this mot: Iupiter Merentibus offert, si∣gnifying that his highnes deserued eche glo∣rious reward for his worthy vertues. He bare also another in the beginning of his gouernment, learnedly deuised by the re∣uerend Master Piea Francesco da Riui: and it was that which Virgil speaketh of in the An. of the golden Bowe, with this mot: Vno auulsu non deficit alter, signifying a bowe rent from the tree, in the place whereof suddenly suc∣ceeded another, meaning thereby, that the Duke Alexander was not so soone departed this life, but that there was another of the same golden lyne ready to succeede him. Dom. It seemeth vnto mee my Lord that you haue sufficiently touched those which a∣pertayne to the house of Medicis: It there∣fore remayneth, that you nowe speake of o∣ther Princes and famous Captaynes, which you your selfe in your time haue knowen. Iou. I will not faile herein, and now you haue pleasauntly pricked me forwardes, you make me call to minde many thinges perti∣nent to this purpose, which now I wil disbur∣then to doe you pleasure and satisfie your de∣sire: sith the number of so many Imprese are tedious vnto you.
Dom. This memorie of yours cannot seeme yrksome to any man of iudgement, nor tedi∣ous to those which delight in these Gentle∣manlike discourses, and let not this extreme heate which alreadie maketh you to sweate, (although we are set in a freshe & ayrie place) be any excuse to cause you to breake of your talke. Iou. Well, sith it is your pleasure, I am con∣tent to begin with the valian̄t troupe of Cap∣taines, which you haue sene renowmed in our historie. And me seemeth that the honor of Rome requireth of desert that we begin with the Romaines, because they haue in effecte borne awaie the mainprise of picked Soul∣diers, as the inheritors of the auncient vertue of their Countrey. Amongst whom in my daies the two principal Famelies, chief of the auncient Facton Guelfa and Gebellina, which were called Vrsini and Colonesi, haue had each of them two most renowmed: The Famely of Vrsina had Verginio and Nicolo: the Colonesi, Prospero, and Fabritio. Verginio, in authoritie, riches, multitude of Souldiers, & in the mag∣nificence of his house, being Captaine of all the Primates of Italie, ascended to the tipe of Dignitie: from which againe he fell, after the comming of King Charles into Italie, being taken with the Earle of Pitigliano at Nola by the French men, deceiued by the promise of the Nolans and by Lewes d' Arsio the French
Captaine, and was kept prisoner vntill the se∣dicious vprore hapned in the French Campe at Tarro, wherein he finely escaped the hands of those which garded him, being as then bu∣sied about greater matters. Now the Colonesi being vnder the conduct of the Cardinall As∣canio Sforza, who at the beginning serued the French men: and being made a newe league betweene the Princes of Europe, they retour∣ned to the seruice of the King Ferandino, Pro∣spero first, and then Fabritio, vowing themselfe Aragonians. Verginio also was inuited to go serue the same King, being offered a great pay, and to be recompenced with offices of honour and dignitie, as to be high Constable, which of∣fice was afterward geuen to S. Fabritio, with the gouernment of Abruzzo Alba, and Ta∣gliacozzo: but he iudging it not beseeming his honour, wilfully condiscended to the French, and rather accepted of their pay: although therein the Vrsini vtterly disliked his deter∣mination, because it might be preiudiciall to the honour and state of Italie, which then be∣gan againe to conspire against Fraunce, fea∣ring least it should become subiect to so puis∣sant a nation. But he hardened with a fatale obstinacie, addressed himselfe with many o∣ther Captaynes of the same conspiracie a∣gainst king Ferandine: answering those which disswaded him to the contrarie (as the ser∣uants
of the Pope, of the Duke Lodouico, and of the Lordes of Venice, who shewed him the daunger hee wilfully cast himselfe into, and therewithall willed him to waigh what great rewardes and benefites were offered him) sayd, I am like vnto the Camell, whose nature is this, that comming to a cleare riuer, drinks not of the water vntill first hee hath fouled it by trampling with his feete. And therefore I beare a Camell troubling a Riuer with this French mot. Il me plait la trouble. But his rash determination had rufull end. For being o∣uercome Trouble doth please me. in this conflict besieged in Atella, and at length taken, died in prison in the Ca∣stell of Ouo. This receiued he the punishment of his paruerse enterprise. The Earle of Pitigliano, being in pay with the Lords of Venice, in the warres of Lombar∣die, had for his Impresa a coller of Iron, called in Latin Millus, set ful of sharpe prickes, as we see about the necke of the Sheepheards Ma∣stiues to defende them from the biting of the Wolues, with this mot, Sauciat & defendit al∣beit this Impresa is to be seene at this daie at Rome, in the Pallace of Nicosia in possession of the S. ors of the house of Vrsina: and in the middest of this coller is this Posie, Prius mori quam fidem fallere: there also are figured two handes, which seeming to take holde of the Coller, are pearced with the sharpe prickes which are set thereupon: and in the middest
there is depainted a Rose. To the other former Imprese are nothing inferiour those of the other two Brethren the Colonesi, Prespero and Fabritio, who at diuers times had sondry inuentions: some Militarie, and some amorous, according to their phan∣tasies. For both of them euen to extreme old age, thought it no shame to be amorous, and especially Prospero who hauing placed his af∣fection on a noble Ladie, vnto whose compa∣nie (to dissemble the secrete fauour which he receiued, and to aucyde sufpition) he aduer∣tured to bring a freende of his: which thing was vnaduisedly done, considering that wo∣mē are almost all generally desirous of choice and chaunge, of whom she became inamou∣red, deeming him worthy the possessiō of her person: which Prospero perceiuing, and there∣by receiuing no final discomfort he tooke to his Impresa the Brasen Bull of Perillus, who was the first which experienced the torment that he him selfe had inuented, being com∣maunded to be pút therein (by the Edict of the tyrant Phaleris) and a great fire to be kin∣dled vnderneath, where with yelling cries he ended his miserable life. And this did Prospe∣ro, thereby to signifie, that he himself was the cause of his owne misfortune. And the mot was this. Ingenio experior funera digna meo. My self was cause of my owne misfor∣tune. Dom. Mee seemeth the soule of this gal∣lant inuention had bin farre better after this
maner, Sponte contractum inexpicabile maluns. Iou Truely that of Fahritia, excelled for bra∣uerie, who perseuering in taking the French part, although inuited with promise of great rewardes, to participate with the whole con∣sent of Italie, yet at the first he refused it, and therupon tooke for his Impresa a vessell made after the auncient forme, with this mot, Sam∣nitico no capitur auro: to signifie that he would not bee corrupted with coyne no more then was that Fabritius the aúcient Romaine, with the profered golde of the Samnites, who were in league with Pyrrhus. He also did beare an other, very commen∣dable, which was the Touchstone, with this mot, Fides hoc vno, virtusque probantur: to im∣porte that his vertue & faith should of al men bee knowne by touch and triall. This did he weare at the cóflict of Rauenna, where his va∣liaunt courage was manfully shewen, albeit he was there wounded and taken prisoner. In the same warre Marc' Antonio Columne Nephewe to Prospero, who lay in garrison de∣fending the Citie Rauenna, where he worthe∣ly behaued himself against the violent rage & terrible battery of Mouris de fois, had a bowe of Palme wrethed with a bow of Cipres, with this mot, ERIT ALTERA MER∣CES: Meaning that he went to the warres either to winne victorie or loose his life. The Palme being borne in signe of Victorie, and
the Cipresse worne at Funeralles. This man had all the giftes which either nature or for∣tune might bestow, to make a man singulare. The same Marc' Antonio wore also an o∣ther in the warres of Mirandola and Bologna, wherein the Cardinal of Pauia was Legate, of nature proude and imperious, and the loftie minded Romaine not yeelding to be cōtrol∣led, but would execute euery duetie which pertayned to the warres himself, the rather for that he perceiued the Cardinall to vse dis∣honest dealing with the Duke of Vrbin, ther∣fore he was after slaine of him. To manifest his noble minde he vsed for his Impresa the Heron, which bird in the time of raine flyeth so hie aboue the Cloudes, that she escapeth the wett, to the ende it may not fall on her back, and yet naturally vseth to bathe her in the little streames, content to haue the wa∣ter vnder her, but not that it should fal vpon her. The Impresa was very delightsome to be∣holde: for besides the braue shewe of the bird, there was figured the Sunne aboue the Cloudes, the birde betweene the Sunne and the Cloudes, in the middle region where raine and hayle are ingendred, belowe were Marish groundes with Sedge & other greene hearbes, but aboue all it was adorned with this goodly mot about the necke of the He∣ren, Natura dictante feror. I remember also an other which he vsed
(as one which greatly delighted in these in∣genious inuentions) in the warres of Verona: which Citie was valiauntly defended by his manhoode, against the force of both the French and Venetian Campes, which was a vesture in the middest of the fire, which not∣witstanding burned not, as made of that Lint of India, which Plinic called Albestin, which maie bee purged from spots in the fire & not consumed, and it had this mot, Semper perti∣nax. S. Mutio Colonna, the Nephewe of S. Fabri∣tio, happely did immitate the prompt witt of Marc' Antonio, & was a valiaunt and prudent Knight, who for his desertes had of Pope lu∣lio the 20. and Pope Leo the 10. the companie of an hundred Launces, on whose vpper Ar∣mour and Ensignes he caused to bee figured an hande burning in the fire vpon an Aulter of Sacrifice with this Posie, Fortiafacere, & pa∣ti Romanū est. alluding his owne proper name to the auncient Mutius, who intending to haue slaine Porsenna King of Toscanie, and For that his hande failed in striking an other, he burnt it of, in the sight of Porsenna: which was so merueilous, (that as the Poet saith) Hane spectare manūm Porsenna non potuit. The Colonesi bare altogether one Impresa for them all, at such time, as Pope Alexander shewed extremitie to the Romaine Baronyt whereupon they were constrained with Ihon
the Cardinall to slye Rome, and parte of them tooke Naples, and parte Scicill: in which case they were thought to make a better depar∣ture then had done the Ursini, for that they had rather loose their robe and dignitie then to commit their liues to the mercie of bloo∣die tyrants, as did they: whereupon they be∣came vndone and miserably strangled. Their Impresa was to signifie, that although they were persecuted by hard fortune, and their former power so greatly abated, yet liued they, and in hope that when these boysterous stormes were past, they should againe haue to reioyce: and this it was: Certaine Bulrushes figured in the middest of a Riuer, whose na∣ture is to bowe & not to breake, neither with the violence of waue nor winde, & their mot was, Flectimur non frangimur vndis. Dom. Sith you haue recited the deuises of these Romaine Barons, it seemeth also con∣uenient that you say somewhat of other Prin∣ces and Captaines of Italie, and likewise of Forainers, if happely they come to your me∣morie. Iou. But first hearken to that which S. Bar∣tolomeo Aluiano, a Captaine stoute & valiaunt, but very vnfortunate, vsed to beare on his En∣signe. He was a great defēder of Vrsina factiō: he manfully ouercame Bracciano, the Chāpiō of Pope Alexander: And tooke Viterbiū, spoy∣ling all which tooke part with Iohn Gatto (in
fauour of the Maganzesi) saying they were the pestilent venome of the Citie: and after the death of this Iohn Gatto their Captayne, he bare in his ensigne an Vnicorn, whose pro∣pertie is to haue power against poyson, figu∣ring a fountayne all inuironed with Todes & Serpents, and the Vnicorne putting in his horne into the Riuer before hee drinke, to purge the venome, with this mot about his necke, Venona pello. The same Ensigne was lost in the Battle of Vincentia, after that this Al∣uiano had a great space defended him against the fury of his enemy: Marc' Antonio da mon∣te, holding it in his armes, and neuer leauing it, vntill he fell downe dead. For the same Aluiano was composed also another Impresa, by Cotta of Verona his Poet, after the sacking of Vincentia, whereof it was sayde the Purueyour or Paymayster Master Andreo Loredan, was the principal cause, who at that instant when the Cesarian enemies be∣ing put to flight, run armed with this brest∣plate of Crimsin Veluet, into the Pauillion of the Generall, and sinding him sitting at the Table with many other captaynes, consulting what were best to bee done: he began to lay before them their cowardise, and long linge∣ring, in not pursuing the Enemie: Albeit they were of this minde, that the enemies which slye ought to haue a bridge of siluer. But he with greate instancie vrged them that they
should not so suffer thē to escape their hands, considering that they had alreadie turned their backes. By the braue and furious words of this Loridano, were many incensed to pur∣sue them: and by that meanes were the Vene∣cians ouercome, and Loridano left dead in the fielde, receiuing the iust penaltie of his rashe attempt. Whereupō Cotta exhorted his Lord, that in stead of the Vnicorne that he had lost in that Battel, to beare in his Ensigne a Gan∣der in the middest of certaine Swannes, with this briefe about his necke: Obstrepuit inter o∣lores: to signifie that it was vnfit and ill besee∣ming that a Senator with a lōg gowne should presume to iudge of warlike affayres among Captaines. But this deuise Aluiano refused, (albeit greatly commending it) for that he would not seeme to scorne the sayd Loridano being dead, in comparing him to a Gander. Now will I speake of others, renowmed with the fame and glorie, which they by their worthie deedes haue atchiued: amongst whō I reckon as chiefe Francesco Gonzago Lorde of Mantua, who became most famous in the Battell at Tarro, and by the Conquest which he got ouer the Kingdome of Naples, for the King Ferandino. This Gonzaga being of mali∣cious enuie accused before the Venetian Se∣nate, for whom he was Captaine general: and after he had iustified himself, he vsed for his Impresa a Furnace wherein golde is tried, set
on the fire, with certaine stemmes of golde therein, with this Posie out of the holy Scrip∣ture: Brobasti me Domine, & cognouisti willing also, Sessionem meā following in the same sen∣tence to be vnderstoode. His slaunderous ac∣cusers obiected, that he coueted to sit on two seates, that is to say, serue the Venetians in the warres, and also Lodouico Sforza his brother in law, in taking the aduauntage of the time af∣ter the Battell, ceasing to pursue the French men halfe conquered, in which case he neuer offended, for it was all forged by the Earle Gaiazzo, to pleasure the French men, and in dispight of the Duke Lodouico, for Gaiazzo desired not to see the Venetian Lordes Con∣querers: to the ende, that if the French men had bene ouercome, they had not so victori∣ously haue gone to occupie the state of Mil∣lan, of them-desired euer since the time of Duke Phillip and his father. Amongst all the famous Captaines, the Lorde Giouan, Giacopo Triuultio, was of soue∣raine wit, and in great reputation, who from the beginning as an Enemie to the Duke Lo∣douico Sforza, seeing him seeke the vsurping of the Dukedome, which was the right of his Nephewe, he ioyned with the King of Ara∣gona open Enemie to Lodouico, for the same cause. And to signifie that in the gouernment of his Countrey he was not to yeeld one iote to him: he bare for his Impresa a quadret of
Marble, with a stile of Iron plāted in the mid∣dest, opposite to the Sunne, which was the an̄∣cient Ensigne of his house, with this mot, Nō cedit vmbra soli: Although the Sunne turne a∣bout neuer so often the stile alwaies yeeldeth his shadowe. Alphonso Duke of Ferara, a Captaine of re∣solute Prowesse and admirable constancie, when he went to the Batell of Rauenna, did beare a Globe or round boule of mettle, full within of artificiall fire, which powred forth flames by certaine creueis, and it was so cun∣ningly contriued, that at due time and place the fire would issue forth, making great con∣fusion of those, which were within the daun∣ger thereof. The inuention wanted a Posie which was afterwardes added by the famous Aristo, and it was Loco & tempore: and then trāslated into French to giue it a better shew after this maner, A lieu é temps. Valiaunt did In place and time. he shewe himself in this bloodie battell, pla∣cing his Artillarie in such sorte, that he slewe much people. After that by the death of Pope Leo, the Duke of Vrbin had recouered his estate, being reconciled with the Baglioni, and in frendship with the Cardinall of Medicis, who at that time gouerned the state of Florence, was or∣dained generall for that common wealth. And on a time Master Thomas Maufrede his Embassadour, requested mee to deuise some
Impresa for his Standard: whereupon I caused to be figured a Palme, hauing the top therof weighed downe with the heauie poize of a great Marble tied thereunto, to signifie that which Plinie saith of the saide tree, being of this nature that it returneth to the former fashion be it depressed with neuer so greate a waight, mounting it vp in time, and drawing it on high: adding therunto this mot, Inclina∣taresurgit: alluding to the vertue of the Duke, which neuer had beene oppressed, though sometimes by the fury of Fortune for a time abased. This inuention pleased him well, and he ordained that it should be set on his Stan∣dard: albeit vpō certaine occurrents he came not to take the office of Generall. Dom. I am glad that you are begun to re∣cite some Imprese which you your selfe haue deuised, whereof I haue seene diuers in the Chamber where you studie. Iou. In trueth I haue made many in my time, but I shame to recount thē all, sith there are some which haue those defects which are peculiare to humaine actions. For as I said at the beginning, the framing of an Impresa is the aduenture of a readie and phantasticall braine: and it is not in our power, although with long studie, to forge an inuention, fit∣ting the humour of him which shall weare it, or aduaūcing the credite of him which com∣poseth it: for therein he aduētureth his fame,
being accompted learned. And in effect it is one thing to saie well, in shewing a conceite, and an other thing, to expresse the same with a soule and bodie, that it may bee altogether currāt without any error. For I my self which haue made so many for others, desirous greatly, but yet in vaine, to finde the body of a subiect to this mot, Fato prudentia minor: wherein I fare like the Shoemaker, who fit∣teth with newe and nete shoes euery other mans foote, and is faine himself to weare his owne broken and patched: for neuer could I finde out subiect of any thing which satisfie me. But first before I shew you those of mine owne composing, in respect of modestie I wil recite some of other men. Dom. I pray you haue regard that you vt∣ter no more which shal seeme maymed or vn∣perfect. Iou. I shall now recount those which shall be perfectly good, sith heretofore wee haue bene shewed such as haue bene ridiculous: and to prosecute our purpose I say, that the Impresa of S. Ottauiano Fregoso at the warres of Bolona & Modena, was accounted ingenious, but very extrauigant considering the picture: for he wore a great many Ciphers Sables in a field: Or in the borders of the vtter part of the Bards of his horses. Which Charecters of them selues, in the art of numbring signifie nothing, but hauing a figure of number set
before them, they make a multitude almost infinite: as for example placing but an vnite before the said Ciphers, they signifie a Million Millions. Aboue the border was written this. Hoc per se nihil est, sed si minimū addideres maxi∣mum fiet: Signifying that with a little ayde he should recouer the State of Genoua, which whilom was in the possession of Signior Pietro his father, who there was slaine, & this Signior Ottauiano at that time banished, little at all ayded by the Duke of Vrbin: but yet of suffi∣cient hope to bee restored to his house, as af∣terward he was by Pope Leo. Trueth it is that the Posie is to to long, but yet the nature of the wittie subiect doth beare it singular wel. Signior Hierosin Adorno, who tooke Genoua, by the force and strēgth of the Cesarians, and chased from thence the foresaid Signior Fre∣goso, for that he making himself of Fraunce, gaue ouer the gouernmēt of the Dukedome, reseruing but only that title of Gouernour. This Adorno was a youth of singulare hope, and adorned with great vertnes: but enuious death too sone cut of his desired life: he, as it is the slipperie nature of that fraile age, was ardently inamoured of a Ladie decked with notable beautie, and adorned with rare cha∣stity: & on a time he requested me to inuēt an Impresa to this tenor: how that he thought and verely beleeued, that the obtayning of her fauour would be the attayning of his fe∣licitie:
& contrarywise, the losing of the same the bereauing of his life, in yeelding to him a desired death to ende the tedious trauailes which he had sustained, either in the pursutes of loue or practises of warre: which I hearing there came to my remembraunce that which Iutius Obsequeus wrighteth in his Booke da prodigijs. The lightning to bee of this nature, that comming after greate trauailes and dis∣graces, it will make an ende of them, but du∣ring the time of happie fortune it bringeth damage, ruine or death: and so I figured the lightning of Jupiter, after that forme as we see it in antique Monuments, with this briefe a∣bout it, Expiabit aut obruct. The last parte of which Posie he shortly after verified, depar∣ting this life in Venice, where he sat chief Em∣bassadour for the Emperour. But sith we are entred to mētion the wor∣thies of Genoua, I will rehearse three of myne owne which I made at the request of two Gentlemen of the house of Flisca, Sinibaldo, & Ottobuono, whereof one was to signifie the re∣uenge, which they had of the death of their Brother Girolamo, cruelly murdered by the Fregosi cōpetitors of the state: for the which these lost their liues, Zaccaria Fregoso, S. Fre∣gosino, Lodouico, and Guido: which rouenge did something recomforte them for the losse of their Brother: saying, that their enemies had not much whereof to vaunt, in vsing such
crueltie against them: being a thing not vsual among the Fregosi, Adorni, and Flischi, to im∣brue their handes in the blood of their for∣raine enemies, but a thing lawful to contend for the principalitie in ciuile contention a∣mong thē selues, or els in open warre. I ther∣fore figured an Elephant assalted of a Dragō, who twinding about the legges of his ene∣mie, is wont by his venemous byting to em∣poyson his belly, wherewith he dieth. But the Elephant by nature knowing the daunger, trayleth him along the grounde till he come to some stone or blocke, whereunto leaning himself he rubbeth there against the Dragon that he dieth. The deuise had a goodly shew, and the mot did sufficiently bewray the sig∣nification thereof: which was in Spanishe af∣ter this maner, Non vos alabereis: to shewe vn∣to the Fregosi, that they had not to boast of You neede not boast. the vilanie committed against their blood. I also composed another for the Flischi vp∣pon this occasion: They being in conference and consulting to take the Emperours part, and to ioyne with the Adorni: whereupon many which were affectioned vnto them and also their seruaunts, aduised them not hastely to resolue them on this enterprise: for that the forces of the King of Fraunce were great, and that S. Ottauino Fregoso had got them on his side, and had set firme footing in the go∣uernment, and therefore was well prouided
to defende himself against any which should offer him the onset, at that time: To whō they replied, that they knewe how and when to put in practise such exploites. And vpon this they demaunded me some Impresa, and pre∣sently there came to my remembraunce that which Plinie writeth of the Alcions, cer∣taine birdes, which by instinct of nature, at∣tend Solstitium vernale, as most commodious for them, knowing the iust time when the calme season, and quiet seas shall bee, which duelie hapneth once in the yeare, and is cal∣led of the common sorte S. Martins Sommer, in which season the sayde Alcions build their nestes, lay their Egges, and hatch their yong in the middest of the Seas, hauing happie lea∣sure by the quiet calme. Wherefore the daies wherein the Alcion breedeth are called Al∣cionides. I caused then to bee figured a cleere Skie, with a calme Sea, & thereon a nest, from the middest to either ende somewhat reared vp of some high, with the neckes of the birds looking ouer the prowe being of merueilous straunge colours, as azure, red, white, greene, and yealowe, with this mot aboue them in French, Nous sçauous bien le temps: as much to say, as we knowe well the time, when we haue to giue the onset on our enemies. And so it happely sell out that they returned to their possessions reuēged on their aduersaries, with the good Augure of these Alcion birds. This
deuise was depainted in many places of their stately Pallace at Viola, before it was by pub∣lique edict ruined. I made also an other which peraduenture may better like you, for Sinibaldo Flischo, con∣cerning a matter of loue, which began now to florishe in wanton peace, after the restles toyles of warre. For this Sinibaldo seruing a Ladie, who began to enter into some suspitiō of him, seeing him, euery where to frequent other gallant Dames, according to the cu∣stome of the Gentlemen of Genoua, whereof she sharply oftentimes reproued him, com∣playning of his vnpure and corrupted faith. Whereupon, he desirous to clere himselfe of that suspition, requested mee to inuent some pretie deuise concerning his case. And I figu∣red him a Needle touched with an Adamant, applied to a Sea carde with a Compasse ther∣vnto, and aboue the cleere azure Skie with Starres, with this mot, ASPICIT V∣NAM: To shewe that although in the hea∣uens were very many faire Starres, yet there was but one regarded of the Adamant, which is onely the Pole starre: and so he reconciled himself with his Mistrisse, whom he entirely loued. And albeit he sported with others, yet was it not in earnest, but rather to couer his faithful affection, vnder the vaile of a preten∣sed loue. Dom. Well my Lorde, sith there is not to
bee obserued any order, in rehearsing these thinges which are extraordinary: therefore I praie you prosecute those Impresa which shall come next to hande, whether they bee amo∣rous or touching Armes: although in my cō∣ceipt it were better to dispatch first those per∣tayning to Armes, and to end your discourse with the sweete inuentions of loue. Iou. There commeth now to my remem∣braunce one of S. Gion Paule Baglione, a man of greate wisedome and expert in feates of Armes, very affable and of such courtly elo∣quence, as they vse in the Perugian tōgue, but yet passing subtile and craftie, hauing aspired to bee (as it were) Tyrant of Perugia, and Go∣uerner of the Venetian Campe. Howbeit, bet∣ter had it bin for him, to haue kept him quiet with honor at home in his Coūtrcy: for Pope Leo (prouoked by the infinite complaintes, made by the chiefe of the famelie of the Ba∣glioni) trayned him to Rome, by smoth entrca∣ties, whether whē he came he cut of his head. And so became his Impresa cleane dashed and most vaine: which was a Griphon argent in a fielde Geules, with this mot, Vnguibus & rostro, at que alis armatus in hostem: whereupon witte∣ly sayd S. Gentile Baglione: this great bird had not the vse of his winges, as at other times it hath to auoyde the ginne, which was layde for it. I remember also an other which I made
for Girolamo Mattei a Romayne Captayne of the Horsemen pertayning to the Garde of Pope Clement, a man of noble courage: who hauing with great patience, perseuerāce, and dissembling, attended a time to slay Girolamo, the Nephewe of the Cardinall of Valle, to the end to reuenge the death of Paluzzo his bro∣ther, by him cruelly murdred in a ciuile con∣tention. And hauing requested me to find him some Impresa to this sence: that a noble minde hath powre to digest with time euery greeuous iniurie. And I figured for him an Austritch deuouring an Horsenaile, with this mot. Spiritus durissima coquit. So much was his notable reuenge commended, that his very enemy of the house of Ualle accepted of an a∣greement, cancelling all cause of iarres be∣tweene the two famelies, and the Pope Clement pardoned the homicide, and made him cap∣tayne. The Austritch also serued me, by reason of the diuersitie of her nature, and her diuers properties, for a nother deuise, which I had for my Lord the Marquesse of Uasto, at such time as the Emperour and the Pope assembled at Bologna, and consulted of the affayres of I∣talie: where was made Captaine of the league, for the defence of all estates, and the preser∣uation of peace Antonio da Leua, which de∣gre rather seemed to appertayne to the Mar∣quesse then to him. But Pope Clement displea∣sed
for some dammages receiued by the Spa∣nish Fauteric in Piacentino and Parmegiano, where the Souldiers liuing at their own plea∣sure (the Marquise not restrayning their ouer great libertie) pillaged almost al the country, whereof the Pope would be reuenged in hin∣dring his dignitie, which thing the Marquise taking greeuously, complayned of the Pope in this maner: I may repent me that I was not at the sacking of Rome, when I departed and left my Souldiers, and like a true Italian refused to be Captayne. For I could not bee present at the iniuries and damages done to the Pope. Whereupon on a day as I recomfor∣ted him he sayd vnto me: were it not that I had bene ayded by myne owne deserts, to at∣tayne to be Generall of this inuincible band of footmen, it had not fayled but some had put in their foote before me. And thereupon willed me to make him some Impresa, and me seemed that the Austritch Cursant made ve∣ry much to his purpose, who as Plinie saith, is accustomed to vse her Winges as Sayles, ex∣celling in swiftnes of running all other crea∣tures. And albeit Nature hath giuen her Wings, yet hath she not the vse of them as haue other birds. And vnto this Austritch I added this mot. Si sursum non efferor alijs, sal∣tem cursu praeteruehor omnes. Also I gaue the proportion of the same birde to the Earle Pietro Nauarro, when by
the capitulatiō of peace, he was deliuered our of the prison of Castell Nuouo, and came to Rome, where I began with him to haue very strinct familiaritie, thereby to be informed of diuers poyntes concerning my Historie touching humaine affayres which I was then to write, wherein he curteously satisfied me, as one most couetous of his honour. And hauing recounted all his victories and misfortunes, he requested of mee an Impresa vppon certaine subiectes which I liked not: whereunto I replied. Sir, you neede not seeke farther then your owne noble deedes for an Impresa: for I hauing made you renowmed in my historie, as the glorious inuenter of that admirable and supernaturall arte of Vnder∣mining, which shall immortalize your name: as there where you caused most miraculously the Castle of Ouo at Naples to bee blowne vp into the aire: I would not haue you part from this, being a thing which hath purchased vn∣to you surpassing honour and singulare repu∣tation. Whercupō he confessing it to be true, aunswered me: I praie see if you can finde me one to this effect. Then came there to my re∣membraunce that which some write of the Austritch, which doth not hatch her Egges as doe other birdes by couering on them, but doth accomplishe it with the effectuall raies of her eyes. So I figured the Austritch Male and Female, stedfastly looking vppon their
Egges with the raies passing from their eyes to their Egges, with this mot, Diuersa ab illis virtute valemus. Expressing therby the renou∣med commendation of his wit in the inuen∣tion of Vndermining, which with the violēce of the fire, is in effect equall to the infernall Furies. This deuise pleased him well, and he willingly accepted of it. Dom. Truely my Lord these your Austrit∣ches with their diuers properties, haue serued passing fitlie in these three farre different Im∣prese, & I doubt whether any of the rest which remaine can excell them, but it may bee they maie disgrace others, composed of noble wittes, which you shall hereafter recite. Iou. I am not so arrogant to assume so much to my self, as to make such which shall excell, nay rather coūteruaile the deuises of others: as namely of that of the Marquise of Pescara, the first time he was Generall of all the light Horsmen in the Battell of Rauenna, where to defende his Ensigne, he was greeuously woū∣ded, and being founde amidst the dead Car∣kasses was taken prisoner by the French men, he bare in his Ensigne a Spartan Targat, with this mot, Aut cum hoc aut in hoc: According to the same which that couragious woman gaue vnto her Sonne going to the Battell of Mantinea, to signifie vnto him, that he should bee resolute in this, either to combat so vali∣auntly, therby to purchase victorie, or els dy∣ing
like a Gentleman or worthie the name of a Spartan, to bee caried dead in his Target to his house, according to the auncient vsage of Greece: which thing Virgill seemeth to note in this verse: Impositum scuto refirunt pallanta frequentes: which also may be gathered by the wordes of the famous Epaminondas, who be∣ing in a Battell wounded to death, and caried forth by his Souldiers, earnestly demaunded whether his Target were saued, and aunswere being made, that it was, hee euen in the ex∣tremitie of death shewed some signe of re∣ioycing. The French Captaines haue beene much delighted in Militarie and amourous Imprest, amongst whom, the best renoumed, and who deserued to be soueraigne at Armes, was the Lorde of Trimouille, who being Conquerer in the Battel of S. Aulbin in Bretaigne, where was takē prisoner the Duke of Orleans, which after was King Lewes: had for his Impresa a whoele with this mot, Sans point sortir hors de l'orniere: Without trās∣gressing the prescribed li∣mets. to signifie that he alwaies kept himselfe vp∣right in the seruice of his King, without go∣ing astray for any inconueniēce which might happen. He was a Captaine of absolute cou∣rage, in so much that being 60. yeres of age, honorably died fighting, in the sight of his King, when he was ouercome and taken in the Battell at Pania. There was also among the chief Captaines
which came into Italie famous and renow∣med, Lewes of Luxembourg of the race of the Emperour Henry, who died at Bonconuento, whose Sepulture you saw in the great Church at Pisa. It was this Lewes, to whom the Duke Lodouico Ssorza, yeelded himself being betra∣yed by the Suissers at Nouara, hoping to haue by him or by his meanes some comforte in his calamitie. He (to come to our purpose) had for his Impresa a Sunne, Or, in a fielde a∣zure, inuironed with thick Cloudes, with this mot, Obstantia nubila soluet: to inferre that he hauing endured diuers aduersities, after the beheading of his Father the high Constable of Fraunce, hoped notwithstanding that by his valure and vertue, that euen as the Sunne with his skalding beames dissolues the Clou∣des, so should hee vanquishe all that was ad∣uerse to his shining vertues. There succeeded this Gouernour in Lom∣bardie, Charles of Ambouse, called, for the dig∣nitie of the office he bare in the Kings court, great Master, and Lord of Chamon: He was of a pleasaunt disposition, and much addicted to loue, yet by his visage a man would haue iud∣ged him rigorous, and by his Cholorique wordes fierce and angry: notwithstanding he delighted to courte Ladies, and tooke greate pleasure, in feasting, banquetting, dauncing, and in Comedies: which life was not liked of King Lewes. For he lay then sporting in these
delightes when hee should haue succoured Mirandula, besieged and taken by Pope Iu∣lius. He gaue for his Impresa a sauage man with a Clubbe in his hand, and aboue him this La∣tin posie, Mitem animum agresti sub tegmine seruo: thereby to assure the Ladies, that he was not so rigorous as he seemed to the outward vewe. The foresayde inuention to many seemed good: but notable in my conceipt was that of Francesco Sensauerino Earle of Gaiaza, who in emulation of his Brother Galeazzo at the comming of the French men into Italie, de∣parted from the Duke Lodouico, and ioyned with them, not without breach of his honor: for that such a departure caried some suspect. His Impresa was set on the Coate armour of a hundred Launces, which he obtayned of the King, & it was the Trauayle wherein Smithes vse to put in wilde horses when they shoe thē, with this mot, Pour dompter folie: to signifie that he would tame a certaine enemie of his, To tame follie. which was of the like wilfull nature. There was also among the French men a famous Captaine of tried valure named Ed∣ward Stuart, of the blood royall of Scotland; called my Lord of Aubinie: he as being Cosin to King Iames the fourth, gaue a Lyon ram∣pant in a fielde argent, all sowne with buckles, imbrodered on his Cotes and Ensignes with this mot, Distantia iungit: Signifying that he
was the meane and the buckle to hold vnited the King of Scots and the King of Fraunce, to counteruaile the forces of the King of En∣gland, the naturall enemie of the French men and Scots. Dom. It seemeth good to me, my Lord, that you returne againe to our Italians, at the least to those (as we say) of the second ranke, since you haue alreadie from the beginning spokē of the most famous, to whose glorie few dare presume to aspire, now at this daie: for nei∣ther the Colonesi nor Vrsini, haue any of their progenic which wil tread their steppes in the practise of Cheualrie. And it behoueth those Princes which seeke to equall them selues in honor with Francesco Gonzaga, Alphonso d' E∣stè, Giacopo Triuultio, or with the Signiori Reg∣nicoli, to striue with restles labour and indu∣strie: but now they, it seemeth, are in decli∣ning: for that at this day, honors and digni∣ties, the rewardes of Cheualrie, are giuen into the handes of Straungers. And if the Earle Ferrante Sensauerino, Prince of Salerna, a man decked with notable vertues, doth not resus∣sitate the honour of his Kingdome, I see not what hope there is of other Princes in Italie. Iou. There is some hope in deede of him, whereof he gaue great likelihood in the Bat∣tel of Cerosola, where it was manifest that tho∣row his pollicie retiring a little back, he made in greate parte frustrate the victorie of the
French men. And it maie be said that he pre∣serued the state of Millan, and Piemont for the Emperour, which was no small commen∣dation in so great disgraces. Dom. Tell me my Lorde, doth this Prince beare any Impresa, in my opinion he should not want being so gallant a Knight. Iou. Truely I neuer saw any Ensigne of his, neither any amorous deuise, whereof I mer∣uaile, hauing in his house the excellent Poet Bernardo Tasso. Also in his countrey the Duke of Amalfi of the house of the Piccolomini, a courteouse and valiaunt Knight, and aboue all an excellent Rider, and very skilfull in iud∣ging of a good and couragious horse, being exhorted in my presence by the Lord Mar∣quise of Vasto his Cosin, to leaue the pleasures of Sienna, whereof he was Gouernour, and to goe with him vnto the warres of Piemont: he aunswered, the spirit was willing but the flesh was weake: but what mcaneth (saith he) that place of Scripture, Nemo nos conduxit. Vpon that the Marquise made him Generall of the light horsmen in the warres of Piemont. And the Duke before he departed requested me a denise for his Ensigne, to this effect that the Marquise had before saide vnto him, that three things were conuenient for him which should take on him the like office, which are courage, liberalitie, and vigilancie: Doe not you (sayd I) put him in remembraunce of li∣beralitie,
neither courage, sith he hath lear∣ned them both of you, neither of vigilancie, for that he is of this nature to rise before day, either to goe to the chace or at least to get him out of his bed: whereat he smiling sayd: the vigilancie I meane comprehendeth all care and industrie a man vfeth; to the end he be not taken at vnawares, or els to seeke how to take his enemie at the aduauntage. Wher∣vpō I figured for his Impresa a Crane holding vp her left clawe, wherein she clafpeth a stone for a remedie against sleepe: which thing Pli∣nie recordeth of these Birdes, being meruei∣lous watchfull: and thereunto added this briefe, Officium natura docet. Dom. Tell me my Lorde, were there none amongst the Nobilitie of the Regnicolo more auncient then this man which did beare any goodly deuise? Iou. I remember but two, the one of An∣drea di Capua Duke of Tremoli, and the other of Tomaso Caraffa Earle of Matalone. The Duke in his flowring age, being made Cap∣taine generall of Pope Iulio, died in Ciuita Ca∣stellana, as was thought by poyson, giuen him of some which enuied his honor. He bare for his Impresa a bundle of darting Iauelines, to signifie that he wanted not weapons to keepe the enemies from approaching him, his mot was Fortibus non deerunt. The Countie of Metalone, the Generall
of King Ferandino, had for his deuise Romaine Ballance, with this mot of the holy scripture, Hoc fac & viues: which seemed very extraua∣gant, for that the Ballance serueth to waigh many things: and it was skorned by Mons. di Persi Brother to Mons. d' Alegria, who discō∣fiting the Aragonian Campe at Eboli got the Ensigne of the Generall, and sayd: in good faithe my Enemie hath not obserued that which was written about his Ballace: for that he hath not well waighed his forces with mine. And sith we are entred among the Neapo∣litans, whose Princes seeme to degenerate frō their auncesters in not going to the warres, which I think is because the honors and dig∣nities due vnto them are giuen to straungers: yet I say there wāteth not men of the second forme, both noble and valiaunt, who by their valure aspire to honour: Amongst whom is Signior Giou Baptista Castaldo, famous for a thousand freshe and notable experiences, be∣ing General of the Campe of Charles the Em∣perour, obtayning great praise for his enter∣prises at Germanie, amounting to the honour of Liutenaunt and Captaine for the King of the Romaines in the affayres of Transiluania a∣gainst the Turkes and the Valacchi. This Ca∣staldo, all the time that the whole warres en∣dured, against the French men in Piemoat, he would not be there, seeing that the Marquise
of Vasto did distribute al the honorable Offi∣ces to ill experienced Souldiers, and therfore liued aloofe at Millan: declaring that the Marquise did worke thinges against nature, to make all Nations to wonder at his disor∣derly dealing. And thereupon willed me to compose him some Impresa, and I figured him the Mount AEtna of Sicilia, whose top bur∣neth casting out violent flames of fire, and a little belowe hath the grounde all couered with Snow, not farre from that a vastie place full of burnt and consumed stones, and at the foote thereof lyeth a most pleasaunt & fruit∣full soyle: adding thereunto this mot, Natura maiora facit: Alluding to the disorder of the Marquise in bestowing the honours of the fielde. Thus he became stayned with the re∣proache of vnskilfulnesse and want of Iudge∣mēt, in preferring such as he thought might commaund him: and putting by, so valiaunt a Captaine, as was this Castaldo. Dom. Now I pray you my Lorde what are the other Imprese which I haue seene depain∣ted in your Gallery? Iou. There is among other, that of the ex∣cellent and neuer sufficiently commended Lady the Marquise of Piscara, Vittoria Colonna, to whom I accompt my selfe infinitly bound, as I haue shewed to the worlde in the life of her inuincible Spouse, the Lorde Marquise of Piscara. This Lady, albeit she lead a chast and
sober life, vertuous and liberall towards eue∣ry man. Yet there wanted not enuious and malignant persons, which did molest and dis∣turbe her well disposed mynd. But cōforting her selfe with this: that they which though to harme her, hurt them selues: which proo∣ued most true by diuers reasons which are not here to be vttered. Therfore I figured her certayne Rockes standing in the middest of a turbulent Sea, beating against them with boysterous waues: with this brise added a∣boue it. Conantia frangere frangunt. As much to say, that the Rocks of their firme force and strength, repell the furious surges of the ra∣ging Sea, breaking and consuming them into froth. And this Impresa bearing a gallant shew I caused to be figured in my house. And sith we are entred to speake of Wo∣men, I will also shewe you another which I made for the Lady Marquise of Uasto, Maria d'Aragone. Who was wont to say, that as she her selfe made singulare acount of her honor and chastitie, so not onely would she preserue it in her owne person, but also take great care that none of her gentlewomen and feruants should, rechlesly corrupted, transgresse the li∣mits of honestie. And thereupon set downe a straight order in her house, to remoue all oc∣casions both from her men and women, of seeking to defile themselues or their honour. And therefore I made her that Impresa which
you so greatly commended in my Gallery, which is two bundels of rype Millet, bound together with this mot. Seruari & seruare meū est. For the Millet is of such nature, that not only it gardes it selfe from al corruption, but also preserues other thinges from putrifying which lye neere it, as the Rubarbe and Caufire: which precious things the Apothicaries keepe in boxes full of Millet, to the ende they may not be consumed. Dom. I am gladde that you are discended from Captaynes to treat of Women: which also is the more pertinent to the purpose, for that these two were the wiues of most hono∣rable knights. Iou. Hereupon I call to mynde a beautiful dame, the loue of Odelto diffois, called Monsig∣di Lutrec, who on a time merely sporting with him sayd, that he was noble and valiant, but too too prowde, wherein peraduenture she tould the trueth. For when diuers of the ri∣chest Seigneurs of Millan came in the morning to his house to salute him, without putting of his Bonnet, or with any other gesture of cur∣tesie or humanitie, hardly would he dayne to shewe them a merry countenaunce, which thing brought him into reproche and con∣tempt with the Nobilitie of Milan. Where∣vpon he tooke occasion (in steede of a Cowe, Gueles with Bees, the auncient Armes of his house) to figure a large Chimney, and therein
a great fire, with this mot Dou' è gran fuoco è gran fumo. To inferre an answere to the Lady, that where there is a fiery courage ioyned with Nobilitie, there must also be a great smoke of pryde: Wherefore it is necessarie, that great estates, take especiall regard that they commit nothing to cause them to bee hated of the common people, as was Theodo∣ro Triuulsio, who hauing bin long a complay∣ning among the French men, and Aragoni∣ans in the kingdome of Naples, was esteemed wise and politique, rather for speaking litle in Counsailes and assemblies, then for combat∣ting in Skirmishes, he bare for his deuise only fiue yeares of corne, without any mot, being a man litle liberall either in hospitalitie or re∣warding Souldiers, and of small curtesie in af∣fayres of peace, which brought him into dis∣dayne with the Uenetian Lords, for when he was generall, that they determined to change him for Marc' Antonio Colonno. And therfore Master Andre G: itti, puruoyer of the campe, vouchsafed to bestowe on him a bitter bob after the conflict of Bicocea: saying, our Ge∣nerall goeth very ill prouided for victuals, ca∣rying but the prouision of fiue eares of corne with him, to whome replied Master Caesar Vio∣la his Standard bearer, a gentleman of Milan: meruayle not thereat Sinior pouruoyer, for that our Captaine liueth with a thin diet, put∣teth out to credit, and after payeth himselfe
with ready coyne. But these corne eares of Theodoro reduce to my memorie, a deuise which I made for the Marquise of Uasto, whé after the death of Antonio da Leua, he was chosen Generall for the Emperour Charles the fifth, saying that he had scarce ended the toyle and trauayles which he had induted in attayning the Captayneship of the Fauterie, but that newe cause of troubles began to spring, the chardge thereof being almost vn∣supportable. Thereupon, conformable to his purpose I figured him two Sheues of rype Corne with this briefe. Finiunt pariter reno∣uántque labores. Signifying therby, that scarce is the corne fully ripe, but that the Plowmans restles toyle is renued, againe prouiding for another Haruest, and the rather was this a∣greeable to the subiect of the Marquise, for that his great grandfather Don Roderico d' A∣ualos, high Constable of Castile did beare the Sheffe of corne which he wan in Battayle. Also not long before he had an other no∣table deuise inuented by Master Gualtier Cor∣bct Senate of Milan, vpon certayne talke had with the sayde Marquise, who greatly desired to be generall (as afterward he was) that hee might wholy shew his valour, without hauing his deserued prayse communicated with the other Captayne which was in authoritie a∣boue him, saying that he had prooued, that many of his owne exploytes, in feates of Ar∣mes
were attributed either to the Marquise of Piscara, or els to Sinior Prospero, or Antonio da Leua: and that now he hoped, sith he was freed from a compagnion, to manifest to the whole world what he could doe in the arte Militarie. And herupon Master Gualtier figu∣red the Spheres of the foure Elements sepera∣ted: with this mot aboue them. Discretis sua virtus inest. As much to say, that the Spheres in their proper places haue their peculiare ver∣tues, whereunto, notwithstanding, a Philoso∣pher will not yeeld, for that the Element of fire in his own proper sphere doth not burne, but onely when it is mixed with other Ele∣ments, but for that it had fayre apparence it went for currant, being set on the banners of of the Trompetters. This Marquise had also another concer∣ning a matter of loue, inuented by Antonio E∣picuro, a learned man in the Vniuersitie of Naples: The which was the Temple of Iuno Lacina figured, borne vp with Pillers, and therein an altar with flaming fire, which with no winds could euer be blowne out, and yet the Temple was on euery side open, all the space betweene the pillers, thereby to signi∣fie to the Lady whome he serued (and who long time had loued him, and now greeued seeing her self, as she thought, abandoned of him, wherein notwithstanding she was decei∣ued) that the fire of his loue was eternall and
vnquenchable, as was that on the altar of Iu∣no Lacina. And the inscription it selfe of the Temple engrauen on the Pillars, serued in steade of a mot. Iunoni Lucinae dicatum. This deuice also beares a fayre shewe, but it requi∣reth some man of skill to declare the Historie to those which knowe it not. Also that Impresa was somwhat loftie of Lodouico GonZaga, called for his brauery Ro∣domanto, who the same day that Charles the fifth visited Mantua, wore in his Cote of ra∣ced Satin all embrodered with squares of di∣uers colours, one represented a Scorpion, and the other this mot. Qui viuens laedit morte me∣detur: being the nature of a Scorpion to cure her venemous infection, being killed & layed to the wounde. Thereby to signifie that he had slayne him which presumed to offend him, and had cured the hurt of the offence with the death of his enemy. The same Lodouico Gonzaga had also an o∣ther Imprese farre better, and it happened vp∣pon this occasiō: Being ariued with the Em∣perours Campe to assalt Rome, betweene the gate Aurelia, and Settimiana, tooke the Sub∣urbes of S. Peters, through the courage of his Souldiers. Whereupon Rome being misera∣bly sacked by Germaines, Spanyards and Ita∣lians, which tooke the Emperours parte: he said, that the Souldier is to haue renowme, as his guerdō, be it good or bad. As if he should
say, although the taking of Rome, and the spoyle therof was abominable to euery good natured Italian, yet notwithstanding did he thinke it would make him famous: and vpon this he had figured the sumptuouse Temple of Diana Ephesia, which being burned by one desirous of fame, (not regarding whether it were good or bad) by destroying the most gorgious Monument of the earth: who ther∣fore became so despightfully loathed of the Grecians, that they neuer vsed his name, so de∣testable an act had he committed: his Posie therunto was, Alterutra clarescere fama: which I after added, misliking this which he had before, Siue bonum, siue malum, fama est. I composed also another for the Marquise of Vasto: who had intelligence that his Soul∣diers in their tents and lodgings presumptu∣ously talked, saying with great iolitie that the Marquise might well giue the assault to this or that Forte, or skirmish with displaied En∣signes at the first and least occasion, or bende his force against such or such a Castle, preten∣ding them selues to bee very skilfull and of great hardinesse in their loftie wordes, yea, e∣uen reprehēding their Captain as one which lay idle. But the Marquise sayd, such men, whē hapned the point of daunger, and neede re∣quired to shewe their prowesse, would then keepe quiet both their handes and their ton∣gues, when as he should enter the fielde with
sword in hand. And to expresse this his con∣ceipt, I depainted him that Mechanicall In∣strument, which hath many clackes set on a wheele, which make a great ratling, and is v∣sed to bee set in stead of Belles to call to de∣uine seruice on the holidaies during the time that it is darke, as commonly is vsed in Italie, at the time of the death of our Sauiour, when the Belles are not to be rong, the stead wher∣of the noise of this Instrument supplieth, and truely it beareth a pleasaunt and phantasti∣call shewe, hauing this mot, Cum crepitat, sono∣ra silent: to meane thereby that when needful occasion should serue, and the Marquise with glittering Armour were entering into daun∣gers, these pretended venturers would trem∣ble with feare, shewing them selues not aun∣swerable to their brauery vsed in wordes. I may not passe ouer in silence the Esten∣dard of the Earle of Santafiore, which he bare in the Battell of Seruia, which was poudred with Quinces, being the auncient Armes of Signior Sforza da Cotignola, by right line his great Grandfather, and amongst the Quin∣ces was this mot, Fragrantia durant Herculea collect a manu: to signifie that the Quinces ga∣thered by the hande of so noble a Captaine, endured yet, yeelding a sweete odour: allu∣ding to Hercules, who gathered the like fruit in the Westerne gardens Hesperides. The field was Gueles and the Quinces Or.
An amorous Ladie in Italie, who through her incontinent desire and vnsatiable appe∣tite, not sufficed with the fauour of an hono∣rable Lord, who effectuously serued her, aba∣sed her body to a youth of meane estate and poore parentage, but in the lineaments of his body comely, and of proper personage, with whose feauture she became fettered, & doted so much vpon him, that neither coun∣cell could reclayme her, nor shame compell her, nor the intire affection of her noble lo∣uer restrayne her from committing sacrilege with her honour. The foresayde Lorde had quickly some inkling of this matter, perad∣uéture by the Lady herselfe (for quis bene cela∣uerit ignem) who by her inconsiderate gestures and semblances vnwarily discouered her trās∣ported loue. Whereupon he with great dis∣pight contemned her, and willed me to com∣pose an Impresa to this effect: That whereas he accounting himselfe happy, being in the proper possession of so great a good, and af∣terward to become copartner with so base a compagnion, he thought himfelse extremely iniuried. Wherfore I vpon this, caused to bee depainted a triumphal Chariot, with an Em∣perour therein triumphing, drawen with foure whihte horses, and a slaue standing be∣hind him, holding fast his crowne of Lawrell vpon his head after the auncient manner of the Romaines, who to temperate the happie
fortune and vainglory of the Emperour vsed to haue a slaue to triumphe with him, The posie thereunto was taken of Iuuenal. Seruus currn portatur eodem. Here the humane forme may seeme tollerable to the scrupulous sear∣cher; being in an extraordinary habite. Dom. This greatly delighteth me, for that the soule being a verse of Iuuenal, geueth it great light, but tell me my Lorde, doe Cardi∣nals, with whome you haue bene conuersant, vse to beare Imprese. Ion. Yea in trueth, being worthy Princes, as was the Cardinall Ascanio Sforza, who la∣boured by al possible meanes to creat Federi∣co Borgia Pope, which was Alexāder the sixth, and it was not long after, but by manifest tri∣all, he found him not onely vngratefull, but also his deadly enemie. In so much, that by the meanes of him and his own vnluckie for∣tune, the Duke Lodouico Sforza was dechaced milan by the French men. And without ge∣uing ouer his hatred, he neuer ceased to pur∣sue the famely of the Sforzi, vntill they were betraied, put from their estate, and lead priso∣ners into Fraunce. To this purpose Ascunio framed for his Impresa the Eclipse of the Sonne, which happeneth by reason of the interposition of the Moone betwixt it and the earth: to inferre, that as the Sonne can∣not then shine on the earth, by reason of the iniury and ingratitude of the Moone, hauing
no light of her own, but such as she receiueth from the Sonne, and in the Eclipse she taketh away from her benefactor as most vngrate∣full, Euen so Pope Alexander rewarded a sin∣gular good deed with most vile recompence, his mot hereunto was: Totum adimit quo in∣grata refulget. Dom. Without doubt this Pope Alexander was a terrible and pestilent monster among all the Nobilitie of Italie: but I meruaile the lesse at his ingratitude towards this Ascanio (which was for a long time the honor of the Romaine court) for that diuers his successors haue followed his steppes, which may plain∣ly be seene in searching their liues. Iou. Hippolito d'Este Cardinall of Ferrara, (Vncle to the last which bare the fame name) had for his deuise, a Falcon holding in her talents the counterpoize of a Clocke, as is to bee seene on the Parke gate of the Stewes of Dioclesian, but he had thereunto no mot: for he would haue to be vnderstood by deuiding this worde Falcon, that he wrought al his af∣fayres in time, after this maner, Fal con tempo. The Falcon with the diamant of the house of Medicis, is attainted of the like fault. And besides this he bare an amorous Im∣presa, which was a Camell on his knees char∣ged with a great burden, with this mot, Non suefro mas de lo que puedo: as if he should saie to his Ladie, lay on me no greater torments thē
I can beare: for I will suffer no more then I am able, being the propertie of the Cammell to incline him selfe to the earth of his owne will, to haue his lode layd on him, and when he feeleth that he is burdened sufficiently, beginning to set forwarde, he signifieth that he can carie no more. After the death of Ascanio, and the Cardi∣nall of S. George, there succeeded Lodouico of Aragon and Sigismondo Gonzaga, who repen∣ting them selues to haue created Pope Leo: the one of them, to wit the Cardinall of Ara∣gon, wore a white tablet with this mot about it, Melior fortuna notabit: and the other, Gon∣zaga bare a Crocodile, with this briefe, Crocodi∣li lachrymae: which is vsed in a Prouerbe, signi∣fying the dissimulation of those, which make faire apparence of amitie, & within beare the venome of hate and emnitie. The two most famous gallants of the Ro∣maine court, haue been two youthes, the one exceeding the other, Hippolite of Medicis, and Alexander Farnese. And as for the first, we haue alreadie shewed his Impresa, Inter omnes of the Comet, and the eclipsed Moone. Now it resteth that we declare those three deuises of Fernese: whereof the first was an Arrowe hitting the white of a But, with this Greeke mot, , as much to say, it belioueth to ayme to the white. The second was one which I made him, to
satisfie his request: which is to be seene in his rich and stately embrodered. Tapistrie: and it hapned vpō this occasion: On a time talking with me he sayd, that at the beginning of his Cardinallhipp he was not resolued what Im∣presa to take, and that I should compose him one, to this effect, that he sayd vnto me: if God did fauour him in his secrete desires, in time would he publishe them with some no∣table Impresa. Whereupon I figured a little scrole of white paper, with this briefe aboue it, Votis subscribunt fata secundis. Lastly, when by Pope Paulus the third, he was sent Legat into Germanie with the flower of the Italian Cheualrie, to aide the Emperor Charles the fift against the Dutch men, which fauoured the doctrine of Luther, and rebelled against him, I made for his Impresa, the triple forked lightning, the peculiar weapon of Iu∣piter, which he vseth when he will chasten the pride and impietie of men, as he did in the time of the Giants, with this mot, Hoc vno Iu∣piter vltor: alluding the excommunications to lightning and the Pope to Iupiter. By the ayd of this supplie, which at the beginning of the warres came very commodiously, Charles the Emperour gayned the victorie. Mons, Andre Gritti, Purueyer for the Vene∣tians warres, wherein he was renowmed from the beginning to the ende, which warres en∣dured eight yeres, and merited by his coura∣gious
valour, to be Prince and Duke of their Commonwealth. At that time by his power was Padoua recouered and defended against the forces of Maximilian, who had on his side all the Nations of Europe: He had a notable Imprese, inuented by Giouan Catta, the famous Poet of Verona: & it was the heauen with the Zodiac and the twelue Signes, borne vpō the shoulders of Atlas, kneeling on his left knee, and with his handes embracing the heauens, with a mot there aboue, Sustinet nec fatiscit: Albeit the Lord (respecting modestie) would not weare it publiquely, to auoyde enuie, al∣though it greatly pleased him, and was high∣ly commended of euery man. Atlas hath a humaine forme, yet is the thing tollerable by reason it is a fiction. The Lady Isabella Marquise of Mantona, doth not deserue to be passed ouer in silence, who for her honorable conditions was al∣wayes esteemed to be of a noble minde, and had sundry times of her life, diuers assaults of fortune, which gaue her occasion to haue more then one Impresa, and amongst other, it hapned that for the vnmeasured loue (which her sonne Duke Federico, which he bare to a Lady, to whome he did all the fauour and ho∣nour he might. Whereby the Lady Isabella re∣mayned vnhonoured and little esteemed. But the beloued of the Duke vsed to ride very stately thorowe the Citie, accompanied with
a great troupe of gallant gentlemen, which were wont to attend on the Marquise. And at length it came to this, that there remayned to accompany her, but only two or three old gentlemen which neuer would forsake her. Vpon which inconucnience, the sayde Lady caused to be figured this Impresa, in the olde Court of her Pallace in the Suburbs, to this purpose: which was a Candelsticke made triangulare wise, whereon are set many Can∣delsticks for diuine seruice vsed at this day in the holy weeke. From the which Candelstick not without some misterie the priestes vse to take away the Candles one by one, vntil they haue left on the top of all but one, to signifie that the light of fayth cannot perish at all. Vnto the which deuise there wanted a mot, whereupon I added this. Sufsicit vnum in tene∣nebris, according to that of Virgil, Vnum pro multis. For the Sonne and Heire of the Marquise of Vasto, inheritour of the name, and the E∣state of the great Marquise of Piscara, in whō was seene the expresse Image of vertue, stri∣uing to attayne to the glorie of his Vncle, & Father, and of his other Ancestors at such time as he went into Spayne to serue King Phillip, I figured a great tree of Lawrell per∣tayning to the auncient house of the Auolos, from the which Lawrell were seene certayne great branches cut of, and among the rest
which remayned, was a straight and gallant twigge springing vp on a great height, with this mot: Triumphali è stipite surgens alta petit, which was so much the more congruent to the purpose, for that the Lawrell is dedicated to triumphers. I will not omit one which I made the last yere for Sinior Andrca, the sonne of Don Fer∣rante Gonzaga, who being a youth of great hope and towardnes, hauing gotten to bee Captayne of a band of horsemen, he required of me an Impresa for his Standarde: and I al∣luding to that of Virgil, Parma inglorius alba, caused to bee depaynted a Shielde or rounde buckler, all fringed about, with foure rounde circles set at foure sides thereof, bound toge∣ther with foure wreathes of Lawrell. In the first Circle was the Furnace trying golde, the Impresa of the Mraquise Francesco, (with this mot: Probastime domine) who was his grand∣father by the fathers side: in the second, the mount Olimpus, with the Altar of fayth, of Duke Federico his vncle: in the third, that of Andrea Capua Duke of Thermopolt his grand∣father by the mothers side, which was the bondle of Dartes, with Fortibus non deerunt: in the fourth was the Cattell of his father without a body, with this mot: nec spe, ncc me∣tu, and about his shield in a fielde Argent was written this briefe, Virtutis trophaea nouae non degener addet: to signifie that he would not
take away or detract from his Ancestors, but rather did some notable Impresa of his owne. Dom. Is it possible, my Lord, that the olde Captaynes and auncient Princes vsed no no∣table inuentiō in their Impresa? in my iudge∣ment, they (and especially the worthies of (Millan) for a long time, were loth to lcaue their deathes heades, their Barnacle, courry combes and brushes with their posies either fondly composed or too too arrogant. Iou. It is true, but yet there hath ben some good and currant, as was that of Galeazo Vis∣cont which builded the Castle and bridge at Pauia, a worke worthy the noble minde of a Romaine, he bare a firebrand with a bucket of water, to signifie that he held in his hande both warre and peace, but there wāted there∣vnto a posie. That of the Earle Colo of Campo Basso, who liued in the memorie of our Fa∣thers, had both a subiect and a soule. He be∣ing in pay with the great Charles of Bourgo∣nie, feared not to aduenture the reproch of notable disloyaltie, to be reuenged of a perti∣culare iniury, and it was for some displeasure conceiued against the Duke (a man without measure chollericke) for crossing him in a consultation holden concerning the warres, for the which he bare him deadly hatred, and it so stack in his disdainful stomacke, that vn∣till the time of reuenge, he could neuer for∣get it, which fitly was offred him in the bat∣tle
of Nansi, where he gaue aduertisement to Renato Duke of Loren, that he should not fearc to assault the Duke his Lorde with the Suissars,, for that he with his companie would not once moue to giue ayde, but be as loo∣kers on. Whereby in that conflict the Duke was slayne, and the Earle Cola addressed him toward Fraunce, to acquaint him with King Lewes. And his Impresa was afterward a great mightie stone of Marble, cleft with the force of a Figge tree springing out of the creuise thereof, which in time creeping and encro∣ching farther into the Marble, spoyleth and defaceth it with weake force and slender vio∣lence, and aboue it was this mot taken out of Martial, Ingentia Marmora findit caprificus. And this Impresa was not onely counted gal∣lant in shewe, but also an example for Princes that they ought not in choler to abuse their seruants, especially such as be noble and of stoute courage. Dom. This reuenge was great, but very ig∣nominious, and not vnlike to that of the Priest Rinaldo da Modena, sometimes Steward, and Chamberlaiue to the Cardinall of Yorke in England, who hauing receiued besides the iniury of words, certayne blowes of the sayde Cardinall, which he could not well digest, and to be reuenged thereof he gaue him poyson, whereof he died, and afterward confessing his fact, his body was quartered in Rome, in
the time of Pope Leo. Let this suffice that it is no iesting with mē of courage, which esteeme their honour: therefore either dispatch them of life, or neuer meddle with them. For the man receiuing the offence, at the end, for his honour will watch a time to be reuenged. Some worthie men in their Impresa follow the conformitie of their names, or els of their Armes: as did Matthias Coruin King of Hun∣garie, who bare a Rauen, a birde in force, witt and viuacitie singulare. Some bare their pro∣per Armes for an Impresa, as did Iohn Schiepu∣sensis after that he was King of Hungarie, be∣ing by the ayde and fauour of Soliman greate Lord of the Turkes, and through the affectiō of the Nobilitie of his Kingdome, crowned in Alba, who bare a Wolfe with her Vdder full strouting, being the Armes of his Father, but he added thereunto a mot, composed ve∣ry pithely by Stephanus Brodericus, Chauncel∣lor of his Kingdome, which was Sina aliena{que} pignora nutrit: to signisie that he receiued into fauour, such as was his enemies. I had almost forgotten to tell you the Im∣presa of Francesco Maria della Rouera Duke of Vrbin, (after that with his owne hands he had slaine the Cardinal of Pauia in Rauenna, in re∣uēge of the insuppotible iniuries receiued of him) which was a Lyon rampant in his pro∣per colour in a fielde Gueles, with a sworde in his pawe, with this briefe, Non deest generoso in
pectore virtus. The like was that which Pompey bare, (as Plutarch reporteth) and the inuen∣tiō was of Signior Castiglione, who was present with him at the death of the Cardinal: albeit the Duke would not make great shew of this Impresa, to auoyde the emnitie of the Cardi∣nalles. Signior Stephano Colbuna, the magnanimous Generall of the Duke Cosimo, had a Siren, the auncient Armes of the house of Colonna, and requested me being his godfather to ad ther∣vnto a mot, which I did, conformable to his noble minde: and it was this, Contemnit tutae procellas: to signifie that he despised aduersi∣tie, trusting to his valour, as the Siren in swim∣ming, contemneth all tempestes. I figured for the Lady Duchesse of Florence a Peahen, which vnder her wings couered sixe of her yong, three on the one side and three on the other, with this mot, Cum pudore laeta foecundit as: alluding to the nature of the bird, which therefore is dedicated to Iuno the Queene of heauen, according to the opinion of the Panims. Dom. Tell me my Lord, I pray you, sith you haue made, as it were a capitulation of all the noble Princes, Captaines, and Cardinalls, are there no other kinde of men which beare Imprese? Iou. Yes in truth are there, and some of the best learned men: as Giacopo SanZaro, who be∣ing
excessiue amorous, and iudging it to bee for his honour aleadged Bocace, who greatly commendeth Guido Caualcanti, Dante, & Ma∣ster Cino di Pistoria, for that they euen to their extreme age were fo und to be inamou∣red. Wherefore remaining alw aies, expecting some recompence in his loue, bare for his deuise a pot full of little blacke stones, with one amongst all the rest white, with this mot, AEquabit nigras candida vna dies: meaning, the day wherein he should bee thought wor∣thie the loue of his Mistrisse, should counter∣uaile all the blacke, clowdie, and vnfortunate daies of his life. To this was agreable the old custome of the Auncients, who were wont to marke the successe of their good and bad ad∣uentures, with little blacke and white stones, therby to number at the yeres end, of which they had most, to see to knowe whether that yere hath bene luckie or vnfortunate. And he demaunded of me my iudgement of his Im∣presa, and I tolde him it was good yet some∣what supernaturall: for that the pots of the Auncients were wont to be made of earth or mettaile: wherefore a man could not figure within any blacke or white stones: for that these pots were not transparent: to which he aunswered, that his was to bee supposed of grosse glasse, wherein they might bee discer∣ned. And so we passed the time in pleasaunt iesting about this matter.
Master Lodouico Aristo inuented a notable Impresa, figuring a Hiue of Bees with their ho∣nie, whom the vngratfull peasant doth stiffle with smoke, bereauing them of life, to reco∣uer their honie and waxe: with this mot, Pro bono malum: signifying therby as it is thought how he had beene ill intreated of a certaine Nobleman, which may also bee gessed by his Satyrs. Erasmus Rotcrodam, borne in Holland, so ex∣celled in the giftes of the mynd and so admi∣rable witt, that he surmounted all other the learned of his time, as his infinite works doe plainely testifie: who for his autoritie in lear∣ning, bare for his Impresa the God Terminus, being in signification somewhat difficult: meaning that he would not giue place to a∣ny other Writer, as the God Terminus would not yeeld to Ioue in the Capitol, as wrighteth Varro: His Posie was, Vel Ioui cedere nescit. He had freendly familiaritie with Sir Thomas More of Englande, a man of equall fame in wit, of whom he demaunded what posie were fit to be set on his Studie doore, to whom Sir Thomas More aunswered, that the Image of Apelles paynting somewhat, would very fitly adorne it: By the which Erasmus meruayled what he ment, and he to expresse the signifi∣cation sayd: It well beseemeth you, for that Apelles was wont to say, Nulla dies sine linea: which you haue very well obserued in your
writinges, amazing all the worlde with your innumerable volumes. Moreouer, the worthy learned man An∣dreas Alciatus, had for his deuise the Caduceum Mercurie, with the horne of richesse of the Gote Amalthaea the nource of Iuppiter, to si∣gnifie; that by the aboundance of learning and knowledge whereof Mercurie is sayde to be superintendāt, he had attayned renoume, a worthy reward for his trauayles. But truely this gallant deuise doth want a Gnome. I remember that in my youth being amo∣rous at Pauia, I was constrayned of necessitie, for auoyding a greater inconuenience to vn∣dertake a hurtfull departure to saue my life, and to signifie the necessitie which enforced me, I figured the beast called a Beuer, who to escape the hands of the hunter, knowing that he is pursued for no other cause then for his stones which are of great vertue, biteth them of with his teeth as sayth Iuuenal. and leaueth them to the pursuers: with this Greeke mot: , as much to say Necessitie, to the which as sayth Lucian, both goods and men obey. Finally, I made an Impresa at the request of Master Camillo Giordan, a Lawier, vpon this that he said he was doubtfull in minde, and in suspence to aduenture a certayne enterprise: and to be resolued therein, he attended the aduice and coūcell of some Oracle. And there∣vpō I figured him the Aigyptian Spinx, which
did interpret Riddle with abstruse and secret matters, and also that Serpent with his tayle in his mouth, which signifies time, with this Gnome: Inccrta animi decreta resoluet. Also my Nephew Iulio Iouio composed him an Impresa, wherein he deuided or prophe∣sied to him selfe some happie successe, as his worthy wit replenished with all learning did well deserue, figuring a tree with graftes set thereon with (this Dutch mot): Wan Got will, as much to say when God will, this my graffe shall spring and florish, Dom. If it were not presumption my Lord, I would shewe you one which I made for my selfe, although Imprese are onely fit and con∣uenient for men of greater calling, and not for me. Iou. And wherefore not for you Sinior Do∣minico? tell it me plainly and I will absolue you of all blame of presumption which you may incurre thereby. Dom. Being then emboldened by your authoritie and fauour I will shewe it you: be∣ing desirous to signifie a fantasie of mine, not any way immodest, vpon this that not able to liue in mine owne natiue country Piacenza, in such tranquillitie and quiet of mind as I de∣sired, I chose for my second countrey the flo∣rishing citie of Florence, where I hope fortune will prosper me vnder so prudent a Prince, and thereupon I figured a Peache tree loden
with fruite, which in the proper soyle where∣in it first springeth yeeldeth forth poysoned & vnpleasaunt increase, but being transplan∣ted in some farther Cost, becommeth whole∣some and fruitful: and the Posie was, Transla∣ta proficit arbos. Iou. Signior Dominico, this deuise although it sauor of subtile inuention, yet doe I mislike it for two reasons: the one is, for that (as I re∣member) it hath bin deuised alreadie by Ma∣ster Alciat in his Emblems: the other for that it is not agreable to you, in so much you were not planted venemous, for then could you not haue brought forth such fruite in your natiue soyle as you haue done. Wherefore if you will be ruled by me, prouide you of an o∣ther better beseeming you. Dom. Well my Lorde, sith you haue com∣posed so many for others, vouchsafe me the fauour of some of your pithie and sharpe in∣uentions: for to say the trueth I am not satis∣fied with mine owne. Iou. I will not faile to fulfill your request, yet not in respect of any recompence, for the trauailes which you haue vndertaken in trās∣lating my historie, wherein sith you spare no toyle to attaine to learning, it shall not bee a∣misse that you figure the sollowe share, which with long tilling becommeth bright shining as siluer: with this mot, Longo splendescit in v∣su: Alluding to your selfe, who with long la∣bour
haue gotten singulare learning. Dom. Truely I willingly labour and will as long as I liue, exercise my selfe in studie, ho∣ping to get some brightnesse of shining fame: and herein I shall immitate your Lordshippe, who with your continuall studie haue made your name immortall: which thing hapneth not to many. But haue you any other nota∣ble Imprese to recount vnto me, for loth I am that this so sweete a banquet should haue so short an ende. Iou Hardly doe I remēber any more, wor∣thie the rehearsing, and I loue not to enter∣lace the Corrall with the Rubie: the Bricke with the Emerauld, or the Beril with the Dia∣mant: and well may these suffice you, consi∣dering my age, wherein memorie is wont to suffer some defect. Dom. Truely I confesse my Lord, you haue done more then your age would well allowe, yet this I say, that he which shall peruse and see what you haue written of this matter, will say you haue reserued many other notable deuises. But herein you may excuse your self, and say as you did in your Booke de Elogijs, or the discourse of famous mē, newly published: that albeit there are certaine left out, yet the fault was not yours, in that you had not their true portraitures, but rather theirs who neg∣lected to send them to your studie, to accom∣panie so many worthie and Heroical persons.
As of late I met with a certaine Gentleman of the Prouince of Romagna, greatly complai∣ning that he could not finde in your Elogies, the Knight della Volpe, who shewed himself so valiaunt a man in the seruice of S. Marke, and for the honor of Italie. But I to comfort him said, that I was assured the said Knight would not willingly haue his Picture drawne, being somewhat deformed in visage, hauing lost an eye honorably in fight, and that I would for recompēce procure him a place in this tract of Imprese: and thereupon I demaunded him whether he had euer borne any. What Sir (saith he) is it not wel knowne he bare a Foxe in his Ensigne shewing his deuouring teeth, with this mot, Simul astu & dentibus vtor: to signifie that there was no dealing with him being so defended on euery side. Iou. In deede the Knight was of great cou∣rage and vigilancie, and eskapeth not our hi∣storie without great commendation: & ther∣vpon the Venetians erected him a goodly sta∣ture in their Church of our Ladie. And now at the last I will not conceale the Impresa of Giouanni Chiuchiera, accompted a famous Knight in Warre, although it maie (like vnto the former) moue the beholders to laugh, which had depainted in his Banner, (to shew his courage and skill in the exercise of light Horse) a fierce Wolfe with a bloodie Lambe betweene his legges, turning his head
backe regarding two great Sheepheards Ma∣stiues, whereof the one being nerest, looking also backe behinde him to see if the other dogges came in to succour him, as fearing to assaile so terrible an enemie: the mot added thereunto was, Pauent oues, Timent canes, in∣trepidus maneo. But Signior Dominico, the num∣ber of Captaines with their Imprese being so great, that it will confound the wittes of the diligent and laborous writer, I thinke it best for this time, to giue an end to our discourse. Dom. Well, sith it is your pleasure, I would not seeme troublesome vnto you: hoping that an other time shall as fitly serue for our purpose. The ende of the Imprese of Paulus Iouius.
HERE FOLLOW, TOVCHING THE FOR∣mer subiect, certaine notable de∣uises both militarie and amorous, Collected by Samuell Daniell. ACertaine gentleman of Italie na∣med Hermet Stampo, a Prelate, bare for his deuise a Lawrell tree menaced with lightning, with this briefe: Nec sorte, necfato, to signifie that his vertue could not be endama∣ged or anoyed by any fatale chaunce, for lightning (as writeth Plinie) hath no powre to hurt the Lawrell. The same S. Stampo, being created Mar∣quise of Soncino, and hauing married a wife, leauing his Fcclesiasticall habite: represented this deuise: two Palme trees, the male and fe∣male, which neuer bring foorth fruite, vnles they are one planted by the other, adioyning thereunto this mot: Mutua foecunditas. His brother the Earle Maximian, being a∣morous of a Lady named Anna Moronna, who afterward was his wife, had for his Impresa a silk worme, which only liueth with the leaues
of the Mulberie tree, which tree in Lombardie is called Moronna, with this mot: Suol di cio viuo, which is halfe this verse of Petrarch: Suol di cio viuo e d' altra mi calpoco. Thus in English: Onely of this I liue disdayning other foode, to shewe that as the little beast doth only liue by those leaues: so he onely contented him∣selfe to feede on the leaues of his loue, in hope one day to enioy the fruit of legitimate mariage. The Earle Baptista di Lodron, who died at the taking of Gazal Montferrato, had for his perticular deuise a Calthrope, a Stratagemi∣cal instrument vsed in warre, made with three yron prickes so ioyned, that howsoeuer it be throwen, one prick alwayes standeth vpright, with this Posie thereunto: In vtra{que} fortuno: to signifie that the value and constancie of his noble mynde, in all fortunes vncertainties, remayned firme and vpright. Gasper de Mayno, a Knight of Millan, bare a Stockdoue with a Diamant in her bill, being the nature of this birde neuer to lose any thing it hath once taken, thereby to in∣ferre, that he would neuer giue ouer to loue his Lady, whose vowed seruant he faithfully remayned, whose name was also Diamante. His mot was: In aeternum. The Lisard of all his properties, hath one most rare and admirable, among the wonder∣full and infinite effects of nature, which is, it
is neuer in loue to the which all other beasts doe yeeld, whereupon S. Federico Duke of Mantona, made him this Impresa: The Lisard figured, with this mot: Quod huic deest me Iorquet. Meaning thereby that it was the loue of his Lady which tormented him, from the which torments this beast was exempt. The Earle Maurucio Pietra, who afterward was Bishop of Uigena, being Student in Suna, tooke to his surname Disarmato, for that be∣ing a souldier, he left the practise of Armes, and tooke him selfe to his studies, whereby he amounted at length to the Pontificall di∣gnitie. He had for his deuise a Snayle, with her head foorth of her shel wounded with an arrowe, & his mot was this verse of Petrarch: Trouonemi amor del tutto disarmato. Thus in En∣glish. Loue did me finde vnarmed, quite allu∣ding to his surname, and also to the Impresa of that vniuersitie, which was a Snayle put in∣to the fire, which feeling the heate thereof doth scritche, wherevpon the Louewormes, slaues to affections, would inferre that they being all fiered with amourous flames, were constrayned to sing and discharge in langui∣shing verse their sweete sowre passions. Sinior Charlo Ursino, had for his Impresa a Ball mounted vp on hye with the stroke of an hardie arme with this mot Perculsus eleuor, which might be alluded to his inuincible courage, who the more his power was abated
by aduerse fortune, the more he seemed to exalt his vnconquered mind by force of ver∣tue. A yong gallant of Salerna, hauing a long time serued a curteous and beautifull dame, and at length by the fauour of the winged boy cropped both the flower and fruite of his long deferred pleasures, to the extreme contention of ech of them both. But fortune fell to good hap, set her enuious foote in the pleasant plotte of their delights, to fade the sweete sauoring Flowres of their vnconstant ioyes. For this youth roming about the citie, vnhappely hapned to fixe both his rouing eyes and flitting fancie on the force of a yong Damosell adorned with infinite beautie, and was so ardently inamored, that he doted vp∣on her. In which new affection, the heauens seemed so fauourable to further his purpose, that he easely trayned the tender heart of his yeelding Lady to the lure of his loue, as one greatly delighted to liue by exchaunging: whereupon (as louers are commonly wont to beare open eares and vnclosed eyes, and of∣ten to repeate a falfe tale for trueth) his first fauoured to whome bruted fame had reuey∣led, the transported affection of the wande∣ring youth, seeing her selfe abandoned, liued desolate, plunged in the deapth of all perple∣xities, and almost desperate. Yet at the length waighing her case with wisdome, did mode∣rate
the griefe of her desaster, without disco∣uering to any her secret sorowe, purposing onely to disclose, by some couert meane, to the disloyall and vngratefull louer, her pen∣siue and passionate heart. And thereupon she caused a false Diamant, to be so cunningly set in Gold, that it would easely haue deceiued any man saue onely the expert artificer, and within the ring next vnto the finger, she had made to be engrauen this mot in Ebrewe: Lamazabatani, which done, all dissolued into teares she sent it to her loue, praying him, if any pittie or pietie remayned in the breast of a periured, to haue compassion on her, and restore her his loue. The youth being learned and discreete, that at the first sight he vnder∣stoode the Hebrewe mot, yet could he not comprehend what secret the deuise (impor∣ted) vntill by chaunce shewing his ring to a frend of his, an excellent gold smith, who told him that the Stone was a counterfait, he began to meditate on the mistery, and loue hauing opened the eyes of his vnderstanding, he soone perceiued thereby the lamentable complaint of the miserable Lady, and the in∣iury he had done her: resoluing into two words the mot of the false Diamant, in this sort: Di amante falso. Adding thereunto her Of a false Lo∣uer. mot out of the Gospell, signifying why hast thou forsaken me. Whereupon the gentle∣man sorowing his fact, had compassion on
the desolate dame, placing her againe in the possession of his loue, which she long time af∣ter enioyed. The Earle Clemete Pietro being amorous of a Ladie, enforced for a time to depart frō her, had for his Impresa an Elephant, which by na∣ture (as saith Plinie) knowing that the Hūters pursue it for no other thing but for his teeth, (which are of admirable vertue) he knocketh them out against a tree: His mot was out of Petrarch. Lascai di me la meglior parte a dietro. I left behind the better parte of me. The same Gentleman being also at an o∣ther time inamoured of a Gentlewoman na∣med Laura, he had for his deuise a Rauen cō∣batting with a Cameleon, who being hurte and inuenomed by his enemie, knowing the wound to bee deadlie, to cure himself taketh the fruite of the Laurel in his mouth: his mot was, Hinc sola salus: to signifie that his amo∣rous wound neede no better Cataplasme, then his Ladie Laura. He had also another, being Captaine of the Horsmen in Piemont, which was an Egle fly∣ing so high against the Sunne that it burned her feathers, with this mot, Aude aliquid dignum. The fourth deuise of this worthie Knight, was a naked sworde hauing this mot, Ex hoc in hoc: to shewe how he was to trie by the sworde his iust cause, and the reason he had
t̄o combat with his enemie. Giouanni Battista Bottigella, an honorable Gentleman desirous to expresse an amorous conceipt, had for his Impresa a Ship with hoy∣sed sayle, and the Fishe called in Latin Remora holding it fast: which Fishe (as Plinie recoun∣teth) is of such great force, that if it take to a Ship, it staieth it and holdeth the same so fast, that neither the furie of windes, nor any o∣ther force, is of power to stirre it: His mot was, Sic frustra: signifying that euen so it no∣thing preuailed him to bee faithfull and con∣stant to his Ladie, sith she shewed her selfe ri∣gorous and cruell towards him. Hippolito Girami a Gentleman of Millan, at the warres of Sienae, in the seruice of the Emperour, bare a sworde figured, with a Ser∣pent twinding about it, hauing a Laurell gar∣land in his mouth, with this posie, His duoi∣bus. The sword in this place signifying strēgth and valure of bodie: The Scrpent wisedome and vertue of minde. A certaine Gentleman to signifie that ac∣cording to his courteouse and gentle nature, was willing to please in euery vertuouse and reasonable action, but by force, and cōstraint he was not cōpelled to do any thing: where∣vpon he figured a Palme tree, whose proper∣tie is sufficiently knowne, with this mot, Fle∣ctimur obsequio non viribus. An Italian Ladie named Liuia Tormiella,
was in her life most beautifull, & of rare cha∣stitie, who to signifie the integritie of her worthie mind wholie addicted to vertue, had depainted Heliotropium the Marigold, which alwaies turneth towardes the Sunne, as if it had sence, with this mot, Uertitur ad solem. An honorable Gentleman hauing vnfor∣tunatlie maried a wife of singulare beautie, but (according to the common rumour) of single honestie. For all wnich knewe him, ve∣rely beleeued that she offred him an extreme iniurie, as in trueth she did. But the poore Gentleman (as commonly it hapneth in the like case) perceiuing her vnfaithfull dealing, dronke vp his sorrowe in silence, intreating (notwithstanding) his wife honorablie, in all louely maner: supposing thereby, for that she sprāg of noble blood, that she would become faithfull and loyall, respecting her honor. But herein he was greatly deceiued: for the dis∣loyall Dame hauing sauoured the sweete of sondrie dishes, neglected her olde diet as vn∣pleasant to her insatiable appetite, which he to his insupportable griefe vnderstanding, to excuse his hard hap, figured Argus with his hundred eyes garding Io the Minion of Iupi∣ter transformed into a Cowe, who, notwith∣standing his diligent watching was deceiued of his chardge: Hereunto he added this mot, Frustra vigilant. Girolamo Palauicino, did beare for his Im∣presa
an Egle, which according to Plinie, only of all Birdes, hath neuer beene slaine with an Arrowe: wherfore he is sayd to carie the wea∣pons of Iupiter: hereby to signifie that he had neuer bin striken with the wrath of the hea∣uens: and although he had bin with great in∣iurie persecuted, yet was he againe restored to felicitie and honor: his mot was, Est mihi sorte datum. A certaine Gentleman hauing espoused a noble and vertuouse wife, caused her to were for her Impresa a Snayle closed in her shell, as she remaineth all the winter, to defende her from the colde, with this Posie, Proprio alitur succo: to signifie that she should satisfie her self with the loue of her owne husband, euen as the Snayle is nourished with her owne moy∣sture. A Dutch Gentleman soiourning at Neples the nurce of delicious pleasures, and recourse of all vices, in the blouming flower of his youthfull yeares, being well monied, became amorous of a Dame, with who he spent both his vnrecouerable time, and consumed his dearlie gotten treasure, in vaine delights, and vnconstaunt pleasures. But at length co∣ceiuing his error, knowing whether his youth and this abuse would bring him, accepting good councell retired from Naples, to escape the toyles of inticing affections. And to shew his intention he figured a Bucke, couched in
a ditch: being the nature of this beast, that after hauing conioyned with the female, doth so lothe himselfe by reason of the stenche of his filthinesse, that he retireth solitarilie into some ditch, wherein he remaineth vntil there happen a great shoure of rayne to washe and make him cleane: and afterward returneth a∣gaine to feede: his Posie was, Lasciuiae paeni∣tentia. The Captaine Consaluo Fernando in the last warres at Naples, performed great exploytes, but rather by pollicie then any great power, whereby he alwaies ouer came in Battell: and desirous to manifest to the worlde, how he was ayded by his subtile practises, tooke for his Impresa a Crossebowe bent with a racke, and thereunto this Posie, Ingeniū superat vires. A certaine gentleman after his long and tedious suite, finding the soyle which he til∣led altogether fruitles, and the flintie heart of his mistresse to afforde him no fauour, to shewe that his maladie was without remedy, he figured an heart wounded with an arrow, with a branch of the herbe Dictamus in his mouth, which herbe groweth plentifully in Candia, whereof the wounded Hart eating is said to be cured, with this Spanish mot there∣vnto. Esto tiene su remepio y non yo, As much to say, this beast findeth remedie, and not I: like vnto that, whereas Phaebus in Ouid, complay∣neth of his loue to Daphne, saying:
Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis. Sinior Pyrho di Stipiciana, being at the de∣fence of Carignan in Piemont, valiantly sustay∣ned the siege against Mons. d' Augnian, and all the French Campe, and (after that the Marquise of Vasto was discomfited at Cerisole, where the Emperours part lost the battayle) he before he would yeeld, although greatly destitute of victuals, held them out fourtie dayes, and at the length, hauing no hope of succour, he was constrayned to yeeld, and so departing from Carignan, went (according to the othe he had made) vnto the King of France, who greatly honoring his vertue, al∣beit he was his-enemy, made him the proffer of great preferment if he would serue him. But Sinior Pirhus rendring thanks to his ma∣iestie, refused all conditions and offers made. Afterwarde vpon this he had figured for his Impresa the horse of Iulius Caesar, who woulde neuer suffer any other rider, which had (as sayth Plinie) his fore feete like vnto the feete of a man, and so was he figured in the temple of Venus. His mot was: Soli Caesari. Faithfull onely to the Emperour. An amorous gentleman of Milan bare in his Standard a Torch figured burning, and turning downeward, whereby the melting wax falling in great aboundance, quencheth the flame. With this Posie thereunto. Quod me alit me extinguit. Alluding to a Lady, whose
beautie did foster his loue, and whose dis∣dayne did endamage his life. A noble minded Gentleman (whose worthy vertues, sith in flowring yeres they haue purchased the happie fauour of each mans voyce, little neede the simple Blazon of my rude pensill) hath for his Impresa a sworde with this Greeke mot (. Fideliter per∣seueto in fide illi. Vowing thereby his loyall seruice to his law∣full soueraine, perseuering constant and faithfull, following the example of his worthy progenitors, vnder whose Ensigne both I and these my simple la∣bours hope to find fauour. FINIS.
