15571 99843812 8569
A True Relation of the Fleete which went vnder the Admirall Jaquis Le Hermite through the Straights of Magellane towards the Coasts of Peru, and the Towne of Lima in the West-Indies. With a Letter, Containing the present State of Castile in Peru. Herevnto is annexed an excellent Discourse which sheweth by cleare and strong Arguments how that it was both necessary and profitable for the Vnited Prouinces to erect a West-India Company, and euery true subiect of the same ought to aduance it accor∣ding to his power. Written by a Well-willer of the Common-wealth. LONDON, Printed for Mercurius Britannicus. 1625.
A TRVE RELATION of the successe of the Fleet which went vnder the Admirall Iaquis L' Hermite through the Staights of Magellane, towards the Coast of Peru, and the Towne of Lima in the West-Indies. THE Lord Inquisitor Iohn de Manneza, ha∣uing very earnestly vrged the Vice-Roy of the West-Indies, that hee would procure and take care that this yeare the siluer should bee sent soo∣ner downe then was done in the former yeare, seeing that he had letters from the Generall Thomas de Lar∣rasperu, by which hee receiued order to doe it, and shewed what damage were caused in Spaine in the for∣mer yeare, namely in the yeare 1622. the siluer then beeing to late carried from Harana, and in the yeare 1623. Don Antonio de Oquendo tarrying then there in the Winter time, seeing that the siluer was not sent timely away: Wherefore hee did his best endeauor to mooue the Vice-Roy to the same effect according to his Commission which he had. The siluer of the small Nauy beeing shipped, they of Lima were still of opi∣nion that it should not be carried before the 7. or 10. day of May, and although diuers persons intreated the Vice-Roy that it might not sooner be sent away, he caused neuerthelesse the Fleet to depart with the silue from the port of Callao, on the 3 day of May, to th
intent that it might in good time bee sent to the ap∣pointed places, and gaue afterwards notice that such as had not beene ready with their siluer to send it with the Fleete, they should carry to another Ship which is called the Ship of the Recago, which was within the space of few dayes afterwards to put to Sea. And it fell very happily out by the Prouidence of God, that a Chinchorro (beeing a certaine manner of a Barke) which went to Sea in the seauenth day of May, found it selfe on the next morning to be amongst the Fleete of the Enemies, which demaunded them which were in it, whether the Fleete with the siluer should put to Sea on the seauenth of May, as was reported vnto them by one that was but halfe blacke (on that was gotten perhaps by a Spaniard and a blacke-Indian wo∣man) and was taken by them in a Barke: Seeing that they were resolued to attend vppon it, or to pursue it if it was gone to Sea: And without doubt (if God had not preuented it) and they had followed the Fleet, they could easily haue taken it, for it consisted but in two Ships that went very carelesse and ill-prouided; and the Enemies had twelue great Ships besides their Shaloups. But the Pilote that was vppon the aforementioned Chinchorro or Barke, deceiued the Generall of the Hollanders, by not telling the truth, for hee spake vnto him in this manner. Signior, you shall not neede to trouble your selfe a∣bout the small Fleete, seeing that there are already eight dayes past since it went to Sea, and it is not possible that your Fleete can ouertake it: The report
which is made vnto you of the seauenth of May, is of nothing else then of the Ship of the Recago which ly∣eth yet vntill this day in the Hauen of Callao, and is ready to put to Sea beeing loaden with two Millions of siluer which could not bee sent with the Fleete, seeing the siluer was not ready by reason that went to soone to Sea. The Enemies were mightely displeased vppon these tydings, and resolued thereupon to cast anchor a∣gainst the next night before the Hauen of Callao, which they did also afterwards, and set yet in the euening 18▪ of their Shaloupes in Sea, which were of the big∣nesse almost of a Barke, and were not onely furnished with Oares, but also wirh Mastes and Sayles to vse them when the Winde will serue: They came with 14 of them betwixt the Ordinance of the Hauen, not∣withstanding that 130. peeces were mounted vpon it, and fiered 9. of our Ships which lay in the Port; but they could not goe further to take the Ship with the siluer, and to fire a Gallion of the King of Spaine which layde neere it: For our Gunners could see them very easily by the meanes of the great light which pro∣ceeded from the Ships that were set on fire (as is afore∣mentioned) and played so fiercely vppon them with the Ordinance that they were forced to forsake againe the Hauen, and to flye thence, leauying there yet 40 Ships which they could neuer touch although wee were vnprouided and lookt not for such an enterprize When the afore-mencioned shipps were burning at Callao, there were great moanes and lamentations made at Lima (seeing that there was a rumor spread
abroad that the enemies had taken and fierd Callao, and they were directly marching towards Lima) and they lasted vntill such time they learned the truth of the matter. One of our Captaines tooke the same night a Low-Countryman who was discended from Germain Parents, and was a gunner of the enemies, and a very skilfull man, and rare Inginer to make fire-workes: Being brought before the Vice-Roy, hee charged him to declare vppon his oath the truth of such things as should bee propouded vnto him, if hee would saue his life, and on the other side, he threatned to hang him in case he would not reueale the truth, the Prisoner ans∣wering therevppon sayd, that the Fleete was on the twenty nine day of Aprill departed from Holland, be∣ing set forth by the rebells that dwell there, and that it consisted in eleuen gallions, of which there were seauen that were newly built, and other fower that had ben vsed in former time by priuate Merchants: and were very well furnished with Ordinance, and all other manner of necessaryes, which might be requi∣red both to fight at sea and to sayle through the streigh of Magelane. Moreouer hee sayd that besides them there were yet fower pinnasses, in the same Fleete: he was like∣wise asked what Ordinance, armes, munition, and victualls were in the Fleete: Item who was the Ge∣nerall, what course they had kept in their voyage, how long agoe it was they had taken any prizes, and what prizes they had taken during the time of their voy∣age what the fleete intendeth to do, whatstore of victu∣alls
were daily allowed to the men and marriners, how many there were deceased, from whence they had fetcht their water, and where they had refreshed themselues with victualls, and what aduises they had receiued o the sea. Moreouer, he was commanded to declare al such things as hee knew concerning the voyage, for wee knew many things that happened in the same voy∣age, and asked him onely these questions to try whe∣ther hee spake the truth; that wee might punnish him with the afore-mentioned payne if he went a∣stray from the truth. Wherevppon hee declared that there were fower moneths past since the fleete departed from their coun∣try, and were within the space of the same time come in the Zouth-Sea: that the shipps which they had brought with them, were the same which hee named or described in the beginning of his examination, that both the Admirall, Vice-Admirall, and the Schout, by night were great shipps, and that euery one of them was furnished with thirty peeces of ordinance, of which some twenty or thereabouts were brasse peeces, that the least Gallion of all the rest, was furnished with one hundred barrells with powder; that the Fleete is likewise very well prouided with bullets, muskets, and all other manner of warre-like prouision, that where∣soeuer they met with the Indians, and Black-mores, they caused a rumor to bee spread amongst them that they came to recouer their liberty and settle them in it: that the Fleete brought prouision enough with it for the space of two yeares: that both the souldiers
and marriners amounted all together, to the number of two thousand and fiue hundered men. That some of them were discontented by reason that they could not get Biskit, and other victualls, that the Admirall was loath to land his men, fearing that many of them would runne away. That the Admirall was named Iacques L' Hermite, Item that hee was a man of great experience, ha∣uing in former times bin in the East-Indies, that his Leggs were very thicke being swolne: that it was thought that hee should dye by reason of the greife and vexation which hee conceiued in his minde in re∣gard that hee tooke not the siluer which was escaped. That Iohn Hugen the Vice-Admirall (who was to succeede the Admirall if hee should dye) was a lusty and high-minded young man, but very cruell, that since they past Guiena, many of the Fleete fell sicke, and some of them dyed: that they sayled along the Coastes of Affrica. Translated out of the Spannish Coppy.
Laus Deo. In Siuill the 4. of Ianuary. Anno 1625. Here come daily many heauy tydings, the Fleete of Lisbon is aboue a month agoe departed, but it is vncertaine whether it is gone towards the Baye of To∣dos los Santos or not. The Spanish Fleet is ready to depart, & tarrieth but for a good wind: Some are of opinion that it is not bound for Brasill, seeing that the wind hath a good while bene good to goe thitherwards, and that it put∣teth not to Sea: it is a verie strong Nauie. About eight dayes agoe arriued here a Barke that came from the West Indies, and brought letters that were written in the Towne of Lima and diuers other places of Peru, to giue vs to vnderstand how the Hol∣landers had fired and taken many shippes, both in the Callao de Lima and in diuers other Ports and places that lye in the South sea, and that they haue fortified themselues in an Iland which lyeth directly opposite against the Port of Lima, from whence it is but a league distant, by meanes of which fortification and their shippes, they hinder that none of our shippes can ei∣ther come in the Port of Lima, or goe out of it. All the goods and marchandises that went last hence with the Fleete of Terra Ferma, lye as yet at Panama, by reason of which we stand here in great feare, that we shall not in this Summer-time receaue any siluer from Peru. Many Trades-men cannot paye their debtes, by reason that their goods lye yet by them, seing they could not send them to Lima, where they thought to sell them: To be brief, the Hollanders spoile there all our traficke. By the same letters we learne likewise these
following tydings, namely, that the Hollanders haue hanged about Lima diuers of our men, and that we haue taken some of them. That in the Towne of Lima, there was a Hollander who was a shippe-Carpenter accused of treason, and condemned to be torne in peeces with hotte tongues, by reason that he (as was alledged against him) had gi∣uen aduise to the Hollanders, and wisht them to come in the South sea. There are two shippes perished of the last Fleete that went towards Noua Hispania, and we cannot heare any thing of another that was comming from Hauana. It is here a miserable time, and we haue no hope that it will mend, by reason of the heauy warres by sea. Here at Siuill is a Iudge arriued, with a Commis∣sion that he brought from Madrill, to punish all such as had carried out of Spaine without licence, gold, sil∣uer, or Ryalles of eight, and had brought false Ryalles in it. And he hath already taken diuers vpon suspition oraccusation, but whither iustly or vniustly God know∣eth. The first that were taken were these following, Ber∣nard Dores, Henrique Vander Borg, Iuan Vermuelen, Lo∣renzo Bultiau, besides some French men, and one a∣mongst them being put to the torture, hath reuealed many things. Molernaer Cortoys, Vanden Buyr, haue like∣wise beene taken, but they got loose againe, hauing put in Bayle, by fauour of friends. Afterwards were likewise taken Franciseo and Antonio Sandier, Pedro de la Farse, Iuan Gutier: but they are released againe of their imprisonment: Cornelis de Groot retyred into a Church with Oliuer Leffe, and Guilliam Gutier. Many of them are put in prison, and know not what the cause
is of their impr isonment. About eight dayes agoe was at St. Lucar, found in a vessell that was drownd in the sea, as many Ryalles and wedges of gold and siluer, as amounted to the value of 15. thousand Duckets. The Flemings haue here erected an Admiraltie with the permission of the King: the President of it is Signieur Hendricke vande Raet, and his Assistantes Ni∣colaes Anthoine, Francisco de Smit, Pedro Francoys, Iuan Courtois, Guilliam Clent: they are to buy many shippes, to fetch booties from the Pyrates Turkes, Hollanders, and Zealanders. And it is reported that they are to make ready in the Port of St. Lucar about 34. shippes: they put them∣selues in great troubles, and God knoweth how they shall speed. To the Worshipfull the Maiors or Maisters of the West India Companie, which is graunted by the High and Mightie Lords, the States Generall of the Vnited Prouinces. SIRS, Many haue longed a great while for a West India Company, and the matter is at last brought so farre, that the High and Mightie Lords the States Generall haue granted one, and that your Wor∣ships are chosen to be Maisters of the same. Neuerthe∣lesse
this good worke goeth not forth in such a manner as is required: and there are many welwillers of these lands, which were very sory therefore, and some of them doe likewise their best endeauours, not onely to aduance this worke by their owne meanes, but exhort also others both with word of mouth and by writing, to doe the like, that it may come to full perfection. And among others the Author of this Discourse is one of them, and a Participant or Venturer of this Company. He vseth not onely great diligence to ex∣hort euery one to the maintaining of this worke, but goeth likewise about to perswade them by strong rea∣sons to venture their monyes in this Company, to the intent that the Capitall may be the greater before it be shut vp, both for the good of the Company, and for the generall welfare of the Common-wealth: And seing that this came to my hands, and was iudged to deserue Printing, that it might be made common to be read by others, I haue willingly bene at the cost of the Printing of it, to shew my good will to the Company, and haue emboldened my selfe to present this Discourse vnto your Worships, which takes great paines to aduance this worke, and that it may be the better commended by your approbations: and desire therefore, that your Worships will be pleased to take my small labour in good part. And especially I with the Author will pray the Almighty, that it may please his Diuine Maiestie, to prosper your ad∣ministration, and to send his rich blessings one the Company.
To all the Inhabitants of the vnited Prouinces, the Author wisheth a true and right consideration and care of the Common-welfare. IT is strange that so much paines are taken to moue men to their owne welfare and good; for it seemeth that euery one ought to care for his owne welfare: There are dayly complaints made, that the Children haue too little care of their own welfare: We attri∣bute this to the foolishnesse and vnaduisednesse of Youth, so that their Parents are compelled to take great paines to exhort, moue, and compell them ther∣unto. But that men which are come to their yeares, and haue their wit, must be brought thereunto with great paines and labour, that is a thing no lesse to be wondred at then to be complained for. The like hap∣neth in Spirituall matters. What endeauours I pray you are taken to make men apprehend and embrace that good which leadeth them to the euerlasting sal∣vation? In the same manner it goeth in temporall matters. I will now passe by the lazie, vnaduised, strong, and vnthriftie Drunkards, Gamesters, Players, and such
like, which neglect their owne particular welfare, and that of their Families, &c. I will speake now onely of the Common welfare of our deare beloued Country: What endeauors must be vsed to make men which are Inhabitants of these Countries, and whom the generall welfare concerneth in the highest degree, aswell in ge∣nerall as in particular, to embrace and vse such meanes by which it may be procured. For the Defence of these Lands, there are necessary generall contributions, and reuenues. Euery one is ve∣ry sparing and sloathfull (except some few honest men) to raise and pay them. It is necessarie that such moneis as are raised be well managed. But where is any that taketh such care of these thinges as he ought? But I doe not intend to treate at this time of all that which is necessarie for the preseruation of these Lands. For if I should speake of it, I must first of all treate of the true seruice of God, who is to be worshipped with a pure Conscience: and then of the vsing of Charity and Iustice amongst vs. For without these things, there isneither any bles∣sing of the Almighty to be expected, nor likelyhood to preserue any Common-wealth in welfare and pro∣sperity. But I will leaue these points to the Teachers of Gods Word (which may speake of them in their Sermons; and will wish that one amongst them, would out of a godly zeale, deduce into a small Treaty, how necessary they be; and I shall reioyce mightily, if both by the high & lowe degrees they should be embraced) and intend onely to speake of a maine meane which hath long beene expected and wished; and is at last,
through great labour and paines brought so farre, that it is granted: namely, the West India Company. And seeing that it goeth yet slowly forth, and that men must be perswaded, and as it were compelled in a manner to doe themselues good, I will vse the best meanes I can, according to my capacity, for the good of the Common-wealth. It is certaine, that many yeares before the Truce of twelue yeares was concluded, this Company was wisht for: and that by reason of the same Truce it could not be graunted. This was one of the hurtfull effects which the Truce produced, and one of the aduantages which the Enemies receaued by the Truce. And be∣sides them, they had many other of no lesse importāce, which are all clearely demonstrated in a small Booke, which was presently after the Truce published by a well-willer of his Country, who instiled it THE COMPANION OF THE FAR-LOOKING WAR∣NING-GIVER, and shewed briefly, with cleare and strong arguments, how that for the preseruation of the State of these Lands, the Warre was more pro∣fitable and safe then the Truce. But we neede not at this time to debate the matter, seeing that our Enemie is not now of that minde. He did his best endeauour in the time of the deceit∣full Truce, not onely to take breath and to strengthen himselfe, but to ruine vs by ciuill Warres, and dissen∣tions amongst vs. He hauing mist▪ his marke (God be thanked) he renewed the warre againe; and that the rather, seeing that he is become of a high minde, through the Victories which he hath obtained in
Germany, more through deceit, and by the meanes of the negligence and dissentions of the Germaines, then through his owne valiantnesse. He hath these two last yeares set very fiercely vppon vs, and caused these Lands to be at very great and such excessiue charges, which these Lands should not be able to beare for many yeares. Therefore it is necessary that we deuise other meanes, by which we may support and beare the common charges, weaken the enemie, by deminishing his means, and giuing him elsewhere worke. The West-India Company (as I take it) is one of the best meanes to effect this. But because I may treate more orderly of this busines, I will put to the conside∣ration of the Reader, and all the Inhabitants of these vnited Prouinces, these following points. 1 That this Company is necessary. 2 Feasible and possible to be effected. 3 The profit which is receaued from it. 4 The good conduct & administration of the same. Concerning the first point: It seemeth that it will be needles to take much paines to proue it: For there is hardly a well-willer of these Countries, but esteem∣eth this Company to be very necessary. But I would wish that each one said this, not onely with his heart, but shewed his minde likewise by the deed: For words and wishes onely, without deedes, cannot aduance it. Not faire speeches but money will helpe vs herein: For we want no aduisers and Counsellers, but Disbursers, as the Prouerbe saith.
But seeing that there are many which contribute yet verie little to this Company, by reason that they are not well informed of the necessity of it: It seemeth then to be necessarie, which otherwise might bee ac∣compted superfluous, to shew with few, cleare, and strong reasons, the necessity of it. First of all it is to be considered, that wee haue an ir∣reconciliable enemie, who thirsted after the good and blood of vs and of our children. The high mind which the Spaniard beareth is well enough knowne. It is not yet forgotten, or at least it ought not to be, what cru∣elty he hath vsed in America, and other Lands among the poore Heathens which had not giuen him any oc∣casion of offence. Who knoweth not what cruelties, bloodsheds, de∣flowrings of Virgins, pillages, and ransackages of the Townes and Villages of the Low-countries the Spani∣ard hath vsed in them: but such as know not this, let them reade the Historie of Emanuel van Metren, or if this History be too long for them, let them peruse a Booke which is called in Dutch, Den Nederlantschen Morgen-wecker: that is to say, The Netherlandish mor∣ning-waker: and looke vpon the obseruations which are made vpon the proposition of Peckius, and hee shall find this to be true. Then were the offences not so great; and are now since growne irreconciliable by the meanes of the warre which hath continued the space of fiftie yeares▪ He neither shall, can, or will forget the spire which he accounteth that these Lands haue done vnto him,
and it will continually sticke in his stomacke, that he hath spilt so much money and so many men to reco∣uer them. Hee accounteth vs all as Rebells, and as if wee had committed Crimen laesae Maiestatis, treason in the highest degree, and maketh reckoning that wee haue forfeited both life and goods. I know that some Romish Catholikes which dwell amongst vs, thinke that they are excepted: but they are much mistaken. For it is fault enough for them that they haue tarried here, and haue strengthned the power of the Heretikes (as hee calleth vs) by their meanes. In regard of the Reformed Religion hee accounteth vs to be damned persons, that are fit to be burnt. So that the Spaniard maketh reckoning that our liues and goods are for the King of Spaine, and our soules for the Deuill. Consider now by your selues what wee ought to ex∣pect of such an enemie. And therefore it is certaine that wee haue no reason to conceiue any hope of a Peace or Truce to liue in with a tranquill and setled minde. To obtaine peace is impossible, vnlesse wee would surrender our selues whollie into his hands, with soule and bodie, goods and blood. If you like such a peace, accept of it. Truce is but deceit, and is onely concluded by him to make after∣wards his owne vantage. Then it is certaine, that wee haue no other remedie then to keepe our armes in
hand, and trust to the aid and protection of the Al∣mightie. This foundation must first bee laid. This you must know and hold firme in your hearts, that you may looke to your selues. And therefore we haue reason to deuise meanes to increase our power with the blessing of the Almightie, and to diminish the might of the enemie. And to ef∣fect this, there is nothing more fit then the West India Company, for thereby shall our trafficke augment, and the enemies decrease, yea his meanes shall bee taken from him, to make with the same warre vpon himselfe. It is very well knowne that the Spaniard should not be very well if he had not the West Indies. From thence he gets great store of siluer and gold to maintaine his warres. We must annoy him there, if we will make him weake, and not onely goe about that he get none or few thence, but doe likewise our best endeauors that wee get some part of them. For otherwise it is impossible that euer wee should liue in rest of him. The Spaniard himselfe knoweth this very well, and was there chiefly besides some other considerations moued to make a truce with us, fearing we should otherwise erect a West India Companie. Secondly, the present state of these Lands require it, for they are small, and full of inhabitants, which for the most part liue by manufactours, trafficke, and by the Sea. Now then to get meanes for this great num∣ber of inhabitants to entertaine them withall, and to imploy our ships and Mariners▪ it is necessary to haue many Nauigations on the Sea.
We must look that the Merchants and Handicrafts∣men, which nourish themselues by hand labour get no occasion to depart. And wee must especially finde out worke for our Mariners, for feare that they might become desperate, and goe to serue our enemies against vs, or should goe againe towards Algiex and turne Pyrates. The King of Spaine hath forbidden the Inhabitants of these Lands to trafficke in the Lands which are vn∣der his Dominions, and are very many, for some of them border on the North, Spanish, and the Mediter∣ranean Seas. So that we are compelled to try our for∣tune el ewhere. Many yeares agoe when the King of Spaine barred vs from the trafficke which we had in Spaine, we began in these Vnited Prouinces to sayle towards the East Indies, and haue still had good successe, as is knowne to all the world. Let vs then follow this example, and in considera∣tion that that voyage is long, and that we cannot haue our ships which goe thither, at hand when we will, and it requireth not so many ships and Mariners as we haue to imploy, take some neere voyages in hand, to set our Mariners and ships at worke. These two reasons seeme vnto mee sufficient and strong enough. Looke vpon the power of our enemie: Looke vpon the present state of these Lands, and the inhabitants of them, and you shall easily perceiue how necessarie i the erecting of this Company.
But some heauy head shall perhaps say: Although this Company be very necessary, but not likely to haue any good successe, it were better not to begin it, then to dissolue it afterwards with damage and shame. Our Sauiour Christ himselfe teacheth vs this proui∣dence, that whosoeuer will build a steeple that he must first forecast what the charges will be to finish it. But this hath beene already, euen before the resolution was taken to erect this Company. If this were yet now first to be done, it were too late: And it is to be considered, that it should be a great dis∣credit and shame for vs, at which our enemies would laugh, if we should now giue ouer this Company, the resolution of which hath beene taken so solemnly and at seuerall times iteratiuely: And thereupon the Octroy or Patent being granted and published, the Masters of it were likewise chosen. If it were not possible and feasable, bee assured that the States would not haue troubled themselues so long with the consideration of it, nor haue taken so many aduices. Wherefore I pray ye may the West India Compa∣nie not haue as good successe as the East India, which was at the beginning onely by the small meanes of few persons vndertaken, and is now growne so rich and strong? Certainly the voyage is not so great, but halfe so big onely as that of the East Indies. The coasts are not vnknowne to our Mariners, for
by the meanes of the traffique which some particu∣lar persons haue vsed in diuers parts and places there∣abouts, they are as skilfull, and as well acquainted with them, as with any other in the world: yea they are as skilfull of those parts, as they are of our owne coasts. Could particular persons traffique and trade thi∣ther in former times, what should bee the reason I wonder, why a setled Company shall not bee able to doe it. The Traffique of Guinea, Puncto del Rey, and di∣uers other places, are already in daily vse and pra∣ctice. I pray you what may hinder vs, not onely to con∣tinue them, but also to increase them with the traf∣fiques vpon many other places which lye at large a∣bout them? Shall wee want ships? Where is there a Country vader the Sunne, that is richer in shipping then this Land? or in which there may yet daily so many lu∣sty and strong shipps bee built, in lesse time and with lesser charges? Shall wee bee destitute of Mariners? Wee haue already farre more of them then wee know how to imploy: so that this point is one of the chiefest rea∣sons which may and indeed ought to moue vs to the aduancement and furthering of this Company, to the intent that they may haue imployment and not bee idle.
But some miserable Hollanders, which would faine lay their thumbs vpon all that they haue, shall bee afraid for losse at Sea, and will therefore rather buy and purchase lands, rents, and Leases in these coun∣tries. O poore foolish men, who looke onely vnto the Hennes egge (as the prouerbe is) and in the meane time lose the Gooses nest. Haue you then all gotten when you peserue your owne particular goods, and so suffer the Common∣wealth to receiue damage and losse in the meane while? But if doe well consider euen your owne particu∣lar good, is thereby not your money in danger which you haue bestowed on lands and rents in these Vnited Prouinces? Doth there not daily happen Bankrupts and other damages, and is it not all vncertaine whatsoeuer wee possesse in this world? Seeing then that all is to be ventured, is it not best to hazard it in such maner and places that it may yeeld both particular and generall profit. But some shall perhaps say, the danger is too great in this trafficke: For there is both perill at Sea, and of a mighty Potentate, the King of Spaine. His power is not vnknowne vnto vs, his riches which hee getteth out of the West Indies are almost vnualuable, and he shall employ them to his vttermost power to keepe vs out of the West Indies. For this is
the best Pearle which he hath on his Crowne, and his onely meanes and pillar which vpholdeth him in his Chaire. Hee will vse all meanes hee can to bereaue vs of the trade which we haue through the Strait of Gibraltar in Italy, where he hath no command, what shall hee then doe in this case. Certainly this is a point of great consideration: but it will both the difficultie and the necessitie set before our eyes. For if the West Indies bee so deare vnto him that will venture all that he hath before he will lose it, wee haue the more reason to venture for them a blew eye. And if we become Master of all, or of some part, as wee are now in the East Indies, wee shall shorten his wings in such a manner, that hee shall not easily trouble vs nor our good friends so much as hee hath done. Moreouer, I say, that the danger is not so great that it ought to discourage vs, and to make vs con∣ceiue that these voyages will not bee made with good successe. Looke vpon the former times, and you shall per∣ceiue that our honest Predecessors haue not onely re∣sisted the power of the King of Spaine in these Coun∣tries, but haue likewise beene so bold as to wage bat∣tell with him, when he was more powerfull then hee is now, and haue beene the occasion that we liue now in liberty, and enioy the fruits of their labour.
But consider once if we might not rightly be blamed if we liuing now at ease, should loose that which they haue gotten (with the losse of their owne bloud, and by the deaths of so many braue souldiers which were sent to aid them, by seuerall Princes and States of Europe, but especially by her Maiestie of England of happie memorie) and that onely through a base feare, impru∣dencie, couetousnesse, or through any other ill passions. If our Ancestors had had such heauy heads, in what case should wee now bee? where were our libertie, and wel∣fare? The enemie hath now so many yeeres made a heauie warre vpon these lands, but they with their pow∣er and the aid of their confederates, reresisted him brauely through the fauor and grace of the Almightie. These two last yeeres hath the enemie set verie fiercely vpon these vnited Prouinces, but what hath hee gotten in a manner to speake, but damage and shame? Can we doe so much by land? we may do much more by water. This may appeare by the Sea fight which was in the strait of Gibaltar betwixt our Fleet that was commanded by the valiant Admirall Heemskerke, and the Spanish Nauie, which tried there what the Marri∣ners of Holland could doe. I will not boast idly, know∣ing that all things happen according to Gods blessing. But I speake onely in manner of discourse, according to nature, to shew what meanes the Almightie hath gran∣ted vs for our defence. We haue ships enow, and wee want neither Marriners, Souldiers, Munition, and Vi∣ctuals. But you will say, wee want mony. This is the maine point I intend to speake of, and will shew that this shall neither want, if euerie one will doe his best to
bring a good Capitall or stocke in the Company. And therefore let euerie one goe on with a good re∣solution, and he shall finde this matter easily to be per∣formed. But some shall perhaps reply there is daily so much to be giuen to the maintenance of the warres, as pole-money for euery ones head, and other taxations and impositions according to the seuerall estates of the inhabitants, &c. This is giuen, but the other is laid in to get profit. That which is giuen is gone, saith the Pro∣uerbe, although there is nothing lost that is giuen for the defence of the Country, and to remoue the enemies from our frontiers, as hath beene done at Bergen vp Zoom: But this which is required is no giuing, but lay∣ing in a Company of trafficke vpon hope of great gaine. You set daily ships forth, and send abroad, and receiue dayly Merchandizes, and buy and sell wares to get a penny. But what is the reason that you will not venture your monies in this Company to annoy the e∣nemies, by which meanes it is likely to happen that henceforth you shall not bee charged with such great taxations as you are now for the maintenance of war. You complaine that there is nothing to be gotten, that the trades and traffickes are very dead: and now when there are meanes shewne vnto you, where to trafficke with profit, and how to reviue the negotiation, you will not giue eare and lend your helping hand. In former times the Lord gaue vs this aduantage, that our enemies had now and then warres with Eng∣land, France, and other States of Christendome. But the enemie hath hitherto liued in peace with them, and made himselfe maister in a manner of Germanie, so
that all aide which we might get thence is cut from vs, and we haue almost no meanes to defend our selues but our owne power, and the aid of the Almightie. If wee will not vse those meanes of our owne which his diuine Maiestie hath yet left vnto vs, what will become of vs? If it be impossible for vs to erect this Company as it should be done, how shall we then hereafter bee able to resist our enemies, if we neglect this, and other such like meanes? But it is certaine that there can want no money, if the richer sort of the inhabitants of those vni∣ted Prouinces will spare but some of their monies. The common sort of people haue quitted themselues verie well, and haue according to their abilities ventured great some of money, and raised thereby a good Capi∣tall. But if it could be made higher, it would be more sufficient to bring the matter to a good effect. Let but the rich follow their example, and assist the Company likewise, according to their abilitie, all the difficulties will presently be taken away. Diuers rich persons which haue either subscribed for small sums, or haue not done it at all, they excused themselues, saying, that they did it for feare they might be chosen Masters of the Compa∣ny: which charge they would not accept of for many reasons. Let them then now yet signe for as much or more then the Masters must needs participate in the Company, otherwise we shall haue reason to think that they seeke but friuolous euasions. Those which obiect that the West-Indies are in many places inhabited by the Spaniard, and fortified with Forts in such a manner, that wee shall hardly be able to settle our selues there: they scant deserue any answer.
For the West-Indies are so large and great, that the Spaniard cannot beset the hundreth part of it, and we shall haue opportunitie enough to trafficke in such places which lie from his Forts. But it is all for Profit that the Merchant looketh: and where there is any hope of gaine, there hee ventureth willingly. Therefore if we can make apparant that this Company is to yeeld profit, it is likely that there will be many that will resolue themselues to venture their monies in it. First of all, then ought euerie good subiect, and well-willer of his Country, to haue regard to the gene∣rall good of these Lands. It is to be hoped that by the meanes of this Company we shall diminish the traffick of the Spaniards in the West-Indies, euen in the same manner as we haue done with our East-India Compa∣ny in the East-Indies. Hereby shall the reuenues of the King of Spaine be defalked and lesseued, his customes decreased, and his treasure sometimes exhausted. If some heauy head would say, that we shall not con∣tinually haue good successe; I would answer, that it is as much to bee hoped that wee shall continually lie vnder and haue the worst. And although there were not any thing else effected by this Company, but to make the Spaniard elsewhere to imploy his power, and to bestow some of his meanes to warre by water where we haue more vantage then by land, (by which meanes the warre which hee maketh vpon these lands would be
partly diuerted) our Common-wealth should receiue great benefit by it. Moreouer, it is no small matter, that by reason of this Companie, there are not onely many Carpenters and Smiths, besides other workemen, and other poore men which doe now hardly know how to liue, shal get good imployments both here and in the West-Indies. And it is likewise to be considered, that diuers Manu∣factures, as Linnen, Saye, Bombasin, Ribban, Looking-Glasses, Kniues, and other wares (which the Spaniard vsed to get out of the Low-Countries, and other parts, to sell them there) shall by the Companie be vented in the West-Indies, to the great good of our handicrafts men. But all this is yet nothing to the participants which lay their moneyes in the Companie; for euery one loo∣keth commonly what profit he may make with his owne money, notwithstanding that the common good is to be preferred before the particular. Therefore comming now to the particular profit; I say, that by all likelyhood (if the Almightie will be pleased to send his blessing to this Companie, without which, no good successe is to be had) they that shall venture in the same▪ are likely to make more profit of their moneyes, then they could get by any other traf∣fique. It is knowne what profit the East-India Companie hath yeelded to the participants of it, namely, in the time of seuen yeeres, viz. from the yeere 1595. to the yeere 1602. they haue receiued for one hundred Gil∣ders Capitall, three hundred Gilders.
And afterwards when the East-India Companies were vnited by the Octroy, or priuiledge of the States Generall, the participants of the same, which sold their Actions, haue in the time of sixteene yeeres, namely, from the yeere 1604. vntill the yeere 1602. gotten foure hundred Gilders, for euery one a hundred Gilders Ca∣pitall: so that they profited some twentie foure Gilders yearely in the hundreth: and those which haue not sold their Actions, haue receiued about fiue hundred and fiftie Gilders for each hundreth Gilders of their stocke. That this be true, is not onely confessed by the Masters of the East-India Company, but likewise by those par∣ticipants themselues, which complaine against the Go∣uernment and dealing of the Maisters of the Compa∣nie. And it is to be obserued, that notwithstanding the heauy warres which this Company hath had, the Parti∣cipants haue profited so much. Conferre now these profits with other traffickes and imployments, and be∣stowings of moneys, and you shall finde that they ex∣ceed all other gaines which are made with money. If you buy land with your money, you cannot common∣ly get aboue three in the hundred by the yeere, and by buying of houses, you shall get but little more. If you buy rents you shall out get aboue 4. 5. or 5. and a halfe at most. If you put your monies at vse, you receiue no more then 5. 6. and 6. and a halfe in the hundreth yeer∣ly. The best traffickes which are now vsed yeeld sel∣dome aboue ten in the hundred cleere gaine. The Chap keepers I must confesse may sometimes get 18. or 20. in the hundreth: but they loose againe much by bank∣rupts
and slow payments. It is then manifest, that the East-India Companie yeeldeth more profit then any other traffique or dealing; and it is apparant, that the West-India Companie is likely to giue yet once as much profit: and we may easily be induced to beleeue this by these following considerations. For first of all, wee may sayle hence into the West-Indies within the space of seuen weekes, whereas an East-India shippe that goeth but for Bantam, is com∣monly thirtie or fortie weekes by the way; and those shippes which goe to the Moluccaes, are for the most part a whole yeere by the way. Secondly, I gather hereout, that the West-India Companie, by reason of the short Voyages, shall no∣thing neere be at such charges as the East-India Com∣panie is, which giue great wages both to the Mariners and Souldiers. Thirdly, a West-India ship may make two returnes in a yeere, whereas an East-India ship can make but one returne in a yeere and a halfe, or in two yeeres. Fourthly, an East-India shippe is to be cast off, after that it hath made three Voyages in the East Indies, and a West-India shippe may make twelue or more Voyages in the West-Indies. Fiftly, the Voyage for Gold vpon Guinea, and the Voyage for Salt vpon Printo del Rey, which cost no∣thing but the fraught, are alreadie in vse, and haue con∣tinually yeelded great profit, and are likely to yeeld yet more, through good directions and gouernment. Sixtly, there are almost no wares, or marchandizes, but onely moneyes sent into the East-Indies; but in the
West Indies there may many wares and other commo∣dities be sold (as wee said before) to the great profit both of the Companie and of the other Inhabitants of those vnited Prouinces. And last of all it is to be considered, how that the States assist this Companie with ten Tunnes of Gold, which amount to an hundred thousand sterling, and twentie shippes, being altogether well furnished with all manner of necessaries, and haue promised to giue yet more aid to this Companie, as soone as the state of these Lands will bee able to beare it, and the occa∣sions and imployments of the Companie shall re∣quire it. So that I may conclude very well, that it is to bee hoped, that the West-India Companie shall yeeld more profit then euer the East-India Companie yeel∣ded vnto the Inhabitants of those Lands. And there is no doubt to be made, but there will be many that shall repent that they haue not ventured their moneyes in this Companie, when they shall learne the good suc∣cesse of it, and shall resolue to buy some Actions of o∣ther, that they may like∣wise enioy the benefit of it. And it is likely, that there will be many that will vpon this hope, That they shall be able to sell their Actions afterwards with great profit, subscribe for greater summes of money then they would haue done other∣wise. Therefore let euery house-keeper, that will en∣rich himselfe and his familie, venture his moneyes in this Companie, and he shall in time, by the grace of the Almightie, learne that he hath done the part of a pru∣dent and wise house-keeper.
Now concerning the fourth and last point of the or∣ders and Gouernment of the Company, we must a like treate of them a little: for euery one will the rather put his mony in the Company, when they shall be pos∣sessed and assured that it shall bee well gouerned. But seeing that these orders are already concluded by the States, and the Articles of them in Print, that euery one may reade them, and vnderstand how the monies of the Companies shall be administred, I shal not need to talke much of them. They are such, that many honest & vnderstanding Merchants take great liking in them. There are also some which refuse to venter their mo∣nies in the Company, and alledge for their excuse, that they mislike the Orders and Articles of the Company. It were to be wished that men would not in these daies be too curious and nice. For there is not any man that can please euery one. And there is nothing in the world so well done, but some that will looke with curious eies vpon it, shall say that it hath the one or the other fault. Therefore let vs hold with our common Prouerbe, which saith: That wee must commend those things which are reasonable well done. But they shall perhaps say, If they were tollerable we should commend them: But they are too strange. I will not dispute against such for feare that I should do nothing else but loose my la∣bour. What their drift or designe is I cannot tell. But it is to be admired, that so many other vnderstanding Merchants cannot as well as they perceiue the faults & imperfections of these orders. They shall perhaps say out of their malice: that the other haue perceiued them as well as they, but would not finde fault with them,
and lay thereupon so much in the Company, as the Ma∣sters of it must bring in, the Company hoping to get such places, and to come to the handling or receit of the monies. But let vs banish out of our hearts all such ma∣litious and pestiferous conceits which hinder all good affaires. Who is it (I pray you) amongst vs that know∣eth the heart of another? None surely, but onely the Al∣mightie knoweth the heart of man, and the experience shall shew what their intentions haue beene. And this I dare assure you, that if these Articles be but well ob∣serued that the Company shall by the grace of God yeeld great profit, according to the calculations which haue beene made. You know that the East-India Com∣pany hath much enriched the participants of the same, notwithstanding that many haue found fault with the orders and administration of it. But I will wish that if any one could propound any better order or directions for the good of the Compa∣ny, that they would yet shew them to the States, and I make no question or the Company will be very willing to embrace them whiles it is yet time. Therefore seeing that this Company is so necessarie and profitable, both for the State of these vnited Pro∣uinces, and the particular good of the inhabitants, and easily to be erected and maintained, and that no excep∣tions can be taken against it, I will exhort euery one but especially the Magistrates, and the richer sort of the Commons, to lay great sums of monies in this Com∣pany, hat they may bee presidents to others. For there ought great Fleets to bee sent into the West-Indies: And it is apparant that how the Capitall of the Com∣pany
will bee the greater, the traffike will be surer, and yeeld more profite. Herewith ending, I will pray the Almightie, who is the onely fountaine of all goodnesse that he will send his blessing to this Company, and that it may tend to the welfare of these vnited Prouinces, the weakning of our enemies, & especially to the exal∣tion of his Holy Name, and the propagation of the Gospell, that it may bee preached amongst the blinde Indians which haue no knowledge of the right way to saluation. FINIS.
