19277 99855766 21268
The two inseparable▪ brothers. OR A true and strange description of a Gentleman (an Italian by birth) about seventeene yeeres of age, who hath an imperfect (yet living) Brother growing out of his side, having a head, two armes, and one leg, all per∣fectly to be seen. They were both baptized together; the imperfect is called Iohn Baptist, and the other Lazarus. Admire the Creator in his Creatures. To the tune of the wandring Iewes Chronicle. TO England lately newes is come, Which many parts of Christendome haue by experience found To be the strangest and most rare, That same did to the world declare, since man first walkt o'th ground. I many Prodigies haue seene, Creatures that haue preposterous béene, to nature in their birth, But such a thing as this my eame, Makes all the rest séeme but a dreame, the like was nere on earth. A Gentleman well qualifide, beare his brother at his side, ably knit, e you may see, liuing be, t it. This yong-man doth compleatly walk▪ He can both read, write, sing, or talke, without paine or detraction, And when he speakes the other head, Doth moue the lips both Ruby red, not speaking but in action. This head and face is rightly fram'd, With euery part that can be nam'd, eares, eyes, lips, nose, and chin. His vpperlip hath some beard on't, Which he who beares him yet doth want, this may much wonder win. Oue arme's about his brother cast, That doth embrace his body fast, the other hangeth by, These armes haue  fingers all, Yet as a childs they are but small, pinch any part hee'l cry. Onely one legge with foot and toes Is to be séene, and some suppose, the other is contain'd thin his brothers body, yet hath him so to it,
The second part, To the same tune. YEt nothing doth the lesser eate, He's onely nourish'd with the meate wherewith the other féede, By which it seemes though outward parts They haue for two, yet not two hearts, this admiration bréeds. For sicknesse and infirmities, I meane Quotidian maladies, which man by nature hath, Sometimes one's sicke, the other wel This is a story strange to tell, but he himselfe thus saith. Th imperfect once the small poxe had▪ Which made the perfect brother sad, but he had neuer any, And if you nip it by the arme, Or doe it any little harme, (this hath beene tride by many,) It like an infant (with voyce weake) Will cry out though it cannot speake, as sensible of paine, Which yet the other féeleth not, But if the one be cold or hot, that s common to both twaine. Some seauenteene yeares of age they be, A perfect proper youth is he to which the lesse doth cleaue, They were baptized being young, Few then did think they'd liue so long, as few would now beleeue. but that to ratifie this truth▪ A in the Strand this wondrous youth is preent to be seene, And be with his strange burden, hath Bin shewne (with maruaile) as he saith to our good King and Quéene. Iohn Baptist is th' imperfect nam'd, Who through the christian world is fam'd, his Brother which him beares Was called Lazarus at the Font, And if we well consider an t a mystery in t appeares. From Italy their natiue place, They haue some certaine late yeares space, gone one still with another, Indeed they cannot other wie doe, He that see's one must needs see two, the brother beares the brother. Through Germany, through Spain & France. (Deuoyd of danger or mischance) and other Christian Lands They trauell'd haue, nay rather one For both, so many miles hath gone, to shew th' work of Gods hands. And now in England they haue béene About a moneth although vnseene, till now obtaining leaue, In séeing this or such strange things, Let vs admire the King of Kings, and of his power conceaue. That just opinion which is doe, To him who is all good all true, whose works we can't find out, Let admiration then suffice, Sith theres no man that is so wise, but of s owne wit may doubt. And so doe I Martin FINIS. Printed at London for Thoma  the igne f the H in Smithfield
