19550 99840719 5246
The pope in his fury doth answer returne, To a letter ye which to Rome is late come, I Doe esteme your kyndnes much For sendyng worde so sone, Your diligence it hath ben such It is ariued at Rome: But when I had pervsd your byl In that you set thereto your wyl And eke your mynd applyed vntyl The writyng of the same. I did beleue it to be true But surely I must say to you It greued mee those lines to vew Were wrtten in your name. ❧And sure it is no maruell loe For daylye I doe heare, The matter semeth to be so As amply doth appeare: For euery man doth tell for true The same that late was sent of you But out alas, your tidynges new Doth much appall my spirite. And makes me sweare and makes me teare To pull and hale, and rend my heare And brynges me dayly in dispaire To thinke on this despite. ¶But sith there is no remedye That mine obedient chylde, Is hanged vp vpon a tree And to to much reuylde: What shoulde I doe but curse and ban And hurte them toe the worst I can For hanging vp so good a man That bare mee such good wyll? But yf I had him here at Rome His body should be shryned soone And masse at mornyng and at noone With chantyng of each bell. ¶For euer shoulde be sayd and soung The deuyls to controvle, And prayers all aboute his tombe With senceyng for his soule: That neuer a deuyll so deepe in hell Shoulde once presume with him to mell Nor once approch his body tyll To vexe him any way. And I wolde kepe his body so That it from hence should neuer go And dyuers of my fryers mo For him should dayly pray. ¶And gladly wolde I be reuengd On England yf I might, Because they haue toe much a abusd My Bull with great despight: And make thereat a laughing game And set but little by my name And much my holynes defame And dayly me dispyse. Their Queene hath chast the rebels all That loued to bow their knees to Ball And hanged their quarters on the wall As meat for crowes and pyes. ¶But I wyll walke and dayly seke My Purgatorie thorow, And cause all the deuyls at my becke To me their knees to bow: And where as I may any fynde That to their Prince haue ben vnkynde Be sure, with mee they shall be shrynde As they deserued haue. And cheefly now Iohn Felton hee Shall euer be beloued of mee Because that he so louinglye My Bull did seeme to saue. ¶But yf that I coulde haue at once The paryng of his toe, His head, his quarters, or his bones That with the wynde doe bloe: Then shoulde they be layd vp by mee As reliques of great dignitie For euery man that comes to see Those Iewels of such grace. The Nortons bones should so be shrynd That now hanges wauering in the wynd Yf that I coulde deuyse or fynd To bryug them to this place. ¶And I wyll curse and ban them all That speake against my powre, And seekes to make my kyngdome fall My curse shall them deuowre: And yf that here I might you see For wrytyng lately vnto mee Be sure, ye should rewarded bee As best I coulde bethynke. And as for Wylliam Elderton That lately sent me worde to Rome Be sure that he should haue lyke dome To bye him pen and ynke. ¶Take this as written from our grace That vnto you we send, Because we want both time and place To recompence you frend: As for the boyes that trump and scoff And at my holynes doe laugh I mynd to dresse them wel enough Yf case I had them here. And for my seruants that abyde And long haue had their pacience tryde From Romaine faith that wyl not slyde I wysh them all good there. S. P. ¶FINIS. ¶Imprinted by Alexander Lacie for Henrie Kyrkham, dwelling at the signe of the blacke Boy, at the middle North dore of Paules church.
