21292A 99851449 16723
A Letter lately writ∣ten from Rome, by an Italian Gentleman, to a freende of his in Lyons in Fraunce. Wherein is declared, the state of Rome: The suddaine death & sollemne buriall of Pope Gregory the thirteenth. The electi∣on of the newe Pope, and the race of life this newe Pope ranne before hee was aduaunced. Thereto are adioyned the accidentes that haue fallen out, not onely in Rome, but in Naples & other parts of the worlde also. Newely translated out of Italian into English by I. F. Jmprinted at London by Iohn Charlewoode dwelling in Barbican, at the halfe Eagle and the Key. 1585.
¶ To the Right excel∣lent and Honourable Lord, Hen∣ry Earle of Darby, Lord Stanley, and Strange: Lord of Man, and Th'Isles, one of hir Maiesties most honorable priuie Counsell, Lord Lieutenant of the Coun∣ties of Lancaster, and Chester, and of the Citie of Chester, and knight of the noble order of the Garter. I. F. wisheth all happinesse. IF the testimonie of a duetiful mind, might prooue a sufficient counterpeise to a be∣nefite, I might now (right Hono∣rable) discharge the bande, where with I am so deepelie indebted to your honor: But because I am not able with wordes, to match so high and honorable deedes, I am contēted to remaine a debter still. For as the magnificence of Car∣thage
was so great, that such as haue gone about to lift it vp with commendation, were suddainly stopt and enforst to confesse, they had rather say nothing, then say too little. So when I consider the excellencie of your calling, the nobility of your bloode, and the vertues wherin you shine, though I be desirous to giue a tast of your prayses vnto the world, yet find∣ing my sight too weake to stare vpon such a sun, I am cōpelde to turne away my face and giue it ouer. Neuerthelesse, knowing it to be the parte of a Princely coū∣sellour, to haue an eye in the head of euery common weale, I haue presumed to publish these newes of forraine partes in your honors name, and so much the rather, because I finde in your honor the
disposition of Panthoidas, who being sent Ambassadour into A∣sia, regarded not their goodly and sumptuous buildings, the rich or¦naments of their houses, & such other pleasaunt showes, but ra∣ther endeuoured himself to learn their policies, their gouernment, their customes, their Lawes and proceedings, the manner of pla∣cing of theyr battayle, the order of theyr fight, with such like en∣quiries woorthy a Noble man, whose notable steps your Lord∣ship in your honourable last Am¦bassage did honourably followe: to the perpetuall eternising of your honours auncient and no∣ble name, and the perfect conten∣tation of both their Maiesties. Thus being lothe to be too te∣dious, I leaue these nouels to
your honours consideration, vn∣till time shall yeelde better, and better woorthy your honoura∣ble viewe. Till when and euer wholy dedicating my selfe to your honour, I wyshe your honour all felicity, and grace. The 29. of Iune 1585. Your Honors most humble & duti∣full to commande. Iohn Florio.
A Declaration of Newes written from Rome, and from other partes of the world. IT hath peraduenture (my welbeloued Syr) seemed straunge vnto you, that I haue béene so long with∣out writing vnto you, to informe you of the state of these coun∣tries, as you with many praiers intrea∣ted me, and with your sundry curtesies and fauours bounde mée to doo, whilest passing that wayes, you entertained me so fréendly in your fathers house: and who knoweth, whether you haue con∣ceiued some sinister opinion of me? How be it, I haue no more forgot you in mind then I could or would my own brother: Which thing if for my mishap it should happen, or haue happened, I beséech you for that deare fréendships sake, that al∣wayes hath béene betwéene your house and mine, that you will vtterly cancell, and thinke that my long silence, hath ra∣ther béene occasioned of my sundry, and
waightie affaires, then of any other cause whatsoeuer, which vnlooked for, haue so greatly hindred mee since my comming home, that I coulde not dis∣charge that duetie in effect towards you, which the looue I beare you, and your curtesies bindeth mee to. Wherefore I pray you not onely to accept this as a lawfull excuse, but as the bare trueth, which dooing, you shall increase my af∣fection towardes you more and more, Knowe you therefore, that howbeit I haue not writtē vnto you, I haue not o∣mitted to note dayly the acccidentes, and all things worthie of memory, that haue happened not onely in this Cittie of Rome, but also in others abroad, as they haue either béene written or reported vnto vs, as by this my letter, if your lei∣sure permit you to reade it, you may perceiue, which shall not séeme long vn∣to you, since that it containeth ye sturres happened for the space of two monethes in diuers parts of the world, all thinges of great importance, and worthy to bée read, & noted of you, who doo not followe the example of many others, who spend the greater part of their time in reading
of that which hath béene doone many yéeres agoe, and are altogether ignorant of those thinges which dayly happen in this our age. Know you therefore, that twentie dayes after my departure from you, which was vppon the the sixth day of Aprill last, thankes bee giuen to the Lorde, I arriued safe and sound in thys Citie, where I founde Pope Gregorie the 13, of that name somwhat ill at ease, but so little, that neither he nor any of his fréendes made any account of it, but the third night following being ye ninth of the foresaid moneth, there discended a rume downe into his breast, with such violence, that in two houres it dispat∣ched him. Whose death, as it was vnto his fréendes altogether vnexpected and sodaine, so was it vnto them all most gréeuous, but especially vnto his sonnes most domageable, for it is to be presup∣posed, that if he had perceiued any likeli∣hood of death in himselfe, hee woulde so haue ordered his affaires, yt they should not after his death haue béene in those troubles, wherein by reading of this my letter, you shall perceiue them to be. Yet was not his death so gréeuous vnto the
greatest number of the Cardinals, vnto whom it séemed that he had possessed the seate too long, and that it was more then time for him to giue place to others, as∣piring to that dignitie. I haue spoken of the Popes sonne in the singular number which may peraduēture séeme straunge vnto you, because yt hée, besides the Lord Giacomo, whō he had before he was car¦dinal, by him made Duke of Sora (which Duchie lieth in the kingdome of Naples and he with his money & fauour bought of the King of Spaine) as I am truely informed, he had another in the thirde yéere of his Popedome, by a faire coun∣trie wench, that he kept for his owne tooth at Frascato, a place of sollace, not many miles distant from this citie, very pleasant and beautiful, which sonne was called Lorde Philip Buon compagni, which liued not aboue 4. yéere, or there about, of whō if wel you remēber, at my last being wt you, I had some cōmunica∣tion with your cousin, who said yt he was ye Popes sonne, & I answered that Lord Giacomo was his father, for so it was reported, and giuen foorth at his birth, after which, presently he was caried to
his house, who to take that skandall and slaunder from his father, that might haue ensued thereby, was contented to father him, vpō which thing was made this Pasquil, which not yet thrée wéekes since was giuen me by one of his Cour∣tiers, and because the inuention thereof is pretie, & that I knowe you take great pleasure in readyng of such deuises, I haue thought it good to set it downe héere. The Pasquill. The maketh of it fayneth, that Pas∣quine hauing prepared himselfe to flie from Rome, meeteth by chaunce with Marforius, who entring into discourse with him, sayth. M. Pasquine whether goest thou in such hast? P. I goe to seeke my fortune, for I will stay no lon∣ger heere. M. Alas, what doo I heere▪ and what is the cause that moueth thee to forsake thy deare and naturall coun∣trey? P. Because there is no more reli∣gion heere. M. How many that be? and if there be no Religion heere, where is there any then? P. That knowe not I, but well I wote, that the holy Trinitie is nothing at all accounted of heere.
M. Alas for you, and where is it more manifestly knowen and openly profes∣sed then heare? I dare take vpon me to make thee confesse, and say, that in no place else so much as in this holy Citie. P. I pray thee Marforius, doo mee that fauour, as to make mee perceiue that, which if thou doost, I promise thee I will not forsake my countrey. M. I would doo it willingly, but I feare thou wilt but mocke mee, being a thing so manifest that euery one may see it, and feele it. P. I will rather thinke my self beholding to thee then mocke thee. wherfore I pray thee proceed. M. Is it possible that thou doost not perceiue in the Popes persō the representatiō of the eternal father, & in the Lord Giacomo, that of Iesus Christ his sōne, & in yoūg Philip, begotten of the Pope, and fathe∣red vpon L. Giacomo, that of the holy Ghost, proceeding both from the father and the sonne? P. Ha, Ha, Ha, by my faith thou sayest true. I must needes confesse that the Trinitie is not so ap∣parently knowen in any other place as it is in Rome, and therefore I will euen get me home againe, and stay the euent
of the Romaine Trinitie. And thus en∣deth the Pasquill. But to come to my purpose againe, where I left, I say that commonly the day after ye Pope is dead, they are wont to conuey his carkas in a litter alongst Strasteuere, attēded on by his wonted Garde of Swizers. and light horsemen to the Consistoriall chamber in Saint Peters Pallace, where beyng Pontifically apparelled, al in white gar∣ments, euen as if he should celebrate the sacred seruice, he is layd vpon the beare, couered with a cloth of gold, and silke, with letters about it saying, Gregorius 13. Pont. Max. and two Cardinals hats at his feete, and so he is left vntill the eue∣ning, at which time the whole Colledge of Cardinales beyng assembled there, with all the Bishops and Prelates that then are in Rome, and with all the Ca∣nons of Saint Iohn Laterane, and of S. Peter with their richest Coapes on, hee is carried into the Popes Chappell be∣fore the high Altar, where the Bishops, Prelates, and such people as be there do kisse his féete, after which ceremonie he is carried by the Canons of S. Peters, & layd before the Sacrament Chappel, his
Pensioners goyng before with theyr Polares, the head downeward, accom∣panyed with the Cardinals apparelled in Purple, (which maketh a goodly showe) where beyng layde, the woonted funerall ceremonies vnto the dead car∣kas, are celebrated by one of the Canons of the sayde Church, after that he is cari∣ed into S. Sixtus his Chappell, where for thrée dayes space he is left, with his féete towardes the grate, to the end, that those that list may kisse his féete, he be∣ing attyred as I haue sayd before, with many Torches burning day and night about him, with a multitude of Priests tending on him, for feare he shoulde run away, Thrée dayes being ended, he is buried in the sayde Church, where it pleaseth best his kinsmen, whe nyne dayes after continually, many Torches are burning, for so long his funerals doo last, and therefore they are called Nouen∣dalie, which importeth, in English, nine dayes workes. A very high scaffolde in the forme of a Piramides, beyng made in the middest of the Church, couered all ouer with blacke cloth, with his armes rounde about, but without the Keyes,
with letters, saying, Pope Gregorie the 13. which Piramides is vpheld by many pillars, vnder which dooth appeare an Hearce, all couered with cloth of golde, with coushins of the same, where euery morning there is a Masse sung by some Cardinall, created by the last Pope, which Masse being ended, he with foure Cardinals more in black Veluet robes, and the Subdeane hauing sayd the Epi∣stle, taking the crosse in hand, the master of the ceremonies, and other his officers assisting, all the other Cardinals follow∣ing, they goe about the scaffold, or Pira∣mides. The dead Popes whole houshold sitting about the same vpon fourmes all in mourning apparel, with burning tor∣ches in their handes, some bigger then other some, according to the degrées of the men▪ at each corner of the sayd scaf∣folde, is placed a stoole couered with black, vpon which the foure Cardinales in black Veluet doo sit, and he that hath sung Masse sitting vpon another stoole, in the middest of that side that looketh toward the Altar. Then he that sitteth at the right hand, beginneth to giue hol∣ly water to the beare lying vnder the
Key, and vntill such time as they haue agréed about the Popes election, they be so fast, that they can not by any meanes come out. Many yéeres since it was woont to be but one hall, deuided into so many little chambers, with hangings of Tapistrie, as there were Cardinals, but considering that for want of roome and and ayre, many dyed before the election, there are nowe two great roomes, deui∣ded into more then thrée score litle cham∣bers, each one of them being more then sixtéene foote square, euery one of them hauing a little cabinet, or closet ioyned vnto it, for the Cardinales seruing men to be in, before the Chambers there is a long gallerie for the Cardinals to walke in. No Cardinal can bring in more then thrée men, that is to say, a Secretarie, a Gentleman, and a Chamberlaine, who so long as the election lasteth can not by any meanes come out. All which cham∣bers are dressed as it followeth. Those which pertaine to the Cardinales crea∣ted by the last Pope, are hanged with purple, with all furnitures pertayning to it of the same, as Bedsteds, Valences, Curtaines, Couerlets, Pillowes, Cush∣ines,
with silke fring of that colour. There is in euery chamber a little table with a Purple Carpet to it, a little woodden lanterne, a little ladder to hang vp the hangings, one high stoole, and one lowe, which they carie to the scrutine Chamber, a dust basket, a Chest wyth locke and key, and such other necessaries in a Chamber, euerie thinge couered with purple, with the Cardinals armes vpon them to whom they appertaine. Al other Cardinals haue their chambers, & other implementes hanged, and couered with gréene, The order how they are serued in the Conclaue, so long as the e∣lection lasteth is this. Before the gate of the Conclaue, there is a fayre roome, where al the Archbishops, and Bishops, that then are in Rome, doo stande way∣ting at the doore by turnes, daie & night or as they are chosen by looue, foure of them alwayes ready to helpe, and doo all such necessary businesse as the place, and time requireth, what occasion soeuer happen, chaunging euery two houres. Their Chambers being néere the sayde place. About the gallarie of the Pallace going towarde the newe gate, are the
Romane Barrons, and Lordes atten∣ding, with two gardes, one of Italians, the other of Swizers, who are to waite on the Cardinales going into the Con∣claue, or that by reason of infirmitie come out, together with the dead Popes light horsemen, and groomes of his sta∣ble, who accompany them home to their lodgings. The order howe the Gentle∣men or Sewers doo serue the Cardinals their Lords is thus. At ye gate where as I sayd before foure Bishops doo stād, are two Gentlemē, who are to call ye Cardi∣nals or Sewers, as they are orderly set down in writing in a scrowle of Paper, yt euery night is fastened vpon the gate, wherein are the names of all the Car∣dinals written as they are drawen by lots, so that a man may sée who shall first or last bée serued. Euerie night that scrowle is newly written. In deede if any of them be sick, they are first serued. Euery night there are foure of the sayde byls of names made against the day fol∣lowing: one of which is kept within the Conclaue, another is fastened to the gate where the Senatours or Sherifes li, as I sayd before, the other two are
kept by the two aforesayde Gentlemen, one of which standeth by the dresser, at that doore at which the Gentlemē Sew∣ers goe in with meate, in order as they are called, each one hauing two great baskets or flaskets of diuers stuffes fa∣shions and colours, the one for kitchin viandes, the other for other sortes of af∣ter seruice, these carried betwéene two men with coulestaues. And this is the manner of theyr seruice. First euerie Sewer hath very orderly his dishes placed in the foresayd two flaskets, who were first made ready by other officers, as by the Cooke, Paster, Butler, Spi∣cer, Comfeter, Fruterer, and such other that belong to keepyng, or dressing of meates. Before the sayd meates goeth that Cardinals Gentleman Vsher that is first serued, and then two groomes of the stable with two staues in their hāds painted of the Cornutas colour, for so that flasket is called wherin the kitchin meates are caried, after them followeth the Gentleman Steward, with foure or sixe Gentlemen more, carying of fayre glasses in their hands full of diuers sorts of wines, and very cleare water, ye But∣ler
going in the middest of them, with a little glasse of wine in his hand, the said glasses are all couered with Orenge blomes, and other swéete flowers, with papers on them showing the qualitie, or sorte of the Wine, then followe two Groomes of the Stable that carrie the flasket, wherein all other sortes of after meates, Comfets and fruites are, then followeth the Cubberd kéeper, with two other Groomes that carie the Cor∣nuta. All the Gentlemen pertaining to that Cardinal attending on them, thus going al in order towards the Conclaue dresser, they méete first at the first doore the Conseruours, Senatours, or sherifs gard, then comming to the stayers foote, they méete the other garde of Italians and Swizers. And so passing along the gallerie, they come into a seuerall roome where are two little doores, one to go in to serue, the other to come out after they haue serued, at the entrie of that roome is also a garde of Italians and Swizers, which open and shut the doores: where stande the two Cursors, or gentlemen with bils of names in their hands, who in order call for the Sewer that must
come in first, at the vpper end of the said roome standeth a table fiftéene foote long, the Sewer being come to that table, he taketh a very fine and whyte Napkin from the Cubbord kéeper, and layeth it on the table, and another he layeth be∣fore the aforesayde foure Bishops, with two kniues, and two forkes, which they take vp, the Sewer hauing set all the dishes vpō the table, they vncouer them, and taste of them all, there can no Pies nor Pasties passe whole, nor any kinde of poultery, or fowle, for they are al cut, carued, and opened, before the sayde Bi∣shops. There can no wine, nor water be carried in, in any other vesselles then cléere glasses, nor any table cloth, towel, or Napkin, that is not first vnfolded, opened, & very well considered. All ves∣sels both out of which they eate & drink, of glasse, or porcelaine that once goe in, come no more out, for they are the ma∣ster of the Ceremonies his fees. The meate that is left, is deuided among the seruaunts or officers in the Conclaue, as Barbours, Mazons, Carpenters, Poticaries, Swéepers, & such like. So soone as euery Sewer, or steward hath
serued, he enquireth whether his Lorde will haue any other meate against the next time, or not, then taking Conge, he goeth out of the other doore, whylest o∣thers come in at the other. And in this order are all Cardinals serued morning and night, so long as the election lasteth. And all that whyle the Castell or Pal∣lace is very well garded, for at the first trench, besides the souldiers that are in Beluedere, and those which garde the market place, which are a great nūber, there are sixe & twentie Swizers way∣ting day & night, there is a great chaine of yron to crosse the way, and a little house of bordes to shield them from the rayne, Aboue the sayd trench on the left side goyng into the Pallace, are eyght peeces of great Artillerie, garded by a band of Swizers, and two other gardes, that alwayes are attendant there. Not farre from the sayde Artillerie ouer a∣gainst the great gate, which is also gar∣ded by fiftie Swizers, there are thrée péeces of artillerie more, euen in the en∣trie of the Pallace, which also is garded by thrée bandes of Swizers, and for the succour of the sayde gate in any néede,
there is at the left hand a place or house couered with bordes, in which is conti∣nually a bād of Italian souldiours, with a going out one both sides. On the right hand going into the Court, toward Bor∣gias tower vnder the gate, which is loc∣ked with an yron chaine, is continually another band of Italians, and on the left hand therof is an Altar, that may be re∣mooued where one list, couered with ve∣ry rich Tapestrie, and other ornaments where euery morning all the election while, the Masse of the holy Ghost is celebrated and sung, by the singing men of the Chappell. All that while that the Masse is celebrating, the gates stande o∣pen, but very well garded, for then all priests of what order soeuer, & Moncks with the Orflins going before very or∣derly, doo go Procession like through all Courtes, and places beneath the wat∣ches, and gardes stand ready armed as if they were ready to fight, or expect the e∣nemie. The Priest that sayth the Masse betwéene two Deacons with hys face toward the Conclaue, singeth as lowde as hee can the Psalme Veni Creator mundi, and the Letanies, with other
Prayers, the whole quier answering him. This doone, the Canons of S. Pe∣ter, and other Prelates, with the woon∣ted Musick goe in. The procession being ended, at the sound of a little bell al men depart, for that is a signe, that the Scru∣tinie of that morning is doone, and that there is no Pope chosen, then all ye soul∣diers doo vnarme themselues. These or∣ders & ceremonies are vsed euery day, frō that time that ye Cardinals goe into the Conclaue, vntill a Pope bée chosen. The maner how ye Cardinals doo chuse him in the Conclaue, is as it followeth. After two maner of wayes the electi∣on is made. The one is, that euery Car∣dinall writeth vpon a scrowle, the name of him whom he wisheth to bee Pope, & after he hath folded it, he carrieth it to the Altar which is in ye chamber, where the Scrutinie is made, and there stan∣deth the master of the ceremonies which receiueth the sayd scrowles, & that Car∣dinall which is founde to haue the most scrowles, of ye two thirds of those Cardi∣nals yt be there, he is Pope, this manner is called the choosing by scrutiny, because therby the mind of ye Cardinals is sifted
and knowen. But when in the Con∣claue any is founde, that hath none to stand with him, then the Cardinals stay not to haue their opinions enquired by scrutinie, but declare themselues by their voyces, and then the Lord Cham∣berlayne, or some other of the chéefest Cardinals, causeth him whō they sée so fauoured by voyces, to sit vpon the Pa∣pall seate, saying vnto him. Adoro te in Pontificem, all other Cardinals follow∣ing him, striuing who shall be foremost, least by staying, any be thought to bee a∣gréeued. This is called election by Ado∣ration, although that he which is chosen by scrutinie be also adored, which adora∣tion is rather doone for customes sake, then for any necessitie. Presently after the election▪ the newe Popes seruantes run to breake two windowes ouer the Court, where the Masse or Procession is sayd, and there the people flocking a∣bout thē, they cry Cardinall Mont-alto is chosen Pope, afterwardes commeth one of the Cardnals with the crosse in his hand, and sayth thrée times, Papam habemus. After that, all the Cardinalles for a good space abide with ye new Pope,
reioycing with him for his election, then they accompany him to his Pallace, af∣ter that, euery one retyreth him selfe to his owne home. Furthermore you shall vnderstande Sir, that as soone as it is noysed abroad that the Pope is chosen, all the people run to the Pallace where he dwelt béeing Cardinall, and wholy spoyle and rob the same. In times past they were woont to finde there many things of great value, especially house∣hold stuffe, but now they that haue but the least hope to bée Pope, cause theyr seruants secretely to conuay thence all the best, leauing nothing but such things as they care not for loosing. Now to sig∣nifie vnto you the election of this Pope, I say, that in Sede vacante, after the death of Pius the fifte, ye King of Spaine writ to Cardinall Farnese, wishing him to stand to be Pope, for that he desyred onely to haue him, who at the first stoode in some doubt, thinking that the Kinge did it onely in mockery, but he confir∣ming it by his Ambassadour then resi∣dent at Rome, the Cardinall began to perswade himselfe that he meant in good earnest, and endeuoured himselfe ear∣nestly
to the obtaining thereof, and such were his practizes, that many thought he should be Pope, vntill one morning, the Cardinal Granuela in the Conclaue presented him with a letter from the King, by which he requested him at that time to content himselfe, and to labour no further for that dignitie, and that for a speciall consideration, marry withall that hée should assure himselfe the next time not to fayle thereof, at the sight whereof, the Cardinall was greatly a∣stonied, perceiuing that the King went about to delude him, and in thought somewhat grieued thereat, answered, that he acknowledged himselfe a subiect vnméete to beare such a heauy burthen, howbeit to pleasure his Maiestie (whō to please he had alwayes sought) he was mooued to attempt such an enterprise, and now sith that he saw that the Kings pleasure was such, he submitted himself wholy to his wil. Thē Cardinall Gran∣uela thanked him, and requested him to agree with him in choosing the newe Pope, and so the next morning Grego∣rie the 13. of late deceassed was chosen. Cardinall Farnese hauing receiued this
scornefull repulse of the King, although that in showe hée séemed to haue forgot it, yet inwardly he déepely imprinted it, and his drift was to vse such meanes whilest Gregorie lyued that after his death, of himselfe without the ayde of the King of Spaine, he might attaine to his purpose, and be chosen Pope, which secretly he wēt about, yet not so couert∣ly, but that many Cardinals had notice thereof, therefore Gregorie beyng dead, and the Cardinales beyng assembled in the Conclaue, perceyuing fully Farnese his intent, they vnderstoode that if the time were detracted, peraduenture hée woulde haue brought it to passe, there∣fore sodainely they resolued themselues to disappoynt him and choose another. Hereupon Cardinal Este, Alexandrino, and Rusticuzzi with their adherentes, ioyning together by way of scrutinie e∣lected Cardinall Mont-alto, & such was their good fortune, that they not thinking that any others woulde giue their voy∣ces, to their Cardinall comes Cardinall Medici, with sixe voyces to weigh down the ballances on their side, and so vpon Easter day they beyng entred into the
Conclaue, the next morning came Car∣dinall de Augusta, who entred in, and so did Cardinall Madrucci. On Tuesday at night, and vpō Wednesday morning following at ten of the clocke, hee was made Pope, & so acknowledged, and a∣dored of all the Colledge. Wherby Car∣dinal Farnese was two wayes deceiued, the one, in not being himselfe Pope, the other in not hauing any thing to doo in the election of the new, a thing that hap∣pened not vnto him many yéeres before, hee hauing made almost all the Popes since his vncles death, who was Paulus the third, hauing alwaies had many ad∣herents. Mont-alto being thus chosen Pope on Wednesday in Easter weeke, which was (according to our computation) the 24. of Aprill, and presently after his e∣lection, (being before called Felix) he na∣med himself Syxtus Quintus, and forth∣with he depriued Cardinal Como of the office of Secretarie, and gaue it to Car∣dinall Rusticuzzi who had it vnder Pius the 5. and Cardinall Alexandrino had ye place, which Cardinall Sant Sisto had in the consultation. The Marques
Altemps was made Gouernour of Bor∣go, and generall Captaine of both the Popes gardes. The Duke of Sora was confirmed generall of the Church. The L. Marques of Riano had the roome of S. Mario Sforza, who was Lieutenant Generall. The Gouernour of Rome was confirmed anew, likewise the Con∣trouler of the Popes houshold that was first continueth still. Great ioy and tri∣umphes were made at the election of the Pope, but nothing so much as was accustomed, & that because it is thought the people would rather haue had Car∣dinall Farnese. The Sea was vacant fif∣téene dayes without any excesse or disor∣der. Vppon Thursday last Cardinall Mondoui of Piemont, by Sea arriued heere, not without great daunger both of weather and Pyrates, and at Corne∣ton, great contention arose betwixt his company & the townes men, there were discharged more then an hundred shot of Harguebusses. Contrary to the opinion of all men, the Lorde Paulo Giordano Orsino, Duke of Brasciano, came and kissed the Popes féete, who entertained him very curteously, and with all aduer∣tised
him to looke to the gouernment of his estate, and to the ouerthrowe and rooting out of the banished persons, or outlawes as we terme them? I layde he did it contrary to the expectation of all men, because you shall vnderstand, that the Pope had not many yéeres agoe a Nephew, a young man of comely sta∣ture and personage, who viewing on a time a beautifull Damosell of Coram∣bonis de Augubbio, fell so in loue with her, that in short space hée won her and wedded her, but he enioyed her not long for shortly after hee was slaine with a gunne, and it was thought that Lorde Paulo had procured his death, for that not long after hee became very familiar with the Gentlewoman, and meanyng to marrie her, Cardinall Medici, who is brother in law to him, and all his kins∣mē of the house of Orsini, laboured to ye Pope very earnestly, that he should not suffer their kinsman to match with one of so base fortune, whereupon the Pope at their intreatie sent for him, and first by faire meanes sought to disswade him from his purpose, but séeing he could doo no good thereby he grew to threatnings,
saying, threatning him with excōmuni∣cation, but Lord Paulo nothing terrified nor dismayed, sent the Gentlewoman to his house in the countrie, and the Pope as she was going thether, caused her to be apprehended and put into a monaste∣rie of Nunnes, where she remained cer∣taine monthes, notwithstanding, that at the length Lord Paulo found meanes to get her at libertie, and in despight of al men maried her, and yet enioieth her. For this cause it was thought, that hee would not haue submitted himselfe vnto the Pope, and trusted him, and that the Pope being now in that soueraigntie & dignitie, would haue reuenged the death of his Nephew. But sée how vaine the iudgements of men are oftentimes, for now there is a mariage intreated of, betwixt the Popes Néece & Lord Paulo his sonne, & it is thought that he shall be general Standard bearer of the Church. The same day Cardinall Sforza had au∣dience of the Pope, and showed himselfe agréeued of the depriuation of Lorde Mario his Vncle, to whom the Pope answered, but smally to his contentatiō. It is sayd that the last Popes treasurer
(a man very well séene both in the ciuil and Canon lawes, and one that by fin∣ding out diuerse meanes to inriche the Church, hath caused a great sort to cry out of him) is close prisoner in the castle, there to giue account of his administra∣tion. A little while agoe there were taken out of the Castle great summes of mony for the vse of the Sea vacante, which now are resigned againe. The two thousande souldiers appointed for the Garde of ye Conclaue are discargeded, againe, eue∣ry one hauing giuen him besides his promised wages a crowne. The Pope hath alreadie boūtifully re∣quited a great number, which had shew∣ed or doone him any pleasure, when hee was in lowe estate and of small abilitie, amongst ye rest he hath enriched a Cob∣ler, who had sometimes mended hys shooes for nothing, who ye day following for sodaine ioy, set all his olde shooes, lastes, and tooles on fire. Yesterday morning the Lordes Con∣seruours, or Sheriffes came to kisse the Popes féete, and desired thrée fauours of him, that is, aboundance, iustice, & pro∣uisiō
against outlawes abroad, of whom there is a great number: to whom he answered, that he woulde prouide for them all as spéedily as could be. The Pope sheweth himselfe verie thankfull to Pius the fifth, who made him Cardinal, & therfore hath comman∣ded Cardinall Alexandrino, Nepew to Pius the 5. that he withall the seruaunts and such as belonged to Pius ye 5. shoulde come to the Palace, a thing surely very commendable in any man, to be mindful in time of prosperitie of his benefactors. Yesterday ye Marques Altemps tooke possession of Borgo, accompanyed by a great troupe of horsemen, and with a garde of Swizers. The Iesuites cōming to kisse ye Popes féete, obained of him, that the sumptu∣ous building of their commenced Col∣ledge should be continued, and that whē they want money they shoulde repayre vnto him, The Lorde Paulo Giordano yesterday went to Brasciano with his wife, and all his Court, Cardinall Sant. Sixtus, Ne∣phew to the Pope that dead is, goeth to dwell in the Pallace of the Duke of
Parma, it being graunted him by Cardi∣nall Farnese, who desiring of the Pope, that his father might come to Rome, which the Pope that is dead his brother woulde neuer yéelde, to whom the Pope answered, that if he were not banished he might come. By letters receyued from Milan the 23. of this moneth wée vnderstande that the visiter Reggius, hath commission frō the King to receiue the accounts of Lord Giorgio Mariques, without molesting of his person, which hath happened by the intercession of the Empresse, and the general muster is appointed to be ye Ka∣lendes of May, & that to all ye souldiours shall be giuen a 100. Frenche Crownes a man besides the ordinarie pay, but not to those of Don Giorgio his com∣pany. It is said also that there are taken out of the Castle 200000. crownes, to send into Flaūders. That from Geneua there was brought thither prisoner a Spanyard, which the last yéere sayde to the Cardi. Borromeo, that he had order from Don Pietro Ant. sonne to the Duke of Terra Noua, to shoote him tho∣rowe with a gunne, but being therefore
set on the racke, he confessed that he sayd so onely to get a piece of money out of his handes. We vnderstand by letters dated the 20, of this moneth from the Court of the Emperour in Praga, these newes follo∣wing. On Friday last the Emperour gaue audience, to the Comissaries and Ambassadours of diuerse Princes, as touching the deliuerance of the Duke of Saxonie prisoner at Neustat, but althogh his enemy séeke by all meanes possible to hinder the sayd deliuerance, yet it is hoped that in the end he shall haue some fauour shewed him. The Ambassador al∣so of Moscouia had audience, who was accompanyed into the Pallace by the high Chamberlayne, and many of the chiefest Courtiers, and presented vnto his Maiestie, a great number of exqui∣site and fine Armelens, with a furniture of a Gostone. Of the same vncouered of very great value, and brought letters of credite, written in red sarcenet, he came to confirme and renewe the truce and league that alwayes hath béene betwéen his princes father, and the house of Au∣stria whereupon he had a long discourse
committed this cruell fact, to heape vil∣lanie vpon villanie, tooke the fairest of the two young Ladies, and in the pre∣sence of all the other rauished her, per∣mitting and commanding his men, to doo the like vnto the other, and to all the Ladies and gentlewomen that atten∣ded on them, which done, he caused them most cruelly to be slaine, and flong into the sea. This villanie being heard of a∣broade, was of all men detested, and con∣demned to be more then barbarous, espe∣cially of the Venecians themselues, who sought all meanes possible to haue him taken, which thing Emmo perceiuing, and being gauled with the guilt of his conscience, he tooke him to his flight, and being come to Puglia, perceiuing him∣selfe not to be safe there, he licenced two of his Galleys, and with all his bootie a∣mounting to the value of 200. thousand Crownes in money & Iewels, vpon ye thirde which was the best and fairest Galley that was séene vppon the seas these many yéeres, sayling towards the Ile of Malta, where he purposed to yéeld himselfe, to the great Master of the Re∣ligion and order, and there to liue vpon
the praye. The Venecians fearing the displeasure of the great Turke, present∣ly sent the Captaine of the Gulfe, who is a Noble Veneciā, to pursue him with one of the best Gallies, and if it might be, eyther a liue or dead to take him, and all his complices, whose enterprise, the Lorde God so fauoured, to the ende such villanie should not long go vnpunished, that in few dayes, not farre from Puglia he met with him and without great re∣sistance tooke him, and all his men, and carried them to Venice, where ye fourth day after being iustly by the lawes con∣demned, he was publiquely executed and had his head cutte of, and all his goods confiscated, to a kinsman of his that was with him: but in as much as all the souldiers protested that he was nothing culpable, and rather had sought by all meanes and reasons, to diswade him frō that crueltie, they did nothing but con∣demne him to perpetuall prison. At the first, when the great Turke heard of this he séemed to be very angry, and deman∣ded to haue (besides an infinit summe of money, Emmo and all the souldiers) and Gallies furnished in his owne handes.
The Venecians foorthwith, sent Ambas∣sadours vnto him with Emmo his head, excusing themselues as well as they could, and that it was a thing they vt∣terly detested, and were altogether in∣nocent of, offering any reasonable con∣ditions to appease him, but he continu∣ing in his anger, demaunded great and vnreasonable satisfactiō: but now as we heare by these last letters, he is much al∣tered, and séemes to yéelde to any reaso∣nable conditions, to which he would ne∣uer haue condiscended, were he in any good estate with that mightie enemie of his, the great Persian, with whom these thrée yéeres space he hath had continuall warre, and hath lost verie much, who euen at this time troubles him greatly, and that is the reason that hee was so soone appeased with the Venecians. So that nowe it were an easie thing for the Christian Princes (if there were any zeale of Christ in them, and that such en∣uie and malice did not raigne among them) vniting themselues together, vt∣terly to ouerthrowe him, and frée so ma∣ny thousandes of Christian soules that liue in miserable bondage, which if they
doo not but continue still, in séeking to vndoo and deuour one another. You shall sée one day those two mightie States, e∣nemies both to the name of Christ, ioyne together & fall vpon vs, as they did vpon the Princes of Greece. Pardon me good sir, if I haue gone from my former dis∣course, for nothing maketh mee speake but ye great desire I haue, that that ene∣mie of Christians, should once be set vp∣on by those that might (if they would) o∣uercome, hauing the euerliuing Lord to their guide, as they might haue, if they woulde followe that good Godfrey of Buloin, that gathered a Christiā power out of England, Fraunce, Italie, and re∣couered the Holy Land. But nowe re∣turning to it, I say that with the same letters, we heare that S. Barberico, who was newly chosen Procurator of S. Mar∣co, which is one of the greatest dignities in that Signorie, went to the Senate, accompanyed with thrée hundreth noble men, all in their Senatours roabes, which made a rare and goodly showe, and to most of them he made a sumptu∣ous banquet. The Prouisor of Firme Land was come to the citie, his office is
also of great credite among them. A no∣ble man of the house of Contarini, euen in ye Rialto (which is a place in Venice as the Royall Exchange in London) shot at another Noble man with a Pi∣stol, who being taken, was foorthwith banished the citie, and all the States thereof, on paine of a thousand crownes, and to loose his life if he be taken, and howbeit many sue for hym, yet can no fauour be obtained, vntill ten yéeres be expired, and if his father die in ye meane time, his goods shalbe confiscated. The Cardinall Ceneda, was ready to take his iourney from Venice to come hether. The Patriarke of Aquileia was looked for there. The Souldiers were prest before to be sent into Candia to the garisons, they began now to take their pay, and to be sent away vnder diuers Coronels, and Captaines. This is al we heard from thence with the last letters. From Rome, from the day abouesayd to the 18. of May. Vpon Saturday last, there was a publique consistorie held, in which the Cardinals Mondoni, Terra-noua, and Gioyeuse, made their first en∣trie to receiue their Hats, who were ac∣companied
by 32. Cardinals, and a great nūber of other Lords, Barrons, & nobles al on horsebacke. The Cardinals, Este, Ramboglietto, Sirletto, & Medici were not there. They were most courteously & honorably receiued, and entertained of the Pope, who gaue them their Hattes, and made them full Cardinales. The Popes when they made any Cardinals that is not present, they vse this ceremo∣nie. First to send them a red Cap where they are, and then the first time after they come to Rome, and enter the con∣sistorie, they giue them the Hat. These thrée cardinals were made by Gregory, but they had neuer bin at Rome before. The Cardinall Medici had audience of the Pope, and tolde him that ye Duke of Toscana his brother, desired to come and kisse his féete, and doo his duetie to his holinesse, but that he desired to haue audience, and to be receiued in ye kings Hall, the Pope answered him▪ that at more leysure he woulde talke of it, and gaue him an answere. On Munday in ye Consistorie, by ye re∣signation of Monsier Fautino, ye Church of Coscenza was committed to Abbot Pastorius, the Church of Concordia in
Friuli, to a gentleman of Venice, of the house of Quirini: that of Salmona to a Fryer, Chaplaine to the Cardinall of A∣ragona. Likewise, two Churches in Po∣lonia (named by Cardinall Farnese) were prouided of sufficiēt Pastors. The same day, and in the sayd Consistorie, the Pope declared as Legates, these Prelates folowing: Cardinall Saluia∣ti to be sent to Bologna la grassa. Cardi∣nall Colonna to Campagna of Rome. Cardinall Gesualdo to Marca d' Anco∣na. Cardinall Spinola to Perugia, and Cardinall Canano to Romagna. And the Pope nominated his aboue named nephew, Cardinall Mont-alto, gyuing him his owne Hat, his Armes, and hys name, with seuen thousande Crownes reuenues at the first dash. On the Tues∣day following, the sealing beeing ended, Cardinall Farnese departed hence to Grotta ferrata, there to solace and recre∣ate himselfe, and it is thought that he is greatly discontented. The day before Mounsier Fiesco caryed a hat and a hal∣lowed sword to the Duke of Sauoy, and a Rose vnto the Dutchesse, (which is a ceremonie vsed of Popes in honouring of Princes,) for that the Duke and hys
wyfe comming out of Spayne, wil lande at Nizza, where ye Pope hath sent Lorde Fiesco to receiue them, and present them with his presents: and as some thinke, he shal continue with the Duke as Nun∣tio. The same day the Duke of Sora re∣nounced his generalship, and the Mar∣ques Mario Sforza renounced his office, he béeing Lieutenant. Vpon wednesday Signior Bon compagno, brother to Pope Gregory came hether, who for some pri∣uate grudge was not permitted to come during his brothers life. There went to méete him out of the Gates, these men folowing: the Duke of Sora his Ne∣phewe, the Cardinalles San sisto hys sonne, and Vasta villani his Nephewe, with certain others, who conducted him to Cardinall San sisto his house. Where∣by it may be séene how variably ye whéele of Fortune turneth, for if he had beene permitted to come whilst his brother li∣ued, he should haue béene receiued of the Cardinalles and Lordes of the Courte, and with great triumphe brought into the Pallace. Neither will I forget to tel you the cause, why the Pope his brother would not sée him. The cause was this.
Before Gregory came to ye Popedome, he was a very poore Cardinall, and main¦tained his sonne Lord Giacomo (as well as he coulde) at studie in Padua, who in time of vacation, alwaies repayred to his Vncles house in Bologna, where he was very ill intreated of his Aunte, and by her oftentimes misused in termes & spéeches, as calling him asse, dolt, priests bastarde, with the like, which spéeches (as you knowe) with vs are counted spightfull and intollerable. This poore youth, sometimes gaue his father intelli∣gence thereof by letters, who writte to his Brother, and tolde him that he mar∣uayled (séeing he had the gouernment of his wife) he would suffer it, and threat∣ning him that if he wold not redresse it▪ he would be so mindfull of him, as hee should repent it. But his brother, who not onely loued but honoured his wyfe, durst neuer let her vnderstande thereof, though secretely to winne his Nephew, he nowe and then bestowed some spen∣ding money on him, who alwayes dyd commende him to his father, who pre∣sentlie after he was chosen Pope, sent for his sonne Lorde Giacomo, causing hym
most honourably to be receiued, dayly aduauncing him, as well you knowe. Signior Bon compagno hearing of his brothers preferment, foorthwith addres∣sed himselfe to goe to sée him, hoping to be ioyfully entertained and honoured of him: but the Pope foreknowing his com¦ming, sent him straight worde to come no further vppon paine of his displea∣sure, but to returne home againe, not tel¦ling him the cause why, knowing that if he listed he might well conceyue it. Hys brother hearing this message, sorrowfull and pensiue returned backe, and coulde neuer after haue leaue to come thether, (although Lord Giacomo earnestly sued for him.) The Pope immitating héere∣in, Pope Pius the fourth, who woulde neuer suffer his brother the Marques of Marignano, to come in his sight, neither did he at any time show fauour or fréend shippe to him or his, how be it, in this point, Pope Gregory differed from him, for hee gaue to his brothers two daugh∣ters, eache of thē ten thousande crownes in mariage, and caused them to be nobly and honourably matched, and made one of his sonnes Cardinall, gyuing hym
great riches, and the second Gouernour of Rauenna, and vpon him he bestowed a thousande crownes euery moneth, and one of hys sisters sons he made Cardinal Vasta villani. Nowe to returne to the things present, I say that the day folow∣ing, Sig. Bon compagno came to kysse the Popes féete, who receiued him verye curteously, and some suppose that he shal be established Gouernour of the Citty of Fermo during his life, although the com¦munaltie of that Cittie made sute to the Pope, to graunt them for their gouernor the new Cardinall Mont-alto, who an∣swered them, that as yet hee had more néede of a Gouernour himselfe then to gouerne others. Mounsier Ahlobrandi∣no is elected Chauncelour, and Mounsier Basone shalbe Nuntio in Spayne, and Cardinal San Giorgio in Naples. Moun sier Carlo Conti, Gouernour of Cameri∣no, craueth leaue of the Pope to come hether to Rome, it is sayde he shall haue it, and that in his place hee will sende Mounsier Maffetti. At the request of Cardinall Altemps, the Pope hath con∣firmed the olde Fiscull of Rome in hys office, and hath appointed Lusimbardi
ouerseer and Auditor of the Tower of Bologna. We vnderstand by letters frō Spayne, that the day of the Annunciati∣on in the Church of Saragossa, the Duke of Sauoy made the Lords Sig. Giacomo Battista of Sauoy, his Ambassadour resi∣dent in Spayne: the Marques of Ciam∣bra, & Conte Ottauio san vitale Knights of the order of the Annunciation, mea∣ning also to bestowe it vppon the Mar∣ques Boba, and Don Michele Bouelli at his returne into Italie, and hath appoyn∣ted that the seconde ceremonie of ensta∣ling, be doone in Nizza of Brouenza. His maiesty wyll accompany and bring hys daughter, the spouse to Parcelona, who hath vsed much kindnes and fréendship towards the Duke his son in lawe, and with Cardinal Granuella only, his other daughter shall be maried to ye Archduke Ernesto, brother to the Emperour. There is a mariage talked of betwixt one of the Popes Néeces, and Sig. Iulia∣nus, sonne to Signior Giorgio Cesar∣mi, and betwixt hys other Néece & Sig. Pietro Gaetano, sonne to Sig. Honora∣to, but whether they shall come to passe or no, it is vncertaine. Mon. Nazaret
shalbe Legate in Fraunce to séeke to mo∣derate and mittigate those hurly-bur∣lies▪ and therefore the Pope hath sent for him hither. The Bishop of Cameri∣no (in his voiage to olonia, going the∣ther as Nuntio) is deade. The Archby∣shop of Naples is come hether. Newes is brought vs, that in the Mountaines of Safso ferrato, a ringleader of Outlawes called Morte, with 22. of his adherents, is besieged by two thousand mē & more, wherevpon we hope that he shall not es∣cape. Cadinall Vercelli on thursday mor¦ning, being taken with a certaine feuer, departed this life in lesse then 4. houres, and by his death there fell an Abbye of fiue thousand crownes a yeere, which the Pope hath already bestowed on Car¦dinall Mont-alto hys Nephewe. Wee heare that in Naples by reason of ye great dearth that is in that Citie, the people appointed one to deale with ye Viceroy, that so many people might not die for hunger, who went and did cleane contra¦rie: for when certaine ships laden with corne were in the Hauen, he caused them to be sent to Spayne, saying that in Na∣ples there was Corne sufficient, which
thing when the people hearde of, they forthwith in a great rage and fury ran to the Gentlemans house, where they mette with certaine Fryers, who hea∣ring the cause of theyr tumult, desyred them to be contented, that they might goe to his house to confesse him, and per∣swade him to die patiently, and then to kill him, to which the people agréed, but afterwardes, perceiuing that ye Fryers sought to saue him, and to make him flie, they rushed into his house, and before the Fryers faces killed him, and trayled him a long throughout the Cittie before the Viceroy, crying all with a lowde voice. God saue the king and iustice. Whervp∣on, the Viceroy being at his wits ends, withdrewe himselfe into his Castel, and caused hys Garde to giue diligent atten∣daunce, and not sturre in any wise. There is come hither another Ne∣phew of ye Popes, who hath béen twen∣tie yéeres absent from Italie, his profes∣sion is to handle his weapon well, it is thought that he hath béene a good one in his daies, that he hath played many pre∣tie parts, notwithstanding we thinke he shall be generall of ye Church. We heare
that he hath another come from Piacen∣za, so that now he wanteth not kinsmen being in prosperitie, and more are com∣ming dayly from strange countries, al∣though whilest he liued cardinal, it was not knowen that he had any, but ye hus∣band of Corambona. They write from Genoua, how the foure Gallies of Tus∣cane, who had chased two Turkish Gal∣lies, euen to Marsilia, were come to the hauen of Genoua, where they shall take in the Duke of Niuers, which goeth to ye bathes of Luca. We heare also that they of Genoua had chosen two Ambassadors to send to Nizza, to congratulate with the Duke and Dutchesse of Sauoy, and to morow to send hither, to render their obedience to the Pope. By letters from Praga, we heare that the Ambassadour of Muscouia, was resolued to sée the cere∣monie of the golden Fléece, & being in∣uited to a banquet by the Ambassadour of Venice, he drūke so much that almost he was choked therewith. The Vice-chamberlaine began to mend of his sick∣nes, and Lorde Traulen was sore trou∣bled with ye Goute, whereupon his life was greatly doubted, being a man of 76.
yéeres of age. Yesterday the Emperour dispached a Poste to Rome, whether the Ambassadour of Tuscane meaning to send another, he was not permitted, for that his Maiestie woulde haue his man arriue two dayes before the Dukes. This Nuntio is greatly discomforted by ye death of Pope Gregorie, fearing least he shoulde be depriued of his office, espe∣cially for that he hath béene at great ex∣pences. By letters from Venice, dated the 12. of May, wee heare that newes were come from Constantinople, that ye busines of the restitution of the Gallie, to the great honour of the Ambassadour, and satisfaction of the signorie, was con∣cluded and ended, and that there was no talke of any army, which is a manifest signe of peace with the Christians, and therefore hée hath confirmed the league with the King of Spaine for other two yéeres. The Turke is so busied in the warres of Persia, and against the Persi∣ans to his great disaduantage, hauing re∣ceiued another notable ouerthrowe of them, and besides betwixt the Turkes & Transiluanes, there is like to be some∣thing adoo, for yt some notable skirmish
had béene betwéene them already. The prince Valacco placed in his estate with the fauour of the Turke, was againe displaced of the people, and ye other that was put downe set vp. Cardi. Ceneda of whom before I made mention, is retur∣ned to the cure of his Church, and at the end of August wil come hither to Rome. From Genoua tis sayde that in Sauoia, there is great adoo to intertaine sump∣tuously the newe spouses, and there bee chosen besides the foure Ambassadours, foure Matrons, which speake Spanish to receiue the Duchesse. There hath bin a Proclamation against certayne vn∣knowē persons, which robbed a ship in ye hauen with all the munition that there is prouided. Yet neuerthelesse there be many robberies committed. Doctor A∣meranta hath bin stayed by ye inquisition to the great admiration of euery one, he beyng of great credite in the Citie. It is knowen by letters come to the Hebrews, yt the Tartarians are conioyned with the Moscouites and other Potentates to set vpon the great Turke. And this my lo∣uing friend, is asmuch as at this time, I can showe you of the newes we haue in Rome, the which if you well consider,
you shall finde that there is not at thys day, any Court in the worlde, in whych fortune sheweth more then in thys her power, sith that you see that many which within these two monethes, sat in the highest part of her turning whéele, are now thrown downe to ye lowest of them was ye only talke while theyr prosperity lasted, towards them onely were ye eyes of all men bent, & now there is no more account made of them then of any other, and within a short while their memory will faile so, as if they had neuer béene. Contrariwise, those of whome no man talked, and which were accounted as the of scouring of the base, be now the chéefe, and they onely are in the mouthes of men. And to the end, that you may per∣ceiue these things better with the eye of your vnderstanding, I will heere set downe before you, as conclusion of thys my letter, the whole life of this present Pope, ye whych I had of a learned Doc∣tor of Law, Sometime a familiar fréend of ye Popes, who sware & protested vnto me, that 8. yéeres agoe, when hee was Cardinall, hee voluntarily tolde it hym himselfe, without any request thereof, & said, he was not ashamed that any man
should know it, and tooke great delyght in telling it. And this it is. Mont-alto is a little village in Marca d' Ancona hid in an vnpleasant valley, at the side of the mount Appennine, and because the countrey is so obscure, I can not describe it better, saue that it is a little village at the roote of ye mountaines, there distant from the noble citie of Ascoli, ten miles. In that place was this present Pope borne after this sort. There dwelt a lit∣tle fellow named Pietro, who for his lyt∣tle stature and smal personage, was cal∣led Peretto, which is asmuch to say, as little Peter, & also little Peare. His birth & stocke was so base, & his liuing so slen∣der, that vpon ye hils of Fermo to main∣taine himselfe, he was glad to kéepe the swine of one Sig. Horatio Brancadoro, & being one day in the field looking to his swine, there sodainly arose such a migh∣tie storme and tempest, that leauing hys swine to the broade fielde, at fortunes discretion, he betooke himselfe to hys ca∣byn a lyttle of to his wife (who was of no greater Parentage then himselfe) & lying with her that night, hee got her with child, who in due time was deliue∣red of a iollie boy, who nursed him her
selfe as long as her milke lasted. Which boy commyng to the age of thrée yéeres, the father not being able to kéepe him, he gaue him and recommended him to the Baker of the towne, who was a very poore man himselfe, for there were no more then fowre or fiue houses in the village, to whome he did bake, who for Gods sake tooke him, and so the poore childe lyued a great whyle by that slen∣der almes, and croommes of breade, or péeces that the poore women which came thether to bake, woulde nowe and then giue him. His attyre was a long time of a course shyrt ragged and torne, his bed was an Ashheape which was raked out of the Ouen, whereon he was enfor∣ced to lye, least he shoulde die for colde, and this poore life led he, till he was al∣most 8. yéeres olde, at which time there came thether by chaunce a gentlewomā of Ascoli, of the house of Malespini (who hath at this day two sonnes liuing, men of great fame and credite, the one▪ called Sig. Piccione, the other Sig. Nicolo Ma∣lespini) who being mooued to pitie at the miserie of the childe, tooke him thence, & hauing caused him to be wel washed and cleansed, caused him to be apparelled in
the habite of S. Frauncis, and committed him to the custodie of a poore Vicar of that Chappell, who had no learning, but could onely read and say Masse, and be∣cause the childe had no other name but Cenaiuolo, that is to say in English, a Lyer vpon the ashes, the gentlewoman called him Faelix, as prophesying that which should come after, in short space he tooke to surname his fathers name, & so was called Felice Peretto. There then he learned of his master to reade, and to be able to helpe him to say Masse, in so much, as in ye end he grew to be knowen of a quicke wit, so as if he were well brought vp, he might become a profita∣ble member of his countrey, wherupon, his Maister so commended him to the Pryor, of the Friers of his order in the Citie of Ascoli, that he woulde néedes haue him, and there he began to attayne to some learning, wherein in little time hée profited so exceedingly, that amongst the disputers, he was counted one of the chiefe, afterwards he had the degrée of a Preacher, neither was he inferior ther∣in to the best, and therfore he was made inquisitor, and was called Monsi Fe∣lice Peretto, and béeyng enforced to vse
some deuise, for a seale to subscribe the sentences which hée gaue, hauing first sealed his letters with a piece of money, he deuised and tooke vppon him a Lyon Iacent, holding vp in one of his pawes a braunche of a Peare tree, alluding to his name, thus, Beyng inquisitor, hee was sent by the Generall to Venice, there to vse and learne to practise the inquisition, and because he too too seuere∣ly behaued himselfe, he was on a tyme by certaine gentlemen buffeted and dry beaten. By which his mishap, sprung al his benefite and preferment, for Pius Quintus (who loued such seuere felowes as he had béene himselfe, hearing this, to spyte the Gentlemen that had beaten him, called him to Rome, and within a while after made him Cardinall: calling him Cardinall Mont-alto, because hee was borne there, giuing him seuē thou∣sande crownes reuenewes, and a hun∣dreth Crownes a moneth for almes, as commonly Popes giue to poore Cardi∣nals, after which time, he wholly gaue himselfe to ye attaining of good learning, and studie of humanitie: & in short time he became a very profound Philosopher, and is at this day one of the best dispu∣ters
that is at Rome. And howbeit it was so highly and so sodainely exalted, yet did he not degenerate from his first originall, for you should haue séene hym héere in Rome, goe in a filthy great, and greasie Hat, al besmeared, and his hands foule and dyrtie. Yet is he very politike and patient, which was well perceyued in him not long agoe, when his Nephew (of whom I haue before made mention) was slayne, he neuer gaue showe of an∣ger or alteration, which made all the cy∣tie to woonder at him. He is a man who will not easily be led, and gouerned of o∣thers, which maketh me to thinke, that he will not suffer himselfe to be robbed by others, and as the common Phrase is to be drawen by the nose, wherein I pray God he still continue, for wee are long agoe weary, and haue had too many Popes which haue béene thralles, and subiectes to ye Spaniards. It was great∣ly wished, that Cardinall Farnese, had béene Pope, who wyth hys worthy Progeny and noble minde, myght haue comforted and animated this people, and the misery of all Italie, for to speake in∣differently, wee bee all abased and kept vnder, whych commeth to passe be the
policie of the Spanyardes, who séeke  to haue one that is by base Byrth and bringing vp, elected Pope. This man is of stature rather lowe then tall, but of a good complexion, leane and dry, vsed to endure labour, wherefore I thinke, that (if hée bee not ouercome with such deli∣cate and dayntie meates as his degrée requireth) hee will lyue many yeares. Héere nowe I cease from further trou∣bling you, assuring you that hereafter I will vse more diligence, if so bee that I shall vnderstand that these are accep∣table vnto you, and so I end, desi∣ring God to shield you from all euill. From Rome the last of May. 1585. FINIS.
