21820 99838376 2752
A RELATION SENT TO THE FRENCH King by the Marshall de Schom∣berg, of the Fight betweene the Army which he commaundeth, and the Army of Mounsieur the Duke of Orleans, neere to Castelnau-d' Ary the first of September. 1632. The names of many great Mounsieurs, Cap∣taines, and Commaunders slaine of the Duke of Orleans side, and some of the Kings side. Translated out of the French Copie Printed at Lyons. Another famous overthrow since gi∣ven (by that valiant old Protestant Soul∣dier, Monsieur de la Force, with onely 800. Foote, and 400. Horse) to 3000. Foote and 400. Horse of the Duke of Orleans, vnder the Commaund of Delbeuf, one of the House of Guise. LONDON. Printed by I. D. for Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne 1632.
A RELATION SENT TO THE KING by the Marshall Schomberg, of the Fight betweene the Ar∣my which he commandeth, and the Army of Monsieur de Orleance, neere to Castelnau∣d' Ary the first of Sep∣tember. 1632. I Haue alreadie sent word vnto the King with speed (of the which the Lord Le Ferron was the bearer) how the Castle of St. Fe∣lix de Carmaine, having beene surprised by his E∣nemies, and the Towne which had barricadoed it selfe against the said Castle, having demaunded assi∣stance of me, I haue beene bound to engage the Armes of his Majestie in the siege of this place, al∣though that (as he knoweth) I had neither Canons nor necessaries, very few of the Infantery, and saw
Monsieur the Duke of Orleans drew neere towards with the most part of his Forces, but I judged it so important, to cause to be knowne at the entrance of his Majesties Armes into this Province, that I would not refuse to giue protection to people that would serue him. As I passed over all these considerations, and God hath so favoured me, that after I had held the assieged compassed as straite as might be, the twelfth day, which was the last of August, they were constrained to Capitulate, and to depart out of the place the first of this Moneth. I sent to the King the Capitulation, and humbly entreated his Majestie to commaund, that the pardon which I haue promised to these people might be sent vnto me. I haue left in the Castle one Company of the Regiment of Cham∣blay, and committed the keeping of the Towne to the Inhabitants. Monsieur de Roques will certifie his Majestie of the importance of the place, and that it was of such a consequence to reduce it to his obedi∣ence, as without this all the little Townes of Laura∣quez, would never be kept in their obedience. The happie end of this enterprise hath produced effects farre more advantageous, which were, that this hath obliged the Duke of Orleans and the Duke of Mont∣morency to set forward themselues with all diligence to succour this place, with 3000. foote, and 2000. horse. Many voluntary Nobles, and three peices of Canon, whereof having notice, and that they were but three myles off vs, I resolved with the advice of the Marquis de Breze, who made me the first propo∣sition thereof, that at the same houre that the Capi∣tulation of St. Felix should be finished, that I would
goe directly to the enemie, with two designes, the one to Combate with them, the other to saue Castel∣nau d'Ary, which they made full account was theirs. The place of St. Felix being succoured, or fayling to follow their Army. Our determinations haue (thankes be vnto God) so prosperously succeeded, that arriving halfe a mile from this Towne, the Mar∣quis de Breze, who conducted the head of the Army, certified me, that he saw that of the Enemy on the left hand within two Musquet shot of our way, and that he beleeved, that they being to passe a River, whose bankes were inaccessible, vpon a very long bridge; the designe of the enemies was to suffer halfe of our Armie to passe, which contained but a thou∣sand horse, foure Companies of the Regiments of his Majesties Guards, and six of those of Chamblay, and then to set vpon the Arriere guard, and that there was vpon the same River a good passage two thousand paces higher, where if I pleased he would cause the Avant-guard to passe over. I commended his judicious advice, and told him that he could not doe better than that he had propounded; Wee had gained the passage, and halfe of the Army was on the other side the River, before the enemies could judge what we would doe, in such sort, that all the troupes passed over, without the advancing forward of one man of the enemies to come vnto vs. The River be∣ing passed, we set our selues in Battaile-aray in a great Field, and set all the baggage vpon our right hand towards Castelnaud' Ary. The enemies seeing they had fayled of their designe, resolved to passe the Ri∣ver, and to come lodge vpon our way of Castlenau d'
Ary, in places very advantageous for the Infante∣rie; which seeing, I resolved to get before them, and place the Armie of the King betweene Castlenau d' Ary and the enemies, to charge them when I should see part of their people passed on this side the River. The place of Battaile which I sent the Lords de l'Isle and Espenay to view, seemed the fairest place in the world; the which they having described vnto me, I caused the Armie diligently to set forward, and we had not leysure to set our selues in order, when see∣ing the enemies would haue passed in great haste, I resolved not to deferre, Charging them, and the foure Companies of the Regiment of his Majesties Guard having separated the body of the Battalia in∣to two parts, the one to take the right hand of our Cavallerie, and the other the left; and the two hun∣dred and fiftie men of the Regiment of Chamblay be∣ing neere the said Battalia on the left hand, I caused the Avant Couriers to set forward, and we marched forthwith against the enemy, who were encamped along the high-way in houses and in ditches very advantageous, the discharge of the Infanterie being made, and likewise that of the enemies, our Cavalle∣rie (in the front of whom the Marquis de Breze pla∣ced himselfe) would goe vnto them by the right hand and by the left, but the most part of them met with so great ditches, that it was impossible for them to passe. The Carabins found a way more to the purpose then the other, and passing the first made their dis∣charge vpon their enemies, which so strongly resisted them with their Infantery, that they could not pro∣ceed
further; Arnauld and Bideyran valiantly beha∣ved themselues therein, and the last hath slaine the Lord de la Feuillade. During these actions on both sides, Monsieur de Lauriers and de Beau-regard Champron, who sought a passage for to depart out of the field, and to enter in∣to the way, found the passage very hard, and never∣thelesse resolved with themselues, to adventure into the way, where being descended, with the sonne of the said Laurier, and twelue or fifteene of their com∣panions, the Duke of Montmorancy came to charge them with an hundred Gentlemen; They withstood the shocke, where the said Duke was hurt, the Count de Rieux slaine, and foure or fiue others borne to the ground; our Musquettiers discharging vpon the Ca∣vallery, droue many of them from the fight, in such sort, that in an instant the Duke de Montmorancie was abandoned of all those that followed, except foure or fiue, the which he seeing, and being incensed with his wounds, he found meanes to depart out of the way, with those few that remained with him, and entring into the field, met my Company of men of Armes, gaue and received some blowes by sword and Pistoll in passing, and proceeded forward vntill he came before the Troupes of the Guards and Chamblay, where he being shot at by many Musquet∣tiers, his Horse which had beene alreadie very much hurt by Monsieur de Lauriers fell, and he vpon him, where he was taken by the Officers and Souldiers of the Regiment of Guards. The place as I haue alreadie said before, being found so hard for the Cavallery to passe, Monsieur
the Marquis de Breze, and my selfe thought it fitting that having made one so successefull incounter, wherein were slaine so many men of qualitie, it was not necessary to hazard a second, and we having re∣mained an houre on our place of fight, without any shew of the enemies advancing forward. I commaunded that they should beginne to retire themselues towards Castelnau-d' Ary, causing to re∣treate also the Companies of the Guards, and those of Chamblay. The enemies moved not from their station, and I am come to lodge with all the Troupes in the Towne and Suburbes of Castelnau d' Ary, Monsieur the Duke of Orleans was present at the fight, not∣withstanding they sought to hinder him. The intelligence which I haue is that the taking of the Duke of Montmorancie doth so astonish their Armie, that the most part of those of Lanquedock retire themselues; and as for the Duke of Orleans, he is gone with the rest of his Armie towards Be∣siers. I suppose there was never seene a Skirmish of so small durance, wherein so many men of quality were slaine, wounded, and taken Prisoners. Those which are come to my knowledge, are the Duke of Montmorancie, wounded in seaven or eight places, and taken prisoner. Monsieur the Count de Moret, shot through the body with a Musquet, whereof he is thought to haue dyed. The Count of Rieux slaine. The Count of de la Feuillado slaine.
Monsieur de Puylanrens hurt in the arme but slight. Monsieur de S. Florent hurt and taken prisoner, and since dead. The Chevalier de Rare hurt and taken. Monsieur de la veue Cornet of Sauueboeaf priso∣ner. Monsieur de la None, dead as it is said. Monsieur the Count de Bueil hurt and taken. Monsieur de Rochedagon hurt. Monsieur de Ovailly, Captaine of the Guards to the Duke of Orleans, hurt in the face. Foure Captaines of the Regiments of Lanque∣dock slaine. There are divers other by the report of the Coun∣try people, which were carried away in foure Wag∣gons, whose names are not yet knowne. On the Kings side. There are none found to be hurt but the Lords of Beauregard Champron, with a Pistol-shot, and Beaure∣gard Blanchfort, assistant of the Campe, who had his right arme broken with a Musquet. Monsieur de Meneville and de Gade, Lieutenants of the Guards, slaine. Fiue or sixe light Horse of divers Companies slaine. Twentie Horses slaine and hurt. The prudencie with which the Marshall de Schom∣berg hath conducted, and the courage which he hath shewed in the execution of this action, is not to be expressed.
Monsieur the Marquis de Breze, and many others which write thereof, report that they never saw a Generall more vigilant nor judicious, vpon occasion more bold in the execution, wherein he is also no lesse carefull in the conservation of persons which he commaunds there of his owne. Lyons the 18. September. THe Kings Forces vnder the commaund of Mon∣sieur de la Force in Lanquedock, being possessed of the Towne of Bocaire, and laying siege to the Castle which was possessed by the Forces of the Duke of Orleans, which said Castle would be very advanta∣gious to the King, if he could gaine it. The Duke of Orleans vnderstanding that the Kings forces had laid siege to the said Castle, resolved to relieve the same with all speed, specially considering the said Castle was but poorely provided either of Munition or Vi∣ctuals to hold out long. Wherefore he caused 3000. Foote and 400. Horse to march towards it, with all manner of provision, both Munition and Victuals for reliefe of the same, vnder a young, valiant, and vigorous Commaunder, called the Duke▪ Delbeufe, who made little account of any resistance that the King had there to hinder his purpose. On the other side, that old and well experienced Souldier (though fourescore yeares of age, and whose Army did con∣sist but of 800. Foote and 400. Horse) vnderstan∣ding of the setting forward of his and the Kings ene∣mies (with so great and farre exceeding a number of Foote, and so well provided to offend) thought it
not fit to continue in the Towne, and onely to make resistance by way of Defence. Now this braue Pro∣testant Commaunder (who had beene alwayes faith∣full and serviceable to his Prince) would not in his last dayes suffer either in Honour or fidelitie to his Prince, speedily drawes all his Forces out of the Towne, and goes to meete with his enemy, with his 800. Foote and 400. Horse. Vpon the approach of both Armies, the encounter was furious and bloud∣die, and continued long doubtfull, till at last the Ar∣my of Duke Delbeufe was quite overthrowne, and onely himselfe & two more escaped with their liues, all his whole Army being either kild or taken priso∣ners. I thinke the like Victory hath not beene obtei∣ned in the memory of man. Vpon this, De la Force returned againe with his prisoners and baggage to his siege of Bocaire-Castle, where it is supposed the said Castle will not long hold out, but not onely that Castle, but also all those places which held out against the King, will likewise yeeld themselues. It is reported that the Monsieur hath sent to the King his brother, to desire the life of Montmorancie, and that he may be restored to all his Honours and meanes; which they say, the King hath granted him. It is hoped, that there will be some accord made be∣tweene the King and him very shortly. FINIS.
