22447 99852588 17916
THE HVMOROVS COVRTIER. A COMEDY, As it hath been presented with good applause at the private house in Drury-Lane. Written by IAMES SHIRLEY Gent. LONDON. Printed by T. C. for William Cooke, and are to be sold by James Becket, in the Inner Temple. 1640.
A Catalogue of such things as hath beene published by James Sherley Gent. TRaytor. Witty Faire one. Bird in a Cage. Changes, or Love in a Maze. Gratefull Servant. Wedding. Hide Parke. Young Admirall. Lady of Pleasure. Gamster. Example. Dukes Mistresse. Ball. Chabot Admirall of France. Royall Master. Schoole of Complements. Contention for Honour and Riches. Triumph of peace, a Masque. Maides Revenge. Humorous Courtier.
The Actors names. COmachio, an old Lord, Vnckle to Depazzi. Orseollo an humorous Lord. Volterre 2 young Lords. Contarini Depazzi, a young foolish lord Giotto, a cunning Court favourite. The Dutchesse. Laura, a young gentlewoman great in favour. Carintha, wife to Contarini. Dandalo, servant to Contarini. Crispino, servant to Depazzi. Sancho servant to Orseollo. Officer. Servants. Attendants.
THE HVMOROVS COVRTIER. Actus Primi. Scena Prima. Enter Volterre, Orseollo. Volterre. REmember where you are, Ors. That ever man Should be so dull of soule to love a woman. Vol. What in the name of fury hath made you An enemy to that sexe, upon what Lady False beyond Cressida, didst thou loose thy patience? Finde it againe for shame, thou wert not borne A woman hater. Ors. No, I thanke heaven My mothers dead, and all my sisters, I Had a contention in my nature, when They were alive, but tye of blood prevail'd Against my disposition, I confesse I never wish'd them dead. Vol. How hadst thou beene Alive, but for thy mother? Ors, Thats one reason Should make our love the lesse to e'm, they doe But bring's acquainted with the world, which at Our birth we are afraid of, and grow old
But to repent we are not embrois still, Or things lost in conception. Vol. We may As well condemne our fathers, and declaime 'Gainst them for our begetting, come Orseollo, Desist to be a Satire, I hope you wod not The Dutchesse should heare this; collect your selfe You are ith presence, put on a smooth face And speake Court language, let me counsell you To softnesse; what a Courtier and so rugged? Princes they say have many cares, and tis not lesse then treason, in a womans court To be so violent against e'm, these Hangings may eveldrop us. Ors. Let em, let em, May be 'twould move the Dutchesse to exempt me From my attendance; and she knew my minde She would allow me a writ of ease, least I Infect her Court with railing gainst her sexe: I'de rather heare a mandrake, then let in The noise of women; heaven that I might never Converse with any. Volt. Thou wilt never marry. Ors. Marry? Ile first engender with a Viper, Were there but one woman alive, and but By knowing her, no hope to stocke the world Agen, Ide geld my selfe. Volt. Pitty thou shouldst Marry, to get a sonne that should bē like thee; Take heed least women for this bitternesse Make thee not first an Eunuch, but we ha lost Our first discourse, thy passion like a storme Hath quite transported us, from the Duke Foscari, That hath now left us, let's A cold sute with the Dutchesse. Ors. If I stay I shall talke treason, a cold sute? for ever Ice dwell within their marrowes can affect em,
He was too worthy on her. Vol, He deserved, I know not what to thinke out, tis the third Prince, that our duties have commended, In hope to be made happy with her issue: Nay, nay, have truce a little with thy spleene, And lets talke wisely, we shall be observed; I wonder. Ors. So doe I. Vol. At what? Ors. At nothing, At a woman, how tis possible a man Should court and love em so, but now I thinke one, I doe not wonder. Vol. How is this? Ors. They are All Circes, and do steale away our soules; They juggle us into shapes and puppets lovers. Vol. They ha not juggled you me thinkes. Enter Contarini, Signiour Contarini. Con. Volterre and Orseollo, morrow to ye, You heare the newes. Foscari is departed. Vol. In a mist, is he not? here's but we three, The Dutchesse is a strange woman. Or. Contarini hast any other faith, Are they not all so Volterre? Thou hast beene a travailer, and converst with the Antipodes, almost put a girdle about the world, taken dimensions Of every nature, tasted all aires, and canst Distinguish em to an atome, tell me Signiour And be not partiall to the Sex, didst ever Vpon thy honour meete with such a creature, We here call vertuous woman, are not all The stocke of em inconstant? Vol. Nay let's ha
No morē invēctives Signiour Orseollo Traduce not all for some, it must be granted. Con. They are an excellent creation, though Some few decline from vertue, I've a wife, I'm but new married neither, yet I dare Boast my opinion. Ors. Doe not, the Moone Is yet but ith' first quarter Contarini, I would endeere my thoughts to thee, and thou Wert not marryed, boast thy opinion. Goe sacrifice to sleepe, why these are womēn Will cosen a strong faith, cuckold their husbands, Yet taken in the act perswade em into A beleefe they doe but dreame so. Con. Signiour Y'are pleasant. Vol. Pleasant Con. As his gall will suffer him, He has beene casting out up this halfe hourē, Yet there is some behind still, if you name A woman, he takes fire like touchwood, but To the Duke Foscari. Ors, I have it, Vol. What? Ors. Ye talke Duke Foscari. Con. We doe. Ors. I ha the cause hē went away so soone. Vol. Prethee enrich our knowledge, why? Ors. I honour him. Con. So we doe all. Ors. He is a brave Duke, a man, And in that, more then all his titles make him, Some easie natures would ha languished for her, And ha beene paler then ye meane, with watching Distilled their braine, tyred, yea some to seeme Comit Idolatry, given her their soules, And changed em to her motion; in each window Bescratching with some Diamond her name,
And warme it so with kisses till it thaw The very glasse, which weepes it selfe away In pitty of the dotage, beene content To ha worne their youth away in expectation; This Prince was wiser, he left Parma to Behold a creaturē was cride up, the miracle Of nature, a new starre like Cassiopeia That drew the eyes of Italy, and left em Fixt in the admiration, but he needing No Iacobs staffe to take the height, and looking With a true eye upon this wounder, found She was a woman, nothing but a woman, His wisdome quickely taught him to returne A sham'd of his credulity. Vol. He's mad, What a wild passion like a torrent, beares him Against the women, 'tis well your hate Points at the gēnerall, one womans anger Would checke your forward—else Contarini. Con. I darē not hēare him talke morē, wē shall be Held cherishers of his railing humour, in, in, Prethee lets leave him. Vol. Why Signiour, are you so transported You have not power enough to seeme calme, What dost at Court? Ors. Not cringe as you, and adore the nods Of painted Ladies, weary my hammes to answer Madams halfe cursies, I neere come to Court But to defend me from it. Bo. Ha? Ors. The truth is, I would be faine discharged, tis a hell to me, There are so many wormed in't: would the Dutchesse Would banish me into some Wildernesse, I should indure the beasts though they devour'd mē, I hate no monsters but the Harpies. Con. Why?
Ors. Harpies have womens faces Contarini, Yet now I thinke Volterre I have heard There's another feminine murderer Cald the Hiena, that invites men forth To be devourd; y'ave heard how the Egyptian Crocadile weepes, when death it selfe lies bathing Within her teares, thinke but upon women And tell me which I should avoide-first. Enter Comachio, Giotto. Com. I seē a merit nigh, and I hope You will deserve the favour, we are not Wont to admit of servants neere their person, Without more caution. Gio. It makes my bond Of duty and observance greater. Con. My Lord Comachio. Com. Let me employ some of your carē upon My Nephew, something you may adde To improve him, you shall till no barren ground, Though he reward you not with fruitefulnesse, I shall have power to make you thinke your studies Well plac'd. Gio. Your compasse I shall saile by. Exit Com. Contarini hows the day? Vol. Not early. Com. Signior Orseollo, I know what cloud Muffles your thoughts. Con. He is constant to his humour. Com. Not the Dutchesse, come faith yēt Orseollo, We shall intreate you joyne with us to the Dutchesse. Ors. Yes, hey!— Exit. Vol. So, so, he would but trouble us. Com. My Lords, we must be circumspect, We are not to negotiate a designe That lookes but at the profit of one man: The Dutchy calls to owne it, all our cares You know have met, that we might move the Dutchesse To exchange her dull Virginity for Marriage;
Foscari whom our ambition pointed at, is lost And he in some disgust gone hence. Vol. I feare so. Com. His violent departure gives us more Then jealousie, we must sollicite her, But so as shall become our duties, and Expresse our knowledge of her great soulē And pregnant wit. Con. She enters signior Comachia, tis refer'd To your delivery. Enter Dutchesse, Laura, Attendants. Dutch. Comachio! we have no knowledge of thy agē, But what thy wisdome and experience doth Discover, i'st not troublesome, t'attend A young Court? Com. Your grace so desires my duty, that I Delight in service. Dutch. Contarini i'th mornings eyē, reveales More youth, then he did by Hymens tapers; Lookes younger then when we call him Bridegroome. Censure him Laura. she sits. Lau. Your Highnesse knowes he hath a young wife. Con. All my use of time, is but to perfect My obedience to your excellence. Dutch. We cherish both your loves, and you Volterre Are great too within our memory. Vol. I shall endevour new merits. Dutch. The cause of your attendance now, is knowne Ere you deliver it. The departure Of the young Duke (our Lover) from our Court In so obscure a way, without your notice; Our consent publish'd gives you just cause Of wonder: yet so much y'are skil'd both in Our soule and nature, that no immediate Motive of his anger shall be laid to Our charge; but what you thinke, makes our person Safe, and great. Com. We come with humble modesty t'require
So much, as shall concerne our care, both Of your gracious selfe, and our good Country. Foscari, Duke of Parma is a great Prince; Feature; a Lady, like your excellence, His youth and strength may promise issue even To a matron. Dutch. We know he merits all his praise. Proceede To what you call your businesse. Com. His Catholicke Majesty did lately by His Liger, urge a title to this Duchy, And desire your Counsell, he might be nam'd Your Highnesse next, and lawfull heire, unlesse From your owne person, were deriv'd a Prince To intercept his hopes, with ease, you may Consider, how unkinde our fate will be, Beyond his owne naturall soile, doth make Obedience bondage. Dutch. You have yet hope, tis in my power To prevent what you suspect. Com. We have, but Time (the enemy to lie, And to increase) may scorne, destroy that hope. If not for propitious love to us; Yet for your owne sake, your glory, hasten The cure of these our feares: Time is the moth Of nature, devouers all beauty, when those Bright eyes, that governe now with Phoebus-like Predominance, shall yeeld no light unto That darkened sky (your face) some aged mother Pround of her fertill wombe, will shew you then Her off-spring. Behold (quoth she) I neede no Marble house for my fame to dwell in, these Are my living monuments, but your sullaine Chastetie, will not permit your fame t' outlive Your breath. Dutch. No more Comachio! these are my owne thoughts: Shortly you shall see I am art, prevention Of all danger. All. You are my gracious Mistresse.
Com. Yea you shall much divulge your clemency If to stifle publike noyse you reveale The reason; why Foscari was not made Your choyse. Dutch. Foscari is a forraigner: borne in A climate not so temperate as ours, And I am yet to know, whether his minde Be different from such as please me here At home: forraigne alliance is an old Disguise for Sunices hatred: It charmes the Peacefull into a dull security; Vntill the furious finde best advantage To make his anger knowne: then both are more Ingag'd t'inflame, what erst th' one did kindle. I should sinne my good Lords, if I did thinke My humillity disgrac'd my honour, When I suppos'd my owne Court able to Breede a man, fit to mingle blood, even with A Princesse; should I say with mine: what amaz'd, Why does it want example, I should not Thinke my choyce would much accuse my eyes, if I elect a Lover here: unlesse some Are more desert-lesse then I am guilty of, Laura! Exeunt Dutchesse, Attendance. They first gaze on one another, then walke up and downe. Com. Ioyne to us Oedipus, yet we shall want Helpe t'expound this Riddle— Con. A Lover here from her owne Court, sure it Must be from this number, Signiour Volterre! Vol. My very good Lord. Con. You are the man, the starres dance to. The spheares Doe practise musicke, only to make you Merry, you are he signiour. Vol. Who, I my Lord? Con. Doe not conceale your hopes: they'le be worthy Your acknowledgement; you would be install'd Ith' darke, steale titles, without the notice Of the Heralds, but noyse attends honour.
Vol. I neede a Comment to your words. Con. Come, you young men are all temptation; You have the purple veines (signiour) that swell With wanton pride, and Ladies judgements are Much govern'd by their eyes; what grace, what favour, Did the Dutchesse lately shew you, the more T'indeere your duty? hah? Vol. I want a soule (signiour) if she ever Honour'd me with any phrase; but what is Vsuall in her Complement t'other Lords. Con. Ist possible— Vol. He has discoverd somewhat that concernes My joy. Nature needes no excuse why a Dutchesse should affect a travail'd Lord; You are great too, within our memory. These were her words. hum!— Com. Signiour Contarini. Con. My Lord. Com. You observ'd the Dutchesse language? Con. Am I not thinking on't? heart, why doe ye Interupt me?— Com. How's this my Lord Volterre? Vol. Your pleasure signiour! Com. You have a fortunate skill in translation Of misterious language: I pray lend me Your censure upon the last words the Dutchesse Vttered. Vol. Hah signiour? they concerne not me, I am Forgotten by my starres, I, Volterre Is lost to all Eyesight, but his owne. Com. Doe our braines melt this hot weather. These men Were heretofore discreete, and now they talke A if they had no Eyelids, like things that Never slept. I finde the cause. Exit. Con. Quoth she, he lookes younger, then when he stood By Hymens tapers, good, very good, I have O were I single now; my wife, my wife; She ruines all this hope.—
Vol. Since I have travel'd, brought from France, the nice Amorous cringe, that so inchants Ladies: Tis fit I use it often, the tongue is Powerfull too, and I inrich in languages, It shall be knowne— Con. Signiour Volterre. Vol. To bring Revel▪ in the Court, that's the way, I have my selfe an able chine, and I Can friske like a Goate: which females call A lucky symptome—Signiour Contarini, Con. Your lop. must excuse me, I'm a little Serious. Vol. O for a sight of Iupiters wardrobe That I might immetate the shape, in which He courted Diana! Con. Signiour Volterre. Vol. I my Lord that's my name, Ile goe write It downe, least this businesse make me forget it. Exit. Con. Rebellious blood! must I neëds marry? had I but delaid my lust a month, I might Have wasted then my strength and nature, to A nobler purpose: beget Princes, now I am in bondage to my marriage vow. Exit. Act. 2. Scena. 1. Enter Contarini, Dandalo. Con. MY Wife must do't and then I may effect My hope with the great Dutchesse as soone as he Most proud of demerits. Dandalo Wheres your Lady. Dan. Your Lordship may heare both her voyce and Lute, Shees in the garden with Reollo your Musitian. Con. Heare, does she so much dispaire of long life, That she need flatter her soule to tarry here With soft Ayres, and wanton Musicke.
Danda. My Lord. Con. Conduct her hither. Enter Carintha. Car. I saw your entrance, you bring newes from Court, Let me share in't. Con. I must worke her to it with art and leisure. Car. What does your lop say? Con. Sweete lend me thy eare in private—can I Demand a thing from her that slumbred in My bosome, and she be so unkind To give my sute a hard repulse. Car. My Lord I am not guilty of a cause That can warrant your suspect either of My love or duty. Con. I beleeve thee (deere Carintha) but this Injunction is so severe and strange, 'twill Puzle thy consent at first. Car. Sir make it knowne, I cannot be so slow In any performance of your will, as you Are to reveale it. Con. Thy breath is sweeter then the smoke ascending From the Phoenix funerall pile, I could Kisse thee, even engender on thy lips. Car. You were not wont to be thus pleasd, shew me Which way I may requite your passion, speake The sute you talke on. Con. Now I know the strength of thy affection, I slight my sute the grave will prove to easie. Car. What is it. Con. Ile have thee onely kill thy selfe, cruch, thou Shat doe it, hah— Car. Sir I suspect your health, you were not wont To shew your speech so much estrang'd from reason. Con. Is this your love, your forward kindnesse? Car. Scarse has the Moone expir'd a change since you Received me in your bed a cold Virgin; Are you so soone tyred with sacred marriage, Desirous to motive my eternall
Absence and by a meanes so cruell sir, How have I deserved your hatred, or please But to reveale the profit which by death Can bring you. Con. I have not leasure to reply to your Demands, will you do't. Car. You fright my soule. Con. Orseollo happy you, whose frozen nature Will not permit a closure with a woman. The sex doe quite degenerate from those Great patternes which the former age produced. Portia swallowed fire to please her husbands ghost, Who inticed him to Elisium; Lucresse, To purchase life unto her memory, Noyse at her funerall such as might cleave Her fame, priced her deare heart, and dyed Car. We have a certaine faith, a faith That can assure reward, or punishment For deeds, we know our dwelling after death, Which Roman soules unlawfully did seeke, And found too soone, we are prescrib'd those act That makes us Angels. Con. She has bin gossipping with the holy Sisters, zeale, and purity. Car. It were safer for my soule; if your selfe Would be my Executioner. Con. I thanke you Lop. I am exposed To the justice of the law, he whose rich And his Prince become his heire cannot live long; Besides my hopes to enjoy the Duchesse, Are then quite frustrate. Car. What said your Lop. Con. I did not thinke Carintha thou hadst beene So sterne of nature, t'hast a stubborne heart; Deny my first request. Car. Should I kill my selfe. Con. Why must we not all dye, 'tis a thrifty Conscience that perswades the soule to hasten
Her departure hence to avoid future guilt. Car. You counsell strangely, I have deserv'd more Kindenesse from your tongue. Con. If thou suspect'st thou hast not fortitude Enough, t'attempt thy death by violence: Expire with leasure: refraine from meate, till Th' orifice of thy stomacke close, and grow Together; or when thou feedst, eate Arsnicke, Dye any way, so the law call not me Thy murderer. Car. Heaven secure me, have you the use of all Your sences, ye speake thus? Con. But if youle choose an easier way, each morning Fetch a tedious sigh or two, twill make your Heart to cleave, Ile give you cause enough to doe't. Car. You have a bloody mind. Con. Or as some Country Virgins doe scratch morter From an aged wall and eate it up in Private, so die on the greene disease, but now I thinke upon't thats to perplex away, Vnto the Grave. Car. I dare not hate the thought y'have tempted me, Beyond mortall patience, oh unkind Destiny. Exit Con. Doe, fret, gall thy heart strings till they breake, Ive the engine of a babe, any man That had arrived at halfe my yeares, would soone Invent a safe way to shift that trifle From him. Hum, who shall I get to doe't. Happy fancy, 'tis mature I will Above it strait. Exit. Enter Depazzi, Laura, and Crispino. De. I sent you a Letter Maddam. Lau. My Lord I received it. De. How did you taste it? Lau. Excellently. De. I have twenty as good as that lying by me, have I not Cris. Oh my good Lord. (Crispino
De. They shall be all at your service. Lau. Yare too much a Courtier, I must chide you Signiour, I never did deserve the Epithets Your paper throws upon me. De. Epithets I beseech you Madam to impute That to the fretfullnesse of my braine, If any thing have slipt my pen whereby I may incurre Your Ladiships indignation Ile recant It publickely. Lau. I enjoyne no such pennance, But tis an injury easily remitted, Tis the glory they say of Lovers to Hiperbolise. De. Hiperbolize, whats that? I ha not that word Yet in my Alphabet, I hope Madam you Hold a better opinion of me then to imagine I would hiperbolize with your Lady-ship; That were immodest. Lau. Not so Signiour. De. By my faith Madam but it is, de thinke I know not what hiperbolizing is, That were simplicity, if any thing Within my Letter may be drawne within Construction of hiperbolizing, condemne Not me for't, by service Madam, I Had no intention to stretch so farre To your dishonour, it shall teach me wit To write my Letters hereafter. Cris. A haire in your honours locke is disordered, Tis rectified, Lau. Signiour, You doe me much too much satisfaction, Your errour being a small one. De. Tis your favour, Yet when I commit a peccadillo Against your brightnesse, I deserve to be Extinguished your presence for't, I did love You Madam, as I remember when I was an Infant, Lau. How.
Dep. We are Infants you will grant When we cannot speake, and I loved full eight moneths And a halfe ere I had power to tell you on't Ime certaine. Lau. I was not worth so much. De. Nay for that Madam Ile shew my selfe deserving, were you worthy Twere the lesse act of mine to love you, That were a poore thing, I doe not stand on worth. Madam I would not have you thinke so ignobly of me, That I affect you for your worth, Ide rather Vpon my honour have you in your smocke, Than all the Ladies in the world starke naked. Lau. Now your language is course. De. You shall pardon me for that. Cris. Your Lordships fether waves to much toward the Tis now in true point. (East, De. My love is pure and like the Sun transparent. Lau. Now you Complement, I know Y'are excellent at it. De. Troth not I Lady, I cannot Complement, I doe but Refulgent your beauty, whose mellifluous voice Peirces the eare—faith Madam credit me I nere could complement in my life: Most faire, Whom young Apollo courted for her haire. There are poeticall furies in the City, But I converse not with em. Were ever cheekes of roses, locks of amber Ordain'd to be imprison'd in a chamber, Laura I doe but piddle, a pretender, I know not how to Complement. Lau. You now doe. De. Alas not I, I cannot make verses neither; Thy dainty seale of Virgin wax, That nothing but impression lackes. Cris. Your Lordships cloake discovers not sufficiently the riches of the inside.
Lau. An excellent Poet. De. Ile tell you Madam a strange thing, you see These trifles; before I was in love, I could Not ha made an Acrosticke in a day, Sometimes two. Lau. Now you can make Chronograms. De. I thinke I can, and Anagrams for a need. Lau. Signiour you are wonderfull improv'd, Love has inspir'd you richly. I perceive Cupid is a mute too. De. Oh now I cannot sleepe for the multitude, Of Verses that are capring in my skull. Lau. I wonder you are not mad. De. You may. Cris. A haire in your honours locke is disordered. De. But I've a gift to helpe it, I allow My selfe set times to vent em, they would blow Me up else. Lau, As how pray. De. Why thus ith' morning When I have said my prayers in Verse, which fall From me, and I nere thinke on em, next my heart I scrible out an ode, after my breakefast I fall upon a Satire, when I've rail'd My selfe into a fresh stomacke, I dine, Which done, because it is not good to study Vpon repletion or full stomacke, you Vnderstand me; for a matter of two houres I dreame as it comports with our Italian To sleepe, then I say, I dreame familiarly An Heroicke Poem. Lau. Dreame. De. Madam while you live, Your dreaming Poets are the best, and have Distilled raptures, spirits that converse with em, And teach em what to write; this I set downe Before I eate againe, after I walke Vpon the strength of Supper into th' parke,
And ruminate an Elegy at returne, I doe discourse of Epigrams, and an Epitaph Vpon some one or other of my kindred. Enter Comachio, and Giotto. I ha made a rare one on my Vncle, and He would dye shortly to deserve it. Com. Whats that? Lau. If you so methodise your study Signiour I shall but sinne against your muse, tis now Your houre by course, for your heroicke Poem: Twere best you sleepe my Lord, Ile take my leave. De. Nay Madam, tis not every day I study So hard, on some I whet my muse Cris. Your Lordships weapon hangs to much a fore. Com. Thou hast my bosome, treasure up my secrets Faithfully, and deserve I should be thine; Giotto, the first opportunity Commends thee to the Dutchesse, then's the time, To shew thy gratitude, if she still looke on me With lucky eyes. Gio. My Lord y'ave made Your selfe the creditour of what I am; If I returne you not the interrest Of all my service, I should justly forfeit To be unmade againe. De. Sweete Laura, world confounding beauty. Lau. Againe Hyperbolizing, then you Lordship Must pardon me. Exit. De, What's the signification of this word? hum. Cris. I have heard some say, to hyperbolize Is to lye, and it may be she would not have Your Lordship lye with her. Com. Signiour de patri, what part of your discourse Concerned my death, I heard with Madam Laura You name your Vncles dying. De. Twas with griefe then, I had no cause to name you else my Lord. Com. Apply your selfe Nephew to this Gentleman,
And make him precious to you. Exit. Gio. I shall study his honours service. De. Giotto. Gio. My Lord. De. You are a Scholler. Gio. I have lost time in Padua. De. Ile tell you a jst a Gentleman ith Court Writing a Letter to his Mistresse could not Containe himselfe from hyperbolizing with her. Gio. Is your Lordship serious? De. True upon my honour, what a gull twas To make himselfe ridiculous, I laugh'd at him, Then he asked me what that word meant, Giotto What doe you thinke on't? Gio. I my Lord, Your honour needes no comment to informe you, Much lesse my translation. De. Yes I knowt, but what sayes your Dictionarie. Gio. Your Lordship shal pardon me, for that hyperbolizing De. It is some baudy word, he is so modest, Wherein did I hyperbolize with her Ladyship: My Lord Volterre. Enter Volterre. Vol. Signiour de Pazzi Comesta. De. I am transported to see your Lordship well. Vol. Io soy il uvestra servadore. De. Whats this? Gio. Betweene Goth and Vaundell, Spanish. De. And Giotto were not here now, I would aske him What were hyperbolizing by your Lordships favour. Vol. Women are taken with the presence of A man, the garbe, and ornaments of state Endeere him to their senses, I would faine Appeare in glorious habit can you dance? De. I were no Lord else, I was a French mans Scholler, For twenty crownes a moneth, you may guesse by that My abilities. Vol. Tis the best fooling, and the safest for
The body, your French glide away like Rivers, Without a noise, and turning with Meanders, Out move ye, your lofty trickes, are tude, And doe to much examine. De. May we not rise, I ha knowne good dancers rise at Court, what say you to A cosse caper. Vol. Ride the Cannon, and you ha No care to preserve your bonds, but I forget, Adtos signiour, I must attend the Dutchesse. De. Doe not hyperbolize with her my Lord. Vol. Pardonate Signior mio. De, Tis so, tis baudy, that shrug tells me so, Giotto. Gio. Your honours servant. De. Were you never a Courtier before. Gio. I onely hitherto have spent my eyesight. In observation, now I grow proud to write My selfe dependant. De. Signiour Comachio my Vncle, lends you. Gio. But Ime not to learne To adore the rising Sun, I looke on him As in his West, but I've ambition To merit your grace. De. I see then thou wot be a Courtier. Enter Dutchesse, Comachio, Contarini, Volterre, Laura. Dutch. Comachio, shew me your Nephew! Y'are welcome to Court my Lord. De Pazzi kneeles, kisses her hand, De. It is your highnesse pleasure I should presume so, And I am confident I may. Dutch. He has not onely profited in growth Of person, but in's judgement too: talkes well, Our Court wants such Comachio, your Nephewes Contemplation ends here. Padua must Loose him, he shall be our servant. Com. Shee jeeres him, and I gaine no credit by 't. Keepe your tongue quiet, cease your abortive Language, or Ile cut your throate.
De. This is the tricke of all Courtiers, They would engrosse Princes e'n to Themselves, I must not speake to her. Com. This is the Gentleman, your grace was pleas'd T'accept from my commends. Leads Giotto to her, who kisses her har. Dutch. You are a Florentine. Gio. I am proud to owne my Country. Dutch. We have heard so much of your demerits, That 'twere injustice not to cherish you, Be confident, to gaine our best favour. Gio. I've often pray'd for this blessed houre, and thought I did not sinne in my ambition. It is a vertue to covet honour From your excellence: which I shall ever Study to deserve. Dutch. Laura begin your triall. Laura whispers with Giotto Orseollo runnes in and kneeles. Dutch. This is a rude kinde of duty, speake your Intention. Ors. Twice have I kneel'd to gaine your kindnesse in My sute, now grant it, or ile turne Traitour. Dutch. Make your sute knowne. Ors. I have beene bred in rugged warres, A womans governement is soft and fit For Babes to bow to, dismisse streight your Court. Dutch. Orseollo, did not your offence breed mirth, You should perceiv't more difficult to finde A pardon fort. Ors. Send me streight to Sea, if but t'incounter A fleet of fiends rigg'd by witches, or with A colony to settle a Plantation In the desarts of Barbary, Ile choose Any employment rather then to heare a Lady utter perfum'd breath, or see her Advance in her masculine garbe, in her New mimicke posture.
Dutch. Leave us▪ but so, that in an houres space We may command your presence here, to move Our laughter, when leisure will permit it, Or you shall never live to weare gray haires. Ors. Ile conspire with a constable, that commits Iustice in's sleepe, ere Ile want treachery To revenge this constraint of service. Exit: Com. Your grace will beget charity in Other Ladies, if you pardon this his Bold behaviour, for he offends all women. Dutch. How Comachio. Con. Does not your excellence know, he is cald The woman hater. Dutch. Deserves he that Epithite? Vol. Ile shew your highnesse the reall cause, why He hates all women; he was ever bred In the campe, where there are no females, but Sutlers wives: fit drudges, to make fiers Ith' devils kitchin, whose very lookes Disparage the complexion of all their sex; He nere converst with an Italian Bona Koba, a plumpe Lady, that fils Her growne, or with a French Bruvette, A Spanish Muser umbrada, or a Germane Yefrow, the Dutch.— De. Or with a Welsh— Com. Parrot! will ye be prating? De. What should a man doe withs tongue, an ye Won't let him talke. Dutch. My Lord Volterre, is a copious linguist. Vol. I still desire to be enabled for Your graces service. Dutch. Are all the sluces stop'd, that we may see Your Cormorants dive for their prey? Vol. We onely want your highnesse presence there, And the sport beginnes. Dutch. Comachio— She whispers. Con. Signiour? these are your Cormorants, you still
Provide the Dutchesse new game, and pleasure: She did you publicke grace, this morning too Before the French leiger; but you ha travaild Sir. Vol. My Lord, the French conceive things with justice Ime but an isorit du moude, and as The Spaniard saies, Altera, estrabajo Del hombre, but Ive observ'd her grace names Contarini often, lookes on you with A smooth brow. Con. On me my Lord? Dutch. Lead forward to the River. Com. My hopes doe still encrease, fate smiles on me. Dutch. Signiour De Patri, be you neere us. Exit. Volt. Dep. Contar. Com. Dutch. Lau. Y'ave heard her graces will, this is the first Imployment. She knowes you Florentines Insinuate with great subtlety in Humane natures. Gio. She shall receive each man in's just character, Lau. Sir I congratulate your new fortune, Youle finde her excellence a noble mistresse. Gio. You are a gentle Lady, and adde much Credit to her Court. Laura. We shall lose the sport unlesse we hasten To the River. Gio. You have use of my attendance, and I am Happy in't. Exeunt Omnes. Actus 3. Scaen. 1. Enter Giotto, Dutchesse, Laura, Carintha. Dutch. YOu now shall stay at Court Carintha, see Her very lips looke blacke. Saturnes issue. Were not so dull and sullen. Lau. Madam sh'as great motives unto sadnesse Which I've beene earnest with her to reveale,
But she conceales em as the vsurer doth His treasure: striving to beguile noyse, And lessen the number of his bagges with His report. Gio. Lady, too soone you will deprive the world Of your deere presence, if thus early you Consume your houres in pensive thoughts! Dutch. Carintha, have I not power to increase Your griefe; if you conceale the cause of it From me? Car. I am not sad, my faculties preserve Their wonted harmony: your excellence Will not inforce me to belie my passion. Enter Volterre. Lau. There's my Lord Volterre, ist your gracēs Pleasure to retire till we have ended Our discovery. Dutch. Is he come? Carintha, follow me! Exeunt Dutchesse, Carintha. Vol. She gave the game high applause, and begg'd two Of my Cormorants: I must invent new Sports to delight her fancy. Lau. The day afford your Lop much profit. Gio. If your Lop be in good health, ye owe Some thankes unto my prayers. Vol. Laura, the Dutchesse great favourite Giotto, is eminent in Court too. If these afford me such respect Ive cause To thinke my starres faithfull? Madam I would Kisse your left hand— Lau. I beseech your lp enforce me not To be unmannerly you are now above My conversation. Vol. How bright Laura. Signior Giotto. Pray cleere this mistery. Gio. My Lord, be more particular, for my Owne part I know my distance, but you greete Your Fortunes with too much humility,
You want state to converse with me. Vol. I me all wonder and amazement Signiour, Pray give your meaning more perspicuous Vtterance. Gio. Will you forget to be reserved, know your Station, you make me bold against my owne Desire. Vol. Howes this? Gio. I implore your Lordship leave I may be Cover'd, 'twould much assist my health. Vol. Why, dost keepe thy head bare in reverence To me? Madam, shall I intreate?— Lau. Tis in your power to command, in my Duty to obey. Vol. Your duty— Gio. It seemes he hath not yet; how much thē Dutchesse favours him—Volterre listenes. Lau. I conjecture so for e's differs much From that which he must practise when he's Dukē Vol. I heare ye— Lau. How my Lord? Vol. Laura, faith be publiquē! Giotto, why Dost thou conceale the meanes to make thee Happy?— Gio. My Lord I know little, onely those that Waite neere the Dutchesse, heare her often praise Your nimble tongue, your skill in languages. Vol. Phse questo mionto, what would you say, There me interpret the inorticulate Voyces of birds, and beasts, that skill deserv'd A fame. Gio. Your Lordship might then (with great ease) beene Interpreter to the builders of Babel. Lau. Something I've heard her grace speake too, in praise Of your French gesture, your sublime friske, and Odde conveyance of your body. Gio. Tis when your Lordship wreathes your hams in thus. Vol. Ta da rum, ta da rum, te re re, ra da rum. He dances.
Gio. These are the postures that inchant your sex. Lady— Lau. I cannot blame the Dutchesse to be fond. Gio. But does not your lop grow weary with Continuance of this motion? Vol. It is my vulgar exercise ta da rum, ta da rum. Gio. Enough, enough, my good Lord, sure your swim Within your doublet. Vol. Giotto, now I am fit for a race, Never tyr'd. It has beene thought by some (skild In th' ability of my person) that Ime mortall. Gio. Indeed sir tis not fit you should ēxpect Much in heaven, having such joy on earth. You are more than happy, this Lady knowes it. Vol. Do'st ifaith Laura— Lau. Sir, I hope when you shall sit invested With Royall ornaments, you'le not disdaine Laura for your humble servant. Gio. And Giotto knowes that your Religion Will not permit you slight industry. Vol. I tooke part o' my breeding ith' French Court▪ And there I learnt to be familiar With my Nobles. Lau. Did not I say he would govērne gently, Now can't my tongue be quiet, I must tell him all. Gio. Nay Madam— Vol. Giotto, dost concerne you to hinder This her kindnesse? speake deare Lady. Lau. My Lord I affect truth and brevity, I am commanded by her grace to make Your visits private to her. Vol. Hah, forward deere Laura. Gio. Why sir, it is her highnesse will that you Conceale these visits. Lau. And let no encouragement neither from Her eyes nor speech imboldne ye to thinke Vnlawfull, her favours you must take
With silent observation. Enter Comachio. Gio. Here comes my Lord Comachio. Away signiour He must not see you. Vol. Yo soy mug juoderose. Exe. Volterre, Laura Gio. My noble Patron.— Com. I greete thee as my best genius, th'art now Mixt ith' number with such as weare my title, Thou climb'st apace, yet safely too; they strive At Court, who first shall be the flatterer: What female wast that left thee now? I saw Part of her gowne. Gio. The Lady Laura. Com. Thou art most happy, skilfull in thy choyse Of conversation: why she governes Her highnesse heart. Didst question her About my businesse? Gio. I know all, she cannot hide a single Thought from me. Com. Thart strangely powerfull o're Ladies, But what said shee? have I no Rivall in The Dutches love. Gio. Sir, she ownes none but you, with a publike Confidence, onely there is owne impediment. Com. What ist? prethee give't relation? Gio. A spirit not tam'd by his religion Would hazard much rather then suffer it Indanger such a hope. Com. Make it no morē a secrēt. Gio. Could ye thinke she has observ'd your Nephew With an amorous eye. Com. De pazzi, my Nephēw? Gio. Thats the man sir, who is so much oblig'd Vnto her memory. Com. Sdeath this inclines so neere miracle T'would taxe my judgement to beleeve it; Conferre her love upon a foole. Gio. Pardon me sir! I doe not positively
Say she loves him. I make it (for your sake) A cautulous suspect your jealous men Strive against danger. Com. I doe affect thy discipline. Gio. This morning she desir'd to speake with him. Com. To speake with him - good our braines are nere us, Ere thou admitst him to her presence, weele Furnish him with discourse, preposterous Vnto sence, and her demands; so make him More cheape in her conception, here he comes. Enter De Pazzi. Assist my prayers. De. Signiour Vncle, Com. Nephew oppertunely Signiour Giotto hath taken paines To bring us knowledge of new graces, which Our Dutches stores up for you, I am proud To thinke what honour all our blood receives From you, the toppe bough of our family: I never hop'd there could be starres in heaven So auspitious, as I behold now shining, And pointing all their golden beames on you, The Dutchesse loves you— De pazzi, hum. Gio. Not carelessely, and with that common favour, She does divide among the Courtiers, They doe but gleane her scattered graces, For you the harvest's reserv'd and brought Home to your bosome. De pazzi hums. Com. Other with much labour. Clime this high rocke, upon whose swelling top, The Dutches smiles are placed, yet obtaine not One to reward their sweate. De pazzi hums. Gio. But her owne hand Reaches you up, and tempts you to enjoying The Perimids height, you may ascend by stayres, And mount with ease unto that happinesse, Others adore afarre off. De. Does the Dutchesse
Affect me honourably, and for marriage otherwise? Com. That makes the Musicke high, it were not else So ravishing, you are the man mark'd out To be the Duke Depazzi. Gio. Thats her desire, She would not like a theife steale joyes, but make The pleasures lawfull, nuptiall holy rites, Vshering your felicity, you must be Her Husband Signiour, and all we your subjects, Obsequious to your nod, when you have breath To raise t'unlimitted height, and uncreate Whom you would frowne upon. De. I see shee is wise, Com. How will Comachio thinke his age blest, to see Princes borne to his Nephew, and with breath Covetous to expire in prayers for them. Gio. Kneele there great Vncle, I have an ambition If you thinke not the honour over great, To beg tuition of your second sonne, Whom I should study to bring up, with such Choyce education, as shall become The greatnesse of his soule and birth. De. Tis granted, my second sonne is thine, but are you sure I am ordain'd to be the man you talke of; Must I be cran'd up to that altitude. Gio. My Lord You may be confident, Giotto dares not Play with your greatnesse, and my dare was never Yet so incertaine, when I heare your name So sweetened by your Dutchesse breath. De. No more, I have a strong faith, tis so, for my Vncle Doth practise already his observance, I Purpose to visit our loving Dutchesse. Gio. Nay you will be sent for and be courted to That was intimated. Com. But my honoured Nephew Would you admit instructions, for I see With how much envy of the Court you rise To this high sphere of soveraignety, be prudent,
Arme your selfe with some excellent discourses (thoughts. For your first parly, you shall knit her soule to your owne Gio. If my abilities may doe you service. Com. Giotto, you are furnished to read Lectures To us both of Courtship, and I know my Nephew Will gratefully remember, what you adde To raise him to our wishes. Gio. I desire to be a banquerout of knowledge, when My portion may enrich you. De. Should you lose Your braine signiour in my service, you Should finde I would requite you. Com. At his first entrance to her graces presence Something new and sublime, t'insinuate How much she hath consulted with her best Wisedome, when she elected one so meriting, To be her husband. Gio. So with one argument He magnifies her judgement, and his worth. De. I like that well, if you doe pen that speech Commend me pray unreasonable, I shall study it. Gio. That must be, to this we may guesse she will Reply, my Lord, I could misse in such a troope Of Deservers to choose out the ablest. Meaning my Nephew. De. I know that, who else? Gio. Hence take you fresh occasions to extoll Your selfe, and be not nice to let her know Your active blood, and spirit to get Princes, How much the people will be bound to blesse Her race in choosing you, whose promising body Is able to incite them to make bonfires For Dukes unborne. De. Great reason, proceed. Gio. It will be necessary you disparage all men That are about her, though your Vncle, he Will suffer to advance you. Com. Who my Nephew?
De. Let me alone to disgrace him. Gio. It gives you lustre principally remember To raile against her Ladies, call em hags, You cannot be too bitter, this secures Your love toth' Dutchesse, beats of jealousie When you appeare to love her onely of All the sex. De. It will be a good occasion to beate off Laura, to whom I did pretend my selfe A Lover excellent, pray let me have all these Directions in manuscripts, Ile not see her Till they be rotten in my head. Com. Giotto, bindus both to you, this will do't, Art cannot shape him more ridiculous, These are rare principles. Here's Contarini. Enter Contarini, Dandalo. Gio. Remove your selfes: tis not fit he see ye. Exeunt Comachio, Depazzi. Signiour Contarini, your minute is expir'd. Con. I crave your pardon signiour, have you learnt From Laura ought that concernes my knowledge. Gio. I have cause to intreate my intelligence. I am your pensioner, you have enriched My stable with a Barbary Roane. A gift I am ignorant to requite; I must returne great thankes too, from the Lady Laura, for the wealthy Carbanet You sent her last night. Con. I me yet indebted to you both: Signiour You are skilled in my affaire: the noyse still Continue, our great Dutchesse will elect A husband from her owne Court, Ile onely Know the man; that so I may direct my Observance the right way, you will call this An honest pollicy. Gio. Your contemplations are too humble. Con. You Signiour? Gio. Ere I would thinke another worthier then
My selfe, to bearē a soveraigne title; I would disclaime my judgement and runnē madde. But there's a crosse barre to your ambition, (Heaven excuse my sorrow for it?) you are Marryed, you have a wife. Con. Sir, I beseech you give your meaning more expression Gio. Has the Dutchesse any name within her memory, So much as Contarinies? Are not you he whose feature she admires? Nay Sir, it is not long since Laura heard Her wish you were unmarryed: Interpret My relation as you please; But you know Princes are reserved. Whats he? My servant Signiour, he has modest eares And a quiet tongue. Dandalo, you may Stay here, I shall use thy consent in a businesse. Dan. I waite your pleasure. Con. But did her grace wish I werē unmarryēd? Gio. By no itteration that breedes noyse. Con. Well, I allow of her graces wish. Gio. How my Lord? Con. If my marriage discontent her highnēsse: I wish I had no wife— Gio. He has a noble soule! is there no way To avoid this trifle called a wife. Con. Yes Signiour, there are waies, but— Gio. O sir, discharge your minde, it concernes my Prēferment to be faithfull. Con. Troth, were all impediments cleared, I thinke We two should rule equally; Ime strangely fond to those I love. Gio. Signiour you have given me cause to know it. Con. If I could sue out a divorse—— Gio. I signiour, but the judge grants nonē without a lawfull cause. Con. Shēe shall commit adultery. Gio. With whom? Con. Giotto, that I am comē to tell thee.
Shees a beautious Lady, soft and buxsome? Thou shalt lye with her. Gio. I, my Lord? T'were an indeerement too great for my rēquitall. Con. Tis decreed, come, it must be so. Gio. Signiour, I shall beg your pardon. Con. I keepe my mercy for another use, Suspect no danger, you shall come disguis'd When you wooe her too't, which done, the Dutchesse Shall helpe my procurement of a divorce: Why, I knew before, her highnesse lov'd me! I have received favours from her lookes and and speech. Gio. Does not your man listen? Con. No matter, hees our confederate. Dandalo know this Gentlemans hands And kisse em often. Dan. Ime his humble crēature. Gio. I shall be glad to shew you kindenēsse. Con. Lets perfect our designe, good signiour I have no leasure now to ruminate, I affect action. Exeunt. Enter Laura, Carintha, Sancho. San. Madam, I ha signified to my Lord What you commanded, but I hope your Ladiship Hath heard his disposition. Lau. He's not reconciled to our sex, He has proclaim'd that. San. This place breedes no Ladies, No not for civill entertainement, we Have not a woman in the house, their pictures Which adorne other gallaries, you see Tempt not the eye here, all his offices Discharged by men, he saies where he commands He must not see a woman. Car. What not strangers? San. Such is his will. Lau. How then? San. If you desire his presence and discourse,
You must be vail'd here Madam, his owne eye Must not be witnesse to what face he speakes, Ime but his servant. Lau. Tell him Ile expect him in that forme hē Prescribes. San. The other Lady too Must be clouded, then Ile let his Lordship Know y'are prepared. Lau. Pray doe Madam, I hope Your discontent will give you leave to smile At this, her grace found you but this employment, With me, to beate your melancholly off, Apply to the occasion. Car. My gratitude will teach me to conforme. Enter Orseollo, Sancho. Ors. Now Ladies whats your pleasures, that you summon My appearance, I know ye ha supple joynts, What mistery of state sends you to me? I cannot revell in long stockings, friske To please your wanton eye-sight; I nere bosted 'My ribs, or largenesse of my thighs, t' invite you; I make no Sonnets of your anticke dressings, Cry up your colour of your face, and sweare Y'are divine peeces, for I know you are not: I will not draw heavens curse upon me, for Flattering into pride; say that the Lillies, Are pale, for envy of your white, and the Roses Blush, to see better in your cheekes, your haire Beames, rather drawne up to a net, might catch Iove when he plaid the Eagle; that your brests Raise up themselves like two faire Mountainers Ith' pleasant vale of temptation, I hate this I will not dam my selfe to make you proud, Doe not, I know your faces? Lau. Ours, we are not ashamed to shew em. Ors. Doe not unvaile. San. Good Madam. Car. Will you not see what you condemne?
Ors. Ime gone, if you attempt to let me seē A peece of any countenance; while I thus Looke on ye, I can helpe my selfe t'imagine Ye are some other creatures. Lau. Troth my Lord, for pitty to your selfe End your invectives; Madam I told you of this mirth. Car. Can he be serious? Ors. Wracke me not with your stay, Whats the designe hath brought you hither? Lau. This Signiour; tis the Dutchesse pleasurē You make suddaine repaire to Court. Ors. I? Lau. That's our Embassie. Ors. I am no Court physitian, I but vexē Your female constitutions, you know All my receipts are bitter, and her excellēncē Hath plenty of those, she gives a pension to Can flatter; why does she send for me am so Vnwelcome? Lau. My Lord, her grace employes Not me to any so unhappy: And though you have not liv'd so neere the favour, Ith' eye of the Court, which your owne humour too May have beene the cause, I have no honour, if You finde your selfe unwelcome, Ors. Tis a mistery. Lau. I could instruct you further with a secret, Your soule would dance to know, but I confesse Tis more then my commission: Ors. Is there in nature any happinesse for mē? Lau. And from a woman: you will come my Lord? Ors. Stay, from a woman, ha? the Dutchesse— Heard a noyse she would chuse a Lover from Her owne Court, can it be that? death I havē Beene boundlesse in my railing. I begin To curse my selfe fort. San. Be all silence,
Thou hast a knowledge will be dangerous To any hope, perhaps, I could be pleased To see the tip o' your nose Lady, Or the mole upon your chinne. Lau. You will have cause to blesse the occasion Of this dayes message. Ors. I could see your cheeke, Nay halfe your face for tother sillable. Lady you can say more, Car. I dare not signiour, already we have exceeded. Ors. I know such creatures cannot mocke, sweete Lady. Lau. Have you not heard her graces resolution, Touching a husband? Ors. Your are o're darke still, enrich me, Lau. I hope your honour will remember this poore ser∣vice when tis done. Ors. What? one Letter of your meaning. Lau. My Lord the Dutchesse loves you. Ors. Ha? Lau. Come Madam, I shall say you will waite. Ex. Ors. Shall I not see the faces, To which I owe my blessednesse. San. No words of those loose creatures in your custody, Seale up the doores, still the aire least that Creepe out too soone, and kill my growing fate. Exeunt. Actus 4. Scaen. 1. Enter Dutchesse, Laura, Carintha. Dut. VVAs not Orseollo's humour, recreation To thee Carintha? Car. I spent all my thoughts In wonder Madam. Dutch. He began to soften— Lau. We tam'd his Tiger violence, not Magicke
Enter Giotto. Could force him like the charme you sent. Dutch. Giotto? What speakes your hast? Geo. Comachio Madam, and signiour Depazzi. Dutch. Vsher em in. Car. Something in such a plenty may delight Your dulled fancy. Enter Depazzi, Comachio. De. Laura, remoove your selfe, Doe not ecclipse the splendor of that Sunne. My Eagles eye must gaze at. Vncle know Your distance. Dutch. Signiour Depazzi. De. Giotto, my hand agen, be proud, now Madam I addresse my selfe to you, wonderfull Princesse, Not so much for your beauty as your wisdome, Your carnall wisdome. Dutch Wherein Signiour. Com. Good. De. Right you answer, right it is my qu: Your carnall wisdome Madam, you proclaime In choosing out a husband, and that man Whose memory your subjects shall have cause To curse, is I. Dutch. To curse? De. Perfect still, have cause to curse, You did no sooner choose him, which of all Your faire Lords, though you looke a squint upon My merit, could your eye picke out more able? Heroicke, compleat, tempting? I am flesht, Nothing shall put me out. Gio. Observe. De. Your grace saies right, I doe acknowledge it. Gio. You are too hasty, her grace saies nothing. De. Did your grace say nothing? speake it againe, I know you meant to say something to th' purpose. Dutch. What purpose signiour? De. Now she has put me quite out.
Gio. Then raile upon your Vncle. De. Looke on him Madam, there he stands, you may Perhaps imagine him for his gray beard And a starched face, that he is wise a statist: Ile bring ye a justice, thats but newly pack'd Into commission, oth' peace, shall make An asse on him. Com. Nephew, this will make you odious. De. A very gull in mistery of state, A most egregious—in comparison Of one that I could name, but he may serve To fright the pages, muster the blacke guard, Or keepe the doore at maskes, his face will doe More then a hundred others; yet now I thinke on't, Your grace shall magnifie your favour to me, And let me begge him. Dutch. Ha, ha. Com. I hope your grace will pardon him, these fits Are ever at full Moone. Lau. Begge your Vncle Signiour? De. Yes I would furnish him with an Houreglasse and a sithe; And sell him to the Masons for the picture Of time, Madam, would he not shew well? Dutch. This is witty, what detractour Gave out Signiour Comachio, your Nephew Had no rich braine, Carintha, doe you nold him Laura, Comachio, ha? De. Giotto, she has put me out agen, Gio. Then raile upon her Ladies, De. Hum, when I contemplate on your highnesse face I hate all others. Com. Can your excellence. Dutch. Why, is mine so bad? De. I beseech your grace, speake your part right, Oblivion is my qu. I doe remember. Com. Madam Carintha, speake to her grace. De. Has Madam Laura such I lip or eye?
I doe confesse she has a nose, but I Passe over it. Gio. He makes a bridge of that, De. Her cheekes,— Com. Nephew—Madam I humbly pray I may remove This rudenesse, tis a discord must needes grate Your soft eare, De. Vncle you are out now, her cheekes. Lau. Well Signiour, what of my cheekes. De. Why your cheekes are, as they are, death, I ha forgot. This tis when you won't come t'rehearsall. Lau. My cheekes are Such as creation fram'd em, and the colour Is natures gift. De. It had need be gift, I know none so prodigall To be at charge to buy em, yet you thought I was in love w'ye, I confesse I did Once cherish an opinion you were something About a gipsie, and might serve in Lent When flesh was rare, but you must take into Your thoughts, I meant not honestly, you see For whom fate hath reserv'd me, be as patient As such a losse will suffer you, doe not marre Your face, cause I condemne it, it may serve Some hungry signiour, or some City heire That would be dabled in nobility, And pay for his cornuting. Dutch. He is most witty Carintha. Com. Giotto, she is taken with this imprudence, What dulnesse hangs upon her soule? some fatall Appoplexy seise him, that which we Plotted to make him hatefull does inchant her. De. Madam, you see I have a body, ponderous And full of marrow, Ile not get an heire Lesse hopefull then my selfe, my first sonne shall be An Emperour borne, may I doe things to purpose When I am in once. Com. Will not this startle her?
Lau. Sure Madam, he will put downe Hercules. De. Hercules, Hercules, what, a Pedlar. Gio. Pedler, my Lord you would say pidler. De. He shall be what I please, doe not I know Hercules, He got but fifty in a night, but I— Madam your eare. Com. My duty to your grace, makes me forget He is my kinsman. Dutch. Signior Depazzi, We have leasure to heare you finish your discourse With Laura and Carintha. Com. He's courted to her privacy, her soule is In a deepe Lethargie. Gio. Ha? What was intended to destroy his hope, Hath raisd him to assurance, she applauds That which to all understanding but her owne, Appeares prodigious, did you suspect She would heare this prate? Com. He had committed sinne enough to have had His lips sow'd up eternally, death, I could Grow into death with wonder. Gio. She check'd you for interrupting. Com. A fury revels in my braine, shee's mad, And so am I, but— Gio. What for prevention, If she have such a poverty in her reason, Ith' humour she may marry him, and then Beside the mighty fortune lost, you grone Vnder his tyranny. Com. In his blood Ile bathe My feares, a ship lanch'd forth with all her wings, Be calmed thus. Gio. Ile digge the remora That hangs upon the barke, this foole wo'd not Be mised among the living, rather then— Com. Th'art my genious sacred directour To my blisse.
Gio. I ha so much suffering In your ungentle starres, that I would purchase Their better influence with my danger. Com. How I feele my heart incorporate with thine, What doe I owe to heaven for sending me Thy friendship, say, shall this thing be removed, Giotto, that so ruines me. Gio. Shall: there is A most severe necessity, you must not Be conscionable now; and charity Vnto your selfe, will drowne the sinne: Enter Depazzi, Laura. Retort disgrace t'your hate. De. I shall extend my favour, where I see Merit invite, perhaps commend you to Some other Lord; Vncle, you shall continue Your place; Giotto finde out a monopoly, It shall besign'd. Com. I congratulate your high fortune, I knew t'wod take. Exit. De. Com. Enter Orseollo, Sancho. Lau. Here's a pretty front, Signiour Orseollo, stay till I am valid.— Ors. Nay, good Madam, I can indure to see Your face, without danger to my eyes—Signiour Giotto, I joy in your great fortunes. Gio. They shall inable me to doe you service. Lau. My Lord, you cherish my instructions, Y'are come earlier then your houre. Ors I'd faine know my destiny; Madam Ime rough. The warres have spoilt my Courtship; I cannot Flatter kindnesse from you; but I affect Gratitude. What newes Lady, hah? has there Beene no mention of my name or person Since I receiv'd your last intelligence? Lau. I know nothing but what I am enjoyn'd To make a secret. Ors. How deere Lady.
Lau. Giotto, shall I tell him that? Gio. Not for both the Indies. Ors. But she shall Giotto, she and wee be kinde,— Madam,—we three will share in all atchievements. Lau. I cannot hide it from him. Gio. Are you weary of your life Lady? My hopes are finished. Lau. The Dutchesse has commanded him to get Your picture for her. Gio. Who'ld trust a secret in a womans brest? My Lord, as you esteeme our loves usefull Let no eare enjoy this but your owne. Ors. I will forget I heard it; I, I me a souldier Signiour, and shall deserve your faith. Sancho! San. My Lord! Ors. Theres a famous Painter sojornes here In Mantua, a Germane! San. Shadan wierex. Ors. The same, you are to seeke him out, I have Vse for him. Gio. Already you begin to make it publike. Ors. Doe not suspect my servants silence, I Trust him with a secret of weightier Consequence then this, my creature! hunk▪ Lau. Your hopes increase Signiour. Ors. Give me thy hand, Giotto, thine too: Weele governe like the Triumveri— Lau. But sir, there is one obstacle— Ors. What ist? Gio. Ile loose a Thumbe to have it cleer'd. Ors. Heart, let me but know't? Lau. Y'have heretofore appeared so boysterous And sullen to that sex, that the Dutchesse Partly thinkes— Ors. What does she thinke? Lau. Y'are insufficient. Ors. How? a metophrase upon that word. Gio. Sir t'would impeach her modesty t'expresse
Her meaning, ith' blunt dialect, however Twill become my tongue; there's a noise amongst The Ladies, y'are insufficient: that is Your genitalls want the perfect helpe in Procreation. Ors. Horror, horror, name the authour of this Calumny. Gio. Be not so loud signiour, were it a truth Twould not proclaime nature, or your parents Guilty, you are a soldier, perhaps in A skirmish at Lepauto, some Turke Circumcised you with his semiler; Or being at push a pike, you might be Drill'd below the navell, nay I ha knowne The breath of a bullet snatch a remnant Of loose flesh. Ors. Sdeath insufficient! you shall know a secret Which I have fear'd, even ith' keeping o' my owne heart. Gio. Twill trouble me to know a thing, so full Of danger. Ors. Tis onely dangerous to me, but sir, It must out, for Ile stifle now this dam'd Aspersion. It reveales the cause, why I Was still a satire against women. Lau. I, that I would faine know. Ors. Know what Lady? we are in a discourse, meerely, Concernes us two, walke aside, she must not heare't. Sancho, I now release off the Oath, Which did oblige your secresie about My continence, nay good Madam, troth we desire to be particuler. Lau. Hereafter I shall grow reserved too. Ors. A personall secret, as Ime a souldier. Gio. You shall beleeve him Lady for my sake. Ors. How many whores hast thou in keeping for my use? San. Some ten my Lord! Gio. You passe my beleefe. Ors. 'Las, Ime insufficient! a meere Eunuch, I.
Gio. But what urged your invectives gainst the Sex, Since you thus cherish them in private! Ors. The Dutchesse has a chast court: 'twas safty To disguise m'incontinence, least she should Punish it. Gio. Y'are not so ravinous (my Lord) but when Your friend desires a taste, he may be furnished, hah? Ors. You shall visit my seragho, and chose your whore. Gio. May I presume— Ors. That's the medicinall pimpe; who prescribes Plaisters for my belly. Gio. You maintaine him in a gaudy outside. Ors. His sinnes mainetaine him; those of his function. Grow mighty now adayes. Gio. Lady you shall share in our secret, Ors. Are you mad Signiour? Gio. My Lord you are to modest: theres no errour So readily excused by Ladies as this O'th blood. Fame has abused our noble friend: Not Hercules was more inabled for Increase; then he. Lau. Indeed Signiour? Gio. Indeed? why Madam, doe you doubt that I Bely him, Ime sure he keepes tenne whores. Ors. Slight, you are treacherous. Gio. She cries indeed, as if she did suspect You can proffer like a Goate, and performe Like an Elephant. Lau. This was you that railed against women. Fye my Lord. Ors. Troth Madam, my constitution is to blame. But a young sinner deserves mercy. Gio. Your lustinesse redresse you more hopefull To the state. Give me a Prince from whose loynes We may expect issue. Ors. Howsoever I would not have the Dutchesse know Of this; till I am more indeere unto Her heart.
Gio. Does not her happinesse, and mine depend Vpon your fate? My Lord, be confident of my silence. Her grace is now in the privy garden. Walke you thither, and receive those favours, Her lookes administer: without reply Of gratitude, she would not have it knowne She loves you. Ors. Enough I shall be polliticke. Exeunt Orseollo, Sancho, Lau. Was there ever such a wanton Hipocrite? Gio. He Neighs like a horse. I am not cosend In him, I still thought he was a lecher. Enter Contarini. Con. Signiour Giotto. Gio. My good Lord?— Lau. Tis my chiefe blessing to see your Lordship In good health— Con. I thanke you noble Lady. Lau. Ile goe pray to have it still continued. Exit. Con. What meanes this great observance, tis beyond My merit. Dost not admire her graces Favorite should use me thus? Gio. These female Courtiers ha the tricke on't. Con. What signiour? Gio. Tis safe Idolatry to bow unto The rising sonne, shee sees your fortune smile, And therefore flatters ye. Heaven knowes, I neare Shall gaine by Courtship, I Though all the Heraulds Called thee Duke, Ile not kisse your hand Vnlesse 'twere cleane. Con. Thou hast heard some newes. Declare, come, declare, And prosper. Gio. My Lord, I first should chide your tardinesse In action. First now I saw your wife at Court,
Attending on the Dutches: Onely she Defeates your hope; yet her removall from Your bed is not design'd. Con. I have sent her to my house, provided you A rare disguise which you shall weare, and wooe Her body to the darke deed, my man shall Witnesse her adultery; and Ile sue out A divorce; whilst you remaine safe from law, Because not knowne to her. Gio. Why this I like, it tastes of sublime wit. Enter Orseollo. Ors. I will be active in my reigne, in large My Dutchy. Genon is proud, it shall Grow humble I have a long arme, 'twill reach Florence. Or if I chance to lay my hand on Parma I shall gripe it till my fist ake, ere I For sake my tenure. Con. Orseollo. Ors. Your greeting's too familiar! Con. From whence this pride, Ile anger him. My Lord, though I am growne above the use Of Poetry, there still remaines in my Remembrance a Sonnet, made in praise of Women; Which if youle please to heare— Ors. He had a bold Muse, that durst undertake So high an argument, sure a woman Was the object, strucke old Homer blinde; And for his eyes left him a Muse. I've lost My businesse. Exit. Con. He was not wont to speake so well of women. Gio. No humorist is constant to dislike, Or commendation. Nay lead the way my Lord: Ime part of your attendance. Exeunt. Omnes. Enter Volterre, Depazzi, Crispino. Vol. Signiour my affaires hither require haste, The Dutchesse (on some sudden cause) hath sent for me. De. I beleeve tis to take's advise about
A Masine for my wedding, hee's excellent At Revels. On my good Lord.— Vol. You come lately from her, and I would know, How you approve her present lookes. Tis the Art Of forraigne Courtiers to visite Princes, In lucky minutes; when their gesture shewes Em pleasant. How lookes her grace to day: Is, She not physicall, but high and jocond? De. You may without danger of your fortune Choose this minute for conference with her grace. Signiour th'as cause to cleare her lookes; Her thoughts Grow easie to her, she had found out the man; The man, that must: more might be said: but then More must be spoke— Vol. Slight; why this to me; how comes he to know That I am he, her highnesse aimes at? True The man is knowne: nor is his worth concealed. De. Worth Signiour!—None but Laura gave him Notice, Ime the man, I neare spoke of it My selfe. My Lord, the man may with safety Boast, he is the best deserver in the Court. hum. Vol. Your Lordship does him too much right, tis certaine, He has beene told that I am he. De. He hath a glorious feature too. Vol. Nay good signiour, comely; but not glorious. De. How not glorious, speake that agen. Vol. This is a pretty kinde of flattery, He will not suffer me to abuse my selfe. Ile admit he charmes the Ladies? or so— De. That's I; for I charme the Ladies. He knowes I shall be Duke, it cannot be conceal'd. Vol. The man has travaild too. De. Never I. But it seemes the Dutchesse gives It out so: the more to honour her choyse Signiour; I must doe you justice▪ the Court Speakes you most accurate, ith' Spanish garbe. Vol. The Spaniards (signiour) reserves all passion, To expresse his feeling in accurences
Of statē, when in discourse; his Tooth-picke still Reaches out a Tooth-picke, Is his parinthasis: which he doth manage Subtly thus—Par les santos sennor— Lo conosco portierto—porque es Trabaso (conlicenzia diuvestra alteza) Hablas muchas palabeas— No puedo en veridad— De. But why those things Signiour? Vol. This elevation oth' shoulders is a Polliticke gesture, declares a meaning hid; Which you may finde out if you can: and is Often used in triviall circumstances. I question this your Man—— Cris. Your Lordship must speak my mothers tongue then. Vol. Is Don Diego within? De. Stay slave, weele be as politicke as he— Which don Diego doe you meane? he that plaide The sloven in the great Church. The English Have a Proverbe on him. Vol. Why not he of Valder, or any other Diego? De. Be not inraged (my Lord) those grave shrugs appēare Vnmannerly, and would before Ladies, Ingender a suspect of vermine. Vol. Then Ile prefer (sir) the French to your Dislike or praise: whom though a surly Don, Calls an impertinent people; giddy Trifles? yet in my esteeme they merit Highly. They are active even in discourse Let us beginne cheerely, No matter On what slight or triviall subject; Be it On that single melancholly haire upon Your chinne. Rise and fall by my example. De. I am prepaired. Vol. Mounsier, sil adirent que ete cheveil la sera brusle; que farions nous Avec vostre menton: poucce que le Roy. De. Mounsieur be not troubled! banish your feare,
For Ile tosse th' Antarticke pole With like ease as Hercules could a bulrush. Make it a secret. Vol. O vy da', Ie slay bien que la volente, doit esere est eme pour facit: mais quond Ie vous donneray an cheque naude prenez lamanie, que celus, que tombe Gaigneray un pas; pour reu, que ce veleve— De. Troth, I know not, may be it was a mistake in Plato, for those pinnes and feathers which you talke of, are usefull unto Ladies. Besides tis well knowne, the man ith' Moone will not permit excuse in businesse of this kinde: Tis dange∣rous to law, and reason. Vol. Ie ne le croy pas, cesee un chanson dumonde. De. So I was told by one that knowes the Kings heart? he came hither to cheapen Ginger bread, for the Mogols daugh∣ter. Vol. Est i' possibile? Il in a aucun chose ci dificile, mais je le prenderay tant tose. De. Do'st ifaith, know then all the Lyons in Barbary shall not contrary me in this way. Vol. How doe you like it Signiour? De. T'as put me into a heate, and French heates arē not Very wholesome. But I've heard how nimbly You dispose your person in a French Curvet! Vol. I know your minde; but my body is now prepaired For a high visit. My joynts moves by screwes, Ime so starched together; a dance would Loosen me, and make me fall in rumples. Your man is well build for such a motion, Marke tis onely thus—and thus— Cris. I ha seene your Lordship doe it ta da rum, ta da rum. Vol. Good, very good, signiour Depazzi you owe Heaven much thankes, for lending you this servant; I ha not seene a Gentleman in all France Move with so much regard, and vigour. Cris. Your Lordship is my patterne. Vol. M'affaires call me to Court, serviteur tres humble. Ex.
De. Ist possible? This Lord must rise when I am Dukē: Ile prefer none but such as can speake French and dance; Crispino, prepare my Bath, Ile distill and grow amorous. Exeunt. Enter Contarini Giotto, Dandalo, Carintha. Car. My Lord twill become me to receive Whom you give up so noble, I should sinne Against obedience; you are most welcome signiour. Con. My best Carintha. Gio. Madam you incouragē me To serve your goodnesse, my Lord you undoe me, With too much honour. Con. Signiour, if your eye take delight in prospect There's a roome will feede it richly, Shew him Carintha, some Affaires call me to Court. Cherish him Car. With my best care, please you walke. Con. So Dandalo, be faithful to your trust, no intērruption, Giotto prosper in thy sinne, thy deed Will make me happy, though my honour bleed. Exeunt Omnes. Act. 5. Scena. 1. Enter Contarini, Carintha. Con. Y'Are very jocund on the suddaine. Car. Thanke your love for't, that provided Such a cure for melancholly; To my selfe I seeme not to goe but dance, When shall we have a maske My Lord? Con. You'd be revelling againe. Car. I am all for sport, your honour is much bound To the Gentleman your friend, trust me my Lord He is a rare physitian. Con. He's well skild in womens pulces.
Car. Theres no feare my Lord, But heele recover me, I doe like him infinitely For my body, the best in Padua. Con. Good, good he gave you gentle phisicke, But you hope twill worke. Car. No Esculapius Could ha behaved him more judicially Did our Court Ladyes know his skill They would be all his Patients, and be sicke a purpose. Con. You hold him then sufficient. Car. He has a way So easie to doe good upon's. Con. Vpon ye ith' name of lust, you see I had a care. Car. Twas more compassion, and I am bound To acknowledge it, I was all heavinesse; A thousand plummets hung upon my heart, Tis by your meanes I am made light. Con. I thinke so, very light, ha, is she not quicke already, She moves so nimbly, Giotto has don't, I have it here, I feele it spread, hake you: Y'are a whore. Car. Does your Lordship love bastard next your heart, Though some hold wine unholesome, it may thaw Your congealed blood; oh the difference of constitutions. Con. Hey, she jeeres me, how now? Enter Dandalo. Dan. My Lord, her grace hath sent a strict command You waite to night at Court. Con. Ha? Dan. The messenger seemēd full of hast, he onēly Tooke time to say her highnesse had resolv'd, This Night, to cleere all doubts, and from her Court Make happy one, with title of a Duke. Con. Be dumbe, thou bringst destruction to night, Pray you may be mistaken, I am undone else. Dan. It is my unhappinesse then my Lord, to bring un∣welcome truth.
Con. To night, why tis impossible To sue out a divorce, Ime lost, my plots Rebound and strike me dead. Car. My Lord, you seeme Troubled, does your head ake, Ile into th' garden And gather a few simples. Con. Madam a word w'e, You magnified but now a courtesie I did you, you were ever gratefull, I Know't, you shall not doe the benefit If you will yet kill your selfe. Car. That's a small matter. Con. I know tis, considering th'art stained, Lost in thine honour, held but a disease That growes upon thy sex, a tumour; prethee Lance thy selfe tis soone done. Car. That's a poore favour, Well, Ile thinke on't to morrow. Con: 'T must be done to night, and earely to, for else twill Doe me no pleasure deare Carintha, make thy memory Religious. Car. I am thinking where the signe is, Hah, tis in Capricornus, Ile goe let My selfe blood ith' knees, and dye praying, That your Lordship may recover your wits againe. Ex. Con, A fury lend me curses, make me all An execration, I ha plotted fairely, And made my selfe a fine rediculus thing To no purpose, I am deepe in shame, I must on Giotto, have a nimble braine; you must sinke too Or boy me up againe. Exit. Enter Depazzi, Crispino, curling his haire. De. Make no words Crispino, for the Dutchesse Would not have it published that she meanes to chuse me. Cris. Did she promise you? De. Not by word of mouth, but I know her meaning, As well as I were in her, I must be Duke man. Tis certaine, every body knowes it, but say nothing Least it breake out, hast done.
Cris. A little with this locke, and Ile adone your Lordship With a powder; I hope your honour will Not forget Crispino's faithfull service when you are Duke. De. Why I am Duke already, But for the ceremony, my raign's begun, Depazzi the first. But that Ile not shew my selfe unto my people, Because the Dutchesse did intreate me, let me See what place th'art fit for: oh I have it, Thou shalt be judge. Cris. A judge my Lord De. A Iudge my Lord, at least, thou canst discharge it, Tis nothing to sit upon life and death, tis not Required you should speake much, thy trade has halfe Prepared thee, thou canst pole the commons, Ime sure, Cris. And cut off capitall offenders. De. Very good be it so, be a judge. Cris. Where my good Lord? De. Why thou shalt be a Iudge in potentia. Cris. I humbly thanke your grace. Enter Comachio, Giotto. Com. Oh my true friend, I have no happinesse But thou dost make me clime too't, twill be thy owne Instructer, and oblige me everlastingly. Gio. Ile soone remoove your feares, I cannot doubt You will make good your promise Sir, to pardon When y'are Duke. Com. Pardon, reward and honour thee as my preserver, Be not observed, I am your creature. Exit. Comachio. Gio. My Lord, I have assaid which you require privacy, Send off Crispino, De. I ha made him a Iudge. Gio. Tis very trimly done of you, I cry you mercy my very Good Lord, I humbly desire your honourable absence. Cris. It shall be granted. Exit. De. Now Signiour what bring you. Gio. Why some tokens for your Lordship, looke you. De. Th'are no tokens of love as I take it. Gio. Yes but they are, and you must take em so,
But make your choyse, which best affecteth you, For one you must accept. De. O what doe you meane Signiour. Gio. Not too loud, lest I chuse for you, heres a ball, Better then any ere Crispino washt Your honours face with 'twill scoure you. De. Hold, are you in earnest. Gio. A bullet will quickely sing my errand to you, Will you choose. De. I beseech declare your meaning Signiour. Gio. In short, I me sent to kill you, if you like Any death better then another, briefely Resolve and have it, nay without long studdy. De. Every man should consider his end Signiour, alas! Gio. The Dutchesse loves you, and there must be order Taken to stay your raysing, say your prayers. De. I ha not the heart to say my prayers, Ah, if I must needes, I would dye Another death, you ha not brought me. Gio. What ist? De. I would choose my gallowes, ah, stay tis very Short warning, and I am not halfe prepared: What is this, Ratsbane; alas thats to kill Vermine, I would be loath to be sent out of The world like a Rat. Gio. What say you to a halter? De. Indeed Signiour I never loved swinging In my life, and the halter is a dogges death, I would dye like a man. Gio. What say you to a sword? De. Alas I have a sword of my owne, and I had a mind to't But my stomacke will never disgest it. Gio. Then this pistoll. De. But that I have a weake constitution, I have alwayes beene given to loosenesse, And I doubt your pellet will put me into such a scowring. Gio. Why, would you live then? De. Alas every thing would live Signiour, but I should be Sorry to enjoy a life, that stood not with your liking signior.
But if I live to be a Duke.— Gio. Duke thats the sluce open'd this torrent. De. I am abused deare Signiour, Ile renounce it, Ile be first a dog-killer. Gio. This is but aire, your not to be trusted, I ha sworne to send you into another world, You must not more be seene. De. I wo'not; doe but trust me, And as I am honourable Ile goe Into the wildernesse, and live with Beares; Any whether, hide me in a Well, and there be no Water in't, Ile feed on gravell; By this hand, this seaven yeares, none shall know But I am dead. Gio. If they should find you living. De. Never, Ile indure pinching to death Ere Ile confesse it. Gio. Were I certaine You would be buryed to all mens sight, but till To morrow. De. See me put into the ground your selfe, So you'le not smother me, and it be seven nights Ile feede on moles sweete Signiour. Gio. The Dutchesse doth purpose this night her election, Your Vncle envying your hope, must ha Security for non appearance; had I A faith you'ld creepe into obscurity, But for twelve houres I should have one Sinne lesse to answer for. De. Noble Signiour, Ile wrigle my selfe into a Wormehole, or creepe into a Molehill, and live Vpon Emmits egges. Exit. Gio. Be sure you do't then, poore sicke nobility, How thinne he lookes already. Enter Volterre at one doore, Orseollo at tother. Vol. Signiour Giotto. Gio. Now the tide comes. Vol. This is the night Signiour, t'inclines a pace.
Doe I remaine unshaken in her opinion Have I any square still. Gio. O my good Lord. Ors. Signiour a word, Does this night then conclude— Gio. Your happinesse. Ors. Be not tempted from me, I have writ Pamphlets in praise of women, I have a volume Of Recantations. Gio. They are fruitlesse, You are fixt already in her thoughts, away You make your person cheape, meete, and Be happy. Exit Orseollo. Enter Contarini. Con. Giotto. Vol. Deere Signiour. Con. What make they flattering here, ha they all hope To enjoy her; all, onely Contarini Could gnaw his heartstrings now to be excluded, When he expected his fate ripe, and all his Hopes fit for gathering. Gio. Be high and answer your great hopes; Meete confidence. Vol. Sha't be my fellow Caesar in the Empire. Gio. Noble Contarini. Con. Y'ave store of clients signiour, I am come To know my fortune too. Gio. Alas my Lord. Con. You'ld say tis plaine writ in my forehead, yes In capitall letters; you are knowne to th' secretary, That taught my wife this Text hand, but you must Doe something, sure the marriage is decreed To night to rid me of Carintha, or Ile ha thee punish'd for adultery. Gio. Are you mad? Con. As hornes can make a man, it is no time For patience, heare me carefully and have Your best braines. Gio. Adultery? was it not by your consent,
The very sinfull act yours, I but mov'd By your direction, will this published Exempt you from the Law? Con. Ile laugh at thee With my mans helpe, and oath against thee, Ile Returne thy calumny ith' face, I am A Lord, and shall out weigh thee, couldst thou give Thy truth a body, that even men might see As well as heare it. Gio. This is strange and violent ha, Con. Doe, harrow thy skull, I am resolved. Gio. This is but course reward for my last office, No remedy but killing before supper; Did my starres owe me this? you will pardon me When y'are Duke, thats but reason. Con. And reward thee. Gio. I am in, and must wade through, she goes to bed Supperlesse. Con. Oh happinesse, may I trust too't? Gio. Ile put her granam to the charge of wormes To entertaine her, meete, and be Duke, Ile make Your wife immortall. Con. Wo't thou be speedy, for Ile tell thee Giotto, I cannot hope this night to have all perfect. The noyse of this her sudden death, must needes Marre this nights revelling, and pretract the choyse That is expected; then a little time Presents me capable of the mighty favour: I have incouragement to hope for marriage With our great Dutchesse, ha. Gio. Excellent braines, Your wife is already carrying commendations. To your friends ith' tother world. Con. Oh let me hugge thee. Gio. I have your pardon. Con. And my heart too, on, be swift in thy great worke Beleeve it done.
Enter Dutchesse, Carintha, Laura. Dutch. This pleasantnesse becomes you well Carintha, And you shew duty in it, this night we dedicate To our owne delights. Car. Madam, I ha more wonder To tell your grace, when you are pleased to heare me. Dutch. You'le finde our disposition meete it, but Laura, dost thou not smile to thinke upon The event, we shall be censur'd humorous. Lau. But your grace shall publish your reasons, You will appeare just. Dutch. That ambition Should have such feare in humane natures, but Court hath beene long sicke; they are my humours And I must phisicke em. Enter Depazzi. De. Treason, treason, wheres the Dutchesse, O Madam Never was heard of such a horrid treason. Dutch. Our guard. De. Nay I discovered and prevented it Already. Dutch. You amaze us, whats the treason, who is The conspirator? De. My Vncle, but I thinke most o' the Lords Had their hand in't: Dutch. Be briefe. De. There was a plot of treason to ha kild. Dutch, Whom? defend us heaven. De. Nay I ha defended my selfe, they wod a kild. Me, that shall be Duke, because they saw You were inclin'd to marry me. Dutch. Is this the treason? De. And who should be the villaine thinke you, but Giotto.
All. Giotto. De, I Giotto, but like an honest rascall Vpon my promise, to goe hide my selfe For twelve houres, he sav'd my life, did y'ever Heare of such a cunning traitour, but it is Your destiny to ha me, you have cause To pray heartily. Dutch. And so I have, here was a peece of treason, But be reserv'd you are here safe; Ile take My time to know and punish all; what bold Entruders this? Enter Crispino. Cris. My Lord, I heard your voyce in fearefull manner Crying treason, are you in preservation. De. One of my loving subjects; yes Crispino: 'Tis Crispino Madam, one that I ha promised To make a judge, he was my Barber, and Will fit the Common wealth to a haire. Dutch. He must deserve that place then. De. 'Tis confirm'd. Cris. I humbly thanke your excellence. Dutch. Signiour Depazzi, you shall be neere our person, Here's mirth more then's expected; Laura, bid Some waiter command Giotto's presence; Carintha, weele retire and heare your wonder. My Lord, weele sift the treason. De. And let the traitors be bolted Madam I beseech you. Enter Officer, and Servants. Offi. Quicke, set things in order. The Gentlemen That come to see this great preparation, Must please to make roome for't, so, so. What are you Sir. Cris. I am the terrour of the Law.
Offi. What's that, a hangman? Cris. When I looke leane, and frowne, thou dy'st, I am A Iudge, I say, a Iudge in Potentia. Offi. Have we a Towne called Potentia, in our Dutchy. Serv. He's some forraigner, he comes to use his eyes, Let him passe. Offi. Cease your clamors Villaines: sure the devils Are singing a catch. Give order the outward Doores be locked. Let none approach the presence; The Lords must come hither up the backe staires, And through the Privy gallery, beare backe: Exeunt. Knocking at the other doore. More noyse yet, 'twere lesse troublesome living In a drumme then at Court, in nights of Entertainement. Within. Open the doore. Offi. My Lord Comachio's voyce. Enter Comachio, Orseollo, they salute with silence at the doore. Com. The Lords are not yet met. Ors. I hate this overgrowne thing, tis high time He should intend's affaires in Heaven, yet still He hath some businesse upon earth, Cris. Save you my good Lord, signiour Orseollo, I hope you have an able faith. Ors. Why do ye hope so? Cris. That ye may be sav'd too. Ors. The groome is witty. Knocking at the doore. Offi. Who makes that noyse? Within. Signiour Contarini and Volterre would Have entrance.
Enter Contarini, Volterre, who salute each other with silence at the doore, then are saluted by Comachio, and Orseollo. Com. Why was Contarini warn'd, he has a wife, His hope have no incouragement. Cris. My Lord Volterre, I congratulate Your safety, and your health signiour Contarini? Vol. Is not this Depazzies Barber? Con. I wish he had more manners. Cris. There are certaine Iudges in the darke Vol. And thats the reason Iustice is blinde. Cris. And those Iudges shall come to light too, when They shall thinke convenience proper— Vol. His fingers speake his profession Within. Make way there, fellowes oth' guard, The passage. Offi. Beare backe Gentlemen, what doe you meane, Pray beare backe? Lords, Musicke then. Enter Depazzi, Giotto, Dutchesse: Laura. Attendants. Dutchesse sits under her Canopy. Com. My Nephew still alive, Giotto, you Trifle with me, I am dangerous when My wrath is. Gio. You mistooke your Nephew, I proffered him Foure or five severall deaths, and could not get him To accept of one. Come signiour there's great hope, The Dutchesse but pretends a care o're him, The more to disguise her love of you. Com. This is but a weake comfort. Con. Ist done? softly in my eare? Gio. It is not done.
Con. Hell, and damnation! Gio. Your wife is invisible: the Sunne can hardly Finde her out. Con. Secure thy selfe, my wayes are hidden. Vol. Diable prend e'te Droll la! parles doucement. De. Doe not trust the Arch-Duke, he cosend me at Blow-point. Vol. Abien, ce'te unchose'ci dificile. Iene scay que faire. De. Right, why thats the cause I lent the Emperour my Combecase. Vol. Ma foy loblie! mais nous le voyerous tontastine grandement esbahy. De. With like ease may I—hand saw, and invite the Moone to supper. Dutch. Hah, who is the cause of this fury. Vol. Tis onely a French heate, an't like your excellence. Dutch. My Lord the time is now arriv'd wherein We are to gaine your thankes, and strive to oblige Posterity, your care oth' publike weale, Incourag'd your continuall sute to heaven, And us, that we would make an earthy choyce Of a good husband. Even from this number, Weele performe your wishes, envy is the sinne Of Cowards: therefore no Lord of high birth, And temperate breeding will maligne his destiny Whom we shall thinke most worthy our esteeme: Nay, 'twould shew decay of duty Ith' greatest of our Court, to thinke that we Want skill to make a safe election, such A bold thought, in one we call our subject Would soone corrupt our nature, and make our Iustice cruell; we doe expect (my Lords) No verball satisfaction in this point; But as we single out our choyce, weele make A private tryall of each heart, Contarini: She descends, leads him aside. Com. I can perceive no cause of feare from him,
Hee's marryed, Dutch. How does your wife Signiour? Con. She has too much health Madam: but had I knowne Your excellences purpose, to hasten thus Your favour towards your humble subject: Shee had ere this arriv'd in heaven: however If your care finde your blood so violent You are not able to delay the use Of this my person; she shall not live long To finde your desire. Dutch. O my good Lord you still increase my obligation Con. 'Tis great pitty custome should make Princes So reserv'd in wooing, had ye told me But two dayes since of this meeting, I had Casheer'd my wife; a nimbler way then by Contriving a divorce. Dutch. Then you have practised a divorce already? Con. 'Las, no designe seemes difficult, that makes Me capable of your highnesse love. Dutch. What an Iron impudence rules in thy Nature? thou seemest to boast of crimes the devill Would in modesty conceale. Con. How Madam? Dutch. Canst thou expect kindnesse from a Lady, That art so cruell to thy owne: a soule So much ith' tongue of fame, as is Carintha: You are one oth' religious faction, Whose care meerely did reflect upon the Generall good; the safety of your Country, Ile not publish thy disgrace: kneele old man? And thanke the priviledge of this great day; Thou hast thy pardon. He kisses her hand. Con. Horred torture, foyl'd in my hopes, and made An argument for popular scorne, I feare My owne shadow, my hornes are growne so ugly. Dutch. Orseollo. Com. She knowes him a woman hater, his fate
Cannot hinder me. Dutch. How thrives your charity toward our sex, What thinke you of a woman now my Lord? Ors. A woman is the pride of nature: her Husbands best Gaurius, made to credit Heaven, to justifie the first creation good: She is the destiny of time, her wombe Containes the hope of our succession, The power to adde new life unto the world. Dutch. Stay signiour, this is a kin to flattery, Doe you appeare at this our summons, with Hope to gaine by it: you that have professed Your selfe a naturall enemy to all our sex? Ors. Madam I recanted that heresie, Giotto is my witnesse: there are creatures— Dutch. Heele tell me all I neede not tempt it from him, Bold Mounsier, I've heard of your Goattish trickes Of your Seragho, and your Concubines; Dare you be so much a Traitor, to thinke I'ld marry with a publicke stallious, A Towne Bull. Ors. Your Highnesse— Dutch. No more? for the honour of this day I doe Conceale your faults and pardon em. Kisses her hand. Ors. Giotto, I shall pricke your veines. Dutch. Volterre. Com. What meanes these severall parlies? Dutch. I am to give you thankes (my Lord) for your Great care oth' publicke weale. You did implore My haste to marriage, meerely for your Countries good, you your selfe not guilty of, Any hope to profit by it. Vol. Your excellence does me too much right. Dutch. And can your nature suffer you to doe Me wrong: you under value me, my birth And title, for else a little forraigne Vanity, shew in corrupted mixture
Of unknowne tongues; would not incourage thēē T'attempt our person, and so become our equall. Vol. Your highnesse will hold me in excuse. Dutch. Yes y'ave more deserved our mercy thēn The rest—walke aside. Kisses her hand. Dutch. Comachio▪ Com. Hey, I begin to prosper! Dutch. You are your Countries fathēr, chiefe of those Whose zealous interrest ith' common wealth, Vrg'd to intreate my first indeavours, To helpe posterity with issue; yet Prescribed your selfe no share ith' benefit: Fye my Lord! how sinnefull has ambition Made you? tis strange, that he, whom we have held Our Oracle, should conspire the death of One so harmelesse as your Nephew. Com. My gracious Mistresse: Dutch. We know all; but in hope you'le not maligne Our next election, you taste our mercy. Kisses her hand. Com. False Giotto, thou shalt suffer. Dutch. Signiour de Pazzi. Paz. Hom! now I begin my raignē: Dutchēsse, We know thy minde: thou wouldst protest thy great Love unto our royall person. Contarini, Thy speech and lets to bed, weele have our subjects Know our prompt desire to furnish them With a lusty hire. Dutch. Your Lordship will please to hearē me speake. Paz. First we would know thy lips. I say it is Our will to busse thy highnesse. Dutch. The fellowes sawcy, Take him away. Com. How now Nephew?— Paz. Tis fine ifaith— Giotto and the Dutchesse imbrace. Dutch. Beehold (Lords) your Prince Foscari, Duke of Parma, and of Mantua, now our Lover, Whom lately you supposed dismissed our Court. Com. Indeed we see the Golden Fleece his order, And a face like his, but yet his chinne wants
Part of his beard. Gio. I left that naked, more to disguise me From your knowledge. And that our fame, (which must Out live our person) may give reply to those, Who shall hereafter question it; know, we Vndertake this shape, to helpe us in discovery Of all your soules and hearts; the better to Inable us; how to dispose of each Beneath our governement. Dutch. And I made secret promise, to bring you To a Court purged, and in cleare health: your Lords Have all tane physicke from my prescription. Here I present em to you, penitent And wise; for now they know themselves; which is The best knowledge, and chiefe part of wisdome. You are to grant their pardons for my sake. Gio. With great alatrity, and I banish All their crimes from my remembrance. They kneele, kisse his hand by turnes. Con. Deprived of my revenge too! Cris. Then I am no Iudge now. Paz. Tis a new tricke of state, continually To shift great offices. Cris. Eare I've made my cushion warme! Paz. No remedy, If I'me his favourite, Thou shalt be my Pimpe, then th'art sure to rise. Gio. Must we not be reconcil'd to my Lord Depazzi too? Paz. I forgive your highnesse, I. Gio. And I you, your love is soone requited: Lau. I hope your excellence will pardon my Rude intrusion into your acqu: intance. Her grace conceal'd this part of her designe From me. I never knew till now, that you Were more then Giotto, the Florentine. Gio. Madam, you are truely noble: you have Merited our best assistance. All. Long Foscari, Duke of Mantua, and Parma.
Enter Carintha. Dutch. This noyse brings in Carintha. Gio. Vneasie thoughts perplex her husband. Dutch. Make not rumour acquainted with Your griefe: as yet tis contained ith' knowledgē Of us foure, I forgive his excellence His sinne 'gainst me. Make me your good example, And forgive your wife her error. Con. Heaven has punished my ambition, it was My owne seeking. Ime content to suffer. Gio. Then take your wife, and with assurance from The faith of a true Knight and Prince, she doth Retaine that chaslity she had, when first I saw her. Now each wrinkled brow growes smooth; And I begin my soveraignty: with hope To give succession cause, still to prefer This Day, as chiefe within their Kallender. Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.
