23763 99838230 2597
Heauens Blessing, And Earths Ioy. OR A true relation, of the supposed Sea-fights & Fire-workes, as were accomplished, before the Royall Celebration, of the al-beloved Mariage, of the two peerlesse Paragons of Chri∣stendome, FREDERICKE & ELIZABETH. With Triumphall Encomiasticke Verses, consecrated to the Immortall memory of those happy and blessed Nuptials. By Iohn Taylor, Imprinted at London for Ioseph Hunt, and are to be solde
To the illustrous Lamp of true worth, the noble, Ingenious, inditious, and vnderstanding Gentleman Sir Iames Muray Knight. VNto the prospect of your Wisedomes eies I Consecrate these Epithalamies. Not that I thinke them worthy of your view, But for in loue my thoughts are bound to you: I doe confesse my selfe vnworthy far To write, in such high causes as these are, Which, Homer, Virgill nor the fluent Tully, In fitting terms could scarce expresse them fully: But since the Muses did their bounties showe, And on me did poore Poesy bestowe, I hold it best to play the thankefull man, To spend their guiftes the best wayes that I can, And not like pedling Bastards of the Muses, That Like to Lawyers liue on Times abuses. Thus vnto you I giue it as it is, Desiring pardon where ther's ought amisse. Your Worships euer to be com∣maunded in all integritie: Iohn Taylor.
Epithalamies. OR ENCOMIASTICK TRIVM∣PHALL VERSES, CONSECRATED to the Immortall memory, of the royall Nuptialls, of the two Paragons of Christendome, Frederick and Eliza∣beth. With a description of the Sea-fights, and Fyre-workes, with other royall occurrences which were accomplished at the Princely Celebration. I Did not write nor publish (this description of fire and water triumphs) to the entent that they should onely reade the relati∣on that were spectators of them for to such (perhaps) it will relish some what tedious like a tale that is too often told: but I did write these things, that those who are far remoted, not onely in his Maistties Domi∣nions, but also in foraine territories, may have an vn∣derstanding of the glorious pomp, and magnificent do∣mination of our high and mighty Monarch King Iames: and further, to demonstrate the skils and knowledges that our warlike nation hath in engines fire-works and other millitary discipline, that there by may be knowne,
that howsoeuer warre seemes to sléepe, yet (vpon any lawfull ground or occasion) the command of our dread Soueraigne can rouse hir to the terrour of al malignant opposers of his royall state and dignity. But to the purpose. In this representation of a Sea-fight there were 16. Ships, 16. Gallies and 6. Friggots: of the which Nauy, the Ships were Christians and the Gallies were supposed Turkes, all being artificially rig'd and trim'd, well man'd and furnished with great ordinance and Musquettiers: one of the Christian fleet was a great ve∣ssell or a supposed Venetian Argosey, and another was a tall Ship, as it were appointed for the safe Conuoye of the Argosey. And for the auoyding of the troublesom∣nesse of Boates and Wherries, and other perturbati∣ous multitudes, there was a lists or bounds made with Lighters, Hayes, and other great Boates to the num∣ber of 250. or there abouts: the one end of the Lists was as high (almost) as Lambeth bridge, and the other ende as low as the Temple staires, and so fastned to the sowth shore, or the vpper end of the bancks on sowth∣warke side, in the forme of a halfe Moone or Cemi∣circle, So that Boates might passe vp and downe the river betwixt London side and the Lighters any way. The aforesaid Turketh Gallies lying all at an Anchor euer against Westminster, in a hauen or harbor made artificially with Masts and other prouision, 60. yards in∣to the River, which harbor or hauen was belonging to a supposed Turkish or Barbarian Castle of Tunis, Al∣geirs, or some other Mahometan fortification, where the Gallies might scowt out for purchase, and retire in againe for safeguard at their pleasure. About 2. of the clocke on satterday the 13. of February, the aforsaid Argosev and the other Venetian ship hir conuoy, sets forward from ward the Temple, and driuing vp with the winde and tide til they came as high as Yorke house,
where 4. Gallies met and encountred with them: where vpon a suddaine there was friendly exchanging of smal shot and great ordinance on both sides, to the great delec∣tation of all the beholders: the Drummes, Trumpets, Fises, Weights, Guns, showts, & acclamations of the Mariners, Soldiers and spectators, with such reuer∣berating Echoes of ioy to and fro, that there wanted nothing in this fight (but that which was fit to be wan∣ting) which was ships sunk and torne in peices, men groning, rent and dismembred, some slaine, some drow∣ned, some maimed, all expecting confusion. This was the manner of the happy and famons battell of Lepanto fought betwixt the Turks and the Christians, in the yeare of grace 1571. or in this bloody manner was the memorable battaile betwixt vs and the inuincible (as it was thought) Spanish Armado in the yeare 1588. but in the end, in this frendly fight) the ship and Ar∣gosey were encompassed round by the Galleies, and surprizde and taken: whereupon, the whole Fléet made towards them to rescue them, and reuenge their recei∣ued iniuries. Then there was a Eeacon flered by the Turkes which gaue warning to the Castle and the Galleyes, of the comming of the Christian Fléete: Then all the Ships and Galleyes met in freíndly opposition and y∣maginary hurley-burley battalions: then the lofty in∣struments of Wars clamorous encouragements soun∣ded: the thundring Artillary roared, the Musqueteirs in numberles volleys discharged on al sides, the smoake (as it were) ecclipsing Titans refulgent Beames, filling all the Ayre with a confused cloudy mist. The Castle and the Land adiacent, continually dischardging great shot in aboundance at the Ships, and the Ships at them againe: so that after this delightfull battaile had dout∣fully lasted thrée houres, to the great contentment of all the beholders, the Uictorie inclyning to neither side,
all being opposed foes, and combyned friends: all vic∣tors, all tryumphers, none to be vanguishd, and there∣fore no conquerors. The Drums, Trumphets, Flutes and Guns, filling the ayre with repurrussiue acclama∣tions: vpon which, for a Catastrophe or Period to these delightfull royalties, commaund was giuen that the Retreat should be sounded on both sides. And thus these Princely rocreations were accomplished and finished. THese things could not conueniently be printed in order as they were done, by rea∣son of the diuersitie of them. For heere I was faine to describe the fight of the ships & Gallyes first, which was performed last. For the Fire-workes were performed on Thurs-day night the 11. of February, and the fight was vpon the Saterday following. At the which fire-workes the maister Gunner of England, on the shore did performe many skilfull and ingenious exploits with great Bum∣bards, shooting vp many artificiall balls of fire into the ayre, which flew vp in one whole fierie ball, & in their falling dispearsed into diuers streams like Raine-bowes in many innumerable fires. After all which, was discharged a great peale of Chambers, to the contentment of the royall spectators, and the great credit of the performers.
The true description of such part of the Fire-workes as were deuised and accom∣plished by Mr. Iohn Nodes Gunner, and seruant to the King; most excellent Maiestie. THe Imperiall and Beautious Lady Lucida Quéene of the Feminine Territories, of ye man hating Amazo∣nians, with whose bright eye dazeling Coruscancis, and whose Refulgent feature, the Black-sould hell com∣manding Magitian Mango (A Tarta∣rian borne,) was so ensnared and cap∣tiuated, that for her loue, and to be assured to enioy her, he would set all Hell in an vprore, and pluck Don Belzebub by the beard: assuredly perswading himselfe, that without her he could not liue, and for her he would attempt any thing: but she hauing vowed her selfe euer to be one of Vestaes Usa∣taries, alwayes kept Cupid out at the armes end: and bad Madam Venus make much of stump-footed Vulcan, and kéepe home like a good huswife, for she had no entertainment for her. Whereupon this hellish Necromancer Mango, (being thus repulst) conuerts all his loue to outragious rigor, and im∣mediatly, with his Charmes, erorcismes, and potent exe∣crable incantations, he raises a strong impregnable Pauilion,
in the which he immures, and encloses this beautifull Ama∣zonian Queene with her attendant Ladies, where (though they liued in captiuitie and bondage, yet) they had variety of Games and pleasant sports allowed by the Magitian, in hope that time would worke an alteration in her faire flinty breast. And for her sure Gard in her absence, he had erected by Ma∣gick, another strong Tower, as a watch house, wherein he had placed a fiery Dragon, and an inuincible Giant: (of whome I will speake in another place héereafter.) Now to this aforesaid Pauillion wearyed with toyle and trauaile, the Great vnresistable Champion of the world, and the vncontrolable Patron Saint George comes: and séeing so bright and luculent a Goddesse, (according as his necessitie required) demanded entertainment, whereby he might be refreshed after his laborious atchiuements, and honorable endeuours. The curteous Quéene (although the car'd not for the soci∣ety of man) séeing his outward or externall feature and war∣like acouterments, did presently resolue with her selfe that so faire an outside could not be a habitation for fowle Trechery, and with most debonayre gesture, admits his entrance into the Pauilion, where after he had feasted a while, she relates vnto him the true manner and occassion, of her vnfortunate thraldome: Saint George (euer taking pleasure in most dangerous attempts, holding it his chiefest glory to helpe wronged Ladies) vowes, that as soone as Rhoebus rowz'd himselfe from the Antipodes, he would quest the burning Dragon, Conquer the big bon'd Giant, subuert the inchan∣ted Castle, and enfranchise the Quéene with her followers, or else die in the enterprise thereof. After which promise of his, the Quéene to passe away the time, delights him with these pastimes following, being all fire-workes. First, the Pauilion is beleagerd or inuirond round about with fires, going out of which, many fiery balls flies vp into
the Ayre, with numbers of smaller fiers ascending, that cemicircled Cinthia is (as it were) eclipsed with the flashes, and the starres are hud-winckt with the burning exhala∣tions. Secondly, is séene a royall hunting of Bucks, and Hounds, and Hunts-men, flying and chasing one another round a∣bout the Pauilion (as if Diana had lately transformed Acte∣on, and his ignorant dogges ready to prey on his Carkas) from whence continually is flying many fiers dispearsed e∣uery way: The lower part of the Pauilion alwayes burning round about, giuing many blowes, and great reports, with many fires flying aloft into the Ayre. Thirdly, there doth march round about the Pauilion Ar∣tificiall men, which shall cast out fires (as before) as it were in skirmish: another part of the Pauilion is all in a Com∣bustious flame, where Rackets, Crackers, Breakers, and such like, giues blowes and reports without number. Fourthly, the Quéene of Amazonia with all her traine of Virgin Ladyes, with fires, marcheth round as the men did before, with the fire flying despearsedly diuers wayes: the whilst another part of the Pauilion is fired, with many blowes and reports, and fiers flying aloft into the ayre, from whence it comes downe againe in streaching flakes of slash∣ing fire. Fifthly, aloft with the Turret, shall runns (whirling rownd) a fyerie Globe, with the Turret and all on fire, with many more greater blowes then before had bin heard, and diuers and sundry other sorts of fires (then any of the former) procéeding from thence, and flying into the ayre in great aboundance. All which things being performed, and the vndanted Knight Saint George taking his leaue of the Amazonian Queene Lucida, he mounts vppon his Stéede, and aduente∣rously rides towards the inchanted Towre of Brumond.
Now these disports being ended, wherein Saint Georges entertainement was onely expressed, with the Queenes rela∣tion of her bondage, this braue Champion was séene to ride ouer the bridge to combat with these aforesaid Monsters, the Dragon and Giant: all which was expressed in the next de∣uise of Mr. Thomas Butler: and so I end, with my harty inuo∣cations to the Almighty to send the Bride and Bridgraome the yeares of Methushalah, the fortitude of Ioshua the wise∣dome of Solomon, the wealth of Crefsus, and last of all an endles Crowne of Immortalitie in the highest heauens. FINIS. Iohn Nodes.
A true description of the Platforme of a part of the fire-workes, deuised and made by Mr. Thomas Butler Gunner, and seruant to the Kings Royall Maiestie. THis inchanted Castle or Tow∣er of Brumond is in hight 40. foote and 30 square, betwéene which and the Pauilion of the Amazonian Quéene, is a long Bridge, on the which Bridge, the valiant and heroicke Champion Saint George being mounted on hors∣back, makes towards the Castle of Brumond, which being perceaued by the watchfull Dragon, (who was left by Mango the Coniurer as a Centenell) is en∣countred by him, where as Saint George (being armed at all points (but especially) with an vnrebated courage) hauing in his Helmet a burning flaming Feather, and in one hand a burning Launce, and in the other a fiery Sword, with which weapons he assailes the dreadfull Dragon, with such fury and Monster-quelling streakes, as if the Ciclops had bin forging, and beating Thunder bolts on Vulcans Anuile: where in conclusion, after a terrible and long endured Com∣bat, with his Launce he gores the Hellehound vnder the wing, that he presently aftermost hideous roring, and belch∣ing of fire, is vanguished and slaine: at which the terrible shaped Giant rises (who hauing sate as a spectator of this
bloudy battel vpon a great stump of a trée at the Castle Gate) and adresses himselfe towards Saint George, meaning to re∣uenge the death of the Dragon, and to swallow his enemy for a modieum: but at their first encounter, the blowes on both sides fell like Thunder clappes, enforcing lightning, and fie∣ry exhalations to sparkle, from whence their powerfull stroakes lighted: at last the Monstar gaping wide, as an Arch in London Bridge, runnes furiously, intending to swallow his aduersary at a bit: which Saint George seeing, vpon the suddaine thrust his Sword into his gréedy throat and ouer∣threwe him: at which the Monster yelles and rores forth such a terrible noyse, as if the Center of the earth had crackt, that with the vncouth dinne thereof, the Neighbouring hills, woods, and valleyes, séemed to tremble like an earth quake. The Gyane lying at the mercy of Saint George, entreats him to spare his life, and he will shewe him the way how he shall conquer the Castle, and bring the inchanter to his euer∣lasting downefall. Upon which promise, Saint George and the Gyant walke into the Castle together, where he tells Saint George that there is an enchanted fountaine, and whosoeuer can attaine to drinke of it, shall be he whome the Fates haue ordained to be the conclusion of the Castles glory. In the meane space, whilst these things were doing, the Magitian Mango, hauing intelligence of the dangerous e∣state of his Castle, and fearing the losse of his Lady: sud∣dainely mounts him on a flying inuinsible deuill, and in a moment alights within the Castle, vpon whome St. George makes a prosent conquest. The Castle hath on the top thereof a fiery Fountaine, which burnes and sends vp Rackets into the ayre, with ma∣ny reports and blowes: some great, and some lesse, and fire dispearsed many wayes in great aboundance with innume∣rable lights round about. Secondly, the Magitian is taken with his Coniuring Scepter in his hand, and bound to a Pillar by Saint George
and burned, with store of lights (as before) with fiers and. Rackets ascending and descending too and fro in the ayre. Thirdly, the foure squares of the Tower are stered, with abundance of lights, with Rackets flying into the ayre, with hers dispearsed, and scattered diuers and sundry wayes, and with reports and blowes, some great, and some lesse, accor∣ding to their making. Fourthly, the fours Turrets are fyred with fire, and in∣numerable lights, with aboundance of Rackets flying to and fro in the ayre, giuing diuers reports, as before. Then the maine Castle is fyered, and vpon two of the corner Terrets are two Globes fyered, and betwixt each Globe at two other corner Turrets, are two men, catching as it were at the Globes which still turne from them, and they chassing and following the Globes, still burning and turning till all be extinguished with fire: alwayes Rackets flying and reports thwacking, and lights burning. Thomas Butler.
VVilliam Bettis his inuention, of such part of the fire-workes as were performed by him at the Royall Celebration: which he had contriued in such sort, that if the weather had bin Rainy or Windy, yet his dessignments should haue bin accomplished. A Castle with diuers fier-workes, repre∣senting and assuming diuers variable shapes, and immagiary formes: which continued the space of an houre or thereabouts: the nature and quallity of which fire-worke, was performed as followeth. 1 First, there was seene 13. great fiers, to flie to and fro round about the Castle, whereby it séemed to be beleagerd or Circumuolu'd with fires, which yéelded a most pleasing obiect to all the spectators. 2 Secondly, a flight of great store of Rackets was séene to ascend into the ayre, and descend againe, which in their descending were extinguished. 3 Thirdly, the whole Castle was all on fire, wherein was séene many things very delightfull. 4 Fourthly, was séene many Buttons flye, dispearsed diuers wayes from the Castle, with great crackes, blowes, and reports, in great number. 5 Next that, was séene a Stagge or Hart, hunted and chased with dogges, all their bodies being artificially made, and preportiond in one flame of fire, where the following Hounds were plainely séene, to pull downe and vanguish the Stagge which they before had chased. 6 Sixtly, there was séene a great flight of Rackets, with
two or thrée fiers péece. 7 Seauenthly, were séene two or thrée hundreth fires flying from the Castle, and then flying to and fro in and out, many waies all together. 8 Next which, was séene a great slight of Rackets, with many great fires, some of the said fires breaking into many parts, diuers wayes dispearsed in abundance, which fires were séene to fall burning into the water. 9 Ninthlyt, was séene many Rackets flying into the ayre in great abundance, giuing many blowes, Crackes or re∣ports, numberles. 10 Tenthly, was séene diuers other Rackets flying aloft into the ayre, which Rackets did assimulate the shapes or proportions of men, women, fowles, beastes, fishes, and o∣ther formes and figures. 11 Last of all, was heard 100. blowes and reports as lowd as the report of a reasonable Chamber is able to giue, and so with fires, lights, Rackets, and such like, (to the de∣light of all the beholders, and the great credit of the inuen∣tor of this fire-worke) all was extinguished and concluded. William Bettis
Mr. Iohn Tindall Gunner and seruant to the Kings royall Maiestie, The true description of such part of the Fire-workes, as were by him deuised and performed at this Royall Triumphs. A Castle, old and very Ruinous, called the Castle of En∣uie scituated and erected on a Rocke (all ragged and horide to behold) called the Rock of Ruine, encompassed round and drenched in a troblous Sea, called the Sea of Disquiet: the Captaine of this Castle name was Discord with his Liettenant Lawles, antient Hatred, Sericant Ma∣lice, Corporall Contention, with his Lancsprezado Hell∣hound. The Rocke or foundation of this Castle being all replenished with Adders, Snakes, Toades, Serpents, Scor∣pions, and such venomous vermin, from whose throates were belched many fires, with Crackers, Rackets, blowes and reports in great number. To the subuersion of this maleuolent Edifices, there came thrée Shippes, the one of them being called Good-will, in whome Loyalty was Captaine, and Zeale was maister. The second Ship was named the True-loue, in whome Trust was Captaine, and perseuerance was maister. The third Ship was called Assurance, in whome Circum∣spection was Captaine, and Prouidence the Maister. These thrée Ships and Captaines, with their valarous and confident assotiates, assaults this Castle of Enuie, where after halfe an houres fight, or there-abouts, (by the inuinci∣ble prowesse of the assaylants) the Hell-borne defendants were vanquished, their Castle vtterly raced, demollished, and subuerted, with Rackets, breakers, blowes and reports innumerable.
The description of such part of the Fire-workes as were deuised and accompli∣shed by Mr. William Fishenden Gunner, and seruant to his Maiestie. A Piramides or lofty Plat-forme, in the forme of a Tri∣angled spire, with a Globe fixed on the top thereof, the whole worke turning and burning, the space almost of halfe an houre, or néere thereabouts: from whence proceeded many Rackets, fires, blowes and reports, in great numbers, to the great delight and contentment of the King the Quéene, the Prince, the Princesse Elizabeth, the Prince Palatine, and diuers others, the Nobilitie, the Gentry and Commons of this Kingdome. FINIS.
Epithaleamies. OR ENCOMIASTICK TRIVMPHALL VER∣ses, consecrated to the immortall me∣mory of the royall Nuptialls, of the two Princes and Paragons of Christendome, Frederick and Elizabeth. With A description of the Sea-fights, and Fire-workes, with other royall occur∣rences which were accomplished at the princely Celebration. By Iohn Taylor. Printed for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop on London Bridge. 1613.
Epithallamies. OR ENCOMIASTICK TRIVM∣PHALL VERSES CONSECRATED to the Immortall memory, of the royall Nuptialls, of the two Parragons of Christendome, Frederick and Eliza∣beth. With a description of the Sea-fights, and Fyre-workes, with other royall occurrences which were accomplished at the Princely Celebration. HHeGod. that vppon the Poles hath hing'd the skies Who made the Spheares, the Orbs, & Planets sea∣uen Whose iustice dam's, whose mercy iustifies, What was, is, shall be, in earth, Hell, or heauen: Whome men and Angels lauds and magnifies, (According as his lawes command hath giuen) The poore, the Rich, the Begger and the King, In seuerall Anthems his great praises sing.There are som that think scorne that I being of mean degree should write of such Princely oc∣currences. But I make hard shift to shoul∣der into the presse in de∣spight of enuy Then as the meanest doe their voyces stretch To lawd the sempiternall Lord of Lords: So I a lame Decreppit-witted wretch, With such poore phrases as my skill affoords: From out the Circuit of my braine did fetch, Such weake inuention as my wit records. To write the triumphs of this famous Ile, On which both heauen and earth with ioy doth smile.
My Genius therefore my inuention moues To sing of Brittaines great Olympick Games Of mirth, of heau'n and earth beloued loues. Of princely sports, that noble mindes enflames To doe the vtmost of their best behoues; To fill the world with their atchieued fames. T' ataine eternities all passing bounds, Which neither Fate, nor Death, nor Time confounds. Gunnes, Drums, and Trumpets, Fire-works, Bonfires, Bells, With acclamations, and applausefull noyse; Tilts, Turneyes, Barriers, all in mirth excells, The ayre reuerberates our earthly ioyes. This great triumphing, Prophet-likefore-tells (I hope) howThe lake or gulfe of for∣getfullnes of the wc I hope our griefs haue sufficiently carrowsed, Leathes lake all greife destroyes. For now blacke sorrow from our land is chac'd, And ioy and mirth each other haue embrac'd. How much Ichouah hath this Iland blest, The thoughts of man can neuer well conceaue: How much we lately were with woes oprest, For himPrince Henry. whome Death did late of life bereaue. And in the midst of griefe, and sad vnrest, To mirthfull sport heGod. freely giu's vs leaue: And when we all were drench'd in black dispaire, Ioy conquerd griefe, and comfort vanquish'd care Thou high and mighty Frederick the Fift, Count Pallatine, and Palsgrane of the Rhine: Bauares great Duke, when God on high doth lift, To be the tenth vnto the'Worthies nine. Be euer blest with thy belouedThe Prin∣cesse Eliza∣beth. Guift, Whome God, and best of men makes onely thine: Let annually the day be giuen to mirth, Wherein thy Nuptialls gaue our Ioyes new birth.
Right gracious Princesse, great Elizabeth In whose Heroick, pure, White, Iuory breast, True vertue liues, and liuing flourisheth, And as their Mansion hath the same possest: Belou'd of God aboue, and men beneath, In whome the Goddesses and graces rest. By vertues power, Iehouah thee hath giuen, Each place doth seeme, (where thou remain'st) a heauen The Royall blood of Emperours and Kings,By this hap∣py marriage, great Britain, France, Den∣marke, Germa∣ny, & the most part of Christ∣endome are v∣nited, either in affinity or con¦sanguinity. Of Potent Conquerors, and famous Knights Successiuely from these two Princes springs: Who well may claime, these titles as their rights: The Patrons Christendome to Vnion brings, Whose vnitie remoted lands vnites. And well in time (I hope) this sacred worke, Will hunt from Christian lands the faithles Turke. Since first the framing of this worlds vast Roome, A fitter, better match was not combinde: So old in wisdome, young in Beauties bloome, And both so good and graciously inclinde. And from this day, vntill the day of doome: I doubt succeeding ages shall not finde: Such wisdome, beauty, grace, compact together, As is innate in them, in both, in either. None (but the Deuill and his infernall crue)That wc God lou's most, the Deuill hates most: and I am sure that none but the blackcrew are offended with these Royall Nuptialls. At this beloued heau'nly match repines, None (but such fiendes, which hell on earth doth spue:) Will wish Eclips of their illustrous shines, The Gods themselues, with rare inuentions new, With inspiration mans deuice refines: And with their presence vndertakes these taskes, Deuises, Morions, Reuells, playes, and Maskes.
The thund'rersIune. Bride hath left her heauenly bed, And with her presence this great Wedding graces; Himen in Saffron Robes inuelloped: Ioynes and accords these louers lou'd embraces: Yea all the Gods downe to the earth are fled, And mongst our ioyes their pleasures enterlaces. Immortals ioynes with mortals in their mirth, And makes the Court their Paradise on earth. Where the plannet Iupi∣ter hath sole predominance there is all Royall mirth and Iouiall Alacritie.Maiestick Ioue hath left his spangled Throane To dance Leuoltoes as this Bridall feast: Infusing Iouiall glee in euery one, The high, the lowe, the greatest and the least. Sad mindes to sable melancholy prone, Great Ioue their vitall parts hath so possest: That all are rap'd in sportfull extasies, With showts and Clamors ecchoing in the skies. Soll.Apollo from two topt MusesPernassus. Hill Light of theThe muses. Sisters nine hath brought from thence, (LeauingA tragicall mournfull those who hath bene heere already, but I hope now she's lame of the gout, that she'le keep home for euer. Melpomena alone there still To muse on sad and Tragicall euents) The rest all stretching their all matchles skill To serue this Royall Princesse, and this Prince. Thus Sol descended from his Radient shrine, Brings Poesy and Musicke downe diuine. The wrathfull God ofWars Warre in Burnish'd Armes Layes by his angry all-confounding moode: And in the lists strikes vp sweet loues Alarmes, Where freindly warres drawes no vnfriendly bloud, Where honours fire the noble spirit warmes To vndertake such Actions as are good. Thus mighty Mars these triumphs doth encrease With peacefull warre, and sweet contentions peace.
The Queene ofVenus. loue these Royall sports attend, And at this Banquet deignes to be a guest: Hir whole endeuours, wholy she doth bend, She may in loues delights out-strip the best: For who so ere doth Hymens lawes pretend If Venus be but absent from the feast, They may (perhaps) be merry in some sort, But tis but paintedAll, worth nothing. mirth, and ayery sport. Bright MayasMercury. sonne, the God of tricks and sleights Hath op'd the treasure of his subtill wit: And as a seruant on this wedding waightes With masques, with reuels, and with triumphs fit, His rare inuentions, and his queint conceites (Twixt heauen aloft, and hels infrerall pit) He in immaginary showes affords In shape, forme, method, and applausfull words. Old sullenA dogged melancholy planet, a ma∣leuolent op∣posite to all mirth. Saturne hid his moody head In dusky shades, of blacke Cimerian night: And waueringThe moone, who doth ne∣uer continue at a stay, and therefore she absented hir selfe from those delights which I hope will be perma∣nent. Luna closely cooch'd to bed, Hir various change she knew would not delight The loyall minds where constancy is bred, Where Proteus t thoughts are put to shamefull flight. TheseSaturne and Luna for in deede the nights, were darke at the wedding be∣cause the Moone shined two (by Ioues command were straitly bound To stay at home (as better lost then found) Cupid descended from the Christall skies And leaues behinde his golden fethered darts: In steede of whom he makes faire Ladies eyes The peircing weapons of true louing hearts. And be amongst these high solemnities, His awfull presence freely he imparts, To all in generall with mirthfull cheere, All sports the better if lou's God be there.
The of-spring of the high celestiall Ioue His braine-bredMinerus, whom the poets fame to be the God∣desse of wise∣dome, borne and bred in the braine of Iupiter. daughter, and his thigh borne sonne Bachus, whom his fa∣ther Ioue sa∣ued from A∣bortiue birth from his mo∣ther Semell & sowed him upon his thigh till the time of his birth was come to a period Ouid Lib. 3.One with aduice of wisedome shewed hir loue, And tother bounteously made plenty ronne: Where wine in streames gainst one another stroue, Where many a caske was bankrout and vndon, Depriu'd the treasure of the fruitfull vines: By Bacchus bounty, that great God of wines. Thus Ioue, and Iuno, Imps of aged Ops With wise Minerua, Mars and Mercury: Resplendent Sol with musicks straines and stops Faire Venus Queene of loues alacrity, Loues God with shafts betip'd with golden tops And Bacchus showring sweete humidity, Gods, Goddesses, the Graces and the Muses, To grace these Triumphes al their cunnings vses, Amongst the rest was all recording Fame Insculping noble deeds in brazen leaues: That meagre Enuy cannot wrong that name, Where braue Heroick acts the minde vpheaues: Fames golden Trump will through the world proclame Whom Fortune, Fate nor Death nor Time bereaues. Thus like a Scribe Fame waited to record. The Nuptials of this Lady and, this Lord. All-making-marring Time that turneth neuer To these proceedings, still hath bin auspicious, And inTimes pro∣gresse. his progresse will (I hope perseuer To make their daies and howers to be delitious. Thus Fame, and Time affords their best endeuour Vnto this royall match to be propitious: Time in all pleasure through their liues will passe Whilst Fame records their fames in leaues of brasse
You sonnes of Iudas and Achitophell Whose dambd delights are treasons, bloud, and death: Th' almighties power your hawty prides will quell, And make you vassals, vessels of his wrath, Let all that with these Princes worse then well, Be iudg'd and doom'd to euerlasting scath, For tis apparent, and experience proues No hat preuailes, where great Iehouah loues. To whose Omnipotent eternall power, I do commit this blest beloued paire: Oh let thy graces daily on them showre, Let each of them be thine adopted Heire: Raise them at last to thy Celestiall Bowre, And seate them Both in lasting glories Chaire. In fine, their earthly dayes be long and blest: And after, bettred in eternall rest.
A Sonnet to be Imperious maiestick mirrour of Kings, Iames, great Brit∣taines Monarch. GReat Phoebus spreads his Raies on good and ill, Dame Tellus feeds the Lyon and the Ratte, The smallest Sayles God AEol's breath doth fill: And Thetis harbors both the Whale and Spratte. But as the Sunne doth quicken dying Plants, So thy illustrous shine doth glad all harts: And as the earth supplies our needfull wants, So doth thy bountie guerdon good desarts. And like the ayrie Eoll's pleasant gales, Thou filst with ioy the Sailes of rich and poore, And as the sea doth harbor Sprats and Whales, So thou to high and low, yeald'st harbours store. Thus Sea, Ayre, Earth, and Titans fiery face, Are Elementall seruants to thy grace. To Life. SInce that on earth thou wondrous wandring guest, Arithmeticians neuer number can The seuerall lodgings thou hast tane in man, In Fish, in Foule, in tame, or bruitish beast Since all by thee from greatest to the least, Are squar'd (and well compar'd) vnto a span, Oh fleeting Life take this my counsell than, Hold long possession in the royall breast: Dwell euer with the King, the Queene, the Prince, The gracious Princesse, and her Princely Spouse, In each of these thou hast a lasting house: Which Fate, nor Death, nor Time cannot conuince. And when to change thy lodging thou art driuen, Thy selfe and they exalted be to heauen.
To Death. TO thee whose auaritious greedy mood, Doth play at sweepe-stake with all liuing things: And like a Hors-leech Quaffes the seuerall blood, Of Subiects, Abiects, Emperours and Kings: That high and lowe, and all must feele thy slings, The Lord, the Lowne, the Catife and the Keasar, A beggers death as much contentment brings To thee, as did the fall of Iulius Ceasar. Then since the good and bad are all as one, And Larkes to thee, no better are then Kites, Take then the bad, and let the good alone, Feede on base wretches, leaue the worthy wights. With thee the wicked euermore will stay, But from thee, Fame will take the good away. To Eternitie. THou that beyond all things dost goe so farre, That no Cosmographers could e're suruay, Whose glory (brighter then great Phoebus Carre) Doth Shine, where night doth ne're eclipse the day: To thee I consecrate these Princes acts, In thee alone let all their beings be: Let all the measures of their famous tracts In thee begin, but neuer end like thee. And when thy seruant Time, giues Life to Death. And Death surrenders all their liues to Fame: Oh then inspire them with celestiall breath, With Saints and Martyrs to applawd thy name. Thus vnto thee (as thine owne proper rights) I consecrate these matchles worthy wights. FINIS. Iohn Taylor.
