24619 99846833 11825
The Newlanders CVRE. Aswell of those Violent sicknesses which distemper most Minds in these latter Dayes: As also by a Cheape and Newfound Dyet, to preserue the Body sound and free from all Diseases, vntill the last date of Life, through extreamity of Age. Wherein are inserted generall and speciall Remedies against the Scuruy. Coughes. Feauers. Goute. Collicke. Sea-sicknesses, And other grieuous In∣firmities. Published for the Weale of Great Brittaine, By Sir William Vaughan, Knight. Vbi Lux sicca, ibi Intellectus multus. Imprinted at London by N. O. for F. Constable, and are to be sold at his Shop in Pauls Church at the signe of the Craine, 1630.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY LO∣uing Brother, IOHN Earle of Carbery, Baron of Molingar. SIR: Here you may behold, as in a Looking-Glasse, many Sickely Faces, not of Heathen men, but of pretended Christians, with Heathenish Conditions. A Glasse of Steele, farre truer then that Mathematicall one, whereby some haue proiected to discouer with more then Humane Spectacles Another World in the Moone; of Seas, Lands, and Woods, like Ours, before it was lately dis-robed of this latter Ornament by the greedinesse of a few Iron Maers. Here you may see what a number of Diseases haue taken Roote within vs. Yea more, then euer were practized be∣fore Noahs Flood. The maine Cause of their Destruction proceeded from their Carnall matches, The Sonnes of GOD, with the Daughters of Reprobates, where we trans∣gresse
not onely in that. but in many other a contrary to our Christian duties, who haue bin now enlightned for the space of these foure score yeares. Here likewise you may find preseruatiues and Cures both to preuent the imminent plagues, (which we haue worthily deserued,) as to heale the most disordred, both Bodily and Spiritually, (if they be not past Grace;) yea, and to dispossesse them of Diuels, without prophane Holy Water, or Po∣pish Exorcismes. But before these, as a Frontispice vpon a Gate, I haue fixed the foure first Verses of purpose, that once a day at least, you may repeat them ouer. And for the rest, if you read them once a Weeke, I doubt not, but you shall receiue thereby some spirituall Comfort among other Helpes to Deuotion, which are not wanting in your House. Howsoeuer, I am assured your Cogitations shalbe somewhat rouzed vp to looke about you, and to make some doubt, that you haue not many yeares yet vnexpired of your Pilgrimage here on Earth. For our worst part must rot, before it rise vp to Immortality. The thought of Death, I confesse, is terrible, and hath perplexed many, specially, Great persons, in∣somuch that Queene Elizabeth of famous Memory, albeit in all other matters an incomparable religi∣ous Princesse, and adorned with masculine Vertues, yet She could not endure to heare of Old Age, nor Death. For when a Learned Bishop of our acquain∣tance had in a zealous Sermon admonished her to thinke on her last End, by reason of her great Age, which few Princes had attayned vnto, and of the Climactericall yeare of her Life, which hapned at that time, She tooke it so impatiently that the Bi∣shop
for his good intentions, was not only distasted by her, but put for a time to some trouble. Yet God, who neuer forsakes them, that quit them∣selues like Men in his Seruice, did euer sithence, vntill his Decease powre downe many Worldly Blessings vpon him, so that I thinke few Bishops of this Kingdome left behind them to their Wiues and Children such faire Estates, as be left vnto his Wife and Children. The which questionlesse were conferred vppon him, to let the Cowards and Claw-backes of the times vnderstand, what a sweet smelling Sacrifice in his sacred Presence is Magnanimity grounded on Faith and piety; as well appeares by those Martyres in Queene Maries dayes, for whose glorious sakes the Eternall Maiesty at the intercession of those Martyres Generall, his dearely beloued Sonne, did by shortning of those Marian dayes restore that Reformed Religion to this King∣dome, which hath chased hence those False Pro∣phets, who set to sale the Bodies and Soules of Men, togither with the Rabblement of Idolaters, Abbey-Lubbers, Fayries, and Hob-Goblins; and doubtlesse will continue the same vntill the Worlds end: Notwithstanding these our Present and last Conflicts with the Spirituall Dragon, and with those Spirits, which issued out of his mouth; where∣in we haue much a do to escape their Ambuscadoes, Quirkes, and socret Stratagems practised by our Schoole-men, which are farre more dangerous then their open Violences, being such, as it is Written, A∣ble to deceiue the very Elect, if it were possible. But to returne where I haue digressed, the Remembrance of Death will prepare vs for th' other World What can be btter for vs, then to be loosed from the lumpish
clog of Flesh and Blood, which must not inherite Heauen, before it bee purified, as the Holiest and best Patriarkes were, and to liue with Christ in per∣petuall Ioyes. Seeing that Death brings with it so great Happi∣nesse, I hope you will not be offended with me, it by Calculating our Ancestors Yeares, for these three last Dsns, I seeme to put you in Minde, that you ought not to expect much longer time, then they enioyed. Our great Grand father, Hugh Vaughan, Gentle-man Vsher to King Henry the 7th who is Famous in our English Chronicles, for the Iustes in Richmond, before the sayd King, agaynst Sir Iames Parker, about our Ancestors Armes and Scutcheons: Where the sayd Sir Iames lost his life, in the first Encounter. Our sayd Great Grand-Fa∣ther, dyed before he was fifty yeares old. Our Grand-father, who built our House, nay yours by Birth right, (called The Golden Groue,) dyed a∣bout the fiftieth sixth yeare of his Age. Our Fa∣ther likewise about those yeares, payd Nature her Debt. Why then should we expect for a greater Lot? We want not aboue three or foure yeares of theirs. But suppose we should arriue to seauenty, or eighty, or by the helpe of this Dyet, which I here discouer, to the long Age of the Swethens, it would but augment our sinnes and sorrows. There∣fore let vs liue mindfull of that, which cannot be auoyded. For which purpose a Pagan King vsed euery mor∣ning to haue a Dead mans Skull brought to remem∣ber him, that he was a mortall Creature. So in like manuer we see in our dayes many Persons wea∣ring Rings with a Deathes Head engrauen in the seale:
Others with a Posie on the inside, including the Remembrance of Death. Memento mori. But because this Subiect breeds sadnesse, I haue added some more plausible passages to profit the Body, as∣well as the Minde. Now hauing discharged the part of a Brother, in this necessary point, whereto all Adams Posterity are subiect, Sooner or Later: I will now shew where∣fore I entituled this Diminutiue rapture, The New∣landers Cure, more for others satisfaction, who know me not, and yet may by our Free Charter of Election, and the illumination of Gods working Spi∣rit meete with some passage in this Cure, to con∣firme them sure in their Christian Calling, and per∣haps mooue some to lend their helping hands to the Building vp of our New Church, in that remote Countrey, then for any desire I haue to reiterate a matter of Tauetology, like the Cuckoes Song, vnto you, who from the beginning haue bin acquainted with my Actions in this kinde. About thirteene yeares past, being interessed by Patent in the South part of New found Land, from our late King of happy memory: I transported thither certayne Colomes of Men and Women at my owne Charge: After which, finding the Burthen too heauy for my weake Shoulders,  assigned the Northerly proportion of my Grant, vnto the Right Honourable the Lord Vicount Faulkland, late Deputy of Ireland, a Noble Gentleman, of singular Wisedome, Vertue, and Experience: And vppon your motion to my Lord Baltimore, who to his immortall prayse, hath li∣ued there these two last yeares, with his Lady and Children. And for my selfe, during such time as I remye
in this Kingdome, for the setling of my priuate Fortunes, which for ought I see, I must chiefly relye vppon to supply me there, vntill the Planta∣tion be better strengthned, and fearing the displea∣sure of the Almighty, who threatens those, which causelessely looke backe at his Plow: I sent forth, (like Noahs Doue) my late Workes, called The Gol∣den Fleece, and my Cambrensium Caroleia, to stirre vp our Ilanders Mindes to assist and support for a time our New-found Ile, which rightly may besti∣led Great Britaines Sister, or Britanniol, in regard that for these fourescore yeares and vpwards, She hath furnished vs with Fish and Traine, which by Exchange returne vs sundry kinds of Commodi∣ties. In like manner to let the World vnderstand, that my Zeale to New-found Land is not frozen. I tooke her for my Gossipto this Pigmey infant, which now is named the New-Landers Cure. But why should I among so many thousands of Greater Power aspire to such an Atlanticke Waight, which is able to crush into the Earth another Sutton? It is the Lord of Heauen and Earth, whose Powerfull Presence O∣uer-lookes all the foure Quarters of the Earth, who preferres sometimes the most simple to His Workes of Honour, before the Grand Epicures of the World, As the Lillies of the Fields, before the Royalties of Saiomon, euen our Mighty GOD, who is so wonderful in all his Deedes, made chyse of me for his vnworthy Instrument to doe some good in this Heroicall Enterprize. For this cause, and also to edifie my Country with those Bookes, which from time to time, euen from my Youth vp I Published, hath He bestowed
a double Talent vppon me. For these Ends it plea∣sed His Sacred Maiesty to reserue my Seruice for the Publicke Good, by preseruing my Life most Mira∣culously aboue the ordinary sort of men from Fire and Water, and twice from his Pestilentiall Ar∣rowes. Vppon a Christmas Day 1602. In France at a Passage of two Leagues broad betwixt Tremblado and Marena falling ouer board a Ship, in a most terrible Tempest, I floated amidst the Waues of the raging Sea, being ignorant of Swimming, a∣bout a quarter of an houre: Onely with an Oare in my hand, which casually fell vnto me, by what meanes to this present, I cannot tell. And which is most strange to Humane sense, the Storme calmed suddainly, during my aboad in this perplexity, vn∣till the Barke, from which I fell, found leasure to turne about, and take me vp being ouer-wearied, and at the very point to throw away the Oare, and perish. Assoone as I was taken vp, the Storme be∣ganne againe so suriously, that the Mast brake within a foote of the But, and with the fll had like to ouer-turne vs all. In Ianuary 1608. I was stricken with a sulphure∣ous dampe, my House was battred about my eares with Lightning and Thunder, the Artilleries of Gods Glory, in that fearefull manner, as your Selfe beheld the next day, after the ruines of the Catastrophe, not without great astonishment and admiration, how miraculously I escaped. In August 1603. in the hottest time of the Sicknesse, in my returne from beyond the Seas, I was not affraid to stay a while in London.
And during the last and greatest Pestilence, 1625. I frequented the Citty from the beginning, to the latter end, as our famous Country-man Sir Thomas Button, and our vertuous Cousen his Lady, in whole House I continded the most part of that Summer can beare me Witnesse, when you and others of my Friends wondred at my Boldnesse. By which Extraordinary deliuerances I gather, that his Omnipotent Maiesty hath ordayned me, as a Fire brand so often taken out of the Flames, for some glorious seruice of His, eyther to do some good vnto my Follow Christians by my Publicke Writings, or else to aduance this hopefull Planta∣tion by my personall paines and industry. And if I faile in my Presages for this last, I am fully per∣swaded, that I shall no tlight vpon a worse Fortune then chanced vnto a Gentle-woman of Italy, who hauing her destiny told her by an Astrologer, (as that Sexe like Eue is ouer-credulous,) that she should be married to a Prince, she refused many good Mat∣ches, in hope of her Princely preferment, vntill after many yeares expectation in vaine, fearing, as the Prouerbe is, To lead Apesin Hell, she consen∣ted at last to marry with the Principall of an Vni∣uersity, who in that place had the Title of Prince. If I misse in my actuall performance for New-found Land, it lyes not in the power of Flesh and Blood, to take away my Zealous intentions, nor can my Foes (if any such at all haue) deny, but that ueaner men then I, haue had the Lucke to be married to the Muses: As also the mightiest Lords of the earth haue thought themselues graced to be entertained their Seruants and Woers. The truth is, I am ad∣dicted both to the Muses, and New-found Land. And
I could wish, that I had that Command ouer some Misers Purses, or of theirs, who may dye without Issue, and leaue their Fortunes to thanklesse World∣lings, for the benefit of New-found Land, as Marke Anthony had at Athens. For when the Citizens had cologuingly presented him with the Image of their Goddesse Minerua, because he wanted a Wife: He answered, that he kindly accepted of their Offer; and therefore he must needes haue 1000. Talents of them, as a Dowry fit for so great a Princesse. The charge certainely is great now at the first, yet if there were but twenty such Persons but of my poore meanes and resolution, I would not doubt, but before seauen yeares, our New-found Land should not onely double those sayles of Ships, which Trade thither at the present, but likewise the yeare∣ly Gaines, which our Marchants doe reape from that Country, for these many yeares togither, com∣puted to be aboue 200000. pounds a yeare. Indeed there be some Hopes that the London and Bristow Marchants will now after these late stormes settle there some Iron-workes, Glasse-houses, and for the making of Salt. And likewise that my Lord of Faulk and, and our Noble Brother in Law, Sir Henry Salubury Ba∣ronet, with some Gentlemen of North-Wales, will the next Spring proceede to doe somewhat in that Country, which with open armes awaites for their comming. And also there be others out of Eng∣land, to whom I haue freely as I haue receiued, as∣signed Grants, which haue faithfully promised to Plant in their seuerall Diuisions. The which, if they performe, my costly Cares for Sacrifice would be the lesse.
But because my Experience teacheth me, that we oftne meete with backe-sliding and inconstant men, like Worldly Demas, then with bountifull Conuerts, like that Terentiam Demea, I cannot build my Foundation on such slippery mould, but must resolue with my owne poore Estate, to con∣tinue what I haue long since fruitlessely begunne. After this sort those renowned Monsieurs, De Monts, and Poutrincourt were deluded aboue two yeares, by some Courtiers at Paris, and therefore they concluded atlast, no more to trust any but themselues, for the Erecting of their Plan∣tation in Canada, two hundred Leagues beyond our New found Land. Hap what hap may, I haue broake the Ice, I haue past the Ru∣bicon. In the meane time, let me intreate you to conceiue charitably of our New-Land Plantation, which by one hard Winter, among many more to∣lerable, is like to suffer; and to regard this Little God-child of hers. And it you, or any other of our Friends, when wilde or i regular Passions breake out beyond the bounds of Reason, shall meete with some Letiue, by meditating on the toward∣ly disposition thereof, as the discased Israelites found ease with beholding the Brazen Serpent: Do but say, Well-fare the New-landers Cure, and that's as much as I expect for my paines. The Lord enrich you with Heauenly happinesse, as hee hath bountifully dealt with you in this World. And if hereafter it fortune, according to Your Hopes, that you shall liue in Court, as hereto∣fore you haue, to your singular Praise, and your Friends Comfort, for many yearestogither:
Let not transitory Pompe, nor vaine glory, seduce Your Noblest Part to forget the poore New-Landers Cure; nor Him, whom you are tyed in Nature to Respect and Chees, who reciprocally shall cuer, during Life, continue in all Christian Offices Your Lordships Brother at Commaund. William Vaughan.
Authoris Praecautio ad Lectorem Morbis Vulgaribus laborantem. Siquid habent Aloes, vel fellis Opuscula nostra, Me Medicum vatem Publica Cura sacit. Depercunt querus, silices, et Marmore structa: Dona sed Ingenu posthuma Fama canet. Curtieis rodenda sinam Monumenta laborum? Musarum selus est Dona perire pati. Non ic Romulidum sannas nec curo lituras; Vos flocci facio, Gens odiosa Deo. Gorgonicas nec pendo minas, nam munior extra Aegide squamosa, Numinis intus Ope. Sanum Consilium tantum iaculatur odoris, Vt Vincat violas, Lilia, Thura, Rosas: Hoc sine, sunt Arabum catapotia vana, necipsa Porrigit Aegroto pharmacopola tibi. Imbibe Corde, Nouae Terrae quod Musa propnat, Corpus erit sanum, Mens quo{que}, sana, Vale.
THE Newlanders Cure. The first SECTION. The Preparatiue of the Bodies Cure shewing how the Mindes Affections and the Bodies do follow one anothers Dispositions. WHen I had resolued on the Cure of the Mindes infirmitus, it seemed vnto me that the same could not be compleate, except the Body were also made harmoniously correspon∣dent to harbour that Heauenly Light with his pretious Gifts, which our Sauiour promised before his Ascention to send vnto vs. Therefore, that both of them, like euen yoake-fellowes, might walke safely
in this vale of Misery, I haue here inserted a New-found Cure for the Bodies health; Ut sit mens sana in corpore sano. But be∣fore the discouery of this diuine Medicine, in comparison whereof the Elixir so much commended by our Paracelsians, is but vanity of Vannies, (for our Phisicke con∣duceth to the health of the Minde, as of the Body) I wi, as a Preparatiue, minister and shew, how the Qualities of the Mind do follow the disposition of the Body. It is most certayne, when the Body is free from supersiuous Excrements, and noysome Huinours, that then the Functi∣ons and Operations of the Mind appeare more liuely, fresh, and most capable to re∣ceiue in Wisdome and Knowledge, which caused a certaine Philosopher to purge him∣selfe with Hellebore, before hee aduentu∣red to write of deepe Mysteries. Euen so when the Minde is troubled, the Face be∣wayes it, although a man would faine conceale it with all his cunning. Yea, sometimes the very Eyes will manifest the ioy that one conceaues in his heart. Nor is the Minde mooued onely with those motions and instruments of the Body, but likewise feeles great Alterations by such
nourishments and ingedients as we take into our Bodies. The which we see veri∣fied in our debauched Gallants, and com∣mon Drunkards, who seldome enter in∣to quarrels in cold blood, but amongst their Pots of Wine and strong liquor, they passe Polyphemus and all his Cyclops. Others haue drunke away sorrow and care. The like mutation Saffron workes, for if a man commonly vse it in sance with his meate, it makes his heart light and iocound. And being taken in Musadine, or some heady wine, it workes so violent∣ly, that the Taker becomes rauing madde with excessiue Mirth. The often vse of Hares flesh causeth men to be farefull. As on th' other side, Beefe  English couragious and vndaun∣ in perills. And surely, I beleeue one of the chiefest causes of the Sauages in∣humane cruelty proceedes through their  of Wlues and Bcares flesh. In my time I know a Oxford a Poet, who after good  of Ske would write his best Verses, according to that olde, saying: When I haue drunke sweete Wine, My Tongue speakes Late sine.
It is reported, that Thomas Nash a scur∣rilous Pampheter in Q. Elizabeths dayes, vsed to drinke Aqua vitae with Gun-powder to inspire his malicious spirit with ayling matter to shame Doctor Haruey, and o∣ther Aduersaries of his: Which infleming Poion wrought so eagerly vppon his Brame, that hee would often beate him∣selfe about the noddle, and scratch the Walls round about him, vntill hee met with some extrauagant furious Termes, which as he imagined would blurre and lay sufficient aspersions vpon them. The like fiery prouocations the Turkes haue accustomed to take, when they went a∣bout some desperate seruice; wherby they forced a new Bellona out of their mischie∣nous hands. Other some, like our fighting Cockes, haue vsed Garlike for that bloody pur∣pose. Thus the Body is oftentimes turned Nolens volens, to serue and obey the mind, as the Minde likewise to follow the incli∣nation of the Body. For what other fruit can a Body stuffed with corrupt humours, Choller, and Gall produce, but beastlike Passions? Whereas on the contrary, the Abstemious and Continent by their spa∣ring
Dyet do restrayne in time such ouer∣flowings, and thereby prepare them∣selues to be the purer vessels to contayne the Water of Life distilled from the Hea∣uenly Comforter. Euen as a thicke Cloud obscures the Sunne beames from our sight: So the vi∣cious qualities of the Body darken the Mind, which is the great Eye or Light of the Body. And this is the cause, that when the one is grieued th' other is grieued, and when th' one is merry, th' other is so too. Therefore it is a thing to bee wished, that they were kept both in an equall propor∣tion and symmetry with conuenient nou∣rishments, recreations, exercise, and aboue all with spirituall food: Yea and other whiles, if need require, the Mistresse must correct her rebellions Seruant, that the Image of our great Creator bee not quite defaced. But to returne to the Subiect wee haue in hand, the Body of Man is the most tem∣perate of all other mortall Creatures, and therefore it may bee rightly termed the Golden Rule, measure, and square, whereby the Excesse of all other things may be ob∣serued, and their different Faculties dis∣cerned.
And for this cause in respect of our humane Bodies, the fours Elements are noted to be Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry: Here hence we gather, that the Flesh of Fowle is hot and dry, and that the Food of Fish is cold & moist, fit to engender flegme. Betwixt these as the Meane, are Earthly Creatures placed, and among these Mans Body hath the preheminence, as the best tempered vnder the Cope of Heauen. The which also varies according to the Cli∣mate. Sunt Homines alij, variant vt Climata munds. For our Northerne Nations are of a Col∣der constitution then theirs, that liue within the Tropickes, or neere vnto them. And therefore the Ancient Phylosophers would not allow a temperate Body but with in a temperate Country. Neyther is this temper so constant in our temperate coun∣tries, but the inequaltity of the Soyle, and Situation, controules this temper: For we haue Spring and Summer weather in places at the same instant, within a mile or two distant. As for Example, in Dales and at the foote of Hils we feee it warme; whereas
wee cannot endure long to stay on the Neighbouring Mountaynes by reason of Snow, or furious Winds, which likewise other-throw, or hinder the growth of Plantes and Corne sixe or seauen weekes later, then such as we finde in the bottom or lowest descent. The same alteration I haue seene in the Alpes and Pyrenaen Moun∣taynes, where I could be hold ripe Grapes and a fourishing Haruest in the Vallies; and Trauailing but a League higher vp to∣wards the top of the Mountaynes, I might see nothing but horrid Rockes, Hayle, Snow, and Windes in that impetuous manner, that there a man would take September to be Ianuary. Moreouer, this change crosseth our Temper i respect of Age; for Youth is more hot and moyst then more setled yeares. And that Dyet, which might be properly accommodated to olde men, perhaps would weaken or statue the younger sort. How then shall we be able to finde out this Golden meane and Temper in mans Body, when we are subiect to so many mutations? Do not we perceiue the very Beasts and vnreasonable creatures to go beyond vs in some of our noblest Organs? Do they not excell vs in
the fiue sences, viz. The Boare in hearing; the Ounce in seeing; the Ape in tasting; the Vultur in smelling; and the Spider in tou∣ching, as these ancient Verses imply? Nos Aper auditu, Lynx visu, Simia gustu, Un tur doratu, paecellit Aranea tactu. This cannot bee denied in those Crea∣tures; but because I am an ill Huntes-man, I will continue my conuersation with men; amongst which there is much diuer∣sity for their seueral parts. Here stands a man with a most temperate Braine; there another with a sound Liuer; some are long breathed; some excell in the Temper of their Hearts; and in many of these wee might behold Actions, which tend vnto Vnity, as to their Center. But in generall, of late yeares wee dege∣nerate from that, which by our Baptisme we vowed to be; as in like manner wee haue crackt our Braines, shortned our breathing faculties, corrupted our Liuer, inframed our Blood, and all with excesse of varieties of meates and drinkes. We pate of the Holy Ghost, of the Temple of God; but let euery man examine his owne conscience, whether it bee possible that such a sanctified Guest could remaine in
such an impure Body, which hath recei∣ued into it so great store of Victualls, and the choysest, which the Ayre, Earth, and Sea could yeelde, and of the strongest Wines euen vnto vomiting. If after this inquisition wee finde that the Spirit of God requires an vndefiled and purer seate to lodge in, then let vs sweep cleane, and do our best to purifie and pre∣pare our Bodies to be tolerably meete to entertayne this sacred Messenger; for if hee knockes at the doore of our hearts, and we slight his Call, it is to bee feared hee will returne no more to such a nasty Roome, where the Master of the house neglects his dearest Land-Lord. To re∣duce the World vnto a better Temper, the Body as well as the Minde, I had recourse to many Cures. I read Marsilius Ficinus his Worke concerning a Heauenly Body here on Earth, but there meeting with nothing but distractions, at the last I lighted on two Treatises, the one Publi∣shed by Lodouico Cornario an Italian; and th' other by Lessius of Bruxels a learned Ie∣suite, out of whose Precepts I collected this admirable Dyet, which whosoeuer hath the power to practise, hee shall
quickly apprehend the difference betwixt a Table furnished with variety of meates, whose nature in digestion are contrary the one to th' other, and betwixt that simple Cheere, which conrented our Sauiour here on Earth with his Disciples. By the former spring all our sicknesses. By this latter of Sobriety we stint Concupiscence and after one quarter of a yeare our Bodies being accustomed to a set measure of meat and drinke, wee shall confesse, that say∣ing of the Heath'nish Phylosopher, to iumpe aright with a reformed Christian: Turpe est homini non nosse mensuram ventres sui. It is a shamefull thing for an vnder∣standing man not to know the measure of his owne Belly. To wind vp this my Preparatiue in a word, when I had compared Lessius his obserua∣tions with Daniels and his three Companions Dyet, and how by reason of their slender fare being but Pulse, they were in better state then those that fed on dainties, I con∣cluded this new found dyet to be acceptable to Gods spirit, and if it awaites on Faith, it will serue for a Christians Purification be∣fore Glorification.
The second SECTION. The Description of a New found and cheape Diet, to preserue the Body and Minde from all scknesses and Passions, and how a man shall find out the true Proportion what will content a reasonable Creature. BY the former Discourse it is appa∣rant, that the Well-being and Health of Mans Body consists in obseruing the Golden Meane, which is Temperance in our Dyet, that is, cating and drinking no more, then the Stomacke can well di∣gest, and that thereby the functions of the Minde bee not hindered nor made ob∣scure by the excessiue Quantity. For this reason, and because Study and Contem∣pation doe mightily hinder Concoction, they that are this way busied, must eate and drinkelesse, then those that be idle, or doe trauailc abroad. But now to finde out this Measure, I confesse it a great difficulty by reason of the dinersities of mens Constitutions, Yeares, and Strength: For that Measure, which a∣greeth
with an o'de man, cannot square well with a young man, nor that of the strong man with the weake. The Chollericke must haue his propor∣tion differing from the Flegmaticke. These haue euery one a stomacke repugnant to one anothers nature: How then shall wee compose an exact Measure to reconcile these repugnances? Necessity requires vs to lookeafter this Soueraigne good, for the health of the Body and Soule; but Concu∣piscence and our longing wills can hardly consent to be limitted. Yet notwithstand∣ing, naturall reason bids vs to proserue Na∣ture, although wee smart a little to enioy the more content. Let vs then search out what proporti∣on of meate and drink will serue a reasona∣ble Creature; the which the easier to find, we must obserue these Rules. First, if one takes into his body ordinarily so much meate and drinke, that after the meale he feeles himselfe more heauy, sleepy, and lesse capable to conceiue matters of Di∣uine knowledge, Sermons, or any kinde of Study, then hee was before his meale, let him rest assuredly, that hee hath ex∣ceeded the Measure wee looke for. For
it is not fit to feede and please the vegetatiue and sensuall part so much, that thereby the noblest part be offended, which is the Ani∣mall and reasonable Faculty. Wee must consider, that out of the aboundance of meates, which wee re∣ceiue into our Bodies, there will arise Vapouis from the Stomacke vp to the Head, which will darken the Vnderstan∣ding; and also store of Humours and Blood ingendred in the Liuer, Mlt, and Veines, which will inflame vpwards, and helpe with the former Vapours to ouer∣cloud the cleare Rayes of Reason and Wisdome, which they would neuer do, if a man had not exceeded the lawfull mea∣sure. O how much are they deceiued, who feeling themselues feeble in the mor∣ning, runne speedily to Breake-fast, as though Nature languished for want of meate, when as in very deede their weak∣nesse proceedes from the aboundance of Humours congested and gathered toge∣ther, which by their ouer-much moy∣sture haue stuft the Musckles and the si∣newes, and stopt the passages of the spirits, so that the Scuruy and other Diseases creepe in by reason of those
Obstructions and Oppilations. The like abuse some commit in their mornings draughts, which indeede is the chiefe cause of the Dropsies, Gouts, Coughes, and other moyst sicknesses. Secondly, a man must not suddainely thinke to meete with this Measure, but by little and little by degrees hee must leaue of his former course of Dyet, and all by leasure proceede by diminishing his wounted fare, vntill hee arriues to that Quantity, that after his meale hee feeles none of the aboue named impediments to grieue his Head, or to hinder the Functions of his Minde. Thirdly, although a certayne set quan∣tity cannot rightly be prescribed by reason of the different natures of meates, and of the ages of men, yet notwithstanding it is lately tryed by experience, that for olde Persons, or for such as approach neere vnto it, or for some that feare some incurable sicknesse, twelue, thirteene, or foureteene Ounces of meate will serue a man for a day, accounting Bread, Flesh, Egges, or any such solid meate, and so many Ounces or some∣what more of drinke. This measure I pre∣scribe onely to aged persons, the sickely,
to Clergy men, to Iudges, Schollers, or to such as are wholly addicted to their Bookes, to Maydes, and such sedentary or idle people, who vse not bodily exercise. Loaoi  Cornarie, Father Lessius and ma∣ny others by late experience found this quantity to be sufficient. Fourthly, as for the Quality of the meats, there is no great heed to be taken so that they exceede not in the quantity, if the meate distaste not the Appetite, and that the due measure be obserued. Among al the sorts of meates which we eate, those are commended, which are of least putrifacti∣on. For wee see, that Fish and Flesh will taint sooner then Pulse or Corne. And there∣fore Rice, Bread, or such as are made of them will agree best with Nature, for by experience it is sound, that the chiefe cause of the small Pockes, &c. comes of the eating of flesh too soone. They which haue practised this Dyet, do highly commend Panades, or Gruell, which the Italians call Panatllam, or Pul∣ticulam, which is compounded of Bread and Water, or Brewis, or the like diuersi∣fied with Butter, Oyle, Egges, Wine, Cur∣rents, Cynamon, Sugar, Hony, Pepper,
Saffron, Cinger, &c. because this kinde of meate is most easily to be concocted, be∣ing ready to breed good blood, and very like to the Chyle, or that substantiall myce, which the Stomacke workes out of the Concotion of our meate. The fifth Rule, for asmuch as all the difficulty for the obseruing of this mea∣sure proceedes of sensuall appetite, and that this sensuall appetite springs of the appre∣hension of Imagination, whereby varieties of meates are conceiued to bee very plea∣sing to the sences, wee must doe our endea∣uour to correct this depraued Imagination. For the correcting whereof, two things among others are chiefly to bee regarded First, that we with-draw our selues from the sight of such prouoaking and enticing dainties, as we read Epaminonda that va∣liant Theban did, who being inuited to a friends house, and seeing the Table too fully replenished with delicacies, departed suddainly away. And afterwards beeing demaunded wherefore he went so rudely and hastily from thence; answered, because he thought his friend had prepared all that aboundant cheare, as a Sacrifice for the Gods; and not for necessary foode to mor∣tall
Men. Secondly, when wee are for∣ced for manners sake to stay and behold such vaine Varieties, that wee imagine them not to be in very deede so delightfull, faire, and wholesome, as in outward shew they seeme to be, but that they are deceit∣full baites to catch and esnare his fantasie to feede on them for his destruction; and that when they passe through the Body, they are most loathsome Excrements, lea∣uing poysoned relickes behind them to be conuerted into hurtfull humours. Euery thing when it is resolued into the first Principles and Elements will appeare in the true shape, which is no other but Corruption. And the more sweete it is, when it so resolued, it becomes the more sordide and stnking, as may be noted by Suckets and such sugred Condited ware, whereas the Dung of Labourers is nothing so displeasing, for that they feede on sim∣ple food, which Nature best approoues. To verifie this, let vs enquire whose Dung is most stinking, the Dogges or the Dees. This Dyet composed of Bread is pure, simple, not subiect to Corruption, as o∣ther nourishments be. And therefore I
may well auerre, that it resembles that choyse food of Manna, which God besto∣wed on the Israelites in the Wildernesse; the which as the Spanish Author in his Triall of Wits was of opinion, that for many Ge∣nerations after it did reduce their Bodies to a more Temperate Constitution then my other Nations, in so much that their Seede did multiply, and their Minds were more purified, and prepared capable of Gods miraculous blessings, to inherite the land of Canaan, which their Fathers, whose longing thoughts were altogether set on the Onions, Garlike, and flesh-pots of Egypt. wherewith from their Infancy they had accustomed to feed on, were debarred off for their hardned hearts. I prescribe not this Dyet, though solide and substantiall, to Labourers and Hindes, for their stomackes are like Ostridges, which can digest Iron, and by their Vio∣lent motion can better away with Bull-Beefe, Ram Mutton, Beanes and Bacon, then with the daintiest meate in the World: As I hard that a Clownish Boore told my Vncle Sir Iohn Perrot, who on a time comming to visite him being his Te∣nant and sicke, aduised him to eate some
der meate, as Chicken or sucking Rab∣bet; he answered him: Alas Maister, what shall I doe with such kinde of Meate, when I cannot eate the Bacon, which is as yel∣low as the Golden Noble? I limit no such persons, no more then Galen did, when he Dedicated his Worke for the preserua∣tion of Health De sanitate tuenda, not vnto the strong Complexioned and the Barbarous, as the Germanes, who were so accounted in those dayes; but vnto the ciuill and nice-bed Italians. I present the discouery of this Secret, and the Practise of it, to them, that make a conscience of their Calling, not to wal∣low like swinish Epicures in sensuall beastly pleasures, but as men resolued to liue so∣berly, like Christians, who must acknow∣ledge, that the Holy Ghost cannot long re∣side in fat foggy Bodies, that make a God of their Bellies, and who for that cause doe still pamper themselues with delica∣cies, and continue more houres at their gluttonous meales, swilling of sugred Sacke, and many cups of strong drinke, then they doe at their Prayers, or in the seruice of God. St. Paul, as likewise the first Christians,
did often vse to mortifie their Bodies for feare of Temptations: I tame my Body (sayth hee) to bring it into subiection, least while I Preach to others, my selfe become a Cast way. But wee are so faie from such mor∣tifications, that wee cannot spare one meae in the Weeke, though it were to fa a Neighbours life, or to conuert the expence of that meae to defend the Pub∣lcke State from ruine, or from Antichri∣stian Tyray. And yet we must passe for reformed Christians. None must say, Blacke is our Eye, or that wee haue the least skarre abot vs. O that men would looke within them; and see whether that place bee fit to receiue the holy Comforter. If then they finde that my words be true, and that their Gurmandize and Intempe∣tance ae obscured their Iudgements, whereby they were not able by reason of stupidity and dulnesse to fall to the Pra∣ctise of a Sober Liuing, let them out of hand beginne to make some experience of this Dyet, if not continually, yet on those Fasting dayes, which our Church hath ordayned of Christian Policy, to pu∣rifie a loathsome Carkases, and not as me∣ritorious
for satisfaction of Gods Iu∣stice. Thus the Israelites of old time were ad∣uised to fast, and commaunded to Purifie their Bodies in another manner. The which the very Turkes and Iewes doe put in Practise at this day. And wherefore stands this Purification? but to prepare oome for the spirituall Bridegroome? yea, and perhaps, this Abstence may sere for some qualification of his Iustice, al∣though not for any satisfaction, Yet helpe to couer a Multude of sinnes: As Saint Peter and Saint Iames wrot, specialy, if the estimate of what is spared, be confer∣red on pious vses.
The third SECTION. The Commodies, which this New-found Dyet brings to the Body. IT remayneth now, that I propose, what Commodities this set Dyet produceth: First, it preserues a man free from all sicknesses, for it keepes backe all the Humours and watrish spirits, which arise from the Stomacke to the Head. It cures the Got, the Dropsie, the Astmaticke Pas∣sions, the Cough, and Catarrhes, it hinde∣reth Crudities and raw fgmaticke hu∣mours, which indeede are the ingendring causes of all diseases. It bridles and keeps all the Humours in such an equall temper, that none shall offend eyther in Quantity, or in Quality: for indeede all our sicknesses proceed from Repletion, sauing some few which proceede of Famine, in taking more sustenance then Nature requires, or the Stomacke can well digest. For mani∣festation whereof, we see, that all Disea∣ses are cured by Euacuations. Blood letting is vsed to ase Nature. And so are Purga∣tious
taken to free the Body of that insup∣portable load of filthy matter, which by Gluttony was ingendred. Nor will one Purge sustice. But before an ordinary sicknesse be remooued, the Apothecary must minister many Nauseatiue and bitter Potions able to weary the strongest Na∣ture. For at the first, the first Region, as Physitians call it, must be purged; that is, the Guts and entrailes. Secondly, the Liuer. And lastly, the Veines must bee emptied of their watrish Humors and ex∣crements. And it is holden for certaine, that in e∣uery two yeares there is such store of ill humors and excrements ingendred in the Body, that a Vessell of one hundred Ounces wil scarce contayne them. These humours being let alone, will corrupt in processe of time, and wil cause a man to fall into some deadly sicknesse. And commonly, most people, which dye in their Beds, before they arriue to ex∣treamity of old age, doe perish by these ouer-abounding Humors, which they heaped within them through their exces∣siue Feasts and Belly-cheere. The second Commodity, that comes by
this orderly Dyet is, that it doth not one∣ly defend a man from those superfluous Humors within the Body, but likewise it fortifieth him agaynst outward Causes; for hee which hath his Body pure with temperate humors, shall easier endure the iniries and discommodities of cold or hot weather and of oylesome labour, then he that liues licentiously. Yea, and if he be wounded in his body, he will speedily re∣couer. The reason is, because very little fluxe of any offending humor can fall into the wounded part, which in other bodies is wont to inflame; yea, and sometime it will cause a griping Convulsion, or a vio∣lent Feaer. An which our temperate ha∣bit of bodily Mould shall neuer once bee af∣fected with; for there is as much diffe∣rence betwixt them, as thee is betwixt a perfet Chensian Procellane, and our roughest earthen Vessels. Lastly, it preserues a man from the Plogue, for there is nothing heere to spa, no matter to worke vpon, which was verified insober Socrates, who not∣withstanding that the Plage had of∣tentimes
wasted Athens, yet hee was neuer sicke eyther of that, or any other disease. The third Commodity is, that it cau∣seth not onely Health, dut aso Long Life, in so much that when hee dyeth, hee feeles no such pangs and torments, as other men vse to haue, for hee falls, like an Apple fully ripe, euen by meere reso∣lution, mildly, and gently away. The bond of a Temperate mans Body and Soule is dissolued onely, when the Radi∣call moysture is spent; like vnto a Lampe, which is extinguished when the Oye is quite consumed. For euen as a Lampe may bee put out three manner of wayes: First, by outward violence, as by vhe∣ment wind. Secondly, by powring too much wa∣ter vpon it, wherewith the pure Liquor of the Oyle is oppressed. Thirdly, by the vter consumption of the Oyle: So Mans Life, which is com∣pared to a burning Lampe, may bee extin∣guished three wayes. First, by the Sword, Drowning, or such like violent death.
Secondly, by the superfluity or depra∣ued quality of the Humours, wherewith the naturall moysture is corrupted. Third∣ly, when this moysture is spent by the length of time. If a man dyes by reason of eyther of the two former wayes, there must ensue a great commotion in Nature, and therefore he feeles extraordinary grie∣ances, when the bond of Nature is thus oently before the day and ripe time compelled to bee dissolued. But by the third manner of dissolution a man feeles no paine at all, because the Temperature is all by leasure dissolued from within him, and because the gentle moysture, which feedes the Body, becomes wasted together with the naturall heate at the same instant, when the Soule departes. And thus shall our Dyeted persons dye, except they bee forced by some outward Accident. The fourth Commodity is, that it makes the Body Actiue, Light, Liuely, and ready to all motions and exercise: For heauinesse, lazinesse, and the oppression of Nature pro∣ceede from the aboundance of Humours which destroy the passages of the Spirits, and besiedging the ovnts, they ouer moy∣sture them at last. Therefore when this a∣boundance
of Humors is diminished or ta∣ken away by a Regular Dyet, the very cause of dulnesse and heauinesse is also ta∣ken away, and then the pores and passages of the Spirits are made broad and more open. The fourth SECTION. The Commodities which our Dyet brings to to the sences and Minde, and how it may helpe to build there a more conuenient Temple for the Holy Ghost. AS the Body feeles seuerall benefits by this admirable Dyet, so the Minde partakes of no lesse commodities: First, it brings Health and Vigour to the outward sences, for the sence of See∣ing becomes darkned in aged Persons, by reason that the Optick nerues are ouer-char∣ged with superfiuous humours or vapors, whereby the animall spirit, which serues for the vse of the Sight, eyther is obseu∣red, or else is not able to minister asmuch matter, as is sufficient to make the Sight perfect.
This impediment is remooued, or at least much diminished by Sobriety, and Ab∣stinence from those things which fill the Head with fumes, of which kinde are all fat things, and Buter excessiuely taken, raw Onions, Garlike, strong Wine, o∣muddy Beere or Ae. Or if at the worst their sights bee somewhat dimme or red∣dish, the Oynment of Tu with a i. t. e. Aloes wiauayle them. Or if the feare a greater griefe, the Iuice of Stonecrop will  the pin and the Web. The sence of Hearing is hindred by the defluxion of raw Humors from the Baine, into the Organ of Hearing, or into the si∣newes which serues it. By which meanes a man becomes thicke of Hearing, or deafe on that side where the Defluxion hap∣neth. A temperate Dyet will preuent this Defluxion, and with a few locall medi∣cines, vnlesse the deafenesse be inueterate, it will quite expell it. As for the Sence of Tasting, it is cer∣tayne, that the Taste of a Temperate man is farre more quicke, sharpe, and pleasing, then it is in the Glutton, and Drunkard, who by reason of Chollericke or brackish Humors, whether they bee ingended in
the Head, or in the stomacke, takes all Meates otherwise then they are in deede. Another Commodity, which a Tempe∣rate Dyet brings to the Soule, is that it mti∣gateth Affectors or Pssions, chufl melan∣cholly and Anger. Wee see by experience, that they in whom Chor and Melan∣choily beae Dominion, if they bee not in conuenient time pged of those Hu∣mors, they fall into strange and violent sicknesses, as Lunacy and Frezy, especi∣ally if they bee suffered to get footing in the Braine and there to ensame. If it bee sharpe, and falls into the tunicles of the Stomacke, it causeth a man to become very Raenous: If there be aboundance of blood, it makes a man Leacherous, chiefy, if there bee some windy matter crept into it. The Reason is, because the Affections of the Minde do follow the apprehension of the Fantasy; and the apprehension of the Fantasy is conformable to the disposi∣tion of the Body, and to the Humours which beae rule in the Body. Hence it is, that the Chollericke doe dreame of Fires, Flames, Warres, and Slaughters.
The Melancholick dreame of Darknes, bu∣rialls, Sepulchers, Sprights, of deepe pits, fearefull flights, and of the like trouble∣some things. The Flegmatick dreame of Rame, Riers, Lakes, Shipwracke, drow∣ning, &c The Saguine dreame of Ban∣quets, Loue, Ioyes, &c. All these with their Causes are auoyded by a sober Dyet; for insteed of bad there are ingendred no∣thing but true and good Blood, Choller, Flegme, and Melancholly, so that their in∣ward conditions are wel composed, gentle, Milde, Demure, and quiet, neuer ministring any cause of Debate, but with Sobriety and Patience taking all things in good part. The third Commodity, which a sober Dye brings with it, is the safety of me∣mory. which is wont to be impayred and hut by reason of cold Humours, which haue seized on the Braine, and is very o∣minous to the intemperate or aged per∣son. This inconuenience is speedily cured by an orderly Dyet, with abstayning from ho liqurs and fuming drinkes, vnlesse it be in sinl quantity. For although Wine and strong drinke bee hote, yet it causeth
colde sicknesses beeing often taken, as Coughes, Distillations, the Pose, the Apo∣plexie, or Palsie. The fourth Commodity is, the liuely Vi∣gour of the Minde, in Reasoning, Iudging, in Inuention, and in an apter Disposition to conceiue or receiue Diuine Mysteries. Heere hence it comes to passe, that they, which obserue a sparing Dyet are watch∣full, circumspect, prouident, and sound of Iudgement: Whatsoeuer spirituall or men∣tall exercise they take in hand, they com∣monly excell in that kinde of knowledge, which they undertake. The reason is, be∣cause their thoughts are abstracted and seuered from this base earthly mould to Heauenly Contemplation, and to those high Angelical raptures, of which fesh and blood can hardly enter into the Conside∣ration. I beleeue very few in these dayes may be sayd to be thus Diuinely disposed, for I will stand vnto it, that except they haue some power of Abstinence together with that vnspotted Faith, which the Prote∣stant Church holds, they shall neuer passe for men truely Religious, nor shine with that bright Light of Vnderstanding to con∣tmne
the Vanities of this seducing World, nor receiue that solace in their spirits to conceiue themselues as it were in Paradise familiar with God. For doubt∣lesse they that are thus Regularly dyeted, if they haue but a graine of Faith, as it is Written, they may worke wonders, and perhaps performe miacles. They shall see strange Visions, and be rapt vp, as St. Paule was, into the Heauns for some small time to receiue spirituall consolati∣ons, the which if these Reuelations and Consolations concrne onely themselues, they must not blabbe them abroad, vnlesse their publication be more for the glory of God, then for their owne Hypocriticall prayse. For it pleaseth God oftentimes to send or infuse messages to confirme his seruants in their constant courses. As I remember in the Booke of Martyres a Holy man bee∣ing in Queene Maries dayes to be brought to the Stake for the Faiths sake, the night before complayned to one Austin his Friend, that since his Imprisonment hee had no secret encoragement of the Holy Ghost to continue stedfast; but on the con∣trary hee found himselfe very heauy, and
somewhat loath to dye. But the next day as hee was lead towards the Stake to be burned, hee met the sayd Austin by the way, to whom this Good man cryed out with great ioy, laying his hand on his heart: O Austin, Austin, he is come, he is come; meaning, the Holy Ghost, of whose absence hee had bewayled the night be∣fore. I deny not, but there may bee many Saints here in our dayes, but surely they take not the right course to make their Election sure, if they mortifie not their Bodies sometimes, when rebellious Pas∣sions are like to breake out into combu∣stion, or else that they be endowed with this powerfull vertue of Abstinence, as I doe heere prescribe. Nor are they to bee counted perfect Diuines, which can only discourse of Diuinity, Preach eloquent Sermons, or dispute of profound Myste∣ries; but Hee is the true Messenger of God, who liues according to our Saiours life, and his Apostles, or at the least doth his en∣deauour to imitate them, as neere as hee can. And in what outward seruice can a man draw neerer vnto them, then in Sobriety,
and Abstinence? For, as Faith is the inward ground of the Spirituall building of GODS Church: So Abstinence, I hold to bee after a sort, the secondary and outward foun∣dation of this great structure, aswell be∣cause it remooues those lets, which might preiudice our vnderstanding, as also because by it wee meete with many singular good helpes to prepare the Fa∣culties of the Minde to bee more cleare and ready to embrace that course of Life, which best pleaseth our Creaetor. Therefore, as Lessius writes, Seeing that our proceeding or Progresse in Spirituall maet∣ters doe depend vpon the vse of Understand∣ing, or that intellect, which is infused in the Soule, and vppon Faith, which resides in this Understanding, wee cannot loue that which is good or prosite in that Loue; nor hate that which is euill, or grow in ha∣tred of that euill, except it bee first pro∣pounded and discussed in the Vnderstanding, to stirre vp and mooue our Affections for that Vertuous purpose. Whee hence it comes to passe, that they who haue lodged Diuine matters in their Vnderstanding, as the Apostles did, and such as followed their steppes,
they shall easily contmne all Earthly Goods, and climbe vp to the high degree of Sanctity and Holinesse, and for that cause at the last they shall obtayne for their reward a glorious Crowne in Hea∣uen. For the Will of man doth easily conforme it selfe to the Iudgement of the Vnderstanding, when a matter is not there rashly, and suddainly propoun∣ded, but with deliberation deepely, and with length of time discussed and deba∣ted. Whereby it appeares that those things, which doe hinder, darken, or make difficult the Functions of the Minde, for the most part are the Causes, why in knowledge, or in the Oices of Pety, or in Hoinesse of life wee arriue not to the wished and illustrious dgee of Per∣fection. By the Premisses it is apparant, that Temperance, or Sobriety is of great e∣cacy and power both to exnguish those impediments, which elipseour iudgments from meditating on the bright beames of Vnderstanding, and the true course of our Saluation, and therefore it may not vnfitly bee called The secondary Founda∣tion of wisdome and of our spiritual progresse.
For what bee the lets that make vs so vn∣apt to spirituall knowledge; are they not the superfluous limidities of the Braine, the obstructions of the Braines pores and passages, the aboundance of Blood, the heate of the Spirits, which spring from Blood and Choller, or the Humors of Me∣lancholly, which assault the Head and Braine? All which may be preuented by a well ordred Dyet. The fifth Commodity, which this Dyet brings with it against the inwrd motions is, that it asswageth or rooteth out the flames of lustfull desires, which annoy both Body and Soule. And surely next to the Grace of God, nothing auailes more; for a Sober Dyet takes away first the Matter, which is the aboundance of Windy sperme. Secondly, the impulsiue Cause, which is the needlesse store of the animall Spirits, whereby that Sperme is expelled. And thirdly, the prouoking Cause, which is the imagination of venereous doings. This Imagination stirres vp chiefly the Passion of Concupiscence, which presently mooues the Spirits to expulsion, and these spirits being so mooued to expulsion doe vehemently vrge, yea, and doe per∣forme
the Deede, vnlesse the Will chance to restrayne the same. All these abhominations are chased a∣way, or at the least corrected by a Tem∣perate Dyet. The which whosoeuer pra∣ctizeth, shall finde himselfe free from such perturbations, so that our Papists need not afflict their Bodies, as many of them do, with languishing Fasts, Bodily labours, Whip-cords, Wyres of Steele, going bare∣foote, or with lying on the cold ground, so benumming, or making Brawne of their Carkasses, that might by this manner of Dyet be sustayned with vigorous and liuely heate to sympathize and correspond with the Functions of the Minde; where, as in a Glasse, the whole Man, though outwardly made but of Dust and Ashes, may behold from within him, the very Image of the incomprehensible God, both in Vnity and Tri∣nity, except his iudgement bee eclipsed with rronious motions.
The fift SECTION. Examples of such, as by Abstinence and a spa∣ring Dyet haue prolonged their Liues to very old Age. THere was a Sect among the Iewes, called the Essen, who when as they could not in their consciences brook to liue in Ierusalem, betwixt the Pharisees and the Saducees, by reason of the Hypocrisie, and Dissimulation of the one; and the lycentious liuing of the o∣ther, retired themselues to a Desert neere the Lake of Asphaltes, not farre from Ie∣vicho, and there gaue themselues to a Tem∣perate Dyet, with extraordinary Fastes, whereby most of them liued aboue 100. yeares. Paulus Thebus, about the age of 15. yeares od, during the Persecution vnder Decius the Romane Emperour, beeing dis∣contented for the losse of his Father, and liketo be betrayed for a Christian by a co∣utous Hypocrite, that was married to his Sister, because hee might enioy his
Patrimony, fled into a solitary place, and there hid himselfe in a Caue, at the foote of a Rocke, neere to which place grew a great Palme Tree, vpon whose fruite hee daily fed. They write, that for the space of 60. yeares a Rauen euery day at nine a Clocke, brought him halfe a loafe of bread, and that his apparrell was made of the leaues of the Palme tree. St. Herome reports, that from the time which hee entred into this retired place, which was about the yeare 260. vntill the end of his life, hee neuer departed thence, hauing continued there 110. yeares. St. Anthony. who instituted an Hermita life in Aegypt, borne of Noble and Reli∣gious Parents, and being about 20. yeares old, sold his estate, and bestowed part vpon his Sister, and distributed the res∣due to the Poore. And retiring himselfe from the World, he built himselfe a Cor∣tage in a place remote from Company, where hee liued a most austere and strict life. He dyed about the yeare 345. hauing liued 105. yeares. His dyet was only bread and water, sauing that hee added broath or Pottage to his sustenance, when he was ex∣ceeding old, as Athanasius witnesseth.
Hee was so famous in his latter dayes for his Holy and Deuout life, that Empe∣rours, Kings, and Princes sent vnto him for his Counsell, and recommended them∣selues to his Prayers. Cariton an Iconian by birth, hauing en∣dured much troubles vnder Aurelian for the Christian Faith, in the end being en∣larged out of Prison during the Raigne of the Emperour Tacitus, which succeeded him, and going to see Ierusalem, they write that hee was taken Prisoner by a Company of Theeues, who bound his hands, and put an Iron chayne about his necke, and so led him into a Desert place, neere vnto the dead Sea, or Sodomes Lake. Afterwards, these Theeues going foorth for more booies, a Viper came into their Caue, and dranke of the Vessell, where the Theeues kept their Wine: the which shee poysoned, so that when the Theeues danke thereof, they all dyed instantly. And they say, that Caritons bonds at the very same time were miraculously broken or loosned, inso much that hee remained Master of their wealth, whereof he com∣municated the most part to the persecuted Christians, that were fied into those De∣serts,
and with the rest hee built a Religi∣ous house, where hee liued for the most part vpon Bread, Rootes, and Water. He ended his dayes vnder Constantine the se∣cond, and Constantius his brother, being a∣boue 100. yeares old. Iames the Hermite a Persian by Nati∣on, liued by a very sparing Dyet, aboue 104 yeares, as Theodoret writes. St. Macarius one of the Fathers, which assisted at the Counsell of Nice, liued 92. yeares. St. Epiphanius whose learned workes we haue, liued 115. yeares. Arcenius Schoole-master to Arcadius the Emperour, liued 120. yeares, with admi∣rable abstinence. Simeon Stilites liued 109. yeares, with incredible parsimony, Sobriety, and Tem∣perance. St. Romuald and Italian, liued 120. yeares, with a very straight Dyet, whereof hee spent one hundred yeares in a Religious house. Iohannes de Temporibus liued 300. yeares, euen from Charlemaines time, vnder whom hee serued as a Souldier, vntill our Westerne Christians set out for the
Conquest of the Holy Land. Vdalricus Bishop of Padua, a man of wonderfull Abstinence liued one hun∣dred and fiue yeares. Venerable Bede, a Saxo borne, whose Writings wee read, liued 92. yeares in a Monastery, euer since he was seauen yeares of age. But to descend to our owne times, I will conclude with one excellent example of Lodouco Cornario a Venetian Gentle∣man, whose Treatise with Lessius his An∣notations ministred vnto mee my chiefe Light for the discouery of this New-found Dyet, liued aboue 100. yeares. In his youth he spent his time very lycentiously, insomuch that when hee was 5. yeares of age, hee fell to be wonderfully crazed, and diseased with a paine in his Stomacke, and oftentimes in his side, and also infested with the Gout, and wih a spice of a Fea∣uer. In this manner hee languished vntill hee came to forty yeares. And then the Physitians gaue him ouer for a dead man, yet with some hope, that whereas their Physicke could not restore him to his health, yet perhaps hee might prolong his life, if he could betake himselfe to a set sp∣ring
Dyet, the which I haue prescribed here. Coruario seeing no other helpe, and being loath to dye in the midst of his age, and flourishing time, by little and little fe vnto it, and within halfe a yeare was deli∣uered of the most part of his griefes. But before the yeare went about, he was quite rid of all sicknesses. And so continued all his life after, with singular great content∣ment in his Minde and Body. When he was 83. he made a pleasant Comedy, which is a worke of iouiall youth, Partus Iuven∣tutis: For, as hee writes, hee found him∣selfe of such an excellent Temper in Body and Minde, that hee would not exchange his Age at those yeares with any Young man whatsoeuer, that did not obserue his Dyet; and hee hoped to liue as long as the other. Hee could at those yeares get vp a Horse-back as light and as nimble, as when he was but 24. Hee was alwayes merry, neuer once angry nor sad, but of that ad∣mirable temper, that all the Hmours of his Body were in an equall proportion, as it were Harmoniously compacted, in somuch that during the time that hee vsed this Dyet, he neuer after sice∣ned.
His sleepe was moderate, his Dreames sweete and pleasing; and his Hearing and sences sound, his vnderstanding so pure and lightsome, that at 95. yeares od hee wrot a Booke to the Clergy in commendation of Sobriety, and this Dyet. Among Princes, that by temperate Dy∣et prolonged their liues; I will instant on∣ly on two, the Emperour Augustus, and Queene Elizabeth of England, whereof the former liued neere eighty yeares, and was so abstemious, that hee neuer dranke but thrice at one meale. And the other did seldome eate but one sort of meate, rose e∣uer with an appetite, and liued about 70. yeares. Now let me question our Paracelsians, who beleeue such strange Miracles of their Elxr and Potable Gold, whether Arnol∣dus de Villa Noua, Raymundus Lullius, Frier Bacon, Ripley, or any other, whom they flatter themselues to haue had the knowledge of the Phylosophers Stone, whe∣ther, I say, any of these did liue longer, or in better health, in Body and Minde, then Cornario, or some of these did? If they can prooue, that their great Mai∣sters
haue liued as long as Ours, then let mee put them further in minde, that Paracelsus himselfe their principall Patron dyed at forty eight: whereas Galen, who afirmes that euer since hee attayned to twenty eight yeares, hee obserued a Temperate Dyet, which profited him so much, that thereby hee escaped free from all violent sicknesses, all his Life time after, and liued vntill hee was a∣boue an hundred yeares old, as Hippo∣crates and Herodicus before him, onely by reason of a sober Dyet without Phy∣sicke, prolonged their liues to one hun∣dred yeares.
The sixt SECTION. The Effects and Fruites of this admirable Dyet. THe Effect of this New-found Dyet, is singular great, and the Fruites in∣estimable: For thereby Old Age, which is held to be an incurable sick∣nesse; and a tedious misery, becomes fresh, greene, liuely, sprightfull, and flourishing. Now, after long Experience which a man hath learned in the World, hee is able to iudge by comparing his present estate with the Vanities of his fore-passed man∣ner of liuing, of the Causes, why GOD, sent him into the World, and by what meanes hee may thence forwards recouer and redeeme the idle time which hee hath spent, to the glory of God, and the safe∣guard of his Soule, which but for the great mercy of his Sauiour, hee hath foo∣lishly forfeited. Then, he cannot but con∣temne earthly thoughts, and with a braue resolution scorne to fixe his Minde on
things, which like a Dreame will passe a∣way suddainly, remembring that saying in the Gospell: O Foole, this night will I take away thy Soule, and then whose shall those goods be which thou hast prepared, and hea∣ped together? Then, hee will acutely see, that there is no cause for him to ioyne Fied to Field, Farme to Farme, or Lord∣ship to Lordship. For if he obserue this Dyet, hee needes not bee at such former charge for Gut-worke, or to please his sen∣suall Paae, as hee hath beene at to the ha∣zard of his Health, and more of his Soule. He will find that a very final reuenew will sice him, and that now hee shall be the better able to distribute the ouer-pus to his Christian Neighbours, or bestow the same on some monuments for the honour of his Redeemer, who gaue him the grace and power to leaue off his former super∣fluities and noysome Varieties: Then, he shall perceiue that ten yeares redeemed and conferred in this order of life, will better him more then 20. yeares in such irregular vame courses, as he before had fruitlessely consumed. Then, seeing himselfe at more ease and contentment in spirit, with a well composed nature without rashnesse, or in∣perate
Passions, hee may accommodate his Minde to Prayers, to the seruice of God, and to doe workes of Charity. For no extrauagant businesse can fall out to in∣terpose betwixt him and Heauenly cogita∣tions, as he vsed to haue when hee dealt a∣bout matters of worldly profit. But per∣haps some will say, who will pine him∣selfe, and loose so many dainty morcels, to enioy a few yeares longer then our fore-Fathers? Heu non est tanto diga dolore salus. To these I answere, that the addition of a few yeares more to a man that begins to leaue off sinne, and to bee borne a new man Regenerated vnto God through Christ, ought to be dearer then all the de∣licate cheare of the World, which cannot come to passe, while the Body is heauy, and pressed downe with a load of fat, and grosse Humours. For of all the meate, which a man eates, let him consider how little of it turnes to nourishment or Chyle within the Body, and how much goes to excrements, to superfluous Blood, and to those humours, which one day, and in processe of time will cause some grieuous sicknesse, if not mortall, and hee will
iudge my Counsell for Sobriety to be from God, and sent from Heauen in these latter dayes, to assist him in his Christian Pro∣gresse to Saluation. At first is all the difficulty and hardest labour, by reason of the contrary custome, and for that the Stomacke is stretched out at large, and as the French man sayth, as Hollow as Saint Benets Boote. But this difficulty is quickly taken away, if euery day by leasre he with-draw and diminish somewhat of his vsuall Dyet, vntill such time, as hee comes to the stinted measure. And after that the Stomacke is once con∣tracted and made narrower; then there is no more difficulty nor trouble, but that hee may easily continue his Sober Dyes, because that small Quantity doth answere and well agree with Nature, and the ca∣pacity of the Stomacke, onely the danger is, that after the Dyet is accustomed, it must be continued still, for Alteration is somewhat dangerous. The like examp ewe see in them, who in Lent do at the first finde it grieuous to abstayne from their Breake-fast or Supper, but after a few dayes they make nothing of it; no more then those doe, who are
commaunded by their Physitians to re∣fraine from some kinde of accustomed meate, which giues ill nourishment to some dangerous disease, although it bee very pleasing to their Appetite. In like manner doe not wee often see, that some of our Land souldiers hauing beene long at Sea, and there limitted in time of scar∣city to a set quantity of slender Victualls doe fall into Fluxes and languishing sicke∣nesses, if suddainly at their first Landing, they breake that limited and set measure? And how comes that to passe? But be∣cause the Stomacke hath beene kept for many dayes more straightned, narrower, and more contracted, whereby their sud∣daine falling into a larger Dyet without re∣gard had to that violent oppression of na∣ture, which ought not to bee so altered, but by degrees, is the chiefe cause of their Fluxe. Therefore men of experience will take heede at their Landing of this excesse, and reduce their Stomackes by little and little to receiue in such meate, and that in smal quanity at the first, as shall not offend them after wards. They will content themselues with Broathes and weake
meates for the first three or foure dayes, or if they feare such Fluxes, as they haue reason for it, they will take the iuice of ground Iuy, or the Broath of Rice, or the Syrup of Poppy, foure or fiue mornings after their Landing; yea, and perhaps they will Physicke themselues with Rheubarbe, aswell to purge themselues of that taint, which they got a Ship-board, as to streng∣then their Stomackes: Or else they will swallow two or three dayes together, (but not without a Preparatiue or Glister, before hand,) those which the Arabiaens call the Blessed Pi's of Aloes, which are compounded of Aloes, Mirrh, and Saffron, the which likewise beeing infused in some Liquor, to be taken in times of Pestience, or Calentures, are found miraculous. Or if they feare the Scuruy, a Disease sprung from Oppilations in the Stomacke, and now a dayes too common, dee seize on them, they will not neglet in time to take the iuyce of Lemons, Turneps, or else the Sat of Scuruy-grasse, or the iuyce it selfe in some pleasing Liquour. But to returne, where I haue digressed▪ admit, that this Dyet were somewhat grieuous at the first, let them consider.
how they are forced other-whiles to en∣dure a more grieuous Pennance at their Physitians hands, when they must take most loathsome Medicines, whereat Na∣ture trembles to thinke of, as our finest Gentle-women for the Greene-sicknesse are constrayned to take Powder of Steele, &c. whereas the troublesomnesse of our Dyet is recompeneed with wonderfull great commodities and singular fruite. For a Temperate Dyet makes the Body Light, Pure, Healthfull, preserues it from diseases and stinking corruption. It pro∣longeth life vntill extreame old Age. It makes one sleepe quietly, and pleasantly. It makes our meate taste the more sauou∣ring and acceptable. It brings soundnesse to the Sences, quicknesse to the Memory, cleare iudgement to the Wit, it asswageth the rage of vnruly Passions, beates downe and breakes the fury of vnlawfull Lust, and driues away anger and sorrow. To conclude, it conioynes, cements, and as it were glues and scrues together the Soule and Body with such an harmonicall admired temper, that with a quiet Con∣science, Apostolicall patience, and with a Magnanimous sparkling spirit, partaking
equally of Mirth and Grauity, hee shall soone perceiue himselfe metamorphozed and changed of a sensuall Creature to bee a man of Reason; of a darke besotted ap∣prehension, now suddainly become one of the hopefull Children of God, illumi∣nated with Vnderstanding to ponder, iudge, & discusse of Caelestiall matters, tou∣ching the Mysteries of our Saluation, of Faith, Grace, the Resurrection, Beatitude, and the difference betwixt Humane and Diuine policy, betwixt Saint Michael the Archagell, and the Spirituall Dra∣go; betwixt the Heauenly Ierusalem, and the most reformed Common-Wealth a∣mong mortall men. And lastly, hee shall be able to apprehend, how Sinne and the Prince of the Ayre, are linked in one, to confirme Mens hardned hearts in their owne accursed Courses.
The seuenth SECTION. How necessary the Bodies Purification by a Temperate Dyet is for the Soules health. The suddaine Cure of the Cough, the Tisicke, and other Diseases by some Medicines intermixt with this Dyet. PVrification must go before Glorificati∣on. For before a man can assume a Glorified immortall Body in Heauen, it is necessary the whole man bee pu∣rified heere on Earth, the Soule by Faith, and the Body by Abstinence. After this life we must not relye on Apocriphall dreames of a third place, by Capriccious Schoolemen called Purgatory, like to the Poets Elizan Fields. But at our departure out of this World we must repeate the same Words, which our Sauiour spake at the giuing vp the Ghost, Consummatum est, it is finished. Wee haue fought in this World a good fight, wee haue abstayned from Carnall and worldly Temptations. Otherwise,
wee go out, but as halfe Christians, and being luke-warme, Christ will not know vs, if wee stand on bare Faith, without the fruites of Faith, which must not one∣ly spring in vs towards our owne Bodies, but by example and good workes towards our fellowes, the members of Christ. O how much do the Capuchins and Carth∣sians goe beyond vs in Abstinence, and in contemning the World! And if they had the Faith, which we professe, and did not too much macerate and deface the handy∣worke of GOD, vppon a meritorious Baalish hope, surely, they might bee sayd to see with two eyes, and we but with one eye, and being better purified then wee, they were assured of that Glorification, which wee expect. I doubt no but some heere will taxe me, that I sauour a little of Pharisaicall Popish leauen, because I insist on the Bo∣dies Purification, as if I derogated from Faith, which onely iustifieth, and that all meates are tollerable, let a man eate and drinke neuer so much, as long as they are sanctified with our ordinary Graces of thanksgiuing, though sayd by roat or cooled zeale.
And that wee cannot transgresse in what enters into the Body, seeing that all things were purified and made cleare by Christ, according to St. Peters Vision about Cor∣nelius, These Libertines would faine couer their Epicurean excesse with Sophisticall daubings, but they heede not my ayme, who with St. Paul professe, that all things are cleane to the cleane. It is the Quantity, and not the Quality of the Meates, or Drinkes, which I reprooue. If I should tell them further, that the cause why Mo∣ses forbad the Israclites the eating of Swines flesh was, for that hee fore-saw, that the same in those hote Countries would breede Ith and Scabs, and that it did become the Hely Nation, to keepe their Vessells better purified, then to ap∣peare in the House of GOD so polluted; surely I beleeue, they would take me for  Iew, aswell as a Romanist. Why were Lepers, and those that had running Issues debarred from the Temple, insomuch that their King so diseased, was repulsed to en∣ter? Was it not because God loued a pu∣rified cleane Body, ather then a mangy person? Specially, if through his owne
disordered manner of liuing, or the Di∣uine Vengeance he became so defiled? In respect whereof, it is conuenient that we doe our best endeauours to purifie that place, which is destinated for the Holy Ghost, by abstayning from alluring meats of diuerse natures at the same Meae. Go to the Physitian before thou be sicke, (saith the Wise man.) Before Gluttony and Drun∣kennes hale vs into the Prison of sicknesses, let vs take heede of their causes, and not finde fault with Friends, who without Fee or rewards haue opened them the way to Purification, and a sober liuing. Because Lessius and Cornario being Papists latey re∣newed and brought to Light this admira∣ble Dyet, shall wee disdayne their whole∣some Counsell? This vncharitablenesse leads to Errour what we finde among Papists Praise-wor∣thy, and not repugnant to Faith, we ought to embrace and cheerish. By that reason we should haue no Discipline, no Canon Law, nor any ciuill Order for the gouern∣ment of the Church against Refaaries and gyddy headed Heretickes, if we con∣demne all that wee borrow from them. For our Religion it selfe, though after∣wards
eclipsed, was propagated and sent into this Iland from the Bishop of Rome. Because their Mine yeeldes not the finest Oare, shall we not refine the Oare, and pu∣rifie the Gold, that comes from them? yea, though it came exsterquilinio out of their Dunghill, with many dregs and filth, we must not reiect and altogether debase what we receiued from them, as long as it tends to our profit or edification. We ought to commend them for their laudable Fasts, their Almes-giuing, and their continent liues; I meane some few of them, which were indeed most continent, and not mini∣ster occasion of scandall in our Christian calling, to make them the more obstinate, and obdurate. St. Paul could haue wished neuer to eate meate, whilst he liued, if hee thought, that that kinde of meate offended his Brother; where as some of vs on the contrary, would ete Flesh on Good Friday, euen to dispite them. By this indiscreete and vncharitable carriage towards them, in things indifferent, many Soules haue fallen away from our Church, and left those skars, which will continue (I feare) to the worlds end. So tractable in this indiffe∣rent course was Peter Molins that Religi∣ous Minister of France, when hee heard
how some of our English Preachers chose rather to bee silenced, then to weare the Surplice: O I would to God, sayth he, that I were bound to go in a Fooles coate through Pa∣ris all the dayes of my life, so that I were Li∣censed to Preach the Gospell there. And so an English Contesse heretofore, was con∣tent to ride through Couentry starke na∣ked at Noone day, so that she might gayne freedome for that Towne, which for their common and future good, shee afterwards most zealously performed. Now to ad∣uance forwards, and thereupon to conclude our worke of Purification, to be brought to passe by abstinence, and our newfound Dyet, it is lookt for, that I should first cue some of those infirmities, which are already growne through Repletion, and disorders. Among which, I behold the Lunges, which waxe old sooner then the rest of the mem∣bers, as Aristotle affirmed. And the reason is, because they are subiect to all kind of ex∣crements. For they receiue catarrhes, coughs, and other fithy matter from the Braine, besides excrementicious blood, which is ingendred there, and turnes to purulent matter, which render them foule & filthy, as our late Aatomists haue found, asve as that, which comes from the head, and what
ber is made so impure, must needes grow soonest old. For which cause those Persons, whose breath doth stinke by reason of the impu∣rities of the Lunges, shall waxe old soo∣ner then others. As on the contrary, those whose breath smells well, or doth not stinke whilest they are Fasting, may liue much longer. For the abating or correct∣ing of this viscous, clammy, and mattry stuffe, which is there ingendred, or fallen from the Braine, nothing anayles more then this our Dyet, after that the same hath bene practised and vsed two or three Moneths, such impurities will cease of their owne accord. But for feare the Diseased party may in the meane time suffocate and perish, like the Horse, that starued, while the Grasse grew; let him that is troubled with a vio∣lent Cough, which is accounted but a Symptome, mingle some Manna well sifted, and a little Saffron with his Panade, Broth, or Grell, and that being vsed for fiue, or sixe dayes together, will by gentle Purges by little and little consume away the cause; yea, and will supply the place of an Expe∣cterall, aswell as any of those Medicaments
which they call Becchica, or else they may use three or foure drops of the Syrupe of Tobacco in two spoonefuls of Hysop water, or in default thereof, a peece of Tobacco it selfe rowled and chewed in the Mouth, before meate, for foure or fiue dayes toge∣ther, will performe the Cre, or in case of necessity, let him drinke but once an Once of the Iuyce of the Blew-Flower-de Luce root called Irs, newly gathered, bea∣ten, and strayned, with suged Water, and some Saffron; and though the Party were at the very poynt ready to bee choaked with these smy and grosse hmours, and could not rest, but sit vp wheezing, and without sleepe; yet within two or three houres, (as it were by Miracle) hee shall auoyde by Vomit, and Stooles, the causes of his deadly distemper. Or else let him take twenty, or twenty fiue graines of Pantomagogon in Pils, with the Powder of Lycoras, once euery second day for a weeke, and these will gently purge al the Humours. And these Pis I hold to bee singular good to preuent many other diseases, and not so loathsome as most Medicines be. Next, the Braine presents it selfe to my
View, the indisposition whereof may be discouered by the Heate, or Coldnesse. If it be ouer hot, it causeth distillations in∣to the Lunges, Lunacies, &c. For the Cure whereof, some Lettice may bee boyled with our Dyet, or the greene leaues of Poppy, and in defaulte thereof their seedes, or their Syrupes. In that case Diacodion, which is composed of white Poppy, with sugred Water a∣lone, or mixt with our Diet is of admi∣rable operation both to coole, and to pro∣cure sleepe. To which as a Cauat, I wish such distempered persons to beware, how they keepe their Heads too warme with Night-Caps; for thereby I haue obserued that many haue vnaduisedly miscarried. For the cold distemper of the Braine, ac∣companed with Moysture: the smoake of Tobacco with a drop or two of the Oyle of Anny-seed is expedient, if the Party be not too narrow breasted, or else trou∣bled with the fits of Asthma. But oftentimes the Braine may suffer by reason of outward Causes, as Frost, or Cold windes in the same manner, as the Lunges are, for both alike are impayred by Cold, that they might the sooner become
weakned and old, and that by reason of re∣spiration. For both these Members doe breath and respire, the Braine for the per∣ception of smells, and the Lunges more a∣boundantly, for the recreation of the heart. Therefore both these Members doe secret∣ly through their Pores and passages draw in the Ayre, and do receiue their impres∣sions, which happen not to any of th' other Members. For this discommodity, where∣to our Northerne Nations are much sub∣iect, thet haue lately armed themselues with Hoodes agaynst Raine, Snow, and Tempests; and if before their iournies they annoynt the soles of their feete with that excellent Oyle of Euphorbium, or of Pepper, and stop their ares with Cotton or bumbase dipt in Oyle of Anseed, or with Cyuet: They neede not feare distem∣pers through Cold, as long a so as Englands Golden Fleece is able to furnish them with Outward Defences. But wee haue cause to doubt a greater inconunience then, a mo∣mentary cold, which commonly with the weather for sake the hold; for if it prooue an extreame Frost, or blustring Windes, specially after ainy Weather, which occa∣sion the cuils aforenamed, that treacherous guest, the Scruy, the store-house of al diseases,
Farrago omnium morborum, (which some haue mistaken for a spice of the Catholick Disease:) may get possession within the Body. And this happens both by the Sunnes absence, and for that the skinne, and all the outward Pores are stopt, thickned, and congealed with Cold, so that there is no place left for the venting of Euaporati∣ons, and Exhalations out of the Body. And therefore they are driuen backe coagula∣ted, where those Vapours are forced for want of vent to assault the inward parts, and at length they domineere, and cause Oppilations and stoppages, so that the liue∣ly Spirits cannot performe their Offices. Heere hence it fals out, that some of these tainted exhalations are carried vpwards to the Eyes, Eares, Nose, and to the Teeth, and Gummes; and other-whiles to the Breast, or else they descend downe to the Legges. A spoonefull of the Iuyce of Lemons at a time, or the luyce of Scuruy-grafe, or the salt of it, as I shewed in the for∣mer Section, mixt with our Panade, will remooue this Suruy-baggage. And for the putrified Gummes, a drop or two of the
Oyle of Vitrioll, or some Vnguentum Ae∣gyptiacum applyed vnto them, will speedi∣ly cure them. I neede not correct the Stomacke, but with the owne simple Dyet, yet if at first by reason of the suddaine alteration, which I haue notwithstanding here expresly for∣bidden, and on the contrary aduised them to proceede by degrees from twenty oun∣ces, to foureteene, or twelue, and by so many, or a little more of drinke, to bee di∣minished within a moneth: Then if the Stomacke should become somewhat fain∣ting, a cup of Wine and Sugar added to the Dyet, or in extremity Cinamon water, Anniseed, Worme-wood water, or Manus Christi, or Ginger-bread, will quickely restore the cowardly Stomacke. But if the Midriffe rise, or any winde, which our Dyet will speedily chase away, Vineger Scilliticke, or Sea Onion will keepe it downe. Afterwards, if they chance to breake this Dyet, if it be but for a meale or two, I wish them to fast the next meale after, although it were more com∣mendable Esuire inter epulas, to rise vp with an Appetite. For the Stone, if Walter Caries Quin∣tessence
of Goates Blood, which in his Farewell to Physicke, he cals the Hammer for the Stone, may not be gotten, let the Party take Goates Blood, and vse it after the Arabian manner: That is, dried in the Oen, and drunke in some Liquour. More Medicines I could lay downe, for this and other sicknesses, but that I doubt our Practitioners of Physicke would indite me for intiusion into their Profession; al∣beit I thinke they will bee more offended with me for the Publishing of this Dietary Cure, then for any other Quarrell. For I make no question, but the same will both preuent and heale more Diseases, then all their Recipes grounded but vpon coniectu∣rall Prognostickes for the most part, like vnto our Almanackes. Me thinkes, if it were nothing else but for the auoyding of Physitians Fees, and Apthcaries Bils, that were a motiue suf∣ficient to enduce vs to liue soberly. Whereto might bee added the shortning of our dayes, which their Drugges doe cause, besides the poysoned relicks, which they leaue behind them in the Body. For we must vnderstand, that all Purgations, specially Electuaries soluble, haue some ve∣nemous
quality in them, and likewise that the good humours aswell as the bad are exhausted by them, to the future decay of health, and the treacherous wasting of the Oyle of Life. The like fatall in∣conuenience comes by Blood letting. The eight SECTION. Speciall Remedies against Sea sicknesses, the Scuruy, and against the annoyances of snow, Frosts, and cold Winds. Wherein the cause of my Lord Baltimores Disasters in New-found Land this last Winter is de∣bated. THe Disasters which hapned to my Lord Baltimore and his Colony the last Winter at Feriland, in our New-land Plantation, by reason of the Scuruy, haue mooued mee to inserte some more specifique Remedies against that Disease, which not onely in those Climates beares dominion, but likewise heere in England, although hooded with other Titles, yet commonly sprung of the same causes.
For sometimes the Scuruy is ingendred of outward Causes, and sometimes from within the Body, or from both. And therefore they that dwell neere the Sea∣side, where the North-east Windes rage, are most subiect to this infirmity. Before the sayd Lord euer beganne his Plantation, he cannot deny, but I aduised him to erect his Habitation in the bottome of the Bay at Aquafort, two leagues distant from that Place, which for ought I heare, is not much to be discommended, and more into the Land, where my people had wintred two yeares before, and found no such in∣conuenience. Nay, his Lordship himselfe suspected the place; sor his Letters hee complayned that vnlesse hee might be be∣holding to me for the assignment of both those places out of my Grant, he was in a manner disheartned to plante on that Coast, by reason of the Easterly Windes, which with the Mountaynes of Ice float∣ing from Estotiland, and other Northerne Countries towards New-found land, ren∣dred that Easterly shore exceeding cold. Yet notwithstanding, his Lordship beeing perswaded by some, which had more ex∣perience in the gainefull Trade of Fishing,
then in the Scituation of a commodious Seate for the Wintring of his new Inhabi∣tants, bestowed all his charge of building at Fertland, the coldest harbour of the Land, where those furious Windes and Icy Mountaynes doe play, and beate the greatest part of the Yeare. Whereas, if hee had built eyther at Aquafort, or in the Westerly part in the Bay of Placentia, which hath aboue 50. miles ouer-land, betwixt it and that Easterne shore, his enterprize had suceeeded most luckily: And so this of Fertland, might haue serued well for his profit in the Fishing, and also for a pleasant Summer dwelling. Sir Francis Tanfield, vnder the right ho∣nourable the Lord Vicount Faulkland, con∣tinued two yeares, but three leagues more Southward at Renooz, and did well e∣nough, in which place likewise my Colony remayned one Winter without any such mortall accidents. But all Winters, I con∣fesse, are not alike in that Country, no more then they are here with vs in Europe. Yea and here too in the same paralell, the season differs. Who will imagine, that wee in Wales haue lesse Snow and Frosts then London and Essex? And yet by experience
wee finde it so, whereof the very cause proceeds from the Easterne windes, whose rigorous force before they arriue ouer land into our Westerne parts, cannot but be much broken and abated. Besides these Winds, snows, and Frsts, the Scuruy is ingendred by earing of those meates which are of corrupted iuice, raw, cold, salted, or of ill nourishment, which breede grosse blood and melancholly. A∣mong which I reckon Bacon, Fish, Beanes, Pease, &c. And among Drinkes, I ranke all strong liquors whatsoeuer, specially, if they be taken in Frosty weather, when the Stomacke ouer abounds with heate, and consequently at that time most subiect to infiamations, which, when the Th comes, will certainely breake out into some dangerous disease. Do but obserue how the Sap of Plants and Hearbes in Frosty seasons descends downe to the Roote, as to the last refuge and helpe in Nature? The which Plants if we should refresh with Chalke or Lime, well may they flourish for a little while, but their Fruite and themselues are of no continuance. The like I may say of such, as by strong liquors doe conceiue, that
they fortisie and comfort their stomackes in cold weather, when as indeed they get but a sparkling heate like a blast, that will quickly extinguish: From hence arise the Scuruy, Catarrhes, Rhumes, Coughs, Feuers, &c. But leauing these Causes, I will proceed to the Cure of this fatall sicknesse, which now a dayes prooues a stumbling stone to the wisest Physitians, by reason of the ma∣nifold symptomes and infirmities which accompany it, able to deceiue Aesculapius himselfe. First, let the party, that feares or sus∣pects himselfe tainted, change or ayre his apparrell, putting on cleane shifts and linnen. Secondly, let him sleepe in boorded Roomes, and if hee bee able, to haue his Chamber Wainscotted, or well dryed of those dampish sauours, which stone or earthen walls are wont to euaporate and breath out. Thirdly, let him beate and burne one Acre of Land round about his dwelling. Fourthly, let him eate those meats, which are tender, light of digestiō, that will not be soone corrupted, chiefly fresh meats with
dited sauce, but moderately, and without excesse. Fiftly, let him often vse the expressions of Currans, Prunes, or Reasins, or Dia∣prunis, or some of these in broath made with Manna, Cassia, Tamaind, or Seene. For these will loosen the Belly by their moysture and slippery faculty, whose whayish humours the Melt or Spleene is accustomed to steale away, and so by ma∣king it selfe great and bigge to impouerish and infeeble the rest of the Members. Sixtly, for an exquisite Purgation after a Glister, or Preparatiue first vsed, which might be of Oximel. with some of the a∣forenamed Expressions, let him take of the roote of Rheubarbe, or Mechoacan three dragmes, Hermodactilis two dragms, Turbith three dragmes, an ounce of Dia∣gredium, two scruples of Cinnamon and Ginger, three pound of Sugar. Of this Purgation, let the party take one ounce, or sixe dragmes at a time. Seauenthly, after these Purgations, which must be taken euery day, or euery second day, while it lasteth, let him vse bathes made of Brimstone or Branne once a weeke to attenuate the skinne, whereby
the Vapours of the Body may the easier exhale out. But for twelue houres after bathing hee must not stirre out of doores. Whosoeuer will vse these Obseruations, not neglecting those, which I haue gene∣rally deliuered in the former Sections, as Antiscorbutica, to preuent the Seuruy, hee may rest assuredly not to become infeted with the Disease, and if he be tainted, he shall speedily recouer. And now for the poorer sort, who per∣haps are not able to prouide themselues of the premisses, they may eyther purge themselues with those Pils called Panto∣magogon in the precedent Section described, or take three graines of Stibium in a cup of Beere steeped and beaten to powder, e∣uery second day for a weeke together. And to preuent the Scuruy, wee haue tryed in New-found land, that the tops and leaues of Turneps, or Radish being boyled, is a soueraigne helpe. And also that Neetle∣seede, and Hony, with a little Wormwood is expedient. To conclude, Goose-dung being mixed with Meale and Butter, will serue for a Pultes to the tumours or outward griefes, caused through this sicknesse to abate the
inflammations, and the spots, and vlcers; yea, and if their stomackes could away with the loathsome taste with a few cloues in drinke, it will cure the Scuruy sud∣dainely, as they in Zealand haue often tryed. A Pomander to be vsed at Sea, a∣gainst the noysome sent of the Ship. This Pomander will much auayle a∣gainst such offensiue smells: Muske three graines, Saffron one scruple, so much of Cloues and Nutmegs, halfe a dragme of Masticke, of Laudannu on ounce, let these with two dragmes of white waxe bee rowled and stirred together in a hote mor∣tar. As for the poore, they may vse the rind of Oranges, Lemons, or the roote of Angelica. Agaiast violent vomiting at Sea. Let him drinke Worme-word wine, or the salt of Worme-wood in Beere or wine. A bagge of dryed Mintes layd to the sto∣macke is singular good in that case. Like∣wise,
this medicine taken and eaten in the morning, will strengthen the stomacke: One cloue or two of Garlicke, two or three Almonds, two or three Cloues, and a little Ginger, let these be moistned with halfe a spoonefull of Vinegar. After meales Coriander Comfits, or Quince mamelate is commodious. For the first three dayes, let him feede sparingly, and vse Capers or Oliues, with his meate. Remedies to preserue the Members from the discommodities of the Frost, Iee, Snow, and cold Windes. Let not the party presently enter into a warme roome, or two neere the fire, but by little and little let him approach or re∣mayne in a temperate Roome. Let the frozen and congealed members be annoyn∣ted ouer with the Oyle of Chamomell, if the strong smell offend him not, or with Oyle of Lillies, or else with sallet Oyle and salt somewhat warme. And about halfe an houre after that hee bee put a Bed, let him drinke a cup of Wine or Beere well mulled or heated with pepper
rudely brayed and put in a piece of cloath for feare of offending the throate. Let him hold in his mouth some hote spice, as Cinnamon, Ginger, Aoes, Cloues, or Pepper. Garlicke boyled in milke, or Beere, will suffice in this extreamity for the poorer sort. In briefe, if there be any doubt, that some member is almost stupified with Colde, specially with the Frost, let that member be held in cold water for a while, that it may soften and so by degrees return to the temper. The poore may in default of a better Oyntment, before and after their returne home-wards, annoynt their hands and feete with bruised Garlike, tempred with Oyle or Butter, if they cannot haue some of the Oyles aboue named in the former Section. To preserue the Eyes from Snow, which sometimes as the more excellent, annoyes the lesse: A piece of blacke-stuffe or cloath hoden in the hands, and often lookt on, wil performe the same, and defend the sight from iniury. Aboue all, let not the Party go abroad fasting.
The ninth SECTION. Remedies against other Sicknesses incident at Sea, or Land. Against the heat of the Sto∣macke, and to preuent the Calenture, and other Feuers. SYrupus acetosus simplex in this case, is highly commended by Ranzouius, as also to preuent Feuers, which kinde of Syrupe is made of Water-sugar, and Vinegar, as Oximell is made with ho∣ny. Hee that vseth the same shall hardly bee infected with any kinde of Feauer, nor be troubled with the Asthmaticke passion, or Tysicke. In the beginning of a Feauer, the Syrup, or Looch of Poppy, is conuenient both to coole the Body, and to procure sleepe. And so is a Glister or Suppositary, in the beginning of any sicknesse. A Friend of mine who had beene sundry Voyages in the Indies, and within the Tropickes assured me, that when most of his People had beene often sicke at Sea of
Calentures and burning Feuers, hee euer escaped. And the meanes which hee dis∣closed vnto me were these: He vsed euery day to sip a spoonefull of the iuice of Le∣mons, and in default thereof, he accustomed to drinke often a beuerage of Vinegar and Water. And lastly, euery day hee bathed and washed his fundament with cold wa∣ter, which is the chiefest way, that the Turkes, Arabians, and Moores doe purifie themselues before their Sabathes, and during the time of their Fasts. Aboue all, our Dyet, or that which our Mariners call Lob-lolly, will serue them for nourishment at Sea. A Powder to be vsed eyther on Land, or Sea, to defend a man against sicknesse. Take of dryed Rose leaues three drams, of Lignum Aloes halfe a dragm, of Licoras, Nutmegs, and Saffron, of each a scruple, of Muske foure or fiue graines. Make all these into fine powder, and then quilt it in a piece of Taffata, or Sarcenet, and weare it on the left side of the Breast. An Electuary against melancholly Passons,  and to make the heart iouiall and merrir. Take of the conserues of Roses two Ounces, of the conserues of Buglosse, and
Marigold, of each one ounce, of Cinnamon one dragme well powdred. Forme these into an Electuary with two ounces of the Syrupe of Poppy, and at your going to Bed take the quantity of a Nutng. A description of certaine Pils to procure sleepe and to open obstructions. Take of the powder of Alkekenge with out Opium two dagmes, of Opium on diagme and a halfe wel beaten, with one ounce of Sugar-candy. The which with syrupe of Licras must be made in a Masse, and then diuided into Pils and swallow them. They will serue for two or three times. A drinke to ripen and ure the Cough. Take of the syrupe of Enulacampana and Licoras of each two ounces, of Hysop wa∣ter a quarter of a pint. Boyle these in a quart of Ale or Beere, with some red sugar candy to a pint, and drinke thereof two or three spoonefulls at a time, lying on your backe, and letting it distill downe your throate, by little and little. To preuent the Palsie. Nothing is better then to eate some Di∣atrion Pperior, or to swallow downe in the morning foure or fiue graines of pepper.
The Cure of the Winde in the Stomacke, and the Collicke. Commonly this Infirmity hapneth for want of stirring and exercise, or by eating of Fish, Fruite, or the like windy food in greater aboundance then Nature is able to beare without Belching, Rumbling, or the like commotion in the Stomacke; which sometimes descending lower downe into the Guts, before the former meate bee fully digested, begets more strength of winde, so that betwixt the olde excre∣ments and the new, this grieuous payne called the Collcke, is ingendred. For the Cure whereof, if the Wind pro∣ceedes from heate by drinking of Sacke, or strong Liquor, or in the Summer, first let him abstayne from those causes, and take a Glister made of Sugar, Milke, and some cooling Hearbes, or of Broath where in Raisons, Prunes, or Currants haue beene sodden, or where Diaprunis is dissolued, with some Anniseeds. And for a Topicke Medicine, to fortifie and ease the place af∣fected for the present, let the Party apply a dryed Rose-cake somewhat warme, and
besprinkled with a few drops of Vinegar to the Belly. The poorer sort may clap warme trenchers or napkins. But if the Collicke be ingendred of the Colde, as in Winter, or by feeding on moyst and raw sustenance; I wish the poore to con∣tent themselues with Garlicke boyled, or raw. And for the Richer sort, I prescribe this singular Receit, Take Venice Treacle or Mthridate with a few beaten Cloues, dissolued and mulled in a cup of Wine. Or in default thereof, a spoonefull or two of Worme-wood, Cinnamon, or Anniseede Water, or some liquour wherein Pepper hath beene soaked. Diatrien Pperion al∣so eaten is exceeding good, fasting, or at going to bed. And for a locall Remedy, let him put dryed Cammomill betwixt two linnen cloathes to the Belly. Or for want there∣of the Oye, or Paracelsus his stipticke playster, the place being first annoynted with that kind of Oyle, or with that of Roses. Against the euill disposition of the Body, as the Dropsie, the Greene∣sicknesse, and the like. Take of Allom, Brimstone, and of the
fiings of iron, or steele of each a handful. In∣fse them bruised in three quarts of white wine Vinegar three dayes, and let the Party adde thereof a spoonefull at a time to euery draught of drinke. Likewise a Posset made of Allome, will correct this ill dispositi∣on of the Body. Rmedies for the straightnesse of the Breast, and the rising of the Lights. Some do highly commend Quicke Sul∣phur beaten to powder, and well mixed with Sugar Caudy, to be taken either alone or with Wine. Others at the time of the fit, do aduise to giue him Vinegar Scillitick with Ammoniacke dissolued. Fracastorius extolies Lungwort, eyther of the Oke or Iu∣niper; liewise the smoake of Sandaraca, o Opiment in the manner as I haue shew∣ed in my Booke of Directions for Health. But in truth the Foxes Lights soaked for three dayes in Vinegar, and afterwards dryed in an Ouen, being taken to the quan∣tity of a Nutmeg, eyther alone, or with some Liquor, is the best Remedy, aswell for this infirmity, as for the Cough procee∣ding of the difficulty of breathing, for it
is knowne, that of all Creatures the Foxe hath the longest breath, and strongest Winde. In default of the substance, the common Receite called Looch de Pul∣one Vulpis is expedient. Remedies for the Gout, whether it pro∣ceed from Hot or Cold Causes. First let him betake himselfe, if he can, to our Dyet. Secondly, let him beware of all strong Drinkes and Wine. Thirdly, let him purge himselfe with the Potion of Hermodcls, Mchoa∣can, &c. which I haue before described a∣gainst the Scuruy: Or else let him vse Pil∣luae Cochiae which drawes awayes the cau∣ses from the Head. And these Purga∣tions hee shall vse once a moneth. And if there bee cause, let him bleede some∣times. Fourthly, let him exercise. Fiftly, let him annoynt for a locall Lenitiue the place affected with Oyle of Frogs, or of Mirrh, eyther alone, or with a little Saffron, and if the paine bee violen, with some Opium.
But indeede to mollifie and asswage the griefe, for the richer sort, I aduise them neuer to bee without this precious Cata∣plasme. Take of dried Rose leaues one Ounce, of Masticke halfe an Ounce, of Saffron one dragme, of Campher sixteene graines, and of Barly meale two ounces. Powre thereon as much white wine, as wil make them boyle, which must bee gently, al by leasure. and often stirred. The tenth SECTION. Remedies against the odious and vnhealthfull vice of Drunkenesse. The Authors admonitory Conclusion, to liue soberly and temperately. FOr the shutting vp of these particu∣lar Cures, I will insert this Corollary, which I wish all them that haue a care of their healths, daily to reuolue in their mindes, being drawne out of Hip∣pocrates his golden Aphorismes: That whatsoeuer Nourishment enters into an
impure Body, will make it the more im∣pure. But there is one Sicknesse more, which rightly may be stiled the Northerre Ca∣tholicke, crept among vs within these for∣ty yeares, the sinne of Drunkennesse, brought hither out of Germany, and the Low-Countries, which beares such sway, that few merite the name of Gallants, or sociable Creatures, vnesse they can Ca∣rouse more Cups, then the large Body of a Camell is able to brooke, without great al∣teration in Nature. For the suppressing of this odious sick∣nesse, we haue laudable Acts of Parliament, but for want of due execution of the Lawes it increaseth to the great displeasure of Al∣mighty God, the scandall of our Religi∣on, and the grieuous disturbance of their Bodies, which wee see drooping away daily, before the date of life conditiona∣ly granted vnto vs by our Creator. What shall wee do in this desperate case? Our Statutes faile to remedy this euill: Our Preachers with their thundring Woes misse to reforme it: The carefull Cure is neglected; for most men now a dayes doe more intend their priuate ends, then the
publicke good. Only this prouident Coun∣sel is left, which I submit in most hum∣ble manner to the higher Powers, that some more Additions bee enacted, that in such places as lye remote from the meri∣dian of the Fountayne of Iustice, all blind Ale-houses bee suddainly put downe, that none be Licensed, except they were worth twenty pounds at the least in Goods, able to keepe Bedding, with sufficient mans meate, and Horse-meate, that all such as frequent these infamous Houses, especially within seauen miles of their dwelling places, or vpon the Lords Day, may bee bound to their good behauiour, and that during the time of their Bonds, they to be debarred of bearing Witnesse betweene party and party, seeing that it is likely common Drunkards care not what they sweare. Secondly, that they shall not vexe their Neighbours with Law-suites, vntill they be released and become new men: Or else, that they shall stand as persons Out-lawed▪ or Excommunicated out of true Christi∣ans Society. Thirdly, that those Officers, in whose diuision these offences shall bee commit∣ted,
shall without delay see the Penalt∣ties ordayned by Law inflicted, and tha the negligent as accessary bee seuerely-punished. Fourthly, and because Seruants in most of our Gentries Houses are also in∣fected with this Pestilent abhomination, it were fit, that they build new Cellars neere their Parlours, where their Mai∣sters Eye might curbe them, if they meete not with sober Butlers to restraine them. In these latter times people are be∣come so besotted with this abhomina∣ble Vice, that no Admonition can pre∣uayle to with-draw them from it: Whereas in times past the very sight of a Drunkard was as rare as a Goblins; Yea, and if it chanced that any one were but seene reeling in the Streetes, the very Boyes would whoote, and laugh him to scorne, vntill such time as the Magistrate or the Gouernour came, and brought him to the Stockes, or commit∣ted him to prison. But now it is growne so common, that they account it a glorious Act,
and the Musick must play while the health goes round. It is recorded, that the godly Mouica the mother of St. Augustine, beeing but once vpbrayded by a Seruant in the house, that she loued the Wine bottle, she took it for such a disgrace, that neuer after shee dranke one drop of Wine more, as long as shee liued. Platerus makes mention in his practize of Physicke, that hee knew a Noble-man who being diseased of the Goute, and in∣formed by his Physitian that his drinking of Wine and strong Liquor had caused his infirmity, he made a vowe neuer to drink any such Liquor more, which hee religi∣ously kept, and in the stead thereof drank nothing but small Cider, or Veriuice. Whereby he was quite cured of the Gout, without any other Medicine. The like I haue heard of an Hydropicke person, who hauing experimented, that drinke produced and augmented his Di∣sease, hee resolued neuer to drinke more, but contenting himselfe with Broathes, and the like moyst suppings, hee was neuer after-wards troubled with the Dropsie.
To draw our Newlanders Cure now to a Period, let mee intreate all them, which haue any feeling of Sobriety, and of the necessity, wherein our Christian Common wealth stands at this present time, to lay aside their captious Criticismes, and car∣ping censures, together with their need∣lesse Feasts, and in good earnest to em∣brace my Counsell in some measure, if they cannot as yet apply their wills to the stint, which is heere prescribed. I know the impediment proceedes of Custome, and this Custome can hardly bee altered, (ex∣cept the Spirit of God will co-operate,) without some offence to concupiscence. Such is the lamentable obstinacy of many hare-brain'd worldlings now a dayes, that Parents cannot without great difficul∣ty with-draw their owne Bowels from following their boone Companions, and roaring Gallants, whose conuersation but for a few dayes they haue frequented. How much harder then is it to diswade men from those prouocations, which from their Childe-hood they haue continued? The most part presuming on their Consti∣tutions and present strength, suppose, that all the Meate, which they ordinarily feede
vppon, and the Carouses which they swallow, cannot much impayre them. Nay, they will constantly auouch, that it is a signe of Health to drinke Healths, or to eate soundly, whereas they bee but baytes of Pleasure, so that Greedinesse knowes not, where Necessity should e ended, or Nature limitted, as Saint Augustine a∣gaynst Iulian, Lib. 4. Cap. 14. Existiman∣tes nos adhuc agere negotium valetudinis, cum agamus potius voluptatis. It a nescit cupiditas, vbi finiatur Necessitas. But men of vnderstanding will consider, that most of the Bodies sicknesses and vnruly Passions doe arise from the wanton Palate, and that whatsoeuer enters into the Bo∣dy, which the Stomacke cannot perfectly concoct, must needes exceede the true Quantity, which Nature allowes, and so turne to noysome Humours at the last, in despite of Nature. Yee that bee Parents, shall heere learne to weane your Infants with a better Dyet, then with Flesh and Fish; which will rotte and corrupt their tender bo∣dies. Yee, that be Rich, accept of this Trea∣sure, Diuine Sobriety, which will infuse
into your hearts, modest content∣ment. Yee, that be Poore, shall heere learne Frugality, at a cheepe rate. Yee, that bee Young, shall bee taught Continency. Yee, that are Elder, and therfore should be wiser, shall meete here with health and long life. Heere, yee shall finde all your Sences re∣fin'd, aswell the Inward as the Outward. Heere, from temperate heate issue tempe∣rate Effects. The Blood spreads gently through the Veines; the Spirits through the Arteries: And the Soule by Vertue of this Heauenly Gift, beeing as it were dis∣charged of her Massie load, and loathsome Lumpe, hath now some experience of her Liberty, aud that by this Puri∣fication shee is not farre from Glorifica∣tions. In a word, Deare Country-men, con∣demne not this Cure before you Read, or make some tryall of the Substance. The time requires it. For the Misery of Ini∣quity is permitted to acte the last Tragedy of Spirituall Wickednesse in Heauenly matters.
But yee who are enabled to liue tempe∣rately, neede not feare as long as yee con∣tinue stedfast in Faith: Your Olde men shall dreame Heauenly Dreames, your Young men shall see Visions, your Sonnes and Daughters shall Prophesie, your Seruants and Maides shall bee inspired with the Holy Ghost, according to the Prophesie of Il.
Authoris Epilogus de Repletionis & Ebrietatis incommodis. ECce Nouae Terrae Fructus, mensura Diata, Lux reouata, salus, spes, et medicina dolorū. Pone modum ventri Deus imperat, accpe sanum Consilium, compesce gulam, suspede furres. Heu quantes qualesque facit Repletio morbos! Ex hoc Fonte flunt animi deliria Motus: Corporis hinc omnes agores, Asthmata, Tusses, Multiplices Febres, Hydrops, nodos Poagra, Et quot quot memorare horret mens sana (meatus So fertè obstruerent mixti cum Bile vapores,) Ni stella numerare velis, laterem{que} lauare: Curridere solent Nebulonum turba profaa, Scurrilbus{que} socis Sanctorum corda graare? Dum ceuet Damocles, vas saeuire Cyclopas. Post cyathos in Membra Det, potos{que} Thrasones Consilij latebras Parasitis pandere nou; Cur iurat Mars iuris inops? Cur iurgia, Lites, Et pugnas Lapithae de lanâ saepè caprinà Imiscent saturi? phantasma volubile Bacc Crede malos Gentos in tanta pericula ferre: Aerei ludunt sic inter vina Dapes{que}, Graeculus vt Rhetor, sit Gracculus ille Poeta; Gloria sola Deodetur, qui Flamine sancto Auoct a vitijs, Christo diate, Britannos.
THE Newlanders Cure. THE Second PART. Muse on the Matter, More then the Meeter. The first SICTION. The Preparatius to the Cure of the Mindes In∣firmities; wherein the Author by the disco∣uery of his owne Imperfections in his World∣ly Race and Course of life, admoisheth all o∣thers his Fellow Christians to Repent and Confese their sinnes in time. Morstua, Mors Christi, Fraus mundi, gloria Coeli; Et Dolor Inferni sunt meditanda tibi. THinke on your Owne, and Christ his Death, The Iudgement Day, and Hell beneath: Thinke also on bright Heauens Ioyes, For Worldly Hopes are Dreames and Toyes. What are our Pompe, Wealth, Beauty, Fame? But Braine-sicke snares, and Wares too blame?
What Age like our so crackt with Irres? Yet crakes of Loue, prouoking Warres? Proud Nabal, stoope; preuent thy woes, Make peace, and Friends take not for Foes. Iust Dauid did thy Flockes no hame, Nay, they were shielded by his Arme. If to his God thou tell thy Sinnes, Hee'le save thee from the Philistines; But if his Dauids thou abuse, Repentancelate will not excuse, If Misers Guilt thou iustifie, Or Humane Pompe dost glorifie; Or Hypocrues thou magnifie; Or thine owne worth not vilifie; This CVRE will prooue a stumbling blocke, And to such Fooles a laughing stocke. The same, yet I am confident, Shall not displease the Penitent: Nor any Soule of Saints Communion, That doth partake of Christian Union. Those watchfull Spirits long to see, A true Physiian without Fee. In briefe, let me be sayd to Doate, If I shew not an Antidote, Against the World, the Flesh, and Diue, Or at the least against some Euill. And sure, vnlesse they meane to fall. My Patients will admit of all
This Cure, which Newland for the Old, And Sickly offers to vnfold. But first, their Faultes they must Confesse, Or else they dye Remedilesse. They must likewise abandon strife, And Vow to God a better life; Then out of hand beginne to day, Deare Penitents; time flyes away: Beginne, and I a Sinner too Will prompt what you shall fayle to do. Wee heere before thy Maiesty, Dread Lord, present Iniquity, Layd bare without Hypocrisie, The which from Adams Leaprosie Of sinne deiu'd, wee all inherite, And for the same Hells flames do merite. O giue vs Grace Vice to displace, To cleanse our selues, while we haue space: If we Repent, thou heal'st our Sinnes, And wee shall shine like Cherubins. But what am I, whom for thy Glory, Thy Spirit mooues to pen this Story? This little one, like Zoar, where Thy Seruants may behold with feare Gomorraes flame, old Babels shame; And those new sinnes, which vs defame? This Charge became a Leuites zeale, To ring it out with louder peale:
How can thy Gifts in me reside, That am not cleane, nor purifi'd? In Aprill dayes with hare-brain'd fury Led, topsie turuy I did hurry For Worldlings praise, and thankes to curry, Whereby thy Motions I did hury. What then I wrought was to gaine Fame, A blazing blast, to raise my Name. But now I see that I went wrong, For Honors all to thee belong. And whosoeuer goes about To lay thy Goods for his owne out, Usurpes, and steales part of thy Glory, Which made bright Angels darke and sorry. My Summers growth I spent in folly, And gaue my selfe to Passions wholly: To scrape and gape for Golden Dayes, Neglecting what the Gospell sayes: O Foole, this Night Ile snatch thy Soule, Who shall thy Fortunes then controule? My loyes were Toyes, my Cares bred Tares; Thus caught with Snares, I sought false Wares. Thus Dregges to God, to Mammon Wine, In my best Race I did assigne. How then shall I in Autumne now Reape Profit, when I faild to Sow? When Libra for my late repaire, Beginnes to dye my Amber Haire:
Shall I with Saints a gleaning goe, Who, like a Foe, did Time forgoe? O Gracious God, that giuest hire, And with new fire dost men inspire. My Euenings worke thou well dost like, For thy Sunne alwayes shines alike, On Publicans, whose hearts relye Upon Christs merites, those which flye From thee displeas'd to thee appeasd, In hope of Debts to be releasd. O what braue sparklings of thy Lou, Appeare in such, who Sinnes reprooue? I feele some heate by this Remonstrance, To rouze my heart with quicke Repentance. Let Pick-thankes with Ambition swell, Till thou blow'st them from Earth to Hell: Wee on no Creatures dare relye, But heere before thee humbled lye. Whether thou scourge, or vs will purge, Wee will not cease thy Grace to vrge: Yea, though thou hale vs in a rope, Like Sampson bound, yet we will hope. With Dalilaes we dallied long; But now wee sing another Song. When our Confessions mooue to pitty, We then shall frame a sweeter Ditty. Lord, after shrift renew thy fires, Deuotions flames, in our desires.
The second SECTION. The Description, Confession, and Effects of our Common sicknesses, which by the temptations of the Wolrd, the Flesh, and the Diuell, di∣stemper most Mindes in this latter age, where∣n the weaknès of our Common Writers is taxed. VVE brag of Faith, heere Sathan lurkes, For in Good workes we liue, like Turkes. Pure Saints, or Angels wee would seeme, Yet Golden ones wee more esteeme. Wee feed like Kings, are seru'd in State, And make vs Gods of siluer Plate. We chop and change, in Pride wee ruffle, And more for Goods, then Good do scuffle. Wee plod on Protects, more then Zeale, On priuate ends, then Common-weale. Plaine dealing men wee floue, like Fiends: And Sycophants wee trust, as Friends. We count it lawfull to deceiue, Where Gifts vnpunisht wee receiue. VVe fee the Lawyers, full of Gall, VVhile starued Soules for Vengeance call. How many Thousands pine at Home, Though Newfound Land yeelds Elbow roome?
But sinke or swimme, say greedy Elues; None helpes to Plant; all for themselues. They Rob too soone those Infants milke, Which might bring Gold, Salt, Iron, Silke. But why should I for Newland speake, Whilst that the Old doth languish weake? And like to starue in midst of store, Which hath enough, yet couets more? So haue I seene Hydropickes pale Swell big, and dye, with bibbing Ale. Our Minds more Weake in Resolution, Compared to the Antient Nation. Search further, Muse, but with Compassion, And see, how comes this Alteration? The Times precedent had their faults; Wee haue their Old and New assaults. Their Traditions, Superstitions, Times Reuolutions, Constellations: Fiends slye Stratagems, and Temptations, Diuells incarnates Combinations. All these with our New Prouocations Worke; and we feele their Operations. Most Men are bad in eu'ry Trade, Eu'n from the Scepter to the Spade. The Greatest still prey on the Lesse, And spend those preyes in foule Excesse, Witnesse our ioyning Farme to Farme, Peruerting Wealth to Neighbours harme.
Witnesse our Drinkings, wasting Health, Our giddy Smoakes, and deedes by stealth, What mishapen Apish Fashions, Are deriu'd from foolish Passions? Our Purles, rare Pearles, and rich Array, An Armies Charge might well defay. Our Thoughts are in Prides Altitude; Old Sacke-cloaths weare is Clownish rude. Contritions Haire-cloath wee contemne, Nunnes Tyres and Hrmits wee condemne. In stead of these, each Groome exceedes, In Satans Veluet, gorgeous Weedes. In stead of these, now Virgins shine In Church vnmaskt, with Feathers sine. st not a shame, that flaunting Gllians Dare there to tempt against Tertullians Aduise? who barr'd the Affricke Mayde Gods Honse to enter so array'd? Christs Seamelesse Coate would hardly passe Without a Frump. A two-legg'd Asse, They would nicke-name a Minister, If the Frize Casske hee preferre, Preaching against rich sken Stuffe, The Beauer Ha, and swagging Ruffe. Na, English Cloath wee sarce a low, Vnlesse thicke Laces wee bestow: Vnlesse it be, like that in Grae, O abls Beast, or Whooish Traine.
Like VVeather-cockes, our Appetite In many Changes takes delight: For which Men taxe the Female kinde: When both are Moone-sicke, worse then wind. The Raine-bow, Peacocke, or what hew Cameleons shift, so it be new, Or thought Out-landish, that we like; And presently the same dislike. Our Eyes are Witches to our VVits, But why loues Reason Fancies fits? Our Foes vnseene, vs idle finde, And by their wheeling lead the Mind. The Mould of Reason thus made pliant By Fiends rampant and luxuriant, The Braine must needs grow wilde with weeds Whence fall bad seedes, to choake good deeds. Such spite haue they inueterate, To make Mankinde turne Reprobate, That they omit no trickes of State, To lead them to a shamefll Fate, Like to their owne depraued quite; From which, but Christ, none can acquite. Sometimes they play the Lyons part, But commonly vse Foxe-like Art. Now they ike Apes, or Puppets dance; Aon in Horses shape they praunce. Go on, Proud Steedes, men are not well, But hurri'd in a foure-whee'd Shell.
With whimseyes doubts yee tempt the Holy, But Worldly Soules, with costly Folly. Those meanes, which God gaue for his Glory, To helpe the Poore, in Pride yee bury. O Stings! O stormes of Ghostly Foes, Which now Great Brittaine vndergoes! When Christ should reape his Haruest pure, His Angels finde vs all impure. Wee see the Gospels radiant Light, Yet darkling hunt like Birds of Night. VVe euer please the out-ward sence, But leaue the Inside without fence. Our Petty-fogging liberty, Helpes to aduance impiety. But Athens now, and Courts of Law, Had neede themselues be kept in awe, By Stickes more graue, to beate downe Vice Or Thunders sonnes to satirize. The truth is, without Discipline, Our Bees turne Drones, and will decline From Charity, and vertuous Thrift, To idlenesse, and basest shift. Fond Company wee more affect, Then sober Friends, or Gods Elect. The Baffoones irry meery Buffe, Stae Scoggins ests, wis Scullions stuffe, Base Mimcke skoffs, broad scuie tauts, VVith Baggadochian thundring Vaunts,
Stupendious Lyes of Balladry; All which with Tales of Rybaldry, False coyned Newes, and old Wiues fables We Grace, cu'n at our open Tables. Wee glut our guts with luscious cheere, And seldome Fast scarce once a Yeare. Nor then know wee to Mortifie, Or the proud Flesh to vilisie. Wee often Read of Vanity, But seldome Bookes of Piety. Such glistring Baites do hooke vsin, And make vs doate on shining Sinne. Our Stage-playes, Maskes, and Mummeries, What are they else but Fopperies? And Lullabies to rocke a sleepe Soules, that should wake, or rather weepe? What noble Flames doe some inioy? And yet their Talents mis-impoy? The very Best of their Inuentions, They giue for Baudes, to Lords intentions. Of Heauen these Promethean Rakers, Vnworthymen would make partakers. Wisedome is painted a pure Mayde; The Sisters Nine are Virgins stayd. If of their Court our Schollers bee, Why doethey stayne their chast degree? Begetting mungrell monstrous Notions? And giuing way to wanton Motions?
The Graces three haue no lewd Tricke: Why then doe learned Spirits kicke, Like Pampred Iades, more then befits The Sonnes of Art? corrupting Wits With glozing Bookes of Chualry? Or Legends false of Popery? If from Aboue, their Dowries came, Why doe our Chams vncouer shame? Why doe they claw Times Fooleries? Why doe they winke at Knaueres? Why dare they not the Greatest make To startle? and at Vice to quake? Tis true; they Greatnesse feare and losse, But who so feares, reiects the Crosse: That Crosse, which Christians vnder-went Of the best stampe, and element. Huisht, Cowards then: Your Taients hide, Vntill Christs Audit still vntri'de. Some for Despite doe Libels thunder: Others for Glory, nine dayes wonder. But most doe fawne, like Strumpets bold, And prostitute in hope of Gold. On Honors bought they wag their Tailes, To Mammon they strike downe their Sailes. Fraile Beauty some with Heath'nish Rimes Court, wasting so their precious Times. A Goddesse, Starre, an Angels mate, Of Dust and Ashes they Create.
The wonder of Celestiall Creatures, The Paragon of Earthly features: The goodiest Nymph, which Nature made, At whose faire sight all Beauties fade. Both Sunne and Moone eclipsed stand, Till they her Pleasure vnderstand. No maruaile then, that I her Slaue, At her east Frowne amazed raue. VVith such besainting, and for Gold, Our simpring shees are bought and sold. But O what Antickes doe I see? VVith Musicke loud about a Tree? Tripping it on the Saboath Day, And kissing oft their Marians gay? Thus our best dayes wee foole away. Some Pill and Poll, aliue some flay. Some roare, and some, like Asses, bray. Some skoffe and lye, some laugh and play At Cards and Dice whole winter Nights, In Summer dayes with Dogs and Kites. Here stands one curling (Pockey-full) His Perrowicke; another Gull Out-vies his fellow Gull in Oathes; And Complements, whom hee most loathes▪ Of Pedigrees that Scoundrell vauntes, Caling true worth with floutes and tauntes An vpstars Dwarfe, whilst hee most mad, Prates, how for Sires hee Giants had.
This Noddy feares proud Hamans Nods, As Fooles do sprights, or Schoole-boyes Rods. But who lewd Courtiers so obserues, Loud Carters lashes Beast deserues. Another studies how to traine, More Clients in for cursed Gaine. Physitians now, and Lawyers oyne, To spin long Cures, and Suites for Coyne In elder dayes what by our Toyle VVas gain'd, became the Clergies spoyle. But now the Lawyers keepe a Coyne, And reape vpon their Neighbours soyle. As those did quaile, so these may fayle, Or be restrayned, without Bayle; VVhen Charity shall more preuaile, Their double-tongues some will bewayle. They worship Gold in generall: Yet some feare God, I taxe not all. But these Good-men how to discerne, VVhen needfull Suites doe vs concerne; VVe must at Noone haue Candle-light, Or Prophets gift, to saue our Right. Most Students do Trades-men resemble; Since Both for Custome can dissemble. In hugger-mugger many Bribe, Ds if they were of Magus Tribe. If such bee not in Brittane found, Let Simonists of Forraigne ground,
Redeeme their Schooles, and Cloyster-cowles, From Chaffring, and the sale of Soules. Nay, let our Foes feare gaping Hell, If Seates of Iustice they dare sell: Or if to those they Men preferre, Who formerly were knowne to Erre. In what a fearefull Case are those, Who Worldly Fortunes so dispose, As if our God were fast a sleepe? And did not see what rule they keepe? Me thinkes, I see our Fluttring Foes, Watching their time to breath in woes, Vnder pretence of seeming Good, Like him, that beares vnder one Hood A double face, with fained Grace. They blow a pace, till they get place Within the Spirits and the Blood: Where they worke Gall of humours good. This poysn'd Gall, the Soules blacke laundies, Prickes so, that Man on Cocke-horse bandies Against his God, and Natures Law, That Grafts this Rule with filiall aw: Who lets not sinne, if so he can, Consents to it a wicked man. Some yearely rayse a greater Rent, By Interest for Mony lent, Then Maltaes lew of Foes did take; For to the Bones these Men doe rake.
I blame not lawfull Permutation, (But with a sober limitation,) Vtopian-like, to barre Commerce; But common scandals I rehearse To them, who sell their Goods too deare, Or them, that sheare Christs sheepe too neere. More Lay-mens griefes I could reueale, Which shame from Muttring bids conceale. Yet wants there not some Nightingall, Like sweete Saint Paul, to touch them All. Those Practises now passe for Good, Which Noah saw before the Flood. Some Build, some Buy, some cheate, and borrow. Whilst the next Morrow steales on sorrow.
The third SECTION. That the most part of our pretended Christians are infectea with some of the afore-sayd infir∣mities, and that all carnall pleasure shall end in paine. THese Mad Conceites bewitch vs all, Yet Luatickes who dare vs call? These I doll lusts wee hugge in Spirit, Yet doe we boast of Zeale and merit. Like bawling Curres, we barke at Vice, VVe Rayle on Brbes and Auarice: VVe Blame the Whore, and idle Drone, But who throwes guiltlesse the first stone? Many finde fault with swinish Drunkards, Themselues rebellics vnder Placards. The Blind-mn cals his Brother, Blinkard. The Pockey  his fellow, stinkard. Thus others Bots wee quickly score, When we deserue correction more. When Iudgement Conscce shall controle, The purest souls will prooue but foule. Here lures a Toad, a Srpent there, Sharpe stings and poyson eu'ry where.
The Preacher wrot; all is but Uaine: But I dare Write, all ends in paine. What cares haue wee, what toyle, what paine; These seeming pleasures to obtayne? And once obtain'd, what's then our Minde? But Neighing new and more to finde? No Earthly thing brings much content, But afterwards breedes discontent, Which Aams Apple wee may call, Both bitter sweete, and Honey'd Gall. Ioy surfits some; some pine with Paine; Yet the partake in Sinne and Raine. Death spares nor Rich, Poore, Poole, nor Wise; For All must fall before they Rise; The Crowne, which Royall browes adornes, Within is Nettles, Prickes, and Thornes: Feares Discontents, want of Treasure, Iealous of Neighbours, Leagues vnsure. Nor liue our Grandes without trouble, Their Pompe to double, though a bubble. The Midling and the Lowest sort, Grieue to maintayne the Lawyers Port. Thus Christians as a Tennis Ball, Tost by themselues, are prone to fall. Yet None beginne to looke for ease, But thinke of Iarres instead of Peace.
The fourth SECTION. The Description of the Catholicke Scuruy, in∣gendred by the Mystery of Iniquity, the Glo∣rious manifestation whereof had beene restray∣ned and sealed vp by the Angell, vntill 1000. yeares were expired, for the hardnesse of our Fore-fathers hearts. NOt onely these doe vs disease, But onely Ills disturbe our ease. Tis found, that most Diseases tend, And to the Scuruy power lend, To torture Slugs, who nastily Were Cloath'd, or fed too greedily. Great Fends likewise, and Men Soule-sicke, Hell's Scuruy make a Catholicke, With Murthers, Lyes, Hypocrisies, Idolatries, and Blasphemies. As doth the former Scuruy beate, For want of Sunne and Motions heate, Vpon the Spleene, the Breath, and Skinne: So doth that old and Scuruy sinne With Purple spots go on to stayne Both Soule and Body, all for Gaine.
Mens want of Faith, and Scriptures Light, Enwrappes them in blind Aegypts night. Fond quirkes and quillers, Schooles inuentions, Doe hinder them to vse preuentions. But how comes this grosse Sinne to passe In those, who say Christs Blood doth wash, And heaal Plagues, and cancred Lust, By vertue of his Merites iust? When Men distrust the safest way, They cannot chse but goe astray. When Fabells Tower, and Asaes Hopes; When  Gd, and Balish Popes; When Mans posons, rring Braine, They trust, as if Christ dy'd in vaine; When they refuse Gods tendred Motions, And wil carouse false Prophets Potions; Their oules so giutted salla reeling, Like drunen Tosse-pots without feeling. Then Iudgement, Wid, and Memory Depriu'd of Faiths strong Armoy, In blacke Despaire conclude their wayes, And neuer after see good dayes. Or they Presume (a Plague as bad) With too much Learning running mad. These two Extreames, like scorching Sunne, And hideous darknesse, wee must shun. The middle Course with Modesty, Yeeldes some content to Maiesty.
To which adde Faith: then Grace will couer Our brittle Knowledge, and discouer What vengeance more hangs on the Scuruy, Which Christendome turnes topsie turuy With blood, Fraud, Dreames, Ambition, feares, Regardlesse of poore Christians teares: Till He, that Rockes with Thunder teares, He, that controules the Wandring Spheares, Doe by his Light expelling Night Remooue the Beame, that dimmes our sight; And tame the Force of this great Fury, Which wilfully true Faith would bury. The Diuells loose from Bbilon, And waches whom to worke vpon. Old Heresies hee bringeth in: So faire without, and foule within, Some Starres beginne to loose their Light, Which on the Saints shin'd lately bright; And tis most true, some States will rue, If the last Earthquake doe ensue. Proud Gog, and Magogs Horne with eyes, Haue pitcht their Tents to Tyrannize, And Gyant like doe threaten those, Who Lyes and false-hood shall oppose: Those, who serue GOD in Unity, And in the Persons Trinity, They persecute with Fire and Sword, And vow to raze his Written Word,
(Which now hath flourisht many yeares, In spight of Balaam, and his Peeres.) And make vs bow to Romes Mark' Rabble, Their Mazzims God, and Masses Bable. A thousand Yeares by Treachery, And iuggling Trickes, this Mistery Shut vp and seal'd, gul'd faithlesse slaues, But now against Gods Church it aues, That Church, which then for few assign'd, To Deserts fled for feare confin'd, And acts the last red Dragons part, With open Force and cunning Arte, Let vs (say they) with all our Might, Their consciences at length affright, If our false Fire and wonders faile, Our three Frog-spirits shal preuaile, Whom Caphas curs'd with Booke and Bell, Wee'le sacrifice their Blood to Hell; But before this Desolation, We must bnd the strongest Nation. You heare the Plot, now to preuent These latter Plagues; watch and Repent: For if they bind the Valiant Men, What will become of weaklings then? When God remoues his Candlesticke, Hells darknesse more will make vs sicke.
The fift SECTION. The emminent Dangers of this great and Mysti∣call Disease ouer Great Brittaine, by a Re∣flection of those Tibulations, which our Fel∣low Members haue lately endured beyond the Seas, and may hereafter light vpon vs, if wee preuent them not by speedy Repentance. BEhold the sad and riuel'd Face Of Rochell, once the strongest Place Of Christendome, now made a slaue? And forc't for Light to cye and craue. Behold the Land of Casimire, On Khines faire Bankes, whom France did hire, To saue her Church New-Built from fire; Now poore, disrob'd of her Attire. In like manner, see, how many Bright Uirgins Lampes in Germany, Extinguisht lye, whose glorious Rayes Like Carbuncles, made Nights seeme Dayes. Our Fellow-members reape this Curse; And wee deserue the same, or worse. Their Fatall losse concernes vs neare, And ought to strike a trembing feare.
For if Our Sauiour giues vs ouer, The Cut is short from France to Duer. God may permit the Spanish Nation, By Land and Sea to worke vexation. Or those, that are now Friends, to langle, Or out of Trading vs to wrangle. Or let o de Sathans Sorcery Preaile, to bring in Popery. which if He doe, how stand our Liues, Our Church, our Children, States, and Wiues? In stead of Milke our Younglings lucke Would bee, empoys'ned whay to sucke. All then must to the Shauen Crowne, With the Beasts marke, fall prostrate downe. None Iust, but who to Babell tunne: No Maid made Saint, but a faire Nunne. And shee for Penance must submit, To her Confessours veniall fit. But first Mortmaines must be repeal'd, And Praemunires quite expell'd. If this great Earth-quake shall preuaile, And the Old Dragon with his Taile Draw twinckling Starres from Heauen downe, And forme them Fire-drakes of his owne, Or Watch-men then should heare Brauadoes, And turne or burne, or feele Srapadoes. Our sinnes deserue this darke Eclipse, To kisse the Pax with Who lips.
Wee felt of Warre the discontents, The Pestilence sackt our chiefe Tents: A Famine new creepes in through Raine, From which, Lord, keepe our Soules againe. VVhat dangers more may vs oppose, I haue no warrant to disclose. I dare not to me arrogate, Of Prophesie the certaine Fate. But I could wish, that Harmony Suppli'd the place of Simony: That Iustice, Loue, and Godly zeale, Did raigne in Church and Common-weale And for those Perills, which I feare, Let euery Kna his burthen beare. And iustly too, if they allow For currant Good, the ill they know. They who feele not these Offences, Nor looke helpe, haue lost their sences. But let them get Soules spectacles, And they shall see Gods Miracles: How with a strong and mighty hand, Hee still protected this our Land, Against Romes subiects eu'ry where, VVhile we in Faith couragious were.
The fift SECTION. The imminent Dangers of this great and Mysti∣call Disease, ouer Great Brittaine, by a Re∣flection of those Tribulations, which our Fel∣low Members haue lately endurea beyond the Seas, and may hereafter light vpon vs, if wee preuent them not by speedy Repentance. VVIthin my time I can record, How God kept vs from fire and Sword, From Treasons hatcht in Sathans Den, Beyond beliefe of Mortall men. In Infants Yeares I well remember, Hee sau'd our Churches Royall Member, Elizabeth, from Parries Blow, VVhich though a Child I then did know, For that my Father stood ingag'd, For him to Hare, whereat enrag'd, Because my Father for his Debt, Three thousand pounds, was su'd, hee set Vpon Hgh Hare within his Study, Gaue diuerse stabs, and left him bloody. Then, in despaire hee went beyond Sea, VVas reconcil'd to the Romish Sea:
And there by Comoes Cardinall, Put on to play the Canniball. For comming home, hee hunted further, Scorning Hares the Lyon to Murther. But God did keepe our Lyon Queene, Whom Parry meant to ill vnseene. About that time, the Pote did muster, And out of Ireland thought to thrust her, By Peters Keyes, and Paul his sword, With Desmonds helpe, a pow'rfull Lord. But God lookt downe, and saw their spleene, Hee fought for vs, and for our Queene. Then, Foureteene raytors thought to throw Downe Englands Starre; for they did sow Their seedes of foule Conspiracy, To yoake vs to the Papacy. But God himselfe with hand vnseene, Confounded them, and sau'd our Queene. In Eighty Eight, his Elements Scattred Spaines Fleete, and Regiments; So that for their Atlatides, They sought the Pole at th' Orcedes. Thus God preseru'd a Maide Queene, From Nembrod spite, and Giants teene. When Forces fail'd, Bulls went about, And cunning Iesuites they sent out. They Lopez hir'd with Posncaskil, Both Her, and some great Peeres to kill.
But God protected, though vnseene, Our Faiths Defendresse, Englands Queene After these stormes, the Traytor Squire, By Friers Counsell did Conspire: But e, Tyrone, and all our Foes Had ouer-throwes with Tragicke Wees. For on themselues God turn'd their spleene, And still defended Englands Queene. Againe, the paniaras sought Sea-ports, In Ireana, where they wonne some Forts, And marching on, they thought to boast, But God by Mountioy foyl'd their Hoast, And gaue their Dous vnto our Queene, O whom they meant to wreake their teene▪ O Peerelesse Queene, belou'd of God! Who for thy Zeale wert made his Rod, To chastize Gogs, and Tyrants bold! Which more then him, did worship Gold! Thou didst Spaines Fleetes, and Carracks shale, Thou mad'st the Groine, and Lisbane quale, And mak'st vs tell vnfeigned tales, How God for Thee subdued Cales▪ How He for Thee did scourge New Spaine, Brazil, the Ilands, and the Maine. God gaue the Flemings liberty By thee, and all Prosperty. By thee, great Burbn got his Right, I  and in the Leagues despice.
By thee were ships and Trades sustayned, By Thee at home ws Peace maintayned. By thee, God wrought for his great Glory, This to be writ, in after Story: A Queene debarr'd of Bodies Breed, Of spirit left true Christian seed. Scarce to her Orbe our Virgins Stare VVas gone, but by a Ciul VVare Some Papists thought to worke a side, And our oyn'd Kingdoms to diuide: But Watson and his Complices, Payd deare for these Confedracies. Heere is not all, which I hae knowne, Done by our God for Brittaines Crowne. VVhat Poets pen, or Wit of Man, Is able to expresse, or scan The meanes, how in Nouember wee, On the Fift day, escaped free? When many Papists dd consent, To blowat once our Parliament, With Powder vp into the Ayre, In hope to make our Church despaire? They swore vpon the Sacrament, To keepe full close their Blowes intent. The Iesuite Garnet vnder hand, And others of his Learned band Allow'd it for a pious deede, A Christian King and his Male seed,
To murther, with his Royall Mate, And all our Peeres by suddaine Fate. O Piercy, Catesby, what meant yee, With other Brittaines to agree, To pierce Christ through his seruants sides, In hope of Pardon from blind Guides? Guy Faukes by all the damned Crew, Was set to play the boute-feu. Hee had his Match and all things ready, (Alasse that Christians were so heady) To blow them vp out of the Mine, Fierce Nero like and Catiline. Thus to the end their Treason brought; God counter wrought, what they had wrought, Inspir'd the King to search the matter, Suspected by a mysticke Leter; A Letter sent to braue Mounteagle, Whom Treassams Arte could not inuegi: So all came out, wee sau'd from Fire, And they receiu'd their Treasons hire. Iust as they thought our Church to batter, Gods iustice did their owne limbes scatter. Our Papists also should remember, What on the fifth of their Nouember, At the Blacke-Friers fell on them, Which our Religion did contemne. Their Priest, and those, who then him heard, As sometime were the Swinish Heard,
VVithin the Gospell mentioned, By Miracle lay Ruined. Thus may both Churches vnderstand, The seuerall working of Gods hand On that Fifth Day; a stumbling barre To them, but vnto vs a Starre. To these my ripe Remembrances, I adde our strage Deliuerances, From Pestilentiall Arrowes shot By God himselfe, well-nigh forgot Of those, who were by his Alarme, Like Hezekias, saud from hame. So carelesse in Prosperity Are men, when once Aduersity Is past, that they scarce thinke on VVoes, Vnlesse some chance to interpose Betwixt them and their vanities, Or that they loose Commodities Thereby, although but Temporall. For orders sake they outward call On their Redeemer for a while: But in their sleeues they laugh and smile At their true zeale, who them accuse Of blos, which they could ne're excuse. Such Counterfeites are now a dayes, Ingratefull, base in all their wayes, That to speake truth workes enmity, And to Cologue breedes amity.
How many Sicke haue cured beene? How many Coarses haue I seene On Beeres and carts both Day and Night? Whom houres before in Iouiall plight I knew, not dreaming once, that Death Could stop so soone their vital breath: Yet suddainly, behold a Wonder Done by our Lord the God of Thunder. For sixe Moneths space the Plague continued, And after that all Trades Renued. I saw all Frollicke, Flourishing, As if I saw none perishing. Our Courts of Law againe frequented, VVhich Redding had one Terme preuented. For this, O rittains greatest Citty, Sing to thy God a thankefull Ditty. Admire Christs Mercy, feare thy Iudge, Loue thy poore-Neighbours without grudge▪ Trust not to Faith without this chaine; Least Faith prooue vaine, and end in Paine. By these rare wonders I conceiue, That vnto Men God will not leaue, Vs long a By-word, nor a Prey, If his Sonnes Precepts wee obey. For Carnall faultes, or faielties trips, Himselfe will scouge vs for our slips. But for that great backe-sliding deed, The Soules relapse, let vs take heede.
But how shall wee preuent this, Lord, If thou take hence thy sacred Word, Restored in those Martyres twaine, By Sodomites and Gipsies slaine? It is not long, since they reuiu'd, And by thy Spirit vs relieu'd, At their first comming, as with thunder, Our Worldlings were amaz'd with wounder. The Newes did gall, and them appall, They fear'd the fall of Babels Wall. But now they vaunt, and vs doe taunt, They shuffle Cards, as if at Saunt They playd, and wonne all with the Rhine, And what thou gau'st the Palatine. Wee must acknowledge, most iust God, That wee deserue a sharper Rod, Then these our Neighbours now oppressed, For that thy Gifts wee haue suppressed Aswell as they; in stead of which Our Cae and Care is to be Rich. By odious meanes wee buy Promotion, And scandalls rayse for pure Deuotion. Aswell as they in drinking health Away, our youth haue spent thy Wealth. In sensuall beds wee wantoniz'd, To Pompe, as God, wee sacrifiz'd, In Body we, and in the Soule, All ouer are corrupted oule:
Nor can sweete Odours, or perfumes Abate the stinke of our blacke fumes. Our swarmes of Lawyers and Law-suites, Hindring true Loue, and Christian fruites: Our Drunken meetings, and oft Potting, Our costly Fare, the Body rotting, Our daily changes of gay Rayments, Haue meried the Diuels payments, Vnless in Mercy Thou minde Sinners, And wil reine vs for beginners. Once more, Good Lord, regenerate And purifie our Bodies Mate, Thy Image lae, whose three-fold Parts In Ill more knowing, then Good Artes, Are quite depriu'd of Heauenly Blisse, If thou examine what's a misse. Some Sinnes we know, and would redresse, But that strong Fends do vs oppresse, Both Openly and Secretly, Which them to name would seeme a lye, Or slander: Yet thy Seruants know them, And if they might, would not allow them: O let not Achan's singe fault, (like that which Dauid did assault) Bing downe y Plagues without instruction. Though All deserue the same destruction.
The seuenth SICTION. Generall and specifique Remedies not onely against the Catholicke Scuruy, but likewise against all other spirituall Diseases, if they bee pat  practise. MOst men are sicke; yet few beginne, To Cure themselues of deadly sinne. The Body so by Agues kinde, Did neuer shake, as doth the Minde; The doubtfull Mide, her doome fore-told. Yet Custome makes vs ouerbold. We long for Pelfe, and striue for Wealth, Few seeke Rest: fewer their Soules Health. This Custome comes from Elders graue, Who scrape for Earth halfe in the Graue. The Younger noting their base Actions, Whom they thinke Saints, fall to Exactions. O that men would consider this, And leauing trash, would looke for Blisse. No Hearts like our so hadned were, In sicknesse rife Curs to forbeare.
What Cures haue we? both Night and Day, For Cordiall comfort wee must Pray To God alone with Humble spirit, And not depend on Humane Merit. That Freedome, which through Christ we haue, The Father seales, if it wee craue For his Deare sake, who suffred woes, And shamfull Death, to saue his Foes. Wee must deriue our onely Cure From Christ alone, of sinnes impure. Wee must Renounce all other hopes, Deuis'd for Game, by wicked Popes. Wee must not shelter Christ his seede, With Ionas Gourd, nor Aegypts Reede. The Soule, on Creatures which relies, Is like a whoish Wife▪ that lyes With Knaes, and leaues his lawfull Bed, Whom God appointed for her Head. Wee must bee Infants mde and meeke, Harmelesse as Dues, when Christ wee seeke; Yet wise as Serpents, to beware Of Gordian Knots, and Brokage ware. Wee must not wrest the Sacrament, Nor carpe at things indifferent. Christ crucifide wee must behold, As the Brasse Serpent Those of Old. They for a signe did see it stand, But wee the meaning vnderstand.
The Crosse, Bread, Wine, and what with sence Wee apprehend, Time weares from hence. What Faith conceiues, inflames the Spirit; And this braue Flame the Saints inherit: I quickneth so, that Christ his Nature, Inspires and heales the Soule-sicke Creature. As Bread and Wine the Body feede, So must the Minde his Passion heede: Thus Eate and Drinke thou Iustifi'd, His Flesh and Blood, though Glorified. And Mystery and Figure take it, As Christ the Rocke and Bread fore-spake it. Wee must confsse our selues accurst, Of Christian soules the very worst. Wee must the same to others doe, As our selues would bee done vnto. Wee must leaue off Hypocrisie, Our foolish Carke, and Policy. Wee must care more to dcke the Minds, Then the frayle Body pf with Wind. Wee must not mount aboue our Calling, But rest content for feare of falling. Wee must our Patience so enure, That aues grown great we may endure, Who through the Window made their way, Since eu'rv 'Dogge must haue his Day. Wee must not swell, when wee haue store; Nor yet Repine, though some heape more.
Time ends this strife: The houre-glasse passes. What neede Men then to moyle like Asses? Wee must abhorre the Reeling sinne Of Soule-sicke healths, which Sots brought in. To this I adde that Indian borne, Blood-ainting Fume, drinkes shooe in horne; Of which I blame the quantity, But not the Physickes quality. Wee must not liue too sparingly, Nor spend Gods goods superfiuously. Wee must not grudge the Prore to seede, For Almes are Bales in time of neede. More Hiues for Bees, for Gods Elect, On ohe Coasts let vs erect. Our wearied Lands, our swarmes require it: The Lord commaunds, the Saints desire it. Wee must by Deed; shew good example; And at their entry Passions trample. Wee must not brawl for eu'ry fault: The Iust themselues doe sometimes halt. Wee must forgiue our Foes aswell As God doth vs, who mene Hell. Wee must not play more, then the Turke, Who flips no Day, without some worke. The Mind on Labour fixed sure, Stops wandring thoughts from Sathans lure. The Gentle Sparke might sse the Pike, Shoot, Rid, Graft, Study, or the like
The Female sexe findes carke at home, Sings Psalmes, or shewes rare skill on Loom. The Souldier heares the Drummers sound, Stands Sentinell, or walkes the Round. Hee traines, he fights, and spends his blood, Like Maccabeus, for our Good. Good Schollers haue enough to doe, If tempting Lucr they forgoe; Besides the Muses spacious Groue, The Bodies motion they approoue. On Citizens I neede not call, Nor Country-men, who sweare for all. Wee must proud Pompe and Fraud eschew, And thinke thereon what will ensue, As God is iust, a fearefull end, Which from Wraths U ioll will descend. For when we perke, like Cardinalls, And grinde the Poore, like Canniballs, Scorning Christs Members, racking rents, And raking Gifts through discontenrs: Our Angell Guardians fiye away, And Sathan hunts his Beasts of Prey. If these few Rules wee beare in Minde, The Cure is sure; our Pardon sign'd. Then Grace supplies fraile Natures want; Then Loue will come, sinne to supplant. Both which who findes, hee needes not feare, Though all the World in Flames appeare.
The eighth SECTION. An Admonition to the Saints, to contue watch∣full and constant, and not to feare this last and great Persecution threatned by the Spirituall Dragon, and his Angels, although hee come prepared with all his stratagems, Ambusher, and with Multitudes of Men, like the sands of the Sea in Number. VVEll may Esdraes Eagle muster; And bold Chaucers Griffon bluster; The Pellican, doe what they can, Will make them both Frer, Curse, and Ban. Let Romish Nerods roare againe, Their Thundring shots will fall in Vaine. Then Woe to them, that flourish now, And who looke backe at Christ his Plow. When their great Masters Vatican, Nor Basans Bulls protest them can. When his strong guarded Angelo, Shall not deliuer from this Woe
Them, who with Christians blood doe feast. When the false Prophet, scarlet Beast, The mounted VVhore of Babylon, The Man of sinne, perditions Sonne, The Mouth that speakes presumptuous things, The Mistery with Eagles wings, The Gog and Magog of the House, The old red Dragons Rendeuous: That Deceiuer, who in Gods Church, Sits as a God, and by the lurch Liues, and to sale puts Marchandise, Mens soules and bodies, with false lyes. All figures of false Antichrist, That dares vsurpe farre more, then Christ To his Apostles euer left: For hee quits Men of life bereft From Purging Flumes ten thousands yeares, And more hee spares Romes roaming Peeres. When that this Monsters triple Head Soule and Body in scalding Lead Shall boyle in Pits, and Lakes that swimme With Pitch and Brimstone to the brimme: Then will his Followers all too late, With Diues wayle their woefull Fate. Then they will wish with Yeles and howles, That they had liu'd obscure, like Owles. Then they will see the diffrent manner, Of Iacobs fight, 'gainst Esaus Banner.
Then they will know Saint Michaels Armes, Wherwith he saes Gods Church from harms. For though the watch-men smote the Spouse, As shee sought Christ, yet still she growes, Untill her Seede, as heretofore, In spirit playes the arrant Whore. Let croaking Frogs, and chattring Pyes, Let Daniel's Horne with Mysticke eyes: Let curious Schoole-men, errours spawne, Grace and Faith, for Freewill pawne: Let such, as broach those Franticke Tales, Whom Old Saint Dauid chas'd from VVales, Pelagian wise, depart from hence; In spight of all wee haue defence. On Phisicke knowne our Cures relye, Let Mountebankes Elixirs trye: Men, who were call'd, but neuer Cull'd, Theeues of the House, by crochets gall'd. Wee feare strong flames; shrbs safer lye From Lightnings blast, then Cedars high. The low-built Cotage of a Clowne, Stands surer then the Triple Crowne. Aspiring doubts the Church our Mother, As Fancies Braine-wormes, bids vs smother When Seraphins were faine to Vaile, How could Arminius sight but faile? Let sober Learnings Oracles Ste for our eyes plaine Spectacles.
VVith these I see Free-will almost Through Faith regain'd, which Adam lost. The Glorious light restor'd our sight, What sinne had darkned, Grace sets right; And giues vs power, more or lesse, Yet Meanes enough, to sue for Peace. The Heart, which once Faith putrifies, Neuer quite dyes, nor purisies, Nor is a Christian iudged lost, Before hee slights the Holy Ghost; Before his Talent hee impaires; Or that, like Iudas, hee dispaires. God knowes already, who are his; Yet to make sure our Part it is; For otherwise wee should deface Elections Charter, seal'd of Grace. The summe is this: Christ dy'd for All. His Word calls All; some heare his Call; And by their deedes doe manifest, They enter shall into his Rest. Some few discreetly seeke to shunne A hardned Heart, ere day bee done. Mercy for Some there is in store. VVe hope the best: And who knowes more The Tith of houres reseru'd to Pray, The rest not wasted, may repay. The stony heart in Time relents; Much more our God, if Man repents,
And daily begges for Heauenly bread, His Iustice slackes; and wee are fed. But here's the worst, though Prayers draw, There lyes a Pad within the Straw. The Angell Good bids, Fast and Pray, The Angell Bad bids, Feast and Prey. Thus Rime is mar'd, true Prayer bard, A turn'd to E, the Cure made hard.
The Conclusion of the Cure, not vn∣worthy the Consideration. When Strife for Lut, and  take for : When praise for , and  we locke for Catchng: And when from s we sll to Feasts and bibbing, Then [Abbaes Streame] stayes in the  bbing. Our Aduocate craues it to flow againe, The Father yeeldes, and o to eury Veine Their Streame flowes faire, vntill our changling Foles Haue sought to other Streames from muddy Pooles; The Trinity then loathing Braines so sicke, Thir Motion stop; and Men dye Lunoticke. From which Reapse, Distrust, and Heresie, GOD keepe vs all as from Apostasie. [Abbaes Streams.] Abba Father the Voyce of the Spirit in the hearts of Gods Adopted and Regenerated chil∣dren, acknowledging their Election from the Father, out of the corrupted Lumpe of Man∣kind, and out of the vnrefined Oare or vnpuri∣fied Mettle of pretended Christianity, of meere Grace without any Deserts of theirs at all; and consequently their Iustification by the Sonne, through Faith, and the spirituall apprehension of his onely merites: Their sanctification by the Holy Ghost, who proceeding from both their Wills, is content to breath Regeneration, and New life, into our barren wills; and to moy∣sten them with the Streame of liuing Waters,
vnlesse they compell Him with his Heauenly Gifts to retire, by relying on other Physitians, burthensome Traditions, and vnnecessary pud∣dled streames, which Simoniackes, or rather Dmoniackes, doe trucke and vtter for money, vnder the Title of Holy Water, Indulgences, and sanctified Wares, like-charmed soowles, or Amulets, to preserue men from Cerbirus, and Purgatories Bugs, thereby making Mar∣chandize of the Bodies and Soules of Men; as is Prophesied in the Revelation: which Auarice of theirs is flat contrary to the examples of the Apostles, and the Gospell, where St. Peter told the Creeple in Salomons Porch: Gold and Sluer haue I none; And to Simon Magus, Thy money pe∣rish with thee. [Apostacy] signifies a Reuolting or falling off from the true Religion, to the Doctrine of Diuels. To discerne the true Catholike Church, search the Scriptures: How shee fared in this World after the Ascension of our Sauiour, ad the Histories of the Church, and you shall finde her commonly perscuted, and subiect to crosses, and Fiery Tryalls, euen to this our Age. First, by the Iewes. Secondly, by the Romane Emperours. Thirdly, by the Ar∣rians. Fourthly, by the Gothes and Vandales.
And lastly, by the cunning and more dange∣rous practises of the Romish Prelates, for their aduancement to the double Supremacy. How this Church being once the Mother of the West, grew to be Apostate, it is to be supposed, that Sathan tooke hold of the darknesse of Mens consciences, presently after the erupions of those bloody Northerne Nations, about 500. or 600. yeares after Christ, his principall stings and more palpable violences being some∣what restrayned, and bound by the Angel, not to employ them against the Elect so Tyran∣nically, and openly, as hee vsed to doe before the limitted and sealed 1000. yeares, of his Mysticall restaint. About which time, or within a while after, and for the like ambiti∣ous ends, hee seduced Mahomet in the East; So that Faith departed according to St. Paul, from the Temple of GOD, the true Visible Church then consisting but of few Families, and shadowed vnder the Woman, with her man childe in the Reuelation, Fled into the Wilder∣nesse, for feare of the Dragon. And Gods two Witnesses were Massacred in the streetes of spi∣rituall Sodome and Egypt, and their carcasses there left vnbuied; as was Prophesied by St. Iohn. Amidst these abhominations and deso∣lations, it pleased God to stirre vp the Spirits
of sundry Good men, to awake them out of their dreames: As St. Bernard, to inuaigh a∣gainst their Princely Pompe, and Supremacy; Berengari, agaynst Transubstanciation; and the Waldenses and Albigeois against most of their Idolatries: The last of which beganne a∣boue 300. yeares before Luther was borne. How the true Church was dealt with in Af∣fricke, Aethiopia, Georgia, and in the East, by reason of their remotenesse we know not so di∣stinctly. But it is very probable, that the old Dragon was not Idle, but did his vtmost en∣deauour to ouer-whelme the poore distressed Saints, as it were, with a Flood of impieties through all the World. But thus was she vsed in our Westerne Parts, vntill of late yeares by the Resurrection of those two Mysticall Wit∣nesses, and the imprinting of the Bible in the Mother Tongue, which in a manner lay moath∣caten in the Sodomites Libraries, after the Preaching of Wicliffe, about the yeare 1380. and afterwards of Husse, Luther, Cali, and after the Martyrdome of many excellent men, shee found at last some rest in this Iland, and o∣ther places, in despight of the Herods, Aabs, and Hamans of the times. One maine difference I obserue betwixt these two repugnant Chur∣ches, how the one resembles Abel and Iacob
for their mildnesse and patience: And th' other Came and Esau for their mallice and cruelty: which their bloody Inquisitious, Tortures, Massa∣cres, with the transcendent Powder-plot do appa∣rantly testifie. The one maintaines her cause peaceably by the Gospell of Christ; the other by Worldly Traditions, and Mens authority: And when these serue not, with Fire and Sword they force their Opposites to acknowledge the Popes Supremacy, being but the marke of Am∣bition, and therein going beyond the Turkes, who to his Mufty or Maomet, compelles no mans Conscience; a though in all other mat∣ters belonging to a Christian, one Scholasticall Question excepted (which might be left to the Beholders and Beleeuers discetion for the Forme and wonderfull manner, as is the Know∣ledge of the personall Trinity) they cannot deny any Article Faith, which the Protestant holds. Whereby it appeares, that the Church continu∣ed not long a Uirgin after the Apostles times, ac∣cording to the ancient saying of Eusebius: Ec∣clesia post Apostolorum tempora non mansit d Virgo: And that the Mysticall Where with her Scrlet-coloured Beast of the seauen hilled Ctity, the great Citty, which bare dominion ouer all the World, was certainly meant by Rome: To which the chiefe Fathers of the Primitiue Church doe consent: Lactatius lib. 7. Horonim. in Daniel. Augustin. lib. 20. de Cuitate Dei. cap. 19. And
St. Chrisostome  opere imperfect. in Matth. most plainely writes, that Antichrist was to haue  shew all that, which the true Church hath indeed, viz. Baptisme, the Communion, Bishops, &c. Therefore let such, as haue once tasted of the fruites of the Gospell, beware of Apostasie and back-sliding. For as St. Augustine in the a∣fore-sayd Booke, cap. 8. vnto a doubt, Whether any One shall turne to God, during the Raigne of Antichrist: He thus answeares: The Diueli shal haue a continuall fight with those that are in the Fah already, of whom hee may perhaps Conquer some certayne number, but none of Gods Predestinated, no, not one; Since it is not in vaine wha St. Iohn the Author of the Revelation sayth, in one of his Epistles, con∣cerning Apostataes: They went out from vs, but they were not of vs, for of they had bin of vs, they would haue continue a with vs. To confirme our wauering and luke-warme Christians, I aduise them to ponder with an indifferent iudgment, these ensuing verses, which for a conciusiue mo∣nitory to my Newlanders Cure, I here subscribe ou of my Cambrens. Caroleia. Can idiore Fides lusir b lamne Mndum, &c, Our Christian Faith in'd in the rime, When Menu'd neee th Apostles time. But afterwards Eclipsd of Light, She lay rti'd from most Mens sight. Returned nw She lends her Rayes To Brittaine, where as yet shee stayes. FINIS.
