24906 99840188 4664
The copie of a letter sent by a learned Physician to his friend, wherein are detected the manifold errors vsed hitherto of the Apotheca∣ries, in preparing their compositions, as Sirropes, Condites, Conserues, Pilles, Potions, Electuaries, Losinges, &c: Wherein also the reader shall finde a farre better manner how to preserue and cor∣rect the same, to the great honor and credite of the Physician, and comfort of the sicke: but chieflie and especiallie to the great prayse and glorie of Almigh∣tie God. RIght welbeloued Coosin & deere friend, these are to certifie you, that I haue receiued your letters da∣ted the third of Marche, wherein I perceyue you seeme to be sorowful, for that I am so much addi∣cted to this new sect of Physicians, called by the name and title of Paracelsians: a more odious and contemptible name (I perswade my selfe) you could not haue bestowed vpon it, then to intitle it A new sect. But sith you cannot iustlie prooue it, I can the better brooke the accusatiō; it seemeth that you neuer read many of Paracel∣sus his workes, nor yet that booke lately set forth
by Master B. in our mother tounge: which if you had done, I hope you would not haue cal∣led it the New Phisicke. For in those authors you shall find this proposition truely and manifestly confirmed, that it had his beginning with our first father Adam, and so from time to time hath cō∣tinued vntill this day: but indeed so amplified and enlarged of late, and brought vnto euery mans sight (that hath both his eies) by the long labour and infinite paines of Paracelsus, that it seemeth to be borne a new with him. I cannot therefore be a little grieued at you, nor take small offence at your scandalous and slanderous termes, which from the corrupt coller of your angrie mind you haue giuen forth against him. For haue you not called him Heretike, Coniu∣rer, Dronkard, Iugler, Tospot, Aleknight, &c? Ah deere Coosin, did you euer read any heresie in his bookes? if you had, then were it your du∣tie to haue named where; but if you speake it onely vpon hearesay (as many of your coate do commōly) then are you greatly to be reprehen∣ded. I assure you, I haue read so many bookes of his as are extant and find not any spot of he∣resie in him, but contrariwise a pure and true Christian, a friend and fauourer of the flocke of Christ, & a great enemie to the enemies of Iesu, as the deuil, pope, & turke. And who euer wrote more against coniuring then he did, against Ni∣gromancie, sorcerie, witchcraft, gluttony, and
suche like abhominations: repayre to his bookes De occulta Philosophia, and De Magia, there shall you finde it. Iudge him not then good Coosin by the mouth of his enemies (who speake of enuie) no more then you would by the verdict of his friendes, but trie him by his owne wordes. Me thinkes you goe very neere him to find fault with his drinking, I think you haue for∣gotten what Countryman hee was. Can you giue the Dier leaue to quaffe, & the Smith to carrowse, and will you grudge Paracelsus to drinke measurably and with reason? remem∣ber with your selues (for I speake to you and all your companie and fauorites) that Para∣celsus sate not all day on a cushion with a pen in his hand, but was occupied both night and day in distilling, subliming, calcining, mel∣ting, fixing, resoluing, coagulating, reuerbe∣rating, digesting, & cementing, which things could not be performed without great horri∣ble and strong fires, which must needes cause a man to haue a iust quarrell to the cuppe. But that hee was a drunkard, or tooke more then he could beare away, you cannot prooue, nei∣ther doo his workes declare. As for his lear∣ning, you say he had none, if you coūt know∣ledge of diuers tounges, learning, as I thinke you doo, he had the knowledge and vse of as many as any author you haue, and wrote in
more. Galene wrote but in one tongue, & that his mother tongue, no more did Hippocrates or Aristotle, neither can you certainely say that they had any more: but hee wrote as well in the Latine tongue, as in the Germane tongue, which you may perceiue if you please to per∣use his booke De Tartaro. Hee was also a rea∣der in Basilia, which hee could not performe without great learning, aske Erasmus, he will say the same. Moreouer you lay to his charge that his medecines were nothing but poison, wherof you nominate some particulars, viZ. Oile of Vitriole, the glasse of Antimonie, the precipitate of Quickesiluer, and the rust of Iron (as you terme it). As for the glasse of Antimonie, if it doth o∣therwise then well you doo him great wrong to burthen him with it, for you shal not finde in all his works that he did once name it. I de∣nie not but you may find in diuerse places of his workes where he maketh mention of pre∣pared Antimonie, and what great vertue it hath in curing many diseases, if you suppose that he meant the glasse thereof, you are farre de∣ceaued, there is great oddes betweene that & the Magisterie essence, or tincture thereof. If you account and esteeme Mathi: Gesnerus, Ander∣nacus and such like for Paracelsians, as I thinke they would haue prooued if they had liued a litle longer: I confesse that at that time the
glasse of Antimonie was had in great estimati∣on: so that some of them so oft as they named it, would terme it Stibium nostrū, others would not sticke to call it the Philosophers stone: yea they auouched that they would do more good with it (in three dayes) in any desperate disease, then they could with their Methodi∣call medicines in a whole moneth. And so of∣ten as any great griefe came to their handes, whether would they runne for succour but to the same glasse? What would they haue done thinke you if they could haue obtained the perfect preparation therof, that is to sepa∣rate him quite from his impurities, which is nothing performed in vitrifiyng him? For in this glasse, the earthly sulphur is so mingled with his Mercurie, that he is made rather worse then better, and so of force he must do more harme then good. And you Galenists cannot so much disprayse it, but we doo as much & euer did abhor it, for our Master hath taught vs a farre better order how to vse it. The oile of Vitriole, if so be it be wel drawē, rectified, and with the spirite of wine well circu∣lated, vntill it come to a pleasant tartnes: not onely we haue found great commoditie ther∣in, as oft as wee had neede to asswage thirst, open obstructions, or withstand the maligni∣tie of feuers, but a great many of your opini∣on haue highly commended the same, and
will not giue it a Paracelsian name (for they thought it not good enough for such an ex∣cellent extractiō) but they haue giuē it a new name, and termed it their artificiall Melancho∣lie. If Dioscorides durst minister a dramme thereof vnprepared, why should wee feare to giue a scruple of it, when it is purged from his venome by the fire. As by the contrary effect it doth appeare, for he gaue it to pro∣uoke vomite, we bring it to such a passe, that it becomes a singular medecine to stay vo∣mite. He saith it heateth, and wee make it a great cooler. It appeareth therefore that hee (as he commonly did) respected onely the ve∣nemous qualitie thereof. You seeme also greatly to reprooue vs for the powder of Iron, & terme it the rust. What ayle you? what doo you? what meane you to be so partial in dispraising of that in vs, which you allow in your owne authors? you can not inuey against vs therein, but you must in∣clude them also. And is there no difference betweene Crocus Martis reuerberated into an inpalbable powder and the drosse of Iron. If you had euer seene them together, you would say there is not so much difference betweene fine flower and course branne: and yet Dios∣corides may be permitted to vse the one, and poore Paracelsus blamed for occupiyng the other, though he made as small account of it
(as if you read him diligently you shall per∣ceaue) as you haue done or can doo for your liues, because he knew a far better and more perfect preparation of the same, viZ. first to dissolue it, then to separate his impurities. Now you must be answered concerning Precipitate, to speake what I thinke and not to flatter you, I tell you plainly that you are so ignorant in these medecines, that silence were the best answere I could giue. But were you not my very freend & louing Coosin, I should shape you an answere accordingly, for it were too much to prouide you good meate, and to force it vpon you. If you do meane that Pre∣cipitate which is commonly vsed and to bee sold at the Poticaries, fixed wih the spirite of Allome Coperose, and Salt Peter; you mistake the matter: for Paracelsus neuer durst mini∣ster it outwardly, albeit Mathiolus with di∣uerse other haue done it, and that with sin∣gular good successe as they affirme. I pray you bestow a little looking on, and perusing of Paracelsus his bookes, and there shall you find Mercurie prepared three māner of waies. The first is fixed, the second seperated from his impurities, the third and chiefest brought whole to a perfect ripenesse. Concerning the first, if it be so fixed that it will abide the fire, which your common Precipitate will not doo, then shall you finde him a singular good
medecine in sundry grieuous diseases, but there are diuerse wayes to doo it, and after it be done it requireth to bee dulcerated and washed from his Aqua fortis, I doo not meane your common Aqua fortis. Notwithstanding if it be fixed without any liquor, onely in the sunne, which hath bin brought to passe, then neede he not any dulcerations, but of him∣selfe is so sweete as hony. In all these fixings there is no separation of his poyson, but it is so bound that it cannot worke his will so ful∣ly as he did before, although somewhat hee doth, as by vomiting and spitting it doth ap∣peare. Therefore if hee be seperated from his venome, as seperation may be made, then were he more of value then all the composi∣tions and drugges in the Apothecaries shops, then should the french disease be quickly cu∣red without stiffenesse of the ioynts, and losse of teeth▪ Then should these woodden Physi∣cians lacke worke which crie out the diet, the diet, and nothing but the diet, to the di∣et, to the diet. The third and last way where∣of Paracelsus maketh mention, is performed not onely by separation of his impuritie, but afterward also to exalt him, by adding there∣to a fitte Sulphure, and placing him in a rea∣sonable clymate for a certaine space, that hee becomes as an Eagle, that is, expelleth all ve∣nemous impurities of mans body, euen as
the Eagle deuoureth the venemous beastes: hee becommeth a Lion able to vanquish all impurities, whatsoeuer we receaue from the Animals. Thus much I haue thought good to an∣swere you, concerning such medecines as you obiected in your letters against vs: now (if you will giue me liue a little) I will be so bold as to examine your medecines, whereof you make such boastes, and what cures you haue done with them. If you did any, I am perswa∣ded it was through the Lord his blessing of that bad medicine, rather then by certaine skilfulnesse or any cunning, as by that which hereafter followeth (if you will with patience reade it) shall plainely appeare vnto you. And first to beginne with your decoctions, conserues, and syrrupes, all which are compounded ey∣ther of hearbes, fruites, flowers, rootes, or iuyces, by adding eyther honye or sugar. As for ex∣ample, if a conserue of flowers be to bee made, then you prescribe that vnto each pound of flowers there be added two pound of sugar▪ if iuices or decoctions you put equal waight, and sometimes more or lesse as you thinke good. Then are they put vp in paynted potts till the sicke sende for them, and (selie soule) many times he giueth a noble for that, which doth him not two pennie woorth of good. No, you will say, are not these excellent good
simples, as roses, rosemarie flowers, steca∣dos, mints, violets, and such like. Yes, wee confesse that the hearbs are good and whole∣some, but as they are ordered by you they lit∣tle auayle. Is not wheat, rye, and barlie good and wholesome too? and yet they being ta∣ken into the body, nature findeth two sub∣stances in them, the one good, but little in quātity, which she retaineth, the other drosse and great in quantitie, which shee expelleth: part by siege, part by vrine, & part by sweate. If then nature findeth two substances in eue∣ry thing, the one good the other bad, why should not you doo the like, who ought in all your doings to imitate her? And yet contra∣ry to her rules you doo not onely not seeke to separate these impurities, which euery thing, seeme it neuer so wholesome, is ioyned withall, but like vndiscreete and vnreasona∣ble mē you adde more vnto it, for to a pound of flowers, hearbes or rootes, whereof some∣times 15. ounces and an halfe, and somtimes more is baggage, you adde as much sugar therevnto to help afterward. But your answer is ready, for you will say that sugar and honie are added for to preserue those and other things from putrifaction. I will aske you a∣gaine what that is which putrifieth, & which of the two parts, whether is it that which na∣ture retayneth, or that which shee expelleth?
I thinke you will answere according to truth and reason, that the things which nature dri∣ueth out by excrement are especially subiect to putrifaction. But it may bee that you will make an other answere and more fit for your purpose, saying that they both do both of thē corrupt and putrifie together. Then would I demaund which of thē putrifieth each other? I know you will be loth to giue iudgement a∣gainst your selfe. Well then let separation be made, let arte imitate nature. Let there be an artificiall stomacke deuised, let 4. bushels of roses be put thereinto, and after digestion & separation, you shall find in one side halfe an ounce of pure Sulphur or oile, wherein all the vertue of that great quantitie consisteth, and on the other side all the rest drossie matter & impuritie. Now which of these two doo last longest I think you do not doubt, but wil af∣firme it to be that which is small in quantity: for that is knowen to last many yeares, the o∣ther not many houres. The like may be said of all the rest of your sirrupes whatsoeuer, whe∣ther they be made of hearbes, flowers, rootes, iuices or fruits, in that there is not any of all these but they abound with impuritie, which must be preserued, or els they tend not onely to putrifactiō, but do also destroy that essēce that is ioyned with them. Thus may you per∣ceaue that your indeuour is and alwaies hath
beene, to preserue that which nature abhor∣reth: to pound or pouder that which she by al meanes expelleth: for you see that your pre∣paration is cleane cōtrary to her: for she wor∣keth by substraction and diuision, but you la∣bour to adde & multiply: you are very expert in addition and multiplication, Natura paucis contenta, Nature is cōtent with a little or a few things, haue you forgotten this rule? doo you deale well with her, in that when she sendeth to you for ayd, telling you that her stomacks are weake and not able to digest and separate as they were woont to doo, to send her iuices of hearbes or flowers, laden both with their owne impurities, and burdened with the filth of hony or sugar, make separation of either of them, & you shall find such store of filth that you would bee loth to looke vpon it. Oh in what estate is nature in now, that when shee was well & strong she digested but one pound of substance for an ounce of sustenance. And now she must, beyng weake and feeble, digest three pound for asmuch? is this to helpe her or to hinder her? doth shee not abhorre your aide euer after? doth shee not rise so oft as she sees it? Let the sicke be iudge, which once ha∣uing tasted of it, must winke when she should receaue it againe. How much then is nature, the sicke man, and all other diseased persons bound to prayse God for Paracelsus & all his
disciples, who haue deuised stomacks to pre∣pare and separate for them as oft as they haue neede of Phisicke. They haue in store Salia olea and Mercuries, wherof one scruple doth more delight her thē an whole pound either of sir∣rupes, conserues or Iuleps. Yea I haue seene that 9. graynes of a vegetable salt hath more quenched the burning heat of an ague, then 9. drams of the sirrupe of Violets, Cichorie or Limons could haue done, which thing I know you will scarsly beleeue, because your maister Galene saith that euery salt is of an heating and drying nature: of which opinion I was once, vntill I came vnto another schoole, where be∣holding the Anatomie of saltes, I found not only Salia mundificantia, coagulantia, consolidan∣tia, diaphoretica, diaretica, but also Sitim & ca∣lorem resoluentia. So likewise there are Mercurij mitigantes, clarificantes, exhilarantes, consumen∣tes, confortantes & regenerantes, and Sulphura somnifera, narcotica, mitigantia, concoquentia, ano∣dyna, attrahentia and sistentia, are in like māner to be found in hearbes, parts of beasts mine∣rals, &c. Thus deare Cosin, you see that I haue pro∣ued your cōserues, condites & sirrupes to be of no force, & compounded contrary to na∣ture, that they are rather sawces then mede∣cines, and more meete for Cookes then Phy∣sicians, & haue shewed you that the salts, oiles
and liquors of hearbes, rootes, seedes, fruits, & flowers, are far more excellent in strength and operation, but in during also and easines of ministring to the partie, in that they are purged of their impurities, and quite deliue∣red from their lothsome sauour and ill tastes, which must needes be a great comfort to the sicke and diseased. Make triall and you shall find that three drops of the oile of Stecados, or three drops of the oile of Roses, or three drops of the oile of Nutmegs, will doo more good in strēgthning the braine, then 6. oūces of the sirupes prepared with the same simples. Likewise three drops of the oile of Poppie, or of the oile of Nenuphar, will more auayle in causing sleepe and rest, then three ounces of their sirrupes. Moreouer three graines of the salt of Radish rootes, Eringus roots, or Resthar∣row rootes will more profite in diseases of the raines & bladder, then 6. ounces of their sir∣rupes. Also three drops of the oile of mints in strēgthening the stomacke, three drops of the Mercurie of Buglosse in comforting the heart is of more force then six ounces of their sir∣rupes, &c. Now will I indeuour diligently to take a view and suruey of your purgations, to see whether you are wiser in preparing of them, then of your other cōfections. I thinke it will fal out according to the Welchmās prouerb,
Droth in gooth: one bad the other worse: you perceiued by the euill accidents which did ensue, that there was not almost any of them but had an ill qualitie ioined with him, as the Poet saith: Omnis commoditus sua fert incommoda secum. As for example, Sena did breed winde, Rubarb did drie the body ouermuch, Agarick ouer∣threw the stomack, Scammonie weakened the liuer and intrailes, Cassia feebled the raines, Colocinthis bred the bloodie flixe, Euforbium inflamed the whole body, &c there is not one of them to be found without fault. What or∣der tooke you then, did you purge any of these from their euill qualities? not one, but by al meanes went about to hide and beguile nature, as for ilsāple, to beguile the nose (for many of thē haue a very ill sauour) you went to the perfumers & bought Muske, yee went also to the Cookes for hony and sugar, that you might betray the tast therof: and least the sight and ouglines thereof should bewray it, you ran to the goldsmithes to buy gold leaues to couer it. Thus were these poore watchmen betray∣ed beyng placed as porters of nature to see that no enemy come in. After the same man∣ner you thought to flatter the stomacke, liuer, and hart, with Mastick, Ginger, oile of sweete Almonds, quinces, long pepper, gūme Traga∣ganth,
commin, & spike, but in vaine: for they would see a litle neerer to it, although their watchmen were beguild, the stomacke would by al meanes assay to cast it vp againe, and of∣tentimes doth, and neuer would misse, were not these varlets Mastick Tragaganth &c. ready to take these traytors parts. The heart riseth, falleth sendeth forth cold sweats, wherby you may plainely perceaue that he is not pleased with these naughty ghests, albeit they bring in their hands, roses, cloues, spikenard, lignum aloes, cinnamon and such like trifles, hee will not haue his head broke, and his cap put on. And as little account makes the liuer of your three kindes of Saunders. What is the cause if you be asked the question, you make a sleeue∣lesse answere? But go amongst the common people where a man may better be instructed by Lady experience, then by reading and re∣uoluing your methodicall volumes, the vul∣gar sort I say, will tell you that euery purgatiō is a poyson. At which saying (when I was in your predicament and opinion) I haue often∣times laughed: but since the time that I came to the knowledge of the art of separation, I finde it the truth, and no ridiculous matter which they haue set downe. For not onely Co∣locinthis, Eleborus, Turbith, Scammonie, Hermoda∣ctily, Euforbium, and such like haue their impu∣rities, but Polipodie, Sene, Manna, Tamarinds,
Cassia, Rubarbe, haue also their filthines, though not in that extremitie. This could the simple and vnlearned find out: & yet you great clarkes with al your learning & skill could not espy the same, which tendeth to your great discredite, & hath brought you & your art into such cōtempt, that they had rather stand to the mercy of the disease then to meddle with your slubbered & polluted medecines. Yea, the wise herby are brought into this opinion and conceyt, that whosoeuer vseth much physick can not be very healthie euer af∣ter. And I haue heard diuerse say, that they haue marked, & sundry times obserued, that if a man had taken a purgation cōfected after your accu∣stomed manner, & the same had not wrought & taken effect in his body: if that he did not shortly after breake out into itch or scabs, he should feel such an inward weakenes, that a long time after he should not be his owne man againe. The cause wherof may be gathered by that which we spake before, in that these your adulterate medecines, are cōfected only by addition without separatiō of that which is hurtfull, for then the pure not working, but the vnpure getting the mastrie hath his effect, and worketh his will, to the great hurt of the patient, & slander of our honorable science of physicke. But you to saue your owne credite wil make a sluttish excuse, & say the party would not be ruled, & hath either taken colde or kept an ill diet, and so leaue him oftentimes in
worse case then you found him. Alas good Cosin, why are you then displeased & out of cha∣ritie with such persons as do aduise, and of good will exhort you, not to couer the venome of Scā∣monie with Quinces, the windines of Sene with ginger, the drinesse of Rubarbe with succorie, the fretting of Colocinthis with gum Tragaganth, the burning and firie qualities of Euforbium with the iuice of lillies, the stinking sauour of Sagapenum with muske, the bitternes of Aloes with sugar? but haue brought to light the manner how to take quite away these incommodities: that whether they worke or worke not there cā no hurt come to the party. Which that you may bring to passe, you shall not need to send vnto Atticum for fine hony, nor into the East for Saūders, nor into Spain for sugar, nor into Italy for Anniseeds, but only bestow a litle mony with the poore Collier, & as much at the Glashouse, & with these two things of small cost you may draw the pure spirit of wine, which in few daies will seperate the good from the bad, the vertue from the venome, the pure from the vnpure, without any hinderance at all to the operation of the good. Neither need you to feare this, that your medecines will take any heat thereby, to cause any annoyance to the sicke, in that the menstrue being rightly drawne will with euery small heat euaporate quite away. But if there be any heat left it will be nothing so much as is in yours, by adding Ginger, Cinna∣mon,
&c: the which notwithstanding you are woont to giue in hote feuers. Now your simples being prepared in manner aforesaid, you may giue Colocinthis, Euforbium, Eleborus, Elaterium, & Scāmonie so safely, as you may minister the whole substāce either of Sene, Manna, or Cassia. Thus ha∣uing drawē & extracted the essence of each sim∣ple purger, then may you compound if you list Cholagoga, Phlegmagoga, Melanagoga, Hydragoga, yea & Panchimagoga, whereunto if you adde also the essence either of Stecados, Mintes, Betonie, Nut∣megs, Cloues, Mastick, Cinnamon. &c: not that you may correct the medicine, but that thereby you may obtaine a double cōmoditie, for your pur∣gation shall both euacuate and strengthen. In triall whereof you shall finde halfe a scruple of the essence either of Colocinth, Euforb, Hermodact, Turbith, Lapidis, Cyaney, &c. to be more auailable and effectuall in Hemicrania, Cephalalgia, Hydrope, Paralysi, Lepra, Melancholia, Arthritide ophthalmia, then two drams either of pillulae aureae, pillulae Co∣chiae, pillulae sine quibus esse noli, pillulae ex Esula, ex hermodactilis or pillulae è lapide Cyaneo & ceteris, & one scruple of the essence either of Rubarbe, Aga∣rick, Sene, Scammonie (whereof your Diagredium is prepared) to be vsed in Febribus colica Nephri∣tide, then an whole ounce either of Catholicon Be∣nedicta or Diaphaenian, & not onely more profita∣ble to the partie, but more pleasant, in that they are small in quantitie, pleasant in tast, and with∣out
any lothsome smell. And besides al this more ease and profite will ensue to the Apothecarie, in that he shall not euery yeare be driuen to search his boxes, and throw away so much as he findes euill (which must be done in your purgations.) But our extractions wilbe as perfect 20. yeares after, as they were at the beginning when they were first drawen. In so much as we doo not on∣ly finde fault with that which is ill, but we bring also that which is better in place, why should you be angrie or grieued with vs at all? If you were but reasonable men, you would in some measure requite our pains, at the least with good words. Thus much cōcerning your purgations. Concerning your Comfortatiues, as elect de gem∣mis, Dia ambrae, dia Margarit: de cocco Daphn: and such like, wherwith you are commonly accusto∣med to strengthen such parts as you see weake∣ned, I am very loth to say my mind, for that I am assured that I haue not a litle mooued you with that which before I haue spoken; notwithstan∣ding, in that the commoditie & vse thereof shall redound to the good of the cōmon-wealth, and publike safety of all, which things both you & I ought to seeke being both of vs subiects & mē∣bers thereof: I hope it shall neither be from my purpose, no new fāgled toy, nor to be reprehen∣ded, though I do lay open before your eies those errors which haue bene & are daily committed in preparation of these also. And that I may in
breefe manner make demonstration therof, you know that these are commonly compounded of hearbes, rootes, spices, stones, and sometimes of mettals, which by ancient experience haue bene found to haue some vertue in them, to comfort this or that principal part. As for the hearbes & rootes, you may gather by those pointes which haue beene before set downe concerning your sirrupes, that first of al before they be ministred, there must be seperation made of the vertue frō the venome, the vicious & bad from the pure ex∣cellent & good: which being done you shall find Melissa in Doronico, & contrariwise Doronicum in Melissa, although Melissa is not so manifestly to be seene in Doronico, nor Doronicum in Melissa. If Mathiolus had seene this secreet coniunction of nature, hee would neuer haue called Doronicum, Daemoniaecum. Likewise Been album & rubrum haue their impurities, which in any case must be takē away before they bee brought to composition. Moreouer if fiue pound of Cinnamon haue but one ounce of vertue, two pound of Nutmegs as much, three pound of Cloues no more, what should all the rest do in the receipt, which is no∣thing worth, but tendeth onely to putrifaction. Consider wel with your self, must not that needs be a singular balme, one ounce whereof will pre∣serue & whole pound of drosse frō putrifaction a dozen yeare, it is not so in Cinnamon, for take a dram out of the pound, and the rest will indure
iust two dayes: the like is to be sayd of all your spices whatsoeuer. Now for the stones and met∣talline leaues, as leafe gold, leafe siluer, &c: there is an other thing worthie of reproofe therein (wherof we haue not yet spokē) which is Coagula∣tion. We denie not but consent with you in this, that there is great vertue in gold to comfort the hart, so is there in pearels, corrall, in the Saphire against poisō, likewise in the Hiacinth & Smaragd against the Epilepsie and Melancolie, in the Iaspis to help digestion, in Christall against the stone, in La∣pide linceo Iudaico, of Lapide Spongiae the like vertue is found. But except you can prooue that the stomacke of man is able to digest them, that is, dissolue thē (which is alwaies performed in di∣gestion) which I am sure you can neuer doo: we will neuer grant vnto you that the body can re∣ceaue any helpe of thē seeme they neuer so good & wholesome. For daily experience teacheth vs, that though a man eate good and nourishing meate, yet if the same digest not in his stomack, it doth not onely hinder the vertue nutritiue in the body, but putteth that partie so affected, in danger of his life: so that when you are called to such a patient, you make that a very dangerous matter, & not without cause: Euen so do we af∣firme that these stones which are taken into the body & vndigested, do not onely denie comfort & helpe thereunto, but (though they  quātity) if they were not expelled by
would greatly hurt the partie: yea it hath beene seene that the leaues of gold haue so stickē in the ssdes of the stomack, that digestiō hath bin hin∣dered therby a lōg time after-And as litle is ey∣ther gold, pearles, corrall, christall, the rubie, sa∣phire, smaragd, &c. digested & diminished in the stomacke, as it is dissolued in boyling either in coollis or broth: which thing you haue oftē at∣tēpted but vnto smal or no profit. Thus may you see deare Cosin ye watchfulnes & charines of na∣ture, for that the cofers wherin she hath put these cures of most dāgerous diseases, as Epilepsia, Me∣lancho: Ietharg, Paralicis, Lepra, Mania, and such o∣ther, are by her as by a faithfull keeper, so fast locked & bound by coagulatiō, that it is vnpos∣sible for the stomack of an healthy man to picke them open, much lesse of him that is sicke. Yet if you will well behold, you shall see that with this her neernes and warines, there is ioined libera∣litie: for though she hath locked these cofers, yet hath she left the keyes with vs: but you are so slouthful that rather then you wil take any pains to seeke them, you wil cause your patients to eat cofers and all and bid nature vnlocke them if she will, when (alas poore wench) shee hath not the keies her selfe, but is inforced to throw them out again to smal or no profit, & to her great discō∣fort. Cā we then sufficiētly recōpence the infinit  of these Vulcanists & painful smiths, which  d day take paines to blow the coles, to
file vs fit keies for euery locke, one for Christall, another for Corrall, one for Pearles, another for the Adamant, one for Siluer, another for Gold, & so for sundry lockes sundry keies. And as a cū∣ning smith makes diuers locks one like another, & to euery locke a seuerall key, yet he will make one key so curiously that it wil open them all: e∣uen so nature imitated of many, but surpassed of none, though she hath for diuerse lockes made sundry keies, yet hath she one key that will vndoe them all. These keies ought euery expert & true Phisiciā to haue alwaies hāging at his girdle, that as oft as neede requireth hee might goe to the chests of nature, & fetch Magisters, Essences, Tin∣ctures, Elixirs, & such like: Then would you soone shew your Diamargariton, your Aromatica, your Exhilerantia, in that you should find more vertue in an ounce of the essence of Pearle or Corrall, then in the whole cōposition either of Coccy Ba∣pliuy, or Mithridati & more strength in one scru∣ple of the solution of the Smaragd, Hiacinth, Sardi or Granate, then in an whole pound of your Dia∣margar: or Elect. de gem: and more vertue in two drams in the solution of Lapis Linceius iudaici spon∣gia Christallorum, then in the whole receit of your Elect, iustini, or . Thus may you see the force of your medecines according to their cō∣position: you may perceaue by that which hath beene, spoken that your sirrupes be but sauces, your purgations for the most part poisons, and
that your Confertatiues, Exhileratiues, & Regenera∣tiues, are by nature so fast fettred that they cānot once moue against their enemies. I haue tolde you that the remedies for the two formost is se∣paration, and for the other solution. Yet you haue one sorte of medecines which you are wont to minister when al the rest will do no good, wherof a word or two & so an end. These are called Anodina and Narcotica, of which sort are Philonium, Requies, Esdra, & others; the chiefe actors therein are Opium, Mandrake & Poppie, which are most manifest poysons, which is argued not onely by the terrible & dangerous operations which they effect, but to your curi∣ous corrections with Castorie, Mirrhe, Saffron, &c: and by your wordes, for you aduise men not to vse them but in great necessitie, yea neuer to vse them without wise forecast & deepe considera∣tions. But if men would be ruled by that coun∣saile which is more safe, they should neuer med∣dle with them at all, vnlesse they knew a better way to correct them then that before specified. For as I haue said before, these correctiōs by ad∣ditions are no true mitigations of the venome, but by palliations to deceaue the outward sen∣ces, but euery true correction is done by sepe∣ration and substraction. The like is to be done in Opium, Mandrake and Popie: for if you let the stinking Mercurie of Opium flee away, and lay a∣side his Diaphoreticall salt for another purpose,
you shall then haue a pure Narcoticall Sulphure, which by himselfe may be safely giuen inwardly to asswage any paine whatsoeuer, In like māner may you vse Mandrake and Popie, whereunto as vnto the rest, you may adde the tinctures of Cor∣rall, Cinnamon, Cloues, and such like: so shall you haue Anodina comfortātia & Exhilarantia in one medecine. So shall you not neede to stay a long season for the mellowing of them, but may mi∣nister them presently if need require. These few lines I trust will perswade you, and cause you to confesse that you haue a long time erred in the preparation of al your medecines. But I feare you are so deepely grounded in the principles, the foggie mists and bogges of Ari∣stotle, Galene, &c. that you are fully resolued that these simples which we cal venemous, are so cō∣pounded of the foure Elements into one sub∣stance, that there ought not to be any separatiō made, but they must be corrected by additions. O what impietie is this, that such as are called to the knowledge & profession of God and his word, should giue more credite vnto these wic∣ked Infidels, then to his sacred & blessed word? why should wee be Infidels in our philosophie and Christians by name, only in respect of mat∣ters concerning eternitie? why should we be as Christians in matters of the soule, & as Infidels in things belonging to the body? why should we be as professors of holy religion in our meeting
together after the manner of Christians on the Lords day, and all the daies of the weeke after be as Infidels in the things concerning the bodie, which God hath framed as the house of the soule? Dooth not Moses that heauenly philoso∣pher record that God beheld al things which he made, and loe they were exceeding good. How dare you then affirme, that Opium, Mercury, Ars∣nick, or any thing els is except. If they were good then doth that goodnesse still remaine in them: how then commeth it to passe that they are such strong poysons? if you seeke the cause thereof in Aristotle or Galene, you shall neuer finde it: for herein they were as blind as beetels, being alto∣gether depriued of such knowledge, vnto whom God vouchsafed not to impart the same, & yet left them inexcusable against the day of their appearing before the dreadfull Maiestie of that great God, euē our Sauiour Iesus Christ. But let vs take our way vnto the worde of God (which will fully resolue all men that beleeue it) which telleth vs that for the transgression of one, not onely death was enioined vnto him, but for his fault, euery creature hath a deth inflicted vpon him, each creature had an euill ioyned to his good, but like vnto like, vnto strong life was ad∣ded strong death or venome, for the death of Roses is not so strong as the death of Arsenicke; which may bee perceaued hereby, in that the balme of Arsenick is far strōger then the balme
of roses, as the life or balme of roses is inferiour to the balme of Arsenick, which is of such force that he is able to preserue from death & dissolu∣tion many yeares, that most strōg poison which is ioyned with him, whereby wee may perceiue that in the strongest poysons are the most pure & sweetest balmes to be found. But of this you shal heare more in my Anatomy of death. Now we may see that before the fall of Adam all thinges were good, all things came vnto him and were bred vnto his hand without his labour. But af∣terward part of it was ioyned to poison, part of it so fast lockt vp, that without great sweate of browes he should not eat of it. And in these our latter dayes sloth is growen so strong▪ & idlenes hath gotten such maisterie, that there are very few which will let one drop fal frō their browes to seeke this bread, but indeuour by all metho∣dicall meanes to maintaine this idlenes, and to continue it after their accustomed manner, that they may sit in their chambers on a soft cushiō, & take pen & inke & a litle paper, setting downe their prescriptions to their Poticaries. ℞ rad. flo∣res Semina, &c. These men do not onely neglect their dutie themselues, but with might & maine they seeke to deface those (which spare for no costes or labour to earne their bread in this mā∣ner) by raising of ill reports against them, whis∣pering in the eares of the Honorable, & telling them that we are mad men, that we do & say we
know not what, & are not worthie to liue in a common-wealth, Howsoeuer other men be af∣fected, I pray you be not angry, I haue a better opinion of you, I doubt not but you thinke as wel of Paracelsus as his great friēd Erasmus doth, which could not choose but commend his dili∣gence in preparatiō of his medecines, & iudged them farre to exceede those which were com∣mōly vsed. At this time I craue no more at your hands, but patiently to heare me, and read that which I haue here set you downe: neither will I at this present trouble your head with any fur∣ther declaration of the matters before spoken of, nor in prouing vnto you how farre you haue erred in bringing in your humors intemperie & obstructions to be the causes of all diseases, that they be but fantasticall inuētions of an idle head, hauing no foundatiō or groūd in nature, I know I should but anger you, or tell you pa∣radoxes to proue, that neither Apoplexia, Epilep∣sia, Melancolia, Mania, Paralycis, Lithargas, Pleuri∣tis, Peripneumonia, Pestis, Sincope, Colica, Iliaca, Dy∣senteria, Diarhaea, Gonorrhaea, Nephritis, Stranguria, Dissuria, Cachexia, Hydrops, Icterus ater & flaum, Febris, Diaria, Quotidiana, Tertiana, Quartana, He∣ctica, Lepra, Vlcera, Apostemata, or any other di∣sease whatsoeuer, are the proper death or sick∣nesses of Microcosmi, but are the sicknesses and death of the fruit of Microcosmi, & that by trans∣plantation they growe in Microcosmus. Hardly
would you beleeue that Estis is the deth of Ars∣nick. Pluritis the death of Antimonie. Prunella the death of Brimstone. Epilepsia the death of Vitriole. Colica, Podagra, Gonagra, Chiragra, Ischias. Arthritis, Hemicrania, the death of Tartar. Morbus gallicus, the death of Mercury. Lethar, the death of Opiū. Febris, the death of Nitroci sulphuris. Vlcera, the death of Saltes, &c. And if you had bestowed but half your studie in the first booke of Moses, which you spent in the foolish Philosophie of Aristotle, you had espied your errors long agoe. I haue told you already, & yet I grieue not to tel you againe, that for the offence of our first pa∣rents, death was not onely laid vpon them, but for the same transgression God planted a death in euery thing he had made, in euery thing he put a death able to destroy such a life. And these deaths were not, nether are they dead deaths, but quicke & liue deaths, & they tooke power both of multiplication and transplantation of him which sent them. This is the cause that mā dieth such sundry deaths, because hee eateth in his bread the death of all other things, which when perfect separation is not made, bringeth foorth fruit according to his kinde. Ouer these deaths hath the Physician power, and not ouer that which was inioyned to the body of man parti∣cularly. Therfore we affirme that neither Poda∣gra, Hidrops, Lepra or Epilepsia, are vncurable di∣seases, the reason is, for that (as I sayd before)
they are the death of the fruites of the great world, & not of man, & that they grow not na∣turally in man but come in by transplantation, & therefore may be seperated. But soft a litle, I thinke I haue angred you before I was aware, wherefore I will imitate the wise & skilfull Chi∣rurgion, who when hee seeth a great deale of proude flesh in an vlcer, will not apply a strong corosiue to take it away at once, although need should so require, but will by litle & litle apply his corrosiue, as well to keepe the good will & fauour of his patient, as to prefer his owne pro∣fite. Euen so I seing these cancred opinions graf∣ted & rooted in you, thinke it best rather to di∣minish it by litle & litle, then violently at once to pull it away, least thereby I should purchase your displeasure, which I am very loth to doo. But if I shall perceaue that you will giue these my simple letters the second or third reading ouer, you shall not onely encourage mee in my next labours, to set out particularly and plainly that which I haue now hastily trust vp hard in a bundell (cutting it as shorte as possibly I could, doubting how you would take it) but it will prouoke me to reueale vnto you the true and perfect preparation of such rare medecines which are found out by this arte of separation, so called because it doth shewe the way how to seperate the good from the bad, & not to make that which is e, as some haue falsly vn∣derstood.
And the more perfect that the sepera∣tion is, the more worthy name it receiueth: as for example, if Antimonie be so purged, that with∣out any euident annoyance it may be inwardly taken, then is he said to be in his magister, but if he be further purged one degree higher, then is he in his essence. Nowe if you leaue him not there, but do purifie him more, then doth his tincture appeare: and if you can purge him throughly and perfectly then shall you haue his Arcanum, & so of others. There are also these de∣grees in solucion, whereby the essence of gold surpasseth the Magister, & both are expelled by his tincture. Thus leauing of at this time to trouble you, I cōmit you vnto the tuition & protection of Al∣mightie God, who for his sonne Christ his sake inspire you with his holy spirit, whereby mutu∣all loue may bee increased in those that are his, that in things concerning their owne & other mens soules & bodies, they may agree & be of one minde, that God may haue the glory by their actions in this life, and afterward they may through Christs merits attaine euerlasting hap∣pinesse. From my house at S. the 21. of this present March. 1586. Your louing Coosin and freend, student in Physicke.
