5879 99845462 10364
❧ OF THE OFFICE OF SER∣VAVNTES, A BOKE MADE IN LA∣tine by one Gylber∣tus Cognatus and newely Engly∣shed. 1534
❧ TO HIS RIGHT VVOVRSHIPFVL MAISTER SIR HENRY KNYVET KNIGHT, one of the ientimen of the kinges maiesties priuie Chambre. ACCORDING sir, as ye bad me haue I inglishid this li∣tle booke, of the of∣fice of seruauntes, but nat accordynge as I wolde it were, bothe to con∣tent tendereares, and also for mine owne satisfaction. Trusting your goodnes wyl with as free a minde receiue it, as I also went abowt it, albeit in many places I found the same as a glasse to see myne owne fautes in, (as I can nat tell, and am glad to belieue you ment it so)
but thereby I fynde my conscience doble discharged, in confessing the one, and fulfillynge the other. And I pray God geue your maistership longe soo to serue, as in a lesse de∣gree we your ser∣uauntes owght, and woulde doo. Your humble seruaunt Tho∣mas aloner.
FOR AS MOCHE AS MOST MEN SVP∣pose it to skille li∣tle, what waitinge men they take to seruice, or in what wyse they haue them, where as in my iudgemente, not the smalleste part of a mans good, or euyll hap, dependith on the seruant, I haue thoughte good to set fourthe this shorte treatise apon the same ma∣tier, whiche shall nat (as I truste) be vnfrutefull, bothe to the mai∣sters, and them that serue also. And fyrst will I treate what choise is to be had in seruauntes. Then howe their ratches, and condiciōs shuld be tried, Thirdly of the office, and duety of seruantes towardes their maisters, and of theirs like wise to∣wardes their men. For as tow∣thynge
the firste, seinge we chose owt a treinde, we chose owt a wife, nat vnskylfull howe pestilente a thynge a faygned freind, or an e∣uyll manerde wife is, soo muste a seruaunt also be chosen, who if he chaunce good, auaileth greatly: if otherwise, is no meane hyndrance. For why, we reade of hole howses and families, that haue decayed, and ben subuerted through vntru∣sty seruauntes. Then muste this saide choise be hadde, aswel on the one partie, as thother, in as moche as all men agree nat with other so narowly, but that it commeth ofte to passe, what thynges alone by them selfes at well sittinge, yet the same put together may be vnfitly. So because there is great diuersi∣tie of wittes amonges vs, you shal finde two men perhappes of lyke
goodnes, and perfection, wherof neither maye away with other as towchinge howsholde feleship. Further we must make our choise nat onely throughe our eyes, but our eares also, for our eyes cōceiue a certaine gesse apon the fygure, and shape of the bodye, called by Grekes the phisenomy, sins Na∣ture hath endewid mennes bodies with certaine markes, and tokens, wherby (noting well) ye may the sooner wite of a persones inwarde dispositions, as in some mans loke and aspect, there aperith a maner ferocite, or rudenes, with disceite sittinge in his browes, and wrath in al his countenance: and though the Gospel warneth vs to deme no mā by his loke, yet is nat the gesse we conceiue apon the notes of a mans body by theis wourdes for∣bidden,
for it speakith only of owt ward thynges: As if we iudge ho∣lynes in a man apon his pore and simple arraye, humilnes, for hol∣dinge downe his heade, or hard li∣uinge, because he loked leane. But yet apon the bodily marckes, whi∣che either birth gaue, or haunte of vices hath induced, a wyse conie∣cturer may gather many thinges. Theise be naturall notes, or to∣kens, as when the eyes are ouer∣bigge, or to inwardly hollowe, the mouthe straiete, the eybries either slopewise as a foxe hath, or els ioy∣ning toguither, the voice great, or small. Besides theise maye ye also finde in a mans face bothe likely∣hodes of accustomed drunkinnes, or an yrefull mode in him: but of this kinde of contecturinge albe it the great Aristotle disdaigned nat
to make a booke, yet oughte we geue therto, neither none, ne to oche credite, & as the choise ther∣in requireth quicke auisement, soo ought nat the same be ouermoche curious, lest els perhaps the bar∣gaine sholde neuer kuytt betwixte them. But through our eares con∣ceiue we a more assured iudgemēt. For as by our eyes we lerne bothe of thage, and helthines of the per∣sone, or what euer tokens els that Nature hath apparently expressed in his forehed, and eyes: as of vn∣shamefastnes, fiersnes, amasednes, with suche like: So by our eares vnderstande we of his countrye, kinnesfolkes, bringing vppe, life afore ledde: toguither with the tru stines of his seruice in case ere then he hath serued any body: yea of the selfe communication had with him
may ye conceiue no smalle intelly∣gence of his condicions, for there∣by is a mans figure most perfectly inseene, accordinge to Socrates sentence. Who vnto a yonge man sent by his father to be seen and a∣uewed of him, speake ({que} he) some∣what, wherby I may see the. Nei∣ther is it vnwittye that is tolde by Diogenes, who at a marte sitting to be sold for a slaue, when the bro ker bad him stand vp to shew hym selfe: what neadeth that ({que} Dio∣genes) for ar nat fishes solde also lieng? meanynge by this that as fishes ar dom, nomore is a man ke ping his tounge, knowne thouro∣ly, whether he stand, or sit downe. It is an euil signe when a seruaūt reaporteth lewdely by those whom before he dwelled with, or if his talke be vaine, lieng lowde with∣out
any chaunge of hewe. In this case surely not onely the goodnes of his nature must be cōsidred, but also howe thinges may be applia∣ble. for if they agree nat in effecte, they ne can long hang toguither. And so, whose nature is somedele yrous, he shuld chose him seruan∣tes of a mylder moode: who so is godly disposed, let him take none but such as ar giuē to godlines, or easely may be induced to the same. Then let a courtier pike him out a man of courtlike fashons. And so must a merchaunt gette hym those that ar both gaining, and crafty. As touchynge this pourpose, the countreye where they were borne, importeth nat a litle. for seldome shal ye se a man of Sueuia or Si∣lesia serue a Prouinsale, or Hollan der: seldomer a Hispanierde cou∣pled
with an Almaigne, and yet shal one hispanierd serue an other liuing with skarce and sobre fode, euen pointe deuise, that and if the common report is beleuable, some of them get into seruice, to thende that with their clene conueyaunce, and lyght fingring, they may fur∣nishe out their masters also: the I∣talians ar more framed to al mens vsages, yet skant can they susteign any foraine maisters: but aboue al others the Frenchemen are moste seruisable. ¶ THVS hitherto hauing treated of the choise in seruauntes, resteth what proof belongeth to the same: And as vnto them that entre reli∣gion, is giuen one yere of probati∣on, so thinke I it behouing for mē to hire their seruauntes also vnder condition, that if after oone mo∣neths
assay thone likith nat tho∣ther, they may thē breake of, which is indifferent to both parties: and then afterwardes for so longe, & so moche may the bargaine betwene them be more firmely renewed. Let no man sticke moch at his seruan∣tes bluntnes in the begynning, in case he fynde him apt to be taught, and pliant. Concerning which, the firste assay (as sayth the olde pro∣uerbe is) if he make a fyre hande∣somely: For of lesse wood wel cou∣ched shall a greater fyre arise, then of a bigger heape disordrely frus∣shed downe. For as with to moch pestringe the flame is choked, soo the same through due espace left be twen is quickely kendled through the aires helpe. Moreouer in other lyke seruyces it is a good token when a seruaunte of hym selfe for∣seeth
many thynges, when beinge owght warned, he thynketh ther∣on, and of his owne reason dothe gather, what is further there vnto belonging. But of his talke (as I aforesaide) is the surest coniecture taken, howe he is enclined. He se∣meth well to be of an honeste cou∣rage, who beinge admonyshed of his fault, doth blushe therat, and liketh naught him selfe therin: and then againe reioyseth, heryng his duety well done to be commended of his maister, or if he be gladde of his maisters presence, louing, whō he knoweth for his maisters well wyllers, and hatynge, whome he knoweth do mynde, or speake the contrarye. Suppose nat that ser∣uaunt to be trustye, who either is abandoned to thine ennemies, or (that worse is) to thy faigned fren∣des.
Some mē for the nonis leaue abrode money (as who saith) rech∣leslye, for profe if their seruauntes be limefingred, whiche if it be well done, I reporte me: for that in my mynde, maketh nat soo moche to serche owte, as to teache theyr ser∣uantes theft, namely moued with suche a stale, whiche oftentimes entiseth the vprightest, thē of their blabbynge in this wise maye ye be instructed, in telling them some tri full apon ernest charge nat to dis∣close the same, and then do suborne some one, who maye baite them to vtter it, that in case they blabbe it fourth, it skilleth you litle, and if they be hushte, ye maye well in a greatter matter truste them. Plu∣tarche reherseth a propre count by a certaine senatour, who when his wyfe styll enquired of hym what
was done in the senate howse (as the report went howe some waigh∣ty matiers were there as then de∣bated) seing she neuer left boking, I shall tell the ({que} he) in cace thou canste holde thy peace, Tushe, a stone shall sooner vtter it. There was an Egle ({que} he) seen flie ouer the Citie, beinge gyrte with a two∣hande sworde, and therfore take the Senatours aduyse, what is ment by this wonder? for it shuld seme to pretend some gret myshap vnto our citie. Now what became hereof? Forsouth, ere euer the hus∣bande could attein vnto the mer∣cate stede, he founde all the com∣mens there redy assembled deuy∣syng of this foresaid wonder, and there vnto the hole Senate, that meruayled moch at the peoples so sodaine assemble, dyd this Sena∣tour
reherse this tale apon his wi∣fes goodly silence. ¶ AND hitherto hauinge treated what proofe men shold make apon their seruauntes, I shall thurdely speake of bothe their offyces and dueties interchaungeably. wher∣of the chiefe pointe is, that either haue a well willing mynde towar∣des thother, Thone to deserue, tho ther to rewarde. For the good wil is that, that supplieth a gret deale in soch offices. Then that from the begynninge eyther so maye beare with other, tyll at laste apon fur∣ther acquaintance in manners, a faster frendship may knit betwixe thē: for amonges many, soch frēd∣shyp is disioigned, before thone can knowe thother thouroly. And then againe, many at the furste ar mysliked, who, better assaied, may
content you well ynoughe. Ther∣fore on thone part, auaileth the ma sters ientilnes, and (as who saith) winking at smal faultes. On tho∣ther the seruauntes willingnes to fulfill all his maisters hestes. In many, some light tatches do reign, but soch as with as many vertues ar recompensed again. As if a mā be hastye, but yet soone cawlmed, but at neade a faithfull freinde. So fareth it by a seruaunt, perad∣uenture hault mynded. Who na∣theles by a soft meats may be re∣fourmed, the same being both tru∣sty, and at all assayes right profy∣table. And some there be again dut witted, yet if ye enioigne thē ought they wyll geue good eare, with no lesse dilygence to the same. It be∣houeth a master to interteigne his seruantes betwene both: that nei∣ther
his sternes maye withdrawe their good hertes, nor yet his to moch softnes moue them to wan∣tonnes. Nomore shulde their cou∣raige with to moche chiding or re∣uilinge be sharpened: but rather with good intreaty be made boun∣den vnto him, soo that nexte vnto his wief, and children, shulde the seruauntes in his howse be chery∣shed. he oweth them their fode and clothing, nat ouer daintie, but ra∣ther as neade requireth, and they again owe vnto their master, good and true seruice. Wherapon they ar called megnial, & chargetakers, because they perteign to howshold and ought to tend well their may∣sters busines. For and if that pro∣uerbe is wourthly blamed, As ma ny slaues so many ennemies. (Na∣theles euen amonges soche slaues,
there haue some ben, who in theyr lordes defence haue litle estemed their owne liefes). Howe moch the more then maye we conceiue soche truste apon our seruauntes? And yet all slaues were nat soche as in Comedies they ar set fourthe. Therence in his comedie named, Adelphos, setteth fourth an exam∣ple of one only slaue to be wel con∣dicioned: and that was poore Ge∣ta, slaue also vnto a pore wydowe. In an other of his comedies enty∣led Hecyra, he faigneth Parmeno slaue vnto Pamphilus to be som∣deale geuin to vices, and a verye drawlatche, both inquisitiue, and a blabbet fourthe of thinges tolde vnto him. Whiche two faultes are of lyke kynde, and yet soch as most men haue an espece of. Therfore vnles they many wayes be appro∣ued,
I reke it no wisedome in tru∣stinge eany seruauntes with secre∣tes, where as the greater nede con∣streignith nat. no more then chyl∣dern, or wiefes, in as moch as no∣thyng is more harde, then counseil kepinge, and though a seruaunte be trusty, yet is a mās mind chang∣able, yea and by priuey whisterers may he sone be corrupted. For such a kinde of men is there, the moste malicious and reprouable that cā be deuised, whose chief delighte is to sowe discorde atwixe the seruan∣tes, and their maisters, who where in deade they ne can well gouerne their owne meigny, yet take they apon them the rule of others. For∣getting this verse of Homere, nat without cause so moche praysed. Men, that haue praignant policies knowne In others ne adis, but naught in their owne.
The ciuile lawe graunteth acti∣on againste them that corrupte a mans slaue, or bondeman, and I thinke the selfe same case may stād in a seruaunte also corrupted. for what so euer he doth amis in, they ar to wite that entised him thervn∣to. It is an honest mans parte to exhorte others seruauntes to their dueties doing, and when strife fal∣leth betwene them and their may∣sters, to set them (as moche as in him lieth) at agrement. But those wyked tounges that go aboute to disseuer seruauntes from their hy∣rers, ar wourthy being hanged vp in the chimney roofe to be parched dry with smoke. Moreouer as it cometh of ientilnes to remit lighte faultes, soo if you finde your ser∣uauntes gyltie of eany greater of∣fences, as of theft, adultery, mali∣cious
slaundre, or accusement rey∣sed apon eany person, then would I aduise you withoute longe chy∣ding straight to dismisse him. And because seruantes throughe conti∣nuall abode, and practise in howse with their maisters, muste neades haue some intellygence of his af∣fayres, This gifte therfore would I chiefely wisshe in them, neyther to harken moche what is doone a∣brode, nor yet to spread fourth thin ges doone at home. Whiche were better vntolde, namely soche as at meales were perhappes spoken vn dre the frankeste fashon. For no∣thinge can be more knauyshe then soche, as (accordinge to Geta his guise in Therence) when so theyr master hauing shut the dore to him is in secrete communication with some freinde of his, then holdyng
their breathe, laye care vnto locke hole, or note well if eany wourde, perhaps in drynke eskaped hym, whiche strayght they reaporte to them by whom the same was spo∣ken, so tellinge that for ernest, whi∣che myght be ment but in iest, yea and that with some addicions of theyr owne makinge. Wourthely is that slaue cōmended, who when his mayster at supper, throughe drunkinnes, hadde vttred certaine wourdes of treason against them∣perour Augustus Cesar, the nexte mornyng aduised hym therof, and that ere reaport of the same might throughe his accusers come to Ce∣sars eares, he shulde goo and axe his pardone at hym. Wherapon Cesar nat alonely forgaue the mai ster, but also moued him to enfran∣chise
his so faythefull a slaue, ge∣uing to the same of his owne reue∣nues a certayne stipend to liue on. A seruaunte that bryngeth many newis into his masters house, may we well suppose will cary owte as many. Some men make but smal counte of surfeites or drunkynnes in their seruauntes, as thoughe the same were a fault more wour∣thye of lawghter, then displeasure. Whiche in deade, myght partely be borne with, ne were nat the same a trayner of soo huge a heape of vy∣ces folowynge, When therby ser∣uauntes become lyther, vnstanche of tounge, brawlers, fyghters, yea and commenly fulfylled with diseases, so likewyse is horehaunt by som men litle passed of. But yet thereby seruauntes get the frenche
euyl, and deale the same amonges their masters childern and hole fa∣milie, infectinge oftetymes bothe maister, and maistres, maye the same then be counted a light fault in them? Naye verely. And albeit to be amourus, as ferfourth as the law againsaith nat, may somwhat be permitted in younge folkes. yet certes soche louinge causeth moch inconuenience: when thereby ser∣uantes after vndue meanes make shifte to furnishe their crauynge lemans with gay giftes, and them selfes also with gay appareil. But of all others, those are the shame∣fulleste that defyle the selfe howse they dwel in with their lechery, & vncleaner then the burdes ar, doo beray theyr owne nestes. Speadi∣nes in a seruaunte is moche com∣mended by the wise Salomon.
Hast thou seen (saith he) a mā that spedely dispatcheth his busines? he shal waite before princis, and shal nat lowte to meane men. Then bla meth he as moche eany stouthefull dolt, that foldinge his armes to∣guither, ydleth fourth the tyme, or beinge sente on an errante fyndeth many barres in the same with col∣propheting, as, a liō is in the way, a beare haunteth such a wood, It is lyke to be fowle wether. so is he nat sent fourthe, but rather thruste owte by the shoulders. Then shal he houer by the waye apon euerye lyght occasion, staieng hym self e∣uen for the nonis, lest if he returne the shortlier, he maye straighte be put to a newe taske. But yet the o∣thers speadines auayleth nat soo moch, vnles an auised considrance be ioigned therto: els, were it bet∣ter
to do no whit, then to frame a thynge vntowardly, but a certaine ware deliuernes in al thinges chif ly becōmeth eany seruyng man, for to moch rest, is a brodgate vnto vi ces, namely in young men, who for their small practise wote litle howe to gouerne them selfes accordynge to lerned mens repose in studieng. Then, as it is a kynde parte in a master, nat to burthen his seruātes ouermoche, so oughte he also take kepe, that hauing somwhat aye in hande, they do spende their time in some fruict, yea rather shuld he put them to vnneadfull workes, then that slowthes rust myght byte apō them. For as themperour Helioga balus was wont to set his men to taske in this wise, cōmanding one within soch espace to catche him so many. M. flies, an other so many.
M. spiders, & so forth, to thend that beynge pestred with this busynes, they ne myght do accordinge to o∣thers seruantes vsages, who take apon them to haue an oyer in their maisters publike offices, oftetimes vndre that pretence, selling winde vnto suters. albeit this was but a fonde deuise of Heliogabalus, yet may ye same be aplied to our exēple. Pamphilus (as Therēce in Hecyra expresseth) sendith away his slaue Parmeno to the hauen side, apon a faigned messaige, lest being (as in deade he was) bothe inquisitiue, & a blabbe also, he might haue an in∣cling in matiers of priuitie mete to be concelid. I haue knowne also som mē cause their seruantes write some thing of smal purpose, suppo sing it better for thē to do a thig net ther here, ne there, thē that through
idlenes they shuld intend to worse occupations. Lowlynes is a fayre thinge in a seruaunt, for ye shall see some choplogikes, who skante wyl forbeare their owne maisters. Themperour Hadrianus is moch commended for that he warned a slaue of his goinge amides two se∣natours, to remembre his owne de gree and condition. But nowe a dayes a seruaunt, if his maister be but of a meane estate, wyll little e∣steme him, nat so moche regarding how great wages, as of how great a man he receiueth the same. That although this mean maister do no wourse feade, and clothe him, yea and better tendeth his bryngynge vp, then doth that great lorde, yet vnder his wynge liftes he vp his hornes, vnder thother semith he no thinge well apaied with him selfe.
So a seruantes pride reboundeth. oftetimes to his maisters reproch. Moreouer somme there be that grudge to do ought, because they haue of their owne to lyue with, or for their wourshipful stockes sake. But what maketh that to their ma sters, who bestowe no lesse coste a∣pon them, then if they were taken vp by the highe waye. Let no man therfore counte so moche apon his degree at home, as of that rowme in seruice, whiche willingely he be∣taketh him self vnto. It is an euil custome vsed amonges many na∣tions, inespeciall amonges An∣glishemen, to keape abowte them for a shew only, a superfluous nō∣bre of waytynge men, thinkynge them selfes therby the more wour∣shipfull, the greater traine that fo∣loweth them. But (lorde) what a
bande shal that be of tryfling tru∣antes, both doltishe, drunkin, and eke piking. And therfore may Uir∣gilles verse well be verefyed, VVhat shal the maisters do at last? when seruantes bribe, and steale so fast? For who so hath many seruantes, must neades haue some vnthrifty, then one onely is inough to marre the hole flocke. To this I harde it ones saide by a freind of myne me∣rely cōceited, He that hath but one man, hath some man, he that hath two, hath haulf a one: but he that hath thre, hath neuer a oone. For then if oughte be mysdone, thone wyl twyte the fault in the other. If ought be nat done, eche wyll saye he thought his fellowe had goone about it. Iulianus themperour is moche commended, for that he af∣ter the empresse his wiefes deceas,
clerely dispatched his howse of all soche as were to be spared, whiche beinge but an vnneadefull encom∣braunce, yet for her womanishe fan tesies sake, by her liefe dayes he mainteygned. And therefore as a wise man bieth howsehold stuf, ra∣ther to serue him selfe, then to fead others eyes, so a great deale sooner ought vnnecessary meigny be put away, who ar nothing els but con sumers of vitailes, as Homer cal∣leth them. Princis courtes ar mo∣che pestred with this euyll, but nat therewith onely, sithens Ambicion maye hardly there be barred forth. Here I remembre a certayne mad tale, fondely brought fourthe, but yet that serueth to this pourpose. A certaine good bludd had encro∣ched him selfe into the meigny of a bushope in Poleland, althoughe
his name were neuer entred in the checkroll. whiche parte nat with∣standinge, no man yet controlled him, that nacion beinge liberall y∣noughe to depart with meate and drynke. But whē tyme came for al the seruauntes to be payed theyr wages, he also throust in amonges them, wherat when the reste repy∣ned, aduertising the bushop howe the same was none of his retinew, The bushoppe called him fourth, and all to ratinge him, axed howe he durste be so bolde to demaunde wages, beinge neuer admitted of howsholde? I haue doone you syr ({que} he) nowe a fewe monthes past, soch seruice as other your men do. Howe so ({que} the bushop?) mary ea∣ten your meate, and drunke your dryncke, with which aunswere the bushop beinge sturred to laughter
sayde he had good skylle, and soo commaunded hym to be waged. Nat seldome the waywarde dispo∣sition of a maister is in cause that fewe canne abyde in howse with him. That and if soche are wour∣thely noted, as vse their slaues or bondemen (cost they neuer so litle) no better then bearinge beastes, si∣thens they ar men as we be, howe moch thē more deserue they blame, that vse their seruauntes after like rate, being freemen, and but apon a condicion onely apprentised vn∣to vs? Adde herevnto, that amon∣ges christen mē there ought a grea ter respecte of humanitie be had in all intentes. For we all be seruan∣tes vnder one maister, and as tou∣chinge those thynges wherein ve∣raye felicitie chiefely consisteth, the lowest ar on euin bourde with the
highest. Let a maister therefore cō∣sidre with him selfe, thus: what e∣uer good tourne I do him, I do it as for my brother, he being a mem∣bre of the selfe same body I am of, and therby shal I merite of Christ him selfe. Thus then ought a ser∣uant to repute againe: What euer seruice I do vnto him, the same do I vnto Christe, who byddeth vs with all our good hertes to obeye our maisters, and wyll therefore him selfe rewarde vs, be they ne∣uer so vnientill. But nowe some seme to make it tough, in that they shuld become seruantes to others, settinge fourth what hiegh seruice they do, and thereby thyncke them seluis moch beholden vnto, in that they daigne to be obeysant, as who saith they bare in many poynctes with their maysters. But then a∣gaine
they considre nat, howe this ministration is egally delt betwen them. For as to smaller pourpo∣ses the seruaunte endeuorith hym selfe towardes his maister, soo he againe in greter matters doth his parte no lesse, Findinge him bothe howserome, fode, and clothing, ke∣pinge him from vnthrifty compa∣ny, bringinge him vppe as well in sundry craftes, as also in lernyng, and good manners, yea and with an easy bytte refraigninge his pli∣ant courage, and slydinge youthe, which els suffred to ronne at large wolde stomble apon all vnhappy∣nes. That admitte it were so wret∣ched a thyng to lyue in awe, ar nat lordes and princis sonnes then al∣so wretched? But howe goodly a thynge is it (I praye you) for a ser uaunte to lyue vnder great, wise,
and lerned men, when therby (and that without coste, or trauaile) he attaineth knowleage in many thin ges, and also endeweth hym selfe both with wisedome, sobrenes, cur∣tesy, and manerly fashons. That and if eany mishappe chaunce vn∣to the seruaunt, as by slaunder or violence done apon hym, who but the master is ready to support him, if he fall in eany greuous malady, what thought (trow ye) wyll a lo∣uinge maister conceiue for his re∣couerey? And yet is this in him re∣puted as no seruice, where as tho∣ther for caryenge in a dysshe vnto the table, or geuynge a pissepot, fa∣reth as he serued all the worlde. Then nat seeldome a maister is dri uē to beare with his mans condici∣ons, more than he wyll daigne to suffre in his againe, and that com∣meth
of a more cōsidrance in thone then thother. Adde hereto, that to be daunted vnder a sterne, or way∣warde maisters rule, auaileth ofte to tame a wylde harebraine, in tea chinge hym more attemperatenes. This the common sort of seruaun∣tes neuer calleth to remembrance, Onely bearynge in mynde: Thus longe haue I serued, and for thus small wages yearely. Nay thenne should they further recken: Thus longe, haue I been mewed from e∣uyl hauntes, hitherto, haue I ben well entreated, with howserome, meate, and dryneke, this whyle, haue I conuersed with honest com pany, I haue seen mens customes abrode, I haue gotten me reputa∣tion amonges good men, I haue shifted of my rude, and goffishe manners. Theise causes moue the
richest oftetymes, to putte fourthe their beste beloued chuldern in to straunge countreys, to thend they myghte be broken, yea and that of their owne expences. Many do co ueit after reste, and libertie, where as nothynge aboue thone, may be more infectiue, specially in younge folkes, and then thother ne maye so sone be called freedome, as a cer taine licenciousnes, or leude liber∣tie, the veray wellspringe of al fo∣ly, to ronne at randon hither, and thyther, through the wyde worlde perteygninge to no body. Whiche inconuenience now a dayes vndre title of religion is verye breme a∣monges vs. The worlde is full of vagabondes, and neadye folkes, who neyther wyl labour, ne abide with eany man, ne yet be bounde in eany couenaunte. and what do
they then? Forsoth they begge al∣mes, and entendinge to lyue in y∣delnes vncontrolled, they become skolars: then what do they lerne? tenne wourdes of latine, with as many of greeke, and hebrewe, by rote, but those disciplines for whi∣che the tounges were furst ordeig∣ned, do they neuer apply them sel∣fes vnto, as phisike, a study very mete for our bodely healthe, or els the lawe ciuile, whereby commen weales ar gouerned, nor yet the lawe canon, or theologie, whiche chiefly is our soules leache, (And yet I meane nat this by all in ge∣nerall, but by a certayne onely, of whome (wolde god) the nombre were skarcer.) So that this is nat the lybertie of the spirite, (as they call it) ne yet of faythe or charitie, taughte in the Godspell, whiche
freely and for no gaine ment aban donith it self apon others neades, and stirreth all men to be the riper towardes their owne offices. How be it their pietie, and tendrenesse ought nat to be reiected. who with some socoure do relieue soche as ar dryuen to wandre fourthe of their cuntreis, or otherwise ar fallen in to pouertie. and yet (in myne ad∣uise) shulde they do bettre, in indu cynge soch yonge, and strong lub∣bers, to betake them to an occupa∣tion, so with som seruice and work doinge, to erne their fynding. For els wyll al men by their good wil∣les, cleaue vnto ydlenes, and bea∣lycheare skottefree. But (alas) to what steade in a commen wealthe may soch a frothe, or rablement of raskals serue? in case they swarme ouermoche abrode? Thus wyll I
stint here (wourshipful Mecenas) further to dilate of thoffice of a ser uaunt, addinge onely for a conclu∣sion and knot of all toguither, the image or portraiture of a good ser∣uaunt, accordinge as the frenche mē haue the same paincted in their howses, and that in this wyse. Furste shoulde he haue a skarlette bonet apon his heade, with a faire shurte on his backe, but in steade of a nose, they make him a hogges snowte, with asse eares, and hertes feate, holdinge vp his right hande stretched fourth, and apon his left shoulder bering a cowlestaffe with two pailes of water, one before, an other behinde. Last then, holding in his lefte hande a shouell full of quicke coles, signifienge by theise deuises, as towchinge the fayre cappe, and shurte, howe a seruant
go netely apparellyd. by the hog∣ges snowte was mente, he sholde nat be lykerous, or ouerdayntie mowthed, but content with al mea tes. the asse eares pretended, that he also should haue pacient earis, in suffrynge what euer his maister should roughly say vnto him. So lyke wyse his hande holden vppe warned him of vprightnes, in hād lynge his maisters goodes. The hertes fete betokenid quykenes in dispatchinge lightly what euer he went abowt, and so by the two pai∣les, and the fyre was vnderstode both deftenes, and good conuey∣aunce in bringinge many thinges at ones to passe. This moche, at this tyme, came to my mynde to write of, as touchynge the choise we sholde take in seruauntes, and then what proof is to be made apō
them, toguither with their offi∣ces set fourth accordyngly. Albeit apon this ma∣tier there might a greate deale more be enlarged. DIXI. Londini in officina Thomae Berthe, regij impressoris typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad imprimen∣dum solum. ANNO. M. D. XLIII.
