6273.7 33151141 28953
To the honorable Assembly of the Commons house in Parliament. The humble Petition of Dame Grace Darcie widow, mother, and one of the Committes of the body and lands of Edward Darcie Esquire, his Maiesties Warde. Humbly shewing, THat whereas his Maiestie by Indenture vnder the Seale of the Court of Wards, dated xxiij die Iu∣nij Anno xvij Iac. Reg. Angl. did in expresse words grant vnto the Petitioner, and one George Wil∣more Esquire, the other Committee of the said Ward (amongst other lands) the Mannor of Sutton, in Com. Surr. and the Advowson and next presentation to the Parsonage thereunto belonging. Which Parsonage became voide in August 1621. and the Petitioner (so soone as she could haue notice thereof) presented a Clerke thereto, but the Ordinary could not admit him, for that the Church was full, by reason of the Lord Keepers presenting of one Doctor Graunt vnto it, one of the Prebends of Westm. who was Examiner also in his Lordships house, who had closely got his Institu∣tion, and his Induction also in the Church of Sutton aforesaid; so the Petitioner was constrained to send to the Cursitor of Surrey for a Quare Impedit, her onely course to auoide this vsurpation of the said Doctor; but the Cursitor refused to make the said Writ, for that he had a Caueat vnder the Lord Keepers hand to stay the same. Whereupon the Petitioner preferred sundry petitions to his Lordship to recall his direction, and to giue way to the Writ, but he still denied the same; only in the time of the last Parliament (in an∣swer to one of her petitions) he seemed willing to be certified by two of his Maiesties learned Coun∣cell, whether or no it belonged to her, and the other Committee in this case to present; which an∣swer she shewed to his Maiesties Attorney and Sollicitor generall, and made choice of them to con∣sider of the matter, and at length (though with great charge) by her Counsell so plainly instructed them, that they told her they conceiued it to be her right, and had signified as much to his Lordship, and were perswaded his Lordship would in no wise long stay the said Writ. But all this proued but to delay the Petitioner, till the dissolution of the Parliament, and wasting of the six moneths, in which time only by the Common law (as his Lordship well knew) she had time to present; yet be∣fore that time was quite spent, she sent againe to the Cursitor for the Writ, who answered, he had made it, and offered it to the seale, but still his Lordship had reiected it. And further, she being vnwilling to leaue any meanes vnattempted, whereby to preserue the Wards right, in February following, in a wet and cold season, to her further charge and neglect of her health, also iourneyed to Royston, and by humble petition acquainted his Maiestie with the ex∣tremitie of her case, and wrong done to her by his Lordship, who graciously accepted the same; and being moued therewith, gaue direction for the writing of a letter to his Lordship, with the petition inclosed, which was deliuered into his Lordships hands▪ howbeit hee deferred to answer the same. Now forasmuch as the presentation is so wrongfully wrested from the Petitioner, and the very gate of Iustice (which ought to all, and alwayes be open) shut against her, by being denied the ori∣ginall Writ of Quare Impedit in so iust a case, which Writ is free to all his Maiesties subiects to su out (haue they right or no right,) and seeing she hath done her owne vtmost endeuor to haue pro∣cured the same in due time, but by the might of the Lord Keeper was hindred and opposed, and denied all benefit of the Common law, contrary to many the good and ancient lawes of this king∣dome: so that now not only the Petitioner is preiudiced in her present presentation, but the Ward also for euer in his Inheritance, for that he claimeth the same as by descent from his Grandfather, who was a purchaser of the said Mannor and Parsonage, and no auoidance sithence happening, neither Quare Impedit, Assize of Darrain presentment, nor writ of right of Advowson will at any time hereafter lie. Wherefore her most humble suite to this Honorable Senate is, that their wisedomes would fa∣uorably be pleased to take notice of her cause, (considering it may be the case of many the Nobilitie and Gentrie of the Kingdome) and thereupon giue such reliefe, as may be as well for the righting of her in her present presentation, as the Ward in his Inheritance, as also make such prouision for the generall ill consequences growing thereby, as shall be most agreeable to honor, iustice, and that high trust, which the whole Kingdome hath worthily reposed in them. And seeing all those that were heretofore of Councell with the Petitioner in this case, are now of this Honourable House, she desireth that Sir Henry Yeluerton, and Master Stone of London, may be assigned to be of her Councell herein.
