7090.5 29900285 28119
A true Copie of a writing Testimonial by aucthority deuised and commaunded, to satisfie the world, and to cleere Zachary Dow, of London Draper and his Children, from the reproach of a hand wryting, falsely compac∣ted and maliciously published in Blackwell Hall and else where against him, and also from that most iniurious Clayme of 238. li. vpon the same wryting made by one Sara Babington now Sara Gough the wife of Iohn Gough as appeareth. TO all Christian people to, whom this present writing shall come, Iohn Gough of Hoddeson in the Countie of Hertford, Gentleman, and Cittizen and Marchant∣tador of London, and Sara now wife of the said Iohn Gough, and late wife and Administrator of all and Singuler the Goods Chattells Rights and debts which late were of Edwyn Babington, late Cittizen and Draper of London deceased, send greeting in our Lord God Euerlasting. Whereas there was found out a wryting in the nature of a Receipt supposed to be the hand of Zachary Dow, Citizen and Draper of London▪ wherein was expressely set downe, the Somme of two Hundred thirtie eight pounds, little more or lesse, of lawfull money of England, and the said comme to be the late Queenes money, receiued by the said Zachary Dow, at the handes of the said Edwyn Babington, prede∣cessor of me the said Iohn Gough, and late husband of the said Sara, who by vertue and force of the Administration aforesaid, made clayme as her right, to the said wryting in the nature of a Receipt, and to the somme of money mencioned in the same, which said wryting is now lost & can∣not be found. Now know yee therefore that we the said Iohn Gough and Sara wife of the said Iohn Gough, hauing duly weighed and considered the inualidity of the said writing in nature aforesaid, do for vs and either of vs, our Heires, Executors, administrators, and assignes, and euery of vs for euer, vtterly disclayme the same and the somme of money, therein conteyned, and euery part thereof. And also (not noely) acquit, exonerate and discharge the said Zachary Dow, his heires executors, and administrators, and euery of them for euer, of, for, and from all indempni∣ty, incombrance, molestation Contumely, & impeachment whatsoeuer which may from vs, either, or any of vs, if it should hereafter be found, be inferred or inflicted vppō the said Zachary dow▪ his executors, administra∣tors, or assignes or any of them. But also bynde our selues and either of vs our heires executors, administrators, and assignes and euery of vs vnto the said Zachary Dow, his heires, executors, administrators and assignes, firmely by thiese presents, instantly to deliuer or cause to be de∣liuered vnto the said Zachary Dow, his executors or assignes the said wry∣ting in nature aforesaid, (if the same happen to be found at any time hereafter) without any fraude or further delay. In witnes whereof we the said Iohn Gough and Sara wife of the said Iohn Gough, haue herevnto set our hands and seales the Eight and twentith day of Nouember▪ in the Eight yeere of the Raigne of our Soueraigne Lord, Iames by the grace of God King of England, Fraunce, and Ireland▪ Defendour of the faith &c. And of Scotland, the foure and fortith 1610 7 Psal: 14 Verse. Behold he shall trauaile with wickednes: For he hath conceiued mischiefe, But he shall bring forth a lye.
