7065 s110088 99845705 10624
A CATALOGVE OF THE DEPVTIES OF THE HIGH AND MIGH∣TIE STATES GENERALL OF THE VNITED Prouinces. AND Of the Reuerend and Learned DIVINES, who now are met in the Nationall Synode. Celebrated in the Citie of Dordrecht IN HOLLAND. Translated out of the Latin and Dutch Copies. With A SHORT NARRATION OF the occasions, and Introduction of the said Synodicall Assembly. printer's or publisher's device LONDON, Printed by W. I. for Nich. Bourne, and Nath. Newberie, and are to be sold at the Exchange. 1618.
TO THE READER. Stratageme of the diuel.THE chiefest Stratageme of the Diuell, against the Kingdom, Citie, and House of God, is, Contention and Diuision, Mat. 12. yet the Lord in his admi∣rable wisdome knoweth how to exercise his children ther∣by, and to make manifest those which are approoued, 1. Cor. 11.19. Antiochian distention.This Stratageme hath beene vsed by him, euen from the beginning, vntill this crooked Age of ours. In the dayes of the Apostles no small disten∣tion and disputation was raysed in that famous Church of Antiochia, whereof the chiefe Author was (as Epiphanius recordeth) that peruerse Here∣ticke and sonne of the diuell, Corinthus, who af∣ter his disturbing of Gods house, was bruised to death by the fall of a house. It appeareth by the holy Historie written by S. Luke,Disturbers. that the disturbers of the Antiochian Church, came with a faire shew, were adorned with the title of Teachers, and were called by the name of Beleeuers, no lesse then others. It is also to bee noted, that those who now di∣sturbe
the peace of Sion, want no titles nor faire appearance. Parties dis∣turbed.The parties disturbed are called Brethren, wher∣by it appeareth, that the diuell our aduersarie, see∣keth to sow controuersies, euen amongst those, who many wayes are bound to mutuall loue and amitie. The question.The matter in question was a point of doctrine, and therefore S. Paul and Barnabe presently oppo∣sed themselues thereunto, with diligent enquirie and powerful Confutations: for no delay is war∣rantable in the discouering of false brethren and griping Wolues. This faithfull opposition litle preuailing,Synode the resolution of the Antiochian Church was, to refer the matter vnto a greater assembly or meeting of the Apostles and other beleeuers. Which procee∣ding hath since bin vsed in the primitiue Church with excellent successe, for our imitation. At Ierusa∣lem.The fittest place was reputed Ierusalem, where both parties came, and liberty was giuen freely to lay open & debate their Questions and opinions. The President of that holy Assembly was S. Iames sonne of Alphaeus,President. who with his brethren, vn∣derstanding the state of the question, examined the same on the touchstone of Gods holy Word: and finally concluded,Conclusion. That Saluation was onely to be sought and found in Iesus Christ, &c. and not partly in the Ceremonies of the Law. Wherunto was added very sound counsell for the re-establi∣shing of peace in the Church, and for the preuen∣ting of future Contentions.
This patterne of holy meeting,Imitation. is now imitated by the Vnited Prouinces, being admonished ther∣unto by diuers letters of reformed Christian Prin∣ces, but chiefly of his Sacred Maiestie of Great Brittaine, who by his owne Writings, and by the mouth of his Ambassadours hath wrought much in the furthering of this great Businesse, whereby Gods cause is faithfully defended,Vtility. and from whence is expected a worthy Vnion in the refor∣med Churches, to the ouerthrow of the Romish Antichrist, who since his Reuelation hath decei∣ued the world with the vaine glorie of Generall Councels: whereas it is manifest,The abuse of Popery in Synodes. 1. That Synodes were not ordained by him, to cleare or confirme any points of true Doctrine by the Word of God, but for to oppose himselfe thereunto: and for to confirme his receiued errors; yea for to coyne new Articles of faith. Besides, no libertie was graunted in those Sy∣nodes to speake, vnlesse it were with danger of life, as it fell out in the Councell of Constance, where Iohannes Hus, and Hieronymus of Prage were bur∣ned, for maintaining of true Doctrine against Po∣pish errours. Finally, the meeting of Cardinals and shauen Priest is to no purpose, whereas the Pope profes∣seth himselfe to bee the onely man, from whose breast and breath is to bee expected infallible trueth. Place of the Synode.THe place of meeting is the citie of Dort, or Dordrecht, which is reputed to be the aunci∣entest
of Holland, and hath the first place in the Assembly of States. A great and faire Hall is prepared, with conue∣nient Seates for those that are deputed, and Gal∣leries erected for the hearers: in a place called De Doelen, that is, the Artillerie garden. The first day of Nouember was appointed for the first Session,Time. but it was deferred vntill the 13. of the said moneth, expecting some that were not yet arriued. Sermons preparatory 1. Session the 13. of Nouemb.The 13. at eight of the clocke in the morning two Sermons were made, the one in Dutch, the other in French, accommodated vnto the instant action, with very feruent prayers vnto God for the direction of his holy Spirit. These Sermons beeing finished: from euery Prouince were appointed two, for to conduct those forraine Diuines into their seuerall Seates,Deduction to their Seates. Oration of Balthasar Lydius. which was performed with good order and great reuerence: the order is expressed hereafter. The first person appointed to speake was Bal∣thasar Lydius one of the Ministers of Dort, who made a worthy Oration in Latin vnto the Assem∣bly, and a feruent prayer vnto God for the same, and concluded with thanksgiuing vnto the States generall, that they had honoured him, to let his voyce first be heard in such an honorably Assem∣bly. Oration of the States.Whereupon one of the Deputies of the States generall rose, and made a worthy Speach vnto the Assembly, opening the causes of this meeting, and giuing thankes vnto the forraine Diuines,
that they were come from so farre distant places, in such an vnseasonable time: promising euer to be thankfull for the same, &c. And hereupon was read the Letter of the States generall, expounding their intention and will concerning the Assembly. 2. Session the 14. of Nouember.The next day following, by secret voyces or suffrages, were chosen one President of the Assem∣bly, two Assistants, and two Secretaries or Nota∣ries, whose names are hereafter expressed. These beeing elected, they were placed in the roome or seates appointed for them: and deman∣ded in order the Letters of Credence of those that were come to the Assembly which were read in the full Audience:Literae fidu∣ciales. And the matter at that time re∣solued vpon, was, that all the Ministers Remon∣strants,Remon∣strants cited. or Arminians should be cited, and that they themselues might make choice of the fittest a∣mongst them, for to propound, expound, and de∣fend their Doctrine before the Assembly, with due reuerence and order. And all this is to bee done publikely for the instruction of all those that vn∣derstand the Latine tongue, who from all parts re∣sort thither in great multitudes.
THE NAMES OF THE DEPVTIES OF THE MOST NOBLE, Illustrious, and puissant STATES Generall. 1. From the Dukedome of Gelder-land, and Countie of Sutphen: MArtinus Gregorii, Doctor in the Law, chiefe Councelor in the Court of the Dukedome of Geldria. Henricus ab Essen, Councellor in the Court of the Dukedome of Geldria. 2. From Holland and West-Friezland. Walraue de Brederode, Baron of Viana and A∣meyde, Vicount of Vtrecht, &c. Hugo Muys of Holy Knight, Sheriffe of Dort: and in his absence, Cornelius Francisci de Wit, Bourg-Master of the said Citie.
Iacobus Boulenius, Bourgmaster of Amsterdam. Geerardus de Nieubourg, Bourgmaster of Alck∣mar. Rochus ab Honert, chiefe Councelor in the high Court of Holland, Seeland, and West-Friesland. Nicholaus Cromholt, chiefe Councelor in the pro∣uinciall Court of Holland, Seeland, and West-Friesland. 3 From Seeland. Symon Schot, Doctor in the Lawes, and Secreta∣rie of Middelbourg. Iacobus à Campe, Doctor in the Lawes, and Coun∣celor of the States of Seeland. 4 From Vtrecht. Fredericus de Suylen, à Nievelt, Lord of Aerts∣berg, Brekewoude, &c. Gulielmus de Hardevelt, Bourgmaster of Amers∣fort. 5 From Friesland. Ernestus ab Aylua, Councelour of the States of Friesland. Ernestus ab Harinxma, chiefe Councellour in the prouinciall Court of Friesland.
6 From Ouerysell. Henricus Hagen, Lord of Vollenhoue, Knight. Iohannes ab Hemert, Bourgmaster of Deuenter, one of the States generall. 7 From Groeningen and Omlands. Hieronymus Isbrants, Doctor in the Lawes, Coun∣celor in the Chamber of Accounts of the States generall. Edzardus Iacobus Clant, Lord in Essinge, and Sandweer. Daniel Heynsius, Professor in Historie, Secretarie, and Bibliothecarie of the Vniuersitie of Leyden: appointed also to be Secretaty and Notarie in this Assembly.
THE REVEREND FAMOVS AND LEARNED Diuines from forraine Parts sent to this Nationall Synode, at the re∣quest of the Illustrious States Generall. 1 From the most Illustrious, and most mighty King of Great Brittaine. GEorgius, Bishop of Landaf. Iosephus Hall, Doctor in Diuinitie, and Deane of Worcester. Iohannes Davenot, Doctor in Diuinity, Profes∣sor in the Vniuersitie of Cambridge, &c. Samuel Ward, Doctor in Diuinitie, and President of Sidney Colledge. 2 From the Illustrious Elector Palatine. Abrahamus Scultetus, Doctor in Diuinitie, and Professor at Heidelberg. Paulus Tossanus, Doctor in Diuinitie, and Coun∣celor in the Ecclesiasticall Senate of the Electorat. Henricus Altingius, Doctor in Diuinitie, and Professor at Heydelberg.
3 From the illustrious Lantgraue of Hasse. Georgius Cruciger, Doctor in Diuinitie, Profes∣sor and Rector in the Vniuersity of Marpurg. Paulus Steinius, Preacher in the Court at Cassel. Daniel Angeloerator, Superintendent of the Churches in vpper Hassia. Rodolphus Goclenius, Senior Professor in the Vni∣uersity of Marpurg. 4 From the foure Cantons of Heluetia reformed. Iohannes Iacobus Breitingerus, Preacher at Zu∣rich. Marcus Rutimeyerus, Doctor in Diuinitie at Berne. Sebastianus Beckius, Doctor in Diuinitie, and Professor in the Vniuersitie of Basel. Wolfgangus Mayerus, Doctor in Diuinitie, and Preacher at Basel. Iohannes Conradus Cochius, Preacher at Schafhu∣sen. 5 From the Church and Commonwealth of Geneva. Iohannes Deodatus, Professor and Preacher at Geneua. Theodorus Tronchinus, Professor and Preacher at Geneua. 6 From the Church and Commonwealth of Brema. Matthias Martinius, Professor and Rector of Brema.
Henricus Isselburgius, Professor and Pastor of Brema, Doctor in Diuinitie. Ludovicus Croicus, Doctor in Diuinitie, and Pro∣fessor at Brema. 7 From the Church and Commonwealth of Emden. Daniel Elshemius, Preacher of Emden. Ritsius Lucae, Preacher of Emden. From France, Brandenburg, and Nassau are none come. 8 The Professors and Readers in Diuinitie in the Vniuersities and Schooles of the Vnited Prouinces. Ioannes Polyander, Professor and Rector of Lei∣den. Sibrandus Lubbertus, Doctor in Diuinitie, and Professor of Franeker. Franciscus Gomarus, Doctor in Diuinitie, and Pro∣fessor at Groninge. Anthonius Tysius, professor at Harderwyck. Anthonius Walaeus, professor at Middelburg. The reuerend Pastors and Elders sent from the pro∣vinciall Synods to the Nationall. 1 From Geldria and Zutphen. GVlielmus Stephani, Doctor in Diuinitie, and preacher at Aernhem.
Sebastianus Dammannus, preacher at Zutphen. Ioannes Bouilletus, preacher at Warnfeld. Eilhardus à Mehen, preacher at Harderwick. Iacobus Verheiden, Rector of the Schoole of Ni∣eumegen, and Elder. Henricus ab Hell Esquire, of Zutphen, Elder. 2 From South-Holland. Balthasar Lydius, preacher at Dort. Henricus Arnoldi, preacher at Delft. Festus Hommius, preacher at Leiden. Gisbertus Voetius, preacher at Heusden. Arnoldus Muys of Holy, of Dort, Elder. Ioannes Latius of Leyden, Elder. 3 From North-Holland. Iacobus Roelandus, preacher of Amsterdam. Iacobus Triglandus, preacher of Amsterdam. Abrahamus Doreslaer, preacher of Enchusen. Samuel Bartholdus, preacher of Monickendam. D. Dominicus ab Heemskerch of Alckmar, Elder. Theodorus Heynck of Amsterdam, Elder. 4 From Seeland. Hermanus Foukelius, preacher of Middelburg. Godefredus Vdemannus, preacher of Ziricksee. Cornelius Regius, preacher of Tergoes. Lambertus de Rycke, preacher at Bergen-op-zoom.
Iosias Vosbergius, Master of the Accounts of See∣land, and of Middelbourg, Elder. Hadrianus Hofferus, Councellor of Siericksee, Elder. 5 From Vtrecht in the name of the Contra-Remonstrants. Iohannes Debetius, Preacher at Dort. Arnoldus Oortcampius, Preacher at Amersfort. Lambertus Canterus Esquire, and of Vtrecht, El∣der. From Vtrecht in the name of the Remonstrants. Isaacus Frederici, Preacher of Vtrecht. Samuel Neranus, Preacher of Amersfort. D. Stephanus Helsdingius, Councelor of Vtrecht and Elder. 6 From Friesland. Iohannes Bogermannus, Preacher of Leeuwarden. Florentius Ioannis, Preacher of Sneeck. Philippus Danielis, Preacher of Harlingen. Meynardus ab Idserda, one of the States of Fries∣land, and Elder. Kempo à Donia, Councelor and Elder of Leeu∣warden. Iohannes Sandius, Councelor and Elder of Leeu∣warden. 7 From Oueryssell. Casparus Sibellius, Preacher of Deuenter. Hieronymus Vogelius, Preacher of Hasselt.
Hermannus Wiferdingius, preacher of Swol. Ioannes Langius, preacher of Vollenhoue. Willelmus à Brockhuysen Esquire, and Elder. Ioannes à Lauicke, Bourgmaster of Campen, and Elder. 8 From Groningen and Omlands. Cornelius Hillenius, preacher of Groningen. Georgius Placius, preacher of Abingadam. Wolfgangus Agricola, preacher of Behem. Ioannes Lolingius, preacher of Noortbrock. Egbertus Halbes Licentiatus Iuris, and Elder. Ioannes Ruffelart Esquire at Stem, and Elder. 9 From the Drente. Temo Asschenbergius, preacher at Meppel. Patroclus Rummelingus, preacher at Rhuynen. 10 From the Gallo-belgicke Churches. Daniel Colonius, Regent of the Colledge of French Students in Leyden. Ioannes Crucius, preacher of Haerlem. Ioannes Doucher, preacher at Flissing. Ieremias de Pours, preacher at Middelbourg. Euerardus Becker of Middelbourg, Elder. Petrus Pontanus of Amsterdam, Elder. The names of the chiefe Remonstrants or Arminians, cited to the Synode. From Gelderland. Henricus Leo, preacher of Bommell.
Bernerus Wesekius, preacher of Echstenstan. Henricus Hollingerus, Preacher of the Graue. From Souh-Holland. Symon Episcopius, Professor at Leyden. Ioannes Arnoldus Coruinus, Preacher at Leyden. Bernardus Dwinglo, Preacher at Leyden. Edwardus Poppius, preacher at Ter-Goude, Theophilus Rickweert, preacher at the Briell. From North-Holland. Philippus Pynakerus, preacher at Alckmar. Dominicus Sapma, preacher at Horne. From Ouerysell. Thomas Goswinus, preacher at Campen. Assuerus Matthisius, preacher at Campen. From Vtrecht. Carolus Nielius, preacher in the French Church. The President of the Synode. Ioannes Bogermannus, preacher of Leeuwarden. The Assessores or Assistants. Iacobus Rolandus, and Hermannus Faukelius. The Notaries, or Secretaries. Sebastianus Dammannus, and Festus Hommius. FINIS.
