7261 99845584 10492
A True Report of t Araignment, tryall, conuiction, and ¦demnation, of a Popish Priest, named ¦bert Drewrie, at the Sessions house in the old ¦lie, on Friday and VVednesday, the 20. and 24. o ¦bruary: the extraordinary great grace and merc offered him, and his stubborne, trayto∣rous, and wilfull refusall. Also the tryall and death of Humph Lloyd, for maliciouslie murdering one of the Guard. And lastly the execution of the said Robert Dr drawne in his Priestly habit, and as he was a Benedictine on Thursdaie following to Tiborne, where he was hanged and quartered. LONDON, Printed for Iefferie Chorlton, and are to be sold a shop adioyning to the great North doore of Paules. 1607.
A true Report of the Apprehension, Examinati∣on, Araignment, tryall, conuic∣tion, and condemnation of Ro∣bert Drewrie, a Seminary priest, & a Fryer, of the order of Saint Benedict: at the Sessions house in the old Baily, on Friday and Wednesday, the 20. and 25. of February. And lastly, his exe∣cution at Tyborne, on Thurs∣day following, &c. IN a case deseruing so well to bee spoken off, concerning iniury to Gods glory, and apparant wrong of our Countrey (ouer∣run with too many men of such daunge∣rous quality:) I thought it the duty of an honest Subiect, to say somewhat, so farre
as truth would warrant me, because slaun∣der and detraction are no meane enimies to such maner of proceedings. Robert Drewrie being apprehended by his maiesties Messengers at the white Fri∣ers, & afterward brought before the right reuered Father in God, the Lord Bishop of London: declared himselfe there, as Garnet his Maister had done before, Multorum no∣minum, to be a man of many names, but yet no one of them being good. For as no lesse then sixe seuerall names would serue Gar∣nets turne, so this man had three to shadow him by, (Viz:) Drewrie, Browne, and Ham∣den, but Drewry was the last in his owne deliuering, and appearing to bee his true name indeede. His aunswers werr equi∣uocall, and very confused, denying his Priest-hood, and seeming so cunning, as if no hold were to be taken of him. But he being bet∣ter known to the state then himselfe imagi∣ned, and his many dangerous practises suf∣ficiently discouered and scanned: after such priuate examinations as were thought conuenient, time was appointed for his
publique tryall, which followed as heareaf∣ter shallbe declared. On Friday, being the 20. day of February, in the forenoone, my Lord Mayor, Maister Recorder, and other of his Maiesties Iusti∣ces of the peace, sitting at the Sessions house in the old Baily, by vertue of his high∣nesse commission of Oyre and Terminer, for Goale deliuerie, for London, and the Coun∣ty of Middlesexe: Robert Drewrie Priest, and a Fryer of the Benedictine Order, was brought before the Bench. His Endite∣ment, according to forme of Lawe in that case made and prouided, was openly read vnto him: whereunto he pleaded not guil∣tie, but (for his tryall) did put himselfe vp∣on God and his Country, then was a verie sufficient Iurie impannelled for him, to whom (in effect) these speeches were deliue∣red. Robert Drewrie the Prisoner standing at the Barre, had traytorously, wilfully, and in contempt of the Statute made to the
contrarie, departed our of this land, where∣in he was borne, and at Valcdolid in Spayne, (where by Parsons meanes, a Seminary for English Students was erected, as the like were at Rome and Rhemes) hadde bin kinde a Priest by the Bishop of Leon, by au∣thority deriued from the Pope. Sithence which time, he had returned back into this land, to reconcsle, seduce, and withdraw his maiesties subiects, from their naturall dutie, loue, and allegeance, to a forraigne seruice and obedience. Hauing libertie graunted to speake, and answere for himselfe what he could, Robert Drewrie very shallowly sought to insinuate, that if it were treason in him to be a Priest, then it was the like in Saint Augustine, S. Bernard, and other reuerend Fathers of the Church, who receiued their Priest-hood by authority from God, and so did he presume to haue doone the like, for the saluation of his owne Soule, and many others beside, which purposely he came hether to do, acor∣ding to his office and function. His sillie suggestion was presently reprooued, that notwithstanding the great difference bee∣tweene his Priest-hoode, and that of the Fathers before named, yet Priest-hood so∣lie was not imputed to him for Treason,
for that profession, (though neither liked nor ¦lowed by vs) he might vse and exercise in the beyond the Seas, keeping himselfe there, but heere within his maiesties Kingdome, where he, and all other of his ranke, did very well kno & therefore could not plead any ignorance there that sundry good and sufficient lawes heeretof made, had enacted it to be treason, for any borne to forsake his natiue dutie, and being Priest by authority deriued from the Pope, to home again into this land, and (in meere conten of the King and his laes) to reconcile, seduce, alienate loyall Subiects harts, from loue, iust ¦gard and dutie to their Soueraigne, and sub¦ting them in obedience to a forraigne gouernme Drewrie made answer, he could not, neither he deny, but that he came hether to exercise the ¦fice of a Priest, according as he had alreadie do in winning of soules: but he would not admit, he had seduced any, or in any sort diswaded th but only for the good of their soules. Being af¦ward vrged with his maiesties great mercy, had to him and all other of his coate, granted generall pardon, and why he did not (according the Proclamation) depart the land when it wa expresly cōmaunded: he made answer, that he meanes, when it was prooued to him: that only did the King allow such conuenient tras¦ting, but also enabled them with mony, and th¦fore his stay, could not be otherwise, but meere traytorous contempt of the kings lawes: wh to he could make no reply.
Then diuers traitorous and dangerous Papers were shewen, which had bin taken in his custody, and whereof he would gladly haue acquitted himselfe, but that they were manifestly prooued to be his. One of them seemed to bee Parsons opinion, concerning the oath in the late made Statute, which he vtterly disalowed any Catholique to take, appearing to haue vsed the Popes censure therein, wherevppon the Bull or Breefe to that purpose seemeth to take effect. The others were also of traytrous na∣ture, tending to the abuse and corrupting of poore simple soules, and stealing all duty & allegeance from them. There were like∣wise two Letters openly read, the one from certaine Priestes, Prisoners sometimes in the Clinke, to the Arch-Priest maister Black∣well, requiring his iudgement in matters, when they laboured and hoped for tollera∣tion in Religion: The other was Maister Blackwels answer therto, both which though he would haue cunningly auoyded, yet it ap∣peared what reckoning he made of them. When he had answered for himselfe so much as he could, relying still vppon his Priesthood, & vrging that to be the cheefest matter of his offence, though many times the contrary was deliuered to him: the Iu∣rie
passed vppon him, founde him guilty of high Treason, whereupon he was sent a∣way till the time of Iudgement: which be∣cause it was not til Wednesday following, it shall not be much differing from our pur∣pose, to handle and say somewhat in the meane while, concerning the tryall and con∣uiction of Humphrey Lloyde, endicted there vpon Wilfull Murder, hauing slaine Ma∣ster Thomas Morris, one of the ordinary yea∣men of his Maiest Guarde, not long before in Chauncery-Lane. Vpon Sunday in the afternoone being the 18. of Ianuary, the forenamed Humphry Lloyd and Thomas Morris, meeting together in Aldersgate streete, in the companie of cer∣taine other of theyr friendes, went into the halfe Moone Tauerne to drink, where they had no plenty of such Wine, as to cause di∣stemper, or otherwise (that way) to procure impatience.
But it was deliuered in euidence that some spee∣ches concerning Religion passed beetweene them, wherein Morris touched Lloyd to be a dissembler, as neither hot nor cold, but if any thing at all, it was (indeed) best affected to Popery, as afterwarde it plainely appeared. It happened that the lie was retorted between them, which vrged Morris to cast a cuppe of Wine in Lloyds face, and Lloyd there∣upon threwe a Rowle of bread at the head of Mor∣ris. A further and more dangerous strife had pre∣sently ensued, but that honest frends on both sides beeing present, did so discreetely deale with them, that they grew friends againe, drank to one ano∣ther and no hart-burning outwardly perceiued: till at the length, Lloyd renewing remembrance of the former speeches, a more heauier falling out had thereon hapned, but that the friendes, as be∣fore pacified them again, but yet menacing words passed from eyther, Morris threatning to bee uen wt Lloyds bald pate, and Lloyd woulde try acquit∣tance with the others Cods-heade, so that they parted with tearmes of enmity. On the Wednesday next ensuing, Lloyde and a Gentleman in a white coloured cloake, standing talking together at Lincolns Inn gate, it hapned Morris and a friende of hys with him to passe by: the friende saluted Lloyd, as Lloyd did the like by him. And very soone after, the Gentleman in the white cloke, that had stoode talking with Lloyd, being sent by him as it apeared, followed Morris, as Lloyd likewise, and rounding him in the eare, which the friend then with Morris could not heare.
hee perceiued an alteration in the coun¦tenauce of Morris, and the like in Lloyd, wh by this time was come to them, which he be¦ing desirous to remooue, as standing an e¦quall friend to them both, desired them, if a¦ny thing were amisse betweene them, to him perswade a friendly agreement, and no to grow into any vnciuill behauiour in th open street, to the wounding of their credit and reputation, as also what danger migh otherwise ensue, was doubtful to be gath∣red. Lloyd made answere, that he was goo friends with his Cozen Morris, & loued hi as deerly as any in England. Whereto Mo¦ris instantly replied: wilt thou neuer lead thy dissembling? Dost thou pretend to lo me so deerely, and hast euen now sent mee challenge by this man? Lloyd immediate returned him this answere, that if he had sent him a challenge, he was come in perso to answere it, and would performe it, the or any where els: thus his malicious inte very plainely appeared. What other word passed betweene them, I know not, neith could they bee heard by any standers by, forthwith they drewe out both theyr We¦pons, notwithstanding all intreaty to ye co¦trary: And indeede Lloyd did drawe to soo to expresse his bloody and vnquencheab malice, for he soon gaue to Morris his death wound: whereupon he fell downe presentl notspeaking one word.
And to witnesse the more his cruell and bloodie hatred, hee strake twice or thrice at him when he was downe, cutting him ouer the head, and otherwise wounding him, yet he pleaded, that hee did all this, but in hys owne defence. All this which hath bin breefelie reported being much more circumstantially deliue∣red in euidence, and by oath approued to his face: he sought to extenuate his offence by verie shalow speeches, vtterly impertinent, and most against himselfe. in due considera∣on of his friuolous allegations. For he had bin a man of more dangerous quality, then was conceined in his present tryall, hauing tasted the Kings most gracious mercy, and had beene borne withall beyond his deser∣uing. It was also told him, how farre hee had waded in VVatsons treason, and was also a partaker in the Gunne-powder plotte, sen∣ding shot and powder also to them in wales, in all which, the mercie of his Maiesty had looked more mildly vpon him, then himself coulde desire, or any way deserue. But the Iustice of heauen very manifestly appeared, that so false and hollow a hart, sullied with the detested guilt of treason, must now in a wilful and malicious act of blood and mur∣der, declare it selfe to the whole worlde, and
the vpright censure of Lawe, this way de∣priue him of life, that had felte mercy before in a heauier offence. Heer is also to be noted that as the quarel first hapned on talk of po∣pish Religion, so now Lloyd discouers him in his colours. For thogh it was told him, that he had very confidently deliuered himself to be otherwise, and which himselfe was not able to denye: yet nowe Drewrie the Prieste (after his iudgement) passing away by him in the Docket, gaue him a publicke noted absolution with his hand crossing him, and vsing some close speeches, whereupon, thin∣king this sufficient to wash off his stayne o Murder: he forthwith openly confest, tha he is a Catholique, so he had bin alwayes and so hee woulde die, as if that very nam should giue fame to his foule fact, & wher he died a murderer, his owne ydle supposi¦tion of Popishe absolution shoulde make him now to die in the case of a Martyr, and for his conscience. When he was drawne in the Carte (with others toward execution, and all the Carts beeing stayed before Saint Sepulchers Church, where the most Christian and cha¦ritable deed of Master Dooue, at euery such time is worthily performed, to moue pray¦er and compassion in mens harts, for such : All the while that the man spake
Lloyd stopte his eares, not willing to heare any thing, but if any Romaine Catholicks were neere, he desired such to pray for him. And so at Tyborne he did in like manner, calling to Romaine Catholickes to praye with him and for him, but no other prayers would he accept of. But the Lawe hauing censured him, and Iustice likewise beeing past vppon him: what else remaines to bee thought or said of him, let it be so charitably as such a case requireth, and as becommeth all honest Christians. Euermore remem∣bring, that flesh & blood is subiect to frailty, and he that boasteth most of strength, maye soonest fall and be deceiued: therefore let vs measure other mens infirmities, by a consi∣derate care of whatour owne may be, and committing all to him that is the onely iudg of al, desire his heauenly help and assistance neuer to suffer vs to be led into the like tem∣tations. Let vs nowe remember where we lefte before, and returne to the matter con∣cerning the Priest. In this time of respit since his condem∣nation, bethinking himselfe, (belike) of his present dangerous condition: he solicited sundry great Persons by his Letters, en∣treating all possible fauour to bee allowed him. Among the rest, he wrote to Sir Henry Montague, Recorder of London, requiring
to haue some priuate speech with him. The Gentleman being of a milce and mercifull inclination, willing to do good to any, but much more to one at the point of such perill: vpon Monday morning, sent for Drewrie downe into the Sessions house garden to him, where vrging to know, what fauour he requested, and alleaging the kings great and gratious mercy to any that expressed themselues to be his louing Subiects, and would take the oath of duty and obedience to him: Drewrie made voluntary tender of himselfe, that he would take the oath, ac∣knowledging the greatnes of his maiesties mercy, and humbly required, that the like grace might bee affoorded to his Brother VVilliam Dauies the other Priest, that was cōdemned with him. Maister Recorder con∣ceiued very well of this his submission, and was in his minde perswaded, that if he had put him to the oath presently, without any refusall he would haue taken it. But he (as an vpright Iusticer) very wisely conside∣ring, that his fact being openly knowne, and the people acquainted with his dange∣rons practises, his publike submission and taking the oath would the better witnesse his obedience and submission, and proue much more pleasing then any thing done in priuate, deferred it till the time of more con∣ueniency,
so Drewrie departed vppe to his Chamber againe, being vsed with all kind and gentle respect. ¶ The extraordinary great grace and mercy offered at the Sessions-house, to Ro∣berd Drewrie and William Dauies Pristes, on vved∣nesday the 25. of February, and lastly the sentence of death pronounced against them. ACcording to the cu∣stome in such cases ob∣serued, the tryall and condemnation of Ro∣bert Drewrie, passing as hath beene already declared on the Fry∣day before: On Wed∣nesday following, be∣yng the fiue and twentieth day of Fe∣bruary, the Prisoner was brought to the Barre againe. Where it being tolde him, that he had beene already araigned vppon high treason, and had pleaded thereto not guiltie, but for his tryall, had put himselfe vpon GOD and his Countrey, the Coun∣try
had found and deliuered him vppe guil∣ty: it now remained to heare what he could say for himselfe, why iudgement of death should not be pronounced against him. He replyed as he had done before, that he tooke himselfe not to be conuicted of Trea∣son, but onely for his Priest-hoode, which if the Law made treason, hee had nothing to say, but appealed to the Kinges grace and mercy. Heereupon his voluntarie offer, to take Oath on the Monday before was rehear∣sed to him. And it was further tolde him, that now it was apparantly perceiued how collorably hee cloaked his priuate and per∣nicious dealing, answering by equiuocati∣on, and setting downe one thing vnder his owne hand, then afterward speaking dy∣rectly against the same. For proofe where∣of his owne Letter written sithence the time of his condemnation, to a Person of great honor was there read, and as much thereof as concerned the present occasion then in hand, was the more insisted vppon. Wher∣in (if my memory faile me not) it appeared, that he had bin requyred, to set downe his censure & opinion according as himselfe did best gather and conceiue therof, concerning
the Oath of legalty and alegiance mentio∣ned in the late tatute: whereunto (as I re∣member) his answere was thus: I freelye confesse, that (in my opinion) euery honest and good Catholicke, may lawfully & safe∣ly take it. Immediately, because hee had made such a free confession, of the Oathes lawfulnes, and safety in taking, himselfe was willed to take the Oath, which he had thus censured: to let ye world perceiue now publickly, whether his hand and hart held true correspondence together, and whether he were so honest and good a Catholick, as but to expresse the loyalty of a Subiect, and giue Caesar his due. Now plainly appeared both what he and such of his profession in∣wardly are, for he plainly refused to take ye Oath, hauing the Booke deliuered into his owne hands, and willed to take and aledge what exceptions he could against any part or particle of the Oath, his answere was, that hee did but deliuer his opinion of the Oath, what any good or honest Catholick, might do, excluding himself out of any such titles: neither (quoth he) can it be any waye aduantageable to me, being condemned as I am, & therefore I haue no reason to take it. But then to meet iustly with such cuning dissembling, and equiuocating, and to dis∣couer such apparant falshood: that no lesse admired, then most worthy Gentleman, sir Henry Mountague, Knight, Recorder of the
Citty of London, as he had many times be∣fore, so still he continued, in displaying the subtil slights of so dangerous a person, and what hurt ensued to the state by such as he was. To driue him nowe from these ydle suggestions, and to lay open the kings most Royall Mercy, though not so much (as in Truth it deserued yet sufficiently able to conuince such impudence: he told him, that he was a poore Minister of Iustice vnder his Maiesty, and hadde such true acquaintance with his euer-royall and mercifull inclination, that harty sorrow or repentance in an offender, no sooner coulde be discerned, but he was euen as readie to giue pardon and forgiuenes, and rather did superabound in grace, then séek after blood, and therefore willed him to let all the peo∣ple there perceiue, whether he would accept of this proffered grace or no. Nay more, be∣cause euery one was not acquainted with the Oath contained in the Statute, and (perchance) might conceite otherwise there∣of, then in equity it deserued, the Clearke was commaunded to read it there publick∣ly, and himselfe to except against it what∣soeuer he could alledge. The Clerke accor∣dingly began as followeth, reading it de∣stinctly, as it is in the Booke.
The Oath of euery true and ho∣nest subiect. I A.B. do truely and sincerely acknowledge, pro∣fesse, testifie and declare in my conscience, bee∣fore God and the worlde; that our Soueraigne Lorde king Iames, is lawfull and rightful king of this realme, and of al other his Maiesties Domi∣ons and Countries: And that the Pope, neither of himselfe, nor by any authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other meanes, with anie other, hath any power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his Maiesties king∣domes, or Dominions, or to authorize any for∣raigne Prince to inuade or anoy him, or his coun∣tries, or to discharge any of his subiects of their a∣legiance and obedience to his Maiesty, or to giue license or leaue to any of them, to beare Armes, raise tumult, or to offer violence or hurte to his Maiesties royall Person, state, or gouernment, or to any of his Maiesties subiectes within his maie∣sties Dominions. Also, I do sweare from my hart, that notwith∣standing any declaration or sentence of excom∣munication, or depriuation made or graunted, or to be made or graunted by the Pope or his succes∣sors, or by anie Authority deriued or pretended to bee deriued from him or his See, againste the said king, his heires or Successors, or any absolu∣tion of the saide subiects from their obedience: I will beare faith and true allegiance to his Maiestie,
his heires & successors, and him and them wil de∣fend to the vttermost of my power, against al con¦spiracies and attempts whatsoeuer, which shal be made against his or their persons, their crown and dignity, by reason or colour of anie such sentence or declaration, or otherwise, and wil doe my best indeuour, to disclose and make knowne vnto hys Maiesty his heires and successors, al Treasons and Traterous conspiracies, which I shal know or hear of to be against him or any of them. And I doe further sweare, that I doe from my hart abhorre, detest and abiure, as impious and he∣retical, this damnable doctrine and position, that Princes which be Excommunicated, or depriued by the Pope, may bee deposed or murdered by their subiects, or anie other whatsoeuer. And I do beleeue, and in conscience am resol∣ued, that neither the Pope, nor any person what∣soeuer, hath power to absolue me of this Oath, or any parte thereof, which I acknowledge by good and faithful authority to be lawfully ministred to me, and doe renounce all pardons and dispensati∣ons to the cōtrary. And al these things I do plain∣ly and sincerely acknowledge and sweare, accor∣ding to these expresse wordes by me spoken, and according to the plaine and common sence, and vnderstanding to the same words, without Equi∣uocation, or mentall euasion, or secret reseruati∣on whatsoeuer. And I do make this recognition and acknowledgement hartily, willingly, and tru∣ly, vpon the true faith of a Christian, so helpe me GOD.
This Oath, which no good subiect will refuse to take, hauing beene very audibly read, well neare in the perfect hearing of e∣uery one there present, hee was required to alleadge or inferre against any part thereof what he could. But he insisting vainely, as he had done before, that hee had but giuen his opinion thereof for others, and refusing vtterly to take it himselfe, gaue euident and manifest testimony, that such Priestes as himselfe was, were not included in ye ranke of honest or good Catholikes, but apparant Traitors to the King and state, in saying one thing, and dooing the contrary, in ma∣king an outward shew of duty & obedience vnder hand writing, and reseruing a tray∣torous intentiō in their close bosome Wher∣in the grosse deceiuing and abusing of too many ouer-credulous soules (being falsely perswaded of such men, otherwise thē they are indeede) is very much to be pittied and lamented: for they do but iudge by ye exte∣rious habit of smooth sanctitie and holines and not by the close seducing of them and their soules. Religion is the Cloake cast ouer intended treason, and holy protestati∣ons hide hollow harted practises, more de∣uillish then (in plaine meaning) can easily be doubted, and far more dangerous, then weake capacities are able to discouer, as very excellently and elegantly, was there plainely approued.
Another allegation also (as impertinent) did Drewrie make, in saying: that a French Priest, or a Spanish Priest, comming into this land, to exercise their function at either of their Lord Ambassadors, or otherwise, they might in like manner be tearmed trai∣tors: whereat all the by-standers were euen ready to hisse him, Knowing very well, and as it was with good discretion answered him, that such priests, neither were, or could be reckoned subiects to this state, nor were they enabled to deale in such daungerous manner with our people, wanting our lan∣guage, and credit in such a case to counte∣naunce them, as (by their slye insinuating) they being borne subiects, & credited more then beseemed, did too much preuaile by. And as freely might such Ambassadours haue men of spiritual office about them, be∣ing of their owne country, as ours are al∣lowed the like, within their Maisters Do∣minions. So that still he wold haue main∣tained that Priesthood, and not the treche∣rous complotting and practises of Priests, in his vnderstanding, was to bee helde for Treason. The same grace & fauor which had beene before extended to Drewrie, in as ample measure was offered to Dauies the o∣ther Priest, and hee was demaunded whe∣ther he would take the Oath or no. Hee re∣plyed that he was a poore simple ignorant man, and could hardly censure what there∣to
belonged. For there were many learned Priests, whose iudgements (in this case) he would first know, & then perhaps hee might be otherwise altered. Wherein appeareth, yt one onely Romish rule and obseruation, is a lesson or direction to them all, and the Buls or Breues of the Pope, are more regarded and respected by them, then the natiue loy∣alty and obedience, they owe to their King and Country. But mercy hath beene ouer∣mild too long, and won no such grace from, as iustly was expected, but rather hath ar∣med them with more boldnesse & insolence, then either is fit in them to offer, or standes with the wisedome of so great a state to en∣dure: For, Nunquid colligunt de spinis ruas, de tribulis ficus? Do o Men gather Grapes of Thornes, or Figs of Thistles? When no further good, either by testimonie of their owne shame, or euen Father-like & most kinde perswasions, could be wrought vpon either of them: first a most graue, lear∣ned, and indicious admonition was made vnto them, containing breefely the many & extraordinarie great graces of the kings Maiestie towarde menne of their condi∣tion, and howe after graunting them first his free and generall pardon, hee neuer left off, but pursued them still with all fauours that could bee deuised, as not desiring the death of any one, but rather to liue quietly, like a godly, peacefull, and religious King:
not enacting any new or seuere Lawes a∣gainst such daungerous Persons, but ra∣tyfieng and confirming them that he found at his comming, which Queene Elizabeth (of euer happy memory) compulsiuely was cō∣pelled and enforced to make against them. And yet the Iustice of those Lawes, which had beene of seauen and twenty yeers con∣tinuance before, his Maiestie did forbeare to execute: and finding manye, whose liues lay vnder the forfeit of the law, not onely did hee remitte them in grace, but likewise gaue his free pardon to all: Sen∣ding so manie as were in durance away at his own cost and charge, and publishing the like offer to all other, that woulde except of so kind a benifit: as loath to meddle with their blood, that were enemies to his life, and desirous to win them by mercy, if they were not too monstrous. Nor hath he sen∣tenced any Priest with death since his comming to the Crowne, but such as were men of most dangerous qualitie, & had their hands ouer deep in most barbarous & inhu∣maine treasons. But when neither perswa∣sions, sufferances, nor Proclamations will serue, to keepe such dangerous men out of the land, but euen in spight of the King and his Lawes they will needs come ouer, and put in practise their treacherous deuy∣ses: mercy (of necessity) must giue way to iustice, and pitty preuaile no longer, when grace is dispised.
The many and excelent parts contained in Maister Recorders learned and elegant speech, I am not able to set downe, and therefore doe humbly craue fauour, for but glauncing as these few: which thogh they come farre short of their iust merrite, yet let my good will excuse al imperfections. Be∣ing come to the very iumpe of giuing iudge∣ment, Drewrie demanded, if (as yet) he might haue fauour to speak, and (most honorably) it was answerd that he might, for ye kings mercy was neuer too late: therefore he was willed, not to trifle the time in friuolous speeches, but if he would yet take the Oath, do it. and afterward speak what further he would, which made al the standers by, euen confounded with amazement, that Grace should be so aboundantly offered vnto such froward and wilfull refusers. Drewrie wold not yeeld to take the Oath, whereupon the sentence of death was pronounced against them both. To bee conueyed thence to the place from whence they came, and there to be laid vpon an hurddle, and so drawne to the place of execution, where they shoulde hang til they were halfe deade, then to haue their secrets cut off, and with their intrailes throwne into the fire before their faces, their heads to be seuerd from their bodies, which seuerally should be deuided into foure quar∣ters,
and afterward disposed at his Maie∣sties pleasure, in meane while, the Lorde to take mercie vppon their soules, and so they were sent backe to prison againe. A breefe Report of the executi∣on of Robert Drewrie, drawne on a Hurddle in his Fryer-Benedictine habbet to Tyborne, on Thursday the 25. of Fe∣bruarie. ON the next morning, being Thursday, an hurdle being broght to New-gate, Robert Drewrie (hoping yet for life) and not thin∣king to die, as by the sequell it plainely ap∣peard, hauing put on after the maner of the Benedictine Fryers beyond the Seas, a newe sute of aparrell, being made of black stuffe, new shooes, stockings, and Garters, and a blacke new stuffe Priests gown or Cassock being, buttond downe before by Loops and buttons, two and two together to the verye foote, a new cornerd cap on his heade, and vnder it a faire wrought night cap: was in this manner drawne alonge to Tyborne,
where beeing by the executioner prepared for death, he was brought vp into the cart, and vsing such ydle speeches, as he had don often before, that he dyed not for Treason, but for his Priest-hood, hee was willed to deale more iustly, & not to abuse the worlde nowe at his death, in vttering that which was a manifest lie and vntruth. He made answere, that in all his life time, he had not told a lie, and then after a short pause, ad∣ded, not willingly. There were certain pa∣pers shewn at Tyborn, which had bin foūd about him, of very dangerous and Traito∣rous nature. And amonge them also was his Benedictine faculty vnder Seale, expres∣sing what power & authority hee had from the Pope, to make men, women, and Chil∣dren heere, of his order: what Indulgences and Pardons he coulde graunt them, both in this life, and for multitude of yeares af∣ter their death, preseruing them both from Purgatory, & warranting their entrance (by the Popes keyes) into heauen. Hee con∣fessed himselfe to be a Romaine Catholick, and a Priest, and desired all Romaine Ca∣tholickes to praye with him, and for him. And often looking about him, as hopinge there was some mercy for him, for feare ap∣peared very plainely in him, when he felt the Cart to goe  vnder him, and his expe∣ctation
to be deceiued, he caught fast holde with his left hande on the alter aboue hys head, and very hardly was inforced to let it goe, but held so for a pretty while. If this were not an aparant hope of life, I refer it to better Iudgements then mine owne. He hung til he was quite dead, and af∣terward his body was quartered. FINIS.
