747 99842550 7215
ORLANDO FVRIOSO IN ENGLISH HEROICAL VERSE, BY IOHN HARINGTŌ OF BATHE KNIGHT. Now secondly imprinted the yeere. 1607. Principibus placuisse viris non vltima laus est. Horace
A NOTE OF THE MATTERS CON∣TAINED IN THIS WHOLE VOLVME. The Epistle dedicatorie to the Queenes Maiestie. The Apologie. An aduertisement to the Reader. The first xxiij Cantos, or bookes of Orlando Furioso, ending with Orlandos falling mad. The other xxiij Cantos of Orlando Furioso, in which he recouered his wits; ending with Bradamants marriage. A generall Allegorie of the whole. The life of Ariosto. The Table of the booke. The Tales
TO THE MOST EXCELLENT, VERTVOVS, AND NOBLE PRINCESSE, ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE OF GOD QVEENE OF ENGLAND, FRANCE AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, &c. MOST Renowned (& most worthy to be most re∣nowned) soueraigne Ladie; I presume to offer to your Highnes this first part of the fruit of the litle garden of my slender skill. It hath bene the longer in growing, and is the lesse worthie the gathering, because my ground is barren & too cold for such daintie Italian fruites, being also perhaps ouershaded with trees of some older growth: but the beams of your blessed countenance, vouchsafing to shine on so poore a soile, shal soone disperse all hurtful mists that wold obscure it, and ea∣sily dissolue all (whether they be Mel-dews, or Fel-dews) that would starue this shallow set plant. I desire to be briefe, because I loue to be plaine. VVhatsoeuer I am or can, is your Maiesties. Your graci∣ous fauours haue bene extended in my poore familie euen to the third generation, your bountie to vs and our heirs. VVherefore this (though vnperfect and vnworthie worke) I humbly recommend to that gracious protection, vnder which I enioy all in which I can take ioy. If your Highnesse wil reade it, who dare reiect it? if allow it, who can reproue it? if protect it, what MOMVS barking, or ZOILVS bi∣ting can any way hurt or annoy it? And thus most humbly crauing pardon for this boldnesse, I cease to write, though I will not cease to wish, that your high felicities may neuer cease. Your most humble seruant, IOHN HARINGTON.
A PREFACE, OR RATHER A BRIEFE APOLOGIE OF POETRIE, AND OF THE Author and Translator of this Poeme. THe learned Plutarch in his Laconicall Apothegmes, tels of a So∣phister that made a long and tedious Oration in praise of Hercules, and expecting at the end thereof for some great thankes and ap∣plause of the hearers, a certaine Lacedemonian demanded him, who had dispraised Hercules? Me thinkes the like may be now said to me, taking vpon me the defence of Poesie: for surely if learning in generall were of that account among vs, as it ought to be aong all men, and is among wise men, then should this my Apologie of Poesie (the very first nurse and auncient grandmother of all learning) be as vaine and supersluous as was that Sophisters, because it might then be answered and truly answe∣red, that no man disgraced it. But sith we liue in such a time, in which nothing can escape the enuious tooth and backiting tongue of an impure mouth, and wherein euery blind corner hath a squint-eyed Zoilus, that can looke aright vpon no mans doings, (yea sure there be some that will not sticke to call Hercules himselfe a dastard, because forsooth he fought with a club and not at the rapier and dagger:) therefore I thinke no man of iudge∣ment will iudge this my labour needlesse, in seeking to remoue away those slaunders that either the malice of those that loue it not, or the folly of those that vnderstand it not, hath deuised against it: for indeed as the old saying is, Scientia non habet inimicum praeter ignoran∣tem: Knowledge hath no soe but the ignorant.The diuision of the Apologie  three parts. But now because I make account I haue to deale with three sundrie kinds of reprouers, one of those that condemne all Poetrie, which (how strong head soeuer they haue) I count but a very weake faction; another of those that allow Poetrie, but not this particular Poeme, of which kind sure there cannot be many: a third of those that can beare with the art, and like of the worke, but will find fault with my not well handling of it, which they may not onely probably, but I doubt too truly do, being a thing as commonly done as said, that where the hedge is lowest, there doth euery man go ouer. Therefore against these three I must arme me with the best de∣fensiue weapons I can: and if I happen to giue a blow now and then in mine owne defence, and as good fencers vse to ward and strike at once, I must craue pardon of course, seeing our law allowes that is done se defendendo: and the law of nature teacheth vim vi repellere. First therefore of Poetrie it selfe,Of Poetrie. for those few that generally disallow it, might be sufficient to alledge those many that generally approue it, of which I could bring in such an armie, not of souldiers, but of famous Kings and captaines, as not onely the sight, but the very sound of them were able to vanquish and dismay the small forces of our aduersaries. For who would once dare to oppose himselfe against so many Alexanders, Caesars, Scipios, (to omit infinite other Princes, both of former and later ages, and of forraine and nearer countries) that with fauour, with studie, with practise, with example, with honors, with gifts, with preferments, with great and magnificent cost, haue encouraged and aduanced Poets and Poetrie? As witnesse the huge Theaters and Amphitheaters, monuments of stupendi∣ous charge, made onely for Tragedies and Comedies, the workes of Poets to be represen∣ted on: but all these aides and defences I leaue as supersluous, my cause I count so good, and the euidence so open, that I neither need to vse the countenance of any great state to bolster it, nor the cunning of any suttle lawyer to enforce it: my meaning is plainely
and bonafide, confessing all the abuses that can truly be obiected against some kind of Poets, to shew you what good vse there is of Poetrie. Neither do I suppose it to be greatly be∣houefull for this purpose, to trouble you with the curious definitions of a Poet and Poesie, and with the subtill distinctions of their sundrie kinds, nor to dispute how high and super∣naturall the name of a Maker is, so christned in English by that vnknowne Godfather, that this last yeare saue one, viz. 1589. set forth a booke, called the Art of English Poetrie: and least of all do I purpose to bestow any long time to argue, whether Plato, Zenophon and E∣rasmus, writing fictions and dialogues in prose, may iustly be called Poes; or whether Lucan writing a storie in verse be an Historiographer, or whether Master Faire translating Virgil, Master Golding translating Ouids Metamorphosis, and my selfe in this worke that you see, be any more then versifiers, as the same Ignoto termeth all translators: for as for all, or the most part of such questions, I will referre you to Sir Philip Sidneys Apologie, who doth han∣dle them right learnedly, or to the forenamed treatise, where they are discoursed more large∣ly, and where, as it were a whole receit of Poetrie is prescribed, with so many new named fi∣gures, as would put me in great hope in this age to come would breed many excellent Po∣ets, saue for one obseruation that I gather out of the very same booke. For though the poore gentleman laboreth greatly to proue, or rather to make Poetrie an art, and reciteth as you may see in the plurall number, some pluralities of patternes, and parcels of his owne Poe∣trie, with diuers peeces of Partheniads and hymnes in praise of the most praise-worthy: yet whatsoeuer he would proue by all these, sure in my poore opinion he doth proue nothing more plainely, then that which M. Sidney and all the learneder sort that haue written of it do pronounce, namely that it is a gift and not an art; I say he proueth it, because making himselfe and many others so cunning in the art, yet he sheweth himself so slender a gift in it, deseruing to be commended as Martiall praiseth one that he compares to Tully: Carmina quod scribis, musis & Apolline nullo Laudari debes, hoc Ciceronis habes. But to come to the purpose, and to speake after the phrase of the common sort, that terme all that is written in verse Poetrie, and rather in scorne then in praise, bestow the name of a Poet on euery base rimer and ballad-maker: this I say of it, and I thinke I say truly, that there are many good lessons to be learned out of it, many good examples to be found in it, many good vses to be had of it, and that therefore it is not, nor ought not to be despised by the wiser sort, but so to be studied and employed, as was intended by the first writers and de∣uisers thereof, which is to soften and polish the hard and rough dispositions of men, and make them capable of vertue and good discipline. I cannot denie but to vs that are Christians, in respect of the high end of all, which is the health of our soules, not onely Poetrie, but all other studies of Philosophie, are in a man∣ner vaine and supersluous: yea (as the wise man faith) whatsoeuer is vnder the sunne is va∣nitie of vanities, and nothing but vanitie. But sith we liue with men and not with saints, and because few men can embrace this strict and stoicall diuinitie, or rather indeed, for that the holy Scriptures, in which those high mysteries of our saluation are contained, are a deepe and profound studie, and not subiect to euery weake capacitie, no nor to the highest wits and iudgements, except they be first illuminate by Gods spirit, or instructed by his teachers and preachers: therefore we do first reade some other authors, making them as it were a loo∣king-glasse to the eyes of our mind; and then after we haue gathered more strength, we enter into profounder studies of higher mysteries, hauing first as it were enabled our eyes by long beholding the sunne in a bason of water, at last to looke vpon the sunne it selfe. So we reade how that great Moses, whose learning and sanctitie is so renowned o∣uer all nations, was first instructed in the learning of the Aegyptians, before he came to that high contemplation of God and familiaritie (as I may so terme it) with God. So the notable Prophet Daniel was brought vp in the learning of the Chaldeans, and made that
the first step of his higher vocation to be a Prophet. If then we may by the example of two such speciall seruants of God, spend some of our yong yeares in studies of humanitie, what better and more sweet study is there for a yong man then Poetrie? specially Heroicall Poesie, that with her sweete statelinesse doth erect the mind, and lift it vp to the consideration of the highest matters; and allureth them, that of themselues would otherwise loth them, to take and swallow and digest the wholsome precepts of Philosophie, and many times euen of the true Diuinitie.Plutarch de audiendis Poetis. Wherefore Plutarch hauing written a whole treatise of the praise of Homers workes, and another of reading Poets, doth begin this latter with this comparison, that as men that are sickly and haue weake stomackes or daintie tastes, do many times thinke that flesh most delicate to eate, that is not flesh, and those fishes that be not fish: so yong men (saith he) do like best that Philosophie that is not Philosophie, or that is not deliuered as Phi∣losophie: and such are the pleasant writings of learned Poets, that are the popular Philoso∣phers and the popular Diuines.Tasso. Canto 1. staffe 3. Likewise Tasso in his excellent worke of Ierusalem Liberato, likeneth Poetrie to the Physicke that men giue vnto little children when they are sicke: his verse is this in Italian, speaking to God with a pretie Prosopopeia: Sai, che la corre il mondo, oue piu versi Di sue dulcezze, il lusingier Parnaso: E che'lvero condito in molli versi. I piuschiui allettando ha persuaso Cosi al'egro fanciul porgiamo asperso Disoaui liquor gli Orli del vaso Succhi amari ing annato in tanto ei beue E dal inganno suo vita receue. Thou knowst, the want on wordlings euer runne To sweete Parnassus fruites, how otherwhile The truth well sawe'd with pleasant verse hath wonne Most squeamish stomackes with the sugred stile: So the sicke child that potions all doth shunne, With comfets and with sugar we beguile, And cause him take a wholesome sowre receit, He drinkes, and saues his life with such deceit. This is then that honest fraud, in which (as Plutarch saith) he that is deceiued is wiser then he that is not deceiued, and he that doth deceiue, is honester then he that doth not deceiue. But briefly to answer to the chiefe obiections,Agrippa de vanitate scientiarum. cap. 4. Cornelius Agrippa, a man of learning and authoritie not to be despised, maketh a bitter inuectiue against Poets and Poesie, and the summe of his reproofe of it is this (which is all that can with any probablitie be said against it:Foure obiectiōs against Poetry.) That it is a nurse of lies, a pleaser of fooles, a breeder of dangerous errors, and an inticer to wantonnesse. I might here warne those that will vrge this mans authoritie to the disgrace of Poetrie, to take heed (of what calling soeuer they be) least with the same weapon that they thinke to giue Poetrie a blow, they giue themselues a maime. For Agrippa taketh his pleasure of greater matters then Poetrie: I maruell how he durst do it, saue that I see he hath done it, he hath spared neither myters nor scepters. The courts of Princes, where vertue is rewarded, iustice maintained, oppressions releeued, he cals them a Colledge of Giants, of tyrants, of oppressors, warriors: the most noble sort of noble men, he termeth cur∣sed, bloudie, wicked, and sacrilegious persons. Noble men (and vs poore Gentlemen) that thinke to borrow praise of our auncestors deserts and good fame, he affirmeth to be a race of the sturdier sort of knaues, and licencious liuers. Treasurers and other great officers of the common wealth, with graue counsellers, whose wise heads are the pillars of the state, he af∣firmeth generally to be robbers and peelers of the realme, and priuie traitors that sell their Princes fauours, and rob wel-deseruing seruitors of their reward.
I omit as his peccadilia, how he nicknameth priests saying, for the most part they are hypo∣crites; lawiers, saying they are all theeues; phisitians, saying they are many of them murthe∣rers: so as I thinke it were a good motion, and would easily passe by the consent of the three estates, that this mans authoritie should be vtterly adihilated, that dealeth so hardly and vniustly with all sorts of professions. But for the reiecting of his writings, I refer it to others that haue power to do it, and to condemne him for a generall libeller, but for that he writeth against Poetrie,Answer to the first of lying. I meane to speake a word or two in refuting thereof. And first for lying, I might if I list excuse it by the rule of Poetica licentia, and claime a priueledge giuen to Poe∣trie, whose art is but an imitation (as Aristotle calleth it) and therefore are allowed to faine what they list, according to that old verse, Iuridicis, Erebo, fisco, fas viuere rapto, Militibus, medicis, tortori, occidere Ludo est: Mentiri Astronomis, pictoribus atque Poetis. Which because I count it without reason, I will English it without rime. Lawyers, Hell, and the Checquer are allowed to liue on spoile, Souldiers, Phisitians, and hangmen make a sport of murther, Astronomers, Painters, and Poets may lye by authoritie. Thus you see, that Poets may lye if they list Cum priuilegio: but what if they lye least of all other men? what if they lye not at all? then I thinke that great slaunder is verie vniustly raised vpon them. For in my opinion they are said properly to lye, that affirme that to be true that is false: and how other arts can free themselues from this blame let them look that professe them: but Poets neuer affirming any for true, but presenting them to vs as fables and imitations, cannot lye though they would: and because this obiection of lyes is the chiefest, and that vpon which the rest be grounded, I wil stand the longer vpon the clearing thereof. The ancient Poets haue indeed wrapped as it were in their writings diuers and sundrie meanings, which they call the sences or mysteries thereof. First of all for the literall sence (as it were the vtmost barke or ryne) they set downe in manner of an historie, the acts and notable exploits of some persons worthie memorie; then in the same fiction, as a second rine and somewhat more fine, as it were nearer to the pith and marrow, they place the Mo∣rall sence, profitable for the actiue life of man, approuing vertuous actions, and condem∣ning the contrarie. Manie times also vnder the selfesame words they comprehend some true vnderstanding of naturall Philosophíe, or sometime of politike gouernement, and now and then of diuinitie: and these same sences that comprehend so excellent know∣ledge we call the Allegorie, which Plutarch defineth to be when one thing is told, and by that another is vnderstood. Now let any man iudge, if it be a matter of meane art or wit, to containe in one historicall narration either true or fained, so many, so diuerse, and so deepe conceits: but for making the matter more plaine I will alledge an example thereof. Perseus sonne of Iupiter is fained by the Poets to haue slaine Gorgon,Ouids Metaorph. 4. and after that conquest atchieued, to haue flowen vp to heauen. The Historicall sence is this, Perse∣us the sonne of Iupiter, by the participation of Iupiters vertues that were in him; or rather comming of the stock of one of the kings of Creet, or Athens so called; slue Gorgon a tyrant in that countrey (Gorgon in greeke signifieth earth) and was for his vertuous parts exalted by men vp into heauen. Morally it signifieth thus much, Perseus a wise man, sonne of Iupiter endewed with vertue from aboue, slayeth sinne and vice, a thing base and earthly; signified by Gorgon, and so mounteth to the skie of vertue: It signifies in one kinde of Allegorie thus much; the mind of man being gotten by God, and so the childe of God, killing and vanquishing the earthlinesse of this Gorgonicall nature, ascendeth vp to the vnderstanding of heauenly things, of high things, of eternall things, in which con∣templation consisteth the perfection of man: this is the naturall allegorie, because man, one of
the chiefe works of nature: It hath also a more high and heauenly Allegorie, that the hea∣uenly nature, daughter of Iupiter, procuring with her continuall motion, corruption and mortalitie in the interiour bodies, seuered it selfe at last from these earthly bodies, and flew vp on high, and there remaineth for euer. It hath also another Theologicall Allegorie, that the angelicall nature, daughter of the most high God the creator of all things; killing and ouercomming all bodily substance, signified by Gorgon, ascended into heauen: the like infinite Allegories I could picke out of other Poeticall fictions, saue that I would auoid tediousnesse. It sufficeth me therefore to note this, that the men of greatest learning and highest wit in the auncient times, did of purpose conceale these deepe mysteries of learning, and as it were couer them with the veile of fables and verse for sundrie cau∣ses: one cause was, that they might not be rashly abused by prophane wits, in whom sci∣ence is corrupted, like good wine in a bad vessell: another cause why they wrote in verse, was conseruation of the memorie of their precepts, as we see yet the generall rules almost of euerie art, not so much as husbandrie, but they are ofner recited and better remem∣bred in verse then in prose: another, and a principall cause of all, is to be able with one kinde of meate and one dish (as I may so call it) to feed diuers-tastes. For the weaker ca∣pacities will feed themselues with the pleasantnesse of the historie and sweetnes of the verse, some that haue stronger stomackes will as it were take a further tast of the Mo∣ralisence, a third sort more high conceited then they, will digest the Allegorie: so as in∣deed it hath bene thought by men of verie good iudgement, such manner of Poeticall writing was an excellent way to preserue all kinde of learning from that corruption which now it is come to since they left that mysticall writing of verse. Now though I know the example and authoritie of Aristotle and Plato be still vrged against this, who tooke to themselues another manner of writing: first I may say indeed that lawes were made for poore men, and not for Princes, for these two great Princes of Philosophie, brake that former allowed manner of writing, yet Plato still preserued the fable, but re∣fused the verse. Aristotle though reiecting both, yet retained still a kinde of obscuritie, insomuch he answered Alexander, who reprooued him in a sort, for publishing the sa∣cred secrets of Philosophie, that he had set forth his bookes in a sort, and yet not set them forth; meaning that they were so obscure that they would be vnderstood of few, except they came to him for instructions; or else without they were of verie good capacitie and studious of Philosophie. But (as I say) Plato howsoeuer men would make him an enemie of Poetrie (because he found indeed iust fault with the abuses of some comicall Poets of his time, or some that sought to set vp new and strange religions) yet you see he kept stil l that principall part of Poetrie, which is fiction and imitation; and as for the other part of Poetrie which is verse, though he vsed it not, yet his maister Socrates euen in his old age wrote certaine verses, as Plutarke restifieth: but because I haue named the two parts of Poetrie, namely inuention or fiction, and verse, let vs see how well we can au∣thorise the vse of both these. First for fiction, against which as I told before, many in∣ueih, calling it by the foule name of lying, though notwithstanding, as I then said, it is farthest from it: Demosthenes the famous and renowned Orator, when he would perswade the Athenians to warre against Philip, told them a solemne tale how the Wolues on a time sent Ambassadors to the sheepe, offering them peace if they would deliuer vp the dogs that kept their folds, with all that long circumstance (needelesse to be repeated) by which he perswaded them far more strongly then if he should haue told them in plaine termes, that Philip sought to bereaue them of their chiefe bulwarks & defences, to haue the better abili∣tie to ouerthrow them. But what need we fetch an authority so far off from heathen authors, that haue many neerer hand both in time and in place? Bishop Fisher a stout Prelat though I do not praise his Religion) when he was assaid by king Henrie the eight for his good will and assent for the suppression of Abbyes, the king alledging that he would but take away the superfluties, and let the substance stand still, or at least see it conuerted to better
and more godly vses: the graue Bishop answered it in this kinde of Poeticall parable: He said there was an axe that wanting a helue came to a thicke and huge ouergrown wood, and be sought some of the great okes in that wood, to spare him so much timber as to make him a handle or helue, promising that if he might finde that fauour, he would in recompence thereof, haue great regard in preseruing that wood, in pruning the branches, in cuing away the vnprofitable and superfluous boughes, in paring away the byers and thornes that were combersome to the fayre trees, and making it in fine a groue of great delight and plea∣sure: but when this same axe had obtained his sue, he so laid about him, and so pared away both timber and top and lop, that in short space of a woodland he made it a champion, and made her liberalitie the instrument of her ouerthrow. Now though this Bishop had no very good successe with his parable, yet it was so farre from being counted a lye, that it was plainly seene soone after that the same axe did both hew downe those woods by the roots, and pared him off by the head, and was a peece of Prophecie, as well as a peece of Poetrie: and indeed Prophets and Poets haue bene thought to haue a great affinitie, as the name Vates in Latin doth testifie. But to come againe to this manner of fiction or parable, the Prophet Nathan, reprouing king Dauid for his great sinne of adulterie and murther, doth he not come to him with a pretie parable, of a poore man and his lambe that lay in his bosome, and eat of his bread, and the rich man that had whole flocks of his owne would needs take it from him? In which as it is euident it was but a para∣ble, so it were vnreuerent and almost blasphemous to say it was a lye. But to go higher, did not our Sauiour himselfe speake in parables? as that deuine parable of the sower, that com∣fortable parable of the Prodigall sonne, that dreadfull parable of Diues and Lazarus, though I know of this last, many of the fathers hold that it is a storie indeed, and no parable. But in the rest it is manifest, that he that was all holinesse, all wisedome, all truth, vsed parables, and euen such as discreet Poets vse, where a good and honest and wholsome Allegorie is hidden in a pleasant and pretie fiction, Two parts of Poetre, Imitation or inuention, and Verse. and therefore for that part of Poetrie of Imitation, I thinke no body will make any question, but it is not onely allowable, but godly and com∣mendable, if the Poets ill handling of it doe nor marre and peruert the good vse of it. The other part of Poetrie, which is Verse, as it were the clothing or ornament of it, hath many good vses; of the helpe of memorie I spake somewhat before; for the words being couched together in due order, measure, and number, one doth as it were bring on another, as my selfe haue often proued, and so I thinke do many beside, (though for my owne part I can rather bost of the marring a good memorie, then of hauing one,) yet I haue euer found, that Verse is easier to learne, and farre better to preserue in memorie, then is prose. Another speciall grace in Verse is the forcible manner of phrase, in which if it be well made, it farre excelleth loose speech or prose: a third is the pleasure and sweetenesse to the eare, which makes the discourse pleasant vnto vs often time when the matter it selfe is harsh and vn∣acceptable; for my owne part I was neuer yet so good a husband, to take any delight to hear one of mv ploughmen tell how an acre of wheat must be fallowd and twy fallowd, and how cold land should be burned, and how fruitfull land must be well harrowed, but when I heare one read Virgil where he saith: Saepe etiam steriles incendere profuit agros, At{que} leuem stipulam crepitantibus vrere flammis. Siue inde occultas vires & pabula terrae Pinguia concipiunt; siue illis omne per onem Excoquitur vitium, at{que} exsudat inutilis humor, &c. And after. Mulium adeo, rastris glebas qui frangit inertes Vimineas{que} trahit crates, iuuat arua. With many other lessons of homely husbandrie, but deliuered in so good Verse that me
thinkes all that while I could find in my heart to driue the plough. But now for the autho∣ritie of Verse, if it be not sufficient to say for them, that the greatest Philosophers, and gra∣uest Senatours that euer were, haue vsed them both in their speeches and in their writings, that precepts of all Arts haue beene deliuered in them, that verse is as auncient a writing as prose, and indeed more auncient, in respect that the oldest workes extant be verse, as Or∣phaeus, Linus, Hesiodus, and others beyond memorie of man, or mention almost of historie; if none of these will serue for the credit of it, yet let this serue, that some part of the Scripture was written in verse, as the Psalmes of Dauid, and certaine other songs of Deborah, of Salo∣mon and others, which the learnedest diuines do affirme to be verse, and find that they are in meeter, though the rule of the Hebrew verse they agree not on. Sufficeth it me onely to proue that by the authoritie of sacred Scriptures, both parts of Poesie, inuention or imitation, and verse are allowable, and consequently that great obiection of lying is quite taken away and refuted. Now the second obiection is pleasing of fooles; I haue already showed, how it dis∣pleaseth not wise men, Answre to the sond ob∣iection. now if it haue this vertue to, to please the fooles, and ignorant, I wold thinke this an article of prayse not of rebuke: wherefore I confesse that it pleaseth fooles and so pleaseth them, that if they marke it and obserue it well, it will in time make them wise, for in verse is both goodnesse and sweetnesse, Rubarb and Sugercandie, the pleasant and the profitable: wherefore as Horace sayth, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci, he that can mingle the sweete and wholsome, the pleasant and the profitable, he is indeed an absolute good writer, & such be Poets, if any be such, they present vnto vs a prettie tale, able to keepe a childe from play, and an old man from the chimnie corner: Or as the same Horace saith, to a couetous man: Tantalus à labris sitiens fugientia captat Flumina, quid rides? mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur. One tels a couetous man a tale of Tantalus, that sits vp to the chinne in water, and yet is plagued with thirst. This signifies the selfesame man to whom the tale is told, that wal∣lows in plentie, and yet his miserable minde barres him of the vse of it: As my selfe knew and I am sure many remember Iustice Randall of London, a man passing impotent in body but much more in mind, that leauing behind him a thousand pounds of gold in a chest ful of old boots and shoes, yet was so miserable, that at my Lord Maiors dinner they say he would put vp a widgen for his supper, and many a good meale he did take of his franke neighbour the widdow Penne: but to come to the matter, this same great sinne that is laide to Poetrie of pleasing fooles, A  to  is fufficiently answered if it be worth the answering. Now for the bree∣ding of errours which is the third Obiection, I see not why it should breed any when none is bound to beleeue that they write, nor they looke not to haue their fictions beleeued in the literall sence, aud therefore he that well examine whence errours spring, shall finde the writers of prose & not of verse, the authors and maintainers of them, and this point I count so manifest as it needes no proofe. The last reproofe is lightnes and wantonnes, this is indeed an Obiection of some importance, sith as Sir Philip Sidney confesseth, Cupido is crept euen into the Heroicall Poemes, & consequently maketh that also, subiect to this reproofe: I pro∣mised in the beginning not partially to praise Poesie, but plainly and honestly to confesse that, that might truely be obiected against it, and if any thing may be, sure it is this lasciui∣ousnesse; yet this I will say, that of all kinde of Poesie, the Heroicall is least infected there∣with. The other kindes I will rather excuse then defend, though of all the kindes of Poesie it may be sayd, where any scurrilitie and lewdnesse is found, there Poetrie doth not abuse vs, but writers haue abused Poetrie. And brieflie to examine all the kindes: First the Tragicall is meerely free from it, as representing onely the cruell and lawlesse pro∣ceedings of Princes, mouing nothing but pitie or detestation. The Comicall (whatsoeuer foolish play makers make it offend in this kind) yet being rightly vsed, it represents them
so as to make the vice scorned and not embraced. The Satyrike is meerly free from it, as be∣ing wholy occupied in mannerly and couertly reprouing of all vices. The Elegie is stil mour∣ning: as for the Pastorall with the Sonnet or Epigramme, though many times they sauour of wantonnesse and loue and toying, and now and then breaking the rules of Poetrie, go in∣to plaine scurrilitie, yet euen the worst of them may be not ill applied, and are, I must con∣fesse, too delightfull, in so much as Martial saith, Laudant illa, sed ista legunt. And in another place, Erubuit posuit{que}, meum Lucrecia librum: Sed coram Bruto. Brute recede, leget. Lucrecia (by which he signifies any chast matron) will blush and be ashamed to reade a lasciuious booke: but how? not except Brutus be by, that is, if any graue man should see her reade it; but if Brutus turne his backe, she will to it againe and reade it all. But to end this part of my Apologie, as I count and conclude Heroicall Poesie allowable, and to be read and studied without all exception: so may I boldly say, that Tragedies well handled, be a most worthy kind of Poesie; that Comedies may make men see and shame at their owne faults, that the rest may be so written and so read, as much pleasure and some profite may be gathered out of them. And for mine owne part, as Scaliger writeth of Virgil, so I beleeue, that the reading of a good Heroicall Poeme may make a man both wiser and honester: and for Tragedies, to omit other famous Tragedies, that that which was played at Saint Iohns in Cambridge, of Richard the third, would moue (I thinke) Phalaris the tyrant, and terrifie all tyrannous minded men, from following their foolish ambitious humors, seeing how his am∣bition made him kill his brother, his nephewes, his wife, beside infinite others; and last of all after a short and troublesome raigne, to end his miserable life, and to haue his bodie har∣ried after his death. Then for Comedies: how full of harmelesse mirth is our Cambridge Pe∣dantius? and the Oxford Bellum Grammaticale? or to speake of a London Comedie, how much good matter, yea and matter of state, is there in that Comedie called the play of the Cards? in which it is shewed how foure Parasiticall knaues robbe the foure principall vo∣cations of the Realme, videl, the vocation of Souldiers, Schollers, Merchants and Husband∣men. Of which Comedie I cannot forget the saying of a notable wise counseller that is now dead, who when some (to sing Placebo) aduised that it should be forbidden, because it was somewhat too plaine, Sir Frances VValsingham. and indeed as the old saying is, sooth boord is no boord, yet he would haue it allowed, adding it was fit that they which do that they should not, should heare that they wold not. Finally, if Comedies may be so made as the beholders may be bettered by them, without all doubt all other sorts of Poetrie may bring their profite as they do bring delight; and if all, then much more the chiefe of all, which by all mens consent is the Heroicall. And thus much be said for Poesie. Now for this Poeme of Orlando Furioso, which as I haue heard, hath bene disliked by some, though by few of any wit or iudgement, it followes that I say somewhat in defence thereof, The second part of the Apology. which I will do the more moderatly and coldly, by how much the paines I haue ta∣ken in it (rising as you may see to a good volume) may make me seeme a more partiall prai∣ser. Wherefore I will make choise of some other Poeme that is allowed and approued by all men, and a little compare them together: and what worke can serue this turne so fitly as Virgils Aeneados, whom aboue all other it seemeth my author doth follow, as appeares both by his beginning and ending. The one begins, Arma virum{que} cano. The other, Le donne I cauallieri l' arme gli amori Le cortesie l' audace imprese io canto. Virgil ends with the death of Turnus: Vita{que} cum gemitu fugit indignata sub vmbras.
Ariosto ends with the death of Rodomont, Bestemiando fugi l' alma sdegnosa Che fu si altero al mondo e si orgogliosa. Virgil extolleth Aeneas to please Augustus, of whose race he was thought to come. A∣riosto praiseth Rogero to the honour of the house of Este. Aeneas hath his Dido that retaineth him: Rogero hath his Alcina: finally left I should note euery part, there is nothing of any spe∣ciall obseruation in Virgil, but my author hath with great felicitie imitated it, so as whoso∣euer will allow Uirgil, must ipso facto (as they say) admit Ariosto. Now of what account Virgil is reckned, and worthily reckned, for ancient times witnesseth Augustu Caesars verse of him: Ergone supremis potuit vox improba verbis Tam dirum mandare nefas? &c. Concluding thus, Laudetur, placeat, vigeat, relegatur, ametur. This is a great praise, comming from so great a Prince. For later times, to omit Scaliger, whom I recited before, that affirmeth the reading of Virgil may make a man honest and ver∣tuous: that excellent Italian Poet Dant professeth plainly, that when he wandred out of the right way (meaning thereby, when he liued fondly and loosly) Virgil was the first that made him looke into himselfe, and reclaime himselfe from that same dangerous and leud course. But what need we further witnesse, do we not make our children reade it commonly before they can vnderstand it, as a testimonie that we do generally approue it? and yet we see old men studie it, as a proofe that they do specially admire it: so as one writes very pretily, that children do wade in Uirgil, and yet strong men do swim in it. Now to apply this to the praise of mine author, as I said before, so I say still, whatsoeuer is praise-worthy in Virgil, is plentifully to be found in Ariosto, and some things that Virgil could not haue for the ignorance of the age he liued in, you find in my author, sprinkled o∣uer all his worke, as I will very briefly note, and referre you for the rest to the booke it selfe. The deuout and Christian demeanor of Charlemaine in the 14. booke with his prayer, Non vogliatua bonta per mio fallire Ch'l tuo popol fidele babbia a patire, &c. And in the beginning of the 17. booke that would be seeme any pulpit: Il giusto Dio quando i peccati nostri. But aboue all, that in the 41. booke of the conuersion of Rogero to the Christian Religion, where the Hermit speaketh to him, containing in effect a ful instruction against presumption and despaire, which I haue set downe thus in English, Now (as I said) this wise that Hermit spoke, And part doth comfort him, and part doth checke: He blameth him that in that pleasant yoke He had so long deferd to put his necke, But did to wrath his maker still prouoke: And did not come at his first call and becke, But still did hide himselfe away from God, Vntill he saw him comming with his rod. Then did he comfort him, and make him know, That grace is nere denide to such as aske, As do the workmen in the Gospell show, Receiuing pay alike for diuers taske. And so after concluding, How to Christ he must impute The pardon of his sinnes, yet nere the later He told him he must be baptiz'd in water.
These and infinite places full of Christen exhortation, doctrine and example, I could quote out of the book, saue that I hasten to an end, and it would be needles to those that wil not read them in the booke it selfe, and superfluous to those that will: but most manifest it is and not to be denyed, that in this point my author is to be preferred before all the ancient Poets, in which are mentioned so many false Gods, and of them so many fowle deeds, their contentions, their adulteries, their incest, as were both obscenous in recitall, and hurtfull in example: though indeed those whom they tearmed Gods, were certaine great Princes that committed such enormous faults, as great Princes in late ages (that loue still to be cald Gods of the earth) do often commit. But now it may be and is by some obiected, that although he write Christianly in some places, yet in other some, he is too lasciuious, as in that of the bau∣dy Frier, in Alcina and Rogeros copulation, in Anselmus his Giptian, in Richardetto his meta∣morphosis, in mine hosts tale of Astolfo, and some few places beside; alas if this be a fault, par∣don him this one fault; though I doubt to many of you (gentle readers) will be too exorable in this point; yea me thinks I see some of you searching already for these places of the book, and you are halfe offended that I haue not made some directions that you might finde out and read them immediatly. But I beseech you stay a while, and as the Italian saith Pian pia∣no, fayre and softly, and take this caueat with you, to read them as my author meant them to breed detestation and not delectation: remember when you read of the old lecherous Frier, that a fornicator is one of the things that God hateth. When you read of Alcina, thinke how Ioseph fled from his intising mistres; when you light on Anselmus tale, learne to loath beastly couetousnes, when on Richardetto, know that sweet meate will haue sowre sawce, when on mine hosts tale (if you will follow my counsell) turne ouer the leafe and let it alone, although euen that lewd tale may bring some men profit, and I haue heard that it is already (and perhaps not vnfitly) termed the comfort of cuckolds. But as I say, if this be a fault, then Virgil committed the same fault in Dido and Aeneas entertainement: & if some will say, he tels that mannerly and couertly, how will they excuse that, where Vulcan was inteated by Venus to make an armour for Aeneas? Dixerat, & nius hinc at{que} hinc diua lacertis Cunctantem ample xu molli fouet, ille repente Accepit solitam flammam, notus{que} per artus Intrauit calor. And alittle after. Ea verba locutus Optatos dedit amplexus placitum{que} petiuit Coniug is infusus gremio per membra soporem. I hope they that vnderstand Latin will confesse this is plaine enough, & yet with modest words & no obscenons phrase: and so I dare take vpon me that in al Ariosto (and yet I thinke it is as much as three Aeneads,) there is not a word of ribaldry or obscenousnes: farther there is so meet a decorum in the persons of those that speake lasciuiously, as any of iudge∣ment must needs allow; and therefore though I rather craue pardon then prayse for him in this point; yet me thinkes I can smile at the finesse of some, that will condemne him, and yet not onely allow, but admire our Chawcer, who both in words and sence, 'incurreth far more the reprehensiō of flat scurrilitie, as I could recite many places, not onely in his Millers tale, but in the good wife of Bathes tale, & many more, in which onely the decorum he keepes, is that that excuseth it, and maketh it more tolerable. But now whereas some will say, Ai∣osto wanteth art, reducing all heroicall Poems vnto the method of Homer and certaine pre∣cepts of Aristotle. For Homer I say, that that which was commendable in him to write in that age, the times being changed, would be thought otherwise now, as we see both in phrase & in fashions the world growes more curious each day then other: Ouid gaue precepts of ma∣king loue, and one was that one should spill wine one the boord & write his mistresse name therewith, this was a quaynt cast in that age; but he that should make loue so now, his loue would mocke him for his labour, and count him but a slouenly sutor: and if it be thus chaunged since Ouids time, much more since Homers time. And yet for Ariostos tales that
many thinke vnartificially brought in; Homer himselfe hath the like: as in the Iliads the conference of Glaucus with Diomedes vpon some acts of Bellerophon: & in his Odysseas the discourse of the hog with Vlysses. Further, for the name of the booke, which some carpe at, because he called it Orlando Furioso rather then Rogero, in that he may also be defended by example of Homer, who professing to write of Achilles, calleth his booke Iliade of Troy, and not Achillide. As for Aristotles rules, I take it, he hath followed them verie strictly. Briefly, Aristotle and the best censurers of Poesie, would haue the Epopeia, that is, the heroicall Poem, should ground on some historie, and take some short time in the same to bewtifie with his Poetrie: so doth mine Author take the storie of K. Charls the great, and doth not exceed a yeare or therabout in his whole worke. Secondly they hold, that nothing should be fayned vtterly incredible. And sure Ariosto neither in his inchantments excee∣deth credit (for who knowes not how strong the illusions of the diuell are?) neither in the miracles that Astolfo by the power of S. Iohn is fayned to do, since the Church holdeth that Prophets both aliue and dead, haue done mightie great miracles. Thirdly, they would haue an heroicall Poem (aswell as a Tragedie) to be full of Peripetia, which I interpret an agniti∣on on of some vnlooked for fortune either good or bad, and a sudd en change thereof: of this what store there be the reader shall quickly finde. 'As for apt similitudes, for passions well ex∣pressed, of loue, of pitie, of hate, of wrath, a blind man may see, if he can but heare, that this worke is full of them. There follows onely two reproofs, which I rather interpret two peculiar praises of this writer aboue all that wrote before him in this kind: One, that he breaks off narrations ve∣rie abruptly, so as indeed a loose vnattentiue reader, will hardly carrie away any part of the storie: but this doubtlesse is a point of great art, to draw a man with a continuall thirst to reade ouer the whole worke, and toward the end of the booke, to close vp the diuerse mat∣ters briefly and cleanly. If S. Philip Sidney had counted this a fault, he would not haue done so himselfe in his Arcadia. Another fault is, that he speaketh so much in his owne person by digression, which they say also is against the rules of Poetrie, because neither Homer nor Virgil did it. Me thinks it is a sufficient defence to say, Ariosto doth it; sure I am, it is both delightfull and verie profitable, and an excellent breathing place for the reader, and euen as if a man walked in a faire long alley, to haue a seat or resting place here and there is easie and commodious: but if at the same seate were planted some excellent tree, that not onely with the shade should keepe vs from the heat, but with some pleasant and right wholsome fruite should allay our thirst and comfort our stomacke, we would thinke it for the time a litle pa∣radice: so are Ariostos morals and pretie digressions sprinkled through his long worke, to the no lesse pleasure then profit of the reader. And thus much be spoken for defence of mine Author, which was the second part of my Apologie. Now remaines the third part of it, in which I promised to speake somwhat for my selfe, which part, The third part of the Apologie. though it haue most need of an Apologie both large and substantiall; yet I will run it ouer both shortly and slightly, because indeed the nature of the thing it selfe is such, that the more one doth say, the lesse he shall seeme to say; and men are willinger to praise that in another man, which himselfe shall debase, then that which he shall seeme to main∣taine. Certainly if I should confesse or rather professe, that my verse is vnartificiall, the stile rude, the phrase barbarous, the meeter vnpleasant, many more would beleeue it to be so, thē would imagine that I thought them so: for this same  or selfe pleasing is so cōmon a thing, as the more a man protests himselfe to be from it, the more we wil charge him with it. Wherefore let me take thus much vpon me, that admit it haue many of the forenamed im∣perfections, and many not named, yet as writing goes now a dayes, it may passe among the rest; and as I haue heard a friend of mine (one verie iudicious in the beautie of a woman) say of a Ladie whom he meant to praise, that she had a low forhead, a great nose, a wide mouth, a long visage, and yet all these put together, she seemed to him a verie well, fauou∣red woman: so I hope, and I finde alreadie some of my partiall friends, that what seuerall
imperfections soeuer they finde in this translation, yet taking all together they allow it, or at least wise they reade it, which is a great argument of their liking. Sir Thomas Moore a man of great wisedome and learning, but yet a litle enclined (as good wits are many times) to scoffing, when one had brought him a booke of some shallow dis∣course, and preassed him very hard to haue his opinion of it, aduised the partie to put it into verse; the plaine meaning man in the best maner he could he did so, and a twelue-month after at the least, came with it to Sir Thomas, who slightly perusing it, gaue it this encomium, that now there was rime in it, but afore it had neither rime nor reason. If any man had ment to serue me so, yet I haue preuented him; for sure I am he shal finde rime in mine, & if he be not voyd of reason, he shal finde reason to. Though for the matter, I can challenge no praise, hauing but borrowed it, and for the verse I do challenge none, being a thing that euery body that neuer scarce bayted their horse at the Vniuersitie take vpon them to make. It is possi∣ble that if I would haue employed that time that I haue done vpon this, vpon some inuep∣tion of mine owne, I could haue by this made it haue risen to a iust volume, and if I would haue done as many spare not to do, flowne verie high with stolen fethers. But I had rather men should see and know that I borrow all, then that I steale any: and I would wish to be called rather one of the not worst translators, then one of the meaner makers. Specially sith the Earle of Surrey, and Sir Thomas Wiat, that are yet called the first refiners of the English tong, were both translators out of Italian. Now for those that count it such a contemptible and trifling matter to translate, I will but say to them as M. Bartholomew Ciarke an excel∣lent learned man, and a right good translator, saith in manner of a prettie challenge, in his Preface (as I remember) vpon the Courtier, which booke he translated out of Italian into Latin. You (saith he) that thinke it such a toy, lay aside my booke, and take my author in your hand, and trie a leafe or such a matter, and compare it with mine. If I should say so, there would be enow that would quickly put me downe perhaps; but doubtlesse he might bold∣ly say it, for I thinke none could haue mended him. But as our English prouerbe saith, many talke of Robin Hood that neuer shot in his bow, and some correct Magnificat, that know not quid significat. For my part I will thanke them that will amend any thing that I haue done amisse, nor I haue no such great conceipt of that I haue done, but that I thinke much in it is to be mended; and hauing dealt playnly with some of my plaine dealing friends, to tell me frankly what they heard spoken of it (for indeed I suffered some part of the printed copies to go among my friends, and some more perhaps went against my wil) I was told that these in effect were the faults were found with it. Some graue men misliked that I should spend so much good time on such a trifling worke as they deemed a Poeme to be. Foure faults found in this worke. Some more nicely, found fault with so many two sillabled and three sillabled rimes. Some (not vndeseruedly) reproued the fantasticalnes of my notes, in which they say I haue strained my selfe to make mention of some of my kindred and friends, that might verie well be left out. And one fault more there is, which I will tell my selfe, though many would neuer finde it; and that is; I haue cut short some of his Cantos, in leauing out many staues of them, and sometimes put the matter of two or three staues into one. To these reproofes I shall pray you gentle and noble Readers with patience heare my defence, Answer to the first. and then I will end. For the first reproofe, etiher it is alreadie excused, or it will neuer be excused; for I haue I thinke suf∣ficiently proued, both the art to be allowable, and this worke to be commendable: yet I will tell you an accident that happened vnto my selfe. When I was entred a prettie way in∣to the translation, about the seuenth booke, comming to write that where Melissa in the person of Rogeros Tutor, comes and reproues Rogero in the 4. staffe: Was it for this, that I in youth thee fed With marrow? &c. And againe: Is this a meanes, or readie way you trow, That other worthie men haue trod before, A Caesar or a Scipio to grow? &c.
Straight I began to thinke, Samuel Flm∣ming of kings colledge in Cambridge. that my Tutor, a graue and learned man, and one of a verie au∣stere life, might say to me in like sort, Was it for this, that I read Aristotle and Plato to you, and instructed you so carefully both in Greek and Latin? to haue you now becom a transla∣tor of Italian toyes? But while I thought thus, I was aware, that it was no toy that could put such an honest and serious consideration into my minde. The second. Now for them that finde fault with polysyllable meeter, me thinke they are like those that blame men for putting suger in their wine, and chide too bad about it, and say they marre al, but yet end with Gods blessing on their hearts. For indeed if I had knowne their diets, I could haue saued some of my cost, at least some of my paine; for when a verse ended with ciuillitie, I could easier after the aun∣cient manner of rime, haue made see, or flee, or decree to answer it, leauing the accent vpon the last syllable, then hunt after three syllabled words to answer it with facillitie, gentillitie, tranquillitie, hostillitie, scurrillitie, debillitie, agillitie, fragillitie, nobillitie, mobillitie, which who mislike, may tast lampe oyle with their eares. And as for two syllabled meeters, they be so ap∣prooued in other languages, that the French call them the feminine rime, as the sweeter: and the one syllable the masculin. But in a word to answer this, and to make them for euer hold their peaces of this point; Sir Philip Sidney not onely vseth them, but affecteth them: signifie, dignifie: shamed is, named is, blamed is: hide away, bide away. Though if my many blotted papers that I haue made in this kinde, might affoord me authoritie to giue a rule of it, I would say that to part them with a one syllable meeter betweene them, would giue it best grace. For as men vse to sow with the hand and not with the whole sacke, so I would haue the eare fed but not cloyed with these pleasing and sweet falling meeters. The third. For the third reproofe about the notes, sure they were a worke (as I may so call it) of supererogation, and I would wish sometimes they had bin left out, and the rather, if I be in such faire possibilitie to be thought a foole or fantasticall for my labour. True it is, I added some notes to the end of euery Can∣to, euen as if some of my friends and my selfe reading it together (and so it fell out indeed many times) had after debated vpon them, what had bene most worthie consideration in them, and so oftimes immediatly i set it down. And whereas I make mention here and there of some of mine owne frends and kin, I did it the rather, because Plutarke in one place spea∣king of Homer, partly lamenteth, and partly blameth him, that writing so much as he did, yet in none of his workes there was any mention made, or so much as inkling to be gathe∣red of what stocke he was, of what kindred, of what towne, nor saue for his language, of what countrey. Excuse me then if I in a worke that may perhaps last longer then a better thing, and being not ashamed of my kindred, name them here and there to no mans offence, though I meant not to make euerie body so far of my counsell why I did it, till I was told that some person of some reckening noted me of a little vanitie for it: and thus much for that point. For my omitting and abreuiating some things, The fourth. either in matters impertinent to vs, or in some too tedious flatteries of persons that we neuer heard of, if I haue done ill, I craue par∣don; for sure I did it for the best. But if any being studious of the Italian, would for his bet∣ter vnderstanding compare them, the first sixe bookes saue a little of the third, will stand him in steed. But yet I would not haue any man except, that I should obserue his phrase so strict∣ly as an interpreter, nor the matter so carefully, as if it had bene a storie, in which to varie were as great a sin, as it were simplicitie in this to go word for word. But now to conclude, I shall pray you all that haue troubled your selues to read this my triple Apologie, to accept my labors, and to excuse my errors, if with no other thing, at least with the name of youth (which commonly hath need of excuses) and so presuming this pardon to be granted, we shall part good frends.  the life of Ariosto. Onely let me intreate you in reading the booke ensuing, not to do me that iniurie, that a Potter did to Artosto.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER BEFORE HE READE THIS POEME, OF SOME THINGS TO BE OBSERVED, as vvell in the substance of this vvork, as also in the setting forth thereof, vvith the vse of the Pictures, Table, and annotations to the same annexed. THere are peraduenture many men, and some of those both graue and godly men, that in respect they count all Poetrie as meerly tending to wantonnesle and vanitie, will at the very first sight reiect this booke, and not onely not allow, but blame and reproue the trauel taken in letting forth the same in our mother tongue. And surely for such censurers as will condemne without hearing the cause pleaded, I can be well content to haue them spare the labor in reading, which they thinke I haue lost in writing; and appealing from them, if not to higher at least to more indifferent iudges, namely such as wil vouchsafe to heare what can be spoken in defence of the matter, and then will yeeld (as wise men euer should do) to the stronger reason: I do to them direct this my short aduertisement, which (because all that may reade this booke are not of equall capacities) I will endeuor to explane more plainly, then for the learned sort had haply bene requisite. And first if any haue this scruple, that it might be hurtfull for his soule or conscience, Of the matter of the book tending to vertue. to reade a booke of Poetry, as though it might alien his mind from vertue and religion, I referre him (beside many other excellent mens wri∣tings, both in defence and praise thereof) to a litle briefe treatise in the beginning of this booke, written by me generally in defence of Poemes, and specially of this present worke, which I dare affirme to be neither vicious nor profane, but apt to breed the quite contrary effects, if a great fault be not in the readers owne bad disposition. Secondly I haue in the marginall notes quoted the apt similitudes, The marginall notes. and pithie sentences or adages, with the best descriptions, and the excellent imitations, and the places and authors from whence they are taken. Further, where diuers stories in this worke seeme in many places abruptly broken off, Direction for continuing the diuers storis. I haue set directions in the margent, where to find the continuance of euery such storie, though I would not wish any to reade them in that order at the first reading, but if any thinke them worthy the twise reading, then he may the second time not vnconueniently vse it, if the meane matter betweene the so deuided stories (vpon which commonly they de∣pend) be not quite out of his memorie. Also (according to the Italian maner) I haue in a staffe of eight verses comprehended the contents of euery Book or Canto, The contents of euery booke. in the beginning thereof, which hath two good vses, one to vnderstand the picture the perfecter, the other to remember the storie the better. As for the pictures, they are all cut in brasse, The pictures. and most of them by the best workmen in that kind, that haue bin in this land this many yeares: yet I will not praise them too much, because I gaue direction for their making, and in regard thereof, I may be thought partiall; but this I may truly say, that (for mine owne part) I haue not seene any made in England better, nor (indeed) any of this kind in any booke, except it were a treatise set forth by that profound man master Broughton the list yeare, vpon the Reuelation, in which there are some three or foure pretie pictures (in octauo) cut in brasse very workmanly. As for other bookes that I haue seene in this Realme, either in Latine or English with pictures, as Liuie, Gesner, Alciats emblemes, a booke de Spectris in Latine, and in our tongue the Chronicles, the booke of Martyrs, the booke of hauking and hunting, and M. Whitneys ex∣cellent Emblemes, yet all their figures are cut in wood, and none in metall, and in that respect inferiour to these, at least (by the old prouerbe) the more cost, the more worship. The vse of the picture is euident, The vse of the picture and the perspectiue. which is, that (hauing read ouer the booke) you may reade it (as it were a∣gaine) in the very picture; and one thing is to be noted, which euery one (haply) will not obserue, namely the perspectiue in euery figure. For the personages of men, the shapes of horses, and such like, are made large at the bottome, and lesser vpward, as if you were to behold all the same in a plaine, that which is nearest seemes greatest, and the fardest shewes smallest, which is the chiefe art in picture. If the name of any man, The Table. The Tales. woman, country, towne, horse, or weapon seeme strange to any, I haue made a table where to find it. And in the same table, a direction for the seuerall tales, where to begin and end, those that may conueniently be read single, of which kind there are many, and those not vnpleasant. Lastly, at the end of euery Book or Canto, because the Reader may take not only delight, but profit in reading, I haue noted in all (as occasion is offered) the Morall, the Historie, the Allegorie, and the Allusion. The Morall, that we may apply it to our owne manners and disposition, to the amendment of the same. Morall. The Historie, Historie. both that the true ground of the poeme may appeare, (for learned men hold, that a perfect po∣eme must ground of a truth) (as I shew more at large in another place) as also to explane some things that are lightly touched by him, as examples of all times, either of old or of late. The Allegorie, Allegorie. of some things that are meerely fabulous, yet haue an allegoricall sence, which euery bodie at the first shew cannot perceiue. The Allusion: Allusion. of fictions, to be applied to some things done, or written of in times past, as also where it may be aplied without offence to the time present. But these happen in very few bookes. And this is all that  haue to aduertise the Reader, for if any other notes happen to come after, it is but for want of oome in the margent, that they were faine to be put out of their due place. It remaines onely to wish (because I find it will be delightfull to many) that it may be hurtfull to none, lest (if it should) both they and I be called to account for it, where not onely euill workes, but idle words shall be punished.
THE FIRST BOOKE OR CANTO OF ORLANDO FVRIOSO. THE ARGVMENT. Charls hath the foyle, Angelica flies thence: Renaldos horse holpe him his Loue to find: Ferraw with him doth fight in her defence: She flies againe, they stay not long behind. Argalias ghost reproues Ferraws offence, The Spaniard to new vow himselfe doth bind. His mistris presence Sacrapant enioyeth, With Bradamant Renaldo him annoyeth. 1 The inning is  by imi∣tation n Vir∣gil,  1. of his , Arma  cano.OF Dames, of Knights, of armes, of loues delight, Of courtesies, of high at∣tempts I speake, Then whē ye Moores trans∣ported all their might On Africke seas, the force of France to breake: Incited by the youthfull heate and spight Of Agramant their king, that vowd to wreake The death of King Trayana (lately slaine) Vpon the Romane Emperour Charlemaine. 2 I will no lesse Orlandos acts declare, (A tale in prose ne verse yet sung or sayd) Who fell bestraught with loue, a hap most rare, To one that earst was counted wise and stayd: bere∣ mistresse,  speakes  on the  staffe. If my sweet Saint that causeth my like care, My slender muse affoord some gracious ayd, I make no doubt but I shall haue the skill, As much as I haue promist to fulfill. 3 by the  intended  Hip∣ by the  to a  more Vouchsafe (O Prince of most renowmed race, The ornament and hope of this our time) T'accept this gift presented to your grace, By me your seruant rudely here in rime. And though I paper pay and inke, in place Of deeper debt, yet take it for no crime: It may suffise a poore and humble debter, To lay and if he could it should be better. 4 Here shall you find among the worthy peeres, Whose praises I prepare to tell in verse, Rogero; him from whom of auncient yeeres Your princely stems deriued, I reherses Whose noble mind by princely acts appeeres, Whose worthy fame euen to the skie doth perse So you vouchsafe my Imitati of V¦gel to Octais: Atque hau sin tempora circum nter felaces hede∣tam ib srpere laures. lowly stile and base, Among your high conceits a httle plase. 5 Orlando who long time had This hath refe∣rence to a former treatise called Orlandos loues, written by one Boyardus. loued deare, Angelia the faire: and for her sake, About the world, in nations far and neare, Did high attempts performe and vndertake, Returd with her into the West that yeare, That Charles his power against the Turks did make: And with the force of Germanie and France, Neare Pyron The hilles that part France and Spae. Alpes his standard did aduance. 6 To make the Kings of Affrike and of Spaine, Repent their rash attempts and foolish vaunts, One hauing brought from Asike in his traine, All able men to carry sword or launce, The other mou'd the Spaniards now againe To ouerthrow the goodly Realme of Fraunce. And hither (as I said) Orlando went, But of his comming straight he did repent.
7 For here (behold how humane iudgements art, And how the wiser sort are oft mistaken) His Ladie whom he guarded had so farr, Nor had in fights nor dangers great forsaken, Without the dint of sword or open warr, Amid his friends away from him was taken. For Charles the great, a valiant Prince and wise, Did this to quench a broile that did arise. 8 Betweene Orlando and Renaldo late, There fell about Angelica some brall, And each of them began the tother hate, This Ladies loue had made them both so thrall. But Charles who much mislikes that such debate Betweene such friends should rise, on cause so small, Nams Dke of Baer. To Namus of Bauier in keeping gaue her, And suffred neither of them both to haue her. 9 But promist he would presently bestow The damsell faire, on him that in that fight, The plainest proofe should of his prowesse show, And danger most the Pagans with his might, But (ay the while) the Christens take the blow, Their souldiers slaine, their Captaines put to flight, The Duke himselfe a prisner there was taken, His tent was quite abandond and forsaken. 10 Where when the damsell faire a while had stayd, That for the victor pointed was a pray, She tooke her horse, ne farther time delayd, But secretly conuayd her selfe away. For she foresaw, and was full sore afrayd, That this to Charles would proue a dismall day. And riding through a wood, she hapt to meet A knight that came against her on his feet. 11 His curats on, his helmet not vndone, His sword and target ready to the same, And through the wood so swiftly he did runne, Simle. Imitatió of Vir∣gil 2. Aeead. Improussu as∣sirus vluse qua sentibus angue. As they that go halfe naked for a game. But neuer did a shepheards daughter shunne More speedily a snake that on her came, Then faire Angelica did take her flight, When as she once had knowledge of the knight. 12 This valiant knight was Lord of Clarimount, Renaldo his horses name was Lisardo. Duke Ammons sonne, as you shall vnderstand, Who hauing lost his horse of good account, That by mishap was slipt out of his hand, He followd him, in hope againe to mount, Vntill this Ladies sight did make him stand, Whose face and shape proportiond were so well, They seeme the house where loue itselfe did dwell. 13 But she that shuns Renaldo all she may, Vpon her horses necke doth lay the raine, Through thicke and thin she gallopeth away, Ne makes she choise of beaten way or plaine, But giues her palfrey leaue to chuse the way, And being mou'd with feare and with disdaine, Now vp, now downe, she neuer leaues to ride, Till she arriued by a riuer side. 14 Fast by the streame Ferravv she sees anone,Ferraw nisb Knigh. (Who noyd, in part with dust, and part with sweat) Out of the battell hither came alone, With drinke his thirst, with aire to swage his heat; And minding backe againe to haue bene gone, He was detaind with an vnlookt for let, Into the streame by hap his helmet fell, And how to get it out he cannot tell. 15 And hearing now the noise and mournfull crie Of one with piteous voice demaunding ayd, Seeing the damsell eke approching nie, That nought but helpe against Renaldo prayd, What wight it was, he guessed by and by, Though looking pale, like one that had bene frayd, And though she had not late bene in his sight, He thought it was Angelica the bright. 16 And being both a stout and courteous knight, And loue a little kindling in his brest, He promist straight to aide her all he might, And to performe what euer she request. And though he want a helmet, yet to fight With bold Renaldo he will do his best. And both the one, the other straight defied, Oft hauing either others value tried. 17 Betweene them two, a combat fierce began, With strokes that might haue pierst ye hardest rocks. While they thus fight on foote, and man to man, And giue and take so hard and heauy knocks, Away the damsell posteth all she can, Their paine and trauell she requites with mocks. So hard she rode while they were at their fight, That she was cleane escaped out of sight. 18 When they long time contended had in vaine, Who should remaine the maister in the field, And that with force, with cunning, nor with paine, The tone of them could make the other yeeld, Renaldo first did moue the Knight of Spaine (Although he vsd such curtesie but seeld) To make a truce; ne was he to be blamed, For loue his heart to other fight inflamed. 19 You thought (said he) to hinder me alone, But you haue hurt your selfe as much or more. You see the faire Angelica is gone, So soone we leese that earst we sought so sore. Had you me tane or slaine, your gaine were none, Sith you were ner the nere your loue therfore. For while we two haue made this little stay, She lets vs both alone and go'th her way. 20 But if you loue the Ladie, as you say, Then let vs both agree to find her out, To haue her first will be our wisest way, And when of holding her there is no doubt, Then by consent let her remaine his pray, That with his sword can proue himselfe most stout, I see not else after our long debate, How either of vs can amend his state.
21 Ferravv (that felt small pleaure in the sight) Agreed a lound and friendly league to make: They lay aside all wrath aud malice quight, And at the parting from the running lake, The Pagan would not let the Christen knight To follow him on foote for manners sake: But prayes him mount behind his horses backe, Aud so they seeke the damsell by the tracke. 22 O auncient knights of true and noble hart, Riuals are those that be strs to one , as are competitors to . They iuals were, one faith they liu'd not vnder, Beside they felt their bodies shrewdly smart Or blowes late giuen, and yet (behold a wonder) Through thicke and thin, suspition set apart, Like friends they ride, and parted not asunder, Vntill the horse with double spurring driued Vnto a way parted in two arriued. 23 And being neither able to descrie Which way was gone Angelica the bright, Because the tracke of horses feet, whereby They seeke her out, appeare alike in sight. They part, and either will his fortune try, The left hand one, the other takes the right. Ferra. The Spaniard when he wandred had a while, Came whence he went, the way did him beguile. 24 He was arriu'd but there, with all his paine, Where in the foord he let his helmet fall, And of his Ladie (whom he lou'd in vaine) He now had litle hope, or none at all. His helmet now he thinkes to get againe, And seekes it out, but seeke it while he shall, It was so deeply sunken in the sand, He cannot get it out at any hand. 25 Pepler  a tree that groweth by the water like a Willow. Hard by the bnke a tall yong Ppler grew, Which he cut downe, thereof a pole to make, With which each place in feeling and in vew, To find his scull he vp and downe doth rake: But lo a hap vnlookt for doth ensew, While he such needlesse frutelesse paine doth take; He saw a knight arise out of the brooke, Breast hie, with visage grim, and angry looke. 26 The ghost of Ar∣ga The knight was arm'd at all points saue the hed, And in his hand he held the helmet plaine, That very helmet that such care had bred In him that late had sought it with such paine And looking grimly on Ferraro he sed, Ah faithlesse wretch, in promise false and vaine, It greeues thee now this helmet so to misse, That should of right be rendred long ere this. 27 Remember (cruell Pagan) when you killed Me, brother to Angelica the bright: You sayd you would (as I then dying willed) Mine armour drowne, when finisht were the fight, Now if that fortune haue the thing fulfilled, Which thou thyself sholdst haue performd in right, Greeue not thy selfe, or if thou wilt be greeued, Greeue that thy promise cannot be beleeued. 28 But if to want an helmet thou repine, Get one wherewith thine honour thou maist saue, Such hath Orlando Countie Paladine, Renaldo such, or one perchance more braue, That was from Almont tane, this from Manbrine: Win one of these, that thou with praise mst haue, And a for this, surcease to seeke it more, But leaue it as thou promisd me before. 29 Ferra was much amazd to see the sprite, That made this strange appearance vnexpected, His voice was gone, his haire did stand vpright, His senses all were so to feare subiected. His heart did swell with anger and despight, To heare his breach of promise thus obiected, And that Argalia (lo the knight was named) With iust reproofe could make him thus ashamed. 30 And wanting time, the matter to excuse, And being guiltie of no litle blame, He rested mute, and in a senslesse muse, So sore his heart was tainted with the shame. And by Linsusas life he vowd to vse No helmet,This is a fit dee∣rum, so to make Ferrnv to swet by his mothers life, which is the Spanish manner. till such time he gat the same, Which from the stout Almont Orlando wan, When as they two encountred man to man. 31 But he this vow to keepe more firmely ment, And kept it better then the first he had, Away he parted hence a malcontent, And many dayes ensuing rested sad. To seeke Orlando out is his intent, With whom to fight he would be very glad.He finds Orlādo, the 12. booke in Atlantes inchā∣ted pallace, the 28. staffe. But now what haps vnto Renaldo fell, That tooke the other way, tis time to tell. 32 Not farre he walkt, but he his horse had spide. That praunsing went before him on the way, Holla my boy holla (Renaldo crid:) The want of thee annoyd me much to day. But Bayard will not let his master ride, But takes his heeles and faster go'th away.He finds his horse tu book 77. staff His flight much anger in Renaldo bred: But follow we Angelica that fled. 33 That fled through woods and deserts all obscure, Through places vninhabited and wast, Ne could she yet repute her selfe secure, But farther still she gallopeth in hast. Each leafe that stirres in her doth feare procure, And maketh her affrighted and agast: Each noise she heares, each shadow she doth see, She doth mistrust it should Renaldo be. 34 Like to a fawne, or kid of bearded goate,Eimil. That in the wood a tyger fierce espide, To kill her dam, and first to teare the throate, And then to feed vpon the haneh or side, Both feare lest the might light on such a lot, And seeke it selfe in thickest brackes to hide, And thinkes each noise the wind or aire doth cause, It selfe in danger of the tygers clawes.
35 That day and night she wandred here and there, And halfe the other day that did ensue, Vntil at last she was arriued where, A fine yong groue with pleasant shadow grew, Neare to the which two little riuers were, Whose moisture did the tender herbes renew, And make a sweete and very pleasing sound, By running on the sand and stonie ground. 36 Here she at last her selfe in safetie thought, As being from Renaldo many a mile, Tyr'd with annoy the heate and trauell brought, She thinkes it best with sleepe the time beguile, And hauing first a place conuenient sought, She lets her horse refresh his limbes the while, Who sed vpon the bankes well cloth'd with grasse, And dranke the riuer water cleere as glasse. 37 Hard by the brooke an arbor she descride, Wherein grew faire and very fragrant floures, With roses sweet, and other trees beside, Wherewith the place adornes the natiue boures, So fenced in with shades on either side, Safe from the heate of late or early houres: The boughes aud leaues so cunningly were mixt, No sunne, no light, could enter them betwixt. 38 Within; the tender herbes a bed do make, Inuiting folke to take their rest and ease: Here meanes this Ladie faire a nap to take, And fals to sleepe, the place so well doth please. Not long she lay, but her a noise did wake, The trampling of a horse did her disease, And looking out as secret as she might, To come all arm'd she saw a comely knight. 39 She knowes not yet if he be foe or friend, Twixt hope and feare she doubtfully doth stand, And what he meanes to do she doth attend, And who it was she faine would vnderstand. The knight did to the riuer side descend, And resting downe his head vpon his hand, All in a muse he sitteth still alone, Like one transform'd into a marble stone. 40 He tarri'd in this muse an houre and more, With looke cast downe in sad and heauie guise, At last he did lament his hap so sore, Yet in so sweete and comely mournefull wise, So hard a heart no tyger euer bore, But would haue heard such plaints with watrish eies. His heart did seeme a mountaine full of flame, His cheekes a streame of teares to quench the same. 41 The lamentation of Sacrap. Alas (said he) what meanes this diuers passion? I burne as fire, and yet as frost I freese, I still lament, and yet I moue compassion, I come too late, and all my labour leese. I had but words and lookes for shew and fashion, Put others get the game, and gainefull fees: If neither fruite nor floure come to my part, Why should her loue consume my carefull hart? 42 Like to the rose I count the virgine pure,Simile. This is  of Catuli greatly  V flos is secretus  hortis, &c. That grow'th on natiue stem in garden faire, Which while it stands with wals enuirond sure, Where heardmen with their heards cannot repaire To fauor it, it seemeth to allure The morning deaw, the heate, the earth, the aire. Yong gallant men, and louely dames delight In their sweet sent, and in their pleasing sight. 43 But when at once tis gathered and gone, From proper stalke, where late before it grew, The loue, the liking little is or none, Both fauour, grace and beautie all adew. So when a virgin grants to one alone The precious floure for which so many sew, Well he that getteth it may loue her best, But she forgoes the loue of all the rest. 44 She may deserue his loue, but others hate, To whom of loue she shewd her selfe so scant. (Oh then my cruell fortune or my fate) Others haue store, but I am staru'd with want: Then leaue to loue this ladie so vngrate: Nay hue to loue (behold I soone recant) Yea first let life from these my limbs be rent, Ere 1 to change my loue shall giue consent. 45 If some perhaps desirous are to know, What wight it was with sorow so opprest, Twas Sacrapant that was afflicted so, And loue had bred this torment in his brest: That trickling wound, that flattring cruell foe, Most happie they that know and haue it least. The loue of her I say procur'd his woe, And she had heard and knew it long ago. 46 Her loue allur'd him from the Ester land, Vnto the Westerne shores, where sets the Sunne, And here he heard how by Orlandos hand, A passage safe from th'Indies she had wonne. Her sequestration he did vnderstand, That Charles had made, and how the same was done To make the knights more venterous and bold, In fighting for the Floure de luce of gold.The flour de taken for Fi it selfe, be armes of Fi 47 And furthermore himselfe had present bene When Charles his men were ouerthrowne and slaine. Since then, he traueld farre to find this Queene, But hitherto it hath bene all in vaine. Now much despaire, and little hope betweene, So rufully thereof he doth complaine, And with such wailing words his woes rehearst, As might the hardest stonie heart haue pearst. 48 And while in this most dolefull state he bides, And sighes full oft, and sheddeth many a teare, And speakes these same, and many words besides, (Which I to tell for want of time forbeare) His noble fortune so for him prouides, That all this came vnto his mistresse eare, And in one moment he preuailed more Then he had done in many yeares before.
49 Angelica with great attention hard, The mie, and plaint, that him tormented sore, Who long had loued her, with great regard, As she had triall, many yeares before, Yet as a marble pilla cold and hard, She not incline, to pittie him the more. Like one that all the world doth much disdaine, And deemeth none worthie her loue againe. 50 But being now with danger compast round, She thought it best to take him for her guide. Simile. For one that were in water almost drownd, Were verie stout, if for no helpe he cryde: If he let passe the fortune now she found, She thinkes to want the like another tyde. And furthermore for certaine this she knew, That Sacrapant had beene her louer true. 51 Ne meant she tho to quench the raging fires, That ay consum'd his faithfull louing heart, Ne yet with that a louer most desires, T alwage the paine in all, or yet in part: She meanes he first shall pull her from the briers, And feed him then with words and womens art, To make him first of all to serue her turne, That doue, to wonted coynesse to returne. 52 Vnto the riuer side she doth descend, And toward him most goddesse like she came, This is the phrase of the cast coun∣trie people: peace be to you.And id, all peace to thee my dearest frend, With modest looke, and cald him by his name, And further said, the Gods and you defend My chastitie, mine honor and my fame. And neuer grant by their diuine permission, Such;  respect of his  that he discoue∣red afore. Simile.That I giue cause of any such suspicion. 53 With how great ioy a mothers minde is fild, To see a sonne, for whom she long had mourned, Whom she hard late in battell to be kild, And saw the troopes without him home returned, Such ioy had Sacrapant when he behild, His Ladie deere: his teares to smiles are turned, To see her beautie rare, her comely fauour, Her princely presence, and her stately hanour. 54 Like one all rauisht with her heauenly face, Vnto his loued Ladie he doth runne, Who was content in armes him to embrace, Which she perhaps at home wold not haue done, But doubting now the dangerous time and place, She must go forward as she hath begun, In hope by his good seruice and assistance, To make her home returne without resistance. 55 And in most lou'ly manner she doth tell, The strange aduentures, and the diuers chance, That since they two did part to her beell. Both on the way, and since she came to France: And how Orlando vsed her right well, Defending her from danger and mischance, And that his noble force and magnammine, Had still preseru'd the floure of her virginitie. 56 It might be true, but sure it was incredible, To tell to one that were discreet and wise, But vnto Sacrapant it seemed possble, Because that loue had dasled to his eyes: Loue causeth that we see to seeme inuiible, And makes of things not seene, a shape to rise. It is a prouerbe vsed long ago,Sntence. We soone beleeue the thing we would haue so. 57 But to himselfe thus Sacrapant doth say, B'it that my Lord of Anlat were so mad,Orlando was Lord of Anglant To take no pleasure of so faire a pray, When he both time and place, and power had, Yet am not I obliged any way, To intate a president so bad. Ile rather take my pleasure while I may, Then waile my want of wit another day.Ouid. vim licet appelles. grata est vis illa puellu, quod tuuas in∣uita, sape dedisse toiu.t. 58 Ile gather now the fresh and fragrant rose, Whole beautie may with standing still be spent, One cannot do a thing (as I suppose) That better can a womans minde content: Well may they seeme much grieued for a glose, And weepe and waile, and dolefully lament, There shall no foolish plaints, nor fained ire, Hinder me to encarnat my desire. 59 This said, forthwith he did himselfe prepare, T'assault the fort that easly would be wonne, But loe a sodaine hap that bred new care, And made him cease his enterprise begonne, For of an enemie he was aware, He claspt his helmet late before vndone, And armed all, he mounteth one his best And standeth readie with his speare in rest. 60 Behold a warrior whom he did not know, Came downe the wood in semblance like a knight,Bradamam. The furniture was all as white as snow, And in the helme a plume of fethers white. King Sacrapant by proofe doth plainely show, That he doth take the thing in great despite, To be disturbd and hindred from that pleasure, That he preferd before each other treasure. 61 Approching nie, the warrior he defide, And hopes to set him quite beside the seat: The other with such loftie words replide, As persons vse, in choler and in heat. At last when glorious vaunts were laid aside, They come to strokes and each to do his feat, Doth couch his speare, and running thus they sped, Their coursets both encountred hed to hed. 62 As Lions meete,Simile. or Buls in pastures greene, With teeth & hornes, & staine with bloud the field, Such eger fight these warriers was betweene. And eithers speare had pearst the tothers sheild, The sound that of these strokes had raised beene, An eccho lowd along the vale did yeeld. T'was happie that their curats were so good, The Lances else had pierced to the blood.
63 For quite vnable now about to wheele, Simile 7 ke is in Da 1 of goats.They butt like rammes, the one the others head, Whereof the Pagans horse such paine did feele, That ere long space had past he fell downe dead. The tothers horse a little gan to reele, But being spurd, fall quickly vp he sped. The Pagans horse thus ouerthrowne and slaine, Fll backward greatly to his masters paine, 64 That vnknowne champion seeing thother downe, His horse vpon him lying dead in vew, Exspecting in this fight no more renowne, Determind not the battell to renew. But by the way that leadeth from the towne, The first appointed iourney doth pursew, And was now ridden halfe a mile at least, Before the Pagan parted from his beast. 65 Simile. The hbe u in O ud de trets us 3 Fle. Hud a. tr lu; u quato qus Iouu ignis actus vut  est vita esus ps su.Like as the tiller of the fruitfull ground, With sodaine storme and tempest is astonished Who sees the flash, & heares the thunders sound, And for their masters sakes, the cattell punished, Or when by hap a faire old pine he found, By force of raging winds his leaues diminished. So stood amazd the Pagan in the place, His Ladie present at the wofull case. 66 He fetcht a sigh most deepely from his heart, Not that he had put out of ioynt, or lamed His arme, his legge, or any other part, But chiefly he, his euill fortune blamed, At such a time, to hap lo ouerthwart, Before his loue, to make him so ashamed: And had not she some cause of speech found out, He had remained speechlesse out of doubt. 67 My Lord (said she) what ailes you be so sad? The want was not in you, but in your steed, For whom a stable, or a pasture had Beene fitter then a course at tilt indeed. Nor is that aduerse partie verie glad, As well appeares, that parted with such speed, For in my iudgement they be said to yeeld, That first leaue off, and do depart the feeld. 68 Thus while she giues him comfort all she may, Behold there came a messenger in post, Blowing his horne, and riding downe the way, Where he before his horse, and honor lost. And comming nearer he of them doth pray, To tell if they had seene passe by that cost, A champion armd at all points like a knight, The shield, the horse, and armour all of white. 69 I haue both seene the knight, and felt his force, (Said Sacrapant) for here before you came, He cast me downe and also kild my horse, Ne know I (that doth greeue me most) his name. Sir (quoth the post) the name I will not force, To tell, sith you desire to know the same, First, know that you were conquerd in this fight, By vallew of a damsell faire and bright. 70 Of passing strength, but of more passing hew, And Bradamant, this damsell faire is named, She was the wight, whose meeting you may rew, And all your life hereafter be ashamed.This post  taketh Bi Bookes This laid, he turnd his horse and bad adew. But Sacrapant with high disdaine enflamed, Was first lo wroth, and then so shamed thereto, He knew not what to say, not what to do. 71 And after he had staid a while and musd, That at a womans hands he had receiued, Such a disgrace as could not be excusd, Nor how he might reuenge it he perceiued, With thought hereof his mind was so confusd, He stood like one of wit and sense bereaued. At last he go'th, a better place to finde, He takes her horse and makes her mount behind. 72 Now hauing rode a mile, or there about, They heard a noyse a trampling on the ground, They thought it was some companie or rout, That caused in the woods so great a sound:Bayardo to Bucep that he in suffer no quietly  master. At last they see a warlike horse, and stout, With guilded barb, that cost full many a pound, No hedge, no ditch, no wood no water was, That stopped him where he was bent to passe. 73 Angelica casting her eye aside: Except (said she) mine eies all dazled be, I haue that famous horse Bayardo spide, Come trotting downe the wood, as seemes to me: (How well for vs our fortune doth prouide) It is the verie same, I know tis he: On one poore nag to ride we two were loth, And here he commeth fit to serue vs both. 74 King Sacrapant alighteth by and by, And thinkes to take him gently by the raine, But with his heeles the horse doth streight reply, As who should say, his rule he did disdaine. It happie was he stood the beast not nye, For if he had, it had beene to his paine, For why, such force the horse had in his heele, He would haue burst a mountaine all of steele. 75 But to the damsell gently he doth go, In humble manner, and in lowly sort. A spantell after absence fauneth so,Simile. And seekes to make his master play, and sport, For Bayard cald to mind the damsell tho,Albracca in the  table. When she vnto Albracco did resort, And vsd to feed him for his masters sake, Whom she then lou'd, and he did her forsake. 76 She takes the bridle boldly in her hand, And strokt his brest, and necke, with art and skill: The horse that had great wit to vnderstand, Like to a lambe, by her he standeth still, And while Bayardo gently there did stand, The Pagan got him vp, and had his will. And she that erst to ride behind was faine, Into her saddle mounted now againe.
77 And being newly setled in her seate, She saw a man on foote all armed runne, Straight in her mind she ga to chase and fret, Because she knew it was Duke Ammons sonne, Most earnestly he sude her loue to get, More earnestly she seekes his loue to shunne. Once she lou'd him, he hated her as much, And now he loues, she hates, his hap was such. 78 id 1.  to be true  of  ope. .The cause of this first from two fountaines grew, Like in the tast, but in effects vnlike, Plac'd in Ardenna, each in others vew, Who tasts the one, loues dart his heart doth strike, Contrary of the other doth ensew, Who drinke thereof, their louers shall mislike. Renaldo dranke of one, and loue much pained him, The other dranke this damsell that disdained him. 79 This liquor thus with secret venim mingled, Makes her to stand so stiffely in the nay, On whom Renaldos heart was wholy kindled, Though scarce to looke on him she can away, But from his sight desiring to be singled, With soft low voice the Pagan she doth pray, That he approch no nearer to this knight, But flie away with all the speed he might. 80 Why then (quoth he) make you so small esteeme Of me, as though that I to him should yeeld? So weake and faint my forces do you deeme, That safe from him your selfe I cannot shield Then you forget Albracca it should seeme, And that same night, when I amid the field, Alone vnarmed did defend you then, Against king Agrican and all his men. 81 No sir, said she, (ne knowes she what to say) Because Renaldo now approcht so nie, And threatned so the Pagan in the way, When vnder him his horse he did espie, And saw the damsell taken as a pray, In whose defence he meanes to liue and die. But what fell out betweene these warriers fearce, Within the second booke I do rehearse. In this first booke may be noted in Angelica the vngratefulnes of women to their worthiest suters.The Morall. In the foure knights, the passionate affections of loue and fancy. And whereas first Bradamant, and after Renaldo interrupt Sacrapant of his lasciuious purpose, may be noted, both the weake holdfast that men haue of worldly pleasures, as also how the heauens do euer fauour chast desires. Lastly, in the two fountaines may be noted the two notable contrarieties of the two affections, of loue and disdaine, that infinite sorts of people daily tast of, while they runne wandring in that inextricable labyrinth of loue. Concerning the historie,The Historie. we find that in the time of Charles the great (called Charlemaine) sonne of Pepin king of France, the Turkes with a great power inuaded Christendome, Spaine being then out of the faith, (as some part thereof was euen within these four score yeares, namely Granada, which was held by the Moores.) And one Marcus Antonius Sabellicus writeth, that for certaintie there liued in that time of Charlemaine, many of those famous Palladines, that are in this worke so often named, and especially he maketh mention of Renaldo and Orlando, affirming that they were indeed very martiall men, and how Charles obtained great victories by their seruice; and namely he talleth of one Fer∣raw a Spaniard of great stature and strength, who tooke certaine Frenchmen prisoners, afterward rescued by Orlando, which Orlando fought with him hand to hand two whole dayes, and the second vanquisht him. Further, the same author affirmeth, that the same Charlemaine, for his great fauour shewed to the Church of Rome, was by Leo the third named Emperour of Rome: and that he was a iust, a fortunate, and a mercifull Prince, and one that within Europe as well as without did attaine great conquests, suppressing the violent gouernement of the Lombards, and taming the rebelli∣ous Saxons, Huns and Baudrians, and conquering a great part of Spaine: all which testimonies shew, that the ground of this Poeme is true, as I shall haue particular occasion in sundry of the books ensuing to note: and thus much for the story. For the allegory,Allegorie. in this Canto I find not much to be said, except one should be so curious to search for an allegory where none is intended by the author himself: yet an allegory may not vnfitly be gathered of the description of Bayardos follow∣ing Angelica, which may thus be taken. Bayardo a strong horse, without rider or gouernor, is likened to the desire of mā, that runs furiously after Angelica, as it were after pleasure or honor, or whatsoeuer man doth most inordinately affect. Likewise in that Angelica flieth from Renaldo, we may take an allegorical instruction, that the temtations of the flesh are ouercome, chiefly by flying from them, as the Scripture it selfe teacheth, saying, Resist the diuel, but fly fornication. Further, in that Bayardo striketh at Sacrapant, but yeeldeth to Angelica, it may be noted how the courage of our minds that cannot be abated with any force, are often subdued by flatterie and gentle vsage, till they be in the end euen ridden as it were with slauerie. And whereas Renaldo followes Angelica on foote, some haue noted thereby to be meant sensualitie, that is euer in base and earthly, or rather beastly affections, neuer looking vpward. For Allusions,Allusion. there are not any worth the noting in this Canto, saue that it seemes in Renaldos horse Bayardo, he seemes to allude to Buccphalus Alexanders horse.
THE SECOND BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. A Frire betweene two riuals parts the fray, By magicke art: Renaldo hasteth home, But in embassage he is sent away, When tempest makes the sea to rage and fome. Bradamant seekes her spouse, but by the way, While she about the country wyld did rome, Met Pinnabel, who by a craftie traine; Both sought, and thought the Ladie to haue slaine. 1 O Blind god Loue, why takst thou such delight, first  some∣time  have some  mo∣rall or  to the imperens to the  in .With darts of diuers force our hearts to wound? By thy too much abusing of thy might, This discord great in hu∣mane hearts is found. When I would wade the shallow foord aright. Thou draw'st me to the deepe to haue me dround, From those loue me, my loue thou dost recall, And place it where I find no loue at all. 2 Thou mak'st most faire vnto Renaldo seeme Angelica, that takes him for a foe, And when that she of him did well esteeme, Then he dislikt, and did refuse her thoe. Which makes her now of him the lesse to deeme, Thus (as they say) the renders quit pro quo. She hateth him, and doth detest him so, She first will die, ere she will with him go. 3 Renaldo (full of stately courage) cride, Downe theese from of my horse, downe by and by, So robd to be I neuer can abide, But they that do it dearely shall abye, The  on  to Also this Ladie you must leaue beside, Else one of vs in her defence will dye. A horse so good, and such a goodly dame, To leaue vnto a theefe it were a shame. 4 What' me a theefe? thou in thy throat dost lye (Quoth Sacrapant, that was as hot as he) Theefe to thy selfe, thy malice I defie, For as I heare, the name is due to thee: But if thou dare thy might and manhood trie, Come take this Ladie, or this hoise from me. Though I allow in this of thine opinion, That of the world she is the matchlesse minion. 5 Like as two mastiue dogges with hungrie mawes, Mou'd first to hate,Sti from hate to raging ire, Approch with grinning teeth, and griefly iaws, With staring eyes, as red as flaming fire, At last they bite, and scratch with teeth and claws, And teare themselues, and tumble in the mire. So after byting and reprochfull words, Did these two worthy warriets draw their swords. 6 One was on foote, the tother was one horse, You thinke perhaps, the horseman vantage had, No sure no whit; he would haue wisht to skoce; For why at last to light he must be glad, The beast did know thus much by natures force, To hurt his master were a seruice bad. The pagan could not nor with spur nor hand, Make him vnto his mind to go or stand, 7 He stops, when he should make a full carite, He runnes or trots, when he would haue him rest, At last to throw his rider in the nite, He plungeth with his head beneath his breast. But Sacrapant that now had small desire, At such a time, to tame so proud a beast, Did worke so well at last by sleight and force, On his left side, he lighted from his horse.
8 When from Bayardos ouer furious might, The Pagan had himselfe discharged so, With naked swords there was a noble fight, Sometimes they lye aloft, sometimes aloe, And from their blowes the fire flies out in sight: I thinke that Vulcans hammers beat more slow, Where he within the mountaine Aetnas chaps, Doth forge for loue, the fearfull thunderclaps. 9 A description of a cobat between two rghes skil¦full ther wea∣pon.Sometimes they profer, then they pause a while, Sometime strike out, like maisters of the play, Now stand vpright, now stoup another while, Now open lye, then couer all they may. Now ward, then with a slip the blow beguile: Now forward step, now backe a little way: Now round about, and where the tone giues place, There still the other presleth in his place. 10 Renaldo did the Pagan Prince inuade, And strike at once with all the might he cowd, The other doth oppose against the blade, A shield of bone and steele of temper good. But through the same a way Fusberta made, oberta was Renaldos sword.And of the blow reounded all the wood: The steele, the bone like yse in peeces broke, And left his arme benummed with the stroke. 11 Which when the faire and fearfull damsell saw, And how great domage did ensue thereby, She looked pale, for anguish and for aw, Like those by doome that are condemnd to dye: She thinks it best her selfe from hence withdraw, Else will Renaldo take her by and by, The same Renaldo whom she hateth so, Though loue of her procured all his wo. 12 Vnto the wood she turnes her horse in hast, And takes a little narrow path and blind; Her fearefull looks ofttimes she backe doth cast, Still doubting lest Renaldo came behind: And when that she a little way had past, Alow the vale a Hermit she did find: A weake old man, with beard along his brest, In shew deuout, and holier then the rest. 13 An ha , or rather  who person he .He seemd like one with fasts and age consumed, He rode vpon a slouthfull going asle. And by his looke, a man would haue presumed, That of his conscience scrupulous he was. Yet her young face, his old sight so illumed, When as he saw the damsell by to pasle: (Though weake and faint, as such an age behoued?) That charitie his courage somewhat moued. 14 The damsell of the Hermit askt the way, That might vnto some hav'n town lead most neare, That she might part from France with out delay, Where once Renaldos name she might not heare. The frier that could enchaunt, doth all he may, To comfort her, and make her of good cheare, And to her safetie promising to looke; Out of his bag forthwith he drew a booke. 15 A booke of skill and learning so profound, That of a leafe he had not made an end, But that there rose a sprite from vnder ground, Whom like a page he doth of arrants send. This sprite by words of secret vertue bound, Goes where these knights their combat did intend: And while they two were fighting verie hard, He enters them betweene without regard. 16 Good sirs (quoth he) for courtsie sake me show, When one of you the tother shall haue slaine, And after all the trauell you bestow, What guerdon you expect for all your paine, Behold, Orlando striking nere a blow,This  away. Not breaking staffe, while you striue here in vaine, To Paris ward the Ladie faire doth carie, While you on fighting vndiscreetly tarie. 17 I saw from hence a mile, or thereabout, Orlando with Angelica alone, And as for you, they iest and make a flout, That fight where praise and profit can be none. Twer best you quickly went to seeke them out, Before that any farther they be gone; Within the walls of Paris if they get, Your eye on her againe you shall not set. 18 When as the knights this message had receiued, They both remaind amazed, dumbe and sad, To eare Orlando had them so deceiued, Of whom before great iealosie they had; But good Renaldo so great griefe conceiued, That for the time, like one all raging mad, He sware without regard of God or man, That he will kill Orlando if he can. 19 And seeing where his horse stood still vntide, He thither goes: such hast he make away, He offers not the Pagan leaue to ride, Nor at the parng once adieu doth say. Now Bayard felt his maisters spurres in side, And gallops maine, ne maketh any stay No riuers, rocks, no hdge, nor ditches wide, Could stay his course, or make him step aside. 20 Nor maruell if Renaldo made some hast, To mount againe vpon his horses backe. You heard before how many dayes had past, That by his absence he had felt great lacke.Bayardi The horse (that had of humane wit some tast,) Ran not away for any iadish knacke, His going onely was to this intent, To guide his master where the Ladie went. 21 The horse had spide her when she tooke her flight, First from the tent, as he thereby did stand, And followd her, and kept her long in fight,The B  on a  who  depe As then by hap out of his master hand. (His master did not long before alight, To combat with a *Baron hand to hand). The horse pursude the damsell all about, And holpe his master still to find her out.
22 He followd her through valley, hill and plaine, Through woods and thickets for his masters sake, Whom he permitted not to touch the raine, For feare lest he some other way should take, By which Renaldo though with mickle paine in  book.Twise found her out, twise she did him forsake: For first Ferraw, then Sacrapant withstood, That by twise finding her he did no good. 23 Bayardo trusting to the lying sprite, Whose false (but likely) tale so late he hard, And doubting not it was both true and right, He doth his dutie now with due regard. Renaldo prickt with loue and raging spite, Doth pricke apace, and all to Paris ward, To Paris ward he maketh so great shift, The wind it selfe seemes not to go to swift. 24 Such hast he made Orlando out to find, That scant he ceast to trauell all the night, So deeply stacke the storie in his mind, That was of late deuised by the sprite: Betimes and late as first he had assignd, He rode vntill he saw the towne insight: Where Charles whose chance all christned hearts did rew, With the small relikes of his powre withdrew. 25 And for he lookes to be assaulted then, Or else besieg'd, he vseth all his care, To store himselfe with victuall and with men. The walls eke of the towne he doth repare, And take aduice, both how, and where, and when, For his defence each thing he may prepare, An armie new to make he doth intend, And for new souldiers into England send. 26 He minds to take the field againe ere long, And trie the hap of warre another day, And all in hast to make himselfe more strong, He sends Renaldo Englands ayd to pray. Renaldo thought the Emperour did him wrong, To send him in such hast, and grant no stay. Not that ill will to th'lland he did carie, But for another cause he faine would tarie. 27 Yet now although full sore against his mind, As loth to leaue the Ladie he so loued, Whom he in Paris hoped had to find, Because t'obey his Prince it him behoued, He taketh this embassage thus assignd, And hauing straight all other lets remoued, He posted first to Callis with great hast, And there embarkt ere halfe next day was past. 28 Against the mariners and masters minds, (Such hast he made to haue returned backe) He takes the sea though swelling with great winds, And threatning ruine manifest and wracke. Fierce Boreas that himself despised finds, Doth beate on seas with tempest foule and blacke, By force whereof the waues were raisd so hie, The very tops were sprinkled all thereby. 29 The mariners take in their greater saile, And by the wind they lie, but all in vaine, Then backe againe they bend without auaile, Now they are out, they cannot in againe. No (said the wind) my force shall so preuaile,He makes the wind to speake by a figure called rosopopa. Your bold attempts shall put you to some paine. It was a folly any more to striue, Needs must they follow as the wind did driue. 30 In the foreship sometimes the blast doth blow, Straight in the poope, the seas breake to the skies. Needs must they beare a saile, though very low, To void the waues that higher still did rie: But sith my web so diuerse now doth grow, To weaue with many threds I must deuise, I leaue Renaldo in this dangerous place,He comes to hi againe. 4. book staffe 21. And of his sister speake a little space. 31 I meane the noble damsell Bradamant,Bradamant  he left in the first booke, staffe . Of Ammon daughter, and dame Beatrice, In whose rare mind no noble part did want, So full of value, and so void of vice, King Charls and France of her might rightly vauntpunc; So chast, so faire, so faithfull and so wise, And in the feates of armes of so great fame, A man might guesse by that of whence she came. 32 There was a Knight enamourd on this dame, That out of Affricke came with Agramant, Rogero hight, so was his fathers name, (His mother was the child of Agolant)Looke in the In∣dex of names of the story of Ago∣lant and Rogeros mother named Gaiclla. The damsell that of worthy linage came, And had a heart not made of adamant, Disdained not the loue of such a knight, Although he had but seeld bene in her sight. 33 Long trauell and great paine she had endured, And rid alone her louer to haue found, Ne would she thinke her safetie more assured, If with an armie she were garded round. You heard before how she by force procured King Sacrapant to fall and kisse the ground, The wood she past, and after that the mountaine, Vntill at last she saw a goodly fountaine. 34 A goodly fountaine running in a field, All full of trees, whose leaues do neuer fade,The larell, the yeugh and the holily be euer green. Which did to passengers great pleasure yeeld, The running streame so sweete a murmur made, Vpon the South, a hill the Sunne did shield, The ground gaue floures, ye groues a grateful shade: Now here the dame casting her eye aside, A man at armes fast by the brooke descride. 35 A man at armes she spied by the brooke, Whose banks with flowres of diuers hew were clad,Pinnabel son of Anselmus Earl of Maganza. Of which sweet place he so small pleasure tooke, His face did shew his heart was nothing glad, His targe and helmet were not farre to looke, Vpon a tree where tide his horse he had: His eyes were swolne with tears, his mind oppressed, With bitter thoughts that had his heart distresled.
36 The damsell faire entic'd by deepe desire, That all (but chiefly women) haue to know, Atlāta vn le to Rogero a great Necromancer, who did worke this by enchance∣ment.All strangers states, doth earnestly require The dolefull knight his inward griefe to show. Who marking well her manner and attire, Her courteous speech with him preuailed so, He te's his state, esteeming by the sight, That needs she must haue bene some noble knight. 37 Good sir (said he) you first must vnderstand, I serued Charles against the king of Spaine, I horsemen had and footmen in my band, In ambush plac'd the Spanish king t'haue slaine: I brought the fairest Ladie in this land, And my best loued with me in my traine, When sodainly ere I thereof was ware, There came a horseman that procur'd my care. 38 Perhap a man, of some infernall sprite, In humane shape, I cannot certaine say, But this I say, he tooke the damsel bright, Euen as a faulcon seaseth on his pray, So he my louing Ladie did affright, And so affrighted bare her quite away. And when I thought to rescue her by force, Aloft in aire he mounted with his horse. 39 Euen as a rau'nous kite that doth espie Simile.A little chicken wandring from the other, Doth catch him straight, and carries him on hie, That now repents he was not with his mother. What could I do? my horse wants wings to flie, Scant could he set one leg before the tother, He traueld had before so many dayes, Among the painfull hils and stonie wayes. 40 But like to one that were his wit beside, I leaue my men to do my first intent, Not caring of my selfe what should betide, (So strongly to my fancie was I bent) And took the blind god Cupid for my guide, By ways as blind to seeke my loue I went. And though my sense, my guide, my way were blind, Yet on I go in hope my loue to find. 41 A senight space abating but a day, About the woods and mountaines I did range, In sauage deserts wilde and void of way, Where humane steps were rare and very strange. Fast by the desert place a plaine there lay, That shewed from the rest but little change, Saue onely that a castle full of wonder Alantes castle made by enchāt∣ment.Did stand in rockes that had bene clou'n asunder. 42 This castle shines like flaming fire a farre, Not made of lime and stone as ours are here: And still as I approcht a little narre, So they write that  armor was tem∣pered to make it npenetrabl.More wonderfull the building doth appeare. It is a fort impregnable by warre. Compacted all of mettall shining cleare. The fiends of hell this fort of steele did make, And mettall tempred in the * Stigian lake. 43 The towres are all of steele, and polisht bright, There is on them no spot or any rust, It shines by day, by darke it giueth light, Here dwels this robber wicked and vniust,Simile. And what he gets against all lawes and right, The lawlesse wretch abuseth here by lust, And here he keepes my faire and faithfull louer, Without all hope that I may her recouer. 44 Ah wo was me, in vaine I sought to helpe, I see the place that keepes that I loue best, Euen as a foxe that crying heares her whelpe,Simile. Now borne aloft into the Eagles nest, About the tree she goes, and faine would helpe, But is constraind for want of wings to rest. The rocke so steepe, the castle is so hie, None can get in except they learne to flie. 45 And as I tarri'd in the plaine, behold I saw two knights come riding downe the plaine, Led by desire and hope to win this hold, But their desire and hope was all in vaine. Gradasso was the first of courage bold,Grad A king of Serican that held the raine. Rogero next,Roger a man of noble nation, Of yeares but yong, but of great estimation. 46 A little dwarfe they had to be their guide, Who told me that they came to trie their force Against the champion that doth vse to ride Out of this castle on the winged horse. Which when I heard, to them for helpe I cride, And prayd them of my case to take remorse, And that they would, if twere their chance to win, Set free my loue that there was locked in. 47 And all my griefe to them I did vnfold, Affirming with my teares my tale too true: No sooner I my heauy hap had told, But they were come within the castles vew, I stood aloofe the battell to behold, And praid to God good fortune might ensue. Beneath the castle lies a little plaine, Exceeding not an arrow shoote or twaine. 48 And as they talkt who first should fight or last, They were arriued to the castle hill, At length Gradasso (whether lots were cast, Or that Rogero yeelded to his will) Doth take his horne, and blew therewith a blast, The noise whereof the castle wals did fill. And straight with greater speed then can be guest, Came out the rider of the flying beast.Simile. 49 And as we see strange cranes are wont to do,Strange because of  is a  that g sea. They  triangle, nie wr Mag gician. First stalke a while, ere they their wings can find, Then soare from ground not past a yard or two, Till in their wings they gatherd haue the wind, At last they mount the very clouds vnto, Triangle wise, according to their kind: So by degrees this Mage begins to flie, The bird of Ioue can hardly mount so hie.
50 And when he sees his time, and thinkes it best, He talleth downe like lead in fearefull guise, Euen as the faulcon doth the fowle arrest, The dcke and mallard from the brooke that rise, So he descending with his speare in rest, Doth pierce the are in strange and monstrous wise, And ere Gradasso were thereof admonished, He felt a stripe that made him halfe astonished. 51 The Mage vpon Gradasso brake his speare, Who strikes in vaine vpon the aire and wind, Away he flue without or hurt or feare, And leaue Gradasso many a pace behind. This fierce encounter was so hard to beare, Alfana the are Gradasso rode , hauing vow∣d neuer to rule orse til e could et Bayard Re∣alados horse.That good Alfana to the ground inclind, This same Alfana was Gradassos mare, The fairst and best that euer saddle bare. 52 Aloft the starres the sorc'rer doth ascend, And wheeles about, and downe he comes againe, And on Rogero he his force doth bend, That had compassion on Gradassos paine: So sore th'assault Rogero did offend, His horse the force thereof could not sustaine, And when to strike againe he made account, He saw his foe vp to the clouds to mount. 53 Sometimes the Mage Rogero doth assaile, Straightway Gradasso he doth set vpon, And oft they strike againe without auaile, So quickly he at whom they strike is gone, He winds about as ships do vnder saile, His sailes are wings, and rest he giues them none, But sets vpon them in so sudden wise, That he amazd and dazeld both their eyes. 54 Betweene this one aloft, and two alow, This conflict did no little space endure, Vntill at last the night began to grow, With mistie clouds making the world obscure: I saw this fight,Many  wise word are readier o beleue strange eports of credble ersons then the olish. the truth thereof I know, I present was there at, yet am I sure, That very few (except the wiser sort) Will credence giue to such a strange report. 55 This heauenly hellish warriour bare a shield On his left arme that had a silken case, I cannot any cause or reason yeeld, Why he would keepe it couerd so long space: It had such force, that who so it beheld. Such shining light it striketh in their face, That downe they fall with eyes and senses closed, And leaue their corps of him to be disposed. 56 The target like the carbuncle doth shine, Of this  The  headSuch light was neuer seene with mortall eye, It makes to ground the lookers on decline, Be they farre off, or be they standing nie: And as it closed their sight it closed mine, That  a trance no little space was I. At last when I awakt and rose againe, The aire was darke, and voided was the plaine. 57 The sorcerer hath tane them (I surmise) Into his castle, as is likely most, And by this light that dazeld all our eie, My hope is gone, their libertie is lost: This is the truth, n do I ought deuise, You heare the same, I felt it to my cost, Now iudge if I haue reason to complaine, That haue and do endure such endlesse paine. 58 When as this Knight his dolefull tale had done, He sate him downe all chearlesse in the place, This was the Earle Pinnabel Anselmus sonne, Borne in Maganza of that wicked race, Who like the rest so lewd a course did runne, He holpe the more his linage to deface: For onely vertue noblenesse doth dignifie,Vrts vera no∣bi. And vicious life a linage base doth signifie. 59 The Ladie faire attentiue all this while, Doth hearken vnto this Maganzses tale, Rogeros name sometime doth make her smile, Sometime againe for feare she looketh pale: But hearing how a sorcerer base and vile, Should in a castle so detaine him thrall, She pitied him, and in her mind she treated, And oft desir'd to heare the tale repeated. 60 When at the last the whole she vnderstood, She said, sir Knight mourne not, but take some plea∣sure, Perhaps our meeting may be to your good, And turne your enemie vnto displeasure: Shew me this fort, for why it freats my blood, So foule a prison holds so faire a treasure. And if good fortune fauour mine intent, You will right well suppose your trauell spent. 61 Ah (said the Knight) should I returne againe, To passe these mountaines hard and ouertwhat? Though for my selfe it is but little paine, To toile my bodie hauing lost my hart: For you to go where as you may be slaine, Or taken prisner were a foolish pat: Which if it hap, yet me you cannot blame, Because I giue you warning of the same. 62 This said he riseth vp his horse to take, The noble Ladie on the way to guide, Who meanes to venter for Rogeros sake. Or death or thraldome, or what ere betide. But loe a messenger great hast doth make, That comes behind, and (tarry ho) he cride, This was the post that told to Sacraant, How she that foyld him was Dame Bradamant.1. Book. staff. 70. 63 This messenger brought tidings in great post, Both from Narbona and from Mompeleere, How they were vp in armes along the cost Of Aquamort, and all that dwelled neere, And how Marsilias men their hearts had lost, Because of her no tidings they could beare: And (for her absence made them ill apayd) They sent to haue her presence and her ayd.
64 The  of .These townes and others many to the same, Betweene the streames of Rodon and of Vare, The Empror had assignd this worthy dame, Committing them vnto her trust and care. Her noble value gat her all this fame, Because in armes her selfe she brauely bare, And so the cities vnder her subiection, This message sent, requiring her direction. 65 Which when she heard, it made her somewhat pause, Twixt yea and no she stood a pretie space, Of one side honor and her office drawes, On th'other side loue helpes to pleade the case, At last she meanes t'ensue the present cause, And fetch Rogero from th'inchanted place: And if her force cannot to this attaine, At least with him a prisner to remaine. 66 In crteous sort her answer she contriued, With gracious words, and sent away the post, She longs with her new guide to haue ariued, To that same place where both their loues were lost. But he perceiuing now she was deriued, From Clarimont that he detested most, Doth hate her sore, and feareth to the same, Lest she should know he of Maganza came. 67 There was betweene these houses auncient hate, This of Maganza, that of Clarimount, And each of them had weakned others state, By killing men in both of great account. This Pnab (a vile and wicked mate, That all his kin in vices did surmount) Meanes with himselfe this damsell to betray, Or else to slip aside and go his way. 68 And this same fancie so his head did fill, With hate, with feare, with anger and with doubt, That he mistooke the way against his will, And knew not how againe to find it out, Till in the wood he saw a little hill, Bare on the top, where men might looke about, But Bradamant such amorous passions feeles, She followeth like a spaniell at his heeles. 69 The craftie guide thus wandring in the wood, Intending now the Ladie to beguile, Said vnto her forsooth he thought it good, Sith night grew on themselues to rest a while: Here is, quoth he (and shewd which way it stood) A castle faire, and hence not many a mile: But tarry you a little here vntill I may descrie the countrey from the hill. 70 This said, he mounted to the higher ground, And standing now the highest part vpon, He cast about his eyes and looked round, To find some path whereby he might be gone. When vnawares a monstrous caue he found, And strange cut out and hollowd in the stone, Deepe thirtie cubits downe it doth descend, Hauing a faire large gate at lower end. 71 Such as great stately houses wont to haue, Out of which gate proceeds a shining light, That all within most lightsome makes the caue, And all this while on this felonious knight This noble Ladie due attendance gaue, And neuer suffred him go out of sight. She followd Pinnabel hard at his backe, Because she was afeard to leese the tracke. 72 When as this villaine traitor did espie, That his designements foolish were and vaine, Either to leaue her, or to make her die, He thought it best to trie a further traine, Perswading her for to descend and trie, What Ladies faire within the caue remaine; For why (said he) within this little space I saw a goodly damsell in the place. 73 Both rich arayd and very faire of hew, Like one of noble linage and degree, And this her fortune made me more to rew, That here against her will she seemd to be. And when I thought for to descend and vew, The cause of this her griefe to know and see, I was no sooner from my horse alighted, But with infernall hags I was afrighted. 74 The noble Bradamant that was more stout, Then warie who it was did her perswade, Hath such desire to helpe a damsell out, That straight the caue she meaneth to inuade, She finds by hap a long bough thereabout, Thereof a pole of mightie length she made, First with her sword she hewes and pares it fit, That done she lets it downe into the pit. 75 She giueth Pinnabel the bigger end, And prayes him stand aboue and hold it fast, And by the same intending to descend, Vpon her armes her whole waight she doth cast. But he that to destroy her did ntend, Doth aske if she would learne to leape a cast, And laughing, loosd his hands that were together, And wisht that all the race of them were with her. 76 Yet great good hap the gentle damsell found, As well deseru'd a mid so innocent: For why the pol strake first vpon the ground, And though by force it shiuerd all and rent, Yet were her limbes and life kept safe and sound, For all his vile and traiterous intent, Sore was the damsell mazed with the fall, As in another booke declare I shall. In thi second booke in the combat betweene Renaldo and Sacrapant,The Morall. we may obserue how the passion of loue, together with the termes that men stand vpon for their reputation & credit, are oftentimes occasions of bitter quarels: and in their sodae parting and great perplexitie, that both of them were stricken into by the false tale that the spirit told them
of Orlando, we may gather how very apt ielousie is to conceiue and beleeue euery false report. By Renaldos obedience to Charles in going on embassage notwithstanding all his priuat affaires and affections, we may take example of dutiful obedience to our lawfull Prince. And in that Pinnabel seekes to betray Bradamant, and to kill her by letting her fall into the caue, into the which she trusted he would haue let her downe safely and friendly, we may note two speciall things, one, that it is good to be warie into whose hands we commit the sauegard of our liues and state: the other, that base minded men being wickedly set on reuenge, care not by what treason or villanie they worke the ouerthrow of their enemies. For the Historie of this Canto,Storie. I will not affirme too precisely, for I find not in any credible author of Renaldos em∣bassage into England, neither is it very likely, if the King of England were then in Paris, (as in another place of this worke is affirmed) that a Peere of France should be sent hither, and not rather some English noble man sent from the King to his other subiects in England, with directions and instructions from him. That Paris and Charles himselfe were in some distresse about that time, is not vnprobable, and that the Turkes at their first arriuall preuailed very farre against the Christians, though it lasted but a while. As for Rogero, whom he toucheth in this booke, and that is so much spoken of in this wle worke, as Aeneas is in Vir∣gil, though in both rather in fabulous and in Allegoricall sence, then plainly and historicaly: yet I find it in very good Authors, that a man of that name was indeed the chiefe raiser of the house of Este the now Dukes of Perrara. For the Allegorie,Allegorie. as I noted in the first booke of Bayardo, so the same is still continued or rather repeated, namely, that the horse, by which is meant mans feruent and furious appetite, which is more plainly signified where it is said of the horse: His going onely was to this intent, To shew his master where the damsell went. So that still this vnbridled desire figured by Bayardo, leades Renaldo on foote, whereby is vnderstood sensualitie to pur∣sue Angelica, with a base desire of the most base pleasure. In the shield, whose light amazed the lookers on, and made them fall downe astonied, may be Allegorically meant the great pompes of the world, that make shining shewes in the bleared eyes of vaine people, and blind them, and make them to admire and fall downe before them, hauing indeed nothing but shining titles without vertue, like painted sheaths with leaden weapons, or like straw without the graine: either else may be meant the flaring beauties of some gorgeous women, that astonish the eyes of weake minded men, apt to receiue such louing impressions, as Atlantas shield did amaze their senses that beheld it. For the Allegorie of the horse, what is meant thereby, I reserue to another place, where I will follow it more at large then this little space will giue me leaue, and in that booke where he is more treated of. The Allusion,Allusion. to which this flying horse is referred, and from whence it is taken, is from Pegasus, the flying horse that Pindar writes of, bred of the bloud of Medusa, on which beast Bellerophon was wont to ride, flying the false accusation of Pretus wife. Also the shield it selfe seemes to allude to the fable of Medusas head, that turned men into stones.
THE THIRD BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Faire Bradamant was falne in Marlins caue, Melissa meetes her there her ancient friend, And there to her she perfite notice gaue, Of such braue men as should from her descend. She told her where she should Rogero haue, Whom old Atlanta had in prison pend, And from Brunello how to take the ring, That vnto libertie her deere might bring. 1 OH that my head were so well storde with skill, Of such a noble subiect fit to treat, Oh that my wits were e∣quall to my will, To frame a phrase fit for so high conceat: Ye muses that do hold the sacred hill, Inspire my heart with flame of learned heat, While I presume in base and lowly verse, The names of glorious Princes to reherse. 2 Such Princes as excell all Princes far, In all the gifts of bodie and of mind, Temprat in peace, victorious eake in war, Themselues most noble, come of noble kind. And such (except my guesse do greatly arre) As are by heau'ns eternall doome assignd, In wealth, in fame, in rule and in prosperitie, To liue themselues, their children and posteritie. 3 Nor can I now their seuerall actes most rare, Atcheeud by eu'rie one of them recite, No though my verse with Virgils might compare, Or I as well as Homer could endite: With their great praise, great volumes filled are, With large discourse, by them that stories write. I onely meane to show what was foreshowne, Long er their persons or their deeds were knowne. 4 But first of Pinnabel a word to speake, Who as you heard with traiterous intent, The bonds of all humanitie did break, For which er long himselfe was after shent, Thus while base minds their wrōgs do basely wreak They do that once that often they repent, And curse that time,Horace dum pe∣nas odio per vi festinas inulto. a thousand times, too late When they pursude their vnreuenged hate. 5 With fainting heart, (for sin is full of feare,) By stealing steps from hence he doth depart,Sentence. And as he goes he prieth here and there, His fearefull looke bewrayes his guiltie hart,Sentence: Ouid: beu quam diffi∣cile est crimen nō prodere vultu? Not yet his dread doth moue him to forbeare, To heape more sin vpon this ill desart. Appald with feare, but toucht with no remorse, Supposing she was slaine, he takes her horse. 6 But let him go vntill another time, For I do meane hereafter you shall heare,Booke 22. sta. 7. How he was dealt with, when his double crime, In secret wrought, most open did appeare, Now vnto Bradamant I bend my time, Who with her fall, was yet of heauie cheare: And had bene taught a gamball for the nonce, To giue her death and buriall at once. 7 Now when she came vnto her selfe againe, And had recouerd memorie and sence, She gets her on her feete, although with paine, In mind to seeke some way to get fro thence, When loe, before her face she seeth plaine, A stately portall built with great expence, And next behind the same she might descrie, A larger roome and fairer to the eye.
8 Merlins tombe.This was a church most solemne and deuout, That stands on marble pillars small and round, And raisd by art on arches all about, That made ech voyce to yeeld a double sound. A lightsome lampe that neuer goeth out, Did burne on altar standing in the ground: That though the rooms were large & wide in space, The lampe did serue to lighten all the place. 9 The noble damsell full of reu'rent feare, When as her selfe in sacred place she sees, (As one that still a godly minde did beare,) Christ our saui∣our.Begins to pray to him vpon her knees, Whose holy side was perst with cruell speare, And who to saue our liues his owne did leese: And while she stayes deuoutly at her prayre, The sage Melissa doth to her repaire. 10 Her gowne vngyrt, her haire about her hed, Much like a priest or prophetesse arraid, And in her booke a little while she red, And after thus vnto the damsell said: O thou by Gods appointment hither led, O Bradamant, most wise and worthy maid, I long haue looked here for this thy comming, Foretold thereof by prophet Merlines cunning. 11 The descriptiō of Merlins tombe, out of the book of king Arthur, but this is poetic all licence to faine is to be in France, for it is in Wales.Here is the tombe that Merline erst did make, By force of secret skill and hidden art, In which sometimes the Ladie of the lake, That with her beautie had bewitcht his hart, Did make him enter fondly for her sake, From whence he neuer after could depart, And he was by a woman ouer reached, That vnto others prophesied and preached. 12 His carkas dead within this stone is bound, But with dead corse the liuing soule doth dwell: Til doomes day.And shall vntill it here the trumpet sound, That brings reward of doing ill or well. His voyce doth liue, and answer and expound, And things both present past and future tell, Resoluing men of eu'rie doubtfull case, That for his counsell come vnto this place. 13 About a month or little more or lesse, It is since I repaird to Merlins graue, Of him about the studie I professe, Some precepts and instructions to haue. And (for I willing was I must confesse) To meete you at your comming to this caue For which he did prefixe this certaine day, This moued me of purpose here to stay. 14 Duke Ammons daughter silent stands and still, The while the wise Melyssa to her spake, Astonished at this vnusuall skill, And doubting if she were a sleepe or wake, A modest shame with grace her eyes doth fill, With which downe cast, this answer she doth make: Alas what good or merite is in me That prophets should my comming so foresee? 15 And glad of this aduenture vnexpected, She followeth her guide with great delight, And straight she saw the stately toombe erected, Of marble pure that held his bones and sprite, And (that which one would little haue suspected) The verie marble was so cleare and bright, That though the sunne no light vnto it gaue, The toombe it selfe did lighten all the caue. 16 For whether be the nature of some stone, A darke some place with lightsomnes to fill, Or were it done by magike art alone, Or else by helpe of Mathematike skill, To make transparencies to meete in one, And so conuey the sunne beames where you will: But sure it was most curious to behold, Set forth with carued workes and guilt with gold. 17 Now when the damsell was approched nyre, To this strange toombe where Merlins bones were plast, Forth of the stones that shine like flaming fire, His liuely voyce such speeches out doth cast: Let fortune euer fauour thy desire, O Bradamant thou noble maid and chast, From out whose wombe an issue shall proceed, That all the world in glorie shall exceed. 18 The noble blood that came of ancient Troy,In the  ucles of  they  gain gr from the  Pri By the  these f  us vnder East, W North  South. By two cleare springs in thee togither mixt, Shall breed the flowre, the iewell and the ioy, Of all on whom the sunne his beames hath fixt, Twixt those that heat, and those that cold annoy, From Tage to Inde, Danub and Nile betwixt, Emp'rors and kings, and dukes and lords for ay, Of this thy linage carrie shall the sway. 19 And many a Captaine braue and worthy Knight, Shall issue from this stocke, that shall restore By warlike feates the glorie shining bright, That Italy possessed heretofore. And magistrates to maintaine peace and right, As Numa and Augustus did before, To cherish vertue, vice so to asswage, As shall to vs bring backe the golden age. 20 Wherefore sith God hath by predestination, Appointed thee to be Rogeros wife, And means to blesse thine heirs and generation, With all the graces granted in this life, Persist thou firme in thy determination, And stoutly ouercome each storme of strife, And worke his worthy punishment and paine, That doth thy liues delight from thee detaine. 21 This said: the prophet Merline holds his peace, And giues Melissa time to worke her will, Who when she did perceiue the voice to cease, She purposeth by practise of her skill, To shew the damsell part of that increase, That should with fame the world hereafter fill. And for this end she calls a great assemble, Ofsprights that might their persons all resemble.
22 Who straight by words of secret vertue bound, In numbers great vnto the caue repaire, Of whence I know not, whether vnder ground, Or else of those that wander in the aire: Then thrise she drawes about a circle round, And thrise she hallowes it with secret praire. Then opens she a triple clasped booke, And softly whispering in it she doth looke. 23 This done she takes the damsell by the hand Exhorting her she should not be afraid, And in a circle causeth her to stand, And for her more securitie and aid, And as it were for more assured band, Vpon her head some characters she laid. Then hauing done her due and solemne rites, She doth beginne to call vpon the sprites. 24 Behold a crew of them come rushing in, In sundrie shapes with persons great and tall, And now they filled all the roome within, So readily they came vnto her call, When Bradamant to feare did straight begin, Her heart was cold, her colour waxed pall. But yet the circle kept her like a wall, So that she needed not to feare at all. 25 Howbeit Melyssa caused them be gone, From thence vnto the next adioyning caue, And thence to come before them one by one, The better notice of their names to haue, That at more leysure they may talke thereon, When as occasion so may seeme to craue. Although (quoth she) this short time cannot serue To speake of eu'rie one as they deserue. 26 Lo here the first thy first begotten sonne, That beares thy fauour and his fathers name, By whom the Lombards shall in fight be wonne, To Desiderius their kings great shame, Who shall at Pontyr make the streames to runne, With blood in fields adioyning to the same, And shall reuenge the deeds and minds vnpure, Of such as did his fathers fall procure. 27 And for this noble act among the rest, The Emperour shall giue him in reward, The honours great of Calaon and Est, By which his familie shalbe prefard. The next Vberto is whose valiant brest, Shalbe vnto the holy church a gard. Defending it with valiant heart and hand, To th'honour of Helperyan armes and land. 28 Alberto he is nam'd that third comes in, Whose triumphs are most famous eu'rie where, Then his sonne Hugo that did Millain winne, And for his crest two vipers vs'd to beare, Next Atso is and next to him of kinne, That erst of Lombardie the crowne shall weare, Then Albertasso by whose meanes are wonne, The Beringers both father and the sonne. 29 To him shall Othons fauour so encline, He shall in marridge giue to him his daughter, Now Hugo comes againe, o happie line,Hugo, ij. And happie man that sau'd so great a slaughter, When at Christ vicars rule Rome did repine, He daunteth them and so restord them after: The which by wit without the dint of sword, He shall effect in Othons time the thurd, 30 Now Fulko comes that to his brother gaue,Folco. His land in Italy which was not small, And dwelt in Almany his land to saue Of Samsony, that vnto him did fall A duke dome great that did with Castels braue, Accrew to him for want of issue male. By him that noble house is held and cherished, That but for him would be extinct and perished. 31 Then cometh Atso that misliketh warre, But yet his sonnes Bertold and Albertasse,Atso Bertaldo Albertasso of Renaldo. With second Hnrie shalbe still at iarre, And bring the Dutchmen to a wofull passe. Next young Renaldo shining like a starre, Shalbe vnto the church a wall of brasse, And worke the vtter ouerthrow and losse, Of wicked Fredrike named Barbarosse, 32 Behold another Atso shall possesse,Atso. Verona with a stately territorie, Of Oton and Honorius no lesse, Shalbe a marques made to his great glorie, It would be long their names all to expresse, That shall protect the sacred consistorie, And in most valerous and marshall manner, Display and eke defend the Churches banner. 33 Obyso next and Folko you may view,Obyso, Folco. With Henries two, the father and the sonne, Both Guelfs that frutfull Humbrya shall subdew, And keepe the dukedome there by conquest won. Behold him that the good state doth renew, Of Italy that late was quite vndone. Cald Atso sift that brauely ouerthrew, The cruell Esselino and him slew. 34 That cruell Esselyno that was thought,Atso. To haue beene gotten by some wicked diuell, That neuer any goodnesse had beene taught, But sold his soule to sinne and doing euill, Comparing with the cruell acts he wrought, Fierce Nero were but myld and Sylla ciuell. Beside this Atso shall in time to come The powre of second Fredrike ouercome. 35 And then he shall his brother Albandrine, Vnto the Florentines for monie gage, And Othon with the faction Gebellyn, He shall suppresse amid the furious rage, And raise the church, nor letting it decline, But spending to defend it all his age. For which good seruice he shall iustly merite; The dukedome of Ferara to inherite
36 Next him Renaldo now ensu'th, whose lot Shalbe at Naples to be made away, A death his verrtuous deeds deserued not, But wo to them that guiltlesse blood betray. Now followeth a'worthy crue and knot, Whose acts alone to tell would spend a day: .Oso, Nicolas and Alabrandme, Whose noble deeds shall honour much their line. 37 2.Then Nicolas is he that next ensuth, That rul'd in tender yeares both neere and farre, That findes and eke reuengeth their vntruth, That sought his state by ciuill strife to marre. The sports and exercises of his youth, Are blowes and fights, and dangers great & warre, Which makes that ere to manly state he came, For martiall deeds he gets the onely name. 38 Lyonell.Lo Lyonell the glorie of his age, Maintaining peace and quiet all his time, And keeping that with ease by wisedome sage, To which some others by much paine do clime. That fettred furie and rebuked rage, That locks vp Mars in wals of stone and lime: That all his wit, his care and trauell bent, To make his subiects liue in state content. 39 Hercules.Now Hercles comes, an Hercules indeed, Whose deeds shall merite euer during fame: That by his paines his countries ease shall breed, And put his enemies to flight and shame. Sharpe to deuise, to execute with speed, Both stout t'attempt, and patient to the same, No prince shall euer rule his countrie better, No prince had euer countrie more his detter. 40 Not onely that he shall their moorish grounds, By great expence to pasture sirme reduce, Not that the towne with wall enuiron round, And store with things behoostull to their vse, Not that when warre in ech place shall abound, He shall maintaine them peaceably in truce, Not that he shall according to their asking Disburden them of payments and of tasking. 41 But that he shall more and aboue all thease, Leaue them behind him such a worthy race, As search within the circuit of the seas, You shall not find two to supplie their place. So shall the one the other striue to please, So shall the one the others loue imbrace, As may for louing brotherly regard, With Castor and with Pollux be compard. 42 The elder of these two Alfonso hight, Alfonso. Hyppolito.The next of them Hyppolito we call, Both passing stout and valiant in fight, Both passing wise and prouident withall: And both in due defence of countries right, Shall seeme a bulwarke and a brazen wall: They both shall haue of enemies good store, They both shall still subdue them euermore. 43 Their mother (if I may a mother name,) One more like Progne and Medea fell, Vnto her endlesse infamie and shame, Against her sonne Alfonso shall rebell, And ioyne with Venice force (for this to blame) Though for the same ere long they paid full well, For those they thought to hurt, they did this good, To make the groūd more fruitfull with their blood. 44 Nor far fro thence the Spanish souldier hired, By pastors purse and in that pastors pay, That with a forcible assault aspired, To take a sort, and eke the captaine slay. But loe he comes and they perforce retyred, And haue so short a pleasure of this pray, Scarse one of them in life is left abiding, To carrie notice of so heauie tiding. 45 His wit and valour shall him so aduance, To haue the honour of Romama field, Where by his meanes vnto the force of France, The Pope and Spaniards, forced are to yeeld: And there in Christian blood, ò fatall chance, Shall horses swimme, such number shall be keeld, Nor shall not men enough aliue remaine, To burie those shall be in battell slaine. 46 The while his brother vnder Card'nals cap, Shall couer, nay shall thew a prudent head, Hyppolito (I meane) who shall haue hap, With band of men but small (yet wisely led) To giue to the Venetians such a clap, As few the like in stories haue bene read. To take three times fiue Gallies at one ride, And barkes and boates a thousand more beside. 47 Behold two Sygismonds both wise and graue, Alfonso next, whose fame is talkt of rife, With his fiue sonnes, then Hercles that shall haue The king of France his daughter to his wife, That towards him, her selfe shall to behaue,Hy Shall make him liue most happie all his life. Hyppolito it is that now comes in, Not least for praise and glorie of his kin. 48 Next Francis named third, Alfonsos two,Fran Alf With many others worthy of renowne, The which to name might finde one worke to do, From Phoebus rising to his going downe. Now therefore if you will consent thereto, I here will end and send the spirits downe: To this the worthy damsell said not nay, And straight the spirits vanisht all away. 49 Then Bradamant, that all well marked had, Of whom her selfe should be the ancient mother, Did say, to learne she would be very glad, What two those were that differed from the other, That came with backward steps and lookt so sad, Vpon the good Alfonso and his brother. Melyssa sight, misliking that suggestion, That moued her to aske so grieuous question.
50 And then as in a trance these words she spake, O thou more worthy sonne of worthy sire, They are thy bloud, on them compassion take, Let grace allwage, though iustice kindle ire: Then vnto Bradamant as new awake, I must (said she) denie you this desire, I say no more, content you with the sweet, For you this sower morsell is not meet. 51 Tomorrow when the Sunne at breake of day, With light shall dim the light of eu'ry starre: I meane my selfe to guide you on your way, So as I will be sure you shall not arre. The place whereas your loue is forc'd to stay, Is from the salt sea shore not very farre: That were you past a mile beyond this wood, The other way would easie be and good. 52 Of this nights stay the damsell was content, And in the caue with her she doth remaine, And most thereof in Merlins toombe she spent, Whose voice with talke did her still entertaine: Emboldning her to giue her free consent, To loue where she should sure be lou'd againe. Now gan the messenger of day to cro, When as her guide and she away did go. 53 The way they went was darke and vnaccessible, By secret vaults and hollowes of the hill, To find it out had bene a thing impossible, But with a guide of knowledge great and skill: At last they came vnto a path more passible, By which they cease not to ascend, vntiil They quite had left the darke and lothsome place, And saw the beames of Phoebus chearefull face. 54 And while that vp this hill they slowly stalke, With pausing panting oft, and taking wind, To make lesse wearie seeme their weane walke, Melyssa still doth store of matter find, And now of this, and then of that doth talke, But chiefly she the damsell puts in mind, Of her Rogero, how he had bene trained Into the prison where he now remained. 55 Atlanta that Magician strange is he That holdeth him (I trust) vnto his cost, But had you Pallas strength or Mars (quoth she) And eke of armed men a mightie host, Yet to attempt by force to set him free, Your trauell and your labour all were lost. Art must be wonne by art, and not by might, Force cannot free your welbeloued knight. 56 For first the castle mounted is on hie, Impregnable with wals all ouer steeld, And next, the horse he rides hath wings to flie, And gallops in the aire as in the field And last he dazleth eu'ry mortalleie, By hidden force of his enchanted shield, With light whereof mens senses are so dazed, With sight thereof they fall downe all amazed. 57 In all the world one onely meane hath beene, And is yet still to worke so rare a feat, A ring there is which from an Indian Queene, Was stoine sometime, of price and vertue great: This ring can make a man to go vnseene,The ring was stolne from Angelica. This ring can all inchantments quite defeat: King Agramant hath sent his secretarie, Vnto Rogero this same ring to carie. 58 Brunello is his name that hath the ring, Most leud and false, but politike and his wise,A machiaui secretarie. And put in trust especiall by his king, With it Rogeros safetie to deuise: Which sith I wish not he, but you should bring, To bind him to you by this enterprise, And for I would not haue the Turke protect him, Because I know he greatly doth affect him. 59 Do therefore this, when you do meete this man, Whose markes I wish in memory you beare. His statute is two cubits and a span, His head is long and gray, and thin of haire, His nose is short and flat, his colour wan, With beetle brow, eyes watrie not with teare, His beard growes on his face without all stint, And to conclude, his looke is all a squint. 60 Now when as you this comely man shall meet, As sure you shall within a day or two, You may with curteous words him seeme to greet, And tell him partly what you meane to do: But speake not of the ring although you see't, For so you may the matter all vndo, Then he great courtesie to you will offer, And straight his companie to you will proffer. 61 But when vnto the castle you come nie, Then see you set vpon him on the way, And take away the ring and make him die, Nor giue him any time, lest he conuay The ring into his mouth, and so thereby Out of your sight he vanish quite away. The worthy damsell makes her speeches well, And so the one the other bids farewell. 62 Next day she hapt Brunello to espie, She knew him straight, she found him at her Inne, She growes to question with him by and by, And he to lie doth by and by beginne, And she dissembles too, and doth d. nie Her countrey, stocke and name, and sex and kinne. Brunello pleasantly doth talke and tipple, Not knowing he did halt before a cripple. 63 Now when they almost broken had their fast, She marking more his fingers then his eies, When much good talk between them two had past, The most whereof were false and forged hes, Behold mine host came vnto them in hast, And told them newes that made them sooner rise: But here I meane to make a little pause, Before I tell what was thereof the cause.
may note in Bradamant a worthy example of deuotion, that in her sodaine mishap, had recourse . In the great praise of Rogero and Bradamant his posterittie, noblemen and gentlemen of good houses may take  father vertu us ancestors, and thinke themselves beloved of God, and blessed with great temporall blessings,  not from their worthy sure fathers. Also we may note, that commonly good parents bring good children. Melyssa brings Bradamant by intricate wayes from the cave, and instructs her how to confound Atlan∣tes  good and godly counsel makes men overcome all troubles, and enables them to withstand all wic∣  that Bradamant dissembles with Brunello, we may gather a lesson, which in this age we be too apt , name, to dissimble with dissemblers. is diners, Storie. it diuers, and therefore I meane to note the principallest of them, as far as my litle reading : and first for Merlin (called the English Prophet) I know many are hard of beleef, and think it a meeresable that is written both of his birth, of his life, and chiefly of his death: for his birth, indeed I beleeue not that he  by an Incubus, yet the possibilitie thereof might be proued by this place: Bellarminde rather held with the great clerk Bellarmine, that such birth is either impos∣sible, or teacher to the great Antichrist when he shall come. But concerning his life, that there was such a man, a great  to King Arthur, I hold it certaine: that he had a castle in shire called after him Merlinsburie, (now Marl∣,  likely, the old ruines whereof are yet seene in our highway from Bath to London. Also the great stones of  and number, that he scattered about the place, have given occasion to some to report, and others  wrought by his great spill in Magicke, as likewise the great stones at Stonage on Salis∣, , which the ignorant people beleeue be brought out of Ireland: and indeed the wiser sort can rather maruel at,  they were set there. But for the manner of his death, and place of his buriall, it is so diuersly written  countreys chalienged, as a man may be bolder to say that all of them are saise, then that any of them  will have him buried in Cornewall, some in Wales (where they say he was borne,) Ariosto by Poeticall li∣sence,  or him in France, and the fiction of the tombe is taken of a former fiction in King Arthurs booke, , that Merlin being exceedingly in loue with the Ladie of the Lake (to brag of his cunning) shewed her one day  deuices of his, a  that he had made of sufficient capacitie to hold him and his wife, and withall  a charme, which being pronounced in an order that he shewed her, the toombe would close, and neuer againe be opened. She having no mind to him, or rather indeed flatly hating him, grew on the sodaine very gamesome with him,  him some extraordinary kindnesse, and in the end for want of better pastime would needs perswade him to  would hold them both, and so offered her selfe to go in with him: he suspecting nothing lesse then her malicious purpose, went imply in, and straight she shut him in with the couer, and bound it so fast with the charme, as it will ne∣uer . This I thought good to set donne for expounding the II. Staffe of this booke the plainer, not that any matter here  worth the noting, without it be to warne men not to tell such dangerous secrets to women, except they  to imitate the wisedome of Cato in repenting it after. And thus much for Merlin. The rest of the booke  a true historie, and is a repetition of the pedegrue of Alfonso Duke of Ferrara, with some briefe touches  of their great exploits in Italie: the exposition of all which, I will not pursue at length, as being  the learned this haue read those stories, and not very pleasant to the ignorant, nor familiar to our nation.  some very few of them, such as I thinke most necessary, and omit the rest, or referre those  to informe themselues to some authors where they may reade it more at large. Rogero  Bradamant, and this Rogero so much spoken of in this whole booke, came with Charles the great into , where among other Venetian captaines that holpe to suppresse Desiderius king of Lombardie: this Rogero  so good seruice, that the Emperour in reward gaue him and his heires the honors of Calaon and Este, neare . The rme came to be the crest of the Vicounts of Millaine by this occasion: Otho a valiant man of that family, in the  that Gedfrey of Bullen made to Ierusalem, called the holy warres, did fight at the siege of Ierusalem hand to hand with Voluce,  of the , and sue him, whose to make himselfe more terrible, did carry on his crest a huge vi∣per deucuring of a . Euer since in memory hereof that house carries the viper. Betingats  name there were three, but the chiefe man (meant here) was nephew to the first, and came after the death of  grandfather into Italie, and preuailed so farre that he was proclaimed Augustus, and made his sonne King of I  with title King of Romanes: but Agapitus then Bishop of Rome, called in Otho King of the Almaines I deliuer Italie from the ranny of the Beringars, who ouercame them, and used them after with great clemency, till afterward the feeling bhee fan usurping Pope ttrannize as before, the same Otho came againe, and in fine desir , in which it seemes Albertazzo did some great seruice. Of Fruderike Barbarossa Sabellicus a riteth, that he maintained Octauius Antipapa (or vsurping Pope) against Alexander,  great in Italy in Italy, and much bloodshed, and that the Romanes were so crushed in one battel that he  they would neuer be able againe to hold up their heads. But after this, Barbarossa both prosecuted by his enemies, and  with the plague in his camp, was glad to fly into Germany: and comming back with new forces, , the confederats unquished and , and driuen in the end to craue Pope Alexanders fauour. Of this Alexander  make great bot how they restored him, and haue the story ingrauen or painted in one of their  Churches for the Pope saying that her in disgussed aparell, and lining closely in the towne like a poore Priest,  Crano discouered him, and made him, be greatly honoured by the whole city, by whom as is a aforesaid . Guelss and Ghebellines is spoken of (though it would ask a long discourse to tel the original
how it first grew) yet somewhat I must needs say of it: Redate of the  Messia de viris lee. the faction first rose of a  between two Dutchman in Italie being naturall brothers, though unnaturally falling out, and either drawing parties it grew in the end to such a fation. as neither Sylla and Marius, or Caesar and Pompey in Rome, nor ours of Lancaster and Yorke in England, nor any other growne of religion, or what cause soeuer besides, hath bene more violent. Essellino a notable tyrant, whom one Musatto a Padoan in a tragedie he wrote, affirmes to haue bin gotten by the di∣uell: His crueltie was such, he would cut up women quicke with child, and burned at one time 12000 men aliue. He was after taken prisoner, and died of famine. Of Hercules of Este, as the praises are great he giues him, so it appeares in Guychardine, they are well deserued. For when Charles the eight came into Italie like a thunder (as writers of those times call him) this Hercules with his pru∣dent cariage so ordered himselfe, as he and his countrie escaped that tempest. Concerning the victorie that this Hippolito had of the Venetians, I shall haue more occasion to speake of it in the 40. booke. The two that Bradamant asketh Melyssa of, were brothers to Alfonso Duke of Ferrara, their names are Ferdinand and Lulio: the storie is this. It happened that being all yong men, Hippolito and one of these yonger brothers fel both in loue with one Curtesan, but she entertained the loue of the yonger with most kindnes; whereupon Hippolito asked her one day very instantly, what it was that moued her to prefer his brother asore him; and she said it was his beautifull eie: wherupon Hippolito made some of his pages to thrust out his eies. Notwithstanding he afterward recouered his eies, and finding no redresse by complaining to Alfonso, he and one other brother conspired to kill him; but at the time of the execution, their hearts failed them, or their minds altered: and after the conspiracie being discouered, they were kept in perpetuall prison. And in this he alludes to that of Marcellus in Virgil, Luctus ac quaeretuorum.
THE FOVRTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Bradamant ouercomes the false Magician, And sets Rogero free, who by and by Leapt on a horse not knowing his condition, Who bare him quite from sight of any eye. Renaldo sailed as he had commission, To England ward, but borne by wind awrie, At Callidon in Scotland he arriued, When faire Geneuras soule death was contriued. 1 is rather an  then a  of dissem∣.THough he that useth craft and simulation, Doth seldome bend his acts to honest ends, But rather of an euill in∣clination, His wit and skill to others mischiefe bends: Yet sith in this our world∣ly habitation, We do not euer dwell among our frends, Dissembling doubtlesse oftentimes may saue Mens liues, their same and goods, and all they haue. 2 If man by long acquaintance and great proofe, and neces∣ as that of  in Tar∣ time to  himselfe the tyrant. .To trust some one man seant can be allured, To whom he may in presence or aloofe, Vnfold the secrets of his mind assured: Then doth this damsell merite no reproofe, That with Brunello (to all fraud inured) Doth frame her selfe to counterfeit a while, For to deceiue deceiuers is no guile. 3 Now while these two did to conferre begin, She to his fingers hauing still an eie, The host and other seruants of the Inne, blasing  for the most  cause great .Came on the sodaine with a wofull crie, And some did gaze without, and some within, (As when men see a Comet in the skie) The cause of this their wondring and their crying, Was that they saw an armed horseman flying. 4 And straight by th'host and others they were told, How one that had in Magicke art great skill, Not farre from thence had made a stately hold, Of shining steele, and plac'd it on a hill, To which he bringeth Ladies yong and old, And men and maids according to his will, And when within that castle they haue beene, They neuer after haue bene heard or seene. 5 No sooner can he spie a pretie maide, But straight he takes her vp into the aire, The which his custome makes them all afraid, That either are or thinke that they be faire. Those hardie knights that went to giue them aide, Of which sort many hither did repaire,Simile, Horace: Omnia te aducrusum spe∣ctantia nulla restrosum. Went like the beasts to the sicke Lions den, For all went in, but none returnd agen. 6 This tale in worthy Bradamant did breed A kind of pleasure and confused ioy, In hope (which after she performd indeed) The sight of her beloued to enioy, She praid the host procure a guide with speed, As though each little stay did breed annoy: She sweares that in her heart she longd to wrastle With him that kept the captiues in his castle. 7 Because that you sir knight should want no guide, (Brunello said) I will my selfe be he, I know the way, and somewhat haue beside, By which may fortune you may pleasur'd be: He meant the ring offorce and vertue tride, Although he meant not she the same should see. Great thanks (quoth she) that you will take ye paine, In hope hereby the precious ring to gaine.
8 Thus each from other hiding their intent, They forward set like friends by breake of day, Brunello sometime foremost of them went, Sometime behind, as chanced on the way. Now had they certaine houres in trauell spent, When they arriued where the castle lay, Whereas mount Pyrene stands aboue the plaine, So high as may discouer France and Spaine. 9 When is the castle did in sight appeare, So strange, so faire, so stately, and so hie, In which that knight whom the esteem'd so deare, With many others, prisoner did lie. She thought her finest time drew very neare, To take the ring, and make Brunello die. Wherefore with open force she doth assaile him, Whose strength with age and feare soon gan to saile him. 10 Her meaning was the Caitise to haue kild, But vnto that her noble heart said nay, Small praise would come from bloud so basely spild, She meanes to get the ring another way: But first the bound him wher he wild or nild, And though with teares he did for pittie pray, Yet lest she him vnto a tree fast tide, And with the ring away the straight did ride. 11 And being in the greene fast by the towre, Straight (as the fashion was) her horne she blew, Out came that armed knight that present houre, And seeing there a challenger in vew, He seemeth to assault her with great powre, But by the ring she all his falshood knew: She saw he carride neither sword nor speare, Nor any weapon that one need to feare. 12 He onely carride at his saddle bow, A shield all wrapped in a crimson case, And read a booke by which he made to show Some strange and strong illusions in the place: And many that these cunnings did not know, He had dece'd and tane in little space. And could both swords and lances to appeare, When neither word nor lances them were neare. 13 But yet the beast he rode was not of art, But gotten of a Griffeth and a Mate, And like a Griffeth had the former part, As wings and head, and clawes that hideous are, And passing strength and force and ventrous hart, But all the rest may with a horse compare. Such beasts as these the hils of Ryfee yeeld, Though in these parts they haue bin seene but seeld. 14 This monster rare from far theft regions brought This rare Magician ord ed with such skill, That in one month or little more he tought The sauage monster to obey his will: And though by comurations strange he wrought, In other things his fancie to fulfill, (As cunning men sultrie each strange conclusion) Yet in this Griffeth horse was one collusion. 15 The Ladie faire protected by the ring, Found all his sleights (although she seemd not so) Her purpose to the better passe to bring, And first she seemes to ward a comming blow, And then to strike, and oft to curse the wing, That carride still away her flying so, And sith to fight on horsebacke did not boote, She seemes as in a rage to light on foote. 16 The Necromancer, as his manner is, Disclosed at the last his shining shield, Supposing that the vertue would not misse, To make her (as it had done others) yeeld: So haue I seene a craftie cat ere this,Simile. Play with a silly mouse o house or field, And let it go a while for sport and play, But kill at last and beare it quite away. 17 I say that he the cat, the other mise, Resembled had in euery former fight, But now this ring had made this one so wise, That when she saw the strange enchanted light, She falleth not of force, but of deurie,Sit at  arte. As though she were astoned at the sight, And lay like one of life and sense bereaued, By which the poore Magician was deceaued. 18 For straight he lighted from the flying horse, To take her as he had done many mo, The shield and booke in which was all his force, He left behind him at his saddle bow, But thinking to haue found a senslesse corse, Amazd and dead, he finds it nothing so, For vp the starts, so quite the case was altred, That with the cord he brought, himselfe was haltred. 19 And when with those selfe bonds she had him tide, By which he thought before her to haue snared, She strong and yong, he witherd, old and dride, Alas an vnmeet match to be compared, Forthwith determining he should haue dide, To strike his head from shoulders she prepared, Till she was mou'd to mercie with his teares, And with the sight of white and hoaty haires. 20 For when he saw his force was ouerlaid, And that her strength was not to be withstood, O pardon life thou heauenly wight (he said)Sentence. No honour comes by spilling aged blood. Which words to mercie mou'd the noble maid, Whose mind was alwayes merciful and good. Then why he built the castle she demanded, And what he was to tell her him commanded. 21 With wosull words the old man thus replide, I made this castle for no ill intention, For couetice or any sault beside, Or that I loued rapine or contention, But to preuent a danger shall betide A gentle knight, I framed this inuention: Who as the heauens hath shewd me in short season, Shall die in Christian state by silthy treason.
22 Rogero named is this worthy youth, Whose good and safetie saine I would aduance, My name Atlante is to tell you truth, I bred him of a child, till his hard chance, And valiant mind (that breeds alas my ruth) With Agramant entist him into France. And I that (like mine owne child) alway lou'd him, From France and danger saine would haue remou'd him. 23 By art and helpe of many a hellish else, This castle for Rogero I did build, And tooke him as I meant to take thy selfe, But that with greater art I was beguild, From daintie fare, and other worldly pelse, Because he should not thinke himselfe exild, For company I brought him worthy wights, Both men and women, Ladies faire and Knights. 24 They haue all plentie of desired pleasure, I bend to their contentment all my care, For them I spend my trauell and my treasure, For musicke, clothes and games, and daintiesare, As hart can think, and mouth require with measure, Great store for them within this castle are. Well had I traueld, well my time bestowed, But you haue mard the fruits that I had sowed, 25 But if your mind be gracious as your looke, If stonie heart bide not in tender brest, Behold I offer thee my shield and booke, And flying horse, and grant my iust request, Some two or three, or all the Knights I tooke, I giue thee free, let but Rogero rest: Whose health whose wealth, whose sasty and welfare Haue euer bene (and euer shall) my care. 26 Your care (quoth she) is very ill bestowne, In thraldome vile to keepe a worthy wiglit: As for your gifts you offer but mine owne, Sith by my conquest you are mine in right. Those dangers great you say to be foreshowne, entence.  The. Moore. nque prescieris sands est nulla culeas. Quid scure iuuat  patiere ? And vpon him in time to come must light, With figures cast and heauenly planets vewed, Cannot be knowne or cannot be eschewed. 27 How can you others harmes foresee so farre, And not preuent your owne that were so nie? I certaine shall suppose your art doth arre, And for the rest the end the truth shall trie I now intend your matter all to marre, And that before these bonds I will vntie, You shall set free and loose your prisners all, Whom in this castle you detained thrall. 28 When as the poore old man was so distrest, That needs he must for feare and dread obay, bold opini as coniurers nd spirits in  or hollow ones, & by that orke their vange effects. And that this same imperious dames behest, Could neither beare deniall nor delay, To do as she commands he deemes it best, And therefore takes th'inchanted place away. He breaks some hollow suming pots of stone, And straight the wais and buildings all were gone. 29 This done, himselfe eke vanisht out of sight, As did the castle at that present hower, Then Ladies, Lords, and many a worthy knight, Were straight releast from his enchanted power: And some there were had taken such delight In those so stately lodgings of that tower, That they esteemd that libertie a paine, And wisht that pleasant slauery againe. 30 Here were at freedome set among the rest, Gradasso, Sacrapant, two kings of name, Prasyldo and Iroldo that from th'Est Into this country with Renaldo came. Here Bradamant found him she loued best, Her deare Rogero of renowned same, Who after certaine notice of her had, Did shew to see her he was very glad. 31 As one of whom he great account did make, And thought himselfe to her most highly bound, Since stie put off her helmet for his sake, And in her head receiu'd a grieuous wound, Twere long to tell what toile they both did take, Both night and day each other to haue found, But till this present time they had no meeting, Nor giu'n by word nor writing any greeting. 32 Now when before him present he beheld Her that from danger had him sole redeemed, His heart with so great ioy and mirth was fild, The happiest wight on earth himselfe he deemed: And cristall teares from her faire eyes distild, Embracing him whom she most deare esteemed. As oft we see a strong and sodaine passion, Bring forth effects quite of another fashion. 33 The Griffeth horse the while vpon the plaine, Stood with the target at his saddle bow, The damsell thought to take him by the raine,Simile. But he then mounteth vp, and like a crow Ghast by a dog forthwith descends againe, And standeth still, or soareth very low, And when that some come nie in hope to take him, He flies away that none can ouertake him. 34 But neare vnto Rogero soone he staid, Which by Atlantas care was sole procured, Who for Rogeros danger was afraid, And thinkes his safetie neuer well assured, Wherefore he sent this monster for his aid, And by this meanes from Europe him allured, To his welfare his cares and thoughts he bendeth, To succor and preserue him he intendeth. 35 Rogero from his horse forthwith alighted, (The horse he rode on was Frontyno named) And with this flying horse was so delighted, That though he saw him wanton and vntamed, Yet vp he leapt, and soone was sore afrighted, He finds he would not to his mind be framed, For in the aire the Griffeth soard so hie, As doth the Faulcon that at sowle doth slie.
36 The damsell saire that now beheld her deare, Borne farre away by force of monsters wing, Was sorowfull and of so heauie cheare, to heaven by an  That to their course her wits she scant could bring. The tale of Ganymed the once did heare, Whom Poets saine to tend the heauenly king, She doubts may true of her Rogero be, That was as comely and as faire as he. 37 As long as cysight could at all preuaile, So long she viewd him still in all and part: But when his distance made the fight to saile, At least she followd him in mind and hart, To sob, to sigh, to weepe, lament and waile, She neuer leaues these chances ouerthwart. And seeing plaine her loue and shee were parted, She tooke Frontyno and away departed. 38 Now was Rogero mounted vp so hie, He seemd to be a mote or little pricke, For no man could distinguish him by eie, Except his sight were passing sine and quicke: All southerly this Griffeth horse doth flie, (Was neuermade that feru'd man such a tricke) But let him on his way, God speed him well, For of Renaldo somewhat I must tell. 39 Who all the while with raging tempest striued, Borne where himselfe nor no man else did know, By cruell stormie winds and weather driued, That daye; and nights surceased no: to blow: At last in Scotland weary he arriued, mou ferrest Sotland. Where woods of Callidony first do show, A famous wood wherein in times of old, Braue deeds were done by ventrous knights & bold. 40 Here haue those famous knights great honour won, At whose rare worth the world it selse did wonder, Here were most valiant acts archieu'd and done, By knights that dwelt there neare or far asunder, And many a man hath here bene quite vndone, Whose seeble force his enemie was vnder. Here were, as proued is by ancient charter, The famous Tristram, Lancelios and sir Arther. 41 At this same wood Renaldo from his fleet, Well mounted on his Bayards backe did part, He points his men at Barwicke him to meet, The while himselfe alone with valiant heart, Sometime on horse backe, sometime on his feete, Doth march in mind to do some worthy part, But seeing now the night came on so fast, Vnto an Abbey he repaires at last. 42 Here you must begin to  The Abbot and his Monks with comely grace, As holy men of humane manners skilled, Did welcome him, and in a little space, With costly rate his emptic stomacke filled. straight enquired of the place, What feates of armes had there bene late fulfilled, And where a man by valiant acts may show, I his exploits deserue dispraise or no. 43 They said that in that wood and forrest, find Aduentures strange and feates of armes he might, But as the place, so are the actions blind, That oft their doings neuer come to light. But if (say they) we may perswade your mind, Attempt an action worthy of a knight, Where if you passe the perill and the paine, Eternall same shall vnto you remaine. 44 For if you would performe an act indeed, Whereby great name and honour may be wonne, Then this would be the best and noblest deed, That late or long time past was euer done: Our Princes daughter standeth now in need, Of great defence, a danger great to shunne, Against a knight Lurcanio by name, That seekes her life to take away and same. 45 This knight hath her vnto the king accused, I thinke of malice rather then of right, That he hath seene how she her selfe abused, And closely tooke her louer vp by night.This blodie shanked be  is desanul' this Iland  good whi. Now by the lawes that in this land are vsed, Except she haue a champion that by might Within a month Lurcanio proue a lier, She shall be straight condemned to the fier. 46 The Scottish law that breedeth all this strife, Appoints that all of base or better sort, That take a man except she be his wife, And spends her time with him in Venus sport, By cruell torment finish shall her life, Except she find some knight that will support, That she the hainous fact hath not committed, But that in law she ought to be acquitted. 47 The King for faire Geneura takes great thought, Generad  ter to the k Scots. Both for her safetie and her estimation, And seeks by all good meanes that may be wrought For her defence, and maketh proclamation, That by whose helpe from danger she is brought, (Prouided he be one of noble nation) Shall haue the goodly damsell for his wife, With huings large to keepe him all his life. 48 But if within this month that now ensuth, (So little time for her defence is left her) No knight will come that will defend her truth, Then friends and same, and life will be berest her, This enterprise would much commend your youth, The praise whereof would last a great while after: And from Atlantas pillars vnto Inde, A fairer Ladie you shall neuer finde. 49 Now then beside the honour and the praise, To haue a state, may make you liue content, The Princes loue (that helpeth many waies, Knights  sworne to def iustice with  sword, and  leeue the  sed. Whose honour now is halse consum'd and spent. Againe true knights should helpe at all asaies, When any harme to Ladies faire is ment. The very law of knighthood doth commaund you, To graut this aide that we do now demaund you.
50 Renaldo pausd, and after thus he spake, Why then (said he) must this faire damsell die, That for her true and secret louers sake, Did condescend within his armes to lie? Accurst be they that such a law did make, Accurst be they that meane to liue thereby, Nay rather point a punishment and paine For such as do their louers true disdaine. 51 If faire Geneura had her friend or no, I stand not now the matter to descide, Yea I would praise her had she done it so, That by her foes it had not bene espide. Be as be may, my meaning is to go To fight for her, if I may haue a guide That will but shew me where is her accuser, And I shall quickly proue he doth abuse her. 52 I know not if the fact she haue committed, Nor can I say in this the certaine sure: But this I say, it ought to remitted, Much rather then she should distresse endure. I further say, they were but meanly witted, That did so straight a statute first procure. I also say, this law they ought recall, In place thereof a better to enstall. 53 Sith like desire the fancies doth possesse, Both of the male and of the female gender, men should it a greater, withstanding Renaldos on, To do that thing that fooles count great excesse, And quench the flame that Cupid doth engender, To grant the men more scope, the women lesse, Is law for which no reason we can render. Men vsing many neuer are ashamed, But women vsing one or two are blamed. 54 This law I say is partiall and naught, And doth to women plaine annd open wrong, I trust in God they shall be better taught, this point I ke many are  religion. And that this law shall be reuokt ere long. The Abbot and his Monks in word and thought, Allowd Renaldos speech, both old and yong: They all condemne the law, and partly blame The king that may and mendeth not the same. 55 Next morning when Renaldo doth perceaue The Sunne appeare, and starres their heads to hide, He thanks them for his cheare, and taketh leaue, And takes a target-bearer for his guide, For feare left vnknowne paths should him deceaue. Himselfe all armed doth on Bayard ride, And to the Scottish court he goes a stranger, For to defend the damsell faire from danger. 56 And for they thought to take a way more nie, They leaue the common way a mile or twaine, When suddenly they heard a piteous crie, Well like to one that feared to be slaine. In hast they spurre their horses by and by, Along the vale, and looking downe the plaine, A maide betweene two murderers they saw, That meant to take her life against all law. 57 The caitises put the damsell in great feare, And shewd that they were come to end her dayes, Which made her weepe, and shed full many a teare, To moue their minds she trieth many wayes: And though the fact a while they did forbeare, Yet now they had remoued all delayes, When as Renaldo came vnto her aid, And made the malefactors fore afraid. 58 Away they sled and left the wench alone, For dread of death appald and fore affrighted, Who all her cause of danger and of mone, Vnto Renaldo straight would haue recited, But so great haft he maketh to be gone, He gaue no eare, nor from his horse alighted, But to ensue the iourney first assignd him, He causd the guide to take her vp behind him. 59 And now on horsebacke marking well her face, And marking more her gesture and behauiour, Her pleasing speech, and modest sober grace, She now hath wonne a great deale more his fauour, And after he had rode a little space, To tell her hard aduenture he would haue her: And she began with humble voice and low, As more at large hereafter I will show. In this fourth booke, whereas dissembling is praised, we may note in what sort and with what persons it is allowable,Morall. seeing generally in it selfe it is a most vnnoble and vnworthy qualitie. In that Bradamant by the ring doth discouer Atlantas inchantments, and frustrate all his purpose, we nay note, how reason tempered with courage, prevailes to the o∣verthrow of all deceits and subtill practices. In Rogero, that was caried away vnawares by the winged horse, we haue an example to make vs take heed of rash & vnaduised enterprises. In Renaldos speech, condemning the rigor of the law, that adultery was punished by death in women rather then in men, as we may with him instly mislike such partialitie in lawes: so we may note the manner and phrase of speech of yong gentlemen (as Renaldo was) that make so light of their sweet sinne of lechery, as they call it, not regarding how sower heauy punishment hangs over it, and what a foule reprch it is to both sexes. And so much for the Morall. For the Historie of this booke, little is to be said of the time of Charles the great, because the booke digresseth to otherHistorie. matters: but whereas mention is made of Calledon forrest in Scotland, and of King Arthur his knights, I thought it not a∣misse, as in the former booke I told you, what I thought of Merlin that was Arthurs great counseller, so now somewhat to touch, as the space will permit, the reports that are true and probable of king Arthur. It is generally written and beleeued that this Arthur was a notable valiant and religious Prince, and that he governed this Iland in that rude age with great love of his people, and honour of forraine nations, he instituted an order of the knights of the round table onely (as it seemes) of some meriment of hunting, or some pleasant exercises. He was himself of stature very tall, as appeares by the proportion of him left (as they say here in our countrey of Somerset) in a doore of a Church by the famous Abbey
of Glassenbury, in which Abbey his wife Queene Gueneuer was buried, and within our memory taken vp in a coffin, with her body and face in shew plainly to be discerned, saue the very tip of her nose, as diuers dwelling there about haue reported. But what manner of death king Arthur himselfe died, it is doubtfull, and that which they report seemes meerly fabulous, namely that he was caried away in a barge from a bridge called Pomperles, neare the said Glassenbury, and so conueyed by none persons, (or by the Ladie of the Lake) with promise to bring him backe againe one day! vpon which it seems the foolish people grounded their vaine saying (King Arthur comes againe.) For my part I confesse my selfe to haue bin more inquisitiue of such trifles then a wiser man would, and viewing that bridge and all that countrey about Glassenbury, I see good reason to guesse, that all that countrie which now we call our moores (and is reduced to profitable and fertill ground) was sometime recouered from the sea, and might be nauigable vp to Glassenbury in those times: and so I suppose the said King being drowned there by some mishap, and being well be∣loued of the people, some fained (to content their minds) that he was but gone a little way, and would come again: as the Senate of Rome, hauing killed Romulus for his tyrannie, deuised a tale of I know not what  to make the people beleeue he was turned to a god.Camd. in Britania was Somerses. M. Camden the best antiquarie of our time, writeth that king Arthurs body was taken vp at the foresaid Glassenbury in the time of king Henrie the second, which indeed is most credible, as he there proueth. But this I conclude, that this Prince was so worthy a man in his time, as not onely true histories haue greatly recommen∣ded to the posteritie, but almost all Poeticall writers that haue bin since, haue mentioned this famous Prince Arthur of England, as a person of whom no notable exploit was incredible. And thus much for king Arthur. For the Allegorie of this booke,Allegorie. much might be said of Atlant, of his horse and his shield, but I will onely touch what I thinke will be thought most worth the noting, and let passe the rest for each mans priuat conceit. Atlant by many of his ge∣stures and actions here specified, may signifie Cupid, or that fond fancie that we call loue: and whereas he takes vp such braue captains and souldiers, as well as women and weaklings: it seemes consonant to that pretie fantastik verse of Ouid: Militat omnis amans & habet sua castra Cupido. All louers warriers are, and Cupid hath his campe. Further, the wings of this strange beast called the Griphith horse, agree with Petrarks description of Cupids wings: Sopra gli homeri hauea sol due grand'ali, di color mille. Vpon his shoulders were two mightie wings, of thousand colours. Atlant takes, and imprisons those he takes. Loue is as close and inextricable a prison as his. The wayes to Atlants castle are described to be craggie, headlong, and vnpleasant. Such be the wayes of that passion. The castle is said to be placed in the middle of a rockie mountaine losse in sunder: by which is meant, that this folly we speake of possesseth vs, and dwels in vs most of all about the middle of our age, as Dant saith, Nel mezzo del camin di nostra vita, Mi retrouai per vna selua oscura, Che la dritta via era smarrita. While yet my life was in her middle race, I found, I wandred in a darkesome wood, The right way lost with mine vnstedy pace. This is that wandring wood, of which the dolefull Petrarke complaines so often in those his sweete mourning sonets, in which he seemes to haue comprehended all the passions that all men of that humour haue felt. And this he saith of it: Ond' Io son fatto vn' animal siluestro, Che co pie vaghi solitari e lassi, Porto il cor graue, e gli occhi humidi e bassi, Al mondo che e per me vn deserto. Thus I am growne a sauage beast and vyld, That still with wandring steps and solitarie, A heauy heart and watred eyes do carie, About the world which is my forrest wyld. Also whereas it is said what plentie of all pleasures they had in Atlantas castle, it signifieth, that delicious fare and such picuriall and idle life, are the chiefe nurses of this fond affection, according to that saying of Ouid, Otia si tollas periere cupidinis arcus, Contemptaeue iacent & sine luce faces. Take idlenesse away, and out of dout Cupids bow breakes, and all his lamps go out. Finally, the fortification of the castle, the fuming pots of stone, the situation and height, and euery thing that is said of the man, the horse, the house, the shield, are so easie to vnderstand in allegoricall sence, as I thinke it needlesse to pro∣ceed any further in this matter. For allusions,Allusion. I find little to be said, sae of Geneura her selfe, which I will reserue to the next books.
THE FIFT BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Dalinda tels what sleights her Duke deuised, To get with faire Geneura reputation: Lurcanio of his brothers fall aduised, Accus'th her publikely of fornication. A Knight vnknowne in armour blacke disguised, Comes and withstands Lurcanios accusation, Vntill Renaldo made all matters plaine, By whom the vniust Duke was iustly slaine. 1 WE see the rest of liuing creatures all, Looke more at Large in the end of the booke, of this morall.Both birds and beasts that on the earth do dwell, Liue most in peace, or if they hap to brall, The male and female still agreeth well. The fierce, the faint, the greater not the small, Against the law of nature will rebell. The auage Lions, Beares and Buls most wyld, Vnto their females shew themselues most myld. 2 What fiend of hell, what rage raignes here so rife, Disturbing still the state of humane harts? How comes it that we find twixt man and wife, S Te. clleth marriage be t Syna of the bed vndefiled.Continuall iarres bred by iniurious parts? The vndefiled bed is filde by strife, And teares that grow of words vnkind and thwarts: Nay oft all care and feare is so exiled, Their guiltie hands with blood haue bene defiled. 3 No doubt they are accurst and past all grace, And such a haue of God nor man no feare, That dare to strike a damsell in the face, Or of her head to minish but a haire: But who with knife or poison would vnlace Their line of life, or flesh in peeces teare, No man, nor made of flesh and blood I deeme him, But sure some hound of hell I do esteeme him. 4 Such were these theeues that would the damsell kill, That by Renaldos comming was recouered: They secretly had brought her downe the hill, In hope their fact could neuer be discouered, Yet such is God, so good his gracious will, That when she looked least she was deliuered, And with a chearfull heart that late was sorie, She doth begin to tell the wofull storie. 5 Good sir (said she) my conscience to discharge, The greatest tyrannie I shall you tell, That erst in Thebes, in Athens or in Arge, Was euer wrought,In these th ties diuers  tyrannies  bene co or where worst tyrants dwell: My voice and skill would faile to tell at large The filthy fact, for I beleeue it well, Vpon this countrey Phoebus shines more cold, Because he doth such wicked acts behold.Nee tam  equos tyrie  iungit ab 6 Men seeke we see, and haue in euery age, To foile their foes, and tread them in the dust: But there to wreake their ranco and their rage, Where they are lou'd, is foule and too vniust.Sentence. Loue should preuaile, iust anger to asswage, If loue bring death, whereto can women trust? Yet loue did breed my danger and my feare, As you shall heare if you will giue me eare. 7 For entring first into my tender spring Of youthfull yeares, vnto the court I came, And serued there the daughter of our king, And kept a place of honor with good fame, Till loue (alas that loue such care should bring) Enuide my stare, and sought to do me shame. Loue made the Duke of Alban seeme to me, The furest wight that erst mine eye did see.
8 And (for I thought he lou'd me all aboue) I bent my selfe to hold and loue him best, ce.But now I find that hard it is to proue, By sight or speech what bides in secret brest, While I (poore I) did thus beleeue and loue, He gets my bodie bed and all the rest. Nor thinking this might breed my mistres danger, I vsd this practise in Geneuras chamber. 9 Where all the things of greatest value lay, And whore Geneura sleepes her selfe so metime, There at a window we did finde a way, In secret sort to couer this our crime: Here when my loue and I were bent to play, I taught him by a scale of cord to clime, And at the window I my selfe would stand, And let the ladder downe into his hand. 10 So oft we meete togither at this sport, As faire Geneuras absence giues vs leaue, Who vsd to other chambers to resort In summer time, and this for heat to leaue: And this we carried in so secret sort, As none there was our doings did perceaue, For why, this window standeth out of sight, Where none do come by day nor yet by night. 11 Twixt vs this vse continu'd many dayes, Yea many months we vsd this priuie traine, Loue set my heart on fire so many wayes, That still my liking lasted to my paine. I might haue found by certaine strange delayes, That he but little lou'd and much did faine, For all his sleights were not so closely couered, But that they might full easly be discouered. 12 At last my Duke did seeme enflamed sore, One faire Geneura: neither can I tell, If now this loue began or was before, That I did come to court with her to dwell. But looke if I were subiect to his lore, And looke if he my loue requited well, ollicie vsed time to woo aid to win stres.He askt my aid herein no whit ashamed, To tell me how of her he was enflamed. 13 Not all of loue, but partly of ambition, He beares in hand his minde is onely bent, Because of her great state and hie condition, To haue her for his wife is his intent: He nothing doubteth of the kings permission, Had he obtaind Geneuras free assent. Ne was it hard for him to take in hand, That was the second person in the land. 14 He sware to me, if I would be so kind His hie attempt to further and assist, That at his hands I should great fauour finde, And of the king procure me what me list: How he would euer keepe it in his mind, And in his former loue to me persist, And notwithstanding wife and all the rest, I should be sure that he would loue me best. 15 I straight consented to his fond request, As readie his commandment to obay, And thinking still my time emploied best, When I had pleasd his fancie any way: And when I found a time then was I prest, To talke of him, and good of him to say. I vsed all my art, my wit, and paine, Geneuras loue and liking to obtaine. 16 God knowth how glad I was to worke his will, How diligent I followd his direction, I spar'd no time, no trauell, nor no skill, To this my Duke to kindle her affection: But alwayes this attempt succeeded ill, Loue had her heart alreadie in subiection, A comely knight did faire Geneura please, Come to this countrie from beyond the seas. 17 From Italy for seruice (as I heare) Vnto the court he and his brother came, In tourneys and in tilt he had no peere, All Britain soone was filled with his fame. Our king did loue him well and hold him deere, And did by princely gifts confirme the same. Faire castels, townes, and lordships, him he gaue, And made him great, such power great princes haue. 18 Our Soueraigne much, his daughter likt him more, And Ariodant this worthy knight is named,Aetna and Vesuuio, two mountaines that did cast out flames, So braue in deeds of armes himselfe he bore, No Ladie of his loue need be ashamed: The hill of Sicil burneth not so sore, Nor is the mount Vesuuio so inflamed, As Ariodantes heart was set on fire, Geneuras beautie kindling his desire. 19 His certaine loue by signe most certaine found, Did cause my sute vnwillingly was hard,Vt ametis a bilu esto. She well perceiu'd his loue sincere and sound, Enclining to his sute with great regard, In vaine I seeke my Dukes loue to expound, The more I seeke to make the more I mard. For while with words I seeke to praise & grace him No lesse with workes she striueth to deface him. 20 Thus being oft repulst (so euill sped I,) To my too much beloued Duke I went, And told him how her heart was fixt alredie, How on the stranger all her mind was bent: And praid him now sith there was no remedie, That to surcease his sute he would consent, For Ariodant so lou'd the princely wench, That Neptunes floods vnneth his flames cold quench 21 When Polynesso (so the Duke we call) This tale vnpleasant oftentime had hard, And found himselfe his likel'hood verie small, When with my words her deeds he had compard, Greeu'd with repulse, and greeued there withall, To see this stranger thus to be prefard. The loue that late his heart so sore had burned, Was cooled all, and into hatred turned.
22 Inding by some vile and subtil traine, To part Geneura from her faithfull louer, And plant so great mislike betweene them twaine, Yet with so cunning shew the same to couer, That her good name he will so foule distaine, Ale nor dead she neuer shall recouer. But lest he might in this attempt be thwarted, To none at all his secret he imparted. 23 Now thus resolu'd (Dalinda faire) quoth he, Sword.(I so am cald) you know though trees be topt, The .And throwded low, yet sprout yong shoots we see, And issue from that head so lately lopt: So in my loue it fareth now with me. Though by repulse cut short and shrewdly cropt, The pared tops such buds of loue do render, That still I proue new passions do engender. 24 N do I deeme so deare the great delight, As I disdaine I should be so reiect, And lest this griefe should ouercome me qight, Because I faile to bring it to effect, To please my fond conceit this very night, I pray thee deare to do as I direct: When faire Geneura to her bed is gone, Take thou the clothes she ware and put them on. 25 As she is wont her golden haire to dresse, In stately sort to wind it on her wire, So you her person liuely to expresse, May dresse your owne and weare her head attire, Her gorgets and her iewels rich no lesse, You may put on t'accomplish my desire. And when vnto the window I ascend, I will my comming there you do attend. 26 Thus I may passe my fancies foolish fit, And thus (quoth he) my selfe I would deceiue. And I that had no reason nor no wit, His shamefull drift (though open) to perceiue: Did weare my mistresse robes that seru'd me fit, And stood at window, there him to receiue. And of the fraud I was no whit aware, Till that fell out that caused all my care. 27 Of late twixt him and Ariodant had past, About Geneura faire these words or such, (For why there was good friendship in times past Betweene them two, till loue their hearts did such) The Duke such kind of speeches out did cast, He said to Ariodant, he marueld much, That hauing alwayes lou'd and well regarded him, That he againe so thanklesly rewarded him. 28 I knw you see (for needs it must be seene) The good consent and matrimoniall loue, That long betweene Geneura and me hath beene, For whom I meane ere long the king to moue. Why should you fondly thrust your selfe betweene? Why should you roue your reach so faire aboue? For if my ce were yours I would forbeare, Or if I knew that you so loued were. 29 And I much more (the other straight replies) Do maruell you sir Duke are so vnkind, That know our loue, and see it with your eies, (Except that wilfulnesse haue made you blind) That no man can more sured knots deuise, Then her to me, and me to her do bind, Into this sute so rashly are intruded, Still finding from all hope you are excluded. 30 Why beare you not to me the like respect, As my good will requireth at your hand? Since that our loue is growne to this effect, We meane to knit our selues in weddings ban Which to fulfill ere long I do expect, For know I am (though not in rents or land) Yet in my Princes grace no whit inferiour, And in his daughters greatly your superiour. 31 Well (said the Duke) errors are hardly moued, That loue doth breed in vnaduised brest. Each thinkes himselfe to be the best beloued, And yet but one of vs is loued best. Wherefore to haue the matter plainly proued, Which should proceed in loue, and which shold rest, Let vs agree that victor he remaine, That of her liking sheweth signes most plaine. 32 I will be bound to you by solemne oth, Your secrets all and counsell to conceale, So you likewise will plight to me your troth, The thing I shew you neuer to reueale. To trie the matter thus they greed both, And from this doome hereafter not repeale: But on the Bible first they were deposed, That this their speech should neuer be disclosed. 33 And first the stranger doth his state reueale, And tell the truth in hope to end the strife, How she had promist him in wo and weale, To liue with him, and loue him all her life: And how with writing with her hand and seale, She had confirmed she would be his wife, Except she were forbidden by her father, For then to liue vnmarride she had rather. 34 And furthermore he nothing doubts (he said) Of his good seruice so plaine proofe to show, As that the king shall nothing be afraid, On such a Knight his daughter to bestow: And how in this he needeth little aid, As finding still his fauour greater grow, He doubts not he will grant his liking after That he shall know it pleaseth so his daughter. 35 And thus you see so sound stands mine estate, That I my selfe in thought can wish no more, Who seekes her now is sure to come too late, For that he seekes is granted me before, Now onely rests in marridge holy state, To knit the knot that must dure euermore. And for her praise, I need not to declare it, As knowing none to whom I may compare it.
36 Thus Ariodant a tale most true declared, And what reward he hoped for his paine. But my false Duke that him had fouly snared, And found by my great folly such a traine, Doth sweare all this might no way be compared With his, no though himselfe did iudge remaine, For I (quoth he) can shew signes so expresse, As you your selfe inferiour shall confesse. 37 Alas (quoth he) I see you do not know How cunningly these women can dissemble, They least to loue where they make greatest show, And not to be the thing they most resemble, But other fauours I receiue I trow, When as we two do secretly assemble, As I will tell you (though I should conceale it) Because you promise neuer to reueale it. 38 The truth is this, that I full oft haue seene Her iuory corpes, and bene with her all night, And naked laine her naked armes betweene, And full enioyne the fruites of loues delight: Now iudge who hath in greatest fauour beene, To which of vs she doth pertaine in right, And then giue place, and yeeld to me mine owne, Sith by iust proofes I now haue made it knowne. 39 Iust proofes? (quoth Ariodant) nay shamefull lies, Nor will I credit giue to any word: Is this the finest tale you can deuise? What, hop'd you that with this I could be dord? No, no, but sith a slander foule doth rise By thee to her, maintaine it with thy sword, I call thee lying traitor to thy face, And meane to proue it in this present place. 40 The Duello a  not bound swer a chal∣leng for iustifica∣tion of any report  can proue it  true.Tush (quoth the Duke) it were a foolish part, For you to fight with me that am your frend, Sith plaine to shew without deceit or art, As much as I haue said I do intend. These words did gripe poore Ariodantes hart, Downe all his limbes a shiuering doth descend, And still he stood with eyes cast downe on ground, Like one would fall into a deadly sound. 41 With wofull mind, with pale and chearlesse face, With trembling voice that came from bitter thought, He said he much desir'd to see this place, Where such strange feats and miracles were wrought. Hath faire Geneura granted you this grace, That I (quoth he) so oft in vaine haue sought? Now sure except I see it in my vew, I neuer will beleeue it can be trew. 42 The Duke did say he would with all his hart Both shew him where and how the thing was done, And straight from him to me he doth depart, Whom to his purpose wholy he had wonne: With both of vs he playth so well his part, That both of vs thereby were quite vndone. First he tels him that he would haue him placed Among some houses falne and quite defaced. 43 Some ruynd houses stood opposd direct Against the window where he doth ascend, But Ariodant discreetly doth suspect That this false Duke some mischiefe did intend, And thought that all did tend to this effect, By trechery to bring him to his end, That sure he had deuised this pretence, With mind to kill him ere he parted thence. 44 Thus though to see this sight he thought it long, Yet tooke he care all mischiefe to preuent, And if perhap they offer force or wrong, By force the same for to resist he ment. He had a brother valiant and strong, Lurcanio cald, and straight for him he sent, Not doubting but alone by his assistance, Against twice twentie men to make resistance. 45 He bids his brother take his sword in hand, And go into a place that he would guide, And in a corner closely there to stand, Aloofe from tother threescore paces wide, The cause he would not let him vnderstand, But prayes him there in secret sort to bide, Vntill such time he hapt to heare him call, Else (if he lou'd him) not to stirre at all. 46 His brother would not his request denie, And so went Ariodant into his place, And vndiscouerd closely there did lie, Till hauing looked there a little space, The craftie Duke to come he might descrie, That meant the chast Geneura to deface, Who hauing made to me his wonted signes, I let him downe the ladder made of lines. 47 The gowne I ware was white, and richly set With aglets, pearle, and lace of gold well garnished, My stately tresses couerd with a net Of beaten gold most pure and brightly varnished. Not thus content, the vaile aloft I let, Which only Princes weare: thus stately harnished, And vnder Cupids banner bent to fight, All vnawares I stood in all their sight. 48 For why Lurcanio either taking care, Lest Ariodant should in some danger go, Or that he sought (as all desirous are) The counsels of his dearest friend to know,Sentence. Close out of sight by secret steps and ware, Hard at his heeles his brother followd so, Till he was nearer come by fiftie paces,So that he stood within ten paces of his brother. And there againe himselfe he newly places. 49 But I that thought no ill, securely came Vnto the open window as I said, For once or twice before I did the same, And had no hurt, which made me lesse afraid: I cannot boast (except I boast of shame) When in her robes I had my selfe araid, Me thought before I was not much vnlike her, But certaine now I seemed very like her.
50 that stood so farre aloofe, Was more deceiu'd by distance of the place, Ad strght beleeu'd against his owne behoofe, Seeing her clothes that he had seene her face. Now et those iudge that partly know by proofe, The wofull plight of Ariodantes case, When Poness came by faithlesse frend, In both their sights the ladder to ascend. 51 I that his comming willingly did wait, And he once come thought nothing went amisse, Embrac'd him kindly at the first receit, His lips, his cheeks, and all his face did kisse, And he the more to colour his deceit, Did vse me kinder then he had ere this. This sight much care to Ariodante brought, Thinking Geneura with the Duke was nought. 52 The griefe and sorrow sinketh so profound Into his heart, he straight resolues to die, He puts the pummell of his sword on ground, And meanes himselfe vpon the point to lie: Which when Iuranio saw and plainly found, That all this while was closely standing by, And Pmessos comming did discerne, Though who it was he neuer yet could learne. 53 He held his brother for the present time, That else himselfe for griefe had surely slaine, Who had he not stood night and come betime, His words and speeches had bene all in vaine. What shall (quoth he) a faithlesse womans crime, Cause you to die or put your selfe to paine? Not all women  unlesse womenNay let them go, and curst be all their kind, Ay borne like clouds with eu'ry blast of wind. 54 You rather should some iust reuenge deuise, As she deserues to bring her to confusion: Sith we haue plainly seene with both our eyes, Her filthy fact appeare without collusion. Loue those that loue againe, if you be wise, For of my counsell this is the conclusion, Put vp your sword against your selfe prepared, And let her sinne be to the king declared. 55 His brothers words in Ariodantes mind Seeme for the time to make some small impression, But still the carelesse wound remaind behind, Despare had of his heart the full possession. And though he knew the thing he had assignd, For  the  may be by the res of CoenregiContrary to Christend knights profession: Yet here on earth he torment felt so sore, In hell it selfe he thought there was no more. 56 An'eeming now after a little pause, Vnto his brothers counsell to consent, He fro the court next day himselfe withdrawes, And makes not one priuie to his intent, His brother and the Duke both knew the cause, But neither knew the place whereto he went: Diuers thereof most diuersly did iudge, Some by good will perswaded, some by grudge. 57 Seu'n dayes entire about for him they sought, Seu'n dayes entire no newes of him was found, The eight a peasant to Geneura brought These newes, that in the sea he saw him drownd: Not that the waters were with tempest wrought, Nor that his ship was stricken on the ground. How then? Forsooth (quoth he) and therewith wept, Downe from a rocke into the sea he lept. 58 And further he vnto Geneura told, How he met Ariodant vpon the way, Who made him go with him for to behold The wofull act that he would do that day. And charged him the matter to vnfold, And to his Princes daughter thus to say, Had he bene blind, he had full happie beene, His death should shew that he too much had seene. 59 There stands a rocke against the Irish ile, From thence into the sea himselfe he cast: I stood and looked after him a while, The height and steepnesse made me sore agast. I thence haue traueld hither many a mile, To shew you plainly how the matter past. When as the clowne this tale had told and verifide, Geneuras heart was not a little terrifide. 60 O Lord what wofull words by her were spoken, Laid all alone vpon her restlesse bed!Ouid Iu tune fle sinus at pri planxi. Oft did she strike her guiltlesse brest in token Of that great griefe that inwardly was bred: Her golden tresses all were rent and broken, Recounting still those wofull words he sed, How that the cause his cruell death was such, Was onely this, that he had seene too much. 61 The rumor of his death spred farre and neare, And how for sorrow he himselfe had killed, The King was sad, the court of heauy cheare, By Lords and Ladies many teares were spilled. His brother most, as louing him most deare, Had so his mind with sorrow ouerfilled, That he was scantly able to refraine, With his owne hands himselfe for to haue slaine. 62 And oftentimes repeating in his thought, The filthy fact he saw the other night, Which (as you heard) the Duke and I had wrought, I little looking it would come to light, And that the same his brothers death had brought, On faire Geneura he doth wreake his spight, Not caring (so did wrath him ouerwhelme) To leese the kings good will and all his realm, 63 The king and nobles sitting in the hall, Right pensiue all for Ariodants destruction, Lurcanio vndertakes before them all, To giue them perfect notice and instruction, Who was the cause of Ariodantes fall: And hauing made some little introduction, He said it was vnchast Geneuras crime, That made him kill himselfe before his time.
64 What should I seeke to hide his good intent? His loue was such as greater none could be, He hop'd to haue your highnesse free assent, When you his value and his worth should see: But while a plaine and honest way he went, Behold he saw another climbe the tree, And in the midst of all his hope and sute, Another tooke the pleasure and the frute. 65 He further said, not that he had surmised, But that his eyes had seene Geneura stand, And at a window as they had deuised, Let downe a ladder to her louers hand, But in such sort he had himselfe disguised, That who it was he could not vnderstand. And for due proofe of this his accusation, He bids the combat straight by proclamation. 66 How sore the king was grieu'd to heare these newes, I leaue it as a thing not hard to guesse, Lurcanio plaine his daughter doth accuse, Of whom the King did looke for nothing lesse: And this the more his feare and care renewes, That on this point the lawes are so expresse, Except by combat it be prou'd a lie, Needs must Geneura be condemnd to die. 67 How hard the Scottish law is in this case, I do not doubt but you haue heard it told, How she that doth another man embrace, Beside her husband, be she yong or old, Must die, except within two fortnights space, She find a champion stout that will vphold, That vnto her no punishment is due, But he that doth accuse her is vntrue. 68 The King (of crime that thinkes Geneura cleare) Makes offer her to wed to any knight, That will in armes defend his daughter deare, And proue her innocent in open fight. Yet for all this no champion doth appeare, Such feare they haue of this Lurcanios might. One gazeth on another as they stand, But none of them the combat takes in hand. 69 And further by ill fortune and mischance, Her brother Zerbin now is absent thence, And gone to Spaine (I thinke) or else to France, Who were he here, she could not want defence, Or if perhap so luckie were her chance, To send him notice of her need from hence, Had she the presence of her noble brother, She should not need the aide of any other. 70 The King that meanes to make a certaine triall, If faire Geneura guiltie be or no, (For still she stiffly stood in the deniall, Of this that wrought her vndeserued wo) Examines all her maids, but they reply all, That of the matter nothing they did know. Which made me seeke for to preuent the danger, The Duke and I might haue about the stranger. 71 And thus for him more then my selfe afraid, (So faithfull loue to this false Duke I bare) I gaue him notice of these things and said, That he had need for both of vs beware. He praisd my constant loue, and farther praid, That I would credit him, and take no care, He points two men (but both to me vnknowne) To bring me to a castle of his owne. 72 Now sir, I thinke you find by this effect, How soundly I did loue him from my hart, And how I prou'd by plaine course and direct, My meaning was not any wayes to start: Now marke if he to me bare like respect, And marke if he requited my desart. Alas how shall a silly wench attaine, By louing true to be true lou'd againe? 73 This wicked Duke vngratefull and periured, Beginneth now of me to haue mistrust, His guiltie conscience could not be assured, How to conceale his wicked acts vniust, Except my death (though causlesse) be procured, So hard his heart, so lawlesse was his lust: He said he would me to his castle send, But that same castle should haue bene mine end. 74 He wild my guides when they were past that hill, And to the thicke a little way descended, That there (to quite my loue) they should me kill, Which as you say they to haue done intended, Had not your happie comming stop their will, That (God and you be thankt) I was defended. This tale Dalinda to Renaldo told, And all the while their iourney on they hold. 75 This strange aduenture luckily befell To good Renaldo, for that now he found, By this Dalinda that this tale did tell, Geneuras mind vnspotted cleare and sound, And now his courage was confirmed well, That wanted erst a true and certaine ground: For though before for her he meant to fight,A iust quarell is a great encouragement in fight. Yet rather now for to defend the right. 76 To great S. Andrews towne he maketh hast, Whereas the King was set with ll his traine, Most carefull waiting for the trumpets blast, That must pronounce his daughters ioy or paine, But now Renaldo spurred had so fast, He was arriu'd within a mile or twaine, And through the village as he then was riding, He met a page that brought them fresher tiding. 77 How there was come a warriour all disguised, That meant to proue Lurcanio said vntrew, His colours and his armour well deuised, In manner and in making very new: And though that sundry sundrily surmised, Yet who it was for certaine no man knew: His page demaunded of his masters name, Did sweare he neuer heard it since he came.
78 Now came Renaldo to the citie wall, And at the gate but little time he staid, The porter was so readie at his call: Because of the  that .But poore Dalinda now grew sore afraid, Renaldo bids her not to feare at all, For why he would her pardon beg he said: So thrusting in among the thickest rout, He saw them stand on scaffolds all about. 79 It straight was told him by the standers by, How there was thither come a stranger knight, That meant Geneuras innocence to try, And that already was begun the fight: And how the greene that next the wall did lie, Was raild about of purpose for the sight. This newes did make Renaldo hasten in, And leaue behind Dalinda at her Inne. 80 He told her he would come againe ere long, And spurs his horse that made an open lane, He pierced in the thickest preasse among, Whereas these valiant knights had giu'n and tane, Full many strokes, with sturdy hand and strong, Lurcanio thinks to bring Geneuras bane, The tother meanes the Ladie to defend, Whom (though vnknowne) they fauor & commend. 81 There was Duke Polynesso brauely mounted, Vpon a courer of an exc'lent race, Sixe knights among the better sort accounted, On foote in armes do marshall well the place. The Duke by office all the rest surmounted, High Constable (as alwayes in such case) Who of Geneuras danger was as glad, As all the rest were sorrowfull and sad. 82 Now had Renaldo made an open way, And was arriued there in luckie howre, To cause the combatto surcease and stay, Which these two knights applide with al their powre. Renaldo in the court appeard that day, Of noble chiualrie the very flowre, For first the Princes audience he praid, Then with great expectation thus he said. 83 Send (noble Prince) quoth he, send by and by, And cause forthwith that they surcease the fight, For know, that which so ere of these doth die, It certaine is he dies against all right. One thinks he tels the truth, and tels a lie, And is deceiu'd by error in his sight, And looke what cause his brothers death procured, That very same hath him to fight allured. 84 The tother of a nature good and kind, Not knowing if he hold the right or no, To die or to defend her hath assignd, Left so rare beautie should he spilled so. I harmelesse hope to saue the faultlesse mind: And those that mischiefe mind to worke them wo, But first ô Prince to stay the fight giue order, Before my speech proceedeth any farder. 85 Renaldos person with the tale he told, Mou'd so the king, that straight without delay, The knights were bidden both their hands to hold, The combat for a time was causd to stay, Then he againe with voice and courage bold, The secret of the matter doth bewray; Declaring plaine how Polynessos lecherie Had first contriu'd and now betrayd his trecherie. 86 And proffreth of this speech to make a proofe, By combat hand to hand with sword and speare: The Duke was cald that stood nor farre aloofe, And scantly able to conceale his feare; He first denies, as was for his behoofe, And straight to battell both agreed were, They both were armd, the place before was ready, Now must they fight there could be no remedy. 87 How was the king, how were the people glad, That faire Geneura faultlesse there did stand, As Gods great goodnesse now reuealed had, And should be proued by Renaldos hand. All thought the Duke of mind and manners bad, The proudst and cruelst man in all the land, It likely was as euery one surmised, That this deceit by him should be deuised. 88 Now Polynesso stands with doubtfull brest, With fainting heart, with pale dismayed face, Their trumpets blew, they set their speares in rest, Renaldo commeth on a mightie pace, For at this fight he finish will the feast, And where to strike him he designes a place: His very first encounter was so fierce, Renaldos speare the tothers sides did pierce. 89 And hauing ouerthrowne the Duke by force, As one vnable so great strokes to bide, And cast him cleane sixe paces from his horse, Himselfe alights and th'others helme vntide, Who making no resistance like a corse, With faint low voice for mercie now he cride, And plaine confest with this his latter breath, The fault that brought him this deserued death. 90 No sooner had he made this last confession, But that his life did faile him with his voye. Geneuras double scape of foule oppression, In life and fame did make the King reioyce: In lieu of her to leese his crownes possession, He would haue wisht, if such had bene his choice: To leese his realme he could haue bene no sadder: To get it lost he could haue bene no gladder. 91 The combat done, Renaldo straight vntide His beauer, when the King that knew his face, Gaue thanks to God that did so well prouide, So doubtlesse helpe in such a dangerous case. That vnknowne knight stood all this while aside, And saw the matters passed in the place, And eu'ry one did muse and maruell much, What wight it was whose curtesie was such.
92 The king did aske his name because he ment, With kingly gifts his seruice to reward. Affirming plainly that his good intent, Deserued thanks and very great regard. The knight with much intreatie did assent, And to disarme himselfe he straight prepard, But who it was if you vouchsafe to looke, I will declare it in another booke. The very beginning of this booke being as it were a morall of it selfe,Morall. were sufficiēt for the point it treats of without any more speech to that purpose: but because the matter is such as cannot be too much spoken of, namely to perswade mē to cō∣cord in matrimonie, I must needs adde a word or two thereof. And first for mine opinion, I professe that I think it a vertue for a mā to be kind to his wife, & I am of the Censor Cato his mind, who being a maruellous ausiere mā otherwise; yet pro∣noūced flatly that a man could not be an honest man, that was not to his wife a kind man. And I wil go thus much farther, that you shall hardly find a discreet louing husband, I mean (without dissimulation or flattery) but is withal a vertuous good mīded mā, be they of what calling they list: wherfore I honor matrimonial loue in my superiors, I loue it in my equals I praise it in my inferiors, I commend it in all, and to all of what sort or sex soeuer, & I wish them but to call to mind his comparison before set down in verse, and to this effect in prose, that if the male & female in beasts and foule, for the most part, liue in concord & agreement, what a foule and worse then beastly thing is it, for man & wife to be euer bralling & snarling, (for as for smiting) I count it more then mōstrous: & let al sorts embrace this honest loue, not only cōmended but commanded by God, in holy Scriptures, where they are called both one flesh, to giue vs thereby to vnderstand, that as we would not willingly breake our owne shins, nor let our finger ake if we could remedie the same, & if we see one strike him∣selfe, or knocke his head to the wall, we thinke him Bidlem mad. So he that shall willingly grieue the wife of his bosome, or wickedly hurt her, we may thinke him far frō a sober, & farther frō an honest man. And euen as if one haue an ach or any grief in his toe or finger, straight▪ he doth lap that part in warm cloth, & ea seth it al he can, & cherisheth it more then be∣fore til it be sound again: so if any thing either il don, or il takē perhaps though not il ment, (haue bred a litle powting or lowring toward vnkindnesse, we must lap vp the part thus grieued in warm imbracements, & heale it with sweet words. And if it be but a greene wound, annoint it with the precious balsamū (which all good surgeons know to be a soueraigne medicine for such griefes) and so we shall soundly cure it without any maime or scarre, but we must neuer come to the ex∣tremities of cutting or searing, except the disease grow to a Gangrena or some cankred malice vnpossible to be cured. Another good morall obseruation to be gathered in this cāto, is the choise of Cencuta, who being a great Lady by birth yet chose rather a gallant faire conditioned gentlemā thē a great Duke. For first it is no disparagemēt for the greatest Em¦presse in the world to marie one that is a gentleman by birth, according to the old prouerb, A gentlemā may make a king and a clarke may proue a Pope. Secondly, if we marke generally the successe of all mariages, we may find the saying of Themistocles true, Better is a man without mony, then mony without a man. To many and toto pitifull are the ex∣amples that we haue hard of, I will not say seene, of those Ladies that to match thēselues or their daughters on step higher nay but euē the higher end of the same step higher thē they might otherwise haue don, haue with that ambition vndon thē, making them liue with great discontent, or to say the truth, flat misery, with their proud & vnkind Lord. And yet cānot such euident & neare examples moue some both fair, & modest, & vertuous, to keep thē out of such gilded gyues. eleeue it Lady, to whōsoeuer I speak it, that a happie womā is seene in a white apron, as often as in an embrodred kirtle, & hath as quiet sleeps & as contented wakings in a bed of cloth as vnder a sparuer of tissue. Boccasio speaking of the coynesse of some graue widowes, as well as nice damsels, saith as I remēber in the laberinth of louers to this effect. Be a mā (saith he) neuer so diseased, deformed, decrepit, vnwholsome, vnsauorie, yet if he haue bene either so good a storer for mony, that he may leue his wife wealthy; or be so great in titles though a begar in liuing, that she may take her place the higher, they wil (saith he) be contented to lay their so delicate and daintily preserued morsels, in such lothsome dishes to be daily smackt & slauered, binding themselues to suffer such a penance God knowes how long, only to satisfie those humors of coueteous∣nesse and pride, staruing to their griefe, the third humour (if they be so vertuous) that is by some thought the predomi∣nant humor in that sex, and many times dwels vnder the same roofe with the other two. Yet surely I could rather com∣mend his curtesan that he writes of in his Decameron, who hauing bargained with a Dutchman, one M. Bruffaldo, for seuen dayes boord and lodging at a great rate, hauing found him for one or two nights to be but an vnsauorie bed fellow, she chose rather to leese those two nights hire, then to endure fiue more at so painful a price. But I doubt I grow too tedi∣ous while I shoot out such blots out of a Boccas. Now to go forward in the morall. You may note in Polynesso an enui∣ous and trecherous mind: in Ariodant the hurt of a credulous ielousie: in Lurcanio the vehemencie of a wrong surmise. In Polynessos intent to kill Dalinda, you may obserue how wicked men often bewray their owne misdeeds with seeking to hide them. In Geneuras accusation and deliuerie, how God euer defends the innocent. And lastly in Polynessos death, how wickednesse ruines it seife. For the historie of this booke,Storie. either the whole is a historie, or there is no matter historicall in it to be stood on. Allegorie there is none in this booke at all.Allegorie. Allusion there is in this tale of Geneura,Allusion. vnto a storie writtē in Alciats duello, of a matron in France accused in such sort, by two men, and a certaine souldier of Barcellona came with a companion of his, and tooke vpon them the defence of the woman, and being fighting, the companion of the souldier fled: not withstanding he of Barcellona with his courage and vertue gat the victorie of the other two, and so in strange attire went home to his country vnknowne, to which Ariodant seems to allude. Some others affirme, that this very matter, though set downe here by other names, happened in Frrara to a kinsewoman of the Dukes, which is here figured vnder the name of Geneura, and that indeed such a practise was vsed against her by a great Lord, and discouered by a damsell as is here set downe. Howsoeuer it was, sure the tale is a prettie comicall matter, and ha bene written in English verse some few years past (learnedly and with good grace) though in erse of another kind, by M. George Turberuil. The rocke from which Ariodant leapt into the sea, aliudeth to to the rocke of Lewcade, where men that were mad for loue leapt into the water, and washed away ( they thought) that fancie. Strabo calleth it faltus amatorius.
THE SIXT BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Geneurafaire to Ariodant is giuen, And he a Duke is made that verie day. Rogero with the Griffeth horse is driuen, Unto Alcynas ile, and there doth stay. Amirtle in the middle strangly riuen, Alcinas frauds doth unto him bewray: Of which enformd he thence would haue departed, But by the way he finds his purpose thwarted. 1 Most wretched he, that thinks by doing ill, His euill deedes long to conceale and hide, For though the voice and tongues of men be still, By foules or beasts his sin shalbe discride: a Poet to this ef.And God oft worketh by his secret will, word ubi se  persomnia quentes .That sinne it selfe the sinner so doth guide, That of his owne accord, without request, He makes his wicked doings manifest. 2 The gracelesse wight, Duke Polinesso thought, His former fault should sure haue bin concealed, If that Dalinda vnto death were brought, By whom alone the same could be reuealed. Thus making worse the thing before was nought, He hurt the wound which time perhaps had healed. And weening with more sinne the lesse to mend, He hastned on his well deserued end. 3 And lost at once his life, his state, and frends, And honour to, a losse as great or more. Now (as I sayd) that vnknowne knight entends, Sith euerie one to know him sought so sore, And sith the king did promise large amends, To shew his face which they saw oft before, And Ariodant most louely did appeare, Whom they thought dead as you before did heare. 4 He whom Geneura wofully did waile, He whom Lurcanio deemed to be dead, He whom the king and court did so bewaile, He that to all the realme such care had bred, Doth liue; the clownes report in this did faile, On which false ground the rumor false was spred. And yet in this the peasant did not mocke, He saw him leape downe headlong from the rock. 5 But as we see men oft with rash intent Are desperate and do resolue to die,Sentence. And straight do change that fancie and repent, When vnto death they do approch more nie: So Ariodant to drowne himselfe that ment, Now plung'd in sea repented by and by, And being of his limbes able and strong, Vnto the shore he swam againe erre long. 6 And much dispraising in his inward thought, This fond conceit that late his minde poslest, At last a blind and narrow path him brought, All tyrd and wet to be an hermits guest: With whom to stay in secretsort he sought, Both that he might his former griefe digest, And learne the truth, if this same clownes report, Were by Geneura tane in griefe or sport. 7 There first he heard how she conceiu'd such griefe As almost brought her life to wofull end, He found of her they had so good beleefe, They thought she would not in such sort offend: He further heard except she had releefe, By one that would her innocence defend, It was great doubt Lurcanios acculation, Would bring her to a speedie condemnation.
8 And looke how loue before his heart enraged, So now did wrath enflame, and though he knew wel To wreake his harme, his brothers life was gaged, He nathles thought his act so foule and cruell, That this his anger could not be aswaged, Vnto his flame loue found such store of fewel: And this the more increast his wrath begun, To heare how eurie one the fight did shun. 9 For why Lurcanio, was so stout and wise, Except it were for to defend the truth, Men thought he would not so the king despise, And hazard life to bring Geneuras ruth, Which caused euerie one his friend aduise, To shunne the fight that must maintaine vntruth. But Ariodant after long disputation, Meanes to withstand his brothers accusation. 10 Alas (quoth he) Ineuer shall abide, Her through my cause to die in wo and paine, For danger or for death what eare betide, Be she once dead my life cannot remaine, She is my saint, in her my blisse doth bide, Her golden rayes my eies light still maintaine, Fall backe, fall edge, and be it wrong or right, In her defence I am resolu'd to fight. 11 I take the wrong, but yet ile take the wrong And die I shall, yet if I die I care not, But then alas, by law she dies er long, O cruell lawes so sweete a wight that spare not: Yet this small ioy I finde these griefes among, That Polinesso to defend her dare not, And she shall finde how little she was loued, Of him that to defend her neuer moued. 12 And she shall see me dead there for her sake, To whom so great a damage the hath done: And of my brother iust reuengement take I shall, by whom this strife was first begun, For there at least my death plaine proof shall make That he this while a foolish thred hath spun, He thinketh to auenge his brothers ill, The while himselfe his brother there shall kill. 13 And thus resolued, he gets him armour new, New horse and all things new that needfull bene All clad in blacke, a sad and mournfull hew, And crost with wreath of yellow and of greene, A stranger bare his sheeld that neither knew, His masters name nor him before had seene, And thus as I before rehearst, disguised He met his brother as he had deuised. 14 I told you what successe the matter had, How Ariodant himselfe did then discouer, For whom the king himselfe was euen as glad, As late before his daughter to recouer, And since he thought in ioyfull times and sad, No man could shew himselfe a truer louer Then he that after so great wrong, intended Against his brother her to haue defended. 15 Both louing him by his owne inclination, And praid thereto by many a Lord and knight, And chiefly by Renaldos instigation, He gaue to Ariodant Geneura bright. Now by the Dukes atteint and condemnation, Albania came to be the kings in right. Which dutchie falling in so luckie houre, Was giuen vnto the damsell for her dowr. 16 Renaldo for Dalindas pardon praide, Who for her error did so sore repent, That straight she vowd,Hee  tale of G with honest mind and staid, To liue her life in prayre and penitent: Away she packt, nor further time delaid,He ret Renald st. 16. Foge In Datia, to a nunrie there she went. But to Rogero now I must repaire, That all this while did gallop in the aire. 17 Who though he were of mind and courage stout, And would not easly feare or be dismaid, Yet doubtlesse now his minde was full of doubt, His hart was now appald, and sore afraid. Farre from Europa, he had trauaild out, And yet his flying horse could not be staid, But past the pillars xij. score leagues and more, Pitcht there by Hercles many yeares before. 18 This Griffeth horse a birde most huge and rare, Doth pierce the kie with so great force of wing,The Eght That with that noble birde he may compare, Whom Poets faine Ioues lightning downe to bring To whom all other birds inferior are, Because they take the Eagle for their king. Scarse seemeth from the clouds to go so swift, The thunderboltsent by the lightnings drift. 19 When long this monster strange had kept his race, Straight as a line bending to neither side, He spide an Iland distant little space, To which he bends in purpose there to bide, Much like insemblance was it to the place, Where Arethusa vsd her selfe to hide, And seekes so long her loue to haue beguild,Aret in the Till at the last she found her selfe with child. 20 A fairer place they saw not all the while, That they had trauild in the aire aloft In all the world was not a fairer ile, If all the world to finde the same were sought: Here hauing trauaild many a hundred mile, Rogero by his bird to rest was brought, In pastures greene, and hils with coole fresh aire, Cleere riuers, shadie banks, and meddowes faire. 21 Heere diuers groues there were, of daintie shade, Of Palme, or Orenge trees, of Cedars tall, Of sundrie fruites and flowres that neuer fade, The shew was faire, the plentie was not small. And arbours in the thickest places made, Where little light, and heat came not at all: Where Nightingales did straine their little throtes, Recording still their sweete and pleasant notes.
22 Amid the lilly white and fragrant rose, Preseru'd still fresh by warme and temprate aire, The fearfull hare, and cunnie carelesse goes, The stag with stately head and bodie faire, Doth feed secure, not fearing any foes, That to his damage hither may repaire, The Bucke and Doe doth feed amid the fields, As in great store the pleasant forrest yeelds. 23 It needlesse was to bid Rogero light, When as his horse approched nigh the ground, He cast himselfe out of his saddle quight, And on his feet he falleth safe and sound, And holds the horses raines, left else he might Flic quite away, and not againe be found, And to a mirtle by the water side, Betweene two other trees his beast he tide. 24 And finding thereabout a little brooke, That neare vnto a shadie mountaine stands, His helmet from his head forthwith he tooke, His shield from arme, his gantlet from his hands, And from the higher places he doth looke, Full oft to sea, full oft to fruitfull lands, And seekes the coole and pleasant aire to take, That doth among the leaues a murmure make, 25 Oft with the water of that cristall well, He seekes to quench his thirst and swage his heate, With which his veines enflam'd did rise and swell, And cad his other parts to fry in sweate: Well may it seeme a maruell that I tell, Yet will I once againe the same repeate, He traueld had aboue three thousand mile, And not put off his armour all the while. 26 Behold his horse he lately tied there, Among the boughs in shadie place to bide, Straue to go loose, and started backe for feare, And puls the tree to which the raines were tide, In which (as by the sequell shall appeare) A humane soule it selfe did strangely hide. With all his strength the steed stues to be loosed, By force whereof the mirtle sore was broosed. 27 irken out .And as an arme of tree from bodie rent, By peasants strength with many a sturdie stroke, When in the fire the moisture all is spent, The emptie places fild with aire and smoke, Do boile and striue, and find at last a vent, When of the brand a shiuer out is broke, So did the tree striue, bend, writhe, wring and breake, Till at a little hole it thus did speake. 28 Right curteous knight (for so I may you deeme, And must you call not knowing other name) I so you are as gracious as you seeme, Then let your friendly deed confirme the same, Vnloose this monster, sent as I esteeme, To adde some farther torment to my shame. Alas, mine inward griefes were such before, By outward plagues they need be made no more. 29 Rogero mazed looked round about, If any man or woman he might see, At last he was resolued of his doubt, He found the voice was of the mirtle tree, With which abasht, though he were wise and stout, He said, I humbly pray thee pardon me,Ouid.. Meam. Quisq s  fa∣. Whether thou be some humane ghost or spright, Or power deuine that in this woodhast right. 30 Not wilfulnesse, but ignorance did breed Thine iniury, mine error in this case: And made me do this vnaduised deed, By which vnwares thy leaues I did deface: But let thy speech so farre forth now proceed, To tell me who thou art that in this place, Dost dwell in tree amid the desert field, As God from haile and tempest thee may shield. 31 And if that  for this amends may make, Or now or after, or by paine or art, I sweare to thee by her,Bradamant. To whom Rog as a str. and for her sake, That holds of me, and shall the better part, That I shall not surcease all paines to take, To worke thy ioy, or to aswage thy smart. This said, he saw againe the nurtle shake, And then againe he heard that thus it spake. 32 Sir knight, your curtesie doth me constraine, To shew to you the thing that you desier, Although I sweat (as you may see) with paine, Like greenest boughes vpon the flaming fier, I will discouer vnto you her traine, (Wo worth the time that uer I came nie her) That did for malice and by magicke strange, My liuely shape to liuelesle branches change. 33 I was an Earle, Astolfo was my name, Well knowne in France in time of warre and peace, Orlandos cosen and Renalds, whose fame While time shall last in earth shall neuer cease. Of Oton king of English Ile I came, And should succeed him after his decease. Both comely, yong, carelesle of worldly pelfe, To none an enemie but to my selfe. 34 For as we turned from the Ester Iles, Whose banks are worne with surge of Indian waue, Where I and many more with witching wiles,This hath refe∣rence to the booke called Orland, Inaorao. Were straight inclosed in a hollow caue, Vntill Orlando did auenge the guiles, And found by force a meane his friends to saue, We Westward went vpon the shore and sand, That lieth on the Northside of the land. 35 And as we traueld homeward on our way, As chance did leade or destinie vs driue, It was our fortune once on breake of day, Hard by Alcynas castle to arriue, Where she alone, to sport her selfe and play, Such kind of gins for fishes did contue, That though we saw no net, no bait, no hooke, Yet still we saw that store of fish she tooke.
36 The Dolphin strong, the Tunnie good of tast, The Mullet, Stargeon, Samon (princely fish) With Porpose, Sales, and Thornpooles came as fast, As she was pleased to commaund or wish. And still she tooke of each kind as they past, Some strange for shew, some daintie for the dish, The horsefish and the huge and monstrous whales, Whole mightie members harnest are with scales. 37 Among the rest that were too long to count, We aw the fish that men Balena call, Twelue yards aboue the water did amount His mightie backe, the monster is so tall: And (for it stood to sl) we made account, It had bene land, but were deceiued all, We were deceid, well I may rew the while, It was so huge we thought it was an le. 38 I sav this potent witch Alcyna tooke All rt o fish without or net or aide, But only reading in a little booke, O mumbling words, I know not what she said, But seng me, so well she likt my looke, That at her sport but little time  staid, But  forthwih to trap me by her skill, Which straight fel ut according to her will. 39 F toward me with pleasant cheare she came, In modest maner and in . And dd withall her speech  frame, And  to resort, O I would be partner of h gme, She otred me to shew me all the sport, And all the kinds of fish in seas that were, Some great, some smal, some smooth, and some with haire. 40 And if you   Mermaid faire to see, That can with song the raging stormes appease, At yon same little banke you may (quoth the) To which we two will safely pale with ease: (Th banke which she pretends to shew to me, Was that same ish the monster of the seas) And I that too much loued to aduenter, Vpon the fishes backe with her did enter. 41 My cousins  and Ronaldo beckned To draw me thence, I heard not what they said, But of their speech and signes I little reckned, I had not wit enough to be afraid: But soone my courage was appald and weakned, I straight was aine in vae to crie for aid, The monstous fish that eemd to me an Ile, Straight bare me from the shore full many a mile. 42 There was Ronald like to haue bene drownd, Who  to ue me if perhaps he might, But o dainly of him and of the ground, A  ud did take away the sight: and I with seas enuirond round, Did ruell on that monster all the night, And then with gracious speeches she began To gie me all the comfort that she can. 43 And thus at last to this place we repaire, Of which by wrong Alcyna keepes possession, Deposing forcibly the rightfull heire, (Her elder lawfull sister) by oppression: The other two more vicious then faire, Are bastards, and begotten in transgression, I heard it told, and haue it not forgotten, She and Morgana were in incest gotten. 44 And as their first beginning was of sinne, So is their life vngodly and defamed, Of law or iustice passing not a pinne, But like the heifer wanton and vntamed, By warre they seeke their sisters right to wine, Their elder sister Logistilla named, And haue so farre preuailed with their powers, They haue of hers about an hundred towers. 45 And had er this time taken all away, Saue that the rest is strongly fenced round, For of one side the water stops the way, On th'other side the vantage of the ground, Which with a mightie banke doth make a stay, Much like the English and the Scottish bound: And yet the bastard sisters do their best, And labour still to spoile her of the rest. 46 And why, because they see her good and holy, They hated her because themselues are vicious, But to returne, and tell you of my folly, That turnd to me so hurtfull and pernicious, I now againe grew somewhat bold and iolly, I see no cause to feare or be suspicious, And finding she lou'd me by signes most plaine, I wholy bent my selfe to loue againe. 47 When I her daintie members did embrace, I deemed then there was none other blise, Me thought all other pleasures were but base, Of friends nor kin I had no want nor mise, I onely wisht to stand in her good grace, And haue accesse her corrall lips to kisse. I thought my selfe the happiest of all creatures, To haue a Ladie of so goodly features. 48 And this the more confirmd my ioy and pride, That toward me she shewd such loue and care, By night and dayly I was by her side, To do or speake against me no man dare, I was her stay, I was her houses guide, I did commaund, the rest as subiects are: She trusted me, alone with me she talked, With me within she sat, without she walked. 49 Alas why do I open lay my sore, Without all hope of medcine or releefe? And call to mind the fickle ioy before, Now being plungd in glfes of endlesse greefe? For while I thought she od me more and more, When as I deemd my ioy and blisse was cheefe, Her wauing loue away fro me was taken, A new guest came, the old was cleane forsaken.
50 Then did I find full soone, though too to late, Her wanton, wauering, wily womans wit, Accustomd in a trice to loue and hate, I saw another in my seate to sit: Her loue was gone, forgone my happie state, The marke is mist that I was wont to hit: And I had perfect knowledge then ere long, That to a thousand she had done like wrong. 51 And least that they about the world might go, And make her wicked life and falshood knowne, In diuers places she doth them bestow, So as abrode they shall not make their mone, Some into trees, amid the field that grow, Some into beasts, and some into a stone: In rockes or riuers she doth hide the rest, As to her cruell fancie seemeth best. 52 And you that are arriu'd by steps so strange, To this vnfortunate and fatall lle, Although in youthfull sports a while you range, And though Alcina fauour you a while, (Although you little looke for any change,) Although she friendly seeme on you to smile, Yet looke no lese, but changd at last to be, Into some brutish beast, some stone or tree. 53 Thus though perhap my labour is but lost, Yet haue  giu'n you good and plaine aduise, Who can themselues beware by others cost, May be accounted well among the wise: The waues that my poore ship so sore hath tost, You may auoid by heed and good deuise, Which if you do, then your successe is such, As many others could not do so much. 54 Rogero did with much attention heare Astolfos speech, and by his name he knew To Bradamant he was of kindred neare, Which made him more his wofull state to rew: And for her sake that loued him most deare, To whom from him all loue againe was dew, He ought to bring him aid and some releefe, At least with comfort to asswage his griefe. 55 Which hauing done, he asked him againe, The way that would to Logistilla guide, For were it by the hils, by dale or plaine, He thither meant forthwith to runne or ride. Astolfo answerd it would aske much paine, And many a weary iourney he should bide, Because to stop this way Alcina sets A thousand kinds of hindrances and lets. 56 For as the way it selfe is very steepe, Not pasable without great toile and paine, So she that in her mischiefe doth not sleepe, Doth make the matter harder to attaine, By placing men of armes the way to keepe, Of which she hath full many in her traine. Rogero gaue Astolfo many thanks, For giuing him this warning of her pranks. 57 And leading then the flying horse in hand, Not during yet to mount a beast so wilde, Least (as before I made you vnderstand) He might the second time haue bene beguild: He meanes to go to Logistillas land, A vertucus Ladie, chast, discreet and mild, And to withstand Alcina tooth and naile, That vpon him her force might not preuaile. 58 But well we may commend his good intent, Though missing that to which he did aspire,uid Caret successi opt quisquis ab cuen∣ facts not pu. Who iudgeth of our actions by th'euent, I wish they long may want their most desire. For though Rogero to resist her ment, And feared her as children feare the fire, Yet was he taken to his hurt and shame,Simile. Petrark. Euen as the flie is taken in the flame. 59 For going on his way, behold he spies A house more stately then can well be told, Whose wals do seeme exalted to the skies, From top to bottome shining all of gold, A sight to rauish any mortall eyes, It seemd some Alcumist did make this hold, The wals seemd all of gold, but yet I trow All is not gold that makes a golden show.Sense 60 Now though this stately sight did make him stay, Yet thinking on the danger him foretold, He left the easie and the beaten way, That leadeth to this rich and stately hold, And to her house where vertue beares the sway, He bends his steps with all the hast he could: But er he could ascend the mountaines top, A crew of caitiues sought his way to stop. 61 A foule deformd, a brutish cursed crew, In bodie like to antike worke dcuised, Of monstrous shape, and of an vgly hew, Like masking Machachinas all disguised. Some looke like dogs, and some like apes in vew,Look in the A∣gory. Some dreadfull looke, and some to be despised, Yong shamelesse folke, and doting foolish aged, Some nakd, some drunk, some bedlem like enraged. 62 One rides in hast a horse without a bit, Another rides as slow, an asse or cow, The third vpon a Centaurs rumpe doth sit. A fourth would flie with wings, but knows not how, The fift doth for a speare employ a spit, Sixt blowes a blast like one that gelds a sow. Some carrie ladders, others carrie chaines, Some sit and sleepe while others take the paines. 63 The Captaine of this honorable band, With belly swolne, and puffed blubberd face, Because for drunkennesle he could not stand, Vpon a tortese rode a heauy pace: His sergeants all were round about at hand, Each one to do his office in his place: Some wipe the sweat, with faus some make a wind, Some stay him vp before, and some behind.
64 Then one of these that had his feet and brest Of manlike shape, but like vnto a hound In ares, in necke, and mouth, and all the rest Doth vtter barking words with currish sound, Part to commaund, aud partly to request The valian knight to leaue the higher ground, And to repaire vnto Alcynas castle, Or else (forooth) they two a pull would wrastle. 65 This monster seeing his request denide, Strake at Rogeros beauer with a launce, But he that could no such rude iests abide, With Ballsarda smote him in the paunch. .Out came the sword a foote on th'other side, With which he led his fellowes such a daunce, That some hopt headlesse, some cut by the knees, And some their arms, and some their eares did leese. 66 In vaine it was their targets to oppose Against the edge of his enchanted blade, No steele had force to beare those fatall blowes, Vnto the quicke the sword a passage made: But yet with numbers they do him inclose, Their multitude his force did ouerlade: He needs at least Briarius hundred armes To oile the foes that still about him swarmes. 67 Had he remembred to vnfold the shield, Atlanta card at his saddle bow, He might haue quickly ouercome the field, And caud them all without receiuing blow, Like men dismaid and blind themselues to yeeld: But he perhaps that vertue did not know, Or if he did, perhaps he would disdaine, Where force did faile, by fraud his will to gaine. 68 But being full resolued not to yeeld Vnto such beasts, but ere he parted thence He would his carkasse leaue amid the field, Sentence. .And manfully would die in his defence, Then o good hap that failes the forward seeld, Prouided him a meane to rid him hence. There came two Ladie;, either like a Queene, And each of them most stately to be seene. 69 Looke .For each of them an Vnicorne did ride, As white as Lillies, or vnmolten snow, And each of them was deckt with so great pride, As might most richly set them forth to show, But each of them was so diuinely eide, Would moue a man in loue with them to grow, And each of them in all points was so choice, As in their sight a man would much reioyce. 70 Then both of them vnto the mow came, Whereas Rg ought with all that rout, And both of them those brutish beasts did blame, That ought to harme a knight so strong and sou. Rger bluhing now with modest shame, Thankt them that had of danger holpt him out, And straight consented with those Ladies faire, Vnto  castle to repaire. 71 Those ornaments that do set forth the gate, Embost a little bigger then the rest, All are enricht with stones of great estate, The best and richest growing in the East, In parted quadrons, with a seemly rate, The collons diamonds as may be guest: I say not whether counterfait or true, But shine they did like diamonds in vew. 72 About these stately pillars and betweene Are wanton damsels gadding to and fro, And as their age, so are their garments greene, The blacke oxe hath not yet trod on their toe, Had vertue with that beautie tempred beene, It would haue made the substance like the show: These maids with curteous speech and manners nice Welcome Rogero to this paradise. 73 If so I may a paradise it name, Where loue and lust haue built their habitation, Where time well spent is counted as a shame, No wise staid thought, no care of estimation, Nor nought but courting, dauncing, play and game, Disguised clothes, each day a sundry fashion, No vertuous labour doth this people please, But nice apparrell, belly-cheare and ease. 74 Their aire is alway temperate and cleare, And wants both winters storms, and summers heae, As though that Aprill lasted all the yeare, Some one by fountaines side doth take his seae, And there with ained voice and carelesse cheare, Some sonnet made of loue he doth repeate: Some others other where with other fashions, Describe vnto their loues their louing passions. 75 And Cupid then, the captaine of the crew, Triumphs vpon the captiues he hath got, And more and more his forces to renew, Supplies with fresh the arrowes he hath short, With which he hits (his leuell is so true) And wounds full deepe, although it bleedeth not: This is the place to which Rogero went, And these the things to which our youth is bent. 76 Then straight a stately steed of colour bay, Well limbd and strong was to Rogero brought, And deckt with faire capparison most gay, With gold and pearle and iewels richly wrought, The Griffeth horse (that whilome to obay The spurre and bit was by Atlanta tought) Because his iourney long required rest, Was carrid to a stable to be drest. 77 The Ladies faire that had the knight defended, From that same wicked and vngracious band, Which as you heard at large before pretended, Rogeros passage stoutly to withstand, Told now Rogero how that they intended, Because his valew great they vnderstand, Of him to craue his furtherance and ad, Against their so that made them oft afraid.
78 There is (quoth they) a bridge amid our way, To which we are alreadie verie nie, llegorieWhere one Erifila doth all she may, To damage and annoy the passers by, A Giantese she is, she liues by pray, Her fahions are to fight, deceiue and lye: Her teeth belong, her visage rough with heare, Her nayles be sharpe, and scratching like a Beare. 79 The harme is great this monster vile doth doe, To stop the way that but for her were free, She spils and spoiles, she cares not what nor who, That griefe to heare, and pittie is to see: And for to adde more hatred her vnto, Know this, that all yon monsters you did see, Are to this monster either sonnes or daughters, And liue like her by robberies and slaughters. 80 Rogero thus in curteous sort replide, Faire Ladies gladly I accept your motion, If othrseruice I may do beside, You may command, I stand at your deuotion: For this I weare this coat and blade well tride, Not to procure me riches or promotion, But to defend from iniurie and wrong, All such as haue their enemies too strong. 81 The Ladies did Rogero greatly thanke, As well deeru'd so stout and braue a knight, That proferd at the first request so franke, Against the gyantesse for them to fight. Now they drew nye vnto the riuers banke, When as Erifila came out in sight: But they that in this storie take some pleasure, May heare the rest of it at further leasure. In Ariodants combat with his brother, we may note how the loue of kinred often giues place to the loue of carnalitie. In Dalindas going into religion, after she had her pardon, we may note, that amendment of life is necessary after true repentance. In Rogeros travelling three thousand miles, and then resting at Alcynas, we may obserue how the thoughts of men ranging abrode into a thousand matters, lastly abide in the pleasantest. In Astolfos metamorphosis into a myrtle tree (which tree is said to be dedicated to Venus) we may note, how men giuen ouer to sensualitie, leese in the end the verie forme of man (whch is reason) and so become beastes or stockes: but these two last notes will be more aptly considered in the Allegorie. Historie there is none in this booke,ie. but the continuation of the tale of Geneura, amplified probably, though I thinke no way truely. The rest of this whole booke is an Allegorie,ri. so plaine to those that will indeed looke heedfully into it, as needs no expo∣sition, and it is continued in the next booke, and in a manner there expounded, to the vnderstanding of any reasonable capacitie, yet for plainnes sake I will touch some things with my accustomed briefenes, and leaue the rest to the discreet reader to scan, and to applie to his owne profit. First therefore of Rogero, (as we have in part touched before) we may understand the Griffeth horse that carried him, to signifie the passion of the minde contrarie to reason, that caries men in the aire, that is in the height of their imaginations, out of Europe, that is, out of the compasse of the rules of Christian religion and feare of God, vnto the Ile of Alcyna; which signifieth pleasure and vanities of this world. The example of Astolfos mishap, and his good counsell which Rogero followed so slenderly, shew how neither the counsels of friends, nor no examples, can for the most part stay a man in his youthfull course, from that which he shall af∣ter surely repent. Rogeros offring to go to Logestilla, which betokens vertue, signifies the good motiues that men haue of∣ten, by reading good bookes, or hearing good sermons to amend their liues: but then the monstrous crew that stoppeth Ro∣gero, signifying the base conceits of men, and foule desires that assaile them, as namely those seaen sinnes which be called the deadly sinnes: by strong temptations and lewd suggestions, do put vs out of that right way, or at least encomber vs so as we proceed but slowly: howbeit these do not preuaile so farre, but that an honest and well giuen minde doth with∣stand them, and yeeldeth not to them till the two Ladies riding vpon Vnicornes, which some vnderstand by chast loue, or at the least a shew of honorable loue, or rather I suppose thereby to be meant ambition and desire of aduancement, these two driue away all those base thoughts that assailed him, but yet they bring him at last vnto the court of Alcina, where he is held fast, as shall be shewed in the next booke. By Erifila is ment couetousnesse, as the name it selfe shewes, which must be beaten downe er we can come to honour or loue. By Logestilla, that is inuaded by the two baserd sisters, is ment allegorically, the true Christian religion; and there is another cosen of theirs called heresie, and the graundsire of them all, called Atheisme, that are of late very busie with her. But she is defended with the water, which signifies the holy Scripture, and with the mountaine, which in the Scripture it selfe is taken for preachers, as S. Augustine noteth vpon the Psalmes. I lift vp mine eies to the hils, whnce commeth my saluation. The transformation of Astolfo, alludes to Cyrces witchcrast in Homer.
THE SEVENTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. When foule Erifila was ouercome, Rogero guided by two stately dames, Vnto Alcynas sumptuous court doth come, Where he his time in pleasure sends and games: Melissa him rebukes, he standeth dumme, And at her true reproofes he greatly shames. In fine by her good counsell and direction, He frees himselfe from that most foule subiection. 1 ALL they that to far coun∣tries do reort, Shall see strange sights, in earth, in seas, in skies, mag∣inesseWhich when againe at home they shall report, Their solemne tales, estee∣med are as lyes. to those not n∣ the al∣.For y the fond and sim∣ple common sort, Beleeue but what they feele or see with eyes, Therefore to them, my tale may seeme a fable, Whose wits to vnderstand it are not able. 2 But carelesse what the simpl sots surmise, If they shall deeme it  deuice or deede, Yet sure to those that are discreete and wise, It will no wonder nor no passion breed: Wherefore my tale to such I do deuise, And with them to the same to take good heed, For some there are, may fortune in this booke, As in a glasse their acts and haps to looke. 3 For many men with hope and show of pleasure, Are carri'd far in foolish fond conceit, And wast their pretious time, & spend their treasure, Before they can discouer this deceit. O happie they that keepe within their measure, To turne their course in time, and found retreit, .Before that wit with late repentance taught, Were better neuer had then so deare bought. 4 A little while before I did reherse, How that Rogero by two dames was brought, To combat with Erifila the feerse, Who for to stop the bridge and passage soughte In vaine it were for to declare in verse, How sumptuously her armor all was wrought, All set with stones, and guilt with Indian gold, Both fit for vse, and pleasant to behold. 5 She mounted was but not vpon a steed, Insteed thereof she on a Wolfe doth sit, A Wolfe whose match Apuli doth not breed,Horace. Qua potentum . Well taught to hand, although she vsd no bit, And all of sandie colour was her weed, Her armes were thus (for such a champion fit) An vgly Tode was painted on her shield, With poyson swolne, and in a able field. 6 Now each the other forthwith had descride. And each with other then prepard to fight, Then each the other scornefully deside, Each seekes to hurt the other all he might. But she vnable his fierce blowes to bide, Beneath the vizer smitten was so right: That from her seat ixe pacs she was heaued, And lay like one of life and sense bereaued. 7 Rogero readie was to draw his sword. To head the monster lying on the sand. Vntill those dames with many a gentle word, Asswagd his heat and made him hold his hand: He might in honour now her life affoord, Sith at his mercie wholly she doth stand: Wherefore sir knight put vp your blade (say thy) Lets passe the bridge and follow on our way.
8 The way as yet vnpleasant was and ill, Among the thornie bushes and betweene, All stony, steep, ascending vp the hill, A way lesse pleasant seldome hath bene seene: But this once past according to their will, And they now mounted vp vpon the greene, They saw the fairest castle standing by, That erst was seene with any mortall eye, 9 Alyna met them at the outer gate, And came before the rest a little space, And with a count'nance full of high estate, Salutes Rogero with a goodly grace, And all the other courtiers in like rate, Do bid Rogero welcome to the place, With so great showes of dutie and of loue, As if some god descended from aboue. 10 Not onely was this pallace for the sight, Most goodly, faire, and stately to behold, But that the peoples courtsie bred delight, Which was as great as could with tongue be told. All were of youth and beautie shining bright, Yet to confirme this thing I dare behold, That faire Alyna past the rest as farre, As doth the Sunne another little starre. 11 A shape whose like in waxe twere hard to frame, Or to expresse by skill of painters rare, Her haire was long, and yellow to the same, As might with wire of beaten gold compare: Her louely cheekes with shew of modest shame, With roses and with lillies painted are, Her forehead faire and full of seemely cheare, As smoth as polisht Iuorie doth appeare. 12 Within two arches of most curious fashion, Stand two black eyes, that like two cleare suns shind, Of stedie looke, but apt to take compassion, Amid which lights, the naked boy and blind, Doth cast Ins darts that cause so many a passion, And leaue a sweet and curelesle wound behind: Laudaret pacem From thence the nose in such good sort descended, As enuie knowes not how it may be mended. 13 Conioynd to which in due and comely space, Doth stand the mouth stand with Vermilion hew, Two rowes of precious perle serue in their place, To show and shut, a lip right faire to vew: Hence come the courteous words, and full of grace, That mollifie hard hearts and make them new: From hence proceed those smilings sweet and nice, That seeme to make an earthly paradice. 14 Her brest as milke, her necke as white as snow, Her necke was round, most plum and large her brest Two luory apples seemed there to grow, Full tender smooth, and fittest to be prest: They waue like seas, when winds most calme doth blow, But Args selfe might not discerne the rest, Si qua latens  a .Yet by presumption well it might be gest, That that which was concealed was the best. 15 Her armes due measure of proportion bare, Her faire white hand was to be vewed plaine, The fingers long, the ioynts so curious are, As neither knot appeard nor swelling vaine. And full to perfect all those features rare, The foote that to be seene doth sole remaine, Both slender, short, little it was and round, A finer foote might no where well be found. 16 She had on euerie side prepar'd a net, If so she walke, or laugh, or sing, or stand: Rogero now the counsell doth forget, He had receiud late at Astolfos hand: He doth at nought those wholsome precepts set, That warned him to shun Alcynas land, He thought no fraud, no treason nor no guile, Could be accompani'd with so sweete a smile. 17 The dame of France, whom he so loued erst, He quite forgets, so farre awry he swarued: The tale Astolfo had to him reherst, He thinketh false, or else by him desarued: Alcynas goodly shape his heart so perst, She onely seemd a mistresse to be sarued: Ne must you blame Rogeros inclination, But rather blame the force of incantation. 18 Now as abrode the stately courts did sound, Of trumpets, shagbot, cornets, and of flutes, Euen so within there wants no pleasing sound, Of virginals, of vials and of lutes, Vpon the which persons not few were found, That did record their loues and louing sutes, And in some song of loue and wanton verse, Their good or ill successes did reherse. 19 As for the sumptuous and luxurious fare,The  were  sters, a , apparem. I thinke not they that Nynus did succeed, Nor Cleopatra faire, whose riot rare, To Antonie such loue and losse did breed, Might with Alcynas any way compare, Whose loue did all the others fare exceed, So deepely was she rauisht in the sight, Of this so valiant and so comely knight. 20 The supper done, and tables tane away, To purposes and such like toyes they went, Each one to other secretly to say Some word by which some prettie toy is ment, This helpt the louers better to bewray Each vnto another what was their intent, For when the word was hither tost and thither, Their last conclusion was to lie together. 21 These prettie kinds of amorous sports once ended, With torches to his chamber he was brought, On him a crew of galant squires attended, That euerie way to do him honour sought. The chambers furniture could not be mended, It seemd Arachne had the hangings wrought, A banket new was made, the which once finished, The companie by one and one diminished.
22 Now was Rogero couched in his bed, Betweene a paire of cambricke sheets perfumed, And oft he hearkens with his wakefull hed, For her whose loue his heart and soule consumed: Each little noise hope of her comming bred, ribus vocem  & uenem credi∣.Which finding false, against himselfe he fumed, And curst the cause that did him so much wrong, To cause Alcyna tarry thence so long. 23 Sometime from bed he softly doth arise, And looke abroad if he might her espie, Sometime he with himselfe doth thus deuise, Now she is comming, now she drawes thus nie: Sometime for very anger out he cries, What meaneth she, she doth no faster hie? Sometimes he casts least any let should be, Betweene his hand and this desired tree. 24 But faire Alcyna, when with odors sweet, She was perfum'd according to her skill, The time once come she deemed fit and meet, When all the house were now asleepe and still: With rich embroderd slippers on her feet, She goes to giue and take of ioyes her fill, To him whom hope and feare so long assailed, Till sleepe drew on, and hope and feare both, failed. 25 Now when Astolfos successor espide Those earthly starres, her faire and heau'nly eies, As sulphur once inflamed cannot hide, Euen so the mettall in his veines that lies, So flam'd that in the skin it scant could bide: But of a sodaine straight he doth arise, Leaps out of bed, and her in armes embraced, Ne would he stay till she her selfe vnlaced. 26 So vtterly impatient of all stay, That though her mantle was but cyprous light, And next vpon her smocke of lawne it lay. Yet so the champion hasted to the fight, The mantle with his fury fell away, And now the smocke remaind alone in sight, Which smocke as plaine her beauties all discloses, As doth a glasse the lillies faire and roses. 27 iuious on of leasure e offend  eares his of a∣ather  vn∣s haue es bene and ofAnd looke how close the Iuie doth embrace The tree or branch about the which it growes, So close the louers couched in the place, Each drawing in the breath the other blowes: But how great ioyes they found that little space, We well may guesse, but none for certaine knowes: Their sport was such, so well they leere their couth, That oft they had two tongues within one mouth. 28 Now though they keepe this close with great regard, Yet not so close but some did find the same, For though that vertue oft wants due reward, Yet seldome vice wants due deserued blame. Rogero still was more and more prefard, Each one to him with cap and courtsie came, For faire Alcyna being now in loue, Would haue him plast the others all aboue. 29 In pleasure here they spend the night and day, They change their clothes so often as they lust, Within they feast, they dance, dispot and play, Abrode they hunt, they bauke, they ride, they iust, And so while sensuall life doth beare the sway, All discipline is troden in the dust. Thus while Rogero here his time mispends, He quite forgets his dutie and his frends. 30 For while Rogero bides in feast and ioy, King Agramant doth take great care and paine, Dame Bradamant doth suffer great annoy, And traueld farre to find him all in vaine: She little knew Alcyna did enioy Her due delights, yet doth she mone and plaine, To thinke how strangely this same flying horse, Bare him away against his will by force. 31 In townes, in fields, in hils, in dales she sought, In tents, in campes, in lodgings and in caues, Oft she enquit'd, but yet she learned nought, She past the riuers fresh and salt sea waues, Among the Turkes she leaues him not vnsought, (Gramercy ring that her from danger saues:) A ring whose vertue workes a thing scant possible,Of this ring look the Table. Which holding in her mouth she goes inuisible. 32 She will not, nor she cannot thinke him dead, For if a man of so great worth should die, It would some great report or fame haue bred, From East vnto the West, both farre and nie: It cannot sinke nor settle in her head, Whether he be in seas, in earth or skie, Yet still she seekes, and her companions are Sorrowes and sighes, and feares, and louing care. 33 At last she meanes to turne vnto the caue, Where lie the great and learned Merlins bones, And at that tombe to crie so loud and raue, As shall with pitie moue the marble stones: Nor till she may some certaine notice haue Of her belou'd to stay her plaints and mones, In hope to bring her purpose to effect, By doing as that Prophet should direct. 34 Now as her course to Poytiers ward she bent, Melyssa vsing wonted skill and art, Encountred her, her iourney to preuent, Who knew full well, and did to her impart, Both where her loue was, and how his time he spent, Which grieu'd the vertuous damsell to the hart, That such a knight, so valiant erst and wise, Should so be drownd in pleasure and in vice. 35 O poysond hooke that lurkes in sugred bait, O pleasures vaine, that in this world are found, Which like a subtile theefe do lie in waite, To swallow man in sinke of sinne profound: O Kings and peeres, beware of this deceit, And be not in this gulfe of pleasure dround: The time will come, and must I tell you all, When these your ioyes shall bitter seeme as ga.
36 Then turne your cloth of gold to clothes of heares, Your feasts to fasts, to sorrowes turne your songs, Your wanton toyes and smilings into teares, To restitution turne your doing wrongs, Your fond securenesse turne to godly feares, And know that vengeance vnto God belongs, Who when he comes to iudge the soules of men, It will be late alas to mend it then. 37 Then shall the vertuous man shine like the sunne, Then shall the vicious man repent his pleasure, Then one good deed of almes sincerely done, Shall be more worth then mines of Indian treasure, Then sentence shall be giu'n which none shall shun, Then God shall wey and pay our deeds by measure, Vnfortunate and thrice accursed thay, Whom fond delights do make forget that day. 38 But to returne vnto my tale againe, I say, Melyssa tooke no little care, To draw Rogero by some honest traine, From this same place of feasts and daintie fare, And like a faithfull friend refusd no paine, To set him free from her sweet senslesse snare, To which his vnkle brought him with intent His destinie thereby for to preuent. 39 As oft we see men are so fond and blind, To carry to their sonnes too much affection, Sentence:That when they seeme to loue, they are vnkind, (For they do hate a child that spare correction) So did Atlanta, not with euill mind, Giue to Rogero this so bad direction, But of a purpose, thereby to withdraw His fatall end that he before foresaw. 40 For this he sent him past so many seas, Vnto the Ile that I before did name, Esteeming lesse his honour then his ease, A few yeares life then euerlasting fame. For this he caused him so well to please Alcyna that same rich lasciuious dame; That though his time old Nestors life had finished, Yet her affection should not be diminished. 41 But good Melyssa on a ground more sure, That loud his honor better then his weale, By sound perswasions meanes him to procure, From pleasures court to vertues to appeale: Simile.As leeches good that in a desprate cure, With steele, with flame, and oft with poison heale, Of which although the patient do complaine, Yet at the last he thankes him for his paine. 42 And thus Melyssa promised her aid, And helpe Rogero backe againe to bring, Which much recomforted the noble maid, That lou'd this knight aboue each earthly thing. But for the better doing this (she said) It were behouefull that he had her ring, Whose vertue was that who so did it weare, Should neuer need the force of charmes to feare. 43 But Bradamant that would not onely spare Her ring (to do him good) but eke her hart, Commends the ring and him vnto her care, And so these Ladies take their leaue and part. Melissa for her iourney doth prepare, By her well tried skill in Magicke art, A beast that might supply her present lacke, That had one red foot and another blacke. 44 Such hast she made, that by the breake of day She was arriued in Alcynas Ile, But straight she changd her shape and her array, That she Rogero better might beguile: Her stature tall she makes, her head all gray, A long white beard she takes to hide the wile, In fine she doth so cunningly dissemble,Atlant  vncle  master. That she the old Atlanta doth resemble. 45 And in this sort she waiteth till she might By fortune find Rogero in fit place, Which very seldome hapt, for day and night He stood so high in faire Alcyna, grace, That she could least abide of any wight, To haue him absent but a minute space, At last full early in a morning faire, She spide him walke abroade to take the aire. 46 About his necke a carknet rich he ware, Of precious stones, all set in gold well tride,A descript an effer courtur. His armes that erst all warlike weapons bare, In golden bracelets wantonly were tide: Into his eares two rings conueyed are, Of golden wire, at which on either side Two Indian pearles in making like two peares, Of passing price were pendent at his eares. 47 His locks bedewd with waters of sweet sauour, Stood curled round in order on his hed, He had such wanton womanish behauiour, As though in Valence he had long bene bred: So changd in speech, in manners and in fauour, So from himselfe beyond all reason led, By these inchantments of this am'rous dame, He was himselfe in nothing but in name. 48 Which when the wise and kind Melyssa saw, (Resembling still Atlantas person sage) Of whom Rogero alwayes stood in aw, Euen from his tender youth to elder age, She toward him with looke austere did draw, And with a voice abrupt, as halfe in rage, Is this (quoth she) the guerdon and the gaine, I find for all my trauell and my paine? 49 What was't for this that I in youth thee fed, With marrow of the Beares and Lions fell? That I through caues and deserts haue thee led, Where serpents of most vgly shape do dwell, Where Tygers fierce and cruell Leopards bred, And taught thee how their forces all to quell: An Atis or Adonis for to be, Vnto Alcyna as I now thee see.
50 Was this foreshewd by those obserued starres, By figures and natiuities oft cast, By dreames, by oracles that neuer arres, By those vaine arts I studide in time past, That thou shouldst proue so rare a man in warres, Whose famous deeds to endlesse praise should last? Whose acts should honord be both farre and neare, And not be matcht with such another peare. 51 Is this a meane or ready way you trow? Which other worthy men haue trod before, A Caesar or a Scipio to grow, And to increase in honor more and more? But to the end a man may certaine know, How thrall thou art vnto Alcynas lore, Thou wearest here her chaines and slauish bands, With which she binds thy warlike armes and hands. 52 If thou regard not thine owne estimation, To which the heau'ns ordaine thee if thou would, Defraud not yet thine heires and generation, Of which I haue thee oftentime foretold, Appointed by eterne predestination, Except thou do their due from them withhold, Out of thy loines and bowels to proceed Such men whose match the world did neuer breed. 53 Let not so many a worthy soule and mind, Fram'd by the wisedome of the heau'nly King, Be hindred of the bodies them assignd, Whose of spring chiefe must of thy issue spring: Be not vnto thine owne blood so vnkind, Of whose great triumphs all the world shall ring, Whose successors, whose children and posteritie, Shall helpe our country to her old prosperitie. 54 What good hath this great Queene vnto thee done, But many other queanes can do the same? What certaine gaine is by her seruice wonne, That soone doth fancie, sooner doth defame? Wherefore to make thee know what thou hast done, That of thy doings thou maist haue some shame, But weare this ring, and next time you repaire To your Alcyna, marke if she be faire. 55 Rogero all abasht and mute did stand, With silent tongue, and looke for shame downe cast, The good enchantresse tooke him by the hand, And on his finger straight the ring she plast, But when this ring had made him vnderstand His owne estate, he was so sore agast, He wisht himselfe halfe buride vnder ground, Much rather then in such place once be found. 56 But she that saw her speech tooke good effect, And that Rogero shamed of his sinne, She doth her person and her name detect, And as her selfe (not Atlant) doth beginne, By counsell and aduice him to direct, To rid himselfe from this so dangerous ginne: And giues him perfect notice and instruction, How these deceits do bring men to destruction. 57 She shewd him plainly she was thither sent, By Bradamant that lou'd him in sinceritie, Who to deliuer him from bondage ment, Of her that blinded him with false prosperitie. How she tooke Atlants person to th'intent Her countenance might carry more austeritie, But finding now him home reduc'd againe, She saith she will declare the matter plaine. 58 And vnto him forthwith she doth impart, How that faire dame that best deseru'd his loue, Did send that ring, and would haue sent her hart, If so her heart his good so farre might moue, The ring this vertue had, it could subuert All magicke frauds, and make them vaine to proue Rogero as I said, no time did linger, But put the ring vpon his little finger. 59 When truth appeard, Rogero hated more Alcynas trumpries, and did them detest, Then he was late enamored before, (O happie ring that makes the bearer blest) Now saw he that he could not see before, How with deceits Alcyna had bene drest, Her borrowd beauties, all appeared stained, The painting gone, nothing but filth remained. 60 Eu'n as a child that taking from the tree An apple ripe, and hides it in some place,Simi. When he returnes the same againe to see, After a senight or a fortnights space, Doth scant beleeue it should the same frute be, When rottennesse that ripenesse doth deface, And where before delight in it he tooke, Now scant he bides vpon the same to looke. 61 Eu'n so Rogero plainly now deseride, Alcynas foule disgraces and enormitie, Because of this his ring she could not hide, By all her paintings any one deformitie: He saw most plainly that in her did bide, Vnto her former beauties no conformitie, But lookes so vgly, that from East to West, Was not a fouler old misshapen beast. 62 Her face was wan, a leane and writheld skin,The deformitie of pleasure when it is beheld with reason. Her stature scant three horseloaues did exceed: Her haire was gray of hue, and very thin, Her teeth were gone, her gums seru'd in their steed, No space was there between her nose and chin, Her noisome breath contagion would breed, In fine, of her it might haue well bene said,Nestor liued as some retire 300 yeares. In Nestors youth she was a pretie maid. 63 I feare her arts are learned now a dayes, To counterfait their haire and paint their skin, But reasons ring their crafts and guiles bewrayes, No wise men of their paintings passe a pin,Sentence. Those vertues that in women merit praise, Are sober shewes without, chast thoughts within, True faith and due obedience to their make, And of their children honest care to take.
64 Now though Rogero (as before I sed) Detested sore the vgly witches sight, Yet by Melyssas counsell wisely led, He doth conceale the matter for a night, Till of prouision he were better sped, With which he might more safely take his flight. And taking care his meaning close to hide, He doth forthwith his armour all prouide. 65 And tels Alcyna he would go and trie, If that he were not waxen grosse or no, Because that idle he so long did lie, And neuer fought with any armed fo: His sword vnto his girdle he doth tie, With armour on, a walking he doth go, And with a scarfe about his arme he lapt The shield that in the cypresse case was wrapt. 66 And thus arraid, he commeth to the stable, And tooke a horse (as wise Melyssa taught) A horse as blacke as any ieat or sable, So made as if in waxe he had bene wrought, Most swift for course, and strong of limbes and able, This horse hight Rabican was thither brought By Duke Astolfo, who by sorcerie Raem, locke the table.Was turned late into a mirtle tree. 67 As for the Griffith horse that there was by, Melyssa wisheth him to let him stand, And sayth, that she her selfe ere long would trie To make him gentle to the spurre and hand And that she would hereafter time espie, To bring it him, and let him vnderstand, How he should do with very little paine, To make him yeeld to spurre, to rod and raine. 68 She further said, his flight would be suspected, Except he let the flying horse to stay. Rogero none of all her words neglected, But did her counsell wise and sage obay: And so before his meaning was detected, From this misshapen hag he stole away, And meanes (if God will grant him so much grace) To be at Logestillas in short space. 69 Such men of armes as watched at the gate He slue, the rest he sodainly assailed, He happie was scapt with a broken pate, They tooke their heeles when as their hearts them failed. Alcyna now had notice all too late, Rogero was so farre it nought auailed: But in another booke shall be contained, How him dame Logestilla entertained. In Erifila that is ouerthrowne by Rogero and not killed,Morall. we may obserue, that the liberalitie that men make great show of in their youthfull pleasures and entertainments, is not the true vertue that doth indeed quite extinguish and kill that monster of couetousnesse. In Alcyna and Rogeros lasciuious loue, from whom Rogero is glad at last to runne away, we may note the notable allurements of fleshly sensualitie, and take a good lesson to auoyd them onely by flying from them, as hath bene in part touched before. Melyssas good counsell, euery yong Rogero may apply to himselfe, and learne thereby to begone to Logestillas in time, lest he be turned into some beast or tree, as these notable enchantresses do daily transforme their followers. But of all this I will speake more at large in the Allegorie. Concerning the Historie of this book,Historie. there is no matter historicall therein: Only where there is a comparison of the riot of Alcyna with that of the Persian kings, and that of Cleopatra, those to whom the storie is not knowne, shall find an ex∣planation therof in the Table or Index. before how by Erifila is meant couetousnesse,All . which our young gallants beate downe but kill not, nay oft it riseth again and ouercomes them, and makes them fall to meere rapine and extortion. Whereas in the eight staffe, the way was said to be vnpleasant (through that seeme contrary to the saying of Hercules two wayes of vice and vertue) yet no doubt but euen in this way of pleasure, there be many ill fauoured and dangerous passages, as one of the fathers well  that a wretched worldling doth oftentimes toile more to go to hell for his labour, then a vertuous man doth to win heaven. The things that allure most to sensualitie, are set downe in order: in the ninth staffe kind entertainment: in the tenth,  building: in the eleuenth and so forward to the sixteenth, artificiall behaviour and exquisite beautie, set forth with all cunning, as Ouid saith, Et meruit formosa videri, that is, she deserued with the paine she took to seem hand some: in the eighteenth, musicke and wanton sonets of loue: riotous fare in the nineteenth, with all kind of delicacies to provoke venery: in the twentith, wanton discourses and purposes, of which commonly their last conclusion is to lie to∣gether, as there is said: in the two and twentith, perfumes and all effeminate delicacies, in all which we see, the eye, the care, the tast, the smelling, the feeling, the wit, the thoughts, all fed with their obiects of delight, making men quite to forget God and all good counsell; as Rogero quite forgat Bradamant and the counsell of Astolfo. And sure it is worth the  where it is find in the sixteenth staffe, that the tale Astolfo late to him rehearst, he thinketh false or else by him deserued. How yong men that at the first haue seemed very well giuen, very religious, continent and studious of all vertue and good learning, yet after when they come to be aduanced to high fauours or to great liuing, they despise all that was taught them before, and count religion but a pollicie, and philosophie but a folly, and the admonition of graue and  that reproue their ambition, or their sensualitie, or their extreme couetousnesse, to proceed but of enuie  begin estate and felicitie, which they would be glad to come to themselues and cannot. And surely if any will but take a note of any speciall persons, toucht with any or with all three of these enormous vices, let them but marke if they have not in their whole liues and actions (and some perhaps in plaine words) discouered this their contempt of religion and vertu undiscipline: I would this age were barren of examples of this kind. Now concerning the enchantments that bring men into this blindnes to think Alcyna so faire a woman, it is nothing but  of vertue, of beautie, of graciousnes, that the foolish louer perswades himself that he seeth in the person or idol of his mistress, of which Petrarke saith, Da questi magi transformato fui: These are the witches that transformed me.
The griefe that Bradamant takes for Rogeros mispending his time, may note to vs the grace and long sufferance of God, when man runneth astray after the worldly vanities. Melyssa that offereth her seruice to go to reclaime Rogero: doth figure vnto vs both preachers & philosophers, that shew vs by the ring (which hath bene expounded before to be rea∣son) our foule errours and our wandring courses, and so makes vs see our owne deformities, and the deformitie of that we esteemed so dearely, as in this booke you see what manner of monster Alcyna appeared in her owne likenesse, when the ring of reason had dissolued all inchantments. Infinite matter more might be applyed in allegoricall sence out of this booke, if I would couet to stand vpon euerie small matter, for as I said at the first, these two bookes be in a manner a meere alle∣gorie from the beginning to the ending. The comming of Melissa to Rogero alludeth to the comming of Mercurie to Aeneas in Virgil,Allusion. who was then at Car∣thage stayd by the loue of Dydo as Rogero was here by Alcyna. The ring that had the vertue beside dissoluing inchantments, to make one go inuisible, alludeth to Gyges ring, of which it is sayd, that by the helpe thereof he became King of Lydia.
THE EIGHT BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Rogero fled: Melissa after staid, Astolfo with some others to restore: Renaldo musters souldiers sent for aid, To Charles the great, who neuer needed more: Angelica by drowsie hermit laid, Is tane and bound all naked to the shore: Orlando is so troubled with his dreame, He leaues the seruice of his king and reame. 1 OH strange enchantments vsed now a dayes, Oh charmers straunge a∣mong vs dayly found, That find so many charms and subtle wayes, Wherewith they hold fond louers hearts fast bound, Not with coniured spi∣rits that they raise, Nor knowledge of the stars and skill profound, But blinding mens conceits, and them fast tying, With simulation, fraud, deceit and lying. 2 But he that had the rule and ring of reason, Should soone their frauds, their crafts and guiles dis∣couer, And finde a hoord of foule and lothsome treason, To lurke within the shew of such a louer: Well may they seeme most louely for a treason, When all their wrinkles they with painting couer, But vnto men of wit and reason learned, Their subtleties shall quickly be discerned. 3 Rogero (as I said) in secret sort, With Ralucan out of the castle went, And made the watch and guard vnpleasant sport, That most of them his comming might repent: Some had their armes, and some their heads cut short, All put to flight, the gates in peeces rent. And then vnto the wood he entred, when He met by chance one of Alcynas men. 4 This man did beare a faulcon on his fist, With which he went on hauking day by day, To flie in field, or riuer as he list, The countrie full of game still yeelded pray, He had a spaniell could not well be mist, And eke a hauking nagge not verie gay, And meeting good Rogero halfe disguised, That he was fled away he straight surmised. 5 The seruant rideth on, and at their meeting, He askt Rogero why he rode so fast, Rogero gaue him verie slender greeting, As though on such a squire he little past: Well (quoth the faulkner) though thou now art fleeting, I truster long to shew thee such a cast, That with my dogge, my faulcon and my horse, I do not doubt to fetch thee backe by force. 6 And first he lets the faulcon take her flight, But Rabican as fast as she did flie, Then from his horse the faulkner doth alight, His horse flue like an arrow by and by. Then went the dogge, who was of course so light, As is the wind that bloweth in the skie: And last of all himselfe ran with such shift, It seem'd the lightnings flame was not so swift. 7 Rogero thinketh it a foule disgrace, That any man should thinke he fled for feare, And more because he now was had in chase: Wherefore he doth a while the flight for beare, And manfully to them he turnes his face, And seeing no man but the faulkner there. And that no weapon in his hand he saw, He much disdaind on him his sword to draw.
8 But straight the dog doth bite his horses heeles, The hauke his head amazed with her wings. When Rabycan such strange foes forces feeles, He riseth vp before, behinde he flings: Rogero thought the world had run on wheeles, Rogeros, And Balisarda out at once he brings, But they, it seemd, so well were seene in fence, That all his blowes to them brought no offence. 9 Both loth to stay, resolued not to yeeld, He takes his target from his saddle bow, And with the dazling light of that same sheeld, Whose force Melyssa lately made him know, He made them fall as if their eies were seeld, So that no farther let from them did grow, But hauing vanquisht them this wise with ease, He now may ride at leasure where he please. 10 These foes once foild, their forces ouercome, Alcyna straight had notice of his flight, For of the watchmen one to her was come, That while these things were done did stand in sight. This made her stand like one halfe dead or dumme, And after put her into such a fright, That forthwith for auoiding further harme, Through all the towne she made them crie alarme. 11 And calling oft her selfe a foolish beast, Because Rogero so from her was slipt, Somtime she beates her head, her face and breast, Sometime in rage her garments all the ript: She calleth all her men from most to least, A part of whom vnto the sea she shipt, And of the rest she makes a mightie band, To fetch Rogero backe againe by land. 12 All were so busie to this seruice bent, That none remaind the pallace faire to gard, Which greatly helpt Melyssas good intent, Which chiefly was as you before haue hard, To set at large poore prisners so long pent, Which now to do (she absent) was not hard, Dissoluing all her circles and her knots, And stroying all her figures and her lots. 13 And thus in fields, in houses, and in woods, She set at large as many as she found, That had bene turnd, to trees, to stones and floods, And in that state by magicke art fast bound: Likewise to them she rendred all their goods, Who when they saw themselues so cleare vnbound, Departing thence with all the hast they might, To Logestilia they arriud that night. 14 And first of all and chiefe of all the rest, The English Duke came to himselfe againe, Because Rogero lou'd and wisht him best, And lends the ring that makes inchantments vaine, But good Melyssa could by no meanes rest, Vntil she could his armour eke regaine, And that same famous worthie guilded launce, That had to him such honor done in Fraunce. 15 With which Argalia got no little fame, Who vsed oft the same in fight to beare. Now when Melyssa to the castle came, She found his other armour with the speare, And this atcheeu'd, the sage and frendly dame, Mounts on the Griffith horse without all feare, And Duke Astolfo mounting on his crupper, To Logestillas came that night to supper. 16 Now was Rogero with no small a do, Tiring himselfe amid those craggie wayes, And striuing all that he with paine may do, To cut of all those lothsome long delayes, That hindred him for sooner comming to That Ladie faire whose vertues merit praise, Till neare the Southerne sea with mickle paine, He came vnto a sandy desert plaine. 17 Here was he plagu'd with thirst and parching heat, And with the sunne reflecting on the sand, Which from the South vpon the banke did beat,He follow warter  staffe 33. Enflaming still the aire on either hand, But leauing now Rogero in this sweat, That still I may not in one matter stand. To Scotland now I will returne againe, And of Renaldo talke a word or twaine. 18 Great was his entertainment and his cheare, Made by the king and people of the land, Which feasts once done, the worthie valiant peare, As was his charge, doth let them vnderstand, How Charles the great, whose state doth touch them neare In no small need of their good aid did stand, And how for this he sent him to their nation, And to this tale he ads an exhortation. 19 Then was it answerd him without delay, That for king Charles and for the Empires sake, They all were readie to do all they may, And would for this behoofe short order take, And oftred him to shew (if he would stay) What store of horse and footmen he could make: Namely the king himselfe would be right glad, To go in person, but his age forbad. 20 Nor yet should age with him so much haue done, As make him from the battell to abide,Zerb Saue that he had a wise and valiant sonne, Well able such a band of men to guide, Whose value had alreadie praises wonne, And of his youth was now in floure and pride. This noble toward impe he doth intend, As captaine of his armed men to send. 21 Wherefore about his realme forthwith he sent, To get of horses and of men good store, With ships, and things to war most pertinent, As needfull meate, and mony needfull more,Sentence The while Renaldo into England went, The king to Barwicke companie him bore, And men report that when they should depart, The king was seene to weepe for tender hart.
22 Renaldo went with faire and prosprous wind, able com∣ that for∣ations ins∣ our Terms  the ryde  so far vp eur.And past along vpon the English coast, Vntill he hapt the noble Tems to find, Of which all London iustly make their boast: Here he tooke land as first he had assign'd, And in twelue houres iourney riding post, Vnto the Prince of Wales he was conducted, Whom of these matters fully he instructed. 23 The Prince that was Vicegerent to the King, (That Oton hight) who soiournd now in France, From whom Renaldo did commission bring, To take vp horse, and men, and ordinance. When he had once true knowledge of that thing, Which of all other he would most aduance: He marshald men of armes without delay, And points them meet at Callice by a day. 24 lowes it in  booke,  62.But here I must a while from hence digresse, Lest to one tale my pen should still be bound, As good musitians do their skill expresse, By playing on the strings of diuers sound: While Renald here is cheard with great excesse, (As euer in the English land is found) I meane to tell how that faire Ladie sped, That twise before from this Renaldo fled. 25 ica.I told you how Angelica the bright, Fled from Renaldo in a thicke darke wood, How on a hermit there she hapt to light, And how her sight reuiu'd his aged blood: But she that tooke in him but small delight, Whose hoary haires could do her little good, With this good hermit made but little stay, But turnd her horses rains and went away. 26 The hermit seeing he contemned was, (Whom age long since, and loue did newly blind) Doth spurre a thousand times his silly asse, Who still remained more and more behind, And sith he saw he could not bring to passe, To stop her course (afflicted much in mind) In vaine he doth his poore asse beate and curse, His trot was very bad, his gallop worse. 27 And being out of hope of comming nire, As hauing almost lost her horses tracke, He studies now to compasse his desire, With some rare strategeme to bring her back: Vnto that art forthwith he doth retire, (That damned art that is surnamed blacke) And by his bookes of magicke he doth make A little sprite the Ladie ouertake. 28 And as the hound that men the Tumbler name, When he a hare or conie doth espie, Doth seeme another way his course to frame, As though he meant not to approch more nie, But yet he meeteth at the last his game, And shaketh it vntill he make it die; So doth the hermit trauerse all about, At eu'ry turne to find the damsell out. 29 What he intends to do, full well I wot, And meane ere long the same to you to show, The damsell traueld still that knew it not, The spright to do his office was not slow, For straight within the horse himselfe he got, As she on sands of Gascoigne seas did go, The spright that fully had postest the horse, Did driue her to the sea with all his force. 30 Which when the faire and fearfull damsell saw, Although she tride full oft with rod and raine, Her palfrey from his dangerous course to draw, Yet seeing plainly she did striue in vaine, With colour chang'd for anguish and for aw, And casting oft her looke to land againe, At last the sitteth still, nor further striueth. For needs they must go whom the diuell driueth.Sentence. 31 In vaine it was to strike the horse her bare, It was not done by that poore palfreys falt, Wherefore she tucks her garments, taking care Lest they should be bedewd with waters salt, Vpon her haire, which then all loose she ware, The aire doth make an amorous assalt, The greater winds were still, I thinke of deutie, That they acknowledge to so rare a beutie. 32 The waters more, the land still lesse she sees, At last she saw but one small peece of land, And that small peece in small time she doth leese; Now sees she neither shore nor any sand. Then cold despaire all liuely hope did freese, When as her horse did turne to the right hand, And at the twilight, or not long before, Did bring her to a solitary shore. 33 Here she remaining helplesse and alone, Among the fruitlesse trees and senslesse rocks, Standing her selfe all like the marble stone, Saue that sometime she tare her golden locks, At last her eyes to teares, her tongue to mone, She doth resolue, her faire soft breast she knocks, And blames the God of heau'n and powre diuine, That did the fates vnto her fall incline. 34 O fortune, fortune, (thus the damsell cride) Fill now thy rage and execute thine ire, And take this life that takest all beside, And let my death accomplish thy desire: I haue and dayly do thy force abide, Feare still my mind, trauell my limbs doth tire, And makes me think in this great storme and strife, That death were sweet to shorten such a life. 35 Can all thy malice do me further spite? Can any state be worse or more vnstedy? That am from princely scepter banisht quite,Caesar put away his wife for sus∣pition, alledging Non solū à male, sed a suspitior caondrn. A helplesse hap and hurt past all remedy, And worse then this, mine honor shining bright Is stained sore, and eu'n defast alredy, For though in act no ill I euer wrought, Yet wandring thus wil make men think me nought.
36 What can a woman hold of any price, If once she leese her honor and good name? Alas I hate this beautie and despise, And with it neuer had bene of such fame: Ne do I for this gift now thanke the skies, By which my spoile and vtter ruine came, Which cauld my brother Argal shed his blood, Ne could his armes enchanted do him good. 37 .For this the king of Tartar Agricane, Sought of my father Galafron the spoile, Who whilome was in India cald great Cane, And after dide with sorrow of the foile. For this I dyly doubting to be tane, From place to place do passe with endlesse toile, And now to loose alas what hast thou left me, Since same, and goods, and friends are all bereft me? 38 If drowning in the sea were not a death Seuere enough to quench thy raging spite, Then send some beast out of this desert heath, To teare my limbs and to deuoure me quite: I shall thee thanke for stopping of my breath, If to torment me thou haue no delight. These wofull words vtterd the Ladie bright, When straight the hermit came within her fight. 39 Who all the while had in a corner stood, And heard her make this piteous plaint and mone, Proceeding from her sad and mourning mood, Enough to moue a heart as hard as stone: It did the senex fornicator good, To thinke that he was there with her alone, Yet o deuoutly commeth this old carrion, As though it had bene Paul or Saint Hillarion. 40 When as the damsell saw a man appeare, In such a desert solitary place, She straight began to be of better cheare, Though feare and dread appeare still in her face: And with a voice so loud as he might heare, She praid him pitie this her wofull case, Recounting all her dangers ouerblowne, To him to whom they were alreadie knowne. 41 No sooner had the hermit heard her out, But straight to comfort her he doth begin, And shewes by many reasons and deuout, How all these plagues were sent her for her sin: The while he puts his sawcie hands about, Sometime her breasts, sometime her neck and chin, And more and more still gathering heart of grace, He offers boldly her for to embrace. 42 But she that much disdaind this homely fashion, Doth staine her cheekes with red for very shame, Thrust back his carren corpes without compassion, Reuiling him with many a spitefull name, Who testie with old age and with new passion, That did him now with wrath and loue inflame, Drawes out a bottle of a strange confection, That fleepe procureth by a strong infection. 43 With this he sprinkleth both the damsels eies, (Those eyes whence Cupid oft his arrowes shot) Straight sound asleepe the goodly damsell lies, Subiected to the will of such a sot: Ne yet for ought he did or could deuise, He could procure his curtall stir a iot, Yet oft he kist her lips, her cheekes, her brest, And felt and saw the beauties of the rest. 44 The dullerd iade still hangeth downe his head, Sturring or spurring could not make him praunce, The sundrier wayes he said, the worse he sped, His youthful dayes were done, he could not daunce, His strength was gone, his courage all was dead, His weapon looked like a broken launce: And while himselfe in vaine he thus doth cumber, He falleth downe by her into a slumber. 45 But now another euill chance befell, (For one ill turne alone is seldome done) The which to th'end I may the better tell, Know this, about the setting of the sunne, There is an Ile, Ebuda as men tell, Whose habitants are welnigh all vndone, By meanes that mightie Proteus thither sent An Orke that doth the people teare and rent. 46 Within this Ile, as auncient stories tell, (I not affirme how false they are or true) Sometime a king of mightie powre did dwell, That had a daughter passing faire of hue, The which faire Ladie Proteus likt so well, When her on sands in walking he did vew, That though he dwelt in waters salt and cold, Yet fresh hot loue on him had taken hold. 47 Which heate when all the sea could not asswage, He thought her milkwarm flesh could only quench, And (for he saw she was of lawfull age) With her consent he forst the princely wench: Which sinne did set her father in such rage, That straight condemning her in open bench: Her of her life he publikely bereaued, Nor spar'd the infant in hr wombe conceaued. 48 This cruell act her louer so inflamed, On King and Iland he doth wreake his spite, He sends that monster that before I named, With other beasts to stroy the Iland quite: These monsters hurt their men, beat, kild and lamed, In fine put all the people in such fright, That to escape the beast deuoid of pitie, They left their fields, and fled vnto their citie. 49 And though men armd the gates and wals defend, Yet they within scant thought themselues secure, And sith their harmes haue neither ease nor end, And tir'd these tedious trauels to endure, Vnto Apllos oracle they send, To know how they their safetie might procure, Who after humble sute and sacrifice, Answerd them of Ebuda in this wise.
50 Blood guiltlesse spilt did breed great Proteus ire, Inflamd with loue, and fed with beautie rare, Blood guiltlesse must be spilt to quench this fire, Till one be found may with the first compare: This you must do and if you peace desire, To take of damsels those that fairest are, And offer one a day vpon the shore, Till he find one like vnto that before. 51 This wofull answer breeding much despaire, And more dislike within their carefull harts, To thinke that eu'ry day a damsell faire, Must for a prey be giu'n without desarts: This is the cause that maketh them repaire, (To find sufficient store) to sundry parts, And get them virgins faire and vndefloured, Of this most vgly Orke to be deuoured. 52 Now if this be of Proteus true or not, I meane not in defence of it to stand, But this is certaine so, full well I wot, Men vse this cruell custome in that land, And day by day a maid is drawne by lot, And left for prey vpon the rocke or sand, Vnto the monster that doth them deuoure, Eu'n in their prime of youth and tender floure. 53 O wretched wights, whom subtle snares haue brought To this vnfortunate and fatall Ile, Where damsels faire and handsome out are sought, To serue for food vnto a monster vile: Their pyrats bring them home, their vessels fraught With such they take by force, or trap with wile, With which they fill their prisons and their towres, To haue them ready at appointed howres. 54 Thus sending out their vessels day by day, It chanc'd that one of them with tempest tost, Hapt to arriue whereas the hermit lay With that faire Lady hard vpon the cost: Oh cruell chance, oh precious peerlesse pray, Among the pirats either to be lost, Or to be caried to the fatall Ile, To be deuoured of a monster vile. 55 That beautie rare that Sacrapant ay deemed More deare then liuing, libertie or life: That beautie rare that to Orlando seemed Most fit of all the world to be his wife: That beautie rare in India so esteemed, That bred so many a blow and bloudy strife, Is now so quite of aid and comfort rest, Not one to speake a word for her is left. 56 The damsell faire drownd in a deadly sleepe, Was tane and bound before she could awake, Also the drowsie frier, to make him keepe Her companie, away with them they take: This done, they lanched out into the deepe, And with this precious prey they homeward make, Where in a castle they detaind her thrall, Vntill to die her lucklesse lot should fall. 57 Yet such great force her passing beautie had. Among these barbarous and sauage wights, That they appeared sorrowfull and sad, To wey the danger of her dolefull plights, It seemed all of them would haue bene glad, To haue preseru'd her many dayes and nights: But such small store of others there remained, At last to offer her they were constrained. 58 Who can the woes, the teares, the plaints rehearse, The lamentations and the mourning sound, That seemd ye heau'ns thēselues with noise to pearce, To rend the rocks, and stir the stedie ground? Her iu'ry corps conuayd (as in a heare) By wailing wights, where they must leaue it bound: The thought hereof in me such pang doth breed, I can no further in this tale proceed. 59 Wherefore I must some other matter find, Vntill my Muse her sorrow may aswage, For sure no cruell beast were so vnkind, Nor Tyger in their greatest wrath and rage, Nor any cruell tyrant can we find, (Although there are good store in eu'ry age) That could behold or thinke without compassion, A Ladie bounden in so vile a fashion. 60 Oh had Orlando notice of her smart, Who was to Paris gone to seeke her out, Or those two knights whom late the fiend did part, The which for loue of her together fought, They would for her vse all paine, care and art, Of death nor danger they would put no doubt:He returnes to Angelica; 10. boke. staffe 78. But if they helpe not now, it is no wonder, Sith they and she were plac'd so farre asunder. 61 Now in this time to Paris siege was layd, By famous Agramant Traianos sonne, Of which at last they grew so sore afrayd, The towne had almost of the Turks bin wonne, Had not their vowes procur'd them heau'nly ayd, They had bin ruind all and quite vndone, The force of France had welnigh then bin foyled, The holy Empire had almost bin spoyled. 62 For when that now the citie was on fire, And when all hope of humane helpe was past, Then mightie God forgetting wrath and ire, Vpon their teares, repentance true, and fast, At Charles his humble prayer and desire, With helpe from heau'n releeu'd them at the last, And sent such raine to aide the noble Prince, As feld was seene before, and neuer since. 63 Now lay Orlando on his restlesse bed, And thinks with sleepe to rest his troubled sprite, But still a thousand thoughts possest his head, Troubling his mind, and sleepe expelling quite: As circles in a water cleare are spread,Simil. When sunn doth shine by day, and moone by night Succeeding one another in a ranke, Till all by one and one do touch the banke.
64 So when his mistris enterd in his thought, (A lightly she was neuer thence away) The thought of her in him such circles wrought, A kept him waking euer night and day, To thinke how he from India had her brought, And that she should thus on the sodaine stray, No that he could of her true notice know, Since Charles at Burdels had the ouerthrow. 65 The griefe hereof did him most nearely tuch, And causd him often to himselfe to say, What beast would haue bin ouerruld so much? That when I might haue made her with me stay, (For why her loue and zeale to me was such, That in her life she neuer said me nay) Yet I must suffer Namus for to guard her, As though my selfe but little did regard her. 66 I sould to Charles my selfe haue rather scused, And as I did, haue kept the damsell still; Or if excuses all had bin refused, I might in stead of reason pleaded will: And rather then haue bin so much abused, All tho'e that should resist me slay and kill, At least I might haue got her safer keeping, And not haue let her thus be lost with sleeping. 67 Where bidest thou, where wanderst thou my deare? So yong, so louely, and so faire of ew? Euen like a lambe when starres do first appeare, (Her dme and shepheard being out of vew) leateth aloud to make the shepheard heare, And in her kind her euill hap doth rew, Vntill the wolfe doth find her to her paine, The silly shepherd seeking her in vaine. 68 Where is my loue, my ioy, my lifes delight? Wanderst thou still do not the wolues offnd thee? Or needst not thou the seruice of thy knight? And keepest thou the flowre did so commend thee? That flowre that me may make a happie wight, That flowre for which I euer did defend thee, That I forbare, to please thy mind (too chast) Is not that flowre (alas) now gone and past? 69 O most vnfortunate and wretched I, If they haue tane that sweet and precious floure, What can I do in such a case but die? Yea I would kill my selfe this present houre, I would this world and that to come defie, Earth fist my coarse and hell my soule deuoure. And this vnto himselfe Orlando said, With care and sorrowes being ouerlaid. 70 Now was the time when man, and bird, and beast Giues to his traueld bodie due repose, When some on beds, and some on boords do rest, Sleepe making them forget both friends and foes. But cares do thee Orlando so molest, That scarce thou canst thine eyes a little close, And yet that fugitiue and little slumber, With dreames vnpleaant thee doth vex and cumber. 71 He dreamt that standing by a pleasant greene, Vpon a bank with fragrant flowres all painted, He saw the fairest sight that erst was seene, I meane that face with which he was acquainted, And those two stars that Cupid fits between, Whence came that shaft whose head his heart hath tainted, The sight whereof did breed in him that pleasure, That he preferd before all worldly treasure. 72 He thought himselfe the fortunatest wight That euer was, and eke the blessedst louer: But lo a storme destroyd the flowers quite, And all the pleasant banke with haile did couer: Then suddenly departed his delight, Which he remaind all hopelesse to recouer; She being of this tempest so afraid, That in the wood to saue her selfe she straid. 73 And there (vnhappie wretch) against his will, He lost his Ladie in vnluckie howre: But her to find againe he traueld still, Employing to her safetie all his powre, The woods and deserts he with plaints doth fill, And cride, alas, turnd is my sweet to sowre: And while these same and such like words he said, He thought he heard her voice demaunding aid. 74 At this same voice (well knowne) a while he staid, Then followd as the sound him guided most, With this mischance his mind was much dismaid, His body sore with tole and trauell tost: When straight he heard another voice, that said, Now hope no more, for all thy hope is lost. And of the sodaine waking with the sound, His eies all full of watry teares he found. 75 So sore he was affrighted at this vision, That eu'n as though it had bene so indeed, And not a fancie vaine or apparition, Thinking his Lady ood of him in need: In secretfot he getteth all prouision, To make repaire vnto her aid with speed: And (for he would not willingly be knowne) He tooke nor man nor armor of his owne. 76 His coate of armes, of colour white and red, He lest behind for doubt of ill successe, That if it fortund he but euill sped, At least the losse and oile should be the lesse, Vpon his armor cypresse blacke he spred, With colour sad, his sorrow to expresse. And thus disguild in sad and mourning hue, He parts, and biddeth not his friends adue. 77 Not of king Charles, whose kinsman he is neare, Nor taketh he his leaue of Brandimart, Nor yet to kinsman kind, or friend most deare, Doth he his meaning open or impart: Nor vntill day did all abrode appeare, Was Charles aduised that he did depart. But in great rage and choler when he knew it, He sware and vowd Orlando sore should rue it.
78 A which good Brandimart was greatly greeued, As one that deem'd it was without deart, And (that his frend by him might be releeued) To find him out from thence he straight doth part, For by his words, he certainly beleeued, That he could ease his frend Orlandos smart, ledge wife naim .But this to Fiordeledge he not imparted, For feare that she his purpose would haue thwarted. 79 This Fiordeledge of him was dearely loued, A Lady of great beautie and cleare fame, Of parents good, of manners vnreproued, Both wealthie, wise, and modest to the same, Yet taketh he no leaue of his beloued, But early in the morning from her came. To turne that night was his determination, But was deceiued of his expectation. 80 And when she waited had a month or more, Expecting his returne, and all in vaine, For loue of him she was inflam'd so sore, Alone she goes to finde him out againe, And manie sorrie haps she bid therefore, As in the storie, shalbe showed plaine, For of Orlando now I haue to say, That is of more importance then both thay, 81 Who hauing chang'd the armes he late did we are, Directly to the Citie gate he went, And told the Sentnell, softly in his eare, What was his name, and what was his intent: Who straight abast the bridge, without all feare, (Supposing sure his vncle had him sent:) And straight vpon the Pagan campe he lighted, As in the booke ensuing is recited. In the hard adventures of Angelica,al. we may note how perilous a thing beautie is if it be not especially garded with the grace of God, and with vertue of the minde, being continually assaild with enemies spirituall and temporall: In Or∣landos dreame we may see how vnquiet thoughts are bred in the mindes of those that are giuen ouer to the passion of loue or ambicion, or whatsoeuer else may be vnderstood by Angelica. Lastly in that Orlando abandons his Prince and country in their greatest extremitie, we may obserue the vncomely and carelesse actes that dishonest or vnordinat loue do prouoke euen the noblest vnto, if once they get harbour in their mindes, and be not ouerruled with reason and grace. In this booke is little historical matter,orie. saue of the distresse of the Parisians, of which I will not greatly stand more then that I said before it is not improbable that they were about that time assayled by the Turke:  for other matters that be here lightly touched, as the deuotion of Paule or Hylarion, the sable of Proteus or such like, the table shall set it downe more plaine. The former Allegorie is here continued of Rogeros flying from Alcyna, by which must still be vnderstood,gorie. a man re∣forming his course of life, and flying from sensualitie and pleasure: now whereas it is said in this booke that Alcynas man or her faulkner with his horse hauke and dog did impeach Rogeros passage, I take it that by these foure are ment the foure passions that most trouble the minde when it begins to encline to vertue, namely by the seruant feare may be vnderstood, which is euer seruile and base, by the hauke couetousnesse that is euer seeking new prey and is neuer satisfied: by the dog griefe and discontentment that is alway byting and enuying and greeuing at others well doing: by the horse is vnderstood inordinatioy, which is in another kinde an enemie to vertue and constancie, for as soone is a temperat and moderate minde discouered in prosperitie as in aduersitie, and (as Tully saith) a wise man is neither Aduersis rebus oppreslus nec elatus secundis: to which effect I remember a verse of my fathers, written to an Earle many yeares since. Such one is ware by what degrees he clymes, Rather pleasant then proud in high estate, Rather bold then abasht in lowring times, And can in both so well vphold his state, As many would, but few can do or none, Of which few sort, I wish your Lordship one. But to proceed in the Allegorie, these impediments that disturbe men in their good course, are all but like owls or batts driuen away with sunne shine: for the light of vnderstanding and the shining of true worthines, or (as M. Dyer in an excellent verse of his termeth it) the light that shines in worthines, dissolueth and disperseth these dustie impediments, that let a man in his iourney to Logestillas Court, that is, to the court of vertue, of temperance, of pietie, where all good lessons are taught, as shalbe showed more plaine in that part of this booke, where Rogero comes to Logestilla By Melyssa that recouers from Alcyna Astolfos armour and the Lancia d'oro or Goldelaunce, and likewise restores Astolfo to his former state and shape by vertue of the ring, in the absence of Alcyna, by her (I say) we may vnderstand some graue and ghostly counseller, that with strong reasons and godly perswasions, hauing driuen away for the time, a mans sinfull thoughts and desires, takes occasion vtterly to extinguish them and deliuer a man from them with the same reasons, and to draw him to vertue and Religion. Alcynas forces she prepares by sea and by land, signifie the meanes our ghostly enemies vse to bring vs backe againe to our old vices (like the dog to his vomit) by land she followes him, and after by sea she encounters him, which briefely showes, that the remembrance of passed pleasures make a man often in perill to be drawen backe as it were by land, and then by sea (as a place of terrour and danger) we are assailed with greenous ad∣uersities, as without speciall succour we should be quite cast away. Rogeros hard trauell, stony wayes, and afterward the sweat and drought he abode, signifie Allegorically the vn∣pleasantnes of the change of euill life to an austere course of liuing, which after notwithstanding is most exceeding com∣fortable and delightsome. The bawd rier that by his impotencie more then his honestie saued Angelicas maydenhead,usion. is alluded by my author (as some haue supposed) to some such Prelate in Italie of his acquaintance, and but for good manners sake might be al∣luded to some that haue bene so illuded by such good men that notwithstanding they might sue their writ of dotage yet will still be as forward as the youngest in that seruice.d. amorum Atque iacent pigro crimen onuque toro. Angellicas horse that carried her into the sea, Alludes to the bull that bare Europa such another voiage.
THE NINTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Orlando hastes his iourney when he hears, What costly food Proteus his Orke allowes, But by the way mou'd with Olimpias tears, That did lament her late captiued spouse, His hastie iourney be a while forbears, To wreake her wrong vpon her foe he vowes, Which done, no longer in the place he tarries: Byreno false the faire Olympi marries. 1 ALas what damage cannot Cupid bring A noble hart once thral∣led to his lore? That makes Orlando care∣lesse of his king, To whom of late most faithfull loue he bore. Who earst so gaue & wise in euerie thing, And of the church a champion was before, of un∣ ue.Now that in loues blind pathes, he learns to plod, Forgets himselfe, his countrie and his God. 2 Faine would I him disburden of this blame, Glad in my faults a fellow such to finde, he per odea: ehora deterioraFor to my good I feele me dull and lame, But prompt to ill, and swifter then the wind: He not be thinking him how great a shame, It was to leaue his helplesse friends behind, Went where the kings of Affricke and of Spaine, Didly in field encampt with all their traine. 3 Yet not encampt I can them call, for why They lay abrode dispersed with the raine, Some twentie, ten, or eight together lie, Or sixe, or fiue, or foure, or three, or twaine: Some farther off, and some are lodged nie, All weane with their former taken paine: He might haue kill'd of them a worthie crew, Ne yet is Durindana once he drew. 4 The cause was this, so noble was his minde, To murther men asleepe he thought it base, He lets them rest, and seekes his loue to finde, By eu'rie person, and in eu'rie place, And those he meets, with words and speeches kind, (Describing her apparell and her face) He prayes of all good fellowship to shoe, Or where she is, or whither she did goe. 5 When light apporcht, and day began to breake, By day he seekes her in the host of Turkes, His passions strong, do make his reason weake Yeeld to the fit that in his fancie workes. Some helpe it was, he could their language speake, By which the safer he among them lurkes: His words, his weeds, so like to theirs were seene, As though that bred in Tripoly he had beene. 6 But when he saw his staying was for nought, At three dayes end away from thence he flang, He left no towne of France and Spaine vnsought, Ne yet this paine could ought asswage that pang: Him Autumne first this wandring humor brought, When frutes do fade, his fruitlesse loue first sprang, And lasted still his force and rage renuing, Both all the spring and summer next ensuing. 7 Now hauing traueld as his custome was, From realme to realme, he came vpon a day, Where as the riuer cleare sometime as glasse, That twixt the Britans and the Normans lay, Was growne so high as now he could not passe, The snow and raine had borne so great a sway, By force wherof the bridge was ouerthrwowne, The passage stopt, the foords were ouerflowne.
8 And looking round about the shore at large, Deuising how to passe to th' other side, He saw a little way from thence a barge, That seemed toward him the course to guide, Of which a certaine damsell had the charge, To whom with voice aloud Orlando cride, Intreating her because his hast was great, Within the barge him to affoord a seat. 9 The maid affirm'd no price the barge could hire, And to command it he had no commission, But promist she would grant him his desire, Vpon a certaine cou'nant and condition; Which was to vndertake by sword and fire, For to destroy an Ile, without remission, A cruell Ile, Ebuda cald by name, The wickedst place where euer creature came. 10 For know (quoth she) beyond the Irish land, There lies among the rest this gracelesse Ile, That yearely sends of wicked wights a band, To rob, to spoile, to fraud and to beguile: All women kinde that happen in their hand, They giue for food vnto a monster vile, Locke in the end o this book in the Allegorie.A monster vile that vseth euerie day, To haue a maid or woman for his pray. 11 Of merchants and of pyrates that do come, They get them store, and of the fairest most: Now guesse by one a day how great a somme, Of women kinde within this Ile are lost. If then of loue you euer tasted cromme, Make one within the king of Irelands host, That make them readie shortly to proceed, To take a faire reuenge of this foule deed. 12 No sooner had Orlando heard her out, But vowd to be as forward as the first, To ioyne himselfe with that same worthie rout, Sent .And now (for loue doth euer cast the worst) Within himselfe begins to cast this doubt, Least that this wicked monster and accurst, Had got his Ladie for a daintie bit, Because he heard no newes of her a yet. 13 And this conceit his minde so much possest, And in his heart made such a deepe impression, Sentence. A .(For both in nature he did still detest All such as vnto others do oppression) And much he fear'd his loue among the rest, Might fall into the monsters vile possession, That straight he shipt, and by their due account, Within three dayes he past saint Michels mount. 14 But hauing passed now the milke white sand, Of which the Ile of Albion takes his name, The wind that in the South before did stand, With o great furie to the Northwest came, In vaine it was against the same to stand, And therefore to retire it was no shame, Backe in one night the tempest draue them more Then they had sayl'd three dayes and nights before. 15 For when they saw it was no boote to striue Against the furie of so fearce a winde, They went euen as the weather did them driue Vntill the streame of Antwerpe they did finde, Where they to land with safetie did arriue: There loe, an aged man with yeares halfe blinde,Here  tale of . Who deemd Orlando of that crew the chiefe, To this effect vtterd to him his griefe. 16 How that a certaine dame of noble blood, Of vertue verie great, of beautie rare, Of sober cheare and of behauiour good, (Though now opprest with miserie and care) Requested him, except his hast withstood, That she to him a matter might declare, In which to aske his wise aduice she ment, To which Orlando quickly did consent. 17 The Ladies pallace stood within the land, To which the Earle conducted was with speed, Where at the entrie did the Ladie stand, In mourning shew, and sorrowfull in deed, Who brought Orlando sadly by the hand, Into a chamber hang'd with mournfull weed, First him by her to sit she doth beseech, And then in ruefull sort she vs'd this speech. 18 First (worthy knight) I would you vnderstood, I was the Earle of Hollands daughter deare, Who was to me so tender and so good, That though my brothers both were him as neare, Yet my desire in nothing he withstood, Nor spake the word that I was loth to heare: Thus whiles in state most stedie I did stand, A certaine Duke arriued in this land. 19 The Duke of Zeland and his arrant was, To Bisky there against the Moores to fight, His age and beautie that did others passe, Moou'd me that had not tafted loues delight, Nor arm'd against his darts with steele or brasse, To yeeld my selfe his prisner without fight, Beleeuing then as still I do and shall, That he to me doth carrie loue not small. 20 For while the windes contrarie here him stay, Though naught for his, yet exc'lent for my drift, What time me seem'd each weeke was but a day, The pleasant houres did slide away so swift, We kept our selues togither day by day, Till at the last we made vs so good shift, That er we parted we had so procured, Each was to other man and wise assured. 21 Byreno was from hence but newly gone, (So is my deare beloued husbands name) But that a great Ambassador anon: Directly om the king of Friseland came, To treat a certaine marriage vpon With other of that nation of good fame, That to my Sire from Holland did repaire, That I might marrie with his sonne and haire.
22 But I in whom faith tooke so deepe a roote, I could not change my new made choise and tho I would, to striue with loue it was no boote, That wounded me so lately with his bow, To stop the motions newly set on foote, Before they might to farther matter grow: I would not go, I flatly told my father, That I to die a thousand deaths had rather. 23 My louing sire that chiefest care did take, That all he did might me his daughter please, Agreeing to my will, and for my sake, My griefe so new conceiued to appease, Straightway the motion of this marriage brake, Which did so sore the Friseland king displease, He made sharpe warres on Holland in short space, By force whereof he ruind all my race. 24 For first he is of limbes and bodie strong, To meete his enemies in open field, And then so politike in doing wrong, He makes their force vnto his fraud to yeeld: He hath his other weapons strange among, A weapon strange, before this seene but seeld, A trunke of iron hollow made within, And there he puts powder and pellet in. 25 def∣of an h, being ing not  be∣mpisAll closed saue a little hole behind, Whereat no sooner taken is the flame, The bullet flies with such a furious wind, As though from clouds a bolt of thunder came. And whatsoeuer in the way it find, It burnes, it breakes, it teares and spoiles the same. the end eke in .No doubt some fiend of hell or diuellish wight, Deuised it to do mankind a spite. 26 And thus with this deuice and many other, In open field our battels twise he brake, And first in fight he slue mine elder brother, (The bulet through his curat way did make) And next in flight he tooke and kild the tother, Which causd my fathers aged heart to quake, Who notwithstanding stoutly did intend, His honor and my safetie to defend. 27 But in a hold that onely now was left him, They him besieg'd that all the rest had wonne, And by sharpe battell all the rest had rest him, Where to a loup one leueld so a gunne, The blow thereof of life and sense bereft him, So swift it came as none the same may shun. A weapon vile, wherewith a foolish boy May worthy captaines mischiefe and annoy. 28 Thus was my father and my brothers slaine, Before this furious king his warre would cease, And I sole heire of Holland did remaine, Which made his former fancie more increase: He thinks by match with me my land to gaine, And offerd to my people rest and peace, If I Arbante marry would his sonne, Which I before refused to haue done. 29 And I (as well for hatred I did beare, Most iust to him and all his generation, By whom my fire and brothers killed were, By whom was spoild and robbed all our nation, As that to breake my promise I did feare, Which I Byreno made with protestation, That howsoeuer fortunes wheele should turne, Yet none should marry me till his returne) 30 Made answer this, that if for euery ill I now abide I should haue thousands more, Though they my corpes with cruell torments kill, I would not breake my promise giuen before. My countrimen perswade me change this will, First praying me, then threatning me full sore, Except I do, to yeeld me and my land (Desired prey) into mine enemies hand. 31 But finding still their threats and prayers vaine, And still that in my former mind I staid, Me and my country by a priuie traine, Vnto the king of Friseland they betraid; Who thinking now with flatie me to gaine, First bid me not to feare or be dismaid, red free to giue me lands and life, would be his sonne Arbantes wife. 32 Then I that see my selfe inforced so, Although I meant that death should set me free, Yet loth as vnreuenged hence to go, On those that had so greatly iniur'd me: Did muse on many meanes to helpe my wo, At last I thought dissembling best to be, Wherefore I fained that I was relented, And that to haue his sonne I was contented. 33 Among some seruants that my father had, Two brethren strong and hardy I did chuse, Most apt to do what euer I them bad, And for my sake no danger to refuse, For each of them was brought vp of a lad Within our house, I did their seruice vse In warre and peace, and found their faiths as great, As were their hearts to any hardy feat. 34 To these two men I open made my mind, They promist me their seruice and their aid, One into Flanders went a barke to find, The tother with my selfe in Holland staid: Now was our day for marriage assingd, When flying newes the strangers made afraid, With many sailes Byreno was reported, Into these parts newly to haue resorted. 35 For when the first conflict and broile was fought, Wherein my brother cruelly was slaine, I straight by letters with Byreno wrought, To make all speed to succor vs from Spaine. But while prouision for each thing was sought, The Friseland king gat all that did remaine, Byreno hearing not what late was past, Conducts his nauie hither in great hast.
36 The Frisland king that heard of his repaire, Dth leaue the marriage for his eldest sonne, And to the sea he goes with nauie faire, They meet, they fight the king of Friseland wonne, And to expell all comfort with despaire, prisner tane, I quite vndone, Abrode Byreno captiue like was carried, At home vnto his en'my I was married. 37 But when he thought in armes me to embrace, And haue that due that wiues their husbands ow, My seruant standing in a secret place, Which I to him did for this purpose show, Affoords him to his sport but little space, And with a Pllax strake him such a blow, That staggring straight, and making little strife, He left his loue, his liuing and his life. 38 And thus this youth borne in vnhappie houre, Came to his death as he deserued well, In spite of all his sire Cymseas powre, Whose tyranme all others did excell: Whose sword my sire and brothers did deuoure, And from my natiue soile did me expell, And meant to enter vpon all my lands, While I by marridge should be in their hands. 39 But when we once performed had this deed, And taken things of greatest price away, Before that any noise or tumult breed, Out of the window we deni'd a way: And packing thence with all expedient speed, We came to sea before the breake of day, Where as my seruant waited with a barge, As he before receiu'd of me in charge. 40 I know not if  tooke more griefe, Or wrath or  kindled in his mind, To  his torne that lay past all reliefe, To find a thing of value left behind, Then when his pride and glory should be chiefe, Then when to make a triumph he assignd, And hoping all were at a wedding glad, He finds them all as at a buriall sad. 41 His hate of me and pittie of his sonne, Sentence Horaece .Torment him night and day with endlesse greefe: But sith by teares no good the dead is done, And sharpe reuenge aswageth malice cheese, From dolefull teares to rage he straight doth runne, And seeks of all his sorrow this releefe. To get me in his hands with subtile traines, Then me to kill with torments and with paines. 42 Those of my friends or seruants he could find, Or that to me did any way retaine, He all destroyd and left not one behind, Some hang'd, some burn'd, and some with torment slaine, To kill  once he had assignd, O purpose onely to procure my paine, But that he thought his life would be a net, The sooner me into his hands to get. 43 Wherefore he set a hard and cruell law, Except Byreno could in twelue months space, Find meanes by fraud or forces me to draw, To yeeld my selfe a prisner in his place, (Such Princes are that haue of God no aw) Then die he should without all hope of grace: So that to saue his life, my death alone Must be the meanes, for other can be none. 44 All that by paine or cost procure I could, With diligence I haue already done, Sixe castles faire in Flanders I haue sold, The mony spent, and yet no profit wonne, I sought to bribe those that him kept in hold, But they my craft with greater craft did shunne: I also mou'd our neighbours neare and farre, English and Dutch on him to make sharpe warre. 45 But those I sent when they long time had staid, I thinke they would not, or they could not speed: They brought me many words, but little aid, My store decreast, but greater grew my need: And now (the thought whereof makes me afraid) That time drawes nie, when neither force nor meed, As soone as full expired is the yeare, From cruell death can safe preserue my deare. 46 For him my father and his sonnes were slaine, For him my state and liuing all is lost, For him those little goods that did remaine, I haue consum'd to my great care and cost, For him with hearts disease and bodies paine, With troublous waues of fortune I am tost, Now last of all I must lay downe my life, To saue my spouse from blow of bloudy knife. 47 And finding that my fortune is so bad, I must to saue his life lay downe mine owne, To leese mine owne I shall be faine and glad, Where sorrow springs of seeds that loue had sowne; This onely feare and doubt doth make me sad, Because I know not how it may be knowne, If I shall sure release Byrenos bands, By yeelding me into the tyrants hands. 48 I feare when he hath shut me in this cage, If all the torments I shall then endure, His fury to Byreno may asswage, Whose libertie I study to procure: I rather feare least following his rage, When he shall find he hath vs both so sure, He will not care his oath and vow to breake, Vpon vs both at once his wrath to wreake. 49 Behold the cause why I did long so sore To speake with you, demaunding your aduice, As I haue oft of others done before. Yet found I none so hardy nor so wise, That would assure his freedome to restore, Whose loue doth me to hate my selfe intice, The cause no doubt is this, they stand in feare Of those his guns, whose force no steele can beare.
50 But if your vertue do not disagree, With this your comely shape and manly show, Let me request you sir to go with me, Where I my selfe in prison shall bestow, And promise me to set Byreno free, If so the tyrant from his promise go. For I shall die with great content and ioy, If by my death Byreno scape annoy. 51 Her dolefull tale the damsell here did end, gne of ourage  wordsWhich oft was interrupted with her teares: Orlando louing not the time to spend In idle talke, all answers long forbeares, But in his mind he fully doth intend To foile her foes and rid her of her feares, He briefly said, that she should him commaund, To do much more then she did him demaund. 52 He meanes not tho that she her selfe should yeeld Vnto the cruell tyrant as a pledge, Except his sword (that failed him but seeld) Had on the sodaine lost his force and edge, He meanes (like common birders in the field) To catch the birds and neuer hurt the hedge, And thus resolu'd to do this worthy deed, From Flanders now by sea they go with speed. 53 The skilfull Pilot doth the vessell steare, Sometime on th'one, sometime on th'other side, The Iles of Zeland some before appeare, And some behind as fast themselues do hide, And straight to Holland they approched neare, Orlando went to land, but bids her bide: His meaning is that she shall vnderstand, The tyrants death before she come on land. 54 Himselfe forthwith was mounted on a steed, A darke browne bay, with white starre in his face, Both large and strongly limbd (like Flemish breed) But not so full of life nor swift of pace, Yet good enough to serue him at his need, When as his Briliador was not in place: And thus he came to Dordreck, where he found With men of armes the gates enuirond round. 55 The wayes, the wals, with arm'd men watched were, stos asisFor tyrants still are most of such condition, (And chiefly new) that ay they stand in feare, And further now some newes had bred suspition, How that an armie great approched neare, Well stor'd with men, and stuffed with munition, The which they said Byrenos cosin brought, By force his kinsmans freedome to haue wrought. 56 Orlando wils a watchman carry word Vnto their King, how that a wandring knight Desires to proue his force with speare and sword, Whom if the King could ouercome in fight, Then he should haue the Ladie by accord, That slue Arbante on his wedding night: For he had taken her into protection, And could deliuer her to his subiection. 57 But craued eke the King should bounden be, By promise firme (if he were ouercome) To let his prisner (cald Byreno free, And of his message this was all the summe: And this was told vnto the King, but he That of true vertue neuer tasted cumme, Bent all his will and wit against all reason, To falshood foule, to false deceit and treason. 58 He makes account if he this knight can stay, The which to do he meanes great meanes to make, That then the Ladie quickly get he may, And make him yeeld her for his safetie sake: He sendeth thirtie men a priuie way, Him to inclose about and prisner take, Who fetching compasse to auoid suspition, At last arriued where they had commission. 59 In this meane time with words he foded out, The worthy Earle, vntill he saw his men, According as he bad them come about, Enclosing all the way behind, and then Out of the gates he rusheth with a rout, Of men on horse and foot of three times ten,Simile. As hunters do inclose the beasts in woods, Or fishers do inclose the fish in floods. 60 So doth the king Cymosco care and striue, To stop the wayes with all foresight and heed, And meaneth sure to haue him tane aliue, And thinks the same is such an easie deed, That of those guns with which he did depriue So many liues, he thinks there is no need, For such a weapon serueth very ill, Where he did meane to take and not to kill. 61 As cunning fowlers do the birds reserue,Simile. That first they take in hope of greater pray, And makes them for a bait and stale to serue, To take the rest by sport and pretie play, So meanes the king aliue him to preserue, But vnto this Orlandos force said nay: He meanes not to be handled in that sort, But breakes the nets and marreth all the sport. 62 The noble Earle with couched speare in hand, Doth ride where as he finds the thickest prease, Two, three and foure, that in his way did stand, The speare doth pierce, nor at the fift doth cease, It past the sixt the brodenesse of a hand, Nor that same handbredth maketh any peace, The seuenth so great a blow therewith he strake, That downe he fell and neuer after spake. 63 Eu'n as a boy that shoots abroade for sport,Simile. And finds some frogs that in a ditch haue bred, Doth pricke them with an arrow in such sort, One after one vntill such store be dead, As that for more his shaft may seeme too short, From fethers fild already to the head, So with his speare Orlando him besturd, And that once left, he draweth out his sword.
64 That sword that neuer yet was drawne in vaine, Against whose edge doth armour little boote, At cu'ry thrust or blow he gaue was slaine, A man on horse, or else a man on foote. The edge whereof with crimson still doth staine, And where it lights it pierceth to the roote. The Frieland king repents him now too late, That he for hast his guns behind forgate. 65 With voice alowd, and many a boistrous thret, He bids them bring his gun, but none doth heare, Who once within the gate his foote can get, He dare not once peepe out againe for feare: But when he saw none by his words did set, And that almost they all departed were, He thought it best to saue himselfe by flight, From o great force of this same furious knight. 66 He backe retires, ne drawes the bridge for hast, Because Orlando now approcht so nie, And had not then his horse him speeded fast, As though he did not runne but rather flie, Orlando would haue made him sore agast, Who caring not to make the poore sort die, Past by the rest and kept the King in chase, That sau'd himselfe by his good horses pace. 67 But yet ere long againe he doth returne, And brings with him his iron cane and fire, Wherwith he doth beate down, and bruse and burne All those whom he to mischiefe doth desire: He hopes this weapon well shall serue his turne, Yet for all this he meanes to come no nire, Smil.But like a hunter priuily doth watch, Where he the heedlesse beast may safest catch. 68 The King with this his engine ly'th in wait, A weapon tearing trees and rending rocks, Whose force no fence can ward with any sleight, It giues so sound and vnexpected knocks: Thus hauing layne at little at receit, And watcht his vantage like a craftie foxe, When once the Earle within his reach he spide, He setteth fire vnto his peeces side. 69 Straight like a lampe of lightning out it flies, And sendeth forth withall so great a sound, As seemd to shake the euerlasting skies, And to remoue the vnremoued ground, The shot gainst which no armour can suffice, But breaketh all that in the way is found, Doth whiz, and sing, and kindles as it went, Yet did not that effect the tyrant ment. 70 For whether twere his ouerhastie speed, And too great will to hurt did make him swerue, Or whether feare possest him in the deed, That not to guide his hand his heart could serue, Or whether God of mercie meere and meed, Was pleasd his champion longer to preserue: It onely strake the horse with so great paine, That downe he ell and neuer role againe. 71 The horse and horseman downe together fell, Downe lay the horse, vp quickly roe the knight, And on his feet was straight recouerd well, More earnestly bent then before to fight, And as the stories of Antheus tell, In whom each fall increased more his might: So though Orlando with his fall was troubled, His force and fury seemed to be doubled. 72 But when the king of Frizland plainly saw, How this bold knight grew fiercer then before, He thought it best by flight himselfe withdraw, His fainting heart with feare was pierst so sore: A side he turnes the horses foming iaw, Now full resolu'd to proue his force no more, Orlando with such speed doth him pursue, As doth an arrow from a bow of Yue. 73 And what he could not riding erst atchieue, He doth the same and more vpon his feet, And runs so swift as few men would belieue, Except themselues had present bin to see it, Vntill at last so hard he him did driue, He ouertooke him in a narrow street, And with his sword he cleft his head in twaine, The senslesse corpes doth on the ground remaine. 74 Now as Orlando did this feate contriue, There grew new broiles from thence a litle distance, For then Byrenos cosin did arriue, With men on horse and foot for his assistance, And finding none that durst against him striue, He entred had the gates without resistance, So late a feare was in the people bred, That none of them durst come to make a hed. 75 The silly Burgers knew not what to say, Nor who these were, nor what was their desire, Vntill the Zelanders themselues bewray, Both by their speech and manner of attire: Then made they peace, and promist them straight∣way, To do what ere the captaine should require, Against the men of Frieland them to aid, Who yet in prison still Byreno staid. 76 For why that people alwayes had in hate, The king of Frieland and his men of warre, Their Dukes late death, and altring their estate, Had mou'd their minds, but that that all did marre, Was ouertaxing them is such a rate, As alwayes breeds a great dislike and iarre. Orlando twixt these men made such conclusion, As turnd vnto the Friseland mens confusion. 77 For straight to ground they threw the prison gate, They fetch the prisners out without a kay, Byreno to the Earle is not vngrate, With thanks a part of his due debt to pay: And then they go to shew Byrenos state, To faire Olympia, that at anchor lay, For so the call they Lady chast and faire, That of that country was vndoubted haire.
78 She that was thither by Orlando brought, Without all hope of any such successe, Who lately (silly creature) onely sought, Her death might bring her louer from distresse: Now was her afetie and Byrenos wrought, When she supposd and lookt for nothing lesse: The ioy cannot with many words be told, Wherewith the tone the tother did behold. 79 The people do the damsell faire restore, Vnto the state that vnto her was due: But she that vowd her selfe for euermore, To be vnto Byreno louer true, Persisting now as faithfull as before, Nor fearing any harme that might ensue, Doth grant to him for loue and meere affection Of her and her estate the full protection. 80 Byreno leaues his cosin in his place, To guide that countrie with sufficient gard, His louing wife in Zeland he will place, That done, with forces marche to Friseland ward: And hopes to conquer it in little space, If that his fortune were not ouer hard, And that which most assur'd him of this thing, He had in hold the daughter of their king. 81 Whom he did meane to marrie (as men say) Vnto a younger brother of his name: Orlando shipt himselfe that present day, Byreno with him to his shipping came, And offerd him a large part of the pray, Because his valew cheefly won the same, Who nothing tooke but that same engin rare, Which we before to lightning did compare. 82 Ne tooke he this away because he ment, To proue the force thereof vpon his foe, Or vse the same when he to battell went, His courage would not suffer him do so: To hurle away the same was his intent, Where it mankinde might neuer damage moe: He lets nor powder nor the shot remaine, Nor ought that did vnto the same pertaine. 83 And when that now the shelues and shallow shore, Some twentie leagues or there about was left, No land discernd behind nor yet before, Vpon the right hand or vpon the left, Because (said he) hereafter neuer more, May any knight of life and limb be rest By thee, or coward vaunt him with the stout, Lye there alow vntill I fetch thee out. 84 O curst deuice found out by seme foule fend, And framd below by Belzebub in hell, Who by thy meane did purpose and intend, To ruine all that on the eart do dwell, From whence thou camst, I thither thee do snd: (This said) the peece vnto the bottom fell: Orlando maketh all the speed he may, Himselfe vnto Ebuda to conuay. 85 I say the noble Earle in hast him hide, Vnto that cruell Ile to finde that wight, Whom he more lou'd then all the world beside, On whom his thoughts were running day & night, Nor would he by the way one whit abide, Lest of new stay might new occasion light, And cause him when he had his purpose mist, To crie with late repentance, had I wist. 86 His course he meanes of neither side to bend, Nor South nor North, such hast he meanes to make, But goes as that blinde archer doth him send, That deepe with dart of golden head him strake. And here a while to leaue him I intend,He returnes to Orlando in the xij. booke st. 25. Returning to the match of which I spake: For you may thinke I lost it in the carriage, If you should heare no more news of the marriage. 87 Great feasts were made in Holland, and great sport, Because of this new match and copulation; But greater shall in Zeland by report, For which there was great care and preparation: Yet would I not you thither should resort, Except you knew Byrenos inclination, For chaunces fell that spoiled all the cheare, As in the booke ensuing you shall heare. In Orlando that at the first motion entertained the enterprise of Ebuda, we may learne to be prone and readie to a honorable exploites: In his comming to succor the distressed Olympia, we may note how God sends vnexpected reliefe to the honest afflicted: In Olympia we may see a rare mirror of constancy, which I doubt too few of her sex will imitate. By Cymoscos tyrannie and death, all Princes may take a warning, that no engins nor stratagems can keepe a tyrant safe in his estate, but onely clemency and bountie, that to lawfull Princes breedes euermore loue and loyalty in the subiect. Concerning the inuention of gunnes, he seemeth to insinuate that they haue bene inuented long before the time that our writers speake of in Germany, which was about Richard the second his time: Virgil hath a verse iu the sixt of the Aeneados, that sounds much to this effect, and my selfe haue wondered at it many times, to see how plainely it expres∣seth the qualitie of a peece of Ordenance. He telles that one Sallomoneus a Gyant had an engin of warre with which he imitated Iupiters thunder & lightning & surely this he would not haue fained, but that he heard of some such thing: the verse is this. Dum flammas Iouis & sonitus imitatur Olympi. Some of our far trauelled men tell vs that they of Chyna hd vse of peeces some thousands of yeares, which I could be willing to credit, saue that they also tell of the records there sice before Adams creation many yeares. Allegorie I finde none but of the Ile of Ebuda where women be giuen to monsters to be deuoured, of which I will speake in another of the Cantoes that followes of that matter. In the monstrous effectes of gunnepowder he alludes perhap to that huge damage done at Venice where their Arsenal or storehouse was blowne vp: as a like mishap though not so terrible, happened in the Tower my grandfather Sir Iohn Markham being then Lieuteuant of the Tower.
THE TENTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Wicked Byreno fals in loue of new, And in an Ile his kind Olympia leaues: Rogero bids Alcynas realme adew, But Logestilla gently him receues: She shewes him how to rule the horse that flew: He flying in the aire, from thence perceaues Renaldos musters: after which he found Angelica vnto the rocke fast bound. 1 AMong the mirrors rare of loyall loue, That present are, or haue bin in time past, Whose faith no force of fortune could remoue With fauning cheare, nor yet with frowning blast: Olympia faire all others far aboue, By iust desert requireth to be plast: Whose stedfast loue (to say I dare be bold) Doth passe the patterns of the new or old. 2 How could she signes more euident impart, Vnto Byreno of her louing mind? No, though she should haue open laid he hart, Yet could she not haue prou'd her selfe more kind: And if such loue and dutie, by desart May looke of due like loue againe to find, Her faith requires vnto Byreno showne, That he should seeke her safetie as his owne. 3 Nor onely not to leaue her in annoy, Or her reiect for any other dame, No not for her that bred the bale of Troy, Or any other of more worthy name, But her preferre before all worldly ioy, Before his senses fiue, before his fame, Or any other thing of greater price, To be exprest by word or by deuice. 4 Now if Byreno did her well requite, If that he shewd to her the like good will, If he regarded as he ought of right, To bend vnto her liking all his skill, Nay if forgetting all her merits quite, Vngrate, vnkind, he sought her life to spill: Behold I shall a tale to you recite, Would make a man his lip for anger bite.Sentence 5 And when that I shall haue declared plaine His crueltie, her loues vnkind reward, I thinke you Ladies neuer will againe Beleeue mens words, your hearts will wax so hard; For Catull. Nil ma∣tuunt iurare ni∣hil promittere parcunt. Ouid: Iupiter ex alto periuria re∣det amantum. Tibullus-Veneris perturia vents irrita per terras & freta summa ferunt. Callimachus: Iu∣rauit quidem, sed amatoria iura∣menta deorū non subeunt aures. louers loued Ladies loues to gaine, Do promise, vow and sweare without regard, That God doth see and know their falshood still, And can and shall reuenge it at his will. 6 Their othes but words, their words are all but wind, Vtterd in hast, and with like hast forgotten, With which their faiths they do as firmely bind, As bundels are trust vp with cords all rotten: Coynesse is naught, but worse to be too kind, Men care not for the good that soone is gotten:Sentence. But women of their wits may iustly bost, That are made wiser by an others cost.Sentence: Foelix quem sacrunt aliena pericula cautum. Ouid: Flamma{que} de stipula nostra breuis{que} fuit. Ouid: Venator sequitur fugien∣tia capta relin∣quit. 7 Wherefore I wish you louely dames beware, These beardlesse youths, whose faces shine so neate, Whose fancies soone like strawne fire kindled are, And sooner quencht amid their flaming heate: The hunter chaseth still the flying hare, By hill by dale with labour and with sweate, But when at last the wished prey is taken, They seeke new game, the old is quite forsaken.Simile.
8 Euen so these youths, the while you say them nay, In humble sort they seeke, they serue, They like, they loue, they honor and obay, They wait, they watch your fauours to deserue: Ouid: A part they plaine, in presence oft they pray, For loe of you they mourne, they pine and starue: But hauing got that erst they sought so sore, They turne their sailes vnto another shore. 9 Though this be true, I not perswade you tho, To leaue to loue, for that were open wrong, To cause you like a vine vndrest to grow, Vncared for the brites and thornes among: But least on youths you should your selues bestow, That neuer in one fancie tarry long; Sentence.The meane is best, young fruites the stomacke gripe, The elder cloy when they be ouer ripe. 10 I shewd you in the tale I told you last, How that Byreno had Cymoscos daughter, To marry whom a motion late was past, Because his brother lou'd and greatly sought her, But his owne mouth was of too lickrish tast, To leaue so sweet a morsell, hauing caught her: He thought it were a point of foolish kindnesse, To part withall, a peece of so rare finenesse. 11 The damsell lttle passed fourteene yeare, Most tender, sweet and louely, fresh and faire, Simile.As when the budding rose doth first appeare, When sunny beames in May make temprate aire, likes her face, her sober cheare, And vsd to her to make to oft repaire, That eu'n a Brimstone quickly taketh flame,Simile. So  tooke him to his perpetuall shame. 12 The streame of teares that for her sire she shed, A flaming fornace bred within his brest, The  she made, and dolefull words she sed, Doth breed his hope of getting his request, Thus soule desires with hopes as foule are fed, Simile.As water hote from boiling straight doth rest, When liquor cold is powred in the pot, So with new loue his old was quite forgot. 13 From flow to ebbe thus turned was the tide, His late belou'd Olympia lothsome grew, To looke on her his heart could scant abide, His thoughts were all so setled on the new, Yet till the time might serue he thinks to hide, His filthy hate with faire and painted hew, And though in fancie he did her detest, Yet still great kindnesse he in shew profest. 14 Ouid: Hit amor . Of And if he shewd the other signes of loue, (Although such loue was worse then any hate) Yet none there was herein did him reproue, But tooke his meaning in another rate, They though some good remorce his mind did moue, In gracious sort to pitie her estate, And that to her he charitably ment, Because she was so yong and innocent. 15 O mightie God, how much are men mistane?Ouid  Met Que  ca  ipso sce mens To ditur How oft with fained shewes they are deceaued? Byrenos wicked meaning and prophane, For good and godly was of men receaued: The marriners their oares in hand had tane, And from the shore the ship was quickly heaued, To Zeland ward the Duke with all his traine, With helpe of oares and sailes doth passe amaine. 16 Now had they lost the sight of Holland shore, And marcht with gentle gale in comely ranke, And (for the wind was westerly) they bore To come within the lue of Scottish banke, When as a sodain tempest rose so sore, The force thereof their ships had well nie sanke, Three dayes they bare it out, the fourth at night A barren Iland hapned in their sight. 17 Here faire Olympia from her ship to sand, From sands he passeth to the higher ground, Byreno kindly led her by the hand, (Although his heart another harbour sound) They sup in their pauillion pitcht on land, Enuirond with a tent about them round: The supper done, to bed do go they twaine, The rest vnto their ships returne againe. 18 The trauell great she lately did endure, And had three dayes before her waking kept, And being now vpon the shore secure, (Now glad of that for which er long she wept) And taking her amid his armes secure, All this did cause that she the sounder slept, (Ah silly soule) when she was least afraid, Of her falle husband thus to be betraid. 19 The trecherous Byreno, whom deceit And though of leud intent doth waking keepe, Now hauing time for which he long did wait, Supposing faire Olympia sound leepe, Vnto his ships he hies with short retrait, And makes them all lanch forth into the deepe; And thus with wicked practise and vniust, He her forsooke that chiefly him did trust. 20 Now were the sailes well charged with the wind, And beare him lighter then the wind away, The poore Olympia now was left behind, Who neuer waked till that breake of day, To lightsomnesse had changd the darknesse blind, And sunnie beames had driu'n the mist away, She stretcht her armes betweene a sleep and wake, And thinks Byreno in her armes to take. 21 She findeth none, and drawing backe againe, Againe she reacht them out, but findeth none, Her leg likewise she reached out in vaine, In vaine for he for whom she feeles is gone, Feare sleepe expels, her eies she opens plaine, Nor yet she heares, she sees, nor feeles not one, With which amazd, the clothes away she cast, And to the shore she runneth in great hast.
22 With heart dismaid, and seeing her before Her fatall hap, vnto the sea she hies, She smote her brest, her haire she rent and tore, Now looking (for all lightsome were the skies) If ought she could discerne, but euen the shore; But euen the shore, no other thing she spies: Then once or twise she cald Byrenos name, Then once or twise the caues resound the same. 23 And boldly then she mounted on the rocks, All rough and steepe, such courage sorrow brought, Her woful words might moue the stones and stocks, But when she saw, or at the least she thought, She saw the ships, her guiltlesse brest she knocks, By signes and cries to bring them backe she sought, But signes and cries but little now auailes, That wind bare them away that fild their sailes. 24 What meanest thou (thus poore Olympia spake) So cruelly without me to depart? Bend back thy course, and cease such speed to make, Thy vessell of her lading lackes a part: It little is the carkas poore to take, Since that it doth already beare the hart: Thus hauing by the shore cride long in vaine, Vnto the tent she backe returnes againe. 25 And lying groueling on her restlesse bed, Moistning the same with water of her eies, Sith two on thee did couch last night (she sed) Why did not two from thee together rise? Accurst the wombe that false Byreno bred, Accurst the day that first I saw the skies: What shall I do? what can I here alone, Or who (wo me) can mitigate my mone? 26 I see no man, nor any signe I see, That any man within this Ile doth dwell: I see no ship that hence may carry me, With (at the least) some hope of being well: I here shall starue, it cannot other be, And buried how to be I cannot tell; Ah how if wolues that wander in this wood, Deuoure my flesh, or drinke my guiltlesse blood? 27 Alas I doubt, and stand eu'n now in feare, Lest that some rau'nous wolfe that here abides, Some Lion, Tyger, or some vgly Beare, With teeth and clawes shall pierce my tender sides, Yet what beast could with greater torment teare, Then thou more fierce then any beast besides? For they contented are but once to kill, But thou my life a thousand times dost spill. 28 But presuppose some vessell here arriue, And take me from this place for pittie sake, And so perchance I may be left aliue, The Beares nor Lions neuer shall me take, Yet will it be in vaine for me to striue, Againe to Holland my repaire to make: Thou keepst by force the place where I was borne, Whence by deceit thou broughts me (false forsworn) 29 Thou tookst from me my liuing, by pretence And colour of thy friendship and alliance, Thy men of armes were paid by my expence, I gaue thee all, such was my fond affiance. Or shall I turne to Flanders? sith from thence I sold my selfe, and am at flat defiance With all the nation, whom to set thee free, I quite forsooke, that now ah wo is me? 30 Is there for me in Friseland any place? Where I refusd for thee to be a Queene, The which refusall ruind all my race, As by the sequell was too plainly seene? O cruell hap, ò strange and monstrous case, The righteous God iudge thee and me betweene, Was euer Tyger carried heart so hard, For so firme loue to pay so foule reward? 31 But what and if some pyrat wanting feare Of God and man, shall take me as a slaue? Thou God forbid, let Tyger, Wolfe and Beare, First carry me a prey into their caue, And there my flesh in peeces all to teare, That dying, I my chastitie may saue. This said, her raging griefe her hands addresses, To offer force vnto her golden tresses. 32 And euen as Hecuba fell raging mad,Simile With griefe of mind and sorrow sore oppressed, To see her Polydorus little lad, By kinsmans fraud and crueltie distressed: So rau'd Olympia faire, as though she had With twentie thousand diuels bene possessed: At last she sitteth on the rocks alone, And seemes as senslesse as the senslesse stone.He followes this of Olympia wher Orlando found her naked in E∣buda, booke xi, staffe 43. Rogero. 33 And in this state I meane to let her stay, Till of Rogero I haue talkt a while, Who traueld in the hot and sandy way, Full many weary and vnpleasant mile: And now it was the middle of the day, When as vpon the South side of the Ile, He saw three Ladies neare a little towre, Did sport themselues within a pleasant bowre. 34 These Ladies faire were of Alcynas crew, And there refresht themselues a little space, They had great store of wines both old and new, And sundry kind of iunkets in like case: A pretie barke there lay within their vew, That did attend their pleasures in the place, And wait when any little gale should blow, (For now was none) that they might homeward go. 35 Then one of these that had espide the knight, At such a time, and in such way to ride, With courteous speech inuites him to alight: The second brings him wine on th'other side, And makes him farre more thirstie with the sight, But these enticements could not cause him bid, He feares Alcyna prisner so might take him, If by this stay she hapt to ouertake him,
36 Simile.Euen as salt peeter mixt with brimstone pure, straight when once it feeles the fire, Simile.Or as the sea with winds and aire obscure, Doth we  and swell, and euer riseth hier; So they that law their words could not allure, H noble mind to follow their desier, Tooke high disdaine that they were so contemned, And him of great discourtesie condemned. 37 And straight the third as in a raging mood Said thus, O creature void of all gentilitie, And borne (no doubt) of base vnworthy blood, And bred where neuer vsed was ciuilitie, Ay during life fro thee depart all good, Nor mast thou die in quiet and tranquilitie, But burned mast thou be, or cut in quarters, Or driuen to hang thy selfe in thine owne garters. 38 With these and many bitter speeches mo, They raile on him, and then they take their barke, And cast along vpon the Southerne shore, That they his passage and his course might marke. But he that now was gotten farre before, Did little to their threats or curses harke: And notwithstanding all that they contriued, Yet to his ship in safetie he arriued. 39 The Pilot doth Rogero much commend, That from Alcyna so himselfe did saue, And as a wise and well experienc'd frend, Sound counsell and good precepts him he gaue, And wisht that he his time would better spend, And leaue fond toyes, embracing wise dome graue, And from the good the euill to discerne, As I  vsed men to learne. 40 There is the food that fils and neuer cloyeth, There is the loue, the beautie and the grace, That maketh him most blest that them enioyeth, To which compar'd, all ether ioyes are base: There hope, nor feare, nor care the mind annoyeth, Respect of persons, nor regard of place: The mind still finding perfit contentation, That rests it selfe in vertuous contemplation. 41 There are (said he) some better lessons taught, Then dancings, dallyings or daintie diet, There shal you learne to frame your mind & thought From will to wit, to temperance from riet: There is the path by which you may be brought Into the perfect paradise of quiet. This tale the Pilot to Rogero told. And all the while their course they forward hold. 42 But  they see a nauie vnder saile, Of ships that toward them in hast did bend, wrathfull striuing tooth and naile. Doth thinke to fetch againe her fleeting frend: But all her diligence could not auaile, to returne doth not intend, And of her forces he was not afraid, Because that I  sent him aid. 43 For straight a watchman standing in a towre, So high that all the hils and shore was vnder, Did ring the larum bell that present houre, He saw her fleet, though distant farre asunder: And when that now approched was their powre, With cannon shot they made them such a thunder, That though Alcyna threatned much and braued, Yet was Rogero from her malice saued. 44 Then at his first arriuall to the shore, Foure damsels met him sent by Logestilla, Andronica that wisely sees before, And Fronesis the iust, and chast Drusilla, And she that boldly fights for vertues lore, Descending from the Romane race Camilla: And straight rusht out of men a worthy band, Ay prest to meet their foes on sea and land. 45 Within a large and very quiet bay, A nauie was of vessels big and tall, That readie at an howers warning lay, To go to fight at any little call: And now there was begun a great affray, By land and sea the conflict was not small, Which did the realme in hurly burly set, Alcyna late did from her sister get. 46 Tis strange to see of wars the strange successe, She that of late was counted of such might, Is now so driu'n in danger and distresse, That scant she could preserue her selfe by flight, Rogeros parting brought her griefe no lesse, Then did the foile, which both bred such despite, And such despaire, to die she had intended, (If so she might) to haue her torments ended. 47 And as her selfe the dame of Carthage kild, When as the Troyan Duke did her forsake: Or as her blood the Queene of Aegypt spild, For that so famous Romaine captaines sake: Euen to Alcyna with like sorrowes fild, Wisht of her selfe with like death end to make, But (either auncient folke beleeu'd a lie, Or this is true) a fairy cannot die. 48 But leaue we now Alcyna in this paine,Flere Alcyna That from her elder sister fled apace, And to Rogero let vs turne againe, That was conducted to a beeter place, Where finding now that he did safe remaine, He thanked God that gaue him so much grace, To see his foes of forces all depriued, Himselfe within the castle safe arriued. 49 And such a castle that in starely show And costly substance others all surmounted, The value of the wals can no man know, Except he first vpon the same had mounted: Men haue not iewels of such price below,The  gestilles For Di'monds are to these but drosse accounted, And Pearles but pelse, and Rubies all are rotten, Where stones of such rare vertue can be gotten.
50 These wals are built of stones of so great price, All other vnto these come farre behind: In these men see the vertue and the vice, That cleaueth to the inward soule and mind. Palsus at, &famia uem? sum cem.Who looks in such a glasse, may grow so wise, As neither flattring praises shall him blind With tickling words, nor vndeserued blame, With forged faults shall worke him any shame. 51 From hence doth come the euerlasting light, That may with Phoebus beames so cleare compare, That when the Sunne is downe there is no night, With those that of these iewels stored are: These gems do teach vs to discerne aright, These gems are wrought with workmanship so rare, teriam  opus.That hard it were to make true estimation, Which is more worth the substance or the fashion. 52 On arches raisd of porphiry passing hie, So hie that to ascend them seemd a paine, Were gardens faire and pleasant to the eie, Few found so faire below vpon a plaine: Sweet smelling trees in order standing by, With fountaines watring them in steed of raine, Which do the same so naturally nourish, As all the yeare both flowres and frutes do flourish. 53 No weeds or fruitlesse trees are in this place, But herbs whose vertues are of highest price, As soueraigne sage, and thrift, and herbe of grace, And time, which well bestowed maketh wise, And lowly patience, proud thoughts to abase, And hearts ease, that can neuer grow with vice. These are the herbs that in this garden grew, Whose vertues do their beauties still renew. 54 The Ladie of the castle greatly ioyed, To see the safe arriuall of this knight, And all her care and trauell she employed, That honor might be done him in her sight. Altolfo (in his passage lesle annoyed, Doth take in his acquaintance great delight, And all the other his good fauour sought, That by Melyssa to themselues were brought. 55 Now hauing all themselues some dayes reposed In Logestillas house, and taken rest, And finding all themselues right well disposed, To make returne againe into the West, The good Melyssa for them all proposed, Vnto the mightie Ladie this request, That by her leaue without incurring blame, They might returne them all frō whence they came. 56 To whom dame Logestilla thus replide, That after they a day or two had staid, She would for them most carefully prouide, For all their iourney furniture and aid: And first she taught Rogero how to ride The flying horse (of whom he was afraid) To make him pace or passe a full careere, As readily as other horses here. 57 When all was ready now for him to part, Rogero bids this worthy dame farewell, Whom all his life time after from his hart He highly honored and loued well. First I will shew how well he playd his part, Then of the English Duke I meane to tell, How in more time and with far greater paine, He did returne to Charles his court againe. 58 Rogero mounted on the winged steed, Which he had learnd obedient now to make, Doth deeme it were a braue and noble deed, About the world his voyage home to take. Forthwith beginneth Eastward to proceed, And though the thing were much to vndertake, Yet hope of praise makes men no trauell shunne,Sentence. To say another day, we this haue done. 59 And leauing first the Indian riuer Tana, He guides his iourney to the great Catay, From thence he passeth vnto Mangiana, And came within the fight of huge Quinsay; Vpon the right hand leauing Sericana, And turning from the Scythians away, Where Asia from Europa first doth draw, Pomeria, Russia, Prutina he saw. 60 His horse that hath the vse of wings and feet, Did helpe with greater haste home to retire, And tho with speed to turne he thought it meet, Because his Bradamant did so desire, Yet hauing now of trauell felt the sweet,Sentence: (Most sweet to those to knowledge that aspire) When Germany and Hungry he had past, He meanes to visitArtosto cals v ultima Ingleter∣ra the vttermost countriy. So in time past he old *Romances wrote. Et penitus toto diuisos orl Bri∣gannos. England at the last. 61 Where in a medow on a morning faire, Fast by the Tems at London he did light, Delighted with the water and the aire, And that faire citie standing in his sight, When straight he saw that souldiers did repaire, To muster there, and asking of a knight, That in the medow he had met by chance, He vnderstood that they were bound for France. 62 These be the succors (thus the knight him told) Renaldo sude for at his comming hither, With Irish men and Scots of courage bold, To ioyne in hearts and hands and purse together. The musters tane and each mans name enrold, Their onely stay is but for wind and wether, But as they passe I meane to you to shew them, Their names and armes, that you may better know them. 63 You see the standerd that so great doth show,Ariosto doth but roue at thse no∣ble mens names, and if any of vs should write of the noble men of that time, we should do the like. That ioynes the Leopard and the Flouredeluce, That chiefest is, the rest do come below, And reu'rence this according to our vse: Duke Leonell Lord generall doth it ow, A famous man in time of warre and truce, And nephew deare vnto the King my master, Who gaue to him the Duke dorne of Lancaster.
64 This banner that stands next vnto the kings, With glittring shew that shakes the rest among, And beares in azure field three argent wings, To  Earle of Warwicke doth belong. This man the Duke of Glosters banner brings, head, except my guesse be wrong, The sierbrand the Duke of Clarence is, Thence the Duke of Yorke doth claime for his. 65 The launce into three sundry peeces rent, Belongs vnto the worthy Duke of Norfolke: The lightning longs vnto the Earle of Kent, The phin longs vnto the Earle of Pembroke: The ballance eu'n by which iust doome is ment, Belongs vnto the noble Duke of Suffolke. The Dragon to the valiant Earle of Cumberland, The garland is the braue Earls of Northumberland. 66 The Earle of Arundell a ship halfe drownd, The Marquesse Barkly giues an argent hill: The gallant Earle of Essex hath the hound, The bay tree Darby that doth flourish still: The wheele hath Dorset euer running round, The Earle of March his banner all doth fill With Cadar trees: the Duke of Somerset A broken chaire doth in his ensigne set. 67 The Faulcon houering vpon her nest, The Earle of Deu'nshire doth in banner beare, And brings a sturdy crew from out the West. The Earle of Oxenford doth giue the Beare: The banner all with blacke and yellow drest, Belongs vnto the Earle of Winchester. He that the cristall crosse in banner hath, Is sent from the rich Bishop of the Bath. 68 The archers on horse, with other armed men, Are two and fortie thousand more or lesse, The other ootmens number doubles them, Or wants thereof but little as I guesse: The banners shew their captains noble stem, A crosse a wreath, an azure bat, a fesse, and , Edward bold and Harry, Vnder their guide the footmen all do carry. 69 The Duke of Buckingham that first appeares, The next to him the Earle of Salibury: Burga next a man well stricke in yeares, And Edward next the Earle of Shrewsbury. Now  about, and to the Scottish peares, Braue men, and well appointed you shall see, Where  sonne vnto the Scottish king, Vnto the field doth thirtie thousand bring. 70 All chosen men from many a shire and towne, All ready to resist, assaile, inuade, Their standerd is the beast of most renowne, That in his paw doth hold a glittring blade, This is the heire apparant to the crowne, This is the goodly impe whom nature made, To shew her chiefest workmanship and skill, And ater brake the mould against her will. 71 The Earle of Otton commeth after him, That in his banner beares the golden barre: The spotted Leopard that looks so grim, That is the ensigne of the Duke of Marre. Not far from him there commeth Alcubrin, A man of mightie strength and fierce in warre, No Duke, nor Earle, nor Marquesse as men say, But of the sauages he beares the sway. 72 The Duke of Trafford beares in ensigne bright, The bird whose yong ones stare in Phoebus face:An Lurcanio Lord of Angus, valiant knight, Doth giue a Bull, whom two dogs hold in chase; The Duke of Albanie giue blue and white, (Since he obtained faire Geneuras grace) Earle Bohune in his stately banner beares A Vulture that with clawes a Dragon teares. 73 Their horsemen are with iacks for most part clad, Their horses are both swift of course and strong, They run on horseback with a slender gad, And like aspeare, but that it is more long: Their people are of warre then peace more glad, More apt to offer then to suffer wrong: These are the succors out of Scotland sent, That with the noble Prince Zerbino went. 74 Then come the Irish men of valiant harts, And actiue limbs, in personages tall, They naked vse to go in many parts, But with a mantle yet they couer all: Short swords they vse to carry and long darts, To fight both neare and farre aloofe withall, And of these bands the Lords and leaders are, The noble Earles of Ormond and Kildare. 75 Some sixteene thousand men or thereabout, Out of the Irish Ile at this time went, Beside the other Ilands thereabout, Sweueland and Island other succors sent; To good king Charles, for why they stood in doubt, If he were conquerd they should all repent, And still their numbers daily did increase, Of those that better like of warre then peace. 76 Now while Rogero learnes the armes and name Of euery Brittish Lord, behold a rout Of citizens and folke of all sorts came, Some with delight, and some with dread and doubt, To see a beast so strange, so strong, so tame, And wondring much, they compast him about: They thought it was a strange and monstrous thing, To see a horse that had a Grissons wing. 77 Wherefore to make the people maruell more, And as it were to sport himselfe and play, He spurd his beast, who straight aloft did soare, And bare his master Westward quite away: And straight he was beyond our English shore, And meanes to passe the Irish seas that day, Saint George his channell in a little while, He past, and after saw the Irish Ile.
78 Where men do tell strange tales, that long ago Saint Patricke built a solitary caue, Into the which they that deuoutly go, By purging of their sinnes their soules may saue: Now whether this report be true or no, I not affirme, and yet I not depraue. But crossing from hence to Island ward he found Angelica vnto the rocke fast bound. 79 Both nakt and bound at this same Ile of wo, For Ile of wo it may be iustly called, Where peerlesse peeces are abused so, By monster vile to be deuourd and thralled, Where pyrats still by land and sea do go, Assaulting forts that are but weakly walled: And whom they take by flattry or by force, They giue a monster quite without remorce. 80 I did declare not many books before, If you the same in memory do keepe, How certaine pyrats tooke her at a shore, Where that chast hermit lay by her asleepe, And how at last for want of other store, Although their hearts did melt, and eyes did weepe, Mou'd with a helplesse and a vaine compassion, Perforce they bound her on this wofull fashion. 81 And thus the caitiues left her all forlorne, With nothing but the rocks and seas in sight, As naked as of nature she was borne, And void of succor, and all comfort quite, No vaile of lawne as then by her was worne, To shade the damask rose and lillies white, Whose colours were so mixt in euery member, Like fragrant both in Iuly and December. 82 Rogero at the first had surely thought, She was some image made of alla blaster, Or of white marble curiously wrought, To shew the skilfull hand of some great master. But vewing nearer he was quickly taught, She had some parts that were not made of plaster: Both that her eyes did shed such wofull teares, And that the wind did waue her golden heares. 83 To see her bound, to heare her mourne and plaine, Not onely made that he his iourney staid, But causd that he from teares could scant abstaine, Both loue and pitie so his heart assaid, O so∣atenia inter angū.At last with words to mitigate her paine, Thus much to her in louing sort he said, O Ladie worthy onely of those bands, Wherewith loue binds the hearts and not the hands. 84 And farre vnsit for these or any such, What wight was found so cruell and vnkind, To banish all humanitie so much, Those polisht iuory hands in chaines to bind, About that corps whom none can worthely tuch With hurtfull hands, vnworthy bands to wind? This said, she blusht, seeing those parts were spide, The which (though faire) yet nature striues to hide. 85 Faine would she with her hand haue hid her eyes, But that her hands were bound vnto the stone, Which made her oft to breake to wofull cries, (Sole remedy where remedy is none) At last with sobbing voice she doth deuise To tell the knight the cause of all her mone:Sentence. But from the sea a sodaine noise was heard, That this her speech and all the matter mard. 86 Behold there now appeard the monster great, Halfe vnderneath and halfe aboue the waue, As when a ship with wind and weather beat, Doth hasten to the hau'n it selfe to saue: So doth the monster hast, in hope to eate The daintie morsell he was wont to haue: Which sight so sore the damsell did appall, Rogero could not comfort her at all. 87 Yet with his speare in hand, though not in rest, The vgly Orke vpon the brow he strake, (I call him Orke, because I know no beast, Nor fish from whence comparison to take) His head and teeth were like a bore, the rest A masle, of which I know not what to make, He gaue him on the brow a mightie knocke, But pierst no more then if it were a rocke. 88 And finding that his blow so small hurt brings, He turnes againe on fresh him to aslay, The Orke that saw the shadow of great wings, Vpon the water vp and downe to play, With fury great and rage away he flings, And on the shore doth leaue the certaine pray, The shadow vaine he vp and downe doth chase, The while Rogero layth him on a pace. 89 Euen as an Eagle that espies from hi,Simile. Among the herbs a partie colourd snake, Or on a bank sunning her selfe to lie, To cast the elder skin, a new to make, Lies houering warily till she may spie A vantage sure the venomd worme to take, Then takes him by the backe, and beates her wings, Mauger the poison or his forked stings. 90 So doth Rogero both with sword and speare, The cruell monster warily assaile, Not where he fenced is with grizly heare, So hard as that no weapon could preuaile, But sometime pricks him neare vnto his eare, Sometime his sides, sometimes his vgly taile; But nature had with such strong fences armd him, As all his blowes but small or nothing harmd him. 91 So haue I seene ere this a silly flie,Simile. With mastiue dog in sommers heate to play, Sometime to sting him in his nose or eie, Sometime about his grizly iawes to stay, And buzzing round about his eares to flie, He snaps in vaine, for still she whips away, And oft so long she dallies on this sort, Till one snap comes and marreth all her sport.
92 But now Regero doth this sleight deuise, Sith that by force he cannot make him yeeld, He meanes to dazle both the monsters eies, By hidden force of his enchanted sheeld, And being thus resolu'd, to land he flies, And from all harme the Ladie faire to sheeld, He puts the precious ring vpon her hand, Whose vertue was enchantments to withstand. 93 That ring that worthy Bradamant him sent, When she from false Brunello had it tane, With which Melyssa into India went, And wrought his freedome, and Alynas bane, That ring he lends the damsel, with intent To saue her eyes by vertue of the same, Then takes he forth the shield, whose light so dazed The lookers o, they fall downe all amazed. 94 The monster now approching to the shore, Amazd at this, resistance none did make, Regero hewes vpon him more and more, But his hard scales no harme thereby did take. Oh sir (said she) vnloosen me before Out of this maze the monster do awake, And let your sword slay me this present houre, So as this monster may not me deuoure. 95 These wofull words mou'd so Rogeros mind, That straight he did vnloose the Lady faire, And causd her by and by to get behind Vpon his horse, then mounting in the aire, He leaues his Spanish iourney first assignd, And vnto little Brittain doth repaire, But by the way be sure he did not misse, To giue her many a sweet and friendly kisse, 96 And hauing found a solitary place, A pleasant groue well waterd with a spring, Which neuer herd nor herdman did deface, Where Philomela vsed still to sing, Here he alights, minding to stay a space, And hither he the Lady faire did bring, But sure it seemd he made his full account, Ere long vpon a better beast to mount. 97 His armour made him yet a while to bid, Which forced stay a more desire did breed, But now in him it was most truly tride, Oft times the greater hast, the worse the speed, He knits with hast two knots, while one vntide. But soft tis best no furder to proceed, I now cut off abruptly here my rime, And keepe my tale vnto another time. In Byreno that abandoned his kind Olympia in a desolate Iland,Morall. and fell in loue with another, we may note an ex∣ample of ingratitude, the monsirous fault of all faults, and most odious before God and man: and herein learne to abhor and detest this vice in him and in all others, that hauing received preferment or aduancement, either by men or women, when they haue done, shake them off like horses that be lame, or garments that be old, preferring one to the mill, the other to the dunghill: or as our Stukley said, make as much of his wife as he could, and if any could make more of her, they might take her, after he had gotten many thousand pounds by making much of her. In the spiteful words that one of Alcynas wo∣men spake of Rogero, we may obserue the maner of want on worldlings, that if they see a young man live temperatly, or go plainly, or speake deuoutly, straight they say he is a base fellow, and one that knowes not what belongs to a Gentleman: which foolish maner of phrase, by Rogeros example we must learne to contemne, and know that such men are indeed base as thinke temperance, and sobrietie, and deuotion base qualities. Finally in Rogeros trauell about the world, we may see how commendable it is for a yong gentleman to trauel abrode into forrain nations, but yet we may note withall an incon∣uenience that comes many times with it, to see some Angelicas naked, that will tempt men of very stanch gouernment and staid yeares to that which they shall after repent, as Rogero did this his wantonnesse, as appears more plainly in the next booke, where you shall find he lost both his horse and the ring by the vngratefulnesse of Angelica. For the matter historicall of this tenth booke,Historie. there is litle to be said, and nothing to be affirmed: for the succors sent to France from England, Scotland, Ireland, and many places thereabouts, though I cannot affirme precisely of the time, yet sure it is that many have bin sent hence against the Turk to France and elsewhere. And whereas he speakes of S. Patrick the Irish Saint, I would haue them that would know the story of him to look in Surius de vitis Sanctorum, and there they may see it at large: for mine owne part, at my being in Ireland, where I taried a few moneths, I was inquisitiue of their opinion of this Saint, and I could learne nothing, other then a reuerent conceit that they had of him, as becomes all Chri∣stians to haue of deuout men, and chiefly of those by whom they are first instructed in the Christian faith: but for his pur∣gatory, I found neither any that affirmed it or beleeued it. Logestillas castle,Allegorie. the ornaments thereof, the herbs of the garden, all these figure the true magnificence, glory, comfort, and vtilitie of vertue. The foure Ladies sent to rescue Rogero, are the foure Cardinall vertues, which being well vnited together, are able to ouerthrow whole nauies of vicious pleasures. And so whatsoeuer else is spoken of Logestilla in Alle∣gory is taken for vertue. In Angelica tied to the rock,Alsio. and deliuered by Rogero, he alludes manifestly to the tale in Ouid of Andromade and Perseus, who with his shield turned the beholders into stones.
THE ELEVENTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Angelica doth hide her selfe away, By vertue of the ring Rogero lent her: Rogero sees a gyant beare away, His spouse halfe dead, and greatly doth lament her: Orlando at the Ile of woe doth stay, Where many women meete but hard aduenter: Here be the monster kild, Olympia freed, To marrie whom Oberto soone agreed. 1 THe galiant courser in his full carrire. Is made by man, to stop with slnder raigne: But man himselfe his lust and fond desire, Is seldome drawn by rea∣son to refraine; Tis hard to stop, but har∣der to retire, When youthfull course ensueth pleasure vaine, Simile.As Bears do breake the hiues and weake defences, When smell of honie commeth to their sences. 2 No maruell if Rogero could not hold, But that he would now take a little sport, That naked did Angelica behold, Within a groue alone from all resort; His loue to Bradamant now waxeth cold, Or at the least is temperd in such sort, He meanes therewith at this time to dispence, And not to let this go a maiden hence. 3 Whose beautie was so rare as well it might, A notable Stk.Haue made Zenocrates an Epicure, No maruell then if this same gentle knight, Could not so great temptation well endure: But while he hastend to his hopt delight, Of which he thought him in possession sure, There fell a strange and vnexpected thing, By meanes Angelica did know the ring. 4 This was the ring that she with her had brought, To France, the verie first time she was there, What time by ayd thereof so well she wrought, She holp her brother to th'inchanted speare, By vertue of this ring she set at nought, Those magicke arts, that men so greatly feare: With this Orlando Countie Palladine, She did release from wicked Dragontine, 5 By helpe of this inuisible she went, Out of the towre where Atlant had her set:A of  Or For this same ring Brunello false was sent By Agramant, who longd the same to get, To tell that storie is not my intent, For feare it might my other matter let, But certaine tis, that when this ring was lost, In fortunes waues she had bene euer tost. 6 Now when she saw this ring was on her hand, She was so strooke with maruell and with ioy, That scarce she could discerne and vnderstand, If she were wake or if she dreamd sometoy: But to make triall how the case doth stand, And know if she this treasure doth inioy, Into her mouth the ring she doth conuay, And straight inuisible she goeth away. 7 Rogero that each minute thought an howre, (His armour of, and readie for the play) Expecting now the damsell in a bowre, Where he had pointed her for him to stay, Found all to late, that by the rings strange powre, She had vnseene conuayd her selfe away. He lent it her to saue her eyes from blindnesse, And for reward she quits him with vnkindnesse,
8 With which her act dipleasd and ill apaid, He curst himselfe, and chased in his mind: O cruell and vnthankfull wench (he said) Is this the loue that I deseru'd to find? Dost thou reward him thus that brought thee aid? To thy preseruer art thou so vnkind? Take ring and shield, and flying horse and me, This onely barre me not thy face to see. 9 This said, he goth about where she had beene, Still groping as the weather had bin darke, Embracing oft the aire his armes betweene, In steed of her, then heedfull he doth harke, To find her by the sound that was not seene, And whence the same doth come he wel doth mark. But on went she vntill it was her lote To come into a silly shepheards cote. 10 And though this same were far from any towne, Yet there she quickly did her selfe prouide Of meate and drinke, and of a simple gowne, Sufficient for the time her bare to hide, Not suting for a Ladie of renowne, That had bin euer clad in pompe and pride, Had gownes of crimson, purple and carnasion, Of eu'ry colour, and of eu'ry fashion. 11 But yet no kind of weed so base or ill is, Her of her princely beautie to bereaue, They that so much extoll faire Amarillis, Or Galate, do but them themselues deceaue: Cease Tyterus to praise thy golden Phillis, Peace Melebe, this passes by your leaue; Ye souldiers all that serue in Cupids garrison, May not presume with this to make comparison. 12 Now here the damsell faire a palfrey hired, With other things most needfull for her way, And means to her owne home to haue retired, to An∣ the 12.  staffe.From whence she had bin absent many a day. The while Rogero now with trauell tired, Lamenting he had lost so faire a pray, Doth seeke his horse who had not long bin idle, But in his masters absence brake his bridle. 13 Which when he found, the raines in peeces torne, The horse soard far away with mightie wing, How could such haps with patientnesse be borne, Of one great losse to find a greater spring? He sitteth in a dumpe, like one forlorne, For losse of her, his horse, and of his ring, Whose vertue great did make him much repent it, But yet much more her vertue that had sent it. 14 And in this rage he puts his armor on, And on his shoulder carieth his shield, Pursuing that first path he lights vpon, He found it brought him to a goodly field, On side whereof when he a while had gone, It seemd the wood adioynd some sound did yeeld, And still the neare and nearer that he goes, The plainer sound he heard of sturdy bloes. 15 A combat twixt a Giant and a Knight, He sees hard by most furiously begunne, The Giant with a club doth think by might, The battell of the tother to haue wonne; The tother with his sword and nimble fight, His furious blowes with watchfull eye doth shunne. Rogero seeing this great inequalitie, Yet standeth still and shewes no partialitie. 16 But in his mind he wisht the Knight to win, When lo the Giant with new fury fed, To lay on lode with both hands doth begin, And with one blow he layes him downe for dead, And straight in cruell sort he steppeth in, For to disarme him, and cut off his head: But when the Giant had the face disarmed, Rogero knew the partie he had harmed. 17 He saw it was his Bradamant most deare, Whom this same Giant would haue made to die, Wherefore with courage stout he steppeth neare, The Giant to new combat to defie, Who either heares him not, or would not heare, Or meaneth not a conflict new to trie, But tooke her vp, and on his shoulders layd her, And so in hast away from thence conuayd her. 18 So haue I seene a wolfe to beare away A lambe from shepheards fold, so haue I seene An Eagle on a silly Doue to pray, And soare aloft the skie and earth betweene: Rogero hies him after as he may, Vntill he came vnto a goodly greene, But th'other eu'ry step so much out stept him, That in his view Rogero scantly kept him. 19 But now a while of him I speake no more, And to Orlando I returne againe,He comes to Ro∣gero again in the 1 book, staff. 14. Who hauing lost the sight of Holland shore, Did hasten to Ebuda with much paine: I did declare not many books before, How he Cymoscos engin strange did gaine, And to the bottome of the sea did throw it, That none might find it out againe or know it. 20 And though his meaning and intent was so, Yet vaine it was, as after was perceiued, For why, that serpent vile our auncient so, That Eua first in Paradise deceiued, Not much aboue two hundred yeares ago, (As we from our forefathers haue receiued) From out the sea by necromancie brought it, And then in Almanie afresh they wrought it. 21 They wrought it both in iron and in brasse, The cunning and the art increasing still, As oft by proofe we find it comes to passe, The worse the worke, the greater growes the skill,Sentence. And to each kind a name assignd there was, According to the first inuenters will, To tell the names of all were but a trouble, Some demicanons, some are called double.
22 The Culerings to shoot a bullet farre, The Falcon, aker, inin and the Sling, Not armed men, but walled townes to marre, Such  force is in this hellish thing. Ye souldiers braue, and valiant men of warre, Now cease to field your manly darts to bring, And get a hargubush vpon your shoulder, Or ele in vaine you sue to be a souldier. 23 How didst thou find (oh filthy foule inuention) A harbor afe in any humane hart? Thou mak'st a coward get the souldiers pension, And souldiers braue thou robst of due desart, Whole millions haue bin slaine, as stories mention, Since first  was this wicked art, France, Italy and England chiefe may rew it, Since first they vsd this art, and first they knew it. 24 The English bowmen may go burne their boes, And breake their , and cut in two the string, That weapon now may keepe the corne from croes, That did the French at Agincourt so sting: But to that wight I wish a world of woes, That did to light, deuice so diu'llish bring, Let him be giu'n into the hands of Sathan, To be tormented ay with Cre and Dathan. 25 Now good  though he greatly striued, With speed to get him to the Ile of wo, Yet first the Irish King was there arriued, By chance, or else that God would haue it so, Because it might the better be contriued, On wrongfull wights his iudgements iust to show. But when  b once in sight appeared, Orlando all the companie straight cheared. 26 And putting off his armes of colour sable, He bids the master out to launch his boate, And in the same anker strong and cable, With which he means vnto this Ile to floate, Not doubting (if lucke serue) he will be able, To put the anker in the monsters throate. And thus alone the noble Knight doth venter, Into the Ie  buda then to enter. 27 Now was the time when as Aurora faire, Began to shew the world her golden head, And looke abroade to take the coole fresh aire, lying still in iealous bed, When as Orlando hither did repaire, By two blind guides, Cupid and Fortune led, When lo vnto the shore his shipboate turning, He seemd to heare a noise as one were mourning. 28 At which strange sound casting his eye aside, He might discerne a goodly damsell naked, With armes abrode vnto the rocke fast tide, That what with cold and what with terror shaked, Eftsoones the hideous monster he espide, Whose light might well haue made stout harts haue quaked, Orland nd therewith is not , Nor his high courage any w abated. 29 He gets betweene the monster and his pray, That pray that he so hotly doth pursue, And (for before he was resolu'd what way He would attempt the monster to subdue) Vpon his shoulder doth the anker lay, And when he came within his vgly vew, Euen mauger all his malice, might and rancor, Into his open iawes he beares the ancor. 30 As they that dig in mine of cole or stone, The same in sundry places vnderprop, Lest it should fall when least they thinke thereon, And so their breath or else their passage stop: So is this anker fastend in the bone, Both in the bottome of his mouth and top, That though he would againe he could not close it, Nor wider open it for to vnlose it. 31 Now hauing gagd his hideous chaps so sure, That out and in he can with safetie go, He enters with his sword the place obscure, And there bestoweth many a thrust and blow, And as that citie cannot be secure, That hath within her wals receiu'd her fo, No safer could this Orke be now from danger, That in his entrals hath receiu'd a stranger. 32 But griped now with pangs of inward paine, Sometime he plungeth vp vnto the skie, Sometime he diueth to the deepe againe, And makes the troubled sands to mount on hie: Orlando feels the sea come in amaine, That forced him at last his swimming trie, He swims to shore with body strong and able, And beares vpon his neck the ankers cable. 33 And as a sauage Bull that vnaware About his hornes hath now a cord fast bound,Simile. Doth striue in vaine to breake the hunters snare, And skips, and leaps, and flings, and runneth round, So though Orlando with his strength so rare, Assaid to draw him nearer to the ground, Yet doth he fetch an hundred frisks and more, Ere he could draw him vp vpon the shore. 34 His wounded bowels shed such store of blood,The  deed  ed  the s at the  wakes They call that sea the red sea to this howre, Sometime he breathed such a sudden flood, As made the clearest weather seeme to lowre, The hideous noise fild eu'ry caue and wood, So that god Proteus doubting his owne powre, Fled straight fro thence, himself in corners hiding, Not daring longer here to make abiding. 35 And all the gods that dwell in surging waues, With this same tumult grow in such a feare, They hid themselues in rocks and hollow caues, Left that Orlando should haue found them there: Neptune with triple mace by flight him saues, His charret drawne with dolphins doth him beare, Nor yet behind Glaucus or Triton taried, For feare in these new broiles to haue miscaried.
36 Those Ilanders that all this while attended, And saw the monster drawne to land and tane, With superstition moued much, condemned This godly worke for wicked and profane; As though that Proteus would be new offended, That had before, and now might worke their bane. They doubt he wold (thus fools their good haps con∣sters Send to their land his flock of vgly monsters. 37 And therefore Proteus anger to appease, They meane to drowne Orlando if they can, Whose deed they deemd his godhead did displease And eu'n as fire doth creepe from bran to bran, Vntill the pile of wood it wholy cease, So doth this fury grow from man to man, That they concluded all vpon the matter, To throw Orlando bound into the water. 38 One takes a sling, another takes a bow, This with a sword is armd, he with a speare, And some afore, and some behind him go, Some neare approch, some stand aloofe for feare: He museth much what his vngratefull so Should meane, for benefits such mind to beare: And inwardly he was displeasd and sory, To find such wrong where he deserued glory. 39 As little curres that barke at greatest Beare, Yet cannot cause him once his way to shunne, No more doth he these curlike creatures feare, That like a sort of mad men on him runne. And (for they saw he did no armor weare) They thought the feat would haue bin easly done, They knew not that his skin from head to foote, Was such to strike on it, it was no boote. 40 But when that he his Durindana drew, He layd there with about him in such sort, That straight their faintnes and his force they knew, They found to fight with him it was no sport. Thrise ten of them at blowes but ten he slew, Their fellowes fled that saw them cut so short, Which foes thus foild, Orlando now intended T'vnloose the Ladie whom he had defended. 41 But now this while, behold the Irish band Arriued neare vnto their chiefest citie, Who had no sooner set their foote on land, But that forthwith they put apart all pittie, And slue all sorts that came vnto their hand, The fierce, the faint, the foolish and the wittie, Thus were't iust doome, or were it cruell rage, They spar'd of neither sexe nor neither age. 42 Thus th'lle of wo is made a wofull Ile, And for the peoples sake they plague the place, Orlando sets the Lady free the while, That there was bound in that vnseemly case, To haue bin giuen vnto the monster vile: And viewing well, he cald to mind her face, And that it should Olympia be he guessed, But twas Olympia that had thus bin dressed. 43 Distrest Olympia thus vnkindly serued,Olympia. Whom loue and fortune made a double scorne: For first of him, of whom she best deserued, She was forsaken quite and left forlorne. And next by pyrats taken and reserued, Of monster vile to be in peeces torne. And in this case the good Orlando found her, And then with great compassion he vnbound her. 44 And thus he said, now tell what strange annoy, Or euill hap hath hurt thy happie raigne? Whom late I left in solace and in ioy. Why do I find in danger and in paine? How is the blisse that thou didst then enioy. So chang'd and turnd to misery againe? And she in wofull maner thus replied, When shame her cheeks with crimson first had died: 45 I know not if my chance or else my choice, If fortune or my folly be in blame, Shall I lament, or shall I now reioyce, That liue in wo, and should haue did in shame And as she spake, the teares did stop her voice: But when againe vnto her selfe she came, She told him all the wofull story weeping, How false Byreno had betraid her sleeping. 46 And how from that same Ile where he betrayd her, A crew of cursed pyrats did her take, And to this wicked Iland had conuayd her, For that same foule and vgly monsters sake, Where now it was Orlandos hap to ayd her: She walked naked when these words she spake Looke how Diana painted is in tables, Among the rest of Ouids pleasant fables. 47 Of whose sharpe doome the Poet there doth tell,Ouid. Mtam. 3. How she with hornes Actaeon did inuest, Because he saw her naked at the well: So stands Olympia faire, with face and brest, And sides, and thighes to be discerned well, And legs and feet, but yet she hides the rest. And as they two were talking thus together, Oberto king of Irish Ile came thither. 48 Who being moued at the strange report, That one alone the monster should assaile, And gag him with an anker in such sort, To make his strength, and life, and all to faile, Then draw him to the shore as ship to port: Is towd with ropes, without or oares or saile This made him go to find Orlando out, The while his souldiers spoiled all about. 49 Now when the King this worthy Knight did see, Though all with bloud and water foule distained, Yet straight he guest it should Orlando be, For in his youth in France he had remained, And knew the Lords and Knights of best degree, In Charles his court a page of honor trained: Their old acquaintance cauld at this new meeting. They had a louing and a friendly greting.
50 And then Orlando told the Irish king, How and by whom Olympia was abused, By one whom out of danger great to bring, She had no paine nor death it selfe refused, How he himselfe was witnesse of the thing. While they thus talke, Oberto her perused, Whose sorrows past, renewd with present feares, Did fill her louely eyes with watry teares. 51 Such colour had her face, as when the Sunne Doth thine on watry cloud in pleasant spring, And eu'n as when the sommer is begunne, The Nightingales in boughes do sit and sing, So that blind god, whose force can no man shunne, Sits in her eyes, and thence his darts doth fling, And bathes his wings in her cleare cristall streames, And sunneth them in her rare beauties beames. 52 In thee he heates his golden headed dart, In those he cooleth it, and temperd so, He leuels thence at good Obertos hart, And to the head he drawth it in his bow, Thus is he wounded deepe and feeles no smart, Hs armor cannot send to fierce a blow: For while on her faire eyes and limbes he gaped, The arrow came thet could not be escaped. 53 The description of Olympias beautie.And sure Olympias beauties were so rare, As might well moue a man the same to note, Her haire, her eyes, her cheeks most amorous are, Her nose, her mouth, her shoulders and her throte, As for her other parts that then were bare, Which she was wont to couer with her cote, Were made in such a mould as might haue moued The chast Hipolytus her to haue loued. 54 A man would thinke them framd by Phydias arts, Their colour and proportion good was such, And vnto them her shamefastnesse imparts A greater grace to that before was much: I cease to praise those other secret parts, As not so fit to talke of as to tuch, In generall all was as white as milke, As smoth as iuory, and as soft as silke. 55 Had she in valley of Idea beene, When Pastor Paru hap did to befall, To be a iudge three goddesses betweene, She should haue got, and they forgone the ball. Had she but once of him bene naked seene; For Heera he had not car'd at all, Nor broke the bonds of sacred hospitalitie, That bred his country warres and great mortalitie. 56 Had she but then bene in Crotana towne, Zeuces looke in the .When Zeuce for the goddesse Iunos sake, To paint a picture of most rare renowne, Did many of the fairest damsels make To stand before him bare from foote to crowne, A patterne of their perfect parts to take, No doubt he would haue all the rest refused, And her alone in steed of all haue chused. 57 I doubtlesse deeme Byreno neuer vewd Her naked corps, for certaine if he had, He could not so all humane sence exclude, To leaue her thus alone in state so bad: But briefly all this matter to conclude, It seemd Oberto would haue bin full glad, In this her wo, her misery and need, To comfort her by either word or deed. 58 And straight he promist that he would attend her, And set her in her country if he may, And mauger all her enemies defend her, And take reuenge on him did her betray. And that he might both men and money lend her, He would to pawne his realme of Ireland lay, Nor till she were restor'd aske no repayment, And straight he sought about to get her raiment. 59 They need not trauell farre to find a gowne, For why immediatly they found good store, By sending to the next adioyning towne, The which his men of warre had spoild before, Where many a worthy Ladie of renowne, That had bene naked tide vnto the shore, And many a tender virgin and vnfoiled, Were of their raiment and their liues despoiled. 60 And yet for all they were so richly gownd, Oberto could not cloath her as he wold, No not in Florence (though it doth abound With rich embroderies of pearle and gold) Could any peece of precious stuffe be found, Of worth to serue to keepe her from the cold, Whose shape was so exact in euery part, Euen hard to match by nature or by art. 61 Orlando with this loue was well content, As one that hither came with other end, For sith he mist Angelica, he ment His iourney backe to France againe to bend, With them by ship to Ireland first he went, As in his way, and with the king his frend, Not hearing, had his loue bin here or no, For all were dead that could haue told him so. 62 At both their sutes be scant staid there one day, His passing loue such passions in him bred, But ere he went he doth Oberto pray To do for her as much as he had sed, And parting so from thence he tooke his way, Eu'n as his fortune and his fancie led, But good Oberto need not be desired, To do as much or more then he required. 63 For few dayes past but that with her he went To Holland, where he raised such commotion, That straight Byreno taken was and shent, Receiuing on three trees a iust promotion: And all those countries did forthwith consent, To sweare them faith and be at their deuotion. Thus of a Countesse she is made a Prince, And liues in ioy and solace euer since.
64 Orlando bends his course to Brittish shore, f the mpia.Whence he not long before to ship did mount, Where he had left his famous Brilliadore, A goodly courser and of good account, No doubt of valiant acts he did good store, Though what they were I cannot here recount, For such a minde he carride still vnto them, He cared not to tell them, but to do them. 65 But in what fashion he did passe the rest Of that vnfortunate and fatall yeare, I say by me it cannot be exprest, Because thereof no record doth appeare, But when the spring did ground with green inuest, And sunne in Gemini made weather cleare, Then did he acts both worthie of reciting, And to be kept in euerlasting writing. 66 From hils to dales, from woods to pastures wide, From waters fresh vnto the salt sea shore, To seeke his loue he vp and downe doth ride, The lesse he finds he seeketh still the more; At last he heard a voice for helpe that cride, He drawes his sword aud spurs his Brilliadore, But to refresh the reader now tis reason, And stay my storie to a better season. In the beginning of this eleuenth booke is a notable morall of temperance,Moral. with two comparisons, one of the horse, ano∣ther of the Beare, which I iudge fit for this place rather to be repeated then expounded. If (saith he) a horse, with a little snaffle, may be stopt in his full carrire, what a shame is it for a man not to bridle his disordinate affections with reason, but to be like a Beare so greedie of honie, that he breakes downe the hiues, and deuoureth the combes, till his tongue, eyes and iawes be stong, readie to make him runne mad: so do young men deuoure with extreme greedinesse, these sensuall pleasures, of venerie, surfetting, drinking, pride in apparrell, and all intemperance, till in the end they are plagued with sicknesse, pouertie, and many other inconueniences to their vtter ruine and confusion. Wherefore in the person of Rogero young men may weigh the losses he had by following his present fancie to Angelica; namely his ring and his horse: by the tone is vnderstood reason, by the other courage. In Angelica whose beutie so exceedingly shined in her poore apparel, you great Ladies may see, that your true natural beauties becom you best, beside that it hath euer bene counted a great signe of modestie and chast disposition in women, to be rather cleanly then sumptuous in apparrell, for the vaine expence therin hath bene often occasion both to corrupt the minds and manners of many not ill disposed. And therefore that excellent verse of Sir Philip Sidney in his first Arcadia (which I know not by what mishap is left out in the printed booke) is in mine opinion worthie to be praised and followed, to make a good and vertuous wife. Who doth desire that chast his wife should bee, First be he true, for truth doth truth deserue, Then be he such as she his worth may see, And alwayes one credit with her preserue: Not toying kind, nor causlesly vnkind, Not stirring thoughts, nor yet denying right: Not spying faults, not in plaine errors blind, Neuer hard hand, nor euer rayns too light: As far from want, as far from vaine expence, Tone doth enforce, the tother doth entice, Allow good companie, but driue fro thence, All filthie mouths that glorie in their vice. This done, thou hast no more but leaue the rest, To nature, fortune, time, and womans brest. In which you see his opinion of the two extremities of want and vaine expence. Of the inuention of gunnes,Historie, as I somewhat touched two bookes before, so here you see how he affirmath in a manner that they were inuented in Germanie. And so I haue read, that the first time they were vsed was in the yeare 1391. in the Venetians war against the Genoas, but it is maruell that the inuentors name of so monstrous a thing is not knowne. Baken the great English necromancer wrote many yeares before that time, that he knew how to make an engin, that with salt peter and brimstone wel tempered together should proue notable for batterie, but he said he would not discouer it, for feare it would be a meane to destroy all mankinde. In the destruction of the Ile of Ebuda,Allegorie. and all that hath bene sayd of it before, with the monsters that are said to de∣uoure women naked and forsaken, this Allegoricall sence is to be picked out (though to some perhaps it will seeme greatly strayned.) By the Iland is signified pride, and loosnesse of life, that they are brought to (by pirats) which signifie flatte∣rers, that go rouing about to tise them hither, robbing them indeed of all their comely garments of modestie, and so∣brietie, and at last leaue them naked vpon the shore, despised and forsaken, to be deuoured of most vgly and misshapen monsters signified by the Orke, as filthie diseases', deformities, and all kinde of contemptiple things, which monsters, a good plaine friend, with an anker of fidelitte will kill, as Orlando did this, and so cloth againe the nakednesse, that before pride and flatterie made vs lay open to the world. And whereas is it said that Neptune and Proteus fled from Orlando,Allusion. it is meant that a true Christian driues a∣away all superstitious idolatrie, where soeuer he commeth. I finde no Allusion worth the noting.
THE TVVELFTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Orlando doth pursue with great disdaine, One that did seeme his loue by force to carrie: Rogero led by such another traine, With him doth in the charmed pallace tarrie: Orlando parting from the place againe, He sees indeed her whom he faie would marrie, Fights with Ferraw, and foiles two Turkish bands, And findes faire Isabell in outlawes hands. 1 FAire Ceres when she hast∣ned backe againe, From great Ideahomward to returne, There where Enceladus with endles paine, Doth beare mount Aetna that doth ener burne, When she had sought her daughter long in vaine, Whose losse so strange did make ye mother mourne, la duabus as p  Spundo  er coach rpents.She spoiles for spite her brest, cheeks, eyes and heare, At last two boughs from Pyne tree she doth teare. 2 In Vulcans forge slie sets on fire the brands, And giues them powre for euer to be light, And taking one a peece in both her hands, And drawne in coach by yoked serpents might, She searcheth woods and fields and seas and lands, And brooks and streames and dens deuoyd of light, And hearing here on earth no newes to like her, At last she went to hell it selfe to seake her. 3 Were good Orlandos powre to be compared, As well with Ceres as his louing minde, He would no paine, no place, nor time haue spared, His deare belou'd Angelyca to finde, To go to rocks and caues he would haue dared, And place to saints, and place to sends assignd, He onely wanted one of Ceres waggons, In which she carried was with flying draggons. 4 How he did search all France before he told, Now Italy to search is his intent, And Germany and Castill new and old, And then to Affrica to pasle he ment, And as he thus determined, behold He heard a voice that seemed to lament, And drawing nye to vnderstand what tyding, On a great horse he saw a horse man ryding. 5 Perforce he bare vpon his saddle bow, A Lady sorrowfull and sore afrayd, That cryde a loud still making open show, Of inward griefe and thus to him she said, O worthy wight (Lord of Anglante) know I dye, I dye, without you bring me ayd, And then he thought coming more nie to vew her, It was Angelyca, and that he knew her. 6 I say not that it was, but that it seemd, To be Angelyca that thus was caryd, But he that iustly great disgrace it deemd, Thus in his sight, to haue his mistresse haryd, Whose loue aboue all treasures he esteemd, To take reuenge hereof he nothing taryd, But put his spurres to Briladores sides, And in great hast to that same horseman rydes. 7 With many bloodie words and cruell threts, He bids that horseman to come backe againe, But he at naught his wordes and speeches sets, Reioycing in so rich a gotten gayne, The vilen still ground of Orlando gets, Vntill they came into a faire large plaine, Wherein a house of great estate was built, The gate hereof in gorgeous sort was gilt.
8 The building all of marble faire was wrought, Most costly caru'd and cunningly contriued, To this faire house his pray the soule thief brought, Straight after him Orlando there arriued: Then he alights and all abcut he sought, For him that had him of his ioy depriued, He maketh search in chambers all about, And galleries and halls to finde them out. 9 Each roome he finds set forth with rich aray, With beds of silke, and gold of curious art, But yet he finds not that desired pray. The want whereof did sore torment his hart. There might he finde with like affliction stray, Gradass, Sacrapant and Brandimart, And fearce Ferraw postest with strange confusion, Procured in that place by strong illusion. 10 They all complaine in anger and in rage, How of this house the master them hath vsed, One lost his horse, another lost his page, Another doubts his mistresse is abused: Thus are they kept like birds within a cage, And stand with sense and wits and words confused, And manie with this strange deception carried, Within this place both weeks & months had tarried 11 Orlando when he saw he could not learne, Where this same theefe his mistresse had conuaid, Thought she was carride out at some posterne; Wherfore within no longer time he staid, But walkes about the cattle to discerne, I that were true of which he was asf aid: But as he alked vp and downe the plaine, He thought he heard her call him backe againe. 12 And to a window casting vp his eve, He thought he saw her face full of diuinitie, And that he heard her plainly thus to crie, Onoble wight of proued magnanimitie, Helpe now, or neuer helpe, alas shall In mine Orlandos sight leese my virginitie? Kill me, or let a thousand deathes befall me, Rather then let a villaine so to thrall me. 13 These wofull speeches once or twise repeted, Caus'd him returne into the house againe, And searching once againe he chaste and freted, (Hope still asswaging somewhat of his paine) And oft he heard the voice that counterfeted The speech of his Angelica most plaine, From side to side he follow'd still the sound, But of Angelica no signe he found. 14 Now while Orlando tarrid in this traunce, In hope for to auenge his mistresse harmes, Roger (who I told you had this chaunce) To see his Fradamant in gyants armes, (Drawne to this place with such another daunce) Namely by force of some vnusuall charmes, Saw first the gvant in this castle enter, And after him he boldly doth aduenter. 15 But when he came within the castle walls, And made much narrow search, as in such case, In garrets, towrs, in parlers and in halls, And vnder staires and many a homely place, Oft casting doubts what hurt his loue befalls, Or left the theefe were gone in this meane space, Forthwith he walketh out into the plaine, And heares a voice recall him backe againe. 16 That voice that lately did Orlando make, Returne in hope Angelica to finde, Rogero now for Bradamant doth take, Whose loue no lesse possest his carefull minde: And when the voice vnto Gradasso spake, Or Sacrapant, or Brandimart most kinde, To euerie one of these it plainely seemed, To be her voice whom ech one best esteemed 17 Atlanta had procur'd this strange inuention, Thereby to keepe Rogero from mischance, Because he saw, it was the heauens intention, That he by treason should be kild in France, Ferraw and those of whom I last made mention, Whith all whom vallew highest did aduance, To keepe him companie he here detained, With good prouision while they here remained. 18 And while these knights with strange enchanments bound Do here abide, behold the Indian queene Angelica that late her ring had found, (Whose vettue can her cause to go vnseene,Angelica And also frustrate magicke skill profound) Now longing home, where long she had not been, And being now of needfull things prouided, Yet wants she one that her might hom haue guided 19 Orlandos companie she would haue had, Or Sacrapant, she car'd not which oftwaine, Not that of eithers loue she would be glad, For them and all the world she did disdaine, But (for the way was dangerous and bad. In time of warre to trauell France and Spaine) She wisht for her owne safetie and her ease, To haue the companie of one of these. 20 Wherefore a while she trauels vp and downe, To seek for them that long in vaine had sought her, And passing many woods and many a towne, Vnto this place at last good fortune brought her, Where whē she saw these knights of great renowne, Thus seeke for her, she scant abstaines frō laughter, To see Atlantas cunning and dissembling, Her person and her voice so right resembling. 21 Her selfe vnseene, sees them and all the rest, Now meanes she sure to take one of them two, But yet she knowes not which (her doubtfull brest Did stay as vnresolued what to do) Orlandos vellew could defend her best, But then this doubt is added thereunto, That when she once so highly had prefard him, She shall not know againe how to discard him.
22 But Sacrapant although she should him lift High vp to heauen, yet maketh the no doubt, But she will find some sleight and pretie shift, With her accustom'd coynesse him to lout: To him she goes, resolued of this drift, And straight the precious ring she taketh out From of her mouth, which made her go concealed, With mind to him alone to be reuealed. 23 But straight came in Orlando and Ferraw, That both desired, her to haue enioyd, Thus all of them at once their goddesse saw, Not being now by magick art annoyd, For when the ring on finger she did draw, She made vnwares all their enchantments voyd, These three were all in complet armor, saue Ferraw no headpeece had, nor none would haue. 24 The cause was this, he solemnely had sworne, Vpon his head no helmet should be set, But that that was by stour Orlando worne, -rasano.Which he did erst from Traians brother get, Ferraw to weare a helmet had forborne, Since with the ghost of Argall he had met: Thus in this sort they came together armed, By vertue of her ring now all vncharmed. 25 All three at once do now the damsell vew, All three at once on her would straight haue seased, All three her faithfull louers were she knew, Yet with all three at once she is displeased, And from all three she straight her selfe withdrew, Who (haply) one at once would her haue pleased, From henceforth none of them she thinks to need, But that the ring shall serue in all their steed. 26 She hastens hence and will no longer stay, Disdaine and feare together make her swift, Into a wood she leades them all the way, But when she saw there was none other shift, Into her mouth the ring she doth conuay, That euer holpe her at the deadest list, And out of all their fights forth with she vanished, And leaues them all with wonder halfe astonished. 27 Onely one path there was, and that not wide, In this they followd her with no small hast, But she first causd her horse to step aside, And standeth still a while till they were past, And then at better leisure she doth ride, A farre more easie pace, and not so fast, Vntill they three continuing still their riding, Came to a way in sundry parts diuiding. 28 And comming where they found no further tracke, Ferraw, that was before the tother two, In choler and in fury great turnd backe, And askt the other what they meant to do, And (as his maner was to brag and cracke) Demaunded how they durst presume to wo, Or follow her, whose propertie he claimed, Except they would of him be slaine or maimed. 29 Orlando straight replide, thou foolish beast, Saue that I see thou doest an helmet want, I would ere this haue taught thee at the least, Hereafter with thy betters not to vant: Ferraw doth thank him for his care (in ieast) And said it shewd his wits were very scant, For as he was he would not be afraid, To proue against them both that he had said. 30 Sir, said Orlando to the Pagan King, Lend him your headpeece, and er we go hence, I will this beast in better order bring, Or sharply punish him for his offence. Nay soft (said Sacrapant) that were a thing, The which to grant might shew I had no sence, Lend you him yours, for Ile not go to schoole, To know as well as you to bob a foole. 31 Tush (quoth Ferraw) fooles to your faces both, As though if I had bin disposd to weare one, I would haue sufferd (were you leiue or loth) The best and proudest of you both to beare one, The truth is this, that I by solemne oth Vpon a certaine chance did once forsweare one, That on my head no helmet should be donne, Vntill I had Orlandos helmet wonne. 32 What (quoth the Earle) then seems it vnto thee, Thy force so much Orlandos doth surmount, That thou couldst do the same to him, that he Vnto Almonta did in Aspramount? Rather I thinke, if thou his face should see, Thou wouldst so farre be wide of thine account, That thou wouldst tremble ouer all thy body, And yeeld thy selfe and armour like a nody. 33 The Spanish vaunter (like to all the nation) Said he had often with Orlando met, And had him at aduantage in such fashion, That had he lift he might his helmet get, But thus (quoth he) the time brings alteration, That now I seeke, I then at naught did set, To take his helmet from him then I spared, Because as then for it I little cared. 34 Then straight Orlando mou'd in rightfull anger, Made answer thus, thou foole and murren lier, I cannot now forbeare thee any longer, I am whom thou to find doest to desier, When met we two that thou didst part the stronger? Thou thoughtst me farder, thou shalt feele me nier, Try now if thou beest able me to foyle, Or I can thee of all thy armour spoyle. 35 Nor do I seeke to take this ods of thee, This said, forthwith his helmet he vntide, And hung the same fast by vpon a tree, Then drew his Durindana from his side; And in like sort you might the Spaniard see, That was no whit abated of his pride, How he his sword and target straight prepard, And lay most manfully vnto his ward.
36 And thus these champions do the fight begin Vpon their coursers fierce, themselues more fierce, And where the armour ioynes and is most thin, There still they striue with sturdy strokes to pierce: Search all the world, and two such men therein Could not be found, for as old bookes rehearse, Their skins were such, as had they bin vnarmed, Yet could they not with weapons haue bin harmed. 37 Ferraw had in his youth inchantment such, That but his nauell, hard was all the rest, Vnto Orlando there was done as much, By prayer of some saint (as may be guest) Saue in his feet, which he let no man tuch, Take it for truth, or take it for a iest, Thus I haue found it wrote, that they indeed Ware armor more for shew then any need. 38 Thus twixt them two the fight continues still, Yet not so sharpe in substance as in show; Ferraw imploying all his art and skill, Sharpe thrusts vpon the tother to bestow: Orlando that hath euer strength at will, Layth on the Spaniard many a lustie blow: Angelica doth stand fast by vnseene, And sees alone the battell them betweene. 39 For why the Pagan Prince was gone the while, To find her out, when they together fought, And by their strife, that he might both beguile, He hopes, and had conceiued in his thought: again 27 book, 15 staff.He rides away, and trauels many a mile, And still his deare beloued mistris sought, And thus it came to passe that she that day, Was onely present at so great a fray. 40 Which when she saw continue in such sort, Not yet could guesse by ought that she did see, Which was most like to cut the other short, She takes away the helmet from the tree, And thinks by this to make her selfe some sport, Or they by this might sooner sundred be, Not meaning in such sort away to set it, But that the worthy Earle againe may get it. 41 And with the same away from hence she goes, The while they two with paine and trauell tired, In giuing and in taking deadly bloes, Ferraw (that mist the headpeece first) retired, And for he did most certainly suppose, That Sacrapant had tane it vndesired, Good Lord (said he) what meane we here to do? This other knight hath cousened vs two, 42 And vnawares the helmet tane away. Orlando hearing this, doth looke aside, And missing it, he doth beleeue straightway, As did Ferraw, and after him they ride: They came at last into a parted way, That in two parts itselfe doth there deuide, Fresh tracke in both of them was to be seene, This of the Knight, that of the Indian Queene. 43 Orlando hap was to pursue the Knight, Ferraw, that was more luckie of the twaine, Happend vpon Angelica to light, Who to refresh her former taken paine, Fast by a fountaine did before alight, And seeing sodainly the knight of Spaine, Straight like a shadow from his fight the past, And on the ground the helmet left with hast. 44 But as the fight of her did make him glad, In hope by this good fortune her to get, So thus againe to loose her made him sad, And shewd that she did him at nothing set: Then curst he as he had bin raging mad, Blaspheming Tryuigant and Mahomet, And all the Gods adord in Turks profession, The griefe in him did make so deepe impression. 45 Yet when he had Orlando helmet spide, And knew it was by letters writ thereon, The same for which Traianos brother dide, He takes it quickly vp and puts it on, And then in hast he after her doth ride, That was out of his sight so strangely gone, He takes the helmet, thinking little shame, Although he came not truly by the same. 46 But seeing she away from him was fled, Nor where she was he knew nor could not guesse, Himselfe from hence to Paris ward he sped, His hope to find her waxing lesse and lesse: And yet the sorrow that her losse had bred, Was part asswag'd, the helmet to possesse, Though afterward when as Orlando knew it, He sware great othes that he would make him rew it. 47 But how Orlando did againe it get, And how Ferraw was plagued for that crime, And how they two betweene two bridges met, Whereas Ferraw was killed at that time, My purpose is not to declare as yet, But to another story turne my rime: Now I must tell you of that Indian Queene, By vertue of her ring that goeth vnseene. 48 Who parted thence all had and discontented, That by her meanes Ferraw his will had got, That she (with this vnlookt for hap preuented) Left him the helmet, though she meant it not, And in her heart her act she sore repented, And with her selfe she laid alas God wot, I silly foole tooke it with good intention, Thereby to breake their strife and sharp contention. 49 Not that thereby this filthy Spaniard might By helpe of my deceit and doing wrong, Keepe that by fraud he could not win by might, Alas to thy true loue and seruice long, A better recompence then this or right, From me (my good Orlando) should belong: And thus in this most kind and dolefull fashion, She doth continue long her lamentation.
50 Now meaneth she to trauell to the East, Vnto her natiue soile and country ground, Her iourney doth her other griefes digest, Her ring doth in her iourney keepe her found, Yet chanced she, ere she forsooke the West, To trauell neare a wood, whereas she found A fine yong man betweene two dead men lying, With wound in bleeding brest euen then a dying. 51 shall come  her againe in  19. booke,  staffee.But here a while I cease of her to treate, Or Sacrapant, or of the knight of Spaine, First I must tell of many a hardy feate, Before I can returne to them againe: Orlandos actions I will now repeate, That still endur'd such trauell and such paine, Nor time it selfe, that sorrowes doth appease, Could grant to this his griefe an end or case. 52 And first the noble Earle an headpeece bought, By late ill fortune hauing lost his owne, For temper or the strength he neuer sought, So it did keepe him but from being knowne. Now Phaebus charret had the daylight brought, And hid the starres that late before were showne, And faire Aurora was new risen when Orlando met two bands of armed men. 53 One band was led by worthy Manilard, A man though stout, yet hoary haird for age, Who with his men did make to Paris ward, He not for warre, but fit for counsell sage: Alsyrdo of the other had the guard, Then in the prime and chiefe floure of his age, And one that passed all the Turkish warriers, To fight at tilt, at turney or at barriers. 54 These men with other of the Pagan host, Had layne the winter past not far fro thence, When Agramant did see his men were lost, By vaine assaults vnto his great expence, And therefore now he sweares and maketh bost, That he will neuer raise his siege fro thence, Till they within that now had left the field, Were forst by famine all their goods to yeeld. 55 And for that cause, now sommer comes againe, He gets together all the men he may, With new supplies of Affrike and of Spaine, And some of France that did accept his pay, But that in order due they may remaine, He points them all to meet him in one day, Who by commandment hither came in clusters, To make appearance at the pointed musters. 56 Now when Alsyrdo saw Orlando there, Inflamd with pride end glory of his mind, He longed straight with him to breake a speare, And spurs his horse, but quickly he doth find Himselfe too weake so sturdy blowes to beare, And wisheth now that he had staid behind, He falleth from the horses back downe dead, The fearfull horse without his master fled. 57 Straight there was raisd a mightie cry and shout, By all the souldiers of Alsyrdos band, When as they see their captaine (late so stout) Throwne downe and killed by Orlandos hand: Then out of ray they compast him about On eu'ry side in number as the sand, They that are nie, with blowes do him assaile, And those aloose throw darts as thicke as haile. 58 Looke what a noise an herd of sauage swineSimile. Do make when as the wolse a pig hath caught, That doth in all their hearings cry and whine, They flocke about as nature hath them taught: So do these souldiers murmure and repine, To see their captaine thus to mischiefe brought, And with great fury they do set vpon him, All with one voice, still crying, on him, on him. 59 I say the nearer fight with sword and speare, And those aloose send shafts and many a dart, But he that neuer yet admitted feare To lodge in any harbour of his hart, Vpon his shield a thousand darts doth beare, And thousands more on euery other part, Yet of them all makes no more care nor keepe, Then doth a Lion of a flocke of sheepe. 60 For when at once his fatall blade he drew, That blade so often bathd in Pagans blood, No steele there was of temper old or new, Nor folded cloths the edge thereof withstood, About the field, heads, legs, armes, shoulders flew, The surrowes all did flow with crimson flood, Death goeth about the field reioycing mickle, To see a sword that so surpast his sickle. 61 This made the Pagan rout so sore agast, He that could swiftest runne was best apaid, And as they came, so fled they now as fast, One brother for another neuer staid: No memory of loue or friendship past, Could make one stay to giue another aid, He that could gallop fastest was most glad, Not asking if the wayes were good or bad. 62 Onely one man there was in all the field, That had so long in vertues schoole bin bred, That rather then to turne his backe or yeeld, He meaneth there to leaue his carkas dead: Old Manylard, who taking vp his sheeld, Euen as his valiant heart and courage led, Sets spurs to horse, and in his rest a lance, And runs against the Palladin of France. 63 Vpon Orlandos shield his speare he brake, Who neuer stird for all the manly blow, But with his naked sword againe he strake, And made him tumble ore the saddle bow: Fortune on vertue did some pitie take, For why, Orlandos sword fell flatling tho, That though it quite amazd and ouerthrew him, Yet by good hap it maimd him not nor flew him.
64 With great confusion all the other fled, And now of armed men the field was voyd, Saue such as were or seemed to be dead, So as Orlando now no more annoyd, Went on his iourney as his fancie led, To seeke herin whose fight he onely ioyd, Through plains and woods, through sandy ways and miry, He trauels making still of her enquiry. 65 Vntill it was his fortune toward night Here you should begin  read the ale of .To come fast by a mountaine in whose side Forth of a caue he saw a glims of light, And towards it he presently doth ride: Then at the mouth thereof he doth alight, And to a bush fast by his horse he tide, He doubts, as euer loue is full of feare, That his belou'd Angelica was there. 66 Eu'n as the hunters that desirous are, Simala.Some present pastime for their hounds to see, In stubble fields do seeke the fearfull hare, By eu'ry bush, and vnder eu'ry tree: So he with like desire and greater care, Seeks her that sole of sorrow can him free, He enters boldly in the hollow caue, And thinks of her some tidings there to haue. 67 The entrance straight and narrow was to passe, Descending steps into a place prosound, Whereas a certaine faire yong Ladie was, Kept by some outlawes prisner vnder ground, Her beautie did the common sort surpasse, So farre as scant her match was to be found, So as that darke and solitary den, Might seeme to be a paradise as then. 68 On her an aged woman there did wait, The which (as oft with women doth befall)This old  was Gabr whom you  but a bad  the xxi book. About some matter of but little waight, Did happen at that time to chide and brall, But when they saw a stranger comming, straight They held their peaces, and were quiet all, Orlando doth salute them with good grace, And they do bid him welcome to the place. 69 Then after common words of salutation, Although at first of him they were afraid, Yet straight he enterd in examination, By whom in that same caue they had bin stai And who they were in so vnseemly fashion, That kept a comely and a noble maid? And said, he saw it written in her face, Her nurture and her linage were not base. 70 She told him straight how long she there had beene, And by what hap she had bin thither brought, Amid her words the sighs do passe betweene, The corall and the pearle by nature wrought, Sweet teares vpon her tender cheeks were seene, That came from fountaine of her bitter thought: But soft, left I should do the Reader wrong, I end this booke, that else would be too long. Moral.In that Angelica would haue chosen Sacrapant before Orlando, we may note how women for the most part in their choose follow rather some priuat respect, then the true worth of the men that offer themselues at their deuotion. In th soe took away the helmet, with purpose to make sport with it, though at last Orlando by that means lost it against her wil, we may see that things done in list, oft turne to earnest: and therfore that excellent rule of ciuilitie is euermore to be kept: Play with me and hurt me not, Ieft with me and shan me not. Historie.In the quarrell betweene Orlando and Ferraw, we may see the common originall of all quarrels, namely honour and women. Of Ferraw I spake in the first booke of his strength and stature, but whether it be true, or might be true, that his body should be made impenetrable by sorcery and witchcraft, I can neither assume it was so, nor maintaine that it could possible be so, yet I know some that beleeue the contrary, and (as they thinke) vpon good grounds: and some say it is a great practise in Ireland to charme girdles, and the like, persuading men that while they weare them they cannot be hurt with any weapon and who can tell whether the diuel may not sometime protect some of his seruants? but one notable ex∣ample I haue heard tending much to this effect: Rorie Oge (a notable rebell of Ireland) hauing taken in a vile and tre∣cherous Parlee, my valiant cosin sir Henrie Harington prisoner, had one night his caben or little houell where he lay beset with one hundred souldiers of the said sir Henrie his band, meaning to rescue their captaine by force, sith the rebels demaunds for his deliuery were such as sir Henrie himselfe (being his prisoner) would not condescend vnto, but would rather hazard his life as he knew he should: I say these hundred men wel appointed, be set the house strongly, being made of nothing but hardels and durt, yet the villain ere they could get in, gat vpin his shirt, and gaue the knight xiiij. wounds very deadly, and after gat through them all without hurt, where a mouse almost could not haue got betweene them: and I haue heard it affirmed in Ireland, that it was with meere witchcraft. Allegorie.In the pallace, where euery one hath that he liketh best presented vnto him, yet no man can enioy it, is to be vnderstood that he that followes his owne vaine desires without the rule of reason, shal euer run astray, and neuer attaine to the true contentment he desires. Allusion.In Orlando and Ferraw, he alludes to the fight of Cygnus and Achilles, who were both in like sort fained to haue bin inusolable.
THE THIRTEENTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Orlando heares Zerbynos loue to tell, Her strange misfortune and her hard aduenter: These outlawes that in that vast caue did dwell, Orlando hang'd, that had in prison pent her. Bradamant though Melissa did her tell Atlanta frauds, yet doth his Pallace enter, Where she is staid by force of Atlants charmes, While Agramant musters his men of armes. 1 FVll ventrous were the no∣ble knights of old, And worthy that their same should ay endure, That durst with valiant heart, and courage bold Find cut in dens and pla∣ces all obscure, Such as in courts we now but seeld behold, Faire dames, of beautie, mind and manners pure: As erst I told you how Orlando found, A braue young Ladie hidden vnder ground. 2 Now in my former matter to proceed, I say when he had vewd her person well, And markt her face and hauiour with great heed, He doth request the damsell faire to tell, Who was the author of so soule a deed, To force her in so vnfit place to dwell: And the as plaine and briefly as she can, In this sweet sort her wofull speech began. 3 Most worthy knight (she said) although I know, That I shall buy my speech to you full deare, (For sure I am, this woman here will show, My words to him that first did place me heare) Truth I will tell, though truth increase my woe, .And make him looke on me with angrie cheares Dispaire hath euer danger all contemned, What should she feare that is eu'n now condemned? 4 I am that Fabel that somtime was, A daughter deare vnto the king of Spaine, Well did I say I was, for now alas, I am the child of anguish and and of paine: Loue, onely loue, this great change brought to passe, Loue, onely loue, of thee I may complaine, That flattring alwaies in thy first beginnings, Yeeld'st certaine losse in steed of hoped winnings. 5 Then in good state I spent my happie dayes, Noble and young, honest and rich, and faire, Now base, despised, poore, and wanting prayes: Drownd in a dungeon of most deepe dispaire, Thus loue throws downe, whom fortune hie doth raiseSentence. And marrs the sport in which he is a plaire: He that in art of loue did show his skill,Ouid. Sentence. Saith loue and maiestie agrees but ill. 6 But that I plainly may declare my mind, Thus it fell out: my father twelue months since, To make a famous triumph had assig nd, Vnto the which came many a Lord and Prince: Now whether liking did mine eies so blind, Or that his vertue did it selfe conuince: Zerbin (me thought) the king of Scotlands sonne, In this same triumph honor chiefe had wonne. 7 The passing feates of armes I saw him do, In which he was compared with the best, His person and his beautie ioynd thereto,Gratius  chro  corport In which he far surpassed all the rest, Did cause that heno sooner did me woe, But I as quickly granted his request: Interpreters nor other means none wanted, To make the seeds to grow that loue had planted.
8 When as these feasts and solemne shewes were ended, My Zerbin backe againe to Scotland hasted, Wherewith how grieuously I was offended, Well may you guesse if euer loue you tasted: But he that cannot be too much commended, Whose loue to me no lesse in absence lasted, With purpose and with promise firme to marry me, Studed all meanes away from hence to carry me. 9 Twere vaine he thought to aske me of my fire, (Zerbin a Christen, I a Sarazine) Our country law contrarid that desire, To which our loues so wholy did encline: This feat doth some new stratagem require, More heedfull, secret, circumspect and fine: When loue hath knit two hearts in persite vnitie, ntence. Ouid.  cart effectu  voluere duo  Philip Sid∣ made it thus:  why no selo∣ can that pre∣nt, to which  parties once  full consent.They seldome faile to find their oportunitie. 10 An house of great estate in Bayon towne, My father had with gardens sweet and faire, In which with large descents still going downe Vnto a riuer comes the garden staire, Here (if ill fortune on vs do not frowne) He meanes when I shall walke to take the aire, Soone to surprise me walking in an ally, And so conuey me to his armed gally. 11 But sith with him the case did then so stand, Not to be present at this enterprise, He sent me letters written with his hand, By Oderike of Byskie stout and wise, Expert in seruice both of sea and land, And wils me do as he should me aduise, Whose faith he nothing doubteth to be found, As one to him by benefits much bound. 12 This firme and fast, and sure obliged frend, Of proued courage, value and of skill, Against the time appointed he doth send: And I that for their comming looked still, Against the time appointed did descend, To giue him scope to worke his masters will, And he accordingly came vnespide, With armed men vnder the garden side. 13 I seeing them, my selfe most fearfull saine, They seeing me, soone of their purpose sped, Those that resistance made, forthwith were slaine, And some afraid and faint like cowards fled, The rest with me as prisners do remaine; Then straight we were vnto the gally led, And gone so farre we could not be recouered, Before my father had the fact discouered. 14 Of this departure I my selfe was glad, In hope ere long my Zerbin to haue found, But lo a sodaine tempest made vs sad, And neare to Rochell almost had vs dround, The master of the ship no cunning had, To keepe the keele from striking on the ground: It booted not against the waues to striue, Vpon sharpe rockes the tempest doth vs driue. 15 In vaine it was to pull downe all our sailes, And on the foreboord close to couch the mast, No paine against the raging sea preuailes, On land we looke each minute to be cast: Diuine helpe oft doth come, when humane failes, And when in reason all releese is past: For doubtlesse I do deeme by powre diuine, We were preserued in this dang'rous time. 16 The Byskin that the danger well doth note, Doth meane a desprate remedy to trie, He straightway launcheth out the little bote, He and two more go downe therein and I, This done, he cuts the rope and lets her flore, Threatning with naked sword that he should die, That durst presume to giue so bold aduenter, Against our wils into the bote to enter. 17 The rope now cut, away the bote was carried By force of waues vnto the shallow shore, And by geat fortune none of vs miscarried, So great a plunge I neuer scapt before, But they (poore soules) that in the gally tarried, Were drownd, the vessell quite in peeces tore, Where though my losse of stuffe and iewels greeu'd me, My hope to see my Zerbin still releeu'd me. 18 Now being come to land (in lucklesse houre) And trusting onely Oderikes direction, Loue (that doth euer loue to shew his power, In tempring and distempring our affection) My good to ill, my sweet doth turne to sower, My hope to hurt, my health into infection: He in whose trust Zerbin so much relieth, Freezeth in faith, and in new fancie frieth. 19 Now whether first at sea this humor grew, Or else he moued was with new occasion, To haue me here alone with so small crew. As from his will I could not make euasion, He bids all faith and honestie adew, And yeelds himselfe vnto this foule perswasion; And that he may his pleasure surely warrant, He sends the seruants of a sleeuelelle arrant. 20 Two men there were that had so luckie lot, With vs into the shipbote to descend, One hight Almonio, by birth a Scot, A valiant man, and Zerbius trustie frend, Odrike tels him that it beseemed not, So few vpon a Princesse to attend, And that the daughter of the King of Spaine, Should go on foote and with so small a traine. 21 Wherefore he wisheth him to go before To Rochell, there a palfrey to prouide, And hire some men, a dozen or a score, Me to my lodging mannerly to guide: Almonio went, then was there left no more, But Coreb, one of wit and courage tride, In whom the Byskin put the more affiance, Because that he was one of his alliance.
22 Yet long he seemd in doubtfull mind to houer, Faine if he could he would haue rid him thence, At last he thinks so fast a friend and louer, Will with his friends iniquitie dispence: Wherefore he doth to him his mind discouer, In hope that he would further his offence, Sentence.And do as friends in our dayes haue a fashion, Aduance their pleasure more then reputation. 23 But he whose honest mind could not suppose, That Oderike had had so little grace, The fact not onely threatens to disclose, But cals him false and traitor to his face: From bitter words vnto more bitter bloes, They came and fought together in the place, And  in this prospect no whit delighting, Fled to the wood while they two were a fighting. 24 Betweene them two the combat was not long, But o the worser cause the better sped, Whether he were more skilfull or more strong, Orike doth lay Corebo there for dead: That done, he runs the woods and seme among, Oud Mtemer. And followes fast the way that I had fled, I thinke that he god Cupids wings did borrow, He made such hast to hasten on my sorrow. 25 His  umors.Feare made me swift, for sore I was afraid, Loue made him twister runne to ouertake me, Then sore against my will my courie he staid, Then sundrily both foule and faire he spake me, Sometime he promised sometime he praid, Oust de .Sometime he threatned he by force would make me: With , with gifts, with threats he oft did proue me, With at, with gifts, with threats he nought did moue me 26 But when he could not with his words preuaile, He doth resolue no farther time to stay, With open force he then did me assaile, As doth a hungry Beare cease on his pray, And I de ended me with tooth and naile, And cries and skreeks, and all the wayes I may, Not was I in mine owne defence afeard. To scratch his eyes, and pull away his beard. 27 I know not if it were my skreech and crie, That might haue well bin heard a league and more, Or if it were their vse that dwell there by, To come to seeke some shipwracks on the shore, But straight vpon the hill we might descrie, Come toward vs of companie good store, Which makes my Byskie man away to runne, And to surcease his enterprise begunne. 28 Prounbe.Thus this vnlookt for crew preseru'd me then, And hinderd him of his vmust desire: But I was sau'd as is the flounder when He leapeth from the dish into the fire. For though these barbarous and sauage men, To touch my person did not once aspire, No vertuous thought did breed this moderation, But hope of gaine and greedie inclination. 29 The leader of this miserable band, Did thinke his market will be raised much, In selling me, when men shall vnderstand, He sels a maid whom none did euer tuch, And now I heare a merchant is in hand, Of him to buy me if his lucke be such, From whom into the East I shall be sent, Where to the Souldan they will me present. 30 And in this sort her wofull tale she told, And mingled sighes with teares in rufull fashion, Expressed with such dolefull words as would Haue mou'd a stonie heart to take compassion: It easd in part her mind, thus to vnfold The bitter cause of her vnpleasant passion. Now while Orlando to this tale attended, The crew of caitiues to the caue descended. 31 A barbarous and foule misshapen crew, Armed, one with a spit, one with a prong, Mouthes, eyes and face, most vgly were to vew, One had no nose, anothers was too long, But when their leader somewhat nearer drew, And saw Orlando standing there among, Turning to his companion, he said, Lo here a bird for whom no net we laid. 32 Then to the Earle he said, I am right glad To find one so well armed in my caue, For long for such an armor longd I had, And surely now this I suppose to haue: How thinke you, when my person shall be clad With this your coate, shall I not then be braue? Wherefore good sir, think not your welcome scant, That come so fitly to supply my want. 33 Orlando turning with a sower smile, Answerd, his armor was of price too hie, And that he greatly did himselfe beguile, That thought of him his armor there to buy: And as they nearer came, he stoopt the while, And tooke a brand that in the fire did lie, And straight he threw it at the caitiues head, And laid him there along the floore for dead. 34 A short thicke planke stood on a scrubby post, That seru'd them for a boord to drinke and eate, And (for the same full heauy was and great) This like a coight at them Orlando tost, It fell downe there among them to their cost, They neuer saw before so strange a feat: By which scarce one of them escaped harme, In head, in leg, in brest, in side or arme. 35 So shall you see a country man that takes In time of spring a brickbat or a stone, And throwes the same vpon a knot of snakes, That he together clusterd all in one, How great a spoile the stone among them makes, And those that scape, how quickly they be gone: So did Orlando with these pesants play, That glad were they that scapt to runne away.
36 Those that could scape the heauie tables fall, Vnto their feete commended their defence, Which were (as Turpin writes) but seuen in all, Which seuen were glad to runne away from thence: But yet their flying brought them helpe but small, Orlando meanes to punish their offence, Their feete, nor yet their fence, could them so gard, But that he brought them to the hanging ward. 37 Now when the foresaid aged woman saw, In how bad sort these trends of hers were serued, She was affeard, for well she knew by law, That no lesse punishment she had deserued, This veriuous woman is spoken of againe in the 20 Canto aloue the 60. staffe.Forthwith from thence she stale away for aw, And vp and downe the desert wood she swarued, Vntill at last a warrior stout her met, But who it was I may not tell as yet. 38 The tender damsell doth Orlando pray, Her chastitie and honour to protect, Who made her go with him, and from that day, In the 23 booke. Staff. 45.Had vnto her a fatherly respect: Now as they went, a prisner by the way, They saw, whose name I may not now detect: Bradamant.Now should I speake of Bradamant by right, Whom erst I left in such a dolefull plight. 39 The valorous Lady looking long in vaine, When her Rogero would to her returne, Lay in Marsilia to the Pagans paine, Where eu'ry day she did them some shrowd turne, For some of them in Prouence did remaine, And Languedock where they did spoile and burne, Till with her valew she did them rebuke, Supplying place of captaine and of duke. 40 Now on a day as she sat still and mused, The time of his appointment long expired, Doubting left she by him might be abused, Or that her companie he not desired, And often whom she blamd, she straight excused, Thus while with carefull thought her selfe she tired, Melissa whom she thought not to be neare her, Came suddenly of purpose for to cheare her. 41 With pleasant countenance Melissa sage, Much like to those that carrie welcome newes, Wils her, her causelesse sorrow to asswage, And good Rogeros absence doth excuse, Swearing that she durst lay her life to gage, He would not absent be, if he might chuse, And that he did now in his promise hault, Was not by his but by anothers fault. 42 Wherefore (quoth she) get you to horsebacke straight If you would set your faithfull louer free, And I my selfe intend on you to wait, Till you his prison with your eye shall see, Whereas Atlanta, with a strange deceit Detaineth men, of base and hie degree, And showes by strange illusion distrest, Each one the partie whom he loueth best. 43 Each one doth deeme he sees in great distresse, His loue, his frend, his fellow or his page, According as mens reasons more or lesse, Are weake or strong such passion to asswage, Thus do they follow this their foolish guesse, Vntill they come like birds into a cage, Searching the pallace with a pensiue hart, The great desire not suffering them to part, 44 Now then (said she) when you shall once draw nye, Where this same Necromancer strange doth dwell, He will your coming and the cause descrye, And to delude you (marke me what I tell) He straight will offer there vnto your eye, By helpe of some inhabitants of hell, Rogeros person, all in wofull plight, As though he had beene conquered in fight. 45 And if you follow, thinking him to ayd, Then will he stay you as he doth the rest, But kill him therefore and be not affraid, For so you shall your frend deliuer best, So shall your foe Atlanta be betrayd, In his owne trap when as he looketh left, And feare not when he commeth by to strike him, Though he your deare resemble, and looke like him 46 I know full well how hard twill be to trye, And how your heart wil faile, and hand wil tremble When you shall go about to make one dye, That shall Rogeros shape so right resemble: But in this case you may not trust your eye, But all your sprites, and forces all assemble, For this assure you, if you let him go, You worke your owne and your Rogeros wo. 47 The Prouerbe faith, one that is warn'd is armd, The which old saw,Sentence or Pro∣uerbe. doth proue by due construction, That they, that after warning had are harmd, Did ill regard or follow good instruction, Now Bradamant rides to the place so charmd, And vowd that old Magicians destruction, And that they may the tedious way beguile, They spend the time in pleasant talke the while. 48 And oft Melissa doth to her repeat The names of those that should be her posteritie, That should in force, and deeds of armes be great, But greater in Religion and sinceritie, Atchiuing many a strange and worthy feat. And vse both head, and hand, with great dexteritie, In ruling iust, and bountifull in giuing, Cesars in fight, and saints in godly liuing. 49 Now when Melissa sage such things did show, The noble Lady modestly replide, Sith God (quoth she) doth giue you skill to know, The things that shall in future times betide, And meanes on me (vnworthy) to bestow An issue such as few shall haue beside, Tell me among so many men of name, Shall there no woman be of worthy fame?
50 Yes many a one (said she) both chast and wife, Mothers to such as beare imperiall crownes, Pillars and staves of roiall families, Owners of realmes, of countries and of townes, Out of thy blessed offpring must arise, Such as shalbe eu'n in their sober gownes, For chastitie and modestie as glorious, As shall their husbands be in warre victorious. 51 Nor can I well, or do I now intend, To take vpon me all their names to tell, For then my speech would neuer haue an end, I finde so many that deserue so well, Onely I meane a word or two to spend, Of one or two that do the rest excell: Had you but talkt hereof in Merlins caue,For there she  as the men  was . 3. You should haue seen the shapes that they shal haue. 52 Shall I begin with her whose vertue rare Shall with her husband liue in happie strife, Whether his valiant actions may compare, Or be preferd before her honest life? He fights abroad against king Charles at Tare, She staid at home a chast and sober wife: Penelope in spending chast her dayes,Sent. As worthie as Vlysses was of praise. 53 Then next dame Beatrice the wife sometime Of dwickeSforze, surnamed eke the More; Wise and discreet, and knowne without all crime, Of fortunes gifts and natures hauing store: Her husband liu'd most happie all her time, And in such state as few haue liu'd before: But after fell from being Duke of Millen, To be a captiue fetterd like a villen. 54 To passe the famous house I should be sorie, He cals bar  be  kings daughter.Of Aragon, and that most worthie queene, Whose match in neither greeke nor latine storie, Or any writer else hath euer beene: And full to perfite her most worthy glorie, Three worthie children shall of her be seene, Of whom the heauens haue pointed her the mother, Istell by name, Alfonso and his brother. 55 As siluer is to tinne, as gold to brasse, As roses are to flowres and herbs more base, As diamonds and rubyes are to glasse, As cedars are to sallows: in like case Shall famous Leonora others passe, In vertue, beautie, modestie and grace: But aboue all, in this she shall excell, In bringing vp her children passing well. 56 Soule.For as the vesseil euer beares a tast, Of that same iuyce wherwith it first was filled, Soule.And as in fruitfull ground the seed growes fast, That first is sowne when as the same is tilled: So looke what lore in youthfull yeares is plast, By that they grow the worse or better willed, When as they come to manly age and stature, Sentence.Sith education is another nature. 57 Then next her neece, a faire and famous dame, That hight Renata I may not forget, Daughter to Lews the xij. king of that name, Whom of the Britten Dutches he did get: Whose vertue great shall merite lasting fame, While fier shalbe warme and water wet, While wind shall blow, & earth stand firm & sound, And heau'nly sphears shall run their courses round. 58 I passe all those that passe all these some deale, Whose soules aspiring to an higher praise, Despising pompe and ease, and worldly weale, In sacred rytes shall spend their blessed dayes: Whose hearts and holy loue and godly zeale, To heau'nly ioyes, from earthly thoughts shall raise, That to good workes, to prayre and pure diuinitie, Shall consecrate their liues and their virginitie. 59 Thus doth Melyssa vnto her discourse, Of those should come hereafter of her seed, And while they talked oft by entercourse, They in their iourney onward do proceed, And oftentimes Melyssa hath recourse, To will her of Atlanta take great heed, And least she should with faint and foolish kindnes, Be led vnwares in error and in blindnes. 60 Now when they neare approched to the place, Then Bradamant departed from her guide, And after she had rode a little space, She saw one brought with hands togither tide, Exceeding like Rogero in the face, In voice, in stature, haire and all beside: Bound fast with chaines betweene two gyants led, That threttend him er long he should be ded. 61 But when the damsell saw within her vew, The lamentable state and hard condicion, Of him whose face she certaine thought she knew, She changeth straight her trust into suspicion, Doubting Melyssa of some malice new, Or hidden hate had giu'n her such commission, To make Rogero for a greater spite, Be slaine by her in whom he doth delight. 62 Is not this he (thus to her selfe she spake) Whom stil mine heart and now mine eies do see? If my Rogero I can so mistake, I neuer shall haue knowledge which is he: I either dreame and am not now awake, Or else no doubt it can none other be, Melyssa? what, may not Melyssa lye? Shall I beleeue her tale, and not mine eye? 63 Now while that thus she thought, and thus she said, And in this vnwise doubt did thus perseuer: She thought she heard him speake and aske for aid, Saying (my loue) assist me now or neuer; What shall I in thy fight be so betraid? Doest thou forsake me? then farewell for euer: These vnkind words her heart so greatly daunted, She followes him into the house inchaunted.
64 No sooner was she enterd in the gate, But that the common error her possest, Wandring about the house betimes and late, Nor night nor day she taketh any rest; The strange inchantment brought her in that state, That though she saw the man that lou'd her best, And spake with him, and met him eu'rie howre, To know the tone the tother had no powre. 65 book. ass. 18But let not now the reader be displeased, Although I leaue her in this charmed place, I, meane er long her trauell shall be eased, mile.And she shall see and know Rogeros face. Eu'n as the tast with diuers meats is pleased, So thinke I by this storie in like case, The frendly reader shall be lesse annoyed, If with one matter long he be not cloyed. 66 With sundrie threds a man had need to weaue, To make so large a web as I intend, Wherfore all other matters I must leaue, Of Agramant a little time to spend: Who sorely at the flour deluce did heaue, And all his might to mar the same did bend, Sending for men to Affricke and to Spaine, Those to supply that in the field were slaine. 67 Thus all on war his heart was wholly fixt, His new supplies with sundrie captaines led, Were come, with men of sundrie nations mixt, With whom that no disorder may be bred, A day forvews and musters was prefixt, That eu'rie one might know his guide and hed, Then fell they to their mustring and their vewing, As shall be shewd you in the booke ensuing. In this tragicall discourse of Isabella (for it is in conclusion an excellent tragedie) young Ladies might take this good lesson,Moral that though they make choise of most worthie men (as Isabella did) yet if it be without their parents good will, it seldome prospers, but is full of diuers misaduentures and hazards, that many times be the cause of their vtter ruine. In that Oderike giueth place to his disordinate lust, forgetting all faith and loyalty, we may note the frailtie of young men, and what vnfit tutors they are for such charges, who when they haue broken all the bands of faith and honestie, they think notwithstading they haue made a sufficient excuse for the matter, if they may lay the fault vpō (sauing your reuerence) Cupid In Corebo, that would not be wonne to consent to his frends desire in so foule a matter, we may take good exam∣ple of faith and loyaltie, that must neither for frendship nor kindred yeeld to any dishonorable act. In the execution of the theeues we may learne, that such an end is fit for men that liue by robberie and spoile, and will take no honest tra∣uell for their liuing, as fit (to vse the old Prouerbe) as a rope is for a theese, The notable women that are so commended by Melissa in this booke,Historie. were of the house of Ferrara, & many of them wor∣thie this exquisite praise that is here giuen them. The first he speakes of is the Duchesse of Mantua, whose husband had a great victorie at Tare a riuer of Italie, against Charles the right of France. Ariosto therefore compares her chastitie with this victorie, according to that excellent wise saying, it is a greater vertue to conquer ones owne affections then to win cities. Beatrice wife to Lodwick Sforze of whom in the three and thirtith booke there is more said, only here he notes (which was true indeed) that during his wiues life he liued more happy then he did after: for at her death began his miserie Hercules of Este married Alfonsos daughter, of whom he had Alfonso Hippolito and Isabella. Concerning Renata, Lewis the xij. king of France maried the Duchesse of Brittaine, and had by her issue this Renata, one of whose ofspring was after matched into the house of Austria, so as that Dukedome is in great danger to be gotten by the Spaniards, now that line of France that came of the elder sister is extinguished. But this is beside the booke, onely I thought good to touch the particular stocke of some of these famous women, that my Author so much extolleth: as I haue my selfe read of some of them in Guicciardin and Frances Vlloa that wrote the life of Charles the fist in Italian: and this I will note withall, that my author doth with great discretion commend three speciall vertues in the women of the house of Este. First deuotion, for he alledgeth that many of them entred into religion, and liued all their time denoutly, which he praiseth chiefly, though in the last place, saying. I passe all those that passe all these some deall. Next cha∣stitie. Penelope in spending chast her dayes, as worthie as Vlysses was of praise. Thirdly education of children, as is likewise touched before in another place. The vertues that in women merit praise, Are sober showes without, chast thoughts within. True faith and due obèdience to their make, And of their children honest care to take. Bradamant, that after Melissas warning giuen vnto her of Atlantas illusion,Allegorie. yet is caried away with the sight of Rogero falsly represented vnto her: signifies by allegorie, that a Christian, hauing receiued ghostly counsell for the health of his soule, and is instructed in true beliefe, yet after, when the world and his owne grosse sence represents vnto him some contrarie imaginations, he thinkes Melissa (that is, the preacher or instructer) doth but abuse him, and tell him a tale of Robinhood, and so they are caried into the diuels pallace, where they find nothing but shadows and illusions. Where Orlando takes vp a firebrand, and killed one of the outlaws therwith,Allusion. it alludes to two like matters in Oui. Ecce rapit medijs slagrantem Rhetus ab aris,12. Met. Primitium torrem dextraque a parte Charaxi, Tempora perfringit.— And in the xij. of Virgil. Obuius ambustum torrem Corineus ab ara Corripit, & venienti ebuso plagamque ferenti, Occupat os flammis. Illi ingens barba reluxit Nidoremque ambusta dedit.—
THE FOVRTEENTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Agramant mustring of his men, doth misse Two bands that by Orlando late were slaine: Mandricard vowes to be reuengd of this, But by the way he haps to entertaine Dame Doralice, whose beautie was his blisse. An Angell brings Renaldo and his traine Vnseene there where the Pagan did encampe, And sendéth discord to the Turkish campe. 1 AMong the fierce assaults, and cruell bloes, That France hath felt from Affrick and from Spaine, In which so many men fed Wolues and Croes, That were on both sides in the battell slaine, Although the French were foiled by their foes, n the 1. booke is s mentioned how Charlemaine left he field at Bur∣els, since wch me they kept bet went and  not come to  battell. This Alfonso was Duke of Ferrara  whō he speakes n the 3. book, bro∣her to Hipolyto. Of this battell k GuicciardnThat long they came not to the field againe, Yet was this foile sore to the Pagans cost, For diuers Lords and Princes that they lost. 2 So bloudie was the victorie they gate, That scant this ioy did counteuaile that wo, And if we may compare things done or late, (Renownd Alfons) to things done long ago, Rauennas fall by fortune or by fate, In which your vertue great did flourish so, To win the field so bloudy and so hard, With this of theirs may iustly be compard. 3 For when the souldiers of the Spanish band, Whom then the Pope retained in his pay, By the honour of lded spurre and  understood ighthood. Pope  gaue  armes the  with aknes of gold.Had almost got the victory in hand, The Frenchmen ready now to runne away, Thou camst to succor with that noble band Of valiant youths, that merited that day The honor of the gilded spurre and hilt, In recompence of blood so brauely spilt. 4 So didst thou bruse the The king of A. gōs colars was llow and red. Akorns rich of gold, So didst thou breake the  yellow staffe and red, So didst thou then the Flowre de luce vphold, When as the captaine was in battel dead,The laurel by the ancient Romans was giuen to him that had slaine or takē aboue 5000 in battell. Ciuica corona was his that sa∣ued a citizen of Rome. For which the Laurell crowne they ware of old, By iust desert belongeth to thy head; And Ciuill crowne, no lesse in honor precious, For sauing vnto Rome her owne Fabricius. 5 Colonna nam'd a collum true indeed, Vnto the state of Rome and Romane name, Whom you by value tooke, and sau'd by meed, By which more honor true and worthy fame, Vnto your selfe you did procure and breed: Then in the ouercomming all that came,In this battel the Spaniards deus∣sed to haue men placed in carts, & drauing them violently on their enemies, disorde∣red them. Fom Aragon, from Castill and Nauar, For all their speares and new deuised car. 6 Now though we all our liues and safeties ow, To you that this great conquest did atchieue, Yet our side did receiue so great a blow, As scarce that ioy this sorrow did relieue: And that the dames of France most plainly show, Whom this so bloudie triumph still doth grieue, Witnesse their widdows in their mourning gownes, And watry eyes in villages and townes. 7 King Lews of France had need in time prepare,Foys was slaine as this battell. For captains new to these vnruly bands, That wickedly without all feare or care, Of lawes of God, of nature, or of lands, No sort, nor sex, nor age, nor order spare, From force of their vnchast and bloudie hands. Christs bodie in the sacrament they tare it, To beare away the siluer plate that bare it.
8 Gudin sets downe the  or∣ders of the soul∣diors at the sack of Raena.Wretched Rauenna better had it beene, That thou the French shouldst not at all resist, Thou mightst by Bresey haue bene warnd I weene, Now thou a warning art for such as list, To shun like losse by thy mishaps foreseene, Not stubburnly in folly to persist; So Riminy and Faens were preserued, By marking in what sort thou hadst bene serued. 9 As now king Lews (I say) had need to send New captains to supply their roomes were dead, So then the Pagan Princes did intend To see their men from sundry countries led, And all disorders and defects to mend, To point them captains that do lacke a head; First then Marsilio all his souldiers veweth, And Agramant next after him enseweth. 10 The states of Spaine are here set down in  stars.The chiefe of those are of Marsilios traine, Are first the Catalins, men of great land, And of the best and noblest blood of Spaine: The next that do to them in order stand, Are of Nauar, whose King was lately slaine At Burdels by Renaldos valiant hand, Marsilio sore laments the sory case, And pointeth Isolir supply his place. 11 If any be  o vnderstand se names. I refer him to the Table.Bulligant gouerneth those of Lion, Grandomus for th Algarbys doth prouide, Marsilios brother called Falsiron, Doth those of lesser Castile rule and guide: Those of Mallaga do attend vpon Madrasso, so doth Ciuill all beside, There where as Beus water so abounds, As all about it makes them fruitfull grounds. 12 Tssora, Bariend and Stordilan, Vnto the field do bring their forces in, Granado this, Mairick he hath rane, The first to rule in Lisbon doth begin. Where Larbin late was brought vnto his bane, Tessyra vnto Larbin next of kin, Those of Gallicia Serpentine doth guide, Since valiant Maricold in battell dide. 13 Those of Toledo and of Calatraue, Whom Synagon did leade not long ago, Now Matalist their gouernment must haue, Because that he was slaine by Christen so: Then Pisardin a man in battell braue, With all the band of Salamance doth go, With many other souldiers of Pagenza, Of Auila, Zamorra and Palenza. 14 Those of the court and of Marsilios traine, Ferra.With those of Saragose, Ferraw doth guide, The chiefest flowre, and the chiefe host of Spaine, Well armd, well horst, well furnished beside, With whom two kings that late had lost their raine, Morgant and Malsatise did there abide, And in the state of priuate men remained, And were by him most friendly entertained. 15 The name of many a Duke, and Lord and Knight, For breuitie I purpose to omit, Such as were stout and hardie men in fight, Such as were wise and politike in wit, With th'Earle of Sagunt Archidant that hight, Langiran, Ammirant and Malagit: There was great Fulliron, Marsilios bastard, That in that fight did shew himselfe no dastard. 16 After the Spanish hoast was viewd and past,Agrts  ster of African Note that the word past. in vsed  there sundry ces, downe in the Apologie. Before king Agramant, the next that came, Was one that all the rest in stature past, The gouernor and king of great Orane, Then came a band, whose leader small time past, At Burdels field was brought vnto his bane, Lamenting that the king of Garamant Was conquerd by the Ladie Bradamant. 17 Then came the third, and that a headlesse crew, Whose captaine Argust was in battell slaine, To this the second and the fourth, a new King Agramant doth leaders fresh ordaine. But few there were that for these roomes did sew, So few sufficient men there did remaine; Buraldo and Argonio for the best, And Ormida he chose among the rest. 18 Then came Brunello with a chearlesse face,Brunt. And looke for shame still fixed on the ground, For late he fell in Agramants disgrace, Who doubted that his faith had not bene sound, Ere since he went vnto th'inchanted place,Of this look be in the beginning of the  . Where to a tree dame Bradamant him bound, Because he lost his ring, whose losse so greeued him, That though he told him true, he not beleeued him. 19 But Isolir the brother of Ferraw, That was the first that found him and vntide him, Auoucht to Agramant the thing he saw, How there by force some enemie had tide him, So as the King his anger did withdraw, Although he neuer after well could bide him, But swore the next offence that he committed, An halter should vnto his necke be fitted. 20 With those of Esperie came Soridano, And Dribon did come with those of set, With those of Nasomanie Prusiano, King Agricalt Amonios charge did get, Malabusers came with them of Fisano, The rest doth Pinadure in order set, Ballastro those that followd erst Tardocco, Those of Canaria and of Morocco. 21 From Mulga and Arsilla others came, The first their former captaine still doth hold, Vnto the next the King a new doth name, One Corineus a trustie man and bold, Then Baliuesse a man of euill fame, Clarindo next of whom great deeds ar old,Sobr. Sobrino next a man of elder age, In all the campe was none more wise and sage.
22 Those of Getulia came with Rimedont. With Maribaldo those of Bolga went, And those of Cosa came with Balnifront, Their former Lord his life in battell spent: Then came the king of Algier odmont a  Trze  in the took  was king of ier, &  A. . Rodomont, That lately into Turkie had bene sent, To bring some new supplies of horse and men, And backe againe was new returnd as then. 23 In all the campe was not a man more stout, In all the campe was not a man more strong, Nor one of whom the French stood more in doubt, Was there the Turkish armie all among, In Agramants nor in Marsilios rout, Nor all the followers did to them belong. Beside he was (which made them dred him chiefe) The greatest enemie to our beliefe. 24 Then Puliano came, a gallant king, And Agramantes cousen Dardanell, Whether some Owle did at their window sing, Or other lucklesse bird I cannot tell, As oft we see it is an vsuall thing, That some presage ones mischiefe shall fortell; But sure it was prefixt in heau'n on hie, What time and hour next day they both should die. 25 Now all their bands were musterd sauing two, Those of Noritia and of Tremisen, King Agramant doth maruell what they do, He knowes not where to heare of them nor when: Now as he was dispatching hereunto Some messenger, behold one of the men, That seru'd the king of Tremisen, in hast Came and discouerd all that had bene past. 26 Sir king (quoth he) by fortune and ill chance, The noble kings Alsird and Manilard, Canto 12.  lter end.Happend to meet a cruell knight of France, While with their bands they traueld hither ward, He ouerthrew them both, (oh hard mischance) And kild, and spoild, and draue away their guard, And sure (quoth he) I thinke his force is such, To all your campe he would haue done as much. 27 Among the rest that to this tale gaue eare, There was a Prince that late from Affricke came, To whom king Agramant great loue did beare, .And Mandricardo was the Princes name, His heart was stout, and far from any feare, His bodie strong and able to the same, And that which greatest glorie did him yeeld, He had in Sorie conquerd Hectors sheeld. 28 Now that the messenger his tale had done, Which made the hearers hearts for sorrow cold, This valiant Prince king Agricanes sonne, Straight was resolu'd (with heart and courage bold, That to win praise no paine did euer shonne, Although his purpose secret he de did hold, To be reuenged on this bloodie knight, That had to manie slaine and put to flight. 29 He askt the messenger what cloths he ware, And in what tourd garments he was clad? Blacke (quoth the messenger) his rayments are, No plume nor brauerie his helmet had: And true it was, Orlandos inward care, That made his heart so sorowfull and sad, Causd that his armour and his open shoes, Had like resemblance of his inward woes. 30 Marsilio had before a day or twaine,Looke hereof is the Allusion. Giu'n vnto Mandricard a gallant steed, His colour bay, but blacke his taile and maine, Of Frizland was the dame that did him breed, The Sier was a villan braue of Spaine: On this braue beast this braue man mounts with speed,A race of horses in Spaine, called villan di Spagna interior to the Ginnes. Swearing he will not to the campe turne backe, Till he had found the champion all in blacke. 31 He meetes the sillie people in the way, Halting, or maymd, or weeping for their frends, Their woofull lookes, their fearfull hearts bewray, (Weeping in such a losse but small amends) But when he came where the dead bodies lay, In vewing of their wounds some time he spends, As witnesses of his strong hand that gaue them, Him he enuies, and pities them that haue them. 32 Eu'n as a Wolfe, by pinching famine led,Simile. That in the field a carreu beast doth find, On which before the dogs and rau'ns haue fed, And nothing left but hornes and bones behind, Stands still, and gazeth on the carkasse dead: So at this sight the Pagan Prince repind, And curseth oft, and cals himselfe a beast, For comming tardie to so rich a feast. 33 But when the mourning knight not here he found, From thence he traueld many a wearie mile, Vntill he found a medow compast round, With running streames that almost made an Ile, Saue one small entrance left of solid ground, Which guarded was with armed men that while, Of whom the Pagan asketh why they stand, To guard the place with weapons in their hand. 34 Their captaine viewing well his braue attire, Doth thinke he was a man of great regard, And said king Stordilano did then hire,Doralye. Into these parts his daughter deare to guard, Espousd to king of Sarza by her Sire, Who shortly for the marriage prepard: And here (quoth he) we do this passage keepe, That none may trouble her while she doth sleepe. 35 To morrow to the campe we minde to go, Where she vnto her father shall be brought, Who meanes on Rodomont her to bestow, By whom this noble match is greatly sought. Now when the captaine had him answerd so, This Prince that setteth all the world at nought, Why then (quoth he) this maid be like is faire, I pray thee cause her hither to repaire.
36 My hast is great, but were it greater far, Yet would I stay to see a prettie maid: Alas you misse your marke, your aime doth arr, (Gentle sir foole) to him the captaine said: Thus first they gan with bitter words to iar, And then from blowes but little time they staid, For straight the Prince did set his speare in rest, And smot there with the captaine through the brest. 37 And straight wayes he recouered his speare, And at the next that came there with doth runne, For why none other weapon he did weare, Since he the Troian Hectors armor wonne, At what time he most solemnly did sweare, To win the sword worne by Traianos sonne, Cald Durindan, a blade of temper rare, That Hector erst, and now Orlando bare. 38 Great was the force of this Tartarian knight, That with his speare and weapon none beside, Durst with so many ioynd togither fight: Yet sets he spurs to horse, and sloutly cride, Where is a man that dare withstand my migh Who dares forbid me where I list to ride? And with that speare himselfe he so besturd, That small preuaild against him bill or sword. 39 But when his speare in peaces burst he saw, The trunchen huge he takes in both his hands, His blowes were such, not blood but life to draw, All dead or fled, not one his force withstands: Simile.As Ebrew Samson with the Assesiaw, Did heap on heaps the proud Philisten bands, So Mandricard sinote oft with so great force, As one stroke kild both horsman and his horse. 40 Now though they tooke this thing in high disdaine, To be thus conquerd with a broken sticke, Yet when they learned had vnto their paine, It was in vaine against the wall to kicke, Though vnreuenged lie their fellowes slaine, They leaue the dead, rather then loose the quick: But he so eager was to kill and slay, That scant he sufferd one to scape away. 41 Simile. And as the reeds in marishes and lakes, Dride with the sunne, or stubble in the field, When as by hap the fire among it takes, May not it selfe, against that furie sheeld; Fu'n so this crew, but small resistance makes, And eu'n of force is du'n at last to yeeld, And leaue her vndefended to their shame, For whose defence they from Granata came. 42 Now when the passage open did appeare, He hastens in the Ladie faire to see, Whom he doth finde in sad and mourning cheare, And leaning of her head against a tree, Al downe her cheekes ran streames of cristal cleare She makes such mone as greater could not be, And in her countenance was plainly showne, Great griefe for others harmes, feare of her owne. 43 Her feare increast when as he nearer drew, With visage sterne and all with blood distained, The cries were great of her and of her crew, That to their gods of their ill haps complained, For why, beside the guard whom late he slew, She had, that priuatly with her remained, Laund'rers and nurses, playfellowes and teachers, With learnd Phisitions, and heathnish Preachers. 44 Now when the Pagan Prince saw that faire face, Whose fairer was not to be found in Spaine, He thinks if weeping giue her such a grace, What will she proue when she shall smile againe? He deemeth Paradise not like this place, And of his victorie he seekes this gaine, To haue his prisner suffer him to woe her, And yeeld himselfe a prisoner vnto her. 45 Howbe't he maketh her against her minde, Vpon her ambling nagge with him to ride, Her masters, maides, and seruants left behind, And promisd them he will for her prouide, He will be seruitor, and nurse, and hind, And playfellow, and gouernor, and guide, Adew my frends (quoth he) I you enlarge, For of your Mistres I will take the charge. 46 The wofull folke all mourning part away, With scalding sighes, cold hearts and watrie eyes, And one vnto another thus they say, How deepe reuenge will her stout spouse deuise, How will he rage to leese so faire a pray? Oh that he had bene at this enterprise, No doubt but he wold quickly wreak this slaughter And bring againe king Stordilanos daughter. 47 Of this faire pray the Prince was well apaid, Which fortune gate him ioyned to his might, And now it seemd his hast was well alaid, That late he made to meete the mourning knight, Before he rode in post, but now he staid, Bethinking where to rest himselfe that night, To finde a place was now his whole desire, Where he might quench his lately kindled fire. 48 And first to comfort and asswage the paine, Of Ladie Doralyce (so was her name) He frames a tale and most thereof doth faine, And sweares that he allured by her fame, Had purposely forsooke his home and raigne,M And for her loue into these quarters came, Not that he ought to France and Spaine that dutie, But onely to the beames of her rare beautie. 49 If loue deserueth loue (quoth he) then I, Deserue your liking that haue lou'd you long, If stocke you do esteeme, my stocke is hie, Sith I am sonne to Agrican the strong, If state may stand in steed, who can denie, To God alone our homage doth belong? If valew in your choise be of behoofe, I thinke this day thereof I haue showd proofe.
50 These words and such as loue had then him taught, Who lent him eloquence to serue his turne, So sweetly in her tender fancie wrought, That in a little while she ceast to mourne, And first her feare asswag'd, and then her thought, A pleasing looke doth to her eye returne, By which the Prince (in loue no nouice) guest, That she ere long would grant him his request. 51 Now doth the night approch, and Phoebus facé In Ocean sea begins it selfe to hide, The which did cause them somwhat mend their pace And on their way with greater speed to ride: And now they traueld had but little space, gil. Etiam ma procul arum cul∣ sumant.When first a smoke and then a light they spide, Then came they where they heard the bandogs bark When as the aire was now obscure and dark. 52 A few poore cotages where heardmen dwell, They find, and there together they allight, The houses poore, but such as very well Might serue them to repose them for a night, Their fare was meane, fit hunger to expell, To which the heardmen friendly them inuite, As curtesie oft times in simple bowres .Is found as great as in the stately towres. 53 But after supper what did passe betweene Dame Doralyce and Agricanes haire, May not be told, because it was not seene, But they may guesse, that haue with Ladies faire By night alone in place conuenient beene, Where to disturbe them no man did repaire, I doubt he did not so his passion bridle, To let so faire a dame lie by him idle. 54 But sure I am when day light did appeare, They both arose well pleasd and well content, And thankt the heardmen for their friendly cheare, And so from thence they both together went, Vntill they came vnto a riuer cleare, followes in xxij booke,  staffe.Before the forenoone of the day was spent, And riding downe along the riuer side, Two horsemen with a damsell they espide. 55 But let them go, for why my high conceat Forbiddeth me long in one path to tread, rement.And cals me back of Agramant to treat, Who being newly troubled in his head, To heare there were from England succors great, Vnder the conduct of Renaldo led, To counsell cald the Princes sage and wise, Some remedie for mischiefes to deuise. 56 They all conclude the next ensuing day, With sealing, ladders on the wals to mount, Lest dangers new be bred by long delay, And succors fresh hinder their first account: Thus Agramant, thus doth Marsilio say, Sobrino sage, and cruell Rodomont, Who to destroy Paris alone doth threate, And to pull downe the sacred Romane seate. 57 And to this end they straight prouide in hast, Innumerable ladders apt to scale, With timber towres vpon great wheeles so plast, As that they may approch the citie wall, From whence they may broade bridges safely cast, And passe without all ieopardie to fall, And throw their balls compact of firy matter, Then haue they rams, the walls to bruse and batter. 58 But Charles, the day that went before that day, The Painims meant to do their worst and best, Did cause the Priests and Friers masse to say, Did cause the people all to be confest, And humbly prostrate vnto God to pray, To saue and pittie them that were opprest, And then they all receiu'd in Christen vnion, The blessed sacrament, that high communion. 59 Himselfe with Lords and Barons of great fame, (An humble feare of God in him so wrought)The example of the Prince doth much with the people. Charls his prayer In person publikly performes the same, And by example others duties tought, And calling on our Sauiours blessed name, O Lord (said he) though I my selfe be nought, Let not my sinne, my wickednesse and ill, Moue thee thy faithfull peoples blood to spill. 60 And if it be thy sacred will (O God) To punish vs for our so great transgression, And make vs feele thy hand and heauy rod, At least defer this plague and iust oppression, That by thy foes we be not ouertrod, We that of thy true faith do make profession, Lest they blaspheme thy name (we ouerthrowne) And say thou couldest not defend thine owne. 61 So shall our fall make them thy law despise, So shall their wicked number still increase, So shall the powre of Babylon arise, So shall thy sacraments and Gospell cease, Looke on this people Lord with gracious eyes, Turne foiles and warres to victories and peace, That when these dogs and runnegates be daunted, Thy tombe and temple may be dayly haunted. 62 Alas our merits are of none effect, To pay a portion of our grieuous debt, Except thy grace our weaknesse so protect, That our misdeeds out of thy sight be set. Lord heale our soules with grieuous vice infect, Forgiue our faults, our errors all forget, And though our sinnes the sands in number passe, Yet let thy mercies greatnesse them surpasse. 63 Thus praid the Prince most sorowfull and sad, With humblenesse of heart and great contrition, And to this prayre he then a vow doth ad, Well suting to his state and high condition. Nor small effect these vowes and prayers had, For presently without all intermission, His Angell good vp to our Sauiour mounted, And there his vowes and prayers all recounted.
64 And thousand pray'rs alike at that same time, By messengers alike to God were brought, When lo the goodnesse, and the powre diuine, That neuer shall, nor neuer vaine was sought, His gracious care doth to their prayre incline, Those whō he made, and whō he deare had bought: Then to the Angell Michael straight he beckned, Who not a little of his calling reckned. 65 And thus he said, go thither straight in post, Where now in Picardie the Christens land, And so to Paris guide that English host, Let not their foes their comming vnderstand, In this attempt shall Silence helpe you most, Will him this enterprise to take in hand, This done then see you find dame Discord out, And will her hast vnto the Pagan out. 66 And charge her there according to her skill, Among the best to sow such soule dissension, That they may one the other wound and kill, And fill their camp with brauls and with contention: Let some men like their entertainment ill, And grudge because they haue no bigger pension, And let them all so vary out of measure, That they may do their Prince but little pleasure. 67 The blessed Angell not a word replies, But doth his makers holy will obay, Forthwith eu'n in a moment downe he flies, And where he goes the clouds do fleet away: But by the way he thinks and doth deuise, Of eu'ry place where Silence find he may, Though he an Angell were he could not tell, Where this same enemie of speech doth dwell. 68 At last he fully doth himselfe perswade, To find him in some houses of deuotion, That first for lie monasticall were made, Where godly men despisers of promotion, I well aire from all this worldly wicked trade, With minds abhorring flesh and fleshly motion, Where idle words should counted be a shame, And where on eu'ry wall they write his name. 69 Wherefore into an Abbey he doth go, And makes no question Silence there to find, And Peace and Charitie, and Loue also, And lowly thoughts, and well contented mind: But soone he was aware it was not so, All contrary ther humors were inlind, For Silence in that Abey doth not host, His name was onely was vpon a post. 70 T repro is  most if them. .Nor Quietnesse, nor Humblenesse, nor Peace, Nor Cha nor godly loue was here, They were  es, ba  those times do cease, Now Cou and Eae and Belly cheare, Pride,  and Angr  so increase, That silence  and comes not neare. With  the Angell then doth vew, And findeth Discord n this rew. 71 Her whom the heau'nly King did will him find,Discord Next after Silence, her he findeth furst, To seeke her out in hell he had assignd, Among the spirits damned and accurst, It sore did grieue his pure vnspotted mind, Where he expected best, to find them worst, It seemd to him a thing vncouth and strange, In sacred place to find so great a change. 72 He knew her by her weed of sundry hew,Discords  and descrip Virgil. Ex gaudens was All patcht with infinite vnequall lifts, Her skin in sundry places naked vew At diuers rents and cuts, he may that lifts: Her haire was gray, and red, and blacke and blew, And hard, and soft, in laces some she twists, Some hangeth downe, vpright some standeth stating, As if each haire with other had bene squaring. 73 Her lap was full of writs and of citations, Of processes, of actions and arrests, Of bils, of answers, and of replications, In courts of Delegats, and of Requests, To grieue the simple sort with great vexations She had resorting to her as her guests, Attending on her circuits and her iourneys, Scriu'ners and clarks, and lawyers and atturney. 74 The Angell calleth her, and bids her go, Vnto the Turks as fast as she can hie, Among their kings such seeds of strife to sow, As one of them may cause the to ther die. Then he demaundeth her if she do know, Within what place Silence doth vse to lie, He thought that she that traueld much about, In stirring strife might hap to find him out. 75 I cannot call to mind (quoth she) as yet, That I haue talkt with Silence any time, I heare them talke of him, and praise his wit, And secretnesse to couer any crime; But my companion Fraud can serue you fit,Fraud For she hath kept him companie sometime, And which was Fraud she pointeth with her finger, Then hence she hies and doth no longer linger. 76 Fraud shewd in comely clothes a louely looke,Descript of Fraud. An humble cast of eye, a sober pace, And so sweet speech, a man might her haue tooke, For him that said, haile Marie full of grace, But all the rest deformedly did looke, Fu'l of all filthinesse, and foule disgrace, Hid vnder long large garments that she ware, Close vnder which a poisond knife she bare. 77 The Angell asketh her if she do know The place where Silence makes his habitation. Forsooth (quoth Fraud) he dwelled long ago With the wise sages of the Greekish nation, Archytas and Pythagoras (I trow) That chiefe to vertue had their inclination, And afterward he spent these latter yeer With Carmelit and with Saint Bennet frier.
78 But since these old Philosophers did faile, And these new saints their saintlike life did change, He sought new places for his most auaile, And secret and vncertaine he doth range: Sometime with theeues that true men do assaile, Sometime with louers that delight in change, Sometime with traitors he doth bide, and furder, I saw him late with one that did a murder. 79 With clippers and with coyners he doth stay, Sometime in secret dens and caues obscure, And oft he changeth places day by day, For long he cannot in a place endure. But I can tell you one most ready way, Where you to find him out shall be most sure, where as Sleepe doth dwell, and out of doubt, At midnight you shall find him thereabout. 80 Though Fraud by custome vse to lie and faine, Yet was this tale so euidently trew, The Angell now no longer doth remaine, But with his golden wings away he flew To Arabie, where in a country plaine, Far from all villages and cities vew, There lieth a vale with woods so ouergrowne, As scarce at noone the day light there is showne. 81 ihouse of .Amid this darke thicke wood, there is a caue, Whose entrance is with Iuie ouerspread, They haue no light within, nor none they craue, Here Sleepe doth couch his euer drowsie head. ub nesse.And Slouth lies by, that seems the gout to haue, And Idlenesse, not so well taught as fed, They point Forgetfulnesse the gate to keepe, That none come in nor out to hinder Sleepe. 82 She knowes no names of men, nor none will learne, Their messages she list not vnderstand, She knowes no businesse doth her concerne, There sentinell is Silence to this band, And vnto those he comming doth discerne, To come no neare he beckens with his hand, He treadeth soft, his shoes are made of felt, His garment short, and girded with a belt. 83 To him the Angell go'th, and in his eare He tels him thus, Iehouah bids you guide Renaldo, with the succors he doth beare, To Paris walls, so as they be not spide, Nor let the Pagans once suspect or feare Their comming, nor for it at all prouide, And let them heare no incling of these foes, Vntill they find their force and feele their bloes. 84 No answer Silence made, but with his head He made a signe, as who should say he would, And with the Angell straight himselfe he sped, In greater hast then can be thought or told, To Picardie, from whence the Angell led, That present day the bands of souldiers bold, To Paris walls, an hundred miles asunder, Yet no man was aware it was a wonder. 85 And Silence still surueyeth all the rout, Before, beside, behind, with great regard, And with a cloud doth compaste them about, No man of them was seene, no noise was heard, Then walketh he among the Pagans cour, And vnto them that kept their watch and ward, And brought them somewhat (what I do not find) That made them for the time both deafe and blind. 86 Now while Renaldo came with so great hast,He returnes to Renaldo in the 16 Cant. 24 staf. As well it seemd an Angell did him guide, And as he went, with so great silence past, As by his foes his comming was not spide: King Agramant had now his footmen plast By Paris walls, fast by the ditches side, He meanes the citie to assaile that day, On eu'ry side by all the meanes he may. 87 He that would take vpon him to declare, Of Agramant host the certaine number, That to destroy this Citie did prepare, Shall seeme himselfe as frutelesly to cumber, As if he told what flowres in Hyble are, What fish in sea, what water drops in Humber, What starres in skie at midnight when it couers, The vnchast acts of close and secret louers. 88 The larum bell in eu'ry place doth ring, About the towne with strange disorderd sound, In Churches Mattens they do say and sing, Some kneeling down, some groueling in ye ground, If gold were vnto God so gratefull thing, As fond men think, no doubt there would be found, Enough in this extremitie, that would Make all the saints new images of gold. 89 There might you see godly old men and iust, Lamenting that their liues so long did last,Virg, Oterque quater que beats. And call them happie that were laid in dust, And buried many yeares and ages past; But gallant youths, deuoid of all mistrust, Not with these perils any whit agast, Whom enemies nor engines none appalls, Go to defend right manfully the walls. 90 Bold Barons, Earles and Dukes of great degree, With souldiers, forreiners, and of the towne, Did come to Charles, and praid him to agree, To let them out, and let the drawbridge downe: Glad was king Charles their forward minds to see, To fight for Christs religion and his crowne, But yet as then he doth not thinke it best, In this one point to grant them their request. 91 He rather thinks it better them to place, The forces of the fierce assault to breake, With distant bands a great or little space, According as the wall was strong or weake: Himselfe with chearfull vigor in his face, Vnto them all most curteously doth speake, These he doth comfort, them he doth encourage, And fill the stout with hope, the faint with courage.
92 of Paris.Faire Parislieth in a pleasant plaine, Eu'n in the nauell, rather in the hart Of France, the riuer cuts the same in twaine, And makes an Iland of the better part, The rest that doth in greatnesse more containe, A ditch and wall doth from the plaine depart, King Agramant assaults the Westerne side, As hauing Westward gotten all beside. 93 Marsilio with the warlike bands of Spaine, He points to keepe the field in armed ranks, Sabrino sage and those with him remaine, Are placed vpon Sequans fruitfull banks. Himselfe with an innumerable traine, With ladders, bridges, fagots, barres and planks, Doth thinke to fill the ditch and make it leuell, And at the walles do keepe vnruly reuell. 94 What should I speake of Rodomont most fell, Blaspheming God, not onely scorning men, That knew to vse a glittring blade so well, As I so well know not to vse my pen: His deeds alone would aske a day to tell, That in few houres he did performe as then: As for the rest they came like swarmes of flies, And fild the aire with shouts and hideous cries, 95 A description of the a  of a  well de∣fended.And they no lesse prouided are within, With rampers, bulwarks, and with double dikes, And where their foes to climbe do once begin, They push them down with bils, with staues & pikes; If one be kild, another steppeth in, No man his place for feare of hurt mislikes, Some throw down bricks, some stones, some scalding water, And grieue them much with all, most with the later. 96 Some throw among them newly slacked lime, That burneth most when most it seems to quench, With pots of brimstone, pitch and turpentine, Annoying them with heate, and smoke, and stench, The rest are still employd, and leese no time, With wreathed stakes to fortifie the trench: Thus all within were busie, all without, On both sides fortune standing still in doubt. 97 The while the king of Sarza brought about His owne and men of diuers other lands, Himselfe to shew his might and courage stout, Rodomonts de∣ .That made him counted valiant of his hands, From Cupid campe was not excluded out, But rather soly subiect to such bands, A Lion geuls he giues in loftie banner, A Ladie bridling him in lowly manner. 98 So by the beast he meant his owne fierce mind, And by the dame his mistris faire was ment, The bridle was to shew how loue could bind His loftie heart, and bow it to her bent. He little knew, that shewd himselfe so kind, How of his purchase others tooke the rent: He knew not Mandricard did pleade possession, Of her to whom he makes this kind profession. 99 Straight to the wals are thousand ladders plast,Herest  seale. With double ranks that two may climbe at once, And vp the souldiers get on them in hast, One shoulders vp another for the nonce: He that goes slow, and he that climbes too fast, Are each in perill of a broken sconce. Their enemies assailing still the hier, Their captains those that linger or retier. 100 Thus eu'ry one do clammer vp the wall, For value some, and other some for feare, And some are slaine, and some are made to fall, Repenting late that euer they came there: Fierce Rodomont alone (contemning all) No paine, no place for perill doth forbeare, But rusheth on, more despratly then stotly, Blaspheming God while others pray denoutly. 101 A paire of curats passing hard he ware, Made of an vgly Dragons scaly skin, This armour his great auncestor first bare, He that to build Babel did first begin: (A towre whose height shold with the clouds cōpare) And thought from God the rule of heau'n to win: And to the same effect likewise he made, Of passing proofe an helmet, shield and blade. 102 Thus Rodomont that came of Nimrods kind, As proud and irreligious as was he, Regardeth not a passage safe to find, Or where the wall might weakest guarded be, But with a heart to mischiefe all inclind, Where he the same defended best doth see, (Protected with his shield) he makes no bones, To go through fire and water, darts and stones. 103 When once vpon the battlement he was, Where all the wall was broade and largely paued, How did he slay the Christens then alas, How fierce he vnto them himselfe behaued? His blade doth pierce their plates of steele and bras, Al were not priests whose crowns that day were sha∣ued, He kild alone so many as their blood Did cause the ditch to fill with crimson flood. 104 Beside the baser sort, these men of name, At this same first conflict by him were slanie, Orgetto Duke, that late from Flanders came, Arnold and Hugo, two of Charles his traine, And Lews that gouernd Prouence with great fame, Walter and Denis, Hawnce of Satallaine, Some were thrust through, some had (past all releefe) Their helmets and their heads clou'n to the teeth. 105 And some by force from off the wall he caft, Among the which was one Moschino hight, That by his will would neuer water tast, But still in wine did put his whole deligh But lo his lucke was to be drownd at last, Within this dirtie dish for further spite, And he that neuer water could abide In all his life, now here in water dide.
106 Thus while that Rodomont did kill and slay, All that he found vpon the vtmost wall, His band of men the while had found the way, To passe the ditch and so the wall to scale. But now within another dike there lay, The sight whereof their courage did appall, For why the Christens sent such store of shot, As this same place did seeme to them too hot. 107 The dike was drie, the bottome eu'n and plaine, Both sides were steep, but steepest next the towne, At this the souldiers curtesie do straine, Which of them first shall venter to go downe, stratagem uch is now actised with gunpowder.Within the citizens had made a traine, With about great and cost of many a crowne, That when the ditch with armed men was filled, Wheat and smother they should all be killed. 108 It cubits had in bredth thrise ten and more, And in the bottome there were closely plast, Barrels of pitch, brimstone, and oyle good store, All matter quicke to kindle, long to last. The captaine led them all the way before, And thousand souldiers followd them as fast, But Rodomont as though he had had wings, Quite ore the dike like to a grewnd he springs. 109 And being placed on the inner side, Armd and vnarmed men to him are like, No steele there was his forces could abide, Death followth eu'rie blow that he doth strike: Which when a while to their great cost they tride, They do of force abandon quite the dike, He follows slaying without all remorse, So sharpe his sword, so furious is his force. 110 But when the souldiers thought the banke to mount, With scaling ladders, as they did the wall, They found themselues deceiu'd of their account, For straight the fier works were kindled all, Whose sudden flames the clouds thēselues surmount Which sight the Pagans greatly did appall; And to increase their terror and their wonder, It made a noise like to continuall thunder. 111 The Christens do reioyce at this reliefe, To see their practise had succeeded well: The Pagans plagu'd, with heat, and smother chiefe; In great dispaire do rore alowd and yell: Thus twixt the noise of fier and cries of griefe, They make an harmonie most meete for hell. And here I meane to leaue them in the fire, For to repose my selfe I now desire. In Mandricardo that after his great exploites atchieued in other countries,Moral. is still ready to hazard his person for more honor, may be obserued, that ambition is as vnsatiable as any other humour of man. In his woing of Doralice, we may see how loue makes men many times, not onely valiant, but eloquent. In the assaulting and defending of Paris, is set downe what sundry accidents happen when such populous cities come to so great extremitie. In Charles that first makes his prai∣ers to God, and after makes all prouident preparation for defence of the towne, we see a liuely patterne of an excellent and worthy Prince, both for deuotion and policie. Concerning the historie,Historie. I haue quoted many things in the margent, as the straightnesse of roome would permit, that the simplest reader may vnderstand what is meant by the fourth staffe: here onely I will ad a word of Rauenna, referring the reader that is desirous to be better informed hereof, to Guicciardin, who sets it downe at large. Rauenna was besie∣ged by the French vnder the conduct of one Fois, a notable captaine of so young a man. The Spaniards and Pope Iulio tooke vpon them to defend it, but in the heat of that assault Fois was slaine: yet the souldiers either by force or by parlee gat into the towne, and being within, they committed the notablest outrages that haue bene heard of, neither abstai∣ning from rapes nor sacriledge. Concerning the Catalyns, whō he nameth formost in the musters, they are the chiefe house in all Spaine: and it is to be noted, that Spaine is deuided into fiue kingdomes, Nauar, Castill, Catalogna (which is now called Aragon) Portugall, and Granata. For Gallicia is counted none, because it had a king but a while. The rest of the strange names you may find in the table. In the description of Discord and Fraud,Allegorie. and finding Silence in the house of sleep, being long since banished from philo∣sophers and diuines; the allegorie is so plain, as it were time lost to spend time to expound it, because it expounds it selfe so plainly: only I will obserue one thing, in which mine Author is thought to keep an excellent decorum. For, making Discord and Fraud of the feminine gender, he still makes Silence the masculine; as the like pretie conceit is in our Cambridge Comedie Pedantius, (at which I remember the noble Earle of Essex that now is, was present) where the Pedantius him∣selfe, examining the Gramaticall instruction of this verse: Caedant arma togae, concedat laurea linguae, vpon speciall consideration of the two last words, taught his scholler Parillus, that laurea, lingua sunt vtraque foemininae generis, sed lingua potissimum, and so consequently silence might not by any meanes haue bene of the feminine gender. In Mandricardos rape of Doralice,Allusion. he alludes euidently to a notable villany in the like kind, done by Caesar Borgia son to Pope Alexander the sixt. For one Caraccio a captaine of Venice, hauing bene lately contracted to a gentlewoman of good account, she came with an honorable train neare to a citie called Cesenna in Romagna: here Borgia with a band of men, set vpon her company, and took her away by force, and neither by threats nor intreatie of the Venecian Ambassador would restore her again: the allusion holds in many parts, as first where he saith in the 29. staff. That Marsilio had giuen Mandricardo an horse. Of colour bay, but blacke the taile and maine, Of Frizland was the mare that did him breed, The sier was a villan braue of Spaine. This notes Borgia, whose father was a Spaniard, his mother a Flemming, and he a mungrel bastard. In the one an thirtith staffe, in the simile of the Wolfe, he noteth his crueltie: in the eight and fortith staffe where he saith, If state may stand insteed, who can denie, Onely to God our homage doth belong▪ In that he alludes plainly to the Pope that is reputed Christs Vicar on earth.
THE FIFTEENTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Faire Paris is assaild on eur'ie part, By those of Affricke, and by those of Spaine: From Logestill' Astolfo doth depart, And takes Calligorant in his owne traine, Then slew Orillo, that by Magicke art Reuiu'd, when by the brothers he was slaine: Stout Sansonet Astolfo kind doth vse, But Gryphin of his mistres beares ill news. 1 TO winne the field against our armed foes, Is counted honorable anie wayes, Although it be with poli∣cie or blowes, Yet bloodie cōquests stain the Captaines praise, .But chiefest honour doth belong to those, Whom Fortune to such height of hap doth raise, To haue their foe supprest and ouerthrowne, With little losse and damage of their owne. 2 he spake of  the 3.  you shall  in Guye∣ as large.Such was the victorie that you then gaind, O stout Hyppolito you conquerd so, When the Venetian Nauie had obtaind, With armed vessels all the streame of Poe, Your policie and vallue them constraind, With losse inestimable thence to go: Their marriners and souldiers all destroying, Our marriners and souldiers not annoying. 3 The Pagan 'Rodomont did want this skill, That forst ten thousand men the trench to enter, By his commandment sore against their will, Vpon so perillous a place to venter, Where straight the smother doth their bodies kill, And send their sinfull soules beneath the center, Himselfe in safetie sees them there a dying, Still swearing, cursing, heau'n it selfe defying. 4 emant.Now Agramant an hot assault and fearce, Gaue where he thought the same was lest exspected He striues the wals to batter, break and pearce With engins strong, and rams thereto erected: Those kings whose names I did before rehearse, Brought men, some stout, & some with fear infected, And such as rather wish to stand aloofe, Then weare a corslet of the surest proofe. 5 But Agramant herein was much deceaued, For where he thought them weake and vnprepard, He found that manfully he was receaued, And that the king himselfe the place did guard,Charles. With thousands more readie to be bereaued Of life and limbe, and such as nought regard, Before that they would take so great disgrace, As in their masters sight to leese their place. 6 But here I cease vntill another time,In the xvi book. in the xvi. staff. To tell of these assaults the hard successe, Of damage like to both sides: now my rime Vnto the English Duke I must addresse, Astolfo sonne of Oton whom sometime, Alcynas witchcraft held in great distresse, Who like another Cyrce men transformed, To trees, to beasts, and soules of shapes deformed. 7 You heard before how all her strange deceits, Melyssa sage did with the ring discouer, And how she gaue them also good receits, As made them all their former shapes recouer, How after hauing scaped all their sleights, They did no longer in such fancies houer, But to be surely able to resist her, They fled vnto her vertuous elder sister.
8 Where when they had with comfort great remained, Desirous to their countries to retire, They asked leaue of her, and leaue obtained, Of her that neuer hinders iust desire: But er they went she frendly them constrained, With precious gifts to be endowed by her, Such gilts as were of precious price indeed, And all their liues should stand them all in steed. 9 But chiefly to this English Duke she gaue, Of secret skill a little written booke, Containing many a precept wise and graue, The which of her most thankfully he tooke; These teach a man from charmes himselfe to saue, That in the same aduisedly doth looke, And that to find them out he may be able, The booke had in the end a perfit table. 10 Beside this booke on him she doth bestow, Another gift of as great price and more, A horne in which if he do once but blow, The noise thereof shall trouble men so sore, That all both stout and faint shall flie therefro, So strange a noise was neuer heard before; When to the Duke these rare gifts were imparted, He humblie tooke his leaue and thence departed. 11 Look  the Al∣legorie.And least Alna should by force attempt, To bring him backe or worke him some disease, Andronica was with a nauie sent, To waste him sate till he were past those seas, And vertuous Sohrosina with him went, To see him passe with safetie and with ease, So good a condcter, so sure a guide. As was not found in all the world beside. 12 And thus she saild along that Indian shore, And sees and eeeth sight of sundrie Iles, Those called fortunate and others more, That distant are, some few, some many miles, And for he neuer heard of them before) He askt his guide some questions others whiles, As whether from those Indian seas perchance, A ship may saile to England, Spaine, and France. 13 She answerd thus; to put you out of doubt, First know the earth itselfe it like an Iland, In toned with waters round about, There is a previous  beyond  one would for that be .That compasse in on eu'ry side their drie land, And though to this day no man hath found out, Nor thinks there can be any way but by land, Because they iudge the lands length there is such, That it the other Hemispher doth tuch. 14 Yet I foresee, et many ages passe, Nw in  and masters new shall rise, Sir Francis  the sunes .That shall find out that erst so hidden was, And that discouer where the passage lies, And all the men that went before surpasse, To find new lands, new starres, new seas, new skies, And asse about the earth as doth the Sunne, To search what with Antipodes is done. 15 Behold I see the signe of holy crosse, A signe within these quarters seene but seeld, I see where ten a thousand put to losse, And to th'imperiall banner all do yeeld, I see in spite of eu'rie thwart and crosse, The house of Aragon still wins the feeld, I see that fortune is disposd to lift, Vp vnto heau'n the name of Charles the fift. 16 It pleaseth God to keepe the wayes vnknowne, Vnto these parts as they haue bene and are, Vntill seuen hundred yeares be ouerblowne, What time he meanes to raise an Emp'ror rare, That shall both finde and make them all his owne, And one that shall most worthily compare, In warre for courage, and in peace for iustice, With Traian, with Aurelius or Augustus. 17 I see the will of heau'n doth so incline, The house of Austria and of Arragon, Shall linke togither in a happie line, And be by match vnited both in one: I see a braunch grow by the banke of Ryne,Charles the . Out of this house, as like there hath bene none, Whose match (thus much to say I dare be bold) May not be found in writers new or old. 18 By him againe Astrea shall be brought, And be restored from her long exile, And vertues that haue long bene set at nought, Shall raigne and banish fraud deceit and guile;It was  that  to conquer  world, and  to enter  and  Pope and  to enter  and becomes Pope and Emp∣eror both, so verse  to , but a  of some For which great works by him so nobly wrought, God meanes to grant him all this earthly Ile, And vnder this wise Prince his deare annointed, One shepheard and one flocke he hath appointed. 19 Which that it may the better be effected, He giues them Captaines both by sea and land, That shall win places neuer yet detected And none shall dare their forces to withstand; Cortese first, by whom shall be erected, The Emp'rors banner in the Indian sand, Who by his valiant hand and wise direction, Shall win and keepe those Indies in subiection. 20 Loe, with the noble Marques of Pescare, Prosper Colonna prosperous in fight, Loc him that may with both of them compare, Or be preferred if you do him right, I meane the Marques Vast, whose vallew rare, In tender youthfull yeares shall shine most bright, Like to a horse that running swiftest pace,Simile. Doth last set out, and first doth win the race. 21 In him shall faith and courage be so mixt, That when his years shal seeme but young & tēder As passing not the twentie yeare and fixt, Yet shall his fame and forces not be slender; On him shall eyes and hearts of men be fixt, To him shall townes and forts, and castels render, As to a Captaine with such worth endewed, As he alone the world might haue subdewed.
22 What should I speake of famous Andrew D'Orie, That to the pyrats so much terror breeds, As Pompey so much praisd in Latin storie? This Andrew either matches or exceeds: What nobler name can be, what greater glorie, Then to roote out such hurtfull cursed weeds? So as men may with safetie and with ease, From Italy to Nylus passe the seas. 23 By his assistance, furtherance and his aide, In Italy Caesar a crowne obtaines, For which good seruice though he be well paid, Yet for himselfe thereby he nothing gaines: great praise need of D'Oria  the  of  more then his .The paine is his (ò noble mind well staid) The profit to his country sole remaines: And whereas some to rule their country sought, By him his countries freedome shall be wrought. 24 This loue by him vnto his country showne, In honor true shall more his name aduance, Then both the Caesars victories well knowne, In England, Spaine, in Italy and France: For thought their enemies were ouerthrowne, By valour oft, and oftentimes by chance, Yet this did blot their praise and make it lesse, That both their countries freedome did oppresse. 25 Wherefore let them and others all beside, That tyrannize their countries be ashamed, And hanging downe their heads, their faces hide, When they shall heare this noble. Andrew named, By whose rare temperate and happie guide, His countries peace and freedome shall be framed: And thus Andronica the Duke foretold, What men in future ages come there shold. 26 The while with prosprous winds the vessels driued, Came first within the view of Persian shore, And then from thence their way they so contriued, They past the gulfe (so called long before) And there to land so happily arriued, Misdoubting of Alcynas might no more, He thanks these guides ye all the way defended him, And humbly to their Ladie recommended him. 27 More woods then one, more fields then one he past, More then one valley, more then one high hill: He meeteth the eues by night, by dayes as fast, That lie in wait poore trauellers to kill: Of beasts, of serpents huge he was agast, That with their terror those wild deserts fill, But when he blew his horne they fled away, No man nor beast durst in the hearing stay. 28 He trauels through the happie Arabie, So called for the store of spices sweet, henix.There where the bird that burnes and doth not die, To dwell of all the world hath thought most meet: Thence went he to the sea, that once was drie, Which Iacobs sons went through vpon their feet,Red sea. Proud Pharao following them vnto his cost, Himselfe and all his charets drownd and lost. 29 Fast by the banks of Traians streame he rides, There where as Nylus doth receiue the same, An horse of passing swiftnesse he bestrides, That was ingendred twixt the wind and flame, Not such a beast in all the world besides, And Rabycano is this horses name:Rabicano Astol∣fos horse of excel∣lens swifines. Now as along the riuers banke he past, He saw a boate make toward him in hast. 30 A simple hermit did the vessell steare, Whose beard with age was ouergrowne and gray, And when he came so nie that he might heare, These words to him he fatherly doth say, My sonne if you do hold your safetie deare, Except you meane to die this present day, Proceed no farther in the way you ride, But terme ouer to the other side. 31 For if you do that fatall way proceed, You shall within a mile a giant meet,Caligorans. Whole stature other men doth farre exceed, For why his height is counted fourteene feet, He makes a sport of eu'ry cruell deed, The flesh of man vnto his tast is sweet, He eateth some aliue, and some he slayeth, He quarters some, and other some he slayeth. 32 Amid this crueltie he hath great sport, To vse the seruice of a certaine net, Which in the common way in secret sort, With dust and grauell couerd he doth set, And then when strangers do that way resort, First if he may, behind them he doth get: And then with hideous outcries he them scares, Vntill they fall into his net vnwares. 33 But hauing caught them once in such a cage, Of birth or merit he hath no respect, Of wealth nor sex, of country nor of age, No priuiledge from him can them protect,Looke in the Al∣lusion. Their carkases his hunger must asswage, Their sculs like monuments he doth erect, In posts and windowes hanging them on pins, His chambers all are hanged with their skins. 34 Take then (my sonne) take then this other way, Where with more ease and safetie you may go. Thanks (gentle Frier) the English Duke doth say, Yet can I not your counsell follow tho, Though danger bids go safest way one may, Yet what saith honor? honor saith not so, Let none retire with shame, thus honor seath,Sentence. The worst that can befall one is but death. 35 But contrary, if I may him intrap, As he to do to others doth deuise, And take himselfe in his prepared trap, The good is great that hereof may arise. Well, quoth the hermit, God grant blessed hap, And send his Angell Michael from the skies, That may deliuer him into thy hand, Or giue thee strength his forces to withstand.
36 On  the Duke blest by the simple Frier, Much trusting in his sword, more in his sound: And being now approcht a little nier, The cruell grants gracelesse house he found, ond all with marrith ground and mier, His chambers all within were furnisht round With skins and skuls of many a wofull hed, Or such as euill chance had thither led. 37 Ash  at by forrest wild do dwell, Naile by on the heads and pawes of Beares, And of their dangers do delight to tell, And call to mind their hardly scaped feares: So looke who did in strength the rest excell, grant kept some speciall limbs of theirs, The rest in ditches carelesly he throwes, To  and be deuourd by dogs or crowes. 38 is this giants name) Stands looking at his gate with watchfull eie, Reioycing much when any stranger came, And namely now the Duke he doth espie, Not doubting but by him to do the same, He had to others done, and make him die; But first he seekes behind the Duke to get, And thinks hereby to driue him to the net. 39 When as the Duke the Giant fierce espide, He stand his horse and would not forward go, For feare left in the net he might be tide, Of which the hermit had forewarnd him tho: Then blweth he his horne of vertue tride, That in the heaters terror breeds and wo, Which to possest his senses altogether, As straight he fled, and saw not where nor whether. 40 with his heart he lost his eies, And still he fled, and cares not how nor where, to the place where that most strange net lies, Which he to take the Duke had placed there, Th has armes and all his members ties, Which when Astolfo saw (now out of feare) He lights and drawes his sword, intending then To venge the death of thousand guiltlesse men. 41 But finding him so sure and strongly bound, He thought it were a base vngentle part, To stay a prisner whom in bands he found, So as he could not stir, nor no way start: God Fulcan wrought this net in caues profound, Of flaming Aetna, with such skill and art, That though the wires did seem but smal and weak, Yet could no force the same consume nor breake. 42 I say this  net then Vulcan wrought, When certaine iealous thoughts his heart inflamed, His spouse the with in Mars his armes he caught, And openly then made them both ashamed, At which prospect though many gods then laught, Atque aqum .Yet many wisht in like sort to be shamed: She Mercury did after steale this net, His louely Clora therewithall to get. 43 Faire Cloris who flies out before the morne, And sprinkleth aire with smell of fragrant flowres, That in her louely lap about are borne, From whence do fall the pleasant Aprill showres: But Mercury, sith she his loue did scorne, ay with his net in waite not many houres, Till at the last by Nylus banks he caught her, And there to daunce la volta then he taught her. 44 The net in Anubs temple he did leaue, Where many yeares in safetie it did bide, Vntill Calygorant not asking leaue, And caring not what should thereof betide, Or this great relique did the church bereaue, With all the plate and ornaments beside: And to this wicked vse the net employed, By which the passengers were sore annoyed. 45 Now of this net Astolfo tooke a wire, And (like a theefe) behind him tide his hands, Who now was meeke as any could desire, And like a lambe by him most gently stands: At least the waight thereof himselfe might tire, First hauing bound his prisner sure in bands, He makes him carry that vpon his backe, And vsde him like a mule to beare a packe. 46 And thus he parteth thence triumphing so, And led the giant prisner in a string, And all about the country him doth show, (A sight that to them all great ioy did bring) To Memphis Pyramids he then doth go, Most famous for the tombe of many a King,Peter  proverb  the great Pyra∣mid  furlongs  thereforth  in compasse  more then in long of More hie in height then fiftie times Pauls steeple, Then saw he Cayr so huge and full of peeple. 47 But not so peopled as they now report, That thousands in the streets by night do lie For want of roome, yet builded in such sort, That eu'ry house is made three stories hie, Where runnegates do dwell, that make a sport, Their saith and their saluation to denie: Of which the Sowdan for his owne behoofe, Keepes fifteene thousand lodging in one roofe. 48 Thence went Astolfo to the banks of Nyle, To Damyat a citie thereabout, And here he heard within a dozen myle Oryllo dwelt, a hardy theefe and stout,Oryllo. That robd poore men, and kild them other while, As trauellers of him stood sore in doubt, And (that which him with greater wonder filled) The common voice was he could not be killed. 49 Full many a thrust, full many a cruell blow, Of many men in fight he had endured, And vnto many men great care and wo, And death itselfe he often had procured: Put his owne bodie was enchanted so, As eu'ry wound he had forthwith was cured, I thinke some Fayry was his dame, or rather I thinke some Incubus had bene his father.
50 The worthy knight this wicked creature sought, Vntill at last he came vnto the place, Where then Orillo with two champions fought, The combat hauing held no little space, Yet at his hands they both had gained nought, Though both of them gaue undry blowes apace, and A∣.Their names were these that held this mungrell tack, Griffin the white and Aquilant the black. 51 The Necromancer fought with vantage great, He rode vpon a cruell hideous beast, A Crocodile that flesh of men doth eat, And birds and beasts, and doth them all digest, Yet had the brethren throwne him from his seat, And urther had the Crocodile distrest: But him to wound and kill in vaine they striued, For still his wounds did heale, and he reuiued. 52 Sometime they cleft his head by force in twaine, As butchers cleaue a bullocks with an axe, But straight he ioyneth both the parts againe, As if they had bene made of melting waxe. Who so hath seene the Alcumists most vaine, That work with Mercurie their cunning knacks, Which quite disperst, reioyneth eu'ry member, Would soone by this be made that to remember. 53 Fierce Aquilant among so many bloes, With one, his head from off his shoulders strake, About he seekes and gropeth as he goes, And in the dust to find his head doth take, And finding it, he takes it by the nose, Or by the locks, nor more ado doth make, But sets it on as if it were but glewed, And fights as if his forces were renewed. 54 Stout Griffin at a blow cuts off his arme, And takes it vp and flings it in the brooke, But he like one that had receiu'd no harme, Doth diue the same within the streame to looke, Which found, he ioynes (I know notwt what charm) Vnto the place it late before forsooke: Two dames stood by in white and blacke attire, The combat being fought at their desire. 55 These were the courteous dames that with great care ding as  the poet  as  thor fol∣.Had brought them vp eu'n frō their swathing bands, For thee two brothers did by fortune rate, In their first childhood chance into their hands: These two to Oliuer Gysmonda bare, Though straight they were conuaid to forren lands, Where these two Ladies kept them as their owne, I need not tell at large a tale so knowne. 56 Now was the time that neare approcht the night, That makes each thing with shadow shew obscure, So that not want of force, but want of light, Did cause the combat could no longer dure: The Ladies clad in garments blacke and bright, That (as I said) this conflict did procure, On this condition did them all dismisse, That to returne next day they do not miss. 57 But when that English Duke both saw and knew, The valiant youths Griffin and Aquilant, Not onely by their armes he saw in vew, But by their blowes, of which they were not scant, He doth acquaintance old with them renew, And they no point of courtesie do want, For straightway by the Ladies he was led, To take with them a supper and a bed. 58 Then in a garden sweet they did prouide Great store of daintie meats and costly wine, Fast by a coole and pleasant fountaines side, As best agreeth with the sommer time, The while the giant with strong chaines they tide Vnto the bodie of an auncient Pine, Lest he might hap to trouble and molest them, While they determind to refresh and rest them. 59 The boord with rich and costly fare was filled, And yet their smallest pleasure was their meat,Sentence. For in deede at a wise mans boord the smallest plea∣sure the guests haue, is their cheare in compa∣rison of the plea∣sing talke that happens either in mirth or grauity. The Knights in languages and learning skilled, Talke of Oryllo and the wonder great, To see one wounded so, and yet not killed, It seemd to them a dreame and strange conceat, And eu'n the wisest and most learnd did wonder, How he reioynd his members cut in sunder. 60 Astolfo onely in his booke had read, (That booke that taught all charmes to ouerthrow) How this Oryllo neuer could be dead, While in his head one fatall haire did grow, But hauing puld this haire from off his head, He should be subiect vnto eu'ry blow, Thus said the booke, but precept there was none, Among so many haires to find that one. 61 Astolfo ioyfull of this good instruction, Not doubting but by this to make him die, First makes some circumstance of introduction, And prayes the brothers giue him leaue to trie, If he could bring Oryllo to destruction, And they this friendly sure do not denie, Not doubting he alone would striue in vaine, With him that late resisted had them twaine. 62 Now had the Sunne remou'd the nights darke vaile, When as Oryllo turned to the field, And then the English Duke did him assaile, Both fought on horseback, both with spear & shield. Eu'n then Oryllo felt his heart to faile, (A hap to him that hapned had but feeld) Eu'n then some strange presage did him offend, That shewd his dayes drew shortly to their end. 63 Their speares now broke their naked swords they drew, Astolfo layes on blowes on him a maine, About the field Oryllos members flew, But he together gathers them againe, And straight his fight and forces doth renew, The English Duke dismembring him in vaine, Vntill at length one blow so luckie sped, That by his shoulders he cut off his hed.
64 And hauing headed him so eu'n and iust, Straight with his head on horsebacke he doth mount And rides away, Orillo in the dust Doth grope to find the same as he was wont, But missing it and full of new mistrust, To ouertake him yet he makes account, He ride and would haue cride ho tarrie tarrie, But in his hand the Duke his tongue doth carrie. 65 But though his head were lost, he finds his heeles, To purre and pricke he neuer doth forbeare, The headlesse body neuer stirs nor reeles, Put sits as sure as if the head were there: The while the skull Astolfo puls and peeles, Among such store to find th'inchanted haire, For in the haires no diffrence was in sight, To know if he did take the wrong or right. 66 But sith to make sure worke he thought it best, He makes his sword serue for a barbers knife, To shaue the skull therewith he doth not rest, Vntill he finisht had the bloudy strife: He cuts that haire by chance among the rest, That haue that hld Orillo in his life, The face looks pale, deuoid of liuely heate, The body backward fals out of the seate. 67 This done, the Duke brought in his hand the head, Returning to the companie againe, And shewd them where he left the carkas dead, Which when they saw with certain signes and plaine A kind of enuious ioy in them it bred, For glad they were their enemie was slaine, But inwardly they were displeasd and sorie, That this saine Duke had got from them the glorie. 68 The women also were not well content, That he had slaine Orillo in the fight, Because  had their first intent, Which was to stay these youths al means they might, In hope thereby some mischiefes to preuent, Which thy foresaw should vnto them alight: Straight all that country was with rumor filled, How th'English Duke Orillo fierce had killed. 69 T have ard some .For as in all those cities they dovse, The keeper of the next adioyning fort, Sent by a Doue a letter of the newes, From Damiat vnto the nearest port, By which deuice most rare they cannot chuse But heare and send with speed each true report: And thus in eu'ry country and in towne, They do extoll this English Dukes renowne. 70 The worthy Duke the brothers doth perswade, From thence their courses into France to bend, To do the dutie for which man was made, Gods honour and their countries to defend, Which now the Turks and Pamims did inuade, And neare had brought the same to wofull end: Which counsell from so great a Prince proceeding, They follow straight with forwardnesse exceeding. 71 The women now with teares in watry eies, Bid them farewell, and so they parted thence: And for they heard the holy citie lies Not passing sixe or seu'n dayes iourney thence, To take it in their way they do deuise, To see the place, where for humane offence, True God, true man, descending from aboue, Did die for vs vnworthy of such loue. 72 And sith the way betweene was large and wide, And void of fruits for sustenance of man, They do good store of bread and wine prouide, With needfull things, as for the time they can, And on the giants shoulders them they tide, Who like a sumpter horse them after ran, And on this sort with most deuour intent, Like pilgrims to Ierusalem they went. 73 Sixe dayes they traueld in their weary way, Nor seeing man, nor beast, nor bird aliue, The seuenth, immediat after breake of day, In that most blessed citie they arriue: Then visit they the tombe where Iesus lay, When with his death he did vs dead reuiue, And brought hell, sinne and death into subiection, With suffring, dying and his resurrection. 74 Now while the tombe with great heed they behold, Bare head and feet in shew of meek submission, And with more inward ioy then can be told, Yet ioyned with a deepe and sad contrition, That strake their hearts in awe and made them cold, With true remorse deuoid of superstition, And with themselues they still continued musing, Each one himselfe in such like words accusing. 75 Why then, where thou deare Lord didst for our sake,A spand. With water and with blood the ground distaine, Shall not mine eyes some small amends to make, Shed teares in memory of so great paine? Oh drowsie heart that dost not now awake, Oh frozen heart that meltest not in raine, Oh stony heart that dost not now relent, Lament thee now, or else for ay lament. 76 Thus with an humble and repentant sprite, They tarride at the tombe no little space, When so the priest appeared in their sight, Whose office was to keepe the holy place, Who seeing them so lowly and contrite, He doth impart to them this speciall grace, (Sith to amendment they were now resolued) Them of their sinnes forepassed he absolued. 77 This done, they went about and viewd the towne, Held in those happy dayes by Christen hands, Who striuing now to keepe each other downe,A true  of . With causlesse warres do trouble sea and lands, Or leesing or neglecting that renowne, In which Gods honour and their safetie stands: But letting this great enemy increase, By their seeld making, neuer keeping peace.
78 A gallant knight whom Sansonet they call, This citie gouernd vnder Charles the great, Who then intended to repaire the wall, And make the towne a strong and stately seat: Astolfo gaue to him the Giant tall, For strength and stature fit for such a feat, To serue his present purpose for the nonce, Vnto the walls to carry heauy stones. 79 And Sansonet doth eke on him bestow, A curious belt and hangers for a blade, And spurs of gold, in substance rich and show, That for that knight were thought to haue bin made George.That slue the Dragon with a deadly blow, Which did the Ladie chast and faire inuade: Thus gifts both giu'n and tane on either part, Each from the other friendly doth depart. 80 Now going from Ierusalem, behold They met a Greekish pilgrim by the way, That such ill newes to good Griffino told, As made him out of temper all the day: It was his euill fortune, deare to hold, And giue his heart vnto her for a pray, That had a pleasing hew, and faire smooth skin, But false, vnchast, and trecherous within. 81 Her name was Origilla, whom of late He left at Constans of an Agew sicke; And hoping now to find her in good state, He heares she hath him seru'd a sluttish tricke, As namely she had got a newfound mate, Not caring if that he were dead or quicke: She thought that for her yong yeares twas no reason, To lie alone in that sweet pleasant season. 82 This newes his mind doth gripe, his heart doth bite, He mournes by day, by night he takes no rest, That breeds him paine that others breeds delight, And this torments him more then all the rest, He shames, and shuns to haue it come to light, What was his griefe that did him so molest. And this to keepe it close the rather made him, Because from her his brother did disswade him. 83 But all in vaine, for he was wholy bent To follow her, although he knew her nought, Yet to himselfe he keepeth his intent, That secretly his going may be wrought: He vowes to makes th'adulterer repent, Who now to Antiochia her had brought: But in another booke I will expresse, Of his departure what was the successe. In the beginning of this booke was an excellent morall (if you obserued it) shewing how hurtfull it is for a captain to be prodigall of his men,Moral. and rash or headlong in his attempts: the former of which faults (that worthy and valiant gentle∣man) sir Iohn Smith hath very grauely and iustly reproued in some captains of our time, in that treatise that he wrote in defence of the vse of long bowes: and indeed it cannot be denied but bloudy conquests are no praise to the conquerour: In token whereof the Lacedemonians appointed, that he that wan a bloody victory should sacrifice a cocke; but he that o∣uercame by policie without bloudshed, an oxe: so much they preferred wisedome that is peculiar to man, before strength that is common to beasts. In Charles is to be noted the prouidence of a wise and valiant Prince: In Astolfo, that by the power of his horne rids the country of theeues and malefactors, we may learne to apply the talents are giuen vs, to good vses: In Griffin, that after all his deuotion at Ierusalem, comes againe to Origilla, we may note the frailtie of flesh, and withall, that outward holinesse without inward zeale auaileth nothing. The historie (set downe here in maner of a prophecie) of the prosperous raigne of Charles the fift,Historie. is too long to stand vpon in this place, but Iouius, Guycciardin, Vlloa, Surius, and Sleydan himselfe (though his enemy) do witnes his great conquests, his happie discouery of the Indies, his notable captains, and the great felicitie of his whole life: of which authors, because two are already in English, I imagine there be few that are like to reade this, but haue read the one of them, and consequently know as much to be true as I do here set downe. And for the Indian voyages, we need not so much admire the captains of forren nations, hauing two of our owne nation that haue both as forwardly aduentured, and as fortunatly performed them, namely, sir Francis Drake, whom I touched before, and yong Master Candish. In that Logestilla giueth Astolfo at his departing a booke to instruct him, and a horne to breed terror to his enemies;Allegorie. by the booke is signified wisedome, whereby all charmes and toyes are discouered: and by the horne is vnderstood iustice, that indeed brings terror to all misdoers, and driues them out of the country. Further, whereas Logestilla sends Andro∣nica and Sophrosina to safe conduct Astolfo, least Aleyna should attempt any new matter against him, it is to be vnder∣stood allegorically, that fortitude and temperance are the two most notable guides that we can haue in this world to keepe vs from pleasures snares, or violent assaults. Also whereas Astolfo looks first in his booke ere he take vpon him the enter∣prise to fight with Orillus, it is to be vnderstood, that good aduice is to be taken before men vndertake dangerous exploits. The house of Callygorant alludeth vnto the den of Cacus in the vij. of the Aeneads in Virgill,Allusion. —Semper{que} recenti Caede tenebat humus, foribus affixa superbis, Ora virum tristi pendebant pallida tabo. Simon Fornatius thinks that in the person of Calligorant, he meant a subtill sophister that became an heretike, and corrupted many, but after recanting, did good seruice in the Church. The fatall haire of Orillus, though it be meerly fa∣bulous, yet hath it allusion to some truth: for besides that, diuers Poets haue written of some, whose life lay in their haire, as Nysus killed by his daughter, and Alcest that could not die til Mercury cut off one haire: and of Dido likewise is said that Iris was sent to cut her haire to rid her out of her paine: besides these (I say) the Scripture testifies of the vertue of Samsons strength to haue bin in his haire, which is as strange for reason as any of the rest. Here end the notes of the xv. booke.
THE SIXTEENTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Stout Griffin finds his subtle mistres straying, With vile Martano, but is pacifi'd: The Turks and Christians all their force displaying, Do fight, on both sides many thousands dyde: Both man and house by sword and fire decaying, Do make a wofull sight on either side: Without the towne the Christians plague the Turkes, Within fierce Rodomont much mischiefe workes. 1 GReat paines in loue full many men haue found, Of which my selfe haue prou'd so great a part, As by my skill some good may hap redound, To such as are lesse skilfull in this art: Wherefore what I affirme with iudgement found, To breed iust cause of lesse or greater smart, Beleeue what I set downe for your behoofe, Probatum est, I know tis trne by proofe. 2 I do affirme, and haue, and euer shall, That he that binds himselfe in worthy bands, Although his mistres shew him grace but small, Although he find no fauour at her hands, Sharp words, coy looks, smal thanks, hope none at al, Though more and more aloofe from him she stands f this looke in e morall more  large. Yet so his heart and thoughts be highly paced, He must not mourne, no though he die disgraced. 3 Let him lament, let him mourne, pine, and die, Whom wanton wandring eies, whom staring heare, Haue made a slaue, when vnder them doth lie, A heart corrupt, a tongue that false will sweare, Simile.Like wounded Deare in vaine he seekes to flie, And in his thigh the shaft about doth beare, And this aboue the rest torments him cheefe, He is asham'd and dares not shew his greefe. 4 Such was the hap, such was the wofull state, Of Griffin now possest with foolish loue, He knew her mind and manners worthy hate, Yet could not he this fancie fond remoue: His reason faine his passion would abate, But appetite is placed her aboue: That be she near so false, ingrate or nought, Yet needs of him she must be lou'd and sought. 5 Away he steales from hence in secret sort, Nor to his brother once adew doth say, For feare least that his brother would dehort Him from her loue, as oft he did assay: And that his iourney may be cut more short, He coasts the countrie for the nearest way, He trauels all the day and halfe the night, Vntill Damasco came within his sight. 6 Fast by this towne this trull he ouertooke, That louingly with her new loue did ride, And all old frends and louers all forsooke, He was her Champion, he her onely guide: A man might boldly sweare it on a booke, Digum patella operculum, Or as the English Pr uerbe fasth. Like will to like quoth the divell to the coll. He were a husband fit for such a bride, He false, vnconstant, trecherous, so was she: She had a modest looke, and so had he. 7 He rode all armd vpon a stamping steed, With guilded barb that cost full many a crowne; She ware no lesse magnificent a weed, A rich embrodied purple veluet gowne; Thus to Damasco ward they do proceed, Where late there was proclaimed in the towne, A solemne feast that should endure some dayes, For iusts, for tilt, for turneyes, and for playes.
8 Now when the queane good Griffin had espide, (For whó she knew her squire would be to weake) Though sore appald, as scant she could it hide, Least he his wrath on both at once should wreake, Yet as the time permits she doth prouide, Consulting with her guide before she speake: And when they had agre'd how to deceiue him, With open armes she runneth to receiue him. 9 And framing then her speech with great regard, To answer fit vnto her gestures kind, Deare sir (quoth she) is this the due reward, My loyall loue to you deserues to find? That from your sight I should a yeare be bard, Your sight that soly can content my mind? You left me greeued with a burning feauer, But burning more in loue of you for euer. 10 Where I your comming lookt for long in vaine, Each houre a day, each month did seeme a yeare, And of your absence long I did complaine, Enquiring oft, if I of you could heare: Alas how full is carefull loue of paine? So sad mine heart, so heauie was my cheare, As being in dispaire which way to mend it, I loth'd my life, and did desire to end it. 11 But loe how fortune when I looked least, Hath now prouided me of double aid, And sent my brother, this most welcome guest, With whom I haue without dishonour staid, And now your selfe whose presence makes me blest, For had your comming longer bene delaid, So was my heart and soule to you inclined, That sure for greife I should haue dyde and pined. 12 Thus flattring words where with her tongue abounds, Holpe her in so good sort her tale to frame, That new on him the greater fault redounds, As glad he was to scuse himselfe fro blame, And her strong reasons founded on weake ground, Do cleare both her, and him that with her came, And makes him deemd a kinsman and a brother, That did his best to make this maide a mother. 13 So that he did not onely not reproue Her that so trech'rously had him betraid, So that he did not wreake as did behoue, Th'ad alterer that false with her had plaid; But thinkes it well if he the blame remoue, Which to his charge so probablie she laid: And as for him (loue makes him see so blindly) He calls him kinsman, and salutes him kindly. 14 Thus Griffin of his loue no whit abates, But keepes her companie as with his owne, Vntill they came within Damasco gates, Where none of them were seene before or knowne. The towne was full of Lords and greate states, The rumor of the feast so far was blowne, Which that they might haue more securely haunted, The king to all that came sate conduct graunted. 15 But here I cease to talke of Origill, He followe  booke And of her mate with her as fitly met, As knauish iacke could be for whorish gill, Vnchast and false, as euer water wet: To flatter and dissemble passing skill, And all was fish that came into her net: Now here I leaue good Griffin in her armes, And turne me to the Turkish men of armes. 16 I left where Agramant assaulted hard, A gate which he had hoped to haue found, But weake and feeble, naked, vnprepard, And easie to be beaten to the ground: I told you how king Charles the place did gard, Inuirond with selected souldiers round; As namely Guydons strong and Angilero, With Oton stout Ouolyo Berlingero. 17 Thus either band in sight of either king, Doth fight in hope of great reward and praise, And thinks such honour backe that day to bring, As should themselues and all their ofspring raise But such great store of darts the Christns fling, As still the Turkes are foiled many wayes, They die, and by their deaths do others teach, How hurtfull tis to roue beyond their reach. 18 But 'Rodemont whose men consumd with fire, Do fill their masters mind with double rage, Yet to auenge theirs deaths doth so desire, As nought but blood his thirst of blood can swage: He spares not in the passion of his ire, Nor men nor women, order, sex nor age, Away do runne the silly people crying, And leaue their children, frends and wiues a dying. 19 They happie were whose feet did serue them best, The surie of this cruell Turke to shunne, For some were killed in the flight, the rest Vnto the Churches or strong houses runne, And locke the gates against so fierce a guest, That in the streetes had so great mischiefe done: And of them all that had bene slaine in chase, Not one of them was wounded in the face. 20 But as the Tyger kills the fearfull Doe, Simile. That but by flight cannot it selfe defend, Or as the Wolues do spoile the sheepe: eu'n so This cruell Turke their guiltlesse blood doth spend: They neither know to strike nor ward a blo, To hurt their foe nor yet to help their frend: Thus past the Pagan to S. Michels bridge, And none there was his passage to abridge. 21 He kills alike the sinner and the good, The reuerend father and the harmelesse child, He spils alike the young and aged blood, With widowes, wiues, and virgines vndefild, And though that all did yeeld and none withstood, Yet mercie from his mind was so exild, He shewd to such as things can truly valew, Great signes of crueltie but none of valew.
22 Nor doth the cruell rage and fury cease, With seeing of so many people slaine, But rather still it growes and doth increase, Against those other that aliue remaine: Nor graunts he to the Churches any peace, But eu'n as though the walls could suffer paine; He maketh furious warres against the walls, And flings against them store of firie balls. 23 Their houses all were built in Paris then, Of timber (and I iudge this present houre Of bricke and stone there are not sixe of ten) Which made the Pagan then to bend his powre, To burne the houses, hauing kild the men: And though that fire do of it selfe deuoure, Yet he doth helpe the fire, and ouerthrew them, And those that lurkt within he spoyld and flue them. 24 Had Agramant had like successe without, As had within this wicked Rodomount, The walls of Paris had not kept him out, On which so oft he did assay to mount: But now this while the Angell brought about, Renaldo stout the flowre of Clarimount, Both with the English and the Scots supplies, As secretly as Silence could deuise. 25 And that they might them more vnwares assaile, They cast a bridge a league aboue the towne, And passe the riuer to their best auaile, And so in battle order comming downe, Not doubting if their footing do not faile, To get that day great glorie and renowne: And still among the rankes Renaldo rides, And for things needfull euermore prouides. 26 Two thousand horse in good Duke Edmonds guide, And thrise two thousand archers he doth send, To get to Paris on the tother side, To helpe within the citie to defend: (The cariages and other lets beside, To leaue behind a while he doth intend) These succors greatly helpe the towne within, And at Saint Dennis gate they let them in. 27 Renaldo takes the conduct of the rest, Appointing each his office and his place, As in his skill and iudgement seemeth best, Seu'ring each band from other with a space: And seeing eu'ry one was prone and prest, As was to be required in such case, He calleth all the Lords and Leaders chiefe, And vsd to them this pithy speech and briefe. 28 My Lords (quoth he) I need not to repeate ldos oration 8. staf. to theYour weightie bisnesse vnto you at large, I onely say, you haue iust cause and great, To giue God thankes, your duties to discharge, That here hath sent you, where with little sweat, But giuing on our foes one valiant charge, You may obtaine true fame and glorie more, Then all your auncestors obtaind before. 29 God, onely God that giues and guides good chance, Hath offerd vnto you this good occasion, Your names and glories highly to aduance, Which is in noble minds a strong perswasion: Behold the Kings of England and of France, Endangerd greatly by the Turks inuasion, Shut vp in trenches and in wals with shame, You may set free to your immortall fame. 30 The very law of nature and humanitie, Wils noble hearts to helpe the weake distressed, But more the lawes and state of Christianitie. Without your helpe now like to be oppressed, And right Religion turnd to Turkish vanitie, Of which what harms wil grow, may soon be guessed Our temples faire with their foule idols filled, Our virgins (chast by vow) deflourd and killed. 31 No meane, no stay, no end will be of slaughter, Of rapes and rapines wicked and vniust; No man shall keepe his sister, wife or daughter, From out the reach of their vnruly lust: But now if you these sorrowes turne to laughter, And raise their honor troden in the dust, They must ow you the freedomes and the liues, Of them, their friends, their children and their wiues. 32 In auncient times a laurell Ciuick crowne To him that sau'd one citizen they gaue, Ciuica corona. If then they had such honor and renowne, How many crownes shall you deserue to haue, If (not a townsman, but) a noble towne, And thousand innocents therein you saue In you it lies them to preserue and cherish, That (but for you) in wo should pine and perish. 33 Which if they should (as God forbid they should) By these vile Saracens be ouerrunne, Then were the Romaine Empire bought and sold, The holy Church were spoyld and quite vndone: In you it is these huge harmes to withhold, By you alone must this exploit be done, Tread then this path of praise so large and ample, Ile leade the way, follow but mine example. 34 This speech by him pronounc'd with so good spright, With voice so audible, with comely grace, Incensed them with such desire to fight, That tedious seemd to them each little space. And as we see in riding men delight To spurre a horse although he runne apace: Simile. So stird Renaldo with this exhortation, Those of the English and the Scottish nation. 35 And hauing thus confirmd their forward hearts, And promist largely in his masters name, Great recompence to eu'ry mans desarts, Vnto the riuer walls he closely came, His armie he deuides in sundry parts, Least breach of order bring them out of frame. And with the Irish band he first indents, To spoile their lodgings, and to rob their tents.
36 The rest he thus in prudent sort deuides, The award  hath in gouerment, The Duke of Lancaster the battell guides, The Duke of Clarence with the rereward went, with some chosen men besides, first the charge by generall consent: This on a sodaine they do raise a shout, And fild our side with courage, theirs with doubt. 37 riding out afore the rest, (With rd to do as much as he had said) Puts spurs to horse and sets his speare in rest, His onely sight the Pagans greatly fraid, With fainting hearts pale lookes and panting brest, They shew most certaine signes of minds dismaid, Yet stout king Pulians shewes no token, Of heart astonished or courage broken. 38 But trusting to his strength, and void of foare, And ranging out in sight of all his band, He met him man to man, and speare to speare, He met him horse to horse, and hand to hand: But straight it plainly was discerned theare, Sleight without force in little steed doth stand: This kind of fight was of a rougher sort, Then running of a course at til in sport. 39 Thus was king Pulian ouerthrowne and tane, To small tenor of the Pagan host, Next came the king (that giant) of Oran, That of his goodly stature much doth best, But soone Renaldo brought him to his bane, His horse his weapon, and his life he lost; The horse was glad to find himselfe enlarged, And of his heauy burden to discharged. 40 Not was Renaldo of his sword more spare, Then  before himselfe he shewd, His blade  purced to the bare. When he his thrusts or deadly blowes bestowd: No shields no coates of so good temper are, Nor cloth in hundred  together sowd, That this same fatall blade of his withstood, But that at cu'ry blow it fetcht the blood. 41 Nor did erbino merit common praise, That of his value shewd that day good proofe, He met the stoutest Turkes at all assayes, On horse, on foote, at hand, and farre aloofe, Attempting and performing sundry waves, That might be for their harme and his behoofe: And all his band in fight was fierce and hot, As is the nature of the valiant Scot. 42 And thus their firy heate and courage bold, Well shewd by blowes they to the Pagans gaue, Did make their stomacks faint, their courage cold, And glad in th'end by flight themselues to saue: For Sbrin one in yeares and iudgement old, (Though no lesse stout the these lesse age that haue) Doth now a little with his band retire, To shun the fury of the Scottish fire. 43 The worthy Dukes of Albanie and Mar, Ensude in valiant sort the good successe, And with the same preuailed had so far, As they had brought the Turkes to great distresse, Till Isolir the new king of Nauar, Came with his band their fury to represse, And on that side the battell did restore, Almost now lost, at least declind before. 44 Then grew the fight on both sides firme and stable, Both sides defend, both sides alike inuade, They cast on both sides darts innumerable, And make there with a darke vnpleasing shade: Leonida  same, being  that the  shot came  as  see the  them,  merely, the shall fight  shade. An endlesse worke it were to write the table, The Christens kild with bow, with bill, with blade, Sometime the sway goeth hither, sometime thether, Like waters driu'n with doubtfull tides and wether. 45 When one is slaine, his roome another fils, When one is hurt, another takes his place, And he that now another smites and kils, *Fals dead himselfe within a little space: His  deder at,  longin the  & express quas accepte auras. O Met. Great heapes of bodies dead make little hils, The earth it selfe doth looke with bloudy face, The greene wherewith it erst was ouerspred, Did urne to sanguin and vermilion red. 46 My pen would faile, and skill would be too scant, To tell the famous acts that Zerbin wrought, How his new brother. noble Ariodant, A fresh supply against the Pagans brought, And how still one supplying tothers want, Against the Turks with mutuall forces fought, Then namely when the Prince was almost slaine, By bastards two of Aragon in Spaine. 47 Chelindo one, the other Mosco hight, These two at once on Zerbin bent their force, In hope that if their hands could hit aright, To wound him sore, or at the least vnhorse, They wound him not, yet forst him to alight, For vnder him so sore they hurt his horse, To serue his Lord he was no longer able, But made the field his euerlasting stable. 48 This foile and fall his courage more do whet, To lose the seruice of his trustie steed, But from the saddle quickly he doth get, His losse his wrath, his wrath reuenge doth breed: He meanes not long to tarry in their debt, That to his horse did this vnworthy deed, And first he gaue to Mosco such a thrust, As made him tumble senslesse in the dust. 49 But when Chelindo saw his brother ded, Reuenge and feare in him together straue, His inward feare prouokt him to haue fled, Himselfe from danger imminent to saue, But straight reuenge another humor bred. Expelling feare, and makes him bold and braue, He spurs his horse in hope to ouertunne him, But Zerbin slightly steps aside to shunne him.
50 And such a blow he lent him as he past, Vpon his shoulders from the reredemaine, That horse and man vnto the ground were cast, Whence neither of them rose aliue againe: And now the Spanish band came in so fast, As noble Zerbin had almost bin slaine, But Ariodante then himselfe besturd, And makes an open lane by dint of sword. 51 The while, the Duke of Clarence doth assaile, Their rere that was by Baricondo led, The English archers shoot as thick as haile, Which to their horsemen great annoyance bred, On eu'ry side the Christens do preuaile, On eu'ry side the fearfull Pagans fled, Great store were slaine, and many prisners taken, Their battell now declined sore and shaken. 52 And had bin lost had not Ferraw by chance Come to their aid as yong Olimpio fell, Slaine by a knight of Scotland or of France, A cruell knight, whose name I cannot tell: Ferraw was sore aggriue'd at this mischance, He knew this youth, and lou'd him passing well, Because his skill in musick was so choice, Both for sweet stroke, and for his pleasing voice. 53 Had not the humor of ambition vaine, With crotchets new his foolish fancie fild, He might haue better staid at home in Spaine, Then come abroad to be in battell kild: But thus we see they get but losse and paine, That deale in that in which they be not skild, I wish musitions meddle with their songs, And pray the souldiers to reuenge their wrongs. 54 Ferraw that saw ten thousand slaine before, Without or fetching sigh or shedding teare, With this his minions death was grieu'd so sore, As scarce he could eu'n then to weepe forbeare, But he that kild him shall abuy therefore, By Macon and Lanfusa he doth sweare, And straight performd it to the knights great paine, For with his pollax out he dasht his braine. 55 Nor so content, he runs among the presse, And in his rage so many Scots he slew, That their late forwardnesse he did represse, And causd that they in hast themselues withdrew: Then to the tents was sent the king of Fefte, To make resistance to the Irish crew, That spoild their lodgings hauing robd the best, And went about to set on fire the rest. 56 Then when the stout King Agramant espide, The danger great he and his men were in, And how these new supplies on eu'ry side, Made his retire, and ground of them did win: To saue his owne in time he doth prouide, And lets alone the wals and them within, Himselfe with Lords and other Princes store, Came where Ferraw was entred late before. 57 And in such strength they do their forces linke, And with such fury they restore the fight, That now the Scots began to faile and shrinke, Renaldos encou∣ragement of the Scots. Saue that Renaldo came eu'n then in sight, And cride, O worthy Scots, and do you thinke To saue your selues by so vnworthy flight? Will you so leese the honor late you wonne? Care you no more to saue your masters sonne? 58 Do you regard no more your reputation, By you in sundry bloudy battels got, To leue the flowre and iewell of your nation, Amid his foes as if you lou'd him not? Ye shame your selues and all your generation, If you distaine you with so foule a blot, Turne, turne I say, and take some heart of grace, And meet and smite these Panims in the face. 59 They that before were sore with feare possest, Were now so heartned, that with honest shame, Each one doth seeme his safetie to detest, Each one his mind with anger doth inflame, And where they left their captaine halfe distrest, With this so forward guide as fast they came: So Zerbin rescude was from Turkish forces, And mounted straight one of the emptie horses. 60 Renaldo that did euer take delight To set on those that were most strong and stot, When once king Agramant was come in sight, Him fro the rest forthwith he singles out: But when betweene them was begun the fight, They sundred were by those that stood about, I meane the Turks, who their chief Prince defended, Who else perhap his raigne eu'n then had ended. 61 Now while without the wals the battell so, On either side with fury was renewd, Fierce Rodomont within did worke such wo, More rufull sight with eye was neuer vewd; To wracke profane the holy temples go, He setteth fire on all, and to conclude, He did alone so spoile the goodly citie, As might haue mou'd a stony heart to pitie. 62 And while King Charles that was farre off from thence, Did entertaine the new come English host, The which Renaldo sent for their defence) Behold there came a messenger in post, That lookt like one bestraught of wit and sence, His voice with hast and feare was welnigh lost, And when his broken words were plly hard, Ah well away (he cries) we all are mard. 63 Some find of hell (for sure a fiend of hell It is that doth our citie so destroy) Is sent from Belzebub with vs to dwell, To worke our vtter ruine and annoy: This day we must bid all good dayes farewell, This day must be the last day of our ioy, Lo yonder how our sacred temples smoke, Nor one in their defence dares strike a stroke.
64 Simile. Looke how a man would be amazd to heare A noise confusd of backward ringing bels, And after find, when he approcheth neare, New set on fire his house wherein he dwels; In such amazement and in such a feare Was Charles to heare the tale this poore man tels, And as he thither nearer came and nearer, He sees the buildings clearer burne and clearer. 65 Of hardie Squires he culs a gallant crew, And meanes to driue away this wicked wight, If man it be, or spright with humane hew, That doth vnto the towne this soule despight: Now came he where he plaine might see in vew, Men murdred, houses burnd, a wofull sight. But now although perhap my storie please you, To pawse a little may refresh and ease you. Moral.In the person of Griffino is described a yong man besotted with loue and affection of a vile strumpet, so as she easily perswades him, that he that indeed kept her so openly, as all the world spake of it, was her brother, or her cosingerman, or some such matter as easily blinded his eyes, being bleared afore with affection: and in this kind, though I meane to touch none by name, yet I doubt not but many will feele themselues touched of both sorts; such as Griffino, that place their loue in vnworthy persons: and such as Martano, that vnder the name of kinred, are most vile and filthy adulterers, which how common it is now a dayes, this saying shewes, turned now almost to a prouerbe, The nearer of kin, the sooner in: and that verse of Ouid, translated, or pretily turned by a pleasant Gentleman to this purpose, Tuta frequénsque via est sub amici fallere nomen, Tuta frequénsque licet sit via crimen habet. A safe and common way it is by kinred to deceaue, But safe and common though it be, tis knau'ry by your leaue. The great aphorisme or maxime set downe in the two last verses of the second staffe of this booke, was imitated by a Gentleman of our countrey in his yonger dayes,Master Edward Dier a . though a man euer of great wit and worth: his verse was this,Master Edward Dier a . He that hath plast his heart on hie, Must not lament although he die. To which purpose, all that haue written of this common place of loue, and chiefly Petrark in his infinite sonets, in the mid∣dst of all his lamentation, still had this comfort, that his loue was placed on a worthy Ladie: and our English Petrarke, Sir Philip Sidney, or (as Sir Walter Raulegh in his Epitaph worthily calleth him) the Scipio and the Petrarke of our time, often comforting himselfe in the sonets of Stella, though despairing to attaine his desire, and (though that tyrant hon still refused) yet the nobilitie, the beautie, the worth, the graciousnesse, and those her other perfections, as made him both count her and call her inestimable rich; makes him in the midst of those his mones, reioyce euen in his owne grea∣test losses, as in his eighteenth sonet, which many I am sure haue read: With what sharpe checks I in my selfe am shent, When into reasons recknings I do go, And by such counts, my selfe a bankrout know, Of all those goods which heau'n to me hath lent, Vnable quite to pay eu'n natures rent, Which vnto it by birthright I did ow, And which is worse, no good excuse can show, But that my wealth I haue most idly spent: My youth doth wast, my knowledge brings forth toyes, My wit doth striue tho'e passions to defend, With my reward (spoyled with vaine annoyes) I find my course to loose it selfe doth bend: I see, yet do no greater sorrow take, Then that I leese no more for Stellas sake. And this much of this matter of love. In the conflict at Paris gate, in presence of both Princes, we may note how the Ge∣nerall eye is a great encouragement to the souldier. In Renaldos oration, we may obserue that eloquence and learning is not onely a great ornament, but sometime a great aid to a Captaine. And for the speech it selfe, it is both pithy and methodicall. For being (as they terme it) of the deliberatiue kind, it layes downe (though briefly, yet plainly if you mark it) the facilitie,Historie. the commendation, the vtilitie, and the necessitie of that to which he perswades them. For historicall matter, there is litle in this booke, only where he touches the weake buildings of Paris, being built so high and so sleight, it is euident they are so at this day, and doubtlesse it is a great blot in a magnificent citie to see browne paper houses, which were a matter easily redressed in one age: as Augustus Caesar did at Rome, forbidding them to build but with stone, and making great prouision for stuffe and cariage for such as would build, at a reasonable price, as Sue∣tonius setteth downe at large: but this is not much to the purpose. Allegorie.Whereas Silence is said to be sent by God, with an Angell to conduct the Christian succors to Paris: by the Angell is meant allegorically Gods assistance and grace, without which no victories can be obtained: and by Silence is vnder∣stood wise secretnesse, to conceale our intent from our enemies, which is a great furtherance in warre. Allusion.For the Allusion of Martano, I referre it to the next booke, where his cowardize is more largely touched. The end of the Annotations of the sixteenth Booke.
THE SEVENTEENTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Fierce Rodomont leaue Paris is constraind, Martano at Damasco tilts most vyly, Stout Griffin thinks his running thereby staind, And goes fro thence, the while Martano slyly Doth steale his coat and horse, and so obtaind Great guifts, and of the king is graced highly: But Griffin taken in Martanos clothing, Receiues disgrace, each one his presence lothing. 1 THe most iust God, when once mans sins do grow Beyond the boúds of par∣don and of grace, Because that mé his iudge∣ments iust may know, Of Syll & Ma∣rius cruelise read Plutark in their liuesNo lesse then loue, to rule on earth doth place, Helisgabalus sir named Varius, for his monstrous lecherie, and his  therein.Vile Monsters such as ty∣rannize vs so, With wrong the right, with lust they lawes deface: For this same cuse were Sylla sent and Marius, The Nerons both, and filthie minded Varius. 2 Antoninus Bas∣sianus slaine for his beast  and rueltie, for which his name  so odious, that none was euer after him, so called.For this Domician held in Rome the raigne, And Antoninus of that name the last, And Massimin a base vnworthie swaine, To plague mankind in Princely throne was plast: For this in Thebs did cruell Creon raigne, With other tyrants more in ages past, For this of late hath Italie beene wonne, By men of Lumbardie, of Goth and Hunne. 3 Of Esselin I spake before in the notes of the third booke.What should I of vniust Attyla speake? Of Esselin, and of an hundred more? Whom God doth send his anger iust to wreake, On vs that still neglect his sacred lore. The times forepast long since, the present cake, Of such examples yeelds vs wofull store, How we vnthankfull and vnfruitfull sheepe. Are giu'n to hungrie rau'ning Wolues to keepe. 4 He means herby Lodwickt , that cal∣led in Charls the 8 out of France  Italie. Such Wolues as would not onely by their wills, Seaze all our goods and substance as their pray, But also send beyond the Alps high hills, For other Wolues more hunger staru'd then thay:Thra bia and  were the  where  the  where The bones of men that Thrasimeno fills; The fights of Treb and Cannas are but play, If with our bloodie slaughters they compare, Of Adda, Mela, Ronco, and of Tare. 5 No doubt God in heau'nly throne that sits, And thence our deeds and thoughts doth plainly see Vs to be spoild and conquerd thus permits, By those that are perhaps as ill as we: But if to please him we would bend our wits, Then from these foes he soone would set vs free, And we should see their punishment er long, That vs oppresse by villanie and wrong. 6 But now to turne from whence I did digresse, I told you how when Charles the news had hard, Of houses burnd, and men in great distresse, By him that doth nor God nor man regard, Vnto their aid he doth himselfe addresse, And chuse some speciall men to be his guard, And meeting such as fled, their course he staid, And these or such like words to them he said. 7 O simple fooles, what meane you hence to runne? Turne backe for shame, turne backe and do not fly, You chuse the greater ill the lesse to shunne, To liue with shame, and may with honor dy, What citie haue you left when this is wonne? What hope is left a fortune new to try? Shall one vile Pagan bost another day, That he alone bath du'n you all away?
8 This said, he came vnto the pallace gate, Where now the Pagan Prince triumphant stood, Most like a serpent fierce that hath of late, His old skin cast and left it in the wood, Reioycing now of his renewed state, Of his fresh strength, of young and lustie blood, He shewes his forked tongue and comes apace, And eu'rie beast that sees him giues him place. 9 Thus scornfull and thus proud the Pagan stands, With threats to spoile the Pallace and deface, And not a man that once his force withstands, Vntill king Charles appeared in the place; Who looking on his old victorious hands, Said thus: and is now alterd so the case, That these my hands that wonted were to win, To yeeld and to be faint should now begin? 10 Why should the strength, the vigor and the might, That I was wont in you to feele now faile? Shall this same Panim dogge eu'n in my sight, My people slay, my dwelling house assaile? No, first on me a thousand deaths alight, No death can make a princely heart to quaile; And with that word with couched speare in rest, He runnes and smites the Pagan on the brest. 11 And straight the other of the chosen crew, On eu'rie side the Pagan do beset, he xviij staff. 5But how he scapt, and what did then ensew, Another time ile tell, but not as yet: For first some matters past I must renew, And namely Griffin I may not forget, And craftie Origilla with the tother, That was her bedfellow and not her brother. 12 These three vnto Damasco came togither, The fair'st and richest towne of all the East, What time great lords and knights repaired thither, Allured by the same of such a feast. I told you from the holy citie hither, Was fiue or sixe dayes iourney at the least: But all the townes about both small and great, Are not like this for state and fruitfull seat. 13 For first, beside the cleare and temprat aire, Not noid with sommers heat nor winters cold, There are great store of buildings large and faire, Of carued stone most stately to behold, The streetes all pau'd where is their most repaire, And all the ground is of so fruitfull mold, That all the yeare their spring doth seeme to last, And brings them store of fruites of daintie tast. 14 Aboue the Citie lies a little hill, That shades the morning sunne in erly houres, Of waters sweet (which here we vse to still) They make such store with spice and iuyce of flowrs As for the quantitie might driue a mill, Their gardens haue faire walkes and shady bowrs: But (that which chiefe maintaineth all the sweets) Two christall streames do runne a mid the streets. 15 Such was the natiue beautie of the towne: But now because they looke for great resort, Of Princes and of Lords of great renowne, They decke their citie in another sort: Each Ladie putteth on her richest gowne, Each house with Arras hang'd in stately port: The noble youths do stand vpon comparison, Whose horse doth best, who weares the best caparis 16 Thus Griffin and his mates come to this place, And first they view these shows with great delight, And after they had rode a little space, A curteous squire perswades them to alight, And praieth them to do his house that grace, To eate and take their lodgings there that night: They thanke him for his kind an friendly offer, And straight accept the courtsie he doth profer. 17 They had set downe before them costly meat, Of sundrie wines there was no little store, Of precious fruits the plentie was so great, As they had seldome seene the like before: The while their host doth vnto them repeat, The cause of all this feasting, and wherefore The king appointed all these solemne sports, To draw togither knights of sundrie sorts. 18 But Griffin (though he came not for this end, For praise and brauerie at tilt to runne, But came to find his fleeting female frend) Yet was his courage such he would not shunne, In these braue sports some little time to spend, Where of well doing honor might be wonne, He promist straight though little were his leasure, Before he go to see and shew some pleasure. 19 And first he asketh farther of the feast, If it were new ordaind, or else of old? His host replieth thus (my worthie guest) I shall in briefe to you this thing vnfold: Our Prince the greatest Prince in all the East, Hath newly pointed this great feast to hold; This is the first, but all of his retinew, Mind ech fourth month this custome to continew. 20 In token of great gladnes and great ioy, By all the citie is the feast begunne, In token of the danger and annoy, That Norandin (our king) did lately shunne,Horandine, Here beginneth the tale of Luci∣na at this 20 ft. and endeth as the 50. Lockt vp foure months where he could not enioy The vse of earth, of water, aire nor sunne: Yet at the four months end by hap he scaped The death, with yawning mouth on him that gaped. 21 (But plaine to shew you whence did come the seed, Of which this danger seemed first to grow) Loue did to Norandin this danger breed, The king of Cypres daughter pleasd him so, Because her beautie did the rest exceed, To see her, Caesars word was vent  vice. needs (in person) he would go: He saw, he likt, he woode, he wun, he marrid her, And homward then by ship he would haue carid her
22 But lo a wind and tempest rose so sore, As three dayes space they looked to be drownd, And made them land vpon an vnknowne shore, Where straight we pitcht our tents vpon the ground, And (for of trees and grasse there was good store) The King in hope some venson to haue found, Into the next adioyning wood doth goe, Two pages beare his quiuer and his boe. 23 His meaning was some stag or buck to kill, We wait his comming in the tent at ease, When suddenly such noise our eares doth fill, As winds in woods, and waues do make in seas, And ay more nie vs it approched, till We plaine might see vnto our sore disease, A monster huge that ran along the sand, Destroying all that in the way did stand. 24 This Orke (for so men do the monster call) Directed straight his course vpon our tent, His eyes were out, how ere it did befall, But yet he was so quicke and sharpe of sent, As all his blindnesse holpe not vs at all, He hunteth like a spaniell by the vent, His sent is such as none can hope to shunne him, His pace is such as no man can outrunne him. 25 Thus whether they prepar'd to fight or fly, Or whether feare both sight and flight did let, He takes them as his prisners by and by, Of fortie, ten scarce to the ship could get, Among the other prisners tane was I, Whilst I our Queene in safetie would haue set, But all in vaine to flie, it did not boote, He was so quicke of sent, aud swift of foote. 26 As shepheards hang a wallet at their wast, So at his gudle hangs a mightie sacke, In which the better sort of vs he plast, The rest he bound together in a packe, And to his caue that was most huge and vast, He beares vs (hopelesse euer to come backe) A comely matron in this den he had, Maids faire and foule, some poore, some richly clad. 27 Beside this female family of his, He hath a caue wherein he keepes his flocke, That caue in length and largenesse passeth this, Made all by hand out of the stonie rocke: And (for mans flesh his chiefest daintie is) Into the caue he safely doth vs locke, The while he leades abroade his goates and sheepe, Which in the fields adioyning he doth keepe. 28 The King not knowing this, returned backe, The silence that he found some feare did breed: But when he found his wife and men were lacke, He then to sea did hast him with great speed: He sees plaine signes of hast, of spoyle, of wracke, Yet knowes he not the author of this deed, Vntill he had his ship by hap recouered, Then by his men the fact was plaine discouered. 29 When he had heard at last the wofull newes, How greatly was his heart surprysd with griefe? What gods, what fortune did he not accuse? For all his losses but Lucyna chiefe? But dangers all and death he first will chuse, Ere he then leaue his loue without reliefe, He either will her libertie procure, Or else he will like chance with her endure. 30 He leaues his ship and goes by land apace, There where the monster had his loue conuaid, And often wailes her hard and wofull case, Desiring and despairing of her aid. Now came he in the kenning of the place, And stands twixt halfe amazd and halfe afraid: At last he enters (loue expelling feare) When by good hap the monster was not there. 31 His wife was there, who with compassion moued, Admonisht him to make but little stay, But hasten thence if so his life he loued, Lest that her husband find him in the way: Yet from his purpose this him not remoued, But to the sober matron he doth say, In vaine you seeke to driue me hence by terror, Desire hath hither brought me, and not error. 32 By my ill hap while I abroade was riding, The Orko bare away my dearest wife, I hither come of her to heare some tiding, Or hauing lost my loue, to leese my life, I care not I, if she in life be biding, If she be dead, my death shall end this strife, Loue in this point so resolute hath made me, You should but leese your labour to distwade me. 33 The gentle matron in this sort replies, Know this, thy wife in safetie doth remaine, But hard it is to compasse or deuise, Which way to get her from his hand againe, His want of fight, his passing sent supplies, To striue with him by force it were but vaine, He spoileth men, but women do not die, Saue onely such as striue away to flie. 34 But those he finds his companie to shunne, With hatred gre doth for ay pursew, Some he doth hang ail naked in the sunne, And day by day their torments doth renew; And some immediatly to death are done, Both yong and old, both foule or faire of hew, So that to seeke to set Lucyna free, May harme her much, and little profit thee. 35 Wherefore my sonne depart the while thou may, (The matron saith) Lucyna shall not die, For hither shortly he will her conuay, Where she shall fare no worse then these and I, Depart? (quoth he) nay here I mind to stay, And fall what shall, I will my fortune trie, And if my hap be such I cannot free her, At least I meane before I die to see her.
36 The matrons mind with much compassion moued, To see his louing and most constant mind, That from his purpose would not be remoued, To bring him aid and comfort was inclind: And then she told him how it him behoued, If so to see his wife he had assignd, To vse some such deuice as she would tel him, That when the Ork should come be might not smel him. 37 She had that hanged in the houses roofe, The hairie skins of many a bearded goate, And knowing best what was for his behoofe, Of one of them she makes him make a coate, And with goates suet for a further proofe, To noint his body from the foote to throate: And in this sort his shape and sauour hiding, He commeth to the place where we were biding. 38 Now night drew neare, his horne the Orke doth blow, And all his heards came backe vnto his sold, And Norandin among the goates doth go, And enters in, loue maketh him so bold, The Orko shuts the doore, and leaues vs so, Shut vp as safe as in a towre or hold, Then doth the king at large vnto his louer, His comming and the meanes thereof discouer. 39 doth not onely not reioyce, To see her husband come thus strangely clad, But with most lamentable mournfull voyce, She blamd him that such perill venterd had, And sweares that if she might haue had her choyce, She would alone haue felt this fortune bad, And that before it somewhat easd her paine, To thinke that he in safetie did remaine. 40 Thus said Lucina faire with watred eies, As seeming now more dolefull then before; But Norandino in this sort replies, Thinkst thou my deare I loued thee no more? Yes sure, and will eu'n now a meane deuise Both thee and these to freedome to restore, And to deliuer from this seruile slauery, By helpe of this same skin and grease vnsauery. 41 And straight he taught vs as himselfe had tride, Each one to kill a goate and take the skin, And outwardly to weare the hairy hide, And to be nointed with the grease within. Thus eu'ry one doth for himselfe prouide, Before the sunne did yet to shine begin, Then came the Orke and mou'd away the stone, And out the bearded goates came one and one. 42 The smelling Orko at the doore doth stand, We past like goates and make no noise nor speech, Yet oft he groped with his hideous hand, But poore Lucina could not chuse but skreech; Or that he hapt to touch her with his wand, Or else too roughly pawd her by the breech, So back he puts her straight, and locks her vp, And sweares that she should drinke a sory cup. 43 Himselfe driues out his flocke (as wont he was) And we like goates among the goates do keepe, And when as they were feeding on the grasse, The monstrous heardman laid him downe to sleepe. Thus we escapt, but our good King alas, (That mist his loue) doth nought but waile & weep And saue that still he hopt of her reliefe. He would no doubt haue dide of very griefe. 44 At night he turneth back with like desire, As he before had come to set her sree, And he conceales himselfe with like attire, From him that wants his instrument to see. The Orke inflam'd with cruell rage and ire, And finds himselfe deceiued thus to be, This recompence he points her for her paines, Vpon that hill to hang each day in chaines. 45 A cruell doome, but who could it resist? Away went we, each for himselfe afraid, But Noranaino euer doth persist In his first purpose of procuring aid, Lamenting that so narrowly he mist To g her out, among the goates he staid, And like a goate (forgetting his estate) He go'th out early, and returneth late. 46 She sees him go and come, but all in vaine, She maketh signes to him to haue him part, He constantly resolueth to remaine, The loue of her possesseth so his hart, Despising danger and enduring paine, He hopeth hopelesse still to ease her smart, At foure onths end (good fortune so prepard) Gradasso iner came and Mandricard. 47 And (for her father was their louing frend) They gaue this bold attempt to set her free, And to her father straight they do her send, Who was full glad and ioyfull her to see, And that her daungers had this happie end: But Norandino was more glad then he; Who with the goats no longer now did stay, But hile the Orko slept he stale away. 48 And now for ioy of this great perill past, In which he stayd so wofull and forlorne, And that the memorie therof may last, To those that shalbe, and are yet vnborne, (For neuer Prince before such wo did tast, Nor stayd so long in miserie and scorne, And it shalbe iust sixteene weeks tomorow, That he remained in this wo and sorow.) 49 Therfore I say the king prepares this sport, With verie great magnificence and bost, Inuiting hither men of eu'rie sort, Such as in chiualrie excell the most, That far and neare may carie the report, Of these great triumphs vnto eu'rie cost. This tale the courteous host did tell his guest, Of him that first ordaind the sumptuous feast.
50 In this and such like talke they spend the night, And then they sleepe vpon their beds of downe, But when that once it shined cleare and light, The trumpets sounded ouer all the towne, And Griffin straight puts on his armor bright, Aspiring after same and high renowne; His leud companion likewise doth the same, To shew a hope as well as he of fame. 51 All armed thus they came vnto the field, And view the warlike troupes as they did passe, Where some had painted on their crest and shield, Or some deuice that there described was, What hope or doubt his loue to him did yeeld, They all were Christens then, but now alas, They all are Turks vnto the endlesse shame, Of those that may and do not mend the same. 52 For where they should employ their sword and lance, Against the Infidels our publike foes, Gods word and true religion to aduance, They to poore Christens worke perpetuall woes: To you I write, ye kings of Spaine and France, Let these alone, and turne your force on those: And vnto you also I write as much, Ye nations fierce, Zwizzers I meane and Dutch. 53 great was the first  was called the most Christian King for ending the Church of Rome. Lo, tone of Christen kings vsurps a name, Another Catholike will needs be called: Why do not both your deeds declare the same? Why are Christs people slaine by you and thralled? Get backe againe Ierusalem for shame, That now the Turke hath tane from you and walled Ferdinands was the first  was called Catholike, for driuing the Moores out of Granaia.Constantinople get that famous towne, That erst belonged to th'Imperiall crowne. 54 Dost not thou Spaine confront with Affrike shore, That more then Italy hath thee offended? Yet to her hart thou leauest that before, Against the Infidels thou hadst intended: O Italy a slaue for euermore, In such sort mard as neuer can be mended, A slaue to slaues, and made of sinne a sinke, And lotted sleepe like men orecome with drinke. 55 Ye Swizzers fierce, if feare of famine driue you, To come to Lombardie to seeke some food, Are not the Turks as neare? why should it grieue you To spill your foes, and spare your brothers blood? They haue the gold and riches to relieue you, Enrich your selues with lawfull gotten good, So shall all Europe be to you beholding, For driuing them from these parts and withholding. 56 This ras Lee the .Thou Lion stout that holdst of heau'n the kayes, (A waightie charge) see that from drowsie sleepe Thou wake our realme, and bring her ioyfull dayes, And from these forren wolues it safely keepe, God doth thee to this height of honor raise, That thou mayst feed and well defend thy sheepe, That with a roring voice and mighty arme, Thou mayst withhold thy flock from eu'ry harme. 57 But whither roues my rudely rolling pe, That waxe so sawcie to reproue such peeres? I said before that in Damasco then They Christend were (as in records appeares) So that the armor of their horse and men Was like to ours (though changd of later yeares) And Ladies fild their galleries and towrs, To see the iusts as they did here in ours. 58 Each striues in shew his fellow to exceed, And to be gallant in his mistris sight, To see each one manage his stately steed, Was to the standers by a great delight: Some praise vnto themselues, some shame do breed, By shewing horses doings wrong or right, The chiefest prize that should be of this tilt, An armor was rich, set with stone and gilt. 59 By hap a merchant of Armenia found This armour, and to Norandin it sold, Who, had he knowne how good it was and sound, Would not haue left it sure for any gold, (The circumstance I cannot now expound, I meane ere long it shall to you be told) Now must I tell of Griffin that came in, Iust when the sport and tilting did begin. 60 Eight valiant knights the chalenge did sustaine, Against all commers that would runne that day, These eight were of the Princes priuate traine, Of noble blood, and noble eu'ry way, They fight in sport, but some in sport were slaine, For why as hotly they did fight in play, As deadly foes do fight in battell ray, Saue that the King may when he list them stay. 61 Now Griffins fellow was Martano named, Who (though he were a coward and a beast) Like bold blind Bayard he was not ashamed,Prioris. To enter like a knight among the rest, His countenance likewise in shew he framed, As though he were as forward as the best, And thus he stood and viewd a bitter fight, Between a Baron and another Knight. 62 Lord of Seleucia the tone they call, And one of eight that did maintaine the iust, The Knight Ombruno hight of person tall, Who in his vizer tooke so great a thrust, That from his horse astonied he did fall, And with his liuely blood distaind the dust: This sight amazd Martano in such sort, He was afraid to leese his life in sport. 63 Soone after this so fierce conflict was done, Another challenger straight steppeth out, With whom Martano was requird to runne, But he (whose heart was euer full of doubt) With fond excuses sought the same to shunne, And shewd himselfe a faint and dastard lout, Till Griffin egd him on, and blam'd his feare, As men do set a mastiue on a Beare.
64 Then tooke he heart of grace, and on did ride, And makes a little florish with his speare, But in the middle way he stept aside, For feare the blow would be too big to beare: Yet one that would seeke this disgrace to hide, Might in this point impure it not to feare, But rather that his horse not good and redie, Did shun the tilt, and ranne not eu'n nor stedie. 65 benes an ut OratorBut after with his sword he dealt so ill, Demosthenes him could not haue defended, He shewd both want of courage and of skill, So as the lookers on were all oftended, And straight with hissing and with voices shrill, The conflict cowardly begun was ended: In his behalfe was Griffin sore ashamed, His heart thereto with double heate inflamed. 66 For now he sees how much on him it stands, With double value to wipe out the blot, And shew himselfe the more stout of his hands, Sith his companion shewd himselfe a sot, His fame or shame must flie to forren lands, And if he now should faile one little iot, The same wold seem a foule and huge transgression, His mate had fild their minds with such impression. 67 The first he met Lord of Sidona hight, And towards him he runs with massie speare, And gaue a blow that did so heauie light, As to the ground it did him backward beare: Then came of Laodice another knight, On him the staffe in peeces three did teare, Yet was the counterbuffe thereof so great, The knight had much ado to keepe his seate. 68 But when they came with naked swords to trie, Which should the honor and the prise obtaine, So Griffin did with deadly strokes him plie, At last he left him stom'd on the plaine. Straightway two valiant brothers standing by, That at Griffino tooke no small disdaine, The tone Corimbo, tother Tirse hight, These two forthwith do challenge him to fight. 69 Successiuely them both he ouerthrew, And now men thought that he the prise would win, But Salintern that saw them downe in vew, To enuie good Griffino doth begin, This man the stoutst of all the courtly crew, Doth take a speare in hand, and enters in, And to the combat Griffin straight defies, And scornes to haue a stranger win the prize. 70 But Griffin chose one staffe among the rest, The biggest and the strongest of a score, And with the same he pierceth backe and brest, That downe he fell and neuer stirred more; ames the are those the prine The King that loued and esteemd him best, Laments his death, and maketh mone therefore, But yet the common sort were faine and glad, That knew his mind and manners were but bad. 71 Next after him two others he doth meat, Ermofilo the captaine of his guard, And Carmond Admirall of all his fleet, With these a while he had a conflict hard, The first vnhorst was left vpon his feet, The other with a blow was almost mard. Thus of eight challengers remaind but one, The rest were quite subdude by him alone. 72 This one was he of whom at first I spake, Lord of Seleucia a valiant man, This one to Griffin did resistance make, And long it was ere ought of him he wan, But one blow on his head so fierce he strake, As he likewise to stagger now began, Had not the King made them to haue bene parted, Sure Griffin had him kild ere he had parted. 73 Thus all those eight, that all the world defide, By one alone were vanquished and slaine, So as the King was forced to prouide, An order new for those that do remaine; (By parting runners some on either side) For yet was spent not past an houre or twaine, Lest this his triumph should haue end too soone, He makes them spend therein the afternoone. 74 But Griffin full of wrath and discontent, Backe to his host with his companion came, The praise he wan did him not so content, As he was grieu'd at his companions shame: Wherefore to leaue the towne they do consent, While men were busie looking on the game, And to a little towne fast by he goes, And meanes himselfe a while for to repose. 75 The trauell sore he had before endured, So great a wearinesse in him had bred, And such desire of sleepe withall procured, As straight he gat him to his naked bed. The while Martano to all fraud inured, And vsing aid of her mischieuous head, (as he did soundly sleepe) deuisd the while A stratageme most strange, him to beguise. 76 They do conclude to take Griffinos steed, And cote, and eu'ry warlike implement, And that Martano in Griffinos steed, Himselfe to Norandino shall present. This they deuisd, this they performd in deed, And boldly backe againe Martano went, In Griffins armor stoutly stepping in. As did the Asse that ware the Lions skin.In Aesops fablos 77 He rusheth in among the thickest presse, An houre before the setting of the sunne, The King and all the rest straightway do guesse, That this was he that had such honor wonne: And straight great honour they to him addresse, And cause the like by others to be done, And his base name, not worthy to be named, About the towne with honor was proclamed▪
78 Fast by the King he rideth cheeke by cheeke, And in his praise they songs and verses make, In Hebrew tongue, in Latin and in Greeke. And now this while did Griffin hap to wake, And seeing that his armour was to seeke, He first begins some small mistrust to take, Yet hardly could it sinke into his reason, That she had giu'n consent to such a treason. 79 In feare and doubt no little time he houered; But when his host the truth had plaine declard, And that he saw the falshood plaine disouered, By which she had in follies bands him snard, Thē truth shewd plain that loue before had couered, And to reuenge this wrong he straight prepard, But wanting other furniture (perforce) He tooke Martanos armor and his horse. 80 And backe vnto Damasco he doth ride, Arriuing there within an houre of night, And entring at the gate vpon the side, The pallace of the King stood plaine in sight, Where then the King a banket did prouide, For many a Duke and Lord, and valiant Knight, And Griffin boldly sate among the rest, Forgetting that he ware the scorned crest. 81 And taken for the man whose coate he ware, His presence did the better sort offend, Of which when vile Martano was aware, That of the table sate at th'vpper end, And sees that to disgrace him they forbare, And thinke him his companion and his frend: His friendship and acquaintance he renounced, And this hard doom of him he straight pronounced. 82 Sir King (quoth he) it seems that for my sake, You graciously forbeare to do him shame, That of his basenesse shamefull proofe did make This day, and now againe confirmes the same: But you the matter and the man mistake, I know not him, his nation, nor his name, By chance I met him onely on the way, I neuer saw him I, till yesterday. 83 Wherefore might I herein your grace aduise, You should a sample make him for the rest, That here presents vnto your princely eies, A fit counseller for a Prince.Himselfe vnworthy, and vnwelcome guest, Let him tormented be in cruell wise, (This is my doome) let him be hangd at least, And vnreuenged let him not be borne, That knighthood should receiue so great a scorne. 84 Thus much the vile and base Martano seth, And Origilla soothd it with as much, And wisht an halter stop the villains breth. Nay (quoth the King) the sinne is nothing such, As is in law or reason worthy death, His life or yet his libertie to tuch: This, for examples sake I thinke it meet, To do him some disgrace in open street. 85 And straight he rounds a Sergeant in his care, And secretly appoints him what to do, Who came forthwith vnto the table where Griffino sate, and made no more ado, But leadeth him, that no such thing did feare, A secret prison and a sure vnto, And for that night he clapt him vp in fetters, Where theeues do vse to lie and euill debters. 86 Next day Martano that did greatly dread, Lest this his foule deuice would come to light, If Griffin should be heard his cause to pleade, Therefore as soone as Phoebus shined bright, (Pretending businesse) away he sped, And leaues Griffino in this wofull plight: But ere he goes, the King to him imparts No small rewards for his, not his desarts. 87 But let him go his wayes, and do not doubt,M with a  booke, 31 That this vnknowne and vnreuengd shall be: Straight was Griffino from the iayle put out, And carted so as all men might him see, Tide hand and foot, and people all about, Of which the most were but of meane degree, Also the armor whence this error came, Was hald about vnto his farder shame. 88 With many filthy words they him reuile, From filthy tongues, that hard it is to stop, And shewd him round about the towne the while, At eu'ry crosse, and house, and stall and shop: Then thinking him for euer to exile, They led him of that hill vnto the top, And there his bonds they loose with great disgrace, And then they will him packe him thence apace. 89 With scornfull sound of basen, pot and pan, They thought to driue him thence like Bees in swarmes, But when he was vntide then he began To make them know their error to their harmes, Then he did lay about, and play the man, Now hauing vse of both his warlike armes, But in what sort the them dismayd and scared, Within another booke shall be declared. In the beginning of this booke,Morall. he shewes how God doth plague people oftentimes, by sending tyrants and most wicked and cruell Princes to rule ouer them; which as it is indeed the greatest punishment a country can haue, so of the contrary side, may be in lesort concluded, that countries cannot haue a more ample blessing of God, nor a greater testimonie of his fauour, then to haue a mercifull Prince, that loueth the people, and is carefull of their peace and profit: and as mine author complameth of the misery of Italie, oppressed by tyrants, so contrariwise I might take occasion to magnifie the fe∣licitie of our realme of England for the gracious and mild gouernement of our Soueraigne, saue that so high and plen∣tifull a matter, requires an entire treatise, and not so broken a discourse as I vse in these briefe notes, and therefore Ire∣serue it wholy for another worke of mine owne, if God giue me abilitie to performe it: but now to the matter of this booke.
In that Rodomont kils and massacres the people, without resistance, or without any man to make head against him, we may marke how fitly and properly the multitude may be likened to sheepe, not onely in that they be shorne, and flee∣sed euery yeare for their wooll, and sometime pinched to the quicke by the greedie shearers, but also that when they should come to defend themselues, their houses, and children, from inuading of the enemie, they runne away like sheepe, from the noise of the barking of a little curre, vntill their shepheard come and defend them. In the tale of Norandine, that for his faire Lucinas sake did hazard his life so manifestly, and after was contented to Lap himselfe vp in a goates skin, and to noynt himselfe ouer with goates suet, we may note how hartie loue and affection, will make a man disdaine nothing, be it neuer so base. In Martanos cowardise, and craftie vndermining of Griffino, we may marke how cowardly fellowes be commonly trecherous, and priuie vnderminers. And in that Norandine (a good natured and affable Prince) did condemne Griffino to prison, without once calling him to answer for himselfe, we may take an excellent good note (as my authour hath done vpon this matter in the next booke) how hurtfull a thing it is in a cōmon wealth when a magistrate (and specially a Prince) shal heare such a Martanist as Martano, or such a Gil as Origilla was, whisper them in their eares, & giue malicious and vntrue (though probable) informations against well de∣seruing men: And sure, though some hold opinion that these kinde of people (called informers) be to be cherished, as ne∣cessarie seruants of the state, though defamed otherwise, and euen confessing themselues, that it is no honest mans office; yet for my part, I haue heard wise men say, that such men are hurt full to the state in pollicie, and make more malcon∣rents, then they discouer; and I am sure it is far from the rules of Christen charitie, and to be controld euen by heathenish ciuillitie. Tully speaking of the like men saith, Anseribus cibaria publicè locantur & canes aluntur in Capitolio. Likening them, to be as necessarie to keepe in the common wealth, as geese and doggs in the Capitoll: yet as Tully there noted, if the doggs barkt without cause, at such as came of deuotion to worship the Gods, then their legs ought to be bro∣ken: And euen so these doggs, these bloodhounds, nay bloodyhounds, that bite in their barking, if they shall at any time snap at such as come to honor and serue their Prince, it were pittie their leggs should be broken; for though they fal lame, yet they can be carried in coaches and horslitters; marrie if their neckes were broken, the Realme should (I thinke) haue a fair riddance of them. But I wil end this note with a verse of that pleasant Poet Martiall, written aboue 1500 yeares since to Caesar, who had then banished promooters out of Rome: the which verse (I confesse) concurs with my opinion. Turba grauis paci, placidae\'que inimica quieti, Quae semper miseras sollicitabat opes, Tradita Getulis, nec coepit arena nocentes, Et delator habet quod dabat exilium, Exulat Ausonia profugus delator ab vrbe, Impensis vitam, Caesaris annumeres. To this effect in English, after my plaine manner of versifying. The vile Promooters, foes to peace and enemies to rest, That with false tales, do neuer cease, mens goods from them to wrest, Are banisht hence full many a mile, to barren place and wast, And he that others did exile, that selfe same cup doth tast; O happie Rome, that such hath lost, as mischeefe stil contriue, But Caesar was at too much cost, to let them scape aliue. And thus much for the morall. Historie I haue none to stand vpon in this boke saue such as either are alreadie touched in the margent,orie. or else to be found in the Table. Allegorie there is none. But the allusion is noted by one Symon Fornarius at very great length,sion. and the substance of all is this, that indescri∣bing this notable triumph and feast of Norandino, he couertly describeth the notable tilting and turneying of certaine of the Medices in Florence, and how one Gentleman of Florence plaid such a part as Martano, shunning the tilt, and did indeed vomit for feare, and was laught at for his labour. Also the number of the challengers agreed of Norandi∣nos and this; so as it is euident that Fornarius saith right of the matter. Here end the notes of the xvij. Canto.
THE EIGHTEENTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Now Griffin's knowne and felt: Algyre doth threaten The Tartar Prince: Charles fighteth and preuailes: Martano like a coward is well beaten, Marfisas force Damasco warriers quailes: From thence with tempest tost, and weather beaten, Both she and Griffin and Astolfo sailes: Medor and Cloridan with care and paine, Seeke for the carkas of their master slaine. 1 MOst worthie Prince your vertues high and rare, With tongue and penne I praise, and euer shall, Although my words and verse inferiour are, In number and in worth to match them all: But all aboue this one I do compare, And far prefer, and pure diuinest call, That giuing gracious eare to those are greeued, Yet eu'rie tale is not by you beleeued. 2 Oft haue I heard your highnesse hath refused, Although the same most earnestly were sought To heare the guiltlesse absent man accused, (And when a great complaint to you was brought) exceellent use in a princeYou haue the matter and the man excused: Suspending still your iudgement and your thought, And keeping till the truth were truly tride, Euer one eare for the contrarie side. 3 Had Norandino had so great a grace, As not to credite tales so lightly told. He had not offerd Griffin this disgrace, No though thereby he might haue gained gold: But so doth rashnes vertue oft deface, As here was proued that was said of old; The silly people beare the scourge and blame, Oft when their Princes do deserue the same. 4 For Griffin (as in part I told before) When as his hands and feete were once vntide, Did deale about of blowes and thrusts such store, As well was he could for him selfe prouide, His wrath was such as none he then forbore, The old, the young, the strong, the feeble dide: And they that laught before to see him carted, Now for their labor whinde as much and smarted. 5 The people faint and mazed fled away, From him whom late they did deride and scorne, He followd them and kild them by the way, Dastards more meet to die, then to be borne. But in this chase a while I let him stay,He comes to Griffin the st. of  booke. Triumphing now that lately was forlorne: Of Rodomont now somewhat must be spoken, On whom at once I said eight speares were broken. 6 Eight speares at once vpon the scaly skin, Did light, and diuers darts were throwne aloofe, For spears and darts he passeth not a pin, Such was his strength, so sure his armors proofe: But when he saw that more and more came in, To part from thence he thinks his best behoofe, For why on eu'rie side they do assaile him, That needs at length his breath and strength must faile him. 7 Eu'n as the Lions whelps that see a Bull,Simile. Are at the first of his great strength affraid, But when they see their sire to teare or pull, His throte and sides, they runne their sire to aid, And flie vpon his face and horned scull, Till prostrate on the ground they haue him laid: So now when Charles himselfe was in the place, Each one tooke armes, each one took hart of grace
8 Who so hath seene a huge well baited Beare, Simile.With many dogs, men standing close about, When he by hap the stake or cord doth teare, And rusheth in among the thickest rout, How suddenly they runne away with feare, And make a lane to let the Beare go out: He might (I say) compare by such a sight, The manner of this Pagans fight and flight. 9 He rusheth out, and with his two hand blade, He florisheth about in so fierce sort, That soone a way for him to passe was made, To hinder him his way it was no sport, And those that by the way did him inuade, Except they shifted better, were cut short: Thus in despite of Charles and all his realme, He came vnto the banks of Sequans streame. 10 And standing from the banke a little distance, That few or none behind could him enclose, An howers space and more he made resistance, Against king Charles, whose power stil greater groo Till in the end in hope of no assistance, Displeas'd, but not disgrast away he goes: He takes the riuer fretting in his minde, That he had left a man aliue behinde. 11 And so he swell'd in anger and in pride, That he had thought to turne him backe againe, And to haue mounted on the other side, And all that should withstand him to haue slaine: But lo a messenger he then espide, That made him from that rash attempt refraine, It follows in the 15 of t bookBut who did send him, and what word he bare, I meane to you another time declare. 12 But first what Discord did I meane to show, Who as you heard was by the Angell sent Among the Pagans, seeds of strife to sow, And as she was commanded thither went: Yet leauing Fraud behind the coales to blow, Least all the fire of strife should quite be spent, And to augment his strength, as much as may be, He carrid Pride with him out of the Abby. 13 Go deputies.Pride leaues Hypocrisie to keepe his place, And thus these iaing friends togither go, And when they traueld had a little space, They found by hap dame Ielousie also, That met a dwarfe that run a trudging pace, Eu'n as she wanderd idely to and fro: And learning vnto whom this page was sent, To go with him she quickly did consent. 14 You call to mind (for sure you cannot chuse, But call to mind so late a written storie) How Mandricardo Doralice did vse, And kept with ioy whom he did win with glorie: She secretly sent notice of this newes, (Though afterward her selfe perhap was sorie) To Rodomont, and sharply him incited, To venge her rape as I before recited. 15 The messenger arriued then by hap, When from the streame the Pagan did ascend, And told him all the tale of her mishap, And how another did possesse his frend: Cold ielousie straight enterd in his lap, And Pride with Discord do the matter mend, Alledging if he put vp this disgrace, Then let him neare looke Ladie in the face. 16 Like as a Tyger that her young hath lost,Simile. Supprisd by hunters hand and borne away, Doth follow on the foote through eu'rie cost, No dikes nor waters wide can make her stay: So Rodomont with loue (and anger most) Enflamed, could endure no more delay, And though he want his horse, that did not boote, To cause him stay, he rather goes on foote. 17 He meanes what euer horseman next he spide, To take his horse offrend or else of foe, At this is Discord pleasd, and said to Pride, That she was glad their bus'nes coned so: I will (quoth she) a horse for him prouide, An horse shall cost him deare enough I trow; But what of him and of that horse befel,It followeth the 23 booke 23. Another time not now I meane to tell. 18 This while the most renowned Christen king, That had expulst the Pagan from the towne, His valiant men of armes about doth bring, And on the sodaine lets the draw bridge downe, And with afresh assault their foes so sting, While fortune smild on him, on them did frowne, That they had runne away like men dismaid, Had not Ferraw couragiously them staid. 19 My mates in armes (quoth he) brethren and frends,Ferraw Prou'd valiant heretofore, now hold your place: More happie far is he his life that spends, In honour, then that keeps it in disgrace; Loe me your generall that here entends, No way to staine the blood of Spanish race; The patterne follow that I shew you furst, And then I care not, let them do their worst. 20 Thus in that part Ferraw the fight renewd, And draws with him the chosen Spanish band, That oft in Christen blood their hands imbrewd, And none almost but they, did now withstand: But destinie can neuer be eschewd, As may by their successe be rightly scand; Behold Renaldo comes, and as he came,Ouid  Hector It seem'd he carrid lightning fierce or flame. 21 Nor long before Almontes valiant sonne, Hight Dardanell, had slaine a Christian knight, And proud of that his glorie lately wonne, And of this good successe he had in fight, About the field he carelessely did runne, Vntill he hapt to see a wofull sight, He saw Alfeo yeelding vp the ghost, A youth whom he esteem'd and loued most.
22 Lurcanio was the man that did the deed, And Dardanell to venge it doth intend, Lurcanio followd on and tooke no heed, The other all on him his force doth bend, And with a waightie speare, him and his steed, Vnto the earth together he doth send, And pierst his thigh, and put him in such paine, As scant he able was to rise againe. 23 But Ariodant (that deare his brother loued) And sees him in such paine and danger lie, Was there with all in wrath so greatly moued, He meaneth to auenge his hurt, or die: But though that he attempted oft and proued, Yet could he not to Dardanell come nie, For still of other men, the throng and number, Did him in this attempt molest and cumber. 24 No doubt the heau'ns had Dardanell ordained, To perish by a more victorious hand; Renaldos blade must with his blood be stained, And was, as after you shall vnderstand: By him this praise and glorie must be gained, The fame whereof must fill both sea and land: Follows in this , 68. staffe.But let these westerne warres a while remaine, And of Griffino talke we now againe. 25 Who taught those of Damasco to their harmes, What wrong they did to cart him in such sort, They fill the towne with vprores and alarmes, Mens mouthes and eares were full of this report: The King brings forth fiue hundred men in armes, And sends fiue more to fortisie the fort: For why this tumult brought him in perswasion, That sure some host of men did make inuasion. 26 But when he saw no men, no host, no band, No troupes of horse, the citie to inuade, Onely one man (well knowne) that there did stand, And of his people such a slaughter made, (Mou'd with remorce) he stretcheth out his hand Naked, in shew of peace, as is the trade, And openly his rashnesse he lamented, That such a knight to harme he had consented. 27 And Griffin when to find he now begunne, The King was of so good an inclination, And that the wrong to him before was done, Not of his owne, but others instigation: To make a friendly concord doth not shunne, Because hereby he lost no reputation: And there he tarid at the kings request, To cure his wounds and take a little rest. 28 This while his brother Aquilant the blacke, That with Astolfo still in Iewrie staid, And sees his brother now so long did lacke, Was in his mind all sad and ill apaid: They heard no newes of him, they found no tracke, Though wait about in eu'ry place was laid, Vntill the Greekish pilgrim they had met, By whom of him some inkling they did get. 29 He told them how a certaine wanton dame, Hight Origilla, with a ruffian knaue, That kept her openly without all shame, Yet going in apparell fine and braue, These two (the pilgrim said) together came, From Antioch (as forth in speech they gaue) And to Damasco then they meant to go, But what became of them he did not know. 30 And further vnto Aquilant he told, How he Griffino met this other day, And did to him the matter all vnfold, And how forthwith Griffino went his way, With chase enough, and swearing that he would Kill this same vile adultrer if he may: No sooner had his speech the pilgrim ended, In post to follow, Aquilant intended. 31 In post he followd to Damasco ward, And when he traueld had a day or twaine, (Behold that God that euer doth reward The good with blessings and the bad with paine) That gracelesse couple that before you heard, Betraid Griffino with that diuellish traine, Into the hands of Aquilant did giue, While they in pleasure most securely liue. 32 I say that Aquilant by Gods permission, Doth meet the vile Martano on the way, His horse, his coate, and outward apparition, So like vnto Griffino eu'ry way, That Aquilant at first without suspition, Went to embrace him, and began to say, Brother well met, I ioy of your welfare, Your absence bred in me much feare and care. 33 But when he saw the tother not replide, But shrunke away like one that were afraid, Ah traitor villain, yeeld thy selfe he cride, Thou hast my brother spoiled and betraid, Tell me (thou wretch) doth he in life abide? To whom in humble sort Martano said, (With fainting hart, with quaking voice & trembling Yet in the midst of all his feare dissembling) 34 Oh pardon sir, your brother is aliue, And like to liue, and hath no hurt, nor shall, The truth is this, I being loth to striue With him, because I found him stout and tall, Did with no ill intent this drift contriue, To saue my selfe and do him hurt but small, For this same womans sake that is my sister, With open force not daring to assist her. 35 It grieued me to see how he by lust Did her abuse whom nature made me loue, And for I thought it was both meet and iust, Her from this wicked custome to remoue, And sith I did his valew great mistrust, I thought it best by pollicie to proue: I stale his horse and coate while he was sleeping, And so conuaid her quite out of his keeping.
36 Well might Martano beare away the bell, Or else a whetstone challenge for his dew, That on the sodaine such a tale could tell, And not a word of all his tale was trew, Put yet in shew it all agreed well, Saue one which Aquilant most certaine knew Was false, and he in vaine did seeke to smother, He was her bedfellow, and not her brother. 37 With hand and tongue at once he doth replie, And in one instant he both strake and spake, I know (quoth he) vile villaine thou dost lie, And on the face so fiercely him he strake, He makes two teeth into his throate to flie; Then with great violence he doth him take, And him and her he binds in bitter bands, Like captiues carrid into forren lands. 38 And thus in hast vnto Damaseo riding, He swears that he these bands would not vnbind, Till of his brother he do heare some tiding, Whom in Damasco after he did find; Who now with cunning Phisicke and good guiding, Was almost heald in body and in mind, And when he saw his vnexpected brother, They both saluted and embrac'd each other. 39 And after they had made in speech some sport, About full many a foolish accident, (For Aquilant had heard a large report Of Griffins carting, and his punishment) At last he asketh Griffin in what sort They should this couple worthily torment; To hang and draw, and burne their priuie parts, Was not too much for their too foule desarts. 40 The King and a'l his Councell thought it good, Because their fault was such so open knowne, That they should publikely dispill their blood, And their desarts might publikely be showne: But yet that motion Griffin straight withstood, Pretending priuate causes of his owne, Onely he wisht Martano should be stript, And at a cart drawne through the street and whipt. 41 And as for her, although she had deserued A punishment as great as he, or more, Yet was the sentence of her doome reserued Vntill I ucina came, and not before: So that by Griffins meane she was preserued, So great a sway loue in his fancie bote: Here Aquilant by Griffin was procured, To bide with him vntill his wounds were cured. 42 Now Norandin that all his powre still bends, To honor Griffin all the meanes he may, And with great courtesie to make amends, For that disgrace he did him th'other day; To make another triumph he intends, Set forth with pompe and state, and rich array: And that the same may she to forraine nations, He notifies it straight by proclamations. 43 At foure weekes end the triumph should begin, The fame whereof about so farre was blowne, Without the land of Iewrie and within, At last vnto Astolfo it was knowne, Who asking Sansonets aduice herein, Whose wisedome he preferd before his owne, At last for companie they both agree, To go together these same iusts to see. 44 Now as they went vpon their way, behold They met a gallant and a stately dame, With whom this Duke acquainted was of old,Marfisa. Marfisa was this noble Ladies name: She traueld like a Knight, her heart was bold, Her bodie passing strong vnto the same, And when she knew both why and where they went, To go with them she quickly did consent. 45 And thus these three their iourney so contriue, As iust against the day and solemne feast, Together at Damasco they arriue, Each one well mounted on a stately beast, The King that specially did care and striue, To honor Griffin more then all the rest, By all the meanes and wayes he could deuise, Augmented much the valew of the prise. 46 And where it was▪ as I before declar'd, A single armor rich and finely wrought, Now Norandino at this time prepar'd, To set it out with things not lightly bought; To this he adds a horse most richly barbd, By riders skill to great perfection brought, Well shapt, wel markt strong limbd, and passing swift, The beast alone, fit for a Princess gift. 47 All this he did, because great hope he saw, That Griffin once againe the prise would win, But then was verifide the old said saw, Much falls betweene the Challice and the chin:Prouerbe Quid Me  inter spam For when Marfisa (void of feare or aw) Without had viewd this armor and within, And finds it had bene hers by marks well knowne, She seizeth straight vpon it as her owne. 48 The King that ill so great disgrace could brooke, Did shew himselfe there with much discontent, And with a princely frowne and angry looke, His silence threatned that she should repent, And in so great despite the thing he tooke, That straight some sergeants vnto her he sent, With souldiers, some on foote and some on horse, Deceiu'd much in her sex, more in her force. 49 For neuer did a child take more delight,Simile. With gawdie flowres in time of spring to play, Nor neuer did yong Ladie braue and bright,Simile. The first  similes Like dauncing better on a solemne day, Then did Marfisa in the sound and sight Of glittring blades and speares delight to stay: And this did cause her take therein more pleasure, Because her strength was great beyond all measure.
50 Those few that were to apprehend her sent, And punish her for this vnlawfull deed, Were cauld their comming quickly to repent, And others by their harmes tooke better heed: The armed Knights most diuersly were bent, Some standing still to mark what this would breed, Some to the sergeants thought to bring reliefe, Or whom were Griffin and his brother chiefe. 51 The English Duke doth deeme it were a shame, To leaue Marfisa in this dangerous case, Sith chiefly for his companie she came, And Sansonet doth deeme it like disgrace, Wherefore they meane how ere the matter frame, Not leaue her vnassisted in the place, Astolfo had a charmed speare all gilt, With which he vsed oft to runne at tilt. 52 The vertue of this charmed speare was such, Besides the gilding bright and faire of hew, That whom so ere the head thereof did tuch, Straight him from off his horse it ouerthrew, Griffino first although disdaining much, He quite vnhorst, nor who it was he knew: Then Aquilant that to reuenge it ment, Vnto the ground in manner like was sent. 53 Thus did these warriers three themselues behaue, But chiefe Marfisa, who would neuer rest, But would in spite of all, the armor haue, Nor once vouchsaft to aske it or request; She doth the King and all his nobles braue, And when the best of them had done his best, On eu'ry side she beat the people downe, And from them all made way out of the towne. 54 Sansonet and Astolfo did the like, King Norandinos men of armes pursew, The foolish people crie stop, kill and strike, But none comes neare, but stand aloofe to vew: A narrow bridge there was, this place they pike, And to defend it against all the crew, Till Griffin came, hauing his horse recouered, And by some markes the English Duke discouered. 55 And straight his brother Aquilante came, And of Astolfo both acquaintance take, And then in ciuill termes they somewhat blame Her litle count she of the King did make, Astolfo friendly told to them her name, And in defence of her some words he spake, The rest that came maruell to what it tends, To heare them talke together now like frends. 56 But when that Norandinos souldiers hard Her name, so dreaded ouer all the East, They surely thought that they should all be mard, And that the citie would be tane at least, Therefore they pray the King to haue regard. But now Marfisa (moued by request Of those two brothers) friendly doth consent, Her selfe before the Prince for to present. 57 And thus without much reuerence she spake, Sir King, I maruell what your highnesse ment, A prise and gift of such a thing to make, As is not yours without I giue consent: The armes this armor hath plaine proofe do make, Namely a crowne into three peeces rent: Once I put off this armor in a way,That theefe was Bruneo, as is as large set downe  Boyardos book To chase a theefe that stale from me a pray. 58 Then said the King, faire dame the truth is so, Of one Armenian merchant I them bought, I make no question be they yours or no, Nor needs for proofe more witnesse to be brought, For though they were not, I would them bestow On you, if so the same by you were sought: As for Griffino vnto whom I gaue them, He shall be pleasd I hope, and not to haue them. 59 I will him recompence some other way, And giue him gifts of as great worth or more; Thanks to your highnesse Griffin straight doth say, Preserue me in your grace, I aske no more: But when Marfisa saw that eu'ry way They honord her, she chang'd her mind before, To shew magnificence she vsd this drift, That he must take this armor as her gift. 60 And thus good friends all turned back againe, And then with double ioy the feast they hold, In which chiefe praise did Sansonet obtaine, The other foure did then themselues withhold, Wishing the praise should vnto him remaine, And then with greater cheare then can be told, By Norandino they were nobly feasted, And there themselues they well repos'd and rested. 61 Seu'n dayes or eight the King them entertained, And those once past, of him their leaue they take, The which with gifts and honor great obtained, Vnto the towne of Tripoly they make, And in one companie these fiue remained, And mind not one the other to forsake, As long as one of them was left aliue, Vntill in France they safely should arriue. 62 And straight they get a vessell for their hire, A merchants ship new laden from the West, The master of the ship an auncient fire, Consented to their wils with small request, The wind as then seru'd fit for their desire, And blowes a gentle gale all from the East, So that with filled sailes in little while, They came as farre as Cypres, Venus Ile. 63 Here eu'ry place was full of odours sweet, Of gardens faire, of spice of pleasant tast,Cypres an Ile co∣secrate to Venus. The people lustfull (for dame Venus meet) From tender yeares to doting age do last, With wanton damsels walking in each street, Inuiting men to pleasure and repast, From hence againe they loosed, at what time Don Phaebus charret vnto th'East did clime.
64 The weather still was temperat and cleare, A pleasant gale their swelling sailes did fill; No signe of storme or tempest did appeare, To such as in the weather had best skill: But loe the weather oft doth change her cheare, Eu n as a woman oft doth change her will, For sodainly they had such stormes of wether, As if that heau'n and earth would come together. 65 The aire doth on the sodaine grow obscure, But lightned oft with lightnings dreadfull light, And saue their houreglasse kept them reckning sure Twas hard for to discerne the day from night: The desprat marriners do all endure, As men inured to the waters spight, The heau'ns aboue, the waues beneath do rore, Yet are not they dismaid one whit therefore. 66 One with a whistle hang'd about his necke, Showes by the sound which cord must be vndone, And straight the shipboy readie at a becke, Vnto the tops with nimble sleight doth runne, The other marriners vpon the decke, Or at the steere the comming waues do shunne, And then by turnes they pumpe the water out, By paine and care preuenting eu'rie doubt. 67 He returne to them in the  booke. 34 .Now while this noble crew with tempest tost, Went in the sea as winde and weather draue, And looke each minute to be drownd and lost, The Christians with a fresh assault and braue, Set on the Pagans sorely to their cost: Who now began the worser side to haue, But chiefly then their courage gan to quaile, When noble Dardanellos life did faile. 68 RenaldoRenaldo him had noted from the rest, Full proud of slaughter of so many foes, And to himselfe he said tis surely best, To crop this weed before it higher growes, Therewith he sets his fatall speare in rest, And cries to Dardanello as he goes, Alas poore boy, much wo to thee they bred, That left to thee that sheild of white and red. 69 He trie if you defend those colours well, (He saith) which if with me you cannot do, Against Orlando fierce. I can you tell. For to defend them will be great adoe. Thus said Renald, and noble Dardanell, In valiant wise thus answerd thereunto, Know this (quoth he) that these my colours I Will brauely here defend, or brauely die. 70 With that he spurr'd his horse (as this he spake) Dardanello And with great force Renaldo did assaile, But loe the staffe vpon his armor brake, So as his blow but little did auaile, But straight Renaldos speare a way did make, And pierce the double folds of plate and maile, And went so deepe into the tender skin, The life went out there where the staffe went in. 71 Looke how a purple flowre doth fade and drie,Simile. Hou  of a Poppey. That painefull plowman cutteth vp with sheare, Or as the Poppeys heads a side do lie, When it the bodie cannot longer beare; So did the noble Dardanello die, And with his death fild all his men with feare, As waters runne abrode that breake their bay,Simile. So fled his souldiers breaking their array. 72 They flie vnto their tents with full perswasion, That of the field the masterie was lost, Wherefore to fortifie against inuasion, They spare no time, no trauell, nor no cost; Now Charles by forhead meanes to take Occasion,Sentence  Froe  oft ost  Occasus And follows them full close with all his host, And comming to their tents so brauely venterd, That he with them themselues almost had enterd. 73 Had not his valiant attempt bene staid, By ouer hastie comming of the night, So that of force as then it was delaid, And either side was driu'n to leaue the fight, But with this difference, all the Turks dismaid, And newly gatherd from their fearfull flight, The Christians on the tother side pursewing, And day by day their hope and powre renewing. 74 The number of the Turks that day were slaine, Was more then fourscore thousand (as they say) Their bloud did fat the ground of all that plaine, And makes the ground more fertile to this day: Among the dead some men halfe dead remaine, Left there for theeues and robbers as a pray, Within the Pagan campe great mone they make, Some for their friends, some for their kinsfolks sake. 75 Two youths there were among so many more, Whose friendship fast and firme, whose faithful harts Deserued to be plast the rest before, And to be praised for their good desarts, Their names were Cloridano and Medore,Cloridano. Medore. Both borne farre hence, about the Ester parts, Their parents poore, and not of our beleefe, Yet for true loue they may be praised chiefe. 76 The elder of the two hight Cloridan, An hunter wilde in all his life had beene, Of actiue limbs, and eke an hardie man, As in a thousand men might well be seene: Medoro was but yong, and now began both  of  such To enter too, of youth the pleasant greene, Faire skind, black eyd, and yellow curled heare, That hangd in louely locks by either eare. 77 These two among the rest kept watch that night, And while the time in sundry speech they spent, Medoro oftentime most sadly sight, His masters death did cause him so lament, Oh (said Medoro) what a wofull spight? What cruell scourge to me hath fortune sent? That Dardanel Almontes worthy sonne, So sodainly should vnto death be done?
78 Behold his noble corse is left a pray, To be deuoured by the Wolfe and croe, A foode too fine to be so borne away, But I shall remedie that hap I troe, Ile finde the meane his corse thence to conuay, I am resolu'd my selfe will thither goe, That for the good he did me when he liued, At least his corse by me may be relieued. 79 When Cloridano heard this saying out, He stood amazd, and musing in his mind, In tender yeares to finde a heart so stout, Vnto so dangerous attempt inclinde, And straight disswades him, casting many a doubt, To make him change the thing he had assignde, But still Medoro doth resolue to trie, To burie Dardanell, or else to die. 80 When Cloridan so resolute him found, Of his owne franke accord he vow doth make, To follow him in broken state and sound, And neuer him to leaue or to forsake; And straight they two do leaue this fenced ground, And pointing new supplies their roomes to take, They find the Christen campe lie all neglected, Like those that feare no harme, nor none suspected. 81 I say those Christens that the watch should keepe, Lay as they cared not for foe nor frend, Their senses so possest with wine and sleepe, That none of them their office did attend: But Cloridan that saw them drownd so deepe, (Said thus,) Medoro, now I do intend, To get for our great losse, this small amends, To kill some foes, that killed all our frends. 82 Stand thou and watch and harkeu eu'rie way, And for the rest let me alone to trie, This said, he goes where one Alfeo lay, That tooke vpon him knowledge in the skie, By which he dreamt he should liue many a day, And in his wiues beloued bosome die, stronomerBut all was false his cunning him deceaued, For now this Pagan him of life bereaued. 83 And many more whom here I do not name, That sleepe on boords, or making straw their bed: At last where wretched Grillo lay he came, That on an emptie barrell coucht his hed, Himselfe had empted late before the same, unkard.A deadly sleepe the wine in him had bred, The Turke his sword within his bowels fixed, Out came the blood and wine togither mixed. 84 Neare Grillo slept a Dutchman and and a Greeke, That all the night had plide the dice and drinke, gamsters.To both of them at once he did the leeke, That dreamt perhaps of seu'n, and of sysefinke: They had bene better watched all the weeke, Then at so bad a time as this to winke: Death certaine is to all the Prouerbe seath, Vncertaine is to all the houre of death. 85 Looke how a Lion fierce with famine pinde, That comes vnto a flocke of silly sheepe, Where neither fence, nor people he doth finde, Doth spoile the flocke the whil ye shepheards sleep; So Cloridano with as bloudie minde, That found those husht that watch and ward should keepe, Could not his cruell rage and mallice bridle: Nor was this while Medoros weapon idle. 86 For he that did disdaine to make to die, Those of the common and the baler sort, Came there where Duke Labretto then did lye, Embracing of his Ladie in such sort, As yuie doth the wall, they lay so nye, Now soundly sleeping after Venus sport, So close, the aire could not haue come betweene; Medore their heads at one blow cuts off cleene. 87 Oh happie state,Boccaccio hath the like concess to this. ô life, ô death most sweete, For sure I thinke their soules embracing so, In heau'nly seat do oft togither meete, And in good peace and loue did thither go. Then next a captaine of the Flemish fleete, And th'Erle of Flaunders sonnes with other moe, Medoro kild, and so far forward went, He came but little from the Emp'rors tent. 88 But loe they both with shedding blood now tyred, And fearing least at length some few might wake, Er long time past, both by accord retyred, And mind their first attempt in hand to take, (As both, but as Medoro chiefe desired) Most secretly vnto the field they make, They meane although they both were faint & wery, The noble Dardanellos corse to burie. 89 The heaps of men that in the field remaine, Some dead, and some betweene aliue and dead, Had made their labor to haue bene in vaine, Had not the moone shewd out her horned head, So bright, as cleare discouerd all the plaine, That then was couerd with Vermillion red, Were it a chaunce or else his earnest prayre, That made the moone at that time shine so faire. 90 Now after search by Phoebes friendly light, The good Medore espide him on the ground,Phoebe the name of the . Who when he saw that grieuous wofull sight, He was for sorrow readie there to sound; And out he cries, alas ô worthy wight, Not worthy, in this sort to haue bene found, Now my last duetie, do I meane to pay, And then to say, farewell to you for ay. 91 Thus spake Medoro shedding many a teare, And minding now no longer time to tarrie, The loued corse doth on his shoulders beare, And Cloridano holpe the same to carrie, And they that erst were stout and void of feare, Were waxen now so timerous and warie, Not for their owne, but this deare burdens sake, That eu'rie little noise did cause them quake.
92 This while the noble Zerin, hauing chast His fearfull foes while others were a sleepe, That had his heart on vertues lore so plast, As did to noble deeds him waking keepe, Came with his troope where these two made great hast By hills, by dales, by stonie waies and steepe, The carkas of their Lord to beare away, When much it wanted not of breake of day. 93 The Scots that were of noble Zerbins band, And saw two men go loden downe the plaine, Make after them a gallop out of hand, In hope to light vpon some prey or gaine: When Cloridano spying ore the land, Did say t'was best to let the corse remaine, Alledging that it was a foolish tricke, In sauing one dead man to loose two quicke. 94 And herewithall his hold he letteth slide, And thinkes Medoro would the same haue done, He meanes himselfe in the next wood to hide, And toward it in great hast he doth runne; But good Medoro that could not abide, To leaue the office he so late begunne, Although with double paine and duller pase, With all the burthen fled away in chase. 95 And to the wood the nearest way he went, In hope to get it er the horsemen came, But now his breath and strength were so far spent, As they had verie neare him ouertane, Yet in his deed he doth no whit relent, To leaue his Lord he counts it such a shame. But they that thinke this storie worth the reeding, Must take a little respite in proceeding. Morall.In this eighteenth booke, we may note first how hurtfull a thing it is to a Prince or great Magistrate to iudge without hearing both sides: and contrarie how great a praise it is in them to do (as Alexander is noted to haue vsed) to keepe one care for the aduerse partie, or (as we terme it) for the defendant. In the punishment of Martano, we may note how false accusers euer come to some filthie end, as their vile and filhie liues deserue. In Norandine, that finding he had done Griffino wrong, is willing to make amends for it, and to be frends with him, we may see a notable example of princely cle∣mency, which I could wish all Christian Princes to follow, though in deed commonly they do quite contrarie; and rather where they do one wrong, make amends with a greater, according to that heathnish (nay diuellish) saying of Machiauell, that whom you haue done a great iniurie to, him you must neuer pardon, but still persecute. (Tempora tempora quod monstrum aluistis?) Oh times what a monster haue yee bred? how far is this doctrine from his, that taught to forgiue, not seuen times, but seauentie times seuen times? Lastly in Medoro, we may note a notable example of gratitude towards his masters dead corse, in hazarding his own life to burie it; which is indeed (though he were a heathen) a most Christian act, and one of the works of charitie com∣mended in the Scripture, as namely in Tobia; who was greatly rewarded and blessed for it: And further we may note in all ages, buriall hath bene thought a most necessarie thing, and religious: but of Medoros gratitude I shall speake more in the next booke. Historie.Concerning the description of the Ile of Cypres, set downe in 63. staffe, where it is praised for the pleasantnes of it, as all that write of it do testifie, and Horace proues it was called Venus Ile, in this verse to Venus: —Regina Gnidi Paphiq Sperne dilectam Cipron, &c— Allegorie.We may obserue a good Allegoricall sence, in that Rodomont is first assaild by Iealousie, then how Iealousie breeds Discord, and how Pride increaseth it, still edging it forward: saying what a shame is it to put vp such an iniurie? and what will the world say of it? and who could beare it? these be the whetstones to sharpen reuenge, and to kindle the coales of strife. Also we note how mine Author pretily noted, that Discord and Pride, when they went from the Abbey, left Fraud and Hypocrisie for their sufficient deputies in their places; for where Fraud works, there neuer wanteth seed of strife: and where Hypocrisie is, there wants no pride, though it be not plainly discouered. Allusion.In Dardanellos meeting with Renaldo and encountring him, and after being slaine by him, he altogether alludes to the conflict betweene Troylus and Achilles. Infoelix puer atque impar congressus A∣chilli. The end of the annotations of the 18. booke.
THE NINETEENTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Angelica doth heale, and wed Medore: Marfisa, with that other worthie crew, Lands (after trauell long) vpon the shore Of Amazons: where when the law they knew, Stout Guydon, that came thither late before, Fought with Marfisa, who his nine men slew; But when the combat ceast, for want of light, Then Guydon prayth them lodge with him that night. 1 Diuers haue  to this offct of the fic∣kle as of frends: but specially . Donecer is fa mltos nu∣mer abis acos: Tempora tisue NOne can deeme right who faithfull frends do rest, While they beare sway & rule in great degree, For these both fast and fai∣ned frends are prest, Whose faiths seeme both of one effect to be: But then reuolts the faint and fained guest, When wealth vnwinds, and Fortune seems to flee, But he that loues indeed remaineth fast, And loues and serues when life and all is past. 2 Hrace. Vulg  retro .If all mens thoughts were written in their face, Some one that now the rest doth ouercrow, Some other eke yc wants his souerains grace, When as their Prince their inward thoughts should know: The meaner man should take the betters place, The greater man might stoope and sit below. But tell me now how poore Medoro sped, That lou'd his master both aliue and ded. 3 In vaine he sought to get him to the wood, By blinde and narrow pathes to him vnknowne, Their swift, and his slow pase the same withstood, Forst by the burden that he bare alone. But now, when Cloridano vnderstood Medoros case, he made for him great mone, And curst himselfe, and was full ill apaid, That he had left his friend deuoid of aid. 4 Medoro all about so straight beset, To leaue his loued lode was then constrained, But all in vaine he sought fro thence to get, His masters carkas that behind remained, Was vnto him so fierce and strong a let; It staid his wearie steps, and him retained, Eu'n as a Beare that would defend her whelpe,Simile. About doth houer though she cannot helpe. 5 So good Medore about the corse did houer, The while that Cloridano cometh backe, And (for the day was dawnd) he might discouer, How greatly his Medore, his helpe did lacke; Wherefore to do his best him to recouer, He takes his bow and quiuer from his backe, And at a Scot he tooke his aime so well, He strake him in the braine that downe he fell. 6 The fall and death so sodaine of the Scot, Amated much the courage of the rest, And much they marueld whence should come this shot, And sore this accident did them molest: But Cloridan for this forbare them not, But shot another in, about the brest, The which inflam'd Zerbinos mind so sore, That for reuenge he would haue slaine Medore, 7 And fastning in his golden curled heare, His warlike hand, thou shalt said he abuy, Thou shalt the penance and the burthen beare Of him, that here hath made my men to dye: Yet for all this, Zerbino did forbeare To kill him, when he saw with gracious eye, His sweet sad looke, and harkned to his speech, That in this sort for pardon did beseech.
8 account  bene  buriall,  so that forbid it ouer  most de∣ tyrants,  of .Sir knight (he said) for thy Messias sake, I thee do pray and earnestly coniure, So much compassion now on me to take, To let me giue my Lord his sepulture: I little care what spoile of me yee make, What paines or tortures I my selfe endure, I onely sue, so long my life to saue, As I may lay my master in his graue. 9 Now while Medoro spake these words and such, Whereby Zerbino was to mercie moued, And to his fauour was inclined much, As one that gratefulnesse had euer loued, A vile base swaine so rudely did him tuch, As him not onely from his place remoued, But with his staffe most rudely ouerthrew him, That eu'ry one do deeme him dead that vew him. 10 This fact did so Zerbinos mind offend, That presently the villaine he did chase, And to haue killed him he did intend, And had, but that the other fled apace: But when that Cloridano saw his frend, With bleeding wound lie prostrate in the place, He meanes himselfe no longer now to hide, But eu'n to die by deare Medoros side. 11 And as he purpos'd, so he did indeed, For fighting manfully he there was slaine, The Scots do onward on their way proceed, Medoro halfe aliue doth now remaine: And still his brest in wofull sort doth bleed, The staffe had cut therein so large a vaine, And sure he had bled out his life and all, But for one rare good hap did him befall. 12 For lo, a damsell came, though meanely clad, In shepheards weeds, yet fresh and faire of fauour, And such a one as in those base clothes had, A shew of princely birth and high behauiour, She finding him lie there in case so bad, Did thinke it charitie to be his sauiour: This was (if you forget) the Ladie faire, That of Cataya was vndoubted haire. 13 I shewd you by what hap she gat the ring, And how the same had fild her with such pride, And her into so high conceit did bring, That all her suters now she flat denide, She careth not for Earle, nor Duke, nor King, Orlando she and Sacrapant defide, But chiefly she would blush and be ashamed, If she but hapt to heare Renaldo named. 14 So great her folly grew, so vaine her pride, As she esteemed all the world at nought, The which when once the blind boy had espide, (Not blind when any mischiefe may be wrought) He will no longer this presumption bide, And for a fit occasion long he sought, And finding this, he thought himselfe now sped, And vp he drawes his arrow to the hed. 15 Now when this Indian Queene did the behold A louely youth lie dying in the place, His bodie feeble in a mortall cold, A deadly pale amid his liuely face, A kind of passion straight on her tooke hold, That mou'd her mind to pitie this his case, And much the rather when he did declare The wofull cause that bred him all this care. 16 She hauing learnd of Surgerie the art,This art at sir P. Sidney noteth in his Arcadia, was in great estmation in time past. An art which still the Indians greatly prise, Which fathers to their children do impart, Whose knowledge in tradition chiefly lies, Which without bookes the children learne by hart, I say Angelia doth then deuise, By skill she had in iuyce of herbes and flowres, For to renew Medoros liuely powres. 17 And calling to her mind she late had seene, An herbe whose vertue was to stanch the blood,Of Dittamy Virgil speakes 8. Aenead. Dttamum ge∣nerax Cresca carpit ab da. As Dittamie, or some such herbe I weene, That for such purpose wholsome was and good, Straightway she seekes this herbe vpon the greene, With all the hast and diligence she coud, And finding it, she takes thereof a branch, Whose vertue was the course of blood to stanch. 18 Then comming backe againe, she met by hap, A silly shepheard seeking of his cow, That brake out of his ground at some small gap, And now was straid he knew not where nor how, She prayes him take the herbes were in her lap, (A seruitor more fit to serue a sow) And beare her companie vnto the place, Where poore Medoro lay in dang'rous case. 19 Then from their horse she and the shepheard light, And straight between two tiles those herbs she brused And tooke the iuyce betweene her fingers bright, And so into the wound the same infused, Whose vertue great reuiu'd Medoros spright, To find himselfe so well and kindly vsed, That doubt it was which most his wound did salue, The precious surgeon or the precious salue. 20 And now he had recouerd so much force, As what with hers, and with the shepheards aid, He clamerd vp vpon the shepheards horse, Howbeit in the place so long he staid, Vntill he saw his loued masters corse, Into a graue with Cloridanos laid; And then, and not before he did agree, To do as he by her should pointed be. 21 From thence vnto the shepheards house she went, And made her patient eke with her to go, And there to bide with him she was content, Till he were cleerly rid of all his wo, But in this while she felt her heart relent, With sundry quames that wonted not be so, And when his comely personage she saw, A secret heate she felt her heart to gnaw.
22 For while she heald his wound, another dart Did wound her thoughts and high conceits so deep, As now therewith was rauisht her proud hart, Ouid. 1. Metam. Herm quod nulls  est nr .Possessing it although she wake or sleepe: Her wound to heale, there was no herbe nor art, For more and more like flame the same doth creep, Yet her chiefe care is him to helpe and cure, That all this torment doth to her procure. 23 Thus while Medoro better growes and better, She feeles her selfe tormented more and more, And he that for his loue to her was debter, Is he alone that plagueth her so sore: Wherefore though modestie while did her let, Yet now perforce no further she forbore, But plainly to Medoro told her griefe, And at his hands as plainly askt reliefe. 24 O stout Orlando, valiant Sacrapant, O fierce Ferraw, ò hunderds more beside, Where are those valiant acts of which you vaunt? Where is your pompe, your glory and your pride? One poore Medore, all your desires doth daunt, One poore Medore doth all your powre deride, And she whom all of you haue woo'd in vaine, To woo Medoro doth not now disdaine. 25 She suffers poore Medoro take the flowre, Ouid n Fedras  pomaria car pere raniu; &  pram, delgere vg vsm.Which many sought, but none had yet obtained, That fragrant rose that to that present houre Vngatherd was, behold Medoro gained, And ouer her to giue him persit powre, With sacred rites a marriage was ordained, And with the veile of this so sacred order, She couers this her folly and disorder. 26 Now when the solemne marriage was done, Of which god Cvpid askt the banes (I trow) She going forward as she hath begun, Continu'd there with him a month or mo, From rising to the setting of the Sunne, With him she doth sit, talk, lie, stand and go, Forgetting to all maidenly sobrietie, That she of him could neuer haue satietie. 27 If in the house she staid, then would she craue Medr in the house with her to stay, It in the field she walke, then must she haue Mr leade or guide her in the way: And by a riuer in the shady caue, They oft did vse to spend the heate of day: Virg Like to that caue where (shunning stormy wether) The Troian Duke and Dido met together. 28 Tere is not a∣sure in pleaure it self of one may not vtter as, (as  in men vp to  & were bound to say no∣thing of it as  return he would be serve for it.Amid these ioyes (as great as ioyes might be) Their manner was on eu'ry wall within, Without on eu'ry stone or shadie tree, To graue their names with bodkin, knife or pin, Angelica and Medore, you plaine might see, (So great a glorie had they both therein) Angelica and Medore in eu'ry place, With sundry knots and wreathes they enterlace. 29 Now when she thought in this well pleasing place, She had already made sufficient stay, And, for she longd to do Medore that grace, To giue to him her kingdome of Catay, From whence she had bene absent so long space, From this poore house she meanes to go away, Yet minds she ere she go, her host to please, With whom she found such pleasure and such ease. 30 Angelica had since she was a gerle, Worne on her arme (as for Orlandos sake) A bracelet rich, of precious stone and perle, Which as a token she of him did take, And though she had it of this worthy Erle, Yet did she thereof chiefest reckning make, Not that the giuer she did much esteeme, But for the gift was rich, and so did seeme. 31 By her this bracelet many yeares was worne, Not onely in her time of peace and ioy, But eu'n when she remained most forlorne, And subiect to each danger and annoy, Fu'n then when nakt as euer she was borne, The Orko came in hope her to enioy: This bracelet (wanting store of coyne and pence) She giues her host as for a recompence. 32 Next day betime she getteth on her way, And makes Medoro sole her Lord and guide, He kept her companie both night and day, And none but he with her did go and ride; Their meaning is at Berselon to stay, A port in Spaine, vntill they may prouide A vessell, that with helpe of oare and winde, May them transport from Spanish seas to Inde. 33 But ere they were arriued at this port, They met a mad man of his wit bestraught, Besmeard with dirt and mire in filthy sort, His outward sence expeld with inward thought: This mad man made them but ilfauourd sport, And had made worse, had he them rightly caught, But as it was he put them in great danger,Of this  find  29. book And flies at them as dogs do at a stranger. 34 But how she scaped and away did get With her new loue, hereafter I declare: For why Marfisa I may not forget, And those with her that in the tempest are,Marfisa, Griffin, Aquilant, Sansonet, Astolfo. With Griffin, Aquilant and Sansonet, And th'English Duke that hath the horne so rare, Which fiue I left in danger and disease, Tost terribly in the tempestuous seas. 35 Now while the wind continu'd blowing hard, And of his rage did small or nothing bate, The master sets his compasse and his card, And cals to counsell first the masters mate, And then the marriners of best regard, Consulting of the weather and their state, And eu'ry one doth tell his guesse and thought, Neare to what coast the tempest had them brought.
36 Some say Lymisso, Tripoly some say, Some say Satila, full of rocks and sands, And sweare that all of them were cast away, Except they keepe aloofe from off those lands; This causeth some to curse, and some to pray, And lift to heau'n their wofull hearts and hands, Their stuffe nor merchandize none care to saue, But hurle the same into the greedie waue. 37 Well might they bost of iron heart and brest, That could at such a time be voyd of feare, The stout Marfisa at that time confest, She wisht with all her heart not to be theare, So sore the swelling seas did them molest, As though it would the ship in peeces teare, Nor was there any signe the wind would cease, And that the sea would graunt them any peace. 38 was wort to  manner in  dangers.One makes a vow to visite holy toome, Another to Galicia vowes to go, Vnto Saint Iames, some others vnto Roome, Or other hallowd places that they know. The matriners feare nought but want of roome, Sea roome they wish, then care they for no mo, At foure dayes end it cleard and waxed faire, Or were't the season, or their earnest praire. 39 And as the weather grew more cleare and cleare, They did discouer plaine a goodly cost, And to the port as they drew neare and neare, Borne in by tide, their sailes and tackle lost, Behold a goodly citie did appeare, With towres and stately buildings of great cost, Of which when once the master was aware, It bred in him no little feare and care. 40 To cast his anker straight he doth prouide, For vaine it was to labour to go backe, The vessels wanted sailes to stem the tide, The tempest had put all thing so to wracke, And yet he feared on the other side, They of the towne would sure be on his iacke; In fine so full his mind was of confusion, He knew not whereupon to make conclusion. 41 Now while he stood confused in this sort, The English Duke demaunds what cause of doubt Made him refuse so faire and safe a port, And striue against the streame to keepe still out? Sir (quoth the master) briefly to report To you the cause, know this, that hereabout, And namely in that citie dwels a nation, That vse a barbarous and cruell fashion. 42 countrey of Amazons, a mad law .They call them Amazons that here do dwell, Here women guide, and rule, and gouerne all, The men from gouernment they do expell, Some they do kill, the rest keepe bond and thrall, He sole shall scape that runs at tilt so well, As first to make ten men of theirs to fall, And next in venery and flesh delight, Can satisfie ten women in one night. 43 And if a man performe the first of these, And haue such hap to ouerthrow the men, And yet at night his force do faile to please, In act of generation damsels ten, He must be kild or drowned in the seas, Or kept a prisner in some caue or den; But they that both performe, shall haue their liues, And those ten damsels euer for their wiues. 44 When as the pilot out his tale had told, Of women that delight in spoile and murder, The English Duke could hard his laughter hold, To heare of so fantasticall an order, And all the fiue affirmed straight they wold Land at this place, and go by sea no furder, Each place to them was safe and out of feare, Where they might haue the vse of sword and speare. 45 But all the shipmen carrid other minds, As men that better were to stormes inured, And wold haue thought their liues in waues & winds More then in conflicts and in fights assured: But whether reason leades, or causes binds, Or that the better part the same procured, The ship with broken mast and tackle torne, By force of tide into the hau'n was borne. 46 No sooner was the vessell in the port, But straight a gally ready for such need, Stor'd with artillery of eu'ry sort, And one that could both row and saile with speed, Did boord them, and (to make the matter short) A woman clad in graue and auncient weed, As old as Sibill,Sibilla and He∣cula very old women. or as Hectors mother, Spake in effect these words with many other. 47 My friends (quoth she) or yeeld or looke to die, For hope is none to scape away by flight, But thus if any of you meane to trie,Cornelius Agrip∣pa in the vanitie of sciēces, writes that Hercules made fifty molds women in one night. If he alone can vanquish ten in fight, And afterward with twise fiue maidens lie, And of them maids make women in one night, Then such a one shall rule among vs chiefe, And saue his frends from punishment and griefe. 48 But if that any shall the fact attempt, And faile but in the first or in the last, Then he shall die because of his contempt, And into prison ye shall all be cast. They made her answer all they were content, Not one man there was therewithall agast, For in both kinds the knights had so bene proued, As with the danger they were nothing moued. 49 The English Duke with these three youths of France, Straight for this enterprise themselues prepare, But chiefe the Duke that doubted no mischance, By vertue of his booke and horne most rare: Marfisa eke (though for the second daunce She was not fit) so manly mind she bare, As she would needs her force and fortune trie, And sware her sword all weapons should supplie.
50 And straight they all agreed some lots to draw, And to conclude on her the hazard fell, But she that quite was void of feare and aw, Did promise to performe her office well: This sword (quoth she) shall abrogate this law, Alexander cut   in pe∣c  ne cou'd , called Godio .And plague them all that in this citie dwell, And to vndo these doubts I will prouide, As Alexander Gordius knots vatide. 51 No fortreiner hereafter shall bewaile The wicked law of this vngodly land: This said, she putteth on her coate of maile, In hope alone against ten men to stand. Then came the ten were pointed to assaile, But he that was the formost of the band, As far as by apparance might be guest, Was one that farre surpassed all the rest. 52 His horse was blacke as pitch, or polish ieat, Saue in one foote, and in his brow a starre, A shining spot of white, not very great, A loftie raine, an eye that threatned warre; Such as the horse, such was his owne conceat, His sorrows did exceed his ioyes so farre, And deadly care so drownd his small delight, As did the blacke the little spot of white. 53 This knight (that euer vantage did eschew) Would not accompanie those other nine, But standeth still on horseback taking vew, Which way the victorie did most incline: Marfisa rode a horse of daintie hew, Giu'n vnto her of late by Norandine, His colour pide powderd with many a spot, Small head, fierce looke, cleane limbd, and lofty trot. 54 Now when that giu'n of battell was the signe, On her alone all nine at once did flie, And she alone sustaind the force of nine: The tenth (I said) was quiet standing by, As one that did against that vse repine, When more then one should seeke to make one die; And with the first encounter thus she sped, She layd downe foure of them on ground for ded. 55 The fist she iustles, and by force vnhorses, And with a trunch the sixt she gaue a blo. That to the ground both man and horse inforces, With mazed head, and foltring feet to go. The standers by admire her passing forces, And chiefe their wiues that law them killed so, Simile.For as a chainshot sweeps all in the way, So with those nine Marfisa then did play. 56 She bathd he blade in blood vp to the hilt, And with the same their bodies all she mangled, All that abode her blowes, their blood was spilt, They scaped best that here and thither rangled, Or those whose horses ouerthrowne at tilt, Lay with their masters on the earth intangled. Thus of nine enemies remained none, For all were kild, or maimd, or ouerthrowne. 57 The knight that was arrayd in blacke attire, And stood aside, and saw this hardie fight, To shew that he for feare did not retire, But to make knowne his curtsie shining bright, Straight steppeth out, and first he doth desire To speake with her whom he esteemd a knight, For he could not imagine nor suppose A woman could haue giu'n such manly bloes. 58 And thus he saith, me seemes the ods too great, That I of you should take to fight straightway, Sith both your horse and you are in a sweat, Mine offer is to respite you a day, Till you may be refresht with rest and meate, That with mine honour fight with you I may, For I should thinke my selfe disgraced sore, To vanquish one wearid and spent before. 59 Weari'd and spent (quoth she) alas the while, Thinke you I am so weari'd and so spent? Your courteous offer causeth me to smile, To thinke how quickly you will it repent; You do deceiue your selfe, and much beguile, To thinke that I to pawse would be content, I doubt not you shall find but little cause, (When you haue tride) to offer me to pause. 60 Well, said the knight, if you will trie it straight, That you accept, I cannot well refuse: Forthwith two speares of mighty strength & waight Were brought, and he doth bid Marfisa chuse: Now was the Sunne foure howers past his haight,Aclch reserve  and Gal When as these two began their speares to vse, The trumpets sound, they set their speares in rest, And each determining to do their best. 61 The speares in spels and sundry peeces flew, As if they had bene little sticks or cane, Yet of the blowes to both did hurt ensew. Their steeds were welnigh brought vnto their bane, Quite ouerthrowne in all the peoples vew, As though their legs had quite fro them bene tane, So both their horses tumbled on the ground, Yet both themselues from hurt were safe and sound. 62 An hundred and an hundred knights and more, Marfisa had subdude (it was well knowne) Yet such a chance she neuer had before, To haue her horse so strangely ouerthrowne: Also the knight that blacke apparell wore, Doth maruel whence this great mishap was growne, And not a little wondred at her force, That had so stoutly ouerthrowne his horse. 63 Forthwith on foote the combat they apply, In which the tone the tother doth not spare, And either thinks to make the other die, And either of the tother doth beware. But all the while among the standers by. Appeared great attentiuenesse and care, For neuer could they guesse from the beginning, Which of the two was in best hope of winning.
64 conceit tl. at  of .Now gan Marfisa to her selfe to say, It happie was that he before stood still, For had he holpe the tother nine to day, No doubt with me it could haue bene but ill, That now alone so hard doth hold me play, As scant I saue my selfe with all my skill, Thus to her selfe the stout Marfisa thought, And all the while couragiously she fought. 65 Contrarie, to himselfe the knight thus seth, conceit that  had of .Twas well for me, that he before was spent, For had he bene but fresh in perfect breth, I doubt me that er this I had bene shent, Surely (thought he) I scant had scaped deth, If he to rest himselfe had giu'n consent. No question I did great aduantage take, That he refusd that offer I did make. 66 Thus did the combat long twixt them endure, And neither party bosted of their gaine, Vntill the nights darke shadow and obscure, Did couer citie, wood, and vale, and plaine, And that that rest to all thing doth procure, Did force them two to respit this their paine; And first the knight thus said, what can we do? Behold how night is come to part vs two. 67 You may said he one night prolong your life, And longer not, such is the cursed law, Against my will (God knows) I hold this strife, And now I feare and haue no little aw, Lest eu'rie one that was to them a wife, Whom late you kild, will from your beds you draw For eu'rie one of those vnhappie men, Whom erst you slue was husband vnto ten. 68 So that for those same nine that you haue slaine, Nine times ten women seeke reuenge to take: Wherefore I wish that you and all your traine, Within my roofe this night abode do make, For so perhap from wrong they will abstaine, If not for right, at least for reuerence sake. Ile take your offer sir, Marfisa saith, So that hereof to me you giue your faith. 69 That as in fight you shew your valew great, As I haue proued in this present place, So I may find your words without deceat, Lest falshood should your noble deeds deface: I will accept your lodging and your meat, And will perswade my fellows in like case; But rather then for feare you should it thinke, Lets fight it out by light of torch and linke. 70 And thus in fine they all of them agreed, That vnto him that night they would be guest: Straight to a sumptuous pallace they proceed, By torch light brought to chambers richly drest, But when that each put off their warlike weed, Then each of them with wonder was possest: She, that the knight did by his face appeare, To be a boy of age but eighteene yeare. 71 And he, when by her haire her sex he knew, Wonderd to see a woman of such might, As namely that in sight nine tall men slew, And after had with him prolongd the fight: And either pleased the others vew, Behold the one the other with delight, Then each desir'd the others name to learne, As in th'ensuing booke you shall discearne. In the first staffe of this Canto,Moral. is an excellent morall of the profe of frends, which my father many yeares since did translate almost word for word as I haue set it downe, applying it to his master, the worthie Lord Admirall Seymor: and because the verse was my fathers, I count I may without vsurpation claime it by inheritance. He applied it to that noble peere (verie aptly) diuers wayes: both for his life, and for his death, but specially (which I count worthy the noting) for his seruants, who loued him so dearely, that euen in remembrance of his honorable kindnesse, they loued one another exceedingly: and my father I remember, but a weeke before he died, which was in the yeare 1582. wrote with his owne hand the names of those were then liuing of the old Admiralti (so he called them that had bne my Lords men) and there were then xxxiiij. of them liuing, of which many were knights and men of more reuenew then himselfe, and some were but meane men, as armorers, artificers, keepers, and farmers; and yet the memorie of his seruice, was such a band among them all of kindnesse, as the best of them disdained not the poorest, and the meaner had recourse to the greatest, for their countenance and ayd in their honest causes, and many of them are euen now liuing, and yet it wants little of fortie yeares since that noble man was put to death. His picture my father gaue after to the Queenes Maiestie that now is, with a prettie verse written on it, and it hangs now in the gallerie at Somerset house. That there were Amazons,Historie. I thinke no man doubreth that hath read of Alexanders conquests. In Angelicas wedding of Medore I gather this Allegorie,Allegorie. Angelica is taken for honor, which braue men hunt after, by blood, and battels, and many hardy feats, and misse it: but a good seruant with faith and gratefulnesse to his Lord gets it.Allusion. Cloridan and Medore allude to Eurialus and Nisus in Virgils Aeneads. The end of the notes of the xix. booke.
THE TVVENTITH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. With Guidon all his worthie guests agree, To breake from th' Amazons the morrow morne: Astolfo doubting lest it would not be, Doth driue them thence and scares them with his horne: Zerbino laughs Gabrina gay to see; Marfisa seemes to take it in great scorne, And gainst his will commits her to his guiding, By whom he hears of Isabella tiding. 1 RIght wódrous deeds by di∣uers dames were donne, In times of old, as well by sword as pen, Whereby their glorie shi∣ned like the sunne, And famous was both far and neare as then, Harpalite and Camilla two no. table warriers.The fame Harpalice in battell wonne, Camillas worth is eke well knowne to men, Corinna and Saphos, learned tuets.Corinnas praise, and Saphos are discerned, Aboue the rest, because they both were lerned. 2 What art so deepe? what science is so hie, But worthy women haue thereto attayned? Who list in stories old to looke, may trie, And find my speech herein not false nor fained, And though of late they seeme not to come nie, The praise their sexe in former times haue gained, No doubt the fault is either in backbiters, Or want of skill and iudgement in the writers. 3 For sure I see in this our present age, Such vertuous parts in their sweet sexe to grow, The young so sober, and the rest so sage, And all so chast, as writers shall (I know) Haue worke enough to fill full many a page, With their great praise that from their worth will flow, To win the fame their ancestors did leese, And passe Marfisa not in few degrees. 4 But now o turne my speech to her againe, I say that when the knight did aske her name, She made him answer, and did not disdaine, To tell both what she was, and whence she came, Yet (as her fashion was) both briefe and plaine; She saith thus to the knight; I called am Marfisa: and she need to say no more, For all the world had heard the rest before. 5 The tother,Here beginneth the tale of the Amazons. when his turne to speake came in, First making long and farther circumstance, In such like manner doth his tale begin, (And sighing deepe) you all haue heard perchance, Both of my fathers house and of my kin, Of fame in Italie, in Spaine and France: Forsure I am the house of Clarimount, In all the world is knowne and of account. 6 He that Charello and Mambrino slew, And did their kingdoms ruine and deface,Renaldo brother to Guidō, but not by the same ven∣ter. Out of one stocke with me together grew, Although we were not all borne in one place, For why at lster flood (to tell you trew) My father me begat, and in that case, My mother great with childe he left behind, And went to France by helpe of saile and wind. 7 Thus seu'nteene yeares I liu'd like one exild, Vntill I able was to breake a launce, And for that place me seemd too base and vild, I meane to seeke my frends and kin in Fraunce: They name me Guidon sauage of a child,Guidon Seate, looke in the table As yet I could not much my name aduance, For hither by a tempest I was borne, As you were now, with ship and tackle torne.
8 Here first Argillon with nine me I killed, A leau'n months since, and that same day at night, The office of an husband I fulfilled, Vnto ten Amazons in flesh delight; This done, to take my choise then was I willed, Of any ten that pleased best my sight, And these remaine my wiues, and must vntill One come that me with other nine can kill. 9 Vnto the knights this seemd a maru'lous storie, And much they wonderd at this gouernment, They maruell that so great a territorie, For want of men was not consum'd and spent: They thought no lesse the women would be sorie, For want of men, to liue so continent; Twas strange one man sufficed ten of thease, Sith one with vs can scant one woman please. 10 And straight they were inquisitiue to know, When first this foolish order there began, And vpon what occasion it did grow, That women in that countrie ruled man? Then Guidon answerd thus, I shall you show The whole discourse as briefely as I can, According as my selfe haue heard the same, Since (by mishap) into this realme I came. 11 When as the Greekes had quite defaced Troy, And after twise ten yeares returned home, (For ten whole years in danger and annoy, Of surging seas they vp and downe did rome) They found their wiues that had but little ioy, So long a time, to liue and lye alone, Each one a lustie louer to haue chosen, Lest with the cold they might be staru'd and frozen. 12 Their houses full of bastard brats they see: In fine, they purpose after consultation, To pardon all their wiues and let them free, But for these boyes that bred some altercation, To driue them out a doore they do agree, And make them seeke a forraine habitation; It was contrarie much to their desiers, That others brats should warme thé at their fiers. 13 Thus some thrown out. some close their mothers keep In corners, from their angrie husbands sight, And when as elder years on them do creepe, Each one betakes him to his most delight; Some plow, some get them heards of goats & sheep Some sciences, and some do learne to fight. Thus eu'rie one betooke him to some trade, As he assignes that all the world hath made. 14 Among the rest that Art of war ensue, Looke in the Hi∣store of this booke.Phalanto sonne of Clytemnestra Queene, But eighteene yeares of age, and resh of hue, And in the floure of youths well pleasing greene, This one to him an hundred gallants drue, And getting ships and things that needfull beene, With writs of Mart (a thing that breeds much sorow) He gets him to the sea, in mind to borow. 15 Now while Phalanto with his cursed fleet, Abode at sea with that more cursed traine; It fortund at that time that they of Creet, Had Idumeo driu'n out of his raigne, Wherfore for better strength they thought it meet, Phalanto and his men to entertaine. They giue to him great hire, and great reward, The citie of Ditea for to guard. 16 Ditea was a towne of great estate, Rich and frequented with no small resort, And yeelds in plentie large, betimes and late, Of sundrie kinds of pleasures and of sport; And as they all men vsd, so in like rate, They vsd their souldiers in so friendly sort, As though they had agreed by sound accords, To make them all their masters and their Lords. 17 But chiefe they found with women so great grace, As they wan most of them vnto their lure; But when the warres were ended in short space, And that their pay no longer did endure, They all prepar'd to leaue this pleasant place, Which to the damsels did great griefe procure; To leese their husbands, brother, or their father, Then these new louers eu'rie one had rather. 18 And when they saw they could not make them stay, By no deuice of theirs, nor no request, They do agree with them to steale away, And take such things as were of value best; Thus came these damsels loden with their pray, And thence to sea, and were now gone at left An hundred leagues, with these new lawles louers, Before Ditea this their flight discouers. 19 The wind so good then for their purpose blew, Phalanto quickly landed in this cost, And here the amorous and wanton crew, Vnto their loues of this their lewdnesse bost; But now that saying was confirmed trew, That pleasant things do often cloy the most:Sentence. And there can be a greater clog to no man, Then to be wearie of a wanton woman. 20 Wherefore like men that were, and had bene euer, Of gaine most greedie, sparing of expence: They secretly consulting do endeuer, To take the goods, and then to steale from thence. Thus while the women still in loue perseuer, They that regard not pleasure more then pence, Lode with their wealth, of which there was good store Stale to the sea, & left them on the shore. 21 Sore were the damsels daunted and dismayd, When once they saw their loues had the forsaken,Souen For what more spite can be, then be betraid Of him to whom one hath her selfe betaken? And fith they find that weeping doth nt ayd, They meane betime some order shalbe taken, What they shall do, and how heareafter liue, And eu'rie one doth straight her verdit giue.
22 One home to turne againe doth thinke it best. And to their kin and friends them to submit, And with repentance pardon to request, And vow the like fault neuer to commit; Another that good motion doth detest, And sweares it shewd the mouer had no wit, And that with greater honestie or ease, They might go drowne them headlong in the seas. 23 Among the rest one Orontea hight, That lineally of Mynos was descended, And past the rest in beautie and good sprite, And had lesse grieuously then they offended, For to Phalanto she her troth did plight, And to haue bene his honest spouse intended: This one declareth thus her resolution, And makes the rest put it in execution. 24 She wishes them to tary in this land, The cmmoditie of a gosscats of a cie.That had both fruitfull earth and pleasant aire, And fountaines sweet, and woods on eu'ry hand, And medowes greene, and pastures fresh and faire, Beside large hau'us, where ships at ease might stand, To which the merchants often made repaire, By tempest driuen, well loden with good trafficke, Of things that come from Egipt and from Affricke. 25 Wherefore this place she minds not to forsake, But that they may as chiefly they desire, A sharpe reuenge on men for euer take, They vow to put to sacke, to sword and fire, Such ships as to their hauen repaire do make, And kill the men, and this they all conspire: And still when any come, this trade they vse, Nor left a man aliue to carry newes. 26 But when this cruell law some yeares had lasted, There were too m speaers ; in their Parliam  whē they made such a law as y ive driue otange .Which they had meant to haue confirmd for ay, They find that they so fast consumd and wasted, That this their barren kingdome would decay, Except to find some remedy they hasted, And hauing long consulted on the way, They meane of this their law to bate some rigor, Yet leaue the substance still in strength and vigor. 27 And thus they do, they chuse among such men, As tempests driue to this their wicked nation, Some few as were so lustie, as with ten They could performe the act of generation, All in one night, the rest into a den They cast, and kill them in most cruell fashion, The Romans did vse to build aul∣ters to all the af∣fections of the mind, as feare, ope, and such like.And build vnto reuenge a solemne alter, And ouer this they make them stretch a halter. 28 Such men as liue are to this order sworne, To kill all such as hither shall repaire, And all men children that to them are borne, They sell or change as in an open faire, So when some die with age and weaknesse worne, Then other women do the want repaire, Their powre and number thus doth still increase, Their wealth & pomp augmented, with long peace. 29 But after many yeares it thus befell, Elbanio, one of Hercles noble race, A comely tall strong man, and fauord well, And in his speech and manners passing grace, Arriued where these homicids do dwell, And ere he knew the fashion of the place, The cruell sergeants tooke him as they found him, And like a fellon hand and foote they bound him. 30 It fortund as they carrid him to slaughter, Among the rest that did the same behold, Was Alessandra, Oronteas daughter, A fine yong girle, about twise eight yeare old, Elbanio humbly as he went besought her, To be a meane this foule death to withhold, That like a man he might be kild at least, And not be drawne to slaughter like a beast. 31 To beg my life (quoth he) it were a vanitie, (Which in your seruice I would gladly spend) Where humane hearts be voyd of all humanitie, But all the sute that I to make intend, (Which to denie were too too much immanitie) Is this, that thus my life I may not end, But with my sword in hand to fight with men, With seu'n at once, or eight, or nine or ten. 32 This he to her, thus she to him replies, Though to mankind we all professe hostilitie, Yet thinke not (this she spake with watrie eyes) That all our hearts are void of all gentilitie, What Progne or Medea could despiseProgne and Me∣dea two cruell bloody women. Your passing beautie, courage and nobilitie? And were my fellowes all so ill inclind, Yet I my selfe would beare a better mind. 33 Aud though the rigor of our law be such, That no man can obtaine a pardon free, And eu'n this small you aske, to graunt is much, If our law strictly should obserued bee, Yet such remorse I feele my heart doth tuch, To graunt thy sute if others will agree Although I feare thou wilt in such a strife, Prolong thy paine, and not preserue thy life. 34 Oh (said Elbanio) blest were such a day, That in the field my manhood I might trie, Could but your credit carry such a sway, Not ten, but ten times ten I would defie. This said, she causd the execution stay, And to her mother goes she by and by, With thousand stings of Cupid in her brest, And vnto her expoundeth his request. 35 Straight Orontea doth her counsell call, And in such sort thereof to them she spake, In guarding of our hau'n and citie wall, Tis good that of the strongest men we take:Oronteas oration in Elbanios be∣halfe. Therefore to know who be most stout and tall, I thinke it very good some proofe to make, For else we shall vnto our selues do wrong, To saue the weaker men, and kill the strong.
36 And who can wish to make a better triall, Then for one man to fight with fiue and fiue, And if he vanquish them and make them die all, Twere certes meet he should be kept aliue: Thus Orontea said, and they replie all, That in this point with her they cannot striue, Saue old Artemia (carren witherd iade) Mislikt the motion, and this answer made. 37 Artemias oratiō against Elbanio.The cause that first we did some men admit, Was not to keepe our hau'ns or citie wall, For we our selues haue strength enough and wit, To keepe our towne (I trust) and euer shall. Were we as well for procreation fit, Without mans helpe, not one should liue at all; Now for necessitie some few we spare, Such as most able for that seruice are. 38 This motion quite gainsaith our auncient law, To keepe one man as strong as halfe a score: How many women would he keepe in aw? Had we ten such we should beare rule no more. And further, tis an old and certaine saw, Both vsed and proued many yeares before, Sentence.That they that giue a weapon to their stronger, Are like themselues to carry rule no longer. 39 But put the case this one by our consent, And his good hap ten of the others kill, How shall an hundred widowes then lament, That long must he alone against their will? If he an hundred women would content, Then him to saue I should not thinke it ll, Then were he to be lou'd, admir'd and wonderd, If he alone could satisfie an hunderd. 40 This cruell speech did all the rest displease, And loth they were Elbanio should be slaine, His comely shap their sharpnesse did appease, And chiefly she that ouer all did raigne, Doth seeke herein her daughters mind to please, With many reasons answring her againe, And point by point did all her speech confute, And in the end obtaind her daughters sute. 41 Thus to Elbanio pardon they impart, Prouided if he ouercome the men, And after brauely play the husbands part, Not with an hundred women, but with ten. Elbanio thanketh them with chearfull hart, Then was he freely loosed from the den: In fine, when all things ready were ordained, In both exploits the conquest he obtained. 42 Then Allessandra, in whose tender mind Loue had alreadie made so deepe impression, With other nine, were vnto him assignd. And princely mace was put in his possession. But first by solemne vow they do him bind, To hold this law for euer by succession, To sacrifice all men, saue such as trie, To kill ten men, and with ten women lie. 43 And though that many haue in ages past Attempted both, yet few haue had successe, To scape the first exploit, and trie the last, In which to faile, the danger were no lesse, But he that both performes, forthwith is plast In princely seate, and free from all distresse: And this their law (as by records appeares) Alreadie lasted hath two thousand yeares. 44 The last but I, that held this cursed place, Argillon hight, whom I in combat killed, And him and his thereby I did displace, And then their roomes with me and mine I filled, Where we haue tarrid now a tweluemoneths space, Among these wights of goodnesse all vnskilled, And leade a life full of disdaine and scorne, As better had bene neuer to be borne. 45 For why these dallyings and wanton toyes, That wonted are to please our foolish youth, With costly fare, gay clothes, and Venus ioyes, Of which repentance is the frute ensewth, Doth breed to me but anguish and annoyes, And pensiue cares,Non bon y ful leberi vendur me. and euer during ruth; And chiefly when vnto my mind I call, My libertie is lost, and I a thrall. 46 To loose my lustie time in this vile place, Remou'd from kin and friends, and countrey farre, A wofull and remedilesse disgrace, Mou'd by some ill aspect of angry starre,Simile. This Simile Ta Eu'n as a stallion kept for breed and race, Whom some mishap hath made vnfit for warre, By losse of fight and foundring of his feete, For seruice quite vnable and vnmeete. 47 The while this tale the sauage Guidon told, The English Duke that all this while stood by,The end of the Amazons tale. And heard his speech, and did his face behold, And noted all his grace with watchfull eye, And made by all these obseruations bold, He runneth to embrace him by and by, And said, deare cosin, I were much to blame, Except I lou'd the house from whence you came. 48 Your mother could not tie a better lace About your necke, to make your linage knowne, Then this your value in this present place, Against Marfisa in the battell showne: I am Astolfo one of Ammos race, Friend to your house, and kinsman of your owne, I much reioyce to find by this mischance, So neare a kinsman so far off from France. 49 But he that otherwise would haue bene glad, To meet a friend, a Prince of kin so neare, Now on the other side he was full sad, And shewd the same in countenance and cheare, For eu'ry way the sequell must be bad, For if he win they die, the case is cleare, And if he do not win, he is but ded, Thus by ones good the tothers harme is bred.
50 On th'other side his yeares and tender age, Did all of them so farre with pittie moue, And did Marfisas heate so much aslwage, Her enmitie was welnigh turnd to loue: At last she makes a motion wise and sage, Which was, that all to scape by force should proue, She sweares if he would take part with his cosen, Not all the towne could vanquish that halfe dosen. 51 Most glad (said Guidon) I would take your part, Though vaine it is against so great a number, To enterprise by force hence to depart, Their very multitude will vs so cumber: For often (to the terror of mine hart) Ten thousand armed women I do number Here in the streets, and with as many more, They do defend the port, the hau'n and shore. 52 Tush (quoth Marfisa) this I not regard, Were they in number as the sands of seas, To valiant hearts no enterprise is hard, Take you but part, and ioyne with me and these. Yes, answerd Guidon, be I made or mard, Or bee't with paine, with danger or disease, I will take part with you, but if I may, I would aduise you to a safer way. 53 If we this matter wisely take in hand, This is the safest way that I do know, They let no men to touch the salt sea sand, Lest any should attempt from hence to go: And sith tis hard their forces to withstn Ile trie a better way then that, I trow, Among my ten I haue one speciall wife, Vpon whose trust I venter dare my life. 54 She shall a barke prouide in secret sort, And other needfull things for vs prepare, And when as to the tilt-yard they resort, And of our fight in expectation are, We suddenly will make vnto the port, And ship ourselues ere any be aware: To leade the way my selfe I am content, So you and yours to follow will consent. 55 Marfisa straight and all the rest agreed, That Guidon for that time should be their guide, And that accordingly they would proceed, As he for them had promist to prouide: Though (said Marfisa) sauing this my weed, My shape and sexe from all of them doth hide, I know my selfe from harme could be excused, And of them all both welcome and well vsed. 56 But now (said she) such part I mind to take, As you shall tast (how good or bad it proue) That night with his Aleria Guidon spake, (So was her name that bare him chiefest loue) And points that she prouision good should make, For things that needfull were for their remoue. And she no time, nor paine, nor trauell spard, But out of hand a galley straight prepard. 57 And that her fellowes might no fraud suspect, To go to seeke a prize she doth pretend, And with great diligence she doth direct, All meanes to serue their passage to defend: And they within no time nor meane neglect, To bring their stout designement to an end Thus eu'ry one their charge so well attended. That ere the morning all was done and ended. 58 No sooner came the dawning of the day, But that those Amazons like bees in swarmes, That seeke new dwellings in the month of May, So came they well appointed all in armes, To see an end of that vnended fray, Not looking for such new and strange alarmes, For straight those sixe I nam'd and all their traine. Came with intent to scape or else be slaine. 59 First Guidon breakes the way to all the rest, Soone after him Marfisa did ensew, Then Sansonet and th'English Duke were prest, And next two brothers came, then all the crew; But yet with numbers they were so opprest, Both with the shafts they shot, and darts they threw, That notwithstanding all they had deuised, They were in danger great to be surprised. 60 But when the English Duke the danger saw, Vnto himselfe these words or such he said, I see our foes in troupes together draw, I see our friends are weakned and dismaid, Now will I strike our enemies in aw, Now will I bring out friends vnlookt for aid, With this he tooke his horne and blew a blast, That made the hearers eu'ry one agast. 61 So great a terror in their minds was bred, That straight as if with sprites they had bene scard, This way and that confusedly they fled, And left the gates without defence or guard, As tumults often are at stage-playes bred,Simile. When false reports of sudden fires are heard, Or when the ouerloden seates do cracke, One tumbling downe vpon anothers backe. 62 One breakes a leg, another breakes an arme, And some are choakt and stifled in the presse, Some kill themselues for feare of further harme. And whence the danger comes they cannot guesse, But all of them in hast themselues vnarme, And vnto fearefull flight themselues addresse: Nor women onely with this feate are punished, But euen the men themselues were all astonished. 63 Yea euen Marfisas courage, late so fierce, (So great a vertue this inchantment bad) That strange and sudden feare the same did pearce, And she by flight to saue herselfe was glad: The knights likewise whom late I did rehearse, And all the men, as if they had bene mad, To seaward fled as doth a fearfull Doue,Simile. When any noise doth scare her from about.
64 Thus doth the blast annoy both friends and foes, Yet so as all the men to shipboord went: still about the citie goes, For them to terrifie is his intent, And more and more in all the streets he bloes, And chiefly those where they do most frequent, The while his trends were now to shipboord gotten, And launched out, and him had quite forgotten. 65 The ship Aera did before prouide, And Guidon taking ship with all the rest, Would not conent neare to the shore to bide, Put stale away with dreadfull feare possest. Now came the Duke vnto the waterside, And seeing all were gone, he thought it best Some other meane and way to take in hand, By which he might conuey him home by land. 66 Heroceedh to  22 , .But how he gate him home, and there did speed, When from those countries he was come to France, And how his horne did stand him in great steed, Defendng him from danger and mischance, Hereafter I will shew, nw I proceed To her whose deeds do still her name aduance, I meane Marfisa stout, that made great hast To shun the hearing of the fearfull blast. 67 But when they were remoued from the shore, By helpe of sailes and oares, so great a space, As now the fearfull sound was heard no more, Each thought them guiltie of a great disgrace, And of their feare they were ashamd so ore, One shund to looke another in the face, The while their bark had so good wind and wether, As all arriu'd in Tyrhen seas together. 68 And to Marfisa thence by sea they went, Where Braimant bare all the rule and sway, Who late as gouernesse was thither sent, Though thence she had bene absent many a day: For hd she present bene, by her assent, Vnentertad they should not go away. Here when they were refresh: with meate and rest, Marfisa tooke her leaue of all the rest. 69 And said she thought it great disgrace and shame, So many in one company to see, Simile.For crowes (quoth she) and pigeons do the same, And eere, and sheepe, and beasts that fearfull be, But Falcons that do flie at stately game, With other birds and beasts in their degree, That feare not others force, and trust their owne, Shun companie, and lue to go alone. 70 But yet the rest that were of other mind, Together kept, and bad the Dame farewell, Vntill by hap a castle they did find, Wherein a Lord of great estate did dwell, That in appearance courteous seemd and kind, Of th he speaes sardr in the 22. booke, 41 stasse.But not in acts, as after I shall tell, For he surprisd them all that night asleepe, And made them sweare a cruell law to keepe. 71 The while Marfisa on her way doth ride, Appareld like a knight of some renowne, And as she passed by the riuer side, She met a woman in a tawnie gowne, Ilfauourd, crooked, old and hollow eyd, Her forehead furrowd with continuall frowne, Her bodie tyr'd with trauell and ill fare, Her guiltie mind afflicted more with care. 72 This filthy hag, this carren witherd iade, Was she whom in the caue Orlando found,Gabrin. When of the theeues such massacre he made, That kept faire Isabella vnder ground: This wretch that holpe them in that wicked trade, And feard the plague that might on her redound, Fled from all companie for feare of danger, Vntill she hapt to light vpon this stranger. 73 And for she saw her clad in strange array, Though gracelesse, yet she gathers heart of grace, And at the foord her comming she doth stay, And when Marfisa came vnto the place, Sir knight (for so she seemd) I shall you pray, (Said this old bag) to do me so much grace, That on your horse behind you I may ride, Till I be past the streame on th'other side. 74 Marfisa that was euer from her cradle, Of courteous kind, doth grant her desire, And made her clamber vp behind her sadle, To passe the riuer and a filthy mire, That to horse had almost bene a stable: And when they were ascended somewhat higher, They met a faire yong Ladie with a Knight, Both richly clad, both comely to the sight. 75 But both their minds were false, their manners bad, And therefore matcht together very fit, For he was Pinnabell, that lately had Faire Bradamant deceiu'd at Merlins pit.In the second booke. She was his loue, for whom he was so sad, When Bradamant on him did hap to hit, Till after by this noble Damsels meane, That strange inchantment was dissolued cleane. 76 This Ladie that was Pinnabellos loue, And was both proud and scornfull of behauour, And sees this hag, did straight her laughter moue, To scorne her writheld skin and euill fauour: For which Marfisa stout doth her reproue, And with a sharpe reply she straight doth braue her, Because (quoth she) I fin thou dost disdaine her, Against thy knight and thee I will maintaine her. 77 I say this woman fairer is then thou, Now let thy knight come fight in thy defence, For I by force my saying will auow, And if that I preuaile, ere thou go hence, Thou shalt thy horse and garments all allow To this old woman for a recompence. Then Pinnabell to fight doth him addresse, Because in manhood he could do no lesse.
78 But when they met (Marfisas passing force, Was such) she quickly vanquished the knight, And ouerthrew him quite beside his horse. This done, she makes the stately dame to light, And with the aged woman cloths to scorse, At which the tone tooke sport, the tother spite, She tooke likewise the Ladies ambling nagge, And thereupon she sets the trotting hagge. 79 Who in this youthfull tyre and rich array, Doth looke in shew more vgly then before, Thus three dayes with Marfisa she did stay, Before they hapt to meet with any more; The fourth they met Zerbino on the way, The Scottish Prince that would haue sau'd Medore, And now in anger great the Scot pursude, That in his presence prou'd himselfe so rude. 80 Zerbino.Now though Zerbino were but ill apaid, Yet was he straight with laughter great surprisde, To see an aged woman so arraid, In youthfull cloths as though she were disguisde: And to Marfisa merily he said, Sir knight it seemeth you are well aduisd, To get so faire a peece to carrie by you, As you are sure that no man will enuie you. 81 The woman seemd some hundred yeares of age, Her witherd skin such store of wrincles had, And like an ape or monkie in a cage, So looked she in this apparrell clad: But now she looked worse, when with new rage, Her eyes enflamed were, and she halfe mad: For what more spite can be a woman told, Then if one say she looketh foule and old? 82 Marfisa seemeth wroth (to make some sport) And thus she saith, surcease your standrous toung, Your vertue of her beautie commeth short, She is (in spite of you) both faire and young: And if you dare contrarie my report, Or that hereby you feele your courage stoung, I will maintaine against you eu'rie word, On horse, or foote, by speare or else by sword. 83 Zerbino at this challenge did but laffe, And said he would not leese their frendship so: Tis fit (quoth he) that swine should feed on draffe, I am not I, so mad and fond I trow, For her to draw a sword or breake a staffe, But as you came you may together go: No doubt you are a fitly matched paire, If you as lustie be as she is faire. 84 Wherefore I list not paine and trauell take, To get a conquest better lost then wonne: Then (answerd stout Marfisa) I will make Another offer which you may not shunne, On this condition let vs for her sake, A course at field one with the other runne: That if you win then I will keepe her still, If I, then you shall serue he while she will. 85 Content (quoth Zerbin) and with that they ran, With couched spears, and met amid the plaine; But Zerbin had the worse, Marfisa wan, As better horst, and stronger of the twaine: Who seeing Zerbin downe, she then began, To talke with him and iest with him againe, Behold (quoth she) I here to you present, This louely damsell for your more content. 86 Now see you keepe your promise and your troth, To this faire dame to be a champion trew, And do not breake the bands of sacred oth, And so (quoth she) for now I bid adew. Zerbin was mou'd with shame and anger both, Shame for his foile, a thing most strange and new: And wrath for her whom he thereby did gaine, Which he might deeme the greater losse of twaine. 87 Then of his mistresse new he doth enquire,Though it is n set downe how Gabrina knew Marfisa to be a woman, yet it is to be gathered that in 3. dayes companie thee might know it. What knight it was that did him ouerthrow, She willingly did graunt him his desire, Supposing to his griefe might greater grow, It was a Ladie in a knights attire, Marfisa hight (quoth she) that layd you low, The which strange news I thinke not much did lacke To make his armor blush vpon his backe. 88 Vpon his horse in anger great he gets, And curst himselfe he had not sit more sure, He bites his lips, and inwardly he frets,Simile. And she in him more anger to procure,Horace hath this sinulitude of a asse. With byting words his discontentment whets; Yet he doth for his oth sake all endure, Like tired horse he quiet all abides,Demitto auricu∣las, vt ique mentis a sellus. But this of a horse is more wort. That hath the bit in mouth, and spurs in sides. 89 At last into this bitter plaint he burst, On thee ô fortune well I may complaine, And call my selfe vnhappie and accurst, That dost at once two plagues for me ordaine, Two plagues that of all plagues I count the worst, As first this foile, my former fame to staine; And hauing lost a Ladie of rare features, To haue this mistresse, fowlest of all creatures. 90 She,He had heard newes that Isa∣bella was dround by some flying report. whose surpassing beautie well deserued, All worldly blisse, whose match was neuer found, She from misfortune could not be preserued, But that by cruell stormes she must be dround, And this, who if she had bene rightly serued Ought longer this, haue fed worms vnder ground, Thou hast these many yeares and still dost saue, That I by her at last this plague might haue. 91 By these and such like words as Zerbin spake, That aged woman giues a sured guesse; That this was he, to whom, and for whose sake, Faire Isabell (kept erst in great distresse, There where Orlando did from theeues her take) Was wont so great affection to professe, And to describe his parts and shape so trew, As eu'rie one might know him at a vew.
92 And now that by his words she plainely found, That this was Zerbin, and that he beleeued Faire Isabella was in tempest dround, With which conceit she saw he sore was greeued, She that did know her to be safe and sound, Yet meaning not his griefe should be releeued, She telleth onely that that would disease him, And doth conceale that which she thought would please him. 93 You sir (quoth she) that me so greatly scorne, If you but knew what tydings I could tell, Other whom you lament as dead and lorne, You would both speake me faire and vse me well: But first I will with horses wild be torne, And suffer all the paines of earth and hell, Before that I will condescend to show it, Or then by me you euer come to know it. 94 Looke how a gentle grewnd, that doth assaile Simile.And flies vpon a stranger at the furst, Will on the lodaine faune and wag his taile, If o of bread one profer him a crust: So Zerbin that before on her did raile, And bitterly vnto her face her curst, Now he inteates her, and doth pray and flatter, To giue him farther notice of the matter. 95 At last with long intreatie she replies, And faith, faire Isabella is not ded, But so she liues, that sure she death enuies: And neuer hope to haue her maidenhed, For I haue seene (quoth she) with these mine eyes, How twentie lawlesse men her captiue led, And eu'rie one might haue her at their pleasure, As hauing libertie, and lust, and leasure. 96 Ah wicked hagge, thou know'st it is a lie, And yet behold how thou canst paint it out, Thou know'st that none of them with her did lie, Thou know'st Orlando thence did fetch her out: And made the malefactors all to die, That of her danger now there was now doubt. But now alas this lying storie bred, A thousand iealousies in Zerbines hed. 97 He askt herwhere and when his loue she saw, He speakes her oftentimes both soule and faire; But not a word more could he from her draw, Neither by threatning words, nor yet by prayre: He feeles a corzie cold his heart to gnaw, His little hope was turnd to great dispaire: And thus this old ilfauord spitefull Callet,Callet is a nick∣name that they vse to a woman, is signifies  Irish a witch. Gaue good Zerbino such a choking fallet. 98 What patience thus prouoked could haue borne, At such a womans hands so vile a spite? And saue he was vnto her seruice sworne, No doubt he would haue done her then her right. Thus she of mallice full, and be of scorne, Went on their way, vntill they met a knight: But what became hereof if you will know, The booke ensuing shall the sequell show. In the tale of Phalanto and his companie,Moral. women may note the notable inconstancie of young mens dishonest loues, how sweet and pleasant so ever they be at the first. In Pynabello and his wife that scorned Gabrinas olde age and de∣formitie, we may obserue the soule sinne and the iust punishment of pride and contempt of others. In the good Zerbino, that for his promise sake suffers himselfe to be so notoriously abused of a spitefull malicious old wretch, we may marke a notable example of a man true and faithfull of his word. In the beginning of this booke he reciteth the names of foure women famous,Historie. two for warre, two for learning, and in∣deed there haue bene many more, excellent in either kind: as Thomeris that killed Cyrus, Zenobea, Hipsicratea wife to Mythridates, Debora the Hebrew, whom the Scripture commendeth; Valesca queene of Boemia, Thenca queene of Slauonia, Amalasunta queene of the Gothes: All these are famous for their wise government. And for learning diuers women haue greatly excelleds as Eriana, Aspasia, Cleobulyna, Theana, Leontio, Manto, Hicostrata, Carmenta, the Sibils, Sulpicia. But for a persite patterne of excellency in both kinds, both in gouerning the common wealth most wisely, peaceably, prosperously, and skill in all kind of learning, and languages, Greeke, Latine, French, Italian and Spanish I may say it truly, and without flatterie, that our gracious soueraigne is to be preferred before any of them, yea before all of them, and therefore may iustly be called the rewell, or rather the wonder of all her sex. All the Allegoricall matter of this booke is onely in Astolfos horne,Allegorie. of which I haue spoken before this. The tale of the Greeks comming home from Troy,Allusion. and finding so many bastards, alludes to a like hap that fell vnto the Spartants when they made warre on the Messenians; from whence one in deed named Falanto or Phalanto with other bastards called Parthenians went to the Oracle to know what they should do, and were directed by the said Oracle to go to Tarentam: Their answer they received of the Oracle was this, Statireum, & pingue solum, tibitrado Tarenti Incolere, & latè sedem per Iapygasaedes, So as they taking heart vpon this, went from Sparta, and as some thinke built the citie of Tarentum. The end of the notes vpon the xx. booke.
THE XXI. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Most worthie Zerbin by his promise bound, Defends Gabrina most unworthie wight, And for her sake he ouerthrowes to ground Hermonida, unluckie Flemish knight: Who doth to him her most lewd life expound, Increasing by his speech, her cruell spite: Yet still the good Zerbino trauels with her, And many a wearie mile they rode togither. 1 NOr Iron nailes make fast a planke or boord More firme, nor cords a burden surer binde, Then faith once giu'n by promise or by word, Tyes most assuredly the vertuous minde, Old times to vs good store of samples foord, How praise deuine was vnto faith assinde, And how in garments white she still was painted, That echimal pot or staine might shew her tainted. 2 Faith euer should be kept in secret sort, Although to one, or whether giuen to more, Although in deserts farre from all resort, Or else a iudge or multitude before: What though the witnesse wants to make report? Real the mora vpon u the end of the booke.Yet must we keepe our cou'nant euermore, As well by word and priuate protestation, As by record and publike obligation. 3 And so did Zerbin as before I told, His promise firme vnuiolate preserue, And though Gabrina was both foule and old, Though her misdeeds all rigor did deserue: Yet he his faith and promise firme doth hold, And left his former busines her to erue, Till as they traueld on the way by chance, They met a Flemish knight late come to France. 4 The knight of statute comly was and tall, And in his shield he bare an azure bend, His name Ermonida they vse to call, It seemd he was not this old womans frend, For straight his fight her heart did to appall, Vnto her guide her life she doth commend: And praid him (as he promist) to vouchsafe, From this her enemie to keepe her safe. 5 This man (quoth she) my guiltlesse father killed, For malice onely that to me he bare: This man my onely brothers blood hath spilled, Because he wisht my safetie and welfare: Yet with reuenge his rage cannot be filled, But still he seekes to worke my farther care. Well (quoth Zerbino) be of better cheare, For none shall do thee harme whilst I am heare. 6 Now when the knight of Flaunders saw that face, That of all faces he did most detest: With me to combat in this present place, You must prepare (quoth he) and trie your best, Or yeeld to me this woman void of grace, That as she hath deseru'd she may be drest: If you resistance make you will be slaine, For so it fals to such as wrong maintaine.Sentence. 7 Zerbino curteously doth thus replie, Bethinke your selfe with more consideration,Sentence. To make a woman of your hand to die, What staine it is to knightly reputation; As for the combat if you needs will trie, Her to defend is my determination: For I am sworne to fight in her defence, And therefore cannot with mine oth dispence.
8 This and to this effect much more in vaine He spake, him from his purpose to perswade, At last they were so kindled with disdaine, That one the other fiercely did inuade: Zerbino was the stronger of the twaine, And strake the tother through the shoulder blade, So as he fell halfe dead and halfe aliue, Not able any more with him to striue. 9 But Zerbin doubting left he had bene dead, With much compassion from his horse did light, And first he loosd his helmet from his head, And seeketh to reuiue him if he might; Who looking firmely on Zerbino, sed, I cannot much lament that such a knight, Hath hurt me in this fight and ouerthrowne, In whom such valew and such worth is showne. 10 In this alone my hap I do lament, That it should be for such a womans sake, And much I maruell that you would consent, To your protection such a one to take, Which I am sure you would full fore repent, If I to you her deeds should open make, And that you should so greatly damage me, For such a wicked caitiue as is she. 11 Here beginneth the tale of Ga∣brina.And saue my voice and strength will faile I doubt, Before my tale will come to perfect end, I will declare if you will heare it out, The wicked life of this vngracious send; I had a brother valorous and stout, In Holland borne, who (for he did intend To win by seruice honour and renowne) Heraclio seru'd that bare of Greece the crowne. 12 A noble Gentleman Argeo hight, Neare the confines of Seruia did dwell, Who in my brother tooke so great delight, That in short space they were acquainted well, Argeo marride had this cursed wight, Of whom the present storie I do tell, And tooke in her (vnworthy) so great pleasure, As past the bands of reason and of measure. 13 Simile. Ou ed il is  in  places Oe in  Tu    cum sine pondere succi, Mobus ventis  facia vo∣lani.But she more light then leaues in Autumne season, That eu'ry blast doth blow about and change, Against all wiuely care, all cause and reason, Because she doth delight her selfe in change, With wicked hart and head full fraught with treason, So farre she lets her raging loue to range, She sues to haue my brother to her louer, And doth to him the foule desire vncouer. 14 A in the third of the tamor. No   sroudes a, I am male hoe. . ventus.But neither doth a rocke more firmely stand Vpon the shore against the surging waue, Nor doth the Cedar more vpon the land Resist the tempest that doth rage and raue, Then doth my brother her desire withstand, Though she at sundrie times the same doth craue, SimileAnd though she seeketh many a meane and triall, Simile.Yet still she turneth with a flat deniall. 15 At last it fell (as oft it doth befall To valiant men that loue to fight and quarell) My brother was sore wounded in a brall, So that it seemd his life was in some parell: Wherefore he gets within the castle wall, Both that his frend might know & venge his quarell, And other needfull things may be procured, By which his hurt might be the sooner cured. 16 Now while my brother staid in this ill state, His friend Argeo sometime absent thence, This woman early visits him and late, And offers him good store of pounds and peace: But he that alwayes villany did hate, And would not do his friend so great offence, Thought (as in euill cases is the best) Of two great mischiefes to chuse out the left. 17 He meanes to leaue Argeos friendship quite, And get him home againe from whence he came, Or hide himselfe where this most wicked wight Shall neuer see his face nor heare his name: This, though it grieu'd him, as it ought of right, He chuseth as a way lesse worthy blame, Then yeelding to her lust for to abuse her, Or to her louing husband to accuse her. 18 Wherfore (though of his wound both saint and weake) He doth resolue to part with constant mind, He gets him thence, and not a word doth speake, And leaues this filthy minded beast behind: But fortune ill his purpose good doth breake, And alterd quite the course he had designd, Home came her husband finding her alone, Complaining grieuously and making mone. 19 Her cheekes with teares all blubberd were and red, Her lookes did shew her mind was ill apaid, Her lockes all torne did hang about her hed, With which her louing husband fore afraid, Did aske her oft what chance such change had bred, Till at the length the wicked wretch thus said, With spiteful heart, with wicked voice & trembling, And faind a cause, the cause it selfe dissembling. 20 Alas (quoth she) what should I seeke to hide My wicked act and hainous deadly sinne,Iuvenal in his 13. satyre, Paena auem vehemens as mulio  illu Nocte die sum portare in pecto∣re estem. Ouid. Paeniss & fa o quror pse . Which though from you, and all the world beside, I could conceale, yet doth the soule within, And conscience grudge, a burden such to bide, So as the inward torment I am in, Doth passe the plague or penance far away, That mortall man vpon my sinne can lay. 21 If so a sinne of right you may it name, That one is forst vnto against her will, But thus it is, your friend that hither came, (I thinking he had thought nor meant none ill) Inforced me to my perpetuall shame, Against all lawes, all honestie and skill: And doubting that I would the fact bewray, Forthwith he gate him hence and fled away.
22 But though my bodie he haue so desild, Yet is my mind from sinne deuoid and cleare, Although from sight of men I am exild, Nor dare I once in publike place appeare: This ad, with thousand names she him reuild, So that Argeo that the tale did heare, Beleeued it, and straight withall intended To punish him that neuer had offended. 23 He taketh horse forthwith and followth post, All on reuenge his mind was wholly bent, And for he perfitly did know the cost, And for my brother faire and softly went, He met him in an hower at the most, Bidding him stand or elíe he should be shent: My brother would distwade him if he might, But all in vaine, Argeo needs would fight. 24 The tone was strong and full of fresh disdaine, The tother weake and lth to hurt his frend, So that himselfe defending long in vaine, My brother was constraind to yeeld in th'end: And thus at last he prisner doth remaine, And yeelds, himselfe vnable to defend: Which seene, Argeo doth surcease to strike, But speaketh vnto him these words or like. 25 God neuer let my heart so farre be moued, With rightfull wrath that I thy blood should spill, Since once I thee esteemed well and loued, Whom once I loued, I will neuer kill: And though thy act may iustly be reproued, The world shall see my goodnesse by thine ill, For be t loue, or be it in disdaine, I will be found the better of the twaine. 26 Another meane then death to vse I mind, In panishing this sinne and soule misdeed, This  (with willow bands he there did find) He makes a hurdle fit to leue such need, On which my brothers bodie he doth bind, That with old hurts and new did freshly bleed; And to his castle he doth him conuay, In mind to keepe him there a prisner ay. 27 Yet though with him a prisner he remaind, In other things he felt no lacke nor want, Saue that his libertie was him restraind: But o, this wretch that late did him supplant, And to her husband so of him complaind, Thought she would trie if he would yet recant, And tor at her commaund she had the kayes) She goes to him, and thus to him she sayes. 28 Now sir (quoth she) I trust you feele the frute, That this your foolish constancie hath wrought, Had you not better bene to graunt the sute, That I in friendly ort so often fought? You see us vaine to argue or dispute, Say what you can, you are a traitor thought And he to whom you shewd so great fidelitie, Imputes to you treason and infidelitie. 29 I thinke both for your ease and reputation, You had bene better graunted my request, You see you haue a sorie habitation, And in the same for euer looke to rest, Except you change your first determination, And mollifie your stonie hearted brest, Which if you yet will do, I do assure you, Both libertie and credite to procure you. 30 No, neuer hope, no said Filandro, neuer, (So my vnhappie brothers name they call) In vaine to change my mind you do endeuer, And though Argeo caussesse keepe me thrall, Yet I in faith and troth will still perseuer, Sufficeth me, that he that seeth all,Horace s, Marus  esto, nilco- sib, nulia  scer culp. Doth know mine innocencie and doth see me, And when he list can both reward and free me. 31 I care not though the world of me thinke ill, I hope another world will make amends, Yet let Argeo slay me if he will, Or let him (as it seemeth he intends) Though wrongfully, in prison hold me still, Yet one day he will find he hurts his frends, And know by proofe how he hath bene beguild, When truth appears,Sentence. and time brings forth her child. 32 Yet for all this, this woman void of shame, Did cease no whit Filandro still to tempt, And oftentimes in vaine to him she came, And euer turnes repulst and with contempt, And in this frantike fancie she doth frame A thousand sleights to further her attempt, And many things in mind she doth reuolue, Before on any one she do resolue. 33 Sixe months entire she doth her selfe absent, Nor euer came Filandro to entice, Which made him hope that she was now content To cease her sute, and follow his aduice; But lo,Sentence. how fortune (that is euer bent To further wicked persons in their vice) Doth vnto her a fit occasion lend, To bring her wicked lust to wofull end. 34 There had bene hate and enmitie of old, Betweene her husband and another knight, Morando cald, who often would be bold, If so Argeo absent were a night, To come with force and to assault his hold, Or thereabout to do him some despight: But if he were at home, then all that whiles He came not neare him by a dozen miles. 35 Wherefore to be reueng'd on this his so, That often did him wrong and great outrage, Argeo giues it out that he will go Vnto Ierusalem on pilgrimage: And from his house disguysd he parted so, In secret sort without or man or page, And eu'ry night comes in at the posterne, That none but she his comming might discerne.
36 Thus all the day he wànders all about, In woods, in groues, in pastures here and thither, To see if he could find Morando out, That in his absence vsed to come hither: And farre he keepes himselfe from any rout, Vntill that darknesse doth obscure the wether, Then would he get him home a secret way, Of which his wife did keepe a priuie kay. 37 Thus all but she Argeo absent thought, By which his wicked wise with wonted skill, Another meanes and new occasion sought, To bring to passe her foule vnbridled will: With weeping eyes (her eyes to weepe she tought) And all with teares her bosome she doth fill, Then came she to my brother and complained, That (but he helpe) her honour would be stained. 38 Nor mine alone, but mine Argeos too, Who were he here (quoth she) I would not care, You know what harme Morando wonts to doo, When as mine husbands absence makes him dare, And now behold the caitiue me doth woo, And to intrap me sets full many a snare, And offred seruants great reward and hire, So they would helpe to further his desire. 39 And hearing that Argeo was away, And would continue so no little space, He came within the castle wall to day, (His absence gaue him so much heart of grace) Where, had my husband bene but in the way, He durst not onely not haue shewd his face, But sure he would not haue presum'd at all, To come within a kenning of the wall. 40 And what by message he before had done, Now face to face by mouth he doth the same, So as I hardly know which way to shunne, That which to do, would breed my endlesse blame. Had not my sugred speech his fauour wonne, By faining I my will to his would frame, He would perforce haue had his foule intent, Which now he hopes to get by my assent. 41 I promist him (but promise made for feare Sentence.Is voyd) and I performance neuer ment, But so that act I made him to forbeare, Which he to do by force was fully bent. Now if you be a friend, or euer were, Vnto Argeo, you may this preuent, Not onely saue mine honour thus distressed, But his to whom such loue you haue prosessed. 42 Which if you me denie, then I may say, Not honestie, of which your boft you make, But crueltie did cause you say me nay, And of my sute so small regard to take: And that you were not moued any way With friendships rule, or for Argeos sake: Although twixt vs it might haue secret beene, But now my shame must needs be knowne & seene. 43 Tush (quoth Filandro) this is more then need, To vie such circumstance in such a case, As I began, so meane I to proceed, And though Argeo hold me in disgrace, Yet vnto him I not impute this deed, But ready will be still in time and place, To do him seruice any way I may, So you but shew to me the meane and way. 44 Sir then (said she) the way were this, to kill Him that doth seeke my husbands shame and mine, Which you may easly do, if so you will A while vnto my words your eare incline: I haue put off his comming hither, till It be betwixt the houres of ten and nine, What time I promist him so to prouide, To let him in, so as he were not spide. 45 Now then my counsell is, that you do stay Here in my chamber, vntill I procure Him to disarme himselfe, so as you may Slay him with small ado, and make him sure. This is (quoth she) the onely ready way, And safest for your selfe, I you assure: To this deuice Filandro doth assent, Thinking hereby his friends hurt to preuent. 46 Now more and more approcht the cursed night, When as his wife (if I a wife may call) This hellish hag and foule infernall sprite, Did place my brother armd behind a wall, And as she wisht, eu'n so it fell aright, For ill deuice amisse doth seldome fall;Sentence. Her husband in the eu'ning somewhat late, Enterd his castle at the posterne gate. 47 Filandro at one blow cuts off his hed, Taking him for Morando in exchange, She stands fast by that him had thither led, Nor shewes in word or gesture any change: Argeo there remaineth slaine and ded, And kild by him (ò chance most hard and strange) That while he friendly thought to do him good, Most cruell and vnfriendly shed his blood. 48 Now when this seate had thus bene brought to passe, Gabrina (so is this good womans name) That doth in craft the fiends of hell surpasse, Vnto my brother for his weapon came, Which he deliuerd as his promise was, And that once done, then she without all shame, Prayes him to take in hand a lighted candle, And view him well whom he so ill did handle. 49 There first he saw how he had kild his frend, A fight that made him at the heart repent, And she afresh the matter to amend, Doth threate, except he would to her assent, That she should bring his life to shamefull end, For to accuse him of this fact she ment, Wishing him though his life he did despise, To shunne a shamefull death if he be wise.
50 Filandro mazd, and full of feare did stand, When of his error he was first aware, He thought at first to kill her out of hand, By whom he was intrapt in such a snare, But she had got his weapons in her hand, And to defend her selfe did straight prepare: But sure he could haue found it in his hart, By peecemeale to haue torne her eu'ry part. 51 Simile. T one Ss an I vsed in a  poeme, Non grau mourns  mole, &Like as a ship in midst of seas opprest, Betweene two winds that do together striue, Can haue no time of respito or of rest, But goes what way the stronger wind doth driue: So now Filandro doubting which was best, To die, or in such sort to bide aliue, Stood long in doubt, and neither way did bend, Yet chose the worier bargain in the end. 52 His reason open layes before his face, The danger great if once the fact were knowne, Beside the infamie and great disgrace, That would about the world of him be blowne: Beside to chuse he had but little space, So as his wit and sence was scant his owne: At last he doth conclude what euer come, To swallow this vnlau'ry choking plum. 53 Wherefore against his will, inforst by feare, He promiseth to take her for his wife, And vnto her he solemnly doth sweare, To marry her if now she saue his life: And (for it was not safe to tarry theare) When once the murder should be publisht rife, He turnes vnto the place where he was borne, And leaue; behind him infamie and scorne. 54 And still he carrid in his pensiue heart, His friends mishap, lamenting it in vaine, How for a iust reward of such defart, A Progne and Medea he did gaine; And saue his oth restrained him in part, Horace.  ane pus & ang.No doubt he would the wicked hag haue slaine: But yet he hated her like to ade or snake, And in her companie small ioy did take. 55 From that to this, to laugh or once to smile, He was not seene, his words and looks were sad, With often sighs, and in a little while, Orestes looks in the historie.He grew much like Orestes, when he had First slaine his father by his mothers guile, Then her, and last of all fell raging mad, With spirits vext so was my brothers hed, Still vext till sicknes made him keepe his bed. 56 But when this cursed strumpet plainly saw, How small delight in her my brother tooke, She doth her seruent loue from him withdraw, And in short space that fancie she forsooke: And lastly she resolues against all law, So soone as she can sit occasion looke, To bring Filandros life to wofull end, And after her first husband him to send. 57 An old Phisition full of false deceit,This of the P. sition u  word taken as of the x. booked Apul gi Asse, and  here ∣ther very aply suseried to etifie his tale,  and to paint fori leudnesse of a vld woman. She findeth out most fit for such a feate, That better knew to giue a poisond bait, Then for to cure with herbs or wholsom meate: Him, that for gaine most greedily doth wait, By profers large she quickly doth intreate, To take vpon him this vngracious cure, With poysond cup to make her husband sure. 58 Now while my selfe was by, and others more, This old Phisition came to him ere long, And brought a cup, in which was poyson store, And said, it cordiall was, to make him strong: But lo, Gabrina that deuisd before, Eu'n in the prise of wrong, to do some wrong, Before Filandro of the cup did tast, Stept twixt the leach and him in no small hast. 59 And taking in her hand against his will, The cup in which the poysond drinke was plast, She said, good Doctor do not take it ill, That I require you first the drinke to tast, I will not haue my husband drinke, vntill You haue your selfe before him tane the tast: I will (said she) be certaine by the rood, That this you giue him, wholsome is and good. 60 Now in what pickle thinke you was the leach? The time was short to take a sound aduice, He might not vse perswasion now nor speach, He durst not tell how she did him intice, Nor could he guesse what was herein her reach, To make him tast first of the poysond spice, Wherefore to take a tast he thought it best, And then he giues my brother all the rest. 61 Euen as a hawke that hath a partridge trust In griping talents, sits and plumes the same,Simile. Oft by a dog whom she doth not mistrust, Is kild her selfe and reaued of her game: So this Phisition gracelesse and vniust, While he to greedie gaine his mind doth frame, Was vsd by her euen as he well deserued, And so I wish all such Phisitions serued. 62 The poore old man that felt his stomacke ake, Began to take his leaue, and homeward hasted, He thinks some strong Antidoton to take, is a med taken to  sicknesse. Against the poysond cup he lately tasted: She sweares his home returne he may not make, While th' operation of the potion lasted, And that she will see plainly ere he go, If so it do her husband good or no. 63 By humble sure and offers he doth trie, That with her licence he may thence depart, But all in vaine, his sute she doth denie: Now had the liquor welnigh toucht his hart, Wherefore perceiuing plainly he must die, He doth the secret to vs all impart: Thus to himselfe he did the same at last, Which oft he did to others in time past.
64 And straight in little space my brother dyde, And after him dide this same false Phisition. We that had heard and seene the matter tride, Of which my selfe before had some suspition; Both hand and foote we then this monster tyde, And bring her vnto such as had commission, Where her confession, and our accusation, Made them pronounce her doome of condēnation. 65 Thus in the gaile in fetters she was laid, Adiudged to be burned at a stake, Thus (said the knight) and more he would haue said How she escapt, and how she prison brake, But so he fainted, as they were affraid, He would haue sounded as those words he spake: Wherefore his page him to his horse doth lift, And then to binde his wounds they make a shift. 66 Then Zerbin tooke his leaue and made a skuse, That he had hurt the knight in her defence, Affirming he had done, as is the vse, To saue his charge from damage and offence: And yt thenceforth with him he would haue truce, This said, he tooke his leaue and parted thence, And promist him with words of great ciuillitie, To further him vnto his best abillitie. 67 Sir (said the knight) for this I do you thanke, And wish you of that woman to beware, Left that she serue you some such slipper pranke, As may procure your farther woe and care: For hard shall any scape from danger franke, That in her companie long season are: Gabrina silent all the while stands by,Sentence. For hard it is to proue the truth a lye. 68 Thus hence they part, and for his promise sake, At her commandment Zerbin doth attend, And wisht in heart, the diuell might her take, Though with his hand he must her still defend: And those last words the knight of Holland spake, To giue him warning of the cursled send, Do fill his mind with so great griefe and spight, That now he scant could well abide her fight. 69 And this same old and weather beaten trot, Perceiuing how Zerbino was inclind, Would not once yeeld or be behind a iot, In spitefull wishing, nor in euill mind: Her eye and tongue and looke conceale it not, Not yet her deeds as after he did finde, Thus in this harmony and concord good, It was their hap to trauell through the wood. 70 Now when the time approched neare the night, They heard a noise of bustling and of blowes, Causd as they guessed by some brall or fight, But where it was yet neither of them knowes, Zerbino longed much to see the fight, And thither wards in no small hast he goes, And in no lesse, Gabrina maketh after, As shalbe shewd you more at large hereafter. A more necessarie morall (as I thinke) cannot be found for our age we now line in,Morall. then that, with which this booke begins: namely, of the keeping of faith, and promise, which euen among Turkes and heathen Philosophers hath bene re∣ligiously kept; and yet among vs 'that call our selues Christians, and boast of an extraordinarie light of the Gospell, is often most irreligiously broken: so that as Ouid faith of his time in ironicall manner. Aurea nune verè sunt secula, plutimus auro Venit honos, auro conciliatur amor: In Enlish thus, This may indeed, be call'd the age of gold, For honour, loue and all, for it is sold. So may I say, this is a notable time for credite, for now generally (euen with some of the better sort) mens words be as good as their obligations: namely, neither of both worth the taking for a farthing. Secondly, in Filandro we may note a speciall good nature and inclination, that would rather abandon a place which he liked very well, then either breake the lawes of frendship and hospitalitie; or accuse the wife to her husband. In his killing Argeo, and all the tragicall procee∣dings of the wicked Gabrina, we may note the mōstrous effects of an vnbridled affectiō in a mischieuous woman, that kil∣led both her husbands, and lastly the Phisition, and stil continued working fresh mischief til her death, as after foloweth. Orestes, whom he spake of in the 55. staffe of this 21. booke was sonne of Agamemnon,Historie. who being slaine by the trecherie of his wife Clytemnestra, Orestes in reuenge there of killed his mother, and after that, was himselfe tormented with furies, or rather with his conscience for so horrible an act, and so fell mad, and was healed againe; and after, that notable accident of Pilades and him fell out. Simon Fornarie affirmeth that in this tale of Gabrina, my authour doth allude to a woman of like lewdnesse,Allusion. liuing in his time, and by Argeo and Filandro to be ment two Gentlemen of Naples; but the truth is, the tale is almost verba∣tim, taken out of Apuleius golden Asse. Specially for that part of the Phisition: Sed vxor, quae iampridem nomen vxoris cum fide perdiderat, medicum conuenit quendam norae persidie qui iam multarum palmarum spectatus praelijs, magna dextrae suae trophoea numerabit, as I before noted on the 57. staffe. The end of the notes vpon the xxj booke.
THE XXII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Astolfo doth dissolue the charmed place, And spite of Atlant, sets his prisners free: Then Bradamant doth see Rogeros face: To helpe an unknowne knight they craued be; But by the way Rogero in short space, Subdewd foure knights, of worth and good degree, That were by Pinabell in prison hild, Whom Bradamant with iust reuengment kild. 1 YE courtly dames, that are both kind and true, Vnto your loues, if kinde and true be any, As sure I am in all your louely crue, Of so chast minde, there are not ouer many; Be not displeasd with this that doth ensue, For neither must I leaue it, neither can I, And beare with me for that I said before, When on Gabrina I did raile so sore. 2 Ouid. Parcte paucarum dis∣fundere crimina in omnes.Mine ernest words, nor yet her great offence, Cannot obscure in honour and cleare fame, Those few, whose spotlesse liues want no defence, Whom hate nor enuie no way can defame: Iudas Iscariot.He that his master sold for thirtie pence, To Iohn nor Peter breeds no blot nor blame: Nor men of Hipermestra, worse haue thought, Hipermestra one of the 50 Sisters. Loo in the Sto∣rie of this booke.Although her sisters were vnchast and nought. 3 For one that in this verse I shall dispraise, As driu'n by course of this my present storie, Whole hundreds are whom I intend to praise, And magnifie their well deserued glorie, If this then be offensiue any wayes, To all or any, I can be but sorie: Now of the Scottish Prince a word or two, That heard a noise, and went forthwith thereto. 4 Betweene two mountaines in a shadie dale, He doth descend that way the noise him led, But when he came he saw vpon the vale, A Baron lately slaine and newly ded. But er I enter further in this tale, I first must tell you how Astolfo sped: Whom late I left in that most cursed cittie,He come to that matter in the 25 Booke. st. 29. Where women murther men without all pittie. 5 I told you how his horne with mightie blast, Not onely all his foes had driuen away, But also made his friends so sore agast, As not the stowtest of them there durst stay: Wherefore (I said) he was constraind at last, Alone to get him homward on his way, Forthwith on Rabicano he doth mount, An horse of which he makes no small account. 6 His horne that serues him still at all assayes, He carries with him and his learned booke, First by Armenia he goes his wayes, Then Brusia and the way of Thrase he tooke, So that within the space of twentie dayes, The streame Danubio he quite forsooke: Then from Boemia ward he doth decline, Vnto Franconia and the streame of Rhyne. 7 Then through Ardennas wood to Aquis graue, And thence to Flanders where he shipping found, What time a Northeast winde did blow to braue, As set him soone in sight of English ground: So that no whit annoyd with winde nor waue, His natiue soile receiu'd him safe and sound: He taketh horse, and er the Sunne was downe, At London he arriu'd the chiefest towne.
8 Here at his first arriuall straight he heares, How that the Turkes faire Paris did beseege, And how his sire (a man well stroke in yeares) Was there, and sent for ayd to raise the seege: And how of late the Lords and chiefest peares, Were gone with new supplies to helpe their leege, But little stay he makes these words once hard, But taketh ship againe to Callice ward. 9 And for the winde seru'd then not very well, They were by force thereof borne quite aside, So that the master scant himselfe could tell, What course he held, they were borne downe so wide, Yet at the last so luckie it besell, Within a kenning they some land had spide, And drawing neare they found the towne of Roan, Where presently the Duke tooke land alone. 10 And crossing through a wood when time drew neare, That neither day could well be cald nor night, He hapt to finde a christall spring and cleare, And by the side thereof he did alight, With mind to quench his thirst and rest him heare, As in a place of pleasure and delight, He ties his horse vnto a tree, and thinketh To have him tarrie safe there while he drinketh. 11 Sentence. Mula cadune enter caelicem su∣premari labra.Strange things may fall betweene the lip and cup, For scant Astolfo yet had wet his lip, But from a bush a villaine started vp, Vntide the horse, and on his backe doth skip: The Duke that scant had tasted yet a sup; And finds himselfe thus tane in such a trip, Forgets to drinke, and followes in a rage, For wrath not water doth his thirst asswage. 12 The little villaine that the horse had got, (Like one that did in knauish pranks delight) Although he might haue run yet did it not, Because Astolfo should not leese his sight: But with false gallop, or a gentle trot, He leads the Duke vnto that place aright, Where many knights and Lords of high degree, Atlantti caste.Without a prison, more then prisners be. 13 Astolfo, though his armour doth him cumber, Yet fearing least he might arriue too late, In following the villaine doth nor slumber, Vntill he came within the pallace gate, Where (as I said) of Lords no little number, Were wandring vp and downe in strange estate: Astolfo of their presence doth not force, But runneth vp and downe to finde his horse. 14 The craftie villaine was in no place found, Though many a homely place for him was sought, Yet still the Duke doth search the pallace round, And for his beast he takes no little thought: At last he guest it was enchaunted ground, And as by Logestilla he was tought, He tooke his booke and searcheth in the table, How to dissolue the place he might be able. 15 And straight in th'index for it he doth looke, Of pallaces fram'd by such strange illusion, Among the rest, of this (so saith the booke) That it should neuer come vnto confusion; Vntill a certaine stone away were tooke, In which a sprite was kept by strange inclusion, And if he did but lift the threshold stone, The goodly house would vanish and be gone. 16 The Duke not doubting now of good successe, Go'th to the threshold where the stone was laid, And which it was he presently doth guesse, And then by force to moue it he aslaid: But Atlant, that expected nothing lesse, And sees his bold attempt, was sore affraid, And straight an hundred meanes he doth deuise, To hinder him from this bold enterprise. 17 He makes the Duke, by this his diuellish skill, To seeme of diuers shapes vnto the rest, To one a darse, of face and faucurill, To one a gyant, to a third a beast, And all their hearts with hatred he doth fill, He thinkes by them the Duke should be distrest: By seeming vnto eu'rie one the same, For which each one into the pallace came. 18 Behold Rogero stout, and Brandimart,Rogero. Bradama. Prasildo, Bradamant, and others moe, Vpon Astolfo set with cruell hart, As to reuenge themselues vpon their foe: But with his horne the Duke then plaid his part, And brought their loftie stomackes somwhat low: But had not th'horne procur'd him this exemption, No doubt the Duke had dyde without redemption. 19 For when they heard the strange and fearfull blast, They forced were for feare away to runne,Simile As fearefull Pigeons flie away agast When men do ring a bell or shoot a gunne; The Sorcerer himselfe was not the last, That sought by flight the fearfull noise to shunne: Yea such it was, that neither rat nor mouse, Durst tarrie in the circuit of the house. 20 Among the horses that did breake their bands, Was Rabican of whom before I told, Who by good hap came to Astolfos hands, Who was full glad when of him he had hold, Also Rogeros Griffith horse there stands, Fast tyed in a chaine of beaten gold, The Duke, as by his booke he had bene tought, Destroyed quite the house by magike wrought. 21 I do not doubt but you can call to minde, How good Rogero lost this stately beast, What time Angelica his eyes did blinde, Denying most vnkindly his request: The horse that sored swifter then the winde, Went backe to Atlant whom he loued best, By whom he had bene of a young one bred, And diligently taught, and costly fed.
22 This English Duke was glad of such a pray, As one that was to trauell greatly bent, And in the world was not a better way For him to serue his purpose and intent; Wherefore he meaneth not to let him stray, But takes him as a thing from heau'n him sent, For long ere this he had of him such proofe, As well he knew what was for his behoofe. 23 Now being full resolu'd to take in hand, To trauell round about the world so wide, And visite many a sea and many a land, As none had done, nor euer should beside, One onely care his purpose did withstand, Which causd him yet a little time to bide, He doth bethink him oft, yet doth not know On whom his Rabicano to bestow. 24 He would be loth that such a stately steed Should by a peasant be possest or found, And though of him he stood then in no need, Yet had he care to haue him safe and sound, In hands of such as would him keepe and feed; While thus he thought and lookt about him round, Of this you shall see more in the 23. booke. 7 staff.Next day a while before the Sunne was set, A champion all in armes vowares he met. 25 But first I meane to tell you what became Of good Rogero and his Bradamant, Who when againe vnto themselues they came, The pallace quite destroyd of old Atlant: Each knew and cald the other by their name, And of all courtesies they were not scant, Lamenting much that this inchanted pallace, Had hinderd them so long such ioy and sollace. 26 The noble maid to shew her selfe as kind, As might become a virgin wise and sage, Doth in plaine termes as plaine declare her mind, As thus, that she his loues heare will asswage, And vnto him her selfe in wedlocke bind, And spend with him all her ensuing age, If to be christned first he were content, And afterwards to aske her friends consent. 27 But he that would not onely not refuse To change his life for his beloueds sake, But also if the choise were his to chuse, To leese his life and all the world forsake, Did answer thus, my deare, what ere ensues I will performe what ere I vndertake, To be baptizd in water or in fire, I will consent if it be your desire. 28 Though Rogero in here willing to be baptized, and after still defer∣red it, you must note be knew not in what danger  master was in  afterwards in the xxv. booke.This said, he goes from thence with full intent, To take vpon him christend state of life, Which done he most sincerely after ment, To aske her of her father for a wife; Vnto an Abbey straight their course they bent, As in those dayes were in those places rise, Where men deuout did liue with great frugalitie, And yet for strangers kept good hospitalitie. 29 But ere they came to that religious place, They met a damsell full of beauty cheare, That had with teares bedewed all her face, Yet in those teares great beautie did appeare, Rogero, that had euer speciall grace In courteous acts and peech when she came neare, Doth aske other what dangers or what feares, Did moue her so to make her shed such teares. 30 She thus replies, the cause of this my griefe, Is not for feare or danger of mine owne, But for good will, and for compassion chiefe, Of one yong knight, whose name is yet vnknowne, Who if he haue not great and quicke reliefe, Is iudgd into the fier to be throwne, So great a fault they say he hath committed, That doubt it is it will not be remitted. 31 The fault was this, there was good will betweene Him and the daughter of the King of Spaine, And left his loue should be descride and seene, He finely doth himselfe a woman saine, And went and spake as if he had so beene, And thus he plaid (to tell the matter plaine) The maid in shew, the man in deed so well, That in a while he made her belly swell. 32 But out alas, what can so secret be, But out it will when we do least suspect?Sentence. For posts haue eares, and walls haue eyes to see, Dumbe beast and birds haue tongues ill to detect,Sentence. First one had found it out, then two or three: And looke how fire doth creepe that men neglect,Simile. So this report from mouth to mouth did spring, Till at the last it came vnto the king. 33 The King straight sends a trustie seruant thether, Who making search when they two were in bed, Found out the troth and tooke them both together, Found him a man, and found her belly sped, Away they carred her I know not whether, Away vnto the prison he was led, And must be burnd this day or else to morow, The thought whereof doth moue my mind to sorow. 34 This made me purposely to come from thence, And not to see one of so comely shape, So sharply punisht for this small offence, As if it were for murder or for rape, Nor any hope could sinke into my sence, How possible it were for him to scape, And who could see or thinke without compassion, A fine yong youth tormented in such fashion? 35 Twas strange to thinke how nie this tale did touch The noble Bradamants most tender hart, It seemed she pittide this mans state as much, As if her brother had playd such a part:It was  her brother,  you  seen,  in  25. booke. Some cause there was to make her fancie such, As afterward at large I shall impart: And straight she makes this motion, that they twaine Might saue this wofull youth from being slaine.
36 Rogero much commends her noble mind, And to the mourning damsell thus they said, We both are to this enterprise inclind, If fortune serue we will the yong man aid, But when they saw that still the mournd and whind, Tush (quoth Rogero) cease to be afraid, Tis more then time that we were going hence, Not teares but force must serue for his defence. 37 These comfortable words Rogero spake, With that his warlike looke and manly show, Did cause her heart of grace forth with to take, Yet still she doubts which way were best to go, Not that she feard the right way to mistake, For all the wayes she perfuly did know, To turne the way she came she was afraid, Lest in the way they haply might be staid. 38 There are (quoth she) two waves vnto the place, Of which the stone is easie, faire and plaine, The tother foule, and farre the greater space, Yet at this time the safer of the twaine, But yet I feare, except God send more grace, That ere we thither come, he may be slaine: Thus stood this damsell still, not little musing, Betweene the nearer way and safer chsing. 39 Rogero that was resolute and stout, Did aske what reason mou'd her to perswade Them two to take the farther way about; And straight way she to them this answer made, Forsooth (said she) the cause that moues my doubt Is this, I feare that some will you inuade, By meanes that Pinnabell (Anselmus sonne) Hath here of late a custome leud begunne. 40 As namely that who euer that way ride, Of what estate soeuer or degree, Must leese their horses first, and then beside Most of their clothes and raiment spoiled be. Foure valiant youths of strength, and courage tride, Are sworne to this, so that no he nor she Can passe that way without this euill paiment, That he must weapons leese, and she her raiment. 41 The custome is, as yet but three dayes old, By Pinnabello and his wife deuised, This was  Galna,  you might reade before in the latter end of this 20. loke.Who meeting haply (as I heard it told) A knight, or one in knightly clothes disguised, With whom a woman vgly to behold, And by this couple scorned and despised, This Pinnabell the worse had of the quarrell, His wife was spoild of horse and of apparrell. 42 This spite enraged so the womans mind, That wishing to reuenge, not knowing how, Yet wrath and folly so her sence doth blind, That straight she makes a foolish solemne vow, And he that was to euill deeds inclind No lesse than she, doth of the same allow: The vow was this, for anger of this foile, A thousand others in like sort to spoile. 43 That very night came to that house by chance, Foure valiant knights as euer armor bare, To fight on horse or foot with sword or lance, But few many with the worst of them compare, These foure I say were first that led this dance, By night surprised ere they were aware, Both Griffin, Aquilant and Sansonet, And Guidon Sauage, scant a man as yet. 44 These foure in shew he gently entertained, And makes them friendly countenance and cheate, With courteous speech and friendly manner fained, As if he lou'd them well and held them deare: But while secure they in their beds remained, And when Sunne rising now approched neare, He did beset the lodging where they lay, And tooke their armor and their clothes away. 45 And further bound them in that present place,Pinnabels lw. Both hand and foote as if they prisners were, And ere he did those causlesse bonds vnlace, He makes them solemnly to vow and sweare, To keepe this order for a tweluemonths space, That whosoeuer hapned to come there, They foure endeuour should with all their forces, To take away their raiment and their horses. 46 To this by solemne oth are sworne they foure, Constraind thereto by this their cruell host, And though herewith they were offended sore, Yet must they sweare for feare of farther cost, Alreadie not so few as twise a score, Their horses and their furniture haue lost, And none as yet so able haue bene found, But one of these haue laid him on the ground. 47 But if some one do hap so strong to be, To make his partie good with one of those, Then straight the order is, the other three Must him assist, thus none vnconquerd goes. Wherefore if you will be aduist by me, Tis best to shun this way as I suppose, Sith each of these is such as I recited, How great thinke you will be their force vnited? 48 But presuppose that you their force withstand, As your great courage makes me thinke you might, Yet needs it hinder must the cause in hand, And make you tarry here about all night: Sith then this case so dangerously doth stand, I would perswade you now to shun this fight, Lest while you in this enterprise remaine, The poore yong man may fortune to be slaine. 49 Tush quoth Rogero, haue no doubt at all, Let vs endeuour still to do our best, And then hap good or ill, fall what may fall, Let God and fortune gouerne all the rest:Sentence. I hope this enterprise I finish shall So well, as I shall eke do your request, And there arriue to saue him in good time, That should be burned for so small a crime.
50 This said, he gets him on the nearest way, Fast by the place where Pinnabell doth dwell, And at the bridge they forced were to stay, And straight a man (whose name I know not well) Came out in hast, and stand to them doth say, And then begins their order them to tell, Perswading them, if they will shunne the perell, To yeeld in peace their horses and apparell. 51 Peace (quoth Rogero) leaue thy foolish prating, A tale alreadie knowne thou dost repeate, Sentence.Children with bugs, and dogs are seard with rating, With me it small auailes to brag or threate, I leese but time with thee to stand debating, Shew me the men that mind to do this feate, My hast is such that long I may not stay, Wherefore I pray you bid them come away. 52 Lo here comes one of them, this old man sed, And as he spake the words, out came a knight, A tall strong man, all armd from foot to hed, His armor like a fornace shined bright, His colours that he ware were white and red, This was the first, and Sansonet he hight, And for he was a man of mightie strength, Two massie speares he brought of mightie length. 53 The one of these he to Rogero gaue, The other to himselfe he doth reserue, Then each, in hope the victorie to haue, Do spurte their stedie steeds that will not swerue, Rogeros shield from wounding doth him saue, The others did him not so well preserue, The speare both pierst his shield and prickt his arme, And ouerthrew him to this further harme. 54 You do not sure, nor cannot yet forget, What of Rogeros shield before I told, That made the fends of hell with toyle to swet, And shind so bright as none could it behold, No maruell then though valiant Sansonet, Although his hands were strong and hart were bold, Could not preuaile so strong a shield to pierce, Of so great force as late I did rehearse. 55 This while was Pinnabell approched nie To Bradamant, and askt of her his name, That in their sight his force so great did trie, To ouerthrow a knight of so great fame. Sentence.(Lo how the mighty God that sits on hie, Can punish sinne when least men looke the same) Now Pinnabel fell in his enemies hands, When in his owne conceit most safe he stands. 56 It was his hap that selfe same horse to ride, Of this ye might made in the end of the . booke.Which eight months past from Bradamant he stale, Then when he falsly let the pole to slide, At Merlins caue (if you did marke the tale) But now when she that traitor vile had spide, That thought by trechery to worke her bale, She stept forthwith betweene him and his castle, And sweares that she with him a pull would wrastle. 57 Looke how a fox, with dogs and hunters chast,Simile. That to come backe vnto her hole did weene, Is vtterly discourag'd and agast, When in her way she nets and dogs hath seene: So he that no such perill did forecast, And sees his so stept him and home betweene, With word him threatning and with sword assailing, Doth take the wood his heart and courage failing. 58 Thus now on flight his onely hope relying, He spurd that horse that chiefe his trouble bred, No hope of helpe, and yet for helpe still crying, For doubt of death almost already ded, Sometime the fact excusing or denying, But she beleeuing not a word he sed, None in the castle were of this aware, About Rogero all so busied are. 59 This while forth of the gate came th'other three, That to this law so solemnly had sworne, Among the rest that came was also she That causd this law, full of disdaine and scorne, And none of these but sooner would agree With horses wilde to be in peeces torne, Then to distaine their honor and good name, With any act that might be worthy shame. 60 Wherefore it grieu'd them to the very gall, That more then one at once should one assaile, Saue they were sworne to runne together all, If so the first of victorie did faile: And she vncessantly on them did call, What meane you sirs (quoth she) what do you aile? Do you forget the cause I brought you ther? Are you not sworne to take part all togither? 61 Fie, answerd Guidon, what a shame is this? Let rather me alone my fortune trie, And if of victory I hap to misle, At my returning backe then let me die. Not so quoth she, my meaning other is, And you I trust will not your word denie: I brought you hither for another cause, Not now to make new orders and new lawes. 62 Thus were they vrged by this scornfull dame, To that which all their hearts abhorred sore, And which they thought to them so great a shame, As neuer like had chanced them before; Alo Rogeros words increast the same, Vpbraiding them, and egging more and more, And asking why they made so long delay, To take his armor and his horse away. 63 And thus in maner forts and by constraint, They came all three Rogero to inuade, Which act they thought wold sore their honors taint, Though full account of victory they made, Rogero at their comming doth not faint, As one well vsd through dangers great to wade, And first the worthy Oliueros sonnes, With all their force against Rogero runnes.
64 Rogero turnd his horse to take the field, With that same staffe that lately ouerthrew Stout Sansonet, and with that passing shield, That Atlant made by helpe of hellish crew, That shield, whose ayd he vsed very seeld, Some vnexpected danger to eschew: Twise when Alcynas kingdome he forsooke, Once when the Indian Queene frōth'Ork he tooke. 65 Saue these three times he neuer vsd the aid Of this his shield, but left it couerd still, If he abroade, or if within he slaid, He neuer left it open by his will. As for these three, he was no more afraid Or all their strenght, their number nor their skill, Nor made no more account with them to fight, Then if they had seemd children in his sight. 66 And first he met the yonger of the twaine, That Griffi hight, who had to great a blo, As in the saddle he could scant remaine, But quite amazed reeled to and fro; He strake Rogero but it was in vaine, For why, the stroke fell ouerthwartly so, That quite beside Rogeros shield it slipt, But yet the case it all to tare and ript. 67 Now when the renting of the silken case, In which Rogero vsd the shield to hide, Had cast out such a light in each mans face, That none of them the force thereof could bide, They fell downe all amazed in the place, Admit they sit, or stand, or go, or ride, Rogero with the cause not yet acquainted, Did maruell how his foes so soone had fainted. 68 But when he once was of the cause aware, And how the couer of his shield was rent, By meane whereof it open lay and bare, And thence such light vnto the lookers sent: He lookes about where his companions are, Because forthwith to get him thence he ment, I meane his Bradamant and that same maid, That for that youth did erst demaund his aid. 69 But his belou'd as then he found not, where He erst had left her when he went to iust, And when he plainly saw she was not there, And that that happend he could not mistrust, He parted thence, and with him he doth beare The maid that made to him the sute so iust, Who lay that tune amazed with the rest, With sudden blasing of the light distrest. 70 He takes her kirtle, and with it doth hide The light that did so dazle all their eyes, That light on which to looke none could abide, As if two Sunnes had shone at once in skies: Fortwith himselfe all malcontent doth ride, To haue this combat ended in such wise, As might imputed be to Magicke art, And not his prowesse or his valiant hart. 71 Now while this thought such passions did him yeeld, That though he had indeed most brauely donne, Yet men would thinke the glorie of the field, Not by his valiantnesse to haue bene wonne, But by the force of that inchanted shield, That cast a light more piercing then the Sunne, I say as thus he thought, he passed by A large deepe well, that by the way did lie. 72 A well at which the beasts in summers heate Did vse their thirstie drought to quench and coole,Ouid. Atque  pasto pasca antecib. And chew againe their vndigested meate, And walke about the shallowes of the poole. Here did Rogero oft these words repeate, Thou shield, that late didst make me such a foole, To cause me get a conquest with such shame, Lie there (quoth he) with thee go all my blame. 73 With that he threw the shield into the well, The well was deepe, the shield of mightie weight, That to the bottome suddenly it fell, The water ouer it a monstrous height: But lo dame Fame the thing abroade doth tell, How he because he would not win by sleight, But by meere value, had his target drownd, Where it should neuer afterward be found. 74 Yet many (that had heard the strange report) Of those that dwelled thence, some farre, some nire, To seeke the target thither did resort, And to haue found it out had great desire, But it was cast away in such a sort, As none vnto their purpose did aspire, For why the maid that onely did behold it, And knew which well it was, yet neuer told it. 75 But when the knights came to themselues againe, And were awake, and one the other saw, That late were vanquisht with so little paine, As if to him they had bene men of straw, They wondred much what troubled had their braine, And all of them did thence themselues withdraw, And all that day they argue and deuise. How that same light should dazle so their eyes. 76 This while came notice of the wofull fall Of Pinnabell, whom Bradamant had killed, With which they greatly were displeased all, Not knowing why or who his blood had spilled; His wife and sire that heard what was befall, His sonne, her spouse, the place with outcries filled, And curst and chafed with too late repentance, That none on Pinnabell had giu'n attendance. 77 Now when the damsell iustly had him slaine, And tane away his horse, sometime her owne, She would haue turnd the way she came againe, But that the same was vnto her vnknowne; To purpose small, she trauels with great paine, To seeke it out, as after shall be showne: For here to stay is my determination, And pawse a little for my recreation.
In the person of Bradamant,Morall. that was so readily inclined to the ayd of a young man, though then we vnknowne to her, we may note, how to a noble disposition, a little perswasion suffiseth, to moue them to the succour of such as are distressed. in Pinabello and his wife, that thought to reuenge the scorne they receiued, with doing the like scorne to others, we may see, how base and dunghill dispositions follow not any course of value or true reputation, but onely to wreake their malice on some bodie, not caring whom: as they are wont to tell of Will Sommer (though otherwise a harmelesse foole) that would euermore if one had angerd him, strike him that was next him. Lastly in Bradamant that met Pinabell by hap, riding on the same horse that he had stolen from her long before (what time he left her for dead) and thereby now dis∣couered him, and killed him, we may note a most notable example of diuine iustice, in the like cases, as many times it fal∣leth out, and in this Poet you shall find many of them: as Polynessos death in the fift bookes; Martanos punishment in the eighteenth booke, Marganorres execution in the seuen and thirtith booke: all which examples (whether true or fained) haue this chiefe scope and end, to make men know that there is a diuine power, that will iudge and punish the actions of men, be they neuer so secure or so secret; and onely the cleare conscience it is that assureth a man of his estate, both in this world and in the world to come: and he that feareth not that diuine power, it is vnpossible that he can liue free of most wicked acts. That wise and honorable counseller Sir Walter Mildmay, as in all other things he shewed himselfe an vncorrupt man to his end, so his writings and sayings were euer spiced with this reuerent feare of God: for ex abun∣dantia cordis os loquitur: and among other of his (worth the noting) of which he himselfe gaue me a little volume when I was a boy of Eaton college (the which since his death haue bene published in print) but one speciall verse he had to that effect in Latin, and was by me put into English at the request of that honorable Gentleman his sonne in law, Master William Fitzwilliams. Vltio peccatum sequitur, delinquere noli, Nam seelus admissum poena seuera premit: Quod si fortè Deus, patiendo differat iram, Sera licet veniat, certa venire solet. Flie sinne, for sharpe reuenge doth follow sinne, And wicked deeds, do wrathfull doomes procure: If God stay long ear he to strike beginne, Though long he stay, at last he striketh sure. A worthie saying of a most worthie man, and thus much for the morall. Hipermestra was daughter to Egittus, this Egittus had fiftie daughters,Historie. who caused them all to be maried to Da∣naos fifty sonnes, and being commanded by their tyrannous father, killed them all in one night, only Hipermestra refused to obey so filthie a commandement, and saued her husband, whose name was Linus. Astolfo that with helpe of his booke dissolues the inchanted pallace,Allegorie. and with his horne draue away those that assaul∣ted him and put him in great danger, signifieth allegorically (as I haue in part touched before) how wisdome with the helpe of eloquence, discouereth the craftiest, and tameth the wildest. Furder in that Rogero casteth away the inchanted shield, and refuseth the vse thereof, the Allegorie thereof signifieth, that though a man for necessitie sake, sometimes be driuen to take some helpes of no verie honorable sort, and sometimes to reliue himselfe with policies scarce commen∣dable, yet one should when that vrgent necessitie is past, hurle such conceipt from him where it may neuer be found again, as Rogero flang his shield into that well; and so fame shall blow abrode our noble mind in so doing, as it did Rogeros for refusing an ayd of such force. The end of the Annotations vpon xxij. booke.
THE XXIII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Astolfo on the Griffith horse doth mount: To Zerbin Pinnabellos death is laid; Orlando saueth him: fierce Rodomount Frontyno takes from Bradamantes maid: The Paladyn and Mandricard confront; They part by chance, and each from other straid: Orlando falls starke mad, with sorrow taken, To heare his mistres hath him quite forsaken. 1 LEt eu'rie one do all the good they can, For seldom cometh harme of doing well, Though iust reward it wā∣teth now and than, Yet shame, and euill death it doth expell, But he that mischieueth a∣nother man, Sentence. The Latine pro .Doth seldome carrie it to heau'n or hell: Men say it, and we see it come to passe, Good turns in sand, shrewd turns are writ in brasse. 2 Sentence.Seeld mountains meet, but men may often meet, Looke in the mo∣ral of the former booke, where this  touched more largely.(The Prouerbe saith) and who so sets a trap, May catch himselfe, as here you plainly se e't In him, that thought this dame in woes to wrap, But hurts himselfe; a punishment most meet; God still defending her from all mishap: Sentence.God her preseru'd, and will all those preserue, As shunne all vice, and him sincerely serue. 3 It little did auaile to Pinnabell, To be amid his kinsfolke and his frends; And neare the castle, where his fire did dwell, Where eu'rie one, him honours and attends, Loe here the end of him doth plainly tell, Sentence.How wicked liues haue often wretched ends: But to proceed, I said when he was slaine, The noble damsell sought her way againe. 4 Which when she saw she could by no meanes know, But more and more vncertainly did roue; And sees the sunne was now declining low; She meanes that night to rest her in the groue: And sleepe sometime, or else sometime (I trow) To looke on Mars, on Saturne, or on Ioue,Meaning the Planets. But chiefly, whether she awakes or sleepes; Rogeros image in her heart she keepes. 5 Oft times she fretting to her selfe would say, Loe; hare with me farre more preuailed hath, Then loue could do, that now haue lost my way, And left my comfort to auenge my wrath; Nor had my wit so much forecast or stay, To take some marke of my foretrodden path: I did (quoth she) as fooles are wont to do, Take one shrewd turne to do another two.Sentence. 6 These words and many like to these she spake, To passe the rest of that her restlesse night, Till starres gan vanish and the dawning brake, And all the Easter parts were full of light, Then at aduenture she her way doth take, Not knowing yet if it were wrong or right; And hauing traueld in that way some miles, By hap Astolfo came that way the whiles.Astolfo. 7 He rides the winged horse, but in his hand, He leades the famous Rabican behinde; And eu'n as then, in great doubt he did stand, Where to bestow a beast of so good kind: She knowing him, went to him out of hand, With words, with showes, and with embracements kind, And ioyd to find this kinsman of her owne, And vnto him her selfe she maketh knowne.
8 Astolfo much reioyst at this their meeting, Then one the other askt of their well fare, And after their long talke, and friendly greeting, In which each shewd of other louing care: Sith I (quoth he) intend hence to be fleeting, To see what sights in forren countries are, This horse of me, I shall request you take, Till I returne, and keepe him for my sake. 9 Also he said, this corslet and this speare, seare called Lauce∣d .With you I leaue till I returne againe, (This speare the sonne of Galafren did beare, Whom as you heard before Ferraw had slaine,) With head whereof, if any touched were, Straight wayes to fall to ground they must be faine, All these he left behind to make him light, Before that he begins to take his flight. 10 He returnes to  booke about the 88 staffe. Simile.Thus leaue once tane, away the Duke doth sore, First low, and after still more hye and hye, Till at the length she could him see no mores So doth the Pylot first, with watchfull eye, Guide out his vessell softlie by the shore, While he doth thinke the rocks and shallowes nye: But after when he dreads no more such doubts, He sayles apace, and claps on all his clouts. 11 Now when the Duke was from the damsell gone, What she might do she mused in her minde, And carefully she meditates thereon: How she may take the iourney first assignd, And not neglect her kinsmans charge; anon One horse of A∣stolfa, the other her owne that she tooke from Penabell.A wandring peasant twas her hap to finde, To him she doth betake the horses spare, Though of the wayes they both vnskilfull are. 12 Her meaning was to go to Vallumbrose, As first her loue and she concluded had, Whom there to finde she certaine doth suppose; Whom there to find, she would haue bene full glad, But loe a quite contrarie course she goes, And sees a sight that made her then full sad, Her fathers house Montalbanie she spide, In which as then her mother did abide. 13 If she shall forward go, approching nire, She shalbe stayed there, she stands in doubt, If she stand still, or backward do retire, She feares to meet acquaintance there about; If she be staid, she feeles such burning fire, Of longing loue as cannot be put out: She chaunst amid these thoughts, and many other, To meet Alardo there her younger brother. 14 This meeting in her minde bred much vexation, When as she found her brother her had spide, And made her alter her determination, Which that she might from him the better hide, She vsd some common words of salutation, And to Montalban with him she doth ride, Where as her mother, full of care and feare, Had wisht, and wayted for her comming there. 15 But all those kind embracings and those kisses, She had of parent, kinsmen kinde, and friends, She deems of little vallue to those blisses, That she had lost, and thought them small amends: But sith to meet Rogero now she misles, To send a messenger she now intends, Some such to whom she may commit the charge. To tell her mind vnto her loue at large. 16 And if neede were to pray him in her name, As he had promist her, to be baptised, And to excu'e, that thither she not came, As they togither had before deuised: Besides his horse Frontino, by the same, She sent a horse of goodnes nor despised, No horse in France or Spaine esteemed more, Bayardo sole except, and Brigliadore. 17 Rogero (if you call it well to minde) What time the Griffith horse he first did take,In the fourth booke. That soard away as swift as western winde, And forst him quickly Europe to forsake, That gallant beast Frontino left behind, Whom Bradamant then, for his masters sake, Tooke home, and with much care and costly feeding Made him by this time, faire and fat exceeding. 18 And straight her mayds and women seruants all, That skilfull were to few, to weaue, and knit, She doth to worke in hast togither call, And she her selfe among them all doth sit, To worke a net, of art and cost not small, For his caparison to make it fit: When this was done, and finisht, straight way after, She calls her nurse Callitrifeas daughter. 19 This mayd knew best her minde of all the rest, And off had heard her praising to the skyes, Rogeros comly shape, aud valiant brest, His sugred speech, sweet face, and lou'ly eyes, This mayd with secrets all shee trusted best, On this mayds secrecie she much relyes; Hyppalea named was this trustie mayd, Her then she cald, and thus to her she said. 20 Hyppalea mine, you know of all my crew, Of women seruants, I esteeme you most, As one that hath bene secret, wise, and trew, (A praise of which we women seld can bost) My meaning is to make a choise of you, To haue you to Rogero ride in post; And vnto him mine absence to excuse, And shew, that I could neither will nor chus. 21 Your selfe (quouth she) may ride a little nagge, And in your hand lead by Frontino spare, And if perhap some foole wilbe so bragge, As that to take the horse from you he dare, To make him that he shall no farther wagge, But tell who owes the horse, and do not care: She thought Rogero was of so great fame, That eu'rie one would quake to heare his name.
22 Thus when Hypalca was instructed well, Of all that to her arrant did belong, And that no more remaind behind to tell, She tooke her horse, and there she stayd not long, In ten miles space (so luckie it befell) None offer made to do her any wrong, No traueller, no knight, nor peasant staid her, Nor once with word or deed so much as frayd her. 23 About the time the Sunne to South did mount, She met (poore soule) a knight, vnto her cost, domene.That Turke most terrible cald Rodomount, That followd armd on foote, a page in post; Who when he saw a horse of such account, He God blasphemd and all the heau'nly host, That such a gallant seruiceable beast, In some mans hand, he had not found at least. 24 He had before profest by solemne vow, When wanting horse, he traueld on his feet, That were't frō knight, or knaue that driues a plow, To take perforce the next horse he should meet: Yet though he likt the horse, to take this now, And rob a mayb thereof, he thought vnmeet, He sees her leade a horse, and he doth lacke, And oft he wisht his master on his backe. 25 I would he were (quoth she) he soone would make, You change your mind, and glad to get you hence, And you should find how much you do mistake. Your strength and force to offer him offence. And who (quoth he) is this, of whom you Rogero she replies: forsooth, and sence So great a champion is the horses owne I may (said he) then take him with  honor. 26 To take his horse (quoth he) I now intend, For of a horse you see I stand in need: And if I find it true as you pretend, That he so stout a champion is in deed, I Rodomont this action will defend, Now on my present iourney I proceed, And where I go my vertues shine so bright, He soone may find me if he list to fight. 27 This said, with cruell threats, and part with force, He gat his will, full sore against her will, And straight he mounteth vp vpon that horse, She cursing followd him, and banning still, But of those curses he doth little force; Then winners bost, when leesers speake their fill, Sentence.Best pleasd was he, when as she wisht him worst, Sentence.As still the foxe fares best when he is curst. 28 But what she saith he little doth regard, Suppose she curst, or prayd, or rayld, or cride, He seekes out Doralice and Mandricard, And had the little dwarfe to be his guide, No little hast he maketh thitherward: But here a whilemine author steps aside,He comes to Ro∣dot 24. book. 78. staffe. And to that place of purpose makes digression, Where Pinabell was shriu'n without confession. 29 The noble Dame no sooner left the place, Where late this caitiue by her hand was slaine, But Zerbin there arriu'd in little space,Zerbin. With old Gabrina,Gabrina. who perceiuing plaine, One murtherd, straight he followed the trace, (Lest murther vnreuenged should remaine) He minds if fortune be so much his furderer: To be reuenged sharply on the murderer. 30 Gabrina to the quarrie straight approcheth,Quarrie is a word properly signifying the soule, that the halke hath kold, and sometime by metaphor is vsed for a dead bodie. Looke all about, searching the corse and prying, (As one that still on eu'rie gaine encrocheth) To win both by the liuing and the dying, In purses and in pokets all she pocheth, Of him that murtherd on the ground was lying, As hauing this, conioynd to other euills, In couetise to passe the verie deuills. 31 She would haue had his cote and armor faine, Saue that she knew not how them to haue hidden, But from great part of that desired gaine, By want of leysure she was then forbidden; Howb'it she did conuay away his chaine, And er Zerbino backe againe was ridden, She put it safely where it was not seene, Her vpper gowne and peticore betweene. 32 And sore it grieued her to leaue the rest, But now Zerbino was returned backe, And for the time drew nigh of taking rest, And night came now to spred his mantell blacke, To seeke some lodging out they thought it best, Of which,Altariua was Anselmus house father a Pina∣bell.in that wild countrie was great lacke, They leaue the valley, and they came that night, Vnto a castell Altariua hight. 33 They thither went, and long they had not stayd, But in came people with great exclamation, With wofull news, that many hearts dismayd, And filld their mouths and eyes with lamentation, How Pinabell was murdered and betrayd, And lost his life, & wordly habitation. And straight they brought the corse with light of torches And led the same through all the courts & porches. 34 Great were the plaints, the sorow and the griefe, By kindred made, by tenants and his frends; But by his father, old Anselmus chiefe, Who, though reuenge be but a small amends, And his sonnes life was now past all reliefe, By search to find the murdrer he intends, Zerbino hereof makes himselfe a stranger, As well to shunne suspition as danger. 35 Now when the funerals in stately sort, Ordained were with pompe and superstition To which great store of people did resort, And all that would, had franke and free permission, Straight with oyes, a crier doth report, Thereto assigned by that Earles commission, That who so could the murderer bewray. Should haue a thousand duckats for his pay.
36 This newes from mouth to mouth, from eare to eare, (As newes are wont to do) did flie so fast, That old Gabrina, being present there, Among the rest, heard of it at the last: Who either for the hatred she did beare, To good Zerbino, for some matters past, Or else for gaine of that so great reward, Straight to destroy Zerbino the prepard. 37 And that she might more surely him entrap, With th'Erle himselfe to speake she doth request, And probably, she tels how this mishap, Was by Zerbino wrought his new come guest: And straight she puld the chaine out of her lap, Which sole might serue to verifie the rest: That aged fire, that all the tale beleeued, Was sore inrag'd herewith, not onely grieued. 38 And lifting vp his handsvnto the skies, With age now feeble, feeble now with woe, With fainting voice he spake, and watrie eies, (My sonne) thou shalt not vnreuenged go: And while in bed secure Zerbino lyes, Not thinking he had bene betrayed so, With armed men his lodging was beset, He naked tane, as is byrd in uet. 39 With as great crueltie as could be showne, His princely armes were piniond last behind him, And to a dungeon deepe he straight was throwne, And that vile place, to bide in was assignd him, Vntill the sentence of his death were knowne: In fine Anselmus (so did passion blind him) (Her likely tale, his wrath so rashly leading) Condemned him, and neuer heard him pleading. 40 Thus was this worthy Prince without all cause, Condemnd to die (such is the wo full being, Sentence.Where hests of lawlesse lords, must stand for laws, Though from all lawes and reason dilagreeing) Now neare and neare his execution drawes, And gazing people, greedie still of seeing, In clusters march and follow all confused, On horse, on foot, as at uch time is vsed. 41 But loe how God that euer doth defend, Those innocents that put in him their trust, A helpe vnlooked for did thither send, And freed him from this doome of death vniust: Orlando did eu'n then the hill ascend, Orlando. Isabell.Orlando is the man that saue him must, And at that time there did with him remaine, The daughter of Galego, king of Spaine. 42 This was that Isabell, whom he of late, Recouerd from the outlawes in the caue: And hauing brought her out of that ill state, Yet still he promist care of her to haue, And whatsoeuer danger or debate, To him befell, yet her still did saue: Orlando all that great assemblie saw, That did the knight to execution draw. 43 He thither went and aske of him the cause, Why he was drawne vnto a death so cruell, Forsooth (Zerbino said) against all lawes, I am condemn'd if you the matter knew well, Anselmus rage, that will admit no pause, Vnto this flame, doth kindle all the fewell: Beleeuing falsely that I flue his sonne, Whereas by me (God knowes) it was not done. 44 Thus Zerbin said, and said it in such sorr, As made Orlando vow him to releeue, For verie apt he was, each ill report, Of any of Maganza to beleeue; Each house still thought to cut the the other short, Each house still sought the other how to greeue: Each house long time, had tane a pride and pleasure, To worke the tother danger and displeasure. 45 Vnloose the knight ye caitiues (straight he cride) Else looke for death to be your due reward: What man is this (quoth one) that gapes so wide And speakes to soolishly without regard? Were he of steele, of strength and temper tride, And we of straw, his sute might hap be hard. This said, he taketh vp a mighty launce, And runnes against the Palladine of Fraunce. 46 Orlando ran at him with couched speare, And though his armour were both good and sure, As namely that Zerbino erst did weare, Yet was the stroke too grieuous to endure, For though the beauer did it stifly beare, Yet did the blow a greater hurt procure: For on the cheeke, it gaue him such a checke, That though it pierced not, it brake his necke. 47 Nor at that course did all his furie cease, Six other of that speare the force then felt, Then with his sword among the thickest prease, Such store of thrusts, and deadly blowes he delt, That many in the place did straight decease; And eu'n as snow against the Sunne doth melt, So melted they and fainted in his fight,Simile. That in an houre he put them all to flight. 48 When they were fled, he set Zerbino free, Who would haue kist the ground whereon he trod, And done him reuerence humbly on his knee, But that the Earle such courtsie him forbod: But yet he thank him in the high'st degree, As one he honourd most, excepting God: Then did he put his armor on againe, Which late was worne by him that there was slaine. 49 Now while Zerbino there a little staid, Preparing with Orlando to go hence, Behold faire Isabell, that princely maid, That all the while had staid a little thence, And sees no farther cause to be affraid, Game neare, & brought greatioy and great offence By diuers passions bred of one desire, Some cold as ice, and some as hot as fire.
50 For where before Zerbino thought her drownd, Now certaine he reioyced very much, To see her in his presence safe and found, And that her misaduenture was not such: But weying in whose hand he had her sound, A iealous feare forthwith his heart doth tuch, And inwardly a greater anguish bred, Then late it had, to heare that she was ded. 51 To see her in the hands of such a knight, It greatly did him anger and displease, From whom to offer, her to take by might, It were no honestie now haply ease, But for Orlandos sake he ought of right, All passions, both of loue and wrath appease; To whom in thankfulnesse it were but meete, To lay his hands vnder Orlandos feete. 52 Wherefore he makes no words, but on he goth In silent sort, till comming to a well To drinke they lighted, being thirstie both, And each his drought with water doth expell, But when the damsell saw and knew for troth, That was Zerbino whom she lon'd so well, (For when to drinke his beuer he vntide) Straight she her loue had through his beuer spide. 53 With open armes she runs him to embrace, de fastis:  viri collo  pependit And hangs about his necke a pleasant yoke, And speechlesse she remaind a pretie space, And with her cristall teares (before she spoke) Surprisd with ioy, she all bedewd his face, And long it was ere into speech she broke, By which the noble Earle did plainly see, That this could no man but Zerbino be. 54 Now when she had againe her vitall sprites, And that she able was her mind to show, First she Orlandos great desarts recites, That rescude her from place of shame and wo, Commending him aboue all other knights, That vndefiled had preserud her so, And prayd her deare, when she had made recitall Of his good deeds, to make him some requitall. 55 Great thanks were giu'n, and profers great there were Of recompence and seruice on each de, But lo a hap that made them speech forbeare, For why an armed knight they had espide: Mandricardo.Twas Mandricardo that arriued there, Who as you heard, these many dayes did ride To seeke this Earle, till meeting by the way Faire Doralice, a while it made him stay. 56 In the 14. booke.You heard how Mandricard sought out the tracke, (Mou'd thereunto by enuie and disdaine) Of this fierce knight, appareld all in blacke, By whom the king of Tremysen was slaine, And those Noritians all, so put to wracke, As few of them vnwounded did remaine, And now he found him as it came to passe, Yet knew he not that this Orlando was. 57 But marking well the signes and tokens like, To those he heard, of such as thence were fled, You are (quoth he) the selfe same man I seeke, By whom so many of my friends are ded: I haue (he said) traueld aboue a weeke To find you out, and now at last am sped, You are the man that I haue sought (I guesse) And lure your manly looke doth shew no lesse. 58 Sir (quoth Orlando) though I want your name, A noble knight you are it may be guest, For sure a heart so thirsting after fame, Is seldome bred in base vnnoble brest: But if to see me onely now you came, I straight herein will graunt you your request And that you may behold me to your fill, I will put off mine armour if you will. 59 But when you well haue viewd me all about, If yet you haue a farther mind to trie, Which of vs two can proue himselfe most stout, And first in field can make the to ther flie: Attempt it when you lift, and make no doubt, But hereunto right soone agree shall I: That (quoth the pagan) is my mind indeed, And thus to fight together they agreed. 60 But when Orlando viewd the Pagan king, And law no pollax at his saddle bow, No sword by side, no bow, nor dart, nor sling, But eu'n a speare, he needs of him would know, When that were burst, vnto what other thing He then would trust, to giue or beare a blow: Tush (quoth the pagan prince) you need not feare, But I will match you onely with the speare. 61 I haue (quoth he) an oath most solemne sworne, Since first the noble Hectors armes I wan, That by my side should neuer sword be worne, Nor other iron weapon, till I can Get Durindana by Orlando borne, Though how he gate it, well I cannot scan, But since he gate it, great reports do flie, That noble deeds of armes he doth thereby. 62 No lesse (quoth he) I saine on him would wreake My fathers death, whom falfly he betraid, For well I wot my sire was not so weake, With any Christen to be ouerlaid: At this Orlando could not chuse but speake, It is a lie (quoth he) that thou hast said, I am Orlando, and I will not beare it, This sword is Durindan, win it and weare it. 63 And though this sword is iustly wholly mine, Yet for this time I frankly do agree, A while it shall be neither mine nor thine, And if in combat you can vanquish me, Then tak't, and thereat I shall not repine: This said, he hangd the sword vpon a tree, Indiffrently betweene them both to stand, Vntill the strife by combat might be scand.
64 Now one at th'other ran with couched speare, And on the head-peece each the other strake, The staues in sundry peeces rend and teare, But by the blowes the men small hurt do take: And now the trunchens onely left them were, And at foure blowes the trunchens likewise brake, Thus when they saw all other weapons mist, At last they were inforst to fight with fist. 65 SimileSo haue I seene two clownes fall at debate, About some watercourse or marke of land, And either clap the tother on the pate, With crabtree staffe, or with as crabbed hand; Such of this conflict was the present state, And each of them doth to his tackle stand, And being tyr'd with giuing frutelesse stripes, At last they flatly fell to handie gripes. 66 The Pagan, part by sleight and part by force, Thought to haue done as Hercles in time past, To fierce Antheus did,Antheus. Looke in the Historie. and th'Earle inforce, To yeeld himselfe, or leaue his horse at last. Orlando that could surely sit his horse, With all his strength bestrides the saddle fast, Yet did the Pagan heaue him with such strength, That all his gyrses broken were at length. 67 Downe came the Earle, yet kept his saddle still, Nor what had happend was he well aware, But as he fell, intending by his will, Vnto the Pagan king to worke some care, He meant (but his attempt succeeded ill) To ouerthrow the horse the Pagan bare, But missing hold, the horse vnhurt remaines, Yet off he puld his head stall and his raines. 68 The horse that had at libertie his head, Runs ouer ditch and valley, hedge and wood, As partly feare, and partly courage led, For nothing was that his mad course withstood: But Mandricard still beates him on his head, And eu'n as if he speech had vnderstood, He threatens him (except he stay) to beate him, And with faire speech somtime he doth intreat him. 69 But all was one, three mile outright he rode, Ere he could make the harebraine horse to stay, Or cause him once to make a small abode, But more and more he gallops still away: At last with hast the horse and eke the lode Fell downe into a ditch, and there they lay, Both horse and man all foyld and tayd with durt, Yet neither horse nor man had any hurt. 70 This while Dame Doralice that saw her guide Thus post away against his will amaine, She thought it were not safe behind to bide, And therfore followd him though with great paine, And seeing that he could no farther ride, Because his wilfull horse did want a raine, She prayes him take her horses raine and bit, or mine (quoth she) will go though wanting it. 71 Much did the Pagan praise her gentle offer, Yet did refuse it as a part too base, To let her want and take her bridle of her, He thought it were to him a great disgrace. But lo good chance a better meane did profer, Gabrina came vnwares vnto the place, She that betraid of late the Scottish Prince, And heard (of like) of his deliuery since. 72 And therefore fearing punishment and blame, And clogd with guiltie conscience,Quifled the light, Vntill by hap vowares she thither came, And on this couple fortuned to light: They could not chuse but make great sport & game, To see so strange and vnagreeing sight, As such a witherd old ilfauord hag,Simia is , the old To ride in purple on an ambling nag. 73 He that of right or wrong did little passe, Meanes with her store his lacke there to supply, Nor once demaunded who or what she was, But takes away her bridle by and by: She skreecheth out, and weepes, and cries alas, Eu'n ready fearing hurt, vnhurt to die: Hereafter I shall tell you what became on her,He comes  24. 31. Now for a farewell I do wish a shame on her. 74 This while Orlando had his girses mended, And new prouided what before did lacke, And mounting on his horse, a while attended To see iflo the Pagan would come backe; But seeing that he came not, he intended To follow him, and find him by the tracke: But first (as one that well good manners knew) He bad Zerbino and his spouse adew. 75 Faine would Zerbino with this Earle haue gone, And take such part of eu'ry hap as he, But that the noble Earle hereof would none, And said there could not more dishonor be, Then for a knight to shun to fight alone; Wherefore he would not thereunto agree: Thus Zerbin loth doth from this Earle depart, Poore Isbell shedding teares for tender hart. 76 But ere they went, this Earle Zerbino praid, If first he hapt on Mandricard to light, To tell him how long time for him he staid, And meant to seeke him out againe to fight, Now that his comming was so long delaid, He meant to Paris ward to go that night, To Charls his camp, where if he wold enquire of him At any time he should be sure to heare of him. 77 Thus much be praid, and thence away he went, To seeke out Mandricard, but found him not, And (for the day now more then halfe was spent, The Sunne and season waxing somewhat hot) A shadie groue he found, and there he ment To take some ease, but found small ease God wot: He thinks his thirst and heate a while to swage, But found that set him in worse heate and rage.
78 For looking all about the groue, behold In sundry places faire ingrau'n he sees, Her name whose loue he more esteemes then gold; By her owne hand in barkes of diuers trees, This was the place wherein before I told, Medoro vsd to pay his surgeons fees, Where she, to bost of that that was her shame, Vsd oft to write hers and Medoros name. 79 the vse of iting in trees, good Poets  testified. opertied. Vos  testies, si  habet arbor   & Arta∣   of Eron.  serumatà  .And then with true loue knots and pretie poses, (To she how she to him by loue was knit) Her inward thoughts by outward words discloses, In her much loue to shew her little wit. Orlando knew the hand, and yet supposes It was not she that had such postes writ; And to beguile himselfe, tush, tush (quoth he) There may be more Angelicas then she.ca∣ 80 Yea, but I know too well that pretie hand, Oft hath she sent me letters of her writing: Then he bethinks how she might vnderstand His name and loue by that same new inditing, And how it might be done long time he scand, With this fond thought so sondly him delighting. Thus with small hope, much feare, all malcontent, In these and such conceits the time he spent. 81 And ay the more he seekes out of his thought To driue this fancie, still it doth increase, Eu'n as a bird that is with birdlime caught, Doth beate her wings, and striues, and doth not cease Vntill she hath her selfe all ouerwrought, And quite intangled in the slimie grease: Thus on went he, till him the way did bring Vnto a shadie caue and pleasant spring. 82 This was a place, wherein aboue the rest, This louing paire, leauing their homely host, Spent time in sports that may not be exprest, Here in the parching heate they tarrid most, And here Medore (that thought himselfe most blest) Wrote certaine verses as in way of bost: Which in his language doubtlesse sounded prittie, And thus I turne them to an English dittie. 83 Ye pleasant plants greene herbs, and waters faire, And caue with smell, and gratefull shadow mixt, Where sweet Angelica, daughter and heire Of Galafronne, on whom in vaine were fixt Full many hearts, with me did oft repaire Alone, and naked lay mine armes betwixt; I poore Medore, can yeeld but praise and thanks, For these great pleasures found amid your banks. 84 And pray each Lord whom Cupid holds in pray, Each knight, each dame, aud eu'ry one beside, Or gentle or meane sort that passe this way, As fancie or his fortune shall him guide, That to the plants, herbs, spring, and caue he say, Long may the Sun and Moon maintaine your pride, And ye faire crew of Nymphs make such purueyance, As hither come no heards to your annoyance. 85 It written was there in th'Arabian toong, Which toong Orlando perfect vnderstood, As hauing learnt it when he was but yoong, And oft the skill thereof had done him good, But at this time it him so deeply stoong, It had bin well that he it neuer coud, And yet we see,Sentenceto know men still are glad, And yet we see much knowledge makes men mad. 86 Twise, thrise, yea fiue times he doth reade the time, And though he saw and knew the meaning plaine, Yet, that this loue was guiltie of such crime, He will not let it sinke into his braine, Oft he peruled it, and eu'ry time It doth increase his sharp tormenting paine, And ay the more he on the matter mused, The more his wits and senses were confused. 87 Eu'n then was he of with welnigh bestraught, So quite he was giu'n ouer vnto griese, (And sure if we beleeue as proofe hath taught,Sentence. This torture is of all the rest the chiefe) His prite was dead, his courage quaild with thought, He doth despaire and looke for no reliefe; And sorrow did his senses so surprise, That words his toong, and teares forsooke his eyes. 88 The raging pang remained still within, That would haue burst out all at once too fast: Eu'n so we see the water tarry in A bottle little mouthd,Simile.and big in wast, That though you topsie tury turne the brim, The liquor bides behind with too much hast, And with the striuing oft is in such taking, As scant a man can get it out with shaking. 89 At last he comes vnto himselfe anew, And in his mind another way doth frame, That that which there was written was not trew, But writ of spite his Ladie to defame, Or to that end, that he the same might vew, And so his heart with iealousie inflame: Well be't who list (quoth he) I see this clearly, He hath her hand resembled passing nearly. 90 With this small hope, with this poore little sparke, He doth some deale reuiue his troubled sprite, And for it was now late, and waxed darke, He seekes some place where he may lie that night, At last he heares a noise of dogs that barke, He smels some smoke, and sees some candle light,Virgill th the like. But  described with more particulars Eiam summa proul villrum culmina sumat. He takes his Inne, with will to sleepe, not eate, As fild with griefe, and with none other meate. 91 But lo his hap was at that house to host, Where faire Angelica had layne before, And where her name on eu'ry doore and post, With true loue knots was ioyned to Medore, That knot his name whom he detested most, Was in his eye and thought still euermore: He dares not aske, nor once the matter tuch, For knowing more of that he knowes too much.
92 But vaine it was himselfe so to beguile, For why his host vnasked by and by, That saw his guest sit there so sad the while, And thinks to put him from his dumps thereby, Beginneth plaine without all fraud or guile, Without concealing truth or adding lie, To tell that tale to him without regard, Which diuers had before with pleasure heard. 93 As thus, how at Angelicas request He holpe vnto his house to bring Medore, Who then was sorely wounded in his brest, And she with surgery did heale his sore: But while with her owne hands the wound she drest, Blind Cupid wounded her as much or more, That when her skill and herbs had cur'd her patient, Her curelesse wound in loue made her vnpatient. 94 So that, admit she were the greatest Queene Of same, and liuing in those Easter parts, Yet so with fancie she was ouerseene, To marry with a page of meane desarts; Sentence.Thus loue (quoth he) will haue his godhead seene, In famous Queens, and highest Princes harts: This said (to end the tale) he shewd the iewell That she had giu'n him, which Orlando knew well. 95 This tale, and chiefly this same last conclusion, A phrase of speech vsed in the Latin. In securim.Was eu'n a hatchet to cut of all hope, When loue had after many a vaine collusion, Now for his farewell lent him such a rope To hang himselfe, and drowne him in confusion, Yet faine he would denie his sorrow scope, And though a while to shew it he forbeares, It breaketh out at last in sighs and teares. 96 And as it were inforst he giues the raine To raging griefe vpon his bed alone, His eyes do shed a very showre of raine, With many a scalding sigh and bitter grone, He slept as much as if he had then laine Vpon a bed of thornes and stuft with stone. And as he lay thereon and could not rest him, The bed itselfe gaue matter to molest him. 97 Ah wretch I am (thus to himselfe he sed) Shall I once hope to take repose and rest me In that same house? yea eu'n in that same bed Where my vngratefull loue so leudly drest me? Nay,Vulture is that bird that we call Rbus there are diuers kinds of them.let me first an hundred times be ded, First wolues deuoure and vultures shall digest me. Straight vp he starts, and on he puts his clothes, And leaues the house, so much the bed he lothes. 98 He leaues his host, nor once doth take his leaue, He far'd so ill, he bids them not farewell, He leaues the towne, his seruants he doth leaue, He rides, but where he rides he cannot tell. And when alone himselfe he doth perceaue To weepe and waile, nay eu'n to houle and yell, He doth not cease to giue his griefe a vent, That inwardly so sore did him torment. 99 The day the night to him were both aleeke, Abroade vpon the cold bare earth he lies, No sleepe, no food he takes, nor none would seeke, All sustenance he to himselfe denies. Thus he began, and ended halfe the weeke, And he himselfe doth maruell, whence his eyes Are fed so long with such a spring of water, And to himselfe thus reasons on the matter. 100 No, no, these be no teares that now I shed, These be no teares, nor can teares run so rife, But fire of frenzie drawth vp to my head, My vitall humor that should keepe my life; This streame will neuer cease till I be dead, Then welcome death and end my fatall strife: No comfort in this life my wo can minish, But thou who canst both life and sorrow finish. 101 These are not sighs, for sighs some respite haue, My gripes, my pangs, no respite do permit, The blindfold boy made me a seeing slaue, When from her eyes my heart he first did hit. Now all inflam'd, I burne, I rage and raue, And in the midst of flame consume no whit: Loue sitting in my heart a master crewell, Blowes with his wings, feeds with his will the fewel. 102 I am not I, the man that earst I was, hath the   ille  qui Orlando, he is buried and dead, His most vngratefull loue (ah foolish lasse) Hath kild Orlando, and cut off his head: I am his ghost, that vp and downe must passe, In this tormenting hell for euer led, To be a fearfull sample and a iust, To all such fooles as put in loue their trust. 103 Thus wandring still in wayes that haue no way, He hapt againe to light vpon the caue, Where (in remembrance of their pleasant play) Medoro did that epigram ingraue. To see the stones againe, his woes display, And her ill name, and his ill hap depraue, Did on the sudden all his sence inrage, With hate, with fury, with reuenge and rage. 104 Straightways he draweth forth his fatall blade, And hewes the stones, to heau'n the shiuers flee, Accursed was that fountaine, caue and shade, The arbor and the flowres and eu'ry tree: Orlando of all places hauocke made, Where he those names together ioynd may see, Yea to the spring he did perpetuall hurt,Ouid deserting the death of  -Subldi Soder  capiliss Perg  express  cebeg Romanes,  christian By filling it with leaues, boughs, stones and durt. 105 And hauing done this foolish franticke feate, He layes him downe all weary on the ground, Distemperd in his bodie with much heate, In mind with paines that no tongue can expound, Three dayes he doth not sleepe, nor drinke, nor eate, But lay with open eyes as in a sound. The fourth with rage, and not with reason waked, He rents his clothes, and runs about starke naked.
106 His helmet here he flings, his poulderns theare; He casts away his curats and his shield: His sword he throws away, he cares not wheare, He scatters all his armor in the field: No ragge about his bodie he doth beare, As might frō cold or might from shame him shield, And saue he left behind this fatall blade, No doubt he had therwith great hauocke made. 107 But his surpassing force did so exceed, All common men, that neither sword nor bill, Nor any other weapon he did need, Meere strength suffisd him to do what he will, He rootes vp trees as one would root a weed: And eu'n as birders laying nets with skill,Simile. Pare slender thornes away with easie strokes, So he did play with ashes, elmes and okes. 108 The heardmen and the shepheards that did heare, The hideous noise and vnacquainted sound, With feare and wonder great approched neare, To see, and know, what was hereof the ground But now I must cut off this treatise heare, Lest this my booke do grow beyond his bound; And if you take some pleasure in this text, I will go forward with it in the next. In Bradamants sorow for want of Rogero,Morall.we may note how it falleth out many times, that ouer great desire of re∣uenge, worketh to our selues as great displeasure, as we wished to our enemies. In Rodomont, that would not take the horse from Hippalca, till he knew that a braue chāpion was the owner thereof; we may note, that though wrong be in deed a thing reprouable, to whom soeuer it is done, yet it is far more tollerable, or at least excusable, to be done to ones equal, then to poore or inferior persons. In Zerbinos happie deliuerance, from a shameful death, by Orlandos meanes, we may obserue that which can neuer be too much obserued, namely how diuine prouidence neuer failes the innocent. In all the proceedings of Zerbino and Isabella, a patterne might be taken of gratitude, of constantnesse, and of noble and princely inclination. Of Hercules and Antheus,Historie.though the originall it selfe seeme but fabulous, yet thus it is written, that they two wrast∣ling, Hercules perceiued that Antheus strength increased by falling to the ground, and therefore to take him from his force, he tooke him vp in his armes, and so held him from the ground till he had vtterly vanquished him. Plutarke in the life of Sertorius saith this Antheus was threescore cubits high. In Astolfo,Allegorie.that put off his armor, and gaue away his spare horse, and all his superstuous weapons, when he was to take the Griffith horse, and fly about the world, may be gathered a good allegoricall sence, or rather it may be called Theologicall; namely that he that will betake himselfe to so high a profession, as to teach and studie the high mysteries of Christen religion, and liue in contemplation of heauenly things, should cast away the burdenous clog of all worldly in∣cumbrances, and to vse the phrase of our Sauiour himselfe, (leaue father, wife and children) and whatsoeuer else may be a hinderance to our proceedings in that kind: but this discourse is fit for another place, and my selfe also handled it more amply in a little dialogue of mariage that I made in mine young dayes, and therefore here I will cut it off for auoi∣ding tediousnesse. Concerning Orlandos madnesse there is a notable allegorie to be gathered thereof, of which (because I now haue taken vpon me to go thorow with the whole worke.) I will deferre to speake till I come to restoring of his wit againe: which I count more proper for this subiect. But in the manner of his falling mad,Allusion.my author hath (in mine opinion) shewd himselfe his crafts master, setting it out, verie pathetically, or (to speake English) passionatly. Furder there is in it a notable Peripetia, which signifies the agnition, or taking knowledge of a sudden mutation of fortune, either good or bad to a contrarie extreame: of which kind there be many examples, but specially one, to which mine author seemes to allude. Namely that of Oedipus in Sopho∣cles; for when a messenger came to him, to tell him how by the death of Polybus he was elected king of Corinth, Oedi∣pus refused to come thither, for feare of committing incest with his owne mother (of which the Oracle had foretold him) the messenger thinking to cleare him of that scruple; vnaduisedly told him whose sonne he was (which he knew not be∣fore) and thereby now knew certainly that, which before he mistrusted, namely that he had laine with his mother, wher∣upon in deed he fell starke mad, and was after recured as appeares in the storie. Here end the first xxiij. bookes of Ariosto.
THE XXIIII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. The noble Zerbin, pardon doth afford To Odrik and Gabrina, gracelesse payre: A Turke with him fights, for Orlandos sword, He dies, in armes of Isabella faire. Fierce Rodomont with sundrie passions sturd, Doth fight with cruell Agricanes haire, But them in their chief rage their mistres parted, From whence to ayd their Prince they both departed. 1 Sentence.WHo so shall set on Cupids snares his foote, Must seeke to draw backe, least it be caught, And madnes meer, in loue to ouershoot, : Virgil aith of Dido. ri infoelix Dido tota va∣gatur rbe furens.The foole hath felt, the hath euer taught, wise hath euer taught, And though in all alike, it take not root, Yet all shall finde that loue's a thing of naught, For sure,Sentence.it is an open signe of madnes, To haue an others pleasure breed thy sadnes.Sentence. 2 Now though effects proue not in all alike, Yet all are mad in sort, all go astray, Simile.As in a wildernes where men do seeke, And more and more in seeking loose their way, Wherefore let no man this my wish mislike, In whom fond loue, shall carie long the sway, I wish for due reward, such doting dolts, Like wilfull prisners, store of iron bolts. 3 Some man perhap will say, what soft my frend, You spie our faults, in your owne errors blind; And true it is, yet speake I to this end, To bring vs both into a better mind. As for my selfe I hope er long to mend, And from these bands, in time my selfe vnwind: Though it hath tane in me such root, I prooue it, As hard tis on the sudden to remoue it. 4 I shewd you in the booke that went before, By what mishap Orlando wared mad, And lost not onely care of vertues lore, But reason, wit, and all the sence he had: His armor he disperst, his cloths he tore, The verie cloths, wherewith his corps was clad: And though he wanderd, all vnarmd and naked, Yet at his presence, all the countrie quaked. 5 The countrimen that heard the noise aloof, Of trees, that with their fall, made no small cracke: Came neare, and saw by plaine and open proof, His mōstrous strength, by their so monstrous wracke, And straight they found it best for their behoof, With all the hast they could, to get them backe, For those he caught he did this lesson teach,Sentence. To keep a loof from out a mad mans reach. 6 Away they fled, but he pursu'd so fast, That some he caught, and some surprisd with feare, Stood still (as oft it happens) all agost, Not knowing how to hide themselues nor wheare: Some other ploughmen seeing what had past, Thought it but little with to tarie theare, But clim'd (for feare) their houses and their churches Not trusting strength, of elmes, of beech, & burches 7 Among the rest he takes one by his heele. And with his head knocks out anothers braine, Which caused both of them such paine to feele, As till dooms day they neuer shall complaine; Another with his fist he made to reele, Till paine it selfe made him past sense of paine, And when the men fled all away affeard, Then with like rage he set vpon their heard.
8 The voice of men, the bellowings of beast, About the countrie raysd so great a sound, As might haue well bene heard fiue leags at least, And all the people straight were raysed round; Each man prouiding (as he could) the best, And for the present time might then be found, With bows, with bills, with staues, & pikes, & prongs To be reueng'd, on these outragious wrongs. 9 Simile.Looke how the waues are driu'n by westerne blast, And one and one, do rise still more and more, Vntill their force so great be at the last, They sprinkle all the banks, and beat the shore, So now these countries folke came in so fast, By two, and three, a dozen and a score: Till at the last they grew so great a number, Their verie multitude themselues did cumber. 10 But when they saw their force could do no good, And that his skin so strange protection had, That though they smot thereon they drew no blood They thought, yt they might worse be thought then mad, To fight with one that all them so withstood, Wherefore they parted home dismaid and sad. The madman went vnto the nearest village, Although he cared not for spoile or pillage. 11 And finding no man there, nor small nor great, For all were fled away from thence for aw; As famine forst him, he sought out some meat, And were it fine or course, the first he saw, In greedie sort he doth deuoure and eat, Not caring if it rosted were or raw, And when thus homely he had tane repast, About the countrie bedlemlike he past. 12 He feares both man and beast without regard, He takes swift gotes and fallow Deare in chase, Sometimes a Lion fierce, a bore, a pard, He kils by strength and swiftnes of his pase. At last he came where as a knight did guard, He returneth to Orlando in the 29 booke the 41. staffe.The passage of a bridge, and by the place, Had built a towre of no small worke and charge, As shalbe showd hereafter more at large. 13 Now must I tell what hap Zerbino had, Who with faire Isabell togither rode, A long that place where this good Earle fell mad. But by the way, these two made some abode, Where they beheld two men in armor clad, That driue a horse that bare a wofull lode, A knight a prisner to Zerbino knowne, That had beene once a seruant of his owne. 14 Oderik taken pro∣soner & brought to Zerbino.This prisner Oderik of Biskie hight, In whom the Prince had put so great a trust, He made chiefe choice of him, as of a knight, That of his promise would be firme and iust. But he (fond beast) esteeming small delight, And fruitlesie hope, of his vnbridled lust, Aboue his sacred oth and promist fealtie, Would haue defloured her against all lealtie. 15 Faire Isabell by hap eu'n then was telling, How in the boat she desperatly was saued; And hauing scapt the stormie seas and swelling, How trecherouslie this wretch himselfe behaued, That (had not outlawes thereabout bene dwelling) He would haue forst her, vnto that he craued, And eu'n as these, or some such words she sed, She saw the man she spake of captiue led. 16 Those two that led the wicked O'drik tide, Knew well their Lord when as they came in vew, Both by the Lady, that was by his side, And by the rampant Lyon red of hew, Borne by the Prince, not for a shew of pride, But his as from his predecesors dew, They light, and with a courtsie to the ground, And cap in hand, salute their Lord thus found. 17 Zerbino knew and cald them both by name, Corebo tone, Almonio tother hight, Which two with Isabell from Bayon came, In conduct of that most vnworthy wight. And straight Almonio thus his speech doth frame, My Lord (said he) I shall to you recite, Some little part, of that vnpleasant story, That till this houre, had made my heart full sory. 18 Sith (thankt be God) this Lady here doth liue,Almonios speech Who felt these storms, and therein chiefly smarted, I know that she thereof could notice giue, And hath er this to you the same imparted; I onely shall declare what did me grieue, And what had hapned, since from her I parted, What time by this vile wretches lewd intent, For horse and men to Rochell I was sent. 19 And as I went, so backe I turnd in hast, With men and horse as good as I could get, To seeke them out mine eies about I cast, But yet mine eyes on them I could not set, Their tracke I found, and following that full fast, It brought me to a wood where as I met, My fellow Coreb, panting then and groning, This caitife cursing and himselfe bemoning. 20 He told me how, he fighting in defence, Of Isabella, was so sorely wounded, That from that place he had not sturred sence, And how with bleeding much, he oft had sounded, At which report I tooke so great offence, That in my wits I was welnie confounded. And to reuenge, my heart so sharpe was whet, That Corebs danger quite I did forget. 21 But when in vaine this wretch I long had sought, To Coreb I returned backe againe, Who was so weake, and low by bleeding brought, That scant the life did in his limbs remaine. For which his wofull state, I tooke great thought, As one that deemd it fitter to ordaine, Some Priests and Friers, buriall to procure him, Then Surgeons or Phisitions that might cure him.
22 Yet him vnto the towne at last I caried, Where, by such helpe our friendly host procured, It pleased God, Corebo not miscaried, But of his grieuous hurts was soundly cured; Which done, no longer in those parts we taried, But being there by sundry men assured, That Odrick in Alfonsos court was biding, We thither went to heare of him some tiding. 23 And there I challengd Odrick face to face, Great praise in  Prince to pro∣ innocent  not malesa∣.And by the noble iustice of the King, And chiefly (as I deeme) by Gods great grace, That onely rules and gouernes eu'ry thing, I tooke him prisner in the present place, From whence aliue I did him hither bring, For why that king that heard his great offence, Did graunt vs libertie to bring him thence. 24 I might haue staine him, as he well deserued, But yet I chused rather of the twaine, Vnto your doome to haue his life reserued, That you might point him death with worthy paine, And much I ioy that lucke so well hath serued, That we so safe haue found your grace againe, And much more I reioyce, if much more may be, At health and welfare of this noble Ladie. 25 Thus much Almonio said, and then did cease, Expecting what Zerbino would reply, Who all the while stood still and held his peace, And viewd the prisner with an heedfull eye, And much it did his griefe of mind increase, To think a friend could stray so farre awry. Then sighing deepe; what Odrick is this true, Wherewith (quoth he) Almonio chargeth you? 26 Odrick speech.The caitiue, humbly prostrate on the ground, Forgiue my Lord (said he) your seruants crime, Sentence.What wight on earth can voyd of fault be found? What Saint is such as doth not sinne sometime? Tweene good and bad this difference sole is found, That good men sin but seeld, and mend betime, Sentence.The bad man (making scruple none nor question) Yeelds wilfully to eu'ry leud suggestion. 27 If you to me some fortresse had committed, SimileAnd I the same had wittingly betraid, I graunt such fault were not to be remitted, But if I had with force bene ouerlaid, Then sure I am my case would haue bene pittyd, At least no sinne should to my charge be laid, SentenceFor when the enemy is once the stronger, Tis vaine to make resistance any longer. 28 Eu'n so my Lord, my faith I ought to guard, No other then a fortresse or a hold, Put in my charge with carefull watch and ward, As long as strength will serue me it to hold: And so I kept my faith with due regard, Nor was I any way to be controld, Vntill at last I was so strong assailed, That faith gaue place, and fancie then preuailed. 29 Thus Odricke said, and what he said beside, I doubt it somewhat tedious were to tell, As namely, none so great assault could bide, That loue all other passions doth excell, But sure if it were euer plainly tride, That humble speech doth often wrath expell; Now Odricke found of lowly words the fruit, That holp him to obtaine so hard a suit. 30 Zerbino stood a while in mind confused, To punish or to pardon his offence, Sometime his thoughts all clemencie refused, Sometime the loue and seruice done long since, Asswagd his wrath, and rothers fault excused, And mou'd him with his folly to dispence: And still as rage did kindle fire of wrath,Sentence. To quench it mercie store of water hath. 31 Now while in this same doubt Zerbino staid, Behold by hap Gabrina there was brought, She that of late had this good Prince betraid, And had to him so great a danger wrought; Her horse that heard where other horses naid, Came to the noise, as nature had them taught, Against her will, she wanting force to sway him, And hauing lost the raines, wherewith to stay him. 32 The beastly wretch cride helpe, and out alas, While thus her horse ran ouer fields and lands, But when the Scottish Prince saw who she was, And how she thither came he vnderstands, He gaue God thanks that so had brought to passe, To giue those two at once into his hands, Which two, for their misdeeds aboue the rest, He had great cause to malice and detest. 33 And after he had made a little pause, Vnto his seruants turning thus he said, Sirs, Odricke shall not die, although by lawes His fact deserues no lesse vprigtly waid, For sith he faith affection was the cause, Content I am, on loue the fault be laid, The sinne to which a man by loue is driuen,Sentence. So much the rather ought to be forgiuen. 34 The force of strong affection hath ere this Distemperd, yea and sometime ouerthrowne A wiser and a staider head then his, As is to me by mine experience knowne, And that here in he did his dutie misse, I must confesse, the fault was part mine owne, That gaue to him such charge, and did not know How quickly flaming heate can kindle tow.Sentence. 35 Then to the caitiue Odricke thus he spake, Here I forgiue thee, and do thee enlarge, But yet the penance I will haue thee take,Odricks punish∣ment. Is this, to take this woman in thy charge, And sweare to me thou shalt her not forsake, For one whole yeare, but this thine oth discharge, And that thou shalt if any would offend her, Do thy deuoir, and vnto death defend her.
36 This was the punishment on him he layd, And certainly this same had bene cnow, If so the circumstance were duly wayd, And Odericke had right performd his vow. For why so many men she had betrayd, And done such sinnes euen from her youth till now, That whereoere they had together traueld, In her defence he must at last be graueld. 37 Thus Zerbin let this wicked couple go, And thinks sufficiently to plague them both, But sweares if euer he did hap to know, That he therein should violate his troth, His flesh should serue as feeding for the crow, A fit reward for such as breake their oth. Thus went this honest couple thence together, Lurking in corners, wandring here and thether. 38 But what in th'end of these same two became, I know not, and mine author doth not write, I onely heard a speech, or flying fame, That when they once were quite from Zerbius fight, Odricke (to shun the quarrels and the shame, Gabrinas death.That by her companie on him might light) Did hang her vp, and after in short space, Almonio made him runne the selfe same race. 39 The Prince that faine some tidings would haue heard Of that Earle Palladine, who tother day, Fought hand to hand with lostie Mandricard, Vntill his rainlesse horse bare him away, Doth trauell on his way to Paris ward, Though faire and soft, and lingring by the way, And his two seruants he doth send before, And kept with him his Ladie and no more. 40 They rode not farre but that they found the caue, And that same pleasant arbor and the spring, At which Medoro vsd such sport to haue, With that faire daughter of the Indian king; Where she their names together did ingraue, All tide with true loue knots (a wondrous thing) They looke, and see the stones, the words and letters All cut and mangled in a thousand fitters. 41 And as they musd hereon, they might espie Orlandos armor and his famous blade, Hight Durindana on the ground to lie, Hector.That sword that first for Hector had bin made, They saw where Brigliador was feeding by Vpon the grasse amid the pleasant shade: This sight did make them both exceeding sad, Yet little did they deeme that th'Earle was mad. 42 Had they but seene one little drop of blood, They would haue surely thought he had bin staine, But while in this most carefull doubt they stood, Behold there came a country silly swaine, That with no little speed ran through the wood, And scapt the mad mans fury with great paine; He told them how a man bestraught of sences, Had done these outrages and great offences. 43 And further gaue them perfect information, And told each circumstance at their request: Zerbino standeth still in admiration, And as the manner is, himselfe he blest, And with great griefe of mind and lamentation, He takes the sword and armor, and the rest, And Isabella helpeth them to gather, And so they lay them on a heape together. 44 This while by hap came by faire Fiordeliege,Fiordeliege. Who (as I told before) with pensiue hart, Went to seeke out her loued Lord and Liege, I meane Orlandos friend, King Brandimart, Who leauing Paris in the wofull siege, To seeke Orlando did from thence depart, Till Atlant to that cage him did intice, Which he had fram'd by magicall deuice. 45 The which inchantment being now defeated,Astolfo de  this inchantments Booke 22. By good Astolfos value and his skill, And all the knights as I before repeated, At libertie to go which way they will, King Brandimart, though much in mind he freated, To thinke how long in vaine he had stood still, Backe vnto Paris ward his course he turned, Yet missing her, the way that he returned. 46 Thus (as I said) faire Fiordeliege by chance, Saw much of that which hapt, and heard the rest, How that same worthy Palladine of France, With inward giefe of mind and thought opprest, Or by some other great and strange mischance, Went like a man with some ill sprite possess, And she likewise enquiring of the peasant, Heard all the circumstance, a tale vnpleasant. 47 Zerbino being farre from any towne, Hangs all Orlandos armor on a Pine, Like to aAt the brl of knights of  order, or great persons, they  up their arms with a sword a beadpeece. Penon, and lest any clowne Or peasant vile should take a thing so fine, He writes vpon the tree, Let none take downe This armour of Orlando Palladine; As who should say, if any man attempt it, Orlando would ere long cause him repent it. 48 And hauing brought this worthy worke to end, And ready now to take his iourney hence, Fierce Mandricard hapt thither to descend,Mandricard. And when he saw the tree, he askt of whence Those weapons were? which knowne, he doth intend To take away good Durindana thence, He steps vnto the tree and takes the sword, Nor so content, he adds this spitefull word. 49 Ah fir (quoth he) this hap doth make me glad, My claime vnto this sword is not vnknowne, And though before I no possession had, Yet now I lawfully seize on mine owne: Alas poore foolo, and doth he faine him mad? And hath away his sword and armor throwne, Because he was not able to maintaine it, And was afeard that I by force would gaine it?
50 Zerbino crieth out, what? peace for shame, Take not his sword, or thinke not I will beare it, If by the coate of Hector so you came, You stale it, and vnworthy are to weare it: Tush (quoth the Pagan) I will beare that blame, As for your threatning, do not thinke I feare it: Thus tones sharpe answers, tothers sharpe replying, Made them to fall to termes of flat defying. 51 The combat be∣tweene Mandri∣card & Zerbino.And either shewing signes of plaine hostilitie, Prepares the tother fiercely to inuade, Zerbino with his skill and great agilitie, His partie good against the Pagan made, And voided all the blowes with much facilitie, Though hauing great disuantage in the blade, And in that armor massie so and strong, That in times past to Hector did belong. 52 Looke how a Grewnd that finds a sturdie Bore, Amid the field far straying from the heard, Doth runne about, behind him and before, Because of his sharpe tusks he is afeard: So Zerbin that had seene oft heretofore That blade, and of the force thereof had heard, With heedfull eye to shun the blowes he watched, Because he was in weapons ouermatched. 53 Thus warily this worthy Prince did fight, And though by heedfull skill he scaped oft The furious bloes of this Tartarian knight, Yet lo, at last one blow came from aloft, And Durindan so heauie did alight, As pierced through the hard vnto the soft, A finger deepe, and went in length a span, Downe from the place where first the wound began. 54 The Prince so earnest was, he felt no smart, Yet ran the blood out of the brest amaine, And of his curats all the former part With crimson streame of blood it did distaine: So haue I seene her hand that to mine hart Hath bene a cause of anguish and much paine, When she a purple seame or flowre hath drawne, In siluer kirtle, or in sleeue of lawne. 55 The wound was great, but yet did greater show, Which fight faire Isabella much amated, The Prince that seemed not the same to know, With force increased rather then abated, Vpon the Pagans brow gaue such a blow, As would no doubt haue made him checkt & mated Saue that (as I to you before rehearst) His armor was not easie to be pearst. 56 The blow was such as caused him to reele, And on his stirrops staggringly he stood, Had not his armor bene of passing steele, The blow would sure haue entred to the blood, The grieuous paine that he thereof did feele, Did put him in so fierce a raging mood, So that for all Zerbinos skill and sleight, He wounded him in places seu'n or eight. 57 Which when his louing Isabella saw, She went to Doralice, and her doth pray, The fury of her husband to withdraw, And ioyne with her to part the bloody fray, Who both because she was in feare and aw, Lest yet the Prince her spouse indanger may, And for of nature kind she was and meeke, Of that good motion she doth not mislike. 58 Thus those two Ladies this fierce battell parted, In which the prince receiued many a wound, Though being (as he was) most valiant harted, He neuer gaue the Pagan inch of ground: From thence each couple presented departed, Fierce Mandricard to pagan campe was bound,He turnes to Mandricard in this book, 76. staf. To Paris ward the Prince, but driu'n to stay, By reason of his bleeding by the way. 59 Dame Fiordeliege that stood this while aloofe, And saw how Mandricard preuailed had, And how the Prince had fought with euill proofe, Departed thence all sorrowfull and sad, Reuiling Mandricard with iust reproofe, That of this euill gotten sword was glad, And wished that her husband Brandimart, Had present bin to take Zerbinos part. 60 But as she traueld homeward to the campe, She saw the noble Palladine of France, Not like himselfe, but of another stampe, Besmeard and nakt as antiks wont to dance: Quite was extinguished the shining lampe, Of vertue bright that did his name aduance:He returnes to Fiordeliege and Orlando both, in the 29 books, 44▪ staffe. This fight in Fiodeliege much sorrow bred, But tell me now how good Zerbino sped. 61 Who on his way with painfull steps proceeding, With Isabella onely and no more, His former taken hurts still freshly bleeding, Which now with cold were stiffe and waxed sore, And yet this griefe in him the rest exceeding, To thinke that sword of which I spake before, Should mauger him, be by a Turke poslest. I say this grieu'd him more then all the rest. 62 Now gan the dreadfull pangs of death assaile him, So great a streame of blood his wound had draind, His eyes were dim, his speech began to faile him, Strong hart to yeeld to weake limbs was constraind: What can poore Isabella do but waile him? She blam'd the heau'ns and fates that had ordaind Her to escape such dangers and such harmes, And now to haue her deare die in her armes. 63 Zerbino though he seant could draw his breath, Yet hearing her lamenting in such fashion, Doth ope his closed lips, and thus he seath, Both shewing then, and mouing much compassion: So might I (my deare loue) eu'n after death, Be deare to thee as I do feele great passion, To think when as my death frō hence shall reaue me, Alone in wo and danger I shall leaue thee.
64 Might I haue left thee in some safer place, I should esteeme my death a blessed hap, And that the hean'ns had giu'n me speciall grace, To end my life in thy beloued lap, Now greiues it me to thinke of thine hard case, In what a world of woes I thee shall wrap, When I must die, and leaue thee here alone, And none to helpe thy harme or heare thy mone. 65 To this the wofull Isabell replies, With watred eyes, and heart surprisd with anguish, Her face to his, and ioyning her faire eyes To his that like a witherd rose did languish, No thought (said she) my deare in thee arise For me, for know I neither do, nor can with Thee to suruiue, I will be thine for euer, Life could not, and death shall not vs disseuer. 66 Horace hath the like to this. Ah re, mee si partemanima rapit. Maturier vis, quid mor al∣teralNo sooner shall thy breath thy brest forsake, But I will follow thee I care not whither, Griefe or this sword of me an end shall make, And if some stranger after shall come hither, I hope of vs such pittie he will take, To lay our bodies in one 'graue togither: This said, about his necke her armes she clasped, And drawes the fainting breath that oft he gasped. 67 The Prince inforcing his forefeebled voyce, Said thus, I thee coniure my sole delight, By that deare loue that made me first thy choyce, And thee from natiue soyle to take thy flight, If euer in my loue thou didst reioyce, If to commaund thee I haue any right, That thou still liue (as long as God shall graunt thee) And not despaire how euer fortune daunt thee. 68 Th'almightie God, from danger and from ill, Hath hitherto, and will (I trust) thee saue; Eu'n as he sent that noble Earle to kill Those caitiues that did keepe thee in their caue, And fau'd thee from the Biskins wicked will, First hauing thee preseru'd from salt sea waue, Liue then my deare, and trust in him aboue, And while you liue be mindfull of my loue. 69 These latter words his lips had scantly past, When death vnto his heart was softly crept; And as the lampe go'th out when oyle doth wast, So quietly the noble Zerbin slept: What tongue can tell how sore she was agast, How she lamented, wailed, mournd and wept, To her owne eyes and faire haire doing force, When as she saw her deare a senslesse corse? 70 And griefe had set her in so great a rage, With Zerbins sword she thinks an end to make Of her owne life, her sorrow to asswage, Neglecting those last words Zerbino spake, But lo, a certaine saintlike personage, That sword from hand, that thought from hart doth take, A certaine godly hermit and deuout, That was by hap abiding thereabout, 71 Who came and said, oh damsell leaue despaire, Mans nature weake, and womens sex is fraile, Feare him that rules both heau'n, and earth, and aire, Who saith the word, and his word cannot faile, That those that vnto him for helpe repaire, And put their trust in him, shall neuer quaile: Then shewd he her, to proue his saying true, Examples out of Scriptures old and new. 72 Of saintlike women that in time of old,Looks in the story of the Their liues and prayre in chastitie had spent; And further to the damsell faire he told, And prou'd and shewd by reasons euident, That worldly things are vaine and haue no hold, Alone in God is ioy and true content: In fine, he makes to her this godly motion, Her future life to spend in true deuotion. 73 His godly speech by helpe of heau'nly grace, Pourd in her heart by hie diuine infusion, Wrought such effect, and found so great a place, She ceast to seeke or worke her owne confusion, But leauing the profession of her race, Profest her selfe a Christen in conclusion; She gaue her selfe to prayre and pure diuinitie,There is  made  marriage, therefore  (being a  though  to her gra And vowd to God her life and her virginitie. 74 Yet did she not remoue out of her thought, The feruent loue Zerbino had her borne, But by the hermits helpe the corse she brought, And thinks it sin to leaue it so forlorne, And in some village thereabout she bought Sweet balmes to fill the flesh all cut and torne, Then in a Cypres coffin she doth close it, Not being yet resolu'd where to dispose it. 75 That aged fire, though being wise and staid, Yet would not trust in his owne stay so well, To carry such a faire and goodly maid To soiourne with him in his little cell, Twere perill great (thus to himselfe he said) That fire and straw should nie together dwell, Wherefore he meanes to Prouince her to carie, And there to place her in a monestarie. 76 But as he thitherward with Isbell went,He  bell in the  booke. 90 And by the way deuoutly did her teach, All things vnto religion pertinent, And of the same most learnedly did preach, Behold a Pagan fierce with soule intent, This purpose and their iourney doth impeach, As I shall shew more largely afterward: Now back I must returne to Mandricard. 77 Who hauing ended that same cruell fight, In which the worthist Prince aliue was slaine, Soone after by a shadie banke did light, And turnd his horse a grazing on the plaine, Dame Doralice in whom he tooke delight, Alone with him in that place did remaine, When looking sodainly by chance aside, An armed knight come toward them she spide.
78 She guest, but yet she knew not by the view, Who it might be, vntill she spide her page, That came with him, then certainly she knew, Twas Rodomont, full of reuenge and rage, Wherefore vnto her knight she nearer drew, And said (my Lord) mine honour I dare gage, That yon is Rodomont mine ancient louer, Who thinks by fight from you me to recouer. 79 Looke how the Falcon in the aire doth mount, When she espies a Bittor or a Herne, So when this Prince espied Rodomount, And by his hast his furie did discerne, Like one that made of conquest full account, He starteth vp with visage grim and sterne: Straight armd, and horst he is, his foe to meete, In hand the raynes, in sterops are his feete. 80 When as the tone the tother came so neare, As each might harken what the tother sed, Fierce Rodomont spake lowd as he might heare, With threatning gesture, both of hand and hed: And sayd, be sure Ile make thee buy it deare, That with a short vaine pleasure hast bene led, To do to one so foule and open wrong, That can and will it wreake on thee er long. 81 The Tartar Prince that for him little cared, Made answer thus, in vaine you me do threat, Poore boyes with words, or women may be scared, Not I that fight as willingly as eat, Proue when you please I am not vnprepared, At any time for any warlike feat, On horse, on foote, in field, or in the list, I shalbe readie, trie me when you list. 82 Thus words bred wrath, and wrath engendred blowes, And blowes encreast their sharpe auenging will, Eu'n as the wind that first but calmely blowes, But after more and more increasing still, At last it trees and houses ouerthrowes, And seas and lands with tempest it doth fill: So cruell grew the fight them two betweene, Whose match might hardly in the world be seene. 83 Their hearts were stout, so were their bodies strong, Desire to win, in both a like was great, One doth maintain, tother would venge his wrong, And loue their furie equally doth whet, In equall paise the fight endured long, Nor each of tother any gaine could get, But each of them so firmely kept his ground, As if each inch thereof had cost a pound. 84 Among an hundred blowes the Tartar smit, Of which small hurt to Rodomont did rise, Yet one at last so heauily did hit, Vpon his helmet, ouer both his eyes; phrase to  fire out of ees and to  see  a noone.His senses all were so amazd with it; He thought he saw more starres then are in skies, And almost downe he was eu'n in her fight, For whom he first began this cruell fight. 85 But as a strong and iustly temperd bow,Simile. Of Pymount steele, the more you do it bend, Vpon recoile doth giue the bigger blow, And doth with greater force the quarrell send, Eu'n so the Sarzan king that stoupt so low, As highly to reuenge it doth intend, And to acquite himselfe of this disgrace, He striketh at the Tartar Princes face. 86 So fierce he strake, in this so furious mood, An inch or little more aboue his fight, That saue those armes of Hector were so good,Another phrase to strike one to make him think it night, as the Spaniard that had but one eye, hauing the to∣ther strike n  at tennis, said Buenas Noches. No doubt that blow had finisht all the fight, But so astond therewith the Tartar stood, He could not tell if it were noone or night: And while in this amazment he abode, The tother ceaseth not to lay on lode. 87 The Tartars horse that saw the glittering blade, That Rodomont about his head so tost, Did start aside, and with a turne he made, Rescude his master, sore to his owne cost, Downe with the blow fals this vnluckie iade, And with his starting he his life hath lost: To ward his head he wanted Hectors shield, And therefore dead he tumbleth on the field. 88 Now came his master to himselfe againe, Inflamd with greater anger then before, To see his horse so pitifully slaine, But Rodomont forbeares him neare the more. But spurrs on him, and thinks with furie maine, To beare him downe, but he so strongly bore The push, and thrust withall Frontino backe, He made his master glad to leaue his backe. 89 Thus now with minds more aliend from all peace, In eager sort the combat is renewed, To strike, to thrust each other doth not cease, In hope with blood their swords to haue embrewed Fell rancor wrath and pride do still increase, And death of one or both must haue ensewed, Er either of them would from thence haue started, Had not a certaine messenger them parted. 90 One that had traueld all about the cost, To seeke them out, to aske their helpe and aid, To raise the siege, that by the Christen host, Vnto the campe of Agramant was laid: Yet though he came in peace, and cake in post, To speake to them at first he was affraid, And though his office were sufficient warrant, Yet to themselues he dares not do his arrant. 91 But seeing Doralice, to her he told, How Agramant, Marsilio, Stordylan, And others more, like men pent vp in hold, Were in great danger to be kild or tane, Wherefore he wisheth her for to vnfold, Thus much to them, that sought each others bane: And to perswade them to so good accord, As they might go to helpe their soueraigne Lord.
92 She that a woman was of passing sprite, And knew that neither of them would offend her, Stept them between, and chargd them stay the fight, As they their honour and her loue did tender, And helpe their king, that is in wofull plight, And end this fray begun of cause so slender, At least defer so long to trie this quarrell, Till Agramant their king were out of perrell. 93 When she thus much to them declared had, Then doth the messenger declare the rest, And other strong perswasions he doth ad, And doth expound to them their kings request, Alledging that their absence made him sad, That but they helpe, the campe would be distrest, And that if they to rescue him neglected, A present ruine were to be expected. 94 With his report and with her strong perswasion, The hardie knights the combat do defar, Till Agramant be freed from this inuasion, And all the Christen forces moued ar, Thus of this friendly truce she is occasion, That first was causer of their deadly war; To her they binde themselues by solemne oth, That vntill then, they will be quiet both. 95 There Discord was and Pride, and what they may, They do this league to interrupt and breake, But at that time, Loue bare so great a sway, That to withstand him, they were both to weake: In vaine it was to argue and gainsay, When once dame Doralice the word did speake, By her perswasion, firmely they agreed. Like friends vpon their iourney to proceed. 96 One onely want there was, that let them sore, Which was that Mandricardos horse was ded, But loe eu'n then, came thither Brygliadore, That since his masters madnes there had fed, Full glad the Prince of Tartar was therefore, Of such a horse, so quickly to be sped: But least my tale with tediousnes molest you, I wish you lay aside the booke and rest you. Morall.In the great offence of Oderike, and the notable clemencie of Zerbino in pardoning the same, we may note in the one the great frailtie of men in offending (specially in this kinde of fleshly concupiscene,) in the other a notable magnanimi∣tie as well as mercie in forgiuing him: For that (indeed) is true clemencie in a Prince, to forgiue that offence that is com∣mitted against his priuat (as they call it) that is, against his owne person, rather then that, which is done against the law, for that is rather parcialitie and iniustice, then clemencie. Secondly we may obserue both in Zerbino and Isabella, a notable example of gratitude toward Orlando, first in gathering his dispersed armour, next in that Zerbino fought with Mandricardo in defence of Orlandos sword, in which conflict he receives his deaths wound, and though indeed, all that is told of this couple, tendeth to a tragicall end, yet is it withall set downe by my author in a sort, to moue so great compassion, that it seemes all that read it are as it were in loue with them, and lament their so vnfortunate end; which hath made me say sometimes (in sport) to some of mine honorable frends, that if I could without wronging mine author, I would surely have saned their liues, or giuen them a more fortunate end: though (to say true) sith an end is of necessi∣tie due to all mankind, what more honorable death can a Prince have, then by a wound in fight, specially for a good quarrell? what more sweet death, then in her beloued armes whom he was bethrothed to, and intended to marrie? what more happie reward, then same and loue in this world, and heaven in the next? Further though Isabella were after slain by Rodomont in h drunkennues, as is noted in the xxix. booke, yet that notable title that is there given her (the mar∣tir of chastitie) makes her so famous, and her vertue so admirable, as she could never have wisht a better end if she had lived as long as Hecuba. Wherefore if it be true that Ouid said of Cadmus, —Scilicet vltima semper, Expect and a dies homini, dicique beatus Anteobitum nemo, supremaque funera debet. In English thus, Our onely dying day, and end doth show If that a man haue happie beene or no. Then (I say) by the death of these two, though in shew vnfortunate yet in deed most glorious, they may be called happie. Lastly, for the end of this morall, we may take one speciall obseruation of great integritie in the religious man, that con∣verted her to the faith, and yet afterward would not trust himselfe alone with her; for in the fleshly conflicts and temp∣tations, the onely way to conquer, is to play the coward and runne away, and thus much for the morall. Historie.The examples of the vertuous women that are praised by the hermit (though not named) in the 72. Staffe of this booke, are many, recited in the Scripture it selfe: as namely the blessed virgin Marie, Anne, and Magdalen, all which be tooke themselues most deuoutly to the seruice of God, and therefore are worthy to be canonized for examples of chasti∣tie and zeale of religion. Allegorie.In the sodaine parting of the fray betweene the two famous riuals, onely vpon the commandement of Doralice, with whom they were both exceedingly in loue, thus allegorically is supposed to be meant that the strongest passions that are, as anger, and revenge, or what else soeuer, are often ouermastered with loue. Allusion.The speech of Isabella to Zerbino, wishing to die at the same instant with him, alludes to the wish of good Baweis and Philemon. —Quomam concordes egimus annos, Auferat hor a duos eadem, nec coniugis vnquam, Busta meae videam nee sim tumulandus ab illa. Here end the notes of the xxiiij. booke.
THE XXV. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Rogero saueth (to his fame and glorie) His spouses brother, that had else bene ded: Who doth recount to him the wofull storie, That so great danger vnto him had bred: His cousin cheares them, though himselfe were sorie, Next morne, they arme them all from foote to hed, Good Malagige, and Vivian to releeue, Whose thraldome did their kinsmen greatly greeue. 1 THe strife is great yt grows in youthfull minde, When honor falls at vari∣ance with affection, Loue and ambi∣ti two strong Nor could it yet be known or well definde, Which passion keeps the tother in subiection, For both allure, both do our iudgements blinde, And both corrupt the heart with strong infection: Yet lo sometimes these hurts procure our weale, Eu'n as one poyson doth another heale. 2 For here you see these princes that of late, Straue fiercely tone the tother to subdew, Agreed to respit this their sharpe debate, And to repaire vnto the Turkish crew, To succour Agramants distressed state, To whom thy ought in dutie to be trew, And vet herein loue claimeth halfe the praise, For she commanded them to go their wayes. 3 And on they went without more disagreeing, Faire Doralice with these her seruants twaine, The tone in suit, one in possession being, And yet as then in concord they remaine: At last they came vnto a place, where seeing Foure knights themselues did solace on a plaine, (Or which two were vnarmd, two armour bare) With them a Ladie was of beautie rare. 4 He commeth to  a aine in be 16. booke.With these a while they staid, but who these weare, And what they did, and whither then they went, A little while to tell I do forbeare, For to Rogero now my tale is ment, Who would no more the shield enchanted beare, But in the well did drowne it, with intent That men might know his valiant deeds of armes Were done by force of vertue, not of charmes. 5 He scant had gone a mile or little more, From this same well, but that he met a post From Agramant, of which there went good store, The Captaines to recall vnto the host, He told him how the king (besieged sore, And like if succour come not to be lost) Commanded him as his true Lord and leege, To come without delay to raise the seege. 6 Much was Rogero with the message moued, And diuers passions straue within his minde, He faine would haue his Princes seege remoued, Yet loth he was to leaue his loue behinde; But be his doing praised or reproued, He was so to the present cause enclinde, First with his guide he goes to stay the slaughter, Of him that had deflowrd Marsilios daughter. 7 They came vnto the place an houre er night, Where this same execution should be done, A castle that belongd to Charles of right, But late the Spanish king the same had wonne, And kept it in the mids of France by might, By count'nance of the great Trainos sonne: Rogero commeth in, and none denyde him, Because they knew the damsell that did guide him.
8 There first he saw prepard a flaming fire, In which they meant to burne the wofull youth, He thought so small a sinne did not require Such punishment, no more it doth in truth: was Fuchar∣, to, Bradaats her, but ev∣ like Bra  You looke in  But when he markt his face and his attire, And heard and saw the manner of his ruth, Now sure I know (quoth he) I am not I, Or this is Bradamant that here should die. 9 Tis certaine she, I see which way it went, Belike while I at yonder castle staid, She hither came afore me, with intent To bring vnto the prisner here some aid, For which (poore soule) her self should now be shent, Yet I am glad and very well apaid, That I am hither come in so good season, To saue her that should die against all reason. 10 And euen with that, most furiously he files With naked sword vpon the gazing rout, Who ouer standeth in his way, he dies, With so great force he hurles his blade about: Then straight the prisners fetters he vnties, Nor was there one so hardie or so stout, That once durst make resistance or forbid it, No not so much as aske him why he did it. 11 As fearfull fowle that in the sunshine bright, Sit pruning of themselues vpon a banke, When as a Faulcon doth among them light, Flie without care of order or of ranke: So when these caitiues saw this noble Knight, Forthwith they from his manly presence shranke, So did their fearfull hearts and courage faile them, When as they felt Rogero once assaile them. 12 No maruell tho, for why Rogeros force Was not as mens that now borne later are, The strength of Lion, Beare, or bull or horse, Were nothing, if with his they do compare, And chiefe sith now he doth himselfe inforce, To do as much as he or can or dare, Hereby from danger thinking to recouer, Her vnto whom he was professed louer. 13 Here you may begin the tale Furdispina.Now when the youth from danger quite was freed, And all that sought his death away were fled, He thanks the author of this worthy deed, And thanketh her that had him thither led Then, when of helpe he stood in greatest need, When otherwise he doubtlesse had bin dead, And executed like a malefactor, Agnizing him his Lord and benefactor. 14 And furthermore he doth Rogero pray, To let him vnderstand his name and nation; Rogero musing to himselfe doth say, What meaneth this so strange congratulation? In face, in shape, in gesture, in array, This is my loue, I see no alteration, Yet strange it is her voice should be so changed, More strange that she from me is so estranged. 15 It doubtlesse is not she, for if it were, Could she within three houres my name forget? Wherefore to tell his name he doth forbeare, Vntill he may more perfect notice get: And thus he said, I haue I know not where, Seene you ere this, and I bethinke me yet Where it might be, for sure I know your face, Though now I haue forgot the time and place. 16 Most noble sir (said tother) I agree, You may haue seene me, though I know not when, I rather iudge it should my sister be, That fights and carries armes as well as men: My mother at one birth bare her and me, And we be both so like, that now and then Our seruants, yea our father and our mother Haue tane vs in exchange the tone for tother. 17 Chiefly since in her head she had a wound, For which she was constraind to cut her haire, Twere long the circumstances to expound, How she was hurt and heald, by whom and where; Since that betweene vs diffrence none is found, Saue sex and names that from our birth we beare, She Bradamant, I Richardet am cald, She sister, and I brother to Ronald. 18 And further if you please, I shall you tell, As we do onward on our iourney go, A strange mishap that vnto me besell, By being tane for her not long ago; A hap that at the first I liked well, But after wrought my danger great and wo: Yes with good will, Rogero said, and than Yong Richardet to thus his tale began. 19 It happend (as in part I toucht before) My valiant sister passing through a wood, Was hurt with certaine Sarazins so sore, As had her cost almost her vitall blood, Which wound to cure, her tresses short she wore, For so as then her surgeon thought it good; The wound once cur'd for which her head was pold Abroade to go againe she waxed bold. 20 And hauing traueld till the heate of day, All clad in armor, as her manner was, At noone she tooke occasion to make stay, Fast by a watrie streame as cleare as glasse, And putting off her helmet, downe she lay, Vpon a pleasant banke well clothd with grasse, And steepe at last her heauie eyes did close, The place inuiting her to take repose. 21 Now while she did there fast asleepe remaine, There happend to arriue vnto that place, The daughter of Marsilio king of Spaine, That there by chance was hunting in the chase, And seeing signes of manhood very plaine, With that her sweet and amiable face, As horse, and sword, and target all of steele, A little amorous passion she doth seele.
22 And taking then my sister for a man, As by all circumstances well she might, She offers her all courtsie that she can, And askt her if in hunting she delight; And then to chuse a standing they began, And finding one far off from others sight, She opened more plainly that affection, That had her heart already in subiection. 23 And saue her maiden modestie forbad, She would the same in words haue plainly told, Howb'it with sighs, with rufull looks and sad, And silent signes she doth her griese vnfold: And when she thus long time discoursed had, Surpri'd with hope, she could no longer hold, But steps vnto her, and giues her such a kisse, As that alone shewes what her meaning is. 24 My sister at the first doth thinke it strange, That such a sute should vnto her be made, And finding she had tane her in exchange, She thinks it best (before she further wade, Or let the tothers humor further range) Tell troth, for thus she doth her selfe perswade, Of this looke  the morall of the booke.Tis better to be knowne a Ladie gentle, Then to be deemd a base man and vngentle. 25 For what could be more cullen-like or base? Or fitter for a man were made of straw, Then standing in a faire yong Ladies grace, To shew himselfe a cuckow or a daw, And leese occasion both of time and place? My sister therefore that this ill foresaw, And knew she wanted that, that her should aid, Told her by circumstance she was a maid. 26 And thus she told her how the worthy same, Hippolita and stout Camilla wonne, In deeds of armes, mou'd her her mind to frame, To do the like while others sowd and sponne: And that she thought it to her sex no shame, To do as women of such worth had done; She told her this, in hope this would appease her, But this alas did so much more disease her. 27 For why the fancie was so firmly fixt, That in her mind she had before conceiued, By meanes of speech had passed them betwixt, That sore it grieu'd her to be thus deceiued, Before her feare with some good hope was mixt, But now eu'n hope it selfe was her bereaued: And this is one extremest point of griefe, SentenceStill to despaire and hope for no reliefe. 28 He that had heard her wofull plaint and mone, Must needs haue greatly at the same bin grieued, Ah wo is me (she said) that I alone Should liue in such despaire to be relieued: In passed times I thinke there hath bene none, In time to come it will not be beleeued, That loue should make by such a strong infection, One woman beare another such affection. 29 O Cupid, if thou didst my state enni,Looke in the  of the And that thou hadst a mind me to torment, To send such paines as others more do trie, At least me think thou shouldst haue bin content: Shall in so many ages none but I, Yeeld of so vncouth loue such president? The female with the female doth not wish To couple, nor in beast, nor foule, nor fish. 30 I sole am found in earth, aire, sea, or fire, In whom to strange a wonder thou haft done, On me thou shewst the power of thine ire, And what a mightie conquest thou hast wonne. The wife of Nynus had a strange desire,Looke in the story of the To ioyne in copulation with her sonne; Faire Myrrha by her fire was made a mother, And made Adonis both her sonne and brother. 31 Pasyphae, except it be a tale, Was buld, inclosed in a woodden cow; Yet in all these the female sought the male, But nature doth my fancie disallow; No Dedalus could remedie my bale, Nor art can frame, nor sense imagine how, This knot dame nature hath so firmely knit, It cannot be dissolu'd by any wit. 32 This Fiordispina faire (so was her name) In piteous sort her wofull state doth waile, My sister vnto her, her speech doth frame, As chiefly to her comfort might auaile: And wisht her this vnbridled will to tame, Sith nature could not suffer it preuaile, And that she would let that desire be daunted, Which possibly by no meanes could be graunted. 33 All this but all in vaine my sister said, To seeke that fancie from her mind to wrests; She that for comfort car'd not, but for aid, Doth more and more her selfe vexe and molest: Now night grew on as they together staid, What time all creatures seeke repose and rest, The Ladie prayes my sister for her sake, A lodging at her castle then to take. 34 To this request doth Bradamant assent, And so together to that place they came, Where I (but that you did my harme preuent)That place was Marsilies catch where Richer∣det should  beene burned Should haue bene cast into the burning flame: She that all kindnesse to my sister ment, By many outward courtsies shewd the same: And caused her to weare a womans weed, That men might know that she was one indeed. 35 For why the semblance false she saw before, Of manly shape to her was so pernicious, She would now see her in those weeds no more, The rather eke left folke should be suspicious, (If she had bene ashewd the weed she wore) Left that they two did liue together vicious: She further was by phisick rules assured, That contraries by contraries are cured.
36 But nought could salue that fore, nor swage her woes, That night they lay together in one bed, But sundry and vnlike was their repole, One quiet slept, the tothers troubled hd Still waking, or if she her eyes but close, That little sleepe strange dreames and fancies bred: She thought the gods and heau'n would so assist her, Into a better sex to change my sister. 37 As men tormented with a burning feuer, Do dreame with drinke they swage their grieuous thirst, But when they wake, they feele their thirst perseuer, And to be greater then it was at first; So she whose thoughts from loue, sleepe could not seuer, Did dreame of that, for which she wake did thirst, But waking felt and found it as before, Her hope still lesse, and her desire still more. 38 How feruently did she to Macon pray? What vowes did she vnto her prayre anuex? If so by mightie miracle he may, Her bedfellow turne to a better sex? Now neare approcht the dawning of the day, When she in vaine her selfe doth greiue and vex: And so much more her passion grew the stronger, Because my sister now would stay no longer. 39 When Fiordispina saw she would be gone, She causd a gallant gennet to be brought, All richly barbd, and furniture thereon, Which with her owne hand partly she had wrought, This frankly she bestoweth her vpon, My sister takes it kindly, as she ought, And takes her leaue, and on her way doth get, And home she came that night ere Sunne was set. 40 We that long time of her had heard no tiding, I meane her mother, brothers, and her kin, Do welcome her, and aske of her abiding, Why she so long from vs had absent bin? Who straight from vs the troth of nothing hiding, Doth tell vs how great danger she was in; And opned from the ending to beginning, The course of all her leesing and her winning. 41 As namely first how hardly she had sped, And in a conflict had receiu'd a wound, For which she was constraind to pole her head, Before her health she could recouer found; She told how fortune afterwards her led, Where that faire huntresse had her sleeping found; She told vs how the Ladie did her woo, And all the circumstance that longd thereto. 42 To heare this story I was passing glad, For why at Saragoza I had seene This Fiordispina, and some knowledge had Of her likewise when she in France had beene, And likt her well, yet was I not so mad, In vaine to set my loue on such a Queene: But now againe I gaue that fancie scope, When by this tale I had conceau'd some hope. 43 Loue was my counsellor that me aduised, My meaning secret I to none impart, This was the stratageme that we deuised, This was the plot, the cunning, and the art, To go in Bradamantas clothes disguised, And for a while to play the womans part: I knew my face my sisters so resembling, Would be the better helpe for my dissembling. 44 The day ensuing ere it yet was light, I tooke my way, my loue and fancie guiding, I there arriu'd an houre before twas night, Such hap I had, such hast I made in riding: No sooner came I in the seruants sight, But well was he of me could carry tiding: They looke (as Princes oft to giue do use) Some recompence for bringing so good newes. 45 Straight out she came, and met me halfe the way, And tooke me fast about the necke and kist me, And told me how in this my little stay, In anguish great and sorrow she had mist me, Then she did cause me alter mine array, In which with her owne hands she doth assist me; A cawl of gold she set vpon my crowne, And put on me a rich and stately gowne. 46 And for my part to helpe the matter, I Did take great heed to all I did or said, With sober cast I carrid still mine ey, And bare my hands before me like a maid: My voice did serue me worst, but yet thereby Such heed I vsd, my sex was not bewraid: And thus arrayd, my Princesse led me with her, Where many Knights and Ladies were togither. 47 My looke and clothes did all them so beguile, They all had thought I had a woman beene, And honour such was done to me that while, As if I were a Dutchesse or a Queene: And (that which made me oftentime to smile) Some youths there were of yeeres & iudgment green That cast vpon me many a wanton looke, My sex and qualitie they so mistooke. 48 At last came meate, both store of flesh and fish, What kinds of both to tell I ouerslip, I maidenly rast here and there a dislr, And in the wine I scant do wet my lip, The time seemd long that staid my wanton wish, And still I doubted taking in some trip; When bed time came, she told me I must be Her bedfellow, the which well pleased me. 49 Now when the maids and pages all were gone, One onely lampe vpon the cubbard burning, And all costs cleare, thus I began anon: Faire dame I thinke you muse of my returning, And cause you haue indeed to muse thereon, For yesterday when I did leaue you mourning, I thinke both you and I did thinke as then, We should not meet againe till God knowes when.
50 First let me tell you why from you I went, Then why I come, hereafter I shall show: Deare Ladie (thus it was) I did lament Your fruitlesse loue on me was placed so, And though I could haue ay bene well content, To waite on you, and neuer part you fro, Yet since my presence did but make you languish, I thought mine absence minish would your anguish. 51 But riding on my way, I somewhat straid, As fortune and aduenture did me guide, And so I heard a voice that cride for aid, Within a thicket by the riuer side: A Satyr taken had a naked maid, And with a twisted cord her hands had tide, And in his vsage seemed so to threaten her, As if he would haue kild her straight and eaten her. 52 I rusht to them with naked sword in hand, And death to him, and freedome I did giue her, She diuing vnder water out of hand, Vnrecompenst thou shalt not me deliuer, Quoth she, for I will haue you vnderstand, I am a Nvmph that dwell here in this riuer; And for this courtsie I do much regard you, And am well able richly to reward you. 53 Aske of me what you list, and I will giue it, For I vpon the elements haue powre; I can with charms bring down the Moon, beleeue it, I can swage stormes, and make faire weather lowre, What is so hard, but my skill can atchieue it? To drayne the sea, or build in aire a towre? Yea cu'n with simple words (and if I will) I can inforce and make the Sunne stand still. 54 When as the Nymph had made me this great offer, (Lo Ladie what great loue to you I bare) I neither askt with gold to fill my coffer, Nor victory, of which some greedie are, This fauour onely I demaunded of her, To make me able to asswage your care: Nor nam'd I any meanes for feare of erring, The onely way and meanes to her referring. 55 No sooner this request to her I told, But in the christ all streame againe he diued, And sprinkled me with drops of water cold, Which to my skinne so sooner were arriued, But I was changd from that I was of old, And of my former state I was depriued; I felt, I saw, yet seant beleeue I can, That of a woman I was made a man. 56 And sauing that eu'n now I am so nie you, As you may quickly proue my tale not fained, Else you might thinke I said it but to trie you: Now so, since I for you this wish obtained, Aske what you please, I nothing shall denie you, Enioy that which my loue for you hath gained: When I had pleaded thus, and she had heard it, On sight of euidence she gaue her vardit. 57 As one whose state is ouerwhelmd with debt,Simile. By lending or by spending out of measure, That looks ech houre when prouling shreeus wil set Himselfe toward, and of his goods make seasure, If some vnlookt for gaine he hap to get, By some mans death, or by some trouie treasure, Is so surprisd with ioy, he scant doth know, If true it be, or if he dreamed so. 58 So she that now did see, and feele, and tuch, That which she long had longed for in vaine, It ouerfild her mind with ioy so much, It seemed in a trance she did remaine; Therein her incredulitie was such, As to resolue her I did take much paine: If these be dreames (quoth she) for these dreams sake I euer wish to dreame and neuer wake. 59 Not sound of drum, of trumpet, or of phife, Nor warlike instrument of any sort, Did sound alarum to our friendly strife, But douelike billing followd louely sport, This battell hazards neither limbe nor life, Without a ladder I did seale the fort, And stoutly plant my standerd on the wall, And vnder me I made my so to fall. 60 If that same bed were full the night before Of teares, of plaints, of anguish and annoyes, No doubt but now it had in as great store, Both smilings, sports, and solaces and ioyes: No Iuy doth embrace the pillar more, Then she did me, nor Apes can find more toyes, Then we yong fooles did find to make vs merie, Till ioy it selfe of ioy did make vs werie. 61 The thing twixt vs did secret long remaine, And certaine months this pleasure did endure, Till some had found, and told it to my paine, As you well know that did my life assure: Yet I confesse great griefe I still sustaine, Not knowing how her safetie to procure. This Richardetto to 'Rogero told,The end of  ale of F∣dispina. And all the while their iourney on they hold. 62 By that time Richardettos tale was done, They gan vp to a little hill to mount, And when an houre and more was set the Sunne, They came vnto the castle Agrismount, Kept then by Aldiger the bastard sonne Of Bouo,Aldiger of the house of Clarimount, A wise and sober man and of good qualitie, And bountifull in keeping hospitalitie. 63 And after he had bid them welcome both, One as his kinsman, tother as his frend, I heare ill newes (quoth he) that I am loth To tell to you, least it should you offend: But thus it is, to let you know the troth,Bertolage of  house of Maga∣za. I heare that Bertolage doth sure intend To buy the prisners that Ferraw hath tane,Malagigi and Vimea. As namely Malagige and Viuiane.
64 Lanfusa taketh vpon her to sell them, And as I heare tomorrow is the day, Vnto your brothers I sent one to tell them, But they be absent hence so farre away, As ere they come, from hence they may expel them, I am too weake to force, too poore to pay, My loue is great, to wish all good vnto them. But powre so small, as good I can none do them. 65 Young Richardetto much mislikt the newes, So did Rogero for the tothers sake, And when he saw they both were in a muse, Nor knew what counsell, or what course to take, No feare (quoth he) let me this matter vse, On me this enterprise lle vndertake, So I shall handle this affaire so handsome, This sword alone shall pay your kinsmens ransome. 66 This spake Rogero his companions chearing, But notwithstanding Aldiger, his host, Gaue to those lostie promises such hearing, Prouerbs.As if there were great boast and little rost: Which vnto Richardetto plaine appearing, Who knew his vallew, greater then his bost: Good cosen if you knew him well that sed it, You would said he vnto his word giue credit. 67 Then Aldiger on better information, Gaue care and credit to his noble guest, And made him cheare to sute his reputation, And plast him at the boord aboue the rest: And supper done, he was in seemely fashion, In chamber lodgd, of all the house the best, The master of the house in nothing scant, His worthy guest will suffer nothing want. 68 Now was the time when all men foundest sleepe, Rogero onely cannot sleepe a winke, For cares and thoughts that him do waking keepe, And in his troubled braine profoundly sinke; The siege of Agramant doth pierce him deepe, And what dishonor men of him may thinke, And deeme his heart but faint, his faith but fickle, To leaue his soueraigne inso wosull pickle. 69 Had he reuolted at some other time, Men might haue thought that true religion mou'd him, None could haue it imputed as a crime, Nor no man probably could haue reprou'd him: Now, when his masters fortune did decline, And when to aid him chiefest it behoou'd him, Feare, men will thinke, his change procured chiefe, Nor iust remorse, nor zeale of true beliefe. 70 This troubled him, and little lesse then this, It troubled him, to thinke of his deare hart, Whom now by euill fortune he doth misse, Nor cannot once salute er he depart; Wherefore to write to her his purpose is, And so to her at large his minde impart, Both that of him she may haue certaine newes, As that he may his sodaine going scuse. 71 The chamberlaines both prudent and discreet, Vpon Rogero quicke attendance gaue, Prouiding him of needfull things and meet, Inke, paper, light, and what he else would craue: Then (as the manner is) he doth her greet,Rogeros letter to Bradamant. Vpon the front, as letters vse to haue; Thus after verie hartie commendations, Or some such phrase of friendly salutations. 72 Then tels he her how that the Turkish Prince, Had for his ayd, by speciall message sent, Who is besiegd, and hath bene long time since; And how to rescue him is his intent: Least men of cowardise might him conuince, That he away in time of danger went: And now would leaue his lawfull Lord and liege, Then when his enemies did him besiege. 73 He prayeth her to weigh, how foule a deed, How full it were of infamie and shame, To yeeld his Prince no aid in such a need, That sent to him of purpose for the same: He wisht her for her owne sake to take beed, That no such staine might spot her spouses name, That being she, so true and so sinceare, She should no blemish in her husband and beare. 74 He further doth his zeale to her protest, As erst he had in word so now in writing, And sweares that when his Prince were vndistrest, The siege quite raisd, by concord or by fighting, That foolish people might not make a iest, To his reproch, that common speach reciting, Rogero loues to take the lurer side,Prouerbe. And turnes his sailes, as fortune turnes her tide. 75 I shall (he writes) when that time doth expire, Which in a month I hope wil be effected; Finde some occasion from them to retire, And of no breach of honour be suspected. Then shall I full accomplish your desire, And do, as I by you shalbe directed: This onely for my honour I demand thee, And after this thou euer shalt command mee. 76 These things, and like to these Rogero wrate, As then by hap came in his troubled hed, To certifie his loue of his estate, And of the cause that his departure bred: By that time he had done, it was full late, And then againe he got him to his bed, And closd his eies, when he had closd the letter, And after tooke his ease a great deale better. 77 Next day they all arose at breake of day, With minde to go to set their kinsmen free, And though Rogero earnestly did pray, That none might take that enterprise but he, Yet both the other stifly said him nay, And there unto by no meanes would agree, Vnto the place assignd they ride togither, And by the time appointed they came thither.
78 The place they came to was a goodly plaine, In which no tree nor bush was to be seene, Here Bertolage did point to take them twaine, As was agreed Lanfuse and him betweene, But first they met, while here they did remaine, One that a Phenix bare in field all greene, With armor faire embost, and guilt with gold, As in the booke that follows shal be told. In this xxv booke,Morall. in Rogeros valiant proceeding for the deliuerie of Richardetto (though as then not knowne to him what he was) may be noted a wonderfull courage and promptnes to honorable exploits: In the great likenes of face of Bradamant and Richardetto (though this be but a fiction) yet we may obserue the rare, and (as it were) cunning workmanship of nature; admirable, as well in making so many sundrie countenances, one vnlike another: as also some∣times in making some so exceeding like, which indeed though it seldomer fortunes, and sooner alters in brother and sister; yet in two brothers, it is seene many times, and therefore not improbable to be written, as it is here for the forenamed couple. I have heard in England of the two Tremaines not many yeares past: I haue knowne myselfe two of the Wrothes in Eaton schoole, and lately in her Maiesties court two Tracies, two proper and valiant young Gentlemen; whom my selfe being familiarly acquainted with, yet I could verie hardly know one from the other. But to come to the tale of Richardetto and Fiordispina, (which name signifieth as much as the flowre of thorne, and not vnapt for her prickling condition) I must confesse my author sheweth in the tale, rather pleasant wit, then any sober grauitie, and the best I can say is this, that it is a bad matter not verie ill handled. But as I vndertooke in the beginning to make speciall note of all she good matters by which the honest reader might take profite, so I thinke it as conuenient, where any light and lasciui∣ous matter fals (as this is surely one) to temper it in such sort, or at least to salue it so, as it may do least hurt. Namely, I would not haue that xxv. staffe by misapplying it, made worse: being perhaps bad enough at the best. For what can be more cullen like and base, And fitter for a man were made of straw, Then standing in a gallant Ladies grace, To shew himselfe a cockow or a daw, Leesing occasion both of time and place? &c. This taken, as many will take it, may seeme but lewd doctrine, but thus it ought and may be honestly taken, that he that in good honorable sort (as put the case in the way of marriage) may obtaine the loue of some worthy Ladie, and stands in her high sauour, and then will be so bashfull, either for want of wit or heart, to leese that oportunitie, he may be in good reason indued with those gentle titles; neuerthelesse to vnderstand it generally were vngoodly, considering the Scripture commendeth to vs the example of Ioseph, that refused his mistres kindnes. But to conclude the morall of this tale, we may note how full of doubts and feares these vnlawfull pleasures are, how soeuer some men like better, to hunt by stealth in another mans walke, then to haue the fairest course that may be at game of their owne. The examples that Fiordispina recites of other womens vnlawfull lusts,Historie. preferring them before her owne, for their possibilitie (hers being vnpossible) are confirmed by diuers authors, as of Nynus wife Semiramis, that lusted after a horse: Nynos wise after a bull, and other such tales, though I thinke vntrue, or rather cullerd by such names: as in that of Pasiphae, it is thought she loued one that was called Taurus (to say a bull) and thereupon the light headed Poets, that haue a priuiledge as free for the pen, as painters haue for the pencill, make a great wonder of it, whereas perhaps in∣deed it was but euen an ordinarie matter, that is dayly (or at least nightly) committed, by many in these times. Thus tale of Fiordispina alludes to that in the ninth of the Metamorphosis of Iphis,Allusion. and the complaint she makes is much taken from thence, and is wonderfull finely written by Ouid, as you may reade there more at large. Vix\`quetenens lachrimas; quis me manet exitus inquit, Cognita quam nulli, quam prodigiosa nouaeque, Cura tenet Veneris? si dij mihi parcere vellent, Perdere debuerant: si non & perdere vellent, Naturale malum saltem, & de more dedissent, Nec vaccam vaccae, &c. Here end the notes of the xxv. booke.
THE XXVI. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. The learned Malagige strange riddles showes, To his companions out of Merlins well: With Mandricard the Sarzan thither goes, And each tooke quarrels new, as there befell: For Discord seed of strife among them sowes, But Doralices horse, by fiend of hell Affrighted, doth his mistres beare away, Which causd the Pagans both breake off the fray. 1 RIght worthy dames there were in times of old, That more esteemd of vertue then of wealth, But now our iron age is all for gold, For bad, and worse, in sick∣nes and in health, But she that will that elder custome hold, And leaue this new, deserues where ere she dwelth, Here in this life to haue a happie choice, And in the next for euer to reioice. 2 Such was the noble Bradamantas mind, Who sought not after wealth and rich abilitie, Nor state, nor pompe, that many women blind, But after vertue pure, the true nobilitie: And well deserued he to find her kind, That shewd in him such proofs of high gentilitie, And tooke vpon him actions for her sake, Which time to come for miracles may take. 3 Rogero (as before I did recite) With Aldiger and Richardetto came, To rescue those two prisners (if they might) That should be sold with great reproch and shame. I told you how they met a gallant knight, .Whose shield had painted that same bird of fame, That still renews it selfe, and neuer dien And onely one, in all the world there flie. 4 Now when this knight was of these three aware, That stood like men new plast in battell ray, He comes to them, and seeing what they are, Will there (quoth he) some one of you assay, If so his value can with mine compare, With staffe, with sword, or any any other way? If any will, come then, and let vs trie it, If none, then say so quickly, and denie it. 5 Sir answerd Aldiger, I were content, To trie myselfe with you, about or two, But we three came not here for this intents We come, a greater feate then this to do, And at this time, a little time mispent, May hinder vs, and little pleasure you, We three intend (if God do say Amen) Two take two prisners from sixe hundred men. 6 Sure (said that other) if you mind indeed, So great an enterprise to take in hand, No doubt it doth of valiant mind proceed, And pittiet' were, your purpose to withstand: I rather shall assist you in this deed, If you vouch safe to make me of your band, And by my seruice I will quickly shoe, Good proofe if I deserue such grace or no. 7 Perhap that some would know, and if they may, What valiant knight this was that did intreat, To take Rogeros part in such a fray, Whereas the danger could not be but great. Now she, not he, hereafter I must say, Marfisa was,Marfisa of whom I did repeat, How she both fought, and foyld a little since, And with Gabrina, chargd the Scottish Prince.
8 Rogero stout, and they of Clarimount, Of her and of her offer well esteemed, She ioynd with them, they making full account That she had bene of that same sex she seemed. Straight ready on their horses backs they mount, They see aloofe a cornet (as they deemed) Of horse, and mingled some on foote together, And all of them directly tending thether. 9 Their march, their ensignes, penons, and their flags, Did cause for Moores they knowne were & discride, Amid this crew, vpon two little nags The prisners rode with hands behind them tide, That must be changd for certaine golden bags, That Bertolage had promist to prouide; Come (saith Marfisa) to the other three; Now let the feast begin, and follow me. 10 Soft (quoth Rogero) there be wanting some Of those that to the banquet must be bidden, And to begin afore the guests be come, .In reason and good manners is forbidden; By this, the tother crew had ouercome The hill, that late before from them were hidden, These were the traitrous wretches of Magaunse, And now was ready to begin the daunce. 11 Maganza men of one side, merchant like, Brought laden moyles with gold and costly ware, The Moors their prisners brought with sword & pike Enuirond round about with heed and care; The Captains meet with mind a match to strike, The prisners present at the bargaine are, And now are bought and sold (for ought they know) To Bertolage their old and mortall foe. 12 Good Aldiger and noble Ammons sonne, Could hold no longer seeing Bertolage, But both together at him they do runne, With hearts all set on fierce reuenge and rage, His force nor fate their fury could not shunne, Their speares his armor and his brest did gage, Downe falls the wretch, his wealth him cannot saue, Such end I wish all wicked wretches haue. 13 Marfisa and Rogero at this signe, Set out without expecting trumpets blast, And with two staues of straight well seasond Pine, Twise twentie men vnto the ground they cast; The Captaine of the Moores doth much repine, They of Maganza murmured as fast: For each side deemed, as they might in reason, That this had happend by the tothers treason. 14 Wherefore each side with wrath and fury kindled, Vpbraiding tone the tother with vntruth, With swords and bils, pel mel together mingled, Do fight, and then a bloudy fray ensu'th, The Moorish Duke was by Rogero singled, A man eu'n then in prime and strength of youth, But youth, nor strength, nor armour could not saue him, From such a blow as good Rogero gaue him. 15 Marfisa doth as much on tother side, And in such sort besturd her with her blade, That looke which way soeuer she did ride, An open lane for her the people made: If any were so stout the brunt to bide, Yet soone they found their forces ouerlaid; Through coats of proof they prou'd her sword wold enter, She sent their soules below the middle center. 16 If you haue seene the hony making Bees To leaue their hiues, and going out in swarmes,Simile. Virgel wrises that Bees do fight set battels many times. When as their kings and masters disagrees, And they make camps in th'aire like men at armes, Straight in among them all the Swallow flees, And eates and beates them all vnto their harmes: So thinke Rogero and Marfisa then, Did deale among these bands of armed men. 17 Now Aldlger and Richardet no lesse, Vpon Maganza met chants lay on lode, Both free to set their kinsmen from distresse,Horace: Cana perus & angus. And for they hated them like snake or tode, They that the cause nor quarrell could not guesse, And saw their Captaine dead, made short abode: Their plate, their coine and treasure all they yeeld, And were the first that faintly left the field. 18 So flie from Lions silly heards of Goates,Simile. That haue deuourd and spoild them at their list, And torne their sides, their hanches and their throtes, Yet none of them their fellowes dare assist: So fled these men, and cast away their coates, And weapons all, and durst no more resist: Nor matuell if these two had Lions harts, That ready find such two to take their parts. 19 Whose acts at large to tell I do refraine, At which that age did not a little wonder, And now to tell them, men would thinke I faine, Yea though my words their actions far were vnder: For at one blow oft horse and man was slaine, From head to foote whole bodies clou'n in sunder, And either standing on their reputation, Bred for their foes a costly emulation. 20 Still tone of them markt tothers valiant deed, And each of tother fell in admiration, She deemes him Mars, or one of Mars his seed, And farre aboue all humane generation: And saue he was deceiued in her weed, He would haue giu'n her equall commendation, And likned her, as well he liken might, Vnto Bellona for her valiant fight. 21 Thus of two bands these foure the battell wonne, And all their stuffe and carriages they got, The prisners loosd, their bands were all vndone, Their foes all foild, such is their happie lot: The man was well whose horse could swiftest runne, Small count they make of amble or of trot: The tone side leaue their gold on asses loden, The tother of their captiues are forboden.
22 The noble vanquishers do seize the pray, Flnders hath .Which was both rich and sumptuous to behold, Of Flanders worke an hanging rich and gay, (To hang a stately roome) of silke and gold; They also found rich clothing and array, That should haue bene vnto Lanfusa fold, And namely mong the rest a gallant gowne, Embroderd round with cost of many a crowne. 23 They further found good vittels and good store, Wine bottels coole and fresh, and good of tast, With which (not hauing eate that day before) They do agree to baite and breake their fast, And eu'ry one prepares himselfe therefore, And to that end their curats they vnlast: Now when Marfisa had put off her beauer, To be a woman eu'ry one perceaue her. 24 Her golden haire trust vp with carelesse art, Her forehead faire, and full of stately grace, Her eye, her lip, and eu'ry other part, So suting to her comely shape and face, As bred eu'n then in each beholders hart, A reu'rend loue and wonder in like case; And straight they askt her name, the which she told them, And with as great delight she doth behold them. 25 But she her selfe farre more then all the rest, Rogeros shape and person doth regard, His vallew great, his vnappalled brest, Before the others all she much prefard, To him alone her speeches she addrest, Of him alone she would her speech were hard: Thus she in him, and he delighted in her, The while the other had prepard their dinner. 26 The place they din'd in was a pleasant caue, And one of foure that famous Merlin wrought, Where he in milke white marble did ingave Strange stories, which things future strangely taught, The very images seemd life to haue; And sauing they were dumb you weld haue thought Both by their lookes and by their heely features. That they had mou'd, and had bene liuing creatures. 27 Of this looke in the Allegory.From out a desert wood an vgly beast There seemd to come, whose shape was thus defined An asles cares, a wolte in head and breil, A carkas all with pinching  pined, A Lions grizly raw, but all the test To fox like shape did seeme to be inclined: In England, France, in Italy and Spaine, Yea all the world this monster seemd to raigne. 28 Where ere this cruell monster set his foote, He kild and spoild of eury sort and state, No height of birth or state with him did boote, He conquerd kings and clownes, all in a rate, Yea this beasts powre had tane so deepe a roote, It enterd in Christs vicars sacred gate, And vexed Cardinals and Bishops chiefe, And bred a scandall eu'n in our beliefe. 29 Vnto this beast men seemd to bow and bend, This beast brake through each wall and eu'ry sence, No citie could itselfe there from defend, Strong castels made from it but weake defence, In fine, her powre did seeme so farre extend, That many were so fond and void of fence, To thinke and to beleeue this monster fell, Had powre of all things both in heau'n and hell. 30 But when this beast had rang'd a while, behold One wearing on his head a lawrell crowne, With three that wore the flowre de luce of gold, Embroderd richly on their purple gowne, And with these three a stately Lion bold, Did ioyne his force to put the monster downe; The titles and the names that them concerned, Might in their garments plainly be discerned. 31 One that with sword the beast thrusts in the paunch, Was he whose praise no time shall euer smother, Francis the first of that name king of France, Of Austria Maximullen is another, Then Charles the fist that with a mightie launce Smites through the beast, frō tone side to the tother: The fourth that in the brest with arrow wounds him Was Henrie th'eight,Of King H the 8  historie of the booke. the writing to expounds him. 32 Leo the tenth, the Lion fierce is called, Who chast him, and fast caught him by the eare, And in the chase the beast so tyrd and galled, As others tooke him while he held him there: By this the world seemd freed that erst was thralled, By this men seemd secure and void of feare, Seing that beast whose look late made them tremble Stroyd by the powre of this so braue assemble. 33 This story so set forth (as I haue told) With costly workmanship, great pleasure bred, In all their minds that did the same behold, And on this sight more then their meat they fed, And chiefe Marfisa wisht to heare it told, What men these were, if men already dead, Or else a prophecie of things ensuing, dden skill, laid ope to each mans vewing. 34 The Malagigi was by them requested, As one in Mathematikes seene right well, And had the method thereof so digested, As he all hidden mysteries could tell, To shew what monster thus the world molested, And who be these that him frō earth expell: For though they saw their names, they did not know them, But he they knew by his great skil could show them. 35 Know then (quoth he) that these whose names appeare In marble pure, did neuer liue as yet, But long time hence, after six hundred yeare, To their great praise in princely throne shall sit, Merlin the English prophet plast them here In Arthurs time, and by his passing wit, Set here (as yet) their vuperformed deeds, And noted all their names vpon their weeds.
36 This beast you saw, had first her habitation Beneath amongst the wicked fiends of hell, And staid there till that wicked generation, saith of the ge. unemque sculumina &  aurae  humum  signauit  messor.(I meane the iron age) on earth did dwell, When none durst trust without an obligation, When fraud first came tween them that buy and sel, And when the mightie (to their great reproch) First on the poore mens liuings did incroch. 37 Then first this monster cruell got abrode, And euer since her powre doth still increase, And wheresoere she maketh her abode, There is no friendship firme, nor godly peace; fruit of co∣nesse and .Conscience and iustice vnder foote are trod, Good gouernment and wholsome lawes do cease, That Python Phoebus kild with thousand darts, Was monster lesse then this by thousand parts. 38 Thus Malagigi said, and then he told Who those should be that should the monster kill, That should come then when as the world were old, That should renew each good, and mend each ill, Whose names in sacred stile to be inrold in the .Deserue, and to be praisd aud honourd still, That should in time to come, as he did conster, With bountie kill that miserable monster. 39 Those fiue I nam'd, and more by fiue times fiue, Mine author names, that holpe to slay the beast. Rogero and the rest the time did driue, In such like talke during the present feast, And ere they rose, behold there did arriue Vnto this caue vnwares another guest, By name that maid from whom of late by force, Fierce Rodomont had tane Rogeros horse. 40 She hauing heard by hap vpon the way, Her mistris brother was at Merlins caue, Where she had bin her selfe an other day, Not thinking now Rogero there to haue; Him when she saw, she not one word doth say To him, nor any show or inckling gaue, Like one that knew so well to do her arrant. As she durst go, sometime beside her warrant. 41 But vnto Richardet she frames her tale, Yet so as tother might her speeches heare, How one from her a gallant courser stale, Which Bradamant her mistris held full deare, The horse (quoth she) Frontyno she did call, And I had led him thirty mile well neare, Marsilia toward, where she bad me stay, And pointed me to meet me at a day. 42 So fond was I, I feared no mans force, Nor doubted no mans will to do me wrong, When once I should but shew them how the horse Vnto Renaldos sister did belong: Yet one fierce Pagan voide of all remorse, Met me, and tooke him from me, and ere long Did meet a fo, with whom I fighting left him, That hath I hope by this of life bereft him. 43 Rogero with this tale was so much moued, That scant hereof Hyppalca made an end, But Richardetto straight by him was moued, Yea and coniurd, as he would be his frend, That this attempt might sole by him be proued, And (but this damsell) none might him attend: That she may bring him to the Pagans sight, That tooke away her horse against all right. 44 Stout Richardet (though thinking too much wrong,Sentence. So oft to let another vndertake Those enterprises that to him belong) Yet sith so earnestly Rogero spake, He giues consent, and tother staid not long, But of the companie his leaue doth take, And leaues them all, in wonder great to see, That such hie worth could in a yong man be. 45 Now when Hyppalca was quite out of sight, She opned to Rogero all the troth, How she that counts him her beloued knight, And voweth to be his by solemne oth, Sent her of purpose to him this last night, Which she before conceald (as being loth Her mistris brother should her counsell know, How she that horse vpon him did bestow.) 46 She told him how that he that tooke the steed, Did adde these proud and scornfull words beside, Because it is Rogeros horse indeed, So much the rather on the horse I ride, And if he will be grieu'd at this my deed, Tell him I do not mind my selfe to hide, For I am Rodomont (he said) whose name Where ere I passe filleth the world with fame. 47 One might haue seene it in Rogeros face, In how great dudgen this great wrong he tooke, Both for the gift and giuer in like case, And grosse abuse, for which he did not looke: He thinks what infamy and foule disgrace It were to him, so great despite to brooke; Which if he would, then iustly eu'rybody, Might take him for a dastard and a nody. 48 Wherefore with heart vpon reuenge full set, He followeth forthwith his female guide, She that did thinke the fray vnparted yet, That Rodomont and Mandricardo tride, By darke blind wayes, the nearest she could get, Vnto the place directly she did ride, But as you heard, they had deferd the quarell, And hasted thence to help their Liege from perell. 49 And as I toucht before,Rodomont. Mandricard. Doralice. their hap them brought Vnto the foresaid Merlins famous caue, There where before good Malagigi taught, What secret meaning all the pictures haue: Now had Marfisa (by the rest besought) Put on a womans garment passing braue, Which lately for Lanfusa had bin made, And so attyrd, refresht her in the shade.
50 When that Tartarian Prince had spide this dame, Straight in his mind he plots this new found drift, I will (thought he) by conquest win the same, And giue her Rodomontee as my gift, Sentence.(As though that loue were but a sport and game, That might be sold and changed for a shift) For why (he thought) what needs a man complaine, If leesing one, he do another gaine? 51 Wherefore the tothers damage to repaire, And that he might his owne in quiet haue, And for Marfisa seemly was and faire, As no man need a dame more comely craue: He doth forthwith vnto them make repaire, Denouncing straight the challenge stout and braue, That he with those foure knights at tilt wold runne, Till they slue him, or he their Ladie wonne. 52 Straight stept out Malagige and Viuian, Both prest in her defence to breake a speare, Not fearing to encounter man to man, With those two Pagans they saw present there; But when the fray betweene them now began; Pierce Rodomont stood still and doth forbeare, As comming thither with another mind, And not to change his purpose first assignd. 53 Now of the brothers Viuian was the first, That with great might the Pagan did inuade, Vpon whose crest in vaine his speare he burst, His blow no hurt it did, no signe it made, His force was least, so was his fortune worst, For Mandricard (more perfect in his trade) With so great strength and skill his speare inforced, That he was ouerthrowne and quite vnhorsed. 54 To venge his brother, Malagigi thought, But of his thought he quickly was deceiued, His force thus ouermatcht preuailed nought, From off his saddle he was quickly heaued. Next. Aldiger his comming dearly bought, For in his side a great wound he receaued, So downe vpon the grasse he fell halfe dead, His visage waxing pale, his armorred. 55 Then Richardetto came with mightie lance, And prou'd himselfe by his great force to be Worthy the name of Palladine of France, As oft his foes did feele, his friends did see; But at this time one ouerthwart mischance Did hap, that downe among the rest lay he, His horse wherein he put so great a trust, Fell downe with him, and tumbled in the dust. 56 When at no other champion did appeare, But all were ouerthrowne in this late fight, Thinking this conquest now obtained cleare, Without more stay he from his horse doth light, And comming vnto her with smiling cheare, Faire dame (quoth he) you now are mine by right, You cannot it denie, or once excuse it, For by the lawes of battell so we vse it. 57 Indeed (Marfisa said) it were no wrong, And I were yours I grant by law of warre, If I were theirs, or did to them belong. That you haue foiled in this present iarre, But I shall make you know I hope ere long, You misse your marke, your aime did greatly arre, I am mine owne, mine owner is within me, He that will haue me, from my selfe must win me. 58 I handle can (quoth she) both sword and speare, And haue ere this made more then one man bleed, Then cald she for her armor which was there, Which by a page was brought to her with speed, Off go'th her gowne, and for she still did weare A slender trusse beneath her womans weed, Her well shapt limbs therein were plainly seene, In shape like Mars,Cleopatra. in face like Aegypts Queene. 59 When at all peeces she was armed round, She vauteth nimbly vp into her seate, And twise or thrise she makes her horse to bound, To bate a little of his furious heate, And makes a turne or two aboue the ground, Then turnes she to her so to do her seate; Such was (iudge) Pentheseleas fight, Against Achilles famous Greekish knight. 60 Thus each themselues vpon their horse aduances, And with their couched speares forthwith they run, Vp in a thousand splinters flies the lances, But vnto them no hurt at all is done: The Pagan greatly maruels how it chances, That she should scape, and curses Moone and Sun; And she with her successe as ill content, Blasphemeth eke the heau'ns and firmament. 61 Then they assayd with swords most dreadfull dint, To wound the tone the tother, and to kill, Their strokes were such as might haue pierst ye flint, And to their force was ioyned passing skill: They lay on lode amaine, and do not stint, The sound doth all the place with eccho fill, But neuer was it more for their behoose, To haue their armour of to passing proofe. 62 But while they now did most apply the fray, Fierce Rodomont doth step them both betwixt, And blames him much for making such delay, Of that which late by him was firmely fixt; And then with courteous speech he her doth pray, With lowly words and lostie, quaintly mixt, That she would helpe to aid Traianos sonne, Whose tents were in much danger to be wonne. 63 To this request Marfisa doth assent, As well to helpe king Agramant thereby, As for she came to France with that intent, The forces of the Palladines to try; This while Rogero, wroth and malcontent, After the stealer of his horse doth hie; And hauing found of him the perfect tracke, He sends againe his guide Hippalca backe.
64 And for he thought that none could do it better, The messenger he makes her of his mind, And sends by her his lately written letter, Protesting he will still continue kind, And that he doth himselfe acknowledge debter, And would himselfe to her for euer bind, He onely prayes her for a time excuse His absence, which he would not, might he chuse. 65 With this dispatch Hippalca went her way, And came to mount Albano that same night. Rogero made but very little stay, Vntill he had Frontino in his sight; Which seen and known, forthwith there was no way, But he will haue his horse againe, or fight With him, that had with so vnnoble force, The damsell robbed of the gallant horse. 66 And straight in shew of warre he coucht his speare, And to his face the Pagan he deside, But Rodomont doth patiently forbeare, Eu'n as a Iob, and all his words abide: Not that of him he had one sparke of feare, For his great value often had bin tride,, But that the danger of his Lord and King, Weyd more with him then any other thing. 67 Wherefore he gently tels him for what cause He may not fight, and him exhorted to, What all diuine, and what all humane lawes, his di∣ressent Prince.Vnto his Prince commands a man to do. I (said Rogero) am content to pawse, In this respect, and make a truce with you, So that this horse againe to me you render, Which so to take, your reason was but slender. 68 Now while these two herein do square and braue, The Tartar king doth vnto them approch, And when he saw what armes Rogero gaue, He set another brabble straight abroch: Mine are (quoth he) these armes that now you haue, How dare you on my titles thus incroch? They cause why Mandricardo spake these words, Eagle.Was that Rogero gaue the King of burds. 69 An Eagle argent in a field of blew, Rogero gaue, whilom the crest of Troy, As one that thence deriu'd his pedegrew, And did by due descent the same enioy; But hereof Mandricardo nothing knew, Or nought beleeu'd, and calld it but a toy, And tooke it as an iniury and scorne, To see the same by any other worne. 70 For he himselfe did giue, as for his cote, The Eagle was nd to beare vp word to Iu∣piter.That bird that barevp Ganimed on hie, Ere since he wan (as I before did note) Don Hectors armes, and wan such praise thereby, The good successe hereof makes him aflote, So that he did Rogero straight defie, I shall (quoth he) some better manners teach thee, Then in such sawcie sort to ouer reach thee. 71 As wood well dride will quickly fall on fire,Simile. If so a man a little do it blow; So was Rogero kindled now in ire, To heare the Pagan reprehend him so; Thou thinkst (quoth he) to haue thy fond desire, By charging me now with a double so, But know that I my partie good will make, From him mine horse, from thee mine arms to take. 72 Did not we two about this matter boord? And then to take thy life I did abstaine, Because that by your side I saw no sword; But now sith you begin this brawle againe, This shall be fight in deed, that was but word, And that your crest shall turne you to much paine, Which vnto me descent and propagation Hath left, but you do hold by viurpation. 73 Nay thou vsurpst, the tother straight doth say, And with that word he Durindana drew, That sword that erst Orlando flang away, And then a cruell fray was like ensew: But straight the tother two did cause them stay, And chiefly Rodomont did seeme to rew, That Mandricard of lightnesse shewd such token, That twise by him his promise had bin broken. 74 First when to get Marfisa he had thought, He had conflicted more then twise or thrise, And now with tother quarrelled for nought, About a bird or some such fond deuise: Nay then (quoth he) if needs you wold haue fought, We two should trie the title of our prise, Which by consent should stand still vndecided, Vntill our Princes safetie were prouided. 75 Wherefore for shame do as you haue agreed, And let vs cease and lay all quarrels by, And when our Prince from danger shall be freed, Then first betweene vs two the matter trie, And after if you hue, you may proceed To fight it out with him, and so will I: Though well I wot, when I haue done with you, But little will remaine for him to do. 76 Tush (saith the Tartar Prince) for him nor thee, Nor all the world beside, I passe one straw, For though you fight, or though you do agree, Of neither of you both I stand in aw, As water in a spring,Simile. so strength in me Shall still supply much more then you can draw; I hope by that time I haue done my feate, From head to foot with blood le make you sweate. 77 Thus one ill word another doth draw on, And wrathfull Mandricard them both defier Rodomont would haue peace, but they would none, If this speake sharpe, then that more sharpe replies; If one strife be compounded, yet anon Another strife as bad or worse doth rise; In vaine Marfisa labours to compound them, For more and more vntoward still she found them.
78 Simile.Eu'n as the painfull husbandman doth thinke, By care to keepe the riuer in his bounds Medew and a∣able ground.That swels with raine, readie to passe the brinke, And ouerflow his mowd or sowed grounds, He strengthens eu'ry place that seems to shrinke, Yet more and more the water still abounds, And while he stops one vent, another groweth, Till ouer all perforce at last it floweth. 79 So when the dame, of whom I last made mention, Saw how Rogero stout and Mandricard, With Rodomont continude in contention, And each would seeme for tother two too hard, She willing to compound this sharpe dissention, Perswades them, but they little it regard, For still as one at her request forbeares, The other two are at it by the eares. 80 When as she saw their furie still increase, Let either vs (quoth she) our Prince assist, And in the meane time let all quarrels cease; Or if you in this fury still persist, Then I with Mandricard will haue no peace. Do herein (quoth Rogero) as you list, For I resolued am to haue my horse, Although it be by faire meanes or by force. 81 Then do (said Rodomont) your worst and best, For with that horse to part I not agree, But here before you all I do protest, That if our King by this stay damag'd be, And that for want of ayd he be distrest, The cause thereof did not proceed of me; Rogero little weyes his protestation, But firmly holds his first determination. 82 And at the Sarzan furiously he flies, And with his shoulder gaue him such a thrust, He lost his stirrops, and so loosd his thies, That hard he scaped lying in the dust. What? hold Rogero, Mandricardo cries, Either not fight, or fight with me you must, And in great rage, as that same word he spake, Rogeros beauer with great might he strake. 83 The blow was such, as made him forward leane, Rodomont was sonne of Vlie king of Algiov.And ere that he himselfe againe could reare, Vpon him smote the sonne of Vlyen, With so great strength as no strength might it beare That had his armor bene of temper meane, No doubt they had an end made of him there: Rogeros hands flie ope with senslesse paine, The tone his sword, the tother leaues his raine. 84 His horse away beares him about the greene, And Balisard his blade is left behind: Marfisa that had to Rogero beene Fellow in armes that day, was grieu'd in mind, To see him vsd so hardly them betweene, And being strong of limbes, and stout by kind, She smiteth Mandricardo on the crowne So hard, as wants not much to fell him downe. 85 After Rogero Rodomont doth get him, And now Frontino had welnigh bin wonne, But by the way stout Richardetto met him, And with him ioynd his cousin Bouos sonne; Tone iustles him, and furder off doth set him, The tother, namely Vinian, doth runne, Vnto Rogero that by this was waked, And lends his sword vnto his right hand naked. 86 Now backe he doth returne, enrag'd with scorne, Minding to pay his damage home againe,Simile. Eu'n as a Lion, whom the Bull hath borne Vpon his head, is full of fierce disdaine, Flies at him still, nor feares his cruell horne, His anger making him forget his paine, And on his beauer with such force he thundered, As though he weld his head in twain haue sundered. 87 And sure he had performd it very neare, If Balisarda had bene in his hand, Which he let fall, as you before did heare. Now when as Discord saw how things did stand, She thinks no peace can possibly be here, And taking Pride her sister by the hand, Now sister let vs turne vs to our Friers, For here (quoth she) are raisd sufficient fiers. 88 And so away they went, and let them go: And let me tell you how Rogero sped, Who gaue to Rodomont so fierce a blow, That such a great amazement in him bred, That twise or thrise he reeled to and fro; Frontino with his senslesse master fled, Also his sword had falne out of his fist, But that a chaine did tie it to his wrist. 89 This while Marfisa held the tother racke, And yet on either side the conquest swayd, Each had so good an armor on their backe, Of piercing it they need not be afrayd, Yet by a chance Marfisa hapt to lacke, And likewise hapt to haue Rogeros ayd, For in a turne she made, her horse did trip, And in the durt vpon one side did slip. 90 And as againe he labourd vp to rise, The cruell Tattar iustled him so crosse, That on his side the horse constrained lies, Foundring againe vpon the slimie mose; Which when Rogero from aloofe espies, How neare she was to danger great and losse, He steps to Mandricard, fiercely assailing him, While Rodomont stands mazd, his senses failing him, 91 The Tartar doth as fiercely him resist, But yet Rogero strake so great a blow, Both to auenge himselfe and her assist, Whom Mandricardo hapt to ouerthrow, That sure I thinke that blow had little mist, Quite to haue clou'n him to the saddle bow, Saue that the Tartars armor was so hard, And that Rogero wanted Balisard.
92 By this the Sarzan king againe did wake And seeing none but Richardetto neare, He cals to minde how for Rogeros sake, That youth to him was troublesome while eare. Straight with great rage he toward him doth make, Minding to make him buy that curtsie deare: And sure good Richardetto had repented it, But that his cosin with great art preuented it. 93 His cofin Malagige, whose skill was great, In all that doth to magicke art pertaine, With words that he without booke could repeat, Did coniure vp a spryte of hellish traine, And by this meanes he works a passing feat: For (though he namd no place) he doth ordaine, This sprite in Doralices horse to enter, And beare her thence away at all aduenter. 94 The sprite thus coniurd, quickly doth his part, Into the damsels gentle nag he crept, And so his quiet nature did peruart, That one the sudden thirtie foot he lept, And ten foot high, yet with so easie start, That Doralicee still the sadle kept, Yet cride she out, in doubt to haue miscarried, For in the diuels name she thence was carried. 95 Forthwith to helpe her Rodomonte go'th, Because she fled, and cride to him for aid, To stay behind the Tartar is as loth, For feare betweene them he may be betraid, He leaues Rogero and Marfisa both, Nor in the place so little time he staid, As to accord with them vpon some truce, Or make at least some mannerly excuse. 96 This while Marfisa was got vp againe, And now she means to venge her on her so, But he was gone, at which in great disdaine, She frets and chases, that he had seru'd her so, Rogero chases as much, for all in vaine, He knew it would be, after them to go: They know their steeds (and this doth grieue them more Cannot out run Frontin & Brighadore. 97 Wherefore supposing (as it was indeed) That they were gone vnto the Turkish host, To follow them forthwith these two agreed, Though not to follow as they went in post, Not doubting but when Agramant were freed, At leasure them to meet, and to their cost: They onward go, but yet Rogero ment, To bid his friends farewell asore he went. 98 Downe from his horse he gently doth descend, And Richardetto he aside doth take, And promist him for ay to be his frend, And to his noble sister for his sake: To whom (said he) I pray you me commend, Yet in such prettie sort the same he spake, His inward loue was not thereby detected, Nor her great loue to him, one whit suspected. 99 Thus solemne leaue once tane on either side. And profers of great loue and curtsie made, To him was hurt, and all the rest beside, As still among great nobles is the trade, Rogero with Marfisa on doth ride, But how they did the Christen campe inuade, And what great losse did Charls thereby receiue, In next ensuing booke you may perceiue. In the xxvi. booke I obserue that Aldiger did discreetly refuse the challenge of Marfisa, Morall. which might perhaps haue hin∣dred his better purpose in rescuing of his kinsmen. In Hippalca we may note the wisedome of a warie messenger, that knows as well to hold her peace as to speake. Lastly in Rogero, Rodomont, Mandricard and Marfisa, the confused ef∣fects of discord. The Princes named by mine author to be killers & vanquishers of the miserable monster (as I called it) by which aua∣rice is ment, Historie. are so famous in all writings of this age, that I need not speake of them, specially our king Henrie the eight, whose bountie and magnificence can neuer be forgotten while this realme shall be peopied, or any histories read. This description of the monster of couetousnesse, is (in my fancy) very well handled by mine Author, Allegorie. far beyond the like in Dant who maketh her onely like a Wolfe, pined with famine; But Ariosto goeth farder, and more significantly, de∣scribing her first to be vgly, because of all vices it is the most hatefull; eares of an asse, being for the most part ignorant, or at the least carelesse of other mens good opinions; a Wolfe in head and breast, namely rauenous and neuer satisfied; a Lions grisly iaw, terrible and deuouring; a foxe in all the rest, wyly and craftie, and timerous of those that are stronger then himselfe: all which applications are so proper and so plaine, as it is needlesse to stand vpon them. Some verie fondly haue surmised, Allusion. and published the same in print, that this was alluded to the Bishop of Rome, but how absurd that imagination is, the praise of the Pope, then liuing, following in the 32. staffe doth plainly shew. But Fornarius supposeth it to be meant rather by some temporall Prince of Italie, that with his couetousnesse oppressed the people, and therefore might be, not vnfitly, termed such a monster. Here end the notes of the xxvj. booke.
THE XXVII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Rogero and those other Pagan kings, Make Charles againe to Paris wals retire: Among the Turks new seed of quarrell springs, And kindles in their hearts a quenchlesse fire: Which all their campe in great disorder brings. Agramant to appease them doth desire; Fierce Rodomont doth leaue the campe in wrath, Because his mistres him forsaken hath: 1 wits  sudden thē .AMong the many rare and speciall gifts, That in the femal sex are found to sit, This one is chiefe, that they at sodayne shifts, Giue best aduice, and show most readie wit: But man, except he thinks and chews, and fifts, How eu'ry part may answer tother fit, By rash aduice doth often ouershoot him, And doth attempt the things that do not boot him. 2 Good Malagigi thought he had done wisely, In making Doralice to Paris fly, But if he had the matter wayd precisely, (Though Richardetto was perseru'd thereby) He would haue sure confest it done vnwisely, His safetie with so great a losse to buy: For by this act (which he then not forethought) A losse vnspeakeable to Charles was wrought. 3 Alas how much might he haue better done, If he had made the fiend the wench conuay, Vnto the fall or rising of the Sunne? To West, or East, or any other way, Where Rodomont and Agricanes sonne, From Paris wals might haue gone far astray? But he that euer wisheth Christens euill, So at this time did proue himselfe a Deuill. 4 The siend her silly horse most slily enterd, And, not before prescribed any place, He quickly all the company distemperd; Nor bare he her away a common pace, But ouer brooks, and streams, and ditches venterd: She crying still for ayd as in such case, Nor leaues her beast to fling, run, snore and stampe, Vntill she quite was past the Christen campe. 5 There did she come eu'n as she could desire, Among the midst of Agramantes traine, And there at last she found the king her sire, That of Granata did possesse the raigne: The while her louers both themselues do tire, And in pursuing her do take great paine, By tracing her with as great toile and care, As huntlmen do with pleasure trace the Hare. 6 Now Charles tis time for thee to looke about, Vnto thy wals and strengths in time betake thee, Thou neuer canst escape this plunge, I doubt, Except thou stir vp quickly, and awake thee, Thy strength, the lamps of France are quenched out I meane thy frends & champions chiefe forsake thee, Orlando thee, his wits haue him relinquished, And all his vertues drownd and quite extinguished. 7 Likewise Renaldo, though not fully mad, Yet little lesse then mad seekes there and hear, For faire Angelica, and is full sad, To see that he of her no news can heare; Lib. 2. For why a certaine old inchaunter had, Told him a forged tale, that toucht him neare, How she, to whom of loue he made profession, Was in Orlandos keep ng and possession.
8 This made him at the first so loth to go, To England, whither he was sent for ayd; This made him backe againe to hasten so, Then when the Turks his presence so dismaid, And thinking after that, some news to know, By priuie search the Nunries all he laid, And Castels all, in Paris and about, To see if he by search could finde her out. 9 But when he heard of her no news nor tiding, And that Orlando there likewise did want, He could in Paris make no longer biding, Doubting his riuall sought him to supplant, But vp and downe about the countrie riding Sometime to Braua, sometime to Anglant, Snpposing still Orlando her had hidden, Lest of his pleasure he might be forbidden. 10 And thus the wicked fiend his time espide, To giue the Christens such a fatall blo, When as these two, in whom they most affide, Were absent now their Prince and countrie fro; Furder for souldiers of the Turkish side, All that were valiant men, or counted so, Were all against this time entised hither, Wholly vniting all their force togither. 11 Gradasso stout, and Sacrapantee fearce, That in that charmed castell long had dwelt, Which th'English Duke, as I did late rehearse, Dissolued quite, and causd like snow to melt. These two likewise the Christen campe do pearce, The forces of these two the Christens felt. Rogero and Marfisa made lesse hast, And so it happend▪ they arriued last. 12 The first two couple neare the Christens tents, Did meet, and then after long consultation, Each vnto other shewing their intents, They all conclude with on determination, And all of them to this giue their consents. In spite of all the Christen generation, To succour Agramant their Lord and Liege, And mauger Charls his might, to raise the siege. 13 Straight in one crew they foure togither knit, Breake through ye Christen watch by force amaine, Neither in hugger mugger did they it, But crying lowdly, Affrica and Spaine, They lay on lode, and eu'rie one they hit, Dead or astonished doth there remaine: Alarum then all ore the campe was rung, Though few could tel the cause fró whēce it sprung. 14 Some thought the Gascoigns or the Switzers bold, By mutiny had made some insurrection, And their surmise vnto the Emp'ror told, Who came with minde to giue them due correction But when he did the bodies dead behold, Incurable vntill the resurrection, He standeth still like one with wonder mazed, And on their wofull wounds long time he gazed. 15 Eu'n as a man that with a bolt of thunder,Simile. Hath seene his dwelling house smit vnaware, Straight searcheth with no little feare nor wonder, Which way the bolt did passe that cauld his care: So Charles that saw mens bodies cut in sunder, Inquires, of so great wounds who authours are, And when he knew how few they were that did it, Did wish himselfe there present to forbid it. 16 This while Marfisa on another side, With good Rogero do them sore impeach, And through the campe in spite of them they ride, Killing or wounding all within their reach: As in a migne that lies close vnespide,Simile. With trayns of gunpowder men make a breach: Or as a tempest goes along by coast,Simile. So suddenly these two brake through the host. 17 Many that scapt the tother foure by flight, In flying,Mors &  Virg. fell vnwares vpon these twaine; And felt by proofe that neither flight nor fight, Can saue a man ordained to be slaine.Stat  dies. Eu'n as a Foxe, whom smoke and fire doth fright, So as he dare not in the ground remaine,Simile. Bolts out, the Foxe and through both smoke & fire she flieth, Into the Tariers mouth, and there he dieth. 18 Thus last of all, by this most noble paire, The Christen armie once againe was sundred, And then to Agramant they all repaire, Who welcoms them, and at their value wondred. Now hope and courage, driue away dispaire, One Turke, of Christens straight defide an hundred, So great a boldnesse in their mind doth rise, By helpe and succour of these new supplies. 19 Straight way on both sides out their men were brought Their standerds and their banners all displaid, And there that day a bloodie field was fought, And neither side made shew to be dismaid, For hopes alike in either armie wrought, Tones passed conquests, tothers present aid. But fortune on the Christens so did frowne, That they againe were driu'n vnto the towne. 20 The passing force of cruell Rodomount, The strength and value great of Mandricard, Rogeros vertue, that doth all surmount, Gradassos courage of no small regard, Marfisas heart, of principall account, The skill of Sacrapant, with best compard, These were the causers of good Charls his losse, And sent the Christens whom by weeping crosse.Prouee. 21 Great store were drownd in Sequana with hast, The bridge so narrow was for to receiue them, Wishing (as Dedals sonne had in time past) Some wings wherewith aloft in ayre to heaue them, Some thrusting, straue to get them in so fast, That strength & breath, & life at last did leaue them But that, where by king Charls was chiefly shaken, Was this, that many Palladyns were taken.
22 Thus fortune once againe did turne the wheele, The good king Charles had her, but could not hold her, And of this foile this hurt he then did feele, It fainter made his friends, his foes the bolder: The Marquis of Vienna true as steele, Was at that seruice wounded in his shoulder, And many hurt, but none did play his part, So well that day, as valiant Brandimart. 23 He stoutly bare it out, no little space, And when he saw there was no other way, Then to the furie prudently gaue place, And spard himselfe, against another day: Now once againe is Charls in wofull case, Now once againe to Paris siege they lay. Young Orphaus, and old widdows prayre and cries, Againe vnto Gods heau'nly throne arise. 24 The Angell Michel, was but ill appaid, Finding the cause of those good Christens teares, He thought his maker was but ill obaid, And that he may be blamd therefore he feares; He cals himselfe deceiued and betraid, By her should set the Pagans by the eares, From which (it seemed) now she did so vary, As she had rather done the quite contrary. 25 Eu'n as the Seruitor whose loue and zeale, More then his memory may be commended, Forgetting in some waightie cause to deale, That by his Lord to him was recommended, Would with new care his former fault conceale, That er his master know, it may be mended: So this good Angel, went not vp to God, Till he had done as much as he was bod. 26 To seeke dame Discord he doth leaue the skie, againe  & beaten. And to the Abby he returnes againe, Where her amid the monks he might espie, That change old officers, and new ordaine: She laughes to see their portises to flie, Readie to knocke out one anothers braine: The Angel takes her by her painted locks, And with great furie giues her many knocks. 27 He brake a crosses handle on her crowne, And grieuously doth beat her, backe and side, The wretch vpon her mary bones fals downe, At th'Angels feet, and mercie, mercie cride: Packe to the Pagans then, that siege yon towne, (Quoth he) and see that you among them bide, For if this place againe thou euer trouble, Assure thy selfe, thy payment shalbe double. 28 Though Discords back and arms were sore with beating Yet thence with all the hast she could she went; Sore terrifid with that great Angels threating, Doubting againe in like sort to be shent: Yet in this hast, behind her not forgetting, Bellows and coles, in steed of those were spent, By which in many minds, and hearts inuincible, She quickly kindle might a fire inquenchible. 29 Rogero, Mandricard, and Rodomount, Gan now their former quarrels to renew, As making of the Christians small account,Discord among the Pagā . That vnto Paris walls themselues withdrew: Wherefore to Agramant they do recount Their quarrels, & the grounds of whence they grew, Each one by challenge his iust cause auerring, The combats order to the king referring. 30 Also Marfisa doth the king intreat, That she may end her combat first begunne, With as great hast thereof, and as great heat, Against the Tartar, Agricanes sonne: This she desires with hast and instance great, As one that thinks, great wrong to her was done, If in regard of any state or powre, She should attend one day, or yet one howre. 31 But Rodomont alledgeth that of right, He first should end the matter with his riuall, Sith by accord they first deferd the fight, Till time might serue, after their here arriuall: No lesse Rogero for his horse takes spight, And sweares, that whether they agree or striue all, To take Frontino, no man should restraine him, Or else to fight with him that doth detaine him. 32 Further, the matter farther to entangle, The argent Eagle in the azure field, Gaue to the Tartar matter more to iangle, And quarrell with Rogero for his shield: And so confusedly he then did wrangle, As though with all at once he would the field, And in his furie sure he had attempted it, But that the kings commandment flat preuented it. 33 Who first with graue and frendly admonition, To peace and good attonement did exhort them, But when beyond all meanes of composition, He saw that wrath and furie did transport them, To certaine Marshals, he doth giue commission, According to the law of armes to sort them: And of all wayes, this was not thought the worst, To trie by lots, which two should combat furst. 34 Foure little scrowles were put into a pot, The first had Rodomont and Mandricard; Rodomont and Rogero next they wrot; The third Rogero was and Mandricard; The fourth paire that must trie the present lot, Was stout Marfisa ioynd to Mandricard: When lots were cast, these two first out were tane, Fierce Rodomont and sonne of Agrican. 35 Mandricard and Rogero next they finde, Rodomont and Rogero next was said: Mandricard and Marfisa staid behinde, With which the stately dame was ill apaid: Nor was Rogero well content in minde, Doubting that when they first their parts had plaid, The combat will be such betweene them two, He and Marfisa should haue nought to do.
36 Not farre from Paris, lay a leuell ground, That was in compasse scant a thousand paces, This plain with rayles, and bars was compast round, And tents therein were set with equall spaces, With scaffolds raysd vpon the outward bound, To giue to lookers on conuenient places: Now came the time these strifes should be decided, Among those knights, those tents were thus deuided. 37 In the pauillion bordring on the East, Stands Rodomont with visage sterne and grim, Ferraw and Sacrapant were readie prest, To put his scally serpents hide on him: In tother tent that was vpon the West, Gradasso and stout Falsyron do trim, With Hectors armes so stately and so faire, The valiant Prince, king Agricanes haire. 38 On one side in a high tribunall seat, Do sit the kings of Affrica and Spaine, With Stordilan and other Princes great, Both feard and followd of the Turkish traine: Happie was he that day, that could but get, A place to sit or stand although with paine, On rigde of house, or wall, or top of tree, In so greatpresse, the goodly shew to see. 39 On tother side sat Ladies of great name, In stately sort, to see and to be seene, That out of diuers realmes and countries came, To visite or attend the Spanish queene: There Doralyce was plast,Tully noting a man of light be∣haviour, said he was a man of two colours.that louely dame, Who wears a robe of crimson cut on greene, Yet was the crimson staind in such a fashion, It rather seemd inclining to carnation. 40 Among the rest Marfisa sat that day, In short light clothes most sumptuously arrayd, The fashion of such kind, as well it may Become a warrior, and yet a maid, Hippolita (I thinke) vsd such array, When in the field her banner she displaid, Thus each thing was prepared for the fight, And each man was prepared for the sight. 41 An Herald in his coate of armes steppes out,Gradasso and Mandricard fell out, about the sword. And of the law of armes expounds the guise, Prosessing to resolue each little doubt, That in such case accustoms to arise: The people gasing standeth all about, Attent with listning ears, and longing eyes, When from the tent of valiant Mandricard Behold a sodaine noyse and sturre was hard. 42 The cause was this, the king of Sericane, Who (as before I did rehearse) was one, That holpe to arme the sonne Agricane, Taking his sword in hand to put it on, Saw written in the handle, Durindane, And looking more aduisedly thereon, He saw Almontes armes grau'n on the blade, The which strange sight him greatly wonder made. 43 And glad he was when once he did espy it, (The chiefest cause that first to France he came) Although before he neuer could come by it; Wherefore he questions straight vpon the same, If Mandricardo wan it, or did buy it? Who in this sort his answer then did frame: I with Orlando for this sword did quarrell, And ear I had it, put my life in perrell. 44 Further vnto this answer he doth ad, A farther lie, his glorie to increase, How that Orlando for the feare he had, That for this sword he neuer should haue peace, Had throwne away the sword, and faind him mad, That thereby he might cause his quartell cease: Doing herein,as is the Castor wonted, Bite of his stones, when he is nearly hunted. 45 Well (quoth Gradasso) what Orlando ment, I cannot now discusse, nor do I know, But sure I am it is not mine intent, Now I haue found it here to let it go, The money, men, munition I haue spent, Deserue as good a thing as this I trow: You did but finde it, you your selfe confesse it, And now I challenge it and do possesse it. 46 If you denie my claime, here I will proue it, This field the court, this list my pleading bar, My plea is such, as no writ can remoue it, My iugde must be the sequell of the war. War said thother, who can better loue it Then I? these words to me as musicke are, If so the king of Sarza will agree, To stay his combat, till I fight with thee. 47 Be sure Ile answer thee, and all beside. That dare presume to offer me offence: With that Rogero stept betweene and cride, Ho sirs, with this I minde not to dispence, Or let the fight proceed, as lots haue tride, Or I my selfe will put you to your fence: Shall he denie the sword and shall I yeeld, That you shall weare mine Eagle on your shield? 48 Wherefore preserue that order first agreed on, From which in honour, you may no way start, Or if to breake it further you proceed on, I breake will all, if you do breake a part. Tush (quoth the Tartar) threats we haue no need on, If Mars were in you both, and tooke your part, Yet both should finde it folly to attempt, Me of my shield, or sword once to preuent. 49 And with that word forthwith he bent his fist, And on Gradassos hand so fierce he strake, That sodainly, or ear Gradasso wist, He made him vnawares the sword forsake: Who much repind he thus his purpose mist, And that so vnprepard he could him take, And much more grieu'd it him, that this disgrace, Was offerd him in such an open place.
50 Wherefore to be aueng'd of so great wrong, He steppeth backe and out his sword he drawes, The tother doth no farther time prolong, Though in respect of order there was cause, Nay which was more, he thought himselfe so strong To fight with all at once, he askt no pause, But to them both at once he makes defiance, In his owne strength he had so great affiance. 51 This man is mad, but let me with him trie it, Gradasso said, Ile make him wise againe: Nay softly (quoth Rogero) I deny it, For this same combat doth to me pertaine: Stand backe saith tone, saith tother nay not I yet, Backe you; yet both still in their place remaine: Thus do these three with mallice great and spite, Strangely begin a combat tripartite. 52 And sure to much confusion it had growne, Had not some men, more stout perhap then wise, Themselues among them vndiscreetly throwne, With courage great, but yet with small aduise, To succour others danger with their owne: Yet could no force them part, nor no deuise, Till Agramant himselfe, their dreaded Lord, In person came their quarrell to accord. 53 The reu'rence great that vnto him they beare, Made them forthwith their forces to restraine, Who straight the causes of these broiles did heare, And to compound them sought, but all in vaine, For scant Gradasso could be made forbeare, The sword so long with tother to remaine, Vntil the fight were ended now in hand, Of which the sequell could not yet be scand. 54 Scarse had the king with words of great perswasion, This quarrell new begun, a while appeasd, But that another strife, by new occasion, In Rodomontes tent them all diseasd: An hurlyburly and a fierce inuasion, There grows betweene two Princes sore displeasd, Betweene stout Sacrapant and Rodomount, As I to you will presently recount. 55 King Sacarpant, as late before I told, Helping to arme the cruell Sarzan king, With those selfe armes that Nimrod ware of old, From whom this Prince, his pedigree did bring, Whiles he (I say) did curiously behold His furniture, and eu'rie other thing, That to his horse, or vnto him belong, To see they might be sure and firme, and strong. 56 While he, that stately steed Frontino vewd, That proudly champing stood vpon his bit, & froena  spumantia . And all his raines with snowlike some be dewd, Without regard, whose hands embroderd it, A thought vnpleasant in his mind renewd, And to his heart did seeme full neare to sit, He thinks this horse was verie like in sight, To one of his, that Frontlat whilom hight. 57 And more and more with heedfull looke still eying, The markes and shape, and colour of the steed, After his long and verie curious prying, He saw and knew it was his horse indeed: Which horse from him (then at Albracca lying) Brunello stale, for want of better heed; And shewed him an vnusuall cunning knacke, To steale his horse while he sate on his backe. 58 Brunello stale that time more things beside, By name Orlandos sword hight Balisard, Angellicas faire ring, of vertue tride, Which she recouerd as before you heard: Likewise a sword eu'n from Marfisas side: This done, he gaue Rogero afterward, Orlandos sword, and this horse to the same, But to Frontino first he changd his name. 59 Now then I say, when Sacrapant was sure, This horse was Frontlat that sometime was his, And that the markes he saw did him assure, That he therein tooke not his marke amis, To hold his peace he could not long endure, But said; good sir, know mine Frontino is, Stolne late from me, as I can make good proofe, Although (I trow) mine owne word is inough. 60 One at Albracca stale from me this steed, Yet for our late acquiantance I consent, Because I see that now you stand in need, That you shall vse him now I am content: Conditionally, that first it be agreed, You shall acknowledge him not yours, but lent, Else here I claime him as my goods and chattell, And will defend my right in open battell. 61 The Sarzan king, that past (I thinke) in pride, All kings and knights that euer carrid sword, And past (I thinke) in strength and courage tride, All samples that old stories vs afford, Made answer thus; if any man beside, Durst vnto me haue spoken such a word, He should haue found, I tooke it in such scorne, He had bin better haue bin speechles borne. 62 But for our late begunne acquiantance sake, I am content this at your hands to beare, So as you this, do as a warning take, The like attempt hereafter to forbeare, And if you will but harke what end I make, With Mandricardo, then I do not feare, But you shall see such sample of my force, Shall make you glad, to pray me take your horse. 63 Then villany is courtesie with thee, (Saith Sacrapant inflamd with high disdaine) When you be offerd faire you cannot see, Wherefore my purpose is, I tell you plaine, My horse shall seruice do to none but mee, And with these hands I will my right maintaine:A latin prouerb Dentibus & v gutbus. And that is more, if these same hands should faile, I will defend my right with tooth and naile.
64 Thus galling speech, betweene them multiplying, Till each last word, the former worser made, At last they sell to acts of flat defying, And tone the tother fiercely doth inuade: Rodomont on his strength and armes relying; Yet tother so defends him with his blade, And makes it so about his head to houer, That seemes alone his body all to couer. 65 Eu'n as a charter wheele that runnes apace, Seemes to the eye all solyd, firme and sound, Although twixt eu'rie spoake there is a space, Concealed from our sights by running round: So Sacrapant seemd armed in that place, Though armour then about him none was found, So dextrously himselfe he then besturd, As well it stood vpon him with his sword. 66 But quickly Serpentino and Ferraw, With naked sword in hand, stept them betwixt, With others more that present were and saw, As friends of either part togither mixt. Yet them no force, nor prayre could once withdraw, Their lostie hearts were on reuenge so fixt, And wrath had quite so put them out of frame, Till Agramant to them in person came. 67 Vpon the sight of him, their soueraigne Lord, They both agreed their furie to withhold, Who straight perswaded them to good accord, And much good counsell to them both he told: But peace and good perswasions they abhord, And either on his manhood made him bold; Their king doth but among them leese his winde, For more and more he froward them doth finde. 68 By no meanes Sacrapant will be intreated, Vnto the Sarzan king his horse to lend, Except that he (as I before repeated) To borrow it of him, would condiscend: The tother at this verie motion freated, And sweares nor heauen, nor he should make him bend, To seek to haue by prayer or request, A thing of which by force he was possest. 69 King Agramant doth aske by what mischance, He lost his horse, or who it from him stale? The tother opend all the circumstance, And blusht for shame, when as he told the tale; Namely, how late before he came to France, One tooke him napping, as it did befall, And vnderpropt his saddell with foure stakes,A  & possible to be true. And so from vnder him his courser takes. 70 Marfisa, that was come to part this fray, Hearing of this stolne horse among the rest, Was grieu'd in minde for why that verie day, Her sword was stolne as she most truly guest; And then king Sacrapant she knew straight way, Whom erst she knew not, and that gallant beast, For which of late those two began to fight, She knew, and said belongd to him in right. 71 While these things passed thus, the standers by, That oft hereof had heard Brunello bost, Straight in such sort to him did cast their eye, As turned greatly to Brunellos cost: By which Marfisa plainly did discrie Him, by whose theft her sword she late had lost, To be Brunello, whom she saw there sitting, Among great Lords, a place for him vnfitting. 72 She heard, and much it grieued her to heare, How for these thefts and many mo beside, The king rewarded him, and held him deare, Whereas in law for them he should haue dide: These news so greatly chang'd Marfisas cheare, That hardly she her wrath could longer hide, Let Agramant accept it as he will, She minds Brunello presently to kill. 73 Straight way she armed is from head to heele, And makes her page her helmet close to claspe, To him she goes, and with her gloue of steele, She giues him such a blow as made him gaspe, And while the paine hereof doth make him reele With her strong hād, his weak corse she doth graspe As doth the Faulcon fierce the Mallard gripe, To which a while before she gaue a stripe. 74 With furie great from thence away she flings, While he for helpe, and oft for mercie cride, But wil he, nill he, him away she brings, Like to a thiefe with hands togither tide, Where Agramant among the meaner kings, Sate like a iudge their causes to descide, Then making some obeysance for good manner, She speaketh thus in short but stately manner. 75 Sir king, I minde to hang this thiefe your man, That by desart should long ere this haue dide, For when he stale that horse from him, eu'n than He stale my sword that hanged by my side: But if there any be, that dare or can Deny my words, or say that I haue lide: Here in your presences I do desire, To trie by combat whether is the lier. 76 But least some should, as some by fortune may, Affirme I chuse this time to make new strife, Alone at such a time, on such a day, When other quarrels in the campe are rife, I am content a day or two to stay, And to prolong this wretched caitiues life, To see if any man will him defend, And after sure to hang him I intend. 77 I meane (quoth she) to bring him three mile hence, And keepe him as a prisner in yon towre, And with his life I promise to dispence, For two dayes space, and longer not an howre, If any list to fight in his defence, There let him come and trie my force and powre: Away she gallopt when she this had said, And on her saddle bow the wretch she laid.
78 The King was sore displeasd at this attempt, And much it did his princely mind enrage, And minds himselfe to wreake so great contempt, Vntill Sobrino, a sage  seller.one both graue and sage, Told him in wisedome he must be content, His choler in this matter to asswage; And said it were a base part for his highnesse, To fight for one sprung vp by theft and slinesse. 79 Yea though before hand he were sure to win, Yet would such victorie dishonor haue, Because a woman vanquisht were therein: Wherefore (quoth he) if you his life might saue, With one words speech, to speake that word were sin; For sure she doth but law and iustice craue: And Princes neuer do themselues more wrong, most true Then when they hinder iustice, or prolong. 80 You may (said he) to satisfie your mind, Send after her, in manner of request, And promise her, that if iust cause you find, He shall be hangd, and so all strife may rest; But if to this you find her not inclind, Giue her her will, for so I thinke tis best; So that she firmely in your friendship bide, Hang vp Brunello, and all theeues beside. 81 This good direction Agramant obaying, Went not himselfe, nor sent none to molest her, But yet according to Sobrinos saying, He sent a messenger that might request her: Himselfe the while doth trauell in allaying, The tumults fierce that all his campe do pester: Pride laughs at this, and Discord so reioyces, As vp to heau'n flie their eternall voyces. 82 Fiue men most resolute haue set their rest, To be the first that will begin the fight, The strife so intricate, as would molest Apollo to descide or set it right. Yet Agramant still striues to do his best, And to compound the matter if he might: And thus to end the matter he begonne, Twixt Rodomont and Agricanes sonne. 83 He makes to them this good and friendly motion, That sith for Doralice they onely straue, They would agree to stand at her deuotion, And let her take her choise which she will haue, And that once made, to raise no more commotion. This pleasd them both, to this consent they gaue; A certaine hope and trust them both alluring, Each on himselfe of her firme loue assuring. 84 The Sarzan king doth thinke, that needs she must Giue sentence on his side, and be his owne, Sith oft he had in turneys and in iust, Her fauours worne, and his affection showne: How can she loue (thinkes he) or put her trust In one, whō she scant three dayes space hath knowne? Not was alone his owne opinion such, But all the campe beside did thinke as much. 85 They all thinke Mandricardo ouerseene, And made no question but she would reiect him: But he that knew what past had them betweene, And found that she did inwardly affect him, Was sure, although his seruice were vnseene, And done by night, that she would not neglect him: Wherefore of her good will he nothing doubting, Did scorne their scorns, and floured at their flouting. 86 Thus hauing put the matter in her choyce, And put the choice in her owne declaration, She with a sober looke and lowly voyce, Chose Mandricard, against all expectation: The Tartar prince here did much reioyce, But all the rest were filld with admiration, And Rodomont himselfe was so astound. As hardly he could lift his eyes from ground. 87 But when his wonted wrath had driu'n away That bashfull shame that dyde his face with red, Vniust he cals that doome, and curst that day, And clapping hand vpon his sword, he sed, This better arbitrate our matters may, Then womens foolish doome by fancie led,Sentence. Who oftentimes are so peruerse in chusing, They take the worst, the offerd best refusing. 88 Go then (quoth Mandricard) I little care, I hope that fight shall yeeld you like successe: And thus againe to fight they ready are, But Agramant doth soone that rage represse, And said, vpon this point againe to square, Quite were against all lawes of armes expresse: And Rodomont he sharply then controld, That in his sight was against law so bold. 89 The Sarzan king that saw himselfe that day, So noted by those Peeres with double scorne, Both from his Prince, whom he must needs obay, And her to whom so great loue he had borne, With fury great he flings from thence away, And counts himselfe disgrast and quite forlorne: Of all his traine two men he onely taketh, The king, the campe, the place he quite forsaketh. 90 And as a Bull his loued heard that leaues,Simile. By his strong riuall forced to be gone;Lucan hath the like of  Bulls in his 2 booke of Pharsalia. Among the trees all clad with thickest leaues, Doth hide himselfe, and seekes to be alone: So he, whom shame of comfort all bereaues, Flies sight of men yet still he thinks thereon; And chiefe when he remembers what disgrace, His mistris did him in so open place. 91 Rogero gladly would haue him pursude, To get his horse, but yet he doth refraine, Lest men should thinke he had the fight eschude, That did twixt Mandricard and him remaine: But Sacrapant whom no cause doth include, Pursues the Sarzan king, the horse to gaine: And doubtlesse had outgone him that same day, But for mishap that chanced by the way.
92 A damsell fell by hap into a riuer, And was in perill great to haue bin drownd; He lighting from his horse backe to relieue her, Lept in, and brought her out all safe and sound: But doing this good act, her to deliuer, Scarce all that day his horse againe he found, His horse got loose, and he with all his cunning, Could scantly catch him in six howers running. 93 At last with much ado he doth him get, And after Rodomont he then doth make; But where, and how long after him he met, And how the Sarzan did him prisner take, I may not now proceed to tell as yet: First tell we what vild words the Sarzan spake, That cald his Prince and mistris both vnkind, And for her fault doth raile of all her kind. 94 With scalding sighes, that inward pangs bewrayd, He breathes out flames in places where he goes, From rocks and caues his plaints doth eccho ayd, And takes compassion on his rufull woes; O womens wits,Rodoments  against women. how weake you are (he sayd) How soone to change you do your selues dispose? Obseruers of no faith, nor good direction, Most wretched all that trust in your protection. 95 Could neither seruice long, nor sured loue, By me aboue a thousand wayes declared, Thy fickle mind to fastnesse so farre moue, But wilfully to let thy selfe be snared? If reason could haue led thy mind to proue, Was Mandricard with me to be compared? Hereof can reason be alledgd by no man, But this alone, my mistris is a woman. 96 I thinke that nature, or some angry God, Brought forth this wicked sex on earth to dwell, For some great plague, or iust deserued rod To vs, that wanting them had liued well: As in the wormes, an Adder, Snake and Tode: Among the beasts, Beares, Wolues and Tygers sell: And makes the aire the Flie and Waspe to breed, And Tares to grow among the better seed. 97 Why did not Nature rather so prouide, Without your helpe that man of man might come, And one be grafted on anothers side, As are the Apples with the Peare and Plom? But Nature can no meane nor rule abide, But still the must exceed in all or some; Full easie tis the cause thereof to render, For Nature selfe is of the womans gender. 98 Yet be not therefore proud and full of scorne, O womankind, that men come of your seed; The fragrant Rose growth on the pricking thorne,Similia. Sentence. Vergol . The Lilly faire comes of a filthy weed; In lothsome soyle men sow the wholsome corne; The basest mould, the fairest flowre doth breed: Vngratefull, false and craftie y'are and cruell, Borne of our burning hell to be the fuell. 99 These words, and like to these the Pagan fearce, Doth spend amid his rage and frantike fumes; And like a mad man did the same rehearse, Sometime in hie, oft times in baser tunes: I tremble to set downe in my poore verse, The blasphemie that he to speake presumes; And writing this I do, know this that I Full oft in heart do giue my pen the lie. 100 But passion did this Pagans sense so blind, And left within the same so sharpe a sting, That he not onely blam'd his loue vnkind, But also rag'd against his soueraigne King, And cursed him, and wished in his mind, That fortune so great woes on him might bring, That he might loose his state and princely crowne, And see his country turnd quite vpsidowne. 101 And being to such miseries once brought, And with aduersitie assaild so sore, That then by him his freedome might be wrought, And that he might his former state restore, That Agramant might by such proofe be taught, Of faithfull friends indeed to set more store, And learne to know, that such a friend as he, Deseru'd in right and wrong preferd to be. 102 Thus blaming oft his Lord, more oft his loue, To his owne natiue soyle his course he bent, But changing place, could not his sorrow moue, Nor trauels paine, his paine of mind relent; It seemd his horse Frontino well to proue, Before his bridle should be drawne, he ment, To Sonna he doth ride without a bait, And minds fro thence to passe to Prouence strait. 103 And there to cast away all care and carke, And all his anguish quickly to appease, For Affrica he will himselfe imbarke, And passe the large Mediterranian seas; But, for the weather now waxt dim and darke, First in his Inne he minds to take his ease, For all the counntry, eu'n as farre as Spaine, In Agramantes powre did then remaine. 104 Now he resolues to lodge about the cost, And long he is not of a place to seeke, For straight he was inuited by an host, To take his house, if so it might him like: It pleasd the Pagan well, to heare him bost, That he had Corsike wine, and French and Greeke, For though he were a Turke in all the rest, Yet did he like French fashion drinking best. 105 The pleasant host, that was indeed of those, That can with double diligence attend, As hauing sau'd, amid both friends and foes, His goods, and gaind by that which both do spend: When by that princes view he did suppose Him some great man, he straight abroade did send, And thither doth his kin and friends request, To helpe to waite, and welcome such a guest.
106 But loe, his guest fits musing all apart, And of his Mistres runneth all his thought, Which (though he would forget) spite of his hart, He thinks on still, so strong the fancie wrought: The standers by are not so malypart, To talke to him, till he occasion sought: Which hauing found, vp from his chaire he started, And salutations to them all imparted. 107 Then askt he many questions of them all, And as occasion seru'd, discourses varid; But still we finde, and euer finde we shall,Sentence. By thought of heart the speech of tongue is carid: For last to treat of marridge he doth fall, And asketh of the men if they be marrid: And if they be, he prayth them to declare, Of their wiues truthes, what their opinions are. 108 Straight all of them made answer they had wiues, And but mine host, all praisd the happie state; And said they were the comforts of their liues, That draw a happie yoke without debate: A playfellow, that farre off all griefe driues, A steward, early that prouides and late; Both faithfull, chast, and sober, mild, and trustie, Nurse to weake age, and pleasure to the lustie. 109 Tush (quoth mine host) vnder your good correction, (Most noble guest) these fellows say not right, But either with fond loue, or foule subiection, So blinded are, they take the blacke for white: I once my selfe, was toucht with this infection, But now I see, that then I wanted sight: And now I know, as being better taught, That theirs and mine be all vnchast and naught. 110 For as the Phoenix is a bird alone,Simile.  saith, Rara  in ter∣ris . And of that kind, the whole world hath no more; So (thinke I) of all wiues there is but one, That liueth chast in loue and vertues lore: He blest may be, that lighteth her vpon, Small hope (thinke I) there is in so scant store, That many should haue one of such a kind, Of which in all the world but one I finde. 111 I once so blinded was, as now be thease, Till by good hap vnto my house there came; A Gentleman of Venice from the seas, Francis Valerio was he cald by name: He knew, and could declare them all with ease, All womens wiles, and stories to the same, He had of old, and of the later times, To shew both wiues, and single womens crimes. 112 He said, and bad me hold it as my creed, That all of them are false, if they be trides If some seemd chast, it did of this proceed, They had the wit to do, and not be spide, And knew, by deepe dissembling, and good heed, With sober looks their wanton lusts to hide: And this to proue he told me such a tale, As while I liue, I still remember shall. 113 And if it like you sir, to lend me eare, In my rude fashion, I shall it recite, Right glad (quoth Rodomont) by heau'ns I sweare, For thou hast hit my present humor right: Wherefore (said he) sit downe I pray thee theare, For in thy speech alreadie I delight: But heare I end this booke, for doubt I haue, That in his tale, mine host will play the knaue. In this booke we may obserue,Morall. how important a thing it is in an army, to haue store of good leaders; as Liuie noteth of the old Remaines: Fortiorem rem Romanam ducibus esse, quam militibus. That the strength of the Romaines, con∣sisted more in Captaines, then in souldiers. In quarrels that grew in the campe vpon trifling causes; we may note a fault that many of English Seruitors (though otherwise braue men) haue many times bene noted of in their forren seruice, where they verie seldome agree togither, but seeke to disgrace one another. In Agramant, we may note a princely ma∣iestie, in compounding such controuersies. In Rodomonts bitter inuective against women, we may see how passionate extreames loue and hate be. In mine Host, we note how such base fellows are still readie to feed the humors of Prin∣ces, though it be in shamefull vices, or manifest errors. Hippolita to whom Marfisa is compared,Historie. as also the whole countrie of Amazons, and their lawes, I haue spoken of elsewhere: this is that Hippolita, that was brought by Theseus to Athens, and there had a sonne called Hippolitus. In that he faineth,Allegorie. that the spright entring into Doralices horse, conueyed her into the campe of the Pagans, to the great damage of the Christians, we may thereby note how that ghostly enemie doth indeed watch (as the scripture saith) like a roring Lion whom he may deuour, to do mankind all the hurt that may be; and therefore, we must not giue him an inch, least (as the prouerbe saith) he take an ell. In the solemnitie of their combats and preparation,Allusion. Fornarius noteth, that he alludes to a 'policie, vsed by Isabella wife to Ferdinando, king of Spaine. She, to make her men of armes more valiant and couragious, caused them to fight with the Moors in the verie sight of their Ladies and Mistresses, and partly thereby expulsed the Moores out of Gra∣nata. But for Doralices reiecting of Rodomont, and chusing Mandricard; it alludes to a like thing, written by Plu∣tarch in his loue discourses, where Calysto was taken and Strato refused: of which afterward insued the death of al three. Here end the notes of the xxvij. booke.
THE XXVIII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Fierce Rodomont hears of his prating Host A lying tale, to womens great disgrace: Vnto Algier he minds to passe in post; But by the way he finds more pleasing place, Faire Isabell passeth by that cost; The Pagan changeth mind, and sues for grace: The Hermit warnes her keepe her vow and oth, At which the Pagan Prince is passing wroth. 1 YOu Ladies, yee that Ladies hold in prise, Giue not (perdie) your eare to this same tale, The which to telll, mine Host doth here deuise, To make men think your vertues are but small: Though from so base a tongue there can arise, To your sweete sexe, no iust disgrace at all; .Fooles will find fault without the cause discerning, And argue most, of that they haue no lerning. 2 Turne ou'r the leaf, and let this tale alone, If any thinke the sex by this disgraced, I write it for no spite, nor mallice none, But in my Authors booke I finde it placed; My loyall loue to Ladies all is knowne, In whom I see such worth to be imbraced, That theirs I am, and glad would be therefore, To shew thereof a thousand proofes and more. 3 Peruse it not, or if you do it reed, Esteeme it not, but as an idle table; Regard it not, or if you take some heed, Belieue it not, but as a foolish fable: But to the matter, thus it was indeed, When all the guests were cheared at the table; Neare Rodomont (so was the Pagan named) Downe sate mine Host, and thus his tale he framed. 4 of Astol .Astolfo, whilom king of Lombardy, To whom his elder brother left his rayne, Was in his youth so fresh and faire to see, As few to such perfection could attaine: Appelles match, or Zeuces he might be, That such a shape could paint without much paine,Two excellent painters. Great was his grace, and all the world so deemd it, But yet himselfe of all men most esteemd it. 5 He did not of his scepter take such pride, Nor that degree that common men are vnder, Nor wealth, nor frends, nor meaner kings beside, That there about dwelt neare or far asunder: But of his beautie, which he would not hide, At whole rare worth, he thought ye world did won∣der, This was his ioy, and all that he intended, To heare his comely face and shape commended. 6 Among his courtiers, one aboue the rest, Fausto by name; by birth a Romane knight: Who hearing oft so praisd, as they know best, His face, and hands, and all that praise he might, The king did bid him tell at his request; Neare or far of, if he had seene that wight, That in all parts so perfectly was wrought: But he was answerd as he little thought. 7 My Liege (quoth Fausto) plainly to declare, Both what my selfe doth see, and others say, But few with your rare beautie can compare, And that same few were none, were one away: Iocundo hight, a man of beautie rare, And brother mine, excepting whom, I may Prefer your grace before all other creatures, But he doth match or passe you for his features.
8 The king to heare such tidings strange it thought, As hauing still till that day kept the prise, And with a deepe desire straight wayes he sought, To know this man, and see him with his eies: In fine, with Fausto so far forth he wrought, To bring him to his court he must deuise: Although (quoth he) to bring my brother to it, I shall be sure of worke enough to do it. 9 The cause is this, my brother neuer went Foorth of the gates of Rome scant all his life, And such small goods as Fortune hath him lent, He hath enioyd in quiet, free from strife, Left by our sire, and them he hath not spent, Nor yet increast, his gaines are not so rife: And he will thinke it more to go to Pauy, Then some would thinke to th' Indies in a Nauy. 10 But I shall finde it hardest when I proue, To draw him from his louing wife away; To whom he is so linkt in chaines of loue, That all is vaine, if once his wife say nay: But yet your grace is so far all aboue, You shall command me, certes all I may. Thanks (quoth the king) and addeth such reward, As might haue moued any to regard. 11 Away he posts, arriuing in few dayes At Rome, and to his brothers house he went, And with such earnest words his brother prayes, That to returne with him he doth consent: Also his sisters loue he so allayes, That she doth hold her peace, as halfe content, Beside great thanks, laying before her eyes, Preferments large, that hereof might arise. 12 Iocundo now resolu'd to go his way, Gets men and horse against he should depart, Sets forth himselfe with new and rich aray, As still we see nature adornd by art. His wife at night in bed, at boord by day; Sentence.With watrie eyes to shew a sorrie hart, Complaines his absence will so sore her grieue, Till his returne she doubts she shall not liue. 13 Ay me, the thought (quoth she) makes me so fraid, That scant the breath abideth in my brest; Peace my sweete loue and life (Iocundo said) And weepes as fast, and comforts her his best: So may good fortune ay my iourny aid, As I returne in threescore dayes at least: Nor will I change the day I set thee downe, No though the king would grat me halfe his crowne 14 All this might not asswage this womans paine, Two months were long, yea to to long she cries, Needs must I die before you come againe, Nor how to keepe my lite can I deuise: The dolefull dayes and nights I shall sustaine, From meat my mouth, from sleepe will keepe mine eyes: Now was Iocundo readie to repent, That to his brother he had giu'n consent. 15 About her necke a iewell rich she ware, A crosse all set with stone in gold well tride, This relicke late, a Boem Pilgrim bare, And gaue her father other things beside: Which costly things he kept with no small care, Till comming from Ierusalem he dyde: And her of all his goods his heire he makes, This precious crosse to her goodman she takes, 16 And prayes him for her sake to weare that token, And thinke on her: the man that was most kind, Receiu'd it with more ioy then can be spoken, Although he needed not be put in mind, For why no time, nor no state sound nor broken, Nor absence long, a meane should euer find, To quayle his loue, not only while his breath Maintains his life, but neither after death. 17 That verie night that went before the morrow, That they had pointed surely to depart, Iocundos wife was sicke, and sounds for sorrow, Amid his armes, so heauie was her hart; All night they wake, and now they bid Godmorrow And giue their last farewell, and so they part; Iocundo on his way with all his traine, His louing wife doth go to bed againe. 18 Scant had Iocundo rode two mile forthright, But that his crosse, now came into his minde, Which on his pillow he had laid last night, And now for hast had left the same behinde: He would deuise to scuse it if he might, But no excuse sufficient could he finde: But that his loue must needs be much suspected, To finde the precious iewell so neglected. 19 When no excuse within his minde could frame, But that all seemed friuolous and vaine; To send his man, he counted it a shame, To go himselfe it was but little paine: He staid, and when his brother did the same, Ride soft (quoth he) till I returne againe: For home againe I must, there is no nay, But I will ouertake you on the way. 20 Th'affaire is such as none can do but I, But doubt you not, I will returne as fast; Away he spurres as hard as he could hy, Alone without or man or page, for hast: Now had the sunnes new rising cleard the sky, With brightest beames, ear he the streame had past, He hies him home, and findes his wife in bed, Full sound asleepe, such cares were in her hed. 21 He draws the curtaine softly without sound, And saw that he would little haue suspected; His chast and faithfull yokefellow he found Yokt with a knaue, all honestie neglected: Th'Adulterer, though sleeping verie sound, Yet by his face was easily detected: A beggers brat, bred by him from his cradell, And now was ryding on his masters sadell.
22 Now if he stood amazd and discontent, Beleeue it yee, to trie that would be loth; For he that tries it, doubtlesse will repent, As poore Iocundo did, who was so wroth, That out he drew his sword, with iust intent, For their vngratefull act to kill them both: But lo, the loue he bare her, did withstand, Against his heart, to make him hold his hand. 23 O ribald loue, that such a staue couldst make, Of one that now was subiect to thy force; He could not breake her sleepe for pitties sake. That brake all bonds of faith without remorse; But back he goes before they did awake, And from his house he gets him to his horse: Loue so pricks him, and he so pricks his steed, He ouertakes his companie with speed. 24 His looke is sad, all changed is his cheare, Full heauie was his heart they well perceiued, They see no cause of griefe, nor guesse they neare, And they that guesse most likely are deceiued; They thought he went to Rome, but you do heare How at Cornetto he his hurt receiued: Each man espide that loue procur'd that passion, But none descride the manner nor the fashion. 25 His brother deemes that all his griefe doth grow, Because his louing wife is left alone; But he a cleane contrary cause doth know, Her too much companie did cause his mone: He bends his browes, his looks he casts alow, saith  Clodius,  vlcereWith powting lips, and many a grieuous grone; In vaine doth Faustus comfort seeke to bring him, For why he knowes not where the shoo doth wring him. 26 He giues a salue afore the sore is found, His plaisters are as poison to the smart; He seeks to heale, and wider makes the wound, He names his wife, but her name kils his hart: Gone was his tast, his sleeps do grow vnsound, Nature decayth, and little helpeth art; And that faire face that erst was of such fame, Is now so chang'd, it seemeth not the same. 27 His eyes are sunke so deepe into his hed, It made his nose seeme bigger then it should, His flesh doth shrinke, his bones do seeme to spred, He was so chang'd, as more cannot be told; At last an agew makes him keepe his bed, And bait at Innes more often then he would: His faire complexion now is pale and withered, Much like the Rose that yesterday was gathered. 28 With this mishap was Fdustus sore aggrieued, Not onely for his brothers wofull state, But fearing of his Prince to be reproued, Vnto whose grace he vndertooke so late, To shew the goodliest man, as he beleeued, Now growne vncouth, by force of inward bate: Yet as they could, their way they so contriued, That at the last in Pauie they arriued. 29 He would not straightway shew him to the King, Lest eu'ry one might deeme his iudgement small, But sent by letters notice of the thing, And what mishap his brother was befall; How scant aliue he could him thither bring, A secret griefe so greatly did him gall, And with an agew puld him downe so sore, He seemd not now the man he was before. 30 And yet behold this noble King is glad, That he is come, and meanes to make him cheare, As if he were the dearest friend he had, So sore he had desird to see him heare; Nor would the worthy naturd Prince be sad, In praise of beautie to haue found a Peare; He knew Iocundos beautie had excelled, But that by this disease it was expelled. 31 He placeth him to his owne lodging nie, He visits him each day and eu'ry houre, Great plentie of prousio nhe doth buy, To welcome him he bendeth all his powre: But still Iocundo languishing doth lie, His wiues misdeeds makes all his sweet seeme sowre, No songs, no sights, which oft he heard or saw, One dram of this his dolour could withdraw. 32 Fast by his lodging was, amongst the rest, A faire large roome, which very few did vse, Here would he walke, as one that did detest All pleasing sights, and comforts all refuse: Here the wide wound he bare within his brest, With thousand thoughts vnpleasant he renews; Yet here he found, which few would haue belieued, A remedy for that which had him grieued. 33 For at the vpper end of this old hall, There was a place of windowes voyd, and light, Saue that the lime new moulten from the wall, Let in a little beame that shined bright, Here did he see, which some may thinke a tale, A very strange and vnexpected sight, He heard it not, but saw it in his vew, Yet could he scant beleeue it should be trow. 34 For at the chinke was plainly to be seene, A chamber hangd with faire and rich aray, Where none might come but such as trusty beene, The Princesse here in part doth spend the day, And here he saw a Dwarfe embrace the Queene, And striue a while, and after homely play: His skill was such, that ere they went asunder, The Dwarfe was got aloft, and she lay vnder. 35 Iocundo standeth still as one amazed, Supposing sure that he had seene a vision, But seeing plaine when he a while had gazed, It was an act, and not an apparition: Good God (said he) are this Queenes eyes so dazed, To loue a dwarfe, more worthy of derision? Whose husband is a Prince of worthy fame, So braue a man, such loue? now fie for shame.
36 He now began to hold his wife excused, His anger now a little was relented: And though that she her bodie had abused, And to her seruant had so soone consented; Not her for this, but he the sex accused, That neuer can with one man be contented;Junenal saith of one Iberina. Vnus Iberinae vir suffuit? cuius illud, Extorquebus ut haec ocio con∣tenta sit uno. If all (quoth he) with one like staine are spotted, Yet on a monster, mine was not besotted. 37 The day ensuing he returned thither, And saw the dwarfe couragious still and iolly; Eke he another day repaired hither, And still he found the Queene committing folly: He oft returnes, he finds them oft together, They cease not worke, on dayes prophane nor holy: Yea which was strange, the goodly Queen cōplained That of the dwarfe she found she was disdained. 38 One day when in the corner he had stayd, He sees her come all sad and malcontent, Because the dwarfe his comming still delayd, For whom of purpose twise before she sent, Once more she sends, this answer brings the mayd, Forsooth vnto his play he is so bent, That for mistrust at Chesse to leese a shilling, To come to you the apes face is not willing. 39 Iocundo, who before had still bene sad, Vpon this sight became of better cheare; The paines, the plaints, the cloudie stormes he had, Away were blowne, the coast began to cleare: Most ruddie faire he chearfull grew and glad, That angellike his beautie did appeare, So as the King and others thought it strange, In so short time to find so great a change. 40 Now as the King desired much to know, The meane whereby his hurt so soone was healed, No lesse Iocundo did desire to show, And would not haue the thing from him concealed, So as his choller might no greater grow, Then his had beene, when as it were reuealed: But first he made him sweare on his saluation, Vpon the parties to vse no castigation. 41 He made him sweare, for ought he heard or saw, Wherewith his mind might fortune be diseased, Yet from his choller so much to withdraw, As that in shew he may not seeme displeased, Nor punish it by might nor yet by law, Not first nor last, but hold himselfe appeased, So as th'offenders might not haue suspected, That their misdeeds were to his grace detected. 42 The King so sure, by oth so solemne bound, As one that little thought his Queene so stained, Iocundo first his owne griefe doth expound, Why he so long so dolefull had remained, And in whose armes his owne wife he had found, And how the griefe thereof so sore him pained, Had not that salue vplookt for bene applied, Of that conceit no doubt he should haue died. 43 But lying in your highnesse house forlorne, I saw (quoth he) that minisht much my mone; For though it grieued me to weare a home, It pleasd me well, I ware it not alone: This said, he brought him where the wall was torne, And shewd him that, that made his heart to grone, For why the dwarfe did mannage with such skill, Though she curuets, he keeps his stirrop still. 44 Much did the King this foule prospect mislike, Beleeue my word I say, I need not sweare, Horne wood he was, he was about to strike All those he met, and his owne flesh to teare; His promise to haue broken he was like, If of his oth he had not had some feare; But vnreuenged all must now be borne, For on his Agnus Dei he had sworne. 45 Now to Iocundo gently he doth speake, Good brother mine, aduise me what to do,He cals  ∣ther, because  were back of  soci. Sith I am bound by oth I may not wreake The fact, with such reuenge as longs thereto; Forsooth let's trie if others be as weake, (Iocundo said) and make no more ado: This was the counsell he did giue the King, Into their order other men to bring. 46 We both are yong, and of such pleasing hew, Not to be matcht with such another paire; What she will be so obstinatly true, But will be wonne with youth, and being faire? If youth and beautie both do misse their due, The want herein our purses shall repaire: Let vs not spare our beautie, youth and treasure, Till of a thousand we haue had our pleasure. 47 To see strange countries placed farre apart, Of other women eke to make some triall, Will ease the paine that whilom pierst our hart, And salue out sore, there can be no deniall: The King that longd to ease his new found smart, Consented straight, and to auoid espiall, Himselfe, the Knight, two pages, and no mo, Out of the Realme forthwith disguised go. 48 Away they past through Italy and France, And though the Flemish and the English land, And those whose beauties highest did aduance, Those still they found most ready to their hand: They giue, they take, so luckie is their chance, They see their stocke at one stay still to stand: Some must be woode forsooth they were so chast, And some there were that wooed them as fast. 49 In countries some a month or two they tarried, In some a weeke, in others but a day; In all of them they find the women married, Like to their wiues, too gentle to say nay: At last, because they doubt to haue miscarried, They meane to leaue this sport and go their way; They found it full of danger and debate, To keepe their standings in anothers gate.Sentence.
50 They do agree to take by common voyce, Some one whose shape and face may please them both, In whom without suspect they might reioyce; For wherefore (quoth the King) should I be loth, To haue your selfe a partner in my choyce? I must haue one, and I beleeue for troth, Among all women kind there is not one, That can content her selfe with one alone. 51 But of some one, we two might take our pleasure, And not inforce our selues beyond our ease, But as they say,. take meate and drinke, and leasure, And by our doings, other not displease; Well might that woman thinke she had a treasure, That had vs two, her appetite to please; And though to one man faithfull none remaine, No doubt but faithfull they would be to twaine. 52 The Roman youth much praisd the Princes mind, And to performe it, seemed very faine, Away they posted as they had assignd, By towne and citie, ouer hill and plaine, Till at the last a pretie peece they find, The daughter of an Inkeeper in Spaine, A girle of person tall, and faire of fauour, Of comely presence, and of good behauour. 53 She was new entring in the flower and pride, Of those well pleasing youthfull yeares and tender, Her father many children had beside, And pouertie had made his portion slender, And for them all vnable to prouide, It made him soone consent, away to send her; The price agreed, away the strangers carry her, Because the father money wants to marry her. that  makes some . 54 In concord great she did with them remaine, Who tooke their pleasure one and one by turne, As bellows do, of a smith . where Vulcans wonted paine, By mutuall blast doth make the mettall burne: Their meaning is, now they had traueld Spaine, By Siphax realme to make their home returne; And hauing left Valenza out of sight, At faire Zatiua they did lodge at night. 55 The masters go abrode to view the towne, And first the Churches for deuotions sake; And then the monuments of most renowne, As trauellers a common custome take:— The girle within the chamber sate her downe, The men are busied, some the beds do make, Some care to dresse their wearid horse, and some Make ready meate against their masters come. 56 In this same house the girle a Greeke had spide, That in her fathers house a boy had beene, And slept full often sweetly by her side, And much good sport had passed them betweene; Yet fearing lest their loue should be descride, In open talke they durst not to be seene, But when by hap the pages downe were gone, Old loue renewd, and thus they talke thereon. 57 The Greeke demaunds her whither she was going, And which of these two great estates her keeps? She told them all, she needs no further woing, And how a night betweene them both she sleeps: Ah (quoth the Greeke) thou tellest my vndoing, My deare Fiametta, and with that he weeps;Fiametta. With these two Lords wilt thou from Spain be bani∣shed? Are all my hopes thus into nothing vanished? 58 My sweet designements turned are to sower, My seruice long, finds little recompence; I made a stocke according to my power, By hoording vp my wages, and the pence That guests did giue, that came in luckie hower; I meant ere long to haue departed hence, And to haue askt thy fires good will to marry thee, And that obtaind, vnto a house to carry thee. 59 The wench of her hard fortune doth complaine, And saith that now she doubts he sues too late: The Greeke doth sigh and sob, and part doth faine, And shall I die (quoth he) in this estate? Let me enioy thy sweetnesse once againe, Before my dayes draw to their dolefull date One small refreshing ere we quite depart, Will make me die with more contented hart. 60 The girle with pittie moued, thus replies, Thinke not (quoth she) but I desire the same; But hard it is, among so many cies, Without incurring punishment and shame. Ah (quoth the Greeke) some meanes thou wouldst deuise, If thou but felt a quarter of my flame, To meet this night in some conuenient place, And be together but a little space. 61 Tush (answerd she) you sue now out of season, For eu'ry night I lie betwixt them two, And they will quickly feare and find the treason, Sith still with one of them I haue to do. Well (quoth the Greeke) I could refute that reason, If you would put your helping hand thereto, You must (said he) some pretie scuse deuise, And find occasion from them both to rise. 62 She first bethinks her selfe, and after bad He should returne when all were found asleepe, And learned him, who was thereof right glad, To go and come, what order he should keepe. Now came the Greeke as he his lesson had, When all was husht, as soft as he could creepe, First to the doore, which opend when he pushed, Then to the chamber, which was softly rushed. 63 He takes a long and leisurable stride,Imitanō of Ouid in 1. de fallu. Surget amans , vestigia furum. Suspenso  gradus. And longest on the hinder foote he staid, So soft he treds, although his steps were wide, As though to tread on eggs he were afraid; And as he goes, he gropes on either side, To find the bed, with hands abroad displaid, And hauing found the bottome of the bed, He creepeth in, and forward go'th his head.
64 Betweene Fiamettas tender thighes he came, That lay vpright, as readie to receaue, At last they fell vnto their merry game, Embracing sweetly now to take their leaue; He rode in post, e can he baite for shame, The beast was good, and would not him deceaue, He thinks her pace so easie and so sure, That all the night to ride he could endure. 65 Iocundo and the King do both perceaue The bed to rock, as oft it comes to passe, And both of them one error did deceaue, For either thought it his companion was: Now hath the Greeke taken his latter leaue, And as he came, he back againe doth passe, And Phebus beames did now to shine begin, Fiametta rose and let the pages in. 66 Now with Iocundo gan the King to iest, Brother (quoth he) I doubt we do you wrong, It were more time for you to take your rest, That haue this night a iourney rode so long. Iocundo answers him againe in iest, Oh for you do mistake, you sing my song; Take you your ease, and much good do your grace, That all this night haue rid a hunting pace. 67 I, quoth the King? I would in faith I sweare, Haue lent my dog a course among the rest, But that I found your selfe so busie were, And rode so hard, you could not spare the beast. Well (said the Knight) it seemeth me to beare, Although you breake your promise and behest, Yet priuie quips and taunts there needed none, You might haue bid me let the wench alone. 68 One vrg'd so farre, the tother so replide, That vnto bitter words their tongues were moued, Scarce one forbae to say the tother lide; And plaine to trie whose truth should be reproued, They cald the girle, the matter to decide, Who was afraid, as well't her behoued; And she must tell, they standing face to face, Which of them two deserued this disgrace. 69 Tell (quoth the King) with grim and angry sight, Not feare not him nor me, but tell vs true, Which of vs two it was, that all this night So gallantly performed all his due. Thus either deeming he did hold the right, They looked both, which should be found vntrue:Her  made her thinke the fault found. Fiametta lowly layd her selfe on ground, Doubting to die because her fault was found. 70 She humbly pardon cranes for her offence, And that they pittie would her wofull case, That she with pittie mou'd to recompence His loue, that lasted had no little space, And who it was, she told them, and of whence, Had this ill luck in this vnluckie place, How she had hop'd that though they hapt to wake, Yet for his partner either would it take. 71 The King and his companion greatly mused, When they had heard the practise so detected, And their conceits not little were confused, To heare a hap so strange and vnexpected: And though no two were euer so abused, Yet had they so all wrathfull mind reiected, That downe they lay, and fell in such a lafter, They could not see nor speake an houre after. 72 And when at last their stomacks and their eies Waterd and akt, they laughed had so much, Such shifts (quoth they) these women will deuise, Do what we can, their chastitie is such: If both our cares could not for one suffice, That lay betwixt vs both, and did vs tuch, If all our haires were eyes, yet sure they said, We husbands of our wiues should be betraid. 73 We had a thousand women prou'd before, And none of them denied our request, Nor would and if we tride ten thousand more, But this one triall passeth all the rest: Let vs not then condemne our wiues so sore, That are as chast and honest as the best, Sith they be as all other women be, Let vs turne home, and well with them agree. 74 When on this point they both were thus resolued, They gaue the Greeke, Fiametta for his wife, And tide the knot that cannot be dissolued, With portion large, to keepe them all their life: Themselues went home, and had their sins absolued, And take againe their wiues, and end all strife. And thus mine Host the pretie storie ended, With which he prayth them not to be offended. 75 The Pagan Prince, of whom I erst made mention, Was pleased with this storie passing well, And heard the same with heed and great attention, And praised it, and said it did excell, And sweares he thought no wit nor no inuention, No pen could write, no tongue attaine to tell, By force of eloquence, or helpe of art, Of womens trecheries the hundredth part. 76 But at the table sat another guest, Of riper yeares,A  women. and iudgement more discreet, Who such vntruths to heare could not digest, And see their praises so trod vnder feet; Wherefore his speech he presently addrest Vnto his host, and said, we dayly meet With slaunders, and with lying fables told, And this is one, to say I dare be bold. 77 Nor thee, nor him that told thee, trust I will, No though in other things he gospell spake, I dare affirme it well, that euill will, Not any triall that himselfe could make, Mou'd him of all the kind to speake so ill, Belike for some one naughtie womans sake: But he that would enter in womens praise, On higher steps aloft his stile might raise.
78 But tell me now, if any one of you That married are, haue not awrie yet stept? No scarse a man, that hath not been vntrew, And with some other woman hath not slept: Nay that is more, they woo, they seeke, they sew, They trie, they tempt those that be safest kept, Yet women seeke not after men I ween, (I meane not such as common harlots been.) 79 Surely the man on whom your tale you father,Ouid saith. . Cannot himselfe, nor other men excuse, Who still to take an vnknowne peece had rather, Although there owne, were better far to chuse: But if themselues were wood, I surely gather, Such courtesies, they neuer would refuse, But rather straine themselues beyond their might, Such kindnes, with more kindnes to requite. 80 But be't some woman breaks chast wedlocks laws, And leaues her husband, and becomes vnchast, Yet commonly it is not without cause, She sees her man, in sin his substance wast; She feels that he, his loue from her withdraws, And hath on some (perhap) lesse worthie plast, Who striks with sword, the scabberd thē may strike, And sure loue craueth loue,Sentence. like asketh like. 81 Indeed in their behalfe, agree would I, That all wiues that adulterie do commit, Should by a law, condemned be to die, If so their husbands guiltles be of it. But if that men vnpunisht walke awry, Doubtles in sence and reason tis not fit, The weaker sex should for this sin be vext, Do as you would be done to,Sentence. saith the text. 82 Yet when a man is bent to speake his worst, That in despite he can of women say, He cals them but incontinent and curst, No greater fault, he to their charge can lay: To rob, to spoile, houses to breake and burst, Whole Cities, townes, and countries to betray, Vsue, murder, all such sinnes appeare, Proper to men, women of them are cleare. 83 This said this graue wise man, and would haue told Some storie to the same, his speech to verifie, Of women that had liu'd till they were old, Chastlie and vertuouslie, and with sinceritie, But that the cruell Turke, did him behold, With so grim looke as did the poore man terrifie, And made him hold his peace with threats & terror, Yet hating inwardly the Pagans error. 84 These brables ended, night on them did creep, To rest they went hauing their bodies fed: But Rodomont scant all the night could sleep, For cares, that ran still in his troubled hed, His vnkind mistres him doth waking keep, She troubles him, whether he lye on bed, Whether he go, or ride, or sit, or stand, Whether it be, by water or by land. 85 But though himselfe could take but little rest, Yet of his horse he takes no little care, Both that he should be diligently drest, And haue good prouander, to mend his fare: To go by water now he thought it best, Himselfe to ease, and his good horse to spare, That horse he gat, as he might iustlie vant, Spite of Rogero, and of Sacrapant. 86 He takes a barke,Horace xvi. Ode 2 . Quid  cadētes sole  quu  Se quoquefugit. Scandis  virto sa naues cura: nec  equitum . and downe the pleasant streame Of Sonna he doth passe, with winde and ore, Great hast he makes, to get to his owne Reame, But changing place doth helpe him neare the more; In sleepe, of her vnkindnes he doth dreame, A wake, he sighs and still renews the sore: To talke was best, and yet not much the better, Say what he list, yet cannot he forget her. 87 Anoyd by bote, againe he taking land, Vienna, Lions, and Valenza past, (All which then were in Agramantes hand, His late good hap, had so them all agast: To Aquamort, he turns on his right hand, And thence he will to Algier turne in hast, And in his way, his iourney to abridge, He past Auignon, at the sumptuous bridge. 88 Not far from Mompelier a towne he saw, Of Bacchus,That is to say, stored with corne and wine. and of Ceres well beloued. Though then so spoild by souldiers that for aw, The dwellers all, themselues ro thence remoued: Also there was a Church for Christen law, But yet the Priests (in this to be reproued) To saue thēselues, their Church had quite forsaken, So as the same by Rodomont was taken. 89 This seat this place, did so the Pagan please, That here he mind: to make his firme abode; For of the tone side, he might see the seas, On tother side, the ground with corne well lode; Here all prouisions he might finde with ease, Here he doth cause his men his stuffe vnlode, And makes that Church (oh horrible abute) Serue him, to his profane vngodly vse. 90 Now standing pensiue, in this pleasing place, As still he vsd, he saw a Ladie faire, (Though mourning, yet most ful of pleasing grace)Isabella. Who with a Frire, made thither her repaire: A goodly horse, they led a soft flow pace, And as they went, he taught her many a praire: That horse did beare a coffin on his backe, All ouerspred in mourning sort, with blacke. 91 Me thinke by this description you may guesse, Who this same Frire, and who this damtell is, Yet for more plainesse sake, I will expresse Her name, lest any may the matter misse: Twas Isabella, who did late professe, That state that leadeth strait to heau'nlie blisse,Christianitie. He was the Frire, that to that mind conuerted her, When as dispaire, had almost quite subuerted her.
92 Within the mourning coffin was enclosed, His corse, whom she so lou'd aliue and dead, And though to griefe she seemed all disposed, Though all in blacke, she went from foot to head, Yet in that wofull shew there was disclosed, So worthie grace, as in the Pagan bred A fancie, mouing such an alteration, As made him change his first determination. 93 For where before he did dispraise and scorne All women, now againe he doth commend That sex, that doth indeed the world adorne: His second loue to place he doth intend On this, sith that his first hath him forlorne; Here now he hopeth all his wo to end,Simile.  pesius. And with this passion to driue out the tother, As men do driue out one naile with another. 94 And straight in mildest manner that he can, Saluting her, he askt what cauld her paine? And she the wofull tale to tell began, How her true loue by Mandricard was slaine, For whose sake she would neuer marrie man, But serue God all her life that doth remaine, The Pagan laughs at that the damsell faith, As one that knows no God, and hath no faith. 95 And greatly he her good intent controld, Affirming her to merit as great blame, As doth the miser, that hoords vp his gold, And neither doth himselfe imploy the same, And yet from those that would, doth it withhold: So shut not vp your selfe (quoth he) for shame; Fierce Lions, Bears, and serpents that haue stings, Should be shut vp, not faire and harmlesse things. 96 The godly Frire, that tooke no little care, Lest this ill speech might turne her to small good, With new exhortings, bad her to be ware, That such intisements strongly be withstood: And for that end, forthwith he doth prepare, A sumptuous messe of ghostly inward food: But this vile Pagan did no sooner tast it, But vp againe, his squemish stomacke cast it. 97 And seeing that the speeches of this Frire, (Whō he could make by no means hold his peace) Seemd greatly to contrarie his desire; Wrath kindled, and at last did so increase, That this poore priest gat but a forie hire. But he are a while my storie now shall cease, Lest my mishap or punishment be such, As was this Priests, for talking ouermuch. In Iocundo and Astolfo both, may be noted the vanitie of beautie in men, and how weake a protection it is,Morall. against the blow that neuer smarteth, as some haue termed it. urder, in Iocundos wife, that after all the great protestations of kindnesse, was taken in bed with his man, we may note the fraud as well as frailtie, of some of that sexe. In Fiametta, that lying between a king and a knight, tooke vp a Tapster into her bed, I cannot tell what to note, but that which Ouid faith. Non caret effectu, quod voluere duo. Nought can restraine, consent of twaine. In the Queene of Lombardie, that bestowed her loue so basely, we may see that no state nor degree is priuiledged from shame and slander, except vertue and grace from aboue, do keepe them from such enormous offences. Further we may see it is a verie desper at enterprise, to thinke by any restraint, to keepe an vnchast woman from putting in practise her lewd desires. Lastly the defence of women, by the graue wise man, too truly proueth, that though many women are bad, yet many men are worse, and therfore if euery one would mend one (as the Prouerbe saith) al shal be mended. And as for Rodomonts new loue, it shews that no passiō grows so strong by accident, to remoue & take away a natural disposition. Historie nor Allegorie,Allusion. not scant any thing that is good, can be picked out of this bad booke: but for Allusions they come in my mind so plentifully, as I can scant tell how to make an end when I am once entred into them: Onely I will touch one or two, (so fill vp this page withall) that allude to that point of Iocundos patience, in leauing the adulterer vnpunished, and his wife reproued, taking her in so shamefull an act. As I haue heard of one of honest calling (But namelesse he, for blamelesse he must be) that finding one in bed with his wife, and seeing euidently, that she had plaid false at ta∣bles, and borne a man to many, drew out his dagger resolutely, and sware a great oth, that if he had not bin his verie frend, he would at least haue killed him: and when he had done he put vp his dagger againe, and went about some other business. Another, hearing one was newly gone out of his house, that had done that for him, which no bodie desires to do by a deputie, tooke his sword and his buckler and followed in a great rage, and hauing ouertaken him, laid adultery to his charge: the man so hotly pursude, and so hardly charged, confessed it was true: with which the tother (being ful∣ly satisfied, as it seemed with his honest confession) left him, swearing if he had denied it, he would not so haue put it vp. Here end the notes of the xxviij. booke.
THE XXIX. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Faire Isabell, to loose her head is glad, To saue her chastitie from Pagans might: To pacifie her ghost, the Pagan sad, Doth make a bridge at which fals many a knight: Orlando commeth thither, being mad, And in the water both together light. From thence the madman onward still proceeds, And by the way doth strange and monstrous deeds. 1 OH thoughts of men, vncon∣stant and vnstable, As subiect vnto chaunge, as Westerne wind, In al designments fond, and variable, But chiefly those, that loue breeds in the mind: Lo he that late deuild all he was able, To slander and deface all women kinde, Yet now with them whom he so fore reuild, Eu'n on the sudden he is reconcild. 2 Indeed (most noble Dames) I am so wroth, With this vile Turke, for this his wicked sin, For speaking so great slander and vntroth, Of that sweet sex, whose grace I faine would win, That till such time, he shall confesse the troth, And what a dammed error he was in: I shall him make be so in conscience stoung, As he shall teare his flesh and bite his toung. 3 But with what folly he was then possessed, The sequell of the matter plaine doth show; For he that yesterday himselfe professed, To all the kind, a sworne and open foe: Now to this stranger, one in state distressed; Whose birth, whose kin, whose name he doth not know, With one small glance, & sober cast of y, Was so enthralld, he woos her by and by. 4 And as new fancie doth his heart inflame, So to new speach it doth his tongue direct, A new discourse, new reasons he doth frame, With great perswasions, but to small effect: For still the godly Frire refutes the same, Exhorting her such speeches to neglect, And fast to hold her purpose good and holly Of seruing God, and leauing worldly folly. 5 He faith the way of death is large and spacious,Sen But that to life is straight and full of paine. But Rodomont that saw him so audacious, In spite of him this doctrine to maintaine, Steps to him, and with hand and tongue vngracious, First bids him get him to his cell againe, Then his long beard, growne on his aged chin, All at one pull, he pilleth from the skin. 6 And so farre foorth his wrath and furie grew, He wrings his necke,Simile. as pincers wring a naile, And twise or thrise about his head him threw, As husband men that thresh,Simile. do tosse a flaile: Reports most diuers afterwards ensew, But which be true, and which of truth do faile, Is hard to say: some say he was so battered, That all his limbs about a rocke were scattered. 7 Some say that to the sea he hurled him, Though diuerse furlongs distant from the place, And that he dide, because he could not swim: Some others tell, some saint did him that grace, To saue his life, and heale each broken lim, And to the shore did bring him in short space. The likelyhood hereof, who list may way, For now of him, I haue no more to say.
8 Thus cruell Rodomont that had remoued The babling Frire that did him so much spight, The fearfull damsels loue to win he proued, By all kind words and gestures that he might; He cals her his deare heart, his sole beloued, His ioyfull comfort, and his sweet delight, His mistresse and his goddesse, and such names, As louing knights apply to louely dames. 9 Her reasons he doth curteously confute, (Loue soone had made him such a learned clarke) In phrases mannerly he moues his sute, And still his sute was leueld at one marke, And though he might by force haue pluckt the frute, Yet for that time he doth but kisse the barke: He thinkes it will more sweet and pleasing make it, If she do giue him leaue before he take it. 10 Wherefore a while he is content to pawse, In hope by time to win her loue and grace: She deems her selfe like mouse in cats sharpe clawes, In strangers hands, and in as strange a place; She sees he feard not Gods nor humane lawes, Nor had no pittie of her wofull case, That onely for his lust would her perswade, To breake the vow that she to God had made. 11 Her heart and eyes, oft times to heau'n she lifts, And prayes the blessed Virgin and her Sonne, To saue her from this Pagans filthy drifts, That vnto her no villanie be donne: She doth bethinke her of an hundred shifts, How she his beastly lust may safely shunne, That like an open gulfe on her did gape, So as it seemd vnpossible to scape. 12 She finds out many scuses and delayes, That to prolong, which faine she would preuent, Sometime in humble manner him the prayes, That to release her he would be content: But being still repulst at all assayes, At last she doth a way and meanesinuent, Not onely how to shun that present shame, But merit to her selfe eternall name. 13 Vnto the cruell Turke that now began From all good course of curtesie to swarue, She commeth in the meekest sort she can, And faith, if he her honor will preserue, (Which is the part of each true valiant man) She would of him that fauour well deserue, And giue him such a gift as in due measure, Should farre surpasse this momentarie pleasure. 14 But if you needs will me defloure, I wis (She said) when you haue done you will repent, To thinke how fondly you haue done amisse, And lost that might haue bred you true content As for your carnall loue, you need not misse More faire then I, and fitter for your bent, But in ten thousand, one you shall not know, That such a gift vpon you can bestow. 15 I know (quoth she) an herbe,Looke in the Allusion. and I haue seene A little since the place where as it grew, That boild vpon a fire of cypresle cleene, And mixt with elder berries and with rew; And after strained harmlesle hands betweene, Will yeeld a iuyce, that who in order dew, Annoint therewith, shall neuer domage feele, By flame of fire, nor yet by dint of steele. 16 I say if one therewith annoint him thrise, These strange effects thereof will strait ensew, Prouided alwayes that in any wise He must each month the liquors strength renew: I haue the way to make it in a trice, And you shall see by proofe that it is true; This thing I thinke should ioy you more to gaine, Then if you conquerd had all France or Spaine. 17 And now for my reward of you, I pray Let me obtaine this fauourable meed, To sweare that you henceforth will not assay My chastitie, by either word or deed: Foll Rodomont thinks this a blessed day, And hopes he now shall neuer armor need, And sweares he will her honour safe defend, Though to performe it he doth not intend. 18 Yet till she might this worke bring to effect, He doth himselfe against his mind inforce, And that she might no violence expect, He doth not offer any signe of force; But that once doire, his oth he will neglect, For of an oth he neuer had remorce; But specially he thought it least disgrace, His oth to violate in such a case. 19 He makes to her a solemne protestation, And with most damned oaths the same doth bind, That he will neuer do her molestation, If she procure a iuyce of such a kind: This sink so deepe in his imagination, Of Cygnius and Achilles runs his mind,They are foyd so haue beene so in∣chanted that they could feels no paine of fire nor steele. For by this meanes he doth himselfe assure, Such priuiledge as they had to procure. 20 Poore Isabella glad of this delay, By which a while her chastitie she shields, Receiuing this his promise, go'th straightway To seeke these herbs amid the open fields, In eu'ry bank and groue, and hedge and way, She gathers some, such as the country yeelds; And all the while the Pagan walketh by, And to the damsell casteth still an eye. 21 And least she should want cypresse wood to bunie, He with his sword cuts downe whole cypresse trees, And in all other things to serue her turne, That each thing may prouided be he sees: Now with her herbs she made her home returne, The caldrons are on fire (no time to leese) She boyles and perboyles all those herbs and flowres, In which he thought there were such hidden powres.
22 At all these ceremonies he stands by, And what she doth he many times doth looke, The smoke and heate at last him made so dry, That want of drinke he could no longer brooke, Greeke wines there were, and those he doth apply, Two firkins late from passengers he tooke, He and his men by drinking both that night, Their heads full heauie made, their hearts full light. 23 Though by their law they are forbidden wine, Yet now that here they did the liquor tast, They thought it was so sweet and so diuine, That Nectar and that Manna farre it past: At that restraint they greatly do repine, That did debar them of so sweet repast, And at their owne law and religion laffing, They spend that night carowsing and in quaffing. 24 Now had faire Isbell finisht that confection, Which this grosse Pagan doth beleeue to be, Against both steele and fire a safe protection: Now sir (she said) you shall the triall see, And that you may be sure that no infection Is in these drugs, you first shall proue by me, I shall you shew thereof so perfect triall, As you shall see the proofe past all deniall. 25 My selfe (quoth she) mind first to take the say, That you may see I do not faine nor lie, Then after on your selfe you proue it may, When you haue made a witnes of your eie: Now therefore bid your men to go away, That none be present here but you and I, And thus, as with her selfe she had appointed, Her neck and brefts, and shoulders she annointed. 26 Which done, in chearefull sort she open layd Her naked necke before the beastly Turke, And bad him strike, for she was not afrayd, She had such skill and trust in this rare worke: He vnadud, and haply ouerlayd With wine, that in his idle braine did worke, Was with her speech so vndiscreetly led, That at one blow he quite cut off her head. 27 The head where loue and all the graces dwelt, By heedlesse band is from the bodie seuered, Alas whose heart at such hap could not melt? Yea that is more, the head cut off endeuered To shew what pleasure of her death she felt, And how she still in her first loue perseuered: Thrise from the floore the head was seene rebound, Thrise it was heard Zerbines name to sound. 28 His name to whom so great loue she did beare, As she to follow him would leaue her life, To whom us hard so say if that she were A truer widow or a kinder wife; O soule that didst not death nor danger feare, (A sample in these latter times not rise) To saue thy chastitie and vowed truth, Eu'n in thy tender yeares and greenest youth. 29 Go soule, go sweetest soule for euer blest, So may my verse please those whom I desire, As my poore Muse shall euer do her best, As farre as pen can paint, and speech aspire, That thy iust praises may be plaine exprest To future times. Go soule to heauen or hyer; And if my verse can graunt to thee this chartir,Isabella  of. Thou shalt be cald of chastitie the Martir. 30 At this her deed so strange and admirable, He that aboue all heau'ns doth ay remaine, Lookt downe, and said it was more commendable Then hers for whom Tarquinio lost his raigne. And straight an ordinance inuiolable, Ay to be kept on earth he doth ordaine, And thus he said, eu'n by my selfe I sweare, Whose powre, heau'n, earth, sprites, men and Angels feare, 31 That for her sake that dide of this name last, Who euer shall hereafter beare that name,A prop all  sid bease the  of Isabella. Shall be both wise and continent and chast, Of faultlesse manners, and of spotlesse fame, Let writers striue to make their glòrie last, And oft in prose and verse record the same, Let Hellicon Pindus, Parnassus hill, Sound Isabella, Isabella still. 32 Thus said the Hy'st, and then there did ensew A wondrous calme in waters and in aire, The chast soule vp into the third heau'n flew, Where Zerbin was, to that the did repaire: Now when the beastly Turke saw plaine in vew, How he had prou'd himselfe a womanslayre, When once his drunken furfet was digested, He blam'd himselfe and his owne deed detested. 33 In part to satisfie for this offence, And to appease her ghost as twere in part, Although he thought no pardon could dispence, Not punishment suffice for such desart; He vowes a monument of great expence, Of costly workmanship and cunning art, To raise for her, nor minds he to go furder, Then that selfe church where he had done ye murder. 34 Of that selfe place he minds her tombe to make, And for that cause he gets of workmen store, For loue, for mony, and for terrors sake, Six thousand men he set to worke and more; From out the mountaines massie stones they take, With which wel wrought, & hewd, & squard therfore With hie and stately arch that church he couers, And in the midst intombs the blessed louers. 35 And ouer this was raisd with curious sleight, A Pyramid, a huge and stately towre, Which towre an hundred cubit had in heigh, By measure from the top vnto the flowre; It seemd a worke of as great charge and weight, As Adrian made,Moles  now called  Se  to bost his wealth and powre, Of goodly stones, all raisd in seemly ranks, Vpon the edge of stately Tybris banks.
36 Now when this goodly worke was once begunne, He makes a bridge vpon the water by, That of great depth and force did euer tunne, In former time a ferrie there did lye, For such as would a further circuit shunne, And passe this way more easie and more nye; The Pagan takes away the ancient ferrie, And leaues for passengers, not bote, not wherrio. 37 But makes a bridge where men to row are wont, And though the same were strōg, & of great length, Yet might two horses hardly meet a front, Nor had the sides a raile or any strength, Who comes this way he meanes shall bide a bront, Except he haue both corage good and strength, For with the armes of all that this way come, He means to bewtifie faire Isbels toome. 38 of He∣ by means  of A thousand braue Atchieuments he doth vow, Where with he will adorne this stately worke, From whom he taketh all these spoiles or how, He cares not whether Christian or Turke. Now was the bridge full finished, and now His watchmen on each side in corners lurke, To make him know when any one coms neare, For all that come, he means shall buy it deare. 39 And further his fantastike braine doth thinke, That sith by drinking wine he did that sin, In lieu thereof he now would water drinke, As oft as by mishap he should fall in: For when he should vnto the bottome sinke, The top would be an ell aboue his clun, As who should say, for eu'rie euill action That wine procures, were water satisfaction. 40 Ful many there arriued in few days, Some men, as in the way from Spaine to France, Some others fondly thirsting after prayse, In hope by this exploit their names t'aduance, But Rodomont doth meet them both the ways, And such his vallew was so good his chance, That still as many men as there arriues, Lost all of them their arms, and some their liues. 41 Among the many prisners that he tooke, All those were Christians to Algyre he sent, And willd his men safely to them to looke, Because ere long himselfe to come he ment; The rest, saue that their armors they forsooke, All harmelesse backe into their countries went: Now while such feats were by the Pagan wrought, Orlando thither came of wits bestraught. 42 At that same instant that Orlando came, Was Rodomont all armed saue his hed, The naked Earle with wits quite out of frame, Leaps ou'r the bar, and went (as folly led) To passe the bridge, the Pagan him doth blame, For his presumption, and withall he sed, Stay sawcy villen, proud, and vndiscreet, For such as thee, this passage is not meet. 43 For Lords and knights and squyres of good estate, This bridge was built, and not for thee thou beast: He that no sence had in his idle pate, Not heeding what was said still onward prest: I must (the Pagan thinks) this fools pride bate, It seems belike he thinks I am in iest, And thereupon he makes the madman towards, And minds to drowne him, sith he was so frowards. 44 He little lookt to find a match so hard, Now while they two together gan to striue, Behold a gallant dame of great regard, At that same bridge by fortune did arriue, Faire Fiordeliege, that late before had hard, How loue did of his witts this Earle deprius, She hither came to seeke out Brandimart, That now in Pari, was with pensiue hart. 45 And thus this Ladie (as before I told) Came at that season to this dangerous place, And knew this Earle, when she did him behold, And wonderd much to see him in such case: Now held Orlando with his foe hard hold, In vaine the Pagan striues him to displace, And grinning, to himselfe he said at length, Who could haue thought, a foole had such strength? 46 And stretting that he had his purpose mist, He doth by sleight the madmans force assay, Sometime he puts his hand below his twist, Sometime aboue, sometime another way: Orlando stands vnmou'd, do what he list; The Pagan seemd to do by him that day', As doth the Beare,Simile. that would dg vp the tree, From whence she fell, but fees it will not be. 47 Orlando full of force, though void of sence, About the middle tooke the Pagan fast, And heaues him vp from ground, & so from thence, Into the streame himselfe he backward cast: Vnto the bottome both do sinke from whence Each one was glad to get him in great hast, Orlando nakt and light, swam like a fish, So that he soone gat out as he would wish. 48 And being out, away he straight doth runne, Not tarries he to heare, or to exspect, If men do blame or praise that he had donne, But follows on his former course direct: This while the Pagan dranke uye halfe a tunne Of water, ere he could himselfe erect, And hardly he escaped being drownd, So heauie armd, and in place so profound. 49 Now, while the Pagan swimmeth for his life, Faire Fiordeliege with sad and pensure hart, A liuely patterne of a vertuous wife, Doth search the sepulcher for Brandimart, She tooke her time while they fell first at strife,Mantell is a ve∣sliment of solema∣mitie we use by Princes. And vp and downe she lookt in eu'rie part, But here she finds not arms not yet his mantell, Not meets with such as of him tydings can tell.
50 He returnes to Fiordehege in the  booke, slesse 36. and after againe  51. But leaue we her awhile thus mourning sad, And secking him each where saue where he was, And tell we now what hap Orlando had, And what strange feats his furie brought to passe, You might perchance beleeue that I were mad, If none of his mad pranks I ouerpasse. Which were so strange, and in so great a number, As you to heare, and me to tell would cumber. 51 I onely shall some few of those recite, As to my present purpose shall pertaine: The madman westward held his course forthright, Straight to the hils that seuer France fro Spaine, He seldome bayts, but trauels day and night, So much he was distemperd in his braine, And by the mountaines side as he did passe, He met two young men driuing of an asse. 52 This asse they loden had with clefts of wood, Fast bound vpon his burden bearing backe; They seeing one runne nakt as he were wood, Amid their way, they cride, hoe sirra backe, But he makes answer neither bad not good, For sence and vnderstanding he did lacke, But with his foote, the poore asse he so spurned, That both his lode and him he ouerturned. 53 He tost him like a football vp on hy, Whence downe he fell and brake his necke with it; Then at the men he doth with forie fly, Of which the tone had better hap then wit, For downe the rocke the tone lept by and by, Deep threescore yards, and by the way did hit, Vpon a banke of furze, growne in the place, And seapt with onely scratching of his face. 54 The tother that of feare like passion feels, Did thinke to clammer vp vpon the rocke, But straight Orlando takes him by the heels, Simila.And puls him downe and beats him like a stocke, Simila.As fishers vse to beat their sliding Eels, And eu'n as fawlkners teare some time a cocke, To giue vnto their hawks their intrals warme, So he tears leg from leg, and arme from arme. 55 Stapidious, that is so say uvnder∣full. These same and other like, stupendious deeds, He put in practice while those hils he past, Viste, that is so say huge or great. Eu'n such as speech and credit all exceeds, His fits so furious were, his strength so vast: So far vnto the westward he proceeds, That to the sea, he now was come at last, Two son was   Eu'n to the sandie shoars of Tarracona, That leadeth right the way to Barcellona. 56 Vpon those sands (such was his made conceat) He purposd with himselfe a house to build, And being noyed with the parching heat, He thinks with sand his skin therefro to shild: Oesis the maide that the sy'de be aeth bet . Straight with his hands he digs him out a seat, And though the oes his bodie all defild, Yet with that mould his members all he couered, That nothing but his head could be discouered. 57 Now as he lay halfe burid in the sand, (For saue his head, the rest was all vnseen,) There thither came, as in their way by land, Medoro with Angelica his Queen. She not aware what in her way did stand, (O her lorne louers bosting then I ween) Came vnto him so neare and on such soden, That vpon him her horse had welny troden. 58 But seeing straight vp start a naked man, The fight did her greatly amaze and fright, She knows him not, nor guesse at him she can, She thinketh sure, he is some hellish spright: Rough grifly heard, eyes staring, vilage wan, All parcht, and sunne burnd, and deformd in fight, In fine he lookt (to make a true description) In face like death,Simile. in cull or like a Gyptian. 59 But she at this strange fight (as erst I said) Did gallop thence as fast as she could ride, And screeching lowd, she crieth out for aid, Vnto Medoro her beloued guide: The mad Orlando was not ill apaid, When such a prettie damzell he had spide: Though he no knowledge nor remembrance had, How this was she, for whom he first fell mad. 60 Yet, as delighted with her pleasing hew, And liking well to see so faire a face, With great desire he straight doth her pursew, Eu'n as a hound the fear full Doc doth chase, Medoro mou'd herewith, his rapier drew, And after this mad fellow rides apase, And with his horse he thinketh downe to tred him, And with his blade he thinketh to behed him. 61 But by effect, contrariwise he found, That he without his host his reckning made, The madman shrinketh not an inch of ground, And his bare skin was harder then the blade, Yet sodenly when as the madman found, That one behinde his backe did him inuade, He turnd and with his fist so smote the horse, As made him ly on ground a senslesse corse. 62 And in a trise he backe againe doth goe, To catch Angelica who spurrs with speed, And thinketh still her palfreys pase too sloe, For such a turne, and so it was indeed, For had it gone like arrow from a boe, It hardly could haue holpe her at this need; At last her onely hope was in the ring, For now to helpe her was none other thing. 63 The ring that neuer faild her at her need, Did make her now to vanish out of sight. But whether that it were for want of heed, Or that the sodainenesse did her affright, Or that her beast did founder with the speed, Or that she did determine to alight, Of all these which it was I cannot tell, But topsie turuie from the beast she tell.
64 Had she falne shorter, or on tother side, In likelihood the madman had her caught, Which if he had, she doubtles should haue dide, But great good fortune her deliuerie wrought: But now another beast she must prouide, For this another pase will soone be taught, Orlando full doth her pursue so fast, That needs he must ou'rget her at the last. 65 As for Angelica I take no care, I know that she a beast long will not lacke, But rather steale one, as she did that Mare, That now in madmans hands will suffer wracke. To follow her Orlando doth not spare, Till he her stayd and lept vpon her backe, Then gallopt he as long as she was able, And lets her rest in neither field not stable. 66 Vntill at last in leaping ou'r a ditch, The poore Mare put her shoulder out of ioynt, He with his fall, tooke neither ach not stitch, Nor of the bruse he passeth not a poynt; Nor seeketh he for turpentine or pitch, The poore beasts brused members to annoynt, Though he might see with this fall he had mard her, Yet faine he would, she should haue borne him far∣der. 67 Quantum  we sagtta  poest.At last on his owne shoulder her he laid, And bare her so about an arrow shoot, But feeling then that she too heauie waid, He leadeth her and lets her go on foot, She limping follows him, and still he said; Come on, come on, but little did it bt, At last to make her, her flow pace to alter, About his right leg he doth her halter. 68 And tels her now with ease she follow may, And so to harry her he doth begin, The sharpe stones lying in the rugged way, Fret of her haire, and afterward the skin, The beast misused thus, liues searse a day: Orlando hath her tyde vnto his shinne; He sees not, nor he knows not she is ded, But on he draws her as his furie led. 69 And sure he would haue seru'd her such a tuch, I meane his mistres, if he could haue caught her, Had not the vertue of that ring beene such, As how to walke inuisible it taught her: Ah curled be that ring, and curst as much Be he that so vnluckily it brought her; Else sure Orlando had reuenged then, Her often wrongs, to him and other men. 70 Yet why wish I this curse on her alone? I would the like might hap to all the kinde,Ouid de arte avr. Fallute fallenies ex magna parto profaenum suns genus. For in a thousand good there is not one, All be so proud, vnthankfull and vnkinde, With flintie hearts; carelesse of others mone, In their owne lusts carrid most headlong blinde, But more herein to speake I am forbidden,Verisas odium parse. Terense. Some time for saying truth one may be chidden. MorallIn the death of Isabella is a not able example of chastitie, which I must confesse I haue indeuoured to set foorth to the vttermost of my poore skill, of a speciall loue and reuerence I bare to the name, hauing had an Isabell to my mother, and such an Isabell, as if nature did not make me to partiall a praiser, I would boldly affirme (both for the honorable place she liued in, and for the vertuous sort she dyed in) to be worthie to whom the prophecie in the 31. staffe of this 29. booke may be worthily applyed: As a better pen then mine, approued by this made Epitaph and intiled in this sort: A true report of mistres Isabell Harington, sometime of her Maiesties-priute chamber, written by a credible per∣son that was well acquainted with her conditions. A body chast, a vertuous mind, a temperat tongue, an humble hart, Secret and wise, faithfull and kind, true without guile, milde without art, A frend to peace, a foe to strife, a spotlesse maid, a matchlesse wife. And thus much for the name of Isabella. In Rodomont we may see effects of incoustancie, sensualitie and drunken∣nes, all which end (for the most part) in fruitles repentance. HistorieWhereas this fact of Isabella is preferred before that of Lucretia, who killed herselfe after she was destoured, I thinke that no man can instly make any comparison betweene them; for the storie, I will not stand long vpon to recite it being so well knowne, but refer the studious reader, either to Liuie who writes it in prose very faithfully, or to Ouid de Fallis, where it is also recorded verie Poetically and passionatly. Quidfaciat, pugne vincetur foemina pugnans; Clamet? at in dextra qui vetet ensis erat. Aufigiat? positis vrgentur pectora palmis, Tum primum externa pectora tacta manu. AllegorieSome perhaps will picke a prettie Allegorie in the confection that Isablla made, and in deed it is a prettie receit, if it be well marked: It is in the 15. staffe: an herbe, which she named not, (suppose it to be trettifollie or prettifolly) min∣gled with elder berries and rew, (which may signifie sage counsel and repentance) and strained between harmles hands, which betokens innocencie, boyled on a fire of Cypres, which the ancient Romanes vsed at funerals, and therefore may be taken either for death, or persecution, or martyrdome: this confection vsed in due order will be a good Antidoroner medicine, against fire and sword: vnder which is signified, all the perils and aduersities of the world. AllusionThe death of Isabella alludeth, or in deed is meerly taken from the like example of one Brasilla of Durazzo, that in the selfe same sort deceiued a souldier, and was killed her selfe: as Fornarius no eth at large. Here end the notes of the xxix booke.
THE XXX. BOOKE THE ARGVMENT. Strange feats by mad Orlando are atchieued, Fierce Mandricard is by Rogero slaine: Himselfe so hurt, that all the campe belieued, He had bin dead the formost of the twaine: His loue with his long absence sore is grieued: To breake his word his wounds do him constraine: Renaldo with his kinsfolke and his frends, To set his Prince at libertie intends. 1 WHen men with wrath and sodaine pangs of ire, Permit themselues to be orewhelmd & drownd, And hot reuēge that burns like flaming fire, Moues hearts to hurt, or tongs or had̄s to wound, Though after to amend it they desire, Yet place of pardon seldome can be found: Paleno.  the end . Ah (worthy Ladies) I do you beseech, To pardon that my former foolish speech. 2 For I am growne like a diseased man, That when he finds by phisicke no reliefe, And now no more with patience suffer can, The burning torture of his lingring griefe Doth fall to raue and rage, and curse and bau, Blaspheming God, renouncing his beliefe:Neseit . But when that fit is past, then would he faine, But ah he cannot call it backe againe. 3 Yet Ladies of your clemencie I hope, I pittie shall not onely pardon finde, Although I somewhat swarue from reasons scope, And rash words flow from vnaduised minde: She onely beare the blame that slayes my hope, And for true seruice shews her selfe vnkinde: That I did speake was partly of compassion, is in , as much compassion, fecung of With simpathy mou'd of Orlandos passion. 4 Who (as I partly did before declare) In monstrous sort, suruayd Marsilios raigne, And wrought great wo, great danger, and great care, To all the then inhabitants of Spaine: I told you how he drew the silly Mare, Tide to his leg, till she was dead with paine: And how he had so small sence in his head, He drew her after him when she was dead. 5 But comming to a great deepe running water, He was constraind to let her there abide, And (for he swimmes as perfect as an Atter) He quickly passed to the tother side, Where then a herdman came his beasts to water, And on a curtall he himselfe did ride: And though he saw the madman and did view him, Yet being naked he would not elchew him. 6 The madman prayeth him that he would spare His hore; that they two might together cope: I left (quoth he) on tother de my Mare, And fast about her necke I left a rope: I left her dead; but yet with heed and care, Of her recouerie there is good hope: The herdman laugheth at his sencelesse words And vnto him no answer he affords. 7 Hoe (saith Orlando) fellow, dost not heare? I must thy curtall haue, thon needst not laffe: And with that word approching somewhat neare, The crabbed herdman with a crabtree staffe, Gaue him a bastinado on his care, Which put the mad Erle into such a chafe, That with his fist he made the herdman reele, Till paine it selfe made him no paine to feele.
8 This done he leapeth on the horses backe, And at aduenture on he takes his way, Where ere he comes he putteth all to wracke, His horse tastes neither prouender nor hay: But though this tyrd; a horse he may not lacke, The next he meets by force he takes away: To striue with him it was but little boote, He is resolued not to go a foote. 9 He passeth to the straites of Zibeltar, Or Zibelterra (call it which you will) And as he went, with force of open war, Townes he did burne, and all the dwellers kill: Ten yeares will hardly make that he would mar Within one houre, and thus he traueld still, Till on a day, riding vpon the sand, He saw a ship new loosed from the land. 10 The aire was cleare and mild, and calme the wether, And certaine Gentlefolke had hyr'd the barke, With mind to take their solace there together, And to returne againe er it were darke: The madman cries, hoe sits let me come thither: His deeds, his words, they neither marke nor harke, Or if they did, you may be sure they thought, They would not comberd be with such a fraught. 11 He hallows after them, and whopes and hayles, To haue them stay, & with faire words doth wo th̄e, Glad might they be they went with oars and says, For might he come, he surely would vndoe them, The soole that sees how small his speech preuayls, Beats on his horse, and meanes to ride vnto them: In vaine his horse would shun this hard aduenter, But he perforce makes him the sea to enter. 12 First he his feete doth wet, and then his knees, And next his belly, after that his backe, Now scant his nose one in the water sees, And full he layes him on; poore horse alacke, That either in these seas his life must leese, Or swim to Affricke et he can turne backe: At last with swimming tyrd, with water cloyd, His belly fild, till limbs of life were void. 13 The horse vnto the bottome quickly funke, Fortunasauet , as the Latine preuerbe .And had for company his buthern drownd, If fortune that helpe frantike men and drunke, Had not him safe conueyd to Affrike ground: Orlando at the danger neuer shrunke, But to the shore he swam both safe and sound: It happie was the seas were then so still, Else had the Erle bin drownd for all his skill. 14 Now being safe arriued at the shore, Neare Setta strayt he ranged ou'r the cost, And did such deeds as he had done before, On tother side to many poore mens cost; At last he came where as he found great store, Hereu to Orlando in the 39 book 36 staff.Of warlike weapons, and a mightie host: But how with them this madman disagreed, I may not in this booke to tell proceed. 15 And further how Angelica the faire,There is  of Angelica this work. Did meet her loue againe, and what a Lord He grew, by matching with so great an haire, And liu'd with her in loue and sweet accord, (Although in birth an vnsit matched paire) I leaue for other Muses to record: For now I must adresse my selfe to tell, What haps in Agramantes campe besell. 16 I told you two bookes past, or there about, How Mandricard was Doralices choice: And how in face of all the Pagan rout, She gaue that doome, that made him much reioyce, For she was deemd for beautie (out of doubt) The best in Europe by the common voices Now chiefe since faire Angelica was fled, And worthy Isabella lost her hed. 17 But yet this pleasure was not so entire, But that it sawced was with some annoy, For wrath and enuie set his heart on fire, And much abated of his present ioy: It spites him that Rogero dare aspire, To giue his coat, being a berdlesse boy: And further that the king of Sericane, Should openly lay claime to Durindane. 18 And first Rogero will by no meanes yeeld, By no intreatie, nor by no request, That Mandricard should carrie that same sheeld Which had the Argent Eagle on the crest, Except he first could win it in the feeld: On tother side Gradasso doth not rest, But he will be the first to trie by fight, Which of them two had to the sword most right. 19 With Agramant Marsilio tooke great paine, In all or part these quarrels to appease, But when they saw their labour was in vaine, To gouerne or perswade with one of these: Thé chance (quoth Agramant) shal make that plain, For which you striue, and eu'n as fortune please, So let it be, and let some lots be cast, Which two or three, shall fight the first or last. 20 And yet this iust request denie me not, Before the matter any further goth, (Though now you be so violent and hot, That speech of peace and all accord you loth) To grant that who shall combat first by lot, May leesing leese, and winning win for both: This motion, most indifferent must seeme, Sith both their vallews equall we esteeme. 21 This motion neither of them do mislike, And straight Gradassos and Rogeros name, Vpon two scroles were writ so passing like You would haue iudgd them both to be the same: A boy of fourteene yeare of age they pike, To draw the lot, and he that first out came, Must fight with Mandricard, and make it knowne, He fights for tothers title and his owne.
22 When on this order all parts were agreed, The lot to fight vpon Rogero fell, Which hap great griese did in Gradasso breed, Although in shew he seemd to take it well: Contrariwise it did all ioy exceed, The ioy Rogero had, it so befell: So well of his owne vallew he belieued, He ioyd at that at which the tother grieued. 23 But yet Gradasso doth with great regard, Both fauour and aduane Rogeros side, And sheweth him how he must lie to ward A comming blow, how he might slip a side: How for a thrust he may be best prepard: Which blowes be firme, and which be falsiside, When best time is to follow thrust or blow: How one may best take vantage of his foe. 24 The rest of that same day that did remaine, Ensuing this same course of casting lots, They spent as pleased each mans pleasing vaine, In talke, or banquetting, or tossing pots: To see this fight the people glad and faine, Clammer the scaffolds, gazing still like lots, Some for desire do cone by breake of day, And some all night within the place do stay. 25 Thus (as I say) these simple fooles do long, To see the combat these braue knights betwixt, And blame the stay, and thinke the time too long, That for the same the Herralds had prefixt: But sober men that knew what did belong To such exploits, whose wiser heads were fixt, On publike good, this quarrell much lament, And traueld all they can it to preuent. 26 And chiefe Marsilio and Sobrino sage, Aduise king Agramant to stay the fight, And these same champions furie to asswage, And to take vp the quarrell if they might: Forewarning him when he must battell wage, With Charles of France, the losse of one such knight, Will do him greater hurt and damage then, Then would the losse of thousands and other men. 27 But Agramant knew all was true they spake, And saine he would their counsell wise obay, But could not tell his grant how to reuoke: Onely he doth in curteous sort them pray, That he may strike with them so great a stroke, Either to end or to defer the fray; And yeeld the rather vnto his perswasion, Because it rose vpon so light occasion. 28 Or if they did esteeme such toyes so far, As though they matters were of true renowne; is almost the  cause why morals between  and  states be so  taken upThat yet they would the fight so long defar, Vntill the sonne of Pipen were put downe: And till they conquerd had the Realme by war, And tane from him his mantle and his crowne, This motion had in likelihood taken place, Saue each thought first consent would be disgrace. 29 Aboue them all and more then all the rest, That in this sort their speech in vaine had spent: Faire Doralyce doth Mandricard request, That to the kings desire he would assent: She doth exhort, intreat, perswade, protest, She doth complaine, and languish, and lament: To thinke that by his ouer haftie cholor, She still must liue in anguish and in dolor. 30 How can I hope (said she) that ere I shall,Dorayces speech to  Mandricard to peace. Liue any houre in solace and in ioy? When still I see you readie be to brall, With eu'rie man, for eu'rie trifiting toy: The Sarzans foile doth me no good at all, My choyce of you hath bred me more annoy: To end that quarrell, ah what did it boot, Sith straight another quarrell is on foot? 31 I simple foole, in minde was proud and glad, That such a Prince, so braue a man as you, For loue of me his whole state venterd had; But now I finde by this that doth ensew, That I had far more reason to be sad, Sith each like cause, like danger doth renew; And not my loue, but your owne natiue furie, To bide such hard aduentures did procure yee. 32 But if your loue be such as in your speech, You do professe, and in your open show: Then by that loue I humbly you beseech, And by that fancie which too well I know, Doth eu'n my heart and soule with loue bewitch, Let not this quarrell any further grow: I see not why it should you so molest, To see your Eagle in anot hers crest.. 33 If needs you will attempt this hardie feat, And venter life vpon a thing o vaine, Then hazard that you make must needs be great, But none, or verie small can be the gaine: But if that fortune change her fickle fear, Thinke then, ô thinke, what woe shall I sustaine? There neuer yet was Emperor or king, Could boast that he had Fortune in a string.Sentence. 34 But if that life be vnto you lesse deare, Then is a painted bird vpon a sheeld; Yet for my sake, whom it doth touch more neare, Let me intreat you to this motion yeeld: If you were staine, what ioy could I haue heare? Death sole from wo, both could & should me sheeld Not feare I death; my onely griefe would bee, Before my death thy wofull end to see. 35 Thus earnestly faire Doralycee delt, All that same night, as in his armes she lyes, And as she spake, the teares distill and melt, In warrie streames, downe from her cristall eyes: The Tartar that no little passion felt, T'o comfort her faith all he can deuise: And wipes her checkes, and her sweet lip dothkisse, And weeps for company, and answers this.
36 Muards .Ah do not grieue thy selfe so sore (my deare) Ah do not grieue thy selfe for such a toy, Plucke vp thy sprights, and be of better cheare, There is no cause of feare mine onely ioy: No though that all the kings and captains heare, Had sworne my death, and vowed mine annoy: Yet all the kings and captaines I would vanquish, Why then should you causles in sorrow languish? 37 What, did not I with trunchen of a speare, (You know your selfe whether I say the truth) Not hauing sword nor other weapon theare, Win you from all your gard? and shall a youth, A beardlesse boy, cause you my safetie feare, And breed in you so vnaduised ruth? Well might you deeme I were a dastard lout, If of Rogero I should stand in doubt. 38 Gradasso, though vnto his griefe and shame, Yet if one aske him can it not gainesay, That when he last vnto Sorya came, I met and tooke him prisner by the way, Yet he is of another manner same, Then is Rogero, you your selfe will say: I had him there a prisner at my will, And if I listed might haue kept him still. 39 And least I should of this good witnes want, Beside Gradasso, there be hunderds more, As namely Isolyr, and Sacrapant, Whom I set free and had great thanks therefore: Also the famous Grissin and Aquilant, That there were taken, but few dayes before: With diuers more both Turkish and baptised, That by my force were taken and surprised. 40 Their wonder in those countries still doth last, Of that great vallew I that time did show, And should I now a doubt or perrill cast? Am I in greater danger now you trow? Shall one young youth me hand to hand agast? Shall I now doubt his force, or feare his blow? Now hauing Durindana by my side, And Hectors armour on my backe beside? 41 Why did not I, as pointed was by lot, With Rodomont first bloudie barrell wage? That by his ill successe you might forewot, The speedie end of this young sorrie page. They say in Latin Maldernat persue verbu.Drie vp these teares (my deare) and bring me not, Before the combat at such an ill presage: Nor thinke an Eagle on a target painted, Moues me hereto, but doubt of honor tainted. 42 Thus much said he, but she such answer made him, With words expressing such alouing mone, As were not onely able to perswade him, But might (I thinke) haue mou'd a marble stone: The force was great wherewith she did inuade him, In fine so farre she conquers him alone, He grants thus farre to be at her deuotion, If peace be offerd, to accept the motion. 43 And so I thinke indeed he would haue done, Had not Rogero early in the morne, Got vp before the rising of the Sunne, And enterd in the lists, and blowne his horne, To shew that he the battell would not shunne, And that Ioues bird by him was iustly borne: Which either he will carrie on his shield, Or else will leaue his carkas in the field. 44 But when the Tartar fierce did heare that found, And that his men thereof had brought him word: He thinks great shame should vnto him redound, If any treatie he of peace afford: Arme arme he cries, & straight he armes him round, Ae And by his side he hangs his trustie sword: And in his countenance he lookes so grim, Scarse Doralyce her selfe dares speake to him. 45 And armed at all pieces, vp in hast He gets, and that same courser he bestrides,Orlando. That was that Christen champions in time past, Who now doth runne his wit and sence besides: And thus he comes vnto the lists at last, The place that all such quarrels still decides, The king and all his court soone after came, And now ere long begins the bloudie game. 46 Now on their heads their helmets are made fast, Now are the Lances put into their hands, Now was the token giu'n by trumpets blast, Which both the horse and horseman vnderstands: Now in a full carryre they gallop fast, And either strongly to his tackle stands: Now with such force the tone the tother strake, As though that heau'n did fall, and earth did shake. 47 The Argent Eagle comes on either side,Look inside Allussion. With wings displaid on either captaines sheeld, The bird which Ioue (men say) was seene to ride, (Though better wingd) ou'r the Thessalian feeld: As for their mightie strength and courage tride, Their massie speares sufficient witnesse yeeld: Nor strud they more with those t̄epestuous knocks, Then wind sturs towres, or waues do stur the rocks. 48 The splinters of the spears flew to the skie, (As Turpin writeth that was present there) And were on fire by hauing, bin so nie, Vnto the scorching of the fierie Spheare: The champions out their swords draw by and by, As those that neither sword nor fire did feare, And either thrusteth at the tothers face, And seekes by force the tother to displace. 49 They neuer sought to hurt each others steed, Not that they made together such accord, But that they deemd it an vnworthie deed, Not worthie of a worthie knight or Lord: Of base reuenge they count that act proceed, And meet of noble minds to be abhord. So that in those dayes none were knowne to kill A horse, except it were against his will.
50 Vpon their vizers both do strike at once, And though the same were firme and plated double, As being made of proofe and for the nonce, Yet did the force of such fell strokes them trouble; And still they lay on lode as thicke as stones Of haile, that often turne the corne to stubble: I thinke it needlesse further to alledge, It they haue strength, or if their swords haue edge. 51 Yet long they fought together in that field, Ere any signe of any blow was left, Such wary heed each tooke himselfe to shield; But Durindan at last fell with such hest, Full on the circle of Rogeros shield, That halfe way throught the argent bird it cleft, And pierst the coate of male that was within, And found a passage to the very skin. 52 The cruell blow made many hearts full cold, Of such as wisht well to Rogeros part, For most of those that stood by to behold, Rogeros fauourd in their mind and hart, So that afore to say one might be bold, If fortune follow would the greater part, Fierce Mandricard were slaine, or else should yeeld, So that this blow offended halfe the field. 53 But surely some good Angell I beleue, The force of this so fearfull stroke abated, Rogero though the wound him somewhat grieue, Yet was his mind therewith no whit amated, Great vsury he mindeth him to giue, And that the strife may quickly be debated, He frankly strikes with his whole force and might, Full on the helmet of the Tartar knight. 54 With so great force and furie came the blow, As to the teeth no doubt had clou'n his head, Sauing by what mishap I do not know, But want of heed that too much hast had bred, It lighted flatling on him, else I trow, That stroke alone had him most surely sped, But as it was it made his head so idle, He opend both his hands and loosd his bridle. 55 Good Brigliadore that felt the slacked raine, (I thinke still mourning for his masters change) Ran vp and downe at randon on the plaine, .His senslesse rider suffring him to range; Who when he came vnto himselfe againe, And saw his  to run a course so strange, A spurned Viper hath not so much wrath, Nor wounded Lion, as the Tartar hath. 56 He claps the spurs to Brigliadoros side, And on his stirrops he himselfe aduances, And to his so with furie he doth ride, And vp on hie his right arme he inhances, To strike a blow; but when Rogero spide His arme lie ope. as oft in fight it chances, He chopt his swords point vnder tothers arme, And puld it out with blood both wet and warme. 57 By which he did not onely maime his so, By letting blood vpon so large a vaine, But bated much the furie of the blo, Which notwithstanding fell with force so maine, As made Rogero stagger to and fro, And mazd his head, and dazd his eyes with paine; And much it was that time for his behoose, To haue his helmet of so good a proofe. 58 But hauing now againe recouerd force, And as it were new wakned from his dreame, Vpon the Tartar Prince he turnd his horse, And on his thigh he strikes with strength extreame, That through the steele he did the sword enforce: Out spins the blood in pure vermilion streame, Nought could auaile inchanted Hectors armes, Against this sword with stronger temperd charmes. 59 The Tartar feeling to his great disease, His body wounded as he litle thought, Did rage as terrible as do the seas,Simile. With highest winds and strongest tempests wrought, He curleth heau'ns, his smarting pangs to ease, The shield that had the bird for which he fought, Away he hurleth from him for the nonce, And to his sword he lets both hands at once. 60 Ah (quoth Rogero) too plaine triall this is, That to that Eagle thou no title hast, That first didst with thy sword cut mine in peeces, And now thine owne away from thee dost cast: Thus much said he, but whatsoeuer he sees, He must the force of Durindana tast, Which fell vpon his forehead with such might, A mountaine might haue seemd to fall as light. 61 I say the blow vpon his forehead fell, But yet his beauer sau'd it from his face, It happend at that time for him full well, That in the hollow there was so much spaces, Yet harmlesse quite to scape him not besell, For why the sword that euer cuts apace, Did pierce his plated sadle, and beside An inch did enter into Rogeros side. 62 Thus each with crimson had his armor dide, And bloud did streame from both a double way, Yet hitherto it could not be descride, On whether side would chances ballance sway: At last Rogero did that doubt decide, With that same sword that euer home doth pay, And where the tothers target wants, there iust Rogero payes him with a speeding thrust. 63 The blade, gainst which preuailes no Magick are, His curats prest, and ribs and flesh it tore, And found a passage to the naked hart: Now must the Tartar Prince for euermore In sword and painted shield forsake his part, Not onely so, but that which grieues him more, He must forsake his much beloued life, More loued honour, and most loued wife.
64 The wretch yet vnreuenged did not die, But gaue hard recompence ere he departed, At good Rogeros head he doth let flie, And had (no doubt) the same in sunder parted, Saue that his arme was maymd, and so thereby Much of his force from thence had bin diuarted, Much of his force diuerted was from thence Before, when for his arme he wanted fence. 65 But as it was, yet to to hard it fell, And causd the noble knight great paine to feele, His helmet it did cleaue, though plated well, And made for proose of tough well temperd steele, And in the very skull it cloue a spell, Two fingers deepe, and made him backward teele, He backward fals, the paine was so exceeding, With grieuous wound his hed most freshly bleeding 66 Rogero was the first that tumbled downe, And Mandricardo fell a good while after, All thought Rogero dead, because his crowne Still bled, but chiefly Strodilanos daughter Ioyes, that her spouse had won this fights renowne, Now hopes she, she shal turne her teares to laughter, And as she thought, so was the common voyce, So that the Tartars friends did all reioyce. 67 But when there did appeare by certaine signes, The lieue man liuing, and the dead man slaine, Then Doralycee wrings her hands and whines, And griefe came there, and comfort here againe: The chiefest part, whose fauour all inclines Vnto Rogero, are full glad and saine, And gratulate his good successe, and grace him, And runne to him, and in their armes embrace him. 68 Nor was this shew of loue, dissimulation, But true vnsained kindnesse, and good faith, But yet Gradassos saint congratulation, Makes men surmise he thinks not as he faith: He secretly enuies such reputation, Though outwardly the slatterer he playth, And curseth (were it destinie or chance) That to this enterprise did him aduance. 69 But Agramant that euer did before, Do him great honor, and him well esteeme, Now he doth him admire, extoll, adore, So highly of his valew he doth deeme: In him alone he puts affiance more, Then all his campe together it should seeme, Now that the seed of Agricane was spent, And Rodomont gone thence a malcontent. 70 What should I tell the praise that many a Ladie Gaue of this knight, of Affrike and of Spaine? Who knew that Mandricardo was no babie, And saw him now by this mans valew staine; Yea dolefull Doralyce her selfe (it may be) Saue that for modestie she must resraine, Would haue bene moued with a small request, To speake as well of him as did the rest. 71 I say it may be, but I cannot tell, For why before vnconstant she was proued: And sure Rogeros parts did so excell, As any, Ladie doubtlesse might haue moued. While tother liu'd, perhap she likt him well, But now to seeke a new it her behoued, Such one as she her selfe might able warrant, To ride both day and nightly on her arrant. 72 Now brought the King Rogero with great care To his owne tent, that there he may be cured, The best Phisitions thither sent for are, To search his wounds, they straight his life assured: The shield and armes that Mandricardo bare, The which this bloudie battell first procured, All saue the sword that was Gradassos right, Were hanged vp by his beds head that night. 73 Howbeit that braue courser Brigliadore, Rogero needs would giue vnto the King, Who tooke it thankfully, and set more store By that same steed then any such like thing: But hereof now a while I treate no more, He  Rogeros  in the  35. books. First must you heare what news the maide did bring, (I meane Hyppalca) to her mistris deare, Whom loue had made to be of heauie cheare. 74 She told her first what hap to her befell, How Frontine by a Turke was tane away: And after, how she found at Merlins well Richardo and Rogero that same day, To whom she did her hard aduenture tell. And how Rogero went with her straightway, To win the horse out of the Pagans fist, But at that season he his purpose mist. 75 Also she told to Bradamant the cause, Why her deare loue himselfe did now absent, Who promist her, to take a little pawse, And then her mind most thoroughly content: In sine Hyppalca from her bosome drawes That letter which was to her mistris sent, Who so much lesse did seeme to like the letter, Because she would haue likt his presence better. 76 For fith before she did himselfe expect, Now paper in his steed to haue and inke, It caused her to feare and to suspect, And made some doubts into her thoughts to sinke, Yet likt she well the meaning and effect, And kist the letter oft, and sure I thinke, Had burnd it with the heate of her desire, Saue that the teares she shed did quench that fire. 77 She read the writing ou'r, fiue times or six, The words, the phrase, the sence her pleasd so well, And then she made the maid, each time betwix, The message that Rogero sent to tell, And saue he did so short a time prefix To come to her, and ay with her to dwell, I thinke she neuer would haue ceased mourning, Till she had seene or heard of his returning.
78 Rogero to Hippalca promist had, Fifteene, or twentie dayes at most to stay, And her, to tell her mistresse so he bad, But swearing to come sooner if he may But nearethelesse good Bradmant is sad, Still doubting chances to prolong that day. Sentence.All things (said she) to fortune are subiected, And chiefe in warres that are by chance directed. 79 Ay (my Rogero) who could once haue thought, Sith I more then my selfe esteemed thee, That thou by any means couldst haue bin brought, To beare thy verie foes more loue then me? Whō thou should hurt, by thee their help is sought Whom thou should saue, by thee they spoiled be; Needs must I blame thy negligent regarding, As well in punishing as in rewarding. 80 Traiano flue thy fire, I thinke thou knowest, this you may  more on the  end of the 5. book.(For sure the stones it know) yet to his sonne, Thou thinkst in honor thou such dutie owest, That thou must see no hurt may him be donne: Is this sufficient a reuenge thou trowest, Thinkst thou true fame can by such facts be wonne? Lo vnto what thy shew of honor tends, To serue thine enemies, and slay thy frends. 81 Thus Bradamant spake to her absent loue, With passion great, and euermore her maid, With reason seeks that fancie to remoue, Assuring her she need not be affraid: And wishing her with patient mind to proue, If so he would not do as he had said, And that she would in all things hope the best,Sentence. And then to God and fortune leaue the rest. 82 With this good speech of hers, and strong perswasion, She doth his comming till the day expect, Which good Rogero brake, not by occasion That he his word and promise did neglect; But that which hapt against his expectation, His wounds had bred so dangerous effect, But chiefe the same he last tooke in his hed, Which made him fortie dayes to keepe his bed. 83 Now Bradamant doth waite the twentie dayes, And staid at Montalbano with her mother, And making still enquirie many wayes, If she might heare some news of one or other, But none she heard, saue that which to his praise, Was told her after by her younger brother, Which though she ioyd to heare, as was most meet, Yet mingled was some soure with that same sweet. 84 For why the vallew of Marsisa stout, Which did assist them greatly, as he told, To win their kinsmen from the moorish rout, That vnto Bertolage should haue bin sold, This bred in Bradamantes minde some doubt, And strake into her heart a iealiouse cold; Because twas said they two together went To Agramant, that in his campe was pent. 85 For though she could not chuse but greatly praise her, That did her selfe so stout and valiant proue, Yet one the tother side, her beautie frayes her, Lest he perhap on her might set his loue: But yet in fine, hope of his promise stayes her, So that in twentie dayes he did not moue From Montalbano, and in that same space, Renaldo. There thither came the chiefe man of her race. 86 I meane not chiefe of birth, but chiefe of name, For two there were, in birth more old then he, Renaldo vnto Montalbano came, His brothers, cosins, and his frends to see, Whom he had heard by speech of flying fame, Now safe ariued at that place to be, And how Rogero and Marsisa wrought Their libertie, when they were sold and bought. 87 Wherefore he came to see them face to face, And vnderstand with them how each thing stood, It seemd he was as welcome to the place, As is the swallow to her tender brood,Simile. That almost starued and in sorrie case, Haue long expected sustenance and food, And when they there had staid, a day or twaine, Both they and he to Paris went againe. 88 Alardo and Guichiardo, Richardet, And Malagigy and good Viviane, Close after this braue Lord themselues do get, And Bradamant with them they would haue tane, But she alledg'd she could not come as yet; (But hopes ere long they should be ouertane) She prays them for that time content to hold them; For why she was not well at ease she told them. 89 And true it was, she was not well at rase, Not that she had a fit of any feauer, Or any other corporall disease, It was a fit of loue, that burneth euer; Whole heat no herbe nor phisicke can appease; This fit did her from that braue crew disseuer: But in another booke I shall repeat, What succour they did bring to Charls the great. In this thirtith booke, in Orlandos mad pranks (though they be fained things) we may note, what hard and impossi∣ble matters are attempted,Morall. and sometime atchieued by mad men, of which the reason is doubtfull; a naturall reason is given (though many will doubt thereof) that the cause of their extraordinarie strength, is that nature (Intendens om∣nem vim) as they terme it, that is to say, bending her whole force at one instant, doth by that means double the strength and abilitie to any hard and vnmeasurable matter: as we see men often at the pangs of death (through otherwise but weake) yet so strong that three or foure men cannot hold them: or as men somtimes in a feare leape ouer a wall, or downe from a window without harme, which at another time would breake their neckes. Another reason of mad mens vnrea∣sonable strength, is metaphysicall, or supernaturall, and that is when they are possessed with spirits, of which there are
many examples. In Agramant that endeuors to end two quarrels with one combat, we may obserue, that it beseemes the wisedome of a Prince, either to take vp quarrels and civill dissentions betweene their great subiects absolutely, or at least to draw them to as speedie a triall, and with as little damage as may be. Historie and Allusion.Concerning the Eagle about which the two champions straue who should beare it for his armes or Cognizance (as we terme it) he seemes to allude to the civill warres that were betweene Caesar and Pompey, where as Lucan complayneth in his excellent Poem, —Infestisque obuia signis Signa, pares aquilas & pila minantia pilis, For the Romaines Ensigne was the Eagle, and it is strange that is reported by credible writers, how in a battell fought neare Thessalia, between Brutus and Cassius of the one side, and Octauius and Anthony of the other side, two Eagles were visibly seene fighting in the ayre with their beaks and tallents, in most fierce manner: And finally, that of An∣thonyes side preuayled, and put the other to flight. Here end the notes of the XXX. booke.
THE XXXI. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Vnwares doth Guidon with Renaldo fight, But afterward is by his brethren knowne, By whose great courage, and vnited might, The Turks are vanquished and ouerthrowne. Good Brandimart seeks out that wofull knight, Whose wits by loue distraught, are not his owne, Is tane, and of his life was in great perrell. Renaldo and Gradasso fall to quarrell. 1 WHat state of life more plea∣sing may we find, Against isalofic. Then theirs, that true and heartie loue do beare? Whom that Marriage. sweete yoke doth? fast together bind, That man in Paradice first learnd to weare: Were not some so tormen∣ted in their mind, With that same vile suspect, that filthie feare, That torture great, that foolish frenesie, That raging madnesse, called iealousie. 2 Dulcia non me. rust qus non For eu'rie other sowre that gets a placo, To seat it selfe amid this pleasant sweet, Doth helpe in th'end to giue a greater grace, And makes loues ioy more gratful when they meet, Simile.Who so abstaines from sustenance a space, Shall find both bread and water rellish sweet: Sentence. Men know not peace not rightly how to deeme it, That haue not first by war bin taught t'steeme it. 3 Though eyes want sight, of that they would see faine, The thought yet sees, & hearts with patience take it, Long absence grieues, yet when they meet againe, That absence doth more sweet and pleasant make it: To serue and sue long time for little gaine, (So that all hope do not eu'n quite forsake it) Sentence. One may endure, for when the paine is past, Reward, though long it stay, yet comes at last. 4 The sharpe repulses, and the deepe disdaines, And all the torments that in loue are found, At last with pleasure recompence the paines, And make far more contentment to abound: But if this hellish plague infect the braines, Though afterward it seeme both whole and sound, The qualitie thereof is so mischieous, The verie though is to a louer grieuous. 5 This is that cruell wound, against whose smart, No liquors force preuailes, nor any plaster, No skill of starres, no depth of Magicke art,Zarae enses of Deuised by that great clarke Zoroaster: A wound that so infects the soule and hart, As all out sence and reason it doth master; A wound whose pang, and torment is so durable, As it may rightly called be incurable. 6 This is a plague that quickly doth infect All louers hearts, and doth possesse their thought, As well with causlesse, as with iust suspect By this, a man to madnesse meere is brought Oh plague, by whose most damnable effect, In deepe dispaire to die haue diuers sought; Oh Iealousie, that didst without desart, Possesse the noble Prailamantes hart. 7 Not for the tale her mayd or brother told, Which made with in her mind a sharpe impression, But other news that made her heart full cold, How her loue of new loue did make profession; As I more plaine hereafter shall vnfold. For now I needs a while must make digression, To braue Renaldo, that to Paris ward Did march, with that same crew of great regard.
8 The day ensuing ere it yet was night, Sauage. They met an armed knight vpon the way, A Ladie faire accompanid the knight, His armour all was blacke, saue that there lay A thwart the brest a wreath of Argent bright. And straight the formost man in their array, Which Richardetto was, as then did chaunce, He challenged with him to breake a launce. 9 The gallant youth that neuer man refused, Straight turnd his horse, a space for course to take, As one that (for his time) had often vsed, Such feates as this to do and vndertake: Renaldo standeth still, and them perused, To see which knight the fairest course would make, Now Richardet thinks, if I hit him iust, I shall this gallant tumble in the dust. 10 But otherwise it then to him befell, And of his reckning he was quite deceaued, The tother knew to hit, and sit so well, That Richardet was from the sadle heaued: Alardo seeing how his brother fell, Did thinke t'auenge the foile that he receaued, But he likewise inferiour did remaine, His arme was bruisd, his shield was rent in twaine. 11 Guicchiardo next, the selfe same fortune tride, And was constraind vnto the ground t'encline, Although to him Renaldo lowdly cride, Stay, hold your hands, for this course should be mine. Vivian and Malagige, and more beside, That at their kinsmens foyle did much repine, Would then haue fought with this same stranger knight, Saue that Renaldo claymd it as his right. 12 And said my friends, we must to Paris hast; But to himselfe he said, it were a iest, would not  upbraid  For me to stay till all they downe were cast By one and one, lle fight and they shall rest; This said, he spurres his horse and commeth fast, And as he runs he sets his speare in rest; The tother doth as much, and eithers speare, The stroke doth in a thousand peeces teare. 13 The horsemen with the stroke stur not an inch, They both had learnd so perfectly to fit, But on their horses it did shrowdly pinch, Yet Bayard searce his course doth intermit, The tothers horse had such a parlous wrinch, That mard him quite, and brake his backe with it, His master that was greatly grieu'd to see't, Forsakes his seate, and takes him to his feet. 14 And to Renaldo, that with naked hand Came toward him in shew of truce, he sed, Sir knight I giue you here to vnderstand, I likt so well this horse that here is ded, I thinke it would not with mine honor stand, To leaue him vnreuengd, which hath me led To challenge you, eu'n as you are true knight, That you will answer me againe in fight. 15 Renaldo answerd, if your horse you lost, The onely cause of this your quarrell be, Then comfort you, for of mine onely cost, Your want herein shall be supplide by me, With such a horse, as I may boldly bost, To be as good a one as cre was he: Not so fit, said the tother, you mistake it, I will expound my mind, and plainer make it. 16 Though I lykt well my seruiceable horse, Yet fith he now is in this conflict flame, Thinke not that of his death I so much force, As that alone moues me to fight againe; But in plaine termes on foot to true your force, As well as erst on horsebacke I would saine. Renaldo, that of no mans force accounted, Without delay straight from his horse dismounted. 17 And fith (quoth he) I see your noble mind, Of this my company hath no suspition, They shall go on, and I will stay behind, And so will fight with you on eu'n condition. This said, his band to part thence he assignd, Who went their way vpon their Lords commission, Which bred great admiration in the stranger, To find a man so little fearing danger. 18 Now when his standerd quite was out of sight, And all Renaldos companie was gone, Then hand to hand they do apply the fight, With force and furie great they lay it on; Each maruels at the tothers passing might, And yet of either side the gaine is none, They felt the blowes so heauie and so hard, That glad they were to lie well to their ward. 19 Thus these two knights, for honors onely sake, Together combat in such eager fort, That eu'ry little error they should make, Endangerd life in this vnpleasant sport: An houre and halfe this trauell they did take, Each labouring to cut the tother short, And in his mind Renaldo maruels much, Who this should be, whose skill and force was such. 20 And, saue that he could not with his reputation, He would haue wisht the battell at an end, And offerd of a truce communication, And of his vnknowne foe haue made his frend: Likewise the tother felt such inclination, Now finding scarce he could himselfe defend, That he repented has rash hardie part, And would haue had a truce with all his hart. 21 It waxed darke there fell an eu'ning mist, So that at last they neither of them know, When he did hit aright, or when he mist, Nor how to giue, nor how to ward a blow: When first Renaldo wisht him to desist, Sith now the Sunne descended was so low, And that the combat might be now reiourned, Till Phebus were about the world returned.
22 Offring (at which the stranger greatly musd, And his rare curtesie therein commended) To lodge him where he should both be well vsd, And like a man of honour well attended: The tother his great curt'sie not refusd, And so betweene them two the fray was ended: And straight Renaldo gaue him as his gift, His pages horse, that was both strong and swift. 23 Thus on they rode vnto Renaldos tent, And grew acquainted ere they thither came, By meanes in certaine speeches as they went, Renaldo happened to tell his name; By which the stranger knew incontinent, That this was that same Palladine of same, And that himselfe was to Renaldo brother, By fathers side alone, and not by mother. 24 The sauage Guidon, this braue warrier hight, That traueld had full many a hunderd mile, With those two brothers, nam'd the black and white, And Sansonet, vntill by craft and guile They were surprised, as you heard last night, And made against their wils to wait a while, For maintenance of lawes vniust and bad, That wicked Pinnabell deuised had. 25 Now when as noble Guidon certaine knew That this Renaldo was, whom he before Desired long to see, he much did rew That he had done, and did lament it sore: A blind man would not be more glad to vew Simile.The light, he doubted he should nere see more, Then Guidon in his mind was well apaid, To see this knight, and thus to him he said. 26 What stranger mishap, what sinister aduenter, Hath bred this fault in me, my noble Lord, That I with you into this strife should enter, With whom I ought to haue all kind accord? I am your fathers sonne, not by one venter, I euer haue your name and stock adord, Guidon I hight, Constanza was my mother, Borne beyond Euxin seas, and yet your brother. 27 Wherefore I pray, pardon my fond offence, That haue in steed of dutie offerd wrong, And tell me wherein I may recompence This ouersight, and I will do ere long: Renaldo that had heard of him long since, And to haue seene him did not little long, Embrast him, and not onely did forgiue him, But commendation great and praise did giue him. 28 He said his valew was a perfect signe, To shew himselfe in fight so fierce and stout, That he was truly come of that same line, Whose noble brute was blowne the world about: For if your manners did to peace incline, Sent. Nes im∣bellem fero'es progemerant a∣guila columba.Then had there bene (said he) more cause of doubt, The fearfull Hart comes not of Lions seed, Nor doth a silly Doue a Faulcon breed. 29 Thus fell they two acquainted on the way, And talkt together friendly as they went, But neither did their talke the iourney stay, Nor did their riding make their speech relent, Vntill they came where all their brothers lay, When as a great part of the night was spent, Who with great ioy and pleasure did behold them, And chiefe when who this was Renaldo told them. 30 For though he must to them (no doubt) haue euer Bene verie welcome as a brother deare, Yet could he be to them more welcome neuer, Then now, what time as you before did heare, They all did mind to do their best indeuer To rescue Charles that was of heauie cheare: Wherefore for this one cause aboue the rest, He was vnto them all a welcome guest. 31 Thus now the day ensuing on went Guidon, Ioyning himselfe vnto Renaldos crew, And as to Paris walls they forward ride on, They met two valiant youths that well him knew: Further with them conferring, they descride one, A Ladie richly clad, and faire of hew: These warlike youths had Gismond to their mother,Griff. Aguiland, Fur de . White Griffiin, and blacke Aquilant his brother. 32 Now Guidon knew them, and to them was knowne, As hauing bene together many dayes, By whom they were vnto Renaldo showne, And praisd for gallant men at all assayes: As in your iudgement, likewise in mine owne, (Renaldo said) these youths do merit praise, For they haue oft bene prou'd two perfect warriers, As well in spite as sport, at tilt and barriers. 33 Renaldo did by their apparell know them, Tone euer wearing white, the tother blacke, And friendly countenance he now did show them, Chiefly because the King did succour lacke: Wherefore into his band he doth bestow them, That band that to ye Turks must bring much wracke, And they do ioyne them to Renaldos banner, Forgetting all old iarres in louing manner. 34 Betweene the house of Ammon and these twins, About one Truffaldin a iarre there fell, The matter at the first not worth two pins, Wherefore the circumstance I will not tell, But now Renaldo their affection wins, By vsing them so curteously and well, For curteous speech and vsage mild and kind,Sentence. Wipes malice out of eu'ry noble mind. 35 Now after these another knight there came,Sansonet. Hight Sansonet a man of great account, Who welcom'd was, and tooke it for no shame, Of stout Renaldos band himselfe to count: While this thus past, behold the gallant dame, That knew this noble Lord of Clarimount, (For she was one that all the French Lords knew) Told him a tale that made him greatly rew.
36 debege to My Lord (sai she) I bring you sory tiding, He whom the Church and Empire held so deare, Runs all about, in no one place abiding, Of sence and argument depriued cleare: He naked goes, not natures secrets hiding, Which me to tell, and you must grieue to heare, Orlando, that same light and lampe of France, Hath lost his wits, God knowes by what mischance. 37 His armes and sword that he away had throwne, As things by him left and forsaken clearly, I saw a curteous knight, to me vnknowne, But one (it seemd) that lou'd Orlando dearly, Them gather where they scattered were and sowne, And eu'n of charitie as seemed mearly, In triumph wise on tree he hangd the same, And vnderneath he grau'd Orlandos name. 38 But straight the sword that hanged on the tree, With force and scornfull speech away was tane, (As I can witnesse well that did it see) By Mandricard the sonne of Agricane: Thinke you what hurt this will to Europe be, That once againe the Turks haue Durindane; was ZarbanoThe gentle knight straue long with him to saue it, But in the end was forst to let him haue it. 39 I saw Orlando late in monstrous guise, To runne about vncouth and all vnclad, With strangest clamours and most hideous cries: In fine I do conclude that he is mad; And saue I saw it so with these mine eyes, I would not trust if any told it had. She further told how she had seene him later, With Rodomont to tumble in the water. 40 And last of all she told him she had heard, How that about this sword there grew some strife, Betweene Gradasso stout and Mandricard; And how the Tartar hauing lost his life, The sword was giuen Gradasso afterward, As ouer all the Pagan campe was rife: And hauing ended this so sad narration, Thereto she addeth this short exhortation. 41 That he and eu'ry one that were not foe To stout Orlando, would take so much paine, In Paris or elsewhere him to bestow, Till he had purged his distemperd braine: Mine husband Brandimart (said she) I know, To do him any good himselfe would straine: Thus Fiordeliege spake, the louing wife Of Brandimart, that lou'd her as his life. 42 At this strange tale and wofull accident, Such inward griefe the good Renaldo felt, That with the thought, his heart incontinent Did seeme like snow against the Sunne to melt, And with all speed he might, to go he ment, And by all meanes he might so to haue delt, To seeke Orlando, whom if he can find, He hopes to bring him to a better mind. 43 But sith he now had thither brought his band, Or wer't the will of God, or were it chance, He first doth mind to end the cause in hand, And rescue Paris and the king of France; Wherefore he makes his men all quiet stand Till night,They vse in camp to deuide the night into foure watches. what time himselfe will leade the dance, And then betweene the fourth and second watch, He meanes at once the matter to dispatch. 44 He makes his men lie close for all that day, By way of Ambuscado in a wood, And ease themselues and horses all they may, And take the sustenance of rest and food, The place within three leagues of Paris lay, And when the Sunne was set, he thought it good, What time the world doth vse his lesser lampe, To Paris ward to moue his silent campe. 45 And as he purposd, he performd in deed, For straight himselfe, with that same gallant grew, Set out by night, as first they had decreed, In silent sort suspition to eschew. Now came the time that they must do the deed, Now neare vnto the Turkish campe they drew, When first the heedlesse Sentinels intrapping, They kild them al, because they took them napping. 46 The watch once slaine they are no longer dumme, But after stout Renaldo soone they came, They sound the trumpet, and strike vp the drumme, And calling still vpon that noble name, That often had the Pagans ouercome, (I meane Renaldos house of Montalbane) Which crie he cauld both his owne men to quicken, And that the Turks might in more feare be stricken. 47 Himselfe well mounted on his famous horse, Doth presse amidst the Pagan Princes tents, And with his owne, and with his horses force, He treds them downe, and all in peeces rents, Vnarmd or armd he kils without remorse, Who euer commeth in his way repents, The drowsie men halfe armd make poore resistance Against so braue a man with such assistance. 48 For why, beside those men I nam'd before, Whose vertue and whole value oft were showne, Renaldo had sixe hundred men and more, All perfect traind, of strength and courage knowne, Which about Clarimont he kept in store, For his owne vse and causes of his owne, Though at this need his Princes turne to furnish, He soone agreed his owne townes to vnfurnish. 49 And though Renaldo had no great reuenue, The which chiefe sinews vnto warre affords,Sentence. Yet kept he still six hundred in rennue, What with good vsage and with gentle words, That all of them did still with him continue, At his commaund with launces, horse and swords; Nor was there any that from him away went, Though diuers others offerd greater payment.
50 Now thinke when this braue crue the Turks assailed, At vnawares halfe wake or halfe asleepe, How that same name and that same noise them quai∣led, How here they fled and there, with hold and keepe: But smally flight, and lesse their fight preuailed; SimileBut euen as Goates from Lions, or as sheepe Frō Wolues make small defence, such in comparison These Pagans made against Renaldos garison. 51 On tother side king Charles (that by espiall) Had notice of Renaldos comming hither, With all that crue so noble and so loyall, That to his aid combined were togither, With diuers Lords came forth in person royall, And all his men of armes likewise came thither: Eke Brandimart, rich Monodontes heire, Did with king Charles vnto the field repaire. 52 Whom when his spouse, that neare about did hoer, Had found out by his standard and his armes, And plainly saw it was her dearest louer, She rusheth in among the men of armes, And vnto him herselfe she doth discouer, Who straight embraced her in open armes; And leauing then the battell drew apart, That each to other might their minds impart. 53 And after sweet embracing oftentimes, They did conferre together of their state: Overtue of those vnsuspicious times, When Ladies early wander might and late, And yet be faultlesse deemd, and free of crimes, Where now each small suspect turnes loue to hate, Yea eu'n for all their watching and safe keeping, They doubt their wiues do wake while they are slee∣ping. 54 Among the conference this couple had, The Ladie did vnto her spouse vnfold, How his good friend Orlando was falne mad, How she herselfe his madnes did behold, His running naked, carelesse and vnclad, Not credible had any else it told, But credible it was now she had sed it, For in far greater things he gaue her credit. 55 She further did to Brandimart recount, How she had seene the bridge the Pagan made, (I meane the cruell Pagan Rodomount) Vpon the streame so deepe as none could wade, Where he the passengers of best account, Did from each side with furie great inuade, And with the spoiles of those he kild and tooke, Did beautifie a tombe made by the brooke. 56 And last she told how with his strength extreame, Orlando heau'd the Turke armd from the ground, And so with him fell backward in the streame, With perill great there to haue both bene drownd, From whence Orlando went about the Reame, Where his mad parts wold make him soon be found. This tale in Brandimart did breed such sorrow, He staid not for the next ensuing morrow. 57 But taking for his guide faire Fiordeliege, And being readie armd, as then he was, He go'th to seeke that foresaid parlous bridge, In mind (what euer hap) the same to passe, Where many men their liues line did abridge, As in such dangers soone it comes to passe: No sooner came he to the vtmost ward, But Rodomont had notice by his guard. 58 He greatly did to heare such newes reioyce, And straight he cometh forth with warlike gesture, And bids him with a loud and scornfull voyce, Vnto the tombe to yeeld his armes and vesture, Or threatens him if he refuse this choyce, To make him drinke beyond all good disgesture: But Brandimart his threats did nothing feare, And makes no answer, but with couched speare. 59 Then straight to horses side he sets the spurs, The horse he rode vpon Batoldo hight, The horse though good, yet snores, and starts & sturs, Much scar'd with narrow bridge and waters sight: Eke Rodomont his good Frontino spurs, Who neuer starts, as vsed to this fight, Although the bridge did shake all vnder feet, When in the middle way these kinghts did meet. 60 Their speares that were of firme well seasond wood, With so great force vpon their armour strake, That though their horses were both strong & good, Yet both fell from the bridge into the lake, Quite ouerwhelmd with water and with mood, Yet neither horseman did his horse forsake; Long taried they within the streame below, To search if any Nymph dwelt there, I trow. 61 This had not bin the first time nor the fift, That from this bridge the Turke had bene throwne downe, Wherefore his horse and he could better shift, For neither horse nor he did doubt to drowne; For where the streame was most profound and swift He often had bene plung'd aboue his crowne, Which made his horse and him the more audacious Amid the streame, although profound and spacious. 62 He knew by proofe (for he had tride it oft) Where all the shelues, and where the channell lay, Which parts were grauelly, and which were soft: The tother ignorant, was borne away, Tost here and there, now low, and then aloft, The while the Pagan greedie of his pray, At all aduantages doth still assaile him, Whose horses footing more and more did faile him. 63 At last with plunging and with striuing tired, He backward fell into the weeds and mud, Where he was like to haue bin drownd and mired, Saue that his spouse that by the riuer stood, In humble wise the Pagan Prince desired, And in most earnest manner that she coud, Eu'n for her sake, whose ghost he did adore, To helpe her worthy knight vnto the shore.
64 Ah gentle fit, if euer you did tast, Or loue (she said) or of a louers passion, Saue that same knight, on whom my loue is plast, And let him not be drownd in so vile fashion: Suffice it you, your tombe will be more grast, With one such prisner of such reputation, Then hunderds other, that shall here arriue; Then take his spoiles, and saue himselfe aliue. 65 These words that might haue mou'd a stone I thinke, Mou'd him to rescue noble Brandimart, Who without thirst had tane such store of drinke, As from his limbs, his life did welny part: But ere he brought him to the riuers brink, He causd him with his sword and armes depart, And made him sweare now he was in his powre, To yeeld himselfe true prisner to his towre. 66 The dame of comfort all was quite be reaued, When as she saw how ill her spouse had sped, And yet lesse griefe of this chance she conceaued, Then if he had beene in the water dead: She calls herselfe the cause that he receaued This harme, that fondly had him thither led, Into a place of danger such and iopardie, As needs must hazard either life or libertie, 67 About the place in vaine she long did houer, Then parted she in mind to seeke some knight, Of Charles his campe, that might her losse recouer, And proue himself, though not more strong in fight At least more fortunate then was her louer: Long did she trauell all that day and night, And eake the day ensuing, ere she met one, Yet was it her good hap at last to get one. 68 Bradr∣, as appears be 35. booke. stanza.A champion in a rich attyre she met, All wrought with witherd leaues of Cypresse tree, Hereafter I will tell you, but not yet, What wight this was, whether a he or she: Now turne I to the campe, least I forget The noble knights that set their oueraigne free; I meane Renaldo and his new come brother, With cunning Malagige and many other. 69 Vnpossible it was account to keepe, Of those were kild that night, and those that fled, Fierce Agramant was wakned from his sleepe, And with all speed that might be, vp he sped, He weighes the perill and the danger deepe, His souldiers runne away near making hed: Marsillo, with Sobrino and the rest, Wish him to flie, for feare he be distrest. 70 Aduising him, sith fortune now gan frowne, Vnto this tempest wisely to giue place, And go to Arly, or some other towne, So strong to dure assault no little space: So might he saue his person and his crowne, As first was to be car'd for in such case; And then with wisedome warily proceeding, To waite till time might serue of better speeding. 71 Thus Agramant, to so great danger brought, Well knew not what to do, nor what to say, But did as by his counsell he was taught, And in great hast conueyd himselfe away: The while much woe vnto his men was wrought, The Christens them discomfite, kill and slay: The darknesse causd the number be vnknowne, That in this fight were kild and ouerthrowne. 72 With hast full many were in water drownd, That saw there was no safetie in the land, More succour in their heeles then hands they found Against such fierce assaylants few durst stand; But greatest damage did to them redound, By those six hundred of Renaldos band: Who did distribute strokes in so great plentie, As eu'rie one of them massacred twentie. 73 Some thinke that Malagigi plaid his part, In this conflict not wounding men nor slaying, But making of their foes by Magike art, To heare so huge a noyse of horses naying, Such found of Drums, such shouts from eu'ry part, As all the world had vowed their decaying: By which they all were striken in such feare, As not a man of them durst tarrie theare. 74 Yet though the Turkish Prince fled thence so fast, The braue Rogero, he would not forget, But caused him from danger to be plast, And on an easie paced horse him set: Thus now the Turks were by the Christens chast, And glad they were a walled towne to get: But yet Gradasso and his valiant band, Did still vnto their tackle stoutly stand. 75 Nay, which was more, when as he vnderstood, How that Renaldo Palladine of France, Was he that shed such store of Turkish blood, He was so glad he ready was to dance; He thanks his Gods that were to him so good, To send him this so much desired chance, By which he hopes and makes account most clearly, To win that horse Renaldo held so dearly. 76 For why, Gradasso king of Serycane, Long since to France came with an army Ryal, With onely hope to conquer Durindan, That famous blade of so good proofe and triall: And eake Renaldos courser to haue tane, That Bayard hight: and now when by espiall, He knew Renaldo was on that beast mounted, The conquest sure, the horse his owne he counted. 77 So much the rather, for that once before, About this matter they had made a fray, Fast by the sea vpon the sandie shore; (To tell the circumstance I may not stay) But Malagigi thence his cosin bore, And did into a barge him sale conuay: And thereupon Renaldo euer since, Was tane but for a coward by this Prince.
78 Wherfore in hope so rich a spoile to reape, Two howres before the rising of the sonne, All armed on Alfana he doth leape, And with his launce to death are diuers done; On French the Moores, on Moores he French doth heape, And all he meeteth he doth ouerrunne: So did ambition set his heart on fire, To meet Renaldo, such was he desire, 79 Soone after this each met with speare in rest, (But neither then at first the tothers knew) Each brake his speare vpon the tother crest, Vnto the heau'nly car the splinters flew: Then with their swords either was readie prest, (Their lances thrown away, their swords they drew) Each laying on the other so fell strokes, As if not knights had fought, but clownes feld okes. 80 Gradasso though he knew him not by sight, (For yet the morning beames were not displaid) Yet did he guese both by the horses might, And those fierce strokes the tother on him laid; Wherfore with words that sauord scorne and spight, He straight begins Renaldo to vpbraid: And said he had his challenge disappointed, And not appeared at the day appointed. 81 Belike you thought I should haue met you neuer, But now (said he) you here are met right well, Assure your selfe I will pursue you euer, Were you tane vp to heau'n, or downe to hell; No height nor depth, should hinder mine endeuer, I meane to finde you out where eare you dwell, To shunne the fight with meit doth not boote, Vntill you leaue your horse and go on foote. 82 At this his speech, were diuers standing by, As Guidon, Richarder, and others more, Who would haue slaine Gradasso by and by, Had not Renaldo stepped them before, And said in wrath, what masters am not I, Well able wreake my priuate wrongs therefore? Then to the Pagan gently thus he spake, And wisht him marke the answer he did make, 83 Who euer faith, that I did fight eschew, Or hew defect of vallew any way, I say and do auouch he faith vntrue, And I will proue by combat what I say; I came vnto the place to meete with you, No  cuses I did seeke, not no delay, And frankly here to you I offer fight, But first I wish you were informed right. 84 Then tooke he him aside, and more at large, He told what hapned him and how by art, His cosin Malagige into a barge Conuayed him, and forst him to depart: In fine himselfe, of blame quite to discharge, He brought him out to witnes eu'rie part, And then to proue that this was true indeed, He offerd in the combat to proceed. 85 Gradasso that both curteous was, and stout, Gaue eare vnto the tale Renaldo told, And though it seemd he stood thereof in doubt, Yet him in all his speech he not controld: But in conclusion, hauing heard it out, He doth his former purpose firmely hold: Which was by combat fierce to try and know, If so he could Bayardo win or no. 86 The Palladine that passed not a point Of no mans force, to meet him gaue his word: The place in which to meet they did appoint, Was neare a wood, and by a pleasant foord, There only added was a further point; Which was that Duriudan, Orlandos sword, Should to Renaldo as of right accrew, If he the Pagan ouercame or slew. 87 Thus for the present time departed they, Vntill the time approcht of pointed fight, Although Renaldo frendly did him pray, To rest him in his tent that day and night: And offerd franke safe conduit for his stay, So curteous was this same couragious knight: Gradasso greatly praisd the noble offer, But yet refusd the courtsie he did profer. 88 The feare was great that secretly did lurke, In all the minds of all Renaldos kin, Who knew the strength and cunning of this Turke Was such, as doubt it was which side should win: Faine Malagigi by his art would worke, To end this fray, before it should begin: Saue that he feard Renaldos vtter enmity, In so base sort for working his indemnity. 89 But though his frends did feare more then was meet, Himselfe assurde himselfe of good successe: Now at the pointed time and place they meet, Both at one verie instant, as I guesse, And first they kindly do embrace and greet The tone the tother with all gentlenesse, But how sweet words did turne to bitter blowes, The next booke sauing one, the sequell showes. Morall.In the xxxi, Canto I finde little worth any speciall noting, but that which in the beginning of the booke is said against , which is one of thethree incurable diseases noted in our old English Prouerbe: From Heresie, Phrenesie, and Icalsousie, good Lord deliuer me. The rest of the booke hath no new matter, but such as hath bin noted before: and ther∣fore I will end this little space with this short note. Here end the Notes of the xxxj.
THE XXXII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Good Bradamant Rogero long expecteth, But heareth newes that touch her verie nie, How he all other loues beside neglecteth, To wed Marfisa, thus the farne doth flie: To Arly Bradamant her course directeth, To kill Marfisa, or her selfe to die: Three kings and Vllany, she doth subdew, Those with her speare, and this with passing hew. 1 The first fiftie slaues of this 32. booke are of one the translator as you shall be no∣ted in some part of the notes vpon this booke.I Now remember how by promise bound, Before this time, I should haue made you know, Vpon what cause faire Bradamant did ground, The realouse humors ouer charg'd her so: She neuer tooke before so fore a wound, She neuer felt before such bitter wo, No not the tale which Richardett, told her, In such a fit, and so great pangs did hold her. 2 To tell you first, when I should haue begonne, Renaldo call'd my tale another way; No sooner with Renaldo had I done, But straight with Guidon I was forst to stay: From this to that, thus vnawares I tonne, That I forgot of Bradamant to say: But now I meane to speake of her before I speake of those two champions any more. 3 Yet needs I borrow must a word or twaine, Looke hereof in the Moral.How Agramant to Arly d d retyre, And gatherd there the few that did remaine, Escaped from the furie of the fire: Where not farre off, from Affrica nor Spaine, He plants as fit as he could we I desire, For lying on a flood so neare the seas, Both men and vitell were supplyde at ease. 4 To muster men. Marsilio had commission, That may supply the place of them were lost, Of ships of warre there was no small prouision, Soone had he gatherd vp a mightie host: There was no want of armour and munition, Ther was no spare of labour nor of cost, That with such taxes, Affrica was sessed, That all the Cities were full sore oppressed. 5 And further Agramant, that he might win Fierce Rodomont, to aid him with his power, Did offer him a match of his neare kin, King Almonts daughter with a Realme in dower, But he his profer weys not worth a pin, But keepes the bridge and doth the passage scower, That with his spoiles the place was welny filled, Of those he had dismounted, tane, and killed. 6 But faire Marfisa tooke another way: For when she heard how long the siege had lasted, How Agramant his campe at Arly lay, How both his men were slaine, and store was wasted, She sought no cause of any more delay, But thither straight without inuiting hasted, Her purse and person offring in the fight, In iust defending of his crowne and right. 7 She brings Brunello, and the king she gaue him, Who had giu'n cause of very iust offence, Ten dayes and ten, she did of courtsie saue him, To see who durst to stand in his defence; But when ys no man made the meanes to haue him, Though she to kill him had so good pretence, She thought it base, her noble hands to file, Vpon an abiect dastard, and a vile.
8 She will deferre reuenge of all his wrong; And vnto Arly brought him to the king; Whose ioy to tell, would aske a learned tongue, Both for the aid, and present she did bring: (For shew whereof, before it should be long, He offerd her to make Brunello wring: And at what time she pleased to appoint, To haue him sent to crack his chiefest ioynt.) 9 the Vnto some desart place he banisht was, To serue for meat for carrion crowes and pyes, Rogero that had helpt him oft (alas) Now cannot heare his pitteous mones and cryes: He lyes sore wounded, as it comes to passe, And littles knowes where poore Brunello lyes: And when he vnderstands thereof at last, It is so late alreadie it is past. 10 This while what torments Bradamant indured, Those twentie days, how did she waile and mourne? Against which time she thought her selfe assured▪ Her loue to her, and to the faith should turne: She makes no doubt but he might haue procured, Within that space to make his home returne, (Yea though he were in prison kept or banished) If troth and care of promise were not vanished. 11 In this long looking she would often blame, The fierie coursers of the heauenly light, in the  of this book saith thus mens: sum fruel∣ lumps re∣ Lauserum  He∣ esse.She thought yt Phoebus wheeles were out of frame, Or that his charriot was not in good plight: Great Iosuahs day seemd shorter then these same, And shorter seemd ye false Amphitrions night: Each day and night she thought was more then dou∣bled So fancie blind, her sence and reason troubled. 12 She now enuyes the Dormouse of his rest, And wisht some heauy sleepe might ouertake her, Where with she might most deadly be possest, Till her Rogero should returne to wake her: But waking cares ay lodged in her brest, That her desired sleepe did quite forsake her: To sleepe so long doth so much passe her power, She cannot frame her eyes to wincke one hower. 13 But turnes and tosses in her restlesse bed, (Alas no turning turnes her cares away) Oft at the window she puts forth her hed, To see how neare it waxeth vnto day; When by the dawning, darkesome night is fled, She notwithstanding stands at that same stay: And during all the time the day doth last, She wishes for the night againe as fast. 14 When fifteene dayes were of the twentie spent, She growes in hope that his approch is ny, Then from a towre with eyes to Paris bent, She waytes and watches if she can descry At least some messenger that he hath sent, May bring the news where her sweet heart doth ly: And satisfie her mind by what hard chance, He is constraind to stay so long in France. 15 If farre aloofe the shine of armour bright, Or any thing resembling it she spies, She straightway hopes it is her onely knight, And wipes her face and clears her blubbred eyes: If any one vnarm'd do come in sight, It may be one from him, she doth surmise: And though by proofe she finde each hope vntrue, She ceaseth not for that, to hope anew. 16 Sometime all arm'd she mounteth on her steed, And so rides forth in hope to meet her deare, But soone some fancie her concert doth feed, That he is past some other way more neare: Then homeward hasteth she with as much speed, Yet she at home no newes of him can heare: From day to day she passeth on this fashion, Hither and thither tossed with her passion. 17 Now when her twentie dayes were full expired, And that beside were passed some dayes more, Yet not Rogero come, whom she desired, Her heart with care and sorrowes waxed sore; With cryes & plaints, the woods and caues she tyred, Her breasts she beat, her golden locks she tore, Not while these gripes of griefe her heart embrace, Doth she forbeare her eyes or Angels face. 18 Why then (quoth she) beseemes it me it vaine, To seeke him still, who thus from me doth slide? Shall I esteeme of him that doth disdaine, My sute, and scorne the torments I abide? Him, in whose heart a hate of me doth raine, Him, that accounts his vertues so well tride, As though some goddesse should frō heau'n descéd Before that he his heart to loue would bend? 19 Though stout he is, he knows how well I loue him, And how I honor him with soule and hart, Yet can my hot affection nothing moue him, To let me of his loue possesse some part: And left he might perceiue it would behoue him, To ease my griefe, if he did know my smart, To giue me hearing of my plaint he feares, As to the charme the Adder stoppes his eares. 20 Loue; stop his course that doth so loosely range, And flit so fast before my sorrie pace; Or with my former state else let me change, When I sought not to tracke thy tedious trace: I hope in vaine; remorce to thee is strange, Thou dost triumph vpon my pitteous case: For hearts thy meat,Sentence against loue. thy drinke is louers teares, Their cries the Musicke doth delight thine eares. 21 But whom blame I? it was my fond desire, That first entist me to this killing call, And made me past my reach so far aspire, That now I feele the greater is my fall: For when aloft my wings be toucht with fire, Then farewell flight and I am left to fall: But still they spring, and still I vpward tend, And still I see my fall, and finde no end.
22 Desire quoth I? my selfe I was too light, To giue desire an entrance in my brest, Who when he had my reason put to flight, And of my heart himselfe was full possest, No roome for ioy is left, or hearts delight, Since I do harbour this vntruly guest, Who though he guide me to my certaine fall, The long expectance grieues me worst of all. 23 Then mine the fault be, if it be a fault, To loue a knight deserues to be beloued, With all good inward parts so richly fraught, Whose vertues be so knowne, and well approued; And more, whom would not his sweet face haue caught? Myself, I must confes, his beautie moued: What blind vnhappie wretch were she would shun, The pleasing prospect of the precious Sun? 24 Beside my destinie which drew me on, By others sugred speech I was entrained, As though I should by this great match anon, Another Paradice on earth haue gained: But now their words into the wind be gon, And I in Purgatorie am restrained: Well may I Merlin curse the false deceiuer, Yet my Rogero I shall loue for euer. 25 I hop't of Merlins and Melissas promises, Who did such stories of our race foretell: Is this the profit of beleeuing prophesies, And giuing credit to the sprites of hell? Alas they might haue found them better offices, Then me to flout that trusted them so well: But all for enuie haue they wrought me this, So to bereaue me of my former blis. 26 Thus sighs and lamentations are not fained, Small place was left for comfort in her brest: Yet spite of sorrows hope was entertained, And though with much a do, yet in it prest; To ease her mourning heart when she complained, And giuing her sometimes, some little rest, By sweet remembrance of the words he spake, When he was forst of her his leaue to take. 27 The minding of those words did so recure, Her wounded heart that she was well content, For one months space his absence to endure, Yea when his dayes of promise quite were spent: Yet still she lookt for him you may be sure, And many a time that way she came and went, Till by the way at last such news she hard, That all the hope she had before, was mard. 28 For she by chance did meet a Cascoigne knight, That in the warres of Africa was caught, One that was taken captiue in that fight, Then when fore Paris the great field was fought. What she requires to know, he could recite, But carelesse of the other news he brought, Of her Rogero chiefly she enquires, To heare of him is all that she desires. 29 Of whom the knight could let her vnderstand, (For in that Court he late his life had led) How Mandricard and he fought hand to hand, And how much blood on either part was shed: And though by wounds himselfe in perrill stand, That he subdewd his foe, and left him ded. Now if with this, his storie he had ended, Rogeros scuse had verie well bin mended. 30 But he proceeds to tell, how one was theare, A Ladie hight Marfisa in the feeld, Whose fame for martiall acts did shine most cleare, Whose beautie rare to few or none did yeeld. Rogero her, she held Rogero deare, They neuer were asunder or but seeld; And that they two, as eu'rie one there saith, The tone the tother plighted haue their faith. 31 And if Rogero once were whole and sound, Their wedding should be celebrate with speed; That such a paire as yet was neuer found, And happie they should come of such a seed: How much it ioy'd the Pagan Princes round, To thinke vpon the race they two should breed, Which likely were all others to excell In feats of arms that erst on earth did dwell. 32 The Gascoigne knight of all that he had sed, Himselfe had reason to beleeue was sooth, So generall a fame thereof was spred, There were but few but had it in their mouth. Some little kindnesse she did vse, had fed Their foolish humors of this false vntrowth; Still fame will grow if once abrode it flie, Although the ground be troth or be a lye. 33 They came indeed together to this fight, And many times together they were seene, For he was warlike, stout and worthy knight, And she a gallant, faire, and daintie Queene, By which, suspition neuer iudging right, Did gather straight they had assured beene: And specially because when she departed, To visite him she was so soone reuerted. 34 Of iust suspect their reason was put slènder, If they had weighed well their vertues rate, Though of his wounds she seemd to be so tender, And of his danger had so great a care; Against bad tongues no goodnes can defend her, For those most free from faults,Sentence they least wil spare, But prate of them whom they haue scantly knowne, And iudge their humors to be like their owne. 35 Now when the knight auowd the tale he told, (And yet in truth you know t'was but a tale) The damsels heart was toucht with shiuering cold, The little hope she had away it stale, Almost in sound her seate she scarce could hold: With mourning cheare, and face both wan and pale, She said no more: but mad with griefe and ire, Her horse she turnd, and homeward did retire.
36 And all in armour on her bed she lyes, She wisht a thousand times she now were ded, She bytes the sheets to dampe her sobs and cries, The Gascoigns news still bearing in her hed: Her heart is swolne, and blubberd be her eyes, With trickling teares bedewed is her bed, When griefe would be no longer holden in, Needs out it must, and thus it doth begin. 37 Ah wretched me, whom might a maiden finde, In whom she might be bold to put her trust? Since you Rogero mine, become vnkinde, And tread your faith and promise in the durst; You only you, mine eye so farre did blinde, I still esteemd you faithfull, true and iust: Ah neuer wench that loued so sincerely, Was in requitall punisht so seuerely. 38 Why (my Rogero) why do you forget? (Sith you in beautie passe each other knight, And do in feats of armes such honor get, As none can match your chiualrie in fight) This golden vertue with the rest to set, By which your glorious name wil shine more bright If as in other graces you abound, So in your promise constancie were found? 39 This is the vertue breeds most estimation, By which all other vertues shew more cleare, As things most faire do loose their commendation, Which by the want of light can not appeare: What glorie was it by false protestation, Her to deceiue whose Saint and God you were? Whom your fair speeches might haue made beleeue .That water would be carride in a seeue. 40 From any haynous act wouldst thou restraine, That murdrest her who beares thee so good will? How wouldst thou vse thy foe, that thus in paine, Dost let thy frend to be tormented still? Thou that with breach of faith thy heart dost staine, No doubt thou dost not care for doing ill; Well this I know, that God is euer iust, He will er long reuenge my wrongs I trust. 41 For why, vnthankfulnesse is that great sin, Which made the Diuell and his angels fall, Lost him and them the ioyes that they were in, And now in hell detaines them bound and thrall: Then marke the guerdon thou art like to win; For why like faults, like punishment do call, In being thus vnthankfull vnto me, That alwayes was so faithfull vnto thee. 42 Besides of theft thy selfe thou canst not quit, If theft it be to take that is not thine; The keeping of my heart no that's not it, That thou shouldst haue it I do not repine, Thy selfe thou stalst, which I can not remit, Thy selfe thou knowst thou art, or shouldst be mine, Thou knowst damnation doth to them belong, That do keepe backe anothers right by wrong. 43 Though thou Rogero do forsake me so, I can not will nor chuse but loue thee still; And since there is no measure of my wo, Death is the only way to end mine ill; But thus to cut of life, and thou my fo It makes me do it with a worser will; Yet had I dyde when best I did thee please, I should haue counted death, no death but ease. 44 When with these words she was resolu'd to dy, She tooke her sword in hand for that intent, And forst her selfe vpon the point to ly; Her armour then her purpose did preuent, A better spirit checkt her by and by: And in her heart this secret reason went, O noble Ladie borne to so great same, Wilt thou thus end thy dayes with so great shame? 45 Nay rather if thou beest resolu'd to dy, Vnto the campe why dost thou not repaire, Where bodies of braue knights in heaps do ly? Lo there to honor the directest staire, The losse of life with glorie thou mayst buy, To die in thy Rogeros sight were faire, And happily by him thou mayst be slaine, So he that wrought thy wo, may rid thy paine. 46 Thou mayst be sure Marfisa there to see, Who hath so falsly stolne away thy frend; If first on her thou couldst reuenged be, With more contented mind thy dayes would end. Vnto this counsell she doth best agree, And onward on this iourny straight doth tend, She takes anew deuice that might implie, A desperation, and a will to die. 47 The collour of her bases was almost, Like to the falling whitish leaues and drie, Which when the moisture of the branch is lost, Forsakenly about the tree doth lye, With Cipresse trunks embroderd and embost, (For Cipresse once but cut will alwayes die) A fine conceipt, she thinks to represent, In secret sort her inward discontent. 48 She tooke Astolfos horse and Goldélance, As fittest both for this her present feat, That speare could make the brauest knight to dance, And caper with a uch beside his seate. But where Astolfo had it, by what chance, Or why he gaue it, need I not repeate, She tooke it, notwithstanding her election, Not knowing of that magicall confection. 49 Thus all alone without both Squire and page, Thus furnished she set her selfe in way, To Paris ward she traueld in a rage. Whereas the campe of Sarzins lately lay, And (as she thought) kept vp king Charles in cage, Not vnderstanding how before that day, Renaldo aiding Charles with Malageege, Had forced them from thence to raise their seege.
50 Now had she left mount Dordon at her backe, When little way behind her she descride, A gallant Damsell following of her tracke, Loose in the , of this shield of gold.A shield of gold vnto her saddle tide; Of Squires and other servants none did lacke, And three braue knights were riding by her side, But of the Squires that ouertooke her last, She askt one what those were that by her past. 51 And straight the worthie Ladie it was told, How from Pole Attike that same damsell came, Sent from a Queene, with that faire shield of gold, Vnto king Charles (that there was knowne by fame) But so, as he must this condition hold, That on a knight he must bestow the same, Such one as he in his imagination, For prowesse deemd most worthy reputation, 52 For she of Island Ile that holds the raigne, And is (and knows it) that the is most faire, Doth thinke she should her worth not little staine, And her great fame and honour much impaire, It any knight her Ile and her should gaine, Except he stood so high on honors staire, As that he were adiudg'd in feats of warre, The prymer man, and passing others farre. 53 Wherefore the cause she sends to France is this, She thinks if she shall finde one any where, That in the Court of France he surely is: And therefore she doth send to greet him there. As for those three, because you shall not misse, To know the truth, He tell you what they were: They were 3 kings, of whom great fame there goth, Or Norway one, one Swethland, one of Goth. 54 These three, though far they dwell from Island Ile, Yet loue of that same Queene hath brought the hi∣ther, This Ile is calld Perduta otherwhile, Because the seamen leese it in foule weather: These kings hu'd from their country in exile, And to this Queene were suters all together: And she that knew not well how to forbid them, With this same pretie shift from thence she rid them. 55 She saith, she minds to wed for her behoose, That wight that most excels in warlike action, And though (quoth she) you shew no little proofe, Or valew here (as twere in priuat faction) Yet I must haue you tride more far allofe, Before my mind can haue full satisfaction: Wherefore I meane my selfe and crowne to yeeld, Alone to him that bringeth backe my sheeld. 56 This is the cause that these three kings did moue, Each one to come from to remote a nation, With purpose firme their vtmost force to proue, To win the golden shield with reputation, Or leese their hues, for that faire Ladies loue, If that they failed of their expectation. When he had told her thus, he her forsooke, And soone his company he ouertooke. 57 The Damsell rode a softer pace behind, And so as in a while she lost their sight, And often she reuolued in her mind, The tale the fellow told, with small delight. She doubts this shield bestowd in such a kind, Will be in France a cause of brall and fight, That this wilbe a meanes she greatly feares, To let her kin together all by th'eares. 58 This fancie mou'd her much, but more then this, That formerie alouse fancie did her moue, That her Rogeros kindnesse alterd is, That on Marsisa he had plast his loue: This so postest her sence that she did misse Her way, nor neuer thought as did behoue, Till night was almost come, and Sunne nigh set, Where she a lodging for her selfe may get. 59 Eu'n as an emptie vessell that was tide, Simile. Vnto the wharse, with some old roten cable, If that the knot do hap to breake or slide, So that to hold it be no longer able, Is borne away, as please the wind and tide: So Bradamant, with mind and thoughts vnstable, Was in such muse, as she the right way mist, And so was borne, where Rabicano list. 60 But when she saw the Sunne was almost set, She tooke more heede, and asking of a clowne, (A shepherd that by hap there by she met) Where she might lodging get er Sunne went downe The shepherd made her answer, that as yet She was almost a league from any towne, Or other place where she might eate or lodge, Saue at a Castle cald sir Tristrams lodge. 61 But eu'rie one that list, is not assured, Thought he do thither come, to stay therein, To martiall feats they must be well mured. With speare and shield they must their lodging win: Such custome in the place hath long indured, And manie years ago it did begin, Wherefore tis good that one be well aduised, Ere such an act by him be enterprised. 62 In briefe thus is their order, if a knight Do finde the lodgings void, they him receaue, With promise, that if more ariue that night, Either he shall to them his lodging leaue, Or elle with each of them shall proue in fight, Which of them can of lodging to ther reaue: If none do come that night he shall in quiet, Haue both his horsemeat, lodging, and his diet. 63 If foure or fiue do come together first, The Castle keeper them must entertaine, Who cometh single after, hath the worst, For if he hope a lodging there to gaine, He must (according to that law accurst) Fight with all those, that did therein remaine: Likewise if one come first, and more come later, He must go fight with them yet neare the later.
64 The like case is, if any maid or dame Do come alone, or else accompanied, Both they that first, and they that latest came, Must by a lurie have their beauties tried: Then shall the fairest of them hold the same, But to the rest that come shall be denied: Thus much the shepheard vnto her did say, And with his finger shewd to her the way. 65 About three miles was distant then the place, The damsell thither hasts with great desire; And though that Rabicano trot apace, Yet was the way so deepe and full of mire, The snow and drift still beating in their face, She later came then manners good require; But though it were as then both darke and late, She boldly bounced at the castle gate. 66 The porter told her that the lodgings all Where fild by knights that late before them tooke, Who now stood by the fire amid the hall, And did ere long to haue their supper looke: Well (answers she) then haue they cause but small (If they be supperlesse) to thanke the cooke; I know (quoth she) the custome, and will keepe it, And meane to win their lodging ere I sleepe yet. 67 The Porter went and did her message bold, To those great states then standing by the fire, Who tooke small pleasure when they heard it told, For thence to part they had so small desire; Now chiefly when twas rainie, darke and cold; But so their oth and order did require, That they must do it, were it cold or warme, And therefore quickly they themselues did arme. 68 These were those three great kings, whom that same day Dame Bradamant had seene but few houres past, Thought they had sooner finished their way, Because she rode so soft, and they so fast. Now when they were all armd, they make no stay, But all on horsebacke mount themselues at last: No doubt but few in strength these three did passe, Yet of those few, sure one this damsell was. 69 Who purposd (as it seemeth) nothing lesse, Then in so wet and in so cold a night, To lack a lodging and sleepe supperlesse: Now those within at windowes see the fight, The men themselues on horsebacke do addresse, To looke thereon, for why the Moone gaue light: And thus at last, though first twere somewhat late, They did abase the bridge and ope the gate. 70 Eu'n as a secret and lasciuious louer, Reioyceth much, when after long delayes, And many fearest, in which his hope did houer, He heares at last the noise of pretie kayes: So Bradamant that hopes now to recouer A lodging, for the which so long she stayes, Did in her mind in such like sort reioyce, When as she heard the watchfull porters voyce. 71 Now when those Knights and some few of their traine, Were past the bridge, the dame her horse doth turne To take the field, and then with speed againe, With full careere she doth on them returne, And coucht that speare, yet neuer coucht in vaine, For whom it hits it still doth ouerturne; This speare her cosin, when he went from France, Gaue vnto her, the name was Goldelance. 72 The valiant king of Swethland was the first That met her, and the next the king of Goth, The staffe doth hit them full, and neuer burst, But from their saddles it did heaue them both; But yet the king of Norway sped the worst, It seemed to leaue his saddle he was loth, His girses brake, and he fell vpside downe, In danger with the mire to choke and drowne. 73 Thus with three blows, three Kings she down did beare, And hoist their heels full hie, their heads full low, Then enterd she the castle voyd of feare, They stand without that night in raine and snow; Yet ere she could get in, one causd her sweare To keepe the custome, which they made her know; And then the master doth to her great honor, And entertainment great bestowed on her. 74 Now when the Ladie did disarme her head, Off with her helmet came her little caul, And all her haire her shoulders ouerspred, And both her sex and name was knowne withall, And wonder great and admiration bred In them that saw her make three Princess fall: For why she shewd to be in all their fight, As faire in face as she was fierce in fight. 75 Eu'n as a stage set forth with pompe and pride,Simile Where rich men cost, and cunning art bestow, When curtaines be remou'd that all did hide, Doth make by light of torch a glittring show; Or as the Sunne that in a cloud did bide,Simile When that is gone, doth clearer seeme to grow: So Bradamant when as her head was barest, Her colour and her beautie seemed rarest. 76 Now stood the guests all round about the fire. Expecting food, with talke their eares yet feeding While eu'ry one doth wonder and admire, Her speech and grace, the others all exceeding; The while her host to tell she doth desire, From whence and whō this custom was proceeding, That men were driu'n vnto their great disquiet, To combat for their lodging and their diet. 77 Faire dame (said he) sometime there rul'd in France King Feramont, whose sonne a comely knight, Clodian by name, by good or euil chance, Vpon a louely Ladie did alight: But as we see it oftentimes doth chance, That iealousie in loue marres mans delight; Thus he or her in time so iealous grew, He durst not let her go out of his vew.
78 SimileNor euer Argus kept the milkwhite cow More straight, then Clodian here did keepe his wife, Ten Knights eke to this place he doth allow, Thereby for to preuent all casuall strife; Thus hope and feare betweene, I know not how, As he prolongs his selfe tormenting life, The good sir Tristram thither did repaire, And in his companie a Ladie faire. 79 Whom he had rescude but a little since From Giants hand, with whom he did her find, Sir Tristram sought for lodging with the Prince, For then the Sunne was very low declind: Simile.But as a horse with galled backe will wince, Eu'n so our Clodian with as galled mind For casting doubts and dreading eu'ry danger, Would by no meanes be won to lodge a stranger. 80 When as sir Tristram long had prayd in vaine, And still denide the thing he did demaund, That which I cannot with your will obtaine, In spite of you (said he) I will commaund; I here will proue your villanie most plaine, With launce in rest, and with my sword in hand: And straight he challenged the combat then, To fight with Clodian and the other ten. 81 Thus onely they agreed vpon the case, If Clodian and his men were ouerthrowne, That all then presently should voyd the place, And that sir Tristram there should lie alone: Sir Clodian to auoid so great disgrace, The challenge tooke, for why excuse was none: In fine, both Clodian and his men well knockt, And from the castle that same night were lockt. 82 Triumphant Tristram to the Castle came, And for that night, as on his owne he eased. And there he saw the Princess, louely dame, And talkt with her, who him not little pleased: This while sir Clodian was in part with shame, And more with thought and iealous feare diseased, Disdaining not in humble sort to woo him, By message mild to send his wife vnto him. 83 But he, though her he do not much esteeme, For why, by meanes of an inchanted potion, Isotta fairest vnto him did seeme, To whom he vowed had his whole deuotion: Yet for he did the iealous Clodian deeme Some plague to merit, he denide his motion; And sweares it were no manners nor no reason, A Ladie to vnlodge at such a season. 84 But if (saith he) it do his mind offend, To lie all night alone and eke abrode, Tell him I will this other Ladie send To him, that shall with him make her abode: Now tell him that to keepe this I intend, The which to win, I haue such paine bestowd; Tis reason that the fairest should remaine With him that is the strongest of vs twaine. 85 Clodian in mind was wondrous malcontent, Vs'd so not like a Prince but like a patch, That puffing, blowing vp and downe he went All night, as one were set to keepe a watch: But whether he do chase or else lament, He found the Knight for him too hard a match. Next day sir Tristram let him haue his wife, And so for that time finisht was the strife. 86 For openly he on his honour swore, That he her honour had that night preserued, Although discourtesies he had before Had at his hands a great reuenge deserued; Yet in that Clodian had lodg'd out of dore, He was content that penance should haue serued; He nathelesse tooke it for no good excuse, To say that loue was cause of such abuse. 87 For loue should gentle make rude hearts and base,Sentence And not in gentle mind breed humors vile: Now when sir Tristram parted from the place, Sir Clodian meant to stay there but a while, But to a knight that stood much in his grace, He graunts the keeping of this stately pile: Keeping one law for him and for his heires, With eu'ry one that to the place repaires. 88 That namely euer he that was most strong, Should there be lodg'd, and she that was most faire, And that the rest should take it for no wrong, To walke abrode into the open aire: This is the law which hath endured long, And no man may the strength thereof impaire: Now while the man this storie did repeate, The steward on the boord did set the meate. 89 The boord was couerd in a stately hall, Whose match was scarce in all the country seene, With goodly pictures drawne vpon the wall, All round about, but chiefly on the screene; These they did looke on, with delight not small, And would haue quite forgot their meate I weene, Saue that their noble host did them aduise, To feed their bellies first, and then their eyes. 90 Now as they downe did at the table sit, The master of the house began to lowre, And said they did an error great commit, To lodge two Ladies come in sundry howre; Needs one must be put out, where ere it hit, And go abrode into the cold and showre: The fairest (sith they came not both together) Must bide, the foulest must go trie the wether. 91 Two aged men and women more beside He cald, and bad them quickly take a vew, Which of the twaine should in the place abide, And namely which of twaine had fairest hew: This lurie do the matter soone decide, And gaue their verdit, as it was most trew, That Bradamant past her in hew as farre, As she exceld the men in feates of warre.
92 Then spake the knight vnto the Island dame, Whose mind was full of timorous suspition, I pray you thinke it not a scorne or shame, For hence you must, there can be no remission. Poore Vllany (so was the damsels name) Doth thinke she now is driu'n to hard condition, Yet in her conscience true she knew it was, That Bradamant in beautie her did passe. 93 Eu'n as we see the Sunne obscur'd sometime, By sudden rising of a mistie cloud, Engendred by the vapor breeding slime, And in the middle region then when the , ascend as  as ice midle  straight  grow to  a great  in them,  makes the  beare them  though they  of  as we see . embowd: So when the damsell plainly saw that time, Her presence in the place was not allowd, She was so chang'd in count'nance and in cheare, That eu'n vnlike her selfe she did appeare. 94 But much astonyd with the sudden passion, She readie was to found in all their fight; But Bradamant that would not for compassion Permit that she should go abrode that night, Did say, this triall was of no good fashion, And that the iudgement hardly could be right, When men obserue not this same chiefe regard, As not to iudge before both parts be hard. 95 I, that on me do take her to defend, Say thus, that be I faire, or lesse or more, I came not as a woman, nor intend As woman now to be adiugd'd therefore; Who knowes may sex, except I condescend To shew the same? and one should euermore Shun to confirme things doubtfull, or deny it, When chiefly others may be harmed by it. 96 Yet who can say precisely what I am? For many men do weare their haire as long, And you do know that as a man I came, And all my gestures to a man belong; Wherefore in giuing me a womans name, To both of vs perhaps you may do wrong; Your law points women (if their right be donne) By women, not by warriers to be wonne. 97 But yet admit it were as you do guesse, That I indeed were of the female gender, Though that it is so, I do not confesse; Should I to her my lodging then surrender, If that my beautie of the two were lesse? No sure, in that the reason were but slender: The price that vnto vertue longs of dewtie, Should not be tane away for want of bewtie. 98 And if your law were such, that needs of force, Vnto the fairest lodging should be giuen, Yet at this feast I tary would perforce, And from my lodging I would not be driuen: Wherefore mine argument I thus enforce, That this same match betweene vs is not euen, For striuing here with me, the case is plaine. She much may leese, and little she may gaine. 99 And where the gaine and losse vnequall is, The match is euill made in common sence: Wherefore I thinke it were not much amisse, With this same law for this time to dispence; And if that any dare mislike of this, Or seeme to take the matter in offence, I will with sword be readie to maintaine, That mine aduice is good, and his is vaine. 100 Thus noble Ammons daughter mou'd with pittie In her behalfe, who to her great disgrace Should haue bin sent, where neither towne nor cittie Was neare almost in three leagues of the place, Fram'd her defence so stout and eke so wittie, That to her reason all the rest gaue place; But chiefe the perill great and hazard waying, That might haue grown to them by her gainsaying. 101 As when the Sunne in sommer hath most powre,Simile And that the ground with heate thereof is nued, For want of raine the drie and parched flowre Doth fade, and is as twere of life depriued, But if in season come a fruitfull showre, It riseth vp, and is againe reuiued: So when the damsell this defence did heare, She waxed faire againe, of better cheate. 102 And thus at last they fell vnto their feast In quiet sort, for none did come that night, To challenge any of them, or molest, No traueller, nor any wandring knight; All merry were but Bradamante least, Fell iealousie bard her of all delight, Her stomacke so distempting, and her tast, She tooke no pleasure of that sweet repast. 103 When supper ended was, they all arise, Although perhaps they would haue longer sate, Saue for desire they had to feed their eyes: And now the night was spent and waxed late, The master of the house in seemly wise, Doth call for torches to set out his state, And straight with torch light filled was the hall, But what they saw, hereafter shew I shall. The first fiftie staues of this booke I may call mine, as the Poet Martiall sai in a little Epigram of his, of a Gentle∣womans periwig, fifteene hudred yeares since, I thinke the verse was this, or such another, Esse suos iurat, quos emit Galla capillos, Dic sodes, numquid peierat illa mihi? To this effect in English: The goodly haire that Galla weares, Is hers, who would haue thought it? She sweares it is, and true she sweares, For I know where she bought it.
And so may I as truly sweare these are mine for they were giuen me by my brother (Francis Harington) who made them for a proofe of his veine in this kind; and if his sloth had not bin as blame-worthy, as his skill is praise-worthy, he had ea∣sed me of much of the paine that I tooke with the rest: and me thinks when I reade his and mine owne together, the phrase agrees so well, as it were two brothers. Though he (in his modestie) would needs giue his elder brother leaue to take all the paines, and praise (if there were any,) following herein the example of diuers, indeed studious and learned Gentlemen, that haue either disdained to bestow so much paines on another mans worke, or at least would not leese so much time from more graue or more profitable studies; or (which perhaps is the chiefest reason) because they feele, that though it is but a sport to write now and then a little odde sonet, yet it is some labour to write a long and setled stile: as Tullie saith of writing in prose; Stilus est optimus dicendi magister, sed laboris magni est, quem plerique fugimus. Writing is the best schoolmaster for eloquence, but (saith he) it is a painfull thing, and that most of vs cannot away withall. And yet I find (hauing written in both kinds now and then, as my slender capacitie would serue me) that prose is like a faire greene way, wherein a man may trauel a great iourney and not be weary; but verse us a miry lane, in which a mans horse puls out one leg after another with much ado, and often driues his master to light to help him out: but I shall trauell anon so far in this greene way, that I shal be out of my right way, or at least beside my matter; and therfore I now come to the moral. Morall.In the Morall of this xxxij. booke, in the person of Agramant we may note, how a Generall must not vpon one foyle or one ill day (as they call it) despaire of his affaires, or abandon his enterprise, but betake him to some strong place of aduantage, till they may make head againe. In which kind, the old Romanes (conquerors of the world) aboue all other things showed their vnconquered minds; and specially then, when Terentius Varro had receaued that great foile and ouerthrow by Hannibal, as Liuie noteth in the end of the xxij. booke. Quo in tempore ipso, adeò magno animo ciui∣tas fuit, vt Consuli ex tanta clade (cuius ipse magna causa fuisset) redeunti, & obuiam itum frequenter ab omnibus ordinibus sit, & gratiae actae, quòd de republica non desperasset. Cui si Carthaginiensium ductor fuisset, nihil recu∣sandum supplicij foret. What time (saith Liuie) the citie was of so great courage, that the Consull returning from so mightie an ouerthrow (of which himselfe had bin a great occasion) yet was publikly and solemnly met by all the compa∣nies, and had speciall thanks giuen him because he despaired not of the common state: who had he bin captain of the Car∣thaginians, no punishment had bin too much for him. Further, in Brunello that had somtimes bin Agramants secretary, and yet now was hanged for iustice sake, we may note, that wicked mē, thought they be somtime aduanced by their Princes to great honors and wealth, yet when their oppressions and thefts shal be plainly boulted out and manifestly proued, law will haue his course, and iustice must be done. And yet wee see also in this booke, in Bradamants defence of Vllany against the law of sir Tristrams lodge, that for the most part lawes are but like Spiders webs, taking the small Gnats, or perhaps sometime the fat flesh flies, but Hornets that haue sharpe stings and greater strength, breake through them. Historie.Of Iosuas day, which he toucheth in the xi. staffe, the holy Scripture speakes of, how he made the Sunne stand still. But for the false Amphittios night, though it seeme meere fabulous as it is told, that Iupiter made the night three nights long, to take the more pleasure of Alcmene, yet me thinke it is worth the obseruation, how the very prophane and vaine writings of old times do concurre with the sacred Scriptures; for whensoeuer the birth of Hercules was, which I dare not affirme to haue bin at that time, and yet by computation il wil not fall long after. For Hercules was a great while before the last Troian warres, and many old writers agree, that Priamus liued in Dauids time, and sent to him for succor: but howsoeuer that may be proued for the certaine time of his birth, certain it is, when the Sunne stood still in one part of the world, then in reason at their Antipodes and in the other Hemispheare it must needs be night all that while. And if the Sunne were almost downe when Iosua spake (as it may be coniectured) because he would not feare want of light to pur∣sue his enemies vntill the Sunne were neare setting, then it might be euen in the same Hemispheare within a few degrees. As for example, it is night one hundred miles Eastward sooner then it is so farre Westward by a good while: (as they that are Astronomers can easily resolue the simplest that is.) But to be short, it is verified by many writers, that there was one night obserued to be longer then her fellowes, which night either Hercules was borne vpon, or else was fai∣ned to be begotten vpon, and therefore they sirnamed him  of that night that was as long as three nights. But this I submit to the iudgement of learned Diuines. Allegorie.The colour and embrodery of Bradamants bases in the 47. staffe, betokening desperation is there shewed, I need not long to stand vpon: for as for those hidden misteries of colours, with their applications, of blue to constancie, twanie forsaken, white to virginitie, and the rest, they are very well knowne to all our gallant Gentlemen, who often haue more cost in their clothes, and wit in their colours, then coyne in their coffers, or learning in their heads. Allusion.Of the Island Queene that sent the shield of gold to France, which Bradamant thought would but breed quarrels, Fornarius noteth, that mine Author did therein couertly allude to a matter betweene England and France, for Ariosto liued in Henry the eight his time, and maketh very honorable mention of him. But thus it was. After the death of Lewes of France, Marie the younger sister of K. Henrie the eight remaining his Dowager, our King sent for his sister to come into England: but Francis the first, loth she should go out of France, in respect of the great dower she should carry with her, which by the custome of that country was a third part of the reuenue of the Crowne; and yet fearing to have warres with king Henrie, made this offer, that if he would send some braue man at armes that could win her in the field, he should haue her: our King made no dainties to accept the offer, and making it knowne to his Court, Sir Charles Brandon tooke the matter on him, and in fine ouercomming foure French men, with the franke consent of both Kings married the Queene Dowager, and was here in England (as we all know) made Duke of Suffolk; of whose offspring there remaine yet some most worthy branches, but the like to him for armes and cauallary (as we terme it) is my noble good Lord, the Lord Strange, whose value and vertue need not this my barren and briefe testimonie. The end of the annotations vpon the xxxij. booke.
THE XXXIII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Faire Bradamant sees grau'n by passing art, The future wars of France vpon a screene. Bayardos flight the combat fierce doth part, Renaldo and the Serican beweene. Astolso hauing past the greater part Of all the world, and many countries seene, Vnto Senapos kingdome last arriues, And from his boord the foule Harpias driues. 1 Of these famous drawers looke on the history of this booke.TYmagoras, Parrhasius, Po∣lignote, Timant, Protogenes, Apol∣lodore, With Zewces, one for skill of special note: Apelles eke, plast all the rest before: Whose skill in drawing, all the world doth note, And talke of still (to writers thanks therefore) Whose works and bodies, time and death did wast, Yet spite of time and death their fames doth last. 2 With others that in these our later dayes Haue liu'd, as Leonard and Iohn Belline, And he that carues and drawes with equall praise, Michell more then a man, Angell diuine, And Flores, whom the Flemmings greatly praise, And Raphael and Titian passing fine, With diuers others that by due desart, Do ment in this praise to haue a part. 3 Yet all these cunning drawers with their skill, Could not attaine by picture to expresse, What strange euents should happen well or ill, In future times, no not so much as guesse: This art is proper vnto Magike still: Or to a Prophet, or a Prophetesse. By this rare art, the Brittish Merlin painted Strange things, with which our age hath bin acquain∣ted. 4 He made by Magike art, that stately hall, And by the selfe same art he could to be, Strange histories ingraued on the wall, Which (as I said) the guests desir'd to see. Now when they were from supper risen all, The pages lighted torches two or three, Making the roome to shine as bright as day. When to his guests the owner thus did say, 5 I would (quoth he) my guests, that you should know, That these same stories that here painted are, Of future warres the sequels sad do show, That shall to Italie bring wo and care: Whereas the French full many a bloodie blow Shall take, while others they to harme prepare, As Merlin here hath layd downe, being sent From English Arthur, chiefe for this intent. 6 King Feramont that was the first that past The streame of Rhine with armie great of France, And being in possession quiet plast Of all those parts, sturd with so luckie chance, Straight in ambitious thought began to cast, His rule and scepter higher to aduance. Which that he might to passe the better bring, He made a league with Arthur English king, 7 Informing him how that his meaning was,This part  a fiction, for  was  yeares afore Ar∣thur. Of Italie the rule and crowne to get, And askt his ayd to bring the same to passe, Which neuer had atchieued bin as yet. Now Merlin that did all men far surpasse In Magike art, his purpose sought to let, For Merlin had with Arthur so great credit, He thought all Gospell was, if once he sed it.
8 This Merlin then did first to Arthur show, And then by Arthur was of purpose sent, To Fieramont of France, to let him know The cause why he misliked his intent. As namely, many mischiefs that would grow, To all that now, or that hereafter ment, The like attempt, aduising him abstaine From certaine trouble, for vncertaine gaine. 9 And that he might his courage more appall, Thereof in  history of this .And quite remoue him from this enterprise, He made by Magicke, this so stately hall, Adorned as you see in sumptuous wise, And drew these histories vpon the wall, That what he saw in mind, they might with eyes, And thereby know, that in Italian ground, The Flour de luce can near take root profound. 10 And how as often as the French shall come, As frends to aid and free them from distresse. So oft they shall their foes all ouercome, And fight with honor great, and good successe: But be they sure to haue that place their toome, If so they come their freedome to oppresse; Thus much the owner of the house them told, And so went on, the storie to vntold. 11 Lo first how Sigisbert in hope of gaine, And promises of Emperour Mauricius, Doth passe the mountaines with a mightie traine, With mind to Lombardie to be pernicious: But Ewtar driues him backe by force againe, When he of such attempt is least suspicious, So that his enterprise is quite reuersed, Himselfe doth flie, and leaue his men dispersed. 12 Next after him the proud Clodoueus went, And had with him one hundred thousand men, But him doth meet the Duke of Beneuent, With searse for eu'rie hundred souldiers, ten, Who doth intrap him in an ambushment, So as the French might well be lik'ned then, in the While Lombard wines too greedily they tooke, To fish beguiled with a baited hooke. 13 host  with  plague.Straight Childibertus with a mightie host, Doth come with mind to wipe away this blot: But of his gainings he may make small bost, For of his purpose he preuailed not: His enterprise by heau'nly sword is croft. The plague doth grow among his men so hot, What with the burning feauer, and the flixe, Of sixtie men, there scant returneth sixe. 14 Another picture liuely doth expresse, How that king Pepin and king Charles his sonne, Fought both in Italie with good successe; Not with intent that Realme to ouerrunne, Astolso was  prowd  of Lambar∣.But to set free Pope Steu'n from sharpe distresse, And wrongs, that by Astolso were him done, One tames Astolso that was Steu'ns oppressor, To ther takes Desiderius his successor. 15 Behold another Pepin yet an youth, Not like his father, doth that Realme inuade,This happened as the siege of Real∣to an Iland near Venice, where he wold have made the bridge. And thinking to procure their wofull ruth, Of ships and boats a mightie bridge he made: But marke what ill successe to him ensuth, Ear he through his great enterprise could wade, A tempest did his massie worke consound, His bridge was broken, and his souldiers drownd. 16 Lo Lews of Burgundie, descending theare Where, as it seemes he taken is and bound, And he that takes him, maketh him to sweare, That he shall neare beare arms gainst Latian groundLews of Burgen∣die and  eye:  cut for his . Lo how he breakes his oth without all feare, Lo how againe his foes do him confound, And like a moldwarpe, make him loose his eyes: A iust reward for such as oths despise. 17 See here how Hugh of Arly doth great fears,Hugo of Arly o∣uer rowne by the Beringars. Driuing the Beringars from natiue soile, Forcing them twise or thrise to change their feats, And cause the Hunnes and Bauiers backe recoile: But greater force at last his acts defeats, First he compounds, and after all his toile, He dies, not after long his heire doth tane, But yeeldeth vp his crowne to Beringarie. 18 Lo heare another Charles that by perswasion,Looke of this in the historie is. Of euill shepherd, sets on fire the fold, And kills two kings in this his fierce inuasion, Manfred and Corradin, which makes him bold: But his owne faults of his fall gaue occasion; His crueltie was such, so vncontrold, That he and his were all kild (as they tell) Eu'n at the ringing of an eu'niong bell. 19 Now after these about one hundred yeares, For so the space betweene, did seeme to say, From France, one shall inuade those famous peeres, The Vicount Galeasses,This man that in∣uedeth the Gale∣asses was the Erle of Arm∣ake. and shall lay Siege vnto Alexandria as appeares. By those that here do stand in battell ray. Lo how the Duke preuenting eu'rie doubt, Prouideth strength within, deceipt without. 20 And with this warie policie proceeding, He doth the Frenchmen at aduantage take, Not finding his ambushment, and not heeding, Together with the Lord of Arminake, Who dieth of his hurts with ouerbleeding: Lo how the streame of bloud there spilt doth make, A sanguin colour in the streame of Poe, By meanes Tanarus into it doth goe. 21 After all these, one comes that Maria hight,Looke at Maria in the historie. And three that do of Aniow houle proceed. All these to those of Naples do much spite, Yet none of these can brag of their good speed: For though to French they ioyne some Latiā might, Of greedie sort, that with their crownes they feed, Yet still for all their paine and their expence, Alfonso and Ferdinando driue them thence.
Charles the eight looke in the his∣torie. 22 Lo Charles the eight descending like a thunder, Downe from the Alps with all the floure of France, And conqu'ring all (to all mens passing wonder) Not drawing once a sword, nor breaking lance, (Except that rocke that Typheus lyeth vnder While he to high himselfe, straue to aduance) This Ile and castle both, that Iskia hight, Defended was by Vasto gallant knight. 23 Now as the master of the castle told, And pointed out each storie in his place, It came into his fancy to vnfold, The worthy praise of Aluas noble race; Which (as for certaintie they all did hold) Wise Merlin propheside, who had the grace, To shew before hand, both with tongue and pen, What accidents should hap, and where, and when. 24 This is spoken in praise of the Louse of Alua. And namely that this knight whom here you see, Defending so the castle and the rocke, As though he feard not those same fires that flee, As far as Fare, but them did scorne and mocke. From this same knight there shal descend (quoth he) Out of the root of this most worthie stocke, A knight shall win such fame and reputation, As all the world shall hold in admiration. 25 Of these  in the Table. Though Nereus were faire, Achilles strong, Though Ladas swift, though Nestor was most wise, That knew so much, and liued had so long; Though bold Vilsses could both well deuise, And execute what doth to warre belong, Though Caesar, bountie praisd be to the skies, Yet place to giue all these may thinke no scorne, To one that shall in Iskia Ile be borne. 26 And if that ancient Creta may be prowe, Iupiter nephew to Celus. Because that Celus nephew sprang therein: If Thebs of Bacchus birth doth vant so lowd, And Hercules; If Delus of their twin: Then may that Ile no lesse be well allowd, To vant it selfe, that hath so happie bin, To haue that Marquesse borne within that place, On whom the heau'ns shall powre so great a grace. 27 Thus Merlin vsd to tell and oft repeat, How he should be for such a time reserued, When Roman Empires high and stately seat, At lowest eb should be, and welnigh starued; That his rare parts againe might make it great, And that by him it might be safe preserued, Which that you may see plainly to his glorie, Marke in this table the ensuing storie. 28 Lodowicke Sorse the notablest dis∣sembler and  that euer was though before Alathia  time. Looke the Historie. Lo here (said he) how Lodwicke doth repent, That he had thither brought king Charles the eight, Which at the first he did but with intent To weaken, not to presse with so hard weight His ancient foe; for now gainst Charles he went, Making new leagues according to his sleight. He thinks to take him prisner by the way, But Charles by force through thē doth make his way. 29 But yet the souldiers that behinde him staid, Had not the like good fortune nor successe, For Ferdinando grew by Mantuan aid So strong, that soone he did the French distresse: To whose great griefe, this Marquesse was betraid By Gypsen vile, when he fear'd nothing lesse,Looke in the His∣torie of . Which doth in Ferdinand so great griefe breed, As doth his ioy of victorie exceed. 30 Next after these, he shews them Lews the twelfth, That puls out Lodwicke Storse with mightie hand, And gets by force, what he had got by stelth,Of Lews the  looke the . And plants the Flour de luce in Millen land; Yet he no long time there in quiet dwelth, The great Consaluo with a Spanish band, His Captaines and Lieutenants oft repulses, And in the end from Millen quite expulses. 31 Lo here (which I forgat before to show) How Lodwickes frends, and his own men betray him, One sells his castell neuer striking blow;Sforse  common  apparrell  Swizzer,  betrayed. The Swizzers eke that might away conuay him, And had his pay, and did him seruice ow, For filthie lucres sake they do bewray him; Whereby without once breaking of a lance, Two victories came to the king of France. 32 Lo how by fauour of his mightie king,Caesar Borgia Duke  a notable  man. The bastard Caesar Borgia grew full great, And doth the necks of many nobles wring Of Italie, that had most ancient seat. Lo how this king doth eke the akornes bring To Bulloign,By the  who gave  for their . lo how with another feat, He doth the Genowais in fight subdue, And maketh them their late reuolt to rue. 33 Lo here not far from thence, how all the feeld, With dead mens bones is heald at Geriadad,This battel  Geriadad,  the distressed state of  looke in the Hi∣storie. How all the cities vnto Lews do yeeld, How Venice to shut vp her gates is glad; And searse her selfe frō this great storme can sheeld: Lo how the Pope (his part that herein had) Doth take away vnto his great rebuke, Modone and more, from good Ferraras Duk. 34 At which king Lews (with rightfull choller moued) Giues Bulloign to the Bentiuols againe, And thence to Breskie all his force remoued, And succours to Felsina doth ordaine, What time the Churches souldiers felt and proued, The French mens force vnto their mickle paine: Lo after where both armies meet to fight, Neare Chassie shore, to trie their vtmost might. 35 On this side France, on that the powre of Spaine Vnited is, and deadly blows ensew, The ditches all seemd fild with bodies slaine, A hap to make a stonic heart to rew; Long time in doubt doth victorie remaine, Which way the sway would carry no man knew,Of this he  before  booke. Till by the vertue of Alfonse alone, The French preuaile, the Spanish (forst) are gone,
36 Lo how the Pope his lip doth bite for griefe, Because the French men do Rauenna sacke; Lo how he sent to Swizzers for reliefe, Lo how they come and driue the French men back; And they that with their treason caused chiefe Of Lodiwike the ouerthrow and wracke, To make some mends for that they erst had done, Vnto the fathers place restore the sonne. 37 the first. But lo a prince of France then new created, Meets with the Swizzers to their mickle cost, And so their courage quaild, and force abated, As all the nations seemed welnigh lost; And of their title that them animated, Those villens vile hereafter need not bost, Defenders of the Church, tamers of Kings, They cleaped were, now clipped are their wings. 38 Lo how the French king Francis in despite Of all the league, faire Millen doth surprise, Bourbon defending it from Geno as might; Lo while this King doth practise and deuise, Some great exploit, while by foule ouersight, His lawlesse men the towne did tyrannize; of Millen  cruelty Their hauing too much pride, and want of pitie, Doth cause them sodainly to loose the citie. 39 Lo yet another Francis Sforse, a man Like to his Grandfire both in acts and name, Who to driue out the Frenchmen well began, And Millen did recouer with great fame; Lo France againe endeuour all they can, To win with praise that they had lost with shame, But Mantuas worthy Duke on Tycian streame, Cut off his way, and kept him from that Realme. 40 Yong Fredericke, yet but a beardlesse boy, Scant hauing on his chin a little downe, Lo how he saues Pauia from annoy, When furiously the French besiege the towne; He makes their earnest plots turne to a toy, called the  of the sea. The Lion of the sea he beateth downe: Lo here two Marquesses both of one blood, Both borne to do their country endlesse good. 41 The first of these is that Alfonsos sonne, That by the Negro erst you saw betraid, Behold what feates of armes by him are donne, How at their greatest need he them doth aid, How oft he hath on Frenchmen glorie wonne, That of his very name they seem afraid: The tother that so mild doth looke in sight, Is Lord of Vasto, and Alfonso hight. 42 This is that worthy knight, of whom I told, Then when I did the Ile of Iskia show, Of whom I said that Merlin had foretold To Feramont what he by skill did know, That when this world were worne and waxen old, And Rome and Italy were brought most low, Then he should spring, who to his endlesse praise, Their foes should ouerthrow, and them should raise. 43 Lo how he with his cousin of Pescare, And with Colonnas prosprous ayd no lesse, The French and Dutch that at Bycocca are, Do foyle and slay, and driue to great distresse; Lo how againe the French men do prepare,Francis inuasion of Italie with two armies. With new attempts to mend their bad successe, One campe the king in Lombardie doth make, And with another Naples he would take. 44 But she that vseth men as wind doth dust,Fortune. First take it vp and blow it very high, And from that highest place straight when she lust, She throwes it downe whereas it first did lie: She makes this king deuoyd of all mistrust, Thinke he hath men an hundred thousand nie,King Francis ouerthrowne  Pauia, deceased by his musterma∣sters in the num∣ber of his soldiers At Pauie siege beleeuing others musters, (But wo to kings whose seruants are no iuster.) 45 So while this noble Prince mistrusts no harme, His wicked Captaines greedy gaine to win, Cauld that the souldiers in the night alarme, Came to their colours slow and very thin; Within their tents they feele their skirmish warme, The warie Spaniards soone had entred in With those two guides, with whom they durst assay, In hell or else in heau'n to breake a way. 46 Lo how the chiefe nobilities of France Lie dead on ground, a cause of many teares, How many an hargubush, a sword and launce, This stout king hath alone about his eares: His horse slaine vnder him by hard mischance, And yet he nothing yeelds nor nothing feares, Though all the host assaulted him alone, And all the rescues and supplies were gone. 47 The valiant King defends him on his feet,Francis taken prisoner. Bathing his blade long time in en'mies blood, But vertue that with too much force doth meet, Must yeeld at last, it cannot be withstood; Lo him here prisner, lo how in a fleet He passeth into Spaine the salt sea flood, Whence Vasto doth the chiefest honour bring, Of the field wonne, and of the prisner king. 48 Thus both that host the king had thither brought, And that he meant to Naples to haue sent, Were both dispersed quite, and came to nought, Much like a lampe when all the oile is spent.Simile Lo how the King againe so well hath wrought, He leaues his sons for pledge, and homeward went, Lo how abroade he doth new quarrels pike,Meaning the king of England. Lo how at home some do to him the like. 49 Lo here the wofull murders and the rapes, That Rome doth suffer in the cruell sacke, Where neither thing prophane nor holy scapes,The sack of Rome by Bourbou, who was the first man that was killed. But all alike do go to spoile and wracke: The league that should relieue, sits still and gapes, And where they should step forward, they shrinke backe: Thus Peters successor by them forsaken, Is straight besieged, and at length is taken.
50 The King sends Lautrek, new supplies to gather, Not that he should to Lombardie do ought, But that he might set free the holy father, That to so low an ebbe so soone was brought: But Lautrek should haue come a little rather, The Popes own coyn hath his own freedom bought, Lautrek attempts to conquer Naples towne, And soone turnes all that country vpside downe. 51 Lo how a faire Imperiall nauie bends His course to succor the distressed towne, But Doria backe with heaue and ho them sends, And some of them doth burn, and some doth drown: Lo, fickle fortune once againe intends This pestilous mortali grew by potsoning a water neare to Naples, and then stopping the course of it, made  overflow all the marrish grounds, and so infected the aire that Lautreck and all h men died of us. To change her cheare, and on the French to frowne, With agews, not with swords they all are slaine, Scarce of an hundred one turnes home againe. 52 These and such stories had the stately hall, In marble rich ingraued on the skreene, As were too tedious to recite them all, Though then by them they were perusd and seene; Their wonder great, their pleasure was not small, And oft they read the writings were betweene, That in faire Roman letters all of gold, The circumstance of eu'ry picture told. 53 Now when the Ladies faire and all the rest, Had seene and askt as much as they desired, Their host doth bring them to their roomes of rest, Where sleepe renews the strength of bodies tired, Onely Duke Ammons daughter could not rest, Though bed were soft, room warm, and wel attired, Yet still she tost from left side to the right, And could not sleepe one winke all that same night. 54 With much ado her eyes at last she closed,Bradamanti dreame of Ro∣gero. Not much afore the dawning of the day, And as she slept, she in her sleepe supposed Rogero present was, and thus did say, My deare, what ailes thee to be thus disposed, That false beleefe in thee doth beare such sway? First shall the riuers to the mountaines clime, Ere I will guiltie be of such a crime. 55 Beside she thought she heard him thus to say, Lo I am come to be baptizd, my loue, And that I seemd my comming to delay, Another wound, and not a wound of loue, Hath bene the cause of my constrained stay, Suspitions vaine, and causlesse feare remoue: With this the damsell wakt, and vp she started, But found her dreame, and louer both departed. 56 Then freshly she doth her complaints renew, And in her mind thus to her selfe she spake, Lo what I like, are dreames vaine and vntrue, And in a moment me do quite forsake; But ah, what me offends is to to true, I dreame of good, but none I find awake, How are mine eyes alas in so ill taking, That closd see good, and nought but euill waking? 57 Sweet dreame did promise me a quiet peace, But bitter waking turneth all to warre; Sweet dreame deluded me, and soone did cease, But bitter waking plagues, and doth not arre: If falshood ease, and truth my paines increase, I wish my selfe from truth I still might barre, If dreames breed ioy, and waking cause my paine, Ay might I dreame, and neuer wake againe. 58 Oh happie wights whom sleepe doth so possesse, As in six months you neuer open eye, For sure such sleepe is like to death I guesse, But waking thus, is not like life (thinke I) How strange are then the pangs that me oppresse, That sleeping seeme to liue, and waking die? But if such sleepe resemblance be of death, Come death and close mine eies, and stop my breath. 59 Now were those Easter parts of heau'n madered, Where Phoehus beames do first begin appeare, And all the thicke and rainie clouds were fled, And promised a morning faire and cleare: When Bradamant forsooke her restlesse bed, And giuing for her lodging and good cheare, Right curteous thanks vnto her noble host, She leaues his house, and minds to part in post. 60 But first she found how that the damsell faire, The messenger that supt with her last night, Was gone before, with purpose to repaire To those three knights that lately felt her might, When she did cause them caper in the aire, Driu'n without stirrops from their steeds to light, She found they had all night to their great paine, Abid the wind, the tempest and the raine. 61 And that which greatly did increase their griefe, Was that while those within had cheare great store, They and their horse lackt lodging and reliefe: But that which did offend their stomacks more, And was indeed of all their sorrows chiefe, Was least the maid (of whom I spake before) Would tell their mistresse of their hard mischance, They had at their arriuall first in France. 62 And hauing full resolued and designd, To die or venge the foile receau'd last night, To th'end the messenger might change her mind, (The messenger that Vilania hight) Who thought their force and valew farre behind The vaunts that they had made of their great might, Therefore as soone as Bradamant they spied, Straight each of them to combat her defied. 63 Not thinking though she should a damsell be, For of a damsell gesture none she vsed; The Ladie gently spake vnto them three, And thought her hast the fight might haue excused, But they did vrge her still so farre, that she Without disgrace could not haue it refused; Wherefore she coucht the golden headed launce, And from their saddles made them all to daunce.
64 And for that time thus ended was that fray, For she sets spurs to horse, and rode so post, That ere they rose, she quite was gone away: They that their seats had twise togither lost, Were so ashamd they knew not what to say: For why, they wonted were to make their bost, No knight of France should able be to stand Against the worst of them, with speare in hand. 65 But Vllania further them to taunt, That Bradamant a Ladie was, them told, Now sirs (said she) you that were wont to vaunt, From Pālladins to win the shield of gold, Lo how a womans forces can you daunt, Now is (I hope) your loftie courage cold: Sure for those knights you be too weake a match, When one poore damsell you can ouermatch. 66 What need (said she) be furder triall had, You haue alreadie that for which you came, Except that any of you be so mad, To ioyne a future losse, to present shame; Or if perhaps ye would be faine and glad, To end your liues by men of worthy fame: Trow you that vanquisht are by womans hand, Renaldo or Orlando to withstand? 67 Now when as Vllanie declared had, How that a damsell them had ouerthrowne, With griefe and with disdaine they were so mad, That scarse their wits and senses were their own: Each one himselfe, of armour all vnclad, Their horse turnd loose, their swords away were throwne, And vowd for penance of so great, disgrace, To tuch no armour in a twelue-months space. 68 They further vow they ne're will ride againe, No not when that same yeare should be expired, Although the way were mountany or plaine, And though the way were grauelly or myred, Vntill they could by force of arms regaine to  againe in  booke the . Such horses, as for seruice are required, And furniture for three such champions meet; Till then they vowd to trauell on their feet. 69 Thus wilfully they walkt while others rode, But Bradamant went on, and that same night, She at a castle maketh her abode Neare to the way that leads to Paris right: Heare by her host, the Ladie faire was showd, How Agramant was vanquisht in the fight: Good meat, good lodging, and good news she had, Yet eat she not, nor slept, nor was she glad. 70 comes to radamant in  35. booke 31. . But now of her so much I must not say, That I forget my storie out to tell, Of those two knights that met this other day, And tyde their horses at the running well: No lands nor townes were causes of their fray, Nor who in rule nor office should excell, But eu'n that he that strongest was of twaine, Should Bayard win, and Durindana gaine. 71 There needs no signe of war, nor trumpets sound,Gradasso and Renaldo fight. To warne them when to strike or when to pawse, No Heralds need to limit out the ground, Nor reade them lectures of their warlike laws. They met as they by promise firme were bound, And each his weapon at one instant draws, And then they layd about them strong and nimble, Blows bred their smart; and smart their wrath did kindle. 72 Two blades more firme in triall, and more sure, Could not in all the world haue bin prepard, That hauing beene as these were, put in vre, Would not haue bene in peeces burst and mard: But both these blades were of such temper pure, So keene, so tough, and there withall so hard, They might a thousand times at hard-edge met, And neither blade thereby a gap would get. 73 Renaldo quick, hither and thither goes, And often time was forst to change his place, And trauerse ground, for why the weight he knows Of Durindana, that would cut a pase: Gradasso euer gaue the stronger blows, But tother still to scape them had the grace; Or if they hit, they hit in some such part, Where though they made great sound, they causd no smart. 74 Renaldo with lesse strength but far more art, Strake once or twise the Pagan on the arme, And with a thrust had surely pierst his hart, Saue that his armour strenghtned was by charme, So that no maile out of his place would start: But while each sought to do the other harme, A sodaine noyse did part their earnest quarrell,Their parting. They lookt and saw Bayardo in great parell. 75 I say they lookt about and spide at length, Bayardo fighting with a monstrous fowle, Bigger then he, her beak three yards of length, In other shape and making like an owle, Her tallents huge and sharpe, and of great strength, The feathers of her wings all blacke and foule, Her eyes like fire, a long and hideous taile, Her wings so huge, they seemed like a saile. 76 Perhaps it was a fowle, but I thinke not, Nor euer heard I erst of such a bird, Onely so Turpin cals it well I wot, If any will credit to him afoord: Rather I deeme that Malagigi got Some sprite infernall, that himselfe had sturd, To come in shape as I did shew before, Because the champions fierce, might fight no more. 77 Reynaldo eake himselfe beleeu'd the same, And with his cousin Malagige fell out, And to his charge laid not a little blame, And gaue him euill language thereabout, The tother sware by him that heau'ns did frame, It was not he, to put him out of doubt, But were it fowle, or were it a foule deuill, Certaine to Bayard it did worke much euill.
78 The horse that was puissant, brake his raine, When as the sharpnes of her claws he feels, And what wish terrour mou'd and what with paine, He yerketh at her fiercely with his heels: She soard aloft and downe she comes againe, And striks him so, that Bayard almost reels, And sith of other fence no meane he had, He runs away as if he had bin mad. 79 Vnto the nearest wood he right doth runne, And still the feathered beast him held in chase, Till the thicke boughs holp him her gripes to shun, So that she gaue him ouer in short space, And seeing that her sport with him was done, She sored vp on high and left this place, And to another coast her flight doth frame, Where as she thought to find some other game. 80 Gradasso and Renaldo when they saw, The horse was fled that caused all the fray, Do by consent themselues from thence withdraw, To find Bayardo out and if they may: But first each promist to obserue this law, That he that found him first of both, should stay At this same well, till tother should come thither, And then againe to fight it out togither. 81 Thus when each had his word to th'other past, That they would meet there at their coming backe, They after go, but Bayard ran so fast, As soone they lost the sight of any tracke: Gradasso rode and therefore made more hast; The Palladine that his good horse did lacke, Remaind behind, all sad and grieued more, And malcontent then ere he was before. 82 And when he traueld had about in vaine, In body wearie, discontent in minde, With losse of all his trauell and his paine, He turneth to the place they first assignde, In hope the tother would returne againe, And bring the horse, if so he could him finde: But when he saw his looking did not boot, He traueld backe vnto the campe on foot. 83 But yet Gradassos paine succeeded well, For why, a while afore the lights decaying, He passed neare the place, as it befell, Where in a caue he found him by his naying, Still fearing that same monstrous impe of hell: He takes him thence, and then but little waying His promise made, he turnes another way, And to himselfe in secret thus doth say. 84 Looke on the Morall. Let them that list hold things in strife and war, I meane to hold mine owne with peace and ease, Onely to get this horse, I came so far, And past so many lands, and many seas: My promise breach to me shalbe no bar, To keepe that I so quietly do sease; If he desire to win his horse againe, To come to India let him take the pain. 85 As safe as France hath bin for me now twise, So safe for him shalbe my Serycane, I thither wish him come if he be wise, Else of Bayardo now his leaue is tane: If he will haue him he shall know the prise, Now mine Bayardo is and Durindane: This sayd, he mounted on the steed so warly, And by another way went backe to Arly. 86 Where finding ships new riggd, to sea-ward bent, Though then at anker in the harbour lying, With those rich spoils, to passe the seas he ment, In all post hast into his country hying: Hereafter you shall heare which way he went,He  in the  booke 43 And of his last conflict and of his dying: Now him I leaue, Renaldo and all France, And tell you what did to Astolfo chance. 87 Who mounted on his stately winged steed, Well tamed late by Logestillas wit, Tooke perfect vew of France with passing speed, And saw how eu'rie towne of worth did sit, Which hauing well obseru'd, and markt with heed, From Rhine to Pyren mount, he thought it fit, In manner like, all ouer Spaine to ride, And many countryes of the world beside. 88 To Aragon he passed through Nauar, Each man that saw him wondring at the sight, Then Taracon he did dicery not far Vpon his left hand, Biskie on his right, Where Castill, Lisbon, and Galicia are, And Cordoue neare, and Siuill see he might, Which diuers crownes now ioyned in on raigne, Are gouernd by the mightie king of Spaine. 89 There saw he Gades where erst by Hercles hand, Two pillars, markes for Marriners were plast, Then ouer Atlant sea, to Egypt land, And ouer Affrica forthwith he past, And saw where Balearick Iles do stand, Then traueld to Euiza with like hast, And to Arzilla ward he thence departeth, Quite ore that sea, that it from Spagna eparteth, 90 Oran he saw, Ippon, Marocco, Fesse, Algier, Buzea, and those stately townes, Whose Princes with great pompe and pride possesse Of diuers Prouinces the stately crownes, He saw Byserta, and Tunigi no lesse, And flying ouer many dales and downes, He saw Capisse and Alzerbee Ile, And all the Cities to the flood of Nyle. 91 Tripolie, Bernick, Tolomit, and all Betweene the sea and Atlas woodie sides, Then on the Cereneys he right doth fall, And past Carena mounts, and more besides; Then crossing ou'r the barren fields and pall, Where sands with wind do eb and flow like tides, The tombe of Battus he doth leaue behind, And Ammons temple now worne out of mind.
92 Then came he by another Tremisen, That followes eke of Mahomet the law, Vnto another Ethyopia then He went, the which before he neuer saw, That differs both in language and in men: From thence he toward Nubia then did draw, Dobada and Coallee iust betweene, Of which these Christend, and those Turkish beene. 93 begins the  of Senapo  Herpia. The bord'rers still are armd in heate and cold, Senapo yet of Ethyop is the chiefe, And hath great store of iewels and of gold, And much he varies not from our beliefe; For he those principles most firme doth hold, Matthew  to the , & because  Gospell he  be shall  you with  holy ghost &) there.  they vse to  the signe  Crosse into  par of their  That can defend from euerlasting griefe: Here is it (if mine author be no her) Where they do vse to be baptizd with fier. 94 The Duke here lighted after trauell long, And to Senapos stately Court was led; The castle was more sumptuous then strong, And admiration more then terror bred; The locks, barres, chaines, and all that did belong Vnto the bridge and gates from foote to head, Which we make here of iron to endure, Was there faire wrought in massie gold most pure. 95 And though they haue great store of mettals fine, Yet were the chambers and the lodgings here Borne vp with cristall collumns, that did shine All ou'r the stately court most bright and cleare; A stately border causd vnto the eine Red, white, greene, blew, and yellow to appeare, Enriched with diuisions for the nones, Of Rubie, Smarag, Zaphyr, Topas stones. 96 Most orient pearls and gems of passing price, Were sprinkled on the pauements here and there, Hence balme doth come hence other precious spice, Which from Ierusalem men wont to beare; Hence commeth muske, for odours sweet and nice, And amber pure, that some in bracelets weare; And finally all things grow there in plentie, That in this country are esteemd most deintie. 97 Most true it is, else some haue written lies, The Sowdan to this King doth tribute pay, For that in this Kings powre alone it lies, , some think  that was . Great Cayre and fertile Egypt to decay, Because that by those meanes he may deuise, He may turne Nyle from them another way: or Giau,  is to say in  language , because  commaunds . kings. This Prince Senapo there is cald of many, We call him Prester Iohn or Preter Iany. 98 Of all the Kings that euer there did raigne, This King exceld in riches and in treasure, But losse of sight made all his comforts vaine, And bard him eu'ry tast of worldly pleasure, And this did much increase his care and paine, And grieued him indeed beyond all measure, That all his wealth and treasure not preuented, But that with famine he was ay tormented. 99 For when this Prince, as hunger meere him drew, Did but prepare himselfe to drinke or eate, Straight of Harpias came a cursed crew, With mightie wings,Virgil: Polluit∣ore dipes. huge pawes, and bellies great, And all the dishes quite they ouerthrew, And greedily deuoured all the meate; And that they left they did so file and slauer, As few could brooke the sight,Looke in the Allegor. but none the sauer. 100 The cause was this, why his great plague was such, Because in youth (when men most carelesse are) Finding himselfe to be extold so much, And passing other Kings in wealth so far, So foule a pride his loftie heart did tuch, Against his maker, he would needs moue war, To which intent a mightie powre he led, Vnto that mount whence Nylus hath his hed. 101 He had bene told, and did it firme beleeue, That on that mount, whose top did touch the skie, Was that same place where Adam dwelt and Eue, Before their fall did cause them thence to flie: He hoping some rare conquest to atchiue, A mightie host prepared by and by, With mind (so hie his heart with pride did swell) To make them tribute pay that there did dwell. 102 But high Iehoua, their foule pride represt, And downe he sent his Angell that same night, Who slue an hundred thousand for the least, And him condemnd for ay to loose his sight; Then sent he monsters vile him to molest, Those vgly monsters, that Harpias hight, Which so deuoure and so spoyle all his meate, Scarce they permit him once to drinke or eate. 103 And that which draue him into meere despaire, Was that one told by way of prophecie, How those foule creatures euer should repaire Vnto that place, till time they might espie A gallant knight all armed in the aire, Vpon a winged beast aloft to flie: And for that this vnpossible he deemed, Past hope of helpe, himselfe he then esteemed. 104 Now when the people saw from eu'ry wall, And from each towre the strangely flying knight He happie thought himselfe, that first of all Could tell the king of this vnused sight; Who straight the prophecie to mind did call, And with the sudden ioy, forgetting quite His trustie staffe, went groping with his hand. To welcome him that now came downe to land. 105 Astolfo being lighted, nearer drew, And as he was the great court entring in, Behold the King stood ready in his vew, And kneeling downe, to speake did thus begin, O heau'nly Angell, ô Messias new, Though I deserue not pardon for my sin, Yet thinke to vs is proper to offend, To you, to pardon those that wil amend.
106 My guilt so heauie on my conscience lies, I dare not sue thou shouldst my sight restore, Though wel I wot that thou couldst heale mine eies That art of those that ay stand God before, Let then this plague my want of sight suffice, And let me not be steru'd thus euermore, At least from me these filthy monsters driue, And let me eate with quiet while I liue. 107 Ouid of Aeneas comming to S∣billa. And I do vow a temple vnto thee, Of marble faire to build here in this place, Templa tibi sta∣tuam, tribuātib  honores: but this  spoken more Christian like. Whose gates and couer all of gold shall be, Adornd with costly iewels in like case, Nam'd by thy name, and grau'd that men may see Thy miracle, which no time shall deface: Thus saith the prostrate King that nothing sees, And gropes to haue embrast Astolfos knees. 108 Also Sibias ∣swer is not vn∣like thu. The Duke to him thus friendly doth reply, Nor Angell I,Neo dea sūcertè, nec sacri thur honore. nor new Messias am, Nor come from heau'n, but mortall man am I, And thrall to sinne, vnworthy so high name; But for your sake,Humanum dig∣nare capus ne  erres. my best skill I will trie, To kil or driue those fowle from whence they came, Which if I do, giue God, not me the praise, That for your helpe did hither guide my wayes. 109 For him your Churches and your altars make, That must of dutie, Church and altars haue: This said, he vp from ground the King doth take, And went with him and other Barons graue: Straightways of meate prouision new they make, For so the hungry King in hast doth craue, In hope that now the monsters would be quiet, And not to interrupt him at his diet. 110 Forthwith a sumptuous dinner was prepard, In stately sort great store and of the best, Senapo hopes Astolfo can him guard From those foule fowles that did him so molest; But lo a sodain noise forthwith was heard, The sent of those same viands that were drest, Had brought them thither ere the men were able To set downe all the dishes on the table. 111 The description of the Harpias. Of them came seu'n together in a knot, With womans faces, wan with deadly cold, So hungerstaru'd, as death it selfe might not Be at first sight more hideous to behold, Their wings were great, but foule blacke wings God wot, Their talents sharpe to gripe, but strong to hold, A large foule paunch, a filthy taile and long, From whence there came an odour mightie strong. 112 As sodaine heard, so sodaine were they seene, For on the table all at once they fell, And spoild the meat, and from their wombs vncleen Cast loth some filth to see, irksome to smell: The Duke with blade of mettall sharpe and keene, Strikes at the monsters, thinking them to quell; But all in vaine, his bootlesse blade turnd backe, As he had smitten on a wollen sacke. 113 Some rau'nously deuour'd the sweet repast, And did so eager fill their greedie gorge, That by and by they were compeld as fast, The same in beastly manner to disgorge: The wofull King thinks now all succour past, Till good Astolfo sware by sweet Saint George,Astolfo  after the  of the  nobilitie  George. Sith force was vaine, he would another way, To driue these monsters from the king assay. 114 The horne, which euer he about him beares, He meanes against these monsters to employ, He causd the King and his to stop their eares With molted waxe, that no noise them may noy, Else might his blast haue bred in them such feares, To driue them thence, and all the land destroy; Then causd he them prepare another feast, An vp he gets him on his winged beast. 115 The steward that did know his mind by signes, Straightwayes another dinner doth addresse, With store of daintie meates and costly wines, But in a trise more soone then one could guesse, The filthy flocke, as famine them inclines, Came downe and seasd vpon the costly messe; But straight Astolfo blew them such a blast, As on the sodaine made them all agast. 116 The noise into their open eares so entered, That had no meanes to stop them nor defence, As so their stomacks and their tasts distempered, They fled, as feare expeld all other sence; The English Duke to follow them aduentered, And winding still his horne, he chast them thence, To that hils foote, whence Nylus first doth fall, If so that Nyle haue any head at all. 117 About the bottome of this mightie mount, There is a caue descending like a well, By which (as dwellers by do oft recount) A speedie passage one may haue to hell; To this the monsters fled, and made account Within this caue safe from the noise to dwell, Which seene, Astolfo from his beast alighted, And ceast the blowing that them so affrighted. 118 And for he did with heed the caues mouth marke, He nearer doth approch vnto the same, And with a listning eare he then doth harke, If any sound from thence vnto him came; The entrance lookt all like a dungeon darke, With smoke that seemd to come from smothered flame: But more of this hereafter I will treat, For now this booke begins to be too great. Morall. In this xxxiij. booke there are many things worth the obseruation, both for historicall matter, as also in Allegoricall sence, and therefore I would not stand long in the Morall: Only this note I will take of Gradasso for breach of his promise, in not bringing the horse backe to the fountaine, as was couenanted betweene them: that many braue and valiant men,
such as he is here described to be, how euer they stand vpon termes of honor and value, yet if they may obtaine their pur∣pose without blowes, they will many times dispence both with honour and honestie: which yet I iudge rather an example to shun, then a president to be followed. And in Senapo, that through riches and abundance grew so insolent, that he would needs thinke to conquer Paradise; we may see the course of yong carelesse men, that being left rich by their pa∣rents, or else aduanced (vnworthily in their owne consciences) to some extraordinary fortunes, straight in conceits be∣gin to despise the diuine prouidence (as Senapo assaulted Paradise) and dispute with their prophane tongues, not a∣gainst this or that religion, but against all religion, hauing no argument so probable indeed and so forcible, as that which the Poet Martiall reciteth of one Silius: Nullos esse Deos, inane coelum Affirmat Silius, probatque quod se Factum, dum negat haec, videt beatum. Thus in English: That heau'n is void, and that no gods there are, Silius affirmes, and all his proofe is this, That while such blasphemies pronounce he dare, He liueth here in ease and earthly blisse. But this matter I shall touch more at large in the Allegorie. For the histories touched in this book they are many and diuers,Historie. but the special drift that mine author hath in this book, is to note how those kings of France that haue come to inuade Italy, and to make a conquest thereof, or of any part thereof, haue had euer ill successe, and bin either taken or foyled: and of the other side, those that haue come to rescue them, and take their parts, haue many times brought backe honour and victory. Now first mine author for the finer bringing in of the matter fathers it vpon Merlin our English prophet (as they terme him) of whom I haue spoken before in the notes of the third booke, alledging that he by Magicke framed that sumptuous hall, and therein painted vpon the skreen thereof all these stories of the time to come. First he recites all the excellent drawers of the time past, taking by that, occasion to praise the excellent workmanship of some of his owne time: their names he reciteth hudling together; but here I will particularly touch them for their sakes that haue not read of them, and are desirous to know of whence they are. Timagoras was a Calcydonian,Timagoras. and was the first that is specially noted to haue compared his cunning with another of the same science, and to haue had the glorie from him. Parrhasius an Ephesian,Parrhasius. noted specially for his excellent shadowing and giuing good proportion to the countenance, and in the outermost lines of the face, which is a great point of that art. Polygnotus I find no extraordinary thing to speake of,Polignotus: onely I read that he vsed first to draw women in white gar∣ments, and had a speciall grace in making the opening of the mouth. Timant, Timant. they praise his wit as much as his worke, for making in a great table the picture of Iphigenia standing at the altar to be sacrificed; and hauing drawne all the standers by very sad, and with wofull countenances, and specially her vnkle; when he came to her father, he made him with a scarce afore his face, signifying thereby that his griefe was grea∣ter then could be seene in his countenance. Protogenes was borne in Sycaunum a country subiect to the Rhodians,Protogenes. he was noted for somewhat too much curiosi∣tie and tediousnesse (a fault our countrimen be much noted of, that they know not when their worke is well:) howbeit his worke was held in such price, that Demetrius lying at the siege of Rhodes, and hauing oportunitie offered him to haue fierd the towne on that side where a table of his drawing did hang, he raised his siege rather then he would burne the table. Appollodore was so excellent (as Plinie writeth of him thus) that he opened the doore of cunning in that art,Apollodore. by which Zewces afterwards entred into it in the citie of Heraclia.Zewces. The story of the strife betweene Zewces and Parrhasius Zewces. is well knowne I, thinke to all, but yet I will briefly set it downe: Zewces to shew his workmanship, brought a table, wherein he had painted grapes so naturally, that the birds came and peckt at them, thinking them to be grapes indeede: the other had drawne onely a curtaine, such as they vse to haue before pictures to keepe them from the dust; which cur∣taine looked so like a true curtaine, that Zewces being proud of the iudgement of the birds, bad him now to remoue his curtain to shew his picture; but being quickly aware of his error, with a kind of noble bashfulnesse, granted the prise to his aduersarie, confessing it was more to deceiue a workman then a bird. Appelles borne at Coas,Appelles. was held in such reputation for his drawing, that Alexander the great gaue commandement that none should make his picture but onely Appelles. He began the image of Venus, and died ere it was done, leauing the imperfit worke so full of the perfection of his art, that no man durst euer take vpon him to end it: so as euen to this day if any begin a work in any kind with any felicitie, and after leaue it vnfinisht, they straight liken him to Appelles. Now hauing spoken so much of all these famous men of old times, it were an enuiouis part to say nothing of those of this age, that haue bin famous, and are named by mine author also: wherefore I would touch one or two of them. Leonard Vinci was a Florentine,Leon. Vinci. a goodly man of person, and so excellent in the Idea or the conceiued forme of his worke, that though he could finish but few workes, yet those he did had great admiration. Also there was Andrew Mantinea (whom I forgot to put in by ouersight in his due place,Andr. Mant. but I will make him amends here) who being but of meane parentage and very poore, yet his aptnesse to this kind being made knowne to the Marquis of Mantua, and encouraged by his liberalitie (the speciall nurse of all good arts) grew most excellent in it: and beside o∣ther rare workes that is seene and shewne of his in Rome and in Mantua, he is said to be the first that deuised cutting in brasse, which how curious a thing it is, the pictures in this booke may partly testifie.
Gian Belline. Gian Belline was a Venetian, and was the more famous because Mahomet (king of the Turkes) was so farre in loue with a table of his drawing, that he sent for him, but the Venetians would not spare him: mary they sent a brother of his, a very good workman. Now (albert the Turkes are by their lawes forbidden images) yet was this Prince so in loue with that picture I spake of, that when the other drawer came to him, he made him draw both his owne picture and the Turks, and so after sent him backe againe, both highly commended and rewarded. Michael Ag∣nolo. Michael Agnolo (we pronounce it Michel Angelo) was the rare man of this age for drawing and caruing both, at∣taining to the excellency of the art very yong, and doing many notable works: but three be most famous, one was caruing of an Image of Pitie in Rome, another was a Giant in Florence, the third was a picture of certain naked men that went to wash themselues in Arno, and hearing of a sudden alarme in the camp, they made hast to put on their clothes: in which picture were contained all the gestures, lookes and motions that men could imagine would happen in such an accident: his father sirnamed him Angelo in his cradle, as a presage of some great excellencie aboue ordinary that he should grow to. Raphael and Sebastian were but his schollers, though both very perfect: all which I haue the more willingly noted, and at more length then I was wont in the former bookes in like matters so lightly touched, both because my selfe (I must con∣fesse) take great pleasure in such workes (as pleasing ornaments of a house, and good remembrances of our friends) as also to shew in what great reckning that science hath bin with Emperors and great Princes, and with Prelats and religious persons: howsoeuer some austere or rather vnciuil persons, will seeme either to condemne it or contemne it. And though indeed this Realme hath not bred any Michel Angelos, nor men of such rare perfection as may deserue his title: Michel (more then a man) Angell diuine. Yet I may say thus much without partialitie, for the honor of my country, as mine author hath done for the honour of his, that we haue with vs at this day one that for limming (which I take to be the very perfection of that art) is comparable with any of any other countrey.M. Hilliard. And for the praise that I told you of Parrhasius for taking the true lines of the face, I thinke our countryman (I meane M. Hilliard) is inferiour to none that liues at this day as among other things of his do∣ing, my selfe haue seene him in white and black in foure lines only set downe the feature of the Queenes Maiesties coun∣tenance, that it was euen thereby to be knowne; and he is so perfect therein (as I haue heard others tell) that he can set it downe by the Idea he hath, without any patterne; which (for all Apelles priuiledge) was more (I beleeue) then he could haue done for Alexander. But I am entred so far into pictures, that I know not how to get out againe: and though there be so much other story in this xxxiij. booke as wil aske some time, yet I thought better to set downe this of these not able men here altogether, for those that haue a mind to reade it, then to haue turned them ouer to the Table, where they must looke one in one place, and another in another, according as the names would fall out in order of Alphabet. But now to the French storie. 12. staffe. Clodoueus was the first king of France, after that Clodoueus that first receaued the Christian Religion. This Prince, what time Grimoaldo Duke of Beneuent had ciuill warres in Lombardy with Perderite and Gondiberto two brothers, taking this oportunity, made warre on Grimoaldo: but Grimoaldo doubting his strength to meet them in the field, with a notable stratagem vanquished them: he fained as if he fled and forsook his tents, leauing them ful of vittall and strong wines, which the French men so eagerly deuoured, and dranke so deuoutly of the wine, that it made them sleepe more soundly that night then was for their safetie: for the Duke of Beneuent set on them in the dead of the night, and so more by force of his wine then of his weapons vanquished them. 18. staffe. In the time of Pope Vrban the fourth, mentioned couertly in the 18. staffe, one Charles Duke of Aniou was called into Italy by the said Pope, and pronounced King of Sicily. But in a short time hauing done many great feats, the Si∣cilians conspired against him by the meanes of one Iohn of Procida, and murdered them all with great crueltie at the sound of an euensong belleso as it is to this day a by-word vsed in Italy if any notable crueltie be done, that is withall so∣dainly executed, they call it the Sicilians euensong: for they did at one euensong kill not onely all the Frenchmen, but also all the women they thought to be with child by them. 21. staffe. The Earle of Marca, mentioned in the 21 staffe, maried Queene Ioan of Naples (the matter for the strangenes of the president, I thought worth the noting) this Ioan being sister to Charles the third, and heire generall to the Crowne of Naples, was contented, for auoiding the foule infamie that she had by her ouer great familiaritie, and the too much in∣ward acquaintance of one Pandolfo a meane man, to marry with one Iames Earle of Marca, and of the bloud royall of France: but first she indented with him, that he should onely haue the bare title of King, but she would haue the gouerne∣ment wholly in her hands: he being once in possession, brake his couenant, and would needs gouerne all: but she by the help of Francis sforse, in the end depriued him of the whole, and sent him backe into his country againe, where the poore Gen∣tleman was glad to make himselfe an Hermit. 28. staffe. Lodwike Sforse spoken of in the 28. staffe, for emulation of the king of Naples, first brought Charles the eight into I∣taly, and made him so strong, that in the end he was not able to get him out againe. This Lodwike his manner was still to be plotting of new deuices, to set other Princes at variance: now taking part with one side openly, and feeding the o∣ther with money secretly; neuer fast friend to any, neuer so proud as when with his smooth tongue and faire promises he had beguiled some plaine and open man, not so fine headed as himselfe. Now though we might perhaps note some men of our time held for notable wise men, and leaning much to this kind of course, yet I see small incouragement, either by his beginning, or proceeding, or ending, why any should thinke him worth the following: he began an vsurper, he liued a dissembler, he died a begger, and (which is worse) a prisoner. Further it is noted in Guichiardine that he spent (as I remember) eight hundred thousand Duckets in that kind I spake of, setting Princes together by the eares: and he gat this for his labour, that no Prince loued him, as appeared when being ten yeares a prisoner in France, no man euer made sute in a manner for his libertie. Wherefore Tully saith to Anthonie in one of his Phillippiks, Te miror Antone, quorum acta imiteris corum exitus non perhorrescere. I maruell (saith he) friend Anthonie, that you are not afraid of their ends,29 staffe. whose euill acts you do follow. So surely I would wish none of my frends neither in print not publike affaires, to follow those halting courses, but hold it for a maxim, that he that is not a true frend, shall not haue a true frend. The Marquis of Pescara touched in the xxix. staffe,
at the assault of Castellnouo in Naples, being impatient of all stay, bargained with an Ethiopian slaue to burne the French nauie, and to let him in at the Church called Santa Croce, but the slaue hauing greater rewards giuen him of the Frenchmen, betrayed him, and shot him in with a forked arrow, and so killed him. In the xxxiij. staffe where he speakes of Geriadad,33. staffe. where Liuiano the Venetian Captaine was taken, I will refer the reader to Guicciardine for the whole discourse of the matter, beginning at the league of Cambray. But the substance of the matter briefly is this: Maximillian the Emperour, Lewes king of rance, and all the kings of Europe in effect, toge∣ther with Pope Iulio, made a league at Cambray, combining themselues against the Venetians, and indeed preuailed so farre against them, that they left them almost nothing in terra firma as they call it, deuiding all their townes, some to the king of Spaine, some of the Pope, some to Lewes himselfe, diuers to the Emperour, and two or three to the Duke of Ferrara. But in the end (as commonly in songs of so many parts they cannot long keepe perfect harmony, but that some song out of tune) so it fell out, that in parting the spoiles, they of the league could not well agree among themselues, and so gaue breath to the Venetians, who thereby recouered much of their state againe. In the xxxvij. staffe he speakes of the ouerthrow of the Swizzers,37. staffe. that had beene before wonderfull prowd of their glorious title giuen them by the Pope, who sent them the Pontificall banner, with this title vnto it, Deenders of the libertie of the Church, against the pride of Princes. But after that king Francis came into Italie and besieged Millan, the Swizzers that were in the towne refusing to make a peace with him, which he offered them, comming after to bat∣tell were ouercome, and seuen thousand of them slaine. In the xliiij. staffe and so forward for three or foure more,44. staffe. he mentions the battell of Pauia, where the king of France was taken, a thing so generally known as I need not stand long on it: onely mine author touches one chiefe ouersight of this kings, which was, that his muster masters deceiued him in the number of his men: but howsoeuer it was, sure it is this Prince was a most worthy man, and wanted no quality of an excellent king, valiant and bountifull and such a fauourer of learned men, that the Italians termed him, Padre e madre, the father and mother of learning and liberall sciences. In the xlix. staffe he toucheth the sacke of Rome,49. staffe. which the Duke of Burbon was ring leader of, though himselfe was at the verie first assault slaine, with a harguebush shot in the head, but the other Captaines sacked the towne, and in fine draue the Pope to his ransome. And thus much for the storie of this booke: now I come to the Allegorie. Diuers excellent good Allegories may be taken out of this prettie fiction of Prester Iannie,Allegorie. called Senapos. One is, as I partly touched in the morall, when men through wealth and honor grow proud, and despisers of God and religion, whose state is damnable and incurable, except a flying knight come downe from heauen, I meane some Angell of God, or speci∣all grace of God, to remoue these monsters and monstrous opinions out of their minds. The punishment of blindnesse laid vpon him for that his presumptuous assaulting Paradice, shewes that no men are in deed more blind, then those that thinke they see so much more then other men, specially when they enter into that wilfull blindnesse, of not seeing the way to their owne saluation. Italie had bin noted long to haue had many irreligious men in it, and no maruel, for our old En∣glish prouerbe is, the nearer the Church, the furder from God: yet surely those despisers of religion, are themselues dispised of many: in so much as it is growne for a by word among them; when they speake of such a man, they will say, Oh, he is grown a profound wise mā, he begins now not to beleeue in Christ, therby Ironically noting his passing folly. I would stand longer in applying al the particulars of this Allegorie, but that I doubt I am somewhat to tedious in these notes already. In the Harpias that snatch away the meate from the mouth of this king,Allusion. he alludes (as himselfe expoundeth plainly in the beginning of the next booke) to the Swizzers and other strangers that spoile Italie. But a like storie, which this may seeme to allude vnto, is told of Calai and Zet, sonnes of Orithya daughter to Erictheus king of Athens, who are sayd to haue deliuered Phineus king of Thrace from the Harpias in such a like sort. Here end the annotations vpon the xxxiiij. booke.
THE XXXIIII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Astolfo heares of Lydias plague in hell, Vntill the smoke annoyd and fould him so, That he was faine to wash him at a well; Which done, to Paradise he straight doth go, Where he doth meet Saint Iohn, who doth him tell Strange things, and as strange things to him doth show: And there Orlandos with the doth receaue, And sees the fatall threeds the sisters weaue. 1 OH foule Harpias, greedie, hunger starued, Whom wrath diuine, for inst reuenge hath sent To blinded Italy, that hath deserued For sins both old and late, so to be shent. The sustenance that shold for food haue serued, For widowes poore and orphans innocent, These filthy monsters do consume and wast it Oft at one meale, before the owners tast it. 2 He doubtlesse guiltie is of grieuous sin, That first set open that long closed caue, From which all filth and greedines came in To Italie, and it infected haue; Then ended good, then did bad dayes begin, And discord foule so farre off all peace draue, That now in warres, in pouertie and paine, It long hath taride, and shall long remaine. 3 Vntill she can her slouthfull sonnes awake, From drowsie sleepe, that now themselues forget, And say to them, for shame example take, Let others valiant deeds your courage whet: Why should not you the like acts vndertake, As in time past did Calai and Zet? That erst like aid to Phineas did bring, As did Astolfo th' Ethiopian king. 4 Who hauing driu'n away these monsters fell, From blind Senapos boond, as erst I told, And chased them so farre, vntill they fell Into the caue most fearfull to behold; That fearfull caue that was the mouth of hell, To hearken at the same he waxed bold, And heard most wofull mourning, plaints and cries, Such as from hell were likely to arise. 5 Astolfo minds into the place to enter, And visit those that haue forgone this light, And pierce the earth eu'nto the middle center, To see if ought may there be worth the sight; For why he thought what need I seare to venter, That haue this horne with which I can affright Foule Sathan, Cerberus with trebble chaps, And safely keepe my selfe from all mishaps 6 He ties his flying beast fast by the raines,Nere begins the tale of Lydia. With mind to hell it selfe to bid defiance, His horne fast tide about his necke remaines, In which much more then sword he puts affiance: But at his very entrance he complaines Of that same smoke that bred him much annoyance, That sauourd strong of brimstone and of pitch, Yet still Astolfo goeth thorough stitch. 7 But still the farder that he forward goes, He feeles the smoke more noisome and more thick, That in himselfe he gan now to suppose, If furder he should wade he should be sicke; When lo a shadow seemed to disclose It selfe to him, of somewhat that was quicke, And to his thinking hither wau'd and thether, Much like a carcasse hanged long in wether.
8 The English Duke that had desire to know, If so he saw a bodie or a vision, Strake with his sword thereat so fierce a blow, As would indeed thereof haue made diuision, If it had bin as it did seeme in show: But when he saw his sword made no incision, He guessed that it was (by that blows giuing) A passed spirit, not a bodie liuing. 9 Then heard he how thus wofully it said, Oh you that to these lower parts descend, Bring vs no hurt, though you can bring no aid, And be not so to those whom none can frend. The Duke amazd, both hands and footsteps staid, And said vnto the ghost, so God thee send Some speedie ease of this thy painfull smart, As thou wilt deine to tell me who thou art. 10 And if to worke your good lay in my lot, Aboue or here I should be glad to do it. Ah (said the ghost) my plague with such a knot Is tide, as mortall strength cannot vndo it, Yet your request denie you will I knot, Because you haue so great a mind vnto it, I will declare to you my stock and name, And eke the cause why to this place I came. 11 My name is Lydia, borne of princely birth, And bred in pompe and solaces delightfull, Though now in place excluded from all mirth, I lie condemnd by Gods high doome and rightfull, Because while I did liue aboue on earth, Vnto my loue I shewd my selfe so spightfull; And many more be here for like offences, As he that all doth rule, their plague dispences. 12 Anaxarite, for loue of whō I phi hanged himselfe in the Ile of Cy∣prus.Here lies that faire, but cruell Anaxaritee, Whose corps a stone diuine reuenge did make, Her ghost in smoke that no light ay shall clarifie, Doth most seuere, but most iust penance take, Because she could without all sence of charitie, Daphne in the first book of Ouids Metamorphosis. Behold her louer hanging for her sake: Here Daphnce lies, that now repents her shunning Of Phaebus, whom she scapt with ouerunning. 13 Too tedious it would be for me to tell The seu'rall names of eu'ry femall spirit, That for reward of their hard harts, in hell Appointed are such portions to inherit. Yet farre more are the men that there do dwell, For like offence, who for their euill merit Are placed much more low, though somewhat nie them, Where sume doth smother them, and flame doth fry them, 14 And reason good, for sith our sex is weake, The greater sinne it is vs to deceaue, AsTheseus for sook Anadne. Iason for sooke Hipsiphile, and after Medea. Theseus and Iason well can speake, And he thatAentas for sook Dido.  to , de floured Thaar, and af∣ter, despised her. & put her away, for which he was slain by Abs Latin did of rule because, With him, on whom faire Absolon did wreake The wrong that rauisht Thamar did receaue, With diuers that of tone and tother gender, Refusd or left their loues for causes slender. 15 But that I may particularly tuch The cause that brought me to this endlesse paine, My beautie while I liu'd, and pride was such, As none or few did to the like attaine, And both of them in me exceld so much, Twas hard to say which greater was of twaine; But this I know full well my proud mind grew, Out of conceit of my well pleasing hew. 16 It happend that a valiant knight of Thrace, In state and liuing of the better sort, And hearing praise of my praise-worthy face, Confirmed oft by more then one report, He purposd, and performd it in short space, Vnto my fathers kingdome to resort, That he might sue to me, and onely serue me, In hope by his great value to deserue me. 17 In gallant sort when he to Lydia came, And saw with eye what he had heard with eare, He calleth scant report, and niggard fame, That did to him so barren tidings beare: And rauisht with my looke he straight doth frame Himselfe to wait in court, and tarrie there, And shewd such worth, and vsed such behauour, As iustly might deserue my fathers fauour. 18 Exceeding was his seruice and desart,Look in the all of the  of If to a gratefull prince it had bin done, So perfectly he had of warre the art, That for my fire, by his conduct he wonne All Caria, and of Cilicia part, And after these exploits, he then begun, For recompence of these his merits rise, To pray my father I might be his wife. 19 My father him repulst with answer sowre, Because to match me higher was his will, Not to a priuat knight, whose chiefest dowre Was vertue, of whose worth he could not skill, His greedy thoughts did nought but gaine deuoure, And couetise the branch and roote of ill, Made him no more regard his vertuous sute, Then doth an Asse the sound of sweetest Lute.Simile. 20 Alcesté (so was nam'd the worthy Knight) Tooke this so foule repulse in great disdaine, Proceeding thence, from whence he ought of right Expect great recompence for his great paine; Wherefore he parted thence in great despight, And vowd reuenge, nor was his vow in vaine. Vnto th' Armenian king he thence doth go, My fathers emulous and auncient so. 21 Him, readie to accept each light occasion, He soone perswades, without all intermission, To make vpon my father fierce inuasion. And make him chiefe Lieutenant by commission: And hauing wonne him thereto by perswasion, They thus agreed of spoiles to make partition, As namely all the townes he wonne should be The kings, and for himselfe he askt but me.
22 This legue thus made, what woes my sire he wrought, I know not how in speeches to expresse, Foure royall armies quickly came to nought, Disperst or dead in halfe a yeare and lesle; In fine Alcesté by his vallew brought My father and his frends to such distresse, verbe vsed . They tooke them to a fort with such small treasure, As in so Scarbrow warning they had leasure. 23 When here a while he vs besieged had, To such dispaire he then my father draue, To yeeld me vp he would haue bin ful glad, To be his wife, yea eu'n to be his slaue; Nor would my fire haue thought the bargain e bad, If halfe the Realme with me for dowre he gaue, So sore he feard, ere long to leese it all, And dye in wofull bands a captiue thrail. 24 Wherefore in season to preuent the worst, Me that had beene the cause of all this ill, He minds to offer to Alcesté furst, To win thereby his fauor and good will: I went (for why none other doe I trust) With mind herein my sires mind to fulfill, And offer mine owne selfe at his deuotion, With halfe the Realme, if he accept the motion. 25 Alcesté hearing I came him to looke, Against me forth he comes al pale and trembling, Not like a conquerour was then his looke, But rather a captiued man resembling; Which when I found, my first plot I forsooke, For well I saw that this was not dissembling, With lowring looke, I held my peace awhile, Then fit for his estate I fram'd my stile. 26 I waxed bold the more I see him faint, And first I cursed this vnluckie loue, And of his crueltie I made complaint, Which harmd my frends, and chiefe that he would proue Against my will to haue me by constraint, I further did most sharply him reproue, That he so parted with the first deniall, And neuer sought to make new frendly triall. 27 I told him that his manners were to fierce, That though my father his iust suit denyed, Because perhaps his nature is peruerse, And would not at the first attempt be plyed, He should not though, all his good deeds reuerse, But rather ought with constancie haue tryed, By patient suffring, and by painfull seruing, To come vnto reward of well deseruing. 28 And if my father would not haue beene wonne, I would (I said) his fauour haue procured, And would haue prayd him, to make him his sonne If I had found his loue to me had dured; Or else in secret I would that haue donne, By which of me he should haue beene assured; But sith he needs would trie another meane, I told him plaine, my loue was alterd cleane. 29 And though I now came in this humble sort, To yeeld my body, as the price of peace, Because my father, whom he held to short, Intreated me to sue for his release; Yet did I vow to ma his hoped sport, And if to offer force he would not cease, I sware that rather I my selfe would kill, Then grant such ioyes constraind against my will. 30 These words and such as these to him I spake, Finding my powre was ouer him so great, Wherewith I did him as repentant make, As ere was Saint, in Hermits desert seat: He fell downe at my feet, and prayd me take His naked dagger, and did me intreat, To stab him with the same into his hart, To take iust vengance of his lewd desart. 31 Now when I saw him at this passe, I thought To follow this great conquest to his end, And straight a little hope to him I brought, Of fauour, if his errour he would mend, And if my fathers freedome might be wrought, And state restord, and he continue frend, And not attempt hereafter to constraine me, But with his seruiceable loue to gaine me. 32 He promised hereof he would not misse, And backe vnto my sire, me safe did send, Nor once presumed he my mouth to kisse, Thinke you, how he vnto my yoke did bend; I thinke that loue playd well his part in this, And needed not for him, more arrowes spend; Hence straight vnto th' Armenian king he went, Whose all the winnings should be, by consent. 33 And in the mildest manner that he could, He prayeth him to grant his good assent, That my poore sire might Lydia quiet hold, And he would with Armenta be content. The king Alcesté sharply then controld, And in plaine termes, he told he neuer ment, To cease that bloodie warre at any hand, While that my father had a foot of land. 34 What if (said he) Alcestes wau'ring braine, Is turnd with womans words: his damage be it: Shall I therefore loose all a whole yeares gaine At his request? I neuer will agree it: Againe Alcesté prayes him, and againe But all in vaine, he sees it will not be yet; And last he waxed angrie, and did I sweare, That he should do it, or for loue or feare. 35 Thus wrath engendred many a bitter word, And bitter words, did breed more bloody blowes, Alcesté in that furie drew his sword. And straight the guard on each side him inclose, But he among them, to himselfe besturd, He flew the king, and by the helpe of those Of Thrace, and of Cilicia in his pay, Th'Armenians all, he put to flight that day.
36 And then his happie victorie pursuing, First he my fathers frends did all enlarge, And next the Realme within one month ensuing, He gat againe, without my fathers charge; And for the better shunning and eschuing, Of all vnkindnesse, with amends most large, For recompence of all harmes he had donne, He gaue him all the spoiles that he had wonn. 37 Yea fully to content him to his asking, In all the countries that did neare confine, He raisd such summes of coyne, by cursed tasking, As made them grieue, and greatly to repine. The while my hate, in lous faire vizer masking, In outward show, I seemd to him incline; Yet secretly I studied to annoy him, And many wayes deuised to destroy him. 38 In steed of triumph by a priuie traine, At his returne to kill him we intended, But from such fact, feare forst vs to refraine, Because we found he was so strongly frended; I seemed of his comming glad and faine, And promist when our trobles all were ended, That I his faithfull yokefellow would be, In wo or weale, to take such part as he. 39 Wherefore I prayd him first that for my sake, He would subdue some of our priuat foes, And he each hard exploit doth vndertake, And now alone, and then with few he goes, And safe returnes, yet oft I did him make, To fight with cruell Giants, and with those That past his strength oft with som monstrous beast, Or Dragon fell, that did our Realme molest. 40 Don Hercles neuer by his cruell Aunt, Nor by the hard Euristeus, was so wrought,Hercules labors appossed, by his Aunt Iuno and Euristeus his half brother. In Lerna, Thrase, in Nemea Eremaunt, Numid, Etolia, Tebrus where he fought, Not Spaine, nor no where else, as I might vaunt, With mild perswasion, but with murdring thought, I made my louer still to put in vre, In hope hereby his ruine to procure. 41 But as the Palme the more the top is prest,Simile. The thicker do the vnder branches grow, Eu'n so the more his vertue was opprest, By hard attempts, the brighter it did show: Which when I found, forthwith I thought it best, Another way to worke his ouerthrow, A way by which in deed I wrought the fear, Which yet I shame and sorrow to repeat. 42 Against all such as bare him best affection, I secretly did still his minde incense, And euer one and one, by my direction, I made him wrong, till all were driu'n from thence: So was his heart and soule in my subiection, So had my bewtie blinded all his sence, Had I but winkt, or vp my finger hild, He had not car'd whom he had hurt or kild. 43 Now when I thus had foyld my fathers foes, And by Alcesté, had Alcesté wonne, And made him for my sake, forsake all those, That for his sake no high attempt would shunne; I then began my selfe plaine to disclose, And let him know what wise threed he had sponn With bitter spitefull words, I all to rated him, And told him plaine, that in my heart I hated him. 44 And that I wisht his life and dayes were ended, And would haue kild him, if I could for shame, Saue then I should of all men be condemned, Because his high deserts were of such fame; Yet him and them I vtterly contemned, And loathd to see his face, or heare his name, And sware I would wish him thenceforth no better, Nor heare his message, nor receiue his letter. 45 At this my cruell vsage and vngrate, He tooke such griefe that in a while he died; Now for this sinne, he that a I sinne doth hate, Condemns me here in this smoke to be tyed, Where I in vaine repent my selfe too late, That I his suite so causlesllie denyed, For which,The  tale. in smoke eternall I must dwell, Sith no redemption can be had from hell. 46 Here Lidia this her wofull tale doth end, And faded thence; now when her speech did cease, The Duke a farther passage did intend, But this tormenting smoke did so increase, That backward he was forst his steps to bend, For vitall sprites alreadie did decrease, Wherefore the smoke to shunne, and life to saue, He clammerd to the top of that same caue. 47 And least those woman faced monsters fell, Might after come from out that lothsome ledge, He digd vp stones, and great trees downe did fell, (His sword suffising both for axe and fledge) He hewd and brake, and labourd it so well, That gainst the caue, he made a thicke strong hedge, So stopt with stones, and many a ragged rafter, As kept th'Harpias in, a great while after. 48 But now the Duke, both with his present toyle, That did with dirt and dust, him all to dash, And with the smoke that earst did him so foyle, As blacke as foot, was driu'n to seeke some plash, Where he himselfe might of his cloths dispoyle, And both his rayment, and his armour wash, For why the smoke,Looke to the Allegoria. without and eake within, Did taint his cloths, his armour, and his skin. 49 Soone after he a christall streame espying, From foote to head he washt himselfe therein, Then vp he gets him on his courser flying, And of the ayre he more and more doth win, Affecting heau'n, all earthly thoughts defying: As fishes cut the liquid streame with fin,Sumile. So curreth he the ayre and doth not stop, Till he was come vnto that mountaines top.
50 This hill nigh toucht the circle of the Moone, The top was all a fruitfull pleasant feeld, And light at night, as ours is here at noone, The sweetest place that euer man beheeld; (There would I dwell if God gaue me my boone) description ad. sc. The soyle thereof most fragrant flowres did yeeld, Like Rubies, Gold, Pearles, Saphyrs, Topas stones, Crisolits, Diamonds, Iacints for the nones. 51 The trees that there did grow were euer greene, The fruits that thereon grew were neuer fading, The sundry colourd birds did sit betweene, And sing most sweet, the fruitfull boughs them sha∣ding: The riuers cleare as crystall to be seene, The fragrant smell; the sense and soule inuading, With ayre so temperate and so delightsome, As all the place beside was cleare and lightsome. 52 Amid the plaine a pallace passing faire There stood, aboue conceit of mortall men, Built of great height into the clearest aire, And was in circuit twentie mile and ten, To this faire place the Duke did straight repaire, And vewing all that goodly country then, He thought this world, compared with that pallace, A dunghill vile, or prison voyd of sollace. 53 But when as nearer to the place he came, He was amazed at the wondrous fight, The wall was all one precious stone, the same, And then the carbuncle more sanguine bright; O workman rare, ô most stupendious frame, What Dedalus of this had ouersight? Peace ye that wont to praise the wonders seau'n Those earthly kings made, this the King of heau'n. 54 Now while the Duke his eyes with wonder fed, Behold a faire old man in th'entrie stood, Whose gowne was white, but yet his iacket red, The tone as snow, the tother lokt as blood, His beard was long and white, so was his head, His countnance was so graue, his grace so good, A man thereby might at first sight suspect, He was a Saint, and one of Gods elect. 55 He comming to the Duke with chearfull face, Who now alighted was for reu'rence sake, Bold Baron (said the Saint) by speciall grace, That sufferd wast this voyage strange to make, And to arriue at this most blessed place, Not knowing why thou didst this iourny take, Yet know that not without the will celestiall, Thou commest here to Paradise terrestiall. 56 The cause you come a iourney of such length, Is here of me to learne what must be done, That Charles and holy Church may now at length Be fréed, that erst were welnigh ouerrunne, Wherefore impute it not to thine owne strength, Nor to thy courage, nor thy wit, my sonne, For neither could thy horne nor winged steed, Without Gods helpe stand thee in any steed. 57 But at more leisure hereof we will reason, And more at large I mind with you to speake, Now with some meate refresh you, as is reason, Left fasting long may make your stomack weake; Our fruits (said he) be neuer out of season: The uke reioyced much, and marueld eke, Then chiefe when by his speeches and his cote, He knew was he that the fourth Gospell wrote. 58 That holy Iohn whom Christ did hold so deare, That others thought he death should neuer see, Though in the Gospell it appeares not cleare, But thus he said, What if it pleased me, O Peter, that thy fellow tarry here, Vntill my comming, what is that to thee? So though our Sauiour not directly spake it, Yet sure it was, so eu'ry one did take it. 59 He here assumed was in happie houre, Whereas before Enoch the Patriark was, And where the Prophet bides of mightie powre, That in the firie coach did thither passe: These three in that so happie sacred bowre, In high felicitie their dayes did passe, Where in such sort to stand they are allowd, Till Christ returne vpon the burning clowd. 60 These saints him welcome to that sacred seate, And to a stately lodging him they brought; And for his horse likewise ordained meate, And then the Duke himselfe by them was taught, The daintie fruites of Paradise to eate, So delicate in tast, as sure he thought Our first two parents were to be excused, That for such fruit obedience they refused. 61 Now when the Duke had nature satisfide, With meate and drinke, and with his due repose, (For there were lodings faire, and all beside That needfull for mans vse man can suppose) He gets vp early in the morning tide, What time with vs alow, the Sunne arose, But ere that he from out his lodging moued, Came that disciple whom our Sauiour loued. 62 And by the hand the Duke abroade he led, And said some things to him, I may not name, But in the end (I thinke) my sonne he sed, Although that you from France so lately came, You little know how those in France haue sped,He saith, your Orlando, because he was his cosin: Sentence. There your Orlando quite is out of frame, For God his sinne most sharply now rewardeth, Who most doth punish whom he most regardeth. 63 Know that the champion your Orlando, whom God so great strength and so great courage gaue, And so rare grace, that from his mothers wome, By force of steele his skin no hurt might haue, To th'end that he might fight for his owne home, And those that hold the Christian faith to saue; As Sampson erst enabled was to stand, Against Philistins for the Hebrew land.
64 This your Orlando hath bin so vngrate, For so great grace receau'd, vnto his maker, That when his country was in weakest state, And needed succor most, he did forsake her For loue (O wofull loue that breeds Gods hate) To woo a Pagan wench, with mind to take her, And to such sinne this loue did him intise, He would haue kild his kinsman once or twise. 65 For this same cause doth mightie God permit Him mad to runne, with belly bare and breast, And so to daze his reason and his wit, He knowes not others, and himselfe knowes least: So in times past our Lord did deeme it fit, To turne the king of Babel to a beast, In which estate he seu'n whole yeares did passe, And like an oxe did feed on hay and grasse. 66 But for the Palladins offence is not So great as was the King of Babels crime, The mightie Lord of mercie doth allot Vnto his punishment a shorter time, Twelue weeks in all he must remaine a sot, And for this cause you sufferd were to clime To this high place, that here you may be tought How to his wits Orlando may be brought. 67 Here you shall learne to worke the feate I warrant, But yet before you can be fully sped, Of this your great, but not forethought on arrant, You must with me a more strange way be led, Vp to the Planet,The Moons the lowest Planet. that of all starrs errant Is nearest vs, when she comes ouer head, Then will I bring you where the medcine lies, That you must haue to make Orlando wise. 68 Thus all that day they spent in diuers talke, With solace great, as neuer wanteth there, But when the Sunne began this earth to balke, And passe into the tother hemispheare, Then they prepard to fetch a further walke, And straight the firie charret that did beare Elias, when he vp to heau'n was carrid, Was ready in a trice, and for them tarrid. 69 Foure horses fierce, as red as flaming fire, Th'Apostle doth into the charret set, Which when he framed had to his desire, Astolfo in the carre by him he set, Then vp they went and still ascending hire, Aboue the firie region they did get, Whose nature so th' Apostle then did turne, That though they went through fire, they did not burne. 70 I say although the fire were wondrous hot, Yet in their passage they no heate did feele, So that it burnd them, nor offends them not; Thence to the Moon he guides the running wheele, The Moone was like a glasse all voyd of spot, Or like a peece of purely burnisht steele, And lookt, although to vs it seemd so small, Welnigh as big as earth and sea and all. 71 Here had Astolfo cause of double wonder, One, that that region seemeth there so wide, That vnto vs that are so farre asunder, Seems but a little circle, and beside, That to behold the ground that him lay vnder, A man had need to haue bin sharply eide, And bend his browes, and mark eu'n all they might, It seemd so small, now chiefly wanting light. 72 Twere infinite to tell what wondrous thingsThis  greeing  English  we vses, th wits are be the M they have  vp things  circle of the Moone. He saw, that passed ours not few degrees, What towns, what hils, what riuers and what springs, What dales, what pallaces, what goodly trees; But to be short, at last his guide him brings, Vnto a goodly valley, where he sees A mightie masse of things strangely confused, Things that on earth were lost, or were abused. 73 A store-house strange, that what on earth is lost, By fault, by time, by fortune, there is found, And like a merchandize is there ingrost,Looke in the Allegun. In stranger fort then I can well expound; Not speake I sole of wealth, or things of cost, In which blind fortunes powre doth most abound, But eu'n of things quite out of fortunes powre, Which wilfully we wast each day and houre. 74 The precious time that fooles mis-spend in play, The vaine attempts that neuer take effect, The vowes that sinners make, and neuer pay. The counsels wise that carelesse men neglect, The fond desires that leade vs oft astray, The praises that with pride the heart insect, And all we loose with folly and mis-spending, May there be found vnto this place ascending. 75 Now as Astolfo by those regions past, He asked many questions of his guide, And as he on tone side his eye did cast, A wondrous hill of bladders he espide;Pride of Pr and  their . And he was told they had bin in time past, The pompous crownes and scepters full of pride, Of monarks of Assiria, and of Greece, Of which now scantly there is left a peece. 76 He saw great store of baited hookes with gold,Gifts gives Princes  of re. And those were gifts that foolish men prefard, To giue to Princes couetous and old, With fondest hope of future vaine reward: Then were there ropes all in sweet garlands rold, And those were all false flatteries he hard, Then heard he crickets songs like to the verses, The seruant in his masters praise reherses. 77 There did he see fond loues, that men pursew, To looke like golden giues with stones all set, Then things like Eagles talents he did vew, words. Those offices that fauorites do get: Then saw he bellows large that much wind blew, Large promises that Lords make, and forget,Great Vnto their Ganimeds in flowre of youth, But after nought but beggery enfewth.
78 He saw great Cities seated in faire places, and . That ouerthrowne quite topsie turuie stood, He askt and learnd, the cause of their defaces Was treason, that doth neuer turne to good: He saw fowle serpents, with faire womens faces, Of coyners and of thieues the cursed brood, He saw fine glasses,courturs. all in peeces broken, Of seruice lost in court, a wofull token. 79 Of mingled broth he saw a mightie masse, That to no vse, all spilt on ground did lye, He askt his teacher, and he heard it was, The frutlesse almes that men giue when they dye: Then by a faire greene mountaine he did passe, That once smelt sweet, but now it stinks perdye, This was that gift (be't said without offence) That Constantin gaue Silvester long since. 80 Of birdlymd rodds, he saw no little store, gift in understood the  of Rome. h Constan∣  Pope ster, which ur now ursinnes.  because of . And these (O Ladyes sayre) your bewties be, I do omit ten thousand things and more Like vnto these, that there the Duke did see: For all that here is lost, there euermore Is kept, and thither in a trise doth flee, Howbeit more nor lesse there was no folly, For still that here with vs remaineth wholly. 81 He saw some of his owne lost time and deeds, But yet he knew them not to be his owne, They seemd to him disguisd in so strange weeds, Till his instructer made them better knowne: But last, the thing which no man thinks he needs, Yet each man needeth most, to him was showne, By name mans wit, which here we leese so fast, As that one substance, all the other past. 82 It seemd to be a body moyst and soft, And apt to mount by eu'ry exhalation, And when it hither mounted was aloft, It there was kept in pots of such a fashion,  kept , like oyl. As we call Iarrs, where oyle is kept in oft: The Duke beheld with no small admiration, The Iarrs of wit, amongst which one had writ, Vpon the side thereof, Orlandos wit. 83 This vessell bigger was then all the rest, And eu'ry vessell had ingrau'n with art, His name, that erst the wit therein possest: There of his owne the Duke did finde a part, And much he musd and much himselfe he blest, To see some names of men of great desart, That thinke they haue great store of wit, and bost it, And here it playne appeard they quite had lost it. 84 Some loose their wit with loue, some with ambition, Some running to the sea, great wealth to get, Some following Lords, and men of high condition, And some in sayre iewells rich and costly set: One hath desire to proue a rare Magicion, And some with Poetrie their wit forget, Another thinks to be an Alcumist, Till all be spent, and he his number mist. 85 Astolfo takes his owne before he goes, For so th'Euangelist did him permit; He set the vessels mouth but to his nose, And to his place, he snuft vp all his wit: Long after wise he liu'd as Turpin shows, Vntill one fault he after did commit, By name the loue of one fayre Northerne lasse,This is written in the fourth booke of the five Cantos, aided to Ariosto, which many thinke were  of his doing, and are veris vnperfect. Sent vp his wit vnto the place it was. 86 The vessell where Orlandos wit was closed, Astolfo tooke, and thence with him did beare, It was far heauier then he had supposed, So great a quantitie of wit was theare; But yet ere backe their iourny they disposed, The holy Prophet brought Astolfo, wheare A pallace (seldome seene by mortall man) Was plast, by which a thicke darke riuer ran. 87 Each roome therein was full of diuers fleesis, Of woll, of lint, of silke, or else of cotten, An aged woman spun the diuers peecis, Whole looke and hew, did shew her old and rotten:Simile. Not much vnlike vnto that labour, this is, By which in Sommer, new made silke is gotten, Where frō the silke worme his fine garment taking They reaue him of the clothes, of his owne making. 88 For first in one large roome a woman span Threds infinite, of diuers stuffe and hew; Another doth with all the speed she can, With other stuffe, the distanes still renew: The third in feature like, and pale and wan, Doth seuer faire from foule, and old from new: Now who be these? the Duke demands his guide. These be the fatall sisters, he replide; 89 The Parcees that the thred of life do spin, To mortall men, hence death and nature know When life must end, and when it must begin: Now, she that doth deuide them, and bestow The course from finer, and the thicke from thin, To that end works, that those that finest grow, For ornaments in Paradise may dwell, The course are curst to be consum'd in hell. 90 The Duke did further in the place behold, That when the threds were spent that had bin spun, Their names in brasse, in siluer, or in gold, Were wrote, and so into great heaps were donn; From which a man that seemed wondrous old, With whole loads of those names away did run, And turn'd againe as fast, the way he went, Nor neuer wearie was, not euer spent. 91 This aged man did hold his pase so swift, As though to runne, he onely had bin borne, Or had it giu'n him as a speciall gift; And in the lappet of his cloke were borne, The names of men, with which he made such shift; But now a while I craue to be forborne, For in the booke ensewing shalbe showed, How this old sire his cariage ill bestowed.
In this xxxiiij.Morall. booke, is to be noted in the tale of Lydia, the punishment of ingratitude, and what an odious sin the same is, in the sight of God and the world: also here are to be obserued many kinds of ingratitudes: as first of her despising of Alcestes long seruice, and approued good will, and secondly of the fathers ingrate recompences, for his great deserts by seruices in the wars, in which kind, it is not onely slanderous, but dangerous for a Prince to show a niggardly mind, and much more a contemptuous disposition. For though indeed no subiect (rightly considering his duety) ought to be mo∣ued by any ingratitude or iniury of his seueraigne, to forget his allegeance, yet seeing the nature of most men, and spe∣cially of braue and resolute minded men, is subiect to the passion of reuenge, and can hardly bridle the same when they shall find themselues (as they thinke) disdained, or their seruices not well regarded: therefore the wisest and safest way, and sittest for the Maiestie of a Prince, is to be liberall in rewarding, or at least thankfull in accepting such mens ser∣uices, and to consider that loue and bountie, are stronger bands of allegeance, then feare and dutie. Concerning the Historie of this booke,Historie. I have quoted some briefly by the side, and some is so plaine it expounds it selfe: onely I meane to ad a word or two what at I have read, concerning that which is here deliuered by mine author, about the Assumption of S. Iohn. First, how far the Scripture toucheth the same in the Gospell, euerie one knoweth, and how vpon the speech of our Sauiour (if I will be tary till I come, what is that to thee) it was noysed among the Disciples, that that Disciple should neuer see death. After this, as other of good credit haue deliuered, S. Iohn liued till he was an hundred yeare old, and then made himselfe a tombe, and entred thereinto aliue in presense of many, and on the sodaine, a light shone all about the place, and tooke the tombe for the time, quite from their sights: but the light being gone, the coffin was found empty, and the body of that Saint was no more seene vpon the earth. Whereupon it was certainly thoughtthat he was taken vp into heauen or Paradise, as Enoch and Elias were. Though this of S. Iohn be not recorded in the Scripture (nor no more is the assumption of the blessed virgin) and consequently, no man is bound to beleeue it, as an ar∣ticle of our Creed: Yet for mine owne opinion, I thinke it may be verie true, and I would in such cases beleeue a great deale more then I need, rather then anything lesse them I ought; for the tone (if it be a sinne) is surely pardonable, but the other doubtles is verye damnable. But I will briefly note the Allegorie that is meant hereby. First,Allegorie. whereas Astolfo washeth himselfe in a christ all well of cleare water, before he can fly vp to Paradise, it signi∣fieth, that after a man shall by remorse, and deuout consideration, weigh and behold the filthinesse of his sinne, he must then wash himselfe with the cleare spring water of prayer and repentance; and then and not before, be may mount to Paradise: which may here be vnderstood the comfortable peace of conscience, the onely true Paradise of this world. And whereas Astolfo commeth to S. Iohn (whose name signifieth grace) to receiue by his helpe Orlandos lost witts, for so it is set downe that that was the secret cause why he was guided thither, though vnawares to himselfe: thereby it is to be vnderstood, that no hope nor means is left for any man that hath lost his wit, with following the vanities and plea∣sures of this world (as diners carelesse christians do, in forgetting and omitting their duties to God, which is the verie highest point of follie,) I say there is no meane for them to recouer their wit againe, but onely by the helpe of this S. Iohn, that is this, grace of God, which can miraculously restore it againe. In the description of S. Iohns apparell (His gowne was white, but yet his Iacket red, The tone was snow, the tother lookr as blood, &c) by the red is signified charitie, which burneth with Zeale and seruentinesse of loue; by the white is meant virginitie and purenesse of life. All those things that he saines to have beene showed Astolfo in the circle of the Moone, are but similitudes, and like∣nesse of such follies, as he that will marke them well, shall easily discerne. The old man that ran away so fast with the Printed names of men, and flang them in the darke streame, figureth time, as in the next booke mine author verie artificially explanet bit: affirming in the person of S. Iohn, as if it were (as our prouerbe faith) as true as the Gospell, that the onely defence against the malice of time, is the pen of the learned: and that same out lasteth, and out styeth all things: as the well learned Gentleman, and my very good frend M. Henrie Constable wrate in his Sonnet to the now king of Scotland. Where others hooded with blind loue do fly A low on ground, with buzzard Cupids wings, A heau'nly loue from loue to loue thee brings, And makes thy Muse to mount aboue the sky. Young Muses be not woont to fly so hy, Age taught by time, such sober dittie sings, But thy youth flyes from loue of youthfull things, And so the wings of time doth ouerfly. Thus thou disdainst all wordly wings as slow, Because thy Muse with Angels wings doth leaue Times wings behind, and Cupids wings below, But take thou heed, least Fames wings thee deceaue, With all thy speed from Fame thou canst not slee. But more thou flees, the more it followes thee. For the punishment of Lidy as ingratitude by hanging in the eternall smoke,Allusion. makes me call to minde a story of the Em∣perour Seuerus as I remember, who hearing that a fauorite of his accustomed to promise many men great furtherancein their suits, by his favour with the Prince, and having taken their reward, his promise vanished into the aire like a va∣pour, and left the poore suters nothing but his vaine breathed words: the iust Emperour caused him to be smothered to death with smoke, saying Fumo percat, qnifumum vendidit. Let sume him choake, that selleth smoke. Here end the annotations vpon the xxxiiij. booke.
THE XXXV. BOOE. THE ARGVMENT. Saint Iohn the praise of writers doth recount: Bradamant doth with good successe recouer The prisners, that were tane by Rodomount: This done, she sends a challenge to her louer, And sends withall an horse of good account, Which makes Rogero long in doubt to houer; The while, before his face the fall he saw, Of Serpentine, Grandonio, and Ferraw. 1 FAire mistresse who for me to heau'n shall fly, To bring again frō thence my wandring wit, Which I still loose, since from that piercing ey, The dart came forth that first my heart did hit? Nor of my losse, at al com∣plaine would I. Might I but keepe that which remaineth yet, But if it still decrease, within short space, I doubt I shall be in Orlandos case. 2 Yet well I wot where to recouer mine, Though not in Paradise nor Cynthias spheare, Yet doubtlesse in a place no lesse diuine, In that sweet face of yours, in that faire heare, That rubie lip, in those two starlike cyne, There is my wit, I know it wanders there; And with my lips, if you would giue me leaue, I there would search, I thence would it receaue, 3 But to returne vnto that English Prince, Whom (if you do remember) with S. Iohn, By vgly streame I left a little since, The fatall sister spinners looking on, Who sometime do prolong, and sometime mince Our threed of life, I say he saw anon, Among a million more,The golden fleece one passing fleece, More sine then that that Iason brought to Greece. 4 So shone the thred that from that fleece out came, No gold, nor Orient perle could looke so bright, Astolfo much desir'd to know his name, And time of birth, that to that thred had right. Straightways this answer vnto him doth frame, He that the darke Apocalips did write; The number of his birth shall noted be, When twentie shalbe tane from M and D. 5 And as the fleece which here so faire doth show, In finest substance pasteth all the rest; So shall the person that the same doth ow, Make that same age in which be liueth, blest, For all the gifts that nature can bestow, Or with which studie can a man inuest, Shall powred be on him with large proportion, Assigned from aboue, to be his portion. 6 There stands (said he) neare to the bankes of Poe,Perr, A village now of small or none account, Whose moorish seat the streame doth ouerflow, But in that time that I to you recount, Vnto a Citie of such state shall grow, As all the neighbour townes it shall surmount; Nor sole in walls, and buildings fayre and stately, But in good arts of old found out, or lately. 7 Nor thinke you this preferment to proceed, By peraduenture, or as it were by chance, But eu'n as a thing by God himselfe decreed, For one mans sake, his natiue soile t'aduance; As still we see those that good fruits will breed,Simile. Do grasse the stocke, and prune & pike the branch, Or as the goldsmith pollisheth the mettell,Simile. In which he minds a gemme of price to settell.
8 For nere shall soule that shall to earth descend, With mortall garment be more comely clad, Neuer did God a soule from hence downe send, That more choise gifts, nor more rare vertues had Then this, which vnto him he doth intend, That shall his country and his friends make glad, Hippolito of Est his name shall be, To whom the heau'ns such fauours do decree. 9 For all those vertues great that wonted are, To set forth diuers, diuersly deuided, Shall ioyned be in this same man most rare, Vnto such place, by heau'ns appointment guided; Maintaind shall studies be by his great care, All quarrels cease, and broyls shall be decided, Whose vertues all, if I to tell prolong, Orlando should expect his wit too long. 10 Thus much the follower of Iesus spake, The while Astolfo those same webs doth vew, From whence our liues end and beginning take: One spun, one cut, the third doth stuffe renew. Then came they to the foule and lothsome lake, Darke, deepe and mirie, of a deadly hew, Where was the aged man, that neuer stinted To carry bundels of the names imprinted. 11 This was the man, whom (as I told before) Both vse and nature so swift pac't had made, He neuer rested, but ranne euermore, And with his running he did vse this trade; A heape of names within his cloke he bore, And in the riuer did them all vnlade; Or (plaine to speake) away he cast them all Into this streame, which Lethee we do call. 12 This prodigall old wretch no sooner came Vnto this cursed riuers barren banke, But despratly, without all feare of blame, Or caring to deserue reward or thanke, He hurld therein full many a precious name, Where millions soone into the bottome sanke, And scant in eu'ry thousand one was found, That was not in the gulfe quite lost and drownd. 13 Yet all about great store of birds there flew, As vultures carren crowes, and chattring pies, And many more of sundry kinds and hew, That made leud harmonie with their lowd cries: These, when the carelesse wretch the tresor threw Into that streame, did all they could deuise, What with their talents some, and some with beake To saue some names, but find themselues too weake. 14 For euer as they sought themselues to raise, To beare away those names of great renowne, The weight of them so heauie downeward wayes, They in the stream were driu'n to cast them downe, Onely two swans sustaind so great a praise, In spite of him that sought them all to drowne, These two do still take vp whose names they list, And bare them safe away, and neuer mist. 15 Sometime all vnder that soule lake they diued, And tooke vp some that were with water couered, And those that seemd condemned, they repriued, And often, as about the banke they houered, They caught them ere they to the streame arriued: Then went they with the names they had recouered, Vp to a hill that stood the water nigh, On which a stately Church was built on high. 16 This place is sacred to immortall fame. And euermore a Nymph stands at the gate, And took the names, wherwith the two swans came, (Whether they early come, or whether late) Then all about the Church she hangd the same, Before the sacred image, in such rate, As they might then well be assur'd for euer, Spite of that wretch in safetie to perseuer. 17 Astolfo had a great desire to knowThe exposition of the former Allegoris. The mysteries most high, and hidden sence Of that old man, that still ran to and fro, And precious things so leudly did dispence, And of the birds, and of the nymph also, That from the swans tooke names, and bare them And therefore asked what they signified, thence, To whom the man of God thus wise replied: 18 Know first (said he) there cannot wag a straw Below on earth, but that the signe is here; And each small act doth correspondence draw, Although in other shew it doth appeare: That aged man, that running erst you saw, And neuer baits, nor resteth all the yeare, To worke the like effects aboue is bound, As time doth worke below vpon the ground. 19 When here the fatall threed of life is spun, Then doth below the life of man decline, There same, and here their names in mettall done, Would make them both immortall and diuine, Saue here this aged sire, that so doth runne, And there below, time doth thereat repine, He here flings all the names into a puddle, Time there doth all in darke obliuion huddle. 20 And eu'n as here Rau'ns, Vultures, Pies and Crowes, And such like birds, endeuour all they may, To saue those names that worthiest they suppose, But wanting strength, the names stil downward sway: So there promooters, ruffins, bawds, and those That can the parasites and iesters play, That by great Lords are oft more made of, then The true and plaine, and vertuous minded men. 21 And these (forsooth) good fellowes call you must, Because they learne like Asle and Porke to be,The Asse with beare any thing, the Porke ed himselfe . But when their Lords be layd full low in dust, Their line of life cut off by sisters three, Yea oft by their owne surfetting and lust, Then these same goodly squires of base degree, In their vile mouths, their names beare vp and downe A while, and after in obliuion drowne.
22 But as the swans that here still flying are, With written names vnto the sacred port, So there Historians learnd, and Poets rare, Prescrue them in cleare fame and good report; O happie Princes, whose foresight and care Can win the loue of writers in such sort, As Cesar did, so as you need not dread, The lake of Lethe after ye be dead. 23 But surely God their reason so doth blind, And takes from them all sence of wit and skill, That when their rooms on earth they haue resignd, Death both their bodies and their fames might kill; Where at the least some fame would stay behind, (Admit in part their manners were but ill) Had they but wit to get some grace with Cirra,Caatount on  of Par   for  Muses. Their fame should sweeter smel then nard or mirrha. 24 Perhaps Aencas was not so deuout, Nor Hector nor Achilles were so braue, But thousands haue as honest been and stout, And worthy by desert more praise to haue; But those faire lands and castles out of doubt, That their successors vnto writers gaue, Made them so famous ouer forren lands, Canonizd by the Poets sacred hands. 25 Augustus Cesar was not such a saint, As Virgil maketh him by his description, His loue of learning seus th that complaint, That men might iustly make of his proscription; Nor had the shame that Neros name doth taint, Confirmd now by a thousand yeares prescription, Bene as it is, if he had had the wit, To haue bene franke to such as Poems writ. 26 Ilind Homer writes how Agamemnon fought, And wan at last great Troy that long resisted; And how Penelope, though greatly sought By many suters, yet in faith persisted: Yet sure (for ought you know) he might haue taught The contrary to this if he had listed, That Troy preuaild, that Greeks were conquerd cleane, And that Penelope was but a queane. 27 On tother side, we see Queene Didos name, That worthy was indeed to be commended, Is subiect now to slaunder and to shame, Because that she by Virgil is not frended. But on this point I now more tedious am, Then I was ware, or then I had intended, For I loue writers well, and would not wrong them, And I my selfe do count my selfe among them. 28 I wrate a volume of my masters praise, For which to me he hath not bin vngrate, But to this height of honour me doth raise, Where (as you see) I hue in happie state; I pitie those that in these later dayes Do write, when bountie hath shut vp her gate, Where day and night in vaine good writers knocke, And for their labours oft haue but a mocke. 29 So as indeed this reason is the chiefe, That wits decay, because they want their hire,Sentence. For where no succour is, nor no reliefe, The very beasts will from such place retire. Thus said the saint,This is  such as  a  and (as it were with griefe Of such offence) his eyes did flame like fire, But turning to the Duke with sober laster, He pacifide himselfe a little after. 30 But here I leaue Astolfo safe and sound With holy Iohn,He  Astolfo  38 boo.  staffe. for forthwith leape must I, As far as from the Moone vnto the ground, My wings would faile it stil I soard so hie: Now come I vnto her that had the wound, That euer smarting wound of iealousie, I told she had,Canto xx staffe 69. when last of her I spoke, Vnhorst three kings with goldelaunces stroke. 31 And how she lay all at a castle sad, Although in vaine she sought her griefe to smother, How at that place she perfect knowledge had, That Agramant was foyled by her brother, And that to flie to Arlie he was glad, With good Rogero and with many other; This made her vnto Prouence then to hast, Because she heard that Charles pursude him fast. 32 Now vnto Prouence onward as she went, A comely damsell in her way she vewd, Who though she lookt like one that did lament, Yet could not griefe her comely grace exclude; This dame had traueld long, with this intent, To find some knight that from the Pagan ude, (Fierce Rodomont, that prisner held her louer) By force of armes againe might him recouer. 33 Now when the comfortlesse dame Bradamant Had met a dame as comfortlesse as she, Such simpathie she felt of griefe, that scant She kept in teares, so sad a sight to see, She askt her what misfortune or what want, Of her sad plight, vnworthy cause might be: Faire Fiordeliege that for a knight did hold her, The circumstance of all the matter told her. 34 And in most rufull sort she did recount, Both of the tombe and bridge the wofull storie, And how the cruell Pagan Rodomount Had taken him, for whom she was so sorie, Not that he could in value him surmount, That for his value had obtaind much glorie, But that the Pagan not to strength did trust, But to a bridge and vantages vniust. 35 Wherefore most noble minded knight (said she) If such you be, as by your speech I gueste, Helpe my deare spouse from bondage vile to free, And plague the Pagan that doth him oppresse; Or if you cannot so, yet counsell me, Where I may find some ayd for my distresse, Some knight so stout of heart, and strong of hand, As may this cruell Sarazen withstand.
36 So shall you do a braue and noble deed, That wandring knights, do think they ought of due, So might you ayd a worthy man indeed. And one in loue most faithfull and most true: As for his other praise, it is no need For me to tell mine owne griefes to renue, Sith well I know, they plainly are appearing, To all that haue their sense of sight and hearing. 37 The worthie Dame, that thirsted still for praise, Agrees to take this hard exploit in hand, As one that readie was at all aslayes, On horse, on foote, by water or by land: For either thus, she shall her glorie raise, If so she shall the Pagans force withstand, Or die she shall, which danger lesse doth moue her, Because she thinks Rogero doth not loue her. 38 And thus she sayd, most louely louing Dame, Gladly I shall my vtmost forces proue, To succour one that merits so great same, Yet of his praises chiefly me doth moue, Because you giue him such a noble name, That he is true and faithfull in his loue: Which sith you speake by triall, I must weene so, Else I durst sweare no man aliue had beene so. 39 These last words ending with a scalding sigh, A sigh that came indeed from grieuous thought, Then on they went, till they approched nigh The parlous bridge, that Rodomont had wrought: And straight the watch descride them from on high, And blew a horne, by which the Pagan thought, That trauellers were come the bridge to passe, Came out all armed, as his manner was. 40 But when that he one all in armour saw, He greets them lowd with this lewd salutation: Ho stay, and er you passe obserue this law, Vnto this tombe, humbly to make oblation, Of horse and armes, with feare and reu'rent aw: Else with this speare expect sharpe castigation. She, that before had heard of Isbels deth, And of this tombe, thus stoutly to him seth. 41 Ah damned wretch, why should the innocent, Indure the penance of thy grieuous guilt? Thy selfe shouldst die, or suffer punishment, That killedst her, if please her ghost thou wilt: Her soule (vpon my soule) would be content, If by my hand thy guiltie blood were spilt, More then with all the armors, men, and horses, That thou dost win by thy vnlawfull forces. 42 And so much more it will accepted be To her, if thou by my right hand mayst die, Because I am a woman as was she, And only come on thee my force to trie: But let vs first vpon these points agree, That if you hap to vanquish me, then I Shall suffer at your hands, so and no more, Then other prisoners haue done before. 43 But if I vanquish you (as sure I trust) Then I will haue the spoile of all the rest, And make your horse, and arms, a guist more iust, Vpon the tombe of her for euer blest: And then withall, to me you promise must, That all your prisners straight shall be releast. When thus the Dame her mind had signified, Thus the fierce Turke mildly to her replied. 44 Faire Dame, you seeme to me to speake but reason, And thereto I my franke assent affoord: But true it is, that I for feare of treason, My prisners all, haue sent from hence aboord, So as I cannot free them at this season, But firmely here to you I passe my word, If you foile me, of which there is small reobertie, I will send word to set them all at libertie. 45 But if I conquer you, as sure I shall, (For so it is most likely, and most meet) I will not hang your armour on the wall, Nor send you hence a prisner in my fleet, I will remit to you my conquest all. For that faire faces sake, and looke so sweet; Suffise it that this curtesie may moue thee, Where now thou seemst to hate me, thé to loue me. 46 Be not (faire Dame) in your owne strength be guyld, I offer not such grace to eu'rie stranger, For I am strong; at this the damsell smyld, But such a smyle, as shewd not mirth, but anger; And whether courage had all feare exyld, Or that dispaire made her to doubt no danger; She spurd her horse, nor other answer made him, But with her speare in rest she doth inuade him. 47 This so did moue the cruell Rodomount, Vpon his horse he doth himselfe aduance, Not making doubt, but that he would dismount, Out of her seat, the noble Dame of France; But he was quite deceiu'd of his account, No sooner was he toucht with Goldelance, But eu'n as if of strength he had bin reaued, Quite from the saddle backward he was heaued. 48 But yet the Dame her selfe in danger was, To fall into the streame so swift and fleet, By meanes the bridge so narrow was to passe, That hardly two at once thereon could meet; But Rabican, whose swiftnesse did surpasse All foure foot beasts, did firmely keepe his feet: Although so straight and narrow was the bridge, He was constraind to runne vpon the ridge. 49 Now when the Pagan lay thus ouerthrowne, She turnd to him, and sporting, thus she spake, Now sir (said she) I hope it may be knowne, Of vs two which the worser cause did take. But he, like one whose wits were not his owne, He either could or would no answer make; But still he stood, looking on ground and musing, Neither his foyle enying, nor excusing,
50 And hauing walkt some halfe a dozen paces, He suddenly cast all his armour off, And hurles it gainst the stones, and it defaces, That scant he left vnbroke one peece thereof: Determining after such foule disgaces, To hide himselfe, and go a great way of: But er he went, he graunted full commission, To free his prisners without intermission. 51 So thence he went, and what of him became,He comes not to  the later end of the last  where Ro∣gers killeth him. Or what he did, no notice cleare I haue, But onely this, that eu'n for verie shame, He long liu'd close, within a secret caue; The while his armes by that victorious Dame, Were hangd vp at the tombe, for triumph braue, The tother armes and furnitures among, That erst to Pagan Princes did belong. 52 But for all those that were from Christens wonne,Brandimart so to Monodants. She laid them vp, and did in safetie set, Among the which was Monodantes sonne, And Oliuero and stout Sansonet, Who late before with ill successe did runne, So that the Pagan did their armour get, And them themselues as prisners did conuay, Vnto Algirie, farre from thence away. 53 Among the rest that had their armour lost, Was Sacrapant, the fierce Circassen Prince, Who sought for Frontlet, to his paine and cost, And with the Pagan fought but little since; But being foyld, he quite forlooke that coast, Where men, of such disgrace might him conuince, And with great shame (but what could shame him boot He came on horsback, & went théce on foot. 54 Wherefore asham'd in such sort to returne, He minds to follow that his former quest Of her, whose loue long since his heart did burne, Although her loue he neuer yet possest: For still her froward mind did euer spurne, Against his earnest, and most iust request.He speaks no more of Sacra∣pa. Of her returne he late had heard the news, (I know not how) but now he her pursews. 55 And let him her pursue, for I proceed, Of noble Bradamantes acts to tell, Who hauing done this braue and worthie deed, To free the passage where so many fell, She wrate it, so as eu'rie one might reed, How all the circumstance thereof befell; Which hauing done, then she demands to know, Which way Dame Fiordeliege did mind to go. 56 Who straight her purpose, vnto her vnfolding, Told her, to passe the sea by ship she∣ment, At Arly, least the Turke his word not holding, Might keepe her spouse too long in prison pent: Then shall you (saith the Dame) be more beholding To me, for sure (said she) tis mine intent, Vnto that towne to guard you in your passage, So you will do for me, but one embassage. 57 And that withall, you me this grace affoord, To giue Rogero this same horse from me, And say an vnknowne champion sends him word, To challenge him that all the world may see He hath bin false of promise and of word; Of which, our combat shall the triall be: And tell him plainly there is no deniall, But that by challenge I will make this triall. 58 This say, and say no more; and if he aske My name, then tell him plaine you may not tell; The while mine armes shall serue me for a maske, This I desire, do ts and so farewell; This is (said Fior ege) an easie taske From you, that haue of me deseru'd so well, As binds me both to this that you demand me, And to what euer else you would command me. 59 This said, she takes the bridle in her hand, And with her leads Frontino on the way, Vntill they both came to the salt sea sand, That next vnto the towne of Arly lay; But Fiordeliege goes to the towne by land, And Bradamant doth in the suburbs stay, To th'end she may conuenient respite giue her, To him the horse, and message to deliuer. 60 Who when the bridge and gate she quite had past, She prayeth one of those that kept the ward, To bring her to Rogero in great hast, And through the towne of curtsie her to guard This done, she to Rogero came at last, And did her message with most due regard, And gaue Frontino, and then went her way, Nor would she once to heare his answer stay. 61 Rogero standeth still all in a muse, The messenger and message so beguile him, He wonders who it is, that both doth vse Such curtesie, and yet withall reuile him, He thinks the partie doth him much abuse, With fowlest blot of breach of word to file him: And of all others, least of all he thought, That Bradamant of him the combat sought. 62 To thinke it Rodomont he was inclind, But yet it could not sinke into his reach, Why of a sudden he should be so kind, And wherein he could blame his promise breach; And saue with him, he cannot call to mind, With whom he had of frendship any breach: The while the Ladie with a stately scorne, In token of defiance, blew her horne. 63 Straightwayes the news to Agramant doth fly, That one without did challenge some within, And Serpentine, that then by chance was by, Askt leaue to fight, with sured hope to win, And swears the knight should yeeld, or else should by And then the people flockt both thicke and thin, And stood vpon the walls, with young and old, Betweene these two the combat to behold.
64 Out Serpentino came in braue array, And brauely with his speare in rest he ran, But at the first encounter downe he lay, The horse runnes leere away without the man, But noble Bradamant, the horse doth stay, And backe restore: then finely as she can, She prayes him to king Agramant to speake, To send a stronger knight, sith he was weake. 65 The mightie kings of Affricke and of Spaine, That from the wall the courteous act did vew, From praising of the same could notrefraine, Though none of them, thereof the author knew; Now Serpentino backe returnd againe, And to his Prince he told his message trew, How that same champion did desire to fight, With some more stout and more renowned knight. 66 And then Grandonio fierce of Volaterne, The proudest knight that Spaine long time had bred Obtaind next place, and with a visage sterne, And threatning voice thus to the damsell sed: Your curtsie small reward for you shall earne; For either here in fight you must be ded, Or at the least, I will you prisner bring, Vnto Marsilio, of great Spaine the king. 67 Well (answerd she) keepe these your threats in store, Your villany my curtfie shall not let, But that ile frendly monish you before, That backe againe vnto your king you get, Ere that your all, may make your body sore; And say that I desired to haue met, A man indeed of courage, and of worth, And not your selfe, not him that last cameforth. 68 This her replie so mild, and yet so bitter; The Pagan with more furie did enflame; With speare then speech, he thought an answer fitter And toward her in full carreer he came, Intending sure, some deadly blow to hit her; But she that was accustomd to this game, Bare well his blow, and with her Goldélance, She taught him how the somerlaut to dance.sout is a  tha is to se to cast selues for∣ the heels their head. 69 But yet his horse, that loose about did runne, She brought him backe, and thus to him she sayd, Loe sir, you had bin better to haue donne My message, when I curteouslie you prayd; Yet here I will release my prisner wonne, So you will tell your king that I haue stayd, To combat with a man in fight well seene, And not with nouices, of skill so greene. 70 The lookers on that sure thought nothing lesse, Then that a virgin so could guide a speare, With murmurings their wonder great expresse; Still ayming with surmises who it were; Some Brandimart, and some Renaldo guesse, Or others whom the Turks had cause to seare, But most they would Orlando haue suspected, Saue they had heard his sences were distracted. 71 Next stout Ferraw desir'd to haue the place, Not that he hop't the conquest to haue wonne, But that these knights may haue the lesse disgrace, If I (quoth he) shall do as they haue donne: A strong swift horse he takes, and sure of pace, Well made to beare the shocke, and free to runne, The choisest of an hundred that he kept, And thus all arm'd vpon the beast he lept. 72 Against the femall champion forth he goes, And first they interchangeably salute, Please it you (said the Ladie) to disclose Your name to me? that shall be all my sute: He (that what longs to ciuill manners knowes,) To satisfie her therein was not mute, And I refuse you not, then said the tother, Although I rather would haue had another. 73 Whom? (quoth Ferraw) Rogero (she replyed) And scarse she fully could bring forth his name, But that a blush with rosie colour dyed Her louely cheekes, with secret honest shame: (Further she addeth) him whole vallew tryed, And so much praysd, was cause I hither came; None else I seeke, nor for none else care I, Onely his manhood I desire to try. 74 She spake the word in plaine and simple sence, Which some perhaps will subtlie wrest awry, Well (said Ferraw) yet now ere I go hence, Let me with you haue leaue on ecourse to try; To see if I can make no more defence, Then those whom last you made one arth to ly, If I fall as did they, then I will send, That gentle knight, that may our errour mend. 75 Her beauer open was while they confard, At which, when her the Spaniard well had vewed, And markt her bewtie worthy of regard, He was alreadie more then halfe subdewed: He thought an Angell of the heau'nly guard, Could not with greater bewtie be endewed; Against her speare, what fence can he deuise, That is alreadie conquerd with her eyes? 76 Now tooke they field, and ran with all their force, And now Ferraw is from his saddle borne, The damsell doth of curtsie stay his horse, The Spaniard lyeth like a man forlorne; But backe he must vnto the king perforce, Nor true to do his message doth he scorne; He tels Rogero plaine before them all, How this same knight onely for him doth call. 77 Rogero who it is yet little knowing, In hast to make him readie doth begin, A setled hope of conquest plainly showing, Willing to fight, with mind assur'd to win: As for their foyles, and their fowle ouerthrowing, That went before, he weighd them not a pin; But how they met, how kindly him she serued, Vnto the booke ensuing is reserued.
In the beginning of thu booke,Morall. after the excessiue prayses of Hippolito, he returnes to the former matter of the force of time, the Allegorie whereof I will continue in this place: onely for the Morall, I will touch two speciall faults, which mine authour reproues in men of the better sort, one is the great account they make of Parasites, Promoters, and Iesters, and such like; for their basenes and filthines, likened to the asse anporke: and other is their venerie and drunkenes, which he noteth by these words, anzi venere e bacco: I Englsh it, by their owne surffeting and lust; because surfeting contains both kinds of excesse in meat and drinke. And surely I must grant, that our Realme of England hath bin noted sorriot in meats, many yeares since, and not without cause (though not alone) for Plato found the like fault with Italie in his time. but for this other vice of drinking, which, with the name of a health, ouerthrowes all health and sobrietie, it is nor growne as vsuall and more dious then the tother, and I doubt it will not so easily be driuen out, as it is sodainly crept in. I haue beard a prettie tale not impertinent to this matter, of a Gentleman that had his sonne at the Vniuersitie, who being be like of so good a conscience (as most of vs are in that kind) to take but a little for his money, and growing (as it seemed) more in yeares, then either in learning, or good manners: his tutor to discharge his dutie, sent his father word, how he misdoubted the young mans well doing, because he found him giuen to dycing and gaming: the father was sorry, but yet answered, that he hoped when his sonne grew to haue more wit, he would leaue that, or at least not lose by it. The next news he heard of his amendment, was that now he began to follow women: this touched the father somwhat nea∣rer, yet he replied againe, that he made no question but he would leaue that ere long for his owne ease, and therefore yet he would not dispaire of him. The last newes he heard, was that he began to mend his former two faults; but that now he fell to bilbing and drinking. Out vpon the villan (said the father) I will surely disinherit him: for that fault the elder he waxeth, the more he wilbe subiect to it. Wherefore I conclude this Morall with this exhortation: that if wit cannot make men leaue play, nor their owne ease make theē eschew venerie; at least let the vglynes, openesse, and beastlines of this sin make them leaue it; which hath no defence, nor no praise: I say praise, because the Scripture saith, The wicked man i praised in his wickednes But I neuer heard praise ascribed to a drinker, but the well bearing of drinke; which might be a good praise for a brewers horse, or perhaps a brewers man, but sure it is a small bost for a Gentleman. Augustus Caesar was not such a Saint, &c. Of Augustus Caesars faults both Suetonius,Historie. and Plutarke haue written at large, and I am loth to renew the memo∣rie of them, except I did also recite his many vertues, which made large recompence for his few vices: sufficeth it to af∣firme that which mine author saith, that his bountie and loue to learned men couered his faults: and of his bountie, among other things witnesseth the saire Pallace he gaue Virgil, with a goodly Mannor, or rather indeed territorie, in the field called Ager Cremonensis, neare Mantua. Whereas it is said, in the person of S. Iohn. But yet (for ought you know) he might haue taught The contrarie to this,Staffe. 26. if he had listed, That Troy preuayld, that Greeks were conquerd cleane, And that Penelope was but a queane. True it is that one Dion an Historiographer, writeth to that effect, and inforceth verie far to proue, that the Greeks had the worse end of the staffe, and onely that Homer fauoring the Greeks, wrate the contrary. Further some haue carped at Penelopes chastitie (for what may not a mallicious with carpe at?) and they say Homer himselfe insinuateth somewhat of her lightnesse; where he saith in his Odisseas, that she obiected vnto her suters that none of them could shoot so strong a shoot as her husband: but howsoeuer it is, for my part, seeing it hath beene receiued so long for a truth, that Penelope was a chast and vertuous wife, I will not take vpon me (by S. Iohn) to write the contrarie, though mine authour make S. Iohn to cast a doubt of it. Of the Allegorie I haue not much to say, because mine authour himselfe expounds it so plainly; onely I'pray you mark how rightly and with what decorum,Allegorie. he likens Promotors, and Parasites, to vultures, carren crowes, and chattring pyes, as likewise in the beginning of the 34 booke, he likeneth them to Harpias. The sustenance that should for food haue serued, For widowes poore, and orphanes innocent, These filthie monsters do consume and wast it, Olt at one meale, before the owners tast it: As if one would say, the gifts and rewards that belong to old seruitours, and well deseruing souldiers, are catched at the volise by these rauenou, birds, and neuer come to the ground, or if they do, they make so false a bound, that a man shall make a fault in offring at them, and many times hazard both game and set for them. Bradamant a woman ouercomming Rodomont a most terrible Turke,Allusion. alludes to the notable History of Iudith, that cut off Holofernes head: which story, the Lord Du Bertas, and rare French Poet, continued into an excellent Poem in French, and the same is translated into a verie good and sweet English verse, by one M. Thomas Hudson, which worke I the rather mention, because in the 6. booke of the vice of surfetting, which I reproued afore in the Morall, it is not ably described and with all sharply rebuked as followeth: O plague, O poyson to the warriour state, Thou makst the noble hearts effeminate, While Rome was rulde by Curioes and Fabrices, Who fed on rootes, and fought not for delices, And when the onely Cresson was the food, Most delicate to Persia, then they stood, &c. Here end the annotations vpon the xxxv. booke.
THE XXXVI. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Duke Ammons daughter with reuenge full hart, Doth meet Marfisa, minding her to kill, Untill the battels ioynd on either part, And so did sunder them against their will: Bradamant and Rogero talke apart: Marfisa gets of both great euill will, By troubling them, but when she knew her brother, She reconciled is to tone and tother. 1 TIs meete a gentle heartAgainst cruelty should euer show, By curtesie the fruites of true gentilitie, Which will by practise to an habite grow, And make men do ye same with great facilitie: Likewise ye dunghil blood a man shall know, By churlish parts and acts of inciuilitie, Whose nature apt to take each lewd infection, Custome confirmes,Sentence. and makes ill in perfection. 2 Of courteous acts, old stories he that reeds, In auncient times shall find there hath bene store, But in our dayes of bloudy cruell deeds, Is greater plentie then hath bene before; For charitie brings forth but barren seeds, And hatred still is sowd in so great store, That when the fruits of both come to be reaped, The tone is scarce, the tother ouer heaped. 3 What fierce Barbarian Tartar, Moore or Turke, Could vse more crueltie then now of late,Looke in the Hi∣story of this book concerning this crueltie he com∣plaines of. In Latin land Venetian force did worke? Not by consent of the wise men of state, But by the filthy nature that did lurke In wicked hirelings, and a hidden hate; I speake not of the damage and defaces, They did by fire in all our pleasant places. 4 Though that reuenge was foule and to to cruell, And chiefe against Hippolito, who late, When Caesar sieged Padoa, as they knew well, And brought it to low ebbe and wofull state, He both withdrew the matter all and fewell, And quencht the fires kindled by deadly hate, Preseruing many a Church and many a village, By his rare clemencie from fire and pillage. 5 Not those I meane, nor many actions more, That cannot be excused or defended, But such an act as stones might weepe therefore, As oft as it is talkt of or reinembred: Then when my Lord his houshold sent before, There where his foes were secretly assembled, And left their vessels on the saltish land, While in ambushment close they lay on land. 6 As Hector and Aeneas did by fire Assault the Greekish fleet with hardie fight,The first  this bk  tenth staffe,   were   . So saw I two, whose hearts to fame aspire, (One Alexander, tother Hercles hight) Assault their foes, and driue them to retire, Vnto their trenches, nay within them quite, But one of them returned thence full hard,P  both  Cantel  carried  danger  his will,  be repr  crueltie th  b to  ing it  Isig D . The tother of returning cleane was bard. 7 For Ferussine scapt, Cantelmo stayd, O Duke of Sore, what sore griefe didst thou find, To see thy noble sonne lo soule betrayd, Among a thousand blades left there behind? His naked necke on side of gally layd, And chopped off: now surely in my mind, When that same bloudie stroke his necke smit off, You felt like stroke eu'n with the fight thereof.
8 Slauonian vile, where didst thou learne to know Such lawes of warre? within what Scuthian land, Vse men to kill a prisner taken so, That yeelds, and hath no weapon in his hand? Or was it such a grieuous sinne you trow, The foes of his deare country to withstand? Why hast thou Sunne, so long on this age shinde, That breeds of Atrews and Thiestes kinde? 9 Barbarian vile, that kild so sweet a youth, To satisfie thy rancor and thy rage, So rare a youth, as to confesse the truth, His match could not be found in this our age; Whose beautie might haue bred sufficient ruth, Fierce Poliphemus anger to asswage, But not fierce thee, more cruell and more fell, Then any monsters that in deserts dwell. 10 The valiant men did studie in time past, With clemencie their honors to increase, And hate no longer then the fight did last, With victorie reuenge did euer cease: So Bradamant, of whom I told you last, The prisners she had tane, did still release, And staid their horses when themselues were downe, And sent them backe againe into the towne. 11 And praid them but her challenge to deliuer, Vnto Rogero, and to call him out, Who meant with speare in rest her answer giue her, Vnto her challenge that she sent so stout. Now when the other knights were all togither, In presence of the kings, they cast a doubt, Who this should be, and then they aske Ferraw, That talkt with her, and her bare visage saw. 12 Sure (said Ferraw) it is not tone nor tother, Of those on whom before your thoughts were set; I tooke it first it was Renaldos brother, Who is in yeares a very youth as yet: But now I rather iudge it is another, For so much force is not in 'Richardet, I thinke it is his sister by her vsage, Who I haue heard is like him much in visage. 13 She hath ere this of value had great fame, Renaldo and the Palladins among, I must confesse I found it to my shame, Her, then her brothers to be farre more strong: Rogero, when he heard them her to name, Was guiltie straight that he had done her wrong, And blusht in countenance with bashfull grace, And oft his heart shot blood into his face. 14 Yea feare inuaded him, not feare of danger, For force he feared not of any wight, Of Turke nor Christen, countryman or stranger; The very cause of this his dolefull plight Was loue, for loue feares nothing more then anger, He doubts least she conceiu'd not of him right: Thus wauing thoughts his mind do both waies cary, If so he better were to go or tary. 15 The while Marfisa that was present there, And euer had a forward will to iust, Could now no longer from the same forbeare, Though seeing some before her lie on dust. For all their fals did breed in her no feare, So much in her great value she did trust, Wherefore least good Rogero might preuent her, First she rides forth, and in the lists doth enter. 16 And mounted on her horse came swiftly running, Vnto the place where Bradamant did stay, With panting heart to wait Rogeros comming, With mind to take him prisner if she may, She thinks how she might guide her staffe with cun∣ning, As with her stroke do him least hurt she may: Thus commeth out Marfisa, nothing fearing, Vpon her loftie crest the Phenix bearing. 17 Or that thereby to bost her strength she ment,The deuice of the Phenix may be applied either to pride or shaste∣sie. Of her rare strength, of which the tooke some pride, Or else thereby to note her chast intent She had, a warlike virgine still to bide; But Bradamant, who first to meet her went, And not to be Rogero now espide, Did aske her name, and by her name she knew That this was she that made her loue vntrew. 18 Or to say better, whom she did surmise, To be the sole withholder of her deare, Her whom she hates, gainst whom her blood doth rise, And minding now to make her buy it deare, With furie great and rage at her she flies; And that she may make all suspitions cleare, With couched speare she fiercely runneth on her, And meanes to kill her, or to die vpon her. 19 Marfisa was constrained with the stroke, To kisse the ground as those before her had, Which to such rage her courage did prouoke, That with disdaine she seemd as one halfe mad; Nor knowing how so great a foile to cloke, She drawes her sword with an intention bad, But Bradamant cry'th out with lostie hart, What dost thou traitor? thou my prisner art. 20 And though I vsed curtsie to the rest, To vse it vnto thee I am not tide, Whosemind (as I haue heard) is eu'n a nest, Wherein is bred all villanie and pride: Looke how great waters rage and do not rest,Simile. When as the winds do striue against the tide, So rag'd Marfisa rather more then lesse, And for meere spite could not a word expresse. 21 But hurles about her blade with all her force, Not caring what she strikes, nor where, nor how, Vpon the horseman or vpon the horse, Her rage in her no reason did allow: And Bradamant as void of all remorse, With mind to breake that, that refuld to bow, Ranne at her with the speare that would not misse, And made her once againe the ground to kisse.
22 But once againe vpon her feet she getteth, And with her sword reuengement she intends, Each fall she hath, her furie sharper whetteth, Yet still she fals, and can haue none amends, Nor goldelance his wonted force forgetteth, For all it touches, to the ground it sends; Had not the speare bene (as it was) inchaunted, It could not so Marfisas force haue daunted. 23 Some of our men were hither come the while, I meane some of the Christen host, that lay Encamped neare the towne within a mile, So as the wals of Arlie see they may, And thinking (for her sex did them beguile) Some knight of theirs maintaind so great a fray, They thither came with will and with delight, To see so fierce and well maintaind a fight. 24 Whom when as Agramant from far espide, And thinks they came to bring their knight assistance He thought it best in wisedome to prouide, If they should offer force to make resistance; Wherefore he pointed some that of their side, May stand from that same place a little distance, Of this last crew Rogero was the first, With whom the damsell so to fight did thirst. 25 And seeing now how fierce the combat gro'th, Betwixt these two, to whom he wisht none ill, Although in sundry kinds he fauord both, For tone was loue, the tother bare good will; To suffer them to fight he was full loth, Although for honors sake he must be still, Else sure he could haue found it in his hart, To step betweene them, and the fray to part. 26 But they that with him from the citie came, And saw the Christen champion was so strong, Stept in betwixt her and the tother dame, And so withdrew Marfisa them among, Which act the other Christens did inflame, So that with mind to venge so foule a wrong, They stept in to: thus both sides cride alarme, And soone the skirmish waxed fresh and warme. 27 Such as before were armed, out do runne, They that vnarmed were, their armor take, And some runne out on foot, on horseback some, Each to his standerd doth himselfe betake; The diuers sound of trumpet and of drum, That doth the horsemen, this the footmen wake, But Bradamant is malcontent and wrath, To thinke Marfisa thus escaped hath. 28 Then lookt she wishly all about the place, To find out him that caused all her care, At last she knew him though not by his face, Yet by the argent agle that he bare, And viewing well his person and good grace, His goodly stature and his feature rare, She rag'd to thinke another should possesse it, And in these secret words she doth expresse it. 29 Shall any other then that sweetlip kisse?Brad compnt  Poss  sp  N  qu spand. And I in loue thereof stil mourne and pine? Shall any other then possesse my blisse: Shalt thou anothers be if none of mine? No certes, rather then to suffer this, Thou by my hand shalt die, or I by thine, If in this life we shall be ioyned neuer, Death onely be the meane to ioyne vs euer. 30 Although that thou shouldst fortune me to kill, Thy death by right should pacifie my spirit, For lawes appoint, who guiltlesse blood do spill, Shall for reward the doome of death inherit; Yet still I shall sustaine the greater ill, For I should guiltlesse die, but thou by merit, I killing thee, kill one that hates me meerly, Thou killing me, kilst one that loues thee deerly. 31 Why shouldst not thou (my hand) be strong and bold, That by thy stroke his hard heart may be riuen? Who vnto me sharpe wounds and manifold, In time of loues sweet peace and truce hath giuen, And doth eu'a now with stonie heart behold The wofull state to which poore I am driuen, Heart now be stout to take thy iust reuenge, Let this one death thy thousand deaths auenge. 32 With that at him she runs, but first aloud, Defend thy selfe (Rogero false) she said,She  perp  as . And think not thou shalt scape with spoiles so proud, Of heart subdued of a silly maid. Rogero, who to her himselfe had vowd,Diss  perfia poss. And to offend her greatly was afraid, Held vp his gantlet vnto her in token, That he with her desired to haue spoken. 33 He would her wrath with kind words haue appeased, And shewd her how the cause he brake his day, Was that with grieuous wounds he lay diseased, Which forced him against his will to stay; But at this time she was so sore displeased, She would not hearken what he had to say, But with her speare in rest, on him she runneth, Who such vnkind encounter greatly shunneth. 34 But when he saw she was so rash and headie, And that her choler now so great did grow, That she was in her full careere alreadie, He puts his speare in rest, at least for show, And forward set, but when she was eu'n readie, Him to haue giu'n a sharpe disgracefull blow, (Or that it were that she eu'n then recanted, Or that her heart to harme him courage wanted) 35 She bare her launce alost quite ore his crest, And so of purpose that same course she mist, Yet so, as by the manner might be guest, She could haue hit him furer, had she list, And wrath and rage still boiling in her brest, To bend her force gainst him she did desist, But in that mood no little harme she workes, Vnto the other souldiers of the Turkes.
36 In little time, she with her gilded lance Had causd three hundred men on ground to lie, So that the conquest to the part of France, Was thought to haue bene gained sole thereby: Rogero seeks her out, and last by chance, He speakes to her, and faith, my deare I die, But I may talke with you, what haue I done Alas, that you my conference should shunne? 37 As when the Southerne wind with luke-warme blast,. Doth breath on hils where winter long had dwelt, Resolues the rocks of ice that hung so fast, And all the new made mounts of snow doth melt: So with this gentle prayre, though spoke in hast, The damsell such an inward motion felt, That sodainly her hardned heart did soften, As vnto women kind it chanceth often. 38 Yet answer made she none, but held her peace, She onely turned Rabican aside, And hasting to get out of that same prease, She beckned him that after her he ride: Thus went she thence, with mind inclind to peace, Vnto a valley, where on either side, A groue of Cypres so eu'n set was seene, As if they all of one false stampe had beene. 39 Amid this groue a goodly sepulture Was built, which these faire Cypres trees did shade, Of Porphyrie and marble white and pure, And faire engrau'n, to shew why it was made; But of the tombe she tooke no care nor cure, But there expected in the open glade, Vntill Rogero hauing made good hast, Approcht the wood and damsel at the last. 40 ut of Marfisa now I must you tell, Who hauing got by this her hor'e againe, Her loftie heart with rancor great did swell, To be reueng'd of this foule sufferd staine, And seeing where she went, as it befell, And how Rogero followd her amaine, She little thinketh that it is for loue, But rather that they may the combat prone. 41 Wherefore to follow them she thinks it best, So as she came almost as soone as they, But what a redious and vnwelcome guest She seemd to both, one soone coniecture may: Much sure it did the Dordon dame molest, Who sole to her Rogeros faults did lay, She deemd that to come thither nothing mou'd her, But that Rogero in ill sort had lou'd her. 42 And false, Rogero she againe doth name, And was it not enough false man, said she, That of thy falshood I should here by same, But that I with these eyes the same should see? But sith I find thou dost thy actions frame, To driue me with vnkindnesses from thee, I am content to die, but ere I die yet, She that did cause it, dearly shall abuy it. 43 Thus as a Viper angrie and malicious,Simile. With mind indeed to do her best to kill Her, that was come in manner so suspitious, (Though she came more for wrath, the for goodwil) With gilded launce she giues a blow pernicious, That quite vnhorsed her for all her skill, Backward Marfisa fell, and in the durt, Her beauer stucke, but had no further hurt. 44 Duke Ammons daughter that resolues to die, Or kill her fo, so much her selfe forgetteth, That thinking to dispatch her by and by, Before her head out of the mire she getteth, The golden launce she will no farther trie, But throwes it downe, as wrath her courage whet∣teth, And to performe the feate, her sword she drawes, Therewith of feare to cut away the cause. 45 But ere she came so neare, Marfisa met her, Like one with rage, with spite and scorne halse mad, To thinke that now againe she sped no better, And that a while before she sped so bad; So that Rogero could by no meanes let her From fighting, which to stop great will he had, But both of them with choler were so blinded, They fought like bedlem folk, and desprat minded. 46 They came vnto the halfe sword at the first, And with their rage forgetting rules of skill, Their ouermuch desire to do their worst, Was onely cause that they could do none ill; Their hearts were readie for despite to burst, And either purposing to die or kill, Did leaue her sword aside, in mind supposing, With stab to kill each other at the closing. 47 Rogero sunders them, and both intreateth, To pacifie themselues, but all in vaine, Then of their daggers he them both defeateth, And by perswasions mou'd them both againe; Sometime he speaketh faire, sometime he threateth, Except they wil at his request abstaine; But these viragoes wil not thoe desist, Though weapons want, they fight with feet and fist. 48 He steps betweene againe, and back he drawes, Now one, and then the tother by the sleeues, And makes them both against their wils to pause, At which Marfisa not a little greeues; Her selfe too greatly wronged in the cause, And him to be too partiall she beleeues; Wherefore his friendship she doth quite disclaime, And open warres with him she doth proclaime. 49 And taking vp her sword, in termes most vile, She saith he playes the churlish villens part, And that he greatly doth himselfe beguile, To thinke her fight against her wil to part, She sweares she wil, within a little while, Of his owne folly make him feele the smart; And that she wil henceforth so short him curbe, He shall not dare her combat to disturbe.
50 Rogero still bare all her words as words, And sought by speech her to haue pacified; But seeing that it needs must come to swords, And that with blowes, not speeches she replied, No longer time to walking he affords, But to his weapon he himselfe applied, And being moued now with rightfull anger, To saue himselfe, he oft put her in danger. 51 But nere did spectacle breed more delight, These two cities he names charsly because by means of the store of learned men, they had many notable deuices presented on their stages and Thea∣ters. In stately Rome or Athens so well learned, Then Bradamant did take to see this fight, In which she now apparently discerned, That of their loue she had not iudged right; Now iealousie, and all that it concerned, Suspition, feare, mistrust, and wrath, and franzie, Are of the sodaine quite put from her fancie. 52 And taking vp her sword she stands not farre, With mind not yet awhile the fray to part, She thinkes in him she sees the God of warre, Such grace Rogero vsd, such skill such art: And tother seemd in that vnpleasant iarre, Some hellish furie, (so she playd her part) Yet true it is that he awhile forbare her, Nor did his worst, but did of purpose spare her. 53 He knew the secret vertue of his blade, Which he had tride in many battels well, That euermore a way and entrance made, Whose charme all charmed armes did far excell; Wherefore he doth not fiercely her inuade. With bloudy blowes, nor fearfull thrusts and full, But flatling still he cauld his blowes to light, Till once he was of patience put out quite. 54 For once Marfisa, with intention shrowd, Strake with such furie at Rogeros beauer, That with that blow she very plainly showd, That to haue kild him she did her endeuer, Rogero with his argent Eagle trowd, From danger of the stroke himselfe to seuer, But though the shield brake not, gramercy charme, Yet vnderneath the shield it stound his arme. 55 It happie was Don Hectors shield was there, Else had she put him vnto further paine, Scarce could he now the massie target beare, Scarce now the siluer bird he could sustaine: Now he intends no longer to forbeare, But hurleth out a foyne with force so maine, In rage with that late blow so fierce and bitter, Wo vnto poore Marsisa, had it hit her. 56 I know not what good Angell did her keepe, The thrust mist her, and in a tree it strake, The like in V∣gil of Polidorus. Germatum lectwy∣mabulis vox cu∣ditiar tumulu & vox redita ser∣tur ad aures. And enterd in the same a shastman deepe, And on the sodaine all the hill did quake: A secret horror on them all did creepe, They see the hill, the trees and tombe to shake, Till from that sepulcher a voice proceeding, Spake vnto them, all humane voice exceeding. 57 The voice to them with no small terror cride, File not your hands nor hearts with so great sin, It is a kind of cruell parracide, To seeke to kill, and be so neare of kin: Wherefore I charge you lay all hate aside, And marke my speech, and all containd therein, I say you both were gotten of one seed, One wombe you bare, one brest you both did feed. 58 My deare Rogero, my Marfisa deare, Let not the sister seeke to kill the brother, But learne of me some things that touch you neare, Which former times in ignorance did smother; Your sire Rogero hight, who that same yeare, He gat you of dame Gallacell your mother, Was by your vncles of his life depriued, Who also your destruction thus contriued. 59 They put your mother in a steerlesse bote, Who was as then of you twaine great with child, And in the Ocean wide they let her flote, There to be staru'd or drownd in waters wild: But lo how fortune holpe the lucklesse lot, And ere you yet were borne, vpon you smild, For why against all hope or expectation, Your mother made a happie nauigation. 60 And being safe arriu'd at Syrtee shore, There at one burden she brought forth both you, And then (as if she ought this world no more) Her blessed soule to Paradise vp flew; But there by hap (to God be thanks therefore) Was I at hand, and when the cause I knew, I did as much, ere I the place did leaue, As such a barren soile would giue me leaue. 61 Your mother then in dust of earth I lapt, (Our auncient mother) whereto all must go,Sentence. And in my cloke your little selues I wrapt, To seeke some meanes to nourish you, when lo, A Lionesse that late had whelpt there hapt, To come in sight while I went to and fro, Her did I make to leaue her proper whelpes, And giue you sucke, then wanting other helpes. 62 Ten months and ten in forrests wilde and moorish, The Lions tets you vsed were to sucke, I after learnd with wilde flesh you to nourish, Such as I could, of Beaes, or Stag and Bucke; But when you now began in strength to flourish, One day while I was lacke, by euill lucke, A band of fierce Arabians comming thither, Wold haue conuaid you both from thence togither. 63 But thou Rogero when thou sawst them comming, Didst saue thy selfe from that mishap by flight, But thou Marfisa, not so swiftly running, Wert tane, and quickly carrid out of sight, To fetch thee backe againe I wanted cunning, For which I soride many day and night, But as the losse of tone did make me sad, So of the tother greater care I had.
64 Ah my Rogero, thou thy selfe canst tell, If thine Atlanta lou'd thee while he liued, I saw the starres some euill haps foretell, That thou shouldst haue which me not litle grieued: Yet I endeuord still, as thou knowst well, That by my meanes thou mightst haue bin relieued, But finding thee still contrary inchned, For very griefe at last I dide and pined. 65 But here I built this tombe afore I died, Where I foresaw you two should make this fray; he whō And being dead, to Charon lowd I cried, To suffer in this wood my ghost to stray, Vntill this fight, to me foresignified, Should happen, which was done this present day, Now shall my soule from hence depart in peace, Now Bradamant thy iealousie may cease. 66 Thus said the voice, and left them all amazed, With wonder great, and strangenesse of the case, And when a while each had on other gazed, They met in kindest manner, and embrace; Nor Bradamant her selfe, who erst was crazed With iealousie, now tooke it in disgrace, To see her spouse, when he most kindly kist her, Now well assured that she was his sister. 67 Thus they agreed at last, and either twin, Do call to mind some acts of childish yeares, What they had sayd and done, where they had bin, Which eu'n with tender heart did moue their teares; At last the worthy brother doth begin To tell Marfisa what great loue he beares To Bradamant, whom he to wed intends, And so at length he made them faithfull frends. 68 Then all parts pacifide so well at length, Marfisa doth intreate her noble brother, To tell to her the storie more at length, Or that so strange exiling of her mother, And if their fire were slaine by fraud or strength, And who it was that wrought the tone or tother, For sure (said she) I thinke I neuer heard it, Or childishnesse did make me not regard it. 69 Rogero tels her, how of Troian race, From Hector they be lineally descended, , some  was killed  Vsse of this  the Storie  Allusion. By meanes Astianax (of speciall grace, That scapt Viysses and the snares intended, Did leaue a child of like yeares in his place) And from that country to the sea descended, And came to Sicill after trauell long, And tooke Mesina, and grew very strong. 70 His offspring still increasing in renowne, Calabria rul'd in part, and thence to Phare, called  of Mars. And came at last to dwell in Mars his towne, And many a noble Emperour and rare, In stately Rome haue worne th'Imperiall crowne, Of such as from this stocke descended are, From Constance and from Constantine accounting, To Pepin and his sonne, them all surmounting. 71 Rogero first, and Iambaron of these,In this narration my Author fol∣lows not any true story, but a work intitled Almoe, which not with∣standing has to some credits, though ot muc. Rouus, Rambaldus, and Rogero againe, Of whom (as Atlant told) sau'd from the seas, Our mother by the shore brought forth vs twaine, Their acts in auncient stories they that please To looke, may find them there recorded plaine; Then tels he how there came king Agolant, With Almont, and the fire of Agramant. 72 How that Kings daughter, a most noble maid, In feates of armes so valorous did proue, That diuers Palladines she ouerlaid; And then with that Rogero fell in loue, And of her fathers anger not afraid, Did match in Christen state, as did behoue, How after this one Beltram sought by treason, Incestuous loue of her without all reason. 73 And for that cause his brothers and his sire, And his owne natiue soile he did betray, And open Risa at his foes desire; Which being tane, and leizd on as a pray,Risa is a citie of good importance in the country of Rbgium, are, mounts Appe∣nr. Fierce Agolant and his inflamd with ire, Tooke Gallacell our mother where she lay, Six months with child, and put her in a bote, And in the Ocean wide they let her flote. 74 Marfisa all this while with gladsome cheare, Vnto her new knowne brothers tale attended, And in her mind reioyced much to heare, That of so noble house she was descended, From which Mongrana came, as doth appeare, And that of Clarimount so much commended, Which houses both, long in great fame had flouri∣shed, For diuers noble persons they had nourished. 75 But when of Agramant she heard him say, How both his grandsire, vncle, and some other, Consented had their father to betray, And in so cruell sort to vse their mother, She could not suffer any longer stay, But breaking off his tale, said noble brother, (With your good fauor) you haue too much wrong To leaue your father vnreueng'd so long. 76 If not in Almont nor Traianos blood, You can auenge this ill sith they be gone, Yet ought you to auenge it on their brood; Liue you, and let you Agramant alone? This blot, except it quickly be withstood, Will shame you euer, if it once be knowne, That he that did this wrong not onely liueth, But that to you he entertainment giueth. 77 But for my part (said she) by Christ I vow, (Whom as my father did, so serue I will) That I will not leaue armes, till I know how To venge my fathers and my mothers ill; And much I shall lament, and do eu'n now, If in that Pagan campe you tarry still, Or euer should be seene therein hereafter, Except it were to worke their harme and slaughter.
78 Oh how did Bradamant at this reioyce, Aduising him to follow that direction, And to giue eare vnto his sisters voice, To leaue so vile a place, and base subiection, And cleaue to Charles as to the better choice, Who gladly would receiue him in protection, Of which (she said) one sure signe she did gather, She heard him often so extoll his father. 79 Rogero answers thus with great regard, (My deare) to haue done this at first I ought, But then indeed the troth I had not hard, Whereby I might my dutie haue bin tought: Now sith that Agramant hath me prefard, If his destruction should by me be sought, That am his seruant and a daily waitor, The world might iustly deeme I were a traitor. 80 But this my meaning was, and so it is, To find some meanes I may (with honor) part, Which when I haue, then sure I will not misse, To come and to requite your great desart; And that (quoth he) I had performd ere this, Saue that a cause (of which I felt the smart) Enforst my stay, the wounds the Tartar gaue me, So as my friends had much to do to saue me. 81 As she knowes well that holpe me at my need, And eu'ry day did sit by my beds side: Thus much he said, but they that tooke good heed To all he said, in earnest sort replide, Howbeit at the last it was agreed, That he so long with Agramant should bide, Till he some honorable cause might find, To leaue his master and to change his mind. 82 Well (quoth Marfisa) if he needs will go, Then let him go, but I will you assure, That shortly I will vse the matter so, He shall not long with Agramant endure: This said she vnto Bradamant, but tho She told not how she would the same procure: Thus for that time Rogero brake this parlie, And turnd his horse to turne againe to Arlie. 83 When lo they chanc'd a sodaine crie to heare, Proceeding from the next adioyning vale, The voice did seeme, when they approched neare, To be some damsels that for helpe did call: But who it was, hereafter you shall heare, For now of force I must cut off my tale, And pray you my abruptnesse to excuse, For in the next you shall heare further newes. In the beginning of this Canto, he speakes against crueltie,Morall. the most vnnoble thing that can be vsed in peace or warre: for though warre of it selfe is and must needs be bloudy in the heate thereof, yet hath it euer bene detested and contrary to all warlike discipline, to kill those that haue no weapon in hand. Wherefore noble Princes will euer make faire warres, as Pirthus said in Ennius: Quorum virtuti belli fortuna pepercit: Horundem me libertati parcere certum est. Whose life the fortune of the warres doth saue, Frankly I graunt that they their freedome haue. Crueltie euer proceeds from a vile mind, and often from a cowardly heart, that haue nothing in their minds nor mouthes but Mortui non mordent, which beside it is vnchristen, is also false: for the Scripture saith, The blood of Abel cried for vengeance; and it is a better approued prouerbe in England, blood will haue blood. In Bradamant we further note the bad effects of iealousie. In Rogero, that after his long forbearance, at last thought to be reuenged on Marfisa, we may see that Laesa patientia fit furor: Patience prouoked turnes to furie. Historie.Cantelmus whose death he so much bewailed, was taken in an ambushment by the Venetian armie, hauing very cou∣ragiously sallied cut (though Iouius writes it was against his wil) with another companion of his, who scaped very hard∣ly. Cantelmus had his head chopt off on the side of a galley in sight of his father, against which crueltie Ariosto iustly inueyeth. Astianax sonne of Hector (as the most credible authors write) was throwne downe from a high towre by V∣lysses, who in his bloudie pollicie thought good that none of the race of Priamus should be left aliue: but my author here, by Poeticall licence (for I know no historicall ground of it) saith that he was saued, and a boy put in his steed; and that thence (forsooth) are descended many houses of great account. But this is not credible, and the president thereof is pe∣rillous, as I will shew in the Allusion. Allegorie.By Atlants parting the fray betweene the brother and sister, we may in Allegoricall sence vnderstand, that when di∣uers that are neare of kin fall at variance, there is nothing so auaileable for reconciling of them, as the memory of some of their worthy auncestors, which in well disposed minds will stirre a great reuerence, and be a strong motiue vnto them to giue ouer their vnnaturall contentions. Allusion.Concerning the sauing of Astianax, it puts me in mind of one or two perillous examples recorded in our Chronicles, of the like deuice of one Perkin Warbecke, who fained himselfe to be Richard the yonger sonne of Edward the fourth, that was murdered in the Tower. But what a trouble grew by that puppet for a time, may there be seen, which the Chro∣nicles set out very largely. Here end the annotations vpon the xxxvj booke.
THE XXXVII. BOOKE THE ARGVMENT. Rogero with his sister and his spouse, Find Vllanie halfe stript and strangely vsed, Straight each of them, but chiefe Marfisa vowes To be aneng'd on him that her misused: She heares the law that women none allowes; She finds the man that hath the sexe refused: She plagues the tyrant, for his proud behauiour, And makes another law in womens fauour. 1 IF worthie Ladies would but take such paine, The praise of .In studies that immortall glorie raise, As they do often take in matters vaine, Deseruing none at all, or little praise, Which notwithstanding that they might obtain, They haue employed many nights and dayes; To haue thereby some trifling want supplied, That niggard nature had to them denied. 2 And further, if they could with their owne pen, Set forth the worthie praise of their owne kind, And not to be beholding vnto men, Whom hate and enuie often so doth blind, To make vs heare the good but now and then, But eu'rie place full of their ill we find; Then sure I iudge, their praises would be such, As hardly men should haue attaind so much. 3 For many writers do not onely striue, Too highly to extoll our sexes fame. But that they thinke they must withall contriue, To publish womens blemish and their blame; As fearing haply, lest they might arriue, By their most due desart, to greater name; And so they might thereby obscure our praise, As doth a cloud the Sunnes bright shining rayes. 4 But yet, for all such sparing pens do write, Or lauish togues can speake in their disgrace, Enforcing eu'rie il report for spite, That may their credits slander and deface, We still shall find their glorie shining bright, We still shall see, it keepes a worthie place, Though wanting of that height the greater part, To which it should attaine to by desart. 5 Harpalicé and Thomeris beside,Lke  the . With those that Turnus did and Hector ayd, Besides that dame that in an Oxes hide, The first foundation of faire Carthage layd, Zenobia eke, and she that quayld the pride Of Assur, and both Inde and Persia frayd: I say there haue bin many more then thease, That haue bin famous both by land and seas. 6 Nor only Rome and Greece haue bred such store, Of faithfull matrons, chast, and stout, and wise, But all the world beside, some lesse, some more, From whence it sets, to where the Sun doth rise: Though now their names obscured are so sore, That few or none are laid before our eys: And all because that they in those dayes wrate, Were enuious, and false, and full of hate. 7 Yet cease not Ladies, ye that vertue loue, To follow that your course, and so good way, And let not feare your minds from it remoue, That your great fame hereafter may decay; For true it is, as we do daylie proue, No good nor ill can still stand at a stay; Though writers in time past were not your frends, The present time shall make you large amends.
8 The worthie writers of this present time, Haue set your worthie praises so to vew, Some in graue prose, and some in learned time, As none shall need this want hereafter rew: And though they were infected with this crime, Yet in this age, so learn'd are some of you, So well acquainted with the noble muses, You could your selues remedie such abuses. 9 And if I should recite the names of those, That by the writers of our times are praisd, Or that themselues haue wrote in verse or prose, And haue their owne aud others glorie raisd, As I might please some few, so I suppose, I might be blam'd of others, and dispraisd, Or in omitting some, to do them wrong, Or reckning all, too tedious wax and long. 10 Shall I then all omit? that were not well, Sith that to please them all I do desire: Then will I chuse some one, that doth excell The rest so farre, as none may dare enuie her; Whose name doth in such height of honor dwell, As hard it is, for any to come nye her, Whose learned pen such priuilegde can giue, As it can make eu'n those are dead to liue. 11 For eu'n as Phebus shines on eu'rie star, Yet on his sister casts his fairest light, So eloquence and grace ay shining are, Much more on her, then any other wight, And maketh her to passe the rest as farre, As Phebé doth the other starrs in night, Her light so splendent is, and so diuine, As makes another Sunne on earth to shine. 12 in the .Victoria is her name, a most fit name, For one in triumphs borne, in triumphs bred, That passeth Artimesia in the fame Of doing honor to her husband ded; For though she did erect a wondrous frame, For her Mausoleo, with a Pyamed, Yet which is more? to lay the dead in graue, Or else from death, with learned pen to saue? 13 If Laodamie, and if Brutus wife, Argia, Arria, and Euadne chast, Be to be praysed, as they are so rise, Because when as their husbands dayes were past, They willingly forsooke this mortal life: Then in what height must she of right be plast? That such a gift vnto her spouse doth giue, That being dead, she still doth make him liue. 14 eui  Achilles, be∣se be had such  asset of .And if the great Macedon enuie bare, Vnto Achilles, for Meonian Lyre, Much more to noble Francis of Pescare, He would haue borne, whose praise is sounded hyre; By such a wise, so vertuous, chast, and rare As eu'n thy soule it selfe could not desire, A louder trumpe thy prayses out to sound, Sith hardly can a match to this be found. 15 But to conclude both these and others prayse, That I may follow on my present storie, I say that both in these and former dayes, Faire dames haue merited great fame and glorie; Which though by writers enuie much decayes, Yet need you not therefore now to be sorie, Because amongst vs all it is intended, That this foule fault hereafter shalbe mended. 16 Now of Marfisa and of Bradamant, I meane to tell, that still were so victorious, As both my voice too faint, and skill too scant Would be, to count their famous deeds & glorious; Yet shall good will so farre supply my want, As I will recken those were most notorious, And were my might agreeing to my mind, I would deserue as well of all their kind. 17 If you remember, I declared erst, How good Rogero purposd to returne, And how he heard the sound I then reherst, Of some that seemed wofully to mourne; Which wayling so his mind with pittie pierst, As he a while his iourny did adiourne, Both that to know the parties he desired, And ment to succour them, if cause required. 18 With him those dames the noble cosins went,He makes them cosins though v∣ry far of, which we count indeed the noblest tin∣red, though not the kindest. And when they nearer came vnto the place, They saw three damsels wofully lament, Appareld strangely and in sorie case, Their clothing all, had bene clipt of and rent, Vp to their nauels, to their foule disgrace, They sitting on the ground and durst not rise, To hide their secret parts from strangers eyes. 19 As Vulcans sonne (by Pallas pointment nurst)Ericthonian son of Vulcan, deui∣sed a coach to Inde  redlegges which were like surpā. Aglaurs looke the Table. Whom (without mother) got of earth he had, (For whom Aglaur was plagu'd, because she durst, Looke on him when the Goddesse had forbad) Sat in a coach (by him deuised surst) To hide his leggs, that were deformd and bad: So sat the wofull maids their secrets hiding, Scarse from the ground, to lift their looks abiding. 20 The foule prospect, did with great wrath inflame, The worthie dames when they did plaine it vew,Peslus gardens are at a Castle so called in Luca∣s, and beare ross  ini yeare. And in the maids behalfs, they blusht for shame, As do in Peslus gardens roses new: But Bradamant, when as more neare she came, Was grieued more, for one of them she knew, Whose name was Vllanie, that since a while, Was vnto France sent from the Island Ile. 21 She also knew both tother in effect, For she had met them trau'ling on that cost, But yet her speech she chiefly did direct, To Vllan, whom she regarded most; And askt her what vile wight did so neglect All law, and had all humane nature lost, As that without remorse he could abide, To leaue that bare, that nature seeks to hide?
22 Poore Vlanie, that both by speech and sight, The worthie damsell Bradamant did know, To be a Ladie, whom she saw last night, To giue three Princes such an ouerthrow; When first a while she sobbed had and sight, The manner and the matter plaine doth show, How people neare that place, did ill intreat them, And clippe their cloths, and also whip and beat them 23 Fast by (said she) the Castle you may see, Where they do keepe, that vs so ill did vse, As for the shield of gold and Princes three, That came to win it, she could tell no newes: We onely ment to trudge on foote (said shé) To make complaint of those did vs abuse, Vnto the noble Christen Emp'rour Charles, Who punish will I trust such lawlesse catles. 24 Braue Bradamant and stout Marfisa longs, To go immediatly vnto this place, And be aung'd on such enormous wrongs, Done as they deeme, to all the sexe disgrace: Rogero eke, that knows well what belongs, Vnto the law of knight hood, in such case, (To succour all that are by wrong opprest, But chieflie women) goes without request. 25 Looke in the Al∣ligorie of the ap∣plication of .With one consent, they all put off their bases, Which seru'd the maidens verie fit to hide, The secret parts, of those same priuie places, That modestie to show cannot abide. Then Bradamant straight way behind her places, Faire Vilany, and makes her so to ride, Marfisa and Rogero take the paine, Behind themselues, to place the other twaine. 26 Here begins the tale of Marganor that made the law against wo∣men.The dame of Dordon led them all the way, The tother two do follow with great hast, But Villany showd where the Castle lay, To which they many a hill and valley past. But now so much was spent of that same day, That they were quite benightd at the last, At night to take a village they were glad, Where they good meat, good drinke, good lodging had. 27 But when to looke about them they began, They none cou'd see but women in the place, The women drst, brought all, and not a man, In all the village that did show his face: Among themselues they on the matter scan, And much they mused at so strange a case, Among so many, fayre, foule, young, and old, As there they saw, not one man to behold. 28 I thinke that Iason neuer marueld more,Iasons men were called Argonaus, because they ost in a ship called Argo. Nor those his Argonauts, that with him came, Then when they first arriu'd at Lemnos shore, Where they found none but women void of shame, That had their sires, and brethren slaine before, And did a common wealth of women frame: Then did Rogero with the Ladies wonder, To see no men, but women such a nomber. 29 Wherefore (when first they had in seemly sort, Prouided raiment for the damsels three, If not so sumptuous, certes not so short, But to conceale that which men should not see) Then they desir'd some dweller there, report To them, what might the cause and reason be, Why in this towne there were allowd no men, And in this sort the woman answerd then. 30 This order at the which you seeme to wonder, Was by a tyrant pointed for our paine, A tyrant, whose subiection we are vnder, Who by his proclamation doth ordaine, From mothers sonnes, frō husbands wiues to sunder; And in such hard exile we must remaine, And suffer not by merit, but by force, From our deare spouses, such a long diuorce. 31 Thrise haue the trees with winter bene deleaued, Since we haue bene into this place confind, Of husbands, fathers, and of sonnes bereaued, So sore the tyrant hateth all our kinde; And if that any chance to be perceaued, (As some perhaps there be, that are so kinde) To come but once to looke vpon his wife, The man and woman both, shall loose their life. 32 The lawlesse wretch, that makes this cruell law, Dwels two leagues hence, and is of such behauiour, As from his purpose no man can him draw, How much so euer he be in his fauour; He doth all women from his land withdraw, As if he were infected with their sauour, He is so fierce, so sturdie, and so strong, That none dare once protect, whom he will wrong, 33 And which is strange, he vseth strangers worst, If any happen to his house arriue, (It seems he hath of womens bloud some thurst) For though he let them part from thence aliue, Yet first with whipping, and with vsage curst, He doth their torment, and reproch contriue: Wherefore if you your safeties do regard, I wish you not to trauell thither-ward. 34 At this Marfisa and the Dordon dame, Were much incenst, and did desire to know, How he was cald, and whence his furie came, That made him first to such a madnes grow: The woman maketh answer thus, his name Is Marganor, and if you please Ile show The whole discourse: to this they all agreed, And she then on her tale, did thus proceed. 35 This Marganor, that makes full many weepe, Was bloodie from his buth by disposition, But yet a while he did dislemble deepe, That of the same there was but some suspition; His sonnes did make him it the closer keepe, Because they were of contrarie condition, Both boūteous, frank, & curteous, of good qualitie, Of strangers louers and of hospitalitie.
36 Faire dames and knights that hapt to passe this way, Were still by them so frendly entertained, That by such kind of curteous vage, thay The loue and praise of eu'rie one had gained; Their honors also farther to display, The sacred right of knighthood they obtained; Both stout, both strong, comly and of good stature, Not wanting ornaments of art or nature. 37 Cylandro and Tanacro nam'd they are, And long they liu'd with no dishonor stained, And longer had, if they had bene so ware, As not in Cupids snares to haue bene trained; This foolish passion foyld all their welfare, The passion men call loue, this them constrained, To change the worthie course they had begonne, And do that by the which they were vndonne. 38 It happend that there thither came a knight, Belonging to this Emperour of Greece, Who brought with him a Ladie faire and bright, Of good behauour, and a louely peece, With whom Cylandro fell in loue that night, And fully bent of her to haue a fleece, He thought her beautie so possest his hart, That he should surely dye, if she depart. 39 And, for he deemd it labour lost to pray, To open force he doth himselfe dispose, And secretly all armd, vnto the way Where tother needs must passe, asore he goes, And seeing him he would no longer stay, But trusting to his manhood, comes to bloes, Not seeking vantage, but with lance to lance, He minds to trie of fight the doubtfull chance. 40 Not thinking though but with his suer running, To beat him downe, and beare away his wife, But this same knight, that in this art was cunning, Did pierce his shield, and rest him of his life: The newes hereof vnto his father comming, Fild all the court with plaints and sorows rife; At last, when long the time had bene deferred, By his great ancestors they him inteed, 41 Nor did this foule mishap and ill successe, Make Marganor to minish ought his port, Tanacro still did courtesie professe, To strangers all, and vsd them in good sort: But loe, it chanc't within a yeare and lesse, A noble Baron thither did resort, A comely man of personage to see, With him a Ladie faire as faire might be. 42 And to her beautie her behauour fitted, Her looks are modest, manners sober are, Her words are ware, and shew her sharply witted; Likewise her Lord, himselfe most comely bare, As fit to whom the charge should be committed, Of one in shape and qualities so rare: He hight Olindro, Lord of Longauilla, The louely Lady named was Drusilla. 43 No lesse Tenacro doted on this Dame, Then had his brother done on that before, But that foule end to which his brother came, Made him more warie, though not honest more; By former good report that bred him fame, And all his passed praise, he sets no store: Be fame, be vertue troden in the dust, So he may but fulfill his present lust. 44 Thus caring onely to auoyd the danger, In which he saw before his brother dyde, He secretly that night way-laid the stranger, There as he knew next day he needs must ride, Not meaning his owne person to endanger; In fine, the Baron that to saue his bride, Did stoutly giue and take full many a wound, At last they left foule murderd on the ground. 45 Drusilla se'ing her deare Olindro ded, In deadly sound vnto the ground she sanke, But thence in curteous sort the men her led, Whō to haue kild her, she would giue more thanke: But griefe in her such will to die had bred, That wilfully she leapt downe from a banke, To kill her selfe, but poore soule could not dy, But all her head and face was brusd thereby. 46 Tanacro gets some surgeons and Phisicions, To looke vnto her health, and hurts to cure, He causeth her to heare most rare musicions, To cheare her heart, and solace to procure: He maks great brags of her so chast conditions, With mind by marriage to make her sure; He thinks a woman of so vertuous life, Must not be termd a lemman, but a wife. 47 To marrie her he inwardly intends, This outwardly in shew he doth make knowne, And euermore he highly her commends; And though her griefe was by his doings growne, He saith he will for this make large amends, And that he will her loue, and be her owne: But still the more that on that point he grateth, The more in heart she him detests and hateth. 48 But yet her hate did not so blind her wit, But that to keepe it close she tooke good heed; She knew full well she must dissemble it, If she will be reuengd of him indeed: Wherefore vntill the time may serue her fit, She seemes vnto his meaning halfe agreed, And did in shew the same so smoothly carrie, That lastly the consented him to matrie. 49 Sweet peace and loue were written in her eyes, Reuenge and hate were in her heart engraued, To kill him, in her thought she doth deuise, When with most kindnesse she her selfe behaued: He needs must die, needs die in any wise, But eu'n thus long to liue of God she craued: How can I better end my life (she seth) Then in reuenging my deare husbands deth?
50 Thus seeming to forget all former wrong, She chearfully expects the wedding day, As though that she did for this marriage long, And so she did, although another way, She shortens all that might the time prolong, And paints her selfe, and tricks her trim and gay: She onely crau'd thus much for Christ his passion, She might be marry'd of her country fashion. 51 Not that her speech herein indeed was trew, That such the custome was as she pretended, But she doth mind to forge a custome new, With trust assuredly to be reuenged On him, that her beloued husband slew; Reuenge, reuenge was all that she intended: She pray'th, she might obserue her countrie guise, Which in this sort, she doth to them deuise. 52 The widdow that to marrie new intends, According as our countrie law allows, Must first appease the ghost whom she offends, I meane (saith she) that of her former spouse, And make vnto his spirit some amends, By Dirges, trentals, masles, pray'rs, and vows, In that same Church, whereas his bones be resting, Then may she marrie new, without molesting. 53 But when of her new spouse she takes the ring, The Priest in sight of all that stand about, Of hallowd wine a bottle then must bring, And in the Challice he must powre it out; Then ouer it he must both say and sing, Effectual prayrs, and Psalmes, and hymnes deuout, Then must the woman take it of the Vicker, And drinke vnto her spouse the blessed licker. 54 Tanacro liketh well of this her motion, Respecting little how much it imported, To let her marrie with so strange deuotion, He onely wisht to haue the season shorted; And not mistrusting that same hallowd potion, To cut of all delays he her exhorted, Each makes like hast, though sundry in cōstruction, He to her wedding, she to his destruction. 55 Among her women seruants that were theare, Drusilla had one old ilfauord trot, She calleth her, and bad her in her eare, That some strong sodaine poyson may be got, You know (said the) to get it, how and wheare, Conuay it safe into some pretie pot, For I (quoth she) haue found the way and skill, The wicked sonne of Marganor to kill. 56 And doubt not, I know how to saue vs both, As I will let thee know at better leasure, The woman doth the feat though seeming loth, Saue onely that it was her mistres pleasure: Then for a cup of Candie wine she goth, And mingles this and that in so due measure, As made it with but little alteration, Not sowre in tast, yet sure in operation. 57 Now came Drusilla on the wedding day, With gorgeous gowns and costly iewels dect, There where Olindros corps intombed lay, Raisd high on collumns as she did direct: The Priest began the solemne Masse to say, To which came great resort, without suspect, And Marganor himselfe now most contenting, Came with his son and frends the place frequenting. 58 When all the solemne rites to end were brought, Then in a cup of massie gold and fine, The Priest powrd out, as she before had taught, The cursed poyson, with the blessed wine; She soberly drinks a conuenient draught, Inough to do the feat she did designe, Then to Tanacro with a louely cheare, She gaue it, who supt vp the challice cleare. 59 And rendring then the challice to the Frire, He thought in open arms her to embrace. But then she sodainly began retire, Then her sweet looks, and words so full of grace, Were gone, her eyes did seeme to flame like fire, Then wrath and spite were written in her face, She cries with grisly looke, and voice vnpleasant, Anaunt, and touch not me thou traitor peasant. 60 Thoughtst thou of me solace to haue and sport, Drsillas  at h death.And bring me cause of torment, teares, and woe, No, now I trow that I haue cut thee short, That drinke was poyson, if you do not know: But ah this death is of too gentle sort, And I too noble hangman am I trow, A hangman ought with halter stop thy breath, This was for thee, too honorable death. 61 My onely sorrow is that ere I dyde, My sacrifice was not in full perfection, And that thy wicked sire and more beside, Did not with thee, tast of that strong confection: But pardon me (my deare dead spouse) she cride, If I haue fayld for fault of good direction, If I perhaps haue not done all I should do, Yet sure I haue performed all I could do. 62 And looke what I do want in all or part, In working him torture condigne, and shame, I hope the world to come, with greater smart, Will pay it him, and I shall see the same, Thus much she said, and then with chearfull hart, Still calling on her former spouses name, Take here in worth (said she) this sacrifice, That thy poore wife did for thy sake deuise. 63 And of our Lord for me a place obtaine, In Paradise, with thy most blessed spirit, And if he say that none must there remaine, But they that by good works the same inherit; Tell him I haue a cruell tyrant slaine, Of tyrants death I bring with me the merit; To kill a tyrant, what can be more glorious, Or in the sight of God more meritorious?
64 the death .Thus much she said, and fell dead therewithall, And being dead, she kept a chearfull looke, And sure to her the comfort was not small, That for her spouse so sharpe reuenge she tooke. I know not if Tanacro in his fall, Did follow her, or else her ouertooke, He ouertooke her sure, as may be thought, That dranke the bottome, and the greater draught. 65 Fell Marganor that heard his sonnes last grone, And seeing him lie dead past all reliefe, Made at the first so great and grieuous mone, As though he would haue dide of very griefe: Two sons he had of late, now hath he none, Two women had hereof bin causes chiefe, One mou'd the first to hazard life, the tother With her owne hands gaue poison to his brother. 66 Loue, pitie, griefe, disdaine, and hate, and wrath, Desire of death and of reuenge together, The dolefull parent so inraged hath, Like to the roring seas in fowlest wether: Faine to Drusilla he would do some scath, But she was dead before, yet goes he thether, As blinded hate did him still forward pricke, He seeks to harme the corse that was not quicke. 67 word"Eu'n as a snake whom speate to ground doth naile, Doth bite the steele and wood that sense hath none, Or as a dog that doth a man asfaile, If one do fling at him a sticke or stone, Doth runne and bite the same without auaile, Till he that hurled it is past and gone: So Marganor more fierce then dog or snake, Seeks on the senslesse corse reuenge to take. 68 And when that harrying it, and all to tearing, Could not in any part his wrath asswage, Eu'n in the Church on vs, no such thing fearing, He drawes his sword, and in his senslesse rage, Doth hew and mangle women, none forbearing, For dignitie, for beautie, nor for age; While we cried out, and at his furie wondred, He thirtie kild, and hurt and maimd an hundred. 69 So sorely of his people he is dreaded, That no man dare against his acts oppose him, Vnto his will he is so firmely wedded, That for the time starke mad ye would suppose him; Who would reforme him, hangd shall be & headed, For guerdon of his paine, when once he knows him: .His seruants do, as doth the prouerbe say, When furie runs, lets furie haue her sway. 70 But when at last himselfe was almost tired With killing vs, though voyd of all remorce, Then by his friends request he was desired, And as it were constraind by honest force; And to his castle he himselfe retired, Appointing there this law of our diuorce, And clemencie forsooth he doth it call, In that he did forbeare to kill vs all. 71 Thus whether they obeyd or else repined, Men are from wiues, babes frō their dames deuided, And hither all the women be confined; This towne of purpose is for vs prouided, Where if that any man to loue inclined, And by a good and kind affection guided, Come but to see his wife, and thereby show it, Wo be to him if Marganor may know it. 72 And worse then this,Marganors law against woman. he hath ordaind an order, Such one I thinke was neuer heard before, All women that are tane within his border, Must first be whipt with rods till they be sore, And then he doth their vestiments disorder, By clipping them behind and eke before; And so away he sendeth them halfe stripped, When first they haue bin beaten well and whipped. 73 And if that any hope to haue assistance, Or bring some knights them to defend and saue, Forthwith he killeth them and their assistants, As sacrifices on his childrens graue: So as no hope there is to make resistance, For euermore he if he list can haue At his commaund, of men a mightie powre, By name one thousand eu'n within an houre. 74 And further all men in his realme he takes, By either faire perswasions or by feare, Vpon the Sacrament to sweare he makes, That ay they shall to women hatred beare. Now for your owne and these faire Ladies sakes, Iudge you if you haue reason to forbeare, Vnto his castle nearer to approch, Except you will be sham'd with foule reproch. 75 This tale so much did moue the warriers three, With pitie first, and then with high disdaine, That saue it was so darke they could not see, They would haue gone eu'n then him to haue slain: Now for that night they rest, but they decree, So soone as Phebus should returne againe, To arme themselues, and boldly to aduenter, Vpon the tyrants hold by force to enter. 76 Now as they were about their horse to take. They saw before them at the mountaines root, Some twentie men, that no great hast did make, But some on horseback were, and some on foote, All armd, these three them soone did ouertake, Before they full had rode an arrow shoot, And then they saw how they did beare by force, An aged beldam on a sumpter horse. 77 This was forsooth Drusillas chamber mayd, That to her mistris that same poison gaue, And being then mistrustfull and afrayd, What strange effect it fortune might to haue, Vpon the wedding day from Church she staid, And so by secret flight her selfe did saue, And kept her selfe three yeares from law and triall, Till Marganor had found her by espiall.
78 What cannot gaine and hope of mony worke?Sentence. First by his coyne he learned where she lay, Then with his coyne he set these men a worke, Who in this sort did fetch her thence away, And of a Lord (in whose land she did lurke, With promise that she safely there should stay) With coyne of that same Baron her he bought; Ah noble men, can nobles make you nought? 79 Looke how the great and stately streame of Poe,. The nearer he vnto the sea descends, When Lambra, Tycin, Adda, with some mo, Fall into him, and their due tribute sends, The broader and the deeper still doth grow: u'nso the more that Marganor offends, The greater will in these three champions breeds, To be auenged on so vile misdeeds. 80 Yet first to free this woman they intend, Who else (at least) should haue bin hangd in chaines, Straight on those lowts all three their forces bend, They couch their speares, and slack their horses rains: An host of men cou'd scarce such force defend; Much lesse a sort of dastard hireling twaines: Wherefore they cast away then warlike tooles, Their cariage left, and went away like fooles. 81 Eu'n as a greedie wolfe that runneth lodenSimile. With his desired pray vnto his den, That finds vnwares the way to him forboden, By hunting dogs, or by the hunting men, Hurles downe his pray, and by the paths vntroden Doth she for life; so did these cullions then, Not onely that their prisoner enlarge, But leaue their horses and their other charge. 82 Some, others force, some their owne feare vnhorses, By meanes whereof they did at ease prouide, For those three damsels good conuenient horses, That yesterday behind them three did ride: Also Rogero that old trot inforces, (Though she in vaine refused and denide) To go with them, lamenting sore and wailing, But all her lamentation nought auailing. 83 Now were they come vnto the towne at length, About the which there was no ditch nor wall, Yet were the houses built in bredth and length Both orderly and very strong withall; A castle in the midst of mightie strength, Stood on a rocke that ouerlookt them all: To this they march with great desire and longing, Because it was to Marganor belonging. 84 Within this towne no sooner set they feet, But that the guard that kept the watch, began Behind them step, and chained fast the street: Some others, with the greatest hast they can, Cald Marganor, that straight came them to meet, With guard of many a tall and sturdie man, Who with a speech but short, yet full of pride, The leud law of his Citie signifide. 85 Marfisa who before band had agreed,word" Vpon the matter with the other two, Sets spurs to horse, and galloping in steed Of making answer, makes no more ado, But being of her person strong indeed, Employing neither launce nor sword thereto, With bended fist she giues him such a boxe, As stonid him, and would haue feld an oxe. 86 Nor doth Rogero, nor the dame of France, Grant to the others any time of ease, But chiefe the damsell that with goldelance, Doth throw to ground as many as she please; No man there was that durst himselfe aduance, To stand vnto the shocke with one of these; Rogero seuen, she threw downe seuen times seauen, Eu'n as if thunder had falne downe from heauen. 87 The hurtlesse people to their houses fled, The hartlesse souldiers followd them as fast, None stayd behind but those were maimd or dead, And Marganor alone was left at last, And by Marfisa now is captiue led, Who (with his armes behind him piniond fast) Gaue him Drusillas maid to be tormented, And wold haue burnd the town, had they consented. 88 But all consent the law to abrogate, The people easily were wonne thereto, And to accept one of another rate, Which there was ratifide with small ado, His law and him they did detest and hate, Yet as him list they were content to do, As still we see the foolish common vse,. Obey him best that doth them most abuse. 89 And why, they dare not one another trust, Nor tell to one another their complaints, They let him kill and banish whom he lust; Ones goods he takes, anothers house he taints, The silent soule yet cries for vengeance iust Vnto the mighty God and to his Saints, Who though they seeme in punishing but slow, Yet pay they home at last, with heaue and how. 90 So now these silly soules inflamd with ire, With speech and deeds do make their stomacks knowne, And (as the prouerbe saith) each man beares fire, To burne the tree the wind hath ouerthrowne. Ye Princes that to tyrannize desire, Marke this mans end, and make his case your owne, Beleeue it well, that God doth euer send Vnto a wicked life a wretched end. 91 Out came the yong and old, the great and small, In words and workes to do him great disgrace: He that so terrible was erst to all, Is now despisde of all (a wondrous case) Yea those three warriers had ado not small, To keepe him now from killing in the place; Not that they car'd to haue his life preserued, But vnto greater paines they him reserued.
92 They gaue him bound vnto that woman aged, That erst vpon Drusilla did attend, And to those three, whose, minds were yet inraged, Whom whipt and stript he lately thence did send; These with sharp goads and kniues his body gaged, And to torment him, all their wits did bend, Now some cast stones, and some with needels pricke him, Some scratch, some bite, with feet some spurn & kick him. 93 Eu'n as a brooke new swolne with rage of raine, Or with a sodaine thaw of melting snow, Ort bears down rocks and trees with force so maine, As heards do'h drowne and houses ouerthrow, A drouth doth come, and then that brooke againe Abates his pride, and is at last so low, A woman, yea a child with small adoe, May passe the same, and neuer wet their shoe. 94 So Marganor that erst in pompe and pride, Made hearts of men to quake when he was named, To lowest ebb now turned sees his tyde, His combe now cut, his furie now is tamed; Now kennel-rakers scorne him, and deride, To looke men in the face he is ashamed, Small children, yea the babes, be not afteard, To pill away his haire from head and beard. 95 The while Rogero with those champions twaine, The castle summond that did gladly yeeld, Here Vllanie recouered againe, Which lately she had lost, her golden shield: Here met they those three kings, which to their pain Dame Bradamant had twise ou'rthrowne in field, At the same castle, where before I told She wan their lodging, and made them lie cold. 96 Since which, on foote vnarmd they vowd to go, Which want, faire Vllanie from death did saue, For all that went with armd men garded so, Were sacrificed on Tanacros graue; Yet better of the twaine it was to show, The parts that modestie conceald would haue, For why both this and eu'ry other shame,. Is halfe excusd, if force procure the same. 97 Marfisa straight a Parlament did callMafisas law for women. Of all the towne, and made them take an oth, Of high and low, rich, poore, and great and small, Although they were content, or else were loth, That to their wiues they should be subiect all; That in their houses and the Citie both, The women should haue rule, such powre, such graces, As men are wont to haue in other places. 98 She further made this notable decree, That lodging, meate and drinke should be forbode To trauellers, of whatsoere degree, Admit they go on foote, or that they rode, (Within that towne) except they first agree To sweare by some great Saint, or else by God, That they should euermore be womens frends, And foe vnto their foes to their liues ends. 99 And whatsoever stranger there arriues, Must further sweare, before they go their way, If, or they haue, or meane to marry wiues, That euermore they shall their wils obay: This must they keepe on perill of their liues, For why she vowes to come ere twelue-months day, And if she find her law broke in that Citie, To lacke and burne the same without all pitie. 100 This done, the warriers three did hasten hence, But yet their going they so long deferred, Vntil Drusillas corse was tane from thence, Where (as it seemd) it was but homely berred, And order tane, with cost and good expence, Her spouse and she might nobly be interred, With Epitaphs, by which was signified, In how great honour they both liu'd and died. 101 Marfisa made her law in marble faire, Vpon a pillar to be written downe, And then Rogero with the warlike paire Of damsels, tooke their leaues of all the towne: But Vllanie her garments doth repaire, And stayes to make some new and costly gowne, She thinks to come to Court were great dishoner, Except she had some sumptuous clothing on her. 102 Therefore she staid behind, and in her powre Was Marganor, by those same warriers giuen, Who had new torments taught him eu'ry howre, And was at last by his sharpe iudges driuen, To leape downe headlong from a mightie towre, Where all his bones and flesh were broke and riuen: Of him nor these I haue no more to say, But of those three that went the tother way. 103 The rest of that same day together riding, And halfe the next in companie they spent, Vntill they found a way in twaine diuiding, One to the campe tother to Arlie went;Ouid de isti∣bus. Sape uale dicto rursus suns mul∣ta loguutus. Here oft they take their leaues, yet still abiding, For euer parting makes friends ill content: In fine the knight the way to Arlie tooke, They to the campe, and thus I end this booke. In this xxxv ij. booke,Morall. the praises of women are set downe to the encouragement of all vertuous minded yong Ladies, and likewise the miserable end of Marganor and his two sonnes, for their vnbridled lust and crueltie, to the terrifying of all great men that dispose themselues to lawlesse and tyrannous behauiour. Lastly in the law made for women, we may see that that sex is capable of rule and gouernement, and not to be excluded from the highest degree thereof (as a noble learned, and learned noble man hath most amply and excellently proued in a discourse of his, which I happened by fortune to light vpon,Lord Harris Howard. Historie. though as yet I thinke imparted to few.) Concerning the historie of this booke, first it should seeme that the whole booke it selfe was incerted into the rest of the worke by mine author, to take occasion thereby to speake in praise of women, and specially of the Ladie Vittoria, wife
to the famous Francis of Pescard: but concerning the famous women by him briefly touched, I will here set downe as briefly as I can their storie. Arpalice or Harpalice a woman of Thrace, whose father being taken prisoner by the Geties, a nation of Scythia, with great courage and expedition recovered him from their hands, of whom Virgil speakes in his Aeneads: Vel qualis equos Threissa fat∣gat Harpalice volucrem; suga preuertitur Haebrum. Tomeris Queene of the Massagetians. Cyrus became a suter to her, to marry her but she thinking (as it was most likely) he wooed not her, but her kingdome, refused him: hereupon Cyrus made warre on her. Tomeris sent her son against him, who was taken by Cyrus with an ambushment, and slaine. But she faining as though she fled for feare, drew Cyrus to the straits of the hils, where (they write) she slue his whole army, being two hundred thousand men, and left not a man aliue to carry newes; and after in reuenge of her son, she put Cyrus head into a great boule of bloud, vsing that wel knowne speech: Satia te sanguine quisanguinem sitijsti, Fill thy selfe with bloud that didst thirst for bloud. In the 5. staffe. With those that did Turnios and Hector ayd. Those two were Camilla and Pentheselea, of both which Virgil writes in the Aeneads: Pentheselea surens, medijsque in millibus ardet Bellatrix, ardétque viris concurrere virgo. She that in compasse of buls hide, &c. That was Dido: The storie is well knowne of Pigmalions crueltie in mardering Sycheus for hope of his money, but Dido warned in a dreame by the gift of Sycheus, tooke away all the gold, and fled with diuers confederates to Lybia in Affrik, and there bargained to buy as much ground as she could compasse with a buls hide: which bargain being made, she cut the hide into an infinit company of smal thongs, and so built the famous city of Carthage within that cōpasse, as Virgil noteth: Mercatique locum facti de nomine Birsen, Taurino quantum poterant circundare tergo. Zenobia Queene of the Palmirens, widow, or as we call it, dowager of Odenatus: She rebelled against the Romaine Empire, and fought many battels very prosperously; but afterward by Aurelianus she was besieged in the citie of Pal∣mira, and in her flight from thence she was taken and brought to Rome in Triumph. She that lnde and Assure frayd: this was Symiramis wife of Nynus, who was a notable warrier; had not her vn∣bridled lust of the flesh stained the honour of her other vertues, which as it became her owne destruction, so it hath left a notable example to all other Princes of her sex, to take heed and eschew the like infamie, and specially (though they be aboue all positiue lawes) yet not to pollute the laws of nature. Allegorie.In that it is said Marfisa and Bradamant put off their bases, therewith to hide the priuities of the damsels, it may thereby be vnderstood, that the vertues of some excellent women are so great, as not onely serue themselues to make them famous and most honorable, but also extend themselues so farre, as to serue to hide and couer the deformitie of o∣thers not so well apparelled with the garments of honor, and so (as it were with works of supererogation) beautifie those that had defects of their owne. Allusion.Concerning the great praise mine author ascribeth to Madam Vittoria: Whose learned pen such priuiledge can giue, As it can cause those that are dead to liue. And for that cause preferreth her before Porcia wife of Brutus, and a diuers others that died voluntarie soone after their husbands, it was because she wrote some verses in manner of an Epitaph vpon her husband after his decease: In which kind, that honorable Ladie (widow of the late Lord Iohn Russell) deserueth no lesse commendation, hauing done as much for two husbands. And whereas my author maketh so great bost onely of our learned woman in Italie, I may com∣pare) besides one aboue all comparison,The four daugh∣ters of Sir An∣thonie Cooke. Ladie Burke. Ladie Rutll. Ladie Bacon. Blistris Kelly. grew. that I haue noted in the twentith booke) three or foure in England out of one family, and namely the sisters of that learned Ladie, as witnesse that verse written by the meanest of the foure to the Ladie Burlie, which I doubt if Cambridge or Oxford can mend. Si mihi quem cupio cures Mildreda remitti,She wrote to  Ladie Bobe, to send a  of her  wall, where be dwele, end to,  his going  son. Tu bona, tu melior, tu mihi sola oror: Sin malè ceslando retines, & trans mare mittis, Tu mala, tu peior, ta mihi nulla soror. Is si Cornubiam, tibi pax sit & omnia laeta, Sin mare Ciciliae nuncio bella. Vale. In the 14 staffe. And if the great Macedon enuie bare, Vnto Achilles for Meonian lyre, &c. This place M. Alexander Neuell imitated, in his verses vpon Sir Philip Sidneys funerals, with farre sharper conceit then mine author here vseth it. For whereas the now King of Scotland had written among, that pretie Epitaph of the foresand Knight: Vidit vt extinctum nuper Citherea Philippum, Fleuit, & hunc Martem credidit esse suum, Abripuit digitis gemmas, collóque monile, Martriterum nunquam seu placitura foret: Mortuus humana qui lusit imagine diuam, Quid faceret iam sivideret ille rogo?
To this effect in English, When Venus saw the noble Sidney dying, She thought, it her beloued Mars had beene: And with the thought thereof she fell a crying, And cast away her rings and carknet cleene, He that in death a goddesse mockt and grieued, What had he done (trow you) if he had liued? The verse hath a fine conceipt, and perhaps better then it showes for. Now (as I say) M. Neuell praising Sir Philip Sidney in the like manner, vseth the like application, as mine author doth in this place, preferring his fortunatenesse in this kinde, before his, whom Alexander enuieth: for he saith (as I remember) Plectra canant alios, cecinerunt sceptra Philippum, Ista coronatis sunt carmina digna cothurnis. Harps, other praise; a scepter his doth sing, Of crowned Poet, and of Laureat king. Concerning the tale of Drusilla, it is taken out of Plutarke, and thought a true Story: it is both in the Courtier of Castaglion and in Apuleius; but somewhat amplified by mine author. The end of the annotations vpon the 37. booke.
THE XXXVIII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Marfisa doth present her selfe before King Charles, and in his presence is baptized: Astolfo doth Senapos sight restore, By whom such hardie feats are enterprised, That Agramant therewith molested sore, Is by Sobrino finally aduised, To make a challenge on Rogeros hed, To end the troubles that the warre had bred. 1 FAire Ladies, you with gra∣cious eare that heare, My present storie, now me seemes I see, By this vnwóted changing of your cheare, That with Rogero you of∣fended be, For thus againe departing from his deare, And that you take the same as ill as she, As though you thought, and durst affirme it boldly, That fire of loue in him did burne but coldly. 2 And sure had he bin moued hereunto, By any other cause, then that I told, No though thereby he had attained to Rich Crassus wealth, or richer Cresus gold, Yet would I thinke (as now it seemes ye do) Loues darts in him had tane but shallow hold: For so sweet ioy, as this was to be thought, With gold nor siluer neuer could be bought. 3 But when ones honour shall thereon depend, Then should it merit not excuse but praise, And chiefe when one so truly may pretend, He cannot saue his honor otherwayes: And that same woman that herselfe should bend, To stop the same by prayre, or by delayes, Should giue iust cause to eu'rie one to guesse, Her loue were little, or her wit were lesse. 4 For if a woman should of him she loues, Esteeme the life and safetie as her owne, (I speake of such, whose choice no change remoues, And whose affections are not rashly growne) Then sure much more in reason it behoues, That of his honour should more care be showne; By how much more, it should in due account, Both pleasures all, and life it selfe surmount. 5 In following of his Lord so faithfully, Rogero did but eu'n as he was bound, And if he should haue left him then, thinke I He should haue done it but on slender ground▪ What though Almonti made his father die? On Agramant that fault could not redound, Who had for all his ancestors offences, Giu'n to Rogero many recompences. 6 He did but well in going to his Lord, And she as well (it cannot be denied) In that she thereto granted her accord, Which she might hap haue stopt, had she replied, That from the same her liking had abhord; What now she wants, henceforth may be supplied, But if that honor haue one minuts slaine,Sentence. An hundred yeares scant can it cleanse againe. 7 Now while Rogero vnto Arly went, As dutie bound him to Traianos haire, Vnto the Christen campe incontinent, Rogeros spouse and sister (noble paire) As louing frends and cons now they went, And vnto Charles his tent they did repaire; Who minds by siege, or battels doubtfull chance, To driue these tedious troubles out of France.
8 When in the campe it was made knowne and bruted, That Bradamant was come, her noblest brothers Came forth to her, and kindly her saluted, With Guidon, though they came of sundry mothers; And she, as for her sexe and calling suted, Did resalute both them, and diuers others, By kissing some, and speaking to the best, And making frendly gestures to the rest. 9 But when Marfisas name was heard and knowne, Whose noble acts eu'n from Catay to Spaine, And ouer all the world beside were blowne, To looke on her all were so glad and faine, With presse and thrust not few were ouerthrowne; And scarse aman could in the tents remaine, But heauing, shouing, hither-ward and thither, To see so braue a paire as these togither. 10 Now when to Charles his presence come they be, Vpon her knee Marfisa did decline, And (as Turpino writes) no man did see, Her knee to touch the ground before that time, To none of anie calling, or degree, Not vnto Christen Prince or Sarazine: She onely doth esteeme king Pepins sonne, As worthie whom such honor should be donne. 11 But Charles arose, and met her halfe the way, And in kinde stately sort did her embrace, And set her by his side that present day, Aboue the Princes all, and gaue her place. Then voided was the roome that none might stay, But Lords and knights well worthie so great grace, Excluding all the sawcie baser sort, And then Marfisa spake in such like sort. 12 Marfisas oration.Most mightie Caesar, high renownd and glorious, That from our Indies, to Tyrinthian shore, From Scythia, frosen full with breath of Boreas, To Aethiopia scorching euermore, Makst thy white crosse, so famous and victorious, By value much, but by thy iustice more; Thy praise (O Prince) and thy renowned name, Were cause from countries farre I hither came. 13 And to say troth, flat enuie mou'd me chiefe, Because thy powre to reach so farre I saw, I must confesse I tooke disdaine and griefe, That any Prince that fauord not our law, And was to vs of contrarie beliefe, Should grow so great, to keepe vs all in aw: Wherefore I came with mind to haue destroid thee, Or by all meanes I could, to haue annoyd thee. 14 For this I came, for this I stayd in France, To seeke your ruin and your ouerthrow, She means the voice out of the , in the la∣ter end of the 26. booke.When lo a chance (if such a thing can chance) Made me a frend and subiect or a so, I will not stay to tell each circumstance, But this in substance, it did make me know, That I, your bloodie enemie Marfisa, Was daughter to Rogero late of Ryla. 15 He by my wicked vncles was betraid, And left my wofull mother big with child, Who neare to Syrté downe her bellie laid, As strangely sau'd, as wrongfully exild; She brought a twin, a man child and a maid, We fosterd were, seuen yeares in forrest wild, By one that had in Magicke art great skill,. But I was stolne from him against his will. 16 For some Arabians sold me for a slaue, Vnto a Persian king, whom (growne in yeares) Because he my virginitie would haue, I killed him and all his Lords and Peeres And then such hap, God and good fortune gaue, I gat his crowne and armes, as yet appeares; And ere I fully was twise ten yeare old, Seuen crownes I gat beside, which yet I hold. 17 And being enuious of your endlesse fame, (As ert I told) I came with firme intent, By all the meanes I could, to quaile the same, And haply might haue done the hurt I ment; But now a better minde, that minde doth tame, Now of my malice I do much repent, Since by good hap, I lately vnderstood, That I was neare allide to you in blood. 18 And sith I know my father was your man, I meane no lesse then he did, you to serue, As for the hate and enuie I began, To beare you I now the same reserue, For Agramant, and all the harme I can, To all his kin, that do the same deserue, Because I now do know, and am assured, His ancestors my parents death procured. 19 This said Marfisa, and withall, did adde, That she would be baptized out of hand, And when that Agramant she vanquisht had, Returne (if Charles to pleasd) to her owne land, And Christen them, and farther would be glad, Against all those that would Christs law withstand, Ay to beare armes, with vow that all her gaine, To Charles and holy Church should ay remaine. 20 The noble Charles of tongue as eloquent, As wise in head, as valorous in heart, Did much extoll the Ladie excellent, And all her kin and sire by iust desart: And of her former speech incontinent, Most graciouslie he answerd eu'rie part, Concluding that he would for euer after, Accept her as his cousin, and his daughter. 21 And her againe he did embrace of new: And kilt her forhead as his child indeed:It was the  in the old time, for  then  or of , in the . It long would be to tell how braue a crew, From Clarimount, and Mongrane did proceed, To welcome her, or when Renaldo knew Marfisas name, what ioy in him did breed, He calls to mind what force in her he found, Then when Albracca he besieged round.
22 It long would be to tell of Guidons ioy, With Griffin, Aquilant and Sansonet, That leapt with her their land that do destroy. Those men that in their Realme they hap to get: No lesse did Malagige and Vinian ioy, Remembring how she ioynd with Richardet, To rescue them, as long before I told. When vnto Bertolage they had bene sold. 23 Now was prepard against th'ensuing day, A place, as was by Charles himselfe deuised, Set stately forth, and hangd with rich aray, Where this most worthy dame should be baptised, Then Bishops were employd by whom she may, Be taught the Christen faith and Catechised, And all that day a learned Clarke and Preacher, The principles of Christen faith did teach her. 24 Then Turpin Archbishop of chiefe account, In his robes pontificiall doth baptise her, Charles with great reu'rence standeth by the fount, And what to answer, he did still aduise her. to  booke 10.But now tis time that to the Moone I mount, For that receit, must make Orlando wiser, From whence the Duke, descending by strange byas, Came with S. Iohn in charret of Elyas. 25 And by his guide he backe againe was led, And keeps still in his hand that pot or Iarre, That should againe make wise the mased hed, Of that same Palladin well seene in warre. Likewise the Saint vnto Astolfo sed, Assoone as they allighted from the carre, That with an herbe (of which there grew great store) He should againe Sonapos sight restore. 26 For which, and for his former great desart, He should haue men t'assault Biserta land, He teacheth him those people vnexpart, He should so traine, to make them to his hand: He further learned him the way and art, he vnstable , looke in the .How he might safely passe th'vnstable sand: And plainly thus S. Iohn, from point to point. What th'English Duke should do, did him appoint. 27 Then did Astolfo take his winged steed, And of the Saint deuoutly tooke his leaue, And soaring downe, he makes no little speed, To do that which in charge he did receaue; So farre by Nylus bankes he doth proceed, Vntill that Nubia he did plaine perceaue; And following the course of that same streame, Came to Senapo, head of that same Reame. 28 Great was the pleasure, triumph, and the ioy, Senapo tooke when he thereof had woord, Remembring well the trouble and annoy, The foule Harpias brought him at his bood: But when he made him eke his sight enioy, And did so rare a grace to him affoord, That by his meanes his eye sight was restord him, He worshipt him and like a God adord him. 29 Nor onely did he giue him souldiers then, Wherewith he might Biserta towne inuade, But for each one he askt he gaue him ten, That soone two hundred thousand men he made: Scarce had the fields roome for so many men, But footmen all o is that countryes trade, For horses in that Region are but dentie, But Elephants and Camells they haue plentie. 30 Now that same day that went before the day, In which the men of Nubia made account, To march on forward, some part of their way, Astolfo on his Griffith horse doth mount; And Southward he doth passe, and doth not stay, Vntill he came neare to a mightie mount: At foote whereof a vast caue he doth finde,Looke in the Allusion. Which was the lodging of the Sotherne winde. 31 The mightie caue had but a narrow mouth, At which the Duke (as Christs Apostle taught) Did watch so long, vntill the wind of South, Came home to ease his spirits ouerwrought, To enter in, Astolfo him allowth, But when anone, to haue come out he thought, Within a leather sacke the Duke had plast At that caues mouth, he caught and tyde him fast. 32 The Palladin, full proud of such a pray, Returnes to Nubia ward, before twas night, And to the Negros then he showd the way, Appointing them how they should trauell right; He victualls doth and cariages conuay, All safe vnto that hill, that Atlas hight; Quite ore those fields where many haue bene found, With wind for want of water,Because the wind  as wont to  the sand some∣times in such sort as it  the men that went in it. more then drownd 33 And being come vnto the mountaines side, There, where he might discouer all the plaine, He doth his bands and companies deuide, And chuseth those that are most apt to traine, And those he parts and putteth them aside, And orders for the rest he doth ordaine, Then he in fight of all the hill ascendeth, And lookt like one that some great feat intendeth. 34 And kneeling downe (as one that did beleeue, His prayre should granted be, as well as hard) He prayd his master their great want releeue: Then casting stones that were before prepard,uid. Metam. 7. Sa a quu hoc credat  protests (What cannot firme beleefe in Christ atcheeue?) The very stones (a thing to credit hard) Did grow, and hue, and moue by hidden cause, And had both bellyes, legges, and necks, and iawes. 35 And naying lowd, fild all the place with sound, Of horse, some bay, some roane, some daple gray, And of all them were readie horses found, The spurre, the wand, the leg and voyce t'obay; To stop, to start, to passe carier, to bound, To gallop straight, or round, or any way: Thus were the men well horst, with little paines, For eu'rie horse had saddle, bit and raines.
36 Thus by this vertuous Duke, within one houre, Were fourscore thousand footmen, horsemen made, With which so great and vnexpected powre, Full fiercely he all Affrike did inuade, And burnt and spoild full many a towne and towre, All giuing way to his victorious blade, Vntill three Princes, Agramants vicegerents, Made head against the Duke, with their adherents. 37 The king of Aldyzer, and he of Ferse, With stout Bransardo, all three mightie kings, That find their enemies to grow so fierce, He turnes to A∣stolfo in the next booke, 18 staffe.Do send their Lord by sea, word of these things. A little fricket straight the waues doth pierce, And of these euill newes quicke notice brings To Agramant that lay that time in Arlie, Besieged by an armie strong and warlie. 38 Who hearing of his countries wofull case, And by his absence what did them betide, He cald his Lords and Princes to the place, Consulting how for this harme to prouide; And looking once or twice with stately grace, Now on the tone, then on the tother side, But on Marsilio and Sobrino chiefe, In such like words he told to them his griefe. 39 Agramants O∣ration.Although I wot it worst beseemes of all, A Generall to say, I had not thought, Yet so say I, for when a harme doth fall. Beyond the reach of humane sence or thought, Then sure the blame is either none or small, And in this compasse may my fault be brought: My fault it was, Affricke to leaue vnarmed, If of the Nubians now they could be harmed. 40 But who could thinke (but God that vnderstands The things to come as well as those are past) So great an host could passe to many lands, That were from vs so great a distance plast? Twixt whom and vs lies those vnstable sands, That dangerously are mou'd with Southerne blast, Yet are they come, and haue so farre preuailed, Byserta selfe is now by them assailed. 41 Now on this point your consels here I craue, If so I shall all fruitlesse hence retire, Or trie before I go, if I can haue The crowne of France, to which I do aspire, Or how I may at home my country saue, And this destroy, which is my most desire; If any know the meane, then speake he to it, To th'end that we may know the best, and do it. 42 Thus much the sonne of great Traiano spake, And on Marsilio fixt his eyes, that he As chiefe in place, thereby might notice take, That first by him he would aduised be: Who when he had stood vp for reu'rence sake, And bowd his bodie, and withall his knee, Downe sate him in his honorable seate, And spake such words as I shall here repeate. 43 What euer fame doth bring,Marsn  to perswade  to  warrs in  of good or ill, To make it greater it doth euer vse, Wherefore (my soueraigne Lord) I neuer will Be bold or basht with hearing flying newes, But moue such doubt and such assurance still, As though I would not all reports refuse, Yet would I thinke the truth of other sort, Then as so many mouthes shall make report. 44 And I beleeue each tale so much the lesse, By how much more from likelihood it doth arre: Now in this present cause let any guesse, It like it be, a king that dwels so farre, Could come with such an host, as they expresse, To Africa, so often vsd to warre, And passe those parlous sands,Looke in the stone. where to his cost, Cambises erst did leese his mightie host. 45 But they be Nubians, let it be allowd, By miracle come in a showre of raine, Or closely carrid thither in some clowd, Sith by the way none saw so large a traine: Hath Affrike euer to such people bowd? Must they haue aide to driue them home againe? I sure may think you kept a sorie garison, If them and yours betweene there be comparison. 46 I rather thinke th'Arabians are come downe, From those their hils, and done some spoile or wast, And tane some men, & burnt some baggage towne, But small resistance finding as they past, And that Bransardo for his owne renowne, Whom as your deputie you there had plast, For one sets downe one hundred in his letter, To th'end that his excuse may seeme the better. 47 But if you will but send some ship or twaine, That but your standard may therein appeare, No doubt but they will hie them home againe, By that time these but weigh their ankers here, If they Arabians, that can bide no paine, Or if they Nubians be, the case is cleare, Who onely taken haue this heart of grace, To know your person absent from the place. 48 This therefore is the summe of my perswasion, Make sure the conquest here ere you go hence, Charles can no more endure your sharpe euasion, Now that his nephew is distraught of sence: Now by the forehead let vs take Occasion, Least after all our trauell and expence, He hide away his haire,. and turne his bald. And we vnprouident be thought and cald. 49 With these so warie words, and such as these, The subtle Spaniard labourd to perswade, The king of Affrike not to passe the seas, Till of the warres in France and end were made: But sage Sobrino, that espide with ease, How deepe he seemd in shallow streames to wade,Th, how strongly be  forced  reasons. Respecting priuat more then publike cause, Did answer thus after a little pause.
50 or  made him  France  to his .My Liege, when first to peace I counseld you, I would I had not bin so true a Prophet, Or if my sayings needs must proue so true, I would you had beleeu'd them for your profit; Not Rodomont with that rash youthfull crue Of Alcyrd, Marbalust, that then did scoffe it, Whom now I wish here present, face to face, But chiefly 'Rodomont I wish in place. 51 He that then vndertooke to make all France, But like the dust that flies before the wind, He that did vow, in heau'n or hell, your lance To follow, nay to leaue it farre behind, Now when he should the matter most aduance, Vnprofitably lurkes in corners blind, And I that then (because I told you true) Was cald a coward, still abide with you. 52 And still I will abide, what ere ensuth, During this life, which though made weak with age, I will not feare, against the strongest youth That liues in France, in your defence to gage; Nor yet can any charge me with vntruth, Not from the proudest Prince to poorest page, And well I wot, I haue done more then some, That promist much ere they were hither come. 53 Thus much I say, thereby more plaine to proue, That what I then did say, or now impart, Came from true seruice, and of loyall loue, And not of faint, much lesse of hollow hart: Now I aduise you hence with speed remoue, And that you homeward in all hast depart, For well you wot, that wisedome it is none, In winning other mens, to leese ones owne. 54 Yet know not I why we should call it winning, If of our losses iust account we yeeld, Thirtie two kings we were at the beginning, A third part now scarce tarries in the field; And we our selues here vp in corners pinning, Scant safe within these rampiers can vs shield, We so decay except in time we cease, At last we shall be driu'n to sue for peace. 55 Orlando is not there, tis true, what tho? Had he bin there, we had all dide ere this, His want doth but prolong our ouerthrow, By other men, our state in danger is: They haue Renaldo there, that plaine doth show His force and courage not much lesse then his, There are his cousins, all the Palladins, Eternall terror to our Sarazins. 56 .They further haue a man in strength and hart, (I needs must praise my foe against my will) A second Mars, I meane king Brandimart, Whose great puissance ioynd to actiue skill, My selfe in single fight haue found in part, And further proofe haue seene by others ill: Besides, Orlando wanted long ago, Since which we more haue lost then won you know. 57 Now if we sped no better in time past, We shall speed worse hereafter I do dread, We see Gradasso ouer sea is past. And that the valiant Mandricard is dead; Marfisa hath forsaken vs at last, And Rodomont, of whom it may be sed, Were but his faith with force to be compared, The rest might in a manner haue bin spared. 58 Now when as so great helpes and succors faile vs, So many thousands of our souldiers slaine, And all supplies that should at all auaile vs, Alreadie come from Affrike and from Spaine; They haue of late got foure new knights to quaile vs, Compard with any of the Christen traine, Foure knights that if you search from hence to Inde, Foure knights to match these foure you shal not find 59 I know not if you euer heard before, Of Oliueros sons, and Sansonet, With Guidon sauage, whom I value more Then all their other succors that they get, From Almanie the higher or the lower, Although such aids at nought we cannot set, And we do plainly see before our eyes, That eu'ry day they may haue fresh supplies. 60 We may assure our selues if any more We take the field, our side goes to the pot, For if when we were two for one before, Yet we must needs confesse we gained not, Now they so much increased haue their store, With forraine powre, both English, Dutch and Scot, What can we hope but after all our toyle, To haue bad recompence of shame and toyle. 61 Yet all is well, if you will part betime, And hie you home before it proue too late; But if you tarry any longer time, You here will leese your men, at home your state: Now if to leaue Marsilio seeme a crime, For feare the world condemne you for vngrate, To saue him harmlesse you for peace must sue, Which they will so accept, if so will you. 62 But if you thinke such motion may not stand, With honour of your state and high degree, And hope by sight to make a surer hand, Which yet how it succeeded hath your see; Yet seeke at least to haue the vpper hand By this deuice, and herein follow me: Put all the quarrels triall, if you can, To one, and let Rogero be the man. 63 I know, and you do know, and so we all Do know, that our Rogero hath such might, No Christen can so sturdie be or tall, As hand to hand to conquer him in fight: But if you meane to make warre generall, Though he in strength far passe each other knight, Yet in the fight he but for one can stand, And what is one against a mightie band?
64 I thinke it best, if so you thinke it good, To offer this to Charles that if he will, If with his worthie courage so it stood, For sauing those, whom you on both sides kill, And shunning of the shedding guiltlesse blood, Which both of you, on each side dayly spill, Each side to chuse one champion at whose parrell, To make a full conclusion of the quarrell. 65 Prouided first, that which so ere of these Shall dye, his Prince shall pay the tother tribute: I know this motion will not Charles displease, For all his Lords, will there-vnto contribute; And this would worke our safetie, and our ease, For to Rogero, so much I attribute, That such his vallew is, this cause so ius Antagonist is deriued from a Greeke word sig∣nifying the ad∣uersarie that fights hand to hand.Were Mars Antagonist, yet yeeld he st. 66 These words Sobrino spake with such effect, As Agramant thereto gaue his consent, And then Interpreters he did direct, Who straight to Charles with such a challenge went: Charles meanes not such occasion to neglect, He thinks the combat wonne incontinent, He had such store of champions, nere the latter, Vnto Renaldo he commits the matter. 67 Glad were both armies of this new accord, Henceforth to liue in quiet they intend, And either part doth praise his soueraigne Lord, That of these broyles would make so speedie end. Each one in mind these foolish bralls abhord, That made them thus in warres their dayes to spend, Sentence, Dulce bellum the pertu.Each man could say, and no man then denyd it, That warre is sweet to those that haue not tryd it. 68 Renaldo, he in mind doth much reioyse, To thinke his Prince had done him such a grace, To make of him aboue so many choyse, For triall of o great importing case: And though Rogero were by common voyce, The chiefe man deemd of all the Turkish race, And hand to hand had killed Mandricard, Renaldo this, but little did regard. 69 But good Rogero he was nothing glad, Though of so many gallant men and stout, His king to his great praise, him chosen had, Aboue all other knights, and pikt him out; His heart was heauie, and his looke was sad, Not that in mind he ought did dread or doubt, Renaldos forces, or Orlandos either, No scarse and if they had beene both togither. 70 But this procur'd his griefe, because he knew, Renaldo brother was vnto his deare, Who did her plaints with letters oft renew, And charged him so deepe, as toucht him neare: Now if he should to old wrongs, adde this new, To kill Renaldo, then the case is cleare, She should haue so great reason to reproue him, He doubts she neuer will hereafter loue him. 71 Now if Rogero do in silent sort, Lament this combat tane against his will, No doubt his spouse which heard this sad report, Was worse appaid then he, at least as ill; She beats her brest, and breakes her tresses short, And many teares with sorrow she did spill, And calls Rogero oftentimes vngrate, And curseth euermore her cruell fate. 72 It needs must turne vnto her griefe and paine, Who ere is ouercome, who euer win, She dare not thinke Rogero can be slaine, Her heart such anguish doth conceiue therein; And if it pleased Christ so to ordaine, For chastising his wretched peoples sin, That man should dye, that of her house was chiefe, Besides his death, that brought a further griefe. 73 A griefe that was indeed beyond all measure, To thinke she neuer might henceforth for shame, Go to her spouse, without the flat displeasure, Of all her kin and house of whence she came: And when she weigh'd the case at better leasure, Each thing to her seemd worse and worse to frame, For why she knew, her tongue that knot had tyde, That while she liu'd, might neuer loose, nor slide. 74 But that deare frend of hers, that neuer faild, To helpe at chiefest needs, the noble maid, I meane the sage Melissa, so preuaild, That Bradamantés griefe was part alaid, For when she knew the cause, and what she aild, Against the time, she promised her aid; And vndertooke, that of that bloudy quarrell, To her nor hers, there should arie no parrell. 75 This while the gallant knights against the fight, Themselues, and eke their weapons do prouide, The choise whereof did appertaine in right, Vnto the champion of the Christen side, Who, as a man that tooke but small delight, (Since he had lost his famous horse) to ride, Did chuse to fight on foot, and in this sort, All arm'd, with axes long, and daggers short. 76 Or were it chance, or were it in regard, That Malagige aduised him thereto, Because he knew the force of Balysard, Or powre all charms of armour to vndoe, (Of whose sharpe edge you haue ere this time hard) But this they did appoint betweene then two, About the place likewise they do agree, A plaine neare Arlie walls, the same to be. 77 Now when Aurora left the lothed bed,Looke in the Table. O Tytan (vnto whom she hath no list) To th'end that no disorder may be bred, On either side the marshalls part he list, At end whereof, were rich pauillions spred, Where nothing that belongs to stare was mist, And distant from each tent a little space, On either side, they did an altar place.
78 Not long time after this, in battell ray, The Turkish armie with their king came out, Glistring in gold, and stately rich aray. In show, with all Barbarian pompe set out, A swift Arabian horse, of colour bay He rode, and by his side Rogero stout, Rode cheeke by cheeke, and to his greater same, On him to wait, Marsilio thought no shame. 79 His helmet (for the which the Tartar dyde, Slaine by Rogero as I did rehearse) (Which since a thousand yeares, and more beside, Ho∣ Virgels .Was celebrated in more stately verse) Marsilio carrid, by Rogeros side, Well mounted on a Spanish genet fearce, His arms, and all that did thereto belong, Some other states, deuided them among. 80 On tother side came worthie Charlemayne, From out his tents, strongly intrencht, anone, And all his bands of men he did ordayne, So as if to battell he should then haue gone: About him was of Peers a noble trayne, Renaldo in the mids, with armour on, That onely helmet erst from Mambryn tane, Was by Vggero borne, the noble Dane. 81 Two axes, both alike in each respect, Salemon and Duke Namus beare before, The Chieftaines on each side their men direct, To keepe within their limits euermore; And in the midst, was left a large prospect, Betweene each company, and roome good store, For present death it was, if any venter, Saue those two champions, in the list to enter. 82 challeges ade, the  appoints  th parte  must , and bring  weapons, and the challenger  choise .When second choise of weapon (as was fit) Was giu'n Rogero to auoid suspect, Two Priests before the rest came forth, to wit, Of each side one, and one of either sect, Each had a booke, ours had Christs holy writ, Theirs Alcoran, with errours foule infect, With ours came forth the Christen Prince deuout, With that of theirs, the king of Turks came out. 83 Now first king Charles neare to his altar stands, And this great protestation there did make, And lifts to heauen both heart, and eyes and hands, O God, O Christ, that suffredst for our sake, O blessed Ladie, that in swathing bands, Heldst him that mortall flesh of thee did take, And didst nine months inclose that high diuinitie, In sacred wombe, still keeping true virginitie. 84 Be witnesses, that here I make it knowne, And promise faithfully for me and mine, To Agramant, and who so ere shall owne The crowne of Affrike in ensuing time, That if my champion shall be ouerthrowne, To pay to them, each yeare of gold most fine, Ten horslode, and forthwith the warres to cease, And euermore hereafter to haue peace. 85 And if I fayle, then let the fearfull wrath Of both, on me at once this folly wreake, And worke vnto my sect all wo and seath, That all insuing ages plaine may speake, Loe what a plague, and iust reward he hath, That durst his oth to you, and promise breake: This said, his hand he laid vpon the booke, And vp on heauen he fixt his stedfast looke. 86 When this was done, then all departed thence, There where the Turks had with much superstition Adornd their altar with no small expence; And their king Agramant, with like condition, Vowd neuer after this, to do offence To Charles, but passe the seas with expedition, And ay keepe peace, and equail tribute pay, If that Rogero vanquisht were that day. 87 And in like sort he did protest alowd, And cald on Mahomet, his Idol great, And by that booke, that his Priest held, he vowd To keepe most duly all he did repeat: This done, to part from thence were all allowd, And either Prince retired to his seat; Then in like sort they sweare the champions both; And thus much in effect containd their oth. 88 Rogero promiseth, that if the fight, By Agramant shall be disturbd or parted, That neuer after he will be his knight, But serue king Charles, and be to him true harted. Renaldo in like sort his faith doth plight, That if to him, Charles any aid imparted, Before that one of them were ouercome, That then himselfe to Agramant would come. 89 Now when these ceremonies all were ended, Then eu'rie man departed to his side, And then the warriours onely now attended, The trumpets sound, that battell signifide; Which when both heard, then each of thē intended, To show the vtmost of his vallew tride: Now sounds the steele with blows, not few nor soft, Now they themselues, strike low and now aloft. 90 Sometime they would beguile the tone the tother, With mind vnto their strength, to ad their art, They profer at one place, and strike another, Inuading still the least defended part: But good Rogero, that against the brother, Of her did fight, that did possesse his hart, Did oft bestow his blows, with such regard, Most thought Renaldo was for him too hard. 91 He seemed readier to ward then strike, For he himselfe well knew not what he ment, To kill Renaldo, that he did not like, To dy himselfe that was not his intent: But now I hope that none will it mislike, Sith in this booke so much time hath bene spent, And least my tediousnesse may some molest, In this ensuing booke to heare the rest.
Morall.In the beginning of this booke is set downe how great a regard a man ought to haue of true honor indeed, namely to do nothing  herein it may be iustly touched: not as our young gallants in these dayes, that stand vpon their puntos in tri∣sting matters, hauing neither honor in their hearts, nor truth in their mouths. No doubt but to a noble nature and di∣sposition, honor in the tenderest thing that may be: And therefore it may well of them be said: Ma al honor chimancha in vn momento, Non puo in cento annisatisfar, ne in cento. But if that honor haue one minutes staine, An hundred yeares scant can it clense againe. But as in Religion, the true vsage thereof us most necessary to the good of the soule, but heresies and superstition be most damnable; so in this desire of worldy reputation, the good and considerat regard thereof, is the most worthy and Gentle∣manly thing that can be: but the vaine and friuolous maintenance thereof is as ridiculous and to be scorned. For ex∣ample, imagine some man so chast, (as Caesar was called) omnium mulierum vir, or to vse our homely English phrase (as the towne Bull of the Parish) so true of his word, as he that Heywood writes of that kept all the commandements, and namely that concerning false witnesse, With witnesse false thou hurtest none, for why, Each word thou spakest, each man doth know a ly. So temperat in eating and drinking that he surfets but once a weeke, vidz. from Saterday to Saterday; and endewed with other magnificall qualities, as swearing and gaming, and now and then (of the gentlenes of his nature) not scorn∣ing a Pandars occupation. Can you maruell (I say) if such an stand somewhat nycely vpon his honor, if he be touched therein? but the true honorable person indeed, will neither giue iust cause of offence, nor beare any wrong or disgrace; and whosoeuer sailes either in the first of these, for want of stayd gouernment, or faints in the later of these, for want of true courage, let him know his honor goeth lame on one legge, onely the first of these two mayms may be cured, but the tother is called a priuie maim, and is vtterly incurable. Concerning the Orations of Agramant, Marsilio, and Sobrino, a man might make a long, & not vnnecessary discourse of the matter, but that I haue taken vpon me to note, and not to discourse: First therefore in Agramant we may obserue how young couragious Princes (such as he is described to have bin) are egged on by their grand minions (to whom peace is a penance) to warre vpon other mens countryes, and many times leaue their owne vnguarded: In which kind, fooles sometimes giue wiser counsell then they. As in the time of that good king of France Francis the first, they report that when he inuaded Italy, he consulted with his counsell, where he were best to enter Lombardy: some aduising one way, some another, a foole standing by, and hearing their consultation, came in amongst them and sware that they were all fooles: for (saith he) here is euerie man that aduiseth the king how to enter into Italy, but none of you takes care how he shall get out againe: this though accounted (as it was) but a fooles bolt for the time, yet proued too true afterward: for in that iourney the king was taken, and was sent prisoner to a Castle in Spaine called Madrillo. In Marsilio and Sobrino, we may see the qualities of a good counseller to a Prince, and a bad, one hauing only a regard to his owne priuat, the tother plaine and faithfull, and carefull for his Princes best safetie. In that Sobrino the good and faithfull counseller, aduiseth to make an end of the war one way or other, either by taking or paying tribute, one may ob∣serue that indeed it is no policie for Princes, but the vtter ruine & beggering of their Realmes, to prolong their wars, & to trifle away money & time in such serious causes, & be as vncertain in the end as in the beginning. The saying of a no∣ble & wise councellor (another Sobrino) in England, is worthy to be remembered, that with a prety tale he told, vtterly condēned such lingring proceedings. The tale was this, a poore widow (said he) in the country, doubting her prouisiō of wood would not last all the winter, & yet desiring to rost a ioint of meat, & a hen one day to welcome her frends, laid on two sticks on the fire, but when that would not scarse heat it, she fetched two more, & so stil burning them out by two and two (wheras one fagot laid on at the first would haue rosted it) she spent foure or fiue fagots more then she needed; & yet when all was done, her meat was scorched of one side, and raw of the tother side: her frends ill content with their fare, and she enforced ere winter went about, to borrow wood of her poore neighbours, because so many of her owne fagots were spent. HistorieCresus was the king of Lydia, who thought himselfe happie for his riches: but Solon was of another opinion, and therefore thought a foole by him, till in the end Cresus being bound at a stake, to be burned by his victorious enemy, he cryed out on the name of Solon, and through that thicke and darke smoke, he could see that wisedome, which before his eyes dazled with foolish wordly felicitie could not see. Crassus called also the rich Crassus, a Citizen of Rome, his saying was, that no man was rich that could not with his bare reuenue maintaine a Royall army: which if it be a true saying, I doubt whether any Prince Christened at this day be rich. Crassus in reproch of his couetousnesse, had molten gold poured into his mouth by the Parthians, who tooke him prisoner and slew him. Cambises sonne of Cyrus king of Persia hauing conquered Egipt, inuaded the Ammonians with a great armie, but for want of victuals was forced to giue ouer his enterprise. Further he sent an armie before him of fif∣tie thousand men, with commandement to destroy the Temple of Iupiter Amon, and they entring the deserts of that country were neuer seene againe, so as it was thought that while they sate at dinner in the field, a furious Sotherne wind raysed such store of dust and sand, as ouerwhelmed them and quite couered them. Allegorie.In the miracles done by Astolfo, is ment Allegorically, that a man guided by vertue, and assisted by grace, makes all kinde of creatures to serue his turne. Allusion.His turning of stones to horses, alludes to the like thing in Ouids Metamorphosis, where Prometheus and Epime∣theus made men of stones. Inque breui spacio superorum numine saxa, Iacta viri manibus faciem traxere virorum, Et de foemineo reparata est foemina iactu. In his taking the Southerne winde in a bagge, it alludes to a like thing in Homers Odisseas of Vlisses, that had the winde bound in a bagge, and some say the Sorcerers neare the North sea, vse to sell the winde to saylers in glasses, and it is so common among them, that they will laugh as much at those that beleeue it not, as we would be to heare one tell it. The end of the annotations vpon the 38. booke.
THE XXXIX. BOOKE THE ARGVMENT. King Agramant breakes oth, and is constrained, Vnto his natiue soile by sea to flye, Where then Astolfo many townes had gained, And at Biserta siege as then did lye: Orlando thither commeth, madly brained, But th' English Duke did cure him by and by: Braue Dudon, with his nauie made of leaues, Meets Agramant, and hotly him receaues. 1 WHat tongue can tell, or learned pen expresse? The woes, to which Roge∣ro now did runne? In mind, and body, driu'n to such distresse, That of two deaths, the tone he cannot shun: If he be slaine, and if he kill no lesse, Both wayes he sees he shall be quite vndonne: By shame in death, and if he win and liue, By that offence he shall his true loue giue. 2 Renaldo.The tother knight whom no such thoughts encombred Lets frankly fly his blows without regard, In so great store as was not to be numbred, No time, no place, nor no aduantage spard: Rogero seemd to him, as if he slumbred, Small list he had to strike, but all to ward, And if he did, in such a place he strake, His blow great sound, but little signe did make. 3 The Pagan Lords now doubt it will go wrong, They see the combat so vnequall grow, Renaldo seemd too lustie and too strong, Rogero seemd too lasie and too slow. But Agramant that sate the rest among, Doth ret, and fume, and chase, and sweat, and blow, Doth blame Sobrino chiefly, whose perswasion, Was of this combat chiefe and sole occasion. 4 Melissa.This while Melissa sage, whose skill was great In Magicke art, repaired to the place, And with some secret words she did repeat, She changd her voice, her statute, and her face, In mind hereby to worke a wondrous feat; She seemd all armed, in a Dragons case, In sword, in shield, in shew, in eu'rie thing, She seemed Rodomont the Sarzan king. 5 To wofull Agramant she straight doth ride, (In likenesse of an horse, she rode a sprite) And comming to his presence, lowd she cride, (My Liege) this was too fowle an ouersight, To match a beardlesse boy so meanly tride, With such a famous and renowned knight, And chiefe in matter that imports so much, As doth the whole estate of Affricke tuch. 6 Wherefore that you in time this losse may saue, Permit the combat to proceed no more, Let Rodomont the blame and blemish haue, Of breaking that, which you so rashly swore; Now each man shew how well his sword can shaue, Now I am here, each man is worth a score. These words in Agramant had so much force, That without more aduice, he straight tooke horse. 7 And thinking sure fierce Rodomont was theare, Forthwith the Christens host he doth iuade, Of oth nor promise he hath now no feare, This one mans presence him so bold had made: Each man doth in a moment couch his speare, Or charge his pike, or draw his glittering blade: Melissa hauing set them thus togither, With this illusion vanisht (God knows whither)
8 The two stout champions when they plainly saw, heir combat, that all quarrell should descide, Disturbd against all promise, and all law, They cease all force, and lay all wrath aside, And by consent, themselues they do withdraw, Vntill it might more plainly be descride, In whether Prince of faith were found such want: In aged Charles, or youthfull Agramant. 9 And each of them of new doth vow and sweate, That vnto him that first did cou'nant breake, They will for euer endlesse hatred beare, And ioyne together such offence to wreake: The while the hosts of neither side forbeare To make quicke triall who be strong or weake, For lightly at the first conflict they shoe, Their hearts if they be resolute or no. 10 Euen as a grewnd which hunters hold in slip, Doth striue to breake the string, or slide the coller, be  or hu∣ caue he  .(That sees the fearfull Deare, before him skip, Pursewd belike with some Actaeons scholler) And when he sees he can by no meanes slip, Doth howle, and whine, and bites the string for choler In such like case within the tents did stay, Marfisa with dame Bradamant that day. 11 All that same day vnto that present howre, They had beheld with great despite and paine, Such tempting baites yet had they not the powre, To set their foote in that forbidden plaine: But now they do the field on each side scowre, Though erst for duties sake they did abstaine, Now finding such a true and iust excuse, That Agramant had lewdly broke the truse. 12 Marfisa ran the first quite through the brest, And made the speare come forth a yard behind; Then with her sword she flies among the rest, There chiefe where most resistance she doth finde: And Bradamant puts Goldélance in rest, With like effects, but of another kind, For all she toucht therewith she ouerthrew, And yet not one among them all she slew. 13 Thus these two warriours euer as they went, Subdewd their enemies, and kept them vnder, Who euer met them surely should be shent, And each of them at tothers force did wonder: But being both to sharpe reuengement bent, At last they part themselues, and went asunder, Each by her selfe, such high exploits performing, As gaue the Turks long after cause of mourning. 14 As when the Southerne winds do melt the snow, Congeald on tops of mountaines many dayes, It often happens that two streames do flow, Or vie, A prase to say  which  go faster.And taking in their course, two sundrie wayes, At last so violent and furious grow, That bearing downe, and breaking vsuall bayes, They wast the fields, and seeme on vye to runne, By which of them most damage may be donne. 15 Eu'n so these twaine, incenst with rage and wrath, And each in seu'rall acts their forces trying, Do worke the Turks, no little woe and cath, And leaue them ouerthrowne, or maymd, or dying: Scarse Agramant the powre by this time hath, (Say what he list) to keepe his men from flying, Himselfe not shrinking though, nor once retiring, But euermore for Rodomont enquiring. 16 By onely his aduise and exhortation, (For so the vnaduised Prince doth thinke) He broken had his solemne protestation, He maruels now, to find him so to shrinke; Likewise Sobrino with great lamentation, (Religion in his mind so deepe did sinke) Retyrd to Arly, euermore protesting) His faultlesse mind, that periurie detesting. 17 Marsilio eke vnto his countrie fled, The shamefull promise breach, of Agramant Strake in his mind such superstitious dred, He leaueth him to beare the brunt, who cant Against the Christen souldiers could make hed: That no supplies of forren powres did want, With Palladines among them fierce and bold, Mixt like rich gemmes in faire embroderd gold.Simile. 18 But now a while I linquish this conflict,He turnes to A∣gramant in this ooke the 64. st. And passe beyond the seas without a barke, For to this tale I am not tyde so strict, But that I will repeat (if you will harke) Astolfos acts, who forward dayly prickt, With new made horsemen, as (if you did marke) I told you erst, and did all Affrike wast, Vntill three kings resisted him at last. 19 The king of Algazer, and stout Bransard, Did leuy powres, such as in hast they could, And put them all in armes without regard, That some to young were found and some to old; Yea from the musters, women scant were spar'd, For Agramant (as hath before bene told) With hope of vaine reuenge, without aduise, Of able men, vnpeopled Affrike twise. 20 Thus few were there, and of those few were theare, (So quite his countrie weale he did neglect) The greater part vnskilfull, armes to beare, As was more plainly proued in effect, For at first brunt they fled from thence for feare, In hope Biserta walls should them protect: Braue Bucifer was taken in the fight, Bransardo scapt, and sau'd himselfe by flight. 21 For Bucifer alone, he tooke more griefe, Then all the rest (he did him so esteeme) Because Biserta asked great reliese, For which this Bucifer most fit did seeme, Who was in all those parts of credit chiefe; Wherefore Bransardo faine would him redeeme, He many wayes doth cast, but none conclude on, Till at the last he did remember Dudon.
22 This Dudon was by blood and birth a Dane, But yet esteemd the Palladins among, He lately at the Bridge was prisner tane, Where Rodomont the sturdie Turke and strong, Brought many worthy men vnto their bane: To Affrike Dudon then he sent ere long, Now Bransard thinkes (nor was his thought amisse) Stout Bucifer by change to get for this. 23 He perfect notice had, by true espiall, The Nubians leader was an English Lord, Who loue a Dane (there can be no deniall) And once were Danes, as writers do record: Wherefore he sends a messenger for triall Vnto Astolfo, who doth soone accord, To free his kinsman, whom he lou'd so dearly, And ioyned was in blood to him so nearly. 24 Thus Dudon by the English Duke was freed, Who afterward his seruice did employ, Now (as Saint Iohn had wild him to proceed) He sought to worke the Turks some more annoy: And that he might set Prouence free with speed, Which Agramant and his did then enioy, He maketh of his men a new election, Whom he may nd to free them from subiection. 25 And hauing chosen forth some men of these, As best from his huge armie might be mist, Whose number was so great, as he at ease With halfe of them three Affricks might resist: He causd them to be trained for the seas, And praying God his purpose to assist, That night was shewd Astolfo in a vision, How he of ships might make a large prouision. 26 Next day the weather being faire and calme, Astolfo walketh to the salt sea shore, And holding in his hands in either palme, Great store of leaues that he had tane before, Of Bayes, of Cedar trees, of Oke, of Palme, Into the sea he flang them in great store; O metamorphosis beyond all credit, O admirable powre diuine that bed it! 27 No sooner had the water wet the leaues, But presently they chang'd their former hue, The veines that were in them, each man perceaues To grow to ribs and posts in order due, And still at each end sharpe each lease reccaues, Eu'n of a sailing ship proportion true: And of the ships as many sorts there weare, As there were trees that those same leaues did beare. 28 A miracle it was to see them growne To ships and barks, with gallies hulks and crayes, Each vessell hauing tackling of their owne, With sailes and oares to heipe at all assayes. The Duke prouided, when it once was knowne, Those two Ilands haue store of good sailers.Both marriners and masters in few dayes, For with his present pay he soone allured From Sard and Corsie men to eas inured. 29 Those that tooke shipping then, were counted more Then six and twentie thousand strong of hand, Great Admirall was Dudon, who before Had learnd the seruice both of sea and land: Now while they lay at anker nigh the shore, To wait when wind would for their purpose stand, It fortuned a man of warre came by them, Full lode with prisners, and cast anker nie them. 30 These were those prisners whom fierce Rodomount (As oft I haue declard) did dayly get, When at the bridge he did them so dismount, And sometime backward in the riuer set: Here were (among some more of good account) Braue Brandimart and worthy Sansonet, With Oliuer, and some I now not tutch, Both French, Italian, Gascoigne knights and Dutch. 31 The master of the barke had first assignd, His prisoners at Algier to vnlode, But being driu'n by ouer blowing wind, Farre past the place, he thought to make abode Neare great Biserta, where he thinks to find None but his countrimen within the rode; To which he thinks himselfe as welcome guest, As Progne is vnto her chirping nest.Simile. 32 But after, when th'Imperiall bird he saw, Conioyned to the Pard and flowre of France, He was abasht, and looked pale for aw, Much like to him that waking new, doth chance On poisond serpent tred,Simile. and same would draw Himselfe from thence, for feare of more mischance;Virgi Imsum  qui sentious ∣guim, Pressie humi mitens, &c. He quakes, and from the serpent doth retire, Whose poison swels, and eyes do flame like fire. 33 But now the wretched Pilot could not flie, And lesle could keepe the prisners he had caught, For both himselfe, and all they by and by, Vnto the place against his will were brought, Whereas the Duke and Dudon then did lie, Who welcomd well the Christens as they ought, And he that brought them thither, for his paines, Was made a gally slaue, and bound in chaines. 34 Thus were the knights most friendly entertained, And greatly welcomed by Otons sonne, Who horse and furniture for them ordained, And causd to them great honor to be donne: Eke Dudon with these knights some days remained, And thinks the time so spent, not lost but wonne: His iourney purposely three dayes deferring, To spend the same with these braue knights confer∣ring. 35 By their relation he doth vnderstand, In what estate King Charles and th'empire stood, What are the hau'ns, where he may safely land, And where they thought ye same would be withstood. Thus while discreetly on each point they scand, And each man told what he thought ill or good, There suddenly rose in the campe alarme, The cause vnknown, but ech man cride, arme, arme.
36 The Duke Astolfo with his noble crew, That at that time conferring were together, Straight armd themselues, and out their swords they drew And went enquiring hither still and thither, To learne of whence this sudden tumult grew, But yet no cause they could suspect or gether, At last they saw a madman stare and stampe, That nakt alone did trouble all the campe. 37 Those that had seen him first belike did flout him, But when some few vnto their cost had found, That with a bat he so did play about him, His blowes made many fall in deadly sound: They now began so much to dread and doubt him, That they had giu'n to him no little ground, And none of them to meet him had the harts, They onely shot at him, or cast some darts. 38 The noble Duke, and those with him did see, The wondrous force and most stupendious wracke, The madman wrought, and marueld much that he Alone could driue so many souldeirs backe: When lo, a Ladie of no meane degree, Rode towards them attyred all in blacke, And vnto Brandimart she came in hast, And claspt her arms about his necke full fast. 39 I know you know, without my further showing, This was the spouse of noble Brandimart, Who euer since his wofull ouerthrowing, By Rodomont, did with a pensiue hart, Seeke his release, till at the last she knowing, (As I before did more at large impart) How he beyond the seas was prisner sent, Her selfe at Arly to take shipping ment. 40 But while that louing purpose she pursewth, Bardino met with her, an Easterne knight, Who brought vp Brandimart in tender youth, And kept him at a Castell (Siluan hight) He hearing at her mouth at large the truth, And how in Africa they find him might, They soone agreed, no long time ouerslipping, To seeke him out and so forthwith tooke shipping. 41 No sooner they on Affrike shore did land, (Bardino sage, and faithfull Fiordeliege) But first the people let them vnderstand, Astolfo great Biserta did besiege, With many a Captaine braue, and gallant band; Likewise a brute of Brandimart their liege Was spred, that he was there ariued newly, But none was able to confirme it truly. 42 Vntill so long they traueld on the cost, At last she found and saw him with her eyes, Among those Lords, amid the Nubian host, With which such ioy did in her thoughts arise, .As vitall sprites did faile in her almost, Not any word to speake could she deuise, But hangd about his necke a burden sweet, And he as louingly his spouse did greet. 43 Full glad was he to see her, and as glad To see his ancient tutor and his frend, And further talke with them he would haue had, But he was forst to make a speedie end, By meanes the man that naked ran and mad, Did keepe such rule as did them all offend. Faire Fiordeliege that lookt with eye more curious, Cride, ah my deare, this is Orlando furious. 44 Astolfo eke when as he did behold him, And saw how madly he about did range, And no man durst him meet, nor none could hold him, He wonderd greatly at the sight so strange, And by the marks that erst Saint Iohn had told him, He knew it was the man; but such a change There was in all his shape, from top to toe, He rather seemd a beast, more then a man in show. 45 Astolfo straight did call vnto the rest, And said my Lords, this man that you had vewd, Orlando is: at this themselues they blest, And eu'rie one his wofull pickle rewd: Well (said the Duke) to helpe our frend is best, And not to wayle; and therefore to conclude, Come ioyne your force to mine, and let vs take him And I do hope ere long Ile sober make him. 46 To this they soone assent, and Brandimart, With Sansonet and Oliuero iolly, And Dudon closd him round, on eu'rie part, But he as full of strength, as foole of folly, At Dudon strake, and saue the blow in part Was broke by Oliuer, and fell not wholy On Dudon, sure I thinke that staffe accurst, His shield his headpeece, head and all had burst. 47 His shield it brake, and thunderd on his scull, That noble Dudon there withall fell backe, But Sansonet strake with his sword so full, That of the staffe three yards he made him lacke: Now Brandimart thinks backward him to pull, And leaps behind, a pick pack, on his backe, And holds his armes: the Duke doth then deuise, To hold his leg, and Oliuer his thyes. 48 Orlando shakes himselfe, and with a spring, Ten paces off, the English Duke he cast, But Brandimart from him he could not fling, That was behind him, and did hold him fast, But yet with Oliuer he was to bring, For with his fist he smot him as he past, That downe he fell, and hardly scaped killing, From mouth, nose, eyes, the bloud apace distilling. 49 Of headpeece strong he neuer had more need, For sure he could not haue escaped death, Except it had a good one bene indeed. This while Astolfo now had taken breath, And Dudon both who late for want of heed, Were by Orlando tumbled on the heath, With Sansonet, that par'd his staffe so well, All these at once vpon Orlando fell.
50 Good Dudon that endeuors him to cast, With Brandimart, about his shoulders hangs; Astolfo and the rest his arms hold fast, He seeks to loose himselfe with sudden pangs: Simie.Who so hath seene a Bull with mastiues chast, That in his eares haue fixt their cruell fangs, How he doth runne, and rore, and with him beares The eager doggs, that still hold fast his eares. 51 Let him imagine that Orlando now, In such sort drew the warriours on the plaine; But Oliuer, that had the broken brow, Againe on foote recouerd vp againe, Did cast within his mind a reason how, To do with ease, that they did seeke with paine: He doth bethinke a way, that will not misse To do the feat: and his deuice was this. 52 a long Full many a halser, and full manie a cord With sliding knots all knit he doth prouide, And to the leggs and armes of this mad Lord, He made them on the sudden to be tyde; And then their ends on each side by accord, They all of them amongst themselues deuide. Thus were those Princes faine to do vnto him, Simie.As Smiths do to an oxe, when they do shoe him. 53 Then ell they on him when he lay on ground, And then they bind him sure, both hand and foote: Orlando when he felt himselfe thus bound, Doth striue in vaine, for striuing will not boote, Astolfo that doth meane to make him sound, And saw his skin looke blacke as any soote, Requested them vnto the shore to beare him, Which soone was done, for now they need not feare him. 54 Then seau'n times was he washed in the place, And seau'n times dipped ouer eares and hed, To get the scurse from of his skin and face, Which with his naked going had bene bred: Then with some herbs, the Duke gat in this space, He made them stop his mouth, for why he sed, For certaine secret reasons that he knowes, He must not fetch his breath but at his nose. 55 Then kneeling downe as if he askt some boone Of God, or some great Saint, that pot he brought, Which he had carrider beyond the Moone, The latre, in which Orlandos wit was caught, And closd it to his nostrills, and estsoone, He drawing breath, this miracle was wrought, The Iarre was void, and empty'd eu'rie whit, And he restord vnto his perfect wit. 56 As one that in some dreame or fearfull vision, Hath dreamt of monstrous beasts, and vgly fends Is troubled when he wakes with superstition, And feareth what such vgly sight intends, And lying wake, thinks of that apparition, And long time after in that fancie spends: So now Orlando lay, not little musing, At this his present state, and vncouth vsing. 57 He holds his peace, but lifting vp his eyes, He sees his ancient frends king Brandimart, And Oliuer, and him that made him wise, All whom he knew, and loued from his hart; He thinks, but cannot with himselfe deuise, How he should come to play so made a part, He wonders he is nakt, and that he feeles, Such store of cords about his hands and heeles. 58 At last he said,Looke in the storie. as erst Sileno said, To those that tooke him napping in the caue, Solute me: with countenance so stayd, And with a cheare so sober and so graue, That they vnloosed him, as he them prayde, And sufferd him his libertie to haue, And clothed him, and comforted his sadnesse, That he conceiued of his former madnesse. 59 Thus being to his former wits restord, He was likewise deliuerd cleane from loue; The Ladie whom he erst so much adord, And did esteeme all earthly ioyes aboue, Now he despisde, yea rather quite abhord: Now onely he applies his wits to proue, That fame and former glorie to recouer, Which he had lost, the while he was a louer. 60 This while Bardino told to Brandimart, How that his father Monodant was dead, And how his brother Gylyant on the part Of all that those East Iles inhabited, Him sent of purpose these news to impart, And pray him (as he ought) to be their head: Sith all the world had not a Realme more wealthy, Nor any Prince could wish a seate more healthy. 61 Wherefore (saith he) deare sir, it is most meet, That you should now repaire to your owne home, For home though homely twere,Sentence. yet is it sweet, And natiue soile is best: you would not rome About the world, did you once tast and see't, Thus much he said, but Brandimart in whome, True loue & great renown were bands more strong Then priuat profit, answerd this er long. 62 My brothers message, and your frendly paine I kindly take, but lo; my word is past, With Charles and with Orlando to remaine, And them to serue while these garboyles do last: Now in my steed, I will my brother raigne, Let him be my vice-roy, and I will hast, When once these warres are at a finall end, To come, and there my life with them to spend. 63 Thus these did part, and next ensuing day, Went Dudon with his fleet to Prouence ward, Orlando with the Brittish Prince doth stay; And when the state of those same warres he hard, Vnto Biserta straight a siege they lay, But euermore Orlando had regard, That (as Astolfo followd his aduise) To giue him th'honor of each enterprise.
64 But how they did the great Biserta win, of the  of Bieria  booke .When they assaulted it, and on which side, How at the first assault, the men within Did yeeld, and durst no longer triall byde, I cannot farther now proceed herein, But must deferre it to another tyde: Now I do purpose vnto you to show, How Agramant receiu'd an ouerthrow. 65 Who was welye abandond of his men, Eu'n in the verie furie of the fight, For why Marsilio and Sobrino then Were gone, in minde to saue themselues by flight; In walled townes they feard themselues to pen, But went to sea with all the hast they might, And many Princes of the Turkish trayne, The sample follow giu'n them by these twayne. 66 Yet Agramant did beare it out a space, But when he saw there was no other shift, Then from his enemies he turnd his face, To get into the towne was all his drift: Him Bradamant pursewd a wondrous pace, Still spurring Rabican, that ran full swift, She wisht vpon his corps to venge the wrong, In keeping of her deare from her so long. 67 On tother side Marsisa rode as fast, To venge though late, her fathers wofull end, She makes her horse to feele she is in hast, But each of them doth misse that they intend: He got within the gates and made them fast, And then to sea he doth himselfe commend, He sees he was not able to withstand, The forces of his enemies by land. 68 As two coragious Pards, that held in chase An Hart, or bearded Goat vpon a plaine, That scaped then by swiftnesse of his pace, With no small wrath, and chase turne backe againe, As though they thought they had a great disgrace, In that they followd had the prey in vaine, So did the damsels chase, and sigh, and fret, That they to Agramant no neare could get. 69 But though he scapt their hands, yet sure the rest Escaped not, full dearely then abuying, Some wounded in the side, in backe, and brest, Some slaine out right, some worse thē dead a dying, How sorily (pooresoules) had they bene drest, Whose safetie was not wrought, no not by flying, For Agramant, himselfe more sure to saue, To shut the Citie gates commandment gaue. 70 He made the bridges cake to be cut downe, On Rodon streame, that was both large and deepe, Ah wofull subiects vnto tyrants crowne, Who that they may their persons safely keepe, Regard not if their people swim or drowne, But deeme of them like beasts, or silly sheepe, That so themselues they pamper may and cherish, They care not if their men in millions perish. 71 Twas infinite the number that was slaine, In this same last conflict, nor fewer drownd, While they attempted despratly in vaine, To passe the streame, so brode and so profound; Of which great slaughter yet the signes remaine, For dayly neare to Arlie walls are found, Huge heaps of dead mens bones, and of their sculls, Whose flesh was then deuourd, by crows and gulls. 72 Now Agramant made speedie preparation, And causd his ships forth in the deepe to lanch, Prouiding all that longs to nauigation, In mind for ay to bid farewell to France: Two dayes the winde, stopt his determination, The third it seru'd, and then he did aduance His sayles, and eu'rie one did ship his ore, And so away they parted from the shore. 73 Marsilio doubting least his Realme of Spaine, Should now be driu'n to pay this costly shot, And fearing to be forced to sustaine, That storme alone, which fell in France so hot; Doth land at Valence, where he did ordaine All furniture, that might for warre be got, Repairing all his townes against that warre, That after him, and all his frends did marre. 74 But Agramant, his ships to Affrike bent, Ill armd, halfe void of men, but full of griefe, For most of them were sad and malcontent, Three parts of foure, were lost past all reliese: And though for feare perhaps, of being shent, None dare in publike speake to his repriese, Yet secretly, their burning hate to coole, Some cald him proud, some cruell, some a foole. 75 But (as I say) they speake this in their sleeues, For feare of blame, except some two or three, That each to other open dare their greeues, Yet wretched Agramant, he doth not see, How he is scorned; but he still beleeues, That he is lou'd, and why, because that he, Saw neuer lookes but fawningly disguised,Looke in the Morall. Heard neuer words, but fainingly deuised. 76 Now he was fully purposd in his landing, To leaue Biserta and seeke harbour nyer, Because he late had perfect vnderstanding, The Nubians spoyld those parts with sword and fier Wherefore for doubt of dangerous withstanding, He meant to shun that port, and land farre hyer, And thence withall vnto his parts addicted, To bring reliefe vnto the towne afflicted. 77 But loe his cruell fate, doth ouerthrow His counsell sage, and quite his hope deceaues, For while scant winde did make him sayle but slow, Stout Dudon with that nauie made of leaues, Met him full butt, that no such thing did know, And with a fierce assault him there receaues, Enforcing him to vnexpected fight, In that darke, cloudie, and tempestuous night.
78 For Agramant no spy all had till now, Of these same ships, and would haue deemd a fable, If one had told him of a little bow, To make a hundred ships, a man was able: Wherefore he sayled on he car'd not how, And doubts no foe but waue, and wind vnstable, And not expecting such strange sodaine stops, He neuer let his watchmen in his tops. 79 On tother side, our men that had espyde, Their enemies, at sea an houre ere night, Came with great speed, although all vndeseride, For cu'tie ship kept close their fire and light: At last when as they saw their time, they tryde Their vtmost force, and with full sayles they light On their toes shipping, that at first did shrinke, And many did vnto the bottome sinke. 80 Now Dudons men began to play their parts, Some vsing fire, some heauie stones, some steele, Vpon the Turks fell such a storme of darts, As they before, the like did neuer feele: On our side God, with courage fill'd their harts, On their side, each mans hart was in his heele, They stood amazd with feare, and quite astonished, The time now come their old sins should be puni∣shed. 81 Thus Agramant is closd on eu'rie side, Description of a , e fight.With many a pike, and sword, and hooke, and axe, The stones that fell from high, made breaches wide, And much sea enterd at the new made cracks, But most the fire, which they could least abide, That takes in pitched boords, and wreathed flax, To kindle verie quicke, but slow to quench, Annoyd them sore with heat, & smoke, & stench. 82 Some ouer boord do fall in water cold, And there are drownd: some take thē to their swim∣ming, But on another bark while they take hold, They now full fraught, and fearing ouertrimming, With cruell sword (a foule sight to behold) Cut of their bands, wt which they now were climing, The bleeding stumps all mangled there remained, And with fresh blood, the water salt was stained. 83 Some few to saue their liues that had desier, Or at the least, to leese them with least paine. Do leape in water to escape the fier, Till with new seare of drowning, they againe, Vnto the flaming shipwracks do retier, And there, with much a do are glad and faine, To catch some burning boord: and being loth, To dye of either death, they dye of both. 84 Some one for feare of sword, or axe, or pike, Doth all in vaine, vnto the sea betake him, For why some stone, or arrow, or such like, Ere he be farre from thence, doth ouertake him: But least the reader haply may mislike, My too long tale, this motion I would make him, That to another season he defarre, To heare the sequell of this bloudy warre. MorallIn Rogeros irresolute fighting, may be noted how necessary it is for a man before he go to fight, to put on a good and firme resolution, and chiefly of the goodnes of his cause. In Agramants breach of the oth and promise, we may see how odious a thing it is before God and man to be Foedifragi, Truce-breakers; which maketh them indeed, to be forsaken of their frends, prosecuted with great malice of their enemies, lothed, detested, and scorned of their owne subiects, and in the end breeds their vtter confusion. In that Agramants souldiers do mutine against him and reuile him secretly, and he notwithstanding thinkes himselfe to be well beloued of them, and well thought of, we may see in what a lamentable case those Princes are, that (as is said of them) Neuer see lookes, but fawningly disguised, Neuer heare words, but fayningly deuised. Historie.Of the Historie of this booke, first for Sileno that was Virgils Schoolemaster, it is written of him, he was one day laid to sleep, after he had bene made drunke with wine, and his schollers merily bound him, wherupon he waking said that verse, Soluite me pueri, satis est potuisse videri. Concerning this great battell at Arlie, certaine it is (as diuers Historiographers haue noted it) that there remaine to this home, great heapes of bones, betokening some great slaughter of men in that place: but when it should be done, I cannot precisely affirme. Allegorie In that Mehsla by the helpe of the deuill, taking vpon her a false image of Rodomont, moued Agramant to breake truce, the Allegorie thereof is, that they be diuels or diuellish persons, that will moue Princes to breake their word and their promise. Of Orlandos restoring to his wit, which indeed is the chiefe Allegorie of all the booke, and where-upon the booke ta∣keth th name, Orlando Furioso, this in briefe is the meaning thereof. Orlando a man of noble birth, Erle of Auglant, nephew to Charles the great, falls so farre in loue with Angelica, by which (as I haue often noted) is meant pleasure, or honor; that he leeseth his wits and becomes mad: by which may be meant any slly that young men fall into with loue, with prodigalitie, with ambition or vaine studies; (which are at large recited in the 34. booke.) Astolfo with the receit he had of S. Iohn, makes him wise againe, that is, by the grace of God and by the Gospell, which teacheth vs how to despise all these worldly things, and either quite leaue them or turne them to our good and benefite. Allusion.The sea fight which is in the later end of this booke described, is like that which Lucan sets forth in the ciuil wars between Caesar and Pompey: or rather indeed, to that he speaks of in the next book of Cardinal Hippolito against the Venetians. Here end the annotations vpon the 39. booke.
THE XL. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Great Agramant doth fly, and in his flight Would kill himselfe, but Sobrin him forbode, Biserta being fir'd, a wofull sight: At last they meet Gradasso in a rode, They send a challenge, three to three to fight, Vnto Orlando, where he then abode; Rogero fights with Dudon to set free Seu'n kings, whom bound in chaines he chaunst to see. 1 TWere long (my Lord) to tell of all that fought, Looke in the Hi∣story of the simi∣litudes.In that sea fight, and certes all the while, That I should tell it you, I should be thought, To beare pots (as they say) to Samos Ile, Where earthen vessels in great store are wrought. Or Owles to Athens, Crocodils to Nyle: For more then can of this by me be told, Your selfe haue caused many to behold. 2 Your faithfull people had a long prospect, When all a day vpon the streame of Poe, Your men, as your great vallew did direct, The shipping of your foes assaulted so, That with their blood the streame they did infect, And brought vpon them all, a world of woe; Then both your selfe, and others plaine did see, How sundry deaths, in fights of sea there be. 3 Ariofso was sent post to Rome to pacifie Pope Iu∣lio the second, which he tou∣cheth in one of his Satyres. The Lions teeth and pawes mea∣ning the Vencci∣ans, called the Lyons of the sea.It was not then indeed, my hap to see't, (Sent then to Rome six dayes before in post, To craue then, at the holy fathers feet, Reliefe and aid against so great an host) And in that time your grace with them did meet, In such a sort, so sorely to their cost, And so you par'd the Lyons teeth and pawes, That since that time to feare we had no cause. 4 But Aifonsin, and More that saw the same, Asranio, Anniball, and Lerbinet, Albert,Three of the name of An.and Baygn, and three that beare my name, Declar'd to me the conquest you did get: Also their banners, monuments of fame, Which offerd in the Churches you did set, With fifteene Gallies tane a thousand botes, Of that rich conquest, giue vs open notes. 5 He that had seene the fire and wondrous wreake, That at that time was wrought vpon your foes, When for your few, their many were too weake, He might describe the deaths and diuers woes, Of Agramantés host, of which I speake, And of their great and grieuous ouerthrowes, Then when amids the surging waues and salt, Stout Dudon in the night did them assault. 6 When first the fight began, the night was darke, But when the flame vpon the pitch tooke hold, The fire gaue light, and did so clearly sparke, That Agramant might plainly now behold His enemies, and their great number marke, Incredible, if any had it told: Wherefore in season to preuent the worst, He changd the course he had intended furst. 7 And chusing out a vessell swift of sayle, And placing there his things of greatest price, With Brigliadore (sith all hope now doth fayle) To steale from thence he closlie doth deuise: And while that Dudon doth his men assayle, In all the hast he can, away he flyes, His men the sword, the sea, the fire destroyes, And he is fled that caused their annoyes.
8 And in that Barke, with him Sobrino fled, Who much complaind and was not little greeued, .That that which he before so truly sed, Yet then by Agramant was not beleeued: But tell we now how good Astolfo sped, And what exploits Orlando had atcheeued, Who counseld so to raze Biserta towne, That it might neuer noy th'Imperiall crowne. 9 of .And so it was in publicke sort proclaymd, That the third day th'assault they should expect, Astolfo had some ships before ordaynd, (For Dudon had not all) for this effect, And these same ships with Sansonet remaynd, A man that could by sea and land direct, Who rode at anker neare Biserta shore, But distant from the hau'n a myle and more. 10 The Brittish Duke, and valiant Palladine, That like good Christens vsed euermore, To pray to God for grace and aide deuine, Proclaymed in the campe, three dayes before, That to assault the towne they did assigne, .By fast and publicke prayre, Christ to adore, And craue his aid against that wicked towne, That they might raze it quite and beat it downe. 11 And hauing ended that their solemne fast, And made their vowes, accustomd in such case, Then frendly they together take repast, And each his frend, and parent doth embrace, And spake as if those words should be their last, The kindly teares, oft trickling downe their face, And eu'rie one resolued by and by, Either to win the towne, or in the place to dy. 12 .Also the wretched Priests within the towne, With sayned show of foolish superstition, Pray vnto Macon, that he do not frowne On them: and vow to him on that condition, Great Holocausts, with cost of many a crowne, Of him they seeke to haue their sinnes remission, And as if he the fates could mend or alter, They offer sacrifices on his alter. 13 Terms of  Priest.Then when they were by their great Cady blest, They went (but faintly) to their Citie wall, Yet did the fayre Aurora take her rest, And scarce the Esterne coast yet looked pale, When Sansonet, Astolfo, and the rest, That had the needfull things prouided all, The noble enterprise did take in hand, And did assault the towne by sea and land. 14 .Biserta hath this manner situation, Two parts thereof with water are enclosed, Two parts with goodly wall of ancient fashion, But not so strong, as one would haue supposed: And though to make new strength and reparation; The king Bransardo all the towne disposed, His time and warning were so short and small, He could do little good, or none at all. 15 Astolfo did appoint the Nubian king Such wise to noy the keepers of the wall, With darts, and Turkish bowes, and many a sling, That from the battlements he draue them all, That now he might both horse and footmen bring, Vpon the ditch in perill none or small; And each according to his powre and skill, Brought matter wherewithall the ditch to fill. 16 Some fagots brought,Helme is the best of the straw with which they thatch houses. & some brought store of helme Some heauy stones, & some light planks and boords And lest the stream their worke might ouerwhelme, They turned it away by other foords; Great store of wood there grew in that same Realme The which to them great store of stuffe affoords, And now that Prouerbe see performd you might, That many hands make heauie works but light.Prouerbs. 17 The Nubians fierce impatient of all stay, And by desire of gaine all headlong led, The perill great and danger do not way, But each man clapps his target on his hed: And then their battrie to the walls they lay, With rammes, and engines strongly furnished, With which to shake the walls they do begin, Nor were they all vnfurnished within. 18 Darts, stones, and planks, yea eu'n their houses tyle, They flang down on thē, whē; they drew more neare By which they brake and pierced otherwhile, Their engines huge, so as it might appeare, Dame Fortune seemd at first on Turks to smilé, But after soone againe she changd her cheare, No sooner night was gone, and Sun once vp, But that they tasted of another cup. 19 Then on each side they had so hot a charge, As hardly they were able to sustaine: Sansonet of the shipping had the charge, And he by sea assaults them to their paine; And, for their powre was great, and place was large, Each Captaine tooke with him a seuerall traine, Thereby the more to trouble all their foes, And of their vertue, to make larger shoes. 20 And for that speciall cause, they do deuide, Their mightie host into foure seu'rall parts, To th'end that by that meanes it might be spide, Which men had stout, and which had fainting harts, Great towres on mightie wheeles did seeme to ride, Drawne with great force like ordinary carts, And Elephants did carrie towres so tall, As did in height surpasse the Citie wall. 21 A scaling ladder Brandimart doth beare, And clymes himselfe and causeth others clyme: For what man hauing such a guide, could feare; Each man to stay doth thinke it haynous crime: The ladders strength was weighd by no man there, Each roung a man, and some beares two sometime: Now Brandimart to conquest wholy bent. Gets to the top, and winnes a battlement.
22 With hand and foote he clammerd in such sort, He wan a batlement and did it keepe; Then with his sword he made them all such sport, As causd the lookers on, not laugh, but weepe: The ladder now chargd with too great resort, Standing aslope, and not vpright and steepe, Brake in the midst, so that saue Brandimart, All of them fell, vnto their paine and smart. 23 Looke in the Allusion.Their Captaine though, with this no whit dismayd, Keepes still his place though he the hap did marke, Although he saw his men him could not ayd, Though he alone were all their shooting marke; His men below cryde out to him, and prayd Him to retire, but he no whit could harke, But boldly from the wall into the towne, Which was thrise ten foote deepe, he leaped downe. 24 As if the pau'ment had bene straw, not stone, So lept he downe, so nimble and so light, And being there, layd so about alone, He made them all giue place vnto his might: Of those that fought he killed many a one, The rest thought best to saue themselues by flight, But they that saw him leape downe from without, Within their minds were full of dread and doubt. 25 Straightwayes about the campe a rumor spred, From mouth to mouth, & man to man doth come, And same doth fly, and flying gathers hed, Of that hard feat, that Brandimart had done; And comes at last whereas Orlando led His band, and after to king Otons sonne, And then to Oliuero, neuer ceasing, But in her going still her tale increasing. 26 All these, but chiefe Orlando all among, That Brandimart in minde did dearely loue, An hearing it from thence they tarrid long, It would be hard his danger to remoue; Vnto the walls set scaling ladders strong, Resolued now their vtmost force to proue; And vp they mount, with looks so grim and bold, As scant their enemies durst them behold. 27 Simil.As when the seas are wrought with sturdie wind, The ventrous vessell tost with many a waue, Is sometime smote before, sometime behind, And each surge striues a passage free to haue; The fearfull Pilot with astonisht mind, Knowes not which way himselfe he should behaue, Till at the last one surge the whole possesseth, And to both Pilot, ship, and all oppresseth. 28 So when those three, of whom before I spake, Had got the wall, they did the souldiers teach, To follow them, and so large path did make, As thousands of them now the wall did reach: This while the monstrous rammes the walls did shake In other places, and made such a breach, That now in many parts without resistance, They might to Brandimart bring good assistance. 29 Looke how that streame surnam'd of streams the king,Simile. Po called king of . With damage great aboue his bankes doth grow, When some strong wind, or tyde of highest spring, Makes him beyond accustomd bounds to flow, And thereby hurt vnto the fields doth bring, And drowneth flockes, and houses ouerthrow, Then trees do harbour fish, as new come guests, Where flying birds were wont to build their nests. 30 So now Biserta walls were farre too weake, To saue the Citie from both sword and fire; The valiant Captaines first the Ice do breake, To follow whom, the souldiers do aspire; And what with will their ancient wrongs to wreake And what with hope of booties, and desire, They ruind soone that Citie, that had beene Of Affrica, the sole triumphant Queene. 31 Now multitudes lay slaine in eu'ry street, And with the bloud that of their wounds did runne, The channels flowd vermillion vnder feet; But when the fire to take had once begunne, No doubt it was a wofull sight to feet, What spoile vpon the towne by fire was done: Such cryes, such plaints were ouer all the Citie, As might haue moued any hearts to pitie. 32 Their helples Gods now vnder foot were troden, Their sacred iewels taken all for pray, The conquerers come forth of houses, loden, With gold, with plate, with faire and rich aray; And though the souldiers flatly were forboden Foule beastly lust, this was to them no stay, Young children and old matrones could not scape, Deflouring forced, nor vngodly rape. 33 Stout Oliuero with a sound blow slew, King Bucifer, and brought him to his end, Bransardo kild himselfe, when as he knew, The Citie could not now it selfe defend; Astolfo did in single fight subdew Fuluo, and tooke him prisner in the end: These three were those, whom (as before you hard) King Agramant those countryes left to guard. 34 But Agramant,Agramant. who as before I told, Stole from his men, and so away did sayle, When as he did these flames from farre behold, Much did the state of that same towne bewayle; But when a messenger did plaine vnfold, How farre his foes in Affricke did preuayle, He would haue slaine himselfe, of woes to rid him, Saue that the sage Sobrino did forbid him. 35 Ah sir said he (in frendly sort him chiding) Driue from your worthie minde such wretched thought,Sobrins Oret to Agraman, perswade him not to kill him∣selfe. What could be to your foes more welcome tiding, Then that your selfe, your owne destruction sought? They doubt, while you in safetie are abiding, But hard to keepe, that they haue easlie caught; Not one of them but dreads, and greatly feares, That Affricke while you liue, cannot be theirs.
36 Your death would all your frends of hope depriue, (The onely helpe that in our case is left) All they haue got, while you remaine aliue, They can but count it robberie and theft: But if you dye, who shall against them striue? Both Affricke lost, and we of hope are reft: Wherefore though for your selfe you life abhord, Liue for our sake (at least) my soueraigne Lord. 37 The Souldan sure will helpe your cause t'aduance, To him you may for men and money send, Be sure he will be loth the king of France Should nest in Affricke, being not his trend: If Norandino knew of your mischance, He would both men, and horse, and monie send, The states of Media, Persia, and Armenie, With Arabia, will helpe you with their menie. 38 These words then spake the graue wise man and old, To moue his Prince a better minde to carrie, And bad him cheare himselfe, and still he told, What hopes there were (tho sure he thought cōtrary) He saw and knew their comfort was but cold, That long they vse to pray, and sue, and tarie, .Who hauing lost their crownes, to sue are faine To other kings, to helpe them home againe. 39 .Both Hanniball and Iugurth samples be, To Princes all, that trust in forren ayd, With Lodwicke Sforce whom this last age did see, Vnto a stronger Lodwicke foule betrayd: Wherefore vnto that sentence I agree, That Duke Alfonso of Ferrara said, A greater signe of folly is not showne, .Then trusting others force, distrust ones owne. 40 Wherefore in that conflict and bitter warre, In which he found Christs Vicar not his frend, And that the Venice state with him did larre, And he that promised him to defend, From Italie was driu'n and absent farre, Yet neuer would Alfonso condiscend, To put himselfe in other mens subiection, And leaue his state to forren powres protection. 41 But Agramant of comfort all bereft, Forsooke the shore, and lanched to the deepe, To thinke in what estate his Realme was left, Does make him bitterly to wayle and weepe, From right hand now they sayld vnto the left, And Eastward all the night their course did keepe, Vntill a storme that rose within a while, Did cause them harbour in a little Ile. 42 A little Ile voyde of inhabitants, But full of Hates, and Conies, and of Deare, With couerts great, of trees and slender plants, That had not bene cut downe in many a yeare: Else there was nothing to supply their wants, Onely some tokens plainly did appeare, That fishers vsed there their nets to drye, The while the fish in sea do quiet lye. 43 Here onely in the harbour they did find, A ship that had bene weatherbeaten sore, Gradasso forced by contrary wind,Gradasso. Came in that ship from Arly late before, With princely gesture, and behauiour kind, Each king salutes the tother on the shore; For well they lou'd together, and were late, Fellows in arms neare Paris walles and gate. 44 The king of Sericane with no small griefe, Did heare the storie of their late distresse, And which did comfort Agramanté chiefe, His person offerd these harms to redresse, But that he shall in Aegypt finde reliefe, He greatly doubts, and thinketh nothing lesse, Pomeys example teacheth you (he said)Pompey berraied in Aegypt. That banisht men finde there but sorie aid. 45 But sith the case so stands, and that you say, English Astolfo with a Nubian host, And mad Orlando, who this other day As I did heare, for loue his wit had lost, Haue done such hurt, I haue bethought a way, That at this time I thinke will profite most: I will Orlando challenge hand to hand, Who (sure I am) in my hands cannot stand. 46 Were he once dead, the rest I count as straw, And for the Nubians, though I cannot dreame How they should come, yet know I how to draw Them backe again from yours, to their own Reame Those other Nubians, whom a diuers law Sunders from these, as well as Nylus streame, Shall with Arabian and Macrobian forcesThe Arabian horse is of great account. Assaile them, (these haue gold, & those good horses, 47 The king of Affricke praisd this offer kind, And called it a good and blessed storme, That causd him such a frend as this to find, And thanks him for his offer: but the forme Of it (he said) doth no whit please my mind, No thought thereby I might all harmes reforme, And that I might Biletta towne regaine, I would not do mine honor such a staine. 48 If any man must challenge him, then I It is, that am in honor tide vnto it, And whether I shall kill or else shall die, I am resolued, surely I will do it: Nay then sir (said Gradasso) I will trie Another way, if you assent but to it, We two will make one challenge thus: to fight Against Orlando and some other knight. 49 So I be one (then Agramant replide) I care not, though I second be or furst, For in the world is not a man beside, To trust whose courage more then yours, I durst. Sobrino that stood all the while aside, Into such speech, vpon the sudden burst, Hath age (quoth he) brought me in such contempt, To be excluded from so braue attempt
50 Looke in the Morall of this.Disgrace me not so much, to leaue out me, Age hath not tane away my vigor cleene, Skill and experience good companions be, Age knoweth whatsoeuer youth hath beene; Wherefore let me be one, and you shall see, That I am stronger, then perhaps you weene: To this request of his they soone agree, And so they send their challenge three to three. 51 They send a Herald, as it is thevse, The challenge to Orlando stout to beare, With number like to meet at Lippaduse, And so by combat, end all matters theare: The while each side should grant the other truse, And all acts of hostilitie forbeare; This Lippadusa is a little Ile, Distant from Affricke shore some twentie mile. 52 The Herald made good hast, and went apace, And vsd all helpe of oares and sailes he could, And comming to Orlando with good grace, His message and the challenge plaine he told: Amids Biserta in the market place, He found him parting summes of coyne and gold, (Of that same sacked towne the many spoiles) Vnto his men for guerdon of their toiles. 53 Now when Orlando this braue challenge hard, He did accept it, and did much reioyce. And gaue vnto the Herald in reward, Of many sumptuous gifts great store and choise He knew before the death of Mandricard, And heard of Durindan by common voice, How that Gradasso had it, whom to find, A voiage vnto th'Indies he assignd. 54 But knowing that he need not go so farre, And that his great good fortune so had wrought, That he should send to offer single warre, Whom he farre of had purposd to haue sought; He now doth hope that long they should not barre Him of his sword, that he so deare had bought, Eke Brighadore he hopes now to regaine, That did in Agramantés hand remaine. 55 He chuseth for hi frends to take his part, In this so great and dangerous a fray, Ouero cosin to Orlando.His cousin, and that faithfull Brandimart, Both whom he oft law tride before that day; Armours and horse, and swords on eu'ry part, He seekes to get for them the best he may, For none of them had armour of his owne, As I before this time haue made it knowne. 56 Orlando when he first of all fell mad, Lost both his sword and armour that same howre, The tothers twaine, the Sarzan taken had, And now they were safe lockt vp in a towre: In Affrica their armour was but bad, The warres in France did dayly theirs deuowre: They seldome had in those parts any store, And Agramant what was, had had before▪ 57 Such as he could, though it were old and rustie, He caused to be scowrd and furbusht new, And eu'rie day with his companions trustie, He talked of the fight that should ensew. One day, as in a morning fresh and lustie, They walkt vpon the shore, they saw in vew A great ship vnder saile with treble top, Saile to the shore, without all stay or stop. 58 No saylers, passengers, nor anie guide, Within the ship to be discouerd were, But as the tempest draue her and the tide, She came,He comes to  againe in the next booke,  24. staffe. and safely so ariued there: But here a while the emptie ship shall bide, And these three knights, because the loue I beare Vnto Rogero and Renaldo both, To ouerpasse them longer makes me loth. 59 You heard how they themselues aside did draw,Roger. And of their owne accords their combat cease, When as they saw, against all right and law, On either side the battell to increase: They were so earnest, neither of them saw Which side was first, that brake their vowed peace: Wherfore they aske of those that neare them came, Which king of this foule breach should haue the blame. 60 Rogero had a valiant trustie man, That serued him with faithfulnesse and care, Who neuer since the combat first began, Had lost the sight of him, and being ware Of this new breach, with all the speed he can, He did his masters sword and horse prepare, And brought it him, and wished him to vse it, But for that day Rogero did refuse it. 61 Howbe't from thence he did his course direct, And promise with Renaldo doth renew, That if his king were fist did oath neglect, And shewd himselfe in promise so vntrue, That he would leaue him and his wicked sect; This said, he bad Renaldo then adew, Demanding all he met, who was in fault, Of this vngodly and vniust assault. 62 Of all the world he heares it plainly spoken, How that of youthfull Agramantés part, The law of armes, and late sworne truce was broken Which now was turnd vnto his losse and smart: Yet thinks he, men would deeme it were a token In him of faint or of vnfaithfull hart, To leaue his Master in so great distresse, Although his falshood had deseru'd no lesse. 63 The thought thereof draue him to no small muse, If better twere for him to go or tarrie, If he do go, he much shall her abuse Whom he so oft had promised to marrie; Againe he thinketh that he cannot chuse, In his returne to Affricke but miscarrie, He knowes how periurie offendeth God,. How ouer it ay hangs a heauie rod.
64 On tother side, he feares the great disgrace, Men would impute to him his Lord to leaue, And thinke it comes of fearfull heart and base: What if some men perhaps his scuse receaue, When they do know, and vnderstand the case? Yet most will say, he doth his Lord deceaue: .And that a man such promise may forsake, As at the first, vnlawfull was to make. 65 All that same day, and all that night ensuing, He did the matter with himselfe debate, His loue, his Lord, on either side renewing The doubtfull question, each in diuers rate: But noble minde, the greater shame eschewing, Chose lastly to releeue his masters state, Much lou'd he Bradamant, much thought he on her, But more he lou'd his dutie and his honer. 66 Wherefore resolued to depart the Reame, He sought at Arly, ships him to transport, But neither at the sea, nor in the streame, Could he there find a ship of any sort, For Agramaut in hast and feare extreame, Had all from thence, or burnd them in the port, Which when Rogero once did vnderstand, He went vnto Marsilia-ward by land. 67 In Arly, nor from Arly all the way, He saw no liuing Turke, but manie a corse, He mindeth at Marsilia, if he may, To get a ship, by faire meanes or by force, That into Affrica shall straight conuay Him and Frontino, his well tried horse: But while such thoughts he in his mind contriued, Great Dudon with his nauie there arriued. 68 That Dudon, whom king Agramant on seas Met to his cost, when erst his men were slaine: He fled, his frends tane prisners, and in theale Seauen kings that erst in Affrica did raigne; .A man as then, might hardly cast a pease Into that streame, or anie little graine, The Nauie, and the prises, in such number, Did so the riuer pester vp, and cumber. 69 But Dudon selfe was newly come on land, And his chiefe prisners he had set on shore, And as in way of triumph made them stand, The chiefe behind, the meaner set before, With souldiers garded of his choisest band, Who with their warlicke voices euermore, Made that same towne, and all the places round, Of Dudons praise, and Dudons name to sound. 70 Rogero when he saw these bands appeare, First thought it was the fleet of Agramant, But when as he approched now more neare, He saw how much his guesse of truth did want; He sees his captiues frends, with heauie cheare, Bambyrage, Agricalt, and Ferurant, Balastro, Rimedont, and Manilard, And Nasamon, that wayle their hap so hard. 71 Rogero ould by no meanes it endure, To see in miserie his noble frends, He doubts his prayre no succour can procure, And therefore he to trie his force intends: His lance he presently doth put in vre, With which not few vnto the ground he sends; His sword he drawes, and therewith in short space, He doth an hundred hurt, kill, maime, displace. 72 Now Dudon heares the noise, the harme doth see, Done by Rogero, yet to him vnknowne, He sees his men displac't and foyled bee, And by one onely man their hurt is growne: He takes his horse, and to that end that he May venge these harms, or ioyne thereto his owne, He setteth in his rest, a mightie lance, To proue himselfe a Palladine of France. 73 He bids his men in order to retire, That of the field they two may haue good scope: Rogero, that to rescue did desire His frends and now had put them in some hope: And seeing vertuous Dudon did aspire, In combat hand to hand with him to cope, Did deeme he was the Captaine chiefe and guide, And with great courage toward him did ride. 74 First Dudon came, but when he nearer came, And saw Rogero had no speare in sight, He cast away his owne, as counting shame To vse aduantages in any fight. Then saith Rogero to himselfe, this same Is token of a most braue minded knight; And sure, except mine aime be much amisse, One of the Palladines of France he is. 75 Wherefore he minds, ere any more ensew, Or any force of either part were donne, To learne his name: and asking him, he knew How that he was the Dane Vggeros sonne; Now (saith good Dudon) let me know of you Your name, before our combat be begonne: Rogero in like sort him satisfied, And so they both each other then defied. 76 Now Dudon had that Axe or iron Mace, Wherwith he wonne such fame in many fights, As proued him to be of that same race Of Palladines, so braue and worthie knights: Rogero hath the sword that cuts apace, And frustrateth all charms, where ere it lights, So that he had the vantage, had he vsd it, But for that time, it seemed he refusd it. 77 The cause was this, he was aseard perchance, It would offend his louing Bradamant, For being skilfull in the lines of France, He knew that Dudons mother washer Ant: So though this conquest might his name aduance, He doubts her loue, it may not little daunt: For Turpin thinks, this was the onely reason, That Dudon scaped killing at that season.
78 Rogero neuer foynd, and seldome strake, But fltling, and his sword was so good steele, The backe so thicke, as it no hurt did take, Yet ost therewith he made good Dudon feele Such thundring knocks, at causd his head to ake, And made him readie many times to reele, But least much reading may annoy your eyes, To lay this booke aside I you aduise. Morall.In Agramant that from being so victorious, fel into so great extremity, Princes may consider the great mutability of Fortune: or to speake more truly and Christianly, they may see how God can ouerthrow them, when in their own conceipts they are at the very highest. In that their folly is dispraised that trust to others protection, and stand not vpon their own strength, the lamentable examples of many Princes that we haue heard of in this age, and some that we haue seene, may proue the truth of that principle; nor doth it only hold in Princes affairs, but euē in the case of meaner subiects, according as a good frend of mine, perhaps vpon some good, or (peraduenture) bad experience of his owne, wrate many yeares since: If you be wise, this rule well minde, Trust none for you to sue or pray, Not frend most fast, nor kin most kinde, In that your selfe can do or say. Further wheras Sobrino notwithstanding his age, is chosen to be one of the three in the challenge, offring himselfe therto, we may note therby, that old men are not only to be honored for their wisedomes, but also imployed in seruice for their constant courage, if themselues be willing therto, and not to be contemned or scoffed, (a vice that our time is too much gi∣uen vnto (specially by young men that thinke they know all things, and indeed know lesse then nothing. It is a tale well ne, and worthie to be well marked, how one day, the people of Athens being set in their theater to behold playes, two ol men came in, & no man once offerd to giue thē place, til they came where the Lacedemonian Ambassadors sate: they straight rose, and in reuerence of their gray heads not knowing the men, they gaue them place, which act when the people Comended with great applause, the sorenamed Ambassadours gaue them that pretic tuch, which hath euer since stucke by them; That the Athenians knew what was honest and commendable, but would giue others leaue to do it. Historie. In the first staffe of this book, he vseth three similitudes to this effect, as we say in English, to fling water into the Teams To beare pots (as is said) to Samos Ile, (Where earthen vessels in great store are wrought) Or Owles to Athens, Crocodyles to Nile. Of Samos vessels I will recite only that verse that was made of Agathocles: Fama est, sictilibus ornasse Agathoclea regem Atque abacum Samio saepe onerasse luto, Fercula gemmatis cum poneret horrida vasis, Et misceret opes, pauperiem{que} simul Querenti causam, respondit rex ego qui sum Sicaniae, figulo sum genitore natus. Fortunam reuerenter habe, quicunque repente Diues, ab exili progrediere loco. Concerning the Owles of Athens, Tully vseth the phrase Hoc est Athenas noctuam mittam. But the saying rose not so much for the plentie of those birds, as because they had a coigne stamped with the same; as appeares in Plutarke in the life of Lysander, where it was laid to the charge of a grèat officer named Gilippus, that he roosted too many Owles in the penthouse of his house, which was indeed, money that he had stole in that kinde of coigne, and hidden there. The Crocodiles of Nilus are famous, neither are any of those beasts in any other riuer, but one in Affrica called Senega that falls into the Atlanticke Ce. amand because it hath Crocodiles, some hold it for an arme of Nilus, though, in my opi∣nion, with as little reason, as some say Lundy the Ile betweene Cornwall and Wales, to be part of Ireland, because it hath no snakes in it. Of the Crocodile I count this worth the noting, that being bred of an egge, he groweth to be twelue or four∣teene foot long, which no creature doth beside. Hanniball being ouercome by Scipio, fled to Antiochus, and doubting of by sickle disposition went to Prusia king of Bithinia, who by his counsell and policie ouercame Eumenes in a sea fight, which benefite and seruice notwithstanding, the said Prusia would haue betrayed him to the Romanes, but Hanniball seeing no meanes of escape, tooke poyson, which he carried about him of purpose in a ring, and so made away himselfe. Iugurth likewise betaking himselfe to the protection of Boccus king of Mauritania his sonne in law, was by him taken and bound, and deliuered to Sylla, who caried him to Marius, in whose triumph he was after led at Rome, and forced (as some write) to leape off an high arch, or as other will haue it, starued after inprison. Pompey being vanquished by Caesar, fled to Egipt to Ptolomey, whose father had bene much beholding in times past to Pompey, but he for feare of Caesars displeasure made his head to be cut of. Allegorie.In Rogero that notwithstanding all his oths and promises to marrie Bradamant, and become a Christian, yet with a regard of wordly reputation is caried away, and taketh shipping into Affrica, may be allegorically vnderstood, how our sence and vnderstanding, not hauing the helpe of grace to confirme it, is carried away into the sea of errors, and tssed with waues of divers passions, and in the end suffers shipwracke as here Rogero did, though after deliuered by prayer and faith, as is shewed in the next booke. Allusion.The great perill that Brandimart was in, leaping of the wall of Biserta into the towne, alludes to the like fact of Alex∣ander, who was in the like perill at the Citie of Ossidracus in India; where also (as Iustin testifieth) he receiued a very dangerous wound. The end of the annotations vpon the 40. booke.
THE XLI. BOOKE THE ARGVMENT. His prisners Dudon to Rogero giues, Who in a tempest all were drowned quite, Rogero onely scapes the storme, and liues, And then is Christend, and belleues aright. Neare Lippadusas steepe and craggie clyues, Sixe valiant knights, a combat fierce do fight, Where Sobrine hurt, the Marquesse lame on ground, Good Brandimart receiues a deadly wound. 1 Simile.THat odor sweet wherewith an amorous youth Of either sexe, their gar∣ments do perfume, Or head or beard, when (full of louing ruth) In flames of Cupids fire they do consume: We say that odor perfect was in truth, And of his goodnesse we do much presume, If so a good while after it be felt, And that the sweetnesse be long after smelt. 2 Simile. The Icarus was not sonne of De∣dilus, but of Bacchus.That pleasant iuyce that Icarus vnwife, Did cause his men (to his great harme) to tast, And did the Gauls to Italie entise, Where they commited so great spoile and wast, Was doubtlesse perfect good, and of great price, If so at twelumonths end it pleasant last. The tree that doth his leaues in winter nourish, Simile.Without all question did in sommer florish. 3 The bountie that so many hundred yeare, Horace sauh,  forsibus. Est in lunencis est in e∣quis patris  &c. That vertue is clemencie and gratefulnesse.In your most Princely stocke did euer shine, Is to the world an open proofe and cleare, That he, from whom was first deriu'd your line, Was sure a great, and worthie minded Peare, And had that noble vertue and deuine, Which chiefly makes a man so rare and od, As in that one, they most resemble God. 4 I shewd you in the booke that went before, How good Rogero tooke great care and heed, That as in other acts he shewd great store Of vertues rare, that other men exceed, So in this fight he shewd as much or more, Then he had done in any other deed: With noble mind ambitious to all good, For glory thirsting still, but not for blood. 5 Good Dudon found (for well discerne he might) How that Rogero him to hurt forbare, How though he had great vantage in the fight, Yet that to vse the same he still did spare; Wherefore though he were ouermatcht in might, Yet therewithall he shewd this speciall care, That though Rogero were in force superiour, Himselfe in courtsie would not be inferiour. 6 Perdie sir let (saith he) our combat cease, Your courtsie hath alreadie conquerd me, I cannot winne, and therefore seeke I peace; And I (saith tother) will to peace agree: I onely craue this grace, that you release, Those seau'n, whom standing there in bonds I see, Those were the kings, whom late near Affrike shore Had taken bene a day or two before. 7 At his request thus Dudon gaue remission, But ere they went, he made them first to sweare, That neither they, nor none by their permission, Gainst any Christen state, should armour beare; He gaue them also leaue on like condition, To take the choisest vessell that was theare, Who no conuenient season ouerslipping, For Affrica immediately tooke shipping.
8 Thus had those kings their ransomes all remitted, And with Rogero shipt themselues that day, And then to faithlesse winds themselues committed, They weigh their ankers, and their sayles display: A frendly gale at first their iourney fitted, And bare them from the shore full farre away: But afterward within a little season, The wind discouerd his deceipt and treason. 9 .First from the poop, it changed to the side, Then to the prore, at last it wherled round, In one place long it neuer would abide, Which doth the Pilots wit and skill confound: The surging waues swell still in higher pride, While Proteus flocke did more and more abound, And seeme to them as many deaths to threaten, As that ships sides with diuers waues are beaten. 10 Now in their face the wind, straight in their backe, And forward this, and backward that it blowes, Then on the side it makes the ship to cracke, Among the Mariners confusion growes; The Master ruine doubts, and present wracke, For none his will, nor none his meaning knowes, To whistle, becken, crie, it nought auailes, Somtime to strike, somtime to turne their sailes. 11 But none there was could heare, nor see, nor marke, Their eares so stopt, so dazeld were their eyes, With weather so tempestuous and so darke, And black thick clouds, that with the storme did rise Frō whence somtime great gastly flames did sparke, And thunderclaps, that seemd to rend the skies: Which made them in a manner deafe and blind, That no man vnderstood the Masters mind. 12 Nor lesse, nor much lesse fearfull is the sound, The cruell tempest in the tackle makes, Yet each one for himselfe some busnesse found, And to some speciall office him betakes: One this vntide, another that hath bound, He the Main bowling, now restraines, now slakes: Some take an oare, some at the pumpe take paine, And powre the sea into the sea againe. 13 Behold a horrible and hideous blast, That Boreas from his frozen lips doth send, Doth backward force the sayle against the mast, And makes the waues vnto the skies ascend: Then brake their oares and rudder eke at last, Now nothing left from tempest to defend, So that the ship was swaid now quite aside, And to the waues laid ope her naked side. 14 Then all aside the staggring ship did reele, For one side quite beneath the water lay, And on the tother side the verie keele, Aboue the water plaine discerne you may. Then thought they al hope past, & down they kneele And vnto God to take their soules they pray, Worse danger grew then this, when this was past, By meanes the ship gan after leake so fast. 15 The wind, the waues, to them no respite gaue, But readie eu'rie houre to ouerthrow them, Oft they wer hoist so high vpon the waue, They thought the middle region was below them; Oft times so low the same their vessell draue,Vir. 1. Aenead Praeseniemque  omnia moriem. As though that Caron there his boat would show thé Scant had they time and powre to fetch their breath, All things did threaten them so present death 16 Thus all that night they could haue no release, But when the morning somewhat nearer drew, And that by course, the furious wind should cease, (A strange mishap) the wind then fiercer grew, And while their troubles more and more increase, Behold a rocke stood plainly in their vew, And right vpon the same the spitefull blast, Bare them perforce, which made them all agast. 17 Yet did the master by all meanes assay,They that haue bene at the sea do understand these phrases To steare out roomer, or to keepe aloofe, Or at the least to strike sailes if they may, As in such danger was for their behoofe. But now the wind did beare so great a sway, His enterprises had but little proofe: At last with striuing yard and all was torne, And part thereof into the sea was borne. 18 Then each man saw all hope of safetie past, No meanes there was the vessell to direct, No helpe there was, but all away are cast, Wherefore their common safetie they neglect, But out they get the ship-boat, and in hast, Each man therein his life striues to protect, Of King, nor Prince no man taks heed or note, But well was he could get him in the bote. 19 Among the rest, Rogero doth suppose The safest way to be, to leaue the ship, And being in his dublet and his hose, He nimbly downe into the boat did skip, But after him so great a number goes, Before they could the rope vnwind or slip, The boat at length did sinke with ouerlading, And to the bottome carry'd all her lading. 20 Twas lamentable then to heare the cries, Of companies of eu'rie sort confused, In vaine to heau'n they lift their hands and eyes, And make late vowes, as in such case is vsed, For ouer them the wrathfull sea doth rise, As though to giue them eare it had refused, And made them hold their peace by hard constraint, And stopt the passage whence came out the plaint. 21 Some swamme a while, some to the bottome sanke, Some flote vpon the waue, though being ded, Rogero for the matter neuer shranke, But still aboue the water keeps his hed, And not farre off he sees that rockie banke, From which in vaine he and his fellowes fled: He thither laboureth to get with swimming, In hope to get vpon the same by climing.
22 With legges and armes he doth him so behaue, That still he kept vpon the floods aloft, He blowes out from his face the boistrous waue, That readie was to ouerwhelme him oft. This while the wind aloofe the vessell draue, Which huld away with pase but slow and soft, Fró those, that while they thought their deth to shun Now dide perhaps before their glasse was run. 23 O hopes of men vncertaine, vaine and fraile, The ship that all forsooke; as quite forlorne, When all her wonted guides and helps did faile, Her saylers drownd, and all her tackle torne, A safe course held with broken mast and saile, He turnes to Ro¦gero againe in the 47 staffe of  booke.And by an Eddie from the rocke was borne, And eu'n as if the storme had changd his mind, It went with merrie gale afore the wind. 24 And where with marriners it went awry, Now wanting them, it went to Affricke right, And came on land vnto Biserta ny, And gently on the sands it did alight, Orlando.What time Orlando then was walking by, Conferring with his fellowes of their fight, The which was vndertaken by them three, Against three Princes of no meane degree. 25 And for they saw the ship was fast on ground, They tooke a boate and went on her aboord, With mind to question whither she was bound, Or what good marchandise she can affoord; But vnder hatches lading none they found, Saue good Rogeros armour, horse, and sword, Which he behind him left, when in bad taking, He tooke the boat, the ship it self forsaking. 26 Orlando vewd them well with good regard, And hauing chiefly markt the noble blade, He knew it was that famous Ballisard, With which he did some yeares before inuade, All this hath re∣ference to B. dos booke.Fallarius garden, spite of all her guard, Who by strong charms, the sword and garden made It may be you er this haue heard the tale, And how this sword from him Brunello stale. 27 And after to the good Rogero gaue it, Who late had left it in this wofull wracke, Glad was Orlando now againe to haue it, That oft had triall both of edge and backe; He deemd that God, did eu'n of purpose saue it, Now to supply therewith his present lacke: And after oft he said, and thought indeed, That God did send it him at so great need. 28 At so great need, when as he was to fight, Against Gradasso king of Sericane, Who had, beside his great and passing might, Renaldos horse, and fearfull Dudrindane. Rogeros armour though it looked bright, Yet was it not as thing so precious tane, As being prisd more for the sumptuous show, Then for the goodnesse, which they did not know. 29 And sith himselfe for armour did not care, And neuer did the dint of weapon feare, He doth that armour to his cosin spare, But not the sword, for that himselfe doth weare: The horse, that was of shape and goodnesse rare, Had Brandimart, and thus deuided were, Among these three, in guerdon of their paines, An equall share, and portion in the gaines. 30 Now each prepard against the day of fight, Braue furniture, with cost of many a crowne: Orlando on his quarter, bare in sight, High Babels towre with lightning striken downe:Looke in the . His cosin had a Lyme hound argent bright, His Lyme laid on his backe, he couching downe, The word or Mot was this, vntill he commeth, The rest was rich, and such as him becommeth. 31 But Brandimart, who as I erst made mention, Had heard his fathers death, went all in blacke: Of braueries he now had no intention, Left men might thinke, he did discretion lacke, He ear'd for no deuice, nor new inuention, Nor  clothing on his backe, He  one border richly set , but darkned ouer with a net. 32 A net that Fiordeliege his dearest Queene, With her owne hands against that day did make,Fiordeliege, But neither then, nor all the time betweene, That first she vndertooke it for his sake, Till she had done it, was she euer seene To laugh, or smile, or any ioy to take: Her heart still heauie was, her looke still sad, And yet herselfe did know no cause she had. 33 But still in feare, and still in doubt she is, Her spouse by death, shall now from her be sunderd: Oft times herselfe hath seene him be, ere this, In greater fights, an hunderd and an hunderd, Yet neuer did her heart so giue amisse, Wherefore at her owne feare she greatly wonderd: And eu'n that reason made her feare the more, Because she was not vsd to feare before. 34 Now when each thing in order fit was set, The chāpions three were shipped with their horses: Vnto Astolfo and to Sansonet, The charge was left of all those Christen forces, But dolefull Fiordeliege, although as yet To hide her sorow, she herselfe inforces, Yet when the wind away the vessell beares, She bursteth out to open cries and teares. 35 With Sansonet Astolfo tooke much paine, To bring her to her chamber from the shore, Who lying on her bed, she still doth plaine, That she hath lost her spouse for euermore: To seeke to comfort her it was in vaine, For talking made her feare increase the more, But now the worthie champions in this while, Were safe arriu'd at Lippadusa Ile.
36 No sooner set they foot vpon the land, But (on the Easterne side) they pitcht a tent, Because perhap that part was nearest hand, Or else vpon some politicke intent: On tother side, with such an equall band, Came Agramant: but sith this day was spent, They all agreed all fight to be forborne, Vntill the verie next ensuing morne. 37 A watch was charged then on either part, That neither side the tother may deceaue, But ere it yet was darke, king Brandimart, (Though not without Orlandos speciall leaue) Doth meane a wondrous fauour to impart To Agramant, if he the same receaue: For why the tone the tother oft had seene As frends, and had in France together beene. 38 Now after ioyning hands, and salutation, The noble minded Brandimart begun To vse vnto the Turke an exhortation, That with Orlando he the combat shun: Affirming vnto him with protestation, Would he beleeue but in the Virgins sonne, That he both present peace would then assure him, And all his Realmes in Affricke safe procure him. 39 .Because you are, and haue bene deare to me, Therefore (he saith) this counsell you I geeue, And sith I follow it my selfe you see, Thereby you may be sure I it beleeue; Christ is my God, a God indeed is he; An Idol Mawmet is, that doth not liue: Wherefore deare Sir, I do desire to moue From errors foule, your selfe and all I loue. 40 This is indeed the way of truth and life, All other wayes but this, do leade astray; Why should you liue in error and in strife, When in true peace, and knowledge liue you may? Tempestuous cares this world hath euer rife, And if your present state you would but way, You plainly may perceiue your venter such, As you to win but little hazard much. 41 of .What if you could the sonne of Milo kill? Or vs that come with him to win, or die? Thinke you that then you shall haue all you will? Thinke you your state you can restore thereby? No sure, the state of Charles is not so ill, But that he quickly can our lacke supply; Wherefore deare Sir, vnto my counsell listen, All would be well, if you would be a Christen. 42 Thus much said Brandimart, and more beside He would haue said, to peace him to exhort, Saue that with scornfull speech, and full of pride, Fierce Agramant this wife, did cut him short; A madnesse meere it is (thus he replide) .In you, or any man that in such sort, Will counsell and aduise men what to do, Not being cald of counsell thereunto. 43 And where you say, to this loue mou'd you chiefe, That you haue borne, and still do beare to me, Herein you pardon must my hard beliefe, While in Orlandos companie you be; I rather thinke dispaire, and spite, and griefe, Hath mou'd you hereunto, because you see, Your soule is damned to eternall fire, To draw vs thither with you you desire. 44 What victories, or else what ouerthrowes, I shall hereafter haue, God onely knoweth, Not you nor I, nor yet Orlando knowes, God onely where he lift, the same bestoweth But as for me, no feare nor foolish showes, Shall daunt my courage, how so ere it goeth, Die first I will with torment and with paine, Much rather then to yeeld, my stocke to staine. 45 Now when you list, depart from hence you may, As little thankt, as slenderly rewarded, And if to morrow you the Champion play No better, nor no more to be regarded, Then you haue plaid the Orator to day, Orlando sure will be but weakely guarded; And these last words, in manner such he said, As that thereby much choller he bewraid. 46 Thus parted they, and rested all that night, But readie they were all by breake of day, All armd, and readie for the future fight, Small speech was vsd, no lingriug, nor no stay, They couch their spears, & run with all their might: But while I tell you of this bloody fray, I doubt I do vnto Rogero wrong, To leaue him swimming in the sea so long. 47 The gallant youth had labourd many an howre,Rogero. To swim, and saue himselfe from being drownd, The surging waue still threats him to deuowre, But guiltie conscience more doth him confound; He thinks that God will of his mightie powre, Sith he foreslowed when he was on ground, To be baptizd in waters fresh, and fitter, To sowse him now in waues both salt and bitter. 48 He now remembers he had plighted troth, To Bradamant, nor done as he had spoken, How to Renaldo he had made an oth, And that the same by him was fouly broken; Most earnestly he now repents them both, And calls to God for mercie, and in token Of true contrition voweth out of hand, To be baptizd, if ere he come to land. 49 And that he would renownce all Turkish lawes, Nor gainst a Christen Prince once weapon carrie, But serue king Charles, and aid the Churches cause, And from the same hereafter not to varie, And neuer seeke delay or farther pause, His vertuous spouse Dame Brandamant to marrie. (Twas strange) no sooner he this vow had ended, But that his strength increast, & swimming mended.
50 And where before he greatly was affrayd, That those same surging waters him would drowne, He thinketh now they do his swimming ayd: And sometime rising, sometime going downe, He passeth on with courage vndismayd, And scarce he seemed once to wet his crowne: That so with cunning part, and part with strength, He reached to the little Ile at length. 51 The rest of all his company was drownd, Nor euer was a man of them seene more, But by Gods onely grace, Rogero found This little Ile, and clammerd vp the shore: And finding it a small and barren ground, A new feare rose, no lesse then that before, Least in a place of needfull things too seant, He should be staru'd with penurie and want. 52 But yet with constant mind and vnappald, Resolu'd to suffer all that God would send, Vpon the rocke with much a do he crald, And gat vpon the leuell ground in th' end; When lo an aged man, whose head was bald, And beard below his girdle did descend, That was an Hermit that did there inhabit, Came forth to him in godly reu'rent habit. 53 And comming neare he cride, ô Saul, ô Saul, Why persecutest thou my people so? In the Acts of the ApostlesAs erst our Sauiour spake vnto Saint Paul, Then, when he gaue to him that blessed blow. Behold how God when pleaseth him can call, From sea, from land, from places high and low, Sentence.When you did weene him farthest he was nighest, So strong an arme, so long reach hath the highest. 54 Of age and de∣uotion ooe in the Morall.Thus spake this Hermit so deuout and old, Who by an Angell in his sleepe that night, Of good Rogeros comming was foretold, And of all chances should on him allight, With all his valiant actions manifold, That he had done, and should performe in fight, And of his death, and of his noble race, That should succeed him after in his place. 55 Now (as I said) this wise, this Hermit spoke, Iugum Christi suae.And part doth comfort him, and part doth checke, He blameth him, that in that pleasant yoke, He had so long deferd to put his necke, But did to wrath his maker still prouoke, And did not come at his first call and becke, But still did hide himselfe away from God, Vntill he saw him comming with his rod. 56 Then did he comfort him, and make him know, That grace is nere denide to such as aske: (As do the workmen of the Gospell show, Receiuing pay alike for diuers taske) Prouided that our prayre of zeale do grow, And serue not as a viser or a maske: This did the man of God Rogero tell, And so from thence he led him to his cell. 57 The cell a chappell had on th' Easterne side, Vpon the Wester side a groue or berie, Forth of the which he did his food prouide, Smal chear God wot, wherwith to make folk merie Yet fortie yeare he had that liuing tride, And yet thereof it seemd he was not werie: But eating berries, drinking water cleare, He had in strength and health liu'd fourscore yeare. 58 Now kindled had the man of God some woed, And on his boord he set a little frute, The youth to drie his cloths, not farre of stood, For why, to change he hath no other sute; Then he by th' old mans teaching vnderstood The faith, and how to Christ he must impute The pardon of his sinnes; yet neare the later, He told him he must be baptizd in water. 59 And so he was the next ensuing day, And afterward he rested in that place A while, and with the man of God did stay, Resoluing him of eu'rie doubtfull case: Sometime of heau'n, and of the later day, Sometime of earth, and of his noble race, That should in time to come, hold mightie Reames As was reueald to him in former dreames. 60 And further vnto him he doth repeat, How his chiefe house should be sirnamed Esté,The house of Because in time to come king Charles the great, Should say to them in Latin words, Hic este, Which is as much to say, be here the seat, In which you shall hereafter euer rest ye, And many future things to him he told,He turnes  to Rogero in the 43. booke. 188 Which were too long for me now to vnfold. 61 This while Orlando and king Brandimart, With Marquesse Oliuero,The combat of the sixe knight as I told, Met with those three of the contrarie part, Young Agramanté and Gradasso bold, With good Sobrino, who for valiant hart, Giues place to few of them, though being old; Each spurrres his horse, that ran a wondrous pace, And of their blowes resounded all the place. 62 In this same course, each plaid his part so well, That vp to heau'n flew shiuerd eu'rie lance, The hideous noise did cause the seas to swell, And some report, twas heard as farre as France; Gradasso and Orlando as befell, Did meet together, were it choice or chance; The match seemd eu'n, saue that their horses differ, And made Gradasso seeme to runne the stiffer. 63 The weaker horse on which Orlando rode, Was brused so with this so fearfull shocke, As now he could no longer beare his lode, But sinking downe, lay senslesse with the knocke; Orlando then did make but small abode, His courser lying senslesse like a stocke, Sith that with neither raines nor spurres he sturd, He left his saddle, and drew forth his sword
64 With Agramant the Marquesse hand to hand Did most, betweene them equall went the game, Sobrino was by Brandimartés hand, Cast from his horse, I know not how it came, But at that time it could not well be scand, If so the horse or horseman were to blame: But whether beast or rider wanted force, Sobrino certaine downe was from his horse. 65 King Brandimart nere offerd once to tuch Sobrino, when he saw him downe in vew, But to Gradasso that had done as much Vnto Orlando, in great hast he flew; The Marquesse fight with Agramant was such, As which side had the vantage no man knew, For when their staues were shiuerd all and rent, Their axes then they vsd incontinent. 66 Orlando who by hap a horse did lacke, And saw Gradasso bent another way, Whom Brandimart did hold so hardly tacke, That he enforced him thereby to stay; I say the Palladine then looking backe, Saw old Sobrino standing in his way, And toward him he go'th with looke so fierce, As though his eye, as well as sword could pierce. 67 Sobrino gainst the force of such a man, Sought with his surest ward himselfe to saue, And as a Pilot doth the best he can, To shunne the furie of the surging waue, Eu'n so this well experienc't Turke began, Himselfe in this great danger to behaue, With sword and shield his best defence he made, Against the fearfull edge of that same blade. 68 Which blade, of such an edge, in such an arme, No maruell if to pierce it seldome faile, Against the which in vaine was any charme, For though his shield was steeld, his cote of maile, Yet quite through shield and armour it did harme, To saue his shoulder all could not auaile. But he to wound Orlando was not able, For God had made his skinne impenetrable. 69 The valiant Earle redoubled still his blow, And thinks from shoulders off to cut his head, He, that the force of Clarimont did know, was  the house .Gaue backward, or his ground still trauersed, But in his trauersing he was so slow, That with one blow he laid him downe for dead, The blow fell flatling, but with force so maine, As crusht his helmet, and amazd his braine. 70 Downe fell Sobrino backward on the ground, From whence long time it was er he arose, Orlando thinks that he was safe and sound, And that he was starke dead he doth suppose: Wherefore since single foe he no where found, Vnto Gradasso presently he goes, To whom king Brandimart in armes, and horse, In sword, inferiour was, perhaps in force. 71 But yet the noble minded Brandimart, Vpon Rogeros horse Frontino mounted, With that same Sarasin so plaid his part, As if his forces he but little counted: And sure Gradasso not in skill, not hart, But in his sword and armour him surmounted: Enforcing him ofttimes to stand aloofe, Because his armour was of no good proofe. 72 But good Frontino bare away the bell, For being readie to the riders hand, It seemd where euer Durindana fell, Frontino had such wit to vnderstand, That euer more he did escape it well: But all this while it hardly could be scand, In tother twaine on which side fortune works, In Oliuero, or the king of Turks. 73 Orlando had (as late before I told) Left good Sobrino on the gound for ded, Wherefore on foot he goes with courage bold, To succour Brandimart if ill he sped; But in the way by hap he did behold, Sobrinos horse that without rider fled, Orlando straight into the saddle valted, Not looking if he went vpright or halted. 74 One hand his sword, the tother holds his raine, And so he rideth to Gradasso ward, Who when he saw him come, did not refraine, But to encounter with him straight prepard: To fight with one of them, or else with twaine, It seemd he little reckoned nor car'd; He minds and hopeth to effect it soone, To make them both to thinke it night ere noone. 75 Yet for a while king Brandimart he leaues, And turnes him to the Earle, and with a thrust Whereas his armour weakest he perceaues, There doth the fierce Gradasso hit him iust, And enterd, but his cunning him deceaues, Orlandos skin be pierced neuer must. But when with Ballisard Orlando strake, His helmet, coate of maile, and shield he brake. 76 So that both in his face, his breast, and side, He wounded sore the king of Sericane, Who maruels much what strange chance did betide For neuer erst such sore hurt he had tane: He thought there could not be a blade beside To pierce his coate, he hauing Durindane; And sure that blow had him dispatched clearly, If it had had more strength, or come more nearly. 77 He sees that now he must take better heed, And not trust armour, but a surer ward, To seeke to saue himselfe he now hath need, And looke vnto his limbs with more regard: Now while twixt them the fight did thus proceed, Good Brandimart did see he might be spard, Wherefore to breath himselfe he then retired, Still ready t'ayd each part, if cause required.
78 Now had Sobrino long laine in a trance, With that same bruse, and with that bloody wound, Giu'n him by that great Palladine of France, That at two blowes had laid him on the ground, With much a do he doth himselfe aduance, And standing on his feet, and looking round, He thought his Master was in weakest case, And to his aid he moues his silent pace. 79 At Oliueros backe he comes vnspide, Who sole on Agramant did fixe his eyes, And that same horse that Oliuer did ride, He hought behind in such despitefull wise, That wanting strength, he fell downe on his side, And was not able any more to rise: And which was worse then his vnlookt for fall, His foot hung in the stirop therewithall. 80 Sobrino doubled then his blowes againe, Thinking from shoulders off his head to pare, But yet the steele made that attempt but vaine, That Vulcan temperd erst, and Hector ware: King Brandimart at Sobrin runnes amaine, When of his doings he was well aware, And ouerthrew him quite, and stoutly smote him, But th'old fierce man, soone on his feet vp got him. 81 And once againe at Oliuer he flies, And once againe he thinketh him to kill, Or at the least cause him he shall not rise; But he that had his better arme at will, Layd with his sword about him in such wise, As that he kept himselfe from further ill And made his foe, that was of no great strength Stand distant from him, almost twise his length. 82 The Marquesse hopes ere long to ease his paine, If he can cause Sobrino stand aloofe, Who bled so fast, as now from fight t'abstaine He thought it would be best for his behoofe: Now Oliuero all his force doth straine, And to get loose he maketh manie a proofe, But still his foot was fast to his great hurt, And still the horse lay tumbling in the durt. 83 This while king Brandimart doth go to find Traianos sonne, and now he hath him found, Frontino now before, and straight behind, That good Frontino that can turne so round: The horse was sure and of a passing kind, The Sotherne kings was readie, strong, and sound: He had that famous courser Brigliadore, The which Rogero gaue him late before. 84 But sure the Turke great ods in armour had, For he had one of proofe, well tride, and sure, And Brandimartés was indeed but bad. Such as he could in warning short procure, Wherefore to change it now he would be glad, And that he shall, his heart doth him assure: So that he waxed stouter still and bolder, Though Agramant had hurt him in the shoulder. 85 Gradasso further had about his thye, Him giu'n a blow, not to be tane in sport, But yet the king did so the fight apply, And laid on loade in so couragious sort, As that he wounded his left arme thereby, And pricked his right hand (thus they report) But all this was but May game and delight, Vnto Gradassos and Orlandos fight. 86 Gradasso hath Orlando halfe disarmd, And made him with one blow his shield forsake, He could not wound him, for his skin was charmd, But yet his headpeece on both sides he brake: But him Orlando hath in worse sort harmd, Beside that hurt of which before I spake, He hath drawne blood of him in many a place, As namely in breast, in throate, and in his face. 87 Gradasso sees himselfe with blood besmeard, And smarting paine in many places found, And sees that Earle like one that nothing feard, Stand whole, and quite vnwounded safe and sound; Wherefore with both his hands his sword he reard, With mind to cleaue him, rather then to wound, And eu'n as he desir'd, with all his strength, He strake him on his head, at halfe sword length. 88 And sure had clou'd him to the saddle bow, Had it another then Orlando bene, But now as if it had falne flatling thoe, The blade rebounded from him bright and cleene, But yet that Earle was daz'd so with the bloe, I thinke some starres on ground by him were seene; He lost his bridle, and his sword had mist, Saue that a chaine did bind it to his wrist. 89 The horse on which the good Orlando rode, Was eke so scared with the fearfull sound, As there he durst no longer make abode, But on the sands at randon runneth round, And beares Orlando as a senslesse lode, That with the paine still stood as in a sound, And had Gradasso little harder spurred, He might haue tane the Earle ere he had sturred. 90 But as he rode, he saw king Agramant, Vnto extreamest point of danger brought, For why the valiant sonne of Monodant, Had loosd his beauer, and such hold had caught Vpon his gorget, that but small did want, Eu'n with one stab his last end to haue wrought: For why the noble minded Christen Prince, Had wonne his sword from him a good while since. 91 Gradasso doth no more that Earle pursew, But maketh hast king Agramant to ayd, And vnto Brandimart that nothing knew, Nor of no such misfortune was affrayd, He comes behind his backe quite out of vew, And both his hands at once on sword he layd, And in that sort, he strake with all his might, Full on the helmet of the noble knight.
92 Oh heau'nly Father grant a resting place In Paradice, for this thy Martyrs spirit, That hauing runne all his tempestuous race, He may with thee an harbour safe inherit. Ah Durindan, hadst thou so little grace, So ill to quite thy noblest Masters merit, That in his sight thou could of life depriue, His best and kindest frend he had aliue? 93 The sword did pierce a double plate of steele, That little lesse was then two fingers thicke, Good Brandimart gan with the blow to reele, It pierced had so deepe vnto the quicke, His braines all cut therewith he plaine did feele, And downe he fell like one most deadly sicke; A streame of blood out of the grieuous wound, Ran forth, and dyde with crimsen all the ground. 94 By this Orlando waked, and behild His Brandimart that lay now a la mort: He sees the Sericane that him had kild, This angerd him, and grieu'd him in such sort, Twas hard to say which more his stomacke fild, His wrath or griefe; but time to mourne was short, That griefe gaue place, and wrath bare chiefest sway But now I thinke it best a while to stay. In this booke may be noted the notable fondnesse of those men, that in avoiding of the lesse danger, fal into the greater, asMorall. they did that forsooke the ship, and leapt into the boat, where they were all cast away, and the ship it selfe saued. In that Rogero in his extremity of danger, feeleth a remorse of conscience, & straight hath recourse to God by prayer and vow, it is a good president for others to do the like, though indeed most men are apt to do so, but all the matter is, to performe the effect of their vow & promise to God after, for that few care for, according to that saying, made a prouerb in Italian, Scampato il pericolo giabbato il santo, When danger is scaped, the Saint is — mocked. But the example of Rogero may moue vs to more true deuotion; and this speech of the good old Hermit, let euerie one ap∣ply to himselfe that hath need of it, and it may fortune do him as much good as a sermon; for indeed it is most sweet and comfortable and verie true doctrine, and well beseeming the person of a deuout old man (as I called him in the 54 staffe) for seldome goeth deuotion with youth, be it spoken without offence of our Peckedeuanted Ministers: as there goes an old tale of three things that a blind man could see, for when his boy told him that there was brought a verse braue horse, then saith the blind man, I see he is far: the boy maruelled how he knew it; next he told him, there came by a passing faire woman, then I see she is young (quoth the blind man) well guessed Master said his boy. Lastly, came by a deuout preacher: Sir quoth the boy, here comes a good Priest, then he is old said the blind man, and that guesse was so right, the boy was affraid his Master had had his eyes againe. For indeed age and bodies chastised with fasting and studie, are companions of deuotion: as a frend of mine was wont to say in Italian, Dio mi guarda Da medico rognoso, Dio mi guarda Da alchumista stracciato, Dio mi guarda Da monacho ingrossato. God defend me from a mangie Phisition, (for the Phisition that cannot cure the itch in himselfe, will hardly cure other greater diseases in another.) From a ragged or beggerly Alcumist, for he that cannot get himself good clothes, will hard∣ly turne lead into gold. From a corpulent or fat fed Frier: for he that feeds his owne bodie fat, is not likely to giue of the best spirituall food of the soule. In Brandimart that laboreth to perswade Agramant to peace, we may note a noble disposition, and excellent good na∣ture, that being verie stout, and treating of peace (as they say) with his sword in his hand, yet endeuoured to take up the qûarrell before it came to bloud, which though it be a thanklesse office many times (as here it hapned to Brandimart to be scorned for his labour) yet ought not that to terrifie a good mind from so honest an office. And sure the cause why great quarrels rise vpon small matters, betweene great personages, and are afterward so long ere they be reconclied, and so hollowly reconciled at last; is that some of a wicked pollicie, seeke to keepe them at variance, thinking it (as the prouerbe saith) best fishing in troubled waters: but neither S. Peter that was the good fisher of men nor his Master, were of that opinion, but do say contrarily, Beati pacifici. Of the house of Este,Historie. it was first called Ateste, but after (as mine Author hath deliuered) it was turned to Este, by reason of that speech, Hic este Domini, and Fornarius writing vpon this place affirmes the same. In the deuises or impreises of Orlando and Oliuero,Allusion. may be noted the decorum they vsed, for Orlando being a known and approved warrior, giues a more terrible deuice, yet referring the honor to God, in most Christian manner, of striking down and confounding his enemies with lightning. Oliuero whose deuice is the spaniell, or lyam hound couching with the word fin che vegna, doth with great modestie shew therby, that the spaniell or hound that is at commandement, waiteth, till the fowle, or deare he stricken, and then boldly leapeth into the water, or draweth after it by land: so he being yet a young man, waited for an occasion to shew his valew, which being come, he would no longer couch, but shew the same. In this kind we haue had many in our time, as the happie 17. day of Nouember can witnesse, that haue ex∣celled for ex∣cellencie of deuice: of which if I should speake at large, it would aske a volume by it selfe. My selfe, have chosen this of O∣liuero for mine owne, partly liking the modestie thereof, partly (for I am not ashamed to confesse it) because I fancie the spaniell so much, whose picture is in the deuice, and if any make merrie at it. (as I doubt not but some will) I shall not be sorrie for it: for one end of my trauell in this worke, is to make my frends merrie, and besides I can alledge many exam∣ples of wise men, and some verie great men, that haue not onely taken pictures, but built cities in remembrance of ser∣uiceable beasts. And as for dogges, Doctor Caynes a learned Phisition and a good man, wrote a treatise in praise of them, and the Scripture it selfe hath voutchsafed to commend Tobias dogge. Here end the annotations of the 41. booke
THE XLII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Orlando of his conquest takes small ioy, Which caused him his dearest frend to want: Loues diuers passions, breed no small annoy, To stout Renaldo and good Bradamant: She wishing her Rogero to enioy, He th' Indian Queene, but soone he did recant, Taught by disdaine: at last in Latian ground, The Palladine kind entertainment found. 1 wordWHat iron band, or what sharpe hard mouthd bit, What chaine of diamond (if such might be) Can bridle wrathfulnesse and conquer it, And keep it in his bounds and due degree? When one to vs in bonds of frendship knit, And dearly lou'd, before our face we see, By violence or fraud to suffer wrong, By one for him too craftie, or too strong. 2 And if before we can such pang digest, We swarue sometime from law, and run astray, It may be well excusd, sith in ones brest, Pure reason at such time beares little sway: Achilles when with counterfaited crest, He saw Patroclus bleeding all the way, To kill his killer was not satisfide. Except he hal'd and tare him all beside. 3 So now a little since when in his brow, Alfonso wounded was with cursed stone, And all his men and souldiers thought that now, His soule from earth to heau'n had bene vp flone, the  of this book.They kild and spoild, they car'd whom nor how, Strong rampiers, walls, to them defence were none, But in that furie they put all to wracke, Both old and young, and all the towne to sacke. 4 Our men were so enraged with this fall, To thinke they had their Captaine lost for ay, That to the sword they put both great and small, That happend then to come within their way: And so their fortune did preuaile withall, That they the Castle did regaine that day, In fewer houres, to their great fame and praise, Then had the Spaniards got it erst in dayes. 5 It may be, God ordained (as I guesse) That he that time should wounded be so sore, To punish that same sinne and foule excesse, His foes committed had a while before, When Vestidell forlorne and in distresse, Did yeeld, and should haue had his life therefor▪ Yet was he kild when they had him surprised, By men whose greater part were circumcised. 6 Wherefore I iustly may conclude thus much, That nothing can more hotly kindle wrath, Then if one shall the life and honor tuch, Of our deare frend, or do him wrong or scath. Now (as I said) Orlandos griefe is such, And such occasion of iust griefe he hath, He sees his frend, for lacke of better heeding, Lye flat on ground, and almost dead with bleeding. 7 As the Nomadian Shepherd,Simile. that a Snake, Along the grasse and herbes hath slyding seene, Which late before with tooth most poysond strake His little sonne, that plaid vpon the greene, Doth bruse and beat, and kill him with a stake: So goes this Earle with blade most sharpe and keene And yet far more with wrath an choller whet; And Agramant, was then the first he met.
8 Vnhappie he that in his passage stood, His sword was gone as I declard before, Himselfe besmeared all with his owne blood, Braue Brandimart had wounded him so sore; Orlando comes, and in his wrathfull mood, With Ballisard, that payes home euermore, He strikes (by fortune were it or by art) Iust where the shoulders from the head do part. 9 Loosd was his helmet, as I erst did tell, That like a Poppie quite fell off his hed, The carkas of the Lybian Monarke fell Downe to the ground, and lay a long starke ded, His soule by Charon, ferrie-man of hell, To Pluts house or Stigian lake was led. Orlando staid no whit, but straight prepard, To finde Gradasso eke with Ballisard. 10 But when Gradasso plaine beheld and saw, Of Agramant the wofull end and fall, He felt and vnaccustomd dread and aw, Who neuer wonted was to feare at all; And eu'n as if his owne fate he foresaw, He made the Palladine resistance small: Feare had so maz'd his head, and daz'd his sence, That for the blow, he quite forgat his sence. 11 Orlando thrust Gradasso in the side, About the ribs, as he before him stood, The sword came forth a span on tother side, And to the hilt, was varnisht all with blood, By that same thrust alone it might be tride, That he that gaue it was a warriour good, That with one thrust did vanquish and subdew, The stoutest champion of the Turkish crew. 12 Orlando of this conquest nothing glad, Doth from his saddle in great hast alight, And with a heauie heart and count'nance sad, He runnes vnto his deare beloued knight, He sees his helmet cut, as if it had Bene clouen quite with axe (a wofull sight) And eu'n as if it had bene made of glasse, And not of steele, and plated well with brasse. 13 The Palladine his helmet then vnties, And finds the scull clou'n downe vnto the chin, And sees the braine all cut before his eyes; Yet so much breath and life remaind within, That he is able yet before he dyes, To call to God, for mercie for his sinne, And pray Orlando ioyne with him in praying, And vfe to him this comfortable saying. 14 My deare Orlando, see that to our Lord, Thou in thy good deuotions me commend: Likewise to thee commend I my deare Fiorde- And liege he would haue sayd, but there did end; Straight Angels voyces with most sweet accord, Were heard the while his spirit did ascend, The which dissolued from this fleshly masse, In sweetest melodie to heau'n did passe. 15 Orlando though he should reioyce in hart, Of this his end so holy and deuout, Because he knew his louing Brandimart, Was taken vp to heau'n, without all doubt, Yet flesh and blood in him so playd their part, That without teares he cannot beare it out, But that he needs must shew some change in cheare, To leese one more, then any brother deare. 16 This while Sobrino brused in his hed, And wounded sorely in his side and thye; Vpon the ground so great a streame had bled, It seemd his life in perill was thereby; And Oliuero little better sped, On whom his horse still ouerthrowne did lye, He striuing, but his striuing did not boot, To get at libertie his brused foot. 17 And sure it seemes he had bene worse apayd, Had not his dolefull cosin quickly come, And brought to him, both quicke and needfull ayd, Before the paine had him quite ouercome: His foote that long had in the stirrop stayd, Was there withall so void of sence, and numme, That when he stood vpright, he was not able, To tuch the ground, much lesse tred firm & stable. 18 So that indeed Orlando in his hart, But little ioy of so great conquest had, He wayles the death of his deare Brandimart, And that his kinsman was in state so bad: Now lay Sobrino, though aliue in part, Yet with a looke so chearlesse and so sad, And so much blood his aged veines had bled, That doubtlesse in few howres he had bene ded, 19 Saue that Orlando with compassion moued, To see him ly so lorne, and so distressed, Gate him such needfull things as best behoued, And charitably made his wounds be dressed: So kindly, that some kinseman deare beloued, And not his foe, a man might him haue guessed: Such was this Earles good nature,A true praise a noble mind. fierce in fight, But fight once done, from malice free or spight. 20 The horse, and bodies of the other twaine, He tooke away, and left their men the rest, To be disposd to their owne priuate gaine, Or to interre their Lords, as they thought best. But here, that in my story I do faine, Fredericke Fulgoso (as I heare) hath guest,Looke in the story. Sith at this Ile he late arriuing found, In all the same no leuell foote of ground. 21 Nor doth he probable it deeme or take, That sixe such knights as had in armes no peare, On horsebacke should a combat vndertake, Where no one foot of plaine ground doth appeare. To which obiection I this answer make, That then, in times now past seau'n hundred yeare, Plaine ground there was, but now some inundation, Or earthquake might procute this alteration.
22 Wherfore Fulgoso, honor of thy name, Bright Fulgor, causing all thy stocke to shine, If in this point thou hadst imputed blame To me, perhaps before that Prince deuine, From whom thy countries good and quiet came, And did it first to loue and peace incline, Informe him now, that eu'n perhaps in this, My tale of truth or likelyhood doth not misse. 23 to Or.  43. . 144.This while Orlando looking from the shore, A little Frigot did farre of deserie, That both with sayle, and with the helpe of ore, Vnto that Ile, seemd in great hast to flie; But ere of this I tell you any more, I must to France as fast as I can hie, To see if they be merrie there or sad, Now they from thence the Turks expulsed had. 24 .First let vs see how faithfull Bradamant, Doth take his absence whom she loueth most, Who in his oth, due care of faith did want, Which he had tane in sight of either host: Now sure she thinks his loue and faith too scant, To heare he quite had left the Christen cost: If in his publike oth he be vniust, Whereto alas, then whereto can she trust? 25 And still returning to her former plaints, And still bemoning her vnluckie fate, With which her selfe she too too well acquaints, She calls herselfe accurst, and him vngrate, Yea blaming God himselfe, and all his Saints, For not redressing this her wofull state, She scarce abstaines high blasphemie to speake, That God vniust, and that Saints powres are weake. 26 Then she Melissa (absent) doth reproue, And curst that Oracles perswasion blind, That lapt her in this Laberinth of loue, Whence she herselfe by no meanes can vnwinde, But to Marsisa all the rest aboue, She open layes her stomacke and her mind, With her she chides and vtters all her choller, And yet she prayes her comfort this her doller. 27 Marsisa comforts her in all she may, And tels her what a vertue Patience is, And partly doth excuse Rogeros stay: And further giueth her her faith in this, That if she find he wilfully delay, She will constraine him mend all is amisse, Or if she find that he refuse to do it, To fight with him and so compell him to it. 28 With this she did in part her paine asswage, For why it is in sorrow great reliefe, To those of either sex or any age, To haue some frend, to whom to tell their griefe, But now if Bradamant be in such rage, No lesse is he that of her house was chiefe, I meane Renaldo, that cannot expulse Loues fire, from eu'rie sinew, veine and pulse. 29 I thinke I need not now to you repeat, A thing by me so often told before, By name that loue and that affection great, That to Angelica Renaldo bore: Nor did her beautie cause so much his heat, As did that spring of which he dranke such store, Now all the other Palladines were free From all their foes, now Cupids thrall is he. 30 An hundred messengers he sends about, Himselfe the while an hundred wayes more riding, To aske of her, or else to finde her out, Who hath her now, or where is her abiding. At last, because he thinketh out of doubt, That Malagige of her can learne some tiding, He asketh him (but blushing sore with shame) If he knew what of th'Indian Queene became. 31 His cosin wonders at so strange a case, And in his mind thereon long time he mused, That when Renaldo had both time and place, Her offers large and kind he still refused, When both herselfe did sue to haue his grace, And many of his frends perswasions vsed: And Malagige himselfe among the rest, Had prou'd him oft with prayre and with request. 32 The rather eke, because Renaldo then, By taking her, had set his cosin free, Who then was kept close prisner in a den, And for that cause in perill slaine to be; He maruels that he now would seeke her, when No hope, nor cause there was, and further he With angrie looke, did bid him call to mind, How in this point he had bene too vnkind. 33 But good Renaldo now quite of tune, Pray'th him old quarrels from his mind to moue, And doth most earnestly him importune, Vnto his helpe, his skill and bookes to proue: Which made his cosin so much more presume, Vpon his reconcilement and true loue, And promist to assist him if he may, And for his answer he prefixt a day. 34 And straight from thence he go'th vnto the place, Where he was wont the spirits to coniure, A strong vast caue, in which there was great space, The precepts of his Art to put in vre: One spright he calls, that of each doubtfull case Of Cupids court, could giue him notice sure: Of him he askt what bred Renaldos change, By him he heard, of those two fountaines strange. 35 And how Renaldo by misfortune led, First happend of that hatefull spring to drinke, Which his dislike of that faire Ladie bred, And made her loue, and profferd seruice stinke: And how againe, by some ill starre misled, He drank of th'other spring, which causd him thinke Her onely to be loued and admired, Whom erst he hated more then cause required.
36 Moreouer he to Malagigis showd, How that same famous Indian Queene (nay quean) Had on a Pagan youth herselfe bestowd, Of parentage, of state, of liuing meane: And how from Spaine they in a galley rowd, All Christendome and Spaine forsaking cleane, And passing both with safetie and with ease, Looke in the story.(In ventrous barks of Catalyn) the seas. 37 Now when Renaldo for his answer came, His learned cosin seekes him to perswade, Vnto some better thought his minde to frame, Nor further in this gulfe of loue to wade; Alledging what a slander and a shame, It was to fancy one her selfe had made, Not like a Queene, but like a vile maide Marian, A wife, (nay slaue) vnto a base Barbarian. 38 In fine he said, she was to th'Indies gon, With her Medoro, and was welnie there: Renaldo not a little musd thereon, Yet all the rest he could with patience beare, And for the paine, he counts it small or none, So he at last might finde her any where; Wherefore of it he had no care not keepe, Nor could that make him once to breake his sleepe 39 But when he heard that one of birth so base Had with his mistres laid his knife a boord, It seemd this strake him speechles in the place, He was not able to pronounce a word: His heart did quake within, his lips like case So trembled, answer he could none afford; But ouercome with anguish of the passion, He flang away from thence, in carelesse fashion. 40 And much lamenting this her foule abuse, He vowes to follow her what ere insue, But yet to Charles he faineth this excuse, That sith Gradasso, of his word vntrue, Had tane his horse contrary to the vse Of valiant Knights, he meanes him to pursue; Alledging that it were his great dishoner, To let Bayardo haue a forren owner. 41 And that a Turke should bost another day, That he by fight did him thereof bereaue. King Charles (though loth) yet could not say him nay To such an honest sute, but gaue him leaue; Which tane, alone from thence he goes his way. And all his frends in Paris he doth leaue: With Guidon, Dudon stout to him do proffer Their company, but he refusd their offer. 42 Away he goes alone, yet not alone. Griefs, teares, and plaints, still his companions are: And oft in heart he bitterly doth grone, To thinke that erst he should so little care, For her great loue, which wilfully forgone, He now esteemes at rate so high and rare, He could haue wisht (thus was his mind perplext) But one day to enioy, and die the next. 43 Then he bethinkes with no lesse griefe, nayrage How she could finde in that her lofty hart, To set her loue on such a sorry page, The merites all, and seruice put apart, Done vnto her eu'n from her tender age, By men of high renowne and great desart: Thus with a fired hart, and watred eyne, He rode vntill he toucht the bankes of Rhyne. 44 Ere long into Ardenna woods he enters,Looke in the Allegory. Soone after he Basylea quite had past: Ardenna woods, whence many come repenters, And in that forrest haue bene sore agast, To trauell through the same Renaldo venters, When suddenly the skie did ouercast, And there arose a blacke and hideous storme, And then appeard a monster of strange forme. 45 She seem'd of womans shape, but in her hed, A thousand eyes she had, that watch did keepe, As many eares, with which she harkened, Her eyes want lids, and therefore neuer sleepe, In steed of haire, her crowne snakes ouerspred, Thus marched she foorth of the darknesse deepe, Her tayle one Serpent bigger then the rest, Which she with knots had tyde about her brest. 46 This fight, Renaldos mind appald so sore, He feeles his heart alreadie gan to fayle him, And sith it neuer had done so before, He maruels what, (the goody eare) now should aile him: Yet still his minde misgaue him more and more, To see the monster comming to assaile him, He nathlesse countersets his wonted boldnesse, Though quaking hāds bewraid his inward coldnesse 47 The monster straight assaulted him, much like To one that parfet was and skild in fence, And when againe he with his sword did strike, He misled, and could doe her none offence. Much doth Renaldo this ill match mislike, And little wants to quite distract his sence, Right blowes and reardemaine he striketh many, But yet he cannot hit her right with any. 48 The monster stickes a Serpent in his brest, That strake his heart in to a freesing cold, Another fixed is below his crest, And on his necke and shoulders taketh hold; Renaldo thinkes to get him gone is best, And spurres away with all the speed he could, But that vile monster was not lame to find him, But ouertooke him, and leapt vp behind him. 49 And whether he go straight, or go he wide, The monster fitteth sure and holds him fast, He knowes not how to be from her vntide, Nor any meane within his mind can cast, His heart eu'n quakes within him, and beside That he was with this hideous plague agast, He sorrowd so not knowing how to mend it, He loth'd his life, and did desire to end it.
50 He spurres amaine, and purposely he takes The rugged wayes, the worst that he could find, By craggie Rocks, and hils, through bryers & brakes Through copsies thicke, by narrow paths and blind, But sure the knight the matter much mistakes, He cannot from the monster him vnwind: And like it was, great harme had him betyded, Had not for him, bene helpe in time prouided. 51 is  in the  this book.For loe a knight, vnto his succour went, All armd in shining steele, and on his shield, He bare a yoke in sundry peeces rent, And flames of fire all in a yellow field, So weaponed he was, as if he ment To make all that encountred him to yeeld, A sword and speare he had, and to the same, A Mace from whence he threw continuall flame. 52 His Mace was stor'd with euerlasting fire, That euer burned, and did neuer wast, No other weapon needed one desire, To make good way with, wheresoeu'r he past, And sure Renaldos danger did require Quicke remedie, wherefore the knight doth hast: And when he saw this monster and did vew her, With his stiffe speare forthwith he ouerthrew her, 53 But this same fall did her no whit annoy, Wherefore to vse his speare he now misliketh, He onely will his fierie Mace imploy, And with that same the monster foule he striketh: Then she no longer could her force enioy, Renaldo while she fled, occasion piketh, To scape away, as him that knight perswaded, While he this monster more and more inuaded. 54 Now when the knight had with his fierie Mace, Driu'n backe this monster to her darksome den, of .Where she for spite doth beat her head and face, Repining at the good of other men, Then to Renaldo he doth ride apace, And when he had soone ouertane him, then He offerd in kind sort, with him to ride, From out the darksome places him to guide. 55 But when Renaldo was from danger free, And that same knight by whom his safetie came, So courteously to come to him did see, His speech to him in kind words he did frame, And gaue him many thanks in hye degree, And then besought him he might know his name, That th'Emperor and all his court might know, What knight did so great grace on him bestow. 56 The knight in courteous manner thus replide, I would not you should take it in displeasure, That I my name from you a while shall hide, But ere the shadow grow a yard by measure, I shall you tell: thus onward still they ride, Renaldo being pleasd to stay his leasure, So long they went together till they found, A christall spring that ran along the ground. 57 At which full oft the herdmen, that did dwell Neare those same woods,Of this Well you heard in the first booke. haue in their louing fits, Drunke loue away, with tasting of that well, And of those passions purged cleane their wits: Now (for the knight that rode with him could tell That for Renaldos ill, this Phisicke fits) He doth aduise him there to stay a space, And make that well their baite and resting place. 58 Renaldo of the motion well allowth, And lighteth straight, and to the well doth go, Both for that heat and trauell bred his drowth, And that the monster had disturbd him so; Vnto the christall well he puts his mouth, And greedily drinks downe fiue gulps or mo, And from his brest doth with one draught remoue, His burning thirst, and his more burning loue. 59 Now when that other knight that with him went, Saw him lift vp himselfe from that same brooke, And found he did his foolish loue repent, And that he now that humor quite forsooke, Then to declare his name he was content, And looking with a graue and loftie looke, He said, Renaldo, know I hight Disdaine, That came to loose thee from loues foolish chaine. 60 This said, he vanisht from Renaldo quite, His horse nor him he could not after see, Renaldo maruels at this wondrous sight, And lookes about, and saith, what where is he? At last he thinks tis some familiar spright, That by good Malagigis sent might be: To rid him of that tedious care and wo, That many months had him afflicted so. 61 Or else that God to him this helpe did lend, Of his especiall grace and louing kindness, As erst he did vnto Tobias send, His Angel to deliuer him from blindnes: But let it Angel be, or be it send, Renaldo takes against him no vnkindnes: He thanks and praises it, and doth acknowledge, To haue receiu'd of him grace, wit, and knowledge 62 Now, that same great mislike and hate retorned, Of faire Angelica, whom late he loued, Now he despised her and greatly scorned, To thinke that he for her one foote had moued: Yet onward into India ward he iourned, As for Bayardos sake it him behoued: Because both honor did compell him to it, And to his Prince he vndertooke to do it. 63 He rides to Basile next ensuing night, Where verie late before, some newes were hard, How that Orlando challeng'd was to fight, And for that fight, how he himselfe prepard, Not, that Orlando newes here of did write, But one that came from Sycill thitherward, Affirmed he had heard the same reported, By many that to Sycily resorted.
64 These newes do set on edge Renaldos hart, He faine would present be at this conflict, He faine would take therein Orlandos part, To whom he bounden was in bands most strikt, Of friendship, of allyance and desart: Wherefore he takes post horse, and spurd and prickt, And changd both beasts, & guides each tē miles end And toward Italy he still doth bend. 65 At Constance he did passe the streame of Rhine, And then beyond the Alpes, he soone doth goe, To Mantoa, and ere the Sun decline, He passed ore the stately streame of Poe, Here he did doubt and did not soone designe, If he should trauell all the night or noe: Here you must begin, to reade the tale of the Man∣ in knight that had the married mans uppe.Till at the last a well behauourd knight, And full of curtesie, came in his sight. 66 This knight forthwith vnto Renaldo went, And askt him if he were a marride man, Renaldo maruels what the question ment, But answerd yea, then tother straight began, And praid him, that he would be then content, To be his guest, at such cheare as he can: Offring to show him, while with him he tarride, A sight well pleasing vnto all were marride. 67 Renaldo glad so good a bait to make, And no lesse willing, haps most rare to heare, Would not the offer of this knight forsake, Of entertainment good, and friendly cheare, But onward with him doth his iourny take, Vntill he saw a goodly place appeare, So well set forth, both for the shew and sence, As seemd not for a priuat mans expence. 68 The porch was all of Porpherie and Tuth, On which the sumptuous building raised was, With Images that seemd to moue, see, tuch, Some hewd in stone ome caru'd and cut in brasse, Likewise within, the beautie was asmuch: Beneath a statey arch, they straight did passe, Vnto a court that good proportion bare, And was each way one hundred cubites square. 69 And either side a Porch had passing faire, That with an arch, is on two cullomns placed, Of equall sise they seemed euerie paire, Yet sundrie works which them the better graced; At each of these a wide, large easie staire, Without the which, all buildings are defaced, And those same staires so stately mounting, led Each to a chamber richly furnished. 70 The cullomns hie, the chapters guilt with gold, The cornishes enricht with things of cost, The Marbles set from farre, and dearely sold, By cunning workmen carued and imbost, With Images, and antikes new and old, (Though now the night thereof concealed most) Shew that that worke so rich beyond all measure, Could cant be builded with a Princes treasure. 71 But nothing did so much the fight enrich, As did the plenteous fountaine, that did stand Iust placed in the middle, vnder which The Pages spred a table out of hand, And brought forth napry rich, and plate more rich, And meates the choisest of the sea or land: For though the house had stately roomes full many, In summer season this was best of any. 72 This fountaine was by curious workmen brought, To answer to the rest with double square, Eight femall statues of white marble wrought, With their left hands, an azure skie vp bare, Which raining still, expelled heat and drought, From all that vnder it, or neare it are, In their right hands,That  nifieth plea copa cornu Of Amalt looke in the  was Amaltheas horne, By eu'rie one of those eight statues borne. 73 Each of these statues rested both their feete, Vpon two Images of men below, That seemd delighted with the noise so sweete, That from the water came, that there did flow, They also seemd the Ladies low to greete, As though they did their names and vertues know: And in their hāds they hold long scroles of writings Of their owne pennings and their owne enditings. 74 And in faire golden letters were the names, Both of the women wrote, and of the men, The women were eight chast and sober dames, That now do liue, but were vnborne as then: The men were Poets that their worthie fames, In time to come, should praise with learned pens These Images bare vp a brasen tressell, On which there stood a large white Marble vessell. 75 This tooke the water from the azure skie, From whence, with turning of some cocke or vice, Great store of water would mount vp on hie, And wet all that same court eu'n in a trice; With sight of these Renaldo fed his eye, So that his host could scarcely him entice, To feed his stomacke,Il Sala  the Italian . yet he oft him told, His meate would marre and sallets would be cold. 76 Then downe at last they sat them at the boord, And pleasant talke did helpe disgest their meate, His host that was no niggard, did affoord Great store of delicates, to drinke and eate, And all this while Renaldo spake no word, Although he did it oft in mind repeate, And though his tongue did itch, to pray him tell, What twas that would please marride men so well. 77 At last he put him mannerly in minde, Of that he first did promise him to show, Eu'n then he plainely saw his host incliude To inward griefe, and did more pensiue grow, With secret sighs, and leauing halfe behinde; At last a Page came in with curtsie low, And beares a standing cup of gold most fine, Without of gemmes, and full within of wine.
77 With this, the Master of the feast did smile, And on Renaldo lookt with pleasant cheare, But one that well had marked him that while, Might see more griefe then mirth, in him appeare: Now noble guest (quoth he) within a while, You shall see prou'd, a strange conclusion heare, That needs must be full welcome to be tried, By all that are in bonds of wedlocke tied. 78 For sure I thinke (he said) each husband ought, Make search if so his wife esteeme him dearly, If same, or shame, by her to him be brought, If man or beast, he be reputed mearly: The burthen of the horne though it be thought To weigh so heauie, and to touch so nearly, No doubt but many get them in their marriage, Yet feele them not, they be so light in carriage. 79 But if a man by certaine signes may know, How that his wife to him is true and iust, He hath more cause more kindnes her to show, Then he that liues in right, or wrong mistrust: For some without a cause do iealous grow, Whose wiues are chast, and free-from lawlesse lust: And some yt for their wiues truth durst haue sworne, Haue for their labours, in their head a horne. 80 Now sir, if you beleeue your wife is true, As sure till one do finde contrarie proofe, I thinke both you, and all men ought of dew, For that no doubt is best for their behoose, Here you shall see it tride within your vew, For which I prayd you harbour in my roofe: This cup (said he) if you desire to know it, By drinking in the lame, will clearely show it. 81 Now drinke hereof, and proue this passing skill,Acteons armes were horne gi∣uen him by Dia∣na, wherupon a pleasant fellow wrote this de∣slicke of one that had married a light huswife. Thda e credi disse, sed illa Dana est, Namque Acteoneum da  Gau ca∣put. For if Acteons armes, be on your crest, Do what you can, you shall the liquor spill, Beside your mouth, vpon your lappe and brest, But if your wife be chast, then drinke your fill, No such mischance your draught will then molest. Thus much he said, and fixt on him his eyne, And thinkes Renaldo sure would spill the wine. 82 Renaldo halfe allured to assay, To finde a thing, which found he might repent, Did take in hand the golden cup straight way, As if to quasse it off, were his intent: Yet first he doth the certaine danger way, To which by tasting such a cup he went. But giue me leaue a while some breath to take, Before you heare what answer he did make. This booke begins with a Morall against wrath, and reuenge, excusing rather then allowing them that yeeld to that bloodie passion: but let all noble minded men (I speake to men of the sword) if they do as Orlando did, reuenge the death of their deere friend, yet after take example of Orlandos clemencie towards Sobrino, whom (after the furie of the com∣bat was past) he made to be cured. Tully in his Oration pro Marcello, hath many excellent sayings to this effect, to raise Caesar and, all such as being able to reuenge, yet rather chuse to forgiue: as in one place he saith, verum animum vin∣cere, iracundiam cohibere, victoriam temperare, &c. Haec quifaciat, non ego eum summis viris comparo, sed si∣millimum Deo iudico. To ouercome the passions of the minde, to bridle ones anger, to moderate the victorie, &c. who doth these things I compare not him to the best sort of men, but I liken him to God himselfe. Further in the same oration he cals wrath an enemie to wisedome; and our common English prouerbe saith, the hastie man neuer wanteth woe: all which I alledge rather to proue mine authours saying true: that it is hard to bridle wrath, and to temper revenge; and consequently the more commendable for those that can do it: according to the saying, pulchra quae difficilia; and there∣fore the more noble and great a man is either in byrth or fortune, the more honorable it is for him to be spare and not bloodie in reuenge; Posse & nolle nobile. And euen in this last booke, you read how hurtfull desire of reuenge alleth of time to him that desireth it; for Agramant came of purpose into France to be reuenged vpon Charles, and was as you see, first expelled out of that Realme, and after bereft of his life. Of Alfonsoes hurt you may reade in Guycchardin,Historie. and how his men recouered the Bastia from the Spaniards, who had certaine Moores with them at that time; and therefore he saith (of men whose greater part were circumcised.) Ful∣goso, or Fregoso, was Archbishop of Salerne, and as it seemes, had carped at Ariostos verse of Lyppadusa: but he de∣fends the matter prettily, alledging that an earthquake, or inundation had destroyed all the leuell ground. The like re∣proofe had Virgil about the hauen of Mongibello, which he describes at the roote of that hill, where indeed there was none: and the like excuse is made for him, that it filled with the continuall casting vp of stones out of the burning hill. Catalani are the chiefe house of Spaine, alledged here by the Poet, for their good successe in discouering the Indies, though indeed the Portugals Lusitani not Catalani deserue the praise of it. The monster that assaulted Renaldo signifies Iealousie that he had,Allegorie. that another possest his loue: the knight that deli∣uered him was Disdaine, that with the heat of noble courage, signified by the fierie Mace, ouerthrew the monster, and draue him quite away: it is so plaine in the verse it needs no exposition. The cup that Renaldo was offerd,Allusion. puts me in minde of the like fansie, in the Historie of Herodotus in the second booke, briefely it is thus. Pharao King of Egypt, hauing by ill hap, lost his eiesight, was aduised (by some Oracle) to bath his eyes in the vrine of a chast woman. Wherefore first he proued his wiues, and after diuers other great Ladies, but he found none did him good but one poore gentelwoman, wherefore being recouered of his fight, he put all the other to death, and mar∣ried that one: but because the matter of the cup is continued in the next booke, I shall speake more to this effect, in my notes vpon the same. Here end the notes of the XLII. booke.
THE XLIII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Renaldo heares two tales to like effect, Tone of a Bargeman, tother of a knight: Both prouing that rewards will soone infect The mindes of chastest dames, and make them light: To Lippaduse he doth his course direct, But first Orlando finisht had his fight: That Hermit that Rogero did baptise, Heal'd Oliuer, and Sobrine in likewise. 1 O Curst, ô greedie, ô vnsa∣ciable Desire of gaine, I do not maruell sure, If thou the base and filthy minds art able, men.To cause to stoope vnto thy carren lure, Sith oft we see some per∣sons honorable, Can scarce thy weake and base assaults endure, Who if they could thy foule entisements shun, No doubt but they great glory should haue won. 2 men.Some men can measure earth, and sea, and sky, And tell the change and cause of eu'ry season, And wade so farre with wit, or mount so hy, They search both heau'n & hel with depth of reason But when thou com'st in place, then by and by, Thou putst their daintie tasts so out of season, They place their whole delight, their hope, their health In only scraping and in heaping wealth. 3 .Another man in warres hath great renowne, And gets the conquest in each bloudie strife, And wins this fortresse, and that walled towne, Opposing his stout brest to perils rife, Thou onely conquerst him, and thrusts him downe, And keepest him thy prisner all his life: professionsSome men, excelling in each art and studdie, Thou doest obscure, with base desires and muddie. 4 .What should I speake of dames of worth not small, That hauing louers, men of great desarts, Oppose their honours, as a brasen wall, Against their suits with vnrelenting harts? But come some miser, base deformed squall, That saue his riches,Omid. Aureanuns ve∣r unt secula∣purimus  Venit hones,  a∣mor. Dana had a  of gold fell in her lap. Looke in the Table. hath no worthy parts, They breake the wall, and make therein a gap, To take the showre that fell in Danaes lap. 5 Nor without cause hereof complaine do I, Take me that can, for I do rightly take it, Nor from my matter do I swarue awrie, Or by a vaine digression do for sake it: Yet to my former speach I not applie, But tending to a future tale I spake it: Now let me tell you of Renaldo first,One thirst was for were, the to∣ther to know his wiues cste. That with one draught wold swage his double thirst 6 But whether that his courage did him faile, Or that on more aduise,Sentence  to that  Mlut bene posium ne moue as Sentence. he changed minde, He thought and said, what should it one auaile, To seeke a thing he would be loth to finde? My wife a woman is, their sex is fraile, I yet am to beleeue the best enclinde; I know I cannot better my beliefe, And if I change it, it will be my griefe. 7 What good may come by such a straight espy all, Into my sences surely cannot sinke, Much hurt may come, there can be no denyall, Let nothing seuer those whom God doth linke:Sentence. Wherefore to make so vnaccustomd triall, Were sinne, and tempting God as I do thinke: Then drinke this cup, (quoth he) that lift, not I, I am not, nor I minde not to be drie.
8 God would such skill from mortall men be hid, Simile..And eu'n as Adam wrought his ouerthrow, By tasting fruit, that God did him forbid, So he that curiously will search to know, This was well considered of Renaldo.All that his wife hath said, or what she did, May fortune at the last himselfe beshrow: And shall confound himselfe (this thinke I verily) And liue in sorrow, that did erst liue merily. 9 Thus much said good Renaldo, and withall He thrust away that hatefull cup of wine, And then he saw of teares, a streame not small, Flow from the master of that house his eyne: Which past, he said, now foule may them befall, That first procurd this miserie of mine: To proue (which I shall sorrow all my life) That, which berest me of my dearest wife. 10 Why was not I (said he) with you acquainted, Ten yeares ere this, to take aduise so sound, Before my heart was thus with sorrow tainted, Of which no ease can now, nor end be found: But that you may, as in a table painted, Behold my griefes, I will to you expound, What cauld this mine vncomparable woe, And then you sure will pittie me I know. 11 Not farre from hence you left a little towne, About the which there runnes a prettie lake, That fals into this streame of great renowne, Bnaco.But from Banaco first his head doth take, Erected when those walls were beaten downe, Cadmus sonne of Agenor, turned into a Dragon, bult the towne of bs.That erst Agenors dragon there did make; There was I borne of house and stocke not base, Though of meane wealth inferiour to my race. 12 But though to me dame Fortune was but spare, That by my birth small wealth to me there grew, Yet Nature did with bountie great and care, Supply that want, by faire and comely hew, My seemly personage, my beautie rare, To me the liking of full many drew: Sentence. Take such, La∣us prprio sorde∣scit re, and Catovold verse. Nec te collcudes nec te culpaueris ipse.My qualities thereto, were quaint and iollie, Although I know to praise ones selfe is follie. 13 Within this towne a great rich man did tarrie, Well learnd, and wise, and old beyond all credit, For ere he dide, he on his backe did earrie, Full sixscore yeares and eight at least, he sed it: An hundred yeares he liued solitarie, But after that (you know what humor bred it) He lou'd a dame, and with his wealth so wrought her That at the last he gat of her a daughter, 14 And least the daughter should proue like the mother, Sentence.To sell her chastiue for filthie pelfe, Which whosoeuer sels, it quite vndoth her, Although she thinks she doth enrich her selfe, Therefore he bred her farre from sight of other, And by the helpe of many a hellish elfe, Which by his skill in Magicke, he could master, He built this house of Tutch and Allablaster. 15 He caused chast old women,Chast old  for if they  bene unchast  their youth, be but ill ∣nesses. her to nourish In this same house, in which she grew so faire, And in those yeares when youth doth chiefly florish, He let not any thither to repaire, That were in looks, or speech, or manners whorish, But contrary, he causd in Marble faire, Or else on tables to be drawne and carued, All such whose chastities had praise desarued. 16 Nor onely such as haue in ancient times, Bene patterns true of manners chast and pure, And haue opposd against all fleshly crimes, Most chast and vertuous thoughts (a buckler sure) By which their name to such high honor climes, As their great praise shall euermore indure: But such as shall excell in times to come, Of which those eight, that erst you saw be some.These eight  those that suppor∣ted the sound in the xlij book▪ 17 Now when this aged sire had with his skill, Procur'd his daughter be thus choisely bred, It was my hap, (shall I say good or ill?) That I was deemd most worthy her to wed; And that old man bare her so great good will, He gaue to me this house thus furnished,It was a faire demaine. With needfull things within it and without it, And all the lands in twentie mile about it, 18 But her owne shape, so pleasd my heart and eyne, That for the rest I did but little care, For needle workes, and for embrodries fine,Pallas was ex∣cellēnt on  works Look in the Table. I thinke her skill with Pallas might compare; To heare her play or sing, a thing deuine It was, her stroke so sweete, her voyce so rare: In other sciences, her skill was such, As was her fathers, or almost as much. 19 Great was her wit, no lesse then wit, her fauour, As might in senslesse stones affection moue, To this she had a sweete and kind behauour, As more then all the rest ingendred loue,Sentence. It seem'd her sole delight was in my fauour, Out of my sight, she was most loth to moue: So liued I, and still had liued so, But that my selfe did worke my selfe this wo. 20 For when her father finisht had his life, Full fiue yeares after I had got his daughter, Then grew the causes of this wofull strife, That vnto sorrow turneth all my laughter; For when I doted most vpon my wife, And of the world the chiefest iewell thought her, A dame of noble birth, of person seemely, Did hap to fall in loue with me extreemly. 21 This dame, for passing skill in Magicke art, Was comparable to the best Magicion, But yet for all her skill, my constant hart, She could not moue nor turne on no condition: To cure her malladie, or ease her smart, I still refused to be her Phisition, Because, the med'cin that of me she sought,Looke in the Allusion. As iniurie vnto my wife I thought.
22 Yet was her bewtie much, I must confesse, And great her offers she to me did make, Beside the loue she did to me professe, Would moue a man some care of her to take; But my wiues loue, did me so firme possesse, I all reiected, onely for her sake, And that which most to her my liking drew, Was that I found her still so kind and trew. 23 The good opinion, and the strong surmise, I had of my wiues chastitie and truth, Would without doubt, haue made me to despise The Dame, whose bewtie bred to Troy such ruth, And all the wealth, though laid before mine eyes, That Iuno offerd to the Troian youth, Yet my refusall, and her oft repulses, No part of her great loue, from her expulses. 24 Melissa, so was this inchantresse name, Perceiuing still in vaine to me she sewed, Once finding me at leysure, to me came, And in most cunning sort, her suit renewed, And secretly she kindled iealous flame Within my brest, which oft I since haue rued. She saith, I do but well so true to be Vnto my wife, if she were so to me. 25 But how know you (saith she) your wife is trew, That of her faith as yet no proofe haue made, You neuer let her go scant from your vew, When none can come to vice her to perswade, Nor none can see her, none to her can sew, Tis easie to resist where none inuade, To praise her truth vntride, is too much hast, Your care, and not her vertue keeps her chast. 26 But get you but from home some little while, That men to sue to her might take occasion, And thinking you are absent many a mile, With letters and with gifts to make inuasion, And then if you shall finde in her no guile, Except she yeeld to gifts, and to perswasion, So she haue hope to do it vnespied Then thinke your wife is chast, when that is tryed. 27 With these and such like words th'Inchantresse sly, Did make me do that hath me vndonne, By name, to giue consent my wife to try, If so she could by such assaults be wonne: But how shall I be well assur'd (said I) To know at my returne, what she hath donne, And whether she, with these so great assayes, Haue at my hands deserued blame or prayse. 28 Forsooth (saith she) I will on you bestow, bro∣ king  of Cn∣ll A drinking bowle, not much vnlike that cup, With which Morgana made her brother know, Genewras fraud, when he thereon did sup. Who drinks hereof, his wiues truth plaine shal know If she be chast, he drinks the liquor vp, But if a cuckold to carrowse doth thinke, He sheddeth in his bosome all the drinke. 29 Now ere you go, the cup I wish you tast, And you shall drinke, perhaps and shall not spill, Because as yet, I thinke your wife is chast, As neuer being tempted vnto ill: But try againe when as a month is past, And you shall see I trow, a prettie skill, For then I grant, that if you drinke it cleanly, Aboue all men, you blessed are not meanly. 30 I tooke her offer, and I tooke the say, Of that same cursed cup, with sweete successe, I find my wife vnspotted to that day, As I my selfe was sure, and she did guesse: Now straight (quoth she) to part from hence away, For one or two months space, your selfe addresse, Then try at your returne, how you haue sped, If you drinke cleane, or if the drinke you shed. 31 But now this parting such a penance seemed, As I in deed could by no meanes endure, Not that of my deare wife, I ought misdeemed, For her of all the rest, I thought cocksure; But that her company I so esteemed: Well then (Melissa saith) I will procure, If you will do, but what I shall you teach, That you shall change your cloths, your shape, and speach. 32 And so you shall your selfe to her present, And make your selfe a plaine and perfect proofe. I foolishlie to this deuice assent, And so it hapt that hence, not farre aloofe, A knight of large reuenue and of rent, Dwelt at Giabana, fit for this behoofe,Giabana, it is to be pronounced Iabana, a  vpon the riuer of Dae. His personage was braue, his purse well lyned, His years but young, to Venus all inclyned. 33 That gallant youth had one day bene a halking, His hawke by hap, into my garden flew, He comming thither, found my wife a walking, And much he likt her, at the very vew; But when he had a while with her bene talking, To burning loue, his warme affection grew, That after that, full many wayes he prou'd her, If his request to grant, he could haue mou'd her. 34 But hauing still such short and sharpe repulses, He meanes no more, in that fond suit to wade, But from his thought, her shape he not expulses, That first to giue the bold attempt him made; So well Melissa knew to touch my pulses, To take his forme, she doth me soone perswade, I straight was chang'd I know not how nor wheare,Looke in the Allusion. In face, in clothes, in speech, in eyes, in heare. 35 Now hauing to my wife a tale deuisd, As though to th'East I then my iourny tooke, And being like this youth, so strange disguisd: In gate, in voyce, apparell, and in looke, I came as sly Melissa me aduisd, And she did like my Page or Lackie looke, Vpon her arme she beares a little flasket, In which, of iewells rich she hid a casket.
36 I that well knew each roome, came in securely, Into the house, my Page and I together; There where my Ladie sate alone demurely, For neither groome as then, nor maid was with her Then I expound my suit, and that more surely She might beleue my words, I needs would giue her, Pearls Rubies, Dyamonds of passing price, Sentence.The wicked baites, to draw good minds to vice. 37 I bad she should esteeme this gift but small To that she might of me in time exspect: I said, her husbands absence fit did fall, Sentence.And wisedome bids occasions not neglect: I prayd her weigh my constant loue withall, Which long had lasted, though without effect, And last, I sware I had some grace deserued, That had so long, that had so truly serued. 38 At first she blusht, and lookt with lowring cheare, And would not hearken, but did still retire, Lutth 'Orient Pearls, and stones that shon so cleare, Did mollifie her heart, to my desire: She softly saith, but so as I might heare, That for the thing, which I so oft require, She grant it would, and would on me bestow it, So she were sure that none beside might know it. 39 This answer was to me a poysond dart, To strike my soule, in desperat disease, And straight my heart, my head, and eu'rie part, I felt a frozen iealousie to sease: And presently Melissa by her art, Restor'd my shape (as she could do with ease.) How lookt my wife (think you) when by my trapping She found herselfe thus foulie taken napping. 40 We both do looke like ashes, pale and wan, We both stood dum, we both cast downe our eye, Scarse able was my voyce (do what I can) To serue my turne, while I did thinke to cry: Then wouldst thou wife vnto another man, Mine honour sell, if he the same could by? She held her peace, and answer made me none, But onely wept and made a piteous mone. 41 The shame was much, but much more the disdaine, That of my foolish vsage tane she hath, Within due bonds she could not it containe, But that it brake to spite, to hate, to wrath: Resolu'd with me no longer to remaine, When Phebus charret trode his Westerne path, That euening in a small barge of her owne, Downe streame she swimmeth, as if she had flowne. 42 Betimes next day she doth vnto that knight, Herselfe present, that her before had loued, In whose disguised shape, I her last night, Both gainst mine owu, and gainst her honor proued You well may iudge it was a welcome fight To him, that long before such suit had moued, From thence she sends to me this message plaine, That she would neuer come at me againe. 43 Ah woe was me, for from that houre to this, She bydes with him, where me they lout and scorne, And I that could not see my sugred blys, Now by forgoing it, am quite forlorne; Nor can I say but iust my penance is, Which still growes more, and will till I be worne, And sure one yeare, of life had quite berest me, Saue for one onely comfort that was left me. 44 This onely comfort brought me some releefe, That for the space of ten yeares, all my guests, (Though many of their wiues had great beleefe) Yet still they shed the drinke vpon their brests: To finde so many partners in my greefe, Asswageth much the paine that me molests, Your onely selfe hath bene the onely stranger, That hath refusd a draught of so great danger. 45 My ouermuch desire to sist my wife, In so precise, and in so straight a sort, Doth cause that now I shall not all my life, Liue on good houre, endure it long or short▪ Glad was Melissa that procurde this strife, But soone I turnd and marred all her sport, For finding she, was of my harme procurer, I hated her, and could no more endure her. 46 But she that finds herselfe disdained mearly, Where she had hoped to haue found reward, And me, whom she profest to loue so dearly, Her loue and kindness nothing to regard, The griefe hereof did uch her minde so nearly, To leaue this countrey she forthwith prepard, And euer since farre hence she is abyding, Whereas of her, we heare no newes nor tiding. 47 Thus told the wofull knight, in dolefull wise, This ruefull tale vnto his noble guest, Who with compassion moued, thus replyes; Melissa counsell certes was not best, That did without discretion you aduise, To anger waspes, or so to stirre their nest,Sentence it is  Latin, And you your selfe did greatly ouershoot you, To seeke a thing, whose finding would not boot you 48 What maruell is it if your wife were wonne With gifts, and were to lightnes soone alluered? Is she the first (thinke you) that so hath donne? No, nor the fiftith be you well assured, Yea, minds full sound haue wanted powre to shunne Such baites, and haue not such assaults endured: Haue you not heard of men that haue for gold, Their masters and their friends most dearest sold? 49 You should not with a dart so fierce assayle, If her defend herselfe to see you sought,Horace  per  dios are satellite & perr . What, know you not stone walls cannot auayle, Nor steele, if gold be to the batt'ne brought? Now sure your selfe of duetie more did fayle, In tempting her, then she in being caught, Perhaps if she had tempted you o sore, Your folly would haue bene as much or more.
50 Thus spake Renaldo, and withall he rose, And prayd he might be take him to his rest, He minds a while himselfe there to repose, And after to depart he doth request; Small time he hath, and that he would dispose With great regard, for so he thinks it best: The gentle knight doth tel him when it please him He may within his chamber rest and ease him. 51 But if you will vnto my counsell harke, And that you haue (as you pretend) such hast, I will appoint for you a little barke, That shall with oares conuey you safe and fast, There may you sleepe the while you find it darke, And when your stomake serues you, take repast: Thus may you, downe the streame in safety sliding, Win one whole night, & saue a whole daies riding. 52 Renaldo this good offer doth accept, And gaue him heartie thankes, then tooke his barge: He found his host with him had promise kept, And makes of needfull things prouision large: No sooner was he setled, but he slept, But yet before he gaue the stearman charge, If that to sleepe too long it did befall him, When he came neare Ferrara, then to call him. 53 Now did the knight of France in quiet sleepe, And past by diuers townes of count the whiles, And still the barge a pace most swift doth keepe, Vpon that hand, where Poe make diuers Iles: And now the Rosie colour gan to creepe To th'Esterne skie, when hauing past some miles, Bandano then the stearsman wakt Renaldo, When they discouerd both rocks of Tealdo. 54 Whereon when as the knight his eye had fixt, He saith, O happie place that I behold, Of which, by vew of wandring starres and fixt, My cosin Malagigis oft foretold, How that by heau'nly doome it was prefixt, On thee to lay such blessings manifold, As that thy glorie to such height should rise, Of Italie to hold the chiefest prise. 55 Thus good Renaldo spake, the while his bote Downe that same streame did swim, or rather fly, And when the knight came nearer he did note The place, that seemed then all wast to ly, And with a moorish water all on flote: Yet did he much reioice thereof, for why, He knew that that same towne in future time, Ordained was to great renowne to clime. 56 His cosin Malagige and he whileare, Had past that way, what time his cosin told, That when the Ram had tane the golden spheare, That fourth is plast in height, seau'n hundred fold, Then should there be the brauest Iland theare, That euer sea, or streame, or lake did hold, So well replenished that none should dare, With this Nausicas Iland to compare. 57 And that it should for building faire,Of these you may looke the table if you be not instru¦cted in the histo∣rie. disgrace Tiberius Ile, that Capry they do call, And that th'Helperides should giue it place, For passing fruits, and sundrie sorts with all: Beside, more store of beasts, for vse or chase, Then Circes erst did keepe in field or stall, That Venus with her sonne, and all the Graces, Should chuse this seat, and leaue all other places. 58 And that a certaine Prince should this fulfill, So prouident, so stout, so wise, so stayd, As hauing powre vnited to his will, Should with strong Rampires fence ye town (he said) That foes should haue no force to worke her ill, Nor she should neuer need of forraine aid:This is said to the praise of Alfonso Duke of Ferrara And that the man by whom this must be donne, Should be both Hercles Site, and Hercles sonne. 59 Thus while the knight of France with great delight, Did call to mind, what should another day, Vpon that happie Citie there alight, His water-men did giue so lustie way, That of the place he soone had left the sight, And keeping on the right hand all the way, They went beyond Saint Georges in an howre, And passed by Giabanas ditch and Towre. 60 And now Renaldo, as doth oft befall, That one conceipt another out doth driue, Began the knight to memorie to call, That last did him kind entertainment giue, That had iust cause this City more then all To hate, and should haue still while he did liue:In this Citie  he that kept his wife. The cursed cup he further cald to minde, In which men may their spouses falshood finde. 61 And last of his hosts later speech he thought, Concerning that same cup, and how they sped, I meane his guests, that that same triall sought, Into their bosoms still the liquor shed: Now he doth halfe repent he mist the draught, Yet was he glad thereof, for why (he sed) Had it falne well, what had I got thereby? If not, in what a case had then benel? 62 I now beleeue so well, as hauing tried With good successe beleeue I better should not; So that I might haue well bene damnified, But by my triall mend my state I could not: But what griefe had it bene if I had spied,Clarice wife to Renaldo. By my most deare Clarice, that I would not? Much may they leese,Sentence but gains get small or none, That will in play a thousand lay to one: 63 These later words so lowd and plaine he pake, (Though to himselfe) that he that steard the bote, Who to his speech and gestures heed did take, The words, and meaning of his words did note: Wherefore a further cause of speech to make, As one that though he ware a hu'rie cote, Yet was well spoken, and of good bold sprite, He straight doth fall to reason with the knight.
64 In fine, the summe of all their argument, Was that his wit was much to be controld, That sought to make too great experiment, Of womens truths, more then their force can hold:; For she that can with chast and firme intent, Maintaine her truth, against assault of gold, Might eu'n as easilie defend the same, Against a thousand swords in midst of flame. 65 To this the Bargeman said, you sure may sweare it, They must not be assayld with darts so fierce, For their solt brests, too tender are to beare it, Sith coats of sounder proofe, such shot will pierce: And sure a prettie tale (if you would heare it) I could (saith he) to this effect rehearse, Of one who though his wife had sore offended, By her, in greater sinne was apprehended. 66 I meane the tale of that Adonio, which The great grift gaue vnto the Iudges wife, A little dogge that made his owner rich, A thing that in these parts is knowne so rife, The knight replide, mine eares to heare it ich, For neuer yet I heard it in my life: Then if it please you, heare it now you shall, The stears-man said, and thus began his tale. 67 Here begins the Stearsman ale. Vlpian wrote of the  law.There was a learned Lawyer, cald by name Anselmus, borne here in our neighbour towne, That so long studied Vlpian, till he came, To be a Iudge, and weare a scarlet gowne, And hauing won great wealth he woo'd a dame, For bewtie and for state of great renowne; They wedded were, for better and for worse, So he her person lik't, so she his purse. 68 Her qualities and hauiour past the rest, She seemed all of louelynes composed, Not fit indeed for him, that was to rest, And to his bookes, more then to sports disposed: Wherefore foule iealous thoughts his mind possest, And that his wife plaid false, he still supposed, Yet cause was none, of her so to misdeeme, Saue that too faire, and wittie she did seeme. 69 Now in the selfe same Citie dwelt a knight, (Too neare a neighbour to this man of law) That was of that same stocke descended right, That had their ofspring from the serpents iaw, Of Manto looke in the Historie.From whence the Fairy eake, that Manto hight, And built our Citie, doth her lynage draw, This knight that was Adonio cald by name, Was much enamord on the louely dame. 70 And that he might attaine this Ladies loue, He doth begin to spend beyond all measure, In clothes, in feasts, his calling far aboue, This Tiberius was a ruft, and a Cā Prince, looke in the Ta∣ble.In showes, in playes, to do his mistres pleasure: To beare the charge thereof it would behoue, To haue that Emperour Tiberius treasure, So as I weene ere winters twaine were past, His lands were quite consum'd, he spent so fast. 71 Wherefore compeld to strike his loftie sayles, He sodainly surceast his stately port, The house, now that the Lords reuenue fayles, Stood solitarie, quite without resort: There were no Feasants, Partriges, nor Quayles, His pittance now was growne but bare and short, And he that earst was king of all this feasting, Playd least in sight, now doubting of arresting. 72 And therefore lothing to be knowne or seen, He purposd in this place not long to tarrie, But with a minde to leaue his country cleen, He stale away fro thence all solitarie: Her onely loue, that of his heart was Queen, In all his woes he still with him doth carrie, But lo, when as his Ebb did seeme most low, Good fortune made his tyde most high to flow. 73 For as he wanderd here and there abroad,Ouid in the third of the  hath a tale of  vesias that  smiing of two snakes changed his shape. He saw how that a sturdie clowne and stout, With sturdie staffe, layd on no little load, Vpon a bush, still beating there about: Adonio in the place makes some aboad, And ask the cause, of that same country lout, Who told him that a monstrous snake and huge, Had taken that same bush for a refuge. 74 And told him further, he that stir did make, With minde to finde, and kill it ere he part. Adonio for his crest did giue the Snake, And therefore lou'd and fauord Snakes in hart, As from whose kinde he did his gentrie take; Wherefore vnto the clowne he doth impart His minde so farre, at last he him perswaded, To let alone the Snake he so inuaded. 75 This done, he went as he was bent before, Farre from his country, where he was vnknown, And so indur'd till seu'n whole yeares and more, Of woe, and want, quite ore his head were blown: But that great loue he to his mistres bore, Him forst, though now all out of fashion grown, With bushie beard, leane cheekes, & ragged cloths, To turne vnto the place that most he lothes. 76 In this meane time, our towne had cause to send, Some sage Ambassadour vnto the Pope, That must vpon his Holynes attend, And for his suit to take a whole yeare scope: The Iudge by lot was chosen to that end, (O cursed lot that killed all his hope) To shunne this office he tryes many shifts, By scuses, promises, by prai'rs and gifts. 77 But finding that he straue against the streame, At last against his will, he takes the place, Though to depart into another Reame, It seemed vnto him, a grieuous case: His iealousie there with grew most extreame, Misdoubting his wiues truth, so long a space, Yet nath'les her, in graue and frendlesse speech, To haue great care thereof, he doth beseech.
78 .He saith, a woman cannot take vpon her, With bewtie, riches, nor with high Nobillitie, To clayme the true diserued prayse of honer, If chastitie do faile by her fragillitie, This is the vertue that defends her owner, And now she may (he saith) with great facillitie, Attaine great praise, and show thereof great proofe, While he is forst, to stay so farre aloofe. 79 These words he spake, and many such as thease, Thereby to moue her, to continue true, And she (poore soule) yet free from such disease, His parting thence, did much lament and rue; She swears that sooner men should draine the seas, Then draw her mind so to forget her due, Yea first she will eu'n dye the death she saith, Much rather then to falsifie her faith. 80 The Iudge appeased with this her protestation, Began to haue of her the lesse mistrust, But yet his fond and iealous inclination, So moues him, that search further needs he must: He had a friend that could by coniuration, Foretell of future matters true and iust: That were it skill in Magicke, or in starres, His guesse was such, as that it seldome arres. 81 He speaketh to that friend to this effect, That he his wiues natiuitie would cast, To learne if he did right or wrong suspect, That she would in his absence liue vnchast: The man thus praid, the figure doth erect, And in their place the Planets all he plast, Anselmus leaues him busie, and next day, Doth come to heare him what he hath to say. 82 Twas long before th'Astronomer would speake, As loth to speake, that would the Iudge offend, With many scuses friuolous and weake, He shifts him off, but vrged by his frend, He told him flatly she would wedlocke breake, And that she would to him proue false in th'end, Not mou'd by bewty, not by suit desired, But eu'n for lucres sake directly hyred. 83 Now when Anselmus former bad beleefe, Was newly reconfirmd by Spheares supernall, It doubtlesse did so much augment his greefe, I thinke his torture past the paines infernall: And more then all the rest, this greeu'd him cheefe, And to his heart a corsiue was eternall, To thinke that Auarice should her entise, Vpon her chastitie to set a price. 84 Yet to preuent all that such minde might breed, Most earnestly he bendeth all his powre, For (as they say) man is compeld by need, selum  est.To rob the Church, and hallow'd things deuowre, His iewells, plate, and stocke that did exceed, He put all in her hands, that present howre, And made it all her owne by deed of gift, And told her plaine what was herein his drift. 85 He saith he giues it her on this condition, Not that she should striue to increase or mend it, For why (he said) she should haue free commission, To sell, to giue, cast it away, and spend it, But onely that she should auoyd suspisition, Of wedlocke breach, and by no meanes offend it, On this condition, all he then bequeaths her, That he may find her such as now he leaues her. 86 He further doth her earnestly exhort, That presently when he is gone away, She should for more eschuing of resort, Not any longer in the Citie stay, But at his countrey house, where in good sort, Till his returne the season passe she may: Belike, he thought in tillers of the ground, And country swaines, entisements none are found. 87 His louely wife Argia, all this space, Still hanging on his necke while he did speake, With kindly teares bedewed all his face, And much it greeu'd her to be iudgd so weake, And to be deemed so deuoyd of grace, That in his absence she would wedlocke breake, Her manners haue not bene so light and vicious, She saith, to moue him to be thus suspitious. 88 I should too long in this one matter dwell, If all that past betweene them two at large, When he departed, I to you should tell, Stil itterating that his former charge: Now on his way he goes, God speed him well, The griefe was great that dd his heart surcharge, But thus they part, her eyes all full of teares, His minde of iealousies, and thousand feares. 89 This while Adonio looking pale and wan, As earst I told, and ouer growne with heare, To trauell to his country-ward began, In hope that no man now would know him theare, He trauels in the secretst sort he can, Vnseene, vnknowne, till he arriued wheare, He rescude had the snake, seu'n yeares before, That by the clowne pursued was so sore. 90 Arriuing at this place by breake of day, He saw a Ladie walking neare the lake, Who though she seemd attyrd in strange array, Yet for some great estate one would her take, Her count'nance did such maiestie bewray: She toward him with stately gate did make, And looking on him with a gracious cheare, She spake these words so loud as he might heare. 91 Gentleman, though you do not know my face, Yet am I bound to you, and am your frend, I am your cosin, and of Cadmus race Our royall stocke doth lineally descend, I am that Manto, that in yond same place, To build that towne did first begin and end, And Mantua, according to my name, Tis cald, as you perhaps haue heard by fame.
92 Of Fayries, looke on the Historie.I am a Fayrie, and to make you know, To be a Fayrie what it doth import, We cannot dye how old so ere we grow: Of paine and harmes of eu'rie other sort We tast, but yet no death we nature ow; But which is worse then if our liues were short, Each seu'nth day we constrained are to take, Vpon our selues the person of a snake. 93 To be transformd to Serpents vgly hew, That creepeth still, and on his bellie goth, Is such a griefe to vs, to tell you true, Not one of vs but then to liue doth loth. Now that I further may declare to you, From whence this kindnesse that I spake of, groth, Know this, what day we haue this cursed shape, We hardly dangers infinite escape. 94 Thence comes the saying (cane pe∣ & angue)No liuing thing is lothed more then they, So that no sooner one of vs is spyde, But we are chast and hunted out straight way, And if we finde no place our selues to hyde, They lay on load, and beat vs so that day, That we the paine thereof long after byde, And who would not rather one death haue chused, Then beaten euermore to be and brused? 95 Now Sir, the benefit that I confesse I haue receiu'd, in which your merit stands, Was this some seu'n yeares since, or not much lesse, As you did wander ou'r these woods and lands, You saued me from danger and distresse, I should haue sufferd at a villens hands: Who though he could not slay me, neare the latter, Did seeke with cudgill me to bruse and batter. 96 For why those dayes that we be snakes (she saith) And creeping groueling, bellies on the ground, The heau'ns, that other times our hest obay'th, Denyes their aid, in vs no force is found: Sometimes the Sun at our command'ment stay'th, The stedie earth doth moue and runneth round, And we can by our powre, cause in a trise, Ise turne to flame, and fire congeale to Ise. 97 Now heare I come, your courtsie to require, Which seau'n yeares since, I to me done did note, Now to reward you I haue powre and might, While I am free from serpents cursed cote, Three times your fathers wealth, you shall ere night Possesse, and I will set you so aflote, You neuer shalbe poore, to your liues end, But euer haue the more, the more you spend. 98 And (for I know that in your former knot, In which loue bound you first, you still are tide) I will direct you so, by wayes I wot, Your sute shall not be vnto you denide. Now that the iealous Iudge at home is not, Go thither straight, and I will be your guide, She now ist her husbands countrie village, Attending there good huswifrie and tillage. 99 She further doth at large to him deuise, How he shall go, in what apparell clad, How he shall tempt her, in what manner wise, And how to grant his suit, she should be glad; Then told she how she would herselfe disguise, For why, for euer in her powre she had, Except the dayes, in which she was a snake, What shape she lift, vpon herselfe to take. 100 Thus she disguish him like a Pilgrime poore, That on his shoulders doth a wallet beare, And doth for Gods sake beg from doore to doore, A gowne of Fryers gray she made him weare, A strange apparell for a gallant woer: Into an Island dog, with shagged heare, As white as Ermin, and the pretiest else, That euer nature made, she changd herselfe. 101 And thus vnto Argias they resort, First to some vtter roomes, in which were byding, The Hinds and Laborers of meaner sort, Heare he with certaine pypes of his prouiding, His dog made dance, and make such prettie sport, That glad was he could bring his mistres tyding, Who needs would see as much as they had seene, Such was the Doctors destinie I weene. 102 Adonio to her presence thus admitted,Looke in the Allusion. Commands the dog which in all points obayd, His turnes, his dances, and his gestures fitted, So due and iust, to all the Pilgrime sayd. They musd to see a dog so rarely witted, And marking still the qualities he playd, In seeing them they take great mirth & pleasure, And praysd the little dog beyond all measure. 103 Much wonder first but after much desier, Bred in the Iudges wife, the dog to get, She bids the nurse the dog to buy or hier, And try what price the man thereof would set: Dame (said the Pilgrime) had your mistres by her, In coyned gold, as much as euer yet, A womans thought did wish, it would not boot, Of this same dog of mine to buy on foot. 104 And plaine to shew that that was true he sayd, And that it rather better was then worse, He tooke her straight aside with him and prayd, The dog to giue two duckats to the nurse, The dog but shooke his eares, and out he layd The gold; there take and put it in thy purse Adonio saith, and thinke what price is able, To buy a dog that is so profitable. 105 What ere I aske, this dog to me will bring, Embroderd gownes and kittles cloth of gold, A chaine of pearle, a iewell, or a ring, In shorter time then it can well be told; Yet tell my Lady this, she hath a thing, For which alone my Spaniell can be sold, To pay me gold or coyne, I count it dodging,This was pl dealing. But I will sell it her, for one nights lodging.
106 This said, he sent by her as for a token, A gem of passing price, then newly made; The nurse rewarded thus, and fairely spoken, And vsd (perhaps) to trafficke in such trade, Went backe there with, and hauing fitly broken The matter first, her mistres doth perswade, To buy the dog, and said she might archieue it, With such a price, as is no losse to giue it. 107 At first, the fayre Argia backward drew, As partly, being loth to breake her faith, And partly doubting all could not be trew, The which the tatling nurse before her laith; But she with othes doth her first tale renew, And that such offers seldome come the saith, In fine she wan her mistres to agree, Next day more priuatly the dog to see. 108 Adonios next apparance in the place, Became the Doctors ruine and confusion, Such duckets, such spur Ryals in like case, Such gems he shewd indeed, or by illusion, He mollifi'd thereby my Ladies grace, And mou'd her make the bargaine in conclusion, And this did (then perhaps) the rather moue her, When as she knew he was her ancient louer. 109 Thus her true louers presence, and his prayer, The comforts of her nurse, that whorish drudge, The great rewards he presently did pay her, The absence long of that same iealous Iudge; And lastly, hope that sure none would bewray her, Wipt from her conscience scruple all and grudge, So that she tooke his dog, and for his laber, Gane him free leaue to play vpon her taber. 110 Thus now Adonio frankly reapt the fruit, Of that faire Ladies loue that he had wonne, The which he followd still with sweet pursuit, Vnto their likings both: this while the Sun, Before the Iudge full ended had his suit, Through twise six signes his yearely course had run, And home he came at last, suspecting sore, That which th'Astronomer had told before. 111 But ere vnto his owne house he would go, First of th'Astronomer to aske he ment, If so his wife had taryd chast or no, Since he from home on his Ambassage went: The cunning man, that meant the troth to show, Doth calculate, to see how starres were bent, And when that he the planets well had vewd, That she had plaid the quean, he doth conclude. 112 And that it was befalne as he foreshowed, How she, with mightie gifts and bribes allured, Her selfe vpon another had bestowed. The wretched Iudge, with no small griefe indured, To heare these newes, & though too true he trowed The same, yet seeking to be more assured, He cals the nurse aside, at his home comming, And seekes to sist her with no little cunning. 113 With diuers circumquques and deuises, He seeketh of the nurse to finde the trace, But she in speech so warie and so nice is, As one be like well studied in the case, That all his cunning speech her not intices, But that she still denide with shamelesse face, That which the knew, and whereof her perswasion Had bene in part, though not the chiefe occasion. 114 When as the iealous Iudge long time in vaine, Had tempted her with promises and gifts, And that he saw for all his search and paine, He found lesse certentie, the more he sifts, He doth expect to try a further traine, As one not vnacquainted with such drifts, He watcht a time, when they should fall to bralling,Sentence. As still where women are, is oft befalling. 115 And as he thought indeed so fell it out, The testie nurse one day not pleased well, Came vnto him at their next falling out, And of her owne accord, the truth doth tell: Thinke you, when as the Iudge had heard her out, How he did chafe, and fret, and fume, and swell, So neare vnto his heart and braine it sits, It little wanted to haue reau'd his wits. 116 And in this agonie resolu'd to dye, And finish both his owne dayes and his wiues, And so his griefe, and her great shame thereby To wipe away, with ending both their liues, He turneth to the Citie by and by, As that same desperat desire him driues, And thence a trustie seruant with instruction, He sends of purpose for his wiues destruction. 117 He bids him tell Argia in his name, That on the sodaine he was falne so sicke, That but to him without delay she came, The doubt was great she should not find him quick Wherefore her iourney with more speed to frame, To ryde behinde this man, who in a thicke, That was right in the way vnto the Citie, Had charge to kill her there without all pitie. 118 And straight accordingly the seruant went, To say and do, as much as he was bidden, But she foretold of that their fell intent, (For nothing from her little dogge was hidden) And taught withall, the same how to preuent, Away with this sauie seruant she is ridden, And in few howres arriued at the wood, Where he was purposd to haue shed her blood. 119 Then did he tell to her his masters will, And drew his sword a speedie death to giue her, He onely offerd, ere he would her kill, To grant her time, to pray God to forgiue her: I cannot tell you by what manner skill, She did her selfe forth of his hands deliuer, But gone she was, he seeking all about, And for his life he could not find her out.
120 Backe went the fellow, with astonied face, With trembling heart, and courage all dismayd, And made his master, at the wondrous case, No lesse then he had bene afore afrayd, He knew not how; by Faery Mantos grace, His wife could when she list, haue helpe and ayd, For why the nurse that did the rest vnfold, I knew not why, but this she neuer told. 121 The Doctour now was plagu'd with griefe extreame, Far more then euer he had felt before, Proverb.What erst was but a mote, is now a beame, Nor he one iot reuenged is the more; His shame will now be blazd ou'r all the Reame, And all men now, will laugh at him therefore, The former errour might haue bene concealed, But this to all the world wil be reuealed. 122 He thinks that sure, vpon this plaine detection, Of his fellonious mind, of which I spake, She will, to keepe her out of his subiection, To some great Lord, forthwith her selfe betake, And liue in spite of him, with such protection, And so a mocking stocke of him to make, But most he doubts, least to some man she goth, As is a leacher, and a ruffian both. 123 Wherefore so soule a mischiefe to preuent, He spares no paine, no trauell nor no cost, To eu'rie towne, in Lombardie he sent, With letters and with messages in post; And further, he himselfe in person went To seeke his wife that was so strangely lost, But all in vaine, for why other abiding, No inckling he could heare, nor any tyding. 124 And to conclude, at last he cald his man, That man that made to him the strange report, And bids him show the place, and if he can, Where his lewd mistres vanisht in such sort: The seruant straight to leade the way began, And to the place, together they resort, But (which was strange) where erst he left a wood, A wondrous stately Pallace now there stood. 125 The fayre Argia caused had this space, Her Faery to erect there for her pleasure, An house of Allablaster in the place, Adornd and guilt, with cost beyond all measure: Twere hard to thinke, much lesse to tell with grace, What beautie was without, within what treasure; M master was the knight of Mantos, at whose houe Re∣naide supped.My masters house, frō whence last night you came, Was but a paltrie Alehouse to this same. 126 Of costly Arras, there was so great plentie, Of beds of silke, imbroderd, fresh, and new, As furnisht chambers, more then ten times twentie, And halls, and whatsoeuer was in vew, Cups, candlesticks, and bowls of stones most dentie, Of precious substance, and of sundrie hew, To be imploid for eating, and for drinking, And store of gold, and silke beyond all thinking. 127 Now sir, the wretched Iudge, as I said earst, That out to seeke his wife had here assignd, And findes this house, in state as I rehearst, Where he had nothing thought, but woods to find, With wonder great his mazed head was pearst, And doubted not a little in his mind, If so himselfe were sleeping then or waking, Or if his troubled brayne, were in due taking. 128 He sees a Gipsen standing at the doore, All blab-lipt, beetle browd, and bottle nozed, Most greasie, nastie, his apparell poore, His other parts, as Painters are disposed, To giue to Esop; such a Blackamore Could not be seene elsewhere, as he supposed, So vile avilage, and so bad a grace, To make eu'n Paradise alothsome place. 129 Anselmus seeing none but this same drudge, Went vnto him, and praith him make it knowne, Whose house is this: the Gipsen tels the Iudge, That he himselfe, the stately house doth owne: The Iudge, that he doth mocke him sure doth iudge And prayes the certaine truth to him be showne: The Negro doth affirme with many an oth, That that which he had said before, was troth. 130 And that he plainly might the truth perceaue, He prayes him vew the house at better leasure, And offreth him free libertie and leaue, Of any thing was there, at his owne pleasure, For him or for his frends, to take and leaue, And eu'n as of his owne, to make free feature: The Doctor maruels that such liberalitie, Could be in one, of so base show and qualitie. 131 But yet the Iudge, so fayre and kind intreated, In frendly sort, doth from his horse alight, And sees the house, as I before repeated. With wonder great, and with as great delight, So richly hurnished, so Princely seated, So brauely built for vse, as well as sight, And eu'rie part with other so agreeing, He could not satisfie his eyes with seeing. 132 Now when the Iudge came backe againe, he told He nere saw house, so pleasing to his eye, And sweares he thought that ten times Crasus gold, Were scant a price, so rare a house to buy: Yet may (the Negro saith) this house be sold, Though not for coyne (for not for coyne care I) Yet for some other ware, which sure I guesse, You will esteeme at price a great deale lesse. 133 In fine, he made to him the like request, As Sodomits did make for guests of Lot; The Iudge his motion doth and him detest, Who though fiue times repulst, yet ceaseth not, But him with so large offers still he prest, That in conclusion, like a beastly sot, So as it might be done, in hugger mugger, The Iudge agreed, the Negro him should ( ).
134 Argia that there by vnseene had stayd, And seene him falne into the sinne forenamed, Disclosd her selfe, and sharply did vpbrayd His filthy fact, that iustly might be blamed; A Iudge (said she) reputed wise, and stayd, Sione thus? where with the Doctor was so shamed, He wisht the earth would cleaue vnto the center, That he to hide himselfe, therein might enter. 135 But she exclaimeth on him still anew, For his more shame, and for her more excuse, And said, what punishment were fit for you, For this foule sinne, against all natures vse? That did no lesse then death to me thinke dew, For such a small and naturall abuse, With one that lou'd me, and whose gift was such, As ten such houses are not worth so much. 136 If one death did vnto my fault belong, One hundred deaths were fit to thine to giue, And though myselfe am in this place so strong, That if I list, thou shouldst no longer liue, Yet will I do to thee no further wrong, But pardon thee, and thou shalt me forgiue, used for  reckonings.  used .And quite each other, all old debts and driblets, And set the hares head, against the goose gyblets. 137 And let henceforth peace follow in effect, As ought to be betweene the man and wife, Not euer tone to tother once obiect, Our former fault in all our future life: The Iudge was glad, and did it not neglect, To take this frendly end of cursed strie; Thus as good frends, they liued many a yeare, And while they liu'd, they lou'd each other deare. 138 And there the steers-man did his storie end, With which he mou'd the worthy knight to laster, Who blam'd the Doctor, that did so offend, And talked of the same a good while after: But much he did Argias wit commend, Or at the least, the with of her that taught her, To make the Iudge into that net fall in, In which her selfe was falne with far lesse sin. 139 'Tis lake is Pa , of which  speakes,  the store  but now  almost dry.Now when the Sunne gan mount vnto the South, A little Table in the ßarge was spred, And then the knight began to feed his mouth, When sleepe his eyes, and talke his eares had fed: The Mantuan at his charges, him allowth, All fine Acates that that same country bred, The while his swimming vessell doth forsake You is called  of Lon∣ Filo,  Poe runs  six myle .The pleasant country, and vnpleasant lake. 140 From thence, he held his course still forward right, The standing  to Ra∣ 12. myle  has now it is  navigable. The Riuer running straight as any lyne, Which when they passed had with speedie flight, Vpon the tother hand they did decline: pan writes of  cals it  Mssanisa. And by a ditch, and standing poole in sight, Ere of that day, were spent full howers nine, Vnro Rauenna as they were commanded, They went, and there the braue Renaldo landed: 141 Although Renaldo could but seldome bost, Of store of coyne, yet now such store he had, As to the Bargemen of his frendly host, He gaue a largesse such, as made them glad: From thence to Rimini, he went in post, And changing horses still, now good, now bad, That night at Mountefior, he did but sup, And so t'Vrbyno, ere next Sunne was vp. 142 Then Caglie, and from thence the Alpes he past, Then th'Vmbrys and Etruscians, thence to Rome, And so by Barke, to Ostia in great hast He went, and to that Citie he doth come, Which good Aeneas many ages past,That Cisie is called Trapania. Ennobled with his fire Anchyses toome: Then straight by sea he went vnto this Ile, Where I did leaue Orlando, since a while.Orlando. 143 I meane that Ile, that Lippadusa hight, Wherein the famons warriors, three to three, The combat that I spake of erst did fight, The which Renaldo longing sore to see, With ores and sayles, made all the hast he might, But yet for all his hast, it would not be, The wind did for his purpose serue so slacke, More then an houre too late it kept him backe. 144 So that eu'n much about that time he came, When as Orlando had that conquest wonne, In which vnto his euerlasting same, Two Turkish Princes, vnto death were donne; Yet was some sorrow mingled with the same, Both for the death of Monodantés sonne, And Oliueros hurt, of which he found Such griefe, he could not set his foote to ground. 145 Now as the Earle Renaldo did imbrace, He could not chuse, but shed a streame of teares, When as he show'd him, in the present place, Good Brandimart, to whom such loue he beares, Lye newly slaine, with pale and liuelesse face: Likewise to weepe, Renaldo not forbeares, To see his death, and eke his cosins bruse, So griuous, that his foote he could not vse. 146 Renaldo comforts them in all he may, Although himselfe of comfort tasted least, And chiefe to thinke by his vnluckie stay, He was come tardie, to so great a feast: This while the wofull seruants did conuay, Their masters coarses, to the towne distrest, I meane Bisetta, where they made it knowne, Which side preuaild, and which was ouerthrowne. 147 Of this same conquest that Orlando wonne, Astolso and stout Sansonet were glad; Yet ioyd they not, so as they would haue donne, If Brandimart his death then had not had: The fall of noble Monodantés sonne, Strake them into a dumpe and made them sad, But who shall now impart to Fiordeliege, The wofull losse, of her deare Lord and liege?
148 Fiordeliege her dreame.Her selfe had dreamt a strange dreame ouernight, Which did her minde, in fearfull sort dismay, She dreamt the bases of her loued knight, Which she imbrodred blacke this other day, With spots of red were powdred all in sight, And on the same, like storme of haylstones lay; That she had done it so, she sure beleeued, And with the thought thereof, was greatly greeued. 149 She further thought, that to her selfe she sed, Did not my Lord command me blacke to make it, What ment I then to mixt it so with red, And in so strange a manner to mistake it? And ill presage in her this fancie bred, And for an euill token she did take it, Then came these newes which none imparted with her, Till th' English Duke, and Sansonet came thither. 150 When they came in, and that she well had heeded Their count'nances, in such a conquest sad, No further newes, no further notice needed, To make her know, they brought her tidings bad: Forthwith her griefe, and sorrow so exceeded, Scarse any powre her vitall spirits had, But presently in pale, and deadly sound, She fell in wofull trance vpon the ground. 151 But when that life came to his course againe, Her tender checkes, and her sayre haire she tare, Oft calling on his loued name in vaine, Whose losse had bred in her such wofull care, She screeches and cries out, with griefe and paine, Like those with deuils that possessed are, Menades, were they that sacrifi∣ced to Bacthus.Or as the Menades, with sound of home, In furious manner all about were borne. 152 This man, and that, to lend she doth intreat A knife, wherewith her selfe she murder may, Straight to the hau'n she runnes with furie great, There where the bodies of the dead kings lay, With minde to mangle them, and bruse and beat: Then to the sea she will, there is no nay, And passe to Lippaduse, and there abide. And end her life, by Brandimarts deare side. 153 Ah Brandimart my loued Lord (she said) What meant I without me, to let thee part? Ay me vnluckie wretch, in that I staid, And was not present there, to take thy part; Mine eye might vnto thee, haue bene an aid, My voyce might haue assisted thee in part, And if Gradasso thee behind had stricken, One cry of mine, might thee both warne & quicken 154 Or else perhaps, so well I might haue sped me, As to haue stept the blow and thee betweene, If thou hadst scapt, although it did behed me, I would haue said, that it had happie bene: Now dye I will, though death no whit can sted me, And though I know, my death is fruitlesse cleene, Whereas if I had dyde in thy defence, My death had profit bred, and not offence. 155 And if the heau'ns had bene so hard in this, That I could not haue holpe thee in the place, At least my last farewell, and solemne kisse, I should haue giu'n thee, and thy louely face, Bedewd with teares, and ere to heau'nly blisse, They soule had flowne, I should haue had the space, To say, depart from hence in peace my deare, And know, I haue not long to tarrie heare. 156 Is this (deare Brandimart) is this thy raigne,Damagyre the Realme of which Brādamart was King. Of Damagyre, whose scepter I should take? Is this the dowre, thou doest to me or daine? Is this the royall seat, of which you spake? Ah fortune hard, how friuolous and vaine, Dost thou my hopes, and my designements make? Ah why cease I, sith so great good is rest me, To cast away what euer else is left me? 157 With this, againe so great her furie grew, She made vpon her selfe a fresh assalt, And her faire haire, she rent, and tare anew, As if her haire, had bene in all the falt, Eu'n from her tender cheeks the bloud she drew, Still dewing them, with watrie teares and salt: But let her here awhile lament, and mourne, For to Orlando I must now retourne. 158 Who with his kinsman that did now require, Some cunning Leach his grieuous wound to cure, And (for to Brandimar: he did desire, To giue an honorable sepulture,) To that hill went that doth the night with fire Make cleare, and doth the day with smoke obscure,The mount Aet∣na, in Scicilie. And so the winde did fauour his intent, In twentie houres, he came to Agringent. 159 Here when they were downe from their ships alighted, The Sunne eu'n then preparing to go downe, They sent abroad and in great hast inuited, The chiefe Nobilitie of all the towne: Straight at the shore, of torches store was lighted, And many men of honour and renowne, When as Orlando to the shore retourned, Went with him to the corps, and with him mourned 160 There Bardyn stood, a man well stricke in yeares, And in such sort to wayle he did perseuer, That with aboundant shedding of his teares, Men thought he would haue lost his eyes for euer; To blame the heu'ns, and starres, he not for beares, But roaring like a Lyon in a feauer, Tare his gray haire, and all about it sprinkled, And spared not his aged skin, and wrinkled. 161 When as the Palladine approched neare, Straight doubled was the mourning noise and crye, Each striu'd who should most sorrowfull appeare, And eu'rie one lift vp his voice on hye; Orlando with more heauy heart, then cheare, Still keeping fixed on the beare his eye, When silence first, by signes procur'd he had, Pronounc't these words, with mourning voyce & sad
162 fa∣ Orat. o mart.O stout, ô deare champion mine, and frend, That here art dead, but liu'st in heauenly seat, Where thy great ioyes shall neuer haue an end, Nor euer be impaird with cold or heat: Yet pardon me in that I do offend, To wayle my woe, and miserie so great, My sorrow is not, for thy parting hence, But that my selfe am so long absent thence. 163 To thinke that he is seuerd now so far, In whom I ioyd, this doth my paine increase, I was with thee, in tempests, and in war; Why am not I with thee in calme and peace? O mirie flesh, that me from blisse doth bar, Why cannot I obtaine a like release, Sith still I was copartner of thy paine, Why am I kept from part of so great gaine? 164 To you the happie guerdon, and the gaine, To vs the losse, and damage all is left, France, Germanie, and Italy complaine, Their chiefe defence, and their chiefe buckler rest: How shall my Prince, and vncle now sustaine, (Depriu'd of so good helpe) so great a heft, Thy losse of succour hath bereaued wholie, Both holy Church, and eake the Empire holie. 165 The Pagans whom thou dantedst in thy life, How will they gather heart now with thy death? How will they stirre new storms of fearfull strife, Now hauing so good meanes, to gather breth? But how great sorrow, will thy dearest wife Sustaine? me thinks I heare eu'n now she seth I am to blame, and that she hates me most, And saith by me, she hath her worlds ioy lost. 166 Yet Fiordeliege, this comfort may reuiue Both thee, and all that for his death are sorie, That all the valiant knights that him suruiue, Haue cause to enuie, and admire his glorie: The Decij, nor the knight, that lept aliue , leoke In Curtain lake, so praisd in Latin storie, Nor Codrus by the Greekes so magnified, With greater praise, nor honor neuer dyed. 167 These words, and such as these Orlando spake, The while the Fryres, both white, & blacke, and gray A solemne, and a long procession make, In goodly ranke, and in deuout array: That God to heau'n, the dead mans spirit take, Requiem aeternam, for his soule they pray, And tapers in the midst, before, behind, Did cause that knight, like to the noone day shind. 168 Then diuers Earles, and knights, the hearse vphold, All ouer which a mantle rich was spred, Of purple silke, embroderd braue with gold, And with fayre pearle, and stone well garnished, Of equall cost and bewtie to behold, The coffin was, that held the bodie ded, Prouided by the Palladine to be, Fit for his calling, and his high degree. 169 Three hunderd people, of the poorer sort, Of dweller: that inhabited the towne, Vnto the funerals did then resort, And vnto each was giu'n a mourning gowne; An hundred Pages, mounted in good sort, On warlike steeds, clothd to the ground adowne, And both the Pages, and the gallant steeds, From top to toe, were clad in mourning weeds. 170 Then bare they diuers banners fayre displayd, And painted diuers armes, that he obtaind From armed bands alone, without all ayd, And had to Caesar and to Peter gaind: With hunderds more, all in blacke gowns arrayd, To whom were diuers offices ordaind, And last Renaldo, and Orlando came, But Oliuero staid (for he was lame.) 171 It long would be ere I could it rehearse, And tell what ceremonies vsed weare, Nor can I comprehend [ ] well in vearse, How orderly they were accomplisht theare: Vnto the chiefest Church, they bare a hearse, The while nor old nor young, to weepe for beare, His noblenesse, his value, and his youth, Did breed in all their hearts, so wondrous ruth. 172 Now when the women finisht had, and donne, Their bootlesse weeping, and their fruitlesse paine, The Priest had said, their Kyrieleisonne, And all the rites, that there-unto pertaine: The carkasse of great Monodantes sonne, So chested, on two collumns to remaine Orlando causd, till time he might procure, A costly, and more stately sepulture. 173 From Sicilie Orlando not departs, Till he for Tutch, and Porpherle had sent, And all that were most skilfull of those arts, Had talkt with all, and told them his intent: Then Fiordeliege comming to those parts, Her time, her trauell, and her treasure spent, To make the tombe most stately for her spouse, At which to spend her future time she vowes. 174 And sith her plaints and teares were neuer tired, In that selfe place she meane, her dayes to passe, And for her husbands soule, she still desired Continuall Dirges, and perpetuall Masse; From company her selfe she quite retired, And to the place (such her deuotion was) That by the tombe, she built a litle cell, In which till death, she purposed to dwell. 175 Orlando diuers messages did send To her, and after that in person went, To fetch her into France, and did pretend, That her to place with Galeran he ment,Orlandos mother Or if the time, in prayre she still would spend, He would a Nunrie build for that intent, Or that he would, if so she so had rather, Attend her to her country, and her father.
176 But at the tombe she tarride obstinate, And would tro thence by no meane be remoued, Still doing, saying, both betime and late, Penance and prayrs, for him that she so loued, Till death in th' end, cut off her dolefull date, And sent her soone, to find her deare beloued: But now the knights of France, from Sicill parted, For losse of their companion heauie harted. 177 And Oliuer still of his foote complained, For why no salue, nor surgerie preuailed, But that he was with griefe so greatly pained, They doubted that his life would then haue failed: Thus while they all in doubtfull dumpe remained, The man that steard the barke in which they sailed, Did make to them this motion sage and wise, And they agreed to follow his aduise. 178 He told them that not far from thence there dwelled, An Hermit in a solitarie place, That so in sanctitie of life excelled, That he could remedie each doubtfull case; Diseases diuers were by him expelled, Dumb, blind, and lame were heald such was his grace And that he could with one signe of the crosse, Allay the waues when they do highest tosse. 179 In fine, he told them sure there was no doubt, To find reliefe, eu'n present at the hands Of that same man, so holy and deuour, As scarce his match, was found in many lands. Orlando hauing heard the Pylot out. Inquired of the place which way it stands, And presently the place to him was showd, And toward it, in hast they sayld and rowd. 180 Next morning they discouerd all the Ile, But kept aloofe, so as their ship might float, And there they cast their anchor, and the while, Conuayd the wounded Marquesse in a boat, Vpon the shallow waues, scant halfe a mile, Vnto the blesled Hermits simple coat, That verie Hermit, that before but late, Had brought Rogero vnto Christian state. 181 The man of God, that had his dwelling heare, Came forth, and met Orlando at the gate, And welcomd him, with kind and frendly cheare, Inquiring of his arrant, and their state, (Although to him, it was apparent cleare: For God that night, had sent his Angell late, To tell the Saint thereof) Orlando sayd, His arrant was, to get his kinsman ayd. 182 Who had a great and grieuous mayme receaued, In fighting for the Empire, and the saith, And was of hope and comfort, quite bereaued. Be of good cheare (the godly Hermit saith) Who trust in God shall neuer be deceaued; Yet oyntment none vnto his hurt he layth, But first to Church he go'th, and makes his prayre. Then with great boldnesse, doth to them repayre. 183 And calling on that trebble sou'raigne name, Of God the Father, Sonne and holy Ghost, He blest the knight, that maymed was and lame, (Oh wódrous grace, of which Gods saints may bost) Straight to his vse each vaine and sinew came, No part of all his former strength was lost, And as it pleased God, of his great grace, Sobrino present was then in the place. 184 And being now so weake with bleeding brought, That eu'n his vitall sprites were almost spent, And seeing plainly such a wonder wrought, So great, so gracious and so euident, To leaue his Macon he thereby was taught, And to confesse our Christ omnipotent, He prayd in most contrite, and humble manner, To be a souldier vnder Christian banner. 185 The iust old man did grant him his request, And Christend him and did his health restore, At which Orlando stout, and all the rest, Reioyced much, and praysed God therefore. Rogero eke as ioyfull as the best, Increased in deuotion more and more, To see those mysteries deuine, and Oracles, Confirmed so by plaine apparent miracles. 186 Thus all this companie in sweet confort, In this same blessed Hermits house do stay, Who doth them all, most fatherly exhort, To bend their whole endeuours all they may, That in this Inne, where mans abode is short, They seeke to wash away the dirt and clay, That some call life, and greatly do commend, And sole to heau'n, their eyes and hearts to bend. 187 Then sent Orlando to his ship in hast, For bread and wine, and other daintie dishes, And this old man, whom abstinence and fast, Had made forget the tast of beasts or fishes, Of charitie, they prayd some flesh to tast, And he therein consented to their wishes, And when they all had eate to their contents, They found discourse of sundry arguments. 188 And as in speech it often doth be fall, That one thing doth another bring to light, Rogero was at last knowne to them all, For that Rogero, that exceld in fight; The first that him to memorie did call, Was Sobrin, who did know him well by sight: The next that knew his louely looke and stately, Was good Renaldo, that fought with him lately. 189 They all do come to him with frendly face, When of his Christendome they vnderstand, And some do kisse him, others him embrace, In kindest sort, some take him by the hand, But chiefe Renaldo striues, to do him grace: Yet if that you desire to vnderstand, Why more then all the rest Renaldo sought it, Turne ore the leafe and there you shal be taught it.
In the tale of the Mantuan knight may be gathered this good morall,Morall. that it is no wisedome to search for that a man would not find: and how the first breach commonly of the sweet concord of matrimonie, groweth of iealousie, I must con∣fesse, these be two knauish tales that be here in this booke, and yet the Bee will picke out hony out of the worst of them. For mine owne part I haue euer bene of opinion, that this tale of the Mantuan knight, is simply the worst against women in all the booke, or rather indeed that euer was written. The hosts tale in the xx viij booke of this worke, is a bad one: M. Spencers take of the squire of Dames, in his excellent Poem of the Faery Queene, in the end of the vij. Canto of the third booke, is to the like effect, sharpe and well conceited; in substance thus, that his Squire of Dames could in three yeares trauell, find but three women that denyed his lewed desire: of which three, one was a courtesan, that reiected him because he wanted coyne for her: the second a Nun, who refused him because he would not swear secreacie, the third a plain coun∣trey Gentlewoman, that of good honest simplicitie denyed him: which also hath some liknes with that of Pharao I spake of in the notes vpon the 42. book: but this of the Mantuan knight passeth thē all, if you marke the secret drift of it: shewing how a woman of so excellent education, so great learning, so rare beautie, so fine wit, so choise qualities, so sweet beha∣uiour, so aboundant wealth, so dearly beloued by her husband, could so easily be conquerd with the sight of three or four iewels: and then for his comfort, how for ten yeares after, he being a great house keeper, all his married guests that came to him spilt the drinke in their bosomes. This tale (admitting it to be true or probable) would argue women to be of exceeding couetousnes, but loe how easily all this is not onely to be excused for them, but retorted vpon men: for assuredly it is onely the couetouseness of men, that maketh women (as we interpret it) to sell their chastities: for women indeed care for nothing but to be loued, & where they assure themselues they are loued, there of their kind and sweet dispositions, they bestow loue againe. Now because men can protest and sweare, and vow that which they thinke not, therefore no maruel if women are hard of beliefe, and thicke listed to heare them: but when they come to giue things that cost money, and that the coyn begin to walke, which they are sure men esteeme so dearly, as they venter both body and soule for it many times, then no maruell if they belieue them, and thinke them to be in good earnest, and consequently yeeld to that they denyed before. But to go forward with the rest of the morall, both men and women may gather this morall out of both these tales; that as all vice is odious and base, so that which a bodie is hired vnto, is most shamefull and detestable. Of the Faery Manto I cannot affirme any thing of truth,Historie. whether she were a Faery or a Prophetesse, but this I finde wrtiten of her, that when Thebs was razed by Alexander, this Manto daughter of Tyresia, being learned in Magike as well as her father, came vnto that part of Italy, where Mantua is now, and there her sonne Ocnus (as Virgil will haue it) built that Citie, and called it after his mothers name. Ille etiam patrijs ignem ciet Ocnus ab oris, Fatidicae Mantus, & Thusei filius amnis, Qui muros; matrisque dedit tibi Mantua nomen. Concerning those braue men with whom Orlando compareth Brandimart, the Decij. M. Curtius, and Codrus of the Decij, one of them had a dreame or vision, that told him how in the battel which he was to fight next day with the Latins the Captain of one side, and the army of the other side should perish, wherupō he being then Consul, ran wilfully on his ene∣mies and was slaine, and so gat the victory for the Romans. His son Decius did the like after him: Curtius lept into the gulfe, that was prophecyed should neuer be stopt, till the most precious iewell the Romans had were thrown: into the same. Codrus dyed thus, the Dorians hauing warre with the Athenians, the Oracle told them of Athens, that if Codrus were slaine by the enemies, then the Athenians should haue the victorie: this newes being noised in the Dovians campe, they gaue straight charge that none should kil Codrus; but he minding to dye for the defence of his countrie, countersaited himselfe like a Pedler, or such like, and came to the campe of enemies, and picking a quarrell there of purpose with some of the souldiers, was slaine among them. The cuppe presented to Renaldo,Allusion is allegorically to be vnderstood for suspition, which whosoeuer drinketh of, it is great ods he sheds it so into his bosome, as he shal drinke the worse after it while he liues, and therfore Renaldo said wel, Drinke of the cup, (quoth he) that list, not I. I am not, nor I minde not to be drie. For the Mantuans tale,Allegorie. it is not vnlike to that of Cephalus in Ouids Metamorphosis, in the seuenth booke, where he tels how in the like sort changed by negromancy, he tempted his wife so farre, Dum census dare me promitto, loquendo Muneraque augendo, tandem dubitare coegi. I haue heard of a Gentleman that would needs court his owne wise in a maske, causing her to be told he was some other man; and made loue so long to her, till he found himselfe more gracious with her, then he had cause to beast of. As for the Faery Manto, whether there be any Faeries or no, I wil not dispute the matter, but I haue heard strange tales reported by credible persons, of these witches and spirits whatsoeuer they be; and I haue heard it often among the sim∣pler sore, that he that can please the Queene of Faeries; shall neuer want while he liues; and it seemes the like opinion hath crept into other countries, though taken but as a fable, or as the saying is, It may be in my Paternoster indeed, But sure it neuer shall come in my Creed. Marrie for the shaghaird dog, that could dance to please Ladies so well, and had such pretie qualities, I dare vndertake my seruant Bungy (whose picture you may see in the first page of the booke, and is knowne to the best Ladies of England) may cōpare with any Pilgrims dog that serued such a saint this seuen yere: only he wants that qualitie to shake duckats out of his eares. But now to leaue these toying tales, and fall to the soberer matter, the solemne suneralls of Brandi∣mart and Orlandos mourning, alludes to the buriall of Pallas, or Pallante in Virgil: Bardino to Acetes: and Orlando to Aenas: but this here is set forth with denout and Christian termes, and therefore more to be commended. Here end the notes of the 43. booke.
THE XLIIII. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Renaldo to Rogero giues his sister, Against Duke Ammon and their mothers will: Rogero doubting lest he should haue mist her, Vowes Leon and his father both to Kill: He leaueth France, and to the streame of Ister, He rides and trauels in those parts, vntill He found the Bulgars fighting with the Greekes, And aydeth those, because he these mislikes. 1 OFt times we see, in house of meane estate, Of friendship.In fortune bad, and chances ouerthwart, That men doe sooner lay aside debate, And ioyne in sound accord with hand and hart, The princes courts, where riches gender hate, And vilde suspect, that louing mind doth part, Where charitie is cleane consumde and vanished, An' frendship firme, is quite cast out and banished. 2 Hence comes it that twixt Princes and great Lords, Agreements all, and cou'nants are so fraile, Today Kings, Popes, and Emperors make accords Tomorrow deadly warres, with tooth and nayle: And why? their thoughts stil vary from their words, They keepe not othes, but for their owne auaile: Nor weigh they wrong or right, or recken of it, But as the same may turne to their owne profite. 3 Now though such men, as yet were neuer taught, What frendship is, nor euer knew the same, (For frendship neuer growes where there is nought But shewes disguisd, in earnest or in game) Yet if ill fortune them so low haue brought, To meete in meaner place, they straight do frame Their proud hy minds to frendship true and plaine, Which erst they knew not, or they did disdaine. 4 The saintlik man, had in his Cell more powre, His guests in firme and sound accord do binde, Then others should haue had in Princely bowre: And more, this frendship was of such a kind, That euer after, from that present houre, Eu'n to their ends, they all agreed in mind: Appearing to this old man and deuout, As white within, as Swans are white without. 5 He found them all both gentle kind, and meeke, And not in sort of which I erst complained, Of those that neuer thinke and speake alike, But euer go with speech, and uisage fained. They cleare forgat all grudge, and old mislike; No signe, nor memorie thereof remained: But loue together, as if they had come, All of one seede, and laine all in one worne. 6 But good Renaldo could by no meanes rest, To shew Rogero kindnesse great and loue, Both for his prowesse great, and valiant brest, Which hand to hand, in fight he late did proue: And for his courtsie, that did passe the rest, And was praise worthy all the rest aboue: But chiefe the cause was this, because he found, His frends to him had sundry wayes bene bound. 7 He knew, for often he had heard it told, How first Rogero saued Richardet, Whom then Marsilio kept in cruell hold, Because with child he did his daughter get: And further, Bouos sonnes should haue bene sold, But them Rogero did at freedome set: These things in honor true, and reputation, He knew were matters of great obligation.
8 And though before he could no kindnes show To him, while he profest himselfe a Turke, Yet now that him a Christian he did know, He would now let his loue no longer lurke: Which when the Hermit saw, he was not slow, A farther kindnes, them between to worke: (them) He moues them (sith he so good friends had seene That he might make affinitie betweene them. 9 He said it was foreshowd him from on hie, That by the ioyning their two lines in one, Such ofspring should arise, as vnder sky To passe or match the same, there should be none; Wherefore, he wisheth them, that by and by By his aduise, they would agree thereon: Renaldo at his motion straight allowes, That Bradamant should be Rogeros spouse. 10 Orlando, Olivero soone to that, Gaue their good will, and fauour, and assent, Affirming that all France may ioy thereat; They little knew how good Duke Ammon ment, To match his daughter higher farre, and that King Charles thereto did willingly consent: To Leon namely Constantynos haire, Emp'rour of Greece, who sought the Lady faire. 11 Duke Ammon meant not such a match to shunne, But yet his answere he a while dferred, Vntill such time as with his absent sonne, He had on such a weightie cause conferred: Not doubting but he thereto would be wonne, And glad to haue his sister so preferred; But yet, though herein he did nothing doubt him, Yet would he not resolue thereon without him. 12 But now Renaldo absent from his father, And ignorant of that imperiall plot, Vnto Rogero promist her the rather, Because his present friends mikt it not; But chiefe that he by th' Hermits speech did gather, That God ordaind it by eternall lot; And of his father firmely he belieued, At such alliance he could not be grieued. 13 All that same day and night, and halfe the next, They made abode with that same saintlike fire, Still preaching, teaching them the blessed text, Expounding eu'rie place at their desire: The marriners with their long tarrying vext, Oft sent to pray them to the ship retyre, Because the wind blew well to serue their turne, Compelling them in fine, to make returne. 14 Rogero that had liu'd in long exile, (Now glad to do as that old man would haue him) Doth bid farewell, and left that happie Ile, When he had learnd yt faith that sole must saue him, Orlando vnto him his sword this while, And Hectors armes, and good Frontino gaue him, Both to declare his loue so much the more, And that he knew they had bene his before. 15 And though the Palladine in common sence, Had iuster claime vnto the blade enchaunted, As hauing wonne it in his owne defence, Forth of the garden with foule spirits haunted, Whereas Rogeros title and pretence, Came from Brunello, that of theft was taunted, Yet gaue he it of his good nature meerly, Although his right thereto appeared cleerly. 16 Then by the holy man they all were blessed, And to their ship they made their backe repaire, Their oates for waues, their sails for winds adressed, Which then blew verie temperate and faire: No feare of wracke, no doubt to be distressed; No need there was of vowes, or yet of praire: But here I leane them sailing in faire wether, Till th' English Duke and them I bring together. 17 Who when the victorie he vnderstood Orlando got, of which he was lesse glad, Because the same was wonne with so much blood, And sith now France no feare of Affricke had; To send Senapo home he thought it good, And therefore with a count'nance graue and sad, Yet kind and frendly he did giue him thanke, For lending him his aid, so free and franke. 18 And Dudon sent a little while before, All that his great triumphant Nauie backe, Wherewith he plagued had the Turks so sore, And brought them all to ruine great and wracke: Which ships no sooner toucht that Affricke shore, And quite disburdend of the people blacke, But eu'rie ship his shape forsakes and leaues,Looke in the Allegorie, of myracles. And all of them were turnd againe to leaues. 19 And now on parting were the Nubian bands: Some mounted, some on foote pel mell together, The winds that wont to moue the troublous sands, Astolfo gaue their king in bagges of leather, So firmely tyde, and in so sured bands, As feare they need not any change of weather: And will'd him, when they were past all ieoperty, That they should grant vnto the wind his liberty. 20 Turpino writes that they no sooner came, Vnto the mountaine Atlas stonie roote, But that their horses, stones againe became, And so they all went home againe on foote: But after how each thing with them did frame, In this discourse to tell it shall not boote: Now tell we of your English Dukes proceeding, Of his returne to France, and of his speeding. 21 Who hauing rulers for those parts ordained, That might as pleasd, them ruine or repaire, No longer then in Affrica remained, But vnto France he quickly did repaire: By land or sea, to trauell he disdained, But with his winged beast he cuts the aire, And quickly came to Prouince where he did, As much as erst th' Euangelist did bid.
22 Which was that enterd into Prouince, he Should take away his saddle and his raines, And grant him liberty, and set him free, And put him now vnto no further paines: For Cinthias spheare, in which our lost wits be, That maketh of our losses greatest gaines, Had made his horne long since to loose his sound, That now no vertue in the same was found. 23 Now th' English Duke vnto Marsilio came, And iust at that same time arriued there, When those three Palladines of worthy same, With Sobrin and Rogero landed were: Much was their ioy, yet lessond was the same, And outward showes thereof they do forbeare: So great a sadnes in them all it bred, To thinke their friend king Brandimart was ded. 24 But Charles that from Sicilia notice had, How those two kings were slaine, and Sobrine taken, And Brandimart deceast (which made him sad) And that Rogero had the Turkes forsaken; Was in his minde now well apaid and glad, That such a peise, he from his necke had shaken, Which for a long time had so grieuous wayed, As he therewith was welny ouerlayed. 25 Wherefore to do them honour, as was meete, That with their courage did his crowne sustaine, He sent his Peeres and nobles them to greete, Vnto the verie confines of his raigne: Himselfe in person, after did them meete, With Lords and Princes of his chiefest traine: And neare the town, the Queene with many a Ladie Came forth, to do them honor all that may be. 26 King Charles himselfe with chearfull friendly face, The Palladines, their kinsfolke and their frends, The noble men, and people meane and base, To make them for their merits some amends, With friendly shouts did fill vp all the place, Each man and euery child his voice extends, And cride on those two houses of account, That of Mongrana, and of Clarimount. 27 Now to the Prince Rogero they did bring, And told him how he was apparent haire To Risa, and of that great house did spring: And while they spake these words, Marfisa faire Saluted him in presence of the King, But Bradamant (who thither did repaire) Yet kept her selfe aloofe with more respect, Least openly she should her loue detect. 28 Then Charls doth welcom him with words most sweet, And vsd him like a man of rare account, And for he was allighted on his feet, For reu'rence sake, againe' he made him mount; And cheeke by cheeke, to ride through eu'ry street: He knew and ioyd, that at the sacred fount, Rogero by the hermit was baptised, As he by former letters was aduised. 29 In triumph and in feasts they spent the day, And riding through the towne at sundry houres, Some straw greene leaues, or rushes in the way, Some cast downe gardlands made of sundry flowres. The streets were hanged all with rich array, And damsels from the windowes high and towres, To gratulate their prosperous deeds and haps, Cast showres of Roses from their tender laps. 30 At eu'ry corner, market-crosse or gate, High arches triumph-like were new erected, Some of Bysertas fall and wofull state, Which they had ouerthrowne and quite deiected: Some of the combat that was fought so late, With playes and new deuises vnexpected: Thus dedicate, and thus entitled wholly, To those Redeemers of the Empire holly. 31 With gratefull sound, of instruments and voyce, With sundrie sweet and musicall consorts, The people shew how greatly they reioyce, With Iubiles, and shoutes, and playes, and sports. Then Charles and all his knights, and Barons choise To his owne house, and his owne court resorts; And there with tilting, turneis, and with playes, They spent a few of then ensuing dayes. 32 Renaldo taking time, vpon a day,Renaldo motio\̄s the marriage for Bradamant. The marriage matter to his father brake, And told him he had promist by the way, His sister should for spouse, Rogero take: By which, allyance such procure they may, As men may count great folly to forsake: In which himselfe the further did proceed, Because Orlando was thereto agreed. 33 With much disdaine this speech Duke Ammon hard, Affirming, he presumptously had donne, To promise so, sith he had now prepard, To match her to the Greekish Emp'rors sonne: And not this priuate knight, who he had hard, Had not one foote of land scant vnder Sunne:Sentence. The common opi∣nion of the people Alas (quoth he) poore gentrie small auailes, And vertue lesse if land and riches failes. 34 But chieflie Ammons wife, dame Beatrice, Doth call her sonne vngrate and arrogant, And thinks to worke so by her wise aduise, To make an Empresse of her Bradamant: Renaldo much condemneth that deuice, Nor will not of his word one tittle want:Looke of this in the Moral. But said his sister (vnder their correction) Would therein ruled be by his direction. 35 The mother (in her daughter much beguild) Perswades with her, and comforts her to say, That she will rather dye and be exild, Then match so∣meane, when higher match she may She saith, she will not take her for her child, If she will let her brother beare such sway: Wherefore (saith she) be bold, and do denie it, And with your brother, giue me leaue to try it.
36 Poore Bradamant doth silent stand and still, She dares not scarse in thought, for reu'rence sake, Gainsay her mother, or withstand her will, On tother side, she dare not promise make, Of that, which to performe did passe her skill, And was aboue her powre to vndertake: No powre she had in this, nor great nor small, For long ere this, loue sealed on it all. 37 She dares not giue consent, nor yet deny, She onely sighes, and answer maketh none, But when she is alone that none are by, Vnto her selfe she makes a piteous mone; She makes her brests and her faire haire to trie In part her griese, for why she beates the tone In spitefull wife, the tother short she teares, And thus she speakes amid her plaints and feares. 38 Wo me, shall then my will and fancie varie From hers, whose will should rule and gouern mine? Shall my will to my mothers be contrarie, Or that di'daine, my mother doth designe? Shall I presume with such a man to marrie, At whom my parents both do so repine? Sentence.What fowler blot can staine a damsels praise, Then when her parents will, she disobayes? 39 Shall then my mothers reu'rence, and my sites, Make me my deare Rogero to forget? And to new loues, new hopes, and new desires Be take my selfe, and him at nought to set? Or shall the reu'rence which their age requires, And which my selfe hath borne them euer yet, Be now forgot, and I be wholy bent, To mine owne ioy, and solace, and content? 40 meliora  Desea SiqurI know (alas I know) my dutie well, But powre I haue not to performe the same, My fancie reasons rule doth quite expell, And my well orderd thoughts, put out of frame: And tyrant Loue, gainst whom who dare rebell, Makes me cast off all feare of others blame: My speech, my deeds, my thoughts he doth dispose, And ruleth them, against my will God knowes. 41 To Ammon daughter, and to Beatrice I am, but vnto Loue I am a slaue, Though I do now refuse their wise aduise, Of them I may hereafter pardon haue: But if I Loue resist, who knowes the price, Or who can me from his great furie saue? He will not stay to harken to my scuses, But slay me presently, for such his vse is. 42 With much adoe, and with long time I drew My deare Rogero, to the Christian faith, What profite doth thereof to me ensew, It still ill hap my purpose good gainsaith? Simile.So doth the Bee, not for himselfe renew, The hony that in combes he safely laith: But sooner of my life they shall me reaue, Then force me my Rogero deare to leaue. 43 But though herein I disobey my mother, And father to, which I to do am loth: What though? yet I therein obey my brother, That is reputed wiser then they both: Orlando eke, for me speakes tone and tother, And fauour will this match, how ere it goth; And sure I am, the world doth of them twaine, Make more esteeme then all our house againe. 44 Sith then the world esteemes and calleth those, The glorie and the flowre of Clarimount, Lesse shame it is for me, as I suppose, If that I suffer men of such account, Of me in marriage matters to dispose, That all my kin in credit do surmount: Beside they haue the word directly spoken, But to the Greeke the matter is but broken. 45 But now if Bradamant her selfe torment, And doth her euill hap bewaile and blame, No doubt Rogero is as malcontent, Who had some priuie inckling of the same: He secretly doth his ill state lament, And curseth fortune that vnconstant dame, That had for wealth, so sparing left his lot, Which diuers base vnworthy men had got. 46 In each thing else that nature man can graunt, Or that is got by industrie or art, He knowth, and each man saith that none canvaunt daunt, To haue a greater, no nor such a part: His strength was such, no strength the same could His person past his strength; his noble hart, His Princely manners, and his braue behauour, Wan each mans loue, each mans applause & fauour. 47 But this same vulgar sort vntaught and rude, That as them list distribute praise and shame, And (saue the wise and learned) I include Sentence. All men that liue on earth, within that name; For Myters, states, nor crownes, may not exclude, Popes, mightie kings, nor Keysars from the same:Sentence. But onely wisedome graue, and learning cleare, Gifts giuen from heau'n, that are not common heare 48 This vulgar sort (to tell my meaning out) That sauing wealth and riches, nought admyre,Sentence. Of the com opon of mak marriage. And nothing thinke praise worthy them without, And in their base conceits can looke no hyre: That be one neu'r so learnd, so wise, so stout, Well shapt as eye can see, or heart desire, Well borne, well qualited of sober carriage, They nought esteeme all these in case of marriage. 49 Well (saith Rogero) if that Ammon needs Will make an Empresse of his daughter deare, At least this hast he makes, is more then needs, Let him yet giue me respite but one yeare: And if in that same yeare, I do such deeds, That both the sonne and sire, I vanquish cleare: When both their crowns I conquerd I haue & wonne Then I may worthy be, to be his soune.
50 But if he straight the marriage do effect, With Constantinos heire in so great hast, And will Renaldos promise quite neglect, And eke his Cosens, which so few dayes past, Before that blessed man of Gods elect, And that good Marquesse, they did bind so fast: If they shall wrong me so, what then shall I? What can I do in such a case but die? 51 What should I do? shall I then be auenged Of him that me contraries in this wise? Let me be blamed herein, or commended, Let me therein be deemd a foole or wise: But would my state alas, be then amended By th' old mans death? no, no, far otherwise: I doubt this would not worke my more content, But rather contrarie my first intent. 52 My first intention was, and yet is still, That Bradamant should beare me loue, not hate, Now then if I her father here should kill, Or ought attempt against her brothers state: Had she not cause of me to thinke then ill, And to refuse me for her spouse and mate? What shall I do? alas then shall I beare it? Ah no perdy, first I will dye I sweare it. 53 And yet I will not die, but Ile destroy That Leon that procur'd my harme and wo, And is desturber of my chiefest ioy, Him and his father I will kill also: Faire Helen to the louer lewed of Troy, Not cost so deare, nor longer far ago, the slory.Proserpin cost Perythous price so hye, As I will cause them this my griefe to buy. 54 But were it possible (my deare) that thou, Canst leaue thine owne Rogero for this Greeke? Yea though that all thy brothers did allow This match, which Ammon doth so fondly seeke? Yes yes, I feare that thine owne minde doth bow To his desire, and could far better leeke, When with thy selfe, thou dost these offers scan, To haue a Caesar then a priuate man. 55 Can then the dignitie and glorious name, Of pompous shewes, and of imperiall seat, The noble heart of Bradamant so frame, Her vallew rare, and vertue to defeat, And go from her first promise, to her shame, Which me she made with many vowes and great? No sure I know she will them all forsake, Much rather then vnsay, that once she spake. 56 These words Rogero spake, and many such, And oftentimes he spake them in such sort, That diuers ouerhard him, in so much That they were told, by more then one report To Bradamant, whom they did chiefly tuch, Who tooke them not (you may be sure) in sport: But as her priuate griefe was great before, So this report of him did grieue her more. 57 But most it grieu'd her and aboue the rest, That he mistrusted she would him forsake, At any mans commandment or request, And specially for this same Grecians sake: Wherefore to moue this scruple from his brest, And this foule error from his minde to take, She gate her pen and inke one night full late, And to Rogero such like words she wrate. 58 My deare, as erst I was I still will bide,Bradamants lettr, Rogier qual sempre fui tal esser voglia. While life shall dure, yea eu'n when life is past, Though toward me, loue shew his grace, or pride, Or fortune raise me vp, or downward cast: My stable faith, shall neuer faile nor slide, For calme, nor storme, but as a Rocke stand fast, Against the surging waues still vnremoueable, So shall my faith stand firme and vnreproueable. 59 First shall a file, or knife of drossie lead, The Dyamond to sundrie figures carue, Ere any chance by Fortunes frailtie bred, Or powre of loue, shall cause my course to swarue: First shall the streames runne backe vnto their hed, Ere I will iustly such a blame desarue: Or ere I shall, for chances good or ill, Giue my consent to change my setled will. 60 To thee Rogero mine, a good while since, Of me, and of my heart I gaue dominion, I should my selfe of lightnes great conuince, If I so sodainly could change opinion: As for my true allegeance, sure no Prince, Is faithfuller belou'd of dearest minnion: For me you need no fortresse nor no towre, To be defences against forren powre. 61 You need no bands of men to entertaine, To keepe this fortres, strength enough haue I, For riches make on me assault but vaine, So base a price, no gentle heart can buy: Nor noble birth, nor name of crowne or raigne, Which oft doth dase the common peoples eye, Nor beautie, to the which light minds incline, Though greater see I neuer shall then thine. 62 No, feare not, no man powre shall euer haue, My heart to other figure to transforme, Loue did your shape therein so deepe ingraue, As now it can receiue none other forme: My heart is not of wax, for why Loue gaue, (When to his worke he did it first conforme) An hunderd strokes with cheessell and with male, Ere he could fetch therefrom one little scale. 63 Pure Iuorie, gemmes, and eu'rie hardest stone, That most withstandeth steele, a man may burst, But other figure yet receiue they none, Then that to which they formed were at furst: My heart is not vnlike a precious stone, Or Adamant, or what so cutteth worst: Loue sooner shall it breake in thousand splints, Ere other beauties bring it to new prints.
64 These words she wrote, and many more to these, That him with faith, with loue, with hope so fed, Of force to cure each desperate disease, Or rather to reuiue him being ded: But when they thought them safest from the seas, And in the hau'n securely harbored, A new and sodaine tempest rose so sore, As draue them backe to sea from sight of shore. 65 For worthy Bradamant that had assignd, To shew her meaning plaine was, and direct, And calling wonted courage to her minde, And quite reiecting womanly respect, Came vnto Charles, and spake in such a kind; My Leige, if ere my seruice did effect, Ought worth your highnes thanks, at your cōmand Let not your grace denie me one demand. 66 But promise me, vpon your Princely faith And royall word, which I may surely trust, To grant one suit, what ere your handmaid praith, And I will promise that it shall be iust. (Beloued worthy mayd, the Emp'ror saith) Your many seruices confesse I must, Deserue no lesse, and frankly here I vow it, If of my Realme you aske part, lle allow it. 67 My suit is that your highnes will not yeeld, That I (said she) may any husband haue, That shall not first of all, with speare and sheeld, Or else with sword in hand him so behaue, As that he can withstand me in the feeld, Behold the onely fauour that I craue; I would be his that proues himselfe so stout, The rest may be content to stand without. 68 Most noble maid (the Emp'ror straight replide) Thy stout demand, well to thy minde doth sute, Wherefore by me it may not be denyde, It is so noble and so iust a sute: Now (for she sought not this her suit to hide) All they that heard thereof, sure were not mute, But eu'n ere night it publisht was so rise, As it was knowne to Ammon and his wife. 69 And thereupon they presently conceaued, Against their daughter, great disdaine and wrath, For by such motion plainly they perceaued, She to Rogero most deuotion hath: Wherefore to th'end she might be quite bereaued All hope, to follow that forbidden path, From out the court they traind her by a slight, And sent her to their castle that same night. 70 This was a fortresse that but few dayes past, The Prince had giu'n to them vpon request, Betweene Perpignan and Cirtasso plast, And neare the sea, not of importance least: Here as a prisner they did keepe her fast, With minde to send her one dy vnto th'East, They purpose, will she, nill she, she must take Don Leon, and Rogero quite forsake. 71 The Damsell, though not kept with watch or guard, Yet bridled with the Parents awfull raine, Did keepe her close, with good and due regard, And of their rigor did no whit complaine: But yet to this her thoughts were full prepard, To bide imprisonment or any paine, Or death it selfe, by torture or by racke, More rather then from promise to go backe. 72 Renaldo finding that his suttle fire, Had tane his sister thus from out his fist, Nor able as his promise did require, Rogeros suit to further and assist, Forgets he is his sonne, and in his ire, Rebukes his Parents, but say what he list, They are content to giue the words to loosers,Sentence. But in their daughters match they will be choosers. 73 Rogero hearing this, and greatly fearing, Least Leon should by loue, or by constraint, Possesse his Lady by his long forbearing, He minds (but none he doth therewith acquaint,) To giue a speedie death to Leon,Fard' Aug∣dius, for m the Emper were dead, deified them called them which impor much as s swearing That he of Caesar, will make him a saint, And that he will, except his hope deceiue him, Of scepter, life, and loue, and all bereaue him. 74 And in his minde resolued full thereon, Don Hectors armor that from Mandricard He late had wonne, forwith he putteth on, Frontino cake he secretly prepard: But Eagle on his sheeld he would haue none, I cannot tell you well in what regard; In steed thereof an argent Vnicorne, In field of Gewls by him, as then was borne. 75 One onely trustie seruant and no mo, He takes with him his purpose to conceale, He giueth him in charge where ere he go, That he his name to no man do reueale: Thus Mosa, Rhyne, he past with pace not slow, And Austria, to th'Vngarian common weale: And vpon Isters banke, such speed he made, That in a while he came vnto Belgrade. 76 Where Saua doth into Danubia fall, And all along that streame he might discouer Ensignes and banners all Imperiall, That nye the streame in numbers great did houer: Great was their multitude, and Grecians all, Who with a hope that citie to recouer, Which late before from them the Bulgars wonne, Were thither brought by th'Emperor and his sonne. 77 Twixt Belgrade, and the streame in warlike rankes, The Bulgars stood eu'n to the monntaines ridge, Both armies waterd at the riuers bankes, The Greekes endeuord there to cast a bridge; And for that end prepared boats and plankes, The Bulgars sought their purpose to abridge: Scarse had Rogero vewd them wel, and seene them, But that there fell a skirmish hot betweene them.
78 The Greeks were foure to one, beside they haue Good store of boats with many a planke and boord, And to the place a sharpe assault they gaue, And mean to passe although there were no foord: But this was but a policie, and braue, For Leon so this while himselfe besturd, That with a compasse that about he fet, Both he and his, the streame past without let. 79 With little lesse then twentie thousand men, Along the banks he secretly doth ride, And gaue to them a fresh alarum then, Vnlooked for, vnwares, and vnespide: No lesse the Emp'ror Constantino, when He saw his sonne, on land on tother side, By ioyning planke to planke, and boat to boat, With all his powre, an easie passage got. 80 The Bulgar Captaine that Vatrano hight, And was a valiant warrior and a wise, Endeuord both by policie and fight To beare the bront, but nothing could suffice: For Leon both by multitude and might, Vnhorsed him, and ere he could arise; Sith he to yeeld him prisner did disdaine, Among a thousand swords he there was slaine. 81 Till then, the Bulgars valiantly made hed, But when they saw their king and Captaine slaine, So great a terror in their minds was bred, In their faint hearts no courage did remaine: Rogero seeing how the Bulgars fled, And none to stay or bring them backe againe: To helpe the weaker part resolueth briefly, For hate of Constantine, but Leon chiefly. 82 He spurres his horse that like the winde doth runne, And makes them stand, that fled with fainting brest, And hauing spide one brauer then the Sunne, A gallant youth, more forward then the rest: (This same was Constantinos sisters sonne) At him Rogero runnes with speare in rest: He brake his shield and coat like brittle glasse, And through his bodie made the speare to passe. 83 He leaues him dead, and Ballisard he drawes, And with that blade he shewd himselfe so stout, Who meeteth with him, to repent haue cause, He presseth in among the thickest rout; Ones skull he cleaueth to the verie iawes, Heads, leggs, and armes flew all the field about: The streame that erst did run as Christall cleare, Vermillion now doth to the sight appeare. 84 No man that saw, much lesse that felt his blowes, Dare once make head against them, or resist them, Rogero in the field triumphant goes, The Bulgars now march freely where it list them: Nor was there one amongst them all that knowes, What wight it was that did so well assist them: This change they saw procur'd in little space, Who lately fled, now held their foes in chase. 85 The young Augustus standing on a hill, A place aboue the rest much eminent, Seeing one man his men to slay and kill, And that their losse and flight was euident: He wonders at his courage and his skill, And thinks that God had sure some Angel sent, To plague the Grecians for their old offences, And for the Bulgars succours and defences. 86 He sees both by his armes and Vnicorne, That sure he was a knight of forraine Nation, And where as some, more hate wold him haue born He rather held him in more admiration: His heart, whom vertuous thoughts did still adorne, And euer was of noble inclination, Made him extoll him for his deeds of armes, Although his men by him receiu'd such harmes. 87 Eu'n as a babe,Simile. whom sometime mou'd with ire, The mother beats with rod; or with it chafeth, Runnes not vnto the sister, nor the fire, But to the Mam, and sweetly her imbraceth: So now though Leons men are made retire, And though Rogero killeth them and chaseth,This was a true noble nature. Yet his great valew maketh Leon loue him, Much more then hate him, for the harm he doth him 88 But if that Leon loue him and admire, Me thinks he hath but sorrie recompence, For why Rogeros hope and sole desire, Is to do Leon damage and offence: He lookes for him, and oft he doth enquire, Which way he was, but still the diligence, And long experience of the warie Greeke, Do cause Rogero him in vaine did seeke. 89 Don Leon saw his souldiers flie so fast, He sounds retreit, and to his father sent A messenger forthwith, in all post hast, And of his message this was chiefe content; To let him vnderstand how things had past, And wish him flie for feare of being shent: Likewise himselfe and his, hast all they may, Backe ore the streame themselves then to conuay. 90 But yet for all his hast, his men were slaine, And some with hast were drowned in the streame; The Bulgars now did conquerors remaine, That erst in perill were to loose their Reame: The knight of th'Vnicorne, they all see plaine, Causd all their good; wherefore with ioy extreame, To him they go acknowledging indeed, That all their glorie did from him proceed. 91 Some kisse his hands, and some do kisse his feete, And in most humble manner him salute, They thinke for him a praise diuine were meete, And powre diuine they do to him impute: They send their chiefest Captaines him to meete, And all of them to him do make this sute: And vp to heau'n their ioyfull voyces ring, That he would be their Captaine, guide, and king.
92 Rogero vnto them this answer made, That he will be their guide as they thinke best, But that he will not come into Belgrade, Nor staffe, nor scepter touch at no request, Vntill that Leon that did them inuade, He haue once slaine, or tane him at the least: For why a thousand miles for this alone, He riden had, and other cause had none. 93 This said, forthwith he biddeth them adew, And would no longer stay at their desiring, But that way Leon fled, did him pursew, (For flight it was indeed, and not retyring) How beit Leon and his men that knew, What in such case for safetie was requiring, Brake downe the bridge, when they the streame had past And so as then they made the passage fast. 94 Rogero failing of his first intent, Did seeke some place to passe to tother side, Along that streame till all that day was spent, And all that night vncessantly doth ride: Be time next morne vnto a towne he went, To ease his wearied bodie, and beside, To make his horse amends for so great wrong, In keeping him without a bait so long. 95 Vngardo, one of reckning good and state, Held this same towne to Constantino deare, And footmen had, and horsemen got of late, Since of these warres he did first tidings heare: Rogero finding none to watch the gate, More boldly enterd finding passage cleare: The towne it selfe within he likewise found, With meat and drinke, and lodging to abound. 96 Now where Rogero lodged that same night, One of Romania, happend there to oste, That present was at that precedent fight, When as Rogero holpe the Bulgars host: And at that time did him so sore affright, That though of his escaping he might bost; Yet still he feard him, and still did doubt him, And still he thought that Vnicorne about him. 97 Wherefore when as he saw that sheeld, he knew This was the man that eu'n before so late, So many of the Grecian armie slew, Straightway he hasted to the castle gate: And that he may haue audience, he doth sew, For matter that concernes the Realme and state: But when he was admitted, what he told, Within the booke insuing ile vnfold. Morall.How truly and vpon how iust cause mine author blameth Princes for their weake keeping promise, and their conti∣nuall breaking of leagues (be they made euer so solemnly) I thinke our present time can witnesse, in which it is hard to say, whether any two Princes in Europe at this day be assured each of others loue: the reason is plaiue, They weigh not wrong nor right, nor recken of it, Further then it may tend to their owne profit. And as the fault is theirs, so sure they haue a great punishment for it, which is, that they liue in perpetuall feare one of another, and euer one iealous of anothers greatnes: it was a happie time (if euer there was a time) when it was otherwise. In dame Beatrice we may note the notable ambitious humor of women, specially in matching their children aboue their calling, which I touched more at large in the notes of the fist booke: neither are the wiser sort of men free from this folly, for if they may match their daughters, so as they may say my Lord my sonne, they thinke they haue God almightie by the toe (as the prouerbe saith) whereas many times they haue the diuell by the claw: but those that glorie so to make their sonnes their Lords, I would haue them heare that verse of Martiall to one that called his father his Lord. Seruum te dicis natum ingenueq fateris, Cum dicis dominum Sosibiane patrem. A slaue thou art by birth, of this I gather, For euermore thou saist, my Lord my father. Historie.Perythous would needs take vpon him by the helpe of Theseus to steale away the daughter of the king of Molossus, but being both taken, Perithous was deuoured by Cerberus a great dogge that the said king kept, and Theseus was af∣ter resiued by Hercules: thence arose the fable that they went to hell togither to steale Proserpina, for so was that kings daughter named. Allegorie.In the many lets that Rogero hath ear he can get Bradamant, the Allegorie is ontinued from the beginning to the end of the whole worke, to shew how hardly a man comes to a true contentment and peaceable state in this world (which is figured in the match with Bradamant man hauing still enemies bodily or ghostly to hinder or interrupt the same. Allusion.In Bradamants constant loue to Rogero, he alludes to a Lady of the house of Colonna, that married Luigy Gon∣zaga against the Popes will, and many of his adherents. Here end the notes of the 44. booke.
THE XLV. BOOKE THE ARGVMENT. The noble Leon doth Rogero saue, In Theodoras cruell prison pent; Soone after, Leon doth Rogero craue, To win him Bradamant: he doth assent: And fought with her xij. houres a combat brane; Of which he after did so sore repent, In sorrow great, he thought to end his life, To thinke another should possesse his wife. 1 The unstablines of Foriune.LOoke how much higher Fortune doth erect, The clyming wight, on her vnstable wheele, So much the nigher may a man expect, To see his head, where late he saw his heele: Polycrates hath prou'd it in effect, And Dionysius that too true did feele: Who long were luld on high in Fortunes lap, And fell downe sodainely to great mishap. 2 On tother side the more a man is pressed, And vtterly ou'rthrowne by Fortunes lowre, The sooner comes his state to be redressed, When wheele shal turne and bring the happy houre: Looke in the Allusion.Some from the blocke haue grown to be so blessed, Whole realmes haue bene subiected to their powre, As Marius and Ventidius sample is, In former age, and Lews of France in this. 3 That Lews of France (the storie well is knowne) Looke in the slorie.That to Alfonsos sonne, did giue his daughter, Who was at Saint Albinos ouerthrowne, And eu'n with much adoe escaped slaughter; A like misfortune by like danger growne, Coruino scaped but a little after: And hauing past that moment by good chance; One ruled Hungarie, the tother France. 4 Tis manifest in stories new and old, That good and ill, each other do succeed, And worldly blisse hath but a slender hold, Wherefore a man of wisedome, will take heed; And on his fortune neuer be too bold, Although his state and riches farre exceed: Nor yet in fortune ill, dispaire or doubt, For euermore her wheele doth turne about. 5 Rogero, as I lately did repeat, Now hauing both repulst the sonne and fire, Grew to such pride therewith, and such conceat, (Ambition euermore aspiring hire,) He thinkes by fortune and his force so great, To kill Don Leon, which was his chiefe desire, And for that purpose aid he asketh none, But thinketh sure, to do the fear alone. 6 But she that cannot suffer nor abide, That any long should of her fauour bost, Now in the midst of all his praise and pride, When in her fauour he affied most, Did cause him of this knight to be discride; Who went vnto Vngardo straight in post, And told him how that man that put to flight The Greekish host, would lie in towne that night. 7 He said, twas happend eu'n as one could wish, If so they mard not all by ill contriuing, That he was taken now as is a fish, That to the net approcheth without driuing; Or rather layes it selfe into the dish, And makes resistance none, nor any striuing, Much did the Captaine at these newes reioyce, And shewd the same by gesture and by voyce.
8 And presently prouision such he made, That good Rogero taken was that night, And kept as prisner now in Nouengrade, (For so the towne where he was taken hight) What should he do? when arm'd men did inuade Him naked and a sleepe, with so great might: Vngardo straight doth send this ioyfull tyding, To Constantin, at Beltrich now abyding. 9 For since his forces late were beaten downe, He thought it safest, quickly to withdraw Vnto some strength, or to some walled towne, (For of the Bulgars now he had such aw) He doubted they would hazard eu'n his crowne, Now hauing such a guide as erst he saw, And this same towne was strong, and did pertaine, To him, whose sonne was by Rogero slaine. 10 But when this message of their Captains taking, By letters and by Post, was brought to him, He was therewith, in such a ioyfull taking, He thought he now in seas of milke did swim; His face that pale, his heart that earst was quaking, Vpon this newes, it chearfull was and trim; The Bulgars now he counts as ouerthrowne, The victorie he iudgeth sure his owne. 11 As doth the father ioy, so doth the sonne, Of this good hap, though for a further end, He hopeth this braue knight may now be wonne By curtesie, to be his faithfull frend, He needeth not enuie (if that were donne) King Charles the great, (he thinks) but eu'n contend, Both with his Palladines, nd all his garrison, For flowre of Chiualrie, to make comparison. 12 But Theodora was of other minde, Don Leons Ant, whose sonne Rogero slew, For she with choller carri'd headlong blinde, And for his losse, whose death she most did rew, To Constantin her Lord, and brother kinde She went, and at his feete herselfe she threw, And when she first had made a piteous plaint, She with her suit, this wise did him acquaint. 13 I will not rise from these your feete (she seth) My liege, vntill you grant me powre to wreake My selfe on him, that brought my sonne to deth, And did with cruell speare, his bowels breake: Besides he was your nephew, while his breth Did dure, you saw his loue, and seruice eake, Your highnes knowes, it were too great a wrong, To let his death be vnreuenged long. 14 You further see, that God of goodnes meare, Had causd that wretch, the campe thus to forsake, And come like bird to bayt (the case is cleare) Whereas Vngardo did him prisner take, Because my onely sonne, I lou'd so deare, Might not go vnreueng'd to Stigian lake: Then giue me him (my Lord) and be content, I swage my griefe, with his sharpe punishment. 15 Her plaints and mone, so well she doth deuise, So forcibly and heartily she prayd, Nor would not sturre from thence in any wise, (Although the noble Emp'ror did, and sayd Eu'n all he could, to make her thence arise) That sith she would by no meanes be denayd, But still renewd her suit, with piteous weeping, He granteth her the prisner in her keeping. 16 And thus at last, to make the matter short, He sendeth for the knight of th'Vnicorne, And gaue him her, whose chiefe delight and sport, Was to deuise to worke him woe and scorne; All common deaths were of too milde a sort, To haue him hangd, and all in peeces torne, And on each gate, to set a quartred lim, She thought it was not plague enough for him. 17 Chaind hands and feete, and uecke, she lockt him vp In dungeon voide of light, but full of stinke, With mouldie bread, she made him dine and sup, And gaue him puddle water for his drinke: She shortly meanes, that he a sorrie cup Shall tast, but till she may herselfe be thinke The kinde of death, she giueth him a keeper, Whose rancor was as deepe as hers, or deeper. 18 Oh had Duke Ammons noble daughter knowne, Of her Rogeros now distressed state, Or if it had bene to Marfisa showne, Who lou'd him deare, though in another rate, Both tone and tother, thither would haue flowne, And would not cease to ride be times and late, To rescue good Rogero, and assist, Let Ammon and his wife, say what they list. 19 Now Charles the great, began to call to minde His promise, by the which himselfe was bound, That husband none should euer be assinde To Bradamant, but he in fight were found Her match, and (as kings vse in such a kinde) He published the same by trumpets found, Ou'r all his Empire, sending proclamations, That soone the same, did flye to forren nations. 20 Thus much the writing made men vnderstand, That no man Bradamant to wife should get, But one that would attempt with sword in hand, From rising of the Sun, vntill it set, Her force in single combat to withstand; Which if that any could, there was no let, But she agrees, and Charles himselfe allows, That such a one should haue her for his spouse. 21 This Article was likewise there set downe, That they should name the weapon if they list, For why her vallew was of great renowne, To fight on horse, on foote, in field, in list, Duke Ammon now that to withstand the crowne, Wants force and will, no longer doth resist, But after long discourses with his daughter, Compeld in fine, backe to the Court he broughther
22 Her mother eke, though wroth and malcontent, Yet both for nature, and for honours sake, Good store of costly clothes incontinent, Both gownes and kirtles she for her doth make; Thus Bradamant with both her parents went, Vnto the Court, where she small ioy did take, She scarce esteemed it a Court to be, When that her louer there she could not see. 23 .As one that saw in Aprill or in May, A pleasant garden, full of fragrant flowres, Then when fresh earth new clad in garments gay, Deckes eu'ry wood and groue, with pleasant bowres And comes againe on some Decembers day, And sees it mard, with winters stormes and showres, So did this Court to Bradamant appeare, When as she saw Rogero was not heare. 24 She dares not aske of any man for feare, Least such a question might her loue accuse, How beit secretly she lendeth eare, To others talke, as in such case men vse: Each man saith gon he is, but none knowes wheare, For to the Court, of him there came no newes, And he himselfe, when as he thence departed, His purpose vnto no man there imparted. 25 Oh in what feare and rage these newes do set her, To heare Rogero was in manner fled, She thinks that sure, because he could not get her, And that her father nay, to him had sed, That now he sought of purpose to forget her, And shunne her sight, that all his sorrow bred; She thinks that he from thence himselfe withdrawes, For this alone, and for none other cause. 26 But more then all, this doubt her heart assayles, That he was gone to seeke some forren loue, And sith that of his purpose here he fayles, To speed some otherwhere he straight would proue Simile.As from a boord men driue out nayles with nayles, So with new loue he woud her loue remoue; But straight another thought that thought gainsaith, She thinketh her Rogero full of faith. 27 And there-vpon her selfe she reprehends, That she her louer should so much abuse, Thus in her minde, one fancie him defends, And then another, doth him sore accuse, And she her thought to either fancie lends, And in great doubt she is, which part to chuse; But when a while she had her selfe bethought, She leaneth most, vnto best pleasing thought. 28 Then chiefe, when in her mind she doth repeat Rogeros promise, which he bad her trust, She thinks to him the iniurie is great, That causlesly she now should him mistrust, And eu'n as he were present, she doth beat Her brest that still doth harbor thoughts vniust, My selfe hath sinn'd (she saith) which now I curse, But he that caused it is cause of worse. 29 Loue was the cause (quoth she) that in my hart, Your face and grace ingraued hath so seemely, And therewith hath set forth each vertuous part, Beseeming thee so sweetly and so trimly, That sure no dame, that knowes well what thou art, Can chuse but fall in loue with thee extreemly, And therewithall, with all her powre indeuer, To win thy loue, and make thee hers for euer. 30 Oh if that loue had grau'd thy thoughts so well, As it hath grau'd thy visage in my minde, In how great ioy, and blisse should I then dwell, For well I know, that they be true and kinde; Then iealousie, the onely plague of hell, (To which alas I am too much inclinde) Should quickly cease, and I should free me from it, Nor would I in my heart, once thinke vpon it. 31 But as a miser hoording vp his treasure,Simile Doth doubt in absence still, that theeues be there, So I when thou that art mine onely pleasure, Art absent far from me (I know not where) I straight suspect, and straight I doubt false measure, And straight my hope grows lesse, & more my feare Which though I thinke both bootlesse, and vniust, Yet still I doubt, and still I do mistrust. 32 But yet no sooner shall the pelasing light, Of thy sweet count'nance come vnto mine eyes, O thou my ioy, ô thou my lines delight, (Though where thou art I cannot now deuise) But that true hope, false feare shall put to flight, And knowledge plaine, all doubts shall satisfie, Come then my deare, and hasten thy returning, Ere hope & feare shal wast me quite with mourning 33 As when the night hath spred her mantle blacke,Simile. Faint harted folke, are wont to be affrayd, But when againe the day-light doth come backe. They seeme of better cheare, and well appayd: So I do faint, when as my deare I lacke, But in his presence I am vndismayd: Come then my deare Rogero, come vnto me, Before that hope and doubt do quite vndo me. 34 As in the night, each little fierie sparke,Simile. May plainly be discerned with our eyne, But when the day doth come we then shall marke, That all are dampt and do no longer shine, So kindels feare, in minde with doubt made darke, Vntill my Sunne in my Horizon shine Turne then my deare, and with thy light illume me, And driue away this care that doth consume me. 35 As when the Sun declines to South most low,Simile. The land doth Ieese the beautie that she had, And winter stormes breed raine, and ise, and snow, The pleasant birds all silent sit and sad: So when as thou from me farre of dost go, O shining Sunne, whose beames do make me glad, A thousand feares but all vniust and vaine, Make winter in my heart, to my great paine.
36 Shine then on me, O my cleare Sun, and bring Thy beames more nye, this snow and ise to thaw, Refresh these branches witherd in their spring, And do no more thy selfe so farre withdraw: As Philomena dolefully doth sing, When as her young ones all destroyd she saw, Or as the Turtle early mourns and late, When she hath lost her deare beloued mate. 37 So noble Bradamant still mournes and plaines, With feare Rogeeo had her loue reiected, And with salt teares her louely cheeks distaines, Yet secretly, for feare to be detected: Oh had she knowne that he was bound in chaines, And eu'rie houre a cruell death expected, What griefe of minde thinke you, would she then take, That was so grieu'd alreadie for his sake! 38 But loe, the heau'nly goodnes so ordaines, That Theodoras rage, and cruell spight, Against her prisner, whom she keeps in chaines, And means to kil with torture all she might, Reseruing him aliue for greater paines, Came to the eare of Caesars sonne one night, And put into his heart to saue and cherish, And not to suffer so great vallew perish. 39 The noble Leon that Rogero loues, (Not knowing tho that this Rogero was) Whom his rare vertue, and great vallew moues, Which he did thinke, all humane farre to passe, Deuising sundry wayes, this one he proues, And by the same, he brought the feate to passe, So that his cruell Ant could not espy him, Nor once complaine that she was wronged by him. 40 He speaketh in the secretst sort he can, Vnto the bloudy wretch that kept the kayes, And prayth him show him the condemned man, For why he must examaine him he sayes: A knight a valiant man that was his man, He takes with him fit for all bold assayes, The cruell layler, that no fraud suspected, In all points did as Leon him directed. 41 He leads him secretly vnto the den, Where good Rogero was in prison pent, Nor tooke he with him any of his men, But as their guide, the formost of them went: Who when they saw the time best serued, then No longer to defer th'occasion ment, But vnawares they at aduantage catch him, And with a sodaine stab they do dispatch him. 42 Then open they the trap doore out of hand, And downe they let the ladder that was by, And Leon with a lanterne in his hand, Of light conceald, went where the knight did ly, Fast bound vpon a grate with bitter band, Not in the water, but thereto so ny, The very dampe was such, that one might guesse, That ole would kill him, in a month or lesse. 43 With great compassion Leon him imbraced, And sayd, sir knight, the vertue you haue showne, With sured knots, my loue hath knit and laced To you, since first the same to me was knowne, So as my heart and thoughts are wholly placed, To seeke your fafetie, rather then mine owne, Ventring, your welfare and your loue to win, To leese my fires good will, and all my kin. 44 To tell you true, the Emp'rours sonne I am, Leon by name, as yet to you a stranger, To set you free, of purpose now I came, And put my person, and my state in danger That both my father greatly me may blame, And looke vpon me euermore with anger; The losse at Belgrade which you wrought him late, Makes him to beare to you so sharpe an hate. 45 These sugred words, and many more beside, Which were for me too tedious to repeat, He spake, and then his bands he all vntyde, And secretly he causd him moue his seat: Rogero in this wise to him replyde, Your curtesie is such, your gift so great, To giue me life, that you shall ay command it, When euer it shall please you demand it. 46 Thus Leon in this secret sort vnknowne, Rogero from the prison doth conuay, And sent him to a castle of his owne, Whereas he might secure in silence stay, Vntill this tumult all were ouerblowne, And till againe for him regaine he may, His armes and gallant horse, and famous blade, Kept by Vngardo, Lord of Nouengade. 47 The keeper slaine, the next ensuing morne, The prison gates, from off the hinges heaued, The chaines, and manicles, in peeces torne Each man might see, but none by whom perceaued All thought that Leon had him hatred borne, Wherefore of him, they no mistrust conceaued, The cause he had of hate, each man doth know, By name his late receaued ouerthrow. 48 At this great curtesie that Leon vsed, Rogero wonders much, and thinks it strange, And sore he was in minde and thought confused, And sodainly he feeles a wondrous change, His heart relented, and all hate refused, And turnde it all to loue, by sweet exchange, What earst malicious, cruell was, and hatefull, Is turned now to kinde, and milde, and gratefull. 49 So deepe into his head and heart it sinkes, That it possessed all his soule and sence, On this he studies when he wakes or winkes, How he may do to him some recompence: To spend eu'n all his future dayes (he thinkes) Sole in his seruice, and in his defence, Could not requite, no scarce the twentith part, Of so great curtsie, and so great desart.
50 In this meane while, the newes was come from France, Which Charles had notifide to many a nation, Of her that would be woo'd by sword and lance, In single fight (so said the proclamation:) Don Leon was quite out of countenance, To heare of this her strange determination, And as a man that well his owne strength knowes, Himselfe too weake for her he doth suppose. 51 And long debating how he might supply, His want of force and courage, by his wit, In fine he purposd with himselfe to try, This new made fréd, whose name he knows not yet, Although he well could witnesse with his eye, That for no braue exploit he was vnfit, He hopeth by his manhood and his aid, To conquer and to haue that hardie maid. 52 But two things he must do before he goes, One is the minde of this same vnknowne knight, Vnto this hardie enterprise dispose, The tother is to bring him to the fight So secretly, as none might it disclose, And all that while to keepe himselfe from fight; First then, in earnest sort he doth intreat Rogero take on him this hardie feat. 53 Much might the Greeke preuaile by eloquence, The which he vsd to leade him thereunto, But more preuayld the bond of recompence, So firme as no time euer could vndo, That though the motion bred him great offence, And seemd a thing vnpossible to do, With gladder looke then heart he doth reply, Deare sir, I nothing may to you deny. 54 Though he no sooner had this word pronounced, But that he felt such griefe did gripe his hart, As if damnation were to him denounced, Such pangs he had, such torture and such smart: But yet his promise giu'n he not renounced, Nor from the same once purposd to depart, For first a thousand deaths he ment to chuse, Then one request of Leons to refuse. 55 Dye sure he shall (he thinks) for if he leaue His loue, he knowes he cannot byde aliue, For either sorrow will of life him reaue, Or if that nature shall with sorrow striue, Of his owne hands he will his death receaue, And so his soule from hated harbor driue, Each other thing on earth, to him seems possible, But missing her, to liue he thinks impossible. 56 Then die he must, onely he doubts what kinde Of death, were for his state and fancie best, Once this conceit did come into his minde, To lay in fight his naked open brest: Might she him slay, he deemeth in his minde, That such a death, in death might make him blest, But then he sees what follow would of this, That noble Leon, should his purpose misse. 57 And then himselfe of promise eke should fayle, Which was not to dissemble, but indeuer That Leon in his wooing might preuayle, And make dame Bradamant his owne for euer: Thus though that diuers thoughts his minde assayle, Yet wholy in that thought he doth perseuer, That moueth him most plaine to deale and trew, And to all other thoughts he bids adew. 58 This while Don Leon with his fathers leaue, With such retinue as his state required, Of knights and squyres, his natiue soyle did leaue, And went to see the dame he so desired: Rogero did of him before receaue, His armes and horse, and in strange clothes attired, Day after day they so their iorney frame, That it the last to Paris walls they came. 59 Don Leon to the Citie would not go, But neare vnto the same he pitcht a tent, And by Ambassage made the king to know, How he was come, and vnto what intent: King Charles was glad, and did his gladnes show With gifts, and vnto him in person went: Don Leon tels what did his comming breed, And prayes he may dispatched be with speed. 60 And that King Charles that noble maid would cause, To come the day ensuing to the feeld, That would (against all common wedlocks lawes) Be wood and wonne, with onely sword and sheeld: King Charles her cals, and she that askt no pause, Vnto the motion willingly did yeeld, And so accordingly next day she came, Vnto the lists prepared for the same. 61 That day that went before the day of fight, Rogero passed with as great content, As doth a man condemned spend the night,Simile. The which before his execution went, He chusd to fight all clad in armour bright, Because as then to be vnknowne he ment, And (for to hurt her, was not his pretence) Saue sword, he vsd no weapon of offence. 62 Lance he would none, not that he feard the lance Which first Argalia, then Astolfo bare, Which forced men beside their seat to dance, And vnto many men procurde great care, For neither he that vsde it first in France, Nor any of those other, was aware, How all those fears were by inchantment donne,The same Lana d'oro, was some∣time king Gala∣frons, father of Angelica. Saue that same king, that gaue it to his sonne. 63 Likewise Astolfo and the Dordon dame, That with that speare full many did vnhorse, Thought not that it from Nigromancy came, But from their fleight, and their owne proper force, They thought with any speare to do the same: But now Rogero did both speare and horse Refuse, because if he had vsde his owne, He thought it would by Bradamant be knowne.
64 Needs must the damsell call to minde the steed, For why she kept him long at Clarimount, And vsed him with her owne hands to feed, And made of him a speciall deare account: Wherefore Rogero that tooke speciall heed, To go vnknowne refusd on horse to mount, Or any other thing by which he may, Vnto his dearest loue himselfe bewray. 65 He further needs another sword would take, For well he knew against his Ballisard, No steele, nor armor none, defence could make, Whose edge so keene, whose mettall was so hard, Of that new sword likewise he (for her sake) Rebates the edge, so great was his regard, And thus himselfe both weakning and disguising, He came into the field at Phebus rising. 66 And that each one for Leon might him note, Vntill the controuersie were discided, He wears vpon his backe Don Leons cote, The golden Eagle with the head deuided, (Their making both was like, from foot, to throte) Thus when all things were readily prouided, The tone presents him in the open greene, The tother kept him close, and was not seene. 67 But Bradamant now farre in other rate, Herselfe in readines for fight doth set, And if the knight do his swords edge rebate, As fast the damsell her swords edge doth whet: She wisheth with a heart most full of hate, Her sword a passage to the quicke would get, Yea comfort her it would and do her good, If she with eu'rie blow could draw the blood. 68 Eu'n as a Barbrye horse that runnes a race, And for the signe thereof hath long expected, Against his will, doth stay his running pace, With swelling nostrils and with eares erected: Eu'n so the noble damsell in like case, That of Rogeros presence naught suspected, Did swell with wrath, and burnes like flaming fier, Vnto the combat, such was her desier. 69 And as ofttimes vpon some fearfull clap Of thunder, straight a hurlewinde doth arise, And lifts the waues aloft, from Thetys lap, Eu'n in a moment vp vnto the skyes, The Herdman doubting of some great mishap, About some tree, or caue, close hidden lyes, So Bradamant with rage of anger driuen, Aslayld Rogero when the signe was giuen. 70 But neuer did a stiffe and aged oke, Against the Northerne blast more firmely stand, Nor better doth a rocke, indure the stroke, Of surging waues, still wallowing to the land, Then good Rogero, guarded in the cloke Of Hectors armes, her forces did withstand, Though she still layd on loade with spite and hate, Vpon his armes, his sides, his brest, and pate. 71 Sometimes she giues a blow, sometime a thrust, According as her vantage most she spide, And still she watcht, if she could hit him iust Betweene the plates, or where the same were tide; Twas well the core was such as one might trust, For she doth search it still on eu'rie side, And inwardly she fretteth in her minde, That nought fell out of that she had assignd. 72 So shall you see some men besiege a towne,Simile. Wel walld, and strongly flankt with rampiers mayne, Assault it oft, and striue to batter downe Some towres or gates, with perill great and payne, And wast their time, and spending many a crowne, To loose their men about the same in vayne, No more the damsels force did now preuayle, To pierce a plate, or to vnriuet nayle. 73 Sometime foorth of his helmet and his sheeld, She made the sparks of fire fly out in sight, Still smiting him with blowes not soft, nor seeld, Sometime at rear demaine, and oft downe right, As thicke as haylstones that vpon the feeld, Or on the tyled houses do alight: But still Rogero close lyes to his ward, And not to hurt her, still he hath regard. 74 Oft standing still, now turning, then retiring, He makes his foote accompanie his fist, With sword, with shield, with slip (cause so requiring) He wards the blowes, or shunnes them as him lift; And euer not to damage her desiring, When he might hit, of purpose still he mist, Yet in such wife, that she her selfe was ware, And all the rest, that he the same forbare. 75 But Bradamant when she her selfe bethought, What was containd in th'Emperors Edict, That whosoeu'r with her a whole day fought, Should haue her at the end of such conflict, With all her force endeuord still and sought, To gall her aduersarie and afflict; And now the more she troubled was in minde, To see the Sun to West so low declinde. 76 And as her hope still lesse and lesser grew, So her desire increast still more and more, Her louing aduersarie to subdew, That she had fought with all the day before: As laborers whose worke by taske was dew,Simile. That loyterd haue and now are sad therefore, When night drawes on bestur their lasie bones, Vntill their strength, and light fayle both at once. 77 Alas good Bradamant, if thou didst know, The man to whom thou wishest so much ill, That in this fight hath bene thy frendly foe, And winneth thee (perhaps against his will) Thou wouldest first haue kild thy selfe I trow, Then of his blood one little drop to spill, Thou that distst now so curse him and beshrow him Wouldst neither of them do, if thou didst know him
78 But Charles and all his Lords, with full perswasion That this so valiant champion, Leon was, To praise him highly now they take occasion; And sith his strength did hers so greatly passe, They thinke for her, there now was no cuasion, The matter brought to such a narrow passe, Each man esteems this match for her most fit, Each man allowes, each man commendeth it. 79 Now gan Don Phebus dip his golden rayes, (To swage their burning) in the Westerne seas, When Charls himselfe comes to them both & prays The damsell now her furie to appease, And giueth sentence, that without delayes, Don Leon may her marrie when he please: Rogero doth himselfe no whit diclose, But armed full backe to the tent he goes. 80 Don Leon, brotherly doth him imbrace, And then he holpe him to vntie his beauer, And with great kindnes kissed all his face, And said that he was bound to him for euer, And that no time, such merit could deface, Which to reward he would for aye indeuer, Affirming frankly of his owne meere motion, That all he had, should be at his deuotion. 81 I neuer can such curtesie requite, Scant in this life (he saith) or in the next, No though I should surrender all my right Vnto my crowne, and all thereto annext. Rogero, that in speech tooke small delight, And was with inward passion so perplext, Restord to him his armes, that he had worne, And tooke againe his sheeld of th'Vnicorne. 82 Pretending (as he truly might pretend) He wearie was, and would himselfe repose, And therefore to his tent vnto that end, All piuat vnaccompanyd he goes; At midnight horse to take he doth intend, At midnight priuily from bed he rose. And armd, and mounted thence away departed, But why nor whither, he to none imparted. 83 And thus away he secretly doth ride, And giues Frontino leaue to chuse the way, Now neare a wood, then by the riuer side, (He neuer looking to what coast it lay) He faine would die, and still come death he cride, He thought death onely could his paine allay, He onely wished death, to end his griefe, That while he liues, is sure past all reliefe. 84 Ah wretch (said he) of whom can I complaine, For sodain reauing me of all my blisse? Shall I so great an iniurie sustaine? Of whom else shall I be ueng'd for this? I did the fault, and now I feele the paine, Sentence.Nor can I say, but iust the torment is, For punishment doth properly belong, To him that is the author of the wrong. 85 But had I done my selfe the wrong alone, I might perhap forgiue my selfe the same, Though surely cause, nor reason there is none, To pardon such a fact, so worthie blame: But now I haue to her bene cause of mone, To suffer that, it were perpetuall shame; So though I should no iust reuengement take For mine owne cause, yetmust I for her sake, 86 This wrong reuenge I may, I will, I must, By onely death, sith this offence was such; To dye, I soone shall finde the way I trust, The care thereof, my minde no whit doth tuch: Oh that I had long since bene layd in dust, Ere that I iniured my deare so much, I would I had bene put to death before, When I was prisner vnto Theodore. 87 If I had then bene martyrd and tormented, With all the plagues her mallice could deuise, At least my deare, my death would haue lamented, With teares, from out her christ all streaming eyes: Now when she knows, that I haue thus consented To Leon, to betray her in this wise, My part of her, vnto a stranger giuing She will haue cause to hate me dead and liuing. 88 Now while the knight did thus lament and plaine, The Easter parts of heau'n, with light were cleared, And Phebus from his golden house againe, Lift vp his head, wherewith all creatures cheared, Betake them to their ordinarie paine: And then vnto Rogero it appeared, That he was in a wood, a most fit place, For one of such a minde, in such a case. 89 He lights, and off he takes Frontinos sadle, And giues him libertie, and thus he sayes, My gallant beast so good, so seruiceable, As I haue found thee still at all assayes, Go, heare I set thee free, and were I able, As I am willing, to set forth thy prayse,Pegasus, lockes the Table. Thou doubtlesse shouldst not need that horse enuie, That was tane vp from earth vnto the skye. 90 Nor should Arions prayses make thee sory, Nor Cillarus that Castor did bestryde, Nor any praisd in Greeke, or Latin story, For why (thy shape and readines beside) Of all these famous steeds not one can glorie, As thou maist do, it cannot be denide, Of them none passeth thee in commendation, Nor iustly challenge can such reputation. 91 Thou hast bene cherished and loued deere, By such a Nymph, so faire and so diuine, As all the world can hardly show her peere, She hath thee fed, with that fayre hand and fine, I meane my loue, but ah why liue I heere, Sith now I may no longer call her mine? No longer mine she is, ah cruell word, Why end not I my dayes by mine owne sword?
92 Now if Rogero thus himselfe tormented, And cauld the birds and beasts, to mone his plaint, For none but birds and beasts, the place frequented, Whom he with his great sorrow might acquaint; No doubt the damsell was as ill contented, And made a greater, or as great complaint, Sith for her selfe she nothing hath to say, Why she to Leon longer should say nay. 93 Yet all meanes possible she meanes to trye, Before that she will her Rogero leaue, And make king Charles and all his Lords to lye, And Leon of his promise to deceaue: Or if the worst shall hap, she meanes to dye, And with her hands of life her selfe bereaue, For present death she rather ment to chuse, Then her belou'd Rogero to refuse. 94 How commeth it to passe (said she) my deare, That at this time thou art so farre from hence? How can a thing which all the world did heare, So strangely be concealed from thy sence? If thou hadst heard it, sure thou wouldst appeare; For that my drift, that was my sole pretence, Ah my ill fortune euermore accurst, What can I deeme, but eu'n the very worst. 95 Why then Rogero mine, can you alone, Not know that all the world doth know beside, For had you known it straight you woulst haue flown Of purpose hither combat to haue tride; Thou sure art tane, or slaine, for third is none: It may be, Leon that thy praise enuide, Hath like a traytor, set for thee a trap, And thou art tane therein by some mishap. 96 I gat this grace of Charles to marry none, But one that were in fight for me too hard, A slured thou shouldst be that onely one, For no mans force but thine I did regard; I thought none else could vanquish me alone, But loe how God doth this my pride reward, That he that neuer erst in all his life Did manly deed, hath wonne me for his wife. 97 If I be wonne and vanquished, because He matched still my force at all assayes, But Charles doth not iudge rightly of the cause, And therefore I must seeke some new delayes; Ah if I now put in some caffling clause, I shall be cald vnconstant all my dayes, But ficklenes in maids is seldome wonderd, Nor am I first that vide it, by an hunderd. 98 Suffiseth me that in the being trew Vnto my loue, I others all excell, And passe the patterns either old or new, Or neare or far, eu'n wherefon't they dwell: Then will I bid that constancie adew, That may be hindrance to my doing well, So I and Leon may not match together, Let me be deemd as wau'ring as the wether. 99 This Bradamant vnto her selfe doth say, And olt she breaks her speech with sighs and tears, And that night that ensu'd that lucklesse day, To sleepe or close her eye lids she for beares, But when Apollos beames had driu'n away Nocturnus shades,Noctur far∣n to be the god of the night.then lo supernall spheares, By which all humane actions are directed, Brought helpe to her, when least it was expected. 100 For why Marfisa, that braue minded dame, The next day came and sowd new seeds of strife, Alledging that it was great wrong and shame, A forrener should haue her brothers wife; And swears her selfe could not endure the same, And that she would by combat gage her life, According as the law of armes allows, To proue Rogero was her lawfull spouse. 101 And if dame Bradamant would it deny, She faith, she will it to her face auer, As hauing witnes bene with eare, and eye, That good Rogero was aslur'd to her With words, as folkes in mariages apply; And adding she would vnto law refer, If so the damsell to her noble brother Affianced, might iustly take another. 102 Now whether this she spake were false or trew, I know not, but she spake it with intent, To stop the mariage likely to ensew With Leon, which she studi'd to preuent: Some thought perhaps that Bradamant it knew, And that twas done in part by her consent, As hauing no more safe nor honest way, Vnto her left, to lay Don Leon nay. 103 In euill part these newes the Emp'ror tooke, And called for the damsell by and by, And told her what Marfisa vndertooke, (And loe by hap, Duke Ammon then stood by) She fixed on the ground her silent looke, And to the question, said nor no nor I, That by her gesture, eu'rie one did take, That that was true, that earst Marfisa spake. 104 This made Orlando and Renaldo glad, In hope that this might proue a lawfull meane, To make the match which they forepromist had, And hinder this new match, and dash it cleane: For sith Duke Ammon those first banes for bad, And vnto Leons side did wholy leane, To vse pretence of law, they both had rather, Then take by force, the damsell from her father. 105 For if that this pretence may stand for good, The necke of Leons match it then would breake, And moue no cause of warre, or shedding blood: But Ammon in great wrath, thus wise doth speake; This is a tale indeed of Robinhood, Which to beleeue, might show my wits but weake, But thinke not that I will be so belotted, Though this were true, that you haue vainly plotted.
106 For presuppose, which yet I not confesse, My daughter was by folly so alluted, And that they are, which none of wit could guesse, Each vnto other, man and wife assured: I pray you yet, the time more plaine expresse, When this was done, how long it hath indured, This (sure I am) tis but a tale deuised, Except it were before he was baptised. 107 And if twere done before his Christen state, To stand vnto the same I am not tyde, Wherefore this caueat is put in too late, Her owne desire she hath not had denyde: Now tis not fit, a Prince of such estate, As for her sake, aduenterd to haue dyde, Should your Emp'rours promise be deluded, And by such craft, be from his right excluded. 108 You should haue spoken then of this contract, Before our king had sent his proclamation, I meane not thus to haue my credit crackt, For more then so, I weigh my reputation: Thus pleaded he against that precontract, The which to breake was his determination, To either part his eare the Emperor lends, Yet partially, to neither side he bends. 109 Simile. Outd. Qusha succin∣cts vbi truxin∣sibilat Eurus. Murmura pia∣tu , vequa∣lia lutus  queac si quu procul au∣dat illos A wonder lasts nine ays.Looke what a murmure winds do make in woods, When Zephyrus mild blasts among them are, Or when one heats from far the saltish floods, When Eolus and Neptune are at square: So did the common people in their moods, Talke of these matters, and the same compare, And as the manner is (for nine dayes space) This was the newes and talke in eu'rie place. 110 This man Rogero, Leon that defends, According to the fancies of the men, But yet it seemd Rogero had most frends, Scarse had the stranger one, for tothers ten, But as I said, the king to no side bends, And hauing duly weighd the matter then, He points the mariage day to be deferred, The case vnto his Parliament referred. 111 Next day Marfisa made another offer, Sith that none could, during her brothers life, Wed Bradamant, and be assured of her, Her brother should (for ending of the strife) To Leon hand to hand, the combat proffer, So she might be the last suruiuers wife; And he that tother could in battell kill, Enioy her might alone at his owne will. 112 Charles vnto Leon doth impart these newes, As he before the other did impart, That offer Leon ment not to refuse, But saith he take it would, with all his hart, He minds againe the matter so to vse, The knight of th'Vnicorne should play his part, He little knew that in great care and anguish, The noble knight did now consume and languish. 113 But missing him, he quickly did repent, That he accepted had that stout defiance, And therefore straight to seeke the knight he sent, In whose tryde force he put his whole affiance; Him to Rogero to oppose he ment, And all his frends and all his strong alliance: Wherefore to shun both danger great and scorne, He sent to seeke the knight of th'Vnicorne. 114 To all the Cities, and the the townes he sends, And all the villages were there about, And mounting on his horse himselfe intends To go in person and to seeke him out, But neither he nor all Regeros frends, In France, had euer light on him I doubt, Had not Melissa holpe him at his need, As in the booke insuing, you may reed. Morall.This booke began with an excellent Moral, of the vnstablenesse and varietie of Fortune, which as it is plainly set downe and notably proued by examples, so if a man will rightly apply it to his owne state, I know not whether any thing in this whole worke hath bene, yea or can be said to better purpose, not onely for humanitie, but in some sort for diuinitie. For in matters of the world who knoweth not, that the wisest counsell a man can giue, and the wisest course a man can take is this, Vtnecoppressus sis aduersis rebus necelatus secundis, neither to be abasht with aduersitie, nor puffed vp with prosperitie: and in diuinitie (as the most learned diuines haue written) the two onely rocks at which our vessells make shipwrade, the Silla and Caribdis that drown so many thousand Christians in this their worldly passage, are these two extreames, of presumption and dispaire: betweene which two, he that can keepe his course euen, it is vnpossible be should miscarrie, but by wonderfull, and euen most wilfull negligence. In the great curtesie vsed by Leon toward Rogero, and afterward by Rogero toward him, as is shewed both in this booke and the next, we may note first the wonderfull effects of vertue, that breeds loue, not in strangers onely, but euen in enemies: secondly we may see that a man of a true noble nature, thinks himselfe more bound to requite a benefit, then to reuenge an iniurie. For to fayle in reuenge often proceedeth of vertue, but to be vnthankfull, is a most hatefull thing euen in the greatest, and can neuer proceed but from a most vile nature. In Charles may be noted the iust and moderate proceeding of a wife and discreet Prince, who when the controuersie about Bradamant began to grow so intricate, that it was hard to discouer where the right was, in the hearing of the matter, he shewd no maner of partialitie, and in the end referred  the determining of the free Court of Parliament, thereby shewing, that he presumed not too farre of his owne wit, and that he meant to haue the matter heard openly and indifferently; and yet he did wisely remoue from himselfe, the enuie and grudge that might grow to him by giuing a definit sentence in a cause so ambiguous, which a wise Prince will eschue as much as may be, specially when the mat∣ter shall concerne great personages.
Polycrates,Historie.was king of Samos, a man so exceeding fortunate, that he tooke no exploit in hand were it neuer so dif∣ficult, but be brought it to the end he desired, so as being willing (as it seemed) to moderat this great enuie of his fortune, with a voluntarie mishap, he threw one day into the sea a iewell of exceeding great value, with purpose to leese it, and thereby to frame to himselfe a cause of sorrow: but his good fortune would not suffer it, for a Fisherman, not long after bringing him a faire fish for a present, this iewell was found in the bellie of that fish, and so most strangely recouered. Yet behold, this fortunate Polycrates going with an armie against Darius, was taken prisoner by one Orontes one of Darius Captains, and after hanged vpon the top of a high mountaine: doubtlesse a notable example for such as make for∣tune their Goddesse (if any such there be) who haue indeed, no reason to thinke they are aduanced by fortune, but euen the guiltinesse of their owne base and vicious minds, worthy of no part of Polycrates aduancement, but euen his last. Dionysius a tyrant of Sicilie (and sonne of that tyrant that spoiled the Churches, and tooke away a cloke of gold from Iupiter, saying, a cloth cloke was lighter for summer, and warmer for winter: and tooke away Aesculapius golden beard, saying, it was a sawcie part for him to haue a long beard, and his father Apollo to hae none.) This Dionysius (that we may see how well the children of them prosper, that scorne the false gods and beleeue not in the true) continued his fa∣thers tyrannie in Syracusa, and was by them inforced to flye the Realme; so as being a runnegate hauing no meanes to liue, he went to Corinth, and liued there a priuate and meane life: as in the life of Tymoleon in Plutarke is set downe at large, and is verie well worth the reading, for the many prettie sayings and pleasant scoffings that were giuen him, and some returned by him againe: as that, of one that in derision comming into the roome where Dionysius sat (in a blinde tauerne, or alehouse) shooke his gowne, (so they vsed to do, that came to the presence of tyrants, to show they had no wea∣pons about them) tush saith Dionysius, this was needlesse at your comming in, but at your going out it would not be a∣misse, to see if you steale nothing with you. Yet this vertue Dionysius had, (if a tyrant can haue any vertue) that he bare his aduersitie not onely patiently, but euen pleasantly, which is surely praiseworthy, according to that I spake be∣fore in the Morall, not to be abashed with euill fortune, which also Dionysius himselfe confessed he had gotten by Philo∣sophy: and sure it is a point of good courage to be able to beare aduersitie, according to that saying: Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest. Of Marius I need not speake much, considering how largely his whole life is set downe in the forenamed Plutarkes liues, onely I will adde a word of Valerius Maximus opinion of his fortune. Nothing in the world (saith he) could be more variable then the state of Marius: For if you will place him among the vnfortunate, you shall find him most mise∣rable, if among the happie, you shall finde him most fortunate. Two examples are alledged by mine author of this age. Lewes the 12. of France, and Mathia Coruino of Hungary. Of these two a word: Charles the 8. king of France conceiuing some displeasure against the Duke of Orleans, father to to this Lewes, cut off his head, and was in some doubt and mammering if he should not do as much to his sonne, yet after many hard aduentures, it was his hap at last to be king of France. Mathia Coruino was kept in close prison by Vladislaus king of Hungarie, because his elder brother had slaine the Earle of Cyglia, vnckle to the said king, but the king dying young and without issue, this Mathia was made of a priso∣ner, a Prince: but of this kind of sodaine change, our Realme hath one example, that passeth not onely these, but all (I thinke) that haue bene heard of, or written: and that is the Queenes most excellent Maiestie that now is, who from the expectation of a most vndeserued death, came to the possession of a most renowned kingdome: for what greater extremity could one come from? or what greater felicitie might one come to? She that was sent for from Asbridge, with comman∣dement to be brought either aliue or dead, she that was committed to the Towre of London, she that was so often and so straightly examined: she that demanded if the Lady Ianes scaffold were taken downe, doubting to play on the same such another Pageant; she that doubted murdering if her keeper had bene an ill disposed man, she that sent word to her seruants that came to know how she did (tanquam ouis:) lastly, she that wrate in the window at Woodstocke with a Diamond: Much suspected by me, quoth Elizabeth prisoner: Nothing proued can be, quoth Elizabeth prisoner: Became of the sodaine a crowned Queene, with greater applause, then either Lewes in France, or Coruino in Hunga∣rie, and not onely hath raigned, but doth raigne most happily. All which her highnesse troubles, my selfe haue the bet∣ter cause to remember, because the first worke I did after I could write Latin, was to translate that storie out of the booke of Martyrs into Latin,This little booke was given to her Maiestie.as M. Thomas Arundell and Sir Edward Hobby can tell, who had their parts in the same taske, being then schollers in Eaton as I was, and nmaely that last verse I remember was translated thus: Plurimi de me malè suspicantur, Attamen de me mala non probantur. Elizabetha carcere clausa. And thus much for example of the change of fortunes. In Bradamants fight against Rogero,Allegorie.we may see how our opinion blinded with a false supposition, striveth often∣times most vehemently against that it would be loth to ouerthrow, if it were rightly informed. The cruell minde of the Theodora, alludes to the cruelty of another Theodora,Allusion.wife to Iustinianus, who exercised all those cruelties (that this intended against Rogero) vpon Pope Vigilius. Here and the notes of the xlv. booke.
THE XLVI. BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Leon by search, doth good Rogero finde, And hauing learnd the cause of his annoy, He grants to him his loue in manner kinde, Whom now Rogero, sweetly doth enioy: Onely the Sarzan king with hatefull minde, Comes to disturbe Rogeros ease and toy, Nathelesse he is decciu'd of his account, In fine, Rogero kills fierce Rodomount. 1 NOw if my compasse, and my card be trew; I am not fatre from that desired cost, Where I shal pay my vow, and promise dew, Vnto my Saint, of whose great grace I bost. I looked earst with pale, and chearlesse hew, For feare in this wide Ocean to be lost, But now me thinke I see, I now see surely The hau'n, in which I harbor shall securely. 2 Harke, harke, what peals of Ord'nance great and Guns, Are shot in token of congratulation, Harke how they sound the Trumpets, & the Drums, To gratulate my happie nauigation: See how on either shore the people runs, To see me after my long per'grination, Behold a crew of peerlesse knights, and dames, Now I discerne them, now I know their names. 3 But least my ship should perish in the port, As oft it doth befall for want of heed, I will go forward in my first report, And tell to you how well the prince did speed That sought Rogero, who in wofull fort, Did pine and languished, and wisht indeed, Sith that dame Bradamant he might not marry, To dye all comfortlesse, and solitary. 4 But sage Melyssa that had euer sought, To make that match (as often hath bene fed.) And euermore did take great care, and thought, That good Rogero Bradamant might wed, By her great skill in Magicko art so wrought, She had continuall notice how they sped; Two sprites she did imploy for that intent, And still as one came home, another went. 5 By them, she quickly had intelligence, How he had tane so inward griefe and great, He taryd in a wood with firme pretence, To pine himselfe away, with want of meat: Melyssa parteth presently from thence, And with some secret words she did repeat, In likenesse of a horse a sprite she tooke, And to met Leon, that for him did looke. 6 And thus she said to him, sir, if you be So gracious, as your semblance makes me weene, If your good minde with your good lookes agree, If so you haue not lost all pittie cleene, Come then, o'come and helpe and ioyne with me, To ayd the brauest knight, that ere was seene, Who for one curteous part that he hath done, (Except you helpe) is like to bevndone. 7 The noblest, stourest, and the prowest knight, That euer carryd shield, or blade forth drew, The seemlyest, and most worthy minded wight, That euer was in age, or old, or new, Is like to perish in most wofull plight, Except he may relieued be by you; Come quickly then, vnto his aide perdye, And suffer not so braue a man to dye.
8 Don Leon straight supposed in his minde, That this same knight, of whom the stranger spake, Was he whom long he sought and could not finde, And be for whom such care himselfe did take: Melissa leads the way, he close behind Doth follow her, and so good shift they make, That in some twaine, at most in three houres ryding They came there where Rogero was abyding. 9 Now being at the place to which they hafted, They both alighted there, with minde to stay. There saw they how he pinde away and wasted, For in two dayes before, nor all that day, No liquor he had drunke, nor meat had tasted, But in his armor on the ground he lay, And made a pillow of that noble sheeld, With th'Vnicorne vpon vermillion feeld. 10 Here as I said, he lay along and mused On his owne miserie, and on that wrong, With which he had his loue so much abused, And bites for griefe, his hands, and lips, and tong; And his conceits, and wits were so confused, To set his thoughts vpon one thing so long, And hauing on his griefe so firmely fixt them, He saw not them, although he were betwixt them. 11 Don Leon harkned to his lamentation, And heard him often call himselfe vnkind, And saw him vexe himselfe in such a fashion, As vnto pittie great his heart inclind: He finds that loue bred all this molestation, But yet whose loue it was he did not find, He heard how sundry times himselfe he blamed, But all that while his loue he neuer named. 12 And therefore pitying much his wofull case, Although awhile he silent stood and mute, Yet after stood before him face to face, And with great louingnesse doth him salute, And with affection great doth him imbrace, Intreating him, and making speciall sute, That he would tell him plaine, and make him know, What cause had bred him so great griefe and woe. 13 Rogero loth to liue, resolu'd to dye, Prayes Leon now to trouble him no more, But he most sweetly doth to him reply, Sentence.That God hath made a salue for eu'uie sore, If men would learne the same how to apply, Sentence.And that no one thing may auayle man more, To cure a griefe, and perfectly to heale it, Then if he do vnto some frend reucale it. 14 And sure (said he) I take it in ill part, Because you trust not me, that am your frend, Not onely, since with your late frendly part, You bound me vnto you, to my liues end, But was eu'n then, when you with hatefull hart, At Belgrade siege did me and mine offend, Thinke not but I will still procure your good. Both with my lands, my frends, and with my blood. 15 Why should it grieue you to declare your griefe, To one that may perhaps your losse repayre: Bad haps are holpe with hope, and good beliefe,Sentence. Wherefore a wise man neuer will dispayre: I hope my selfe shall bring you some reliefe, By force, by policie, or else by prayre, When all meanes haue bene tryde, and all hope past Then dye, at least keepe that vnto the last. 16 These words so earnestly Don Leon spake, And with such efficacie him he praid, Beleeching him, his frendly counsell take, That tother now, with kindnesse ouerlaid, Was forst an answer vnto him to make; But in his answer, sodainly he staid, And slammerd twise, ere he could bring it out, Dispaire still mouing him to causlesse doubt. 17 Good sir (he said) when I my name shall show, As I do meane, and that eu'n by and by, You will be then full well content I trow, To grant me leaue and libertie to dye: I am Rogero (if you needs will know) That went from France (and if I shall not lye) Mine arrant was, your fire and you to kill, And would haue done it, had I had my will. 18 And all because indeeed I then supposed, Your onely life, did let me of my loue, Man purposes, but all things are disposed,Sentence, By that great God, that fits and rules aboue: Behold it hapst I was in prison closed, And there I did your noble courtsie proue, For there you did me such a great good turne, As all my haued into loue did turne. 19 And hauing bound me with so great desart, And ignorant, that I Rogero was, You did your secrets vnto me impart, And praid me win for you, that warlike lasse, Which was all one, as to haue askt my hart; Yet loe for you, I brought the same to passe, Now take her to your selfe, and much good do you, More good then to my selfe, I with vnto you. 20 But yet withall forbid me not to dye, As now I trust I shall, ere many houres, For liue as well without a soule can I, As without her, that holds my vitall powres: And sure tis best for your, behoofe, for why While I do liue, she is not lawfull yours, For we two are betrotht, and law allowes, One woman, but of one to be the spouse. 21 Don Leon with these newes was so accrazed, He seemed in a traunce, he knew not how, And on Rogero stedfastly he gazed, Not euer mouing lip, nor hand, nor brow, But like an Image long he stood amazed, That some hath hallowd to performe his vow, This act of his, so curteous he doth weene, He thinks the like before had neuer beene.
22 So that he did not (when he knew his name) Repent him of the good he had him done, But rather greatly did increase the same, Proceeding in the course he had begunne: Wherefore to shew from how great stocke he came And that he was indeed an Emperiors sonne: Although in other things he was inferior, In courtesie, he meanes to be superior. 23 And thus (he said) my deare Rogero know, If I as well had knowne your person, when As by your meanes I had an ouerthrow, And that you foyled me and all my men: Yet that great vertue that you there did show, Should eu'n in manner like haue mou'd me then; And so I would all malice haue remoued, And so I would your vertue great haue loued. 24 That once I did dislike Rogeros name, Before I knew you, I must needs confesse, But that I now continue should the same, Assure your selfe I purpose nothing lesse: And if when first I to the prison came, To set you free from danger and distresse, I knowne had all the truth, yet then I vow, I would haue done the same I will do now. 25 And surely, if I would haue done it then, When I had reason to haue borne you hate, Much rather now I ought to do it, when Not doing it I should be most vngrate, And most vnthankfull of all other men; Sith you your loue, your life, and whole estate, Haue freely giuen for me, but as you gaue it, Of me againe, so freely you shall haue it. 26 More due to you then me, the Damzell is, Whom though I much esteeme of due desart, Yet not so much, that if I her do misse, Straightwayes the griefe thereof should kil my hart: Nor shall your death auantage me in this, Sith you in her alreadie claime such part, That lawfully while you abide in life, She can by no meanes be anothers wise. 27 As for my part, first I will quite forsake Both her, and all my worldly ioyes beside, Then it shall once be said, that for may sake, A noble knight of so great worth had dide: This onely thing I could vnkindly take, That you that had before my kindnes tride, Would rather chuse to end your daies with griefe, Then at my hands haue comfort and reliese. 28 These words Don Leon spake, and many more, Which now would be too tedious to recite, Refuting good Rogero euermore, That in conclusion, being vanquisht quite: He said, I yeeld, and ile resist no more, I will not die; but when shall I requite Your courtesie, that twise to me haue giuen My life, when I to greatest woe was driuen? 29 Now had Melissa caused to be brought, Both cordiall meates, and wines of her puruaying, And made him take ye same, who now with thought, And tasting long, was eu'n almost decaying: His horse likewise (as nature hath them taught) Came where he heard the other horses naying: Don Leon cauld his lackies him to get, And then his saddle on his backe to let. 30 And so Rogero with Don Leons aid, With much adoe, did clammer to his feat, So greatly was his former strength decaid, With which he ouerthrew an army great: And lately did withstand that warlike maid, So weakly weapond, as I did repeat: And thus with all conuenient speed they might, They brought him to an Abbey that same night. 31 Where all the night, and three dayes that ensewd, They staid, and had of needfull things good store, Vntill Rogero had his strength renewd, Which had with fasting long, bene weakned sore: Then priuily among them they conclude, To turne to Paris, where the night before, A few Bulgarians, came with an embassage, And this was all the substance of their message. 32 They said how that the people of their Nation, To whom Rogero late such aid did bring, Beyond all hope, beyond all expectation, Had therefore chosen him to be their king: Reiecting all their owne kings generation, And all his royall race (no vsuall thing) So much they loued him, so well they leeke him, And therefore sent to Charles his court to seeke him. 33 Rogeros lackey that had bene their guide, Told cake his masters frends how he had sped, As namely how the Greekes he damnifide, And how the Bulgars hauing lost their hed, Chose him for king, how he alone did ride, To Nouengrade, where he was rane in bed, And vnto Theodora was presented, Who purposed to haue him sore tormented. 34 And how, he heard it commonly was spoken, That he his cruell keeper closely slew, And that the Prison gates were rent and broken, And he was gone, but whither no man knew: Now while Rogeros man such things did open, Rogero closely out of all mens vew, Did come to towne, and there that night did stay, And he and Leon, came to Charles next day. 35 Don Leon arme in arme Rogero led, (Thus it was then deuised them betweene) With that selfe cote, and armes apparelled, That were of late by all the people seene, Then when dame Bradamant had combated With Leon, (as they falsely then did weene) That batterd sword, that cote, that plume all torne, That headpeece now, was by Rogero worne.
36 By which each man eu'n at first fight surmised, This was that knight that had the Ladie wonne, Don Leon selfe bare faced, vndisguised, Came richly clothed, like an Emp'rors sonne, And with retinue not to be dispised: And when he had to Charles due reu'rence donne, Rogero by the hand he then did take, On whom all eyes were fixt, and thus he spake. 37 This is that stout and well approued knight, That did with Bradamant fight hand to hand, Whom sith she neuer tooke nor put to flight, But that he did twelue houres her force withstand, (Most worthy sir) to haue her ought of right, If your edict we rightly vnderstand: And therefore now accordingly he commeth, To lay his claime to her, as best becommeth. 38 Besides his right by proclamation knowne, That iustly doth all others claime debarre, I thinke the vallew that he now hath showne, Proues his sufficiencie in feates of warre: If loue may win her, she is sure his owne, His loue to her doth passe all others farre; And here he stands prepared to auer, By law or force, that he hath right to her. 39 King Charles and all his court did greatly muse At this, for why till then they little thought, That he before did them so much abuse, But that himselfe had that same combat fought: This while Marfisa, that with flying newes Of this same strange report was thither brought, Scant him to end his speech she would permit, But presently this wife she answerd it 40 Sith now Rogero absent is from hence, That might his right against this knight defend, And proue that this is but a vaine pretence, Because the strife shal not so easely end: I that his sister am, in his defense, And in defence of this same cause intend, To fight with whomsoeuer in this place, As shall deny his title or disgrace. 41 And these last words she spake with such desdaine, That some that knew her nature (hastie euer) Did feare she scantly would eu'n then refraine, But without leaue to kill him straight endeuer: Now Leon thinks it best no longer faine; And forthwith pulling of Rogero beauer, Loe here himselfe now readie prest (he said) To answer all shall to his charge be laid. 42 Smile looke in the historie.As old Aegeus at his cursed boord Amazed sat, to finde his spouses wile, When to his sonne she poyson did affoord, And if he lingred had a little while, And had not knowne the handle of his sword, Had kild his sonne, he gate by Pitheus guile: So stood Marfisa mazed in the place, When as she saw and knew Rogeros face. 43 And straight she runnes, and on his necke doth fall, And long it was ere from him she could part, Renald', Orlando, Charles, afore them all Embraced him, and welcomd from their hart: Good Dudon, Oliver, with ioy not small, And old Sobrino, health to him impart, Eake all the other Lords and knights, and Squyres, To bid him welcome shew most prompt desires. 44 Don Leon that in speech was eloquent, When eu'rie one had done his gratulation, Begins to tell to Charles incontinent, And all the rest, Rogeros commendation: And how he to the Bulgars succour lent, (To no small damage of the Greekish nation) And shewd such noble courage and such force, As him to loue Rogero did enforce. 45 So as when he was after tane and brought, To her that vowd with torment him to slay, Himselfe in spite of her, and all that sought To hurt Rogero, brought him safe away: For which kind part of his, Rogero thought Himselfe so bound to him, that he last day, Did him that courtesie that sure doth passe, The greatest courtesie that euer was. 46 He further doth from point to point declare, What for his sake, Rogero had atchieued, But after this, with anguish great and care, The losse of his belou'd so sore him grieued As he to pine away did straight prepare, Had not his sorrow bene in time releiued: All which so rufully Don Leon sed, Scarse was an eye, but teares with blindnes shed. 47 Then spake he to that obstinate old man, I meane Duke Ammon, that faire Ladies fire, And with all skill, and Rhetoricke he can, He wooes his loue, and pacifies his ire: That by intreatie at the last he wan, Himselfe to go in person, and desire Rogeros pardon; praying him in th' end, To take him for his father-in law and frend. 48 This while to Bradamant the ioyfull tiding Was quickly brought, by more then one report, Who in her chamber all her sorrow hyding, Eschewd all solace, shunning all resort: Whereby the blood about the hart abiding, Was drawne now thence in such a sodaine sort, And this vnlookt for ioy so ouerfild her, That eu'n the suddennes had almost kild her. 49 Quite speechlesse, liuelesse sinking to the ground, (So strange a quame her tender heart did feele) And she in whom such force was lately found, For want of strength did here and thither reele; But neu'r did thiefe with hands togither bound,Smile. Condemned to the rope, the axe, or wheele, And blindfold, looking eu'rie houre to die, Ioy more to heare some man a pardon crie.
50 The houses of Mongrane, and Montalbane, Reioyce at these their branches newly knit, But by Maganza comfort small is tane, For in their hearts they sorrie were for it: Anselmus, Falcon, Gynamus, and Gane, Dissembling yet their thoughts with craftie wit But for a time of vengeance they do watch, As doth the Fox, the hurtlesse hare to catch. 51 Beside old quarrels and their ancient hate, New matters done of late did them displease, Although the king, and wife men of the state, For common quiet, did the same appease: The death of Pynabello slaine but late, And Bertolage, did much their mindes disease: Yet now in shew they do dissemble deepe, And close in minde they do their malice keepe, 52 In this meane time, th'Ambassadors that came, To Charles his court, by those Bulgarian sent, Reioycing now that thing so well did frame, In humble manner to Rogero went: And did salute him king, as in the name Of all their countrimen incontinent, And so accordingly did lowly greete, Their new made Prince, and kneeled at his feete. 53 They told him how their Scepter and their Crowne, Was safely kept, alone for his behoofe, In Adrianopolis their chiefest towne: And for they knew by many a former proofe, That Constantito straue to keepe them downe, They pray him not to stay so farre allofe; Affirming boldly that if he were there, The forces of all Greece they would not feare. 54 Rogero granteth them their iust request, And promist to defend them from the Greekes, And vowes if God permit, to do his best, To be with them within some thirteene weekes: But Leon bids them set their heart at rest, He tels them that their choise so well he leekes, He on his Princely word will vndertake, Twixt Constantino and them, firme peace to make. 55 Thus each thing framed now in so good sort, As could be wisht by thought, or by deuise, But neither did Rogeros good report, Get fauour with ambitious Beatrice, Nor personage that past the common sort, Nor feats of armes, in which he wan the prise; And of the which, all Europe now did ring, But onely this, to see him made a king. 56 In royall sort this marriage they prepare, (Whose charge it was, the state wil make it knowne) Charles bare the charge, and tooke thereof such care As if she were a daughter of his owne: Of her and hers, so great the merits are, And had to him so many wayes bene showne; He thought the cost had not exceeded measure, If he had spent vpon them halfe his treasure. 57 He kept an open court by proclamation, Where nine dayes space, who list may freely baunt, Men of their owne, and men of forren Nation, To all of them he did safe conduct graunt: And all that stood vpon their reputation, That sought their soes in single fight to daunt, Had license franke, to challenge whom they lists, For euermore prepared were the lists. 58 In open fields they pitched tents great store, Beside with Oken boughes they made such bowres, Strawing the pauements of them euermore, With fragrant Roses and sweet smelling flowers; That neuer bad the like bene seene before, Nor neuer since, from that same age to ours; Besides the furnitures of silke and gold, Was more then can conueniently be told. 59 Th' innumerable people of each sort, From Greece, from England, Italy and Spaine, Th'Ambassadors that thither did resort, Beside each seuerall Prince, a seuerall traine, Did cause the citie walls to seeme too short, To lodge them all, so they in fine were faine, In houels, boothes, in tents, and in pauillions, To lodge some thousands, if I say not millions. 60 Onely Melissas care was to foresee, The marriage chamber should be well attyred, Which by her skill she ment should furnisht be; For long to make the match she had aspired: Which now that she accomplished did see, She thought she had the thing she most desired: For by her skill in Magicke, She did know, What passing fruit, forth of that branch should grow 61 Wherefore she place the fruitfull wedding bed,This section of pauillion is to take occasion to praise . Amid a faire and large pauillion, which Was eu'n the sumptuolest, that ere was spred, Of silke, and beaten gold wrought eu'rie stitch: And more; from ouer Constantinos hed, At Thracyan shore, where he his tents did pitch Fast by the sea, for his more recreation, She tooke the same to his great admiration. 62 Were it that Leon gaue consent thereto, Or that she did the same, her skill to vaunt, To shew what one by Magicke art can do, That haue the skill the fends of hell to daunt: (For what cannot their powre atchieue vnto, When for our plague, God leaue to them wil grant) From Thrace to Paris in twelue houres it came, I trow she sent one in the diuels name. 63 She causd it to be carrid at noone day, From Constantino, Emp'ror then of Greece, The beame, the staues, the cords they brought away, The pinnes, the hoopes, and eu'rie little peece: She placed it whereas she meant to lay Atlantas Nephew, with his new made Neece:Rogero Nephe to Atlans. In this pauillion she did place their bedding. And sent it backe when finisht was the wedding.
64 Two thousand yeare before, or not much lesse, This rich pauillion had in Troy bene wrought, By faire Cassandra, that same Prophetesse, Ura, de russun̄o unquarn creaira T.That had (but all in vaine) in youth bene taught, Of future things to giue most certaine guesse, For her true speech was euer set at naught She wrought this same, with helpe of many other, And gaue it Hector, her beloued brother. 65 Hippolito of Hectors race.The worthiest wight that eu'r man did behold, That should proceed forh of his noble line, She here portrayd, in worke of silke and gold, Of precious substance, and of colour fine: Also the time and season was foretold, Both of his birth, and of his praise diuine: Don Hector of this gift great count did make, Both for the worke, and for the workers sake. 66 But when himselfe by treason foule was slaine, And Troy was by the Greekes defaced quite, Who enterd it by Synons subtle traine, And worse ensewd there of then Poets write: Then Menelaus did this great relicke gaine, Proteus, looke in the .And after on king Proteus hapt to light, Who gaue to him dame Helen ere he went, And for reward receiu'd of him this tent. 67 And thus to Aegypt that time it came, Where with the Ptolomeys it long remained, Till Cleopatra,that lasciuious dame, As by inheritance, the same obtained: Agrippas men by seathen tooke the same, What time in Rome Augustus Casar raigned: And then in Rome, while Rome was th'Empires seat It staid till time of Constantine the great. 68 That was he, that gaue Rome to the Pope.That Emp'ror Constantine I meane, of whom Faire Italy for euer shall lament, Who when he lothed Tibris bankes and Rome, Vnto the citie of Byzantium went, A place of more receipt, and larger roome, And thither this pauillion then he sent: Of which the cords were golden wire and silke, The staues and pinnes, were lu'rie white as milke. 69 In this, Cassandra wrought such diuers faces, More then Apelles erst with Pensill drew, A queene in childbed lay, to whom the graces With pleasant grace perform'd Lucynas dew: Ioue, Mercurie, and Mars in other places, And Venus do receiue the babe borne new: The first age gold The 2 siluer The 3 brasse, The 4 Iron.The sweetest babe that to the world came forth, From mans first age, eu'n downe vnto the fourth. 70 Hippolito they name him, as appeares Wrote in small letters on his swathing bands, And when he is a little growne in yeares, These were Am∣bassadors sent by Coruine to bring Hippolito to Hungarie.On one side Fortune, tother Vertue stands: Then in another picture diuers Peeres, Clad in long rayments, sent from forren lands, Vnto the father and the mother came, To begge the babe in great Coruynos name. 71 They part from Hercles with great reu'rence then, And from that infants mother Elinore, Vnto Danubia ward, and there the men Still runne to see that infant and adore: Also the king Coruyno wonders when He saw in him both wit and iudgement more, In those his tender childish yeares and greene, Then many times in older men had beene. 72 One doth endeuour in his childish hand, Of the Strigonian Realme to put to the mace, But euermore the tender youth doth stand, So high in that same noble Princes grace, That if he warre in manly Almans land, Or in the Turkes, or any other place; Hippolito is euer by his side, And learneth vertue vnder such a guide. 73 Another place shewes how he doth dispence, His youthfull time in Discipline and art, Fusco instructs him in the hidden sence, Of ancient writs,Fusco ∣ster to Hippoliand precepts doth impart, What actions praise, what actions breed offence, What be reward of good and ill desart: All which the picture did so well expresse, That at the meaning eu'rie one might guesse. 74 Loe where as yet a boy in Vatican,When he was made a Cardi Among the grauest Card'nals he doth sit, And speakes so wisely, that they all began, To wonder at his towardnes and wit; What manner man (if once he were a man) Would this man proue? for Peters chaire how fit? They seeme to say; oh if he thither clime, What holy age were that? what happie time? 75 Within another part described were Of his activities His youthfull sports, when he more strong did grow Oft in the mountaines he doth meet a Beare, Oft-times a Bore, in marrish grounds and low: He rides his Genet fierce, and void of feare, He chaseth oft the Buck, the Hart and Roe, And by his horse swift pace, doth ouer-ride them, And then doth with his sword in twaine deuide them. 76 Of Poets then, and of Philosophars.Of his studie  companie. About him you should see a worthy band, To make him know the course of wandring starres, How heau'n doth moue, & why the earth doth stand Or reading of Elegies, or verse of warres, Fine Epigrams, Odes hard to vnderstand: Or sometime instruments of Musicke hearing, In all his acts a speciall grace appearing. 77 Then on another part was to bevewd,His virtues. His vertues, each one by it selfe distinct, First Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude, And Iustice, and afift vnto them linkt So nye, that who with it is not indewd, The rest may seeme or blotted, or extinct: His bountieGood bountie, shewd in giuing and in spending, A speciall grace to all the other lending.
78 This one place shewes be aids vnluckie Sforse, Him euermore most faithfully assisting, frend. Sometime with policie, sometime with force, Him helping, and his enemies resisting Of fortunes change he doth but little force, In woe and weale, in one faith still persisting: He comforts him when euill haps do grieue him, In dangers he doth saue, in want relieue him. 79 of .Then stands he studying at another season, And for his countries safetie taking care, He searcheth, and he finds by depth of reason, And finding, to his brother doth declare Their most vnnaturall and filthy treason, That some of his owne blood for him prepare, By which he doth deserue such name to haue, As Rome yet free, to tamous Tully gaue. 80 Fast by he stands all clad in armour bright, And to relieue the Church he runnes in post, With sodaine souldiers, raw and armed light, Against a setled and well ordred host: Yet did his onely presence so affright, The aduerse part, that one may rightly bost, It quencht the fire, ere it to burne began, So he may say, I came, I saw, I wan. 81 Here stands he by his natiue riuer side, And straight encounters with the strongest fleete, That euer yet Venetians did prouide, Gainst Greeke, or Turke, but he doth boldly meet, And vanquisht them; and tooke them at one tide, And though the bootie and the gaine was sweet, All (saue the praise) he left vnto his brother, For onely that, cannot be giu'n another. 82 Thus this Pauillion, as before I told, The which Melissa brought so farre from thence, Did please the knights, and dames that did behold, The goodly imag'rie, and rich expence: Although they had not any to vnfold, The meaning of the same and hidden sence; But yet by good Melissas wise instruction, Dame Bradamant did know their whole costruction 83 Rogero markt likewise with great attention, Those goodly figures calling to his minde, That oft his vnckle of that Prince made mention, Hippolito, the flowre of all his kinde: But now king Charles, whose care is and intention, To giue to all men entertainment kinde, Made playes and feasts, with sundry sports and great, And euermore the tables fild with meat. 84 There, men might plainly see and vnderstand, The courage and the strength of eu'rie knight, Sometimes in single wise, now band to band, In iusts, and turnaments resembling fight, But still Rogero had the vpper hand, In all his exercise of day and night: In leaping, running, wrastling, and in dancing, All men him far aboue the rest aduancing. 85 But on the last of these dayes festiuall, Then when to take away they did prouide, What time king Charles was set amid them all, Eu'n iust betweene the Bridgrome and the Bride, Behold they saw a goodly man and tall, That seemd directly toward them to ride. Most proudly mounted on a coursers backe, But yet his horse and he, all clad in blacke. 86 This was fierce Rodomont, king of Algyre, Who at his late receiued foile, and I corne That was in the 35. booke.Of Bradamant,inflamd with spight and ire, All vse of horse and armor had forsworne, Till one whole yeare, one month, one day expire, But liue that while an Hermit all forlorne: For so the knights were wont in ancient times, Of their owne selues, to punish their owne crimes. 87 And though this while he oft had notice how, King Agramant, and how king Charles had sped, Yet nathelesse, for not breaking of his vow, Forth of the doores he neuer put his hed: But when the yeare and month were ended now, And day beside, himselfe he furnished, With armor new, new horse, new sword, new lance, And came therewith vnto the court of France. 88 Not once alighting nor so much as rising, For reu'rence sake, to bow his head or knee, He bare the count'nance of a man despising, Both Charles, and all those Peeres of great degree: At this each man amazed stands deuising, What proud and sawcy fellow this might be, From talking and from eating each man stayes, To hearken what this lofire warrior layes. 89 Now when he was to th'Emp'ror come so nye, That he Rogero fully did confront, With stately voice, and with disdainfull crie, (He saith) I am the king of Sarza Rodomont, That thee Rogero flatly here defie, And ere the Sunne go downe make full account, To proue thou hast bene false vnto thy Prince, And openly of treason thee conuince. 90 For though thy treachery be knowne so cleare, In being Christend, thou canst not deny it, Yet that to all the world it may appeare, I offer here in single fight to trie it: Or if thy courage faile, if any here Will take on them thy quarrell, to supply it, I will accept of any one or more, Yea, not to faile, of six or halfe a score. 91 Rogero, when he first had licence craued Of Charles, this wise to Rodomont replide, (And said) he euer had his honour saued, And who so said contrarie, lowdly lide: For he had to his Prince himselfe behaued, Most loyally eu'n to the day he dide: And said he there was readie to maintaine, That yet his faith had neuer sufferd staine.
92 And that himselfe was bold enough and strong, With him to buckle hand to hand alone, And that he hopte to make him feele ere long, He had enough, perhap too much of one: Straightwayes Renaldo to auenge this wrong, Orlando, and the Marquis would haue gone, Marsisa with the brothers white and blacke, And Dudon would be on the Pagans iacke. 93 Alledging, that sith he was newly marrid, For him to fight, it was against all vie, But from their speeches his opinion varid, And swears that that for him was no excuse: Those armes that erst the famous Tartar carid, He takes, nor will he make one houre of truse: To arme him, all those states their aids afford, King Charles himelie, holpe to put on his sword. 94 His wife takes care his Curats well may fit, Orlando tyes his spurres, Marsisa bold Doth fast vpon his head his beauer knit, Asilf is content his horse to hold: His  Dudon; others thinke it fit, To rid the lysts and driue out young and old; Renaldo, Namus, Oliuer, take charge To Martiall it, and make it cleare and large. 95 Faire dames and dimzels stand with lookes dismaid, Simile.With feare and trembling, like to fearfull Doues, Whó some black tēpest-bringing cloud hath fraid, And driu'n from fields, to shrowd in houses rooues: (Downe fals the haile wc which the come is laid, And profitlesse vnto his owner proues) So do they this fierce Pagans forces feare, Which sure they iugde, Rogero cannot beare. 96 Not onely do saint people so surmise, But many knights of worth, the same did weene, That cald to mind what erst before their eyes, To their griefe they had in Parish seene: When he with fire and sword in fearfull wise, Did welny spoile the towne, and wast it cleene: Of which the wofull signes did still appeare, And would remaine yet many a month and yeare. 97 But Bradamant more feard then all the rest, Not that she thought in strength or skill well tride The Pagan past her spouse, nor valiant brest, Sentence.Or that he had more reason of his side, (Which vnto victorie auailes not least, When men by combat quarels do discide) Yet still her minde is sad, her lookes vncheatfull, Sentence Ed res sollicui plena  Nor blame her though, for loue is euer fearfull. 98 Great suit she makes, great labour to procure, That vpon her she may the quarrell take, Yea if to haue bene slaine she had bene sure, To laue her spouse, but all in vaine she spake: The champions now their lances put in vre, And each with couched speare the tother strake: .The staues like Ise in shiners small did flie, Simile.The splints like birds did mount vnto the skie. 99 The Pagan that his lance did full direct, Against the middle of Rogeros sheeld, Did smyte on it to small or none effect, For Vulcan had the same most firmely steeld: The tothers Target had no knowne detect, Yet to the stroke it did a passage yeeld: Yet was it thicke, a quarter of a foote Of bone, and linde with plated steele to boote. 100 And saue the lance sustained not the blow, But at the first did breake and was dispersed, So that the peeces of it seem'd in show, To haue bene featherd foules (as I rehearsed) That stroke had finished that strise I trow, And had his Curats and his bodie pearced: But now it brake, and both gaue strokes so sound, As made both horses cruppers kisse the ground. 101 The riders neare the lesse sate firme and stedie, And laboured so well with spurre and raine, Their horses were got vp on foote alredie, The men so fight addresse themselues againe With swords; their horses both were strong & redie And each with skill some vantage sought to gaine, And where they thought their armors were most thin, With force they straue to pierce & enter in. 102 Fierce Rodomont had not that Serpents hide He vsde to weare, nor yet that shauing blade, That he was wont to carrie by his side, For Nimrod his great ancestor first made; He lost those armes, and many more beside, Then when as Bradamant did him inuade, At that same church, where he a tweluemonth since, Entombed Isbell, with that peerelesse Prince. 103 He had another armor good and sure, But not like that so passing tough and hard, But neither this, nor any else could dure, Against the piercing edge of Ballisard: No mixture such, no metall was so pure, No charme so strong, but that this blade thē mard: Rogero so besturd him with this blade, More then on hole, in tothers coate he made. 104 Now though a little while the Pagan clokes His hurts receiu'd, with vnappaled minde, Yet when he saw his blood, and felt the strokes So smart, that still they seem'd the quicke to finde: Simile.To so great wrath and rage it him prouokes, Eu'n like the sea turmoyld with blustring winde, He hurles away his shield, and doth endeuer, With both his hands to cleaue Rogeros beauer. 105 With force as great he strikes, and as extreame,Simile. The like is as London bridge. As doth that engin in the Riuer Poe, Borne twixt two shippes, vpon the stately streame, Enforcing downe with many a heauie bloe, Some peece of timber, or some sharpned beame: I say the Pagan smore Rogero so, Had not the charmed helmet bene of force, He doubtlesse would haue clou'n him & his horse.
106 Rogero sitteth staggring in his seat, His hand the bridell left, his thighes their hold, Rodomont giues another blow as great, To maze him more by all the meanes he could: And last a third, but now he so did beat His blade of mettall free, it would not hold, But burst in twaine, with his continuall hammering, And left the Pagan in no little mammering. 107 But yet for this the Turke doth not restaine, But still inuades the knight that wants defence, So had the blow amaz'd his head and braine, So dazed had the blow his wit and sence: The Pagan minds to waken him againe, First he doth close with him, and so from thence, Wringing him by the necke with all his force, To leaue the saddle he doth him enforce. 108 He fell, but yet the ground he touched seant, But that he rose, inflamd with wrath and shame; For looking vp, he saw faire Bradamant, Whose blush did shew how ill she tooke the same: Yea eu'n of sounding she did little want, And still her fainting colour went and came; Which seene, Rogero with his sword intends, For this so great disgrace to make amends. 109 The Pagan with his horse would ouer-runne him, And iustles him, but he with little paine, Doth step aside, and warily doth shunne him, And with his left hand takes the horses raine: (So as the Turke thereby no hurt hath done him) The while he puts in vre his sword againe, And with two thrusts, he did the Pagan harme, One in his thigh, another in his arme. 110 The Turke with whom a peece did yet remaine, Of that same blade that was in peeces flowne, Smote on Rogeros headpeece so againe, As▪ had wel-ny againe him ouerthrowne: But good Rogero now perceiuing plaine, His vantage that was erst to him vnknowne, Takes him by his left arme with all his force, And (will he nill he) puls him from his horse. 111 Were it his strength or sleight, I cannot tell, But so he fell, no ods was them betweene, My meaning is that on his feete he fell, For in the swords, Rogeros odds was seene: Rogero that did know his vantage well, To keepe him now at bay his best doth weene; It is not best for him he doth suppose, With such a strong, and big bon'd man to close. 112 He further saw what store of blood he spilt, So now he hopes by warily proceeding, To force his foe to yeeld, and leane the tilt, Whose strength decaid, stil more & more with blee∣ding: The Turke then takes the pomell and the hilt Of his owne sword, and with force so exceeding Did hurle the same, he smote the knight so sore, He stund him more then eu'r he was before. 113 It strake him twixt the shoulders aud the head, And gaue to him a blow so firme and sound, That good Rogero there with staggered, And scant could keepe his feete vpon the ground; The Turke to close with him then hast'ned, But loe his foote did faile with former wound, So that his too much hast (as oft we see) Did hurt, and made him fall vpon his knee. 114 Rogero lost no time in manfull wise, To strike fierce Rodomont in brest or face, And holds him short, and so his force applies, He laid him on the ground, but in short space, In spyte of him, the Pagan doth arise, And with small kindnes he doth him embrace: And then they striue, heaue, shoue, thrust to and fro, And either seekes the tothers ouerthrow. 115 Each striues with all his skill, and his abilitie, By force to lay the tother on the ground, Now Rodomont was growne to some debilitie, By meanes of more then one receiued wound, Rogero had great practice and agilitie, And vsdeto wrastle, and he quickly found His vantage, which he did not ouerslip, But on his weakest side his foe doth trip. 116 The Turke most full of wrath and of despight, Vpon Rogeros necke tooke stedfast hold, Now drawing toward him with all his might, Now thrusting him backe from him all he could: And by and by he heau'd him quite vpright, As strong Antheus was in time of old: Rogero notwithstanding sure doth stand, And labord still to haue the vpper hand. 117 Full ost the valiant knight his hold doth shift, And with much prettie sleight, the same did slippe: In fine he doth applie one speciall drift, Which was to get the Pagan on the hippe: And hauing caught him right, he doth him list, By nymble sleight, and in such wise doth trippe: That downe he threw him, and his fall was such, His head-peece was the first that ground did tuch. 118 The Turke with such an hard and heauie fall, Was sore perplext, and brused in such wise, His wounds fell fresh on bleeding therewithall, And make the place Vermillion where he lyes. Rogero giues him respite verie small, But keepe's him downe and will not let him rise: And presently presents his dagger point Vnto this throat, and to his chiefest ioynt, 119 As those that digge and search for golden ore,Simile. Within Pannonian, or Iberian hills, Not vnderpropping sure the ground before, Oft for a plague of their too greedie wills, With sodaine ruine, are surprisde so sore, As to get forth againe, doth passe their skills: So was the Turke held downe, and pressed so, By braue Rogero his triumphant so.
120 Who now his naked dagger did present, Vnto the tothers vizer at his eye, And with sharpe words he told him that he ment, Except he yeeld. to kill him by and by: But Rodomont, that rather then relent, Or shew base mind a thousand deathes would dy, No word doth speake, but straue himselfe to sunder From him, or if he could to get him vnder. 121 Simi'e, and a ve  apl compari∣son, for a ghod will oursome a mlliue in conti∣nuāce of tight,   bene tried.Eu'n as a Mastiue fell, whom Grewnd more fell, Hath tyrde, and in his throat now fastned hath His cruell fangs, yet doth in vaine rebell, Though vnder him, and seekes to do some skath: For still the Grewnd preuailes, and doth excell In force of breath, though not in rage and wrath: So doth the cruell Pagan striue and straine, To get from vnder him, but all in vaine. 122 But with long striuing and with wondrous paines, He freed his better arme, and void of aw, His dagger that in his right hand remaines, Which in this later bick'ring he did draw, He seekes to stabbe into Rogeros raines; But now the valiant youth the perill saw, Then for his sasties sake he was constrained, To kill the cruell Turke that grace disdained. 123 And lifting his victorious hand on hie, In that Turks face he stabd his dagger twise Vp to the hilts, and quickly made him die, And rid himselfe of trouble in a trise: Downe to the lake, where damned ghosts do lie, Sunke his disdainful soule, now cold as Ise, Blaspheming as it went, and cursing lowd, That was on earth so lostie and so proud. Morall.This last booke of Ariosto is so full of examples of courtesie, as me thinke we should offer it great discourtesie if we should not ike out some good Morall from it, to recommend to your considerations that haue perused and read ouer the booke; the first and chiefest courtesie is in Leo, that manageth the whole matter so well for Rogero, knitting the consent of all parties like a well deuised Comedie: then Marsisas kindnes is to be praised, that would haue fought in defence of her brother honor. Thirdly Ammon doth well to aske pardon of Rogero for his hard vsage: then the Bulgars are to e allowed for their thank fulnes to make him king for his good seruice: Further Charles the Emperor is to be extolled for  Priely regard in honoring and feasting them so bountifully at the mariage: Lastly Bradamant and the whole crew that would haue emerie one haue taken upon them Rogeros defence against Rodomont, and Rogero not permit∣ting it, yet they disdained not to do him the seruice to helpe to arme him, to put on his spurres, to stay his horse, to hold his rop: in all which I doubt not but the noble minded readers will finde sufficient matter both to commend, and to imitate without my further labouring to set forth the same. Onely one note I may not omit, yea though I were sure to be chidden by some of you (faire Ladies) for my labor, namely, the strong ambition of your sex, which we call weake; For you see how my author in the 55. staffe of this Canto hath deliuered to vs, that Beatrice the mother of Bradamant, would neuer be wonneto accept Rogero for her sonne in-law, neither for his gentrie, nor his personage, nor his vallew, nor his wit, no nor yet her daughters owne choice and affection, till she heard he was chosen a king: with which aspiring humour of women, it seemed how that (neuer too much praised) Sir Philip Sidney was well acquainted with: making in his Arcadia not onely the stately Pamela, to reiect the naked vertue of Musidorus, till she found it well clothed with the title to a seepter, but euen Mistres Mopsa, when she sate hooded in the tree to beg a boone of Apollo, to aske nothing but to haue a king to her husband, and a lusty one to, and when her pitiful father Dametas (for want of a better) plaid Apollos part, and told her she should haue husbands enough, she praid donoutly they might be all kings: and thus much for the Morall. Historie.Aegeus king of Athens, hauing no issue, went to the Oracle of Apolio, to know how he might do to haue a sone, and receiuing a doubtfull answer, asked counsell of Pythe.  of Troezenes, that was in those dayes counted a deepe wise man; who scanning the meaning of the obscure verse, which was this, O; time vir non ante pedem dissolueris vtri Exsertum claras quam tu remearis Athenas. In English not verie cleanly thus. Good sir take heed how ear it falls, what vessell you do broch, Before vnto the cittie walls of Athens you approch. I say Pytheus found out such a mysterie in these verses, that he perswaded him ear he parted thence, to take the paines (or I might haue said the pleasure) to lie with his daughter Ethra: Aegeus hauing done the feat, and being belike (as many men are) sorie when he had done, tooke his leaue to be gone; but ear he went he tooke Ethra aside, and shewed her where he had hidden his sword and his shoes vnder a hollow stone of great weight, charging her that if she bare a sonne, so soone as he were of strength to remoue that stone, she should send him with those tokens to him as priuily as may be. In fine she bare that famous Theseus, who comming to Athens as a stranger, Medea then wise of Aegeus, perswaded her husband to poyson him at a banquet, to which the old man assented: but while Theseus was readie to drinke, Aegues saw the swors, handle, and calling it to mind, ouerthrew the cup and saued the life of his sonne: of which, who so please bet∣ter to enforme himselfe, may reade more at large in the life of Theseus written by Plutarke. Allegorie.In that mine author brings in for the conclusion of his whole worke, that Rogero immediatly vpon his mariage to Bradamant, killeth Rodomont: this is the Allegoricall sence thereof, that Rodomont which is to be vnderstood the vnbridled heat and courage of youth (for in all Rodomonts actions you shall finde him described, euer most furious, hastie, and impacient) Rodomont I say, is killed and quite vanquished by marriage; and howsoeuer the vnrulinesse of youth is excusable in diners kinds, yet after that holy state of matrimonie is entred into, all youthfull wildnes of all kinds, must be cast axay: which the common saying doth proue, distinquishing in ordinarie speech, a bacheler from a married man, by these names, a good fellow, and an honest man.
In Rodomonts punishing of himself, by forswearing the vse of armor, a yeare, a month, and a day, he alludes (I think)Allusion. to one Bucycaldo a Frenchman, gouernor of Geneua, who being a goodly tall man of personage, was ouerthrowne and vanquished by Galeazzo Gonzaga a little man of stature, but of great spirit, and for that cause he vowed neuer to beare armes againe: but in the death of Rodomont to shew himselfe a perfect imitator of Virgil, he endethiust as Vir∣gil ends his Aeneads with the death of Tumus, Vitaque cum gemitu fugit indignata sub vmbras. Here end the notes of the 45. and last Canto of Orlando Furioso. A BRIEFE AND SVMMARIE ALLEGORIE OF ORLANDO FVRIOSO, NOT VNPLEASANT NOR VNPROFITABLE for those that haue read the former Poeme. WHen I had finished this translation of Orlando Furioso, and being al∣most proud in mine owne conceit, that I had in these my young yeares, employed my idle houres to the good liking of many, & those of the better sort, I happened to reade in a graue and godly booke these words:In the Resolu∣tion, of the ac∣counting day. So diuines do hold (for examples sake) that the glory of S. Paule is increased dayly in heauen, and shalbe to the worlds end, by reason of them that dayly do profue by his writing, and rare examplar life upon earth, as also on the contrarie part, that the torments of Arius, Sabelli∣us, and other wicked heretickes, are continually augmented by the numbers of them, who from time to time are corrupted with their seditious and pestilent writings; If it had stayed there, it would neuer haue troubled me, but immediatly followes, The like they hold of dissolute Poets, and other loose writers, which haue lost behind them lasciuious, wanton, and carnall deuices, as also of negligent parents, masters, teachers, &c. This saying (gentle Reader) was such a cooling card to me, and did so cut the combe of that pleasing conceit of mine, that I could not tel whe∣ther I should repent me or not of my former taken paine. For this was not a malicious taunt of a wry-looking Zoylus, but a graue reprehension, and commination of a deuout and diuine writer; Now though the Epithetons of Dissolute and Loose, make me partly presume, that mine author is out of the foresaid danger, whose worke cannot iustly be dee∣med lasciuious, wanton, nor carnal, and though I haue spoken as I thinke sufficiendy in my Apologie, to satisfie all indifferent readers, both for mine authors defence and mine owne excuse, yet because I know in mine owne conscience, that all the verses in this worke be not so full weight, but if they shalbe tryed in so seuere a ballance, some will be found ma∣ny graines too light: I would endeuour all I might to supply that detect, with the more weightie and sober consideration of the Allegorie; which, as I haue partly touched in eue∣ry seuerall booke, so now I intend to present to your consideration the whole bodie of the same, to make as it were a rehearsal Oration of it, which I haue placed in the latter end,
and as it were for a farewell, as men do at a great dinner, in which they haue almost surfet∣ted vpon sundrie sorts of meats,Simile of a surset.more delicate then wholsome, yet in the end close vp their stomakes with a peece of a Quince, or strengthen and helpe their digestion with a cuppe of Sacke; whereas to a temperate feeder vpon wholsome meats, both of them are supersflu∣ous. Also I do the rather place it in the end of my booke, because commonly, that which men reade last stickes best in their memories, and so I wish this to do, being as it were the verie kyrnell and principall part, or as the marrow, and the rest but the bone or vn∣profitable shell; or according (as I said in my Apologie, vsing Tassoes comparison) like to the pill that is lapped in suger, and giuen a child for a medicine, who otherwise would not be drawne to take the simple drugge though it were to saue his life. But to come to the matter, mine author (as you may see from the beginning) applyeth his whole worke, and referreth all the parts thereof to two principall heads and common places: namely,Armes..L.Armes and Loue: in both which, men commit great ouersights, and from both which, proceed many great enormous disorders, both in publique and priuate. For these two faults of wantonnesse and wilfulnesse, are so coupled commonly with youth, that they seeme to be borne at a burthen therewith, and as it were accidents insepera∣ble; and a man might almost canonize him for a Saint, that hath passed the heat of his youth, and not offended in one of these: but many doubtlesse offend in them both. And this is the cause that mine authour hath propounded many examples, but speci∣ally two,Orlando.in the which men may see their frailtie in the latter of these (which I will handle first) namely in the passion of loue. As first Orlando, who with a long and te∣dious voyage, guardeth Angelica from the Indies; then hath her taken from him a∣mong his friends, after looseth her, and by sundrie aduentures pursuing her, and yet missing most narrowly of his purpose, in the end falleth starke madde for her, till by Saint Iohn his wits are sent him againe, which is as much to say, till by the grace of God and the light of the Gospel, he discouereth the darknes he walked in, and so comes againe to himselfe. Secondly and principally in Rogero,Rogero. whom he faineth to haue bene a man of infinite value, and of courage able to ouercome a thousand of our common worldly miseries, but yet ouercome himselfe of this passion of loue, without any resistance: this is the reason that he is borne away vpon a horse with wings (which would not be gouerned) vp into the aire, to the countrey of Alcyna,Alcyna, the court of plea∣sure.(which we may easily conceiue to be the court of pleasure:) by which mine athour giues vs, to vnderstand that the principall occasion of our euill pro∣ceedeth of this, when our appetite not ruled by reason, ruleth vs. as Horace writeth of anger, and may be applyed to any passion that striueth with reason: Ira furor breuis est, animum rege, quinisiparet Imperat, hune frenis, huno tu compesce catena. Wherefore this same appetite is that passionate desire of the minde that we are so of∣ten counsailed to restraine. Now to this desire to this inordinate lusting, is ioyned idle∣nesse, as an assistant and great furtherer; as I partly noted in the fourth booke out of Ouid, Otiasitollas, &c.Idlenes, cap∣taine of all other filthie vices.This idlenes is fayned by the Poer, verie grosse and corpulent, drun∣ken and drowsie, ryding vpon a Tortesse in token of slouth, and he (forsooth) is ring-leader of a monstrous band, of which some haue heads like dogges, some haue neckes like cranes, some are mounted vpon Oxen or Asses, some haue countenances and gestures of Apes, some are armed with prongs, with forkes, with hookes, with broches (all out of the Kit∣chen) of all which, what other meaning can be gathered but this, that idlenes and slouth, and the not beraking ones selfe to some honest trauell, causeth men to proue drunkards, gluttons, backbytets, reprochers, iesters, parasites and promoters, with other monstrous and filthie faultes, though worthie to be punished, yet not worthie to be named.
Wherefore the auncient fathers haue not without great iudgement and iust cause placed slouth among the seauen deadly sinnes, being so precise in the confideration thereof, that they haue deliuered their opinion thus farre of it, that though simply to be idle is not a mortall sinne (as they terme it) yet so to be idle as to be kept thereby from some good ex∣ercise, as hearing of Gods word, or helping out brother that wanted out assistance, may make it mortall. But now, because in common sence it had not bene fit nor probable, that a man of a high spirit and noble courage (as his Rogero is described to be) should be daun∣ted with such a shamefull and base companie as these were, therefore you see he defends himselfe against them most resolutely, though their assault seeme terrible, and their num∣ber infinite,Logestilla be∣tokens vertue.and in despight of them he proceedeth towards the house of Logestilla (by which is meant vertue) by that craggie and painfull way, and shunneth the other way to Alcyna, by meanes of the good warning Astolfo had giuen him of the daunger thereof. But loe two faire yong Ladies sent from Alcyna, which as I noted in the seuenth booke, caried a shew of honourable and chast loue; these wanne him without any resistance, and make him of a resolute warriour, a dissolute louer: but trow you he can come to Aleyna with the bare name of a louer? no, if he be poore, there is no place for him in dame Plea∣sures court;Erifila.he must spend, he must giue, he must lash it out. Erifila, a couetous wretch, keeps the bridge, by which is vnderstood that many men are stopt from this course of folly, in re∣gard of the great charge and expence thereof, and so stay at this bridge; and though no con∣sideration of vertue withhold them, yet feare of the charge doth terrifie them. But when E∣rifila is once ouerthrowne, then they are presently receiued into the bosome of Alcyna, then all the cheare, sporting, dauncing and courting that can be imagined is applied to the welcoming of this youthfull Rogero. Thus he is drowned and viterly ouerwhelmed in this gulfe of pleasure, which mine author hath set downe so liuely, as it were the very picture of the Prodigall sonne spoken of in the Scripture, giuen ouer to all vnthristinesse, all loose∣nesse of life and conuersation. But because the Poet knew very well, that youth of it selfe hath many good gifts of nature, if the same were applied, and that many yong men com∣ming to themselves againe, haue become notable members of their countreys, and worthy patternes of prowesse and vertue; therefore he deuiseth most excellently a meane whereby Rogero vnwindeth himselfe out of the bonds of Alcyna, shewing how one day being got∣ten from her (a thing that seldome happened vnto him) Melissa recalled him againe, and gaue him that Ring that discouered all Alcynas trumperies, and made here odious in his sight: so as now he cursed her in his heart, and was ashamed that euer he had set his loue so basely. This is to be vnderstood, that a man besotted in the fond pleasures of this world, entring into godly consideration with himselfe of his owne estate,Considerationheareth Melyssa, which is to be vnderstood the diuine inspiration of the grace of God, calling him from the damned course of life, to an honest and vertuous course; and by that Ring which signifieth reason, he discouereth the odious filthinesse of that which seemed to him before most pleasant and amiable. Therefore not without verie good cause doth the notable writer (I recited in the be∣ginning of this treatise) lay downe in the very first chapter of his booke the daunger and inconueniences that grow to men for lacke of consideration, vsing also in another place among many his diuine similitudes this one, that men are caried by inconsideration to their euerlasting ruine without any striuing;Simile.euen as Hawkes are caried hooded verie qui∣etly, which if their sight were free, would neuer leaue bating till they had broken their lines, or vtterly tyred themselues: but notwithstanding that the Ring of Reason ma∣keth him discerne these foule deformities of Alcyna, yet it is maruellous to see what won∣derfull impediments be set in his way ere he can discharge himselfe of his late received mi∣stresse. The Faulkner, the horse, the hawke, the dogge, that do all assaile him after a strange fa∣shion, the particular Allegorie whereof, I touched in the eight booke, though to say truth
I needed not so curiously to haue sought for such a hidden meaning in them, when as the verie things themselues are so vntemperatly vsed by many, that they keepe them from ver∣tues and more honorable actions: How many men giue themselues so extreamely to these hunters, haukes, hounds, and horses, that they cannot scarse affoord an houre to the studie of wisedome and temperance? though I do not vtterly condemne the honorable vse of them all, for recreation, so as a man would remember, Ne quid nimis, or as our English Prouerbe saith, Too much of one thing is good for nothing. Now when these difficulties be ouercome, then yet for a great while the way is paine∣full, the weather is hot, the Sunne parcheth, Rogero rideth solitarie without compa∣nie or good fellowship; and by and by another temptation assailes him: Three Ladies sporting themselves by the seaside would stay him; one offers him wine increasing his thirst with the sight of it, another inuites him to alight, the third railes vpon him for his inciuilitie: The first of these is our concupisence, that with a perpetuall thirst still ma∣keth vs couet things hurtfull for our selues: the second is ease, that is loth to sustaine too much labour, but is still perswading vs to giue ouer vertuous workes, because they are painfull: the third is the mockerie and lewd vse of the world, as I haue also noted in his place, to eft at such as liue austerely and vertuously, as though it were a toké of a base mind, whereas indeed, it is the onely noble disposition that may be, to follow vertue, and to de∣spise pleasure. These three women though Rogero fled away, yet they followed him, which signifieth, that our owne imperfections euermore follow vs, neither can we be ridde of them, and it suffiseth not to ouercome them once, but that we must wage continuall battell with them. Now against this perpetuall miserie we are strengthened by discipline, & made able to with∣stand them, which is signified by the wise and graue Pilot, that transports Rogero by sea, from Alcyna to Logestilla; and in sooth it may well be called a sea, in which euerie waue is readie to ouerwhelme vs, and euerie storme able vtterly to discourage vs, if we had not a good Pilot both safely to guide vs, and chearfully to encourage vs, by telling vs what enter∣tainment we shall finde, if we come once into her harbour. 40 There is the food that fills and neuer cloyeth,In the tenth booke. There is the loue, the beautie and the grace, That maketh him most blest that them enioyeth, To which compar'd all other ioyes are base: There hope nor feare, nor care the minde annoyeth, Respect of persons, nor regard of place, The minde still finding perfect contentation, Resting it selfe in vertuous contemplation. 41 There are (saith he) some better lessons taught, There dancings, dallying, and daintie dyet, There shall you learne to frame your minde and thought, From will to wit, to temperance from ryet: This is the path by which you may be brought Into the perfect paradice of quiet: This tale the Pilot to Rogero told, And all the while their course they forward hold. This encouragement and comfort was somewhat, but by and by they discouered a great nauie sent from Alcyna, which vndoubtedly had surprised them, had not Logestilla (which
drawne from the Greeke, is to say wisedome) sent a whole armie in their ayde: which signi∣fieth writings, exhortations, instructions, examples, and precepts, that haue power in them, both to confound Alcyna, and to recouer all that had bene wonne by force, in former times from Logestilla. The foure vertuous Ladies that are sent to guard Rogero, as appeareth by their names and by their Epithetons giuen them by mine author, are the foure cardinall vertues, iustice, prudence, temperance, and fortitude. Which though it be well described in the foresaid x. book, yet in my fancie, that in the last booke, where he prayseth a Cardinals vertues, I meane Hippolito, where also he ads a fift vnto them, and makes them fiue, it doth much better: 77 Then on another part was to be vewd, His vertues, each one by themselves distinct, Prudence, and temperance, and fortitude, And Iustice, and a fift so nearely linkt To these, that who with it is not endude, The rest may seeme blotted, or quite extinct, Bountie imployd in giuing and in spending, A speciall grace to all the other lending. These be the Captaines of that Armie Royall, that can ouercome legions, nay millions of vices: and sure if you will not allow the last of them for a principall leader, yet you must at least, make him treasurer and paymaster, or else it is great doubt that for lacke of pay, you will be driuen to Cassyre your bands. But to proceede, perhaps it will seeme strange to some, as it did to my selfe at the first reading, how it comes to passe that Logestilla and Alcyna are sisters, the one legitimate, the other a bastard; and that the bastard hath vsurped vpon the others state, and hath scarce left her aboue one strong hold. The exposition is this. The nature of man (by which is vnderstood our appetite or affection,) which ought to be subiect to reason, and to be gouerned thereby, this nature (I say) was at the first a lawfull child of God, and was by the spirite of God framed to his owne likenesse, there to gouerne and rule by reason and wisedome, so that afore nature was corrupted, all the partes of our minde were in a perfect accord and harmonie, vnder the gouernement of reason, or rather euerie one setting forward itselfe to vertuous actions: but when this first perfection was lost, and that same great rebellion was made, to the ouerthrow of that quiet and setled state, the heart became so weake, as it was not able to endure the continuall assaults of the passions that assayled it, and in the end was content to take part with them, against the rea∣sonable part of the minde. And now euery part of the body engenders such seeds of con∣cupiscence, that nature is become a bastard sister to reason, and vsurpes that gouernement that is due onely to her, and leaueth her onely one castell, which was so strongly situated that it was impregnable: so that now reason is retired as it were to her principall fortresse, to the head, the rest of this kingdome being possessed (by Alcyna) by pleasure and fond de∣lights. Now then, what maruell is it, if this new Hercules, described by mine author, do with so great difficultie, and through so many impediments, clāmer vp to this stately seate of Lo∣gestilla, built with such rare workemanship, and of such pure stuffe, that a man may in the walls thereof, see euen into his very soule and conscience: In these men see the vertue, and the vice, That cleaeth to their inward soule and minde, Who lookes in such a glasse may grow so wise, As neither flat'ring praises shall him blind, With tickling words, nor undeserued blame, With forged faults, shall worke him any shame.
As for those gildings and paintings, that were in the Pallace of Alcyna, though the show of it were glorious, the substance of it was drosse, and nothing but Alcumie, and cosenage: but these of Logestilla, be precious stones indeed, of inestimable vallue: The looking glasse and mirrour, that will shew vs how our soule and our minde is spotted; oh he that would vse such a glasse, what a notable Antidoton it would be against the poyson of flatterie? You faire Ladies, that spend so many houres in looking and prying in a glasse to see if this shadow sit handsomely, if your rebatoes be well set, if your wyers stand euen vp∣on your heads, and the pendent iust in the middle of your forheads, and in the least of these matters you will not beleeue your maids eyes, but you will see it your selues, why are you so credulous to beleeue lyers and flatterers, that tell you your chastities and other womanlie vertues be extolled and praysed, and will not looke in that true glasse, to see if you deserue it or no? It is true, that men are no fit iudges of themselues, because commonly they are parciall in their owne cause, yet is it as true, that he that will dispose him to iudge indifferentlie of himselfe, can do it better then any bodie else, because a man can see further into his owne minde and heart, then any one else can. But now, to come to this faire house of Logestilla, to which I would so fayne inuite you all, both Lordes and Ladies, that reade this discourse, here be sweete gardens, here be wholesome herbes, here is the continuall spring: Here that vnbridled horse, that bare away Rogero so farre out of Europe, is taught to obey the rodde and the rayne, and made seruiceable and at commaundement. Further, by the helpe of the ring (as was touched before) manie that had bene transformed into brute beastes, were restored to their shape againe: these were such as were so drowned in vice, and in beastlie pleasures, that no part of the reasonable man was left in them. Astolfo was restored to his shape, that had bene turned into a myrtle, (now the myrtle was said euer to haue bene Venus tree;) and because he was so entangled in Venerie, that he could not get himselfe out of it, therefore he is fayned to haue taken roote in the ground as the tree doth, and so was fastened, that without Melyssas assistance he could not haue stirred from thence. Thus, as you see mine Authour vnder a prettie fiction, hath brought you to behold the whole miserie of the life of man, and there in the beginning of the seuenth booke, he exhorteth men to consi∣der the meaning of his tale, Wherefore to some my tale may seeme a fable. Whose wits to vnderstand it, are not able. But now because there are diuers kindes of errours, in this laberinth of loue, and as diuers meanes by which men offen, as there are diuers sortes of men that offend; there∣fore you may perceiue how my autour hath filled the whole booke with sundry exam∣ples both of men and women: as beside Orlando of whom I spake before, whose mad∣nesse gaue the name to his worke, calling it Orlando Furioso, there is Sacrapant, that followes Angelica from the Indies, and is still foded out by her with faire wordes: There is Renaldo, that is extreamely in loue with her, till the water of disdaine draue away, and cooled the heat of his affection; and the whole booke is full of examples of men and women, that in this matter of loue, haue bene notable in one kinde or other, of which I will touch some speciall ones, and omit the rest, as not so much worth the standing vpon. The ordinarie kindes of loue are set downe to vs of the good and the bad in two couples: Angelica and Doralice of the worse kinde, and Olympia and Bradamant of the the better sort. In Angelica, the excellentnesse of her beautie bred such an ex∣ceeding pride, that disdayning the greatest and worthyest Princes that liued in that
age, she cast herselfe away at last vpon a poore seruing-man, for a iust recompence of her too haughtie conceipt. In Doralyce, is set downe a patterne of great lightnesse of manners and behauiour, that first louing Rodomont, and being forciblie taken by Mandricard, yet in one night was so well pacified toward him, that she was content to tarrie with him, and in the end refused Rodomont openlie for him, (though in so doing one might make a reaso∣nable excuse for her:) but after when Mandricard was slaine, she could haue found in her heart to haue loued Rogero also. In Olympia contrarie, we see an honest chast loue, though very hardly required, yet hath it in my opinion some reproofe, namely that it was too sodaine and violent. But in the worthy Bradamant is a perfect patterne of true honorable loue to Rogero, moued first by his value, by his courage, by his behauiour, by his worth, which made him worthie of her loue. In her you shall finde no rashnesse, no want of constancie, of faith, of all other due regards: for neither could her sundry ouerthwart chances neither the expe∣ctation and length of time, (which is wont to breed alterations,) nor the obstinate couetous∣nesse of her father, nor the vaine ambition of her mother, nor the state and Empire of Leon, with all the promised riches and treasures his Father and he possessed, once withdraw her minde from her first loue. Further, Bradamant did not rashlie fall in loue, as did Olym∣pia, but the Prophetesse Melyssa, and tokens from aboue, did encourage her to her honest loue, for showing her of her noble posteritie, and of all those blessings that accompanie the same: so as indeed, in her onely we haue a patterne of honest and commendable loue be∣fore marriage. Now there are in like manner two payre of marryed women, one worthie all re∣proch, the tother meriting all praise. The shamelesse Orygilla and her filchie Martano, are a patterne of base and filthie loue, grounded vpon ribauldrie, and continued with all fraudulent practises that may be; in which also the fond affection, and doting fancie of Grif∣fino is to be pitied, that could not see her trecherie til with notable shame and scorne, he felt the fruits of it. Another patterne of lewdnesse in all kindes, is the tragicall life of the abhorni∣nable Gabryna, that for her filthie lust, brake all the lawes of hospitalitie and huma∣nitie: First tempting Fylandro most impudentlie, then accusing him most falselie, lastlie circumuenting him most subtillie, and making him with a most rare crueltie to kill her husband, and marrie her selfe; and finallie when she grew wearie of him, she found the meanes to poyson both him and the Phisition, and not re∣sting there, spent all her life after in working all kinde of treason and mischiefe, euen to her last gaspe, which she fetcht on the gallowes. Such Gabrynas and Medeas as this perhaps there are in the world, that to effect their diuellish purposes, will not sticke to practise any kinde of trecherie and poysoning, yea and take a pride and felicitie when they can ouerthrow noble houses, set great men together by the eares, cause bloudshed, and ruine, and hurlyburlie in Cities and common wealthes, and cause bro∣thers to cut off one anothers head: whereupon that old verse may seeme to haue bene made vpon some ground: Non audet Stigius Pluto tentare, quod audet Presbiter, effrenis plana{que}, fraudis axus. But now in recompence of these two passing lewd women, we haue two excellent vertu∣ous women: Fiordeliege married to Brandimart, and Isabell espoused to Zerbino. Which, I thinke mine author hath deuised to haue great aduersities, and to haue lost their husbands most vnfortunatly, to the end to lay before all chast and vertuous matrones an example, how the troubles that happen to their husbands, must be a meane to set foorth their praise the more. And indeed, to attribute to them the highest point of glorie in this kinde that may be, you see how he maketh them leese their husbands euen in the prime of their owne
yeares: Zerbyno slaine in France, and Brandimart in Barbarie, and both of them naming their wiues at their last houre, to shew how dearely they loued them; which causeth them to breake into such piteous lamentations, as would moue not onely a tender hearted Ladie, but euen a valiant hearted man, to shed teares with compassion. Further, the deathes of both these Ladies, in sundry kindes are most admirable: Fiordeliege builds her a little roome in the sepulcher of her husband, and there becomes an Anchorite: Isabella falling into the hand of the barbarous Rodomont, and hauing no way to saue her chastitie from his violence, deuised a meane to redeeme it with the price of her life: Oh worthy Isabella, that deseruest to be painted in Tables, and set foorth in clothes of Arres, for an example to all young Ladies of constant chastitie. But now to goe forward, we haue to consider likewise of the inchaunted Pallace, in which as it were in an infinite laberinth, so many braue young men of great vallour, loose themselues in seeking their loues, and when they would depart thence, they heare them∣selues called backe, and thinke they see their faces; but when they come, thinking to finde them, they vanish out of their sights, and turne to shadowes. This inchantment is likewise referred to loue, that painteth forth in our fancie, the Image of the party loued, representing to vs the sweete speech, the seemely behauiour, the gracious lookes of our Idol that we wor∣ship: but neither can we finde it when we seeke for it, neither doth the heart take any re∣pose, still labouring to attaine to the end which more do misse then hit, and yet when they do attaine to it, for the most part they grow as wearie, as before they grew fond. We may say that Dido was in this laberinth, when as Virgil describeth her: At Regina graui iamdudum saucia cura, Vulnus alit vaenis, & caeco carpitur igni, Multa viri virtus animo, multus{que} recurrat, Gentis honos: haerent insixi peclore vultus, Verba{que}; nec placidam membris dat cura quietem. Wherefore this passion may well be called That tickling wound, that flat'ring cruell foe, as it is in the first booke. And no maruell if Rogero once againe, hauing lost his ring of reason, he drawne into this inchaunted Pallace. Onely Astolfo (taught by a booke Logestilla gaue him, to take away a fantasticall Image, or some such witchcraft as lay vnder the threshold) dissolued the inchauntment. But whereas it is said that Atlanta did build it, thereby to keepe Rogero in an idle life, therein he toucheth the fond tendernes of diuers parents ouer their children, who bringing them vp in wantonnesse, ease and pride, make them the more apt to fall into this inchanting laberinth. Many more examples are alledged by mine author: as that prettie Comicall tale of Ariodant and Genewra: the fantasticall tale of Norandino and Lucyna, that were lapt in goates skinnes: the death of Marganorres two sonnes: the tale of the Mantuan knight that had the married mens cup. All which haue good Moralities, and may be fitlie applyed to this common place of loue. Now the other common place is of armes,Of armes. which indeed is more pertinent to matters of state (as tother is to priuate life and manners,) and in this mine author hath carried his in∣uention verie daintilie, and well worth the marking. For he propoundeth to vs the ex∣ample of two mightie Emperours, one of which directeth all his counsels by wisedome, learning, and Religion; But the other being rash, and vnexperienced, ruined himselfe and his counttrie: and in this storie though much of it be fayned, yet are set downe the ve∣rie ordinarie causes, and the vsuall sequels of all such garboyls and troubles. It is almost an vsuall matter to reade of young Princes, that being left in peace and prosperitie, and hauing so much wealth they know not what to do withall, straight follow their youth∣full humour of reuenging some (I know not what) old iniuries, and be put in hope by such hare-brayne Counsellours as Rodomont and his fellowes, of great conquestes
and in the end ouerthrow indeed great armies, not of their enemies, but of their owne, as, the Oracle mocked Craesus: Craesus Halim penetrans magnam perueriet opum vim. So did Hanniball in Italie (though indeed he preuayled a great while) led thereto by a dreame, as some write. Now in these matters of warres, the chiefe fault commonly is, in those Counsellors that put a sword into a mad-mans hand, by putting such conceits into Princes heads. Yet we see Agramant hath his graue Sobrino, that aduised him at the first, not to inuade other mens countryes, but to keepe his owne; that aduiseth him to preuent mischiefe in time, and to sue for peace: that aduiseth him to put the matter to a combat of one man, and the partie ouercome to pay yearely tribute: and finally, that not onely with faithfull counsell, but with valiant seruice, sticketh to him to the last; but Agramants owne rashnesse and follie ouerthrowes all the good that could be done him. Further these youthfull Counsellours, on whom Agramant did so much relye, did not onely hurt him by their fond perswasions to his ill succeeding warres, but also in the middest of the heate thereof, when their seruice should haue stood him in most steed, an∣noyed him, and in a manner quite confounded him with their continuall iarring and squa∣ring among themselues about matters of small or no importance: So that, as Agamem∣non, was wont to wish for ten Nestors, and could haue bene content to haue spared A∣chilles: so Agramant had iust cause to haue wished for ten Sobrinos, and to haue spared Rodomount, and the other great champions. And by the way it is to be noted, how Poe∣ticallie mine author sendeth Discord among them, and where she was found, as you might reade in the fourteenth booke. Now to Agramant is on the other side opposed Charles, a graue and well stayed Prince, wise and valiant, not parciall in doing iustice, bountifull in rewarding seruices, and which is all in all, deuout without hypocrisie, and putting in∣deed his affiance in God, and consequently in his extremities is ayded by God; and in the end obtaining a most happie victorie, driuing both his enemies out of his countrie, and gayning from them a great part of theirs. Further my author hath set downe diuers formes (as I may call it) of valiant men, though not all in a sort to be imitated, but some rather greatlie to be reproued; Mandricard is described to be exceeding full of cou∣rage, and withall verie quarrelsome, and yet with good successe: He takes Doralyce from her guard, he fights with Orlando, with Rodomont, with Marsisa, and still he holds his owne, But this good fortune is a cause to fooles of their ouerthrow; for (as our En∣glish Prouerb saith) So oft goes the pitcher to the water, at last it comes broke home. Mandricard would needs quarrell with Rogero about their cognisaunce, and by him is slaine after all his brauerie. This is written for a warning to such as are of Mandricardos disposition, to take heed of Mandricardos end. Likewise in Rodomont there was exceeding strength of bodie, as well as courage of minde, but the same was gouerned with no deliberation; which caused him to attempt, and to giue ouer things attempted very sodainly, which finally turned to be hurtfull to himselfe as well as to others. On the other side, Renaldo was a franke natured man, valiant & curteous, Ferraw stout, but too ful of cracking, and therby procuring himselfe enmities: Orlando ful of clemencie as well as courage: Zerbino a patterne of a most noble & thankful nature, and though not fortunate, yet most famous in despite of fortune. Rogero, the verie Idea and perfect example of a true knight, that will by no meanes break his faith and his honour, that seekes no aduantage of the inchanted sheeld, that to be grate∣full to Don Leon Augustus, would leese both loue and life. and finally, that in defence of his honour killeth Rodomont. Further, as I haue often noted in the seuerall bookes, it is a verie pleasing thing to see the due punishment of the wicked doers, and the procurers of euill, as besides those I haue noted, you may see that none scapeth of the xxxij. kings that came out of Affricke, but
Rogero and Sobrino, the one a perswader to peace, the other, a iust warriour, and true of his word. Beside, in Astolfo is a praise of learning, who with his sounding horne, by which is meant eloquence, and with his booke (betokening wisedome) both the gifts of Logestilla, becom∣meth a tamer of monsters, as well as a conquerour of men, and accomplisheth greater mat∣ters alone, then all the rest do with their force and armes. Further, in the praise of learning, and to moue Princes to fauour learning, he shewes how onely the pen of the learned is that that preserues the good fame of Princes, as for the com∣mon foolish Pamphlet-writers he condemneth them, likening them to Vultures, carren Crowes, and chattering Pyes, that are not able to saue their friends names from the lake of obliuion, because their writings are not durable. Thus much I thought good to note of the generall Allegorie of the whole worke, to giue you occasion to ruminate, as it were, and bet∣ter to disgest that, which you before in reading, did perhaps swallow downe whole without chewing. Now me thinke it is euen high time to take away, and bid much good do it you, or at least no harme do it you, or if you thinke it will for all this, the best phisicke I can prescribe you, is to take a leafe or two of S. Matthewes Gospell, or of S. Paules Epistles, and it shall restore you to your perfect health. THE LIFE OF ARIOSTO BRIEF∣LY AND COMPENDIOVSLY GATHERED OVT OF SVNDRIE ITALIAN writers, by IOHN HARINGTON. Who are wor∣thie to haue their liues written.THose that performed anie notable worke in their liues, either for the profite of their countrey, or for the aduancement of learning, or in any other thing that hath made them worth the talking of af∣ter their deceasses, haue for the most part both bene recorded in the Histories of their times, and also had their names eternized by spe∣ciall Treatises written of their liues; by which the ensuing ages might know their country, their parentage, their time of birth, their education, their disposition, their actions, and their end: Whether it be that men are willing to prosecute their deserts with a thankfull remémbrance after their deaths, as it were for a kind of recompence of their trauell in this life, whether for the incouragement of those that liue, to make them by vertue hunt after fame. Neither onely haue men of good deserts bene praised for their vertues, but also the wicked haue bene blazed for their faults, that those whom desire of fame cannot allure to well do∣ing, yet feare of shame and ignominie, may terrifie from leud actions. In both which kinds, diuerse haue employed their pennes, both in former ages and now of late, to the great good and delight of the studious reader.Plutarksliues. The xij. Cesars. The x. Empe∣rours. The Mirour of Magistrats. Witnesse Plutarks liues called his Paralels, comparing the notable men of Rome and Greece: Suetonius booke of the twelue Caesars: anothers after him of ten Emperours (excellently written in Italian): And of our owne countrie and in our owne language, the Mirrour of Magistrates, in which the life and fall of many great persons is very well set downe, and in a good verse. Now (as I say) this being a common cu∣stome, and as it were a due reward to men of good desert, no maruell if this Poet, whose
worke hath bene acceptable to so many thousands, haue also found this fauour to haue his life written, which hath bene done by three Italians that I haue read, namely Giero∣lam, Porro of Padoa, Gierolamo Garofala of Ferrara, and by Simon Fornari of Rheggio: out of whose three reports I haue gathered this compendious treatise, to satisfie such as are desirous to know who this Ariosto was, whom I haue so greatly extolled in my Apo∣logie, as a benefactor of all studious mindes, and on whose worke I haue employed so much time, to put it into English verse, and to bestow so many notes as I haue done vpon the expounding of his Allegories, and whatsoeuer else I iudged fit for the readers of weaker ca∣pacities. First therefore you must know,Ariosto his pa∣rentage. that the house or name of the Ariosti came first out of Bologna, (not as some haue vainely surmised deriued of the Aristij or Ariouisti) for yet their name is remaining in Bologna in good account and reckning, and was long since of that reputation for gentrie and wealth, that Margues Obyso the third of the house of Este, thought it no disparagement to him to marrie a wife out of that stocke, called Lippa Ariosta. This Ladie was of excellent beautie and wit, and bringing with her vnto Ferra∣ra some of the Ariosti of her kin and followers, by her fauour and countenance, they so well fethered their nests in Ferrara in her life, that they held euer since the account of Gentlemen of the better sort: But (admit their familie were of good reckning before) yet the excellencie of this famous man we now treate of, by the consent of all that write of it,His father. hath greatly increased the account and credit thereof. His fathers name was Ni∣cholas Ariosto, and both his father and vncles bare offices in their countrey of good va∣lew, his mothers name was Aria of the house of Malagutsie in Reggio,His mother. as appeareth in one of his Satyres where he nameth her. Now though this Lodowike Ariosto were his fathers eldest sonne, yet he had foure brothers and fiue sisters, the names of his bro∣thers himselfe set downe in his second Satyre, Charles, Alexander, Galasso, and Gabriell, where also he complaineth that Mercurie was no great friend to his house,His brothers meaning that their wealth was but small, because none of them had vsed to increase it by traf∣ficke or merchandize. Now though his father were a man of good reckning, as ha∣uing bene in his youth a companion of Duke Borso, and after that an officer to Duke Her∣cules, in a good place, namely his Maiordomo, which I take to signifie as much as great master or steward of his house, and often employed as Ambassadour from him to the Pope, and to the king of France, and consequently receiued of him great preferments, as well in dignities, as reuenewes and fees, yet it seemeth that he liued euer so at the vt∣termost of his abilitie, that he pursed vp little to the increase of his stocke, and thereby left his heire no verie rich man.His towardnes in his child∣hood. But to speake of the sonne of whom I chiefly intend my discourse, certaine it is that from his verie childhood, he shewed great tokens of forward∣nes in all studie, but specially in Poetrie, in so much that his father yet liuing, he trans∣lated the tale of Pyramus and Thisbee into verse, making in a manner a Comedie of it, and so caused his brothers and sisters to play it. Howbeit his father being vtterly vn∣learned, and rather regarding what studie would be most profitable to be followed by his sonne, then what his nature and inclination did best serue him to, compelled him to studie the ciuill law, in which hauing plodded some yeares verie displeasantly, and with no great proofe, at last he left it vtterly, and fell to more sweete studies; for the barbarousnesse of the phrase agreed not with the sharpnes of his conceit, in so much that he writeth of himselfe (though rather pehaps of his modestie, then that it was so) Passar, vent' anni mi trouaua, e vopo Hauer di Pedagogo, ch'a fatica Inteso haurei quel che tradusse Esopo. That is to say, that being twentie yeare old, he had need of a schoolamaster to conster
Esopes fables; though I see not how that could be, considering that being verie young, they say he made and openly pronounced an Oration in Latine, that gaue euen then great hope of him: the best likelihood is, that when his father set him to the Law, which he had no minde vnto, that then he lost his Latine againe, which is soone done, and so was glad to fall to it freshly, after he came to mans estate, which he did verie studious∣ly, reading manie bookes, and especially Horace, whom he studied so thorowly, that he was able to expound diuers hard and obscure places in his Odes, which were then not vnderstood, and it is obserued, that when Leo the tenth was Pope, both his holinesse and diuers great Prelates in Rome fauored him greatly, euen in that respect. Thus as I said, his naturall inclination carrying him chiefly to Poetrie, he gaue himselfe to reade those Poets that were of best account, both in Latine and Italian, as his worke well shewes, in his oft and excellent imitations of them, and his gift was such, that though his youngest brother Gabriel wrote reasonable well, and by meanes of a lamenesse he had, gaue himselfe wholly to studie, yet he came so farre short of him, that there was no comparison: so that as one said of Tully, Satis est non modo in vna familia, sed in vna ciuitate esse vnum Rhetorem; it is enough to haue one good Orator not onely in a fa∣mily, but euen in a whole Citie: So one may say of Ariosto, it is enough that all Italy had one so excellent a Poet. Yet he was often woont to lament as before him Petrarke, and before them both Ouid is noted to haue done, that his father still draue him from Poetrie, as that verse witnesseth, Abi lasso, quando hebbi al Pegaseo melo L'eta disposta, e che le fresche guancie, Non si videan auchorfiorir, d'vnpelo Mio padre mi caccio con spiedi e lancie Non che con sprom, a volger testi e chiose. Em'occupo cing anni in quelle ciancie. But to proceed, when he had prettilie entered himselfe in Poetrie, and was of the age of foure and twentie, his father departed his life, and as I in part noted before, left him no rich man, whether that the inheritance was deuided among all the brothers, as in some places of England and Wales, the custome of the Gauell kinde alloweth, or that his liuing stood most vpon offices and fees that dyed with him: but thus they write, that he was then greatly perplexed with the charge of so great a familie, and with bestowing his sisters, and prouiding for his brothers, that he was euen readie to haue giuen ouer all his studie, had not the emulation that he had with a Gentleman of his owne name and kinne, called Pandolfo Ariosto, still renewed in him his former disposition: but in processe of time this Pandolfo dyed, with which his friend and cosin were greatly discouraged, and for a time againe discontinued, but yet so as the world before that time had some conceit of his sharpenesse of wit, and of his gift in well writing: In the end being toward thirtie yeares old, he was for his good parts entertained into the seruice of Don Hippolito Cardinall of Este,His seruice of Cardinall Hippolito. a great fauourer of learning and good witts, and one that kept continually in his court great store of excellent learned men, among whom Ariosto was receiued in verie honoura∣ble sort: and yet to this time he had not written any worke of fame, but some few Son∣nets: forbearing belike to write till he were well stuffed with matter; as wise buil∣ders beginne not their buildings till they haue brought their Lime and stone and timber in place, left one should stay for the other. At his very entrance into this Cardinals ser∣uice, he determined, as it should seeme, to make some Poem, finding his strength to serue him to it, and though he could haue accomplished it very well in Latine, yet he chose rather
his natiue tongue, either because he thought he could not attaine to the highest place of praise,Why he wrote not in Latine the same being before occupied by diuerse, and specially Virgil and Ouid, or be∣cause he found it best agreed with his matter and with the time, or because he had a desire (as most men haue) to enrich their owne language with such writings as may make it in more account with other nations: but the first of these was the true cause indeed, for when Bembo would haue disswaded him from writing Italian, alledging that he should winne more praise by writing Latine, his answer was, that he had rather be one of the princi∣pall and chiefe Thuscan writers, then scarse the second or third among the Latines: adding, that he found his humor (his Genius he called it) best inclining to it. Wherefore going for∣ward with that resolution, of all the Poems that were then in that kind in manner of history (they were called Romanzi, which in French signifieth briefe notes of occurrents) he chose Boyardo,So did Virgil by Homer for the same cause vpon whose worke he would ground, both because he said Boyardos worke was fresh in euery mans minde, as also because he would shunne the bringing in of new names, and of new matter, which he thought would be nothing so pleasant vnto his countri∣men, as that of which they had some tast alreadie, and yet withall a desire to know fur∣ther of being by Boyardo left vnperfect. Thus (as I said) he began this worke of his en∣tituled Orlando Furioso, being about the age of thirtie yeares, and being entred into the seruice of Cardinall Hippolito, howbeit he did not so wholly giue himselfe either to rea∣ding, for the inriching of his owne wit, or to writing, for the pleasure and profit of others, that he withdrew himselfe from such honorable seruices as he was called to.His imploy∣ments. For when Pope Iulio the second had intended to make warre vpon the Duke of Ferrara (whose bro∣ther Cardinall Hippolito was) master Lodowicke Ariosto was chosen as a most fit man to go of Ambassage to him,His ambassage to pacifie his wrath; the which busines he managed so well, that he wan great reputation of wisedome and discretion at his returning: Howbeit, it was not long after his returne, but that the forenamed Pope, being indeed a man of an vnquiet spirit, and giuen all to the warres, leuied a great power against the Duke, and shipped ma∣ny of his souldiers, to send them ouer Poe the great riuer that runnes by Ferrara, these were met by the forces of the Duke vpon the water, and in that seruice Ariosto himselfe de∣meaned himselfe verie valiantly,His seruice by sea. and tooke one of the best shippes and best stored with victuall and munition in all the fleete. But these armies being dissolued, the Duke thought good once againe to send to pacifie that same ouer terrible Prelat; and euerie man shun∣ning the office, knowing the furious nature of Iulio, Ariosto againe for the seruice and safetie of his countrie,His second am∣bassage. aduentured to go, indeed an exceeding aduenture, for neither were the wayes safe in time of warres to go so weakely guarded; neither was that Popes displea∣sure supportable where he placed the same; yet through both these dangers he waded, and presented himselfe to the Pope; but finding by some priuie intelligence, that the place was too hot for him,His danger to haue bene put to death. he gat home againe with great perill to haue mard all his fine in∣uention, with the losse of that head from whence it came. For this seruice notwithstan∣ding he was greatly both praised and fauoured. Now when things after by the good suc∣cesse of the Duke, grew to more quiet, then he also betooke him to his quiet studies, & con∣sequently did proceede in his excellent Poem: But sodainly, when he had made so much thereof, as gaue great hope to all men, that it would proue an excellent peece of worke, he happened to fall into the Cardinals displeasure, by meanes that he refused to go with him into Hungarie,His troubles. which though the said Cardinall tooke verie displeasantly; yet knowing the valew of the man, and his worth, he would not disgrace him openly, though he wan∣ted no enemies to feed and further that ill conceit in him; which master Lodowicke fin∣ding, was so greatly discouraged, that he intermitted his writing many yeares: and to mend the matter, one taking occasion of this eclipse of the Cardinals fauour, put him in suit for a peece of land of his ancient inheritance, which was not onely a great vexa∣tion to his minde, but a charge to his purse, and trauell to his bodie; for vndoubtedly, the clattering of armour, the noise of great Ordenance, the sound of trumpet and drumme,
the neying of horses do not so much trouble the sweete Muses, as doth the brabling of Lawyers, the paltering of Attorneys, and the ciuill warre or rather most vnciuill disa∣greeing of forsworne Iurors. Thus was good master Lodowike interrupted of his course of writing fourteene whole yeares, euen to the death of the Cardinall; after which time he had, or rather he tooke to himselfe more libertie or leisure to follow his owne humor and priuate studie, and in processe of time finished to great perfection that, which he had begun with great expectation.His sauour & credit with disso. Yet did the Duke Alfonso allure him by all means he could to his court, vsing him like a companion rather then like a seruant, and offering him great offices and preferments if he could haue made him serue him in ordinarie; but he louing his libertie more then any preferment, refused both his and other great offers of great Princes and Cardinals, as also of Pope Leo the tenth, a great fauourer of learning and good wits, of all whom notwithstanding he receiued many graces, and some good giftes; but for countries sake, and of his gratefull nature he was euer relying of the Duke of Ferrara; and finding that the Duke did delight in his writings, and speci∣ally in fine Comedies,His Comedies he made. he made fiue: La Casseria, I suppositi, la Lena, el Nigromante, la Scholastica: but of this last he made but three actes, and it was finished by his bro∣ther Gabriel. These Comedies the Duke did so highly esteeme, that he built a verie sumptuous stage in a faire large hall at Ferrara, of purpose for a place to haue them plaide and represented in his court: and he vsed other great tokens of fauour to him, but specially (which is indeed the onely true token of fauour in a Prince) he gaue him great rewardes, enabling him thereby to build a conuenient house in Ferrara, with a delicate garden to it, in which he vsed often to sit and walke, and make verses, and writing diuers other both wittie and pleasant discourses, or translations out of French or Spanish,His felicitie in translating out of Spanish & other tongs with such felicitie and good grace in the Italian, that his doings were in great account with all the Princes of Italy, and they sent him manie giftes for copies of them: but office of charge he was exceeding loth to take, saying, that he would not sell his libertie for the best Hat in Rome, meaning a Cardinals Hat; further he would confesse of himselfe that he was variable in his desires, and in his disposition, and there∣fore would be tide to nothing.His reperance in diet. For his dyet he was verie temperate, and a great enemie of excesse and surfetting, and so carelesse of delicates, as though he had had no perseuerance in the tast of meates, in so much as one day a friend of his in sport, caused a Muskite to be set before him in steed of a Partrich, but by mistaking of the seruingmā that set it on the boord, another Gentleman happened to tast it, and so the iest was discouered, and he writeth of him∣selfe in one place, Io non ho troppo gusto de viuande, Che Scalco sia, fui degno esser almondo Quando viuean gli huomiuni di grande. That is to say, that his tast was not delicate, and that he was fit to haue liued in the world when they fed on Akornes: howbeit, for women I cannot so much praise his tempe∣rance, for he is noted to haue had dishonest companie with one Alexandra,His mariage doubtfull. though some say he was married to her priuilie, and durst not be acknowne of it for feare to leese some spirituall liuings that he had, which were not lawfull to be held by a mar∣ried man,His sonnes ba∣stards. but howsoeuer it was, his two sonnes were counted but base borne, though both of them prospered reasonable well in the world, their names were Virginio and Gian Battista, Virginio became a spirituall man, and his father surrendered some of his liuings vnto him, the other became Captaine of a band of the Dukes, and a man of good account with the Duke. Also there was a Ladie called Genewra a faire and modest La∣die, whom he made great profession of loue vnto, but whether he enioyed her or no, it is not knowne, and therefore we may imagine the best: he fell in loue with one (whe∣ther
that were this Genewra or no, I know not,) in Florence in the house of Vestucci, a kins∣woman of his, finding her one day dressing of a core like an armour for one of her sonnes, a∣gainst he should go into the great shew that they haue there on midsomer eeue (as they were wont to haue here in London,) whereupon he made that comparison in the 54. stanse of the xxiiij. booke of Orlando Furioso, of the wound that the noble Zerbino Pince of Scot∣land, had receiued of Mandricardo: The Prince so eager was he felt no smart, Yet ran the blond out of his brest amaine, And of his armour all the former part, With crimsen streame of bloud it did distaine: So haue I seene her hand, that to mine hart Hath bene a cause of anguish great and paine, When she a purple seame or flowre hath drawne, In siluer kirtle, or in sleeue of lawne. Also his prettie fantasticall beginning of the fiue and thirtith Canto in the first and second staffe, with the first and second and third of the sixteenth Canto, do proue that he was sub∣iect to that passion of loue, but withall, that his loue was placed vpon women of good worth and of great modestie. Now though I dare not excuse him in this so great a fault, yet partly in respect he was vnmarried, partly because these white diuels haue such a temp∣ting power vpon the earth, me thinkes I should easily obtaine a pardon for him, of all you that reade this short discourse of his life.Another peece of seruice in Grassignana. But omitting this one peccadilio, in all his other proceedings he was verie modest, and iust, and affable, and verie graue and discreet, as he well approued, when after the death of Leo the tenth, he was (though halfe against his will) employed by the Duke, as a Lieutenant or high shreeue, in the countrie called Grassignana, being then full of factions and diuisions, which he so orderdly gouerned, and so well quieted, that he left them all in good peace and concord, leauing among them a ve∣rie good report of his wisedome and equitie, and winning not onely the loue of the better sort, but also a wonderfull reuerence of the wilder sort of people, and a great awe euen in robbers and theeues: as appeared one day by a chance that happened to him in the time of that forenamed office. For as he rode one day with fiue or sixe horses, in one of the most licentious and disorderly parts of the countrie,Loue of the people of all sorts. he was to passe neere Rhodea by a compa∣nie of armed men that lay dispersed in the shade, and by meanes of the dissention and fal∣ling out of two men of some reckening in that countrey, called Domenico Morotto, and Philippo Paechione, there were dayly diuers ryots and outrages committed thereabout vpon the passengers by su ch kinde of men, so as he rode by them not without some doubt to haue bene assaulted: but being past them about a stones cast, the chiefe of the companie demaunded of his man that rode hindermost, what his masters name was, he told him Master Lodomke Ariosto, whereupon straight the partie armed as he was, ran after him; Ariosto stayed his horse seeing him come after him, doubting in his minde to what purpose he came, but when he came nearer, he craued pardon of him, that he had not done his dutie vnto him in his going by, shewing him how he was Philippo Pacchione, desiring his acquaintance, and offering to be at his commaundement with all humilitie and courtesie. Not long after this, hauing occasion about some matter of his office, to haue some con∣ference with one of the principall Gentlemen of Lucca, and appointing the same Gen∣tleman to meete him at a towne called San Pellegrino: at his comming thither, he found not onely the said Gentleman there ready to attend him, but also diuers others: with La∣dies and gentlewomen that came of purpose to see him, drawne by the sound of his lear∣ning and wit, where they feasted him and entertained him verie noblie, euerie one striuing
who could do him most countesie. Immediatly after this commission of his was expi∣red, he was earnestly dealt with to haue bene Ambassadour to Pope Clement, but he would by no meanes accept it. At his comming home giuing himselfe still to writing, the Duke intreated him to translate the Menecmie of Plautus into Italian,Menecmi of Plantus. which he did with so fit phrases of speech, and so agreeable to the Italian tongue, that it was not coun∣ted among the least of his praises: and as for all the others Comedies of his making, they were of such estimation, that they were often represented vpon the stage, and for the most part by Gentlemen, in so much that Don Francesco of Este, that was after Marques of Massa, the first time that the Lena was plaid, to grace it the more, rehearsed the Prologue thereof himselfe in publike. One of his Comedies called Casseria, he beganne in the life time of his father (though he intermitted it many yeares after) and one prettie accident they haue noted about it, which shewes his notable gift that he had to apply to imitation in his Poetrie, all that might with good iudgement be vsed in it.A prety ch̄ace. It fortuned his father one day grew into some choler with him, and rebuked him verie sharpely, and with a long speech and many words, for some matter that he laid to his charge, imputing to him verie great blame for it, and all the while he made him no answer, but gaue him full scope and libertie to take his pleasure with him: soone after his brother Gabriel, when his father had turned his backe, began to reason with him vpon the same subiect, and to lay to his charge the same arguments; but he easily re∣suted him, and with verie good and sound reasons rustified his doing. Why then? (quoth his brother) what ment you, you did not satisfie my father at the first, as you might easily haue done with so reasonable an answere? In troth (said Lodowike Ariosto to tell you true, I was thinking of Erofilos part in my Comedie I haue begunne of Casseria, and me thought my fathers speech to me, was so fit to be assigned to that part of an old man chiding his sonne, that I forgat while I was thinking to make such a part in sport, that I heard such a part plaid in earnest.An early riser. In making his Furioso, he would rise sometime at one or two of the clocke in the morning, when he lay at his friendes houses, as well as when he was at home, and then he would cause an old seruant of his one Iohn de Pescia to bring him pen and inke, and so would write many verses when he found himselfe well disposed to it, and then he had a great pleasure to reade them to his friends, both Gentlemen and faire Ladies, among whom by the pleasantnesse of his wit and his good grace, he was euer well accepted.A good copa∣nion vpon the way. The Duke of Ferrara tooke him for so good a companion, that when he rode any iourney, he would desire to haue him with him, and atidle times he tooke great pleasure to haue him reade to him, as well other bookes as his own, he had so good a grace in reading, and so sweete a pronunciation), and yet not delighting to heare himselfe (a fault that many other haue bene noted of) but alwayes giuing a spirite to that which he read, whether it were his owne writing or other mens, and as he himselfe could pro∣nounce verie well,His good pro∣nunciation. so was it a great penance to him to heare other pronounce ill, that which himselfe had written excellent well. In so much as they tell of him, how com∣ming one day by a Potters shoppe that had many earthen vessels readie made to sell on his stall,A prettie tale how he vsed a Potter. the Potter fortuned at that time to sing some staffe or other out of Orlando Furioso, I thinke that, where Renaldo requesteth his horse to carrie for him, in the first booke, the 32. staffe: Ferma Baiardo mio: Deh ferma il piede Che l'esser senza te troppo minuoce. Or some such graue matter fit for a Potter, but he plotted the verses out so ilfauouredly (as might well beseeme his dustie occupation) that Ariosto being, or at least making sem∣blance to be in a great rage withall, with a little walking sticke he had in his hand, brake diuers of the pots; the poore Potter put quite beside his song, and almost
beside himselfe, to see his market halfe mard before it was a quarter done, in a pitifull sowre manner, between railing and whining, asked what he meant to wrong a poore man that had neuer done him iniury in all his life: yes, Varlet, quoth Ariosto, I am yet scarce euen with thee for the wrong thou hast done me here afore my face, for I haue broken but halfe a dozen base pots of thine, that are not worth so many halfe pence; but thou hast broken and man∣gled a fine stanza of mine worth a marke of gold. He built (as I partly touched before) a pretie couvenient house,His manner of building. and being demaunded why he did not build it in more stately manner, considering what sumptuous pallaces, what stately porches, what goodly fountaines he described in his Furioso: he answered, that words were cheaper layd together then stones. Vpon the front of his doore he wrote a verse, that few of the builders of this latter age can truly write, or at least if they could, I would say their houses were strongly built indeed, for more then the third heire: Parna, sed apta mihi, sed nulli obnoxia, sed non Sordida, parta meo sedtamen are domus. That is to say: This house is small, bt sit for me, but hurtfull vnto none, But yet not sluttish, as you see, yet payd for with mine owne. One fault in his building was, he would often set vp and pull downe many parts thereof, and he would say of himselfe, that he vsed his house as he did his verses, mend them so much, that he mard them quite. For indeed, as a tree planted in an orchard, if it be once or twise well pickt and pruned, it doth further the growing of it, but if a man be euer sid∣ling about it, it will leese the naturall beautie, and hardly keepe life: so is it with one of his stanzes or staues, as we call them, at the first conceiuing of it, one may mend that which he shall sodainly set downe, but if one will still be turning and wresting of it, he may make it leese the grace it had at the first. But what fault soeuer himselfe did finde with his owne Verses, certaine it is that to all the great Princes of Italie they were most acceptable, as witnesseth the diuers great and honourable gifts they gaue him, as namely a pension of twentie pound by the yeare in Millan with an office to it giuen him by Hyppolyto, many sutes graunted him by the Duke of Ferrara, with great rewards from Pope Leo the tenth, from Cardinall Farnese, from Cardinall Bybiena, and chiefty from Marquesse Vasto, and diuers other meaner stares that for breauities sake are omitted. And because now I would also draw to an end, I will a little runne ouer that the hath bene sayd, with somewhat that hath bene forgotten, and so conclude, beginning from his birth.He was borne 1474. He was borne the yeare 1474, in the Castle of Rheggio, his father being then gouernour of the Castle, it stands in Lombardie; he was tall of person, of complexion melancholy, giuen much to studie and musing, and would therewith sometime forget himselfe, he was of colour like an Oliue, somewhat townie in his face, but faire skinned otherwise, his haire was blacke, but he quickly grew bold, his forehead was large, his eye-browes thinne, his eye a little hollow but very full of life and very blacke, his nose was lar ge and hooked, as they say the Kings of Persia were, his teeth passing euen and white, his cheeks but leane, his beard very thin, his necke well proportioned, his shoulders square and well made, but somewhat stopping, as almost all that looke much on bookes in their youth are inclined to be, his hand somewhat drie, and a little bow-legged. His counter∣feit was taken by Tytiano that excellent drawer so well to the life, that a man would thinke yet it were aliue; he was honoured with the Lawrell by the hands of the renowned Em∣perour Charles the fist, in the yeare 1532, which was a yeare before hee dyed. Now for his disposition as we haue partly touched before, he was of nature assable, not proud, ta∣king lesse vpon him then others did yeeld vnto him, yet putting vp no knowne iniurie not of his betters; somewhat amorous in his youth, very secret, passing studious, by na∣ture
fearefull vpon the water, and therefore when hee went out of a shippe at any time he would see others go before him, vsing that saying, De puppo neunssimus exi: though for mine owne part I see no great reason for it. Further, he was not very venturous on horse-backe, for they say he would light at every place of danger, though others rode o∣uer it. He loued not to go much abroad out of his owne countrey, in so much as he writes in one of his Satyres, Che vuol Andare a torne, a torne vada Vegga Ingleterra, Vngheria, Francia e Spagna, Ame piace habitar lamia contrada Vista ho Thosana, Lombardia Romagna Quel monte che diuide, e quel che serra Italia, e vn mare e l'altro che la bagna Questo mi basta, il resto della terra Senza mai pagar l'hoste, andro cercando Con tolomeo, sia il mondo in pace e in guerra. To this effect in English: Who list to ride about, about may ide, His writings do shew he had great skill in Cosmography.See England, Vughery, and France and Spaine; I loue in mine owne country still to bide, In viewing which, I sure haue taune some paine. Thoscan, Romagna Lombardie, beside The hils that Italie close, and diuide, Suffiseth me, the rest of all the maine With Tolomey to search and eu'ry cost, In peace or warre, and neuer pay mine host. For his workes, I haue touched them before; as for the fiue Cantoes that follow Furioso, I am partly of opinion they were not his, both because me thinke they differ in sweetnesse of slile from the other, and beside it is not likely that a man of his iudgement, hauing made so absolute a peece of worke as his Furioso is, and hauing brought euery matter to a good and well pleasing conclusion, would as it were marre all againe, and sent them all by the eares, and bring Rogero into the Whales bellie, and Astolfo with him for compa∣nie, that a little before were conquerours of the world, and vumatchable for courage and learning: but to proceed to his end, he liued til he was 59 yeares old, and toward his latter end he grew sickly, and by much Physicke marred his stomacke, his sicknesse grew first as they write by meanes of ill digestion, he being a grosse feeder, and not chewing his meate well, so that in the end it weakned him very much. That very night that he sickned and tooke his bed, there happened a great mischance, that was (in the opinion of most men) a presage of his death. The goodly Hall that Alfonso had beautified with the most sumptuous Stage that had bene seene in Ferrara, (purposely for Ariostes Comedies) was fiered by mischance, and consumed a great part of the Dukes pallace beside. Now if fire (as one Artimedorus writeth) betokeneth same and greatnesse, then this vnfortunate fire fortuning at such a time as it did, may yet serue as a meane to enoble the more this famous mans death: and as Co∣mets are said to foreshew the death of Princes, so this terrible fire lasting so many dayes as it did, might be thought to foretell his death, chiefly since it consumed that worke that was built for his great same and honour. He tooke his sicknesse not onely patiently but euen chearfully, affirming that he was willing to die, and so much the rather because he heard that the greatest Diuines were of opinion, that after this life we should k now one another, affirming to his friends that were by, that many his friends were departed, whom he had a very great desire to visite, and that euery houre seemed to him a yeare till he might see them. In fine, he dyed in Ferrara the eight of Iuly, 1533, and though he were worthy of all honor,
yet this was all the honour he had done at that time, that the Monkes of S. Benet buried him in their Church (and contrary to their custome, which is neuer to go to burials) went with him to his buriall, and that there was scarce a man that could write, but did honor him with an Epitaph, his bones were after taken vp by one Sygnor Augustino, and layd in a very faite tombe, with his statue from the girdle vpward, in the forenamed Church of S. Benet. And now to close vp this whole discourse of his life, with the greatest prayse, hee was a most cha∣ritable and honest man, as appeared both by his great care he had of his aged mother (whom also he speakes of often in his Satyrs and other writings (saying in one place. L'eta di cara madre, mi percuote, De pieta il cuore. And also by this example that is recited of him, of an aged Priest that hauing three or foure fat benefices, was in great doubt to be poysoned for greedinesse of them, by some that had the next Aduowsons, and in respect of the great honestie of M. Lodowike Ariosto, he chose him before all his owne kinne or friends with whom he would soiorne, as himselfe bosteth, and indeed it was a good boost, Mane di voi ne de pui giunti a lui D'amicitia fidar unqua sivolle Io di fuor cutti scielto vinco fui. To conclude, his learning, his good behauiour, his honestie, made him both beloued of all good men in his life, and bewayled of all honest men in his death, so as me thinke rea∣ding ouer his life, I could find in my heart to wish (sauing for some very few things) Sie mihi countingat viuere fisq, mori.
AN EXACT AND NECESSARIE TABLE IN ORDER OF ALPHABET, VVHERE∣IN YOV MAY READILIE FINDE THE NAMES of the principall persons treated in this work, with the chiefe matters that concerne them. A ACteon. pag. 85. a notable hunter and a cuckold, and for that cause seyned to haue had hornes for the latter of the two proper∣ties, and to haue bene de∣uoured with his own dogs for the former, because he was beggered and consu∣med by them. Aglaure. 307. daughter of Erictheus king of Athens, she is said to haue bene turned to a stone, and her fault was this, because she presumed to looked vpon Erictho∣nius, that was committed to her custodie by Pallas with charge not to presume to open the basket he was kept in. Agramant Emperour of the Turkes, sonne of Tra∣i. mo, alias king of Affricke, alias the Southern king. He came into Fraunce to auenge his fathers death. pag. 1. He besiegeth Parish very straightly. 61, musters his men. 103. assaulteth Paris. 110. continueth his assault. 113.122. is repulsed and besieged in his tents. 142. is rescued. 217. is troubled with the contention of his Princes, and labours to compound them. ibid. is dis∣comfited by Renaldo. 254. slieth to Arly. 255. heares of the siege of Biserta. 320. his Oration to Marsilio, Sobri∣no and the other Princes. ibidem. his challenge on Ro∣geros head. 322. takes an oth of truce. 323. breakes the truce 326. discomfited by land. 331. flies to sea. ibidem. his men mutinous ibidem. discomfited at sea by Dudon. 332. flyes, and would kill himselfe. 336. meets Gradasso 337. sends a chalenge to Orlando, three to three. 337. his stout answers to Brandimart. 345. sights and is dis∣armed by Brandimart. 348. is slaine by Orlando. 352. Agricane king of Tartane and father to Mandricard pag. 7. Albracca a towne in the East Indies pag. 7. Alcyna a famous witch or Faerie. She tooke Astol∣so, and transformed him to a mirtle. pag. 44. entertaines Rogero. 50. the discription of her beauty. ib. the descripti∣on of her deformitie. 53. she pursues Roger by land. 58. by sea. 59 she is discomfited by Logestilla. ibid. Aldiger bastard sonne of Bono entertaineth Rogero the 35. booke. staffe. 63. hurt by Mandricard. pag. 210. Almonio a Scot, seruant to Zerbium, saued in the tem∣pest with Isabella. 96. goes to Rochell. 97. findes Zerbino 194. brings Odericke prisoner. ibidem. executes him and Gabrina, booke 24. staffe. 36. Alzird, a gallant young man king of Tremisen kild by Orlando. 93. Amalthea was Iupiters nurse. By Amaltheas horne is signified plentie. Amazons, looke tales. 153. Amazons a nation of warlike women, so named of , and , which is to say, without papps, or of  and , without bread, because they feed on flesh onely. Angelica called also the Indian Queene, daughter of Galafron, came from India with Orlando and is taken from him by the Emperour Charles. pag. 2. giuen to the Duke of Bauier to keep, and scapeth out of his tent. ib. meets with Renaldo and runnes from him. ibidem she meets Sacrapant and goes with him. pag. 5. helpes him to take Bayardo. pag. 6. meets Renaldo againe. pag. 7. leaues Renaldo and Sacrapant, and meets with an Her∣mit pag. 10. flyes from him and is pursued by him. pag. 59. her horse possest with a spirit, caries her into the sea, and after to land. ibidem. her lamentation. ibidem. she is cast into a sleepe by the Hermit, but yet he is not able to winne her maidenhead. pag. 60. She is caried to the Ile of Ebuda. 61. tyed naked at the shore. ibid. is found by Rogero and deliuered. 79. vanisheth from him by helpe of the ring. 82. her beautie. 83. she comes to At∣lants enchaunted Pallace, and by the ring would dis∣close her selfe onely to Sacrapant. 90. she is seene & fol∣lowed by Orlando and Ferraw. 91. vanisheth from them ibid. takes away Orlandos helmet. 92. she is sory because Ferraw gat it. ibidem. she findes Medore wounded. 147. heales him. woes him, weds him. 148. giues her host the bracelet Orlando had giuen her. ibidem. meets with Or∣lando in his madnesse. 238. scapes from him and goes to the Indies and giues her whole state to Medore. 242. Anglant the place of Orlandos Earldome. Anselmus Earle of Maganza father of Pinabelle bu∣ries his son. 179. condemnes Zerbino wrongfully. 180. Anselmus, a Doct. of law looke tales. p. 364. staffe. 67. Antheus, a giant of great strength and statute, sonne of Neptune and the earth, looke in the historie of the 23. booke. Aquilant brother to Griffino sonnes of Marques O∣liuero: the elder fights with Orillo. 117. goes to Ierusa∣lem
11 meets with Martano. 139. beats him, brings him and Origille to Damalco. 140. goes towards France 142. is in a tempest. ibidem. came to the country of the Amazons. 149. Icapeth thence. 157. taken prisoner by Pinabell. 172. goes with Renaldo to rescue Charles. 252. is at Bradamants mariage 402. Arachme, an excellent women in needle worke, and weauing, and is sayned to haue compared with Pallas in that kinde, and therefore to be turned to a spyder. Ardenna a huge forrest or thicket in France, where he fayneth the two fountaines of loue and disdaine pag. 7. Arethusa daughter of Nereus and Doris, one of Dia∣nes companions till Alphcus rauished her, and gather with child, whereupon Diana turned her into a riuer bearing her name. Argalia sonne of Galafron brother to Angelica slaine by Ferraw, his ghost appeares to him. pag. 3. Argia wife of Polinyse, her husband being killed, & the tyrant Creon forbidding one payne of death to bury him, yet she buried him and liued euer after a widdow. 307. Argia looke tales. 164. Ariodant a Gentleman of Italie a louer of Genewra 33 fight with Lurcanio, and is parted. 38. is knowne to the king of Scots 41. is married to Genewra. 42. rescues Zerino in France. 125. and is no more spoken of by the author. Arria wife of Peto of Padon, her husband and being con∣demned kild her selfe in his fight, protecting that death was pleasnt to her so long as she left him aliue 307. Artimesia wife of Mansoleus, she built that famous sepulcher for her husband, that was counted one of the wonders of the world, in honor of which all sump∣tuous tombes since are called Mausolea. Astolfo king of Lombardie. looke tales 225. Astolfo called the English Duke, sonne of Oton king of England turned into a mittle. 43. warnes Rogero of Alcina. ibid. comes to Logestilla. 58. goes from Logestil∣la. 114. receiues a booke of her and a borne. ibidem. takes Calligorant. 116. ouercomes Orillo. 118. goes to Damasco. 140 meets Martisa. 141. takes her part. ibid. goes toward France. 142. is in a tempest. ibidem. comes to the Amazons countrey. 149. with his horne seareth the Amazons. 157 turnes to England. 169. dislolues the inchanted Pallace. 170. gets the Griffith horse. 171. meets Bradamant. 177. leaues his horse Rabican, his armour and the inchanted speare with her. 178. goes about the world. 274. comes to Senapo. 275. driues a∣way the Harpias. 281. heares the wosull tale of Lidia, ibid. stops vp the mouth of the caue. 284. washes him∣selfe at a well. ibidem. goes vp to Paradise. 285. conferres with S. Iohn ibid. receiues by his meanes Orlandos wit. 287. sees the riuer of Lethe. 292. comes from S. Iohn. 319 heales Senapo. ibid. takes the wind in a bag ibid. turnes stones to horses. ibid. goes to Biserra 328. redeemes Du∣don. ibid. makes ships of leaues. ib. releases diuers Chri∣stian prisoners. ibidem. restores Orlando to his wit. 326. takes Biserta ibid. lends home Senapo. 376. leaues Affri∣ca. 327. lets goe the Griffith horse ibid. comes to France ibid. is at Bradamants marriage. 402. Astraea daughter of Astreus a iust king, and therfore she was called Iustice. 114. Atlant uncle to Rogero. a great Magician makes a Pallace by inchantment. 12. fights with Gradasso and Rogero, ouercomes them and carries them prisoners into the said Castle. 13. fights with Bradamant and is ouercome by her. 26. ouerthrowes his inchaunted Castle, and lets free Rogero, with the rest of his priso∣ners. 17. makes another inchaunted Palace for Rogero. 90. dyes, and his ghost parteth Rogero and Marsisa. 302. Aurora is seyned by the Poets to haue leued Tytho∣nus, sonne of Laomedon, and to haue maried him: but he growing old she fell in loue with Cephalus. B Baliisard Rogeros sword that had bene sometime Or∣landos & stolen by Brunello, giuen to Rogero, was found by Orlando in the ship 344 restored to Rogero. 376. Bardino findes Brandimart. 329. pestwardes him to go home. 330. bewayles his death 370. Bayardo Renaldos horse ranne from his master twise. pag. 2. and 3. is found by Sacrapant. pag. 6. recouered. pag. 10. is found by Gradasso pag 274 recouered again by Renaldo. Bertolage one of the house of Maganza slaine by Ri∣chardet. 207. Bireno taken prisoner by Cimosco. 71. deliuered by Orlando. ibid. maried to Olympia. ibid. fals in loue with the king of Frislands daughter, and betrayeth Olympia. 74 is hanged by Oberto. 86. Biserra a towne in Barbary assaulted by Orlando, and Astolfo. 335. is taken. 336 is sacked. 338. Boreas the Northerne winde. is sayned to haue ra∣uished Orithia and to haue begotten of her Calas and Zet. Bradamant meets with Sacrapant and ouerthrowes him. pag. 6. betrayed by Pinnabell. pag. 14. meeteth Me∣lissa in Merlins caue. pag. 18. is shewed all her posteri∣tie. 19.20. instructed how to take the ring from Brunel∣lo. 21. meets Brunello. ibidem. sends Rogero the ring. 52. meets Melissa againe. 99. is instructed of her femall posteritie. 100. is warned of the inchauntment, yet can∣not auoyd it. 101. is freed by Astolfo 170 meets Pina∣bell. 173. kils him. 174. meets Astolfo, and of him hath Rabycano and goldelaunce. ibid. goes to Montalbano. 178 sends Frontino to Rogero by Hippalca. 179. she re∣ceiues Rogeros letter 247 her complaint. ibidem. iealous of Marfisa. 259. another complaint. ibid. and 261. her dispaire. ibidem. she meets with Vllanie the Queene of Islands messenger. 262. she winnes a lodging at Sir Tristrams Castle. ibidem. she makes a stout Oration for Vllanie. 265. she ouerthrowes three kings againe. 272. she meets Fiordeliege. 292. ouertl. rowes Rodomount. 393. sends a chalenge to Rogero. 294. ouerthrowes diuers knights. 295. fights with Marfisa 299. angrie with Roge∣ro and makes another complaint. 300 pacified. 301. a∣gaine fights with Marsisa, but is reconciled 303 as∣saults Marganor. 312. deliuereth him to Villane to be put to death. 313. goes to the campe. ib. enters into the battaile. 327. chaleth Agramant. 331. complaints to Mar∣sisa of Rogero. 353. resuseth Leon. 378. her complaint. ibid. sues to Charles, and obtaynes to haue a Proclama∣tion for the combat with whomsoeuer would marrie
her. 308. writes to Rogero to comfort him 379. her com∣plaint of his absence. 386. the fights with Rogero taking him for Leon. 389. another complaint. 391. she is mar∣ried to Rogero 402. Brandimart sonne of Monodant, king of Damagyre, husband to Fiordeliege, goes out of Parish to seeke his frend Orlando. 63. is in Atlants Pallace. 90. set free by Astolfo. 170. meetes Fiordeliege, and goeth with her to Rodomonts bridge. 254. is taken prisoner by Rodomount. 255. released by Astolfo. 328. found againe by Fiorde∣liege. 329. sees Orlando mad and helps to take him. 330. assaults Lyserta and is the first that enters it. 335. is one of the three in the chalenge. 338. hath Frontino giuen him. ibidem. his Oration to Agramant. 345. he fights with Agramant and disarmes him. 348. he is deadly wounded by Gralasso. 349. his speech at his death. 352. his stately funerall, at which Orlando makes a funerall Oration 370. his tombe built by his wife. 371. Bransard Lieutenant to Agramant in Barbarie, sends aewes of the danger Africa was in. 320. redeemeth Bu∣cifer with Dudon. 379. kils himselfe. 336. Briarius a Giant said to haue an 100. armes: Virgil sayns him to be in hell for his conspiracie against Iupi∣ter. Et centrum geminus Briareus & bellualernae it is de∣riued of the Greeke,  they call a strong man. Brigliadore, as much to say, Bridle of gold, the name of Orlandos horse. 87. cast off by Orlando in his madnes. 184. found by Mandricardo. 200. giuen by Rogero (who had slaine Mandricard) to Agramant. 247. wonne by Orlando. 352. Brunello is met by Bradamant. described by Melissa to her 21. is Bradamants guide to Atlants Castle. 25 is bound by her vnto a tree, and hath the inchanted ring taken from him. 26 musters his men before Agramant, and was vnbound by Isolir. 104. is arrested by Marfisa and carried away by her 220. is brought backe by Mar∣sisa at ten dayes end to Agramant, and there deliuered to a base villaine to be hanged. 258. Brutus his wife was Porcia: this Brutus was the stout Roman that kild Caesar for his tyrannie, married the daughter of Cato Vucensis, the hearing of her husbands death eate hote coales and kild her selfe to, whereupon Martiall faith. Coningus asslissi satum cum Porcia Bruti, & substracta sibi quareret arma dolor, Nundum seit is ait mortem non posse negari? crediderum saus hoe vos docuisse patrem, Divis & ardentes auido bibit ore sauillas, Imune & serrum turba molestanega. Bulgar a people of Europe in part of Maesia vpon the riuer Danubrum, where it is called Ister, assaulted by Leon. 380 put to flight. 381. rescued by Rogero. ibid. they make Rogero king 382. send Embassadors to Frāce to Rogero. 397. Bulligant gouerns those of Lyon. 104. Ptolomie cals that Citie Germanica. Bucifer king of Algazer taken. 327. redeemes Dudon. 328. slaine by Olmero. 336. C Calai and Zet were sonnes of Boreas, and had wings or so fayned, because they sayled in swift ships. Calligorant a Giant taken by Astolfo. 116. is carried about the country by him. 117. comes where Crillo was. ibid and from thence goeth with Astolfo to Ierusalem. 118. Astolfo giueth him to Sansonet gouernour of Ieru∣salem. 119. Castor and Pollex sonnes of Iupiter and Leda, gotten of her in likenesse of a swanne, brothers to Helena, cal∣led Tyndarides, they deliuered the sea of Pyrates, and therefore are counted Gods of the sea. They fayne that Pollux was immortall, and when Castor dyed be∣sought Iupiter that he might part his immortalitie with him, whereupon they are an example of brother∣ly loue. Catalynes the chiefest familie of Spaine, of the house of Arragon, and are often put by myne author for the whole state of Spaine. 104. Ceres called the Goddesse of come, mother of Pro∣serpina. Charlemaine sonne of Pipin gathers his forces toge∣ther against the Turkes. pag. 1. takes vp the quarrell a∣bout Angelica. pag. 2. is ouerthrowne by the Turkes. ib. Charles besieged in Paris sends Renaldo into England pag. 11. He expectes the assault and maketh publicke prayers vnto God. 107 his owne prayer. ibidem. receiues the English succours into Parish. 125. heares newes of the spoyles Rodomont did. 126. his Oration. 128. 129. he sets on Rodomont. ibidem driues him away out of Paris. 138. is discomfited againe by Ferraw, and made retire. ibid. is rescued by Renaldo. 254. Christened Marfisa. 318. takes an oth of truce 323. welcomes Rogero into France 376. makes a Proclamation at request of Brada∣mant. 385 his vprightnesse in iudging the controuersies. 392. he makes a sumptuous feast at the mariage of Bradamant. 398. Cimosco king of Freezeland slaine by Orlando. 70. Circe a notable inchantresle, daughter of the Sunne and a Nymph called Perses, she turned Vlysses men in∣to beasts. Cleopatra Queene of AEgypt, being feasted by An∣thonie bad him to a banket, and dissoluing one huge pearle in vinegar she dranke it, and it was thought in that respect a banket of in estimable cost. Clytestra wife of Agamemnon plaid the whore in his absence, and killed him at his retuine it is said the had a Musician plaid chast tunes to her, and so long the continued honest, but when he dyed Aegistus corrupted her: her sonne Orestes in reuenge of his fathers death flue her. Cloridan a companion of Medore goes to seeke the carkasse of Dardanello. 143. kils diuers Christians. ibid. kils two Scots. 146. is kild 146. Corebo one of Zerbins men hurt in defence of Isabella 97. is saued. 194. D Dalinda Genewras maid saued from killing by Re∣naldo. 29 discouers Polynessos trecherie. 32 is pardoned and goes to a Nunrie. 42. Danae daughter of Acrisius, mother to Perseus, she be¦ing lockt vp in a tower by her father, that none might accompanie her, it is said that Iupiter rayned a shower of gold through the tyles of the house into her lap, with helpe of which shower he gather with child. Danubius the greatest riuer of Europe farre North
begins in Germanie, and in long running it is called I∣star 60 riuers fall into it, and hate of them nauigable. Dardanello son of Almont musters afore Agramant. 105. hurteth Lurcanio. 138. is killed by Renaldo. 142. foud dead by Medore. 143. is buried by him and the helpe of Angelica. 147. Dido Queene of Carthage famous for the fabulous loue of Aeneas. Discord sought by the Angell Michaell. 108. found in an Abbey. ibid sent to the Pagans camp ibidem. beaten and sent againe. 217. Doralice comming from Spaine is taken by Mandri∣card. 106. sends priuily to Rodomont. ibidem. agrees well with Mandricard. 107. parts Zerbino and Mandricard. 193. parts Rodomont and Mandricard. Lib. 24. staffe 92. borne away by a spirit in her horse. 213. reiects Rodo∣mont, chuseth Mandricard. 221. her speech to disswade him from fight 243. her lightnes. 246. Drusillae, looke tales of Marganor. 308. Dudon released by Astolfos meanes and made Ad∣mirall 328. discomfireth Agramant by sea. 32. fights with Rogero on land 339. giueth him seuen kings. 342. comes into Paris 376. is at Bradamants mariage. 402. Durindane Orlandos sword taken by Mandricard. 24. booke. 49. staffe. wonne for Gradasso. 246. lost by Gra∣dasso in battaile with Orlando. 352. giuen to Rogero by Orlando. 375. E Ebuda, I finde no such Ile, but Ebude belles in our Brittish sea. Encelladus the greatest of all the Giants that rebelled against Iupiter, for this cause they faine that he was laid vnder mount Aetua, and that the cause of the earthquaks there, is when he sturres to change sides. Erichtonius sonne of Vulcan had feete like a Serpent and deuised a coach to hide them. 307. Euadne wife of Capaneus kild with lightnight at the assault of Thebes, his bodie being burned as the man∣ner of buriall was in those dayes, his wife leapt into the fire with it and dyes. 307. F Ferraw a Spanish knight fights with Renaldo for An∣gelica. pag. 2. lost his helmet in the water. ibidem. takes Renaldo vp behind him. 3. meets with the ghost of Ar∣galia. ibidem. vowes to winne Orlandos helmet. ibid. is in Atlants Pallace. 90. freed by Angelica. 91. fights with Orlando. 92. pursues Angelica and sees her. ibidem. gets Orlandos helmet. ibid. musters his band of the king of Spaines guard. 104. restores the battaile lost. 138. his O∣ration. ibid ouerthrowne by Bradamant. 295. Fiordeliege wife of Brandimart goeth to seeke him. 63 heares of Orlandos madnesse Lib. 24. staffe. 46. sees the battaile betweene Mandricard and Zerbin, goeth to∣ward Paris. ibid. staffe 59. comes to Rodomonts bridge. 227. tels Renaldo of Orlandos madnesse. 253. finds Bran∣dimart. 254. sees him ouerthrowne and taken. ib. meets Bradamant, and showes her Rodomonts bridge. 293. deli∣uers Rogero a chalenge from Bradamant. 294. meetes Bardino and goeth with him to Affrica. 329. finds Bran∣dimart. ibid. sees Orlando and deseries him. ibidem. she makes a blacke Caparison for Brandimart. 344. her dreame and speech. 370. her death. 371. Fiametta, looke tales. Fiordespina, looke tales. Frontino the name of Rogers horse is kept by Bra∣damant. 28. sent by her to Rogero. 178. is taken by Rodo∣mont. 179. recouered by Bradamant. 293. sent againe to Rogero. 294 found by Orlando in a ship. 344. restored to Rogero. 375. his praise. 389. Fusberta Renaldos sword. 10. G Gabrina, looke tales: the flyes frō Orlando. 99. meets Marfisa. 158. is committed to Zerbinos protection. 159. robs Pinnabels corse. 179. betrayes and accuses Zerbino. 180. flyes and is misused by Mandricard. 182. is pardo∣ned of life by Zerbino. 194 committed to Ordickes pro∣tection and by him hanged. Lib. 24. staffe 38. Ganimed is fayned by the Poets to be Iupiters cup∣bearer, and to haue bene caryed vp by an Eagle, it is taken generally in the worst part for Bardassos. Genewra, looke tales. Gibbellius, looke Guelfs. Gradasso king of Serycane taken by Atlant into the inchanted Castle. 13. is deliuered by Bradamant. 27. is in Atlants Palace. 90. freed by Astolfo. 170. come to aide Agramant 216 helps to arme Mandricard. 218. fals out with him. ibid. receiues Durindane of Rogero. 246. fights with Renaldo. 255 fights againe. 273 parted and finds Bayardo. 274. ships at Arlie. 274. meets Agramant in great distresse. 337. is one of the chalenge three to three and kils Brandimart. 349. is killed by Orlando. 352. Grandonio, the gouernour of the Algarbies, which dwell in promontorie cald Celticum Promontorium. 104. Griffin fights with Orillo. 117. is in loue with Origilla. 118. goeth with Astolfo to the holy land. ibid. heares of Origilla. 119. he finds her. 121. goeth to Damasco. 129. heares his hostes tales. 130. winnes the prize there. 133. departs thence. ibid. is betrayed by Origill and Martano. ibidem. is carted. 134. kils and beats the people of Da∣masco. 137. is reconciled to Norandino. 139. meets his brother Aquilant. 140. receiues a costly armour of the king. ibidem. is ouerthrowne by Astolfo. 141. frended by him, he goeth with him and others towards France. ib. tost on the sea with a tempest. 142. comes to the shore of the Amazons & heares their law. 149. scapeth thence 158. is betrayed and taken by Pinnabello to obserue his law. 172. fights in defence thereof. 173. is ouerthrowne by Rogero. 174. goeth toward France. ibid. meets with Renaldo and is entertained into his band. 252. is at Bra∣damants marriage. 402. Griffith horse brought vp by Atlant, and lost by him 26. flyes away with Rogero. 27. carries him to Alcinas Ile 43. caries Melissa and Astolfo from Alcinas Ile. 58. brings them to Logestilla. 77. is brought by Melissa to Rogeros riding. ibidem. Rogero is carried by him ouer the world ibidem. breaks his bridle and flyes to Atlant. 83. is got∣ten by Astolfo. 171. flyes with Astolfo oner the world. 274 caries him vp to Paradise. 285. brings him backe againe. 319. is let loose by Astolfo. 376. Guelfs and Gibbellius two notable factions rising first of two brothers in Italie and spreading very farre. Guidon Sauage in the Amazons land fights with Marfisa. 150, entertaines her and her company. 153. tels the tale of the Amazons. 154. scapeth thence hauing
made prouision. 157. ouerthrowes Richardetto, Alardo and Guicchiardo. 25 1. fights with Renaldo till Sunneset. ibid. makes himselfe knowne vnto Renaldo. 252. goeth with him to ayde Charles. ibidem is at Bradamants ma∣riage. 402. H Hecuba wife of Priamus fell mad for sorrow of the death of her son Polidorus, and is fayned to haue bene turned to a dogge. Helena daughter of Leda, she that was taken by Paris. Hercules sonne of Iupiter and Almene, his twelue la∣bours be knowne, howbeit Stephen in his Hiostrical Di∣ctionarie lets downe 34. labours. Hillarion a passing deuout Hermit. Hippalca, Bradamants maid caries Frontino towards Rogero. 179. meets Rodomont and is robd ibidem. meets Rogero at Merlins caue. 209. returnes to Bradamant. 211. deliuers Rogeros letter, and comforts her. 246. Homer Prince of Greeke Poets. I Iason sonne of Aeson and Alemene comming to Lem∣nos was entertained by Hipsipile, and after wanne the Golden Fleece. Indus or Inde a riuer of the East, a very huge riuer of which India taketh name. Iroldo a Christen Captaine. Isabella found by Orlando in a caue. 94 recites to him the cause of her being there. 96. is deliuered by Orlando 98. prayes him to be her Protectour. 99. finds Zerbino. 180. departs with Zerbino frō Orlando. 182. helps to ga∣ther Orlandos armour. Lib. 24. st. 43. entreateth Doralice to part the fray. ibid. staffe. 57. laments Zerbinos death and becomes a Christen. ibidem. staffe 73. meets Rodo∣mont. 231. is wooed by him. 235. laues her chastity with losse of her life. 236. her praise. ibid. her tombe. ibid. L Lada one of Alexanders souldiers, so swift and light of foote that scarce the print of his foot was seen in the sand. 270. Lademia wife to Protesilaus loued him so dearly, that hearing of his death, she pyned away with griefe. 307. Leon sonne of Constantine repulsed by Rogero. 381. de∣liuers Rogero not knowing him from prison. 387. goeth into France to wooe Bradamant, and winnes her by Rogeros meanes calling himselfe the knight of the Vin∣corne. 389. disturbed and chalenged by Marfisa. 391. misleth Rogero. 392 finds him and recomforts him 396. brings him to Charles 398. his speech. ibidem. frees the Bulgars from further warre by promise ibid. is at Roge∣ros mariage. 402. Lidia looke tales. 281. Logestilla defendeth Rogero against Alcina. 76. the description of her house, by which is ment vertue. 77. en∣tertaines Astolfo, and deliuers him a booke and a horne and lets him depart. 114. Lucina looke tales. 129. Lurcanio brother to Ariodant an Italian Gentleman accuseth Genewra. 36. fights with his brother. 38. is hurt by Dardanello. 138. M Malagige rescued by Rogero and others. 207. ex∣pounds the pictures at Merlins well. 208. makes a spirit carie away Doralice. 213. goeth with Renaldo to aide Charles. 247. coniureth to finde the cause of Renaldos dis∣ease. 353. is at the wedding 402. Mandricard sonne of Agricane king of Tartarie had wonne Hectors armes. 105. he seekes Orlando. ibid. wins Doralice, carries her away & wooes her. 106. lyes with her. 107. fights with Orlando. 181. parted. 182. meets Ga∣brina. ibidem. fights with Zerbino and hurts him. lib. 24. staffe 49 winnes Durindane. ibid. fights with Rodomont. ibid. staffe 80. is parted staffe 93. ouerthrowes Richardet∣to and his brothers. 210. fights with Marfisa. ibidem. quarrels with Rogero. 211. reproued by Rodomont. ibid. fights with Rogero. 212. fights with Marfisa. ibidem. par∣ted. 213. rescues Agramant 216 quarels with Rodomont, Rogero and Marfisa. 217. with Gradasso. 218. is chosen by Doralice. 221. disswaded from fight by Doralice. 243. fights with Rogero. 244. is kild. 240. Manilard ouerthrowne by Orlando. 93. Marsilio king of Spaine musters his men of armes. 104. his Cration to Agramant 320. he flyes into Spaine. 327. Marfisa sister to Rogero meetes Astolfo and goeth to Damasco. 140. takes away the prize. ibid. is reconciled and honored. 141. goeth with Astolfo and others toward France, and are tost with tempest. 142. arriues with them at the Amazons Citie. 149. fights with Guidon. 150 scapeth hence 157. part from her companions in Marsi∣lia. 158. meets Gabrina and carries her behind her. ibid. ouerthrowes Pinnabell for laughing at her. 159. meets Zerbino & commits Gabrina to his custodie. 159. meets Rogero. 206. aids him to rescue Malagige and Viuian. 207. dines at Merlins caue. 208. fights with Mandricard. 210. aids Agramant. 215. craues battaile with Mandri∣card. 217. arresteth Brunelio. 220. brings him backe to Agramant. 258. fights with Bradamant & is ouerthrown 299. fights againe. 300. fights with Rogero. 302. parted by Atlants ghost. ibidem. frends with Bradamant. 303. goeth with Bradamant and Rogero 30. aids Vilanie and her companions. 308. heares the tale of Marganor. 309. leads Marganor captiue. 312. calles a Parliament and makes a law for women. 313. goeth with Bradamant to Charles. 317. meets Charles and makes an Oration. 318. she is Christned 319. fights with Agramant. 327. chaseth him. 331. disturbeth Don Leon from marrying with Bradamant. 397. makes a chalenge to Leon on Ro∣geros behalfe. 392. was about to strike Rogero not know∣ing him. 398. is at the wedding 402. Marganor looke tales. 309. his law 311. he is killed. 313. Martano a whooremaster keeps Origilla. 122. shames himselfe. 133 betrayes Griffin. ibid. incenseth Norandi∣no against him. 134. beaten by Aquilant. 139. punished openly. 140. Mausoleo the tombe of a king so named, one of the seuen wonders. Medea a cruell woman, a notable witch, she killed her owne brother, and her owne sonnes, she sent Creusa a little boxe for a token, in which was closed such arti∣ficiall fire, that as soone as it was opened it burned her
and all the Pallace she was in. Medore page of Dardanell goeth to seeke his masters carkas to burie it. 143. kils many Christians asleepe, ibid. carries his maisters corse and is pursued by Scots. 144. hurt by a Scot against Zerbinos will 147. found by Angelica and healed, wooed, and married by Angelica. 147. his Epigramme 148. escapes Orlando hardly. 239. made king of East India. 242. Melyssa showeth Bradamant all Rogeros posteritie 19. 20. instructeth her how to take the ring from Brunello. 21. goeth to deliuer Rogero. 52. her speech to Rogero. 53. comforts Bradamant. 322. in Rodomonts likenes breaks the truce. 326. meeteth Leon and showes him Rogero. 395. bringeth the rich Pauillion by Nigromancie. 399. is at Bradamants mariage 402. Memphis the chiefe Citie of Aegypt neare to which the huge Pyramides were made. Merlins Fountain. 208. his hall in Sir Tristrams lodge and the stories thereof. 258. the English Prophet, of him you shall reade in the notes of the third booke. pag 22. Morgana a passing witch much spoken of in Boyar∣dos booke of Orlando Inamorato. N Nercus sonne of Caropeius and Aglaia a passing beau∣tifull young man, witnes Homer one of those that came against Troy. 269. Nestor is said to haue liued three ages, which some count. 90. yeares, some 300. Nilus the famous riuer of Egypt so called of king Ni∣lus, or as some will haue it of the Greeke , that is new slime, for with the slime thereof it inricheth all Egypt: some doubt whether it haue any head at all but runnes out of the great lake, it fals deuided into the sea in seuen branches, wherefore Ouid cals it in the 1. Met. Septemfluus. Norandino, looke in the tales, makes a great feast. 129. receiueth Griffin into fauour 139. O Odericke is sent by Zerbino for Isabella. 9. would haue rauisht her. 98. woundeth Corebo. ibidem. is brought by Almonio to Zerbino lib. 24. staffe. 16. is pardoned by him ib. staffe 35. breaketh promise and is hanged. ib. staff. 38. Oberto king of Ireland comes to Ebuda and meetes Orlando there. 85. fals in loue with Olimpia. 86. marries her ibidem. Olimpia looke tales: she is deliuered by Orlando and maried to Bireno. 71. betrayed by him and left on the shore. 75. is found by Orlando at the Ile of Ebuda: and her beautie described, she deliuered. 85. Oberto fals in loue with her. 86, marries her ibdem. Oliuero sent prisoner to Biserta, set free by Astolfo. 328. assaults Biserta. 335. slue Bucifar. 336. is one of the three in the challenge. 338. hath Rogeros armour giuen him. 344. his impreyse a lymehound with the word (till he commeth) ibid. he is hurt by his horse fall. 348. is healed by the Hermit. 372. comes into France with Or∣lando and Rogero. 376. is at Bradamants mariage. 402. Origille a strumpet loued by Griffin. 119. is found with Martano, excuseth it. 122. Orillo a Nigromancer looke tales. 116. Orlando comes from the East Indies with Angelica and hath her taken from him. pag. 1. troubled in his sleepe by a dreame. 62. he leaues Paris. 63. comes vpon the Pagans campe. 65. passeth into Britanie and is put backe to Antwerpe. 66. heares the state of Olimpia. ibid. challengeth Cimosco. 69. kills him. 70. flings the harque∣bush into the sea. 71. comes to Ebuda. 84. kils an Orke ibid. sets free Olimpia againe. 85. goeth backe to Brita∣nie. 87. illuded with the likeness of Angelica. 89. pur∣sues Angelica 91. fights with Ferraw. 92. lost his helmet ibid. foyld two bands of Pagans. 93. findes Isabella. 94. deliuers her. 98. hangs the outlawes. ibid. deliuers Zer∣bino. 180. fights with Mandricard. 181. is parted. 182. hears newes of Angelica. 183. fals starke mad. 185. some mad parts of his. 193. wrastles with Rodomont. 237. meetes Angelica and almost catcheth her. 239. comes to Biserta. 242. troubles Astolfos armie in his madnes. 329. is bound & made wise by Astolfo. 330. assaults Biser¦ta. 334. rescues Brandimart at Biserta. 336. sackes the towne. 338. accepts Agramants chalenge. ibid. findes Ballisard in a voyde ship. 344. fights the combat three to three. 348. kils Gradasso and Agramant. 352. meetes Renaldo. 369. comes to Sicilie. 370. he makes Brandi∣marts funerall. 371. his Oration. ibid. comes to the Her∣mit and meetes Rogero there. 372. goeth backe into France with him. 376. is at Bradamants mariage. 402. Orke a monstrous fish. P Paris sonne to Priamus louer of Helena. Paris fiered by Agramant, and quenced by rayne from heauen. 61. assaulted by Agramant. 110. entred by Rodomont and set on fire. 111. Paule the first Hermit or Anchorit. it is said of him that a crow brought him euerie day halfe a loafe of bread, and that Anthonie a deuout man going to see him, the crow brought him that day a whole loafe. Penelope wife of Vlysses famous for her chastitie in the long absence of her husband: hauing many impor∣tunate sutors in her husbands absence she prayd them to respite her till she had ended a web, which she had begunne to weaue, and that being granted looke what she woue all day she vndid at night. Pegasus a horse that had wings, this horse is sayd to be bred of the blood of Medusa; and that Bellerophon thinking to ride him vp to heauen, fell from him, but the horse held on his course still and was made a starre. Phoebus or Apollo taken for the Sunne. Pinnabell son of Anselmus of Maganza meets with Bradamant. 12. lets Bradamant fall into Merlins pit 14. steales her horse. 17. ouerthrowne by Marfisa. 158. takes Griffin, Aquilant, Guidon Sauage, & Sansonet pri∣soners. 172. makes them sweare to his law. ibid. is met and killed by Bradamant. 173. Polinesso Duke of Albany betrayeth Genewra by Da∣lindas meanes. 35. is killed by Renaldo. 38. Polidorus son of Priamus killed by Polimnestor for couetousnes of the gold that Priamus sent with him. Pollux looke Castor. Prasildo a Christen Captaine. Progue killed her sonne Itis, and is fained to haue bin turned into a swallow. Proteus counted a God of the sea called Vertumnus because he is said to turne himselfe into all shapes.
Proteus king of Egypt spoken of in the. 46. booke. Puliano a king musters afore Agramant. 105. slaine by Renaldo 154. Pyramides certaine towers of incredible height built by the Princes of Egypt, of this looke in the seuen won∣ders of the world. R Rabican Astolfos horse. 54. Renaldo fell out with Orlando for Angelica. 2. lost his horse, & in seeking of him found Angelica. ibid. fought with Ferraw. ibidem. rides behind him. 3. parts from him and finds his horse. ibid. he finds Angelica againe. 7. fights with Sacrapant. 10. is parted by the illusion of an Hermit. ibidem. he takes his horse againe. ibidem. he goeth to Paris. 11. is sent in Embassage. ibid. arriues in Scotland. 28. goeth toward the Cot. ibidem. is intertai∣ned by an Abbot and his Monks. ibidem. heares of Ge∣newras danger. ibid. is guided to the Court. 29. meetes with Dalinda. ibid. heares the tale of Genewrae 32.33.34.35.36. fights with Polinesso and kils him. 38. sues for ayd to the Scottish king. 58. goeth by sea to England and is feasted there. 59. brought by Silence to Paris. 123. his Oration. ibidem. he encourageth the Scots. 125. kils Dardanell. 142. troubled with ielousie of Orlando. 216. comes to Mountalbano. 247. goeth to succour Charles. ibid. meets Guidon. 251. fights againe with Gra∣dasso. 257. fights againe. 273. looseth Bayardo. 274. a chāpion for Charles. 222. fights with Rogero. 223, is trou∣bled with his old loue. 353. heares of Malagige where Angelica is. 354. asketh leaue of Charles to go to India. ibid. assayled by a monster and deliuered by a knight. 355. comes to the knight of Mantua. 356. refuseth to tast the cup to try cuckoldes. 360. goeth by water to Rauenna. 369. meets Orlando at Lyppaduse. ibid. meets Rogero at the Hermits 372. promiseth him Bradamant. 375. comes with him into France. 377. fals out with his father about Rogero. ibidem. and. 391. is at Bradamants mariage 402. Richardet gat Fiordespina with child and should haue dyed, & is set free by Rogero. 199. tels Rogero a tale. 200. comes to Aldigers house. 202. goeth with him to rescue Malagige and Viuian. 203. meets Marfisa. 204. rescues Viuian and Malagige. 207. dines at Merlins caue. 208. is ouerthrowne by Rodomont. 210. by Guidon. 251. is at Bradamants mariage 402. Rifee or Riphe mountaines in Seythia. Rodomont king of Algier a man of passing strength musters afore Agramant. 105. enters Paris. 110. doth much spoile. 122. leaues Paris. 138. meets Discord, Pride and iealousie with Doralices messenger. ibid. takes Fron∣tino from Hippalca. 179. fights with Mandricard. Lib. 24. staffe 80. parted, staffe 93. fights with Rogero. 212, parted. 213. rescues Agramant. 217. fals at variance with Mandricard & with Sacrapant. 219. refused by Doralice goeth away malcontent. 221. his inuectiue against wo∣men. 222. his hosts entertainment. 233. meets Isabella. 231 kils the Priest. 234. is drunke and cuts off Isabellas head. 235. makes a tombe, a vow and a brigde. 236. is cast by Orlando into the water. 237. ouercomes Bran∣dimart. 254. is ouerthrowne by Bradamant. 293. enters into a cell for shame of his foyle receiued by Brada∣mant. 294. challenges Rogero at Bradamants mariage. 401. is killed by Rogero. 404. Rogero taken by Atlant. 13. deliuered by Bradamant. 27. carryed away by the Griffith horse. ibid. comes to Alcinas Ile. 42. is warned by Astolfo 43. fights with the monsters, 46. is rescued by two Ladies. ibidem. ouer∣throwes Erissila. 49. is intertained by Alcina. 50. is war∣ned by Melissa. 53. discouers Alcinas illusions. ibid. de∣ceiues Alcina and flies. 57. is impeacht by a Falkner. 58. tempted in his way by three Ladies. 76. assaulted by sea. ibid. deliuered by Logestilla. ibid. parted from Lo∣gestilla on the winged horse. 77. sees the musters in En∣gland. 78. goes to Ireland. 79. sees Angelica tied to the rocke. ibidem. ouercomes the Orke by helpe of his shield. 80. lends Angelica his ring. ibid. leeseth Angelica 83. leeseth his horse. ibid. is carried by a traine to ano∣ther inchanted Pallace of Atlant 90. freed from the in∣chanted Pallace. 170. goes with Bradamant. 171. van∣quisheth Pinnabells foure knights by his shield. 173. throwes away the shield. 174. sets free Richardet lib. 25. st. 10. comes to Aldiger 202. writes to Bradamant. 203. meets Marfisa. 204. rescues Malagige and Viuian.; 207 dines in Merlins caue. 208. goes with Hippalca. 209. finds Rodomont. 211. fights with him and Mandricard. 212. parted. 213. rescues Agramant. 217. offers combat to Rodomont and Mandricard. ibid. kils Mandricard. 245 is sore hurt by him ibid. is chalenged by Bradamant. 294. parts Marfisa and her. 300. fights with Marfisa and is parted. 302 tels Marfisa of his race. 303. promiseth mariage to Bradamāt. 04 assaults Marganor. 312 goes backe to the campe. 313. chosen champion for Agra∣mant. 322. fights with Renaldo. 323. is parted 326. fights with Dudon. 339. takes shipping 343. suffers shipwrack. 344. comes to an Hermit. 346. is christned. ibid. meets Orlādo & Renaldo. 372. hath a promise of Bradamāt. 376 comes into France with them. 3 77. is refused by Brada∣mants parents, his complaint 378. vowes to kill Leon, and cals himselfe knight of the Vnicorne. 380. is made king of the Bulgars. 381. is prisoner to Theodora. 385. deliuered by Leon. 387 fights for him with Bradamant and wins her. 389. his complaint, and would pine him∣selfe to death. 390. is releeued by Leon. 396. marries Bradamant. 399. killeth Rodomont. 404. S Sacrapant makes great lamentation for Angelica, his complaint begins. 4. st. 41. Angelica discloseth herselfe to him. ibid he encounters with Bradamant. 5. is ouer∣throwne. 6. his horse being slaine takes Bayardo. ibid. fights with Renaldo. 10. is patted by an illusion. ibid. is deliuered from the inchanted Pallace. 27. is in another inchanted Pallace. 90. freed by Angelica. 91. leeseth her, and seekes her. ibid. fals out with Rodomont. 220. folows him. 222. taken, and goes home. 294. Sampson a man of great strength spoken of in the Scripture, his vertue was in his haire, he siue 1000 men with the iaw bone of an Asse. 106. Sansonet gouernor of Ierusalem, intertaines Astolfo. 119. goes to Damasco. 140. wins the prize. 141. comes to the Amazons land. 149. scapeth thence. 157. freed by Astolfo. 328. helpes to take Orlando. 330. assaults Biserta. 335. remaines in Affrica. ibid. Scipio a famous Captaine of the Romans. Senapo blind, looke tales. 275. healed of his eyes. 390.
lends Astolfo men and money. ibid. his men assault Biserta. 335. Sobrino a Prince and graue counsellor to Agramant musters before him. 104. his good counsel to Agramant. 221. his answer to Marsilio, a good Oration. 321. flies with Agramant by sea. 334. misliketh of the breach of truce. 327 witholds Agramant from killing himselfe, and comforts him. 337. is one of the challenge 3. to 3. 338. wounded by Orlando 347. hoghs Oliuers horse. 348 is christened. 372. comes to France 577. is at the mariage of Bradamant 402. Stordilano father of Doralice, king of Granada a rich prouince of Spaine, being watered with the riuer of Be∣tica or Bethi. 104. T Tagus a riuer in Lusitania or Portugall, it hath golden sand in some places: by this riuer it is that Pliny writes that Marcs conceiue with the wind, and bring forth colts exceeding swift, but they liue but three yeares. Tiberius. 363 there were many of that name, one suc∣ceeded Augustus, and built wonderful sumptuous buil∣dings in the Ile of Capri, and gaue himselfe to drinke and filthinesse of life, insomuch that being named Ti∣berius Nero, they nicknamed him Biberius Mero. Tiberius. 364. was a good Emperor and a Christian, it written of him, that hauing spent much money to good and Christian vses, and beginning to want he saw a crosse of stone lying on the ground, and for reuerence that it should not be troden on, caused it to be digged vp, and vnder that another, and so a third, till at the last he found an infinite treasure that had bene there hidden, which he tooke as a thing sent by God, and employed it to very good and princely works. Tithonus husband to Aurora, and had by her a gift of long life. Traiano father of Agramant slaine by Pypin king of France, as is mentioned in the fift page. Tripoly a citie in Affrica, so called because three sun∣dry people did ioyne in the inhabiting of it, the Tiri∣ans, Sidonians, and Arabians. Tristrams lodge, looke Tales 103. Turpin Archbishop of France alledged often by mine Author, an ancient Historiographer. V Virgil called the Prince of the Latine Poets. Vlysses son of Laertes the famous Grecian captaine, a notable traueller, Qui mores hominum multorum vidit & vrbes, a man of great policie, passing eloquent: the notable exploits that are attributed to him would be too long to set downe, but in his Oration in Ouids Me∣tamorphosis they be repeated by him, Si mea cū vestris valuissent vota Pelasgi &c. Vllany sent by the queene of Island with the golden shield. 262. defended by Bradamant. 265. is found by Bradamant balte stripped, and goes to Marganors town with her. 308. puts Marganor to death. 313. Vulcan. 10. is fained by the Poets to keepe a shop in the hollownes of the mount Aetna, and there to worke thunderbolts for Iupiter. Z Zenocrates a Stoike, a man of no great wit, but of wonderfull contincie, for when some youths of Athens had couenanted with a harlot to tempt him to her companie, and the sd Zenocrates hauing supped with them and drunke well that night, which is a pro∣uoking to venerie, yet the harlot was not able to tempt him, notwithstanding that she was her crafts master, or at least mistres, wherefore they demaunded their mo∣ney againe, but she auoyded them thus, that her bar∣gaine was to tempt a man and not an image. Zerbin Prince of Scotland musters his men by the Theams. 78. his armes the Lyon. ibid. his comely shape. ibid. loues Isabella. 97. sends Odericke for her. ibid. go∣uerns the vaward of Renaldos battell. 124. fights vali∣antly ibid. kils two Spaniards. 125. in perill to be slaine is rescued by Ariodant. 125. after by Renaldo. ibidem. chaseth his enemies all night. 144. spares Medoro, and pursueth him that did hurt him. 146. 147. takes old Ga∣brina into protection. 159. heares newes of Isabella by Gabrina. 160. fights with Hermonide for her. 162. is be∣trayed by her. 180. deliuered by Orlando. ibidem. findes Isabella. 181. pardoneth Odericke with singular clemen∣cie. 194. commits Gabrina to his keeping. lib. 24. st. 35 gathers Orlandos armour. lib. eodem. st. 47. fights with Mandricard in defence of Durindan. eodem. st. 51. dead∣ly hurt. st. 56. his last lamentation. 67. dies. 69. his stately tombé made by Rodomont where Isabella and he are laid. pag. 236. Zeuxes of him I haue spoken in the Notes of the 33. Booke, onely I will adde this that I spake not of there; how he painted a boy bearing a bunch of grapes, and the bird pecking at the grapes, he found fault with his owne worke, saying the boy was not well drawne, for if he had, the birds would haue bene affraid to haue come so neere.
THE PRINCIPAL TALES IN ORLANDO FVRIOSO THAT MAY BE READ BY THEMSELVES. 1 Tale of Genewra begins pag. 28. staffe 42. 2 Tale of Astolfos turning to a tree. pag. 43. staffe 26. 3 Tale of Rogeros comming to Alcina, pag. 45. staffe. 54. 4 Tale of Proteus and the Orke. pag. 60. staffe. 46. 5 Tale of Olimpia. pag. 66. staffe. 16. 6 Tale of Isabella. pag. 94. staffe 67. 7 Tale of sending Discord and Silence. pag. 107. staffe 59. 8 Tale of Calligorant. pag. 115. staffe 30. 9 Tale of Orillo. pag. 116. staffe 49. 10 Tale of Origille. pag. 121. st. 11 Tale of Lucina and Norandino. pag. 129. staffe 20. 12 Tale of the Amazons. pag. 153. staffe. 5. 13 Tale of Gabrina. pag. 162. st. 14 Tale of Orlandos madnes. pag. 183. staffe. 78. 15 Tale of Fiordespina. pag. 199. st. 16 Tale of mine Host with Rodomonts inuectiue against women. pag. 222. staffe 93. 17 Tale of Tristrams lodge. pag. 263. staffe 77. 18 Tale of Senapo. pag. 275. staffe 93. 19 Tale of Lidia. pag. 281. staffe 6. 20 Tale of Astolfo going to Paradice and finding Orlandos wit. pag. 284. staffe 49. 21 Tale of Marganor. pag. 308. staffe 26. 22 Tale of the Mantuan knight. pag. 356. staffe 66. 23 Tale of Adonio called the Stears mans tale. pag. 364. staffe 66. 24 Tale of Leons courtesie to Rogero. pag. 385. staffe. 11. For other things, as Orations, Letters, complaints, and the like, you shall finde them in the Table in the name of those whom they do most concerne. FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Richard Field, for Iohn Norton and Simon VVaterson. 1607.
