7468 S100229 99836075 319
A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FVNERALLS OF THAT WORTHIE AND WOR∣SHIPFVLL GENTLEMAN, MASTER Thomas Dutton of Dutton, Esquire, who yeelded to nature the 28. of December. By RICHARD EATON Bachelour of Diuinitie, and Pastor of Great Budworth in Cheshire. Deut. 39. 29. Oh that they were wise, then they would vnderstand this: They would consider their latter end. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Legatt for Samuel Man dwelling at the signe of the Ball in Pauls Church-yard. 1616.
TO THE HONOVRABLE AND HOPEFVLL YOVNG GENTLEMAN, SIR GILBERT GERRARD, KNIGHT OF the Noble order of the Bath: The Ladie Elenour his wife; together with her right Worshipfull mother Mistris Thomasin Dutton, all increase of true happinesse. SYR, being called vpon to prepare this sermon for an impression: and finding a necessitie laid vpon me, to satisfie the importunitie of some friends, it came in∣to my minde to tender the same to you. And I doe more then hope that you will kindly accept it from me, and entertaine it as a testimonie of my loue: because it was both preached in your hearing; and at the funerall of that worthy and Worshipfull gentleman Master Dutton your fa∣ther in law. And I am the rather incouraged to commend it to your vse, and to write your name (as it were) in the front of it; because albeit you liued not vnder my Ministerie, yet in as much as out of that part of your faire inheritance, which lyeth here, I receiue some part of my maintenance and sustentati∣, I must needs thinke it my duty, to bestow some spirituall gift; by which I might euidence my care of your soules health, and something further you, in your passage towards that
Countrey which I trust you seeke. Let it not displease y therefore, that I haue presented you with these few notes; bu vouchsafe them a roome of lodging among your bookes. I con¦fesse in this scribling age, many are carried with a busie h∣mour, making the times surfeit with their needlesse papers.  would be loath that anie man who hath in him anie true worth and is of a right religious vnderstanding, should so thinke of me wherefore to cleere my selfe to euery sober iudgement, this I say; I was drawen into this course in presenting this sermon to publique view: by the earnest request of some friends, and by the good approuement of sundrie fearing God. The matter of this sermon is excellent, if the workemanship were suteable, I might boldly say, It were no disparagement to you to afford your patronage, and to haue your name prefixed. Whatsoeuer my defect maie be, I beseech you be pleased to accept from me this small present: small, not in respect of the matter of it, for no man can treate of a more worthie subiect: But in regard of the manner of handling. Accept it I saie, as an vndissembled argument of the sinceri∣tie of my affection, as a testimonie of my well wishing to your soule, and as a pledge of my setled purpose to labour to deserue your loue: And to be a continuall petitioner to the throne of grace, that you and your good Ladie, your Worshipfull mother in law, with the rest of your line and familie maie be kept by the power of God, through faith, vnto saluation. From Great Budworth in Cheshire. Yours in all readinesse to doe you my best seruice in Christ Iesus, RICHARD EATON.
PSAL. 90. 12. Teach vs so to number our daies, that we maie applie our hearts to wisedome. THis Psalme was compiled by Moses, at what time, the spies returning from the land of Canaan, discouraged their brethren; and the Lord for the murmuring of the people, pronounced, that all aboue twenty yeares old (Caleb and Iosua only excepted) should die in the wildernes. Now whē Moses heard this general sentence of death denounced both against himselfe, and all those that ame out of Egypt with him, he frameth this Psalme, and praieth thus for him selfe and all the rest. But I may not insist in generalls: the foundation of my speech shall onely rest vpon this 12 verse. The words are so plaine and manifest, that I may say of this Scripture, as Augustin speaketh, Desiderat auditorem, Tract. 50. in Iohannem. magis quàm expositorem, It requires rather an attentiue hearer, then a skilfull expositor. I will draw the substance of mine intended speech vnto two generall heads: the first a prayer of Moses, Teach vs so to number our daies. The second a reason why he prayed thus, That wee maie applie our hearts to wisedome. Out of these two generall heads, I will distinguish fiue seuerall conclusions. First, Death is the hauen of euery man. Moses ma∣keth
this prayer in the plurall number. Mans time is set, and his bounds appointed which he cannot passe. Peach vs to number our daies; there is a number of dayes. Mans time is short: Moses mentioneth not yeeres, nor monethes, nor weekes, but dayes. Although mans time be short, yet he remembreth it not; for we are apt to forget death. If we could remember death, it would cause vs to apply our hearts vnto wisedome. Thus you see how this Scripture naturally bran∣cheth and deuideth it selfe into these particulars. I wil not offer any violēce in the handling of this text, I will not set any of these points vpon the Racke, I will not proffer to stretch mine arme higher then my stature may carry it; I will not trouble you with Idle curiosities, I will returne therfore to the head of the race, where I first began. The first conclusion to be examined, and the first doctrine to be extracted, is this, That death is the hauen of euery man. What man liueth, saith Dauid, And Psal. 89. 48. shall not see death? The Apostle saith, It is appointed vnto all men, to dye once, Heb: 9. 27. And if we looke into the catalogue of those long liued Fathers before the floud, though some of them liued 700. some 800. some 900, yeers and vpward, yet at length this Epi∣taph was written ouer euery one of their heads, Mor∣tuus est, He died. Though euery day of our life, were Gen. 5. as long as the day of Iosua, when the Sun stood stil in the midst of the heauen, yet the Sunne will set and go Iosh. 10. 13. downe, and it will be night at last. Euery man must ac∣knowledge with Iob, Corruption is my father, and the worme is my mother: therefore Esay witnesseth that ob 17. 14. Esay 40. 6. All flesh is grasse. All these testimonies as a cloud of witnesses, confirme this doctrine. There are also two
reasons to inforce the same. First, all men are dust in their originall, the matter whereof we are made is the dust of the earth: And therefore to dust we must againe returne. And this Gen. 3. 19. reason is vsed, Gen. 3. 19. Secondly, all men haue sinned, and are depriued of the glory of God. Man at the first was created to immortality; and if he had neuer sinned, he should neuer haue died. But when sin entred, death followed as the wages doth the worke; as God threatned, Gen. Gen. 2. 17. 2. 17. And the Apostle, Rom. 5. 15 By one man sinne Rom. 5. 12. entred into the word, and death by sinne: And so death went ouer all men, in whom all men haue sinned. There shall be no difference betweene the rich & the poore in the graue: there is a great difference in their life time, in respect of honours and houses, lāds and liuings, duties and dignities, and such like exter∣nall priuiledges and prerogatiues: But in the end we see that wise men and likewise the ignorant and foo∣lish Psal. 49. 10. perish. Zenacherib in his Ruffe for a time, made proud challenges, Where is the king of Hamah, where Esay 37. 13. is the king of Arpad, where is the king of Hena? kings which he had destroyed: And haue the Gods of the nations deliuered their Clients and orators, out of my hands? But a man might soone haue asked him, Where is the king of Ashur? And hath Nisroch the God of Assiria, deliuered Zenacherib himselfe? Looke into the graue and shew me, where is Diues, & where is Lazarus? where is Alexander that conquered the whole world, and Zerxes that could not number his armie for multitude? where is Nimri that built his rest in the clouds, and Antiochus that sealed vpon the Mountaines? where is Edom that exalted himselfe like an eagle in the skies, and said in the swelling of
his heart, Who shall bring me down? Where is Paper the king of Persia, that wrote himselfe Rex regum, fra∣tersolis et lunae, parceps siderum, king of kings, brother to the sunne and moone, and partner with the starrs? where is Samsō that slew an armie with the law bone ludg. 15. 15. of an asse? what is become of all those great Roman Lords, Nero, Caligula, Vespasian, Titus, Domitiam and the rest? Haue they not all felt and bin foyled by the stroake of this all conquering death? who would haue Acts 12. 23. a Kings. 9. 35. thought that Herod, who was honoured as a God, should haue bin deuoured of wormes? That Iezabel should haue bin eatē of dogs? what would he thinke, that should haue seene Solomon in his glory and Roy∣altie, to see him now lying in the clay? Yesterday the tallest Cedar in Libanus, to day or to morrow a bro∣ken stick trodden vnder foot; when death comes, no difference. The bones of Agamemnon that renowned Captaine among the Grecians, and of Thirsites that ill fauoured and deformed souldier, shalbe mngled together. The bones of Vashti the most beautifull queene, and the blackest Egiptian bond-woman shall not be found asunder: looke into the graue, & there I say is no difference, but Putidum et putridum Cadauer, a rotten and a stinking Carkas. Men of excellent & eminent places must learne to liue religiously & vprightly; for they must go the way of all the earth, and depart hence when it shall be said, Priora transierunt, Former things are passed away, and it wil be said, Come giue an account of thy stew∣ardship. The thriuing of the wicked in the bookes of Iob & of the Psalmes, wanteth not a learned ora∣tour Luke 16. 2. Iob 21. 7. Psal. 73. 3. to set it forth at large. But as in the burning of a candle, when it hath long giuen light, Extremum occupat fumus et caligo, The end is in smoake and in a stinking sauour: so falleth it out with the candle of
the wicked, In puncto descendunt in infernum: In the stir∣ring of an eye they goe downe to hell, where if there be not famus & caligo, smoke and darknesse, and the blackenesse of darkenesse, and a stinking sauour, and much worse, there is no hell at all. Lift not vp your Psal. 75. 5. borne on high, speake not with a stiffe necke, for in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red of the colour of bloud. My brethren, let not the pompe of the world deceiue you, whether it stand in authoritie, in opu∣lencie or voluptuousnesse of life: I say, let it not de∣ceiue you; for as all the fresh riuers runne into the salt sea, so shall all the honours of the world end in base∣nesse, all the pleasures of the world in bitternesse, all the treasures of the world in emptinesse, all the gar∣ments of the world in nakednesse, and all the dain∣ties and delicates of the world in loathsomnesse and rottennesse. Take heede of too large an indulgence, least God giue you a rent, that hath giuen you a gar∣ment; and cloath you with worser then leprosie, that hitherto hath couered you with glory, worship, and dignitie. Let vs prepare for death, that we may haue oyle in our lampes, when the bridegroome commeth. Let vs prepare and prouide for the day of our dissolution. Let vs prepare for a Nunc dimittis. Oh be not like the foolish virgins that knocked at the gate, when it was shut, and too late. Oh be not like the vnprepared Math. 25. 12. Math. 22. 13. guest, that came to the wedding without his wed∣ding garment. Great Iupiter was carelesse of his death. Ʋisuntur magniparua sepulchra Iouis. Great Iupi∣er had but a little tombe. And Alexander the Mo∣narch of the world, prepared nothing at all for his death, he had all other things, sauing onely a sepul∣cher, to burie him in when he was dead. But Abra∣ham prouided for his death, for he bought a field to Gen. 23. 17.
burie his dead in. So did Ioseph of Aramathea, for he Gen. 23. 17. Math. 27. 60. made his tombe in his life time in his garden, to put him in remembrance of death. Oh imitate these lat∣ter: prouide and prepare for your last end, and still looke vp to death, as the wisemen looked vnto the starre which stood ouer Bethlem, Qui gloriatur viribus corporis, gloriatur viribus carceris. He that glorieth in the strength of his bodie, glorieth in the strength of his prison. Plato spake wittily to one of his schollers, when he saw him too curious in pampering his belly and his body, Why doest thou, said he, make thy pri∣son so strong? I will proceede now to the second conclusion, to wit, that mans time is set, and his bounds appointed which he cannot passe. It was said to Belshazzar. Dan. 5. 25. Mene, mene, God hath numbred thy kingdome. So it may be said, Mene mene, God hath numbred the daies of our life. To this Iob beareth witnesse, Are not his Iob 14. 5. daies determined? thou hast appointed his bounds, which he cannot passe. And the Prophet Ieremie saith, The Egyptians could not stand, because the Ierem. 46. 21. day of their destruction was come, and the time of their visitation. A certaine time is appointed for all other things. The day of birth, the day of marriage, the day of ho∣nour, the day of deliuerance, and the day of death must not bee excluded. God hath determined Dan. 1 1: 36. all things, saith the Prophet. God appointed a time when his Sonne should come into the world, Dan. 9. and he came at the same time. God appointed a time when his blessings should come vpon Ioseph: and Gal. 4. 4. when the appointed time was come, he was exalted. Psal. 105. 19. Therefore saith Christ, My time is not yet come. Ioh. 7. 8. Secondly, the prouidence of God hath two parts,
to wit; Gouernment and Knowledge. God is not a retchlesse, carelesse, and improuident God; Oh no: he is not a God by halues, and in part, not onely in the Mountaines, not onely in great imployments, but also in the vallies, and in the least matters. Hee gouerneth all the world, as one that sits in a chaire at ease; his prouidence is seene in the least things, In Pulice et in Culice, as Saint Augustine saith, in Flies and August. in Psal. 148. in Gnats. He is Curiosus et plenus negotii Deus, A curi∣ous God, exquisite in all things, and full of businesse, saith Tullie, against the Atheists and Epicures of his De natura deorum. time: he examineth the least moments and titles in the world that can be imagined: a handfull of meale, a Cruise of Oyle, in a poore Widdowes house; the caluing of Hindes, the feeding of young Lyons, and Rauens, the falling of Sparrowes to the ground: he numbreth the haires of our heads, he feedeth the Fowles of the heauen, and cloatheth the flowres of Math. 6. 6. the field: And if so, then sure this wise and prouident God, who holds the whole Globe of the world in his hand, and ordereth all things therein, who keepeth a perfect Kalender of all times and seasons, hath al∣so prefined the yeere, the moneth, the weeke; nay, the very day of our departure. But it may be obiected, If this be true that a man must liue so long and no longer, and if a mans time be set, then it is in vaine to keepe a good dyet, or to take Phisicke. To which I answer, God hath not ordained the end without the meanes, but the meanes as well as the end: If God haue appointed a man to die in his youth, hee hath appointed a meanes to shorten his life, as he did Absolons. If God haue appointed a man . Sam. 18. 6. to liue long, he hath also appointed a meanes to pre∣serue his life; as Ioseph nourished and cherished his Gen. 47. 12.
father when he was old. But a good mind will neuer quarrell about these things. It is not in the power of Physitians, though they vse the best of their skill, to preserue their sicke pati∣ents any longer then the time that God hath set and determined: let the Physitian doe his dutie with an vpright and faithfull heart, but let him not lie to his patients, making them beleeue he can preserue life and health, and so drawing them into errour, as though death were farre off, when the sicknesse i incorporate into them; when peraduenture the sicke man and his sicknesse are Duo in corpore vno, as it were two in one flesh. There is no remedy when the time appointed is come, our last garment, which is our skinne, must be pulled off, if God call vs away, and say as he said to Abraham, Exi de terratua, Come out of thy Countrey wherein thou wast borne. If he call Gen. 12. 1. to our Spirits, Come out of your houses of Clay wherein you haue long dwelt: there is no Balme at Gilead, there is no Physition there that can preserue vs. All the Phisitions that were about Asa King of 3. Chron. 16. 12. Iuda, could not recouer him of the Gout in his feete. If a man should spend all his substance vpon Phisiti∣ons, as the woman did that had a bloody issue twelue yeeres, yet when the appointed houre is Luke 8. 43. come, the learnedst Phisition will faile, & all meanes to prolong life shall be in vaine. Mistake mee not, I denie not the lawfull vse of lawfull meanes, I know well, a man is bound to further Gods prouidence in what hee may. But to place our confidence in the outward meanes, and to neglect the Lord to whom only the issues of life & death belong, is the common sinne of these faithlesse times. Trust not therefore in Physicke, trust not in thy strength, trust not in any kinde of dyet; for thy time is set, thy daies numbred,
and it is not in mans power to passe his bounds. Secondly, the consideration hereof offers vs mat∣ter of much comfort, for that our life is in Gods hand. The aduersaries of the righteous increase daily, and Psal. 3. 1. many rise against them; many pits are digged, and much mischiefe imagined against the godly. But when all is done, vnles they can get Gods leaue, they doe but weary themselues in vaine for the elect dwel Psal. 91. 3 in the secret and shadow of the Almightie, and are so safely shrouded vnder his wings, that without his permission nothing can touch them. Why then are men so fearefull, as that they dare not stirre one fin∣ger, without trembling? surely such men either know not or remember not, that God hath limited their daies, and that their life is in his keeping. When the Pharisies said to our Sauiour, Depart and goe hence, for Herod will kill thee, he answered them: Go ye and tell that foxe, Behold I cast out diuels, and will heale still, to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall Luke 13. 32. he perfected. This the Apostles likewise acknowled∣ged: Doubtlesse against thine holy Son Iesus, whom Acts 4. 27. thou hadst annointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles & people of Israel, gathered them∣selues together, to do whatsoeuer thy hand & coun∣sell had determined before to be done. When Pilate the lieutenant of the Romanes, had said vnto Christ, knowest thou not that I haue power to crucifie thee, Iohn 19. 10. and haue power to loose thee? Iesus answered, Thou ouldst haue no power at all against me, except it were giuen thee from aboue. The furie and malice of the wicked is stinted and restrained, as with a bit and bridle, they cannot satisfie their lusts, nor accom∣lish their designes. The rage of men, and of the di∣els themselues, is stopped, and all the power of dark∣esse curbed. The tyranny of bloudy spirits is bound
vp, and compassed within the listes of the power of God, and inclosed within the circle of his iurisdicti∣on. They cannot annoy such as are created after the Image of God, and redeemed with the blood of Christ, without the diuine permission: their power is imprisoned, they can goe no further then the chaine, in the which the Lord doth hold them. Be∣hold a great comfort in all our troubles and suffe∣rings, there is a barre laid in the way of the wicked. Consider the strong hand of God, the yeeres and daies, the very moments and minuts of time are de∣termined. These things spake Iesus in the treasurie, Ioh. 8. 20. as he taught in the Temple, and no man laid hands on him, for his houre was not yet come. The third conclusion now followeth to be discus∣sed: Mans time is short in this world. Moses speaketh of daies, not of yeeres, nor of months, nor of weeks, but vseth the shortest diuision in nature. There are as many little skuls in Golgotha, as there bee great ones. Parents doe as often mourne for the death of their children, as children doe for the death of their Parents. Iacob, when Pharaoh asked him how old he Gen. 47. 9. was, answered, that his daies had beene both few and euill. The Hebrewes were wont to reckon their life thus: first, they did deduct the time of their sleep; so that if our dayes bee threescore and ten, by this reckoning fiue and thirtie are stricken off at one blow, because we spend halfe our time in sleepe. Se∣condly, from the remainder they tooke away the time of youth, which Salomon saith is vanitie, as Eccl. 11. 10. though it were not worthy to be called life but vani∣tie. Thirdly, they did subtract the daies of sorrow, because all that time a man findeth no sweetnesse in life, but is still ready to propound Iobs question, Why Iob 3. 20. is light giuen to him that is in miserie, and life to
them that haue heauie hearts? So then these three being ducted, to what a smal epitome is mans life brought? oses may well speake of daies, and of numbring them o, for by this time Iacobs proposition will be found e, that the daies of our pilgrimage are but few. Da∣d it seemes was well acquainted with this manner of ckoning, when he tooke so short a mete wand to measure his life by: a cubit is too long, a span is e∣nough, Behold thou hast made my daies, as an hand Psal. 39. 5. breadth, and mine age is nothing in respect of thee. Psal. 39. 5. There are foure reasons, why God hath appointed mans time to be so short. The Rauen, the Eagle, the Elephant, the Lion, the Hart, fulfill their hundreds. But man dieth before his eye be satisfied with seeing, or before his eare be satisfied with hearing. First, lest they should deferre to do good, as our man∣ner is, vpon hope of long life. Secondly, to withdraw our hearts from the loue of this world. Thirdly, because so long as we liue in this world, we e absent from the Lord. 2. Cor. 5. . Fourthly, because this world is full of miseries, Iob: 4. 1. The pleasures of this world are but the painted ce of Iezabel, euen but an outside of pleasure. Indeed the wicked seeme to liue a pleasant life, none like them; but there is a worme that gripeth and gnaweth them inwardly, they haue many times a trembling heart, and the King of feare doth almost kill them in their se∣cret chambers; The pleasure of this world, is but like lightning, simul oritur, & moritur, it suddenly ap∣peareth & suddenly againe vanisheth away. It is sweete, but withall short, like hunting and hauking; much cost nd care for a little sport. Our conuersation then must be in heauen, euen while we liue heere on earth, and we must vse this world as
though we vsed it not. There is but one way of comming into the world, Vnus introitus, but a thousand waies of going out of the world, Mille exitus. Our life is full of holes, and we are readie to take & let in water at a thousand brea∣ches, Ferro, peste, fame, vinclis, algore, calore, Mille mod miseros mors rapit vna viros: Our time slippeth away with great velocitie. It was a worthy answere of Artabanus, to Xerxes that mightie Emperour of Persia: when the Emperor had viewed his great armie, athousand thou∣sand drinking riuers dry as they went; hee fell a wee∣ping, because it came into his mind, that within the space of an hundred yeeres, not one of that goodlie companie should be left aliue: I would that were the worst, said Artabanus. It would grieue a man viewing at this present so great a congregation, of so many wor∣thy and worshipfull persons, so many of our good friends and honest neighbours: to consider that with∣in an hundred yeeres, peraduenture fourescore, or threescore and tenne (for the Psalmist saith, Mans age Psal. 90. 10. is therabout) to consider, I say, that not one in this as∣sembly shall be left aliue; but another Preacher in this Pulpit, and other hearers in those pewes and seates, sit∣ting and treading vpon your dead, bodies, where you now you sit and tread vpon others: but I would that were the worst. Secondly, because our time is short, we must worke and walke while wee haue the light; the night com∣meth Iohn 9. 4. wherein no man can worke: we haue a great taske and a short time allowed, we had need to listen to the clocke and to count the houres; your life is short, and the art of saluation is long in learning; The way to heauen cannot be trodden in a short time. Astrono∣mers say, that the space betweene heauen and earth, is nine hundred thousand miles, some speake of much more. The ascent then will aske both time and la∣bour,
ease and delay neuer brought any thither. Our Sauiour when he found his Disciples sleeping, said vn∣o Math. 26. 4. them, What, could ye not watch one houre? So may  say, Can you not be contented to feare God, to heare his word, and to pray vnto him for a few dayes? It may bee thou hast yet twentie yeeres longer to liue in this world, and wilt thou not bee contented to serue God as a Christian for twenty yeeres, that thou maist liue as an Angell for a thousand? It may bee thou hast but ten yeeres to continue in this world, and wilt thou not addict thy selfe to the honourable seruice of God for ten yeeres, that thou mayst liue and raigne for euer with Christ in his presence? Thou wouldst for a world∣ly preferment serue tenne yeeres, and canst thou so far vndervalue eternall glorie, as to thinke that any thing on earth deserues more cost and paines, in the seeking and obtaining, then the ioyes of heauen do? But it may be thou art an old man, & hast one foote in the graue already; then I say as Bias one of the sea∣uen wise men of Greece said of a Mariner, Nec inter viuos ec inter mortuos, Thou art not to be reckoned among them that liue, nor among them that be dead: And as Paul speaketh of a widdow liuing in pleasure, that she 1. Tim. 5. 6.  dead while she liueth. When wil ye begin to abound and to be rich in good workes? Is it not time to begin to be religious, when the pillars of your house begin to shake, when your windowes begin to bee darke? doe you meane to goe away in a sleepe, and shall your life passe away like a dreame? Came ye naked of goodnesse from your mothers wombe, and will ye goe backe a∣gaine naked? brought ye nothing into the world with you, of the best and blessedst riches, and will you cary nothing out? A great many of you heere present, are brought to the eleuenth houre of the day, and there is but a twelfth, a few minutes between you and iudge∣ment? what, do you tarry to be started with the shrillest
Trumpet that euer blew, or to be awakened with the fearefullest voice, that euer sounded? The night is com∣ming wherein no man can worke. Then there will be euerlasting throbbings, and throwes of the heart, for endlesse miseries: then the eies will labour for teares which shall euer runne downe, and then the teeth will grinde one another without ceasing. Oh, saith our Sa∣uiour, that you had knowne in this your day! and thus Luke 19. 42. much for the shortnesse of mans life. The fourth doctrine that is remarkable, is this, that man is more apt to forget death then any thing else. Moses was willing to remember death, but still his mind did turne from it, and it did slip out of his mind. Solomon bids vs remember that we must come to iudg∣ment, Eccle. 11. 9. and yet the wicked pleade against it, saith S. Pe∣ter. It is a strange kind of Arithmeticke, that no man 2. Pet. 3. 4. can learne it, except God be the schoolemaster and teach it. Men can number their Coine, their Cat∣tell, their corne, and their land; But no man without the assistance of Gods Spirit, can number his dayes; as though our daies were infinite. This prayer of Moses may seeme strange. Men are able by art to measure the Globe of the earth, and the Spheares of heauen, the quantitie of the Starres, with their longitudes, lati∣tudes, altitudes, motions, and distances from the earth, Flectere per varios docuit qui nomina Casus, Heu ca∣dit, hunc casum flectere non potuit, The Grammarian that declineth all Nounes and euery case, cannot decline death in any case. It is a hard matter to remember Death, and we striue to forget it. Teach vs to number our dayes; Oh no! hold your peace wee, may not re∣member. Amos 6. 10. Teach vs to number our dayes; Amos. 6. 10. nay, teach vs to multiply our dayes. Teach vs to re∣member Death; nay, teach vs to forget death, to pro∣long life, is the common language of our times: Men
cannot abide to thinke of death, they are sicke to eare the name of it; they say to death, as Pharaoh said Exod. 10. 28. o Moses, Get thee out of my sight. There are two reasons why we ought to remember eath, and there are foure reasons why we do forget it. The first reason why we should remember it, is, be∣ause when death comes, the greatest matter that did er concerne vs, will then be in question, to wit; the erlasting Saluation, or else the euerlasting condem∣ation of our soules. Secondly, then it will bee too late to repent, to a∣end, to pray, and to obtaine pardon. The rich man ryed, Oh Father Abraham, send Lazarus to lip the t Luke 16. 42. of his finger in water to coole my tongue: Desidera∣t guttam (saith Saint Austin) qui non dedit micam, e deired a droppe of water, that would not giue a um of bread, but it was too late: Hee should haue beene picifull; repented, and prayed in his life time before his death: For in death there is no remembrance Psal. 6. 5. of thee, (saith Dauid) and in the graue who shell praise thee? The first reason why many doe forget Death, is, be∣cause Death commeth oftentimes like a aylour to ale to prison. Secondlie, the remembrance of death maketh a man sinne fearefully, and taketh away the pleasure of sinne. Thirdly, Death is against nature, a dissolution of na∣ture; and therefore no man naturally can delight in it. Lastly, the diuell gaines much by forgetfulnesse in this kinde, and therefore will be sure, if by any meanes he can, to put that conceit out of mens heads. They are hence to be reprooued, that will not suf∣fer this meditation to settle in their hearts. Behold you despisers, and wonder at the hand of God, you hat are in league with death, & make a couenant and
truce with the graue, you that say to your soules, Tak your ease, and liue at rest for many yeares, your lif Luke 12. 19. Amos 6. 3. hangeth by a small thread. Put not the euill day farr from you, which the ordinance of God hath put so neare; walke not alwaies with your faces towards the East, sometimes haue an eye to the West, where the Sunne goeth downe: sit not alwaies in the prow of th shippe, sometimes goe to the sterne: stand in your watch towers, as the creature doth in the 8. to the Romanes, and waite for the time of your deliuerance; Rom. 8. 19. your bodies are not brasse, your strength, is not the strength of stones. The earth is the wombe tha hath bred you, and the earth is the wombe that will a∣gaine receiue you. Searecloathes, spices, Balme, the Im∣muring stone or lead, or a timber coffin, cannot so closely hide you, but the earth will challenge you for her naturall children, and say, You are my bowels: the earth (I say) your naturall mother, will know you a∣gaine, and receiue you into her possession. Remember 2. Tim. 3. 4. your mortalitie, you that are , louers of pleasure more then louers of God; when A∣dam and Eue became subiect to death, because of their Gen. 3. 2. sin, God cloathed them with the skins of dead beasts. So that the cloathes we weare vpon our backes, and the graues vnder our feete, and the meate which goeth into our bodiesies, crie vnto vs that we must die; like the fishes, fowles, and beasts, which a little before were liuing in their elements, and are now dead in our dishes. Let vs pray as Moses did, That God will giue vs grace to meditate vpon our last end. Though we for∣get other things, though we forget our owne names, and to eate our bread, yet our memorie doth suffici∣ently stand vs in stead, if we can remember our last end. Sathan perswaded our first parents, that they shold Gen. 3. 4. not die at all. Now though he cannot make vs beleeue
that, yet he perswades many, that they shall not die t, yea though they be at the brinke of the graue, and t a steppe betweene them and death. Many there be t are condemned in hell, and there doe suffer the ngeance of eternall fire, who would giue the whole orld if it were in their power, for one day or houre in is world, that they might repent and turne vnto God. What they wold do if they might, let vs do while w may; their glasse is already runne, and ours stands t still: yet a little while, and the time of hope, grace, and mercy will be past. Let vs not then be so much our one enemies, as to forget what belongs to our peace. e doe not reade that Moses, who made this pray∣, did oppose himselfe by the least thought of his heart, to the ordinance of God, when it was told him. Behold the daies are come, that thou must die: though Deut. 34. 7. h might haue liued longer; for his eies were not yet dmme, nor his naturall strength abated. But rather he sake to the people with alacritie of spirit and cheare∣fulnesse of heart, imbracing the tidings of death. He was not pulled like a beast by violence from his den. t on the other side, if a man will not pray, as Moses d: Death will be a death indeede, and little profit or se to be found in it. Oh pray that the flight and de∣prture of your spirits, be not vpon the Sabbath day, that is, in the rest and tranquilitie of your sinnes; pray  God that your departure be not in the frost and win∣ of your hearts: Oh pray to God that your depar∣ture be not in the midnight of your securitie. Wee worth the man, whome the Lord when he commeth shall finde sleeping. The vntimely fruite is better then that man, it had beene much better for him, neuer to haue beene borne. I am now come to the last part of my text, and the doctrine thereof is this: That the remembrance of eath, will cause vs to apply our hearts vnto wisedome.
There are many benefits which come by death, an there bee many benefits that come by the reme¦brance of death; Moses considered the shortnesse  his life: and therefore was carefull to spend his ti well. He chose rather to suffer affliction with th Heb. 11. 25. children of God, then to enioy the pleasures of sinn for a season. The Prophet Ieremie imputeth all the cal¦mities Lam. 1. 9. and sins of Ierusalem, to this, that shee remem¦bred not her last end. There is no greater enemie to repentance, then  thinke we haue a long time to repent hereafter: me doe not vse to thinke vpon death, when they go abo euill things; but they say as the serpent said, We shal not die. It is hard for a man to thinke vpon short life and to thinke well. Though death come after life, yet it guideth the whole life, as the sterne doth the ship; but for deat there would be no rule, but euery mans lust, would be his law. As the bird guideth her flight by her taile, s the life of man is best directed by a continuall recourse vnto the end. Though death the king of feare, differ his sessions, and stay his execution, yet the remembrance tha death will come, maketh the proudest peacocke lay downe his feathers; and is like a dampe that puts ou all the light of pleasure. Hereupon Salomon, Eccl. 11. 9▪ opposeth this memorandum against all vanities as  Eccl. 11. 9. counterpoise, Remember for al these things thou shal come to iudgement. The remembrance of death serues to humble vs, vn∣der the mightie hand of God. Abraham is an example Gen. 18. 27. hereof, I am but dust and ashes. We know not when our great Landlord will come and recken with vs. Quo hora & mora incertior est, eo ma¦gis vigilandum, By how much the more the houre o our departure is vnknowne, we must be so much the
more watchfull and vigilant. Ideolatet vltimus dies, vt eruetur omnis dies. Other farmers know certainly the me of their lease. But wee are all Gods tenants at l, he may put vs out of house and home, when hee . Some landlords set leases for three liues. But God uer demiseth any tenement, longer then for one : we cannot be secured an howre. The remem∣nce of death therefore, is like a strainer: all our thughts, words and actions which come through it, clensed and purified, like a cloath that cometh out of the water. The thought of death causeth many sies to avoide, as Sathan avoided, when Christ al∣leed Math. 4. 11. Scripture. Surely if a man did perswade himself, that this were the last day that euer he should liue, hee would not deferre his repentance till to morrow. If he did thinke that this were the last meate that euer hee old eate, he would not surfeit: if he did beleeue, that thse are the last wordes that euer he shall speake, hee uld not offend with his tongue: if he were perswa∣ded, that this were the last Sermon that euer he should hee, he would attend better then euer he did to any. Rmember your last end. Alas what are our Churches and Church-yards, but Humanarum cladium miseranda pta, the lamentable pinfolds of the deaths of ? Beware that you offer not to God the dregs of your life, lest God make you drinke the dregs of his anger. Remember that death ere it be long will set her  vpon your heads, and your lippes must kisse the dust of the ground: remember that the grauell & slime of the graue, shall dwell betweene your hawtie eye∣. I haue not leasure to say any more, Quid superbis terra & cinis. Oh earth and ashes, why art thou so pud? And thus much out of my text. And now right worshipfull and beloued, I know you looke that I should speake something of this gen∣tlan, whose shadow is here presented vnto our view.
I confesse, the licenciousnes of many preachers in c¦mending the dead contrarie to desert, is worthily  be censured, as that which grieues the godly; hard¦neth the wicked, and makes the ministery of the Go¦pell to be euill spoken of. And yet I haue euer though it not onely lawfull but necessarie, to speake somewh liberally, so it might bee done warrantably, of mag¦strates and publike persons, deseruing well of th Church and Common-wealth: my iudgement a practise in the present occasion shall accompanie eac other, while by your patience I speake a few words  Chrys. lib. de sacerdo. his life and death. Sed vereor ne tanti viri laudes orat mea eleuarem, magi quam exornrem. I feare lest while  striue to set forth this gentleman in his owne worth rather lessen and diminish his praise, then any way dorne it. But as I intend not to deny or with hold fro him any part of his due, so if all your expectations: not fully satisfied, let me alleadge. Bernards words fo Bern. ser. in Cant. 34. my excuse, Culpetur sanè ingenium non voluntas: The fa is not willingly committed, blame them my vnskilfu¦nesse. But I will hold you no longer in suspence. A therefore first of all I say as Dauid said vpon the dea of Abner, Hodie cecidit princeps in Israele. This day there fallen a great man in Israel. I will not speake much 2. Sam. 3. 38. his birth & progenitours, though it be worthy respe to descend from the loines of those that are worth and worshipful. But alas, Stemmata quid faciunt? Ancie and noble pedigrees what are they worth, when t line of well doing continueth not? Honour falling v¦on an vnworthy man, is but as an ornament in t dirt, saith Saluian: It doth but bring the person of s a one, with his faults and infirmities to a more op view, which otherwise perhaps had beene either  knowne or vnregarded. I will say little of his natur parts, of wit, memorie volubility of speech, all whi were excellent in him, and commendable in any, esp¦cially when, as Bernard saith, Gratia ordinat, quod
auit creatio. Grace doth order and sanctifie that which Ber. tract. de gra. reation hath giuen and bestowed. But I will come to he best, wherein he deserued to be commended. It is ell knowne he was a good magistrate in his country. he charge is waighty and the burden heauy which is id vpon them, whom the Lord hath marked out vnto aces of gouernment: which made Chrysost. say, Maror si qis Rectorum, saluaripossit: I maruell (said he) how any agistrate can bee saued. Hee was full of courage in e execution of Iustice. Impunitatis spes magna pocandi ecebra, Hope to escape vnpunished is a great prouoca∣tion of transgressing, It is not the Roabe, nor the sword, r the highest roome that maketh a magistrate. He cō∣ered whose Image he did beare, whose person he did present, what cause he had taken in hand, and whose Iudgement he did execute. It is certain, the vine of the Church doth spread out her branches with much cher∣fulnesse when magistrates doe execute Iustice, without any conniuence. Oh put not honie into the sacrifice, in∣stead of salt; you that are rulers and gouernours in this our Israel, execution of iustice vpon riotous and inor∣dinate liuers, is for the present a sweet smelling sacrifice vto God, the ioy of angels, the comfort of good men, the sauing of soules, & a reuocation of many from de∣suctiō: nor shall your labour be in vaine in the Lord; in respect of your selues, it wil procure you euen in this life, ny sweete blessings from aboue. And hereafter it shal  a crowne vpon your heads, in that day when the iust God shall largely recompence your faithfull seruice. Secondly, he was to be commended, for his Hospita∣ie. It is well knowne, his house was seldome without strangers. I may in some sort compare him to Abraham Gen. 18. 1. Gen. 19. 1. and vnto Lot; they sate in their gates & at the doores of their tents, to inuite strangers. And this gentleman desi∣red his friends & neighbours to come to his house, and they were vnto him welcome guests. In this respect he
was like vnto Iob, he did not eate his morsels alone. Iob. 31. 17. Thirdly, his loue and kindnesse to his poore friends and neighbours, may not be forgotten: he was ready to speak for them, to write for them, and to lend them mo∣ney in their neede. It was his resolution to keepe some money by him alwaies, if God should so blesse him and inable him, that he might lend (as he said) fiue pounds, tenne pounds, or twenty pounds, to any neighbour or Gentleman vpon an vrgent occasion; which sure was in him a charitable consideration, and to you, right wor∣shipful, may be a patterne for imitation. Want driueth many into dangerous extremities; poore men are often forced by necessity to gage their houses, their lands, and vineyards: and they may iustly complaine, as those did in Nehemiah, And now our flesh it is as the flesh of our bre∣thren, Nehe. 5. 5. and our sonnes as their sonnes; there is no power in our handes, for other men haue our lands. It is chari∣ty and mercifulnesse to lend to such. Oh that they which be wealthy & rich, would lay aside superfluities and vanities, and learne frugality and thriftines, as this Gentleman did, and conuert their hands and their harts to such workes of mercy! Oh take something from your bellies and backes, both in regard of your owne soules, to witnesse humility and sobriety before God and man: and for your poore brethrens sake, that they may bee comforted and releeued. It is Christ that hungreth, and Christ that must satisfie you: It is Christ that craueth, and Christ that must giue vnto you. It is Christ that is indebted and impouerished, and it is Christ that must aduance you to glory. There are many poore men that are ashamed to craue an almes, 1 and yet they would be glad with the Disciples of Christ to rub an eare of corne betweene their hands: their bow∣els sound like shalmes for want of foode, and their teeth are cleane. It is charity & mercifulnesse to lend to such. And certainly the lower this well of charitie is drawne,
the clearer & sweeter, will the water flow vp vnto you. Fourthly, he was worthy of much praise & commen∣dation for the ciuil order and gouernment of his fami∣ly; he was excellent that way. I know not wel how to pa∣rallel him with any of his ranke and place: his seruants were obsequious & officious vnto him, both for his cre∣dit and his profite; he abhorred idlenesse in his seruants. Appelles posie was this, Let no day passe witbout a line: he appointed them such offices and imploiments, that euery one in his house, had either a sweating brow, or a working braine. Alexander Seuerus, that worthy and learned Emperour, was wont to say that he would not feede his seruants with the bowels of the Common-wealth. And as he required diligence in their places, so he was liberall & beneficial for their preferments; which he frankly expressed in his life time towards them: and at his death he gaue them annuities & pensions, & be∣stowed vpon them bountifull legacies: herein also he was like vnto Iob. If I should despise my seruants, what shall Iob. 31. 14 I doe when God standeth vp? and when he shall visite mee, what shall I answer? But you will say, all this is well, these things are com∣mendable, but you say nothing of his religion. I cōfesse this is the temple that sanctifieth the gold, this the altar which sanctifieth the sacrifice: all the former though ex∣cellent in themselues, and glorious in the sight of men; yet without this, they are but splendida peccata. Whatsoe∣uer they seeme to be, yet deuided frō sauing grace, they are but glittering sinnes, as Saint Augustin calles them. It happened a little before he fell sicke, that he consi∣dered of the mercies and blessings of God, vouchsafed vnto him, in great abundance; and rendred praise and thankesgiuing to God, for such fauours and benignities. But he complained in my hearing, that with that plen∣tie and fulnesse, there was a great want and defect of the publike worship of God vpon the Sabbath day. His de∣termination
was this; that with all speed he would haue a Preacher in his house, because his corpulent and vn∣weildie body would not permit him to trauaile vnto the Church. Hee resolued therefore to allow a sufficient maintenance, and desired me with great earnestnesse to effect the businesse, and made this his purpose knowen to all his family, and to many others. His heart was smitten with an awfull reuerence of Gods Maiestie, for the sanctifying of the Lords Sabbaths, and for the sin∣cere preaching of the Gospell of Christ Iesus. It is my comfort to see such a happy and friendly aspect of so many principall Planets together in one place, so many Gentlemen and Magistrates. Giue me leaue (I beseech you) to wash my hands in innoceny to free mine owne soule in the sight of God, and to speake a few words, to stirre vp your minds, and to quicken your affections, in the behalfe of the Lords worship and seruice. Think not your dwellings safe enough without the house of God: sing not at home with your owne Muses, absent not your selues from the Lords sanctuary, as though Iorden lay between you and the Church: say not as the women did in Esay; We will eate our owne bread, and we are our owne garments. The Sabbath day is the sanctified day of the Lords rest. If you haue any loue to that hidden Manna, which perisheth not; If you haue any desire to those fruits of the tree of life, in the midest of the Paradise of God: If you haue any sincere affection to those white garments washt in the blood of Christ: If you desire to shine hereafter as the stars in the firmament, rather then to be but as a Glow-worme in this world; then helpe to bring the Lords Sabbaths to rest, they are shamefullie troubled & disquieted: the common daies of the weeke are happier in their seasons then the Lords Sabbaths. The sanctifying of the Sabbath is one of those vn∣changeable lawes, which God himselfe wrote with his owne finger. Resolue therefore as this Gentleman did,
to keepe it holy. God did not ordeine it for carnall plea∣sures, or that we should giue liberty on that day to our sensuall affections. But if you will not regard and obey this, then behold the dispersion and dissipation of your posterity vpon the face of the earth: behold the ruine, vastation, and desolation of your houses; behold the de∣testation of your names, behold the hissing & clapping at your death and departure, among your neighbours. The want of the word of God, is the want of your cre∣dit and prosperity: the want of the word of God, is the want of your true comfort, peace and happinesse: the want of the word of God, will be the want of your salua∣tion, if in this open and free time of the Gospel, you de∣priue your selues through wilfull neglect of that benefit which others receiue by it. Thus you haue heard of this Gentlemans life, I must now speak a word or two of the maner of his death. When the shadow of death was vp∣on his eies, his senses began to faint and faile, yet this was obserueable, that in the time of prayer, his senses were quickned and againe reuiued; so that he was able to lift vp his hands and his eies at euery Petition, and to say Amen to euery conclusion. This was also worthy regard, that the last words he spake were these; O Lord Iesus haue mercy vpon me, & forgiue me my sins, O Lord Ie∣sus receiue my spirit. And presently after, his breath and his spirit departed. So that I may say of him as Ierome reporteth of Nepotians quiet and peaceable departure from this life; Non intelligeres illum emor, sed emigrare, Thou wouldst not thinke he died, but rather that hee walked forth: And this was the manner of his death. I must not be tedious, in regard of the present businesse, Time at this time must haue power ouer y words: I will therfore conclude, and make an end as I did begin, O Lord teach vs to number our daies, tat wee may apply our hearts vnto wisedome. Amen. FINIS.
