8580 99836598 882
¶ By the King. THE Kings Maiestie intending to follow the godly and honourable Statutes and Ordinances of Houshold of his most Noble Progenitors, straitly chargeth and commandeth, that all Vagabonds and Masterlesse folke, boyes and girles, and other idle persons which haue vsed to hang on, haunt, and follow the Court, shall depart from thence within foure and twentie houres af∣ter this Proclamation made, vpon paine of his Maiesties grieuous displeasure, and such further paines, as in the said Statutes and Ordinances be limitted and appoited. And further, that no Artificer, Laundrer or Laundresse, other then such as shall bee speci∣ally licensed, shall follow the Court: And they that shall be so admitted, to haue with them no maner of young children, or other seruants, either of men or women kinde, then shall be specially limitted and enrolled. And moreouer, that no Officer of the Houshold, nor any other person or persons lodged within his Maiesties most Honourable House, doe suffer any Vagabonds, Masterlesse folkes, boyes or other idle persons whatsoeuer, to resort into their Chambers, and Offices at any time, vpon paine of imprisonment in the Marshalseas, and further punishment at his Maiesties will and pleasure. Also that all Lords and others that haue lodging in the House, shall foorthwith send the names of their seruants to the Knight Marshall to be Registred; and if they shall put any of them away for mis∣demeanour, to send him to the Marshall, that he may be discharged accordingly. Further, that no chamber-keeper presume to keepe boyes, or scrapers of trenchers, other then such as shall be thought meet and conuenient to be allowed. And lastly, his Maiestie strait∣ly chargeth and commandeth his Knight Marshall, and all such Officers and Ministers as be attendant about the Court vnder him and euery of them, to doe their vttermost and best endeauour from time to see his Maiesties commandement, aboue specified, spe∣cially obserued, obeyed and kept, as they will auoide his Maiesties grieuous displeasure, and answere to the contrary at their perils. Giuen at Whitehall, the tenth day of Nouember, in the sixteenth yeere of Our Reigne of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the two and fiftieth. God saue the King. ¶ Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and Iohn Bill, deputie Printers for the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. ANNO. M.DC.XVIII.
