919 99836154 408
Certein Pla∣CEs GATHERED OVT OF .S. Austens Boke intituled de es∣sentia diuinitatis, verye necessary to vnder¦stand certein dar∣ke places of the byble and es∣peciallye the Prophetes gathered by Herman Bodius a faithfull preacher▪ and now lately turned into Inglysh. Imprynted At London, at the signe of the Hyll, at the west dore of Paules. By Wylly∣am Hill. And the∣re to be sold. Cum Gratia et Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum
THE PREFACE to THE Reader YT is well sayed of the philosophers (gētle re¦ader) a good thinge is not to be prysed after the greatnesse thereof but after the goodnesse. The whi∣ch sayeng well waighed doth mo¦ch speake against the peruerseiud gements of manymen now adays which esteme al thinges by the gre¦atnesse and especially bookes set∣fourth cōcerning religion which be daily set fourthe more and more to the glorie of God (who be than¦ked therfore) and to the profight of the weake breathren. Thei thī∣ke in these litle bookes is smal go¦odnesse. Me thinke suche men as write so briefly do beest of all for onely thei put in that which is ne¦cessary leauing out other trifles and those bookes I compayre to
preciouse stones who in quantyt beyng small yet in vertue be grea¦te neyther is the greatest stone of most valew & as we trie stones so wold I haue vs tri bokes not iud¦gynge thē eyther by greatenesse or lytlenesse but by the goodnesse v∣singe the rule that Sainte Ihon giueth try the spretes wether they be of God and Paule assaye all thinges kepe that y• is good. whi∣ch ye must do by the worde of god as, S. Paul teacheth i, Timo .iiii all scripture is profitable to teach and reproue this rule if ye vse I doubt not but thou wilt like good gentle reader this booke of S. Au¦stens by me feithfully translated. Of whose praise I nede not to spe¦ke. This onely wold I warne the of briefli that thou read it or thou iudge it, This done I cōmyte the to God whose holye spirite leade the in to all truthe, FINIS.
THE EXPOSYTION of darke Places gathered out of. S Austen ALmighty God the fa¦ther ye sonne and holy gooste are three & one One in substaunce three in parsones Who onely is vnuisible & can not be sene, onely immense & incomprehensible on¦ly vncircumscribed onely vncha¦ungeable with out bodi and euer¦lasting. Euery where present but hidden euery where whole but yet with out measure. Inuisible because in his sub∣staunce he can not be sene as ye A¦postle writeth .i. Timo .vi. whom no man hathe sene and in the gos¦pell. Iohn .i. no man dyd see god at any time. Without body because he hath no bodely shape in him ne is com¦pacte
of any membres as. Iohn .iiii. god is a sprete they that ad∣ore hym muste worshype hym in sprete. Immensus or with out measure For his quantite biggnes great¦nesse longnes or other his quan∣tityes or qualitees can not be me asured of any creature. Vncircumscript or discryueable. For as moche he cannot be dys∣cryued by any meanes. In no place because he stireth not from one place to another. Vnchangeable because he cānot be changed from that he is as he witnesseth by the prophet mala∣chie I am the Lorde and am not chaunged. The same God is cal¦led vnchaungeable because ne∣ther wrath rage repentaunce for¦getfulnes and calling to remem∣braunce and other lyke affecty∣ons can chaunge by any meanes
in his substaunce. He is called immortaul or euer∣lasting in that he cannot die and wheresoeuer in the sacred bible ye holy scripture doth ascribe affec∣tions or motions of the minde or any partes of mans bodye vnto God as heade heare eyes & other lyke these and such other are not to be vnderstanded if ye wyl vn∣derstande them truly not after ye letter as the story lieth after wich sorte the Iewys aud heritiques onely wyse in yearthly thinges, take it Imagening God to haue abody and to be conteined in a place But all those muste be taken spretuallye and so graunted to be in him. And yf anye man sup∣pose that God hathe means mem¦bres and is ledde wythe the af∣fectyones of the mynde as be, wythe oute dowbte that men
maketh hym Selfe an Idole or a false GOD in hys owne her∣te. Wherfore when we read a head gyuen to GOD yt muste be vn∣derstande in a fygure as I tolde before wherby is mente the god-head which was before all thyn∣ges and to which al things ar in subieccion. By the heares of hys heade fyguratyuely muste bee vnder∣stande the holye aungelles or all the electe and chosen sainctes of GOD. Daniell .vii. I dyd be∣holde tyll seates were set and the olde aged sate hym downe hys clothes were as whyte as snowe the heares of his head like pure wolle. The same is meant by the whyte clothes or garmentes that is declared by the whyte heares that is the holye aungelles and the greate numbre of Sainctes
all in white. GOD is saied to haue eyes in that he seeth all thynges and nothyng is hydden frome hym. In whose sighte as the Apostle writeth no creature is inuisyble hebre .iiii. For all thynges are open and bare before his eyen in an other sorte of speakynge the eyes of the Lord do signefy a re∣spect as ye eyes of ye lord vpō ye iust Also the eyen of the Lorde do signefy mistycally hys comma∣undement whereby is mynistred to vs the lyghte of knowledge. Psal .xviii. The Commaunde∣ment of the bryght geuyng light to the eyen. The heares of the Lords eye liddes are the secrete hydden and incomprehensible iudgemēts of god or by them a spiritual phra∣se of speaking in the holy bible is noted wherof is sayed in the psal
the heares of hys Eyelyddes to aske the Chyldren of men, trye theim. Eares are gyuen to God be∣cause he heareth al thynges and nothyng is counceled from him Sapiencie, i. the care of heauen heareth all thinges. By the nosethrilles of God is meante his inspiration in to the hartes of the feythful .ii, Regum .xxii. the smoke came doune from his nosethrilles .i. They be wail∣ful vnquietnes of the repentaūte through his inspiration, The face of god the knowledge of his godhed to men. Psal, lxxix Shewe thy face o Lord and we shall be safe that is giue vs the knowledge of ye which is many∣fested to men by thy sone. Other wise ye face of god doth signefye the inuisible substaunce of ye god head of the sonne of god.
wherof he sayeth him selfe answe∣ring moses by his angel. Exo xxx¦iii thou shal se my backe or my hī¦der partes my face thou maist not see ī which sayng this is imported my incarnatiō thou shal see in the latter dayes my Godhead thou maist not see. The mouth of the Lord is the son¦ne of God the father Iesus christ our Lorde of whome Ieremy in ye voyce of the Iewes theruor, i, be∣cause we haue stirred his mouthe to anger: otherwise it is taken the mouthe of the Lord for his com∣maundemente Esay .xviii. The mouthe of the Lorde hathe spo∣ken. The worde of the Lorde is the sonne of God the father as in the psal by the worde of the Lorde the heauens weare establyshed he sente hys worde and healed them,
The tounge of God mystecally doth signefy the holye ghoste by whome god the father doth open his secretes to men psal .xliiii. mi tonge the pēne of a writer that writethe fast. The lippes of the Lorde the con∣cordaunce Or agrement of bothe the testamentes wherof is writen Prouerbe, xvi. prophecyenge in his lippes his mouthe shal not er¦re in iudgement, The arme of God the father sin∣gularely is taken for his sonne as hiere, xxxii, And nowe O Lorde my God whiche broughte thy peo¦ple oute of the Lande of Egip∣te by stronge hande and a bent ar me. And for his cause the sone of God is called the fathers arm that eue¦rye chosen creature in him is pre∣serued, Act .xxiiii.
The ryghte hande of God the Father is hys onelye Begotten sonne psal, Cxvii. the right hande of the lord mayde vertue the right hande of the LORD promoted me, Otherwyse it dothe sygnefye the glorye of the Father & hys blys¦se endles psalm .Cix, sytte on my righte hand, the right hand of the Lorde dothe sygnefye all hys e∣lecte Sayntes eyther in heauen or in Yearthe on the other syde by his lefte hande is meante repro¦brate and parlones caste a way as the Deuyll and all the vngod∣lye. The hande of the Lorde is the Sonne be cause by hym all thynges are made Otherwyse it Dothe sygnefye the powre of GOD as in Ieremye .xviii, As the claye in the potters han∣de so ye O house of Israell are in my handes.
Thyrdly it betokeneth his scour∣ge, whip or vengeaunce Sopho∣nie .i. and I wyll streache furthe my hande vpon Iuda and Ieru∣salem Iob .xix. The hande of the lord touched me. The finger of God put in the singuler nombre doth signify the holye ghooste by whome the lawe was written in the mount Sinai in twoo tables of stone. Luke .xi. If I cast out deuels in the spirit of God. etc. Fingeris in the plural numbre doth meane the holy prophetes bi whome the hosy goost dyd wrytte the bokes of the lawe and prophe∣tes by his inspiratiō Psalms .viii I shal se the heauens, the wor¦kes of thy fingers by the heauēs are vnderstande the bokes of the law and prophetes bi the fingers the holy prophetes: The image of God the father
who is vnuisible it is his only be gotten sonne Collossians .i. He is the image of God the father who can not be sene. The harte of god the father is figuratiuely the hidden priuitie of hys wysdom psalm .xliiii. My harte hathe breathed oute a good worde God also is said to haue wyn∣ges in so much as he doth louing¦ly defende his owne as the henne gathering hir chickēs vnder hir winges. psalm vnder the shadow of thi winges defende me. God also is sayd lykewise to ha∣ue shoulders because he doth bea¦re paciently the weake membres of Iesu Christe as it were on hys shoulders & in cariīg he defēdeth thē psal .xc. with his shoulders he hathe ouershadowed the and vn∣der his winges thou shalte truste The belly of God doth signify
the hidden misterye and springe of his substaunce or knowledge psal, Cix: oute of my bealy before the daye starre haue I forgotten the. Secundarily it dothe import the incomprehensible and hidden iudgementes of God. The hynder or backparts is his incarnation. Exo .xxxiii: my hyn∣der or backe partes you shall see, The fete of God are the establi¦shement of his myght and powre in that he is euerye where and all thynges are subiecte to hym Esa. lxvi. heauen is my seate and the yearth is the footestole of my feet Secondarily as by the heade his godhead is meante so by hys fete figuratiuelie is betokened his mā head psal .viii. al thīgs vnder his feet shepe & al o xē, by ye feet of Ie¦sus christ is meant his holy prophe¦tes or prechers Deut xxxiii thei yt approch nigh his seat shal take of his learninge,
The clothes of the sonne of god is his flesh takē vp in to heauē of his godhead Esa, xxxv. who is this ye cōmeth frome Edom whiche died clothes from bosra otherwise by his garmētes is meant his holye churche which is Ioigned to hym by faithe and loue. The boke of god is ye holy church Genes .xlvi. he shal wash in wine his clothes .i, the bloud of his pas¦sion his sheshe and in the bloude of ye grape his cloke yt is his chur¦che. The shoone do signefy mistecally his incarnatiō psal .lix. I wil stre¦ache fourth my shoone into Ido∣mea .i. I will manifest mine incar¦nation to the gentiles. The walkīg of the lord ye cōmīg of ye sōne of god īto the world & his re¦turne to his father psal, lxvii. thy walkīg was seē, o, god ye ingoīg of my god y• dwelleth in the holye.
God is sayed to ascende when the sonne of god caried in to heauen fleshe taken of vs as it were prise¦ner psal .lxvii, he ascēded into the highe leading which with him cap¦tiuity as aprysoner. God is redd to hide his face whē he dothe kepe frome certē wicked parsons accordinge to their de∣sertes the true knowledg of him as we see it now cōto passe in the people of the Iewes. He dothe shew his face whan he entrethe to the hartes of the faith full with his fauourable mercye in a pryuy secret and close inspi∣ration pouringe in to their hertes his loue to loue him abundantlye GOD dothe sitt not bode∣lye as men do but in powre a∣boue euerye creature psalme .lxvi: the Lorde hathe raigned ouer the heathen god dothe sitte on hys holye seate. God is saied to sitte
vpon the rubin which is interpre¦ted the fulnesse of knowledge or multitude wherby is meant holy angells or the soules of the godly and spirituall men wherin godsit¦teth and raigneth invisibly for, he sitteth in them that are replenish¦ed with the knowledge and loue of him prouerb the soule of the iust the feare of the wisedome. Whan ye read that god commeth downe in to the worlde therby ye shall vnderstande that he dothe so me thing amōg men that was not done before after this sorte is the sonne of god saied to haue come downe when he did take to him a true mans body of the blessed vir¦gin mary for our satuatiō of who¦se downe cōmyng or incarnation is writē psal .xvii. he bowed downe the heauēs he came downe and a mist vnder his feate he bowed the heauens because before his com∣minge
be sent his messengers the ā¦gells and {pro}phetes to preach his cō¦mīg to mē a mist was vnder his fet in that the vngodly blinded thro¦ugh ther owne wyckednes coulde not acknowledge his incarnation neyther as yet can. God is saied to stand whē he suffe¦rethe the weake paciently to amēd ther life through penaunce or repē¦taunce Aba .iii. he stode & mensu¦red the yearth & did loose ye gētiles when he stode to ayd them & did vn¦doo or loose thē y• beleue in him frō¦the bandes of synne. God is saied to passe ouer or passe bi whē whā he geueth out of ye har¦tes of ani mā forsīne in whome he was thought to dwel before throu¦gh faith & lerning him goeth to an other as frome ye Iewes to the gē∣tiles frome ye heritikes to ye faith∣ful & godly which he is not wō to doo either bi chaungīg of place or
visibly but inuisibli by the secret & iust iudgement of god. God is sayd to walke not by go¦ing from one place to an other so to beleue is heresye, but hys wal∣king is to haue a delyghte in the hartes of his electe Sainctes as it is written yet I wyll dwell in them and walke in thē and I wyl be theyre lorde or at the leastwy∣se the walkynge of God is to goo from place to place in the Holye preaching of his gospell. The speache of god is inuisy∣ble without the sound of any voy¦ce or any other whysper by putīg in secretelye into myndes of the godly what hys wyll is geuynge them a true vnderstandīg eyther by opening to them thinges to co¦me as to the holye prophetes the whiche speakinge by the mouthe of god as some wyll haue it is ta¦ken three maner of wayes. The
fyrste through a creature subiecte as to Moyses when he appeared in the bushe and fyre and to A∣braham or Iacob to whome he dyd appeare by angells the seco∣nd way by dreames as to Jacob the prophet zachary and Ioseph the husbande of the blessed Ma∣ry and other holy men to whome he would open his secrete y• third was neither by creature that can be sene neyther by a dreame but by hys secrete inspyracyon tou∣chinge the hartes of the feythe∣full inuysyblye he makethe them speake as in the prophetes it ys red when they themselues when ye spree of god cam on thē cry a∣lowd sayeng thys sayth the lord To see of the lorde is to allow ye that is wel done as in. Gene .x, & god dyd see all that he had made & thei were veri good otherwyse to se ī hī is to disalow ye wicked∣nes
of mē in knowing it Esay. lix & ye lord dyd see & euil dyd appeare in his eyē. Thirdly to se ī him is to make vs se yt is to say knowing or vnderstandīg psal: cxxxviii. try me lord & know my harte &. cet. and see if y• way of iniquiti be in me Iob. xxviii: thē he dyd se her shew her & serch hir out .i. he made vs seynge hir shewīg hir tellīg other of hir & serching hir out. To knowe in god is to make mē know as Gene xxii: now do I know yt thou seruest ye lord his knowledge begineth not in any time seīg he knoweth al thī¦ges before be ī ayde therfor god is said to kno whē he maketh mē kno¦we yt thei which were vnknowē to them selfes before what thei were by his asking .i. trying thei mai be knowē to thē selfes of this sort is yt ī ye law spokē of ye people of Israel den .xiii, yt I may assay thē wether thei kepe mi cōmādemētes or no:
Not know in god is to refuse or reiecte certein cast awayes and reprobate parsons Luke .xiii. I know ye not whence ye are, hence from me ye that do wickednes. God is sayd to be ialouse when he doth chastice scourge and cor∣rect hys creature whome he wold not haue perrissh and therby cal∣leth him backe to hym againe ey∣ther is he said to be ialouse when he suffereth no sine vnpunished. God is said likwise to be āgry not by anye mocyon of the mynde or other perturbacyon whyche can not chaunce in hym, but because he doth iustlye punisshe the wyc∣ked he is sayde to be angrye that is to reward them as they haue de¦serued and that is called the ven∣geaunce of God his angry wrath rage or fury. GOD is sayd to repente not because he is sorye for anye thing
that he hathe doonne as Menne are for he that knoweth al thing∣es before they be done can not re∣pente him of anye thynge that he hath done the repentaunce of god is to chaunge any thynge that he hadde done before as to chaunge that whyche was begonne thys waye after an other sorte eyther from good to euell as of Saule whom the lord repented him that he made hym Kynge eyther from euell to good thys chaunge from good to euell from euell to good as ofte as it chaunceth eyther by the secret and iust iudgemente of GOD eyther by the extreamytie of his iustice or by his mercye we saye that god doth repent. When the scripture saith that God dothe not repente therby is meante that in no case he chaun∣geth suche thynges as he had ap∣pointed psal. Cix. The lorde hath
sworne and he will not repent .i. The father to the sonne thou art an euerlastinge preiste of the or∣der of Melchisedech The son of God is called the preist of the fa∣ther not in that he is god but mē in whiche parte .i. manhed he of∣fred vppe hym selfe by hys passi¦on and deathe an acceptable Sa¦crifice to God the father for that he shoulde be the priest also whi∣che is the sacrifice. God is saied to forget when he doth not take mercye vppon cer∣tein synners and vngodlye per∣sons not by cruelty whyche can not be in hym but throughe his secrete and iust iudgement. God is saied to hardē the hartes of certen mēas it is writē of Pha¦rao not becaue almightye God doth hardē ther hartes through his almightinesse for to beleue is wicked but whē ther oun naugh¦tinesse
askīg vēgeāce he taketh not awaie the hardnesse of hart which thei them selfes do norishe by euil doyeng as though he doth harden them hym selfe where as he dothe permitte thē to be hardened by the iuste iudgemente of god. God is sayed to slepe when ye only begotten sonne of the father dyd vouchsafe dye for vs in manhead which he had taken vpō hym who¦se deathe was well called a swete slepe otherwyse God is sayed tosle¦pe when hys father dothe not wat¦che but slepe ī the hartes of certen faithfull beynge in prosperite this slepe dyd oure Sauioure figure in hym selfe Mathewe .viii. when he slepte in the shyppe in the myd∣de waues thyrdelye when GOD dothe succoure and ayde hys cho∣sen wythe the sloweste beynge in greate Daunger in the worlde
he is said to slepe. Psa .xliii A rise lorde why dost thou slepe God dothe watche when he shew¦eth hym selfe ready to defend his chosen and auenge hys aduersa∣rye. These and suche other which at attributed to God by the text of holye scripture are not to be vn∣derstande as the plain text liethe but figuratiuelye. For God al∣mightie in the substaunce of hys godhed is a sprete and no flesshe inuisble without body not made of mannes membres and for this cause he is not to be loked out wt the bodelye eyes but withe eyes of the mynde as it is written bles¦sed be the clene harted they shall see God and to see God is to be∣leue in hym trulye and loue hym with al our hartes to this saying of God that we may all attayne first let vs pray God to giue vs
fayth then to increase it finally to make it perfit ye which if we haue we shall vnderstand al these and suche other places as they ought be in the meane season to the wea¦ker I truste my laboure shal not be loste surely this was myne in∣deuoure the which if chaunce hereby God the glorye and praise him in al his wor¦kes to whō be all pra¦yse honoure and glorye nowe And euer worlde wythoute Ende Amen {fleur-de-lys} FINIS ☞❧{fleur-de-lys}☜
Imprynted At London, at the signe of the Hyll, at the west dore of Paules. By Wylly∣am Hill. And the∣re to be sold. ANNO .M.D.XLVIII The .xiii. day of . Cum Gratia  legio ad Imprimen olum
❧A Nota∣ble collection of diuers and sō¦dry places of the sacred scriptures / which make to the declaratyon of the Lordes prayer / Comenly called the Pater noster. Gathered by the famous Clerke Peter viret / Frenchman. And translated oute o Frenche into In∣glysh / by Anthony Scoloker. Th .viii. Daye of Iune. Anno. 1548 IMPRINTED at London / by Anthony Scoloker Dwelling wythout Aldersgate And Wyllyā Seres Dwel∣lyng. In the ¦rentes in hol∣bo. Cum Gratia et solum
