A3305 18811537 108374
AN ANSWER To a LATE Ill-natur'd Libel, ENTITULED, A TRIP to HOLLAND: BEING A Real Description of the Country; the Bravery, Wisdom and Industry of its Inhabitants; and the several Vertues which have their Growth and Encouragement in the SEVEN UNITED PROVINCES. By a Dutch Merchant. LONDON, Printed for J. Nutt, near Stationers-Hall, 1699.
best of Princes? But Ingratitude is the chief ingredient of a Poet; and to Lampoon a Patron who has kept him from starving, if he in the least chanceth to slacken his Hand, is as common to him, as his wants are familiar, and I need not tell the Reader how often a Rhiming Fool is in Necessity: Tho' at the same time, what our Male-Contented Common-Wealth hates, has said in re∣lation to the Vices of the Hollanders, gives us an opportunity of inspecting their Vertues; and since he acts the part of so faithless an Historian, as partially to pass by their Excellencies, the following Discourse shall give as many instances in their commendation, as his has in their dispraise. Our Author is not unlike to a Man in the Yellow Jaundice, who thinks every one of the same Complection with himself; for how could he heap so many Vices upon so Virtuous a People, unless he had been a practiti∣oner in those very Vices he would fasten on his Neighbour? But least the Gentleman should be angry, for he's a little Tasty Fel∣low, I'll abstain from railery, and be for once the Reverse of him, as he saith the Dutch are of Humanity. All that I have to urge in the behalf of the following Paper, is that the decency of Expression, the excellency of the People it Treats of, the truth of every particular, Instance, and the industry which is in practise among them, must needs take off from the prejudices which the Reader may have imbib'd from the Paper which this is designed as an Answer to. And I shall have said enough to ingratiate my self with the Reader, if to shake of Tyranny and Slavery, to be Lovers of their Country, and to be Assistants to those that are in Distress, has so near a resemblance of our English Constitution, that we should give no manner of approba∣tion to our Actions, should we disallow of the practise of them in theirs; then we have all the reason in the World to be on their side, unless we would be against our selves.
AN ANSWER To a LATE Ill-natur'd Libel, ENTITULED, A TRIP to HOLLAND, &c. AS the People we are now to treat of are grown to such a prodigious Highth of Riches and Greatness as to be render'd equal to the most Sovereign Powers, so the Means by which they have acquir'd those Honours which are paid only to them and Crown'd Heads, well deserve to be taken notice of. Solomon tells us ofFour Things that are small, and full of Wisdom; The Pismire, the Grass-hopper, the Coney, and the Spider. For Providence, they are the Pismires of the World; and ha∣ving nothing but what Grass affords them, are yet for almost all Provisions, the Store-house of Christendom, What is it which there may not be found in plenty? They make by their Indu∣stry, all the Fruits of the vast Earth their own. What Land can, boast a Privilege that they do not partake of? They have not of their own, enough Materials to compile one Ship; yet how many Nations do they furnish? The Remoter Angles of the World do, by their Pains, deliver them their Sweets; and and being of themselves in want, their Diligence hath made them both Indies nearer home. They are Frugal, to the saving of Egg-shells; and maintain it for a Maxim, That a Thing lasts longer Mended, than New.
Their Cities are their Mole-Hills; their Schutes and Fly-Boats creep and return with their Store for Winter: Every one is bu∣sie, and carries his Grain; as if every City were a several Hive, and the Bees not permitting a Drone to inhabit; for Idle Persons must find some other Mansion. And lest Necessity bereave Men of Means to set them on work, there are Publick Banks, that (without Use) lend upon Pawns to all the Poor that want. There is a Season when the Pismires fly; and so each Summer they likewise swarm abroad with their Armies. The Ant, says one, is a wise Creature, but a shrewd thing in a Garden or Orchard. And truly, so are they; for they look upon others too little, and themselves too much: And wheresoever they light in a pleasant or rich Soil, like Suckers and lower Plants, they rob from the Root of that Tree which gives them Shade and Protection. So their Wisdom is not, indeed, Heroick, or Numnial, as courting an Universal Good; but rather Nar∣row and Restrictive, as being a Wisdom but for themselves; which, to speak plainty, is descending into Craft, and is but the Sinister Part of that which is really Noble and Celestial. Nay, in all they hold so true a Proportion with the Emmet, as you shall not sind they want so much as the Sting. For dwelling in Rocks, they are Coneys; and while the Spa∣nish Tumbler plays about them, they rest secure in their own In∣accessible Burrows. Where have you, under Heaven, such Im∣pregnable Fortifications, where Art beautifies Nature, and Na∣ture makes Art invincible? Herein, indeed, they differ; the Coneys find Rocks, and they make them: And, as if they would invert the Miracle of Moses, they raise them in the Bosom of the Waves: Where, within these few Years, Ships furrow'd in the Pathless Ocean, the Peaceful Plough now unbowels the Fer∣tile Earth, which at Night is carry'd home to the fairest Mansions in Holland. Every Town has its Garrison; and the Keys of the Gates, in the Night-time, are not trusted but in the Stadt-house. From these Holds they bolt abroad for Provisions, and then return to their Fastnesses, replenish'd. For War, they are Grass-hoppers; and, without a King, go forth in Bands, to conquer Kings. They have not only defend∣ed themselves at their own Home, but have brav'd the Spaniard at his. In Anno 1599. under the Command of Vander Does, was the Grand Canary taken, the Chief City sack'd, the King of Spain's Ensigns taken down, and the Colours of his Excellency set up in their Room. In the Year 1600, the Battel of Nieuport was a gallant piece, when with the Loss of a Thousand Men, or little more, they slew Seven Thousand of their Enemies, took above an hundred Ensigns, the Admiral of Arragon was made Pri∣soner;
the very Furniture of the Arch-Duke's own Chamber and Cabinet, yea, the Signet that belong'd to his Hand. In 1607, they assail'd the Armada of Spain, in the Bay of Gi∣braltar, under Covert of the Castle and Town-Ordnance; and with the Loss only of an Hundred and Fifty Men, slew above two Thousand, and ruin'd the whole Fleet. Certainly, a bolder At∣tempt has scarce ever been done. The Indian Mastiff never was more fierce against the angry Lion: Nor can the Cock, in his Crow∣ing Valour, become more prodigal of his Blood than they. There hardly is upon Earth such a School of Martial Disci∣pline: 'Tis the Christian World's Academy for Arms, whither all the Neighbour-Nations resort to be instructed; where they may observe how unresistable a Blow many small Grains of Powder will make, being heap'd together; which yet if you separate, can do nothing but sparkle and die. Their Recreation is the Practice of Arms, and they learn to be Soldiers sooner than Men: Nay, as if they placed a Religion in Arms, every Sunday is concluded with the Train'd-bands march∣ing through their Cities. For Industry, they are Spiders, and are in the Palaces of Kings. Of old they were the Guard of the Person of the Roman Empe∣ror; and by the Romans themselves, declar'd to be their Friends and Companions. There are none have the like Intelligence. Their Mer∣chants at this Day are the greatest of the Universe. What Nation is it, where they have not insinuated; nay, which they have not almost Anatomis'd, and even discover'd the intrinsick Veins on't. Even among us, they shame us with their Industry, which makes them seem as if they had a faculty from the World's Cre∣ation, out of Water to make dry Land appear. They win our drowned Grounds, which we cannot recover, and chase back Nep∣tune to his own old Banks. All that they do, is by such Labour as it seems extracted out of their own Bowels; and in their wary Thrift, they hang by such a slender Sustentation of Life, that one would think their own weight should be enought to crack it. Want of Idleness keeps them from want; and 'tis their dili∣gence makes them Rich. A fruitful Soil encreaseth the Harvest, a plentiful Sun aug∣ments the Store; and seasonable showers drop fatness on the Crop we reap. But no Rain fructifies more than the due of Sweat. You would think, being with them, you were in old Israel; for you find not a Begger among them: Nor are they mindful of their own alone, but Strangers also partake of their Care and Bounty; if they will depart, they have Money for their Convoy; if they stay, they have Work provided; if unable, they find an Hospital. Their Providence extends even from the Prince to the catching of Flies. And lest you lose an Afternoon by fruitless
Mourning, by two of the Clock all Burials must end; wherein to prevent the waste of Ground, they pile Coffin upon Coffin till the Sepulchre be full. In all their Manufactures they hold a truth and constancy, for they are as Fruits from Trees, the same every Year they are at first; not Apples one Year, and Crabs the next, and so for ever after. In the sale of these they also are at a word, they will gain rather than exact; and have not that way whereby our Citizens abuse the Wise, and cozen the Ignorant; and by their infinite o∣ver-asking for Commodities, proclaim to the World, that they would cheat all if it were in their power. The depravation of Manners they punish with Contempt; but the Defects of Nature they favour with Charity. Even their Bedlam is a Place so curious, that a Lord might live in it: Their Hospital might lodge a Lady. So that safely you may conclude, amongst them even Poverty and Madness do both inhabit hand∣somely. And tho' Vice makes every thing turn sordid, yet the State will have the very Correction of it to be neat, as if they would shew, that though Obedience fail, yet Government must be still it self, and descent. To prove this, they that do but view their Bridewel, will think it may receive a Gentleman tho' a Gallant: And so their Prison, a wealthy Citizen; but for a poor Man, 'tis his best Policy to be laid there, for he that casts him in must maintain him. Their Language, tho' it differ from the higher Germany, yet has it the same Ground, and is as old as Babel; and albeit harsh, yet so lofty and full a Tongue, as made Goropius Becanus main∣tain it for the Speech of Adam in his Paradice. And surely if there were not other Reasons against it, the significancy of the Ancient Teutonic might carry it from the primest Dialect. Steven of Bruges reckons up Two thousand one hundred seventy Mono∣syllables, which being compounded, how richly do they grace a Tongue? A Tongue, that for the general profession, is extended further than any that I know. Through both the Germanies, Den∣mark, Norway, Sueden, and sometimes France, England, and Spain: And still among us, all our Words are Dutch, with yet so little change, that certainly 'tis in a manner the same that it was two thou∣sand Years ago, without the too much mingled Borrowings of their Neighbour Nations. The Germans are a People, that more than all the World, I think, may boast Sincerity, as being for some thousand of Years a pure and unmixed People. And surely, I see not but their Conduction by Tuisco, from the building of Babel, may pass as unconfuted Story, they yet retaining the Appellation from his Name. They are a large and numerous People, having ever kept their own, and transported Colonies into other Nations; in Italy were the Longobards; in Spain the Goths and Vandals; in France the
Franks, or Franconians, in England the Saxons: having in all these left Reverend Steps of their Antiquity and Language. It is a noble Testimony that so grave an Historian as Tacitus hath left still extant of them, and Written above fifteen hundred Years ago; Deliberant dum fingere nésciunt: Constituunt dum erra∣re non possunt. They deliberate when they cannot Dissemble, and resolve when they cannot err. Two hundred and ten Years the Romans were in conquering them, in which space on either side were the losses sad and fatal; so as neither the Samnites, the Carthagenians, the Spaniards, the Gauls, no nor the Parthians ever troubled them like the Germans. They slew and took Prisoners several Commanders of the highest Rank, as Carbo, Cassius, S. Cauras, Aurelius, Cervillius, Cepio, and M. Manlius. They defeated five Consulary Armies, and Varus with three Legions; yet after all this he concludes, Triumphati magis quam victi sunt. They were rather triumph'd over than conquer∣ed. To confirm this, the keeping of their own Language is an Argument answerable; the change whereof ever follows upon the fully vanquished, as we may see it did in Italy, France, Spain, and England. And this he speaks of the Nation in general: Nor was the O∣pinion of the Romans less worthy in particular, concerning these Lower Provinces, which made them for their Valour and warlike Minds, stile them by the Name of Gallia Belgica, and especially of the Batavians, which were the Hollanders, and part of Guelders. You may hear in what honourable terms he mentions them, where speaking of the several People of Germany, he says, Omnium ha∣rum Gentium virtute proecipui Batavi: Nam nec tributis contemnun∣tur, nec publicanus atterit: exemptioneribus & collationibus, & tantum in usum proeliorum sepositi, velut tela atque arma bellis reservantur. Of all these Nations, the Principal in valiant Vertue are the Batavians; for neither are they become despicable by paying of Tribute, nor oppressed too much by the Farmer of publick Revenues, but free from Taxes and Contributions for Servility; they are speci∣ally set a-part for the Fight, as Armour and Weapons only re∣served for War. All this even at this Day, they seem to make good; for of all they World they are the People that Thrive and grow Rich by the War, like the Porcipice, that plays in the Storm, but at other times lies still and sober under the Water. War, which is the World's Ruin, and ravins upon the Beauty of all, is to them Prosperity and Ditation. And surely the rea∣son of this is, their strength in Shipping, the open Sea, their many fortified Towns, and the Country, by reason of its low∣ness and plentiful irrigation, becoming impassable for an Army when the Winter but approaches: Otherwise it is hardly possible, that so small a parcel of Mankind should brave the most Potent Monarch of Christendom, who in his own Hands hold the Mines
of the Wars Sinews, Money; and has now got a Command so wide, that out of his Dominions the Sun can neither rise nor set. The whole Seventeen Provinces are not above a thousand Eng∣lish Miles in Circuit, and in the States Hands there is not seven of those; yet have they in the Field sometimes sixty thousand Sol∣diers, besides those which they always keep in Garrison, which cannot be but a considerable number, near thirty thousand; there being in the whole Country above two hundred Wall'd Towns and Cities. So that if they have People for the War, one would wonder where they should get Money to pay them, they being, when they have an Army in the Field, at a thousnnd pound a Day charge extraordinary. To maintain this, their Excise is an unwasted Mine, which with the infiniteness of their Traffick, and their untired industry, is by every part of the World in something or other contribu∣ted to. The Sea yields them by two sorts of Fish only, Herring, and Cod, sixty thousand pound per Annum; for which they go out sometimes seven or eight hundred Boats at once; and for greater Ships, they are able to set out double the number: Their Merchandise amounted in Guicciardine's time to Fourteen Millions per Annum. Whereas England, which is in compass al∣most as large again, and hath the Ocean as a Ring about her, made not above six Millions yearly; so sedulous are these Bees to labour and enrich their Hive. As they on the Sea, so the Women are busie on Land in wea∣ving of Nets, and helping to add to the heap. And though a Husband's long absence might tempt them to lacivious ways, yet they hate Adultery, and are resolute in Matrimonial Chastity. I do not remember that ever I read in Story, of any great Lady of that Nation, that hath been tax'd with looseness: And questionless, 'tis their ever being busie, makes them have no leisure for Lust. 'Tis idleness that is Cnpid's Nurse, but business breaks his Bow, and makes his Arrows useless. They are both Merchants and Farmers; an their act parts, which Men can but discharge with us: As if they would shew, thrt the Souls in all are Masculine, and not varied into weaker Sex, as are the Bodies that they wear about them. Whether this be from the Nature of their Country, in which, if they be not laborious, they cannot live; or from an Innate Ge∣nius of People, by a superiour Providence adapted to them of such a Situation; from their own Inclinations, addicted to Pasi∣mony; from Custom in their Way of Breeding; from any Tran∣scendency of Active Parts, more than other Nations; or from be∣ing in their Country, like People in a City besieg'd, whereby their own Vertues do more compact, and fortifie, I will not de∣termine. But, certainly, in general, they are the most painful and diligent People on Earth; and, of all other, the most truly
of Vespacian's Opinion, to think that Ex re qualibet bonus Odor lucri: Be it rais'd from what it will, the Smell of Gain is plea∣sant. Yet they are, in some sort, Gods; for they set Bounds to the Seas, and when they list let it pass again. Even their Dwelling is a Miracle; they live lower than the Fishes, in the very Lap of the Floods, and incircl'd in their Watry Arms: They are the Israelites, passing through the Red Sea, the Waters wall them in; and if they set open their Sluces, shall drown their Enemies. They have struggl'd long with Spain's Pharaoh, and they have at length enforc'd him to let them go. They are a Gideon's Ar∣my upon the March again. They are the Indian Rat, gnawing the Bowels of the Spanish Crocodile, to which they got when he gap'd to swallow them. They are a Serpent, wreath'd about the Legs of that Elephant. They are the little Sword-fish, pricking the Belly of the Whale. They are the Wane of that Empire which increas'd under Isabella, and in Charles V's Time was at full. They are a Glass, wherein Kings may see, that though they be Sovereigns over Lives and Goods, yet when they usurp upon God's Part, and will be Kings over Conscience too, they are sometimes punish'd with the Loss of that which lawfully is their own: That Religion too fiercely urg'd, is to stretch a String till it not only jars, but cracks; and in the breaking, whips (perhaps) the Streiner's Eye out. That an Extream Taxation is, to take away the Honey while the Bees keep the Hive; whereas, he that would do that, should first either burn them, or drive them out: That Tyrants in their Government, are the greatest Traytors to their own States: That a Desire of being too Absolute, is to walk upon Pinacles and the Tops of Piramids, where not only the Footing is full of Hazard, but even the Sharpness of that they tread on may run into their Foot, and wound them: That too much to regrate on the Pa∣tience of but fickle Subjects, is to press a Thorn till it prick your Finger: That nothing makes a more desperate Rebel, than a Pre∣rogative inforc'd too far. That Liberty in Man is as the Skin to the Body, not to be put off, but together with Life. That they which will command more than they ought, shall not at last command so much as is fit. That Moderate Princes sit faster in their Regalities, than such as being but Men, would yet have their Power over their Sub∣jects, as the Gods, Unlimited. That Oppression is an Iron heated till it burns the Hand. That to debar some States of Ancient Pri∣vileges, is, for a Falcon to undertake to beat a Flock of Wild Geese out of the Fens. That to go about to compel a sullen Rea∣son to submit to a wilful Peremptoriness, is so long to beat a chain'd Mastiff into his Kennel, till at last he turns, and flies at your
Throat. That unjust Policy is to shoot as they did at Ostend, into the Mouth of a charg'd Cannon, to have two Bullets return'd for one. That he doth but endanger himself, that riding with too weak a Bitt, provokes an Head-strong Horse with a Spur. That 'tis safer to meet a valiant Man Weaponless, than almost a Coward in Armour. That even a weak Cause, with a strong Castle, will boil Solt Blood to a Rebellious Itch. That 'tis better keeping a Crazy Body in an equal Temper, than to anger Hu∣mours by too sharp a Physick. That Admonitions from a dying Man, are too serious to be neglected. That there is nothing certain, that is not impossible. That a Cobler of Flushing was one of the greatest Enemies the greatest Enemies the King of Spain ever had. The People in it are Jews of the New Testament, that have ex∣chang'd nothing but the Law for the Gospel; and this they rather profess, than practise. Together, a Man of War, riding at Anchor in the Downs of Germany. For Foreign Princes to help them, is wise Self-Policy: When they have made them able to defend themselves against Spain, they are at the Pale; if they enable them to offend others, they go beyond it. For, questionless, were this Thorn out of the Spaniard's Side, he might be fear'd too soon to grasp his Long∣intended Monarchy. And were the Spaniard but possessed Lord of the Low-Countries, or had the States but the Wealth and Power of Spain, the rest of Europe might be like People at Sea in a Ship on fire, that could only chuse whether they would drown or burn. Now, their War is the Peace of their Neighbours. So Rome, when busy'd in her Civil Broils, the Parthians liv'd at rest; but those concluded once, by Caesar, next are they design'd for Conquest. If any Man wonder at these Contraries, let him look in his own Body for as many several Humours, in his own Brain for as many different Fancies, in his own Heart for as various Passions; and from all these he may learn, that there is not in all the World such another Beast as Man.
OF AMSTERDAM. AS this famous City was one the first which shook off the Spanish Yoak, so the Courage it shew'd, at a Juncture when their Lives and Liberties were in the utmost Dan∣ger, has entitl'd it more to be the Metropolis of the Seven Provin∣ces, than the Splendour of its Buildings, the Advantages of its Situation, and the Abundance of its Riches. It is to be confess'd, (as our Trip-Master will have it,) seve∣ral Vices are Inhabitants of this place; but here are Vertues which drown the Appearance of them: Here is Industry, with-Necessity; Hospitality, without Design; Charity, without Boast∣ing; Obedience, without Compulsion; Magistracy, without Knavery; Jnstice, without Bribery; and Frugality, without Co∣vetousness. The People are Lovers of Freedom, and fearless of Asserting it; wonderful Cautious, yet Daring to a Miracle; Inimitable in Times of Peace, and Unconquerable in War; have Immunities above their Neighbours, yet never make use of them to their Neigh∣bours Disadvantage. The Story of Japan was forg'd against them by Stubbs, in the late Dutch War, when to be Inveterate was to tell Truth, and to invent a plausible Lye was to be counted a good Patriot. There was something in it, 'tis true; but nothing but what savour'd more of Policy, than Dishonesty. For, how could it be Deny∣ing CHRIST, to write themselves HOLLANDERS? Or, by what Means can they be stil'd Heathens, who made such Eva∣sions for the sake of Professing the Gospel without Disturbance. If they were so irreligious as our Author would have them, they would never have Revolted from the Spaniard on Account of their Religion: And if they were so easily to be persuaded to deny their SAVIOUR, certainly they would never have been so dif∣ficult in submitting to a Religion, which, though it differ'd from theirs in several Points, yet own'd the REDEEMER, who suffer'd for them. As to their hatred to the Spanish King, it appears in nothing but their unwillingness to joyn in a Communion which was dis∣onant
to their Principles, and impracticable by those of another Profession, and if to relieve him in the highest extremity, and support him when his whole Kingdom was threatned with Fire and Sword, be Hatred truly, I shall be to seek for a definition of Love. And his Catholick Majesty would scarce have an Ambassador there, if they were not in his Interests. Their Clergy, tho' Calvinists, a Title which is their Glory, tho' our Author would brand them with it, are mien in their Dispositi∣ons, courteous in their Behaviour, without Affectation, without Pride, without Hypocrisie. They rail at no Religion, tho' they have made choice of One which they think to be the Best, and disputes about Religious matters are as rare here as they are common in London▪ Every one is suffer'd to go on in his own way, though if he be thought to be in the wrong, he has the Prayers of those who think themselves in the right to convert him. Here are no Bishops with costly Equipages, no Deans with fifteen hundred Pounds per Annum, no greasie Prebendaries with their double Chins as big as their Paunches; but a competency is allowed from the State to each Minister, which makes them too low to think themselves above their Fellow Creatures, and too high to be dispis'd by them. Two hundred Pounds a Year is their respective Salary, and by these means are kept in a dependence on the States, who has it in their power to discard them, if they, like the English Clergy, meddle with affairs which belong to the Supream Rulers. Their Churches are large, their Principles not so starch'd as those of our English Presbyterians; their Preaching Doctrinal and Persuasive, their lives Pious and Instructive, and their whole constitution of so exemplary a frame, as it not only takes off from those odious aspersions which are laid upon them, but adds to the glory of an Establishment which scarce can suffer any further increase. Their Merchants are the greatest in the World, their Magi∣strates the justest, and their Laws so strictly put in execution, that to hear of a robbery in Amsterdam is to be told a thing which increases your Wonder; and to detect People in dishonest practi∣ces there, is less frequent than to see them executed for dishonesty here. In short, tho' all Religions are tolerated, there is none but what may think the True incouraged; and tho' Policy in this Place is in its highest perfection, yet Probity and Equity are not eclips'd by it; and it no more takes off from the Glory of the Renowned City of Amsterdam, than the De Witts who were Enemies to his present Majesty of Great Britain were Born here, then that so many Monarchy-haters have their Residence and Na∣tivity in London.
To conclude, if to be Preservers of their own liberties, and De∣fenders of that of others; if to furnish Examples for the security of this and succeeding Ages; if to have Justice and Mercy to kiss each other, whilst Plenty and Peace walk Hand in hand together, be Blessings, as instructive as they are valuable, then had our Author no reason to wish Amsterdam to set Sail, unless Industry, Goodness, and Justice, be so many Eye-sores to him, and he would be as far from receiving good Instructions, as he is from giving them. AND now, O' Land! from whom at first I drew My Breath; to whom, again, my Breath is due! If any thing be written, or is done, Unworthy of a Parent, or a Son: If I've forgot the Duties of my Birth; And Praising, have not prais'd Thee to thy Worth, Grant me Thy Pardon, and forgive the Faults Of unconsider'd Lines, and hasty Thoughts, Till some bold Pen, to Fame and Merit known, Shall justifie thy Cause, which is its own. Tho' Deeds like Thine, and Vertues, are so bright, They, of themselves, can to themselves do Right: And tho' one English Pen has vainly chose To blame Thy People, and his own expose: Yet still Thy Arms with English Forces join, And win their Hearts by Friendship to be Thine. Then shall Britannia midst the Ocean Reign, And Neptune yield the Taxes of the Main: Whilst Belgia's Fleets, with Hers, United Ride, And Heav'n, and Fame, and Conquest's on her Side, No Harms shall hurt 'em, and no Ills molest, Whilst One reclines Her Head on t' Other's Breast. So the Tall Oak, the Pride of all the Grove, Whom Winds insult, and Storms attempt to move, If it's with the Supporting Ivy Crown'd, Secure it stands, scarce nodding on the Ground: In vain the Tempests on it blow, Its Friend, the Ivy, props it from its Foe; Which whistling through its kind Embraces, wastes Its Fruitless Strength in Unsuccessful Blasts. When if on Ida's Yop it stands alone, Divested of all Coverts but its own, Up from the Roots (it self a Wood) 'tis torn, And Ida's Ecchoing Nymphs the spacious Ruin mourn. FINIS.
