A3871 15553464 103691
blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms The Articles of the Charge of the Wardmote Inquest. Peace. YE shall swear, that ye shall truly inquire, if the Peace of the King our Sovereign Lord be not kept as it ought to be, and in whose default, and by whom it is broken or disturbed. Outlaws, Traitors Felons, &c.2 Also if there dwell any man within the Ward that is out-lawed, or Indicted of Treason or Felony, or be any Receiver of Traitors of Felons. Thames. 3 Also ye shall inquire and truly present all the Offences and Defaults done by any person or persons within the River of Thames, according to the intent and purport of an Act made by King Edward the Sixth in his High Court of Parliament; and also of divers other things ordained by Act of Common-Council of this City, for the Redress and Amendment of the said River, which as now is in great Decay and Ruin, and will be in short time past all remedy, if high and sub∣stantial Provision and Help be not had with all speed and diligence possible, as more plainly appeareth in the said Act of Parliament, and the Acts of Common-Council of this City. Congregations. 4 Also if any manner of person make Congregation, or be receiver or gatherer of evil Companies or Riotous assemblies contrary to Law. Rioter, Barreter.5 Also if any man be a common Rioter, or a Barreter, walking by night without Light, against the Rule and Custom of this City. Peace, Hue and Cry.6 Also if there be any man within this Ward that will not help, aid, nor succour the Constables, Beadles, and other Ministers of this City, in keeping of the Peace, and arrest the evil doers with rearing of Hue and Cry. Hucksters, Recei∣vers of Apprenti∣ces, Artificers, &c.7 Also if there be any Huckster of Ale or Béer that commonly useth to receive any Apprentices, Servants, Artificers, or Labourers, that commonly use to play at Dice, Cards, or Tables, contrary to the form of the Statute in that case ordained and provided. Inholder, Taver∣ner, Victualler. Bawds, maintai∣ners of Quarrels, &c.8 Also if there be any Inholder, Taverner, Brewer, Huckster, or other Victualler, that hold open their houses after the hour limited by the Mayor: Or if any kéep an Ale-House, or Victualing-House, or sell Béer or Ale without License. 9 Also ye shall inquire if any Putour, that is to say, man-bawd or woman-bawd, common Hazarders, Contect∣or, Maintainer of Quarrels, Champertours of Embracers of Inquests, or other common Mildoers, be dwelling within this Ward, and present their Names. Strumpet, Adul∣terer, Witch, Scold10 Also if any Bawd, common Strumpet, common Adulterer, Witch or common Scold be dwelling within this Ward. Hot-house.11 Also if there be any house wherein is kept and holden any Hot-house or Sweating-house, for ease and health of men, to the which be resorting or conversant any Strumpets, or women of evil name or fame: or if there be any Hot-house or Sweating-house ordained for women, to the which is any common recourse of young men, or of other persons of evil fame and suspect conditions. 12 Also if there be any such persons that kéep or hold any such Hot-houses, either for men or women, and have found no Surety to the Chamberlain for their good and honest behaviour, according to the Laws of this City, and lodge any manner of person by night, contrary to the Ordinance thereof made, by the which he or they shall forfeit Twenty pounds to the Chamber, if they do the contrary. Thames, Ditches, Streets, &c.13 Also if any manner of person cast or lay Dung, Ordure, Rubbish, Sea-coal Dust, Rushes, or any other thing noyant, in the River of Thames, Fleet, or other Ditches of this City, or in the open Stréets, Ways or Lanes within this City. Channel.14 Also if any person in, or after a great Rain falleth, or at any other time sweep any Dung, Ordure, Rubbish, Rushes, Seacoal-Dust, or any other thing noyant, down into the Channel of any Stréet or Lane, whereby the common course there is let, and the same things noyant driven thereby down into the said water of Thames; That you are very carefully to inquire into. Hogs, Oxen, Kine, Ducks, &c.15 Also if any manner of person nourish or kéep Hogs, Oxen, Kine, Ducks, or any Beasts within this Ward, to the grievance and disease of their Neighbours. Persons indicted n one Ward fly∣ing into anothe16 Also where afore this time it is ordained and enacted as hereafter followeth: Item, for to eschew the evils of misgoverned persons that daily when they be indicted in one Ward flie into another, It is ordained by the Mayor and Aldermen, that as soon as a man or woman suspect first do come to dwell within any house, in any Ward within the City, the Constables, Beadles or other Officers of the same, shall be charged by their Oaths at the general Court, to inquire and espy from whence they come: And if they find by their own Confession, or by. Record, or any of the Books of any Alderman of the City, that they be indicted or cast of evil and noyous Life, and will not find Surety for their good abearing and honest governance to the Alderman for the time being, that then they shall not dwell there from thenceforth, but shall be warned to avoid within thrée or four days, or more or less, after as it shall be séen to the Alderman of the Ward for the time being; and that the Landlord that letteth the house, or his Attorney, shall be also warned to make them to avoid out of his house aforesaid within the said time limited by the Alderman: And if they be found there after the time, that then not only the said dishonest per∣sons shall have Imprisonment of their bodies after the discretion of the Mayor and Aldermen: but also the said Landlords letters of the said houses shall forfeit to the Guild-Hall as much as they should have had for letting of the said house, or should be paid by the year if the said persons or other had dwelled in the said house. You, shall duy nquire o offences against this Act▪ and present them.
Coluring forein Goods.17 Also if any Fréeman, against his Oath made, conceal, cover, or colour the goods of Foreiners by the  the King may in any wise lose, or the Franchises of this City be imblemished. Forein buying and felling.18 Also if any Forein buy or sell with any other Forein, within this City or Suburbs thereof, any Goods or Merchandizes the same Goods and Merchandizes be forthwith forfeit to the use of the Commonalty of this City. Freeman not.19 Also if every Fréeman which receiveth or taketh the benefit, and enjoyeth the Franchises of this City.  continually dwelling out of this City, and hath not, nor will (not after this Oath made) be at Scot and Lot.  partner to the charges of this City, for the worship of the same City when he is duly required. Orphans, Wards, Marriages.20 Also if any man conceal the Goods of Orphans of this City, of whom the Ward and Marriage of ris belongeth to the Mayor and Aldermen of this City. 21 And if any Officer,Officers. by colour of his Office, do extortion to any man, or be maintainer of quarrels against right, or take carriage, or arrest Victual unduly. Boatmen, Ferriers.22 Also if any Boatman or Ferrier be dwelling in the Ward, that taketh more for Boat-manage or Ferriage than is ordained. Purprestures, Pent-house, Jet∣ties, &c.23 Also if any man make Purprestures, that is to say, encroach or take of the common ground of this City, by land or by water, as in Walls, Pales, Stalls, Stoups, Grieces, or Doors or Cellars, or in any other like. within the Ward; or if any Porch, Pent-house, or Ietty be too low, in letting of men that ride beside, or Carts that go thereforth. Pent-houses.24 Also that Pent-houses and Ietties be not contrary to Law. Way, Water-course.25 Also if any common way or common Course of Water before closed or letted, that it may not have its Course as it was wont, to the annoyance of the Ward, and by whom it is done. Pavements. 26 Also if any Pavement be defective, or too high in one place, and too low in another, to the disturbance of riders and goers thereby, and Carts that go thereupon. Regrators, Fore∣stallers.27 Also if any Regrator or Forestaller of Victual, or of any other Merchandizes which should come to this City to be sold, be dwelling within this Ward. A Regrator is as much as to say, he that buyeth up all the Victual or Merchandizes, or the most part thereof when it is come to the City or the Suburbs of the same at a low Price, and then afterward selleth it at his own pleasure at a high and excessive price. A Forestaller is he that goeth out of the City, and méeteth with the Victual or Merchandize by the way, coming to the City to be sold, and there buyeth it. Both these be called in the Law, Open Enemies to a Country. Price of Victual.28 Also if any Butcher, Fishmonger, Poulterer, Vintner, Hostler, Cook, or seller of Victual, do sell Victual at unreasonable prices. Hay. 29 Also if any Hostler sell Hay, Oats, or Provender at excessive prices, taking greater gain thereby than is rea∣sonable and lawful. Victual unwhole∣som.30 Also if any Victualler sell any Victuals not covenable, or unwholesom for mans body, or else dearer than is proclaimed by the Mayor, when any such Proclamation is or shall be. Price. 31 Ye shall diligently make search and inquiry, whether there be any Vintner, Inholder, Ale-house-kéeper, or any other person or persons whatsoever within your Ward,Measures unsealed that do use or kéep in his or their house or houses, any Cans, Stone-pots or other measures which be unsealed, and by Law not allowed to sell Béer or Ale there∣by: and whether any of them do sell by any measure not sealed. If there by any such, you shall seize them, and send them to the Guild-hall, to the Chamberlains Office, and present their names and faults by Indenture, so oft as there shall be occasion so to do. Weights and Measures.32 Ye shall also make search in the shops and houses of all the Chandlers, and of all others which sell by weight or measure dwelling within your Ward, and sée that their Scales be not one heavier than the other; and that their Weights and Measures, as well Bushels as lesser measures, as well those that they sell Seacoals by (which ought to be heaped) that they be in breadth according to the new Standard, sealed, as all others; and that all Yards and Ells, that they be just lengths, and sealed; that the poor and other his Majesties Subjects be not deceived. And further, if any do buy by one Weight or Measure, and sell by others. And if in your Search you find any false Weight, Measures, or Scales, ye shall seize them, and send them to the Guild-hall to the Cham∣berlain. And you shall also do the like, if you shall find any that do sell any thing by Venice Weights, contrary to the Law, present their names and faults. House, Tile.33 Also ye shall inquire if any House be covered otherwise than with Tyle, Stone, or Lead, for peril of Fire. Leper, Beggar.34 Also if any Leper, Faitour, or mighty Beggar be dwelling within this Ward. Bakers, Brewers, Fire.35 Also if any Baker or Brewer bake or brew with Straw, or any other thing which is perillous for Fire. Painted visage.36 Also if any man go with painted visage. Lights.37 Also if there be any man that hangeth not out and maintains sufficient Lights, after the usage, according to the commandment thereupon given. Wood.38 Also if any person bring or cause to be brought to this City or the Liberties thereof, to be sold, or sell, offer, or put to Sale any Tall-wood, Billets, Fagots, or other Fire-wood, not being of the full Assize which the same ought to hold. Which Assize is set down in the printed precept. Country.39 Also if any Fréeman of this City use to resort into the Countries near to this City, and there to engross and buy up much Billet, Tall-wood, Fagot, Tosard, or other Fire-wood, and convey the same by water unto this City, and there lay it upon their Wharfs and other places, and so kéep it till they may sell it at high and ex∣cessive prices at their own wills. 40 Also if any Wood-monger, or any other, sell any Billets or other Fire-wood above the price set by the Lord Mayor. Freemen to shew their Copies.41 Also forasmuch as it is thought, that divers and many persons dwelling within the Liberties of this City daily occupy as Fréemen, whereas indéed they be none, nor never were admitted into the Liberties of this City: Ye shall therefore require every such person dwelling within this Ward, whom ye shall suspect of the same, to shew you the Copy of his Fréedom under the Seal of Office of the Chamberlain of the said City: and such as ye shall find without their Copies, or deny to shew their Copies, ye shall write and present their names in your In∣tures.
Melting Tallow.42 Also you shall enquire and truly present all such persons as use melting of Tallow, contrary to  Common-Council in that case made and provided. 43 Also you shall enquire of all Armorers and other Artificers using to work in Metal, which have  Reardorses, or any other places dangerous or perilous for Fire. Appraisers.44 Also if any have appraised any goods of any Freeman deceased, leaving behind him any Orphan or Orphans, and the Appraisers not sworn before the Lord Mayor, or the Alderman of the Ward. Beam.45 Also if any Fréeman buy any Wares or Merchandizes unweighed, which ought to be weighed at the Kings Beam, of any Stranger or forein not frée of the Liberties of this City, contrary to the Laws of this City in that behalf. Cloaths.46 Also if any buy or sell any Cloth or Cloths in the house, shop, warehouse, or other place of any Clothworker, or other person, against any Ordinance or Custom of this City: or if any Clothworker or other do receive or harbor, any Cloths before the same be brought to Blackwel-Hall, contrary to the Ordinance made in that behalf. Carmen.47 Also if any Carman take any mony for carriage of any Goods, Wares, or Merchandizes, above the rates ordained. Buildings, divided Houses, Inmates.48 Also if any make or cause to be made any new building or buildings, or divide, or cause to be divided, any house or houses, or receive any Inmate or Inmates, contrary to the Law. 49 Also if any dwelling within this Ward which do offer or put to sale any Wares or Merchandizes in the ope stréets or lanes of this City,Hawkers. or go from house to house to sell the same, commonly called Hawkers. contrary to the Act made in that behalf. Fresom.50 Also if any have covetously, fraudulently or unduly obtained the Fréedom of this City. Collectors.51 Also if any Collector of Fifteenths or other Duties for the publick service of the King or of this City, do retain in his hands any part of the mony collected, to his own use. Women receivers of Servants.52 Ye shall also enquire if thére be dwelling within your Ward any Woman-Broker such as resort to mens houses demanding of their Maid-servants, if they do like of their services: if not, then they tell them they will help them to a better service, and so allure them to come from their Masters to their houses, where they abide as Boorders till they be provided for; in which time it falleth out, that by lewd young men that resort to those houses they be often∣times made Harlots, to their utter undoing, and the great hurt of the Common-weal: Wherefore if any such be, you shall present them, that order may be taken for reformation. Privies.53 Also if any have or use any common Privy by having issue into any common Sewer of the City. Vagabonds.54 And if any Constable, Beadle or other Officer be negligent or remiss in discharging his duty touching the execution of the Statute made for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars or otherwise, and where∣in the default is; and the Statutes of 1 Jacobi, 4 Jac. 21 Jac. concerning the restraint of the inordinate haunting and tipling in Inns and Ale-houses, and repressing of drunkenness and other Offences in the said Statutes, and wherein the default is. Poor.55 Also if any, to whom the execution of the Statute made for the relief of the Poor doth appertain, be remiss in discharging his Duty touching the execution of the same Statute, and wherein the default is. Legacies.56 Also if any Executor or other person retain in his hands any Legacy, sum of mony, or other thing given to any charitable use. Drunkard. Whoremonger, Sabbath, Jesuite, Seminary Priest, Secular Priest. Cozeners, &c.57 Ye shall enquire whether there be within your Ward any common Drunkard, Whoremonger, Blasphemer of Gods holy Name, Iesuit, Seminary or Secular Priest, or any receiver, reliever or maintainer of any of them, or any Cozener, or swaggering idle companion, such as cannot give account how they live: if there be any such, you shall present them, and the names of those that lodge them or aid them. 58 Ye shall also inquire whether any person do or shall say or sing Mass within your Ward, or be present at any Mass. Roman Catholick Religion.59 Also if any person or persons within your Ward, being evil affected, do or shall extol the Roman Catholick Religion above the Religion professed and established by the Laws of this Realm, or do or shall deprave the Religion now professed in this Realm by authority, as above, which may bréed discord in the City, and dissension in the Com∣mon-weal, ye shall carefully present the same persons and their offences. 60 Also if any person or persons that kéep horses in their houses, do lay his or their Stable-dung or such kind of stinking filth, in any stréets or lanes of this City, to the great annoiance of the people passing that way, and do not load his Dung-Cart at his Stable-door, as he ought to do. Assemble month∣ly.61 You shall assemble your selves once every month, or oftner if néed require, so long as ye shall continue of this Inquest, and present the defaults which you shall find to be committed concerning any of the Articles of your charge, to the end due remedy may be speedily supplied, and the offenders punished, as occasion shall require. Making of Pre∣sentments.62 And in making your Presentments, your Clerk is carefully to write the Christian name, surname, and addition or calling, of every offender, and the name of the Parish wherein the offence was committed, and some certain time how long the offence hath béen continued, in order to the better prosecution thereof; and in presenting any persons for dividing houses for Inmates, to write the names and addition to the present Landlord receiving the Rents, and the names of the Tenant in possession, and of the Inmate in any house: and also to write in the Margin on the side of every Presentment, the name or names upon whose evidence you make such Presentment. And that you set down at the bottom of your Indenture, the names of one or more persons, either among your selves, or others whom you shall agree on, to prosecute your Presentments. GOD save the KING and QUEEN. Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to th Honoura
