A943 R10192 13289839 98825
ALL THE Letters, Memorials, AND CONSIDERATIONS, Concerning the offered ALLIANCE Of the KINGS of England and France, TO THE High and Mighty LORDS, THE STATES OF THE UNITED NEATHERLANDS, According to the several Times when they were delivered: With Considerations on the said ALLIANCE, and also Reflections on the said CONSIDERATIONS. Faithfully Translated from the Dutch Copies printed at Haerlem by Barent Jansen, Hoog Euys, 1680. LONDON, Printed for Robert Harford, at the Angel in Cornhill, near the Royal-Exchange, 1680.
The Heer Ambassadour Boreel, to Pentioner Fagell. Most Honourable and Noble Lord, HAving been lately to visit the Marquess, de Louvois, who keeps his bed of a broken Leg, we had some discourse together, of the nature whereof, I thought it fit to give your Honour an account, that you may thereby take your measures, if it do afford any matter that concerns the public. After some general discourses about seve∣ral occurrences, his Honour told me, That it was a matter of wonder, that the Peace betwixt the King and the States being concluded above a year ago, and we having for nine Months resided at Court, yet there was not the least inclination discovered on the part of the States, to enter into a nearer Alliance with the King; but on the contrary, it was taken notice of, that in Holland Leagues and Confederacies were sought for elsewhere: Adding farther, That they had been acquainted by the by with an earnest Letter from the Elector of Brandenburgh to the States, since the Peace was concluded with Sweden, by the mediation of the King; and likewise with the manner how Spain demanded the restitution of Maestricht; threatning. That they would seize the Dutch effects which were expected in the Gallions, in case the aforesaid City were not deli∣vered up to that King. Such and the like accidents (continued he) do happen to the State, and are like to be attended with worse, if they continue without making Alliances with other Princes. And what think you (said he) if the King and this Kingdom were in League with you as formerly? It is well known with what Succours His Majesty was then obliged to assist the States, in case they should be attacqued. I do not affirm for a certain truth (added he) that Spain will proceed to reprisal, upon the effects of the Hollanders; but all our advices from Madrid tell us, that that Court was resolved so to do. Hereupon I assured his Honour, That their High and Mightinesses did highly honour the King his Master's friendship, and would use their greatest care to entertain it, and endeavour to live in a good correspondence with His Majesty and his Subjects, by contributing to the utmost what lay in their power, for the preservation of the same. That we had express Orders from their High and Mightinesses to assure His Majesty, that there was no such thing as a League, that was talked of, with England and Spain; but that their High and Mightinesses would observe the Treaties which they had made with His Majesty, and therefore had not as yet, nor intended not to enter into any Alliance, which might prove inconsistent with the concluded Peace. To this the Marquess de Louvois did reply, That that was well; but yet that there appeared in all this no inclination on the part of the States to a nearer Alliance with his Master, though he could aver, that His Majesty
was fully inclined to it: That it was not reasonable to expect overtures from him; but notwithstanding, if it were perceived that the States seemed indifferent in that point, the same perhaps might be done with others, who did shew a greater inclination to the thing: And if so (said he) what the interest of your Country will be, the issue will discover. To conclude, having again as formerly assured his Honour of the since∣rity of the States, I took my leave. Most honourable and noble Lord, I communicated the substance of this Conference to the Lord Dyckveld; but his Excellency not thinking it fit to write a particular, which happened to me alone, though it be not pleasing to their High and Mightinesses that we should singly write to the Pensioner, yet I thought it my duty to acquaint your Honour with what I so unexpectedly met with; for what I know of the humour of that Lord, such free discourses as these are not without Design But this I submit to your Honours known wisdom, and beg leave in compliance with my Duty to write my self. Paris, August 25. 1679. Jacob Boreel. Paris, September 1. 1679. My Lord, THE Marquess of Louvois being so much recovered from the indispo∣sition, which happened to him above a Month ago by a fall from his Horse, as to admit of visits. Last week the Heer Boreel went to wait upon him, where, amongst other things, he told his Excellency, that he wondered that the Peace betwixt this Kingdom and the States, being con∣cluded above a year ago, and their Ambassadours having resided at this Court eight or nine Months, there should be no mention, nor proposi∣tion made on the part of their High and Mightinesses, of entering into a nearer Alliance with this Crown, when Leagues were solicited at other places, which he was assured would not prove successful. That there had been a Letter of the Elector of Brandenburgh communicated to him, which was written to the States upon the subject of the Peace, that was concluded betwixt him and Sweden by the mediation of the King: As likewise the Memorial by way of Answer, which was presented by the Lord Delira to the Assembly of their High and Mightinesses, concerning the giving up of the City of Maestricht. In both which, the demands were urged in very pressing terms, and especially in the last, which threatned reprisal on the Effects that the Dutch Merchants expect in the Gallions. That his Honour could not say positively that that would be put in execution, but that all the Letters from Madrid gave such advice. And that these and such-like occurrences, which perhaps might be fol∣lowed with worse, were only occasioned by the States, remaining without particular Alliances with other Kings. That his Honour thought he might assure us, that we needed not fear any such accidents, in case the States
were allied with the King his Master, and this Kingdom, it being well known with what succours they would be assisted by this King against those that should attack them. Being answered to this, that their High and Mightinesses did highly value the honour of His Majesty's friendship, and that it would be their constant endeavours to preserve the same. That they would contribute what in them lay, to live with the King and his Subjects in amity and good correspondence; and that as an instance there∣of, it was not long since by express Orders from their High and Mighti∣nesses, they had assured Monsieur Pomponne of the sincerity of the States, and that there was not only nothing in the pretended League with England and Spain; but also that their High and Mightinesses would punctually observe the Treaties which they had made with His Majesty, and that consequently they had not made, neither would they make any Engage∣ments, which might be prejudicial to the Amity of His Majesty, and Peace concluded with him. Monsieur Louvois did hereupon reply, That this was all well; but notwithstanding it did not hereby appear, that the States had any inclination to engage in a nearer Alliance: That his Ho∣nour could assure us both, that the King was inclined to it, but that it could not be expected that His Majesty should make the first overtures. Farther adding, That if it were observed, that the States seemed indif∣ferent as to the thing, measures might be taken here for doing the same thing with others, who shew themselves more inclinable that way, the issue whereof would inform us, whether that would be for the interest of our Country, or not. The Heer Dyckvelt having since waited on Monsieur Louvois, to congratulate with him upon his recovery, and the Marriage of his Daughter to the Prince of Rocheguyon, eldest Son of the Prince of Mallsillarq, Master of the Robes to His Majesty, and chief Huntsman of the Grown. After some mutual Compliments upon occasion of the visit, and some discourses concerning the Times, Monsieur Louvois started the same subject, which he had spoken of before to the Heer Boreel, repea∣ting the substance of the afore-mentioned discourse: And having pro∣tested, that what he said was without any Orders, and that he spoke but as one Friend to another. He told him, That the King was fully inclined to enter into a new Alliance with the States, but that His Majesty must be thereunto requested; and that the sincerity of his intentions might be manifest, he was willing to condescend to advantagious Conditions: That there being no contrary interest as to the matter of Commerce betwixt the States and this Kingdom, their High and Mightinesses would find their advantage in a nearer Alliance; that the same would conduce to the secu∣ring of the common Barrier: And that the Spanish Neatherlands might never fall into the hands of the French, it might be stipulated with such necessary conditions and caution as should be demanded. Adding far∣ther, that for instance, the King would probably engage himself never to attack these Countries; and that if at any time he should enter into a War with Spain, he should not act in these Quarters, much less make himself by Arms or Treaties Master of the smallest Cottage therein. That he should not possess the Neatherlands, either by sale or voluntary resigna∣tion; and if he should, that in that case the Alliance should be broken, and their High and Mightinesses at liberty to joyn in League with any
other Prince or Potentate. His Honour added farther, That if the King were forced to attack Spain somewhere else, what projudice would it be to their High and Mightinesses, if His Majesty should make a Conquest of the Milanois, or some part on the Frontiers of Spain? Besides, (said he) put the question we should shortly break with Spain, because of the Orders that are sent to Vivonne, to make the Spanish Ships and Gallions strike, would it be for the interest of the States to renew the War with us? To this, and the conditions proposed, a civil Answer was made to Monsieur Louvois, as the Heer Boreel had done before, affuring his Honour, That the intentions of the States were sincere, and that they would endeavour religiously to observe the Peace, to live with His Majesty in good Intelli∣gence, and true Amity, and to do all they could to cultivate the same, and make it durable. Signed, Jacob Boreel, & Dyckvelt. The Memorial presented by the French Ambassadour to the States of the United Provinces, Jan. 8. 1680. MOnsieur d'Avaux has received an Express, with new and precise Orders to represent to their High and Mightinesses, that the King his Master does wish that they would once declare themselves, and the rather, that after mutual Embassies, His Majesty cannot doubt, but that their High and Mightinesses are satisfied that it is his intention to make a strict Alliance with them; and since there remains no considerable difficulty to hinder the conclusion thereof, His Majesty is persuaded that all delays are but excuses; for it is not just, that after so full a knowledge of his sentiments, His Ma∣jesty should not be precisely informed of your resolutions: And seeing His Majesty cannot have the same assurance of your friendship, as he is willing to give you of his, the said Ambassadour thinks himself obliged to desire their High and Mightinesses, that they would make a serious re∣flexion upon this, as upon many other affairs, which may tend to the esta∣blishing of a defensive and lasting Alliance, and public friendship with His Majesty. And lastly, that His Majesty may be speedily informed of their intentions, that he may take his measures accordingly, and act as their High and Mightinesses shall be pleased to demean themselves towards him. Given at the Hague the 18th of January, 1680.
The Memorial of Mr. Sidney, Envoy extraordinary of the King of Great Britain, to the States of the United Provinces, on Jan. 9. 1680. THE Envoy extraordinary of the King of Great Britain makes no doubt, but that your High and Mightinesses are fully informed by your Ambassadours at the Court of England, what pains the Most Chri∣stian King takes, to draw you into a nearer Alliance for mutual desence, with His Majesty: And because the Ambassadour of his Most Christian Majesty did by his Memorial of yesterday propose the same to your High and Mightinesses; the Envoy having express Orders from the King his Master, does represent to your High and Mightinesses, that his Master cannot look upon the aforesaid Alliance otherwise than as a confederacy against him, and the rather, because your High and Mightinesses have refused to pass an Act of Guarantee of the last Treaties of Peace at Nim∣meghen, to which he had obliged you by two several Trearies of the 10th of January, and the 26th of July, 1678. That the King his Master concei∣ved, that this Alliance meant no less than the French King's giving Rules to this State. But that His Majesty being in full Peace, and no ways apprehensive of his neighbouring Princes, and your High and Mighti∣nesses being likewise in no danger of being in the least molested by any, by a nearer Alliance with you, His Majesty has no other aim, but that he may not give the French King an occasion of shewing his displeasure for the separate Peace, which His Majesty made with your High and Mightinesses, in the year 1674. The Memorial presented by the French Ambassadour to the States General, January 12. 1680. THE Count d'Avaux, Ambassadour extraordinary of his Most Chri∣stian Majesty, by a Memorial presented to your High and Mighti∣nesses the 8th instant, signified to you the intentions of the King his Master, concerning an Alliance propounded betwixt His Majesty and this State; and having as yet no Answer, he cannot longer delay his Obedience to the precise Orders of His Majesty, by letting your High and Mightinesses know, that be much wondred that you should put off to another time the conclusion of this Alliance. That His Majesty would have been pleased, and taken it well, if, without urging the matter, your High and Mightinesses had sent a solemn Embassy to desire that favour of him, especially having concluded a Peace with you, and given you by word and deeds so many proofs of his sincere friendship, and promised to be true to it; it is therefore His Majesty's desire, that your High and Mighti∣nesses
would shew a reciprocal procedure, and carry your selves as you have done, nor only to former Kings, but to His Majesty himself; for since the Establishment of your High and Mightinesses States, you have constantly desired of His Majesty's Predecessors and himself, the continu∣ance of their Alliance and Protection, which was signally manifested in the year 1648, when His Majesty's Forces joyned with yours, procured your High and Mightinesses a firm and setled Peace; since which time you have several times with instances sollicited the renewing of that old Alli∣ance and Friendship: And namely, in the year 1662, you sent a solemn Embassy to His Majesty to desire an Alliance, which then was granted and concluded. That the Alliance proposed by His Majesty is no more but the renewing of former Leagues, and is purely defensive, having no other regard, but the maintaining of your High and Mightinesses State in a for∣mer Peace, and freedom of Commerce, without any danger or fear, and no design to involve the States in new troubles, but to confirm a general Peace in all Europe. And this being the only reason why His Majesty applies himself to you at this time, and that your High and Mightinesses may have the same Alliance with several other Princes and States: It could not enter into His Majesty's thoughts, after he has given you so many De∣monstrations of his sincere friendship, that the renewing of this Alliance should meet with any difficulty or opposition, and that two Months should be expired, without having as yet received from you any final Resolution. That His Majesty could not persuade himself, that the Declaration of the King of England should make any impression on the minds of your High and Mightinesses, seeing the League offered by England is wholly offen∣sive as designed against His Majesty, when the Alliance which he proposes can be of no ill consequence to the King of England, if he will continue in Peace, and not attack the States, as he did in the year 1665; for then His Majesty would be obliged to defend them, as he did at that time. And in regard the Alliance which His Majesty proposes will do good to all, and injure no person, the present Declaration of the King of England against it, ought to be of less force than that which the same Prince made to His Majesty in the year 1662, to hinder the Alliance which he then made with your High and Mightinesses, and particularly to hinder his being Guarantee in an Affair which himself intended to disturb. And see∣ing His Majesty let slip no occasion of shewing his good will to the States, and especially at so important a juncture as this is, His Majesty may justly conclude, that your High and Mightinesses will have no regard to a De∣claration that has so little ground for it; but that you will now call to mind the many demonstrations of His Majesty's true and faithful Amity, particularly that helpful Tax of Tariff, in the year 1664, which is of great advantage to your Traffic, when he desires only the renewing of the Treaty of the year 1662, which is purely defensive, of the same nature with those that your High and Mightinesses have concluded with other Princes and States, and of great advantage for secuting your fishing Trade. His Majesty has likewise ordered the Ambassadour to acquaint your High and Mightinesses, that if you delay the renewing of the said Alliance, he will look upon it as a refusal to engage in so sincere friendship and cor∣respondence, as he would do with you, and at a time when the forbearing
of it may be of hurtful consequence; as on the contrary, the concluding thereof cannot but tend to the setling of your State in Peace, and the increase of your Trade and Greatness, and at such a time also, when His Majesty relies not upon your High and Mightinesses for Peace and security at home. That he knows there is a party among you which do not favour His Majesty; but that ye might be assured the King would take the same measures with them, and that he will employ all his power for promoting of Commerce among his own Subjects, wheresoever it can be done. His Majesty has made his intentions to this effect known to the Ambassadours of your High and Mightinesses, and willed them to communicate the same to you, and that he desires a positive Answer within 15 days; after which time His Majesty's Ambassadour is ordered to sollicit the matter no more, His Majesty being resolved to observe the same measures as your High and Mightinesses have done with him. Given at the Hague the twelfth of January, 1680. A Copy of the Earl of Sunderland's Letter to Mr. Sidney, Envoy extraordinary from His Majesty of Great Britain, to the States of the United Provinces, dated January 14. 1680. VVHen I had read your Letter in Council, I had Orders to speak with the Heer Van Leuwen, concerning the Alliance proposed by France to the States. I told him, That the King would take it ill, if his Masters should come to a conclusion with France, after they had refused such an Alliance as they themselves had formerly desired of His Majesty, and sent Ambassadours to treat about the same. I told him also, That if the States should take that course, this defensive Alliance might hereafter oblige them to other measures with France; and if the French King should enter into a War, they would find themselves thereby necessitated to assist that Crown, which would be sufficient cause of a breach betwixt England and Holland. His Majesty (I told him) did intend to tell him so himself, and therefore desired to speak with him. His Answer was, That he would acquaint his Masters with it, and that he did not believe they would accept the Proposals of Monsieur d'Avaux. In a word, you must use your utmost endeavours to hinder this Alliance, and assure the States, That His Majesty will do any thing that is reasonable; not doubting, but that he, with the assistance of the States of Holland, is in a condi∣tion of preserving the quiet and peace of Europe, which is both their interests.
The Earl of Sunderland's Postcript, with his own hand. YOU must press this Affair to the States as much as possible you can, and shew them the ill consequences of such an Alliance; for if it take effect, His Majesty may be moved to take other measures, though it is against his inclination. Jan. 14. 1680. Paris, January 15. 1680. YEsterday evening, being Sunday, Monsieur Girault, Deputy Intro∣ductor of Ambassadours, came to the house of us your High and Mightinesses's Ambassadours, and in the name of Monsieur Golbert acquainted us, That we should next day, about nine of the Clock, wait on His Majesty at St. Germans. Accordingly we went thither this Mor∣ning, and betwixt ten and eleven were brought to an Audience in the Closet, where we found His Majesty all alone, standing by the Window. When we had made the accustomed Reverences to the King, His Majesty was pleased to tell us, That he thought it convenient to signifie to us, that upon Conclusion of the last Peace, he had had a great inclination to re-establish with their High and Mightinesses, the ancient friendship and correspondence that had been betwixt the Crown and the States General; and that therefore he had by his Ministers, here to us, and his Ambassa∣dours to their High and Mightinesses at the Hague, given intimation of his willingness to renew the former Alliance with them; but because he is sincere in the Affair, he did now declare the same himself, and confirm what ever Monsieur Colbert had told us concerning it. That the Alliance with his Crown had been very profitable and advantagious to the States, in the years 1665 and 1666, and the same in former times much desired by them: That therefore he was much surprised to find such delays in the States in the conclusion thereof, and thought fit, by an Express this day, to order the Count d'Avaux to demand of their High and Mightinesses a positive and final Resolution concerning the proposed Alliance, that His Majesty might know what he was to expect from them, and accordingly take his measures for the good of his Subjects. His Majesty desired, That we should, by an Express, acquaint the States with what he had said to us; or, That if we thought it convenient, His Majesty's Courrier should carry our Letters. We thereupon promised His Majesty to write to your High and Mightinesses, and give you a true account of what he told us, and so took our leaves.
A Letter from the Ambassadours of the States Gene∣ral to their High and Mightinesses. St. Germans, January 17. 1680. AFter we had yesterday dispatched the inclosed, to be sent by the King's Express to the Count d'Avaux; instead of the Express, the Lord Bovin de Fes came to us, and told us, That we should this day have Audi∣ence of the King, and that therefore we should be at St. Germans by nine of the Clock in the Morning. At ten of the Clock we received by an Express your High and Mightinesses Commands, with your Resolution of the twelfth instant. In pursuance of the notice given us, we came thither this Morning, and being introduced into the King's Closet, and received by him as we were yesterday, His Majesty was pleased to tell us, That since he had spoken to us yesterday, he had received News from his Ambassadour at the Hague, and that Monsieur Colbert had received ano∣ther Letter from the said Ambassadour, a little before the Express of your High and Mightinesses was sent to us. That he found no reason to alter his thoughts, and therefore must tell us, That he was highly surprised, that your High and Mightinesses, instead of professing a satisfaction of entering into the Alliance offered by His Majesty to the States, had only thought fit to make a Declaration, which does no ways content His Ma∣jesty; and that he had offered a defensive Alliance, and therefore thought, that he ought to have a positive Resolution to take his measures by. That His Majesty would not threaten you with his indignation, as others did, but that he could not but declare unto us, That if your High and Migh∣tinesses would not enter into the Alliance proposed, he would conceive that the States had other designs, and that consequently be obliged to confederate with other Princes and Potentates for the interest and welfare of his Subjects, and the encreasing and encouraging of their Trade by all possible ways. That as soon as we were gone, he would send Orders to his Ambassadour d'Avaux to acquaint your High and Mightinesses, that within ten days he expected a final Resolution concerning the offered Alliance; and that if the same was not done within the limitted time, his Ambassadour should stir no more in the matter, but that His Majesty would forthwith resolve and deport himself as should best stand with his conveniency. Being answered by us, That we could assure His Majesty; that your High and Mightinesses thought themselves highly obliged by the Honour shew'd the States in the offer of his friendship; and that though you could not for several weighty difficulties embrace the said Alliance, yet you would always, and upon all occasions, make appear, not only your sincere intentions religiously and exactly to observe the peace, but like∣wise
the extraordinary value and esteem you made of His Majesty's friend∣ship and favours, and your earnest endeavours to promote and cultivate the same by all lawful and becoming means; and that if this could please His Majesty, we made no doubt, but that your High and Mightinesses would give a public and satisfactory Declaration in this matter. The King replied, That the Pensionary has already declared as much to his Ambaffa∣dour, but that be could easily perceive, that the dislike they had of the said Alliance proceeded from the Consideration they had for England; and that instead of an Alliance he could by no means take such a Declara∣tion to be satisfactory: And that His Majesty having acquainted your High and Mightinesses with his inclinations of renewing his ancient Friendship and League with the States, he expected that you would on your parts fully comply with him, and make an Alliance, which His Majesty, by his Ambassadours, had proposed to your High and Mightinesses. He farther desired us, That we would give your High and Mightinesses as full and exact an account of this Affair as possibly we could, because His Majesty had been informed, That we had not been so punctual in our former Letters, in relating what Monsieur Colbert had acquainted us with; and thereupon His Majesty would have dismissed us: But we took the freedom, first, to excuse our selves concerning the aforesaid report, protesting, that we had omitted nothing in our Letters to your High and Mightinesses, of what Monsieur Colbert had proposed to us; and then added, That a de∣fensive Alliance contained commonly but three principal Points; the main∣taining of Amity and Peace; the not engaging in War the one against the other; and in case of an attack, to give Succours. That we could assure His Majesty, That your High and Mightinesses are willing to grant the two first, and upon that head declare your selves to His Majesty's satis∣faction, and that the last was no way advantagious for him, being so powerful; but on the contrary, of great advantage to the States, our Republic being so low at present; that His Majesty would therefore be pleased to think, that the reasons must be very weighty that hinder'd the States to embrace the last, which would be so much to their advantage; and that we, in the name of your High and Mightinesses, could declare, that the obstacle was not grounded upon the Proposals of the King of England. Not withstanding His Majesty persisted in his former sentiments, and repeated his fore-mentioned Arguments, telling us, That if we pleased to see Monsieur Colbert, he would more fully explain to us His Majesty's meaning. Having accordingly in the Afternoon gone to wait on Monsieur Colbert, his Excellency, more amply and in higher terms, urged but the same thing that His Majesty had done: And we making use of the Reasons alleaged for the resolution of the States, and what others at that time oecurred to us, endeavoured to persuade him, That His Majesty should adhere to the former Treaties; that nothing was more the resolution and intention of your High and Mightinesses, than to give to His Majesty what contentment possibly you could: And that for His Ma∣jesty's satisfaction, your High and Mightinesses would pass a Declaration, containing the two principal Points of a defensive Alliance, without any Article of giving mutual Assistance to each other, by which the greatest advantage would redound to your High and Mightinesses; and that there∣fore
it was evident, that the difficulties which hindred your High and Mightinesses were of the greatest moment and insuperable. To this his Excellency made answer, that he did confess he understood our Argu∣ment, but that the more force there was in it, the more it made for the King; that by their way of proceeding which was never used in ma∣king of Treaties, something of consequence must be concealed; for it could not well be conceived that your High and Mightinesses should give a Declaration that should be satisfactory to his Majesty, and be ne∣vertheless unwilling to enter into an Alliance, which in regard it would contain more than the aforesaid two Articles, namely, the giving of mu∣tual succours, must of necessity be more to the advantage of the States, than of his Majesty; that therefore it was to be believed, that the diffi∣culties which the States do find, arise from England, though (as we were pleased to say) we had more advantage than prejudice to expect from the alliance that his Excellency would say nothing of what is past, nor of the present state of the one and other Kingdom; but that it was most certainly known that our people did deal much more with Erance than with England, and that in their Commerce they were far more ci∣villy used in France than in England; and that the English did manage their Trade by their own Natives, but the French by the Hollanders. And as we were about to discourse further of this Affair, his Excellency seemed willing to break off; and in conclusion told us, that if your High and Mightinesses did not within ten days after that Monsieur D' Avaux should by a Memorial present to you, what by the King and his Excel∣lency was proposed to us, declare that your High and Mightinesses would renew a defensive League with his Majesty, there should no more be said of it: but that his Majesty would forthwith resolve on what should be thought most expedient for advancing the Interest of his King∣dom; and that whatever might happen upon it, that matters might be known, the Count D' Avaux should wait on all the Members of your High and Mightinesses Assemblies, and declare to them the good in∣tentions and inclinations that his Majesty has towards them; where∣upon we took our leave of Monsieur Colbert: and so remain. The Memorial presented by the French Ambassadour to the States General, January 22. 1680. THe Count D' Avaux Ambassador extraordinary of the most Christian King, having Advice from the King his Master, that his Majesty had made a Declaration to the Ambassadors of your High and Mightines∣ses; does believe that he had not delayed a minutes time in obeying the Orders he received to acquaint your Lordships with the same. His Majesty who on the Third of this Instant made known by Mon∣sieur Colbert his Intentions to the Ambassadors of your High and Migh∣tinesses, has now more fully explained to them himself his own meaning, and therefore gave your Ambassadors an Audience on the Fifteenth In∣stant,
wherein his Majesty confirmed to them all that Monsieur Colbert had formerly declared in his Name. What the said Ambassador mention∣ed to your High and Mightinesses in his Memorial of the Twelfth Instant, he will not repeat again in this; but only tell you, that his Majesty has approved him in all that he has declared in his Memorials; and that be admired that after he had first mentioned his friendship, and so often te∣stified the same to your High and Mightinesses, by the conclusion of the Peace, and the plain demonstrations of his Majesties sinoere willingness to enter into the same Alliance which at other times he has had with your Lordships; your High and Mightinesses should so long protract an Affair, that for many reasons his Majesty knew to be so much to your Advantage. That your present proceedings did not at all correspond to the Zeal which your High and Mightinesses made in the year 1662. to renew with his Master the Alliance that then was concluded. That his Majesty knew not what to attribute to so considerable a Difference, and that he could not conceive why your High and Mightinesses will not re-enter into the same Engagement and Confederacy, but make difficulties in a matter, which if not speedily concluded, as it has been proposed, his Majesty should have cause to believe that the States have altered their measures. His Maje∣sty desired that your High and Mightinesses would give him your Answer by the express Courrier whom his Majesty resolved to send to his Am∣bassadour here, and his intention being to have a speedy resolution in this Affair, he expected that your High and Mightinesses would give the same, according as he had acquainted your Ambassadors, who promised to procure it. As the Courrier was ready to depart, his Majesty being in∣formed of what had passed here, called your Ambassadour again to Au∣dience on the Sixteenth Instant, telling them that he could not suffici∣ently express his wonder of the manner how in Holland they had treated the subject of the proposed Alliance, that the Declaration which the Pensionary Fagell made to his Ambassador, of the States unwillingness to enter into any Alliance with his Majesty upon fear that it might be pre∣judicial to the established Peace, was so far from pleasing him, that he had ordered his Ambassadour to refuse the same Alliance; and that he should visit all the Deputies of the States, and acquaint them with his Majesties Intentions. That he was willing your High and Mightinesses should know so much; and that he had charged his Ambassador to ex∣pect now a final conclusion of this Affair, and that hereafter it was his will that his Ambassador should speak no more of the Matter, nor re∣ceive any publick Act concerning it: And that consequently your High and Mightinesses ought to expect that his Majesty would enter into any Alliances which might be proposed to him for the welfare of his King∣dom, and that he would industriously comply with the ways which were daily offered for promoting the Commerce of his Subjects. That his Majesty knew not how to threaten the States with his Indignati∣on; but that his displeasure upon the account of these their proceedings, might do them more prejudice than the Menaces of others. That his Majesty has enjoyned your Ambassadours to signifie to your High and Mightinesses what he told them; and that they should take care not to al∣ter his sense, as had been done in some Matters of great Importance which
his Majesty was acquainted with, within eight hours after, and where∣in his Majesty had charged Mr. Colbert to explain his meaning. Upon conclusion of the Audience, his Majesty told your Ambassadors that they should repair to Monsieur Colbert; and that he was surprized, that they had Letters in Holland, signifying, that in case they would not enter into the Alliance, his Majesty would have no respect to the Peace: And that they should lose their Trade; which was a misconstruction of his sense, wherewith his Majesty was displeased; and that they should only take into consideration that what had past within eight or ten days, might in the beginning have been thought a just ground of his Majesties dissatisfaction at their proceedings. Datum Hague 22. Jan. 1680. The Memorial of Mr. Sidney, Envoy extraordinary of the King of Great Britain, to the States General of the United Provinces, the 23. of Jan. 1680. THe subscribed Envoy extraordinary of the King of Great Britain, seeing by the Memorial which the Ambassador of France presented yesterday to your Lordships, that he continues by urgent Instances to in∣duce your Lordships to enter into that Defensive League which the most Christian King proposed to your Lordships sometime since, he finds him∣self obliged by new Orders from the King his Master, to renew the In∣stances by him made to your Lordships, by his Memorial of the Ninth Instant, that you will not enter into such a Treaty as the King his Ma∣ster cannot take to be other than an engagement against his Majesty, who pretends not to use such Menaces as the Memorials of the French Ambassadour are filled with; although the King his Master hath more cause to complain, that your Lordships have but even now passed the Act of Guarranty, to which your Lordships were obliged by two such solemn Treaties. But as his Majesty takes nothing more to heart than the advantage of this Republick, so he will not press them upon any thing that is not for their conveniency and interest. The King his Master perswades himself also, that after all those Assu∣rances of his Amity and Assistance in what ever may happen, which he hath given your Ambassador at his Court, whereof without all doubt he hath informed your Lordships, you will not make an Alliance, which he cannot judge to be other than against himself; and that the Instances of the most Christian King, though too pressing and importunate to be presented to a free Commonwealth, will not be capable to divert your Lordships from your true Interest, nor from the Amity and strict Union that is between his Majesty and this State, in a time and on an occasion when he gives your Lordships so essential marks, and when your Lord∣ships have assured his Majesty that you will continue and encrease the same on your parts. Given at the Hague, Jan. 23. 1680. Sidney.
Considerations touching the Alliance with France. THe King of France being desirous to renew an Alliance with the States, hath solicited the same by his Ambassadors; and His Majesty has reason to believe that the States will accept of an Offer so advanta∣geous to them, when upon that account he is willing to comply with them therein for these Considerations: That the States have renewed their Alliance with all those Princes with whom they have been in War: That they have not only after the Peace concluded with England, re∣newed their Alliance with that Crown, but made a new one besides: That in the same Treaty by which they made Peace with Sweden, they renewed their former Treaties of Alliance: That the King of France de∣sires no more of the States but the same thing; and if this be not granted, his Majesty will have reason to believe that the States have particular Reasons that oblige them to contract no nearer Alliance or Friendship with him, and whether his Majesty in that case will not be obliged to take his measures accordingly. And seeing the States are in Alliance with all the Princes of Europe, except the King of France, with whom they will make none, whether his Majesty may not justly belief that those En∣gagements which they have with other Princes, tend to the concerting of Measures against him, when ever opportunity shall offer: That it is no excuse to say, that the Alliance which the States have with England and Spain were made during the War, seeing the Alliance proposed by France does not contain any special Engagement, and indeed no other but the same Conditions which were desired by the States in 1662. If in the present Conjuncture the renewing of such an Alliance be refused, his Majesty is obliged to believe that the Interest of France is not considered, and that the Interest of the States is inconsistent with it; and by conse∣quence, whether he may not always for the future take other Measures; because the States by their refusal will make appear that it is never their Interest to ally with France: That if it be said, that though the Alliance be good and advantageous, yet that the conclusion thereof ought to be deferred till another time; whether if his Majesty did not know (which he does know) what the reasons of this delay were, he ought not to believe that they seek to defer the Alliance only because they never in∣tend to conclude it. And whether those Reasons (let them be what they will) will not be the very same six Months, or a year hence. And whether ever it will be found expedient to renew the Alliance between France and this State, till the Complaints that any Princes may make against the renewing of the said Alliance begin to be suspected by the States. If a Prince (let him be who he will) should oppose the States making of a defensive Alliance, and innocent Amity; yea such an one
as he has with them himself already, whether he does not thereby show that he intends to attack the one or the other, and that he has private designs of his own. That France is far from taking it ill that the States should procure themselves new Friends and Alliances; His Majesty being ready to obtain the same for them, if he knew of any Prince who was not already in League with them. That there is no reason to excuse the renewing of the Alliance with France, because they refused to enter into the League of Guarantee with England, because the said League was as plainly intended against France, as the triple Alliance was formerly. That there is no equality between making a League of this nature with a Prince with whom they are allied already, and the renewing of an Alliance betwixt the States and a Prince with whom they are not allied, and with whom they have always heretofore been so nearly engaged. If there be any good ground to say, That the States ought to remain Neuter, and not to do that for one Prince, which they have refused to another; whether their entering into a nearer Alliance with one Prince during the War, and their refusing to renew an Alliance with another after the Peace, be good signs of Neutrality. That if the Treaties, which the States have made during the War, do hinder them to renew the Alli∣ance with France, it doth appear to His Majesty, that the same Spirit which bore they sway against him during the War, doth still oppose him since the Peace. Whether His Majesty ought not to believe, that the States have not so faithfully performed their part, as he hath sincerely restored them to his friendship, seeing they refuse to give him the same Tokens of Affection which His Majesty doth offer them, and which they formerly with so much Zeal wished for. That if the ground of His Majesty's desire be considered, it will be found, that they are punctually obliged to ful∣fill the same, because the King's Letter of the 18th of M, 1678. con∣tained not the proposals of a Peace which they liked so well, but upon condition they should enter into the old Alliance and Confederacy which they formerly had with His Majesty. That though the King of France had no reason to fear, but that His Forces should not be power∣ful enough to defend himself against the Enterprises of these who are dis∣affected towards him, yet he thinks it concerns him once for all to be in∣formed of the sentiments they have in regard of him, as he is already sufficiently of the ill intentions of those who oppose the renovation of the Alliance, because they cannot without envy or fear look upon the advan∣tages of this Union. That it is with little ground said by some, that the States never made Alliance without pressing Reasons, such as those which made them contract with other Princes during the last War, and that these Alliances were not to continue after the Peace. Such as are better infor∣med of the State of Affairs, do well know, that the Alliance of France was not made upon the account of any particular Case or Occurrence, but upon the desire of the States during the Peace: And that indeed the Alliances which they have made with other Princes, do also continue since the War, some for 20, some for 30 years, and some for ever; and France be∣ing the only Crown with which the States will not treat, an easie Answer may be given to what some publicly say here, That the Alliance is indeed very
advantagious, but that the States at least ought to take their own time, when they shall think it most convenient. To this it may be said, that it will be agreed, that if the States them∣selves would propose a new Alliance, it would be just that they should set such a time for the concluding of it as they might think convenient: But since His Most Christian Majesty desires them to renew the former Allian∣ces they have had with him, and that it doth not come from them, they must have other regards, which they consider more than the advantage of His Majesty's Amity. That if this matter be rightly considered, it may be said, that a lon∣ger time hath been allowed than was necessary for to determin themselves since the first mention of this Alliance, a Minister of the Court of France having made a proposal of it in my last. That the King of France may presume, that the States are so wise in discerning their own interest, and so kind to it, as to have considered since my last, what they were to do in relation to this Proposal. That his Ambassadour having afterward renewed the same, His Majesty may have reason, if it be not answered, to suspect them, and to demand their peremptory Answer, that so he may once for all take his measures accordingly. That the King of France cannot but take it ill, that the States should refuse to enter into this Alliance, out of fear of disobliging those, who, without any reason, oppose the same, and upon no other design, but to conclude a League offensive against him, that being the only reason why they endeavour to hinder this defensive Alliance. It is to be presumed, that the King of France will not always accept of what the States shall be pleased to resolve upon; and after so many advan∣tages of Amity which he has offered to them, they must thank themselves, if, when he sees his Alliance refused, His Majesty do take such measures as will not be very agreeable to them.
Reflexions on the Considerations, touching the Memorials delivered to their High and Mighti∣nesses by the Count d' Avaux, on the 12th and 22th of January, 1680. THE substance of these Considerations may be divided, either into Motives, to induce the States to enter into an Alliance with France, or Answers to the Reasons the States alleage, for refusing the same. The Motives are these three following: 1. That the States have made Alliances with other Princes and States. 2 That they are obliged to make an Alliance with the King of France, because they accepted the Letter of the 18th of May, 1678. 3. Because that the King, in case that the Alliance do not take effect, will have cause, in regard of the carriage of the States towards him, to resent it to their prejudice, and conse∣quently take such measures as will be very unpleasing to them. As to the first; there needs not much debate, but that the Alliance which a State does make with some Princes, doth not oblige them to enter into the same with others; and that the same may be refused without any ill inclination, and much more without any intention never to enter into an Alliance with the Party with whom they refuse it at present. All free States must have a freedom to judge of their Interests, which do vary according to the different conjunctures of time; and the just fear which the States have, (above other considerations) that they may be drawn into a War by this defensive Alliance with France, must plainly declare the innocency of their desires which they have to refuse the same. It is like∣wise to be observed, that it is true that the Alliances with England and Spain were concluded during the War, which evidently demonstrates, that they have not been made out of compliance to one or other Prince; and that the States cannot discharge themselves of them. Concerning the second: It is to be admired that the Author of those Considerations should positively avert, that the States are obliged to enter into an Alliance with France, by reason of a Letter he mentions. The Most Christian King doth not speak any thing in that Letter of renewing the Alliance, as a condition on which he will make Peace, but is willing to free the States of those fears which they had, that if the Spaniards con∣tinued in War, he would make himself Master of all the Neatherlands; and therefore promises, that in case Spain would not accept of a Peace, after the States had made one, and were again entred into their old Alli∣ance with him, that he would always maintain the proposed Frontiers, and attack none of the places therein contained. Now since Spain did accept of Peace, there was no occasion for the Contents of the latter. The King of France is by the said Peace obliged to leave the Frontiers in the
conditioned State, and the States are not obliged to re-enter into an Alli∣ance which is now desired of them. As to the third Motive. As the States may refuse the Alliance with the Most Christian King, without having any ill intention against him, so he has reason to be satisfied, and not deal with them as such who are other ways affected towards him, when with respect they purge themselves, and give assurances, that they will religiously preserve the Peace with him. If the King be just, he will not break his Peace with him; if generous, he will not reckon their desires of maintaining their freedom entire, as a piece of ill conduct in them; and will not encreale their jealousies, that he has a design absolutely to dispose of them, and to make their State a Ladder, whereby to climb up to a Lording it over all Europe, and that under pretext of shewing them Tokens of their Amity. Upon the Answers, which the Author of these Considerations do make to excuse the States from entering into an Alliance, these following Re∣flexions may be made. First, in regard he questions, whether the Com∣plaints, which several Princes may make concerning the renewing of the said Alliance, must not be suspected. It is not with more reason to be questioned (as has been touched before) whether the great heat, with which the Most Christian King doth sue the said Alliance, doth not make him suspected of his willingness to break the Peace so lately re-established in Europe, and for the maintenance of which the States have so great an Interest. That there is not the least appearance, that any of those Princes who opposes the said Alliance, does the same with any intention to attack the Most Christian King. And seeing His Most Christian Majesty has no cause to fear that his power should not be sufficient to defend himself; what important reason can he have to oblige the States to a defensive Alliance, unless he has a design to attack some of his Neighbours, who for the same reasons justly oppose the Conclusion of the said Alliance, though they do it not with threantings of their Indignation, which France uses to force and press the same. That, with good ground may be alleaged against the said Alliance, the refusal which the States have made of entering with England into an Alli∣ance of Gnarantee, though it was their greatest interest to make the same, as being thereunto obliged; and seeing they have not refused it, but only in deference to His Most Christian Majesty, and that the said Alliance was not expresly proposed against him, but against the party who should break the Peace. The rest of the Considerations relate chiefly to the time in which it is desired the Alliance should be concluded, and it seems superfluous to debate that, before one knows for certain whether it will be advantagious to make the same, or not. FINIS.
