B3579 12832981 94347
KING CHARLES his welcome home, OR A CONGRATVLATION of all his loving Subiects in thanke∣fulnesse to God for his Maiesties safe and happie returne from Scotland, 1641. By IOHN BOND, Cantabrid: Coll: St. Iohns. London, Printed by F. L. for T. Bates, and F. Coules, and are to be sold at their shops in the old Baily.
King Charles his welcome home. HAd I great Homer's sweet-Maeonian quill Inspired from the double-fronted Hill Of the thrice-three-Aganippa'an Nimphs, Who guides the fancy with Nectarian Limphs Of fluent eloquence, and Heroick lines: Had I the pen of Maro, whose worth shines bright in the lamp of Poetrie: had I An Angels sweetnesse, and an Eagles ey To view your Majestie: perhaps I might. Respectively expresse the ioyfull sight Of your returne: whose imperiall name Is greater, then the barren Trumpe of Fame Can farre enough proclaime with her shrill voyce; In whom both men and Angels doe reioyce: Or were my pen from Pegase-hoofe-borne spring Distill'd; I might discribe thy welcome, King: But stay retract that line, my Muse, for why? Shoul'st thou presume upon his Maiestie To gaze, least the bright splender of his name Dazels the weaknesse of thy lines in shame. (But as the Caesarian Parrat once did live) To you great Charles my  I doe give. Welcome thou Sun of glory, whose bright beames Doe so illuminate those obscure dreames Of adverse Fortune, unto which we were Late incident, by our quotidian feare. But the bright raies of your returne absolv'd Vs from that passion, and sweelty dissolv'd That cloud of feare into the glorious day Of triumph: for unitly we may say, That Sol's Heav'n-wandring steedes in their first light And infancy of rising, (when the night
Had rob'd the earth of his bright lampe were not More welcom to th'Pers'ans, who neere forgot To worship his arising flames, then we Triumph in your returned Maiestie: Whose presence we adore, as a new Sun Which in our Hemispheare most gloriously doe run. Great Atlas of Religion, (whose rare brow Embroydred with Religions branches, know— The depth of wisedome) whose Maiesticke smile Can reerect Religion, and defile At once both Pope, and Antichrist, the Priests Of Baall, Pontificians, Atheists And the Hel-nourisht crew of Sectaries beside Although puff'd up with the arrogant winde of pride Yet know, great Charles, that by thy sacred frowne They without question must all tumble downe. Fountaine of peace! From thee doth daily spring A concord, that doth decorate a King, And most discreetly doth distill throughout Three Kingdomes re-united round about. Thou dost afford each subiect peace, and then They like to rivers doe returne agen To the great Ocean of their peace, and thus Although thou dost diffuse to each of us This blessing daily: yet we cannot see The fountaine e're to be exhaust in Thee, But rather more redundant, witnesse now Thy care sollic'tous, when discreetly thou Two Kingdomes did'st concatenate in one Religious, firme, and sacred peace alone. When as your ioyfull Subiects did revew Your presence, how ev'ry one withdrew Their former passion, and each single eye Was so transfix't upon your Maiestie: As if you were the Centur of their hope Against the stratagems of th' wicked Pope.
For in your absence, (oh!) how ev'ry heart Clog'd with great feare for you, did daily smart: Here one did sigh, another there did weepe He's heart did smart he's eye were drowned deepe In the full streames of sorrow: this did pray Both for your health and safety day by day: Another prayes for your returne: and this For your long life, that for your heav'nly blisse: This feares, least our Religion should die, That least we grow unto some Anarchie: Thus you might see, great Monarch, that none were, Idle in prayers, but all strucke with feare In this your absence: till your blest returne Did make our hearts in gladnesse more to burne Then they in griefe oppressed were before For now each man your presence doth adore. Loe! what a concurse of thy subiects doe Encompasse thee, as if they meant to woe Your safe returne: this man's pleasant voyce Doth Trumpet forth his ioy: that man reioyce Rather in heart then words: anothers eye Loaded with ioy, salutes your Maiestie. The heads of others doe connive at you The hands of others doe their triumph show: Some doe frequent the Temple, and there praise God for your safe returne, whose mortall Days They wish were crown'd with immortality That we on earth might to eternity With the triumph: all people thou maist see Thus cloath'd with ioy in their solemnitie. Tis not the plots of th' Antichristian Pope Can e're extenuate at once the hope Which is impos'd in thee: whose splendent mind Can all their owlish innovations blind. Nor is it any Faction can oppose Your peace-digested mind, or any foes
Disturbe your concord: let the Papists strive In their Hel-forged plots, and let them drive Their fury to the height of malice, while We are protected under your blest smile. So! let the wicked fume, and fome and fall Starke-mad: still snarling in their frothy gall Of tainted envie: Let them like the waves Precipitate their mallice to their graves, Well! Let them snarle like murmuring rivers, than Rising, and rising to an Ocean: Then swell into a Deluge, till they hide The tops of Mountaines in their teeming pride; Thou Charles shalt stand like Noahs Arke secure Above those waves, and firmly shalt endure While the tumultuous Billowes under Thee Doe rage, and seeke their owne dire Destinie; With Thee above the waves thou shalt protect The Sonnes and daughters of th' Religious sect And sacred Truth, whose ever-pious way Vnder thy Tutele never shall decay. Oh! how shall we expresse our flowing ioy For thy returne, which griefe cannot annoy. Yea ev'n the very City walles would come And leave their seates, Thee now to welcome home If nature did not them oppose: behold The earth whereon thou treadest, doth unfold Her barrennesse, and in those steps, whereon Your sacred Maiestie hath lately gon Least late posteritie should never heare Of thy blest iourney) it doth now appeare How the lacivious grasse doe forthwith strive Which first should be emergent, and so live Sprung up in honour of your blessed fame, And be a monument to your great name. Flora did emulate with her selfe, and trie How to excell the sweet solemnitie
Of her best odours, whilst all then agreed To concurre all in one, striving t' exceed Her wouted-repercussive smell: That done Abstracted all her beauty then in one, Thus charm'd her flowers whose sweet benignitie Ioyn'd in one faire Aspect doe welcome thee. Ceres have dressed the corne-loaded earth Against your comming, to produce a birth Of heav'n-created ioy: and as 'tis seene Did sweepe the earth's most fruitfull treasure cleane; Into her swelling barnes: and thus made roome For your blest Maiesties returning home: The Earth she emptied, Thee t' entertaine: Which otherwise she knew, could not contaiue Your Alexandrian person. Me thinks I see Wine-swelling Bacchus striving how to bee Ambitiously your servant, who present His pearlie coul'red grapes, all which he meant To ripen only for your sake: Thus he To you commends them with humilitie. Bright Phaebus doth his rad'ant beames display And with his great lustre guild this day: And thinkes it great ambition to distend His rayes transluent, which he now did lend To you more then accustom'd light: while he Will doe more service to your Maiestie With his foure steeds: Then he who did farre worse And gave your Maiestie an hundred horse. While you and he shine both, none can define Which is his splendor, Charles, or which is thine. Puffe-mouthed Aeolus retract his winds Which do tumultuously rage and findes That the calme Zephyrus of your sweet breath Doth pacifie their rage, which threatens death And that your smile can keepe distraction back That wallow with discention to their rack.
Mars smiles at your returne, and he doth see There his owne person in your Majestie. Facetious Mercury's lodg'd in you tounge; At your bright eyes doth Cupid without wronge Warme his Caelestiall wings: and in your braine Mellifluous Pallace doth discreetly raigne. Thus all the Gods and Goddesses doe ioy In your returne and call you their Vice-roy. Loe! Constancie doth decorate your face And true Religion sacredly doe grace Your heav'nly mind: And in your better part Firme faith is crowned in your pious heart. But why doe I ennumerate (alas!) Your vertues, which doe farre transcend, and passe The intellect of man's capacity: Which, one may sooner number in the sky Each starre; or else distinguish everysand Within the Ocean's shore, or in the Land Each herbe; then he which can discribe in Thee Each Charactar of your Divintiy The Starres of honour in thee doe so shine That thou art nothing earthly; but divine. Which doe so meet in thee with variation That they doe make a perfect constellation: Which were they obvious but to every ey Each severall Art would trune Astronomie: Our Parliaments adjourn'd: and then we were (Had you not come) subjected beene to feare But since such vertues doe concurre in one We have a Parliament in Thee alone. Well! Live O King, for ever live I say Live prosperously, and that beyond Doomes Day. And although all other Poets doereply A Vale in their Epilogue, yet I In stead of Vale will presume t'allude And with a Salve, Charles, to you conclude. FINIS.
