B4067 12221544 56408
THE NARRATIVE OF Mr. William Boys, CITIZEN OF LONDON: Faithfully Relating what came to his Knowledge concern∣ing the Late Horrid POPISH PLOT, and the Death of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, by his Acquaintance with, and Attendance upon Mr. Miles Prance, before, and after his being Taken and Imprisoned, WHEREIN Many things not yet Discovered to the World, Relating to the Truth of the Kings Evidence, and the Guilt Charged upon Philiberd Vernatti (formerly Servant to the Lord Bellasis) Gerrard, Kelle, and Lusan Priests; All Fled for the said Fact is made Manifest. PUBLISHED For the Conviction of all Gain-sayers, and the Vindication of the said Mr. Boys from the Aspersion the Popish Party would have cast upon him, for his Faithfulness in finding out their Divellish De∣signs, made Evident by the many Snares laid for him. LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the Sign of the Kings Arms in the Poultry. 1680.
I Do appoint Mr. Dorman Newman and no other, to Print this my NARRATIVE. WILLIAM BOYS.
THE NARRATIVE OF Mr. William Boys. THe Malicious Slanders, and Scandalous Reproaches thrown upon me for my good Intentions to Serve my King, and Country, being the Contrivances of that Never-sleeping Party, who have left no stone unturn'd to abolish the Belief of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey's Murther, at least as any way Reflecting upon Romish Design, have occasioned me to Publish these few sheets, not only for the Vindication of my own Innocence, but also for the General Satisfaction of the Nation, and for its farther Confirmation by several particulars never yet made Pub∣lick to the world. That I was a faithful Instrument to procure the Discovery of that In∣human and deeply Meditated Murther, is a thing well known to many, as having been particularly employed by His Majesty and the Council, to persuade Mr. Prance to Discharge the Conscience of a Christian, by making a true Confession, because of my great Acquaintance and dayly Familiarity with him. Which they, who felt the fatal Conse∣quences of my sincere Endeavours, so deeply laid to heart, that they sought several ways to Ensnare my Life, and Undermine my Reputa∣tion, accusing me of being a Party concern'd, and one that spoke by the Dictates of Fear or Imposture; and therefore not to be Credited, whereby they aim'd to kill two Birds with one Stone, that is to say, to stop the Progress of Protestant belief, and Satisfie their Revenge upon me. Therefore for the Satisfaction of the world, and my own Vindication, I thought it but necessary to give this Real and Faithful Account of my Proceedings and Transactings in reference to my Ac∣cusations. In the first place, I was Bred up in a Protestant Family from my Infancy, as being the Son of Mr. Rowland Boys, a Clothier in the City of Worcester; and I have all along Profess'd the same Religion. True it is, that Neighborhood and a Sociable Temper brought me into the Acquaintance of several Roman Catholicks, with whom I had fre∣quent Converse, but with none so strictly obliged in Friendship as with Mr. Miles Prance, between whom and my self there was a more than ordinary Intimacy, which gave cause of Suspicion to many, that I was of the same Persuasion; though indeed the true ground of such Familia∣rity was only upon the frequent occasions of mutual Commerce. A
reason for intimate Converse so fair, that a more probable cannot be given, nor more frequently in practice, there being nothing that Fa∣miliarises even Familiarity it self, so much as the League of Friendship and Profit, and the dependency of Trades one upon another, I being an Artist in Lampwork, for the making all manner of Curious Repre∣sentations in Glass. Upon the 29th. of September was Twelve-Month, at my Return out of the Country, I was by my Neighbour Mr. Prance invited to Dinner, in Token of a courteous Welcome-Home. While we were merry at Table one Thomas Haddon, a Lodger at that time in Mr. Prance's House, came in very hastily full of private Intelligence, which Mr. Prance having understood in a Corner of the Room, return'd to his Guests with a Sorrowful and Pensive Countenance. Which sudden alteration occasion'd me out of Friendship, to be more than ordinarily inquisitive into the Causes of so Disconsolate a Change. At first he seem'd very shie and reserv'd, but when I press'd him more closely, he told me, That several of his Friends had been taken out of their Beds the night before, and carryed to Prison. I ask'd him whether he knew the cause of their Apprehension? He answer'd, No. Perhaps said I they may prove to be Highway-men, and then your Grief will soon be over, though they should receive the Reward of their Misdeeds. To which Mr. Prance return'd, That they were persons falsly accused, but that thi Crime was not for Robbing upon the High-way. Whereupon I bid him be of good Comfort and tear nothing, for that Innocency would justifie it self. While we were thus Discoursing, in came one Grove, a School-Master, living in Princes-street, in the Company of another Stranger, who both took Mr. Prance aside to the end of the Room, where they Whisper'd for some time together, so that I could not un∣derstand any thing of their Discourse; only Grove was over-heard to say, His Unkle Grove (who was since Hang'd) was taken. After we had staid till toward night, the Company that had Din'd together, that is to say, Mr. Prance, Haddon, my Self and others, went all to a Coffee-House in Drewry-Lane, where Mr. Prance being known to be a Papist, was Greeted with a very Sowre Welcome by one of the Company, in these words. Now all the Bloody Designs of you Papists are Discover'd, and several of your Priests and Jesuits are appre∣hended for High-Treason, for attempting to Kill the King and Destroy the Protestant Religion. These words did not a little Nettle Mr. Prance, who therefore to vindicate the Innocency of his own Party, smartly reply'd, That they who were taken were Honest men, and that he would prove them so to be. Which Dispute (one word begetting another) grew to that degree of Heat, that I was afraid of an absolute Quarrel, which would have ended in nothing but Blows. Whereupon I took an opportunity to persuade Mr. Prance to leave the place, and to retire to the Tavern; where being in private, I endeavour'd to get out of him the truth and the occasion of these odd Passages; but he would give me no satisfaction, only continued stiff and firm in the Vindication of his Friends, the apprehended Papists. On the first of October, Mr. Prance was sent for to the same Coffee-House, and Threaten'd by some persons, that they would have him be∣fore the King and Council for his vindication of Traytors, and the ex∣travagant Expressions he had utter'd the last time he was there. To which
Mr. P. more calmly answer'd, that he would send for me, and hear what I would say to it, which he accordingly did. When I came, I told him, he was much to be blam'd for delivering himself in such high Terms, but that I hop'd there would be no farther notice taken of his words, in regard he was known, or at least verily believ'd to be an Honest man, and no way concern'd in Designs of so wicked a Nature. To which he reply'd, That he was as Innocent as the Child unborn. After he made this Pro∣testation, we went both of us to the Parties that had Threaten'd him, and I, undertaking to be his Advocate, desired them that they would not call a man in Question for a few rash words, especially since they knew nothing of ill in his Behaviour, but had rather experienc'd the contrary: who being by that means pacifi'd and oblig'd to a kind promise of Civility, I advised him to be more careful for the future and go home about his Business. About a 11. or 12. a Clock the same Night, Mr. P. being a Bed, was put into a most terrible Affrightment; for hearing as he lay, the Noise of a Constable and his Watch passing along the Street, he verily ima∣gined that they had been come to apprehend him. This sudden Terror caus'd him to call up his Lodger Haddon; who having made himself ready, and observ'd the Coast to be clear about his House, away went Mr. P. to seek a safer Harbour: which when I understood the next day, I Check'd him for his idle Fears and groundless Apprehensions, and Coun∣sel'd him to stay at home. To which he made this short answer, That he was afraid, and could not help it. Thereupon, in point of Friendship I offer'd him my own house, and there entertain'd him for two Nights, viz. the 2d. and 3d. of October; but withal I advis'd him that if any Officer should come to enquire for him at his own house, that he should immediately Surrender himself, for that the bare Suggestions and Surmises of his Neighbours could be no Proof against him, and that his own Inno∣cency would overcome all. Upon the coming forth of the Kings Proclamation, Mr. P. not being willing to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, was resolv'd to have gone out of Town. But when he Communicated his Intentions to me, and had Discover'd the Scruples of his Conscience, I perswaded him not to be so over nice, but to take the Oaths, and not only used all the Arguments my own Capacity had furnish'd me withal, but also for his clearer Information and Instruction profer'd to go along with him to the Bishop of London, Dr. Stilling-fleet, or Dr. Burnet, who, I did not Question, would give him those convincing Arguments that would oblige him to embrace the Protestant Religion and forsake Popery. Which Discourse of mine so far prevail'd upon him, that he went and took the Oaths both of Allegiance, and Supremacy, in obedience to the Kings Command: and after that, went along with me to hear Dr. Sharp, whose Sound Divinity confirm'd him in what he had done. This Success engag'd me to improve my Industry with others, that were his Friends and Visiters; particularly with one Mr. Edwards, a most Severe Roman Catholick, living in Browns-Court in the Old-Bayley, whom I met at Mr. Prance's House, and there endeavoured to perswade him to a Conformity with the Church of England. But his obstinacy was such, that he utterly refus'd to think of any alteration in his Opinion; not but that he loved the King, as he said, but that he would not Swear Allegiance to him. Upon which some Discourse arising between the said Mr. Ed∣wards
and my self, wherein Mr. Edwards seem'd to complain of the hard measure which was Dealt to the Roman Catholicks, that being Subjects and Freeborn-men, they should be forc'd like Exiles, from their Homes and Habitations, meerly for not acting against their Consciences. But here, I met with so angry aRebuke for declaring, in justification of the Pro∣clamation, that no good Subjects would Scruple to take those Oaths which were Commanded by Him, to whom they ow'd their Protection, that I thought my self in some danger of my Life. For one Mr. Owen a Zealot of the same Leaven, taking up the Cudgels against me, flatly told me that I was no Honest man to speak in defence of his Majesties publick Com∣mand, call'd me, in a vehement Passion, Great Heretick, and with a Me∣nacing fury bore up so close me, that I expected some immediate Act of Violence, which perhaps he had executed, had not my Sister, in a trem∣bling sear stepp'd between and pull'd me away from the Company. How∣ever I accounted my self not a little happy in the good Office I had done my friend Mr. P. And I make this short instance, not only to shew how difficult a thing it is, to cure the Canker'd obstinacy of men Intoxicated and Stupified with the Destructive Principles of Popery, but in some measure to let it appear to the world, that the good Service Mr. P. has done, was not an Act, so much proceeding from the hopes of future advantage, but by the Inducements of a fair and Candid Reformation. Soon after these Passages had happen'd, there was a secret Murmuring a∣mong the Neighbours, that doubtless Mr. P. was concern'd in the Murther of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, for that he was so timorous as to lie from his House, and because he was also the Queens Servant. But for my part, when I heard these dangerous Rumours, I still reprov'd the Reporters for going about to bring a person causlesly into trouble, not deeming him in the least to have been Guilty. At another time, when Vernatti was with Mr. P. at the Horse-shooe Tavern, in the Company also of the before-named Haddon, Dr. Parratt's man, whose Office it was to Collect Money from the Friends of Deceas'd Papists to have Masses said for their Souls in Purgatory, it happen'd that I came in, I knew not what their Discourse was before I enter'd the room; but so soon as Haddon was gone, Vernatti fell upon me with all his per∣suasive Arguments to Reconcile me to the Church of Rome, and would have us'd perhaps many more words, but that Mr. P. told him, it was in vain to trouble himself. And indeed it was but an ill time for him to think of Converting me, who had the same Design upon his present Friend. Upon the 20th. of December, when Mr. P. was Apprehended and car∣ried away, his Wife with Tears in her eyes came to me, and requested me to go and give my Testimony for him, that he lay at my House such and such nights, and therefore could not be Guilty of the Crime that was laid to his Charge; I went accordingly to speak what I knew, but my Testi∣mony would not then be admitted. Yet in regard I had Discovered so much kindness for him, and such an Intimacy with him, it was Order'd by some of the Members of the House of Commons, that my House should be Searched; believing there might there be found some Letters perhaps belonging to Mr. Prance, from whence they might Collect some farther Discovery of a truth which they were so diligently labouring to find out. For the Execution of this Order, the Officers appointed came to one Mr. Robert Sexton's House in Princes-street, who understanding their business,
and being my very good friend, persuaded them to desist, or at least to stay for some time, till I came thither my self, in regard it might bring a Scan∣dal upon me, and breed an ill Opinion of me among my new Neighbours (for I was but a little before removed to my House near Ludgate) Luckily I came into Mr. Sextons, while the Officers and he were in this Debate. They strictly examined me what I knew of Mr. P. and his Actions, and told me they came to Search my House. I readily desired them to do it, while I staid where I was; but entreated them to do it with as little noise as might be, for the reasons before-mentioned; assuring them withal, that I had no Letters, Books, or Papers that any way in the world concern'd Mr. P, which gave them sufficient Satisfaction. Much about this time Mr. P. was more strictly examined before the King and Council, where he first made a Confession, and then denied all again; whereupon he was sent back to Newgate. But the Honourable Board having been informed that I had been intimate with the Prisoner, sent for me, to trie whether any thing to the purpose might be gather'd from me in point of Circumstance or otherwise. I answered directly to all Questions demanded, to the utmost of my knowledge. But not being pri∣vy to any thing of the Murther, I could not give that Satisfaction which was sought for, so that I was order'd to attend the next day being the 4th. of January, and to bring along with me my Wife and Servant. We were severally called in, and narrowly examined about many things in relation to Mr. P. What he was? When he lay at my house? We Answered, that we knew no ill of him, but that we thought him to be a very Honest man. We also told them the time that he lay at my House, and the occasion, as is before declared. Which gave the Council such satisfaction, that we were all Discharged. The Council being thus satisfied that I was a Protestant, and a person of honest repute, sent for me again upon the 10th. of January, and com∣manded me to go to Newgate, and to endeavour to draw what I could out of him, concerning the Murther of which he was Accused, and to see whe∣ther I could persuade him to make a full Confession of the truth. According∣ly I went, put several Questions to him, and begged of him over and over to Discharge his Conscience, and to tell the Truth. Mr. P. seemed to be very joyful to see his old Friend, but would Confess nothing, and to all my Questions made only this general Answer, That he was Innocent of the Horrid Murther; however he entreated me to come again, and not to forsake him in his Distress. I promised to return the next day, and did so; but then I found him like a person almost Distracted, and observ'd that in his Frantick Passions he would often repeat his Innocency, and his ignorance of the Murther, but yet when he was asked any Question about it, he never answered to the purpose. Seeing therefore that I could by no means engage him to Confess the Fact, and that all my Labour had been hitherto in vain, I returned back to the Council and gave them an account of what I had done. Nevertheless they ordered me to persist, and to make use of all the means and Persuasions that I thought might take effect to oblige him to Discover the particulars of a Murther, in which they were fully persuaded he was none of the least Active Conspirators. And indeed such was the Care and Diligence of those great Personages in the Discovery of that Detestable Murther, that they gave me great encouragement to return again, and seemed to intimate some hopes of favour to the relenting Priso∣ner. The two sorrowful Brothers of the Murthered Knight went along
with me, and staid in another Room while I Discours'd, entreated and per∣suaded the Prisoner, and spent many kind and friendly words in vain, for nothing yet could prevail. In the Evening upon the 11th. of January D. Lloyd, the Dean of Bangor, came to him, and calling for me, shewed me before Mr. Prance's face a Warrant for his Pardon, intreating him withal upon his Majesties so Gracious and Condescending Mercy, to Discover his knowledge. He would not at first believe the Warrant to be real, For, said he, to me, if it were so, why had not you brought it as well as the Doctor? After many persuasions reiterated in vain, the Doctor per∣ceiving him in a bad Condition of Health, would not urge him any farther that Night; only wish'd him a Physician to give him such Prescriptions as he wanted; whereupon I besought him to take care that some one of the Kings Physicians might be sent him; which he procured accordingly. So that about one of the Clock the same Night I being left with him all the while, Mr. Dickyson came to him, and gave him such proper Remedies as perfectly recover'd him. The next day, being Sunday the 12th. of January I return'd to him again, and spent the whole Afternoon with him, intreat∣ing him with many persuasions as well for his own and his Families sake, as for the publick good, that he would not conceal from merited Justice, those whom now I was fully convinced, that he knew to be such notorious Offenders; but that he would at length declare his knowledge. Urging him withal, not to loose the fair opportunity that was offer'd to him to have both his Life and his Liberty, which if now neglected, might cost him a dear and too late Repentance. At that time I press'd him so effectually, that he began to speak something to the purpose, telling me that he had seen a Relation of the Murther, but, that never being personally concern'd in the Fact, he knew nothing more than what he had learnt from that Narrative. I ask'd him who shewed him the Relation? He answer'd, Vernatti, but this seemed not Satisfactory to me. For upon farther Dis∣course with him, I perceived that he gave me an account, not as from a second Hand, but as one that had been all along concern'd in the Fact. After a long Debate, and many Persuasions, at length I told him, that I was assur'd of his Pardon, if he would ingeniously and in time Confess the whole matter, and how far he himself had been concerned. That I knew there were others in Prison for the same Crime, who if they should first Reveal the Business, his Confession would only serve to Condemn himself; and therefore I ad∣vised him, as he lov'd his life, speedily to prevent his own Misfortune, by giving a free and exact account of the Murther; in regard it was plain, that Vernatti would never have trusted him with the Relation of such a Secret, had he not been a Confederate. That night I could get no more out of him, so that I left him to ponder upon what I had said to him. Which had that good effect, that by break of day the next Morning being the 13th. of Jan. I was sent for to the Prison, to speak with Mr. P. And that very morning it was, that he Discovered to me all that he knew of the Murther of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, and of something more relating to the Plot it self, and gave me a full account of the manner of the Action, if not in the same words yet altogether the same in Substance, which he himself hath already made publick to the world, to which, for avoiding a needless Repetition I refer the Reader. When I brought the account to the King and Council, they gave me my Oath to Confirm that the Recital of it came immediately from Mr. Prances mouth which I readily took, as being a most certain Truth. I farther
told his Majesty what Mr. P. had revealed to me of the Design of Prossers Matteson, Adamson, and Bradshaw; to have Murthered the Right Hono∣rable the Earl of Shaftsbury. And indeed such was the Indefatigable Care and Industry of that Noble Peer in Prosecuting the Discovery of the Plot, such his unwearied endeavours to secure his Majesty and the Kingdom, by his Wisdom and Councils from the Attempts of our Enemies, that they have merited the thankful applause of the whole Nation. No wonder there∣fore that the Papists should be so zealous to remove so great an Obstacle of their wicked Conspiracies out of the way. I also gave an account of what Mr. P. had revealed to me concerning the Plot, or at least of so much as he know. All which things Mr. P. has since himself more amply declared either in his own Narrative, or in the Testimonies which he gave against the several persons, since Convicted and Executed for the Crimes in some part by him proved against them. When the Kings most Excellent Majesty had received a full Information of all these things from me, part in Writing, part by word of Mouth; he caused Warrants to be issued forth for the apprehension of Prosser, Brad∣shaw, &c. and by me sent an Order to Captain Richardson to bring Mr. P. up to the Council the same day. The King was then present, and took the pains to examine him himself, to every particular of what I had delivered and declared; all which Mr. P. confirm'd as he had before Confess'd to me in the Prison; and further declar'd to his Majesty, That he would stand by his said Confession with the hazard or loss of his Life. In consideration of this Confession, his Majesty was pleased to command that Mr. P. should have his Pardon, and that Captain Richardson should suffer him to want for nothing. I was also ordered to keep him Compa∣ny every day. For the Kings Majesty and Council were pleased to be so sensible of the pains I had taken, to bring that horrid Murther to light, that the Earl of Essex, a most Noble and Prudent Counsellour, with the rest of the Honourable Board, did me the high favour to return me a par∣ticular thanks. And Sir Robert Southwell afterwards declared in the Lobby before several persons that I had Discharg'd a good Conscience both toward God and man. And therefore in requital of my good Service upon that occasion, upon the 29th. of Jan. his Majesty in Council was most gra∣ciously pleased to make the following Order in my behalf. At the Court at White-hall the 29th. of January 1678/9. Present the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. The Lords of the Committee of Examinations, having this day repre∣sented to his Majesty in Council, the necessity of having a stock of three or four Hundred Pounds, to answer the Occasions of the Committee, did among other particulars make mention of the Service which had been done by Mr. William Boys, who had for a long time left his own occasions, and the following of his Trade, to obey the Orders of the said Committee, and frequently to resort to his Neighbour Mr. Prance, in order to Discover the truth of the Evidence which he had given touching the Murther of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, and their Lordships praying that his Majesty would please to bestow some mark of his Favour upon him to the value of 30 l. His Majesty was pleased to Or∣der, and it is hereby Ordered accordingly, That the Right Honourable the Lord High Treasurer of England do forthwith cause to be paid to the said
William Boys the Sum of Thirty Pounds Sterling, as of his Majesties free Gift and Bounty to him, out of the Stock, which by the said Committee is de∣sired to answer the Service which is under their Care. Robert Southwell. After the Tryals of the Murtherers were over, I waited upon the Right Honourable, the Earl of Essex to intreat his favorable Assistance and his kind word to his Majesty and Council in behalf of Mr. P. that he might be releas'd out of Prison; That as I had been an Aid and Succour to him in the time of his Trouble, I might not be thought to leave the work im∣perfect, which I had in Friendship begun; having no other end or aim in all my Actions Relating to this Affair, than to approve my self a good and Loyal Subject, a true Protestant and a Cordial Friend. Neither am I con∣scious to my self of having fail'd in any one of these particulars; for which, my Innocency will at no time refuse with all humility to make its appeal to those Noble Lords who were the discerning Witnesses of my behaviour, as having frequent occasion to attend upon them, during Mr. Prance's Im∣prisonment. Therefore for several reasons, I thought it but necessary to give this short account and Narrative to the world as being, First, 1. An Eye-witness of his Majesties most Princely and Tender Care, and unwearied pains, which he took at that time for the publick Security of the Nation, and to bring the Offenders to Condign punishment. And that the Lords of the Council were no less vigorously Active to second his So∣veraign Resolutions with their most prudent Advice, and continual and laborious Scrutinies. 2. To confirm the Relation of the Murther made by Mr. P. as being first received by my self from his own Mouth, which I do Attest before God and the whole world to agree in all particulars with what he himself has Published, and so absolutely consent, that I should but have incurr'd the blame of tyring or abusing the Reader with a Repetition of the same words again. Nor was it extorted from him by any other Wrack or Torture, then that of a Dismaid and Distracted Conscience, which could not Disburthen it self till it had thrown off the Shackles of those fears and jealousies that usually perplex the Guilty, especially considering the remediless Dilemma that was put upon him; that Labyrinth of Life or Death, wherein he found himself intrigu'd without hopes of ever getting forth, unless he made use in time of the Silken Clue that was offer'd. 3. In the third place, I thought it was a duty owing to my own Repu∣tation, to disengage it from the Scandals throw upon me by the Papists, who would make the world believe me to be a Phanatick. As also to rescue it from some ill thoughts of the Protestants who suspected me to be a Papist, in regard of my frequent Converse with those of the Roman Catholick Pro∣fession. As for the Papists, it was no more than I exspected from them, who being unwilling to believe so horrid a Murther, perpetrated by the contri∣vance of their dignifi'd Priests and Confessors, or ashamed that such an eter∣nal Blur should contaminate their Ecclesiastical History, care not what Blemishes and Scandals they throw upon others, to wipe off the Reproach from themselves. Which in regard it has been their continued practice from the beginning of the first Discovery of that Villanous Murther, the
Effects whereof have only redounded to their farther shame and Confusion, I have great reason not to question but that the Reports which they have rais'd upon me, will be as little regarded, as those vilifying Imputations, which they vainly cast upon others. Although, were it true, that I were a Phanatick, I should not account my self so ignominious, as if I were in the number of the Papists, with that weight of Blood and intended Massa∣cre upon their Shoulders. I lightly pass over that other Reproach of theirs, That I was a Presbyterian Rascal, and that if it had not been for such a Presbyterian Rogue as I, Mr. P. had never made his Discovery, as being of little or no value. As for the Protestants, I must confess that their Suspicions do not a little trouble me, and I cannot but look upon their unkindness as proceeding from somewhat of Ingratitude; since that Familiarity with which they so upbraid me, happened to be so Fortunate for their Advantage. But for their satisfaction, I do declare that I never was a Papist, nor of any other Profession then that of the Church of England, in which I also intend to live and die. Nor was I ever concern'd in any of the foul Actions of the Papists relating to the Plot, or the Barbarous Murther of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, but as an Instrument to Discover the Truth: being look'd upon by his Majesty and his most Honourable Privy Council as the fittest, and most likely person to Succeed, by reason of my Acquaintance and Fami∣liarity with Mr. Prance. And to shew how Careful and Faithful I was in the Management of that Secret wherewith I was entrusted by his Majesty, I must farther declare, That when Mr. Redding, who had often sought for me at my house, and having at last found me out, and by all Persuasions and Arguments imagi∣nable, had endeavoured to get from me a Copy of Mr. Prance's Confession and Depositions (which was highly press'd upon me at the Dog Tavern near Ludgate) I refus'd him with Indignation of all his promised Encou∣ragements and Rewards; telling him withal, that as I had been entrusted by his Majesty in the Business, I would by no means or persuasions in the world Falsifie so great a Trust, nor Discover what Mr. P. had revealed before the season of due allowance. When Mr. Reading had given me over, there came two other Gentle∣men to me with the same Proposals; assuring me of a great Reward in hand, to let them have Mr. Prances Confession, and what he had Discover'd con∣cerning the Murther, and the Plot. But all their Promises could not move me in the least to betray a Trust, so Graciously repos'd in me by my Sove∣reign; and with the Honour and Satisfaction of having so done, I hope to live with a more quiet Conscience upon the small gains of my Lawful Industry, than upon the more abounding ways of Treachery, and In∣fidelity. Neither may I here omit to tell my Revilers, that while I was in the midst of that Service which I performed, I was not without some disen∣couraging Apprehensions of being in danger of my Life. For being one Evening at Mr. Sexton's House in Princes-street, three persons living hard by, and well known to be of the Popish Gang, were observed to stand waiting at the Corner of the same Street, who when they perceived that I was coming forth, withdrew themselves towards Lincolns-Inn-Fields, which was my directest way home; of which, Notice being given to Mr. Sexton, both he and the rest of my Friends advis'd me to take another way, in regard it was dark, and fearing those persons were upon the Watch to
do me a Mischief. The persons names were, one Tarleton, a Guilder, since Fled for being concerned in Guilding Mill'd Shillings, and one Ald∣rige a Turner, and Neighbour thereby, with one more who was a Stran∣ger; which, with what I have already said, I hope may serve to quash the Mistrusts of my Religion, and satisfie all good Protestants of the reality and sincerity of my Intentions. Now so soon as I had obtain'd Mr. Prance's absolute Enlargement, I brought him to Princes-street to see his Wife, whom he had not seen all the time of his Confinement, and there alighted at Mr. Sextons House. At that time the same Aldrige above-mentioned, with his Wife and some others, began to renew their former Malice, muttering one to another that the Rogue P. was come out of Prison, and that the Presbyterian Rogue Boys was with him; which not sufficing, they also began to vent their Spleen in irreverent Language against his Majesty himself; for which I had them seiz'd by vertue of a Warrant from several of the Justices of the Peace, who Committed them to Custody, where they remained two days, and were then carried before the Lords of the Council, who were pleased to Discharge them upon their Submission. After this, I took Mr. P. together with his Wife, home to my own house near Ludgate, where he continued for a Month. Thither also came several of the Relations of both to Visit him, as I thought, out of love, but indeed for nothing but to Teaze and perplex him, by Pealing continually in his Ears, That they were afraid he had wrong'd his Conscience, and wishing that the Blood of those that died might not lie at his door. All which for a while Mr. P. took patiently enough, but told them withal, that he had done nothing but what Justice oblig'd him to do, and that had it not been for those wicked Priests and Pa∣pists who had deluded him before, he had never come into that Trouble and Disgrace which he had undergone. Perceiving then, that they came rather to vex him, than Congratulate his Delivery, I made bold to tell 'em, that I believ'd they were sorry that his Life was Sav'd, and that they had rather he should have Died than have Discover'd the Truth, and so with Mr. Prance's leave, forbade them all my house, excepting only his Wife. Being thus disgusted, and meditating new Projects, they endeavour'd all they could, to get Mr. P. from a place so inconvenient for their purposes. Which when they had effected, then they began to form New Designs, for the bringing about whereof, they thought they could find no better way, than to create a difference between Mr. P. and my self, which they intended to heighten afterwards to an absolute Quarrel and breach of Friendship. The Design was very silly and like the rest of their vain Imaginations; however they were resolv'd to put it in execution, hoping that when they had set us once at Defiance, that some strange Incongruities and Incoheren∣cies would have dropt from us for them to lay hold on, and to make their advantages of. So carefully is that great Maxim of the Pope, Divide and Reign, diffus'd from the Hand to every particular Member of the Romish Doctrine. To this purpose the women were the first that attempted to make Tryal of their Female Cunning. The first that began to lay her Trains to blow up the long Friendship between Mr. P. and my self was one Mrs. Billing, as Mr. P. himself acknowledg'd, a profest Roman Catholick, set on by those of her own Religion. But her Plot failing, Mrs. Prance her self went to one Mrs. Dorothy Sher∣born,
her own Sister, and a zealous Papist▪ and Cunningly inform'd her, that the time was now come to be reveng'd upon me for being Instrumental in the Discovery of the Murther of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey; for that her Husband and I were quite fall'n out. Though I have so much Charity for Mr. Prance's Wife, to believe, that she had no unkindness for me, but up∣on the Score of her Religion. This Wheedle encouraging Mrs. Sherbons Zeal, away goes she to the Lady Powis, and inform'd her of the difference which themselves had forg'd between Mr. P. and my self, and advis'd her not to let slip the Opportunity that offer'd it self of making their Advantage of it. The Lady, believing the overture real, and consequently a thing probable to take effect, em∣ployed Mr. Dangerfield, a person at that time altogether unknown to me, to make his way into my Company, and to use his Art to the best advan∣tage of their Design, which was to entrap me, if possible, by Prolixity of Discourse, and to gain what ever Disconcurrencies of former Evidence he could, relating to the Transactions between me and Mr. P. To which end he came to me by no name, but only as from Mr. P. upon a pretence of desiring me to cut him some Amber. To which I made him answer, that it was a thing quite out of my rode, and wonder'd that Mr. P. who knew me better, should so far mistake my calling. The Gentleman perceiving his Errour, desir'd to be more private with me over a glass of Wine. As for Wine I refus'd him, considering how he had fail'd in his Address, which had rendered him very suspicious to me; but in regard he came from Mr. P. as he said, I yielded to drink a Dish of Coffee or a Glass of Ale with him, yet with this Caution to my self, that I resolv'd the Master of the House, as much as possible he could, should be by, all the time of our stay. When we were together, Mr. D. then as I said before) unknown to me, be∣gan with the Death of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey. Upon which he applau∣ded my Kindness to Mr. P. by telling me how great a Friend I had been to him in Saving his Life. But then coming to his point, he fell on the other side to bemoan my Misfortune that I should be so ill requited for my Kindness, for that Mr. P, strangely ungrateful and forgetful of my successful Friendship, did nothing but rail at me, and speak ill things of me, behind my Back. To all which I made only this short reply, That I was very sorry for it, but for the occasion, left it to God and Mr. Prances own Conscience to be the Judges. To this purpose he went on much further, and left no instigations and in∣centives unessay'd to heighten my Provocation against my Friend. However I still persisted in my good Opinion of him, believing Mr. P. to be the same person in reference to his honest affections toward me; and therefore desired M. D. to desist from any further Attempts, which would be but vain and fruit∣less. Which, though it silenc'd his farther Prosecution at that time, yet he again the next morning, still concealing his name, and pretending only came to be an admirer of Art; and therefore, seeing certain Counterfeit Necklaces in my Room, ask'd me, whether I made them or no? I told him, I did. Thereupon he bought some three or four, with some slight Questions before∣hand, what the true value of them might be? To which I repli'd, That in regard he was Mr. Prances Friend, I would have no more of him, than
what I sold them for to the Exchange. But he repli'd, he was so much an admirer of Art, that he could not but believe himself oblig'd to give me a Price according to his own judgment, and the value, that he himself had set upon them; which was more than I demanded. After that we parted, and I saw him no more till about ten days, or a Fourthnight afterwards, at what time I met him accidentally in Fleet-street, when he would have press'd upon me a Bottle of Wine at the Castle Tavern. But I refus'd it, and excus'd my self, by telling him, I did not care to Drink with strange Company, as being known to have been Instrumental in the Discovery of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey's Murther, and therefore did not know what Designs some people might have upon me. After which, I only met him Passant upon a Sunday in Fleet-street with a Lady in his hand. All this while Mrs. Dorothy Sherborn kept an Intimate Correspondence with me and my Wife. But with no other Design than to blow the Coals of Discord between Mr. P. and me, with often Repetitions of my Kindness to her Brother-in-law Mr. P. and telling me how much he was beholding to me for his Life, for which reason, he was a very unworthy person to speak so ill of me, as he did, in all Companies. On the other side I still took his part, and justifying, that what he had done was no more than what it behoov'd him to do, told her, her Brother-in-Law could have no reason to speak ill of me, and that therefore I should be very cautious of believing what she said to be true. Notwithstanding all this, Mrs. Sherborn continu'd without ceasing her undermining Projects, so that neither my Wife nor I could pass by her House, but she call'd us in, and was still exclaiming against the good Service Mr. Prance had done, which she call'd one of the greatest pieces of Villany that possibly could have been Committed. And so changing her Note, accus'd me, to have wrought him to make a Confession of Tales and Stories to save his Life and hazard his Soul. So that it was no wonder her Brother-in-law was so much offended at me as he was. Applauding Providence there∣in, that would by means of their differences unfold the Mysteries of both our iniquities. Which Insinuation might perhaps have wrought some effect upon my be∣lief, well knowing how Indefatigable the Papists are to Bugbear and Ter∣rifie the Consciences of persons not well resolv'd, and consequently that Mr. P. might possibly be wrought upon to have some ill thought of me, but that I knew, that I had only compleated what Mr. P. himself had be∣gun; by fortifying him in his resolutions to stand to that Confession which he had made before the Lords of the Committee, and to confirm him in the ratification of his own Act and Deed. Seeing then, that Mrs. Sherborn prest these things so hard upon me, I resolv'd to put the Question as severely to her, and desired her punctually to tell me, whether she thought there was any Plot or no? To which she an∣swer'd, that she believ'd there was a Plot against the King and Govern∣ment, but not that it was carried on by the Papists, but that I should find in a short time, that it was a Presbyterian Plot: which made me very much
admire, in regard that neither by my Converse with my Acquaintance of that Profession, nor by my reading of their Books, I could find them in∣clin'd or Principl'd to any such Acts of Irregular Violence. Mrs. Sherborn being thus at a loss, one James Pemberton, living near Ladgate, Tracing her Steps, undertook to accomplish what she had begun, though he made his Batteries with the same plausible Insinuations that she had used before; as, that I had been a great Friend to Mr. P. &c. How∣ever that I had over persuaded him to Confess things of which he was no way Guilty, meerly to save his Life; arguing from a supposition, that he was insufficient to be entrusted with so great a secret, that he was altoge∣ther innocent. Finding my self thus frequently and so severely encounter'd, I retreated to my former Question and ask'd him likewise, whether he thought there was any Plot or no? whose answer was to the same Tune that Mrs. Sherborn had Sung before, that he believ'd there was a Plot, though not of the Papists Contrivance, but by the Contrivance of the Presbyteri∣ans, and that in a short time it would be so prov'd: And his Grand Argu∣ment was, that the Papists had died wrongfully, or else they would have made a true Confession of themselves. I repli'd, that was no true proof, and shewed him a Book upon the Tryal of Parry, wherein it was made out, that he first Confest the Treason against the Queen, and at his Execution denied it, against the Letters which were produced under his own hand Writing; which Book he desiring to see, I lent it him; but he found it so ill for his Turn, that though I often re-demanded it of him, I could hardly get it again (by which I shrewdly conjectur'd that he had a mind to have embezel'd it, and dispose of it as a Heretical Story) but at last I did. All these Contrivances ill Succeeding, I receiv'd the following Letter from an unknown person at Westminster. Sir, I Am informed by a Friend of mine that you are a very great Artist for making Artificial Eyes. I do want Two or Three, and if your Leisure would give you leave; I am a Stranger to you, but I am in good hopes, you will do me the favour to come to me to the Dog Tavern in the Palace-yard at Westminster to Morrow by Eleven of the Clock, and enquire for the Number 2. and there you may find me, for my Occasions will not give me leave to come into the City, or else I would not give you the Trouble. So I remain hoping to be better acquainted. Sir, I Am Yours, William Odriffe, Angel-Yard October 31. 1679. This Letter I shewed to several Friends, but they all concurr'd that it was only a Trapan, and a Design laid to ensnare me, and advis'd me not to go without some other persons to bear me Company. With this Caution I went, and enquired for the Number 2. but there was no such person as had subscribed his name to the Letter. I understood indeed that there was an honest Gentleman of the same Name that liv'd at Westminster, but
being sent to by me, he utterly disowned any knowledge of the Matter, or that he had appointed any Business at the said Tavern. But it seems there was a Gang that Watch'd my coming, and hearing my smart enquiry for the Number 2. and my Expostulation with the Servant of the House, one of them came to me, and told me, that he and some others staid for Mr. Odriffe, and that it could not be long ere he come; and thereupon invited me to the rest of the Company. Then I concluded twas time for me to march off; so I thank'd him, for his Kindness and took my leave with a reso∣lution not to come near him nor his Mr. Odriffe neither. When all these Designs prov'd fruitless, then they gave it out, that I held a Correspondence with the Earl of Danby, and that he had given me Ten pounds to pay my Rent; which, as they pretended was for some pri∣vate Service, that I had either done or was to do his Lordship. A thing which I utterly disown; for I cannot remember, that ever I so much as saw the Earl of Danby in my life but once, and that was, as I was coming down with Mr. P. from his Grace the Duke of Monmouths Lodgings in the Cockpit at White-hall, and the said Earl was passing by through the place where the Sentinel stands; and then neither did I know who his Lordship was, till the Sentinel, of whom I ask'd the Question, had in∣form'd me, nor did I so much as speak to him, as all that were present can Testifie. And indeed it would have been a strange confident. Presum∣ption in me to have gone to speak to a person of Honour to whom I was utterly unknown, having no business with him, as I neither had at that, or at any other time. So that how his Lordship should come to know my wants, and be so bountiful as to give me Ten Pound, I can by no means understand. However, if his Lordship were so Liberal, I had the Misfortune to be basely Cheated, for I never had it. And I wish Mrs. Sherborn would do me the Kindness to inform me, who the person was, to whom his Lordship gave order to pay the money, for I pro∣mise her, did I know the person, I should go and demand it. For if it were true, both his Lordship, and my self, are very much abus'd. On the other side I should have been extreamly to blame, that I should not ere this have returned his Lordship my most humble Thanks for so great and special a favour: neither do I know of any person from whom I ever received a kindness, that can Tax me of so much Ingra∣titude. But this is like the rest of the Actions of the Papists, that care not what they say, or Swear to, so it be to advance the Interest of their Holy Mother the Church of Rome, though never so much to the Prejudice and Defamation of the Innocent. At length Mrs. Sherborn declares, that Mr. Dangerfield told her this Story, and that he came to have imposed upon her. A Tale which seems very Incoherent with Truth, that he should go about to Amuse or Trapan her, when they were both at the same time in the fame Con∣federacy together. For Mr. Dangerfield hath since declar'd, that he never knew me, but by her means, and that they had a real Design to have ruin'd me, if they found that they could not win me to serve their purposes, though with this intimation, that my complyance with them would prove a Thousand pound in my way.
But now that the Scene is chang'd, Mrs. Sherborn rails against Mr. Dangerfield as much, or more than ever she did against me, and prose∣cutes his Failings with as loud Invectives and Aggravations, as her An∣ger can express. So that it is evident that the Papists do not bear so much Malice against the persons, or the Vices of men, as against their Refor∣mations, and Recantations of their Errours. The wicked shall be Saints among them, so long as they will be Instrumental to carry on their Designs; but if once, out of an apprehension of their Mistake, or an abhorrency of the Facts which they put upon them to Execute, they seek to retrieve themselves and their Reputation, by a seasonable Re∣pentance and Detection of the Romish Treacheries, then the most pon∣derous Crimes and Scandals are too light to over-whelm their recover'd Reputations. As for Mr. Prance himself, his own Relations began to be his most bitter Enemies, and rais'd a Report, that he was concern'd in making of Fire-balls; and that he was seen in Perpole-Lane, the Night before the New-Prison was Burnt, and that several Fire-balls had been found near the place where he had been Drinking, in that Lane, the night before. This Report so terrifi'd Mr. Prance's Wife, as fearing it might swell to the prejudice of her Husband, that with a mind very much troubled and perplexed, she came and found me out, in a place in the City, where I was with her Husband and some other Company, and calling me aside, told me the whole Relation, and desired my assiistance to search out the Truth, which I promised her. Accordingly I went the next day to satifie her. But after I had made all the diligent enquiry I could, I found the whole business to be grounded only upon the Idle Twattle of an Old-woman that Lodg'd in Perpole-Lane, who the next day after the Fire went to a Female Relation of Mr. Prances in Bride-Lane, and a Protestant, and told her of the Fire that had happen'd the night before, and that Mr. Prance was suspected about it: who made her answer, that she knew nothing of the Fire, neither did she believe her Kinsman any way concern'd in it. However she went in Friendship to her Sister, that was a Papist, and giving her an account of what the Old-woman had told her, desir'd her to give Mr. Prance notice of it, as being more familiar with him. She on the other side meditating to make another sort of use of the Information, improves the Surmise, intending to have Kindled a more destructive flame to Mr. Prances disadvantage, and endeavour'd to have brought not only Mr. Prance but her Sister into trouble about it. But it prov'd such an idle and silly invention of Popish Contrivance as only serv'd to shew the inveterate Malice of their Dying Revenge, ready to lay hold upon any seeming opportunity to have blasted the Credit of Mr. Prance's Evidence, as I made it clearly out. About the beginning of January Mr. Prance came to me, and told me I was to be Examined in reference to a very great and weighty Concern. I asked him whether he knew what it was? To which he made Answer, that it was not convenient for him to speak of it: but said withal, that there was a woman to be examined also with me.
Upon which I endeavour'd to Recollect my Memory, but could not call to mind any person with whom I had had any Discourse about any thing of State Affairs, as not becoming me to meddle with them. Thereupon I ask'd him who the person was that should cause me to be Examin'd? which he refus'd to tell me; a thing that I took somewhat unkind∣ly from him, telling him that I could not have conceal'd any thing from him, which might have fore-arm'd him against the Information of any person whatsoever; but all I could say signifi'd nothing at that time. Upon the Twenty Second of the same Month, he invited me to a Glass of Wine at the Feathers Tavern in Fleet-street, whither I went along with him. There we met (as I thought accidentally) with Mr. Warcupp, one of his Majesties Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, and Captain Cresset, in whose Company I had not sate long, but Mr. Warcupp sent for Mr. Bedlow. After some Salutations that pass'd betwixt us, in came another person, who Saluted me by the Name of Mr. Boys. I return'd him his Salute, but could not Divine who he was, till one in the Company taking up the Glass, presented his Service to him by the name of Mr. Dangerfield. So soon as I hear'd that, I ask'd Mr. Prance if that were the same person who was em∣ployed to make the Plot as Acted by the Presbyterians? He told me it was. Then said I, this is the person that came the last Sum∣mer to have inveigl'd me. Whereupon I ask'd him if this were the person who intended to have me Examined? To which he repli'd, it was: whereupon I staid somewhat longer than I meant to have done; expecting what Mr. Dangerfield or any other person in the room might have to say to me; but there was nothing said that night. Upon the 29th. of January Mr. Dangerfield came to my House, and told me I must appear before the Lord Mayor to be by him Examined, but told me nothing of the occasion. Thereupon I went that day to my Lords House, but his Lordship being that day busie, I had Orders to attend the next, which accordingly I did. Before I went Mr. Prance came to me, and offered to go along with me; but I refused his Cur∣tesie, because he had Conceal'd the name of the Person from me, when I desired him to let me know it: Telling him withal, that I did not Question but to be able to answer any thing that should be alledg'd against me. When I came before my Lord I found the occasion of my being Summoned to be quite contrary to what Mr. Prance had intimated, as that, I had talk'd at a strange Rate of things of high and great Concernment. For indeed the business was only this (and I was con∣scious to my self it could not really be for any other reason) that I should declare and justifie the Truth of Mr. Dangerfields coming to ensnare me, how I came to have a Distrust of him, and the ways and Method which he us'd to engage me to a Discovery of the Secrets which the most Honorable Privy-Council had entrusted me withal, and what Mr. Prance had Confessed touching the Murther, and farther to at∣test
my constant refusal of his Temptations, and Resistance of his plau∣sible Batteries. Of all which I made an Affidavit before his Lordship, since Printed in Mr. Dangerfields Second Narrative, to which I refer the Reader; which gave his Lordship Satisfaction, and serves as much as any thing, to confirm Mr. Dangerfields Evidence. This is that which in Vindication of my self, I thought not only fit, but necessary to declare to the world. A Relation altogether plain, and without any Fallacy of Expression, which he that will go about to disprove, may do it if he can. FINIS.
