D1169 R13200 12716093 66226
A DESCRIPTION OF THE Seven UNITED PROVINCES OF NETHERLAND. WHEREIN IS SET FORTH The Quality of the Country. The Productions of the Soyl. The Trade, Manufactures, Customs, Manners, and Dispositi∣ons of the People. The Constitution of their Laws. The Number of the Towns, Cities, and Fortifications. The Original, Strength, Greatness; and Riches of each City. Together with an Exact Map of the whole  wherein is laid down the Scituation of every City, Town, Village, Castle, Fort, and every other Ramarkable  of the whole LAND. LICENSEED. Roger L'estrange LONDON: Printed for Joseph Moxon, and Sold at his Shop on Ludgate-Hill neer Fleet-Bridge, at the Signe of Atlas. 1673.
A brief Description of the Seven Provinces OF THE UNITED NETHERLANDS. THe Ʋnited Netherlands is part of Belgia or Lower Germany; bounded on the East with Westphalia, on the West with the North Sea, on the North with Embdenland, and on the South with Flan∣ders and Brabant. It consists of the Provinces of Gelderland, Hol∣and, Zealand, Friesland, Ʋtrecht, Overyssel, Zutphen and Groen∣nghen, part of Brabant and part of Flanders. These Provinces are called the Ʋnited Netherlands, from an Agreement and Contract made among themselves in the year 571, to throw off their Subjection and Allegiance to the King of Spain their Soveraign Lord, and to unite all their Power and Force against him. But though they thus united their Power, yet are all these Provinces, yea and most of their Cities in each Province, distinct Commonwealths of themselves, and governed by Laws and Customs different from each other. Only for managing of Publique Affairs, each Province and City of note sends their tates or Trustees to the Hague, where they debate Affairs in a Parliamentary order. And these States thus assembled, are alled the States General, or, as they stile themselves, The High and Mighty States of the Ʋnited Netherlands. In Councel with these States sate formerly the Prince of O∣range, General of their Armies, who for his many Services done against the Spaniards since their foresaid Revolt, was by them made Stadt-holder, Admiral of the Seas, &c. and al∣lowed in their Assembly a double Voice; which Offices and
Titles have since descended to his Heirs the Successive Princes of Orange. But in the year 16 Faction and Jealousie suggested to some Leading Men in their Councels, that so much Authority was not fit to be invested in a Sngle Person, lest by his Power he should change their Commonwealth into a Monarchy, and of Free States make them all his Subjects. To prevent which danger, they Voted that the Generalship belonged not to the Prince of Orange as his Right, but their Courtesie; and made an Edict, that for the future there should be no more Stadt-hol∣der; and caused all the States General to take an Oath to ob∣serve this Edict inviolably. Nay, when this present Prince of Orange in the year 16 was made General of their Armies, they caused him to swear never to accept of the Office of Stadt-hol∣der. But this seems only the humour of the Hogen Mogens, and not the voice of the People: for they remembring the many good Offices of his Forefathers done for the State, cry out against these proceedings with him; and taking an advantage of the present troubles their Country is in, in a tumultuous manner force the States to abjure their former Edict, and absolve the Prince of Orange of his foresaid Oath, and make him their Stadt-holder, Amiral, Disposer of the Militia, and in their Assemblies to have a double Voice, as his Forefathers had. But to the Description of the Country; and First Of Gelderland. THe Land now called Gelderland, or Gelve, was formerly called Ponthis; and had from Charles the Emperour the additional name De Caluwe. It was first made a Lordship in the year 878. Its first Lord (as Guicciardine relates) was Win∣chard van Pont, who with his Brother Leopold built the Castle Pont-Gelve, which now is the City of Gelder, and gives name to the whole Province. It is a strong City. This Province is begirt in the North with the Land of Overyssel and the South-Sea; On the South, in part with the Mase and the Lordship of Gulicb; in the West with the Rhine, and part of Cleveland; and in the East with the Bishoprick of Ʋtrecht. It
is a plain Country, with few Hills, but many delightful and profitable Woods, as that of Echterwalt to the Northwest of Aernhem, and several others. The Soyl is generally very fruit∣ful, particularly of Corn; and in many places, especially about the Rhine, Mase, and Wael, excellent Meadows for feeding of Cattle, which there are kept in great abundance. In this Dakedom (besides that of Zutphen and its seven Vil∣lages, which is an Earldom of it self, and therefore shall be dis∣coursed in its proper place) are numbred fifteen walled Cities; as Nimmegen, Aernhem, and Reurmond, the three head-Cities; then Tiel, Bommel, Harderwijck, Wageninghen, Hattem, Elburg, Gelder, Venlo, Wachten, Douck, Stralen, and Erckelens. There are several other Towns in the Dukedom of Gelder, and Earl∣dom of Zutphen, that have been formerly walled; but by seve∣ral accidents have wholly or in part lost their Walls, but yet re∣tain their ancient Priviledges, as Batenburgh, Gent, Montfort, Echt, Burgh, Keppel, and several others. There are moreover above 300 Villages with Parish-Churches. The States of the Dukedom of Gelder, and Earldom of Zut∣phen, consist of the Barons, Gentry, and the four head-Cities a∣foresaid, viz. Nimmegen, Aerahem, Reurmond, and Zutphen. Nimmegen was formerly called Magus, from one Magus King of Gallia; but afterwards when one Bato King of the Katts came into the Land, and being delighted as well with the con∣venience of its scituation as the antiquity of the Place, he rebuilt and enlarged this almost-ruin'd City, and fortified it with three strong Walls, and called the City Nava Magen; which name be length of time is now altered into Nimmegen. Our Author tells us also, that the Betuwers, which he calls Bataviers, chose this City for the Metropolis and chief Seat of their Kingdom; from whence the Land about it is at this day called the Kingdom of Nimmegen; and the City it self by Latine Authors Pes Im∣perii, because, as some write, Charles the Great advanced it to the dignity of one of the three Royal Cities of these Lands: Aken being the First, this the Second, and Theonville in the Land of Lutzenburg the Third. Nimmegen lies upon an arm of the Rhine called the Wael,
which there is very wide and deep. It is a great, strong, and populous City, whose Inhabitants after they came under the Oostenrijk Princes, much addicted themselves to Learning and Merchandise, when as before they only followed the Wars. The chief Church in this City is dedicated to the honour of St. Ste∣phen the first Martyr. Among the ancient Buildings of this City, the chief is the Castle, scituate upon the top of an high Hill, from whence the whole City is discovered. This is held to be built by Julius Caesar, who by the means of this Castle intended to keep the Country about it in subjection to his power. In and about this City hath been found for several years last past, many Antiqui∣ties of the ancient Romans, even as about the banks of the Wael several Remnants and Ruines of Roman Fortifications are to be seen at this day; from whence those Places are yet called the Roman Footing. Nimmegen is a City-Earldom, a free City, a member of the Kingdom, and Coyns money by their own Authority, and therefore makes no appeals to the Chancery of Gelderland, but at the first instance only to Aken: wherefore the Citizens of this City, as an acknowledgment of their superiority in the Com∣monwealth, send yearly a Glove full of Pepper; which is all the Tax they contribute towards the Publique charges. Yet doth not this Priviledge of theirs diminish the Authority of the States of Gelder, but they have likewise power to Coyn Money, and have the same Jurisdiction in this City as in other Cities of Gelderland. Nimmegen came under the Power of the Dukedom of Gelders in the year 1248, by this means. Earl Otto the second of Gel∣der lent William Earl of Holland and King of Rome 21000 Mark of Silver, on condition that if he repaid it not again on a set day, that then this City and its Appurtenances should be forfeit to him. This condition the Emperour Rodoiphus the first confirmed. And because the money was not accordingly restored, Nimmegen was incorporate into the Dukedom of Gel∣derland. Aerenhem is by Cornelius Taeitus and other ancient Writers
called Arenacum. It lies on the right side of the Rhine, about a mile and half from the place where it divides it self into two branches, between Nimmegen and Doesburg, which lie each 6 miles from thence. It is a pretty, large, and well-built City, with fair and well-ornamented Churches in it, the chief of which is dedicated to the honour of S. Eusebius, in which Church lies buried Charles the first Duke of Gelderland, who died in the year 1538; after whose death, he dying without issue, the Dukedom of Gelderland and Earldom of Zutphen de∣scended by Contract to the aforesaid Emperour and his lawful Heirs, as Dukes of Brahant and Earls of Holland. Aernhem us'd in ancient times to be the general place of resi∣dence of the Dukes of Gelders. It was first compassed with Walls, and endowed with City-Priviledges by Otto the third of Nassow, Duke of Gelderland. Here resides the Provincial Court or Chancery of these two Countries, consisting of a Chancellour and ten Judges; four of which are of the greatest Nobility of the Land, from each Quarter or Circuit one: The other six are of Persons learned in the Law. From the Decrees of this Chancery there is no appeal: yet upon some Grounds another hearing may be had. Moreover, Philip the second King of Spain, as Duke of Gelder, erected in Aernhem a Chamber of Accounts, consisting of two Accountants, an Audi∣tor, and a Secretary. At this Chamber of Accounts must all the Officers (both Civil and Military) of the Commonwealth of Gelder and Zutphen give up the Accounts of their Trust. Aernhem is the Head-City of the fourth quarter of the Go∣vernment of Gelder, viz. the Quarter called the Veluwe; and hath incorporated with it Wageningen, Hattem, Harderwijck, and Elburg, all walled Cities, besides several Villages that keep Courts of Judicature, but with appeal to the upper Courts of this Circuit aforesaid. The Veluwe is a small Country begirt on threesides with the South Sea, and on the fourth with the Rhine and Yssel; so that it is a place both excellent and profitable for Fishing, and is beside reasonably well provided of Woods and Forrest full of Game.
By Aernhem lies another neck of Land called the Veluwe-Zoom, and extends on one side as far as Zutphen, and on the o∣ther side about Wagener; which is all Meadow-Grounds, and well furnished with store of Cattle. At the mouth of the River Ruer, or Roer (which mingles with the Mase) lies the City Ruermond, from whence it takes its name; which commonly for shortness is called Remond; a fair and rich City, and as well for its scituation, natural accommo∣dations, and Populousness, is a strong Place; whose chief Church is Dedicated to the honour of the Holy Ghost, and Dig∣nified with the Title of a Cathedral. Ruermond is the Head-City of the second Quarter of Gelder∣land, and to it belongs Venlo, Gelder, Stralen, Wachtendonck, and Erckelens; with the Freedoms of Monford, Echt, and Niewerstat, lying about four Miles distant from one another; as also that of Kessel, Midler, and Kreckensteel, belonging to its par∣ticular Lords. It is a fair Village, and hath belonging to it a strong Castle seated upon a Hill. This Village takes its name from the small circumjacent Country called Kessel, which be∣longs to the Dukedom. The smaller Towns of Gelderland we shall briefly run over. As Hattem, a little, but strong Town, having a Castle whose Walls are 24 foot thick; lying on the left hand of the Yssel, a∣bout 8 Miles from Elburg. Elburg is a little Town; It lies on the East-side of the South-Sea, 8 Miles distant from Harderwijck. Harderwijck lies on the South-Sea, 20 Miles from Wagenin∣gen; formerly a Village, but made a Town, and walled about, in the year 1229, by Earl Otto the second of Gelderland, who also walled Aernhem, Bommel, Ruermond, Goch, and Wageningen; formerly all Villages, but by him made Towns. In this Town is by the States of Gelder and Zutphen a famous School erected, wherein is read Philosophy and Divinity, but neither Law nor Physick. Wageningen is a small, but strong Town, and very Ancient, if it be the same (as it is held) which Cornelius Tacitus calls Vada. It lies 8 Miles from Aernhem, and as much from Nimmegen.
Tiel lies on the right side of the Wael, 8 Miles from Bommel; is a good strong Town, whose power and jurisdiction reaches all over the little Island wherein it lies, and from whose name the Island it self is called the World of Tiel. Bommel lies on the left side of the Wael. It is a good strong Town, and Head of that Island, which from it is called Bommel-weerd. This Isle is made of the Rhine and Mase, which together encompass it, and, as Guicciardine supposes, is the same that Caesar where he treats of the Mose calls the Isle of Bataviers. In this Island are many fair Villages, and particularly Rossem, the Birth-place of that famous Warriour Martin van Rossem. At this time Bommel is accounted one of the best and strongest fron∣tier Towns of the Ʋnited Netherlands: As also is that strong Fortification St. Andies, which lies above Rossem in the Peninsula, which can with its Bulwarks command both the Wael and the Mase. Stralen is a small, but strong Town, and lies about 6 Miles from Wachtendonck. Venlo lies about 6 Miles on the right hand of the Mose. It is a good and strong Town, where in the year 1543 the Duke of Clove delivered himself to Charles the Fifth, together with all his right and pretensions to the Dukedom of Gelderland and Earldom of Zutphen; to which the Estates of the Land also a∣greed. It was taken in the year 1632 by the States of the Ʋni∣ted Netherlands, under the Conduct of the Prince of Orange, as also was Stralen and Ruermond. Wachtendonck lies upon the banck of the River Niers. Elekelens lies upon the Frontiers of the Dukedom of Gulick, about 4 Miles from Ruermond. The Soyl about it is very fruit∣ful of good Wheat and other Grain, insomuch that the Inha∣bitants addict themselves most to Husbandry. These being all the walled Cities and Towns of Gelderland, we should here end this Discourse: but in regard the Earldoms of Kuylenburg and Buren are pretended to belong to the Go∣vernment of Gelder, and are however Members of it, we shall briefly touch at them. Kuylenburg is a fair Town, whose Command and Jurisdiction
hath a large extent. It lies, on the lest side of the water-stood Lacke, four Miles from Boren. It was raised to an Earldom by King Philip the Second of Spain, and by him endowed with great Priviledges. Buren is no Member of Gelder, and yet lies within the Duke∣dom. The City lies by the Flood Linge, four Miles from Tiel. It hath a Castle 1360 Paces in compass; on it four Towers, and about it three double Moats. It bears also the name of an Earldom, and hath jurisdiction over many Villages and consi∣derable derable quantity of Grounds. It belongs to the Prince of O∣range. Of the Earldom of Holland. SOme Writers suppose it is called Holland from Holt, which in the Germane Language signifies Wood; because in An∣cient times, as they say, Holland was much overgrown with Woods. Others draw the name from the lowness and hollow∣ness of the Land. Others think it was called Hoyland, which signifies Hayland. But the learned Junius is of another Opi∣nion: For he believes that Holland and Zealand were Colonies of the Goths and Danes; who leaving their Islands Oland and Zealand in the Sound, called these so in remembrance of their own; as We and the Spaniards have lately done in America by New England and New Spain, &c. The circumference of this Country is about 240 Miles; but its bredth such, that a man standing in the middle of it might travel out of its bounds in three hours time. This Country is very fruitful for Corn, although not imployed to that produce. But the Land is used for Meadows for Pasturage of Cattle, in which the Soyl is incredibly rich, and brings up the best and largest Cows, which do afford in a Summers day 11 quarts of Milk apiece: So that John Benning is of opinion, that in the Village of Assendelft, and four other circumjacent Villages, is more Milk given, then there comes Rhenish-wine to Dort from all Germany. Of their great abundance of Milk they make most excellent Butter, fit for the Palats of Princes; besides
great numbers of Cheeses, which for their worth may well compare either with them of Placencia, or those cal∣led Parmasan. The choice are those of Texel and Grave∣land, next those of Edam, especially when they grow so me what old. This Country brings up very gallant Horses; And in the Sand-downs are an incredible number of Coneys. Here is also plenty of Harts, Hindes, and Hares; and particularly in the Hagues Woods are a great number of Roe-deer. Neither is here any want of Poultrey, especially of Geese, Ducks, and Snipes. For Fuel here are Fens, which together with their Ditches afford abundance of Turf. Holland hath formerly had Kings of their own, as is mentioned by Suetonius in the life of Caligula, Chap. 44. But was afterwards made an Earldom by Charles Calvo King of France, in the year 863. The People were formerly fam'd for great Warriours. The Cities of Holland are these: Dort, Harlem, Delft, Leyden, Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Goude, Naerden, Muyden, Wesop, Edam, Monickkendam, Purmerent, Alckmuer, Enckbuysen, &c. Dort is the Head-City of Holland; a rich City, and so abounds in eatable Provisions, that it may be accounted a Store-house for the circumjacent Places. It hath power to stop all forreign Commodities coming down the River; so that the Merchant is forced to sell his Wares there, and is not permitted to transport them from thence but in Ships belonging to this City. This Priviledge is called Staple-right. Harlem is in respect of its bigness, neat Buildings, and commodious Scituation, a very brave City; and hath in it the best Church in all Holland, whose Foundation stands upon very strong and Vast Pillars. It is held to be built by the Frieslanders in the year 506. The Harlemers affirm that Printing was invented in this City. Delft is the Dutch name for a Moat, from whence this City takes its name: for from the Mase hither is led a Moat or Ditch.
Leyden, by Ptolony called Ladgduaum Batavorum, is a City lying on the middlemost Rbene. It is an Academy; And here is made great store of Linnen and Woollen-Cloath. Amsterdam takes its name from the Amabel. It was fortified about 300 years ago with Ports, Balwarks, Tow∣ers, &c. by the Heer Gijsbert van Amabel: But being by the ill will of their Neighbours burnt down, it was in the year 1482 encompassed with Walls; since which time it was made a City under the command of Hilland: And by the resort of all Nations of the World, is become the most famous City for Trade of all the World. Gowde takes its name from the Danish word Gouw, which signifies a Trench and Bank to contain it. It lies on the Yssel, and is well provided with all things necessary. Rotterdam, a City of great Trade, and is very full of English and Scotch Inhabitants. Besides these Cities, there are many Freedoms and un∣walled Towns; among which the Hague is the most Famous: Here assemble all the States, and here the Princes Councel-Chamber is kept. The Earldom of Holland is Governed by three Estates; as first the Nobility, of which are chief the Earls of Eg∣mond, Ligny; to whom appertain the Lordships of Wasse∣naer, Valkenburg, and the Burg Earldom of the City of Leyden. Under Holland also are these Earldoms; Maestand, Goyland, Texel, Kennemeland, and Steenbergen; as also the Lordship and Barony of Brederode, to which belongs the Lordship of Vyanen, and the Barony of Lijsfelt. In the Chronicle of Holland are also found these Baronies; Leeke, Seven-bergen, Voorn, Ysselleyn, Stryen, Teylingen, Putten, Harlem, Leerdam, Aspheren, Arken, Altena and Rottersleet. The second Estates consist of the Lords that appear at the Hague in the name of the States. The third Estates are those of the Head-Cities, who in the name of all the rest appear at the Hague.
Of Zealand. ZEaland in Dutch signines Land of the Sea, from whence this Province may have its name; but it is most probable it took its name from the Danes who came hither to inhabit, and called it after the name of the place from whence they came, as was said before in the definition of Holland. Zealand consists of several Islands scituate between the Mase and the Schelde; bordering in the North on Hol∣land, in the East with Brabant in the South with Flanders, ad on the West with the North Sea. The Air of Zealand is not so wholesome as is the Air of its Neighbouring Countries, especially in Summer, be∣cause of the exhalations that rise from the Boggs and Fens; But then the Air is not ready to take the infection of Plague, as other Places; yet having once taken it, it rages most excessive furiously. This Country is very fruitful in Corn, especially in Wheat, which is here as white and heavy as in any part of the World. The Soil is very fat, and fit for all Hus∣bandry. Here grows much Coriander-seed, and Madder, a Dying-Stuff, in great Plenty. Here grows great and high Law∣rels, and other Herbs used in Physick. Here are very pleasant Meadows for Cattle, not only within Inclosures, but on the Washes of the Sea, where several thousands are Feeding, both large, fat, and of excel∣lent rellish. In the year 863, in the Reign of the Emperour Charles Calvi, this Country, as well as Holland, was advanced to the Dignity of an Earldom; whose first Earl was Dedrick Son of Sigisbert Prince of Aquitane. Under Zealand are reckoned seven Islands; of which three lie in the mouth of the Schelde towards Holland, and are called Schouwe, Duyvenland, and Tertholen; four lie Westward of the Schelde, called Walcheren, South-Beveland, North-Beveland, and Wolfersdijk. The
Land of Schonwen is the biggest, whose circumference is now but 28 Miles, though tormerly it was longer, and only separated by a small Isthmus from North-Beveland. The chief Towns are Zirick-zee and Brouwers-Haven. Zirick-zee is counted the ancientest Town in all Zea∣land, and was Founded by one Siringue in the year 849. This hath been a flourishing Town of Trade, by reason of its good Haven, plenty of Commodities, and great num∣ber of Merchants: But the Haven being much choaked up by the washing of Sand into it, it hath lost much of its former Fame. Duyven-land, so called from the multitude of Doves there: In this Land are many Villages, but no Cities or Towns. In the year 1530, this Island was grievously o∣verflowed by the Sea, to the loss of many People. But by mending and strengthning the Banks, they have since kept out the Sea, and amply repaired their great damages. Tolen is separate from Brabant, but with a small strait of the Sea neer the Town of Tolen; so called, because there they collected Toll of Passengers that passed over. It is an old Town, not far from St. Martins Dijck, a very delightful place, and full of Trees. Walcheren, the chief Island, so called by the first Inhabi∣tants, the Waloons or Gauls. this Island is 40 Miles a∣bout, and of great fame, in respect of its scituation, wealth, multitude of Inhabitants, Trade, and curiosity in their Ci∣ties and Villages. It hath four Cities in it: Middleburg, Flushing, Vere, and Aerumnyden; besides many Villages. Middleburgh takes its name from its scituation, it be∣ing a Burgh in the middle of the Island. It is a great City, well furnished with ordinary and extraordinary Build∣ings, Bridges, Towers and Bulwarks. It is the chief City in Zealand, and a City of great Trade. Here was born Pulus à Middleburgo, a famous Mathematician. Vere, or Campvere, takes its name from a Ferry, which the Zealanders call a Vere. It was first walled in the year 1358;
from which time it became a Town of Trade for Scotch Commodities. Flushing is a new City, very strong and powerful at Sea, full of Fishers, good Sea-men, and able Pilots. Acrnmuyden is as a fore-guard to Middleburg, and is a good Haven for Ships. South-Beveland stretches along the Coasts of Flanders and Brabant, and hath in few years last past been above half swallowed up by the Sea. On this Island stood the City Romers-wale, washt away with the Sea. And at this time all its Fields and Gardens are wholly swallowed p, so that the People about it live only upon the Salt-Trade. In this City the Earls of Zealand used to take the ordinary Oath. Tergoes lies in the West-part of this Island. It is a little city, but very pleasant and rich: the Citizens are very friendly and courteous. It is the only City now left in this Island. North-Beveland, which hath one City (Cortgene) and many Villages in it. This whole Island was in the year 1532 swallowed up by the Sea; but some of it is since re∣covered. Wolferts-Dijch, a very small Island, having but two Vil∣lages in it. The Inhabitants of Zealand are careful, ingenious, and quick-witted, of middle Stature: yet their Chronicles make mention of a Gyantick woman born here, to whom the biggest men seemed but Dwarfs: she was so strong, that she could carry two Tuns full of Beer in both her hands, and could carry a piece of Timber that eight men could not tear. This People is very strong at Sea, and have a particular faculty in cleansing foul Salt, which is rought thither from Westward Countries to that purpose. Of Spanish or British Salt they will boyl 100 pound; and by pouring water on it, and boyling it, they will increase it to 145 pound of pure Salt as white as Snow: which Salt, for
whiteness and fineness, is a good Commodity all over Furope. They make also great profits of Corn, Madder, and by their great number of Sheep. They are very neat and curious in their Houses and House-keeping, and very eager after Trade and Commerce, and very charitable to the Poor. The Politick State of Zealand consists in three Estates: to wit, the Clergy; one Noble-man, which used to be the Marquess of Tervere, as a Representative of all the Gentry; and the Community of the Cities. Of Friesland. THe name of West-Friesland hath been diversly deriv'd: for some will have it from Frisia the Country of Phrygia; Others will have it from the bitter Frosts of this Country. Hadrianus Junius will have it call'd Friesland, from the freedom the People of the Country live in. The Frieslanders are accounted the ancientest People of all Ger∣many, and for their courage well known to the romans, who never changed their name. The Air of this Country is tolerable wholesom, and not subject to the vapours of the Fens and Moorasses, whose exhalations are cleansed and putified by the smart Breeses that this Country is used to. The Soil of this Country is very low and Fenny, scarce to be used but in the Summer-time; and therefore produces little Corn, because the Floods and yearly overflowings of the waters, which begin early and end late in the year, spoils the seed that is thrown into the Ground. Yet are there rich and fat Meadow-grounds which feed most ex∣cellent Cattle, from whence the Inhabitants gather yearly great profits. It would almost seem incredible what quan∣tities of excellent Butter and Cheese is yearly sent from hence into other Countries, besides what they spend them∣selves for their own necessity. The Fewel of this Country is Turf, in regard there are few Woods and no Coal among them.
This Province, till the time of Charles the Great, had Kings of their own. In West Friesland are accounted twelve Cities. Leuwarden is the chief City of all Friesland; a rich city, with fair Houses well furnished; is well defended with Moats and a C∣stle. Here is the Chamber of Justice and the Chancery of Friesland; from whose Decrees there is no Appeal. Zurichem, the Native place of Verglius, lies hard by it. Dockum lies in a fruitful Soyl, with fair Meadows about it. Sneeck in the Earldom of Westergoe lies in low watery Grounds, so that no corn grows there; but it hath rich Meadow; to feed Cat∣tle in. This City is quite new, and scarce above 200 years endow'd with the Title of a City. It is in process of time so increas'd, that it may now compare with any city of Friesland. Here was born Jo∣achim Hopper, Petrus à Fermita, Albertus, Hero, and several other Learned men. Staveren lies in a Plain, divided by Dijcks and Pools of Water. The chief strength of this City is its Castle, standing by the Ha∣ven, and butting out into the Sea. Harlingen lies on he mouth of the South-Sea in a fruitful Soyl: It is well defended with a Castle, and hath a good Haven, which brings a good Trade to this City. Franiker, called so by the Francks: Here is an University. The other Cities are Damme, Bolswarden, Yest, Sloten, Worcum and Hendelopen. Friesland hath many Islands belonging to it, among which Schel∣ling is the chief, famous for the many Sea-Dogs that there come basking in the Sun-shine upon the Sea-shores, and are by the strange hopping and dancing of the Country-people cloathed all over, dril∣led so far ashoar, that when they would retire to Sea again they are caught in Nets. On this Island the chief Town was burnt by the English, in the year 1665. Friesland is divided into three Estates. The first is the Earldom of Oostergow, of which Leuwarden is the chief City. It is subdivided into Grietonies; as Leuwarderdeel, in which is Leuwarden; Tietzerck∣sterdeel, in which is Tietzark; Ydarderdeel, in which is Ydaert; Rauwerderahem, in which is Rauwart; Ferwerderadeel, in which is
Ferwert; Dongerdeel, in which is Wetzens; Dantummadeel, in which is Dantummawolt; Acht Kerspelen, in which is Suyrbusum; Gomer∣lant, in which is Collum; Westerlant, in which is Beetz; Smalin∣gerlant, in which is Smalingerbem. The second State is the Earldom of Westergouw, under which are these Grietenies; Wonseradeel, in which is Witmarsum; Franle∣keradeel, in which is Franeker; Banadeel, in which is Mumersgae; Meynaldummadeel, in which is Meynaldum; Baerdaradeel, in which is Baert; Hennardaradcel, in which is Hennaert; Weynbritzera∣deel, in which is Gauve; Geesterlant, in which is Wickel. The third State is the Earldom of Seven-wolden, having under it these Grietenies: Donye, Werstal, in which is Donigae, Lemster; Vuyfgae, in which is Lemmer; Aengewert, in which is Cathrybant; Schotterlant, in which is New and Old Schotten; Wittingerdeel, in which is Oldeborn; Hasscher-Nyfgae, in which is Hasscherborn. All Friesland and Groeningen used formerly to be under the o∣bedience of the Bishop of Ʋtrecht. Of the Bishoprick of Ʋtrecht. HAdrianus Junius is of opinion that Ʋtrecht took its name from a numerical Distinction that the Romans gave their Garrisons lying upon the Rhine: for in the place where this City stands, was quartered the five and thirtieth Legion, which they by abbreviating the words, thus wrote: Ʋ. TRIG. LEG. STAT. which at length is Quintae tricesima Legionis Statio; viz. the Quarters of the five and thirtieth Legion. These half words have some unskill'd in the Latine Tongue taken for whole, and thought by leaving out the three Letters LEG, and coupling the rest, they might well make it Ʋtrigstat, which now is called Ʋtrecht. Others write that the City of Ʋtrecht was at first called Anto∣nina, from one Antonius a Roman Consul, who because of the ty∣ranny of Nero the Emperour fled from Rome hither, and built this City: which was afterwards destroyed by the wilde people, and by them made a strong Fortress, and from them was called Wiltenburgh. This Fortress Dagobert King of France took afterwards, made it much stronger then before, and called it Trajectum, signifying a passage or thorow-fare, because it was so from all parts, as it ap∣pears by a Table hanging up in the Cathedral Church at Ʋtrecht, written in old Latine Verses.
The Bishop Balderijck (who these Verses say) encompassed this City with the Wall it now hath, repaired and mended the Cathe∣dral; for which his generous and publique-spirited Actions, the Emperour Charles de Caluwe presented him with the Cities of De∣venter and Thielt, and the jurisdiction of the same. That the City was of old called Antonina, appears by the afore∣said Verses, and also by the Authority of many old Writers, and se∣veral old Medals found thereabouts. Its first Arch-bishop was St. Willeboort an English Saxon, who came over in the year 690: since when, till the time of Frederick Tautenburgh the last Arch-bishop of this City, it hath had dominion over the Bishopricks of Holland, Zealand and Friesland: But he dying in the year 1580, the Temporal States of Ʋtrecht took the Government into their own hands, and entred into Covenants of Union with the High and Mighty States of the Ʋnited Netherlands. This City lies on an old Branch of the Rhine, which before it took its course into the Leck, passed by here, and from hence into the Sea. It is so commodiously seated, that from hence a man may travel in one days time to which one he will of fifty walled Cities equidistant round about it; or he may set out in the morning, and Dine at any one of 26 Cities, and come back again to Supper at night. Ʋtrecht is a great and strong City; and before it fell from the King of Spain, it had a formidable Castle. The Cathedral Church is dedicated to St. Martin, and is a very brave and magnificent Building. The rest of the Churches in Ʋtrecht, which are many, and those very stately ones, we shall pass by for brevities sake. The Provincial Court of Judicature is here kept; and consists of one President, nine Judges, and other Officers. The Citizens are very courteous, witty, and many of them very rich, but somewhat proud. When the Clergy were here in their splendour, this City was one of the most flourishing Cities in all the Netherlands. We come now to the smaller Towns of this Province; which are Wijk at Duerstede, one of the oldest Towns of all Batavia; for∣merly, as is said, so great and powrful, that it had at least 500 Temples in it; but afterwards destroy'd by the Normans. It is a to∣lerable good Town, and rich, lying on the Leck a branch of the Rhine.
Rhenen also an old Town, and, as it seems, called Grinnes by Cornelius Tacitus. Amersfort, a well-inhabited Town, and well accommodated with Provisions; whose Inhabitants are naturally addicted to the wars. Monifort, a brave and strong Town, formerly appointed for a Frontier Town against Holland; with whom, because the Empe∣rour Charles de Caluwe had given a great part of the Bishoprick, they kept a long and bloody War always stirring, to maintain their ancient Authority: And the Hollanders stirring industriously to keep what was granted them. The City of Ʋtrecht was then so strong, that Pope Pius the se∣cond, who liv'd about the year 1450, writes, that the Bishop could raise at once 40000 armed men of his own People. And though he were sorely opprest by his Neighbours, to wit, the Hol∣landers, Gelderlanders, and Frieses; yet he could withstand them all, and defend his City manfully against them. Of the Lordship of Overyssel. OVeryssel was called by the Latines Transisulana, and as a translate of the word, Overyssel; because it lies on the other side of the River Yssel. It hath three good divisions: to wit, Yseland or Zalland, Drente, and Twente. It is a plain Country, very fruitful, and yields good Corn. It hath in it many small Woods very profitable to the Inhabitants; and ten places that are indowed with large priviledges; as namely, Meppen, Geelmuyden, Coevorden, Hardenberge, Omme, Almeloo, Goor, Diepenhem, Delden, and En∣schede. It hath eight walled Cities, and above two hundred Villages; among which, some are very great and fair ones. It consists of two Estates: the first, of the Officers and Gentry; the other, of the three Cities Deventer, Campen, and Swolle. Deventer is a good and reasonable big City, and very strong; full of fair Houses, and many publique Buildings; well inhabited, and full of People. On the North-west it lies on a sandy Hill, but all the rest of the City is encompassed with fair low Meadows, which o∣verflow with the upper waters. The Yssel running along the Key or Wharf on one side, serves it as a Moat. The other sides of it are strengthened in part with a deep Moat, and in part with a broad Haven. Its walls are high, and thick set with Towers, and many
Bulwarks, and other strong Fortifications. It is a City of great Trade, by reason that it and the two other chief Cities of this Country have had an ancient confederacy with the Hanse or Aen∣zce Towns, and were in the year 1495 put into the number of the free Imperial Cities, and endowed with many large Priviledges. Campen (though it be accounted in Overyssel, yet it lies on this side the Yssel) is a great and fair City, and well Traded: yet for∣merly, before the waters were grown so shallow, it had a far greater Trade than now. It is well fortified with Walls, Towers, Moats and Bulwarks. It lies low on the Wash of the River, which is very broad in that place; which is a great strength to the City, because the Citizens can when they please, set it under water. In the mid∣dle of it there is a fair strong Bridge over the River, whose Locks are 90 Foot wide. Some think this was the Road of Ptolomies Ships: Others hold it to be the Port or Haven of Manarmanis. Zwol lies on a Rivolet which falls into the Vider or Vecht. It is a good and strong City, having double Moats and Walls. This City for its strength used to be the retreat and refuge of those of Vollenhove, the common residence of the Governour and Councel of Overyssel in all times of War and Danger. Vollenhoven lies upon the South-Sea. A good city, and well fur∣nish'd by Water and Land with all necessary Provisions. Here re∣sides, as aforesaid, the Provincial Councel of Overyssel, from whose Decrees there is no Appeal. Steenwijck seems to be an old City, though small. The Soyl a∣bout it is rich in corn, and affords in some places store of Turf, whereby the City hath a reasonable Trade. It used formerly to be a weak City: but since the Wars with Spain, it is grown very strong. It hath formerly had a Castle, but destroy'd in the year 1523. Hasselt is a good, reasonable rich, and strong City. The old Village Ootmarsen was, as Trithemius writes, founded by Odemar King of France, from whom it hath its name: He built it upon the Grave of his special Friend Vechtan. Oldeseel is held to take its name from the People of old called Salii: it is a small Village; and is the onely Village of Overyssel that is under the command of the Arch-Duke, who ordinarily keeps a Garrison here.
Meppel is the first place in freedom of Overyssel; an unwalled Town. Gectmaryden, a good and strong Castle. Coevrden, a very strong and famous place, is the common thorow-fare for those that travel from Friesland, the Onmelands, Drenthe, and Overyssel, towards Germany. It hath in the North-East a continual Moorass as far as to Wedden; in the West a standing water, which reaches beyond Hasselt and Swarteslays. of the Earldom of Zatphen. ZUtphen is the Head-City of the third quarter of the Dukedom of Gelder. It is honoured with the Title of an Earldom, and presides over the Cities of Does urgh, Dodecum, Lochem, Grolle, Brevoordt, and Brockhurst; which last City is accounted an Earldom of it self. As also is s'Herenberg accounted a particu∣lar Earldom in the quarter of Zutphen. The City of Zutphen is so called, as some write, because it lies in a low quagmiry Soyl, as if they would say, Zayd-veers, or South-Fen in English. It is a good, famous, well-timber'd, and strong City; well fortified with Moats and Bulwarks on one side, and on the other with Quagmires. It lies on the right side of the Yssel, which Pliay and Mla say is a branch of the Rhint, and call it Flevam; for inwards flows the Berkel, which mingles its Water with the Yssel. It was in former times very rich and Powerful, as their Proverb witnesseth: Nimmegen the oldest, Ruermond the greatest, Zutphen the richest, and Acrnhem the pleasantest. The chief Church is dedicated to the honour of St. Walburgh. It is an old Church, and well built for matter and form, according to the fa∣shion of the old and first Christian times. The Earldom of Zutphen came under the Dukedom of Gelder by the marri∣age of Otto the first Gelders Earl with the Daughter of Gerlack Earl of Zut∣phen, about the year 1082. Doesburgh, as some Authors of these times say, is the same City that Cornelius Tacitus calls Asciburgum: it is a populous City, and in the last War with the Spaniards made very strong, to serve for a Fortress or Bulwark for the quarter of De Velnwe. Dotecum, a pretty good City hard by it. Earl Hendrick of Gelder raised that fa∣mous cloister of Bethlebem, which in the last Spanish troubles was most destroy'd. Lochem, a strong and well-scituate Town, which during the aforesaid Wars was often taker on both sides. Grolle, a very strong Town, was conquered by the States of the United Ne∣therlands in the year 1627. Bredevoort also, a very strong and well-provided Town. Brenckburst a good Town, raised as is said to a particular Earldom. S'Heren-berge, a good Town, having under its Authority much Land at great distance from it; so that it hath the Title of an Earldom, formerly belong∣ing to its own Lord the Earl William, a brave Prince. Of the Lordship of Grotaingen. GRoeniagen, with its circumjacent Countries and Villages, which are great and many, and commonly called de Qelandea; though it be so inter∣mixt and united with Friesland, that many think it to be part of that Country, is nevertheless a State of it self, and used to Lave a Lord of their own, whom they gave a particular Title to: And as they are now under the High and righty States General of the Unit Notherland, have their Voice among them,
and send their Deputies to the Hague. It is not only the Head-City, but the only City of this Country; and as some hold, called of Ptolomy, Phileum; of Pliny, Phylleum. It took its name from Grunias a Trojan Gentleman, or as Munster writes a French Gentleman: which opinions may both be true, since the French confidently affirm they had their original from the Trojans. The Friese Historiographers hold that this Grunius was the son of Gailo, and that his great Grandfather was called Friso, from whom Friesland seems to have taken its name: which Grunius having this small, but brave quarter for his share, built this City of Groeningen, and called it after his own name. It hath many flowing and standing Waters, led to it by many great Rivers, part made by Nature, and part by mens hands. It is a large, fair, Populous and strong City, full of brave and Lordlike Houses. Its chief Church is a very stately building, and dedicated to the honour of St. Martin, and was formerly under the Bishoprick of Munster in Westphalia, but was, by King Philip the second, it self ad∣vanced to the Honour of a Bishops See. That learned man Rodolphus Agricola was a Citizen of this City, who with his own hands made an Organ which is yet to be seen here, as a great rarity. In the year 1614, the States General erected an University in this City, and have spared no cost to furnish it with Learned men from all parts. The Authority of this City is very great, and extends it self very far: For first, it hath Eastwards and Westwards under its jurisdiction a very large Country, and many Villges in it; Northwards it hath acknowledgment from all the Country that lies between its Walls and the Sea; which is a very fat soil, and especially good for the feeding of Cattle. This Country, as was said, is called the Ommelanden. In Groeningen the People live very handsomly, like Citizens, as in a free Re∣publique: for the City hath great Priviledges and Franchises from their Princes, Judging all Causes both Civil and Criminal according to their own Laws; the Princes keeping there only a Stadt-holder, as the States General do in Civil Causes; but in Criminal they act according to their own pleasure, shewing Mercy or Justice to whom they please, even as absolute and Sovereign Lords do. They used to pay their Prince but 12000 Gilders a year. Dam is a small Village, though it hath formerly been a considerable Town: for in the year 1536, its Walls were broken down by the Emperours Forces and, as is said, are not to be re edified, or a Moat to be made about it. It suffered also much in the foresaid Spanish Troubles. Delf-ziel, a handsome Village lying on the wash of the Sea, hath formerly been a strong Hold, but several times demolished and rebuilt. It suffered also very much in the last spanish Troubles. Of the associated Cities and Countries. S'Hertogenbosch, or Boisleduc hath four Members under it; Kempenland, Peeland, Maesland, and the Land of Oosterwijck; in which lie the Towns of Helmont, Eyndhoven, Megem, and Grave. s'Hertogeabosch hath its name from a Wood which formerly stood there, belonging to the Duke of Brabant: Bosch in that Lan∣guage being called a Wood, and Hertogh a Duke; so that it is Dukes wood; or, as the French call it, Boisleduc. It is a great, brave, strong, populous, rich, and well-moated City, which hath several times been inlarged: it is six miles in Cir∣cumference; hath seven Gates, and as many Bulwarks. It hath very strong
Wall,  38 Wooden-Bridges; many fair Churches, Cloy∣  other places of devotion. It was made a Bishoprick in the year 1554;  Chedral Church is dedicated to the honour of St. John. The People are notable Warricurs, and lived much upon Plunder, till in the year 1629 Frederick Heanrick Prince of Orange after a severe Siege reduced it to the obe∣dience of the States General. Of the Marquisateship of Bergen-Op-Zoom. BErgen is called Bergen-Op-Zoome, because it lies on the River Zoome. It was advanced to the dignity of a Marquisateship by the Emperour Charles the fifth, in the year 1513. It lies so near the Sea, that it may be accounted a∣mong the Sea-Towns. It is now one of the strongest Frontier-Towns of the tenited Notherlands. Of the Barony of Breda. BReda lies upon the small River of Mercke. It is a pleasant city, in which, among other fair Buildings, is to be seen the Palace of the Barons of the same place, who are sprung from the Imperial House of Nassow. This Palace was first founded by one Earl Hendrick of Nassow. It hath double Moats full of Water, as about a Castle. The City is so well furnished with Ravelins and Bul∣warks, that now it is reckoned one of the strongest Places of the United Nether∣lands. The Barony stretches far, and hath great Revenues; to which is incorpo∣rated the Lordship of Steenberg, Rosendal, and Oosterbout. It is famous for the two great Sieges laid to it, by the Marquiss Spinola, and the Prince of Orange. It belongs to the Prince of Orange. Of the City of Maestricht. MAestricht is an old, large, fair, and well-scituated  aking its name from the Mase, whose stream divides it in the  laid over with fair Sto Bridges. In this City are two Churches of Canons, in one of which (na∣med St. Servaes) the Duke of Brabant used to be Canon. Here is also the stately House of Bissen, sufficient to entertain a King and all his Retinue. This City was reduced to the obedience of the States General in the year 1632. Of the Earldom of Vroon-bof, the Town of Grave, and Land of Kuyck. GRave is a small but strong Town. It is the Head-Town of the Land of Knyck, and accounted one of the strongest Tns of the United Netherlands. Roofendal is a very fair Village lying on a River that abounds in Shipping. It belongs to the Prince of Orange. Lille lies on the Scbelde. It hath been a very fair Lordship: but since the aofresiad Spanish Trobles, it is made a great, strong, and invincible Fort. In Flanders. Hulst, a reasonable strong and good Town, is one of the four Ambachts;  under it twelve Villages: It was reduced to the obedience of the States General, as also was Ses van Gent, in the years 1644, 1645. Axele, also a reaschable good Town, but not walled about. It is also one of the four Ambachts, and hath under it seven Villages. Sluys in Zealand hath oe of the fairest and strongest Sea Havens in all Europe, in which 500 Ships may easily ride. It is double-wall'd, and is so strong a Town, that it is counted invincible. Right against Slays, is the Island Casant, with a Village of the same name. Hereabeuts is the Forts and Places of Aerdtborg, a small Village; Os∣sedijck, ter Neuse, the Philippines, Biervlient, formerly a good Town, but now a strong orfication. All which we shall for bravlty here pass by, and reser you to the May, wherein you find the scituation of every City, Town, Village, and places of smaller Note, throughout the whole United Netherlands. FINIS.
