E2307 23226214 109493
Severall Votes Resolved upon by both Houses of Parliament, concerning the securing of the Kingdome of England, and Domini∣on of Wales. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords in Parliament, nemine contradicento. THat the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the safe∣ty and defence of the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, is not any way against the Oath of Allegiance. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the severall Commissions, granted under the Great Seal, to the Lievtenants of the severall Counties, are illegall and voyd. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That whosoever shall execute any Power over the Militia of this Kingdom, and Dominion of Wales, by colour of any Commission of Lievtenancy, without con∣sent of both Houses of Parliament, shall be accounted a disturber of the Peace of the Kingdom. Die Martis, 15 Martij. 1641. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, THat the Kingdom hath been of late, and still is in so evident and imminent danger, both from enemies abroad, and a Popish and discontented party at home; That there is an urgent and inevitable necessity of putting his Ma∣jesties Subjects into a posture of defence, for the safeguard both of his Majesty, and his People. That the Lords and Commons fully apprehending this danger, and being sensi∣ble of their own duty; to provide a sutable prevention, Have, in severall Petitions, addressed themselves to his Majesty, for the ordering and disposing of the Militia of the Kingdom, in such a way, as was agreed upon by the wisedom of both Houses, to be most effectuall and proper for the present Exigents of the Kingdom; yet could not obtain it, but his Majesty did severall times refuse to give his Royall assent thereunto. Ordered, That the House of Peers agrees with the House of Commons in this Proposition. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That in this case of extream danger, and of his Majesties refusall, the Ordinance agreed on by both Houses, for the Militia, doth oblige the people, and ought to be obeyed, by the Fundamentall Laws of this Kingdom. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That these shall be the Heads of a Declaration. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That such persons as shall be nominated Deputy-Lievtenants, and approved of by both Houses, shall receive the commands of both Houses, to take upon them to execute their Offices. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That these severall Votes shall be forthwith printed and published. March 26. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscout. 1641.
