E2589 15690118 104391
July 18. 1648. by the Citty printer. By the Commons assembled in Parliament. IN the whole management of the late Warr, unto which the Parliament was necessitated on the King∣doms behalf for recovering and securing their Religion, Lawes, and native Liberties invaded by the enemies thereof; the great wisdom, mercy, and power of God from time to time appeared in giving to their Forces many great and seasonable victories, (as pledges of his love in owning their Cause) untill the whole power and force of those enemies were broken in pieces, and a hopefull door opened for the settlement of a wel-grounded and lasting Peace; But the same common Enemy by secret contrivances severall ways, obstructed the Parliaments progress therein, seducing the affections of the people, instigating them to a generall Insurrection; and under pretence of petitioning for Peace, subtily promoting a new and bloody Warr; by whose wicked practises, the Cause of God and the Kingdom is endangered, and utter ruine threatned to those persons that yet own and stand firm to their first principles, and earnestly thirst after the accomplishment of that desirable work of Reformation in Church and Common-wealth, when many men are started aside therefrom, and encourage that generall Confusion endevoured by the enemies of Peace and Truth; And we have just cause to say, If the Lord had not been on our side when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us; yea, blessed be the Lord, mighty in Councels and power, who hath not yet given us as a prey unto their teeth, but by weak means hath wrought great Salvations for his people, by many Signall victories over them lately obtained by the Parliament Forces in severall parts of the Kingdom; the which it is our duty briefly to recount be∣fore the people, that their hearts may be enlarged with thankfulness, and the Lord of Hosts receive therefore his due honour and praise. First, That great defeat given to the Enemies forces in Wales under Laughorn, and the reducing of Chepstow, and other Garisons there; as also the reducing of Appleby Castle, Brougham, and other places of strength in the North; and Walmer Castle in Kent. Secondly, That seasonable mercy and success in Northwales against Sir John Owen; the gaining of Maidston in Kent after Four hours hot dispute, a place of very great concernment to the Rebels; in which service of the Generall, had it miscarried, in all probability, and as it appeared by severall Letters then taken, the ill affected persons in and about the City of London, and Counties adjacent, had, as one man risen and engaged in the same Rebellion, to the endan∣gering and ruine of the Parliament, City and Kingdom, which success did allay the distempers then very high in some neighbouring Counties, raised through the false suggestions of the Enemies to their peace. Thirdly, The surprisall of about 600. Horse belonging to Langdale, and many persons, some of quality, by the Forces under Colonell Fenwik and Colonell Lilborne; and that without the loss of any blood on either side. Fourthly, The utter routing of the Pomfret-horse, and some Foot at Willoughby in Nottingham-shire, after a very sharp encounter, by the new raised Forces under Colonell Edward Rossiter, the Enemies Forces consisting most of Gentlemen, Officers and Reformadoes; of the Enemie, about 100 slain, their Generall, Lievtenant Generall, and Major Generall, and many other Gent. Officers, and Souldiers taken, and the number of 500. private Souldiers, be∣sides their Colours, Armes and Ammunition, and Carriages taken: And the wonderfull Mercy of delivering the Citie of Norwich and the wel affected there from imminent and apparent ruine. Fifthly, The dissipating the Forces gathered together under the Earl of Holland, Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Peterborough, and other men of quality; so that in less then a week the places of their standing in Rebellion was not to be found; who otherwise (had not God given a sodain check to their resolutions and hopes) might have proved very prejudiciall to the peace of the Kingdom. Sixthly, The seasonable reducing of Pembrook both Town and Castle, after a hard siege, upon honorable termes to the Parliament the 10. of July last; whereby the Parliament Forces (engaged there) are at liberty to March Northward for to joyn with the other Forces of the Parliament, for the preservation of the peace of the Kingdom upon all occasions. Read 18. July, 1648. and upon the Question assented unto, and Ordered to be forthwith Printed and published; And that the Lord Major be desired to communicate the same to the respective Ministers within the late Lines of Communication, and Parishes within the weekly Bills of Mortality. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1648.
