E3623 13274860 98716
An Exact and True RELATION OF THE Present Posture of AFFAIRS in IRELAND. Giving an Account of the Designs of the Late King JAMES and His Army. Published for General satisfaction, by a Gentleman belonging to the Bishop of Londonderry, that was taken Pri∣soner by King JAMES his Men, and since made his escape from Dublin the 26th of June last, and arriv'd at London on Tuesday last, being the 2d of this Instant July, 1689. Licensed and Entred according to Order. SIR, VVE have this Relation, by a Gentleman who was taken Prisoner at Londonderry by some of King James's Men the eighteenth of April last, and from thence carried to Dublin by a strong Guard, where he was forced to give in 5000 l Se∣curity for his Appearance every day at the Castle: But seeing that King James had so good Intelligence every day from England, he perswaded his Bail to come for England; who there∣upon left Dublin the. 26th of, June, in a small Wherry, with only two Boat∣men; and arriving at Mossen the 29th of the same Month came to London the 2d instant. Who certainly affirms: That Collonel Kirk has been in the River of Londonderry for three weeks past; but could not get in by reason of some Floats of Timber which the Ene∣my has sunk at Brook-Hall. That about the first of June the Royal Regiment marched from Dub∣lin towards Londonderry, where they intended to do great Feats; but the Ga∣rison bravely sallying out, killed eve∣ry Man of them, except only two Lieu∣tenants, who escaped on Horse-back; In pursuing of whom, the Besieged got a brave Prey of Three Hundred Cows, and other Provisions: The next day the Enemy sent to have leave to bury their Dead, which was grant∣ed; in the mean time, while they were at work, Collonel Walker had occasion to send a Message to the E∣nemies General, by a Captain of the Garison▪ after he had deliver'd his Message, and was returning back, one of the French Officers drew his Sword, and vowed that he would revenge his Friends Blood upon the Rogue, and immediately rn him through the Back, and killed him. The Town had immediate News of the said Mur∣der, and Sallyed out, upon which the Enemy, according to their old Cu∣stom, took to their Heels. As for Iniskilling, if they could be provided with Ammunition, it would
hold out for Twelve Months; for they have all the Cows, Sheep, and Salt, that was in the Three Neigh∣bouring Counties: They have made two very Large Redoubts, inclosing all the Island, that was about the Town; so that they have Grass e∣nough under the Command of their Guns, to keep their Horses; which consists of 1500, their Foot of 5000. The Enemy never made any Attempt there, only upon their March to Lon∣donderry, they thought to have taken it in by the way, but were defeated with the Loss of Four Pieces of Can∣non, and 15 Barrels of Powder, and Shot equal, which they had not time to Plant; for the Besieged Sallied out, and took their Cannon, with the Loss only of Ten men; and kill'd 40 of the Enemy. The Protestants of Dublin and Drog∣heda live pretty peaceably; but all the Country besides, though they have Pro∣tections, yet nevertheless they are day∣ly Robb'd, Plundered and abused by the Soldiers and Rabble: And when complaint is made, they have no satis∣faction. The Earl of Tyrconnel is out of all Imployment, and hath betook himself to a private Lodging at Chappel-Lizard; Collonel Macharty finding King James kinder to the French than to the Irish, said one day in a Tavern, That he would lay down his Commission, rather than be subjected to the French. Next morning somebody told King James, who immediately sent for him; who, instead of denying, or excusing what he had said, added much more: So that he insensed the King so much against him, that he disposed of all his Imployments to the French; He was Major General of the Army, Governor of Cork, and Collonel of a Regiment of Horse: this happened upon the 16th of June; the 17th, in the evening, he went out of Town on Horse-back with one Servant towards Kilmanan, it was thought he went to Chappel-Lizard to Tyrconnel. The Lord Brittas being much in favour with the King, was unfortunately at the Globe Tavern upon Cork-Hill with some French Officers, somebody came into the Room, and gave an account that there was an Express arrived from France, giving an account of Queen Mary's being with Child; but it was his ill luck to say, That if she was with Child, it was got by the French King: next morning it came to King James's ear, who imme∣diately sent for him, and turned him out of his Command, as Collonel of Foot, and gave it to a French Captain before his face, upon which my Lord went immediately into the Country, and will not return any more, it is thought. Their whole Army of Ireland, be∣sides them that are in the Garisons, consists of but 15000 Foot, and 5000 Horse and Dragoons, such as they are. There is at the Siege of Derry 9000 Foot, and 2000 horse, the rest is all scattered up and down There is Coin'd in Dublin Shillings and Six pences of Copper, with the Cross and Crown in the middle on the one side, and James Rex on the other. All the old Furnaces and Brewing-Kettles are called in by Order, and those they make this Coin of; for be∣fore this Invention, they had no way of Paying their Army. ADVERTISEMENT. THE Art of Curing Diseases by Expectation, with Remarks on a supposed Great Cure of Apoplectick Fits. Also moct useful Observations on Coughs, Consumptions, Stone, Dropsies, Feavers, and Small-Pox. With a Confutation of Dispensato∣ries, and other various Discourses in Physick. By Gideon Harvey, M. D. Their Majesties Physician of the Tower, and Fellow of the College of Physicians of the Hague, in 12o. Printed for and sold by James Partridge at Charing-Cross, and Randall Taylor near Stationers-Hall. London: Printed for James Partridge at the Post-House at Charing-Cross. 1689.
