E593 12283474 58801
Vindiciae Catholicae, OR The Rights of PARTICULAR CHURCHES Rescued: AND Asserted against that MEER (but DAN∣GEROUS) NOTION OF ONE CATHOLICK, VISIBLE, GOVERNING CHVRCH: The foundation of the (now endeavoured) Presbyterie. Wherein by Scripture, reason, antiquity, and later writers First, The Novelty, Peril, Scandal, and untruth of this Tenet, are cleerly demonstrated. Secondly, All the Arguments for it, produced by the Rev. Apollo∣nius, M. Hudson, M. Noyes, the London Ministers, and OTHERS: are examined and Dissolved. To the Parliament of ENGLAND, and Assembly of DIVINES. By JOHN ELLIS Jun. Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free. Si primatm aliqum unius is agnesceret: Nonne i medium afferre debuit, unum caput ministe∣riale membris omnibus praefectum, cujus auspicijs in unitatem colligamur? certe aut Pauli obli∣vic excusari nequit, qui imprudenter, quod maxime appositum erat, adeoque praecipuum in causa pratermiserit: aut satendum est, rem esse a Christi Institutione alienam: imo APERTE FICTITIAM. Calv. in Ephes. 4. 11: LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes-head-Alley. MDCXLVII.
To the High Court of PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND. To the Assembly of DIVINES. To the Christian Magistrates, and Reformed Churches abroad. Honourable and Reverend, ALL that shall be prefaced unto you, is an humble sute for your prudent con∣sideration of the sequele. For if I have rightly collected; the opinion conten∣ded with, represents you all guilty of Schisme against the Catholicke Church; yea and of a higher crime, so many of you as have with hands lift up to Heaven (of which number my selfe am one) ingaged your selves in materiall points of Reformation; not onely with∣out the Authority or endeavouring to have the minde of the Catholicke Church; but have also concluded and established contrary to what it hath determined in all those Assemblies which our Brethren stile the Represen∣tatives of it.General Coun¦cells. From which transgression the truth here pleaded doth in that respect absolve you: in the comfort whereof, I would here also leave you. But seeing there are those, who would not onely have the opposed Tenet embraced for a fundamental truth in Church Government,cap. 5. §. 3. and propound it as a ground thereof; but that it should also
be constituted and established an ARTICLE of FAITH and Confession thereof; I crave leave to adde a supplication, and with all submission, doe beseech you, that the expe∣dient of a great man about these affaires, in his advice for the restoring of peace in the Church may be diligently weighed:Eram. in praef. ad Hilarium: The summe (saith he) of our Religion is peace and unanimitie;Summa Religionis nostri, pax est & unanimitas, ea vix constare poterit, nisi de quam potest paucissimis definia∣mus, & in multis literum relinqua∣mus suum cuique judicium, propterea quod nigens sit re∣rum plurimarum obscuritas, &c. of which there is little hope, unlesse those things that shall be injoyned as matters of faith, bee as few as may bee; and that wee leave mens judgements free in many things; by reason that the obscurity in a number of them is exceeding great, &c. How much lesse then such opinions, as are not onely New (in the sence now pro∣pounded) and controverted, but moreover appug∣ned constantly also, by the most eminent of our owne party, (and is as inconsistent with your Liberties, as E∣piscopacy, which you have condemned.) Withall I pre∣sume you will not disdaine the wisedome and practise of the most ancient Churches after the Apostles times: we see all their confession of faith in that briefe called the APOSTLES CREED, and afterward the Nicene Creed; made by the first Generall Councell, and for the expli∣cation of the former; in how few words is it compre∣hended, yea and the confessions of the Reformed Chur∣ches, and our owne 39. Articles are but briefe and for the most part cleere. Austin saies The Rule of Faith is common to the weak and to the wise.Ep. 57. ad Dardan. Which Vsshers in the explication of one,Regulum fidi pu∣sillis magnisque commnem, in Ec∣clesiam tent. almost as great, upon it: inferring, that (therefore) The Rule of Faith must containe such truthes ONELY, Vshers answer to the Iesuite, page 418. as are GENERALLY agreed upon, by the consent of all true Christians, and without controversie. Many things should not be rendered of the substance
of Faith; for the denyall of which the crime of Heresy and Schisme, and for the doubt whereof, the penalty of rejection from the family, and worke of the Lord must be inflicted.Rom. 4. c. 15, The great Apostle every where exhorts, with all those who hold in the maine the forme of sound words,1 Cor. 8. c. 10. and yet are in other things diversly minded;Phil. 3. 15. to preserve the vnitie of the spirit in the bond of peace. The Lord restore the Churches to their just freedomes and keepe them from using their liberty as an occasion to the flesh, but by love to serve one another: And the same God raise and uphold the spirit of all States and Magistrates to be Nusing Fathers to them: and conti∣nue to returne this your work of Faith, and labour of love, seven fold into your bosome. So prayes An unworthy Minister of Christ, Son of the Church, and servant of this State. JOHN ELLIS. Jun.
To the Pious and Ingenuous Reader. TOuching my Call to this undertaking I shall give account in the following Tractate: But the oc∣casion of my falling on it, was my defence against Mr Edwards, or rather the Authour of the Letters, which hee hath published in the first part of his Sanious Gangrena, where I being charged to have said in publique: That Popery would come in again under Pres∣bytery as well as under Episcopacy, if the Magistrate did not intervene. I distinguished of Popery Doctrinall and Rective, or in point of Government; which latter I shew∣ed was very probable (for the substance, though not the for∣malitie of it) to follow upon the Presbyterie on the ground that it is now endeavoured, viz. A Catholique Visible Governing Church, whereunto when I had written; it seem∣ed convenient to publish that argument alone; and because one of the Authours of this opinion had invited mee to deal in the point; I was obliged to reply to him: but seeing o∣thers also had written on the subject, it had beene an imper∣fect opposition if I had not taken in the rest also: For I knew no prohibition from replying to any: neither are the hands of any tyed from answering unto me (if they shall see cause) at least mediately. And let no man be of∣fended that so ordinary an instrument as my self deales
with so many, and so considerable Persons. The contest of one Paphnutius, and he a lay person, with the whole (first and best) Councell of Nice is vulgar.Gratian, As also that of the Canon Law: one Laique if he speak scripture, his testi∣mony is to be prefered before the decrees of a Councell. What ever distances there may be in other respects, as years, learning, name, pietie, &c. yet in Point of truth hee is on the highest ground, that hath the advantage of that; as the example of the young man Elihu, in Job, instructeth us. Now this I first publish rather then the former Answer, (delayed not for want of innocency, but of opportunity, some∣what else impedeing also) as men assayled by an adversary, and a Breach of sea at once; first stop the inundation that will drowne all, though the enemie in the mean time prevail the more.
The CONTENTS. 1. THe Occasion, and first Authors of the opinion of one Catholick Visible GOVERNING Church. To∣gether with the intent and scope of this Treatise: as also the Authors call to this service. Chap. 1. Page 1. 2. The State of the Question. Chap. 2. page 4. 3. The just prejudices and strong probabilities against the former Notion. Chap. 3. page 10. 4. Demonstrations against it from the efficient cause of Church Government, from the material, from the for∣mal and final. Chap. 4. page 19. 5. Answers to the Arguments produced for it, Chap. 5. 1. By Apollonius, page 33. 2. By M. Hudson, page 51. 3. The Reverend Assembly, page 60. 4. M. Noyes, page 70. 5. The London Ministers, page 78. 6. The Conclusion, Chap. 6. page 83. 1. Illatory, or by way of Corrollary. 2. Hortatory to the Brethren of this opinion. To the Reader. Whereas I have reckoned (chap. 1.) Mr Randal [in his trea∣tise of the Church] among mine Adversaries, in the Argument I handle: upon better search I finde him not to be so; but to hold the Catholicke Church, as others did, and my selfe doe, as by a marginall quotation I have made appear.
CHAP. I. The occasion and first Authors of the Question: Together with the intent and scope of this Treatise. As also the Authors call unto this service. SECT. I. GOD having put it into the heart and hand of the Parliament of England, to set upon Refor∣mation of the Church as well as of the Com∣mon-wealth: they for that end conveened an Assembly of such Learned and Godly men as they adjudged meet for their direction in that work; and those of known different Judgements, (Episcopal, Presbyterial, and Congregational,) that they might by their opposition, the better discern what way of Church Government and Reformation they should countenance and strengthen with their Authority. Now the Episcopal way a∣ving rendered it self odious by its imperiousnesse and otherwise, the contest remained betwixt the other two: whereof the Presbyterian, being practised (in some things) in certain Reformed States and Churches (who were partly constrained thereunto) there being some hints of Scripture also that might be appre∣hended to look that way, Some other things withal concurring: got place, either in the interests or affections, of a great part of the Assembly, Parliament, City, and Ministers in the Country. Hereby also they were eyed the more by the Churches abroad that were of that way, and had the opportunity to improve their endeavours for their assistance. The Congregational way in the mean time, though it wanted not Assertors very learned and godly, and of great name in the Church, and had the advan∣tage
of an amiable pattern of it in the new-English Plantations; and withall, the daily accesse and addition of the most knowing and conscencious sort of Professors: Yet by reason of the former disadvantages, it was not rendered so considerable among the Churches abroad, as to depart from received Principles, or neglect to appear in the defence of the former, for consideration of it. Hereupon the Walachrian Classis in Holland (among others) be∣ing sollicited by the Presbyterian partie here for their assistance: they appoint G. Apollonius, Pastor of the Church at Middelburgh, to take on him this province, and having according to his princi∣ples acquitted himself of that service; in a Tractate intituled [A consideration of certain controversies which concern the Government of the Church of God,Considerat. quarun∣dam controvers. ad Regimen Ecclesia Dei spectant quae in Anglia agitantur: Edit. 1644. agitated in England] the approbate of the Classis is added to the book, and published 1644. both in Latin and English. This Author observing as it seems, that the assault on the way of the Presbyterian Government was like to be strong; and fearing that the former basis and foundations of it, [viz. That the Government of the Church was to be by the Elders, and they in equal povver. 2. That it is alvvaies convenient (if attainable) and sometimes necessarie, that Churches be associated and act in combi∣nation vvith joynt consent. 3. That as Princes and States have an In∣dependent povver within their owne limits, so Churches under the Go∣vernment of one Prince or State, have no absolute or necessary dependance on other Churches in point of Ecclesiastick Power and Government, &c.] These grounds as was said, being doubted whether defensible: the Author in the third Chapter of his discourse which treates [of the Visible Instituted Church] betakes himself to a larger medi∣um, and of all men (that I know) of the Presbyterian, and almost of the Protestant judgement, he first layes down this conclusion: Conclus. 3. § 2. That there is a certain universal outward Church, dispersed through the whole World,The first Authors of this opinion. described in the Scriptures, which in a certain visible Go∣vernment doth make one onely Corporation, Ministerial Church-body, or Political society: under which all particular Churches, Classical, Pro∣vincial, and National (as it were parts of the vvhole) are conteyned. Apollonius is followed herein by M. Hudson in his Book written on this Subject [Intituled the Essence and Vnitie of the Church Catholick visible:]Apollonius, also by the Reverend Assembly of Divines,Hudson, (as we shall see afterward) Again by M. Noyes a Minister of New-England,The Assembly of Divines. in
his book [intituled the Temple measured] and lastly by certain London Ministers in their Tract [of the Divine Right of the Presby∣terian Government] by which it seems the Notion is so amiable,M: Noyes. that there is as it were a kind of Ambition who should appear first,Ministers of London, in being the Authors or Owners of it: Though the truth is, this conceit (for substance) hath been before all these the Te∣net of some others, whom it is not any great honour to be fol∣lowers of in this: as first the Papists generally: also a few Epis∣copal men: as Crakanthorpe, M. Randall, and perhaps some others. And it may be by some absolute Royalists (for that spirit must needs work in Church affairs to some such opinion) I remember one of them being in conference about Church-government,M. VV. some∣times of this Parliament. acknow∣ledged indeed the Church of Rome to have abused its power that way: but conceived that it was necessary for the Catholick Church to have some one standing Court and place of residence, whereunto to have re∣course on all occasions, and which might have authority over, and influ∣ence upon the vvhole: to this effect was his discourse: which opi∣nion cannot be avoyded, if the notion of one Catholick visible Church be granted, as shall appear hereafter. § 3.Now the scope of this Treatrse is not to unfasten the ground of all Church combinations, and to lay a foundation for absolute Independencie. The conveniencie and somtime the necessity of Classes and Synods for direction and determination (and that by Divine Authority) is freely acknowledged (though not with power properly juridical) yea,Prov. 15. 22, I add, that Episcopacie it self was and might be maintained, as also Presbyterie, (if confined to a particular Church, and not subjected to superior Ecclesiastical power, which was the most ancient way of it) without the notion of one visible Catholick Church; and might both consist together in a particular one. So that as neither Episcopacie nor Presbyterie (absolutely considered) are engaged to owne the opposed Tenet; so neither doth that Truth I plead for, constrain me to oppose either, if within the forementioned limits. My aim is the plucking up of that root from whence sprang the exorbitancy of both, and what was worse then either. And as I am not obli∣ged to oppose, so I would not be interpreted to plead for the one or other. My businesse is to deal with the subject of Church government, and that onely in its exrent and limits.
§ 4.Now for a call to this service, though it challenge the most exercised abilities, and that other more able hands have underta∣ken it (which I heard not of, till these papers were almost in the Presse) yet one of theM. Hudson. Authors I reply unto, having done me the favour to invite me to a disputation about the Argument, and afterward farther obliging me, by sending one of the printed books to me (for which I am his debtor) with desire, that if I excepted against any thing in it, I ould send my thoughts in witing to him privately: I conceived my self particulaly en∣gaged to deal in this argument, and that not privately, but pub∣lickly, because what I was to speak to, was published first. CHAP. II. The State of the question. THat we may know what we speake, and vvhereof vve affirme, (as the Apostle phraseth it) the true state of the controversie is to be expounded,Termes expl. the mistake whereof is the rise of much of the di∣spute about this question. For the clearer proceeding wherein, four or five Termes are to bee explained: First the word CHVRCH, Secondly, the Onenesse, or unitie of it, Thirdly, The Vniversalitie, Fourthly, The Visibility, Fifthly, (that which is included in the other) the povver of it. Concerning the first, The word CHVRCH,1. Church. is taken (as in other acceptations so) 1. Mystically and Essentially, for a company of thoe that have owned the doctrineSo Tilenus Syntag. Thes. de Eccles. of Christ. 2. Politically, as such a company are cast into one Society,Calvine and other add Sacraments, and some Disci∣pline: but these as notes, not as formal causes of it. Corporation, Republique or Body politique. And this againe is considered either Totally, as com∣prehending those in heaven also, Ephes. 3. 15. the vvhole family in heaven and earth: or partially, for those on earth onely: and this, either generally for all, as some would understand the word, (though we cannot give an instance of this signification in Scrip∣ture) or particularly; for those who live together in One place, and are associated into one body, called a Particular Church, as the Church of Rome, Jerusalem &c.
The next Terme is Onenesse,2. Onenesse. or Vnitie, which is 1. Essentiall and in Nature, such as is that of all particular things in their ge∣nerall heads: all men as they partake of the common nature and essence of man, (rationalitie, which is one) are in that respect called one Nation or Maninde,Acts 17. 26. in the singular. 2. There in an accidentall unitie when the agreement is in that which is not of the essence and nature, but adventitious to the things, as time, place, appurtunances, &c. as some Spanjards, some French, some English may be one company,. as by occasion they are met in one place, or as kingdomes and States at generall diets, or by mutuall leagues become one accidentally, by such unions. 3. An Integrall or Bodily onenesse (as I may so speake) when many particulars are joyned together,. as one whole, and this is, 1. of a similer or Homogeneall body, whereof all the parts are of the same nature with the whole and one with another, such as is the onenesse of drops of water in the Sea, and sands on the Shore, or . of a dissimilar and hetrogeneall one; when the parts dif∣fer from the whole and among themselves, and this is double, 1. Physicall and Naturall, as hen all the parts and members make but one individuall substance, as the head, feet, trunke &c. are all one naturall body. 2. Politicall or by way of morall cor∣poration, and Republique, when many single ones are bound up in one sociall relation, as divers persons into one family, severall families into one corporation, many corporations into one Common wealth: and this union againe is twofold, 1. Misti∣call, when things are one in some hidden relation, that is not vi∣sible to the sence, as all families descending from some First house, such are all the sonnes of Adam and of Abraham, all professours of the same faculty, be they never so farre asunder. 2. Visible and outward, when the union of all parts is obvious and evident to the eye and sence, as the union of the members in the bodie of man, or members of a society when they are met, and act visibly together; as the City of London in Common Councell, the King∣dome of England in Parliament. 4. There is a Collective or aggregative onenesse, which dif∣fers from the former, in that this is only by collection, or gathering as an heap of stones is one by being gathered together into one place: but in a body, whether naturall or politique, there is requi∣red
moreover a mutuall incorporation and inward dependance on one another, &c. Thus of the second terme. The third is Vniversall or Catholick; It is taken 1. Properly, for that common nature in which particular things agree,3. Vniversality. as com∣mon to them all. Rationall creature, in the general, is the univer∣sall nature in respect of all particular men. And in this sence, uni∣versality is only a notion framed in the minde of man,Vniversalium fun∣damentum in rebus forma in mente. and colle∣cted from observation of severall particulars, but hath no reall actuall being in time and place. 2. Improperly, for that which though it be a single thing, (either naturall or by way of relation) is yet in regard of the wide spreading of its parts, called universall catholicke and Generall: as we say the Kingdome of England in generall or universall doth this or that, though it be but one single Kingdome, &c. and in this sence that which is called universall may have an actual being and existence. The Fourth Terme is visibilitie:4. Visibility. It is an accident or addition to the nature of things, as they are perceiveable to the eye, or (in a large acceptation) by any other sence; the subject whereof is al∣waies a corporal or bodily thing, representing it selfe as one unto the sence. The last Terme (included, though not expressed) is Church power;5. Church power, It is first Doctrinall; vix. Teaching Discussive, Deter∣minative and concluding (in points of controversie) by the Word. 2. Active: and this is either General and common: and an∣swers to that power that all men by vertue of the onenesse of Na∣ture, and onenesse of the Law of nature, have in order each to other. As 1. to take care of, and do good to one another: to protect each other from violence, &c. 2. Properly Rective and Iuridical: and this is either 1. Extraordinary, in some unusuall cases: as e∣very man hath power of life and death, in case of his owne (other∣wise unavoidable) peril of life. Or 2. Ordinary: which is that which it is actually and constantly endued with, and which it is daily to exercise as occasion serves. And this againe is 1. Imperative, or by way of command, and imposition of truthes, or duties in the name of Christ. 2. Coercive, and executive by censure: by ad∣monition and excommunication, or cutting off from the body of Christ. And thus far of the explication of the termes,State of the quest now we come
to the stating of the Question. And 1. negatively, what is not the question. The doubt then is not 1. whether there be a company of persons in several, or in all parts of the World, that diuisim and in their several places do visibly, outwardly, and openly professe (for substance) the same faith, seals, wor∣ship and Government, and so may be said to be one company, one society, one congregation in Nature and Essence (i. e. Ac∣knowledgement of the same Faith) as we say the Turke or Turkes are one company of men, because their profession of Religion is one: though those of Constantinople and of Persia have no dependance one on another, either Civil or Religious in point of Government. Nor 2. is it the Quaere whether the several Companies or Churches of this Profession as they are one in Nature, so also in Spirit and affection, and thereupon in the engagement of mutual care one of another, and to take notice what doctines are dispersed, what conversation used among the Churches. Brethren of the same first Family are bound to do this, though they be every one master in his owne house. Nor 3. Is it doubtful whether such Churches may voluntarily as oc∣casion shall require, associate together for mutual assistance, and act (in many things) by common and joynt consent, as it was at the first in the Church of Geneva. This the Scripture and the light of Nature dictates,Baynes Dioces. pag. 21. even then when the same Scripture and light of Nature reserves entire and distinct liberties to the particulars, as in the present conjunction of England and Scotland:Declar. H. Com. about the dispo∣sal of the Kings person. And so in the conjunction of the Apostles and Churches at Jerusalem, Acts 15. nothing was done there of particular Jurisdiction, as the decreeing of Excommunication, or the like, to those that should be refractory: this was left to the particular Churches. Now to these two latter, and not to the point of Government properly so called, belongs those testimonies out of the Ancients, alledged by Crakanthorp (to prove that all the Bishops joyntly and severally are set over the whole Church in common,Defensio Eccles. Ang. cap. 28. and not the Pope onely): for these Testimonies expresse onely a generall obligation of duty and charity: not of special office. 4. Nei∣ther is it the scruple whether all or most of the Churches in the world may not possibly become occasionally one by their messen∣gers in a general Councel: though such a thing never yet was,
nor perhaps ought to be, of which hereafter. Thus of the first four termes: In regard of the last, viz. the Power of the Church; the question is not 1. whether an Association of Churches lesse or more, and especially a general Counsel have not a power more then barely consultative, or by way of meer Counsel and advice:Cotton Keyes Kingd. H. cap. 6. and whether they have not, so far as the object of their Commission reacheth, an Authoritative power, (at least virtual) from Christ to act. In all Faculies there is a certain power given both by God and man to the allowed Professors of them, to give Authoritative, not advice only, but directions and rules, to which the Conscience is bound to submit, unlesse special cause disswade us: and this Au∣thority is the more August and solemn, though not greater, (or more or lesse vary not the kind) the greater the number is, and the more publicke the manner of giving forth the precepts shall bee. As for instance: an allowed Lawyer or Physician, have not onely ability to give advice in point of estate or health, by vertue, of their skill, (which others possibly may doe materially as well) but have authoritie and legall power from God and man,page 18. to ap∣point, direct, determine and prescribe rules and waies to be obser∣ved in both; to which the person ought to be obedient that seeks advice: and this the more; if it shall be done by an Assembly of Lawyers or Judges, or Colledge of Physitians by publick consent convened for that purpose: though neither the one, nor other have power to compell the clyent or patient to follow their directi∣ons, nor obtain they any new and superiour power by being ga∣thered; so in the affaires of the Church of God. In doubtfull cases; or upon occasion of grosser errours and scandalls:Ecles. 4. 1. God hath by or dinance (virtual) appointed recourse to others, especially Churches, whose prescriptions, not disagreeing from the word, are to be obey∣ed, not only because they are materially good, but formally theirs: that is, the determinations of many of those, who are appointed by God for such offices in their severall places, so that their acting is the acting of Officers, but not as Officers, (for such they are only in their severall Churches) but yet by reason of  relation, they are the more fit for that work, but do not act in another and supe∣riour right and relation when assembled, and therefore have not any power coercive more then before to constraine by Church-sure,
Excommunication &c. to their decrees. Neither do we find that the Apostles themselves, when holding such a Councel (in our Brethrens opinion) did more,Act. 15. then (in the Name of the Holy Ghost) Decree, and command; but did not impose any such penalty by authority of the Councel, upon the disobedient in the particular Churches. 2. Neither is the question properly, what power the Catho∣lick Church may possibly have in unusual and extraordinary case or accident, and which in ordinary it cannot do, nor is the proper subject of such power, as we saw before in the instance of neces∣sary self defence. 3. Yea further (ad hominem) in respect of the practise and condition of most of those Bretheren who plead this Catholick visible onenesse of the Church:2. State of the Quest. in respect of the Patr. of this opinion. The question would not be what power the Vniversal visible Church might have (if possibly con∣venable) together; as it was at Jerusalem (in which case we grant what is contended for) as what the parts of it have asunder, and without endeavouring the joyning with the other. For even in a Kingdom, though all the Corporations gathered in one, have power over all particulars: yet not some of these, much lesse a few of them asunder; which is the way our Bretheren now pra∣ctise. None of these is the point in controversie. But Secondly, It is positively this, viz. Whether the whole company of Christians on earth,2 State of the Quest. positively. are in their ordi∣nary and setled Church constitution, so one entire single Com∣mon-wealth, Corporation and Congregation, as that of Right, and by the will and appointment of Iesus Christ, it is the first subject of all Church power:Apol. ubi supra. by authority whereof, and commission from which all particular Churches act, and to the determina∣tions of the major part whereof, they are to yeeld obedience (if not apparently contrary to the Word) and the Catholick go∣verning power whereof,Lond. Min. Div. Right Presb. cap. 11. pag. 163. resides immediately as in its proper subject under Christ, onely in the Ministers and Elders; and they not taken severally, but joyntly as one entire Colledge or Pres∣byterie: to whose charge severally and joyntly, the whole and eve∣ry particular Church is committed &c, or more briefly: Whe∣ther the whole be one Corporation, whereof the Elders joyntly are Gover∣nors; and the members gouerned.
CHAP. III. Just Prejudices, and strong probabilities against an univer∣sal visible Governing Church. IT is the custome of warre to skirmish first,Levis armaturae militibus velitare and to begin with the lighter armed Souldiers: this method shall be here followed: and first such things as render this opinion vehemently suspicious and questionable. Whereof the first is; The NOVELTY of it: The saying of Tertullian is received: Quod Antiquiss. Veriss. Truth is Ancient, and error Novel: but M. Noyes would avoid this prejudice, where he saith, that the Fathers so predicated the unity of an universal Church, that they laid foundations for an universal Bishop. I shall therefore endeavour to shew the Novelty of it, and first abso∣lutely considered in it self. Secondly relatively, and that first in respect of the Protestant, and then of the Presbyterian party. 1. Absolutely. If we credit theSee their praises apud Montag. Ap∣parat. Sacr. praefat: and D. VVheare de Meth. leg. Hist. Centurists, the particular Churches in the first hundred of years after the Apostles, did exercise all Church-Gouernment within themselves:Cent. Magd. Cent. 2. cap. de Regim. Eccl. Tit. de privat. Syn. de tit. de consoc. Eccles. They did ordain and de∣pose Ministers, admonish and excommunicate obstinate offenders: held Synods or meetings, wherein they determined the affairs of their own body: In doubtful cases they consulted with other Churches, not by reason of their superiority, but upon the ground of common charity. But no hint of this Catholick Governing body among them. Object. But in occasions which concerned many Churches, they held that they should be transacted in Synods and Councels:Object. and they did accordingly in such meetings exercise superior power in the particular Churches;Crakanthorp ubi supra. as excommunication, ordi∣nation, deposition of Ministers, determining of controversies &c. Besides several expressions of the Ancients imply as much. To which I answer,Answ. First, To the Synods and Councells: That what concerns many, should be debated by many &c. doth not con∣clude them a Corporation, no more then the common Treaties of Nations in things of joynt concernment. Secondly, Their exercising the acts above mentioned in their
particular Churches, and their acting these things in Synods were (it is certain) at some distance of time: and seeing the for∣mer way of Government is mentioned first; it may well be, that the latter came in as the discipline of Churches began to be cor∣rupted, and decline to WORLDLY POLICIE: which happe∣ned in this first age also, say the sameCent Magd. ubi supra in principio cap. de Reg. Eccles. Authors. 3. It might be by Decree and judgement onely, not by actual execution of such things, as 1 Cor. 5. I haue determined that when ye are gathered &c. and John 4. 2. Christ baptized more Disciples then Iohn, though Christ himself baptized not, but his Disciples. 4. Howsoever their practise in this (if it were at the same time, and not after Discipline declined) must be expounded to be consistent with their other practise within themselves, where∣by they owned entire, (and of right) Independent power from any other Church or Churches. So that in such united Synods or Coun∣cells, each Church might act its owne power, though in union with other; and all act as so many several and distinct Churches united; not as one entyre universal body, in the nature and notion of it, different, distinct, and superior to the particular Chur∣ches. So that being gathered, they had a larger power, but not a greater nor another power as a general Councel, but as so many particular Churches or Elders congregated. They acted not as a Parliament, but as a Dyett of so many Free-States. Or to take M. Hudsons owne similitude. As a heap of stones, have no more inward vertue because they are an heap, then if they were each one by themselves; they have a larger, but not a more excellent one, or of another kind; neither doth the power of working, (what ever their vertue be) agree to them first, be∣because they are an heap, but because they are stones of such and such a nature. So here; They might excommunicate then, but it might be from their owne heap (as we may so speak) or Soci∣eties onely: not as out of the Catholick Visible Church also, un∣lesse per accidens; in as much as he that is rightly excommunicated out of one Church, is really excommunicated out of all (be∣cause they are essentially and mystically one, and to go by the same rule) though formally he may not be so. As he that is justly condemned for a Traytor in one of the Kings Dominions, is re∣ally and vertually condemned in the rest: because these Domi∣ons
are politically one in their head; yet may they be Indepen∣dent one from another in their proper Governments and Rights, as was said above concerning England and Scotland. Fifthly, It was but a voluntary association, or by right of Fra∣ternity only, and not of onenesse of Corporation: which appears by astringing and confining, even in after times, in some Coun∣cells, the power of Bishops and Ministers, to, and within their owne Diocesses and Churches, so as to pronounce all the acts they did elsewhere (unlesse by call or permission) void,Conc. Gen. 2. c. 2. and of none effect.Conc. Antioch. Whether it were judgement,Temp. Iul. c. 13. ordination, excommunication, it shall be (say they) of no force:Conc. Sardic. can. 19. As the Councels and Canon Law are cited by Crakanthorp himself;Caus. 9. q. 2. c. null one of our adversaries in this cause.lib. 1, ep. 4. So Cyprian saith, that Stephan Bishop of Rome, put his sithe into other mens Harvest, when he endeavoured by authori∣ty to restore two whom the Bishops of Spain had deposed. Now if they had apprehended the whole Church to be but One Cor∣poration or great Congregation: and all the Bishops and Ministers to be over this one Church in common: why then (though in regard that each man was assigned by the Church to his particular place for the avoyding of confusion) such acts out of their owne Churches might be disorderly and irregular; yet could they not be formally void: for that the whole Church, being committed to each and to all; they had been within their charge, seeing they had an habitual and fundamental right thereunto, as being Officers per se, and properly of the whole Church, and not of any particular Church, but by accident onely. And let it be re∣membred; that these Constitutions were much later then the Churches we spake of before. This for Churches and Coun∣cells. We come now to particular, (and those the most emi∣nent) persons: Let us hear themselves speak. First CHRYSOSTOME:Serm. 1. de Pasch.  &c. The Sacrifice or Passeouer was to be eaten in one house, and not to be conveied out: that is, the house is one that hath Christ: and the many houses of the Hebrews have but onely one, Power, Nature, and Condition, as the Churches throughout the World, and in several Provinces being many in Numbers, are but One Church. Where he makes them One in that they have One Nature and Condition, but saith, they are Many in number. Whereas this opinion makes all the Churches in the world to be
but one in number, in respect of Corporation and Government: as all the houses in a City make but one single Corporation: and all the Corporations in England, make but one single Kingdom. So that this Testimony; taking the distinction above mentioned, of one∣nesse in Nature of those, that are many in number: looks as much, if not more,lib. 7. Strom. on us, then on our opposites. 2. CLEMENS ALEXAND.. There is absolutely but one Ancient and Catholick Church in the Vnity of one Faith:Instit. l. 4. c, 1. whereunto agreeth that of CALVINE: The unitie of the Church consists in the unitie of the Faith, and (expresly against this universal visible Government) he addes, it is not necessary that we see it (the Church Catholick) and that it be visible, for preservation of that unity. 3. CYPRIANUS: when he professedly disputeth the que∣stion about the unity of the Church (passing by the corruptions added in this place, and some of hisDe unitate Eccles, sive de simplicitate praelator. Epistles, by the Papists) defineth the unity of the Church by Doctrine and Discipline:Iames corrupt: Fath. and saith,Perk. praepaer. prob. Scultet. medull. Patr. in loc. This onely is the cause of Schismes: Quod ma∣gistri Coelestis Doctrina suis quod idem est Ecclesiae vivitas non servatur. That the Doctrine of our heavenly Master, or which is ALL ONE, the unity of the Church is not preser∣ved: and as there is one God, one Christ, one Faith: so there is one Church,Insolidum. one Discipline in it: one Bishoprick, whereof in the whole every one hath his share: and as the Sun hath many beams,Robur unum: but one light; and the boughes of a Tree many, but one Trunk, so many particular Churches, whereof (u∣num lumen, unum Caput, una Origo) one light, one head, one original: in all which he makes the unity of the Church to consist in onenesse of nature, faith, spirit, head; not in number and Government. As the leaves and boughes are not one in number, and in themselves, but in their Original and Root: so are the Churches one in Christ, and the spirit, and nature; though diffe∣rent in suppositum and Government. 4. HIERON.Vnum Altare dici∣tur, quod una fides & unum Baptism & una Ecclesia. It is called one Altar: as it is said one Faith, and one Baptisme,Hierona Is. 10: 2 and one Church: but faith and Baptisme, are said to be
one in respect of Kind and nature, not Integrally, and numerally. 5. AUGUSTINE: He, speaking of the first Subject of the keyes or Church power,Tract. in Ioh. 124. saith, For all the SAINTES theefore that doe cleave inseparably to the body of Christ did Peter re∣ceive the KEYES of the Kingdom of heaven: because not he alone: but (universa Ecclesia ligat solvitque peccata) the universal Church doth binde and loose sins. But that he doth not mean joyntly as one body or Corporation; but severally, every Church by it selfe (and so the onenesse of the Church here implyed, is in nature and kind, not in number) appeares by what he saith in other places; as where repeating that about Excom∣munication.De duodec. Abus. Grad. 1. Mat. 18. If he hears not the Church let him be unto thee as a heathen: he saith: He who joyneth him to himself, which is after this or∣der cast out, he not permitting (being orthodox) by vvhom he is cast out (juris sacredotij sancti limites Excedit) doth violate the rights of holy Priest∣hood. He doth imply, that particular Churches did excommunicate within themselves, or the universal Church distributively taken. 6. EUCHERIUS.lib. 3. Reg. cit. cent. 5. cap. 4, Tit▪ de Eccles. The Church dispersed throughout the whole world: consists in one and the same faith, and fel∣lowship of Catholique truth:Dilatata per orbem Ecclesia, in una ea∣demque fide, & ve∣ritatis Catholica societate consistit: & tum innumera sit multitude fide∣lium: unnm tamen Cor, unam habere animam, pro fidei & delectionis societate, merito dicantur. and vvheras there is an innume∣rable multitude of the faithfull, yet they rightly are said to have one heart, and one soul, in respect of their society in the Common faith and love. Where all the universal one∣nesse hee implyeth it of faith and love. This opinion then doth not appeare in prime and best Antiquitie, nor with any evidence in those that followed: so that till better testimonies appeare, we must say that it is therefore absolute new. 2. It is more new Relatively. 1. In reference to the protestant party; who Generally (save very few excepted) have never own∣ed it: but on the contrary constantly opposed it, as shall be shew∣ed anon. But it is most nevv in regard of the Presbytirians: these Brethren being the first we have met with: or, as it seemes, themselves either, for those they quote, make rather against them, (as will appeare afterward) certaine it is, that Calvine whom they vouch as the first restorer of that Government (though his was but a voluntary association) as we saw before, gave evidence expresly against it.
Also Chamier speaking the sence of the French Churches as af∣terward must be related: but we need not be sollicitous to prove this; seeing the Brethren of this opinion confesse this conceit to be opposed by the greatest part of the protestant writers: as wil appear in the fourth Argument. If therefore Novelty and new light be a prejudice against other opinions, it cannot but reflect suspition upon this. 2. Another just prejudice against this opinion,2. Preiudice, Dangerous▪ may be, that it is of Dangerous Consequence. For if the whole Church that is Visible and to be seen on earth, be one single Corporation or Kingdom; and the first subject to whom all Government in Church affairs belongeth, and in whose right, and by power from which, all particular Churches do act: then of necessitie. 1. There must be Viniversal and General officers, and some one above the rest, to whom the particular Churches may have continual recourse. For all Corporations have officers, that are officers of the whole Corporation, and over all, and not particular onely: as not onely the Constables of the severall Parishes, or Aldermen of cath Ward, but the Major also of the whole; who hath (though not a divided, yet) a distinct and superior power in order to the Cor∣poration, above the rest, though conjoyned. 2. Seeing Christ hath provided a seasonable and standing means, for the continual exercise of the Government of his Church, that may be made use of as occasion requires: therefore these officers must have alwaies residence in some one place, though they may also remove to another: they must have an actu∣al being and residence, as being the officers for the exercise of the power of the universal Church. For it is impertinent to say, that it is sufficient the universal Church meet by parties in severall Countreys and Ages: for the meeting of officers of Corporations must be in one place and time; as the Parliament, Convocation, Consisto∣ry, &c. And it were notably vaine to imagine that Christ hath com∣mitted the government of his Church first & chiefly to that body that should not meet six times in sixteen hundred yeares:There are but four Generall Ccels recei∣ved. The first of which was three hundred years after Christ, the last above a thousand years ago. nay never; for there never was yet any universal meeting of the Catholick
Church nor its officers: though some Councells have been called Generall, because of the number of Bishops, unitie of places from whence they have come, and the Emperours latitude of Dominion that called them. 3. From hence would follow that very many particular Chur∣ches would be in peril to be greatly damaged: seeing in appeals they must be adjudged by those that are many thousand miles distant from them, and could not have perfectPreface to M. Cot∣ton, of the keys of the Kingdome of heaven▪ and Cyprian lib, 1. Epist. 3. cognizance of the cause: nor in case they wanted information for their guidance in judge∣ment, could by reason of distance have it in time. 4. Great would be the vexation, charges, travel, &c. that would arise from such a Court, as whereunto Appeals were to come: and yet such there must be, if the whole Church be but one Cor∣poration. 3. A third and fourth prejudice and probable exception against this opinion is, Tis Papal, and Anti-Protestant. 1. Papal, not indeed in regard of the height of it (as it refers the root and head of this universallity unto Rome onely) but in regard of the opi∣nion it self: An universal visible Church: a mayne ground of the former. M. Hudson (and so M. Noyes) indeed would avoid this preju∣dice also,Page 10. 11. but with Labour in Vain: He saith he stateth not the que∣stion as the Papists do: because they take Visible for Glorious: Catholick, for Romane: and subject it to the Pope For 1. what∣soever the Papists add to the question, yet the substance and sub∣stratum of it, is the same. In vain should they fix the seat of it at Rome, and subject it to the Pope, if it might not be in it self one Corporation and Republique. 2. Again they do not take visible for glorious: but for that which is obvious to the sense: though they make Glorious an adjunct thereunto. 3. They so fix the seat of the Church at Rome, and subject it to the Pope (severall of the most eminent of them) as that it is onely in the absence of a general Councel, which they make above the Pope, as being the Church Catholick Representative, as is shewed else-where. But to return. Bellarmine (de Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 11.) haveing related the opinion of the Protestants, and propounded the Romish in op∣position thereunto, viz. There is a visible Catholick Church. He proves
it by the same places, that the Authors of this opinion do, to wit. Mat. 16. Vpon this Rock I will build my Church: and Chap. 18. Tell the Church (which though in that place he bring to prove it Visible: yet it implies to make it universal also: for both these joyntly [Catholick, Visible] he was to prove in opposition to the Protestants) for as they say this could not be meant of a particular Church,Bellarmines defi∣nition of the Ca∣tholick Visible Church, compa∣red with the de∣finition of these Authors. So hee, that it cannot be meant of an invisible. And he defines it to be one visible Church, or Congregation of men bound together by the profession of the same faith, and participation of the same sacraments, under the govern∣ment of lawfull Pastors, and especially, of that onely Vicar of Christ on earth, the Pontiffe or Bishop of Rome. In the definition it is to be noted that hee makes all beleevers but one single Corporation or Congregation, (though divided in pla∣ces,) under one single Governent, under one visible head the Pope of Rome. In all but the last clause (which is not Essential to the thing, though it be to those persons) the definition agrees to the minde of the authours of the opinion here impugned. And 2. It is Anti-Protestant,Instit. l. 4. c. 1. 5. being opposed generally by them. Calvine disputing against the Papists, about the unitie and visibilitie of the Church, saith (as was noted before) The onenesse of the Church consisteth in the onenesse of faith. And for the visibilitie, he saith: It is not necessary for the preserving of this unitie, that we should see the Church with our eyes. Chamier in his Answer to Hardings Argument against Jewell,De Oecum. Pont. l. 1. c. 8. (Art. 4. Sect. 17. urging that Every multitude in it selfe one, did stand in need of one Governour by whom it might be ma∣naged: but the Church visible,Harding. is in it self one) saith: The Church as it is Catholicke or Vniversall is not one in it selfe, be∣cause it is one generall, or universall, gathered and aggregated of many particular Churches, as if one should say, the king∣dome,Vnum . or a Kingdome, not this or that Kingdome, but King∣dome in generall, the parts whereof are all particular King∣domes, the French, Spanish, English. For SO the word CHVRCH being taken, it is compounded (mark, not consti∣tuted) of infinite particular Churches, the Romane Constan∣tinopolitane, &c. Now that which is one in that sence, it is manifest that it needs no one governour: for not as to every Kingdom there is a King, so to all Kingdomes there is one King,
that, that which is called Kingdome in Generall may have a being, and therefore not in the Church, neither: as it is under∣stood to be one collected of many particular Churches: Is it ne∣cessary that one should be president. He evidently both deny∣eth, and excellently refuteth this Catholick union, by this very thing, because the Church is Catholicke, therefore not really one, but notionally only, as all the Kingdomes in the world are one in the na∣ture and notion of Kingdomes, but not one corporation, or one Government. And so before him Bishop Jewell in answer to the same Papist,Loc. citat. (proving the minor or second part of the former argument, viz. That the Church is one visible Congregation or societie, because (as our brethren do) there is one faith and Baptisme,Hardings proof the same with these Brethrens. one calling, so one Church: as Saint Paul saith, ye all are one body and members one of ano∣ther: and in our Creede wee all professe to beleeve one holy Catholick and Apostolick Church) saith, that whereas Mr Harding had proved the major also, out of Aristotles 12. booke of his Metaphysicks, out of Homer: Never did Aristotle or Homer dreame of this NEW FANCY, that one King should rule over the whole world: And by consequence or that the whole world was but one Kingdome; and so he implyeth it to be as ridiculous that all Churches should bee but one governing Church: and hee addeth what is (considerable in this Argument, wherein reason is followed, rather then scripture:) His reason were better if either Peter or Paul, or any Catholick Father had used it: and then citeth Austin, (de Doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 28.) who saith, To attribute much to discourse of reason in understanding scripture (haec con∣suetudo periculosa est,) this custome is dangerous; (per scripturas enim divinas, multo tutius ambulatur) It is far safer following of the Scripture. So that Bishop Jewell conceiveth this against both scripture and Antiquitie. Mr Rutherford also [due right of Presby∣tery, pag. 231. titleing the page thus: How our Church hath been visible] makes it out only by this That in all Ages there have been some who have held the same points with us in the main. Implying the visibility,M. utherford for preaching with∣out speciall Ordi∣nation in some cases. and by consequence, the onenesse also to consist in onenesse of Faith and doctrine. But he hath a little before (pag. 206.) a considerable passage (at this time) about the call of our first reformers: and saith that any enlightened by the spi∣rit
of God, and members of the Catholick Church, should teach, informe and help their fellow members, being seduced and led by blinde guides, is agreeable to the law of nature. Also that, In extraordinary times, men may go beyond the ordinary path so the thing done be materially good. But this by the way. Lastly, the Professors of Leyden (cited for this opinion by Apollon. which is much to be wondered at) doe distinguish betwixt the Church Catholick and particular:Synops. Ths. de E∣cles. N. 33. and say, that The former is one in doctrine and faith, but the latter one in discipline and govern∣ment also. Evidently implying the universall Church not to be one in Gouernment, or not to be one Corporation. And thus of the third and fourth inconveniences of this opinion, and so much also for the first generall head of exceptions against it, viz. the just prejudices, and suspicious appearances of it, as being Novell, dangerous, Papall and Anti-Protestant. CHAP. IIII. Demonstrations against an Vniversall Visible Governing Church. HItherto have been handled the lesse Artillery,The Apost. useth the Metaphor, Eph. 6. and as 'tis hoped, not without successe: The main Batterie now fol∣lows: by Arguments demonstrative, and such as necessarily con∣clude against this opinion:1 Some undenia∣ble suppositions premised. and that this may be done, I premise as granted these principles. 1. That the Author of all Ecclesiastick power in the Churches, is Iesus Christ; for unto him all of it was committed,Matth. 28. and from him derived. 2. That he expressed, plainly enough, whatsoever was of great consequence for the well ordering of his house; as for all other things concerning the salvation of his people. 3. That the Apostles were appoin∣ted by him to perfect by themselves, or Deputies whilest them∣selves were living, either by precept or practise, whatsoever concerned the Churches in such particulars. 4. That they ac∣cordingly did faithfully discharge this trust. 5. That Christ and his Apostles in those their precepts and practise, are a rule to
all Churches to the end of the World. I am with you, (viz.) in observing these things which I have commanded you) unto the end of the World. 6. That they are our rule both negatively and positively: i. e. what they did not in such and such cases when they had op∣portunity, we may not in the like: and what they did, we must do so also, as occasion requires, and opportunity serves. The former particulars are plain enough: the last not difficult: if these places following, and the like be considered. Act. 15. 24. The Apostles charge the urgers of Circumcision upon the Gen∣tiles, not onely because they taught such Doctrine; but also be∣cause they taught it having received no such Commandment; unlesse we understand those words as having reference to what those Teachers it may be boasted: viz. That they had Commission from the Apostles for that Doctrine.Chap. 7. 14. Again, The Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews insinuates it to be sufficient proof, that the Priesthood did not at all belong to the Tribe of Iuda, but of Levi; because the Scripture speakes nothing (saith he) concerning the former in that respect.Numb. 23. The speech of Balaam implies as much and that other of the Prophet;Lam. 3. 37. if the Lord have not spoken,Ier. 23. 21. who can prophesie.Ezek. 13. We know how the Lord thundereth against those who prophesyed, and the Lord had not spoken to them; which yet we would have understood (as was said before) with this caution, viz. not spoken, neither expresly, nor by neer consequence, in things of special concernment to the Church. 7. That the Government of the Church of Christ (it being his house) and the knowledge of the first subject or chief trustee to whom the keys of that house is committed, is of very great concernment; and therefore to be laid down in Scripture: at least by such evidence, as with mode∣rate opening, to godly, knowing, and impartial men, may com∣fortably be perceived.2 Arguments, These things premised: we come to the Arguments. The first whereof is taken (negatively) from the Author and Founders of the Church:1. Acausa efficien∣te, 1. Negativa seu deficiente, if we may so speak ection 1. viz. The silence of Christ and his Apostles touching one Catholick Visible Governing Church. This I conceive is not to be found in Scripture; unlesse by such strayning of reason, as (we saw before) Austin saith is dangerous in the things of God. What is brought on the contrary out of Scri∣pture, shall be examined in another place, to wit, in the fifth chapter, when the Arguments for this opinion (if God permit)
shall severally be discussed: onely for methods sake, this being the joint for this Argument naturally to fall into, 'tis here men∣tioned. The second Argument is from the same persons positively: to wit:2. Positiva sive contra dicente. the contrary Institution of Christ and his Apostles, gathered plainly from their Teaching and Practise. 1. If the keyes of Government were given first and fully with entire power imme∣diately to a particular Church, then there is no universal visible Governing Church (because that is therefore contended for as the first subject of Government) but the first is true, therefore the latter. The former is thus proved. All Church power was given first and fully to the Church of the Jews: But the Church of the Jews was a particular Church, not the universal; unlesse by accident: because so it was, that there was no other Church state in the world at that time: unlesse we shall hold, asBall tryall of se∣parat. grounds, and others. some do, that there were other societies of Beleevers that were not united to the Jewish Church; as Iob and his family, &c. but this is doubtful, I therefore omit it. The Church of the Jews was a particular one. 1. It is every where called One congregation. 2. All the Church in the chiefest Sex of it, met together to solemn worship at one place,Exod. 28. . in the Temple three times a year con∣stantly, and oftner as occasion served, in Fasts, War, Thanks∣giving, Consultations, &c. neither had they any thing to do with those that joyned not themselves to their body: as Cornelius Act. 10. A beleever, and yet one that Peter might not go to. And though it be granted, to have been a Type of the Church of the New Testament, yet not as Catholick, but as Congregational, as it self was: or else as mystical: for even our Brethren denie that or∣der of Governours to bind under the Gospel: though the Papists contend for it. 2. The first Institution of the Church under the new Testa∣ment by Christ, does give entire power of Government imme∣diately to a particular Church, Matth. 18. If thy Brother offend thee, &c. Tell the Church, if he hear not the Church, let him be as a Heathen. &c. Now this was a particular Church, for it was such an one as one might complain to, and it was endued with entire power, even to excommunication. 2. If the power and pre∣sence of Christ be so with a particular Society, that Whatsoever they binde on earth shall be bound in heaven &c. and this be given immedi∣atly
to a particular society of Christians, then the assertion is good, but so it is in that Chapter: When two or three are gathered in my Name, I am in the midst: and so, as that what they binde on earth shall be bound in heaven. &c. As by the coherence may be gathered. Object.Object. But this is meant of the Jewish Church. Answ.Ansvv. 1. If so, the former Argument takes place. But 2. It is notCartwright in lo. likely, for where is the Jewish Consistory called the Church? it is called by Christ Matth. 5. the lower Assembly, a Councel: the greater Sanhedrin, a Iudgement, but not a Church. 2. He had chap. 16. spoken of his Church; and it is like, had ex∣plained himself more fully about it: for all could not be written, (as Iohn informes us chap. 21. ult.) 3. In the former chapter Matth. 18. 18. he giveth the greatest Ecclesiastick Power to a Con∣gregation of Christians, Whatsoever ye shall binde on earth, shall be bound in heaven &c. it is added immediately upon his precept of telling the Church, as the reason of it; and to corroborate it; he assures them in the same place, that what they should aske in his Name should be done: and to strengthen that, he promiseth, that when they were gathered together, he would be in the middest of them. By all which it appears, that he speaks of a particular Christian Church, and which is to be noted, without any mention of appeal to a higher Judicatory, if right should not be done there. 3. The first execution of the greatest act of entire power, was by admonition and command of the Apostle himself, but not by his power, exercised in a particular Church, without appeal to, or consulting of the universal Church, (which they might have done, according to this opinion, the Apostles then being survi∣ving,)1 Cor. 5. viz. delivering one over to Sathan: the Apostle saith, when ye (of Corinth) are gathered, and my Spirit (consent and approbati∣on, or the holy Ghost acting in you and me) by the power of our Lord Iesus Christ, not which he hath committed to me, but which is among you; for (besides that Paul (according to this opinion) being but one of the Catholick Ministers, could not orderly have excommunicated this man, without consulting with, or by authority of the rest of the Apostles, Representatives of the universal Church, if the Catholick Church be the first sub∣ject of Church power.) It is certain that Ecclesiastical Power iherent in any, cannot be delegated or transmitted over to a∣nother,
but of transmitting Apostolical power we read not. 4. If entire power were first committed to particular men, then not to the Catholique Church, and so it was not the first subject of Church power, and so not one visible governing Church; but entire power was committed to the Apostles severally, and to all joyntly, as hath been hitherto confessed by all: Ergo, &c. Object. But the Apostles represented the Catholick Church? Answ. 1. Not in all the power they received,Calvin. for they might do that which all the Churches cannot, as constitute Articles of Faith, &c. 2. They represented the Church, not as united, but as multiply∣ed: for Paul had as much power as any, and yet he was not per∣sonally united to them, as appears Gal. 1. 17. 3. Howsoever they had no successors in Apostolick power, as neither had Moses in his.Histor motuum . Pag. 8. At the first planting of a Church, more power is to be used, then afterward is needfull: as our Bre∣thren of Scotland alleadge, both for their having at the first, and for not reteining Generall Visitors still. 5. If the first reproofe from Christs own mouth for the englect of exercise of Church power, was directed to particular Churches alone by themselves, and not to the combination of them, though neere one the other; much lesse to the universall Church: then particular Churches had entire Independent Ecclesiasticall pow∣er as single Churches, and not as parts of one visible Catholicke: but the former is true, from the second and third chapters of the Revelation, where Christs reproofs are directed to the particular Churches,Videantur Geograph and not to the Presbytery over all, or to the Catho∣licke Church, though some of these Churches were but 8. or 10. miles one from the other, and the furthest but two hundred, (being all in the lesser Asia) and this after Christianity had been about 70. years in the world: so that they had time to have combined or united into an Vniversall, or at least into a Nationall or Provinciall societie or Classis, if it had been so taught them, by the Church∣founders, Christ and his Apostles. 2. Sort of Arg. From the matter or members of this universall Governing Church,2. A materia, Sect. 2. laying for ground what was noted before, viz. That every subject or agent that hath reall and actuall pro∣perties and effects, must some time or other have existence and be∣ing
as one; if one Naturall then so; if one Civil, then must they be as one body gathered into one place, as the Jewish nation, as we said before, Corporations in their Halls, Kingdomes, in their Parliaments.p. 22. This being undenyable (though Mr Hudson de∣ny it, (against all experience and reason) because It is sufficient (saith he) that they are under one King, and governed by the same Laws: but how should they be so, if they never met, at least by their Depu∣ties formally, or virtually, to yeeld to such a government; not (as was proved before) any (cleare) institution, left by Christ for such incorporation.) The 1. Argument is,1 Ab ejus non exi∣stentia. That which never had an actuall being, and existence in the world, that neither is, nor is the subject of Church povv∣er, much lesse the first: but this Church Catholick [as such] never had a being, because it was never together gathered into one place, neither in its members, nor in its Deputies: and therefore can bee one not actually, or really in it self, but byAs M. Rndall speaks: other∣wise an Episcopal man. Of the Ch. pag. 76. imagination onely, and conceit; Either in regard of the same onenesse of kinde and nature that is betwixt Churches, or of relation they have to one head, and in order to, and dependance on one rule or law the word of God.pag. 24. As several Armies, (to use M. Hudsons similitude) gathered by Commission from one Generall, in severall parts of a Kingdome or of an Empire, or of the world; and never yet brought together, nor intended so to be, but to abide under their severall particular commanders, one perhaps in England, another in India, might be called one Army, in Regard of one Com∣mission and one chief General. Yet such a similitude will not here so properly serve, because the Onenesse of the Church is denyed by our brethren to be such as is of an Army, where all are under the command of one: the whole Church (and its Officers) are by them said, to govern all particulars. Object. But Mr Hudson saith,Object. 1. That it is sufficient that the Church Catholick have existence and a being in the particu∣lars, as a heap of stones in particulars stones, the element of water in the particular drops, Churches in particular families, and fa∣milies in particular persons, and whole things in their parts. But tis much that this Authour (or Authours,Answ. a Man-Midvvife may be father also) doth not see that his owne similitudes over∣throweth his opinion, and fully cleareth what is here asserted: for
none of these things were one, if they were not together in one place. Were it one heap of stones, if one lay at M. Hudsons dore, ano∣ther at M. Calamies, (the licenser of his book) which are many miles asunder: and another at a third mans. Object. 2. But he saith that the Catholick visible Church hath sometimes met,Object. 2. as in a general Councel,Pag. ad. by their Commissioners, as a Ministerial Church Catholick. Answ. 1. It is utterly denyed that ever there was any general Councel which might be said to be the Catholick Church;Answ. unto which, as himself seems to insinuate, the particular Churches sent their Commissioners. For 1. They were never sent to all. It was the first general and most famous, which was called by Con∣stantine,Vid. Eus. called the first Councel of Nice, wherein there were 318 Bishops? but how many places were there that were Christian, over whom Constantine reigned not? and he sent but to those un∣der his Dominion. 2. It is probable he sent not to all neither (for after the Synod he wrote to those that were not there) but to the most conspicuous places; now we know in a free and law∣ful Parliament of the Kingdome, the smallest Corporations must be sent to. 3. He called for the Bishops chieflie, if not onely; and I hope our Brethren will not defend their being the orderly Representatives of so many Churches as were under them. M. Cartwright (on Act. 15. and Matth. 18.) requires the presence al∣so of the people. 4. He, not they, assumed Governing Catholick power, at least Supreme,Euseb. de vit. Const. l. 2. c. 6. Scult. me∣dul. in Anal. H. Conc. in calling and dissolving the Councel: he received the Papers, he concluded, he dismissed the Bishops, &c. Moreover here the whole Catholick Church Representative, if it were such, had one Visible head, and that not a Minister, but a Magistrate (though afterward it turned to a Minister, in the Popes of Rome) and so in our owne Kingdom: It being granted that the whole Nation is one Church; the Magistrate being Head of the Nation, declareth himself Head of the Church also: And this, or the other is like to be the issue of this opinion. 2. That Society whose members never can have an actual be∣ing [as such] that is not to be defended either to be,2. Ab impossibili∣tate existendi. or to be the first Subject of Church power; But the universal Visible Church can never have a being as such; that is, as one congregated united body, consisting of the Elders (at least) of every particular Church.
For what place could be capacious to hold them; now it hath been shewed that they must all at somtime meet so. Now the company, though but the Elders of each Church, would be in∣numerable; for who shall exclude any Church from sending, that professe the name of Christ, till excommunicated, and who shall do that. 2. If we shall adde to this, that no Church can dele∣gate or commit to Commissioners their Church power, it will strengthen much more the Argument, for thence it will follow that they must all personally meet, &c. A third sort of Arguments is from the Form and Nature of all bodies corporate,3. A foma. which consists in order of superior and inferior: they are truly described in that definition of Bellarmine before re∣cited, a little altered: viz. A society of men professing the same Faith (Laws) partaking of the same Sacraments (§ 3. oath) un∣der lawful Pastors (common Magistrates) and especially under one chief Priest (supreme Magistrate) Now in such a body,Sacramentum. the nature and forme, lies not in so many several men or families indued with particular priviledges of their owne; and onely coming together, and joyning their several interests and privi∣ledges to make up one aggregated priviledge; as a heap of stones of many stones; or a company of constables of many constables; who have no greater or new power by being gathered, then if they were but single: but the forme and nature of a corporation is, that all are bound in one single body, under lawes and offi∣cers common to all, and that of one place, distinct from others: and their officers made by the consent of the whole, or by him or them that represents the whole: and are officers to the whole, some above other, Officers of Officers; if the body be great, and one, (for the time above the rest in place and power, at least in some kinde and respect (as the Speakers in the Houses of Parliament) besides the Officers of the particular parts of the Corporation: as besides the Aldermen or Constables of seve∣ral Wards, there is the Major &c. Object. If it be objected that Christ is the absolute King of his Church,Object. and that he hath instituted his Corporation different from others, by that place, Matth. 20. 26. It shall not be so among you. Answ. We say,Answ. so hath he made it different from other Socie∣ties
in this also,My kingdome is not of this world Iohn 18. 36. with Rom. 12. 2. that it is not one single corporation, as a Kingdome of this World; but many in number, though one in Nature. But if it must be one Corporation (though Aristocratical, and as a Parlia∣ment, yet) then there ariseth these inconveniences. 1. They must existe in some one place, at least at some time in their owne persons, and alwaies in the persons of those who, in the absence of the whole Society, are to be the Officers for the exe∣cution of the decrees of the Catholick Church: and then if any Prince arise that is more potent, he will make the seat of the uni∣versal Governing Church where he pleases, it may be at Rome, as Con∣stantine did at Nice, for a season. 2. Then must the whole Church be governed by some constant and standing Officers, that are not Officers, but of the whole (at least for the time they sit) as Corporations that are lesse, are governed in ordinary by the Aldermen and Major or Bayliffes: Kingdoms in absence of the Representative Kingdom, which is a Parliament (answerable to a general Councel, according to our Brethrens opinion) by a King and Councel: So must the Church by a Committee at least, and a Chayr-man. And these two are further evident, in as much as whilest the Church-Government had any appearance of Vniver∣sal: there was such a set company of Officers, and they had a certain place of Residence, that they might be resorted to, viz. The Apostles at Hierusalem. 3. There must be one common form of Faith, Discipline, Wor∣ship, and Profession: in all particulars the same agreed on, and to be formally propounded and taken as occasion shall require, by all the beleevers in the World; and this forme to be made ei∣ther in a general Councel, or by that Representative Church or Presbyterie. 4. Then all Churches must act from the Authority, and by vertue of Commission from the Catholick Church, for they act in the name of the Catholick Church.Apollon. c. 3. p. 41. So the Assertors of this opinion Expressely:Hudson a pag. 25. quest. 2. but then it follows unavoydably, that all particular Churches, whether National or Congregational that shall innovate, change, and alter any material thing in Do∣ctrine, Worship, or Government, without the consent of the Ca∣tholick Church, are Schismaticks, and if they be resolute in it, a∣gainst what might be said to the contrary, they are HERE∣TICKS:
as those have done, that have changed in part, Do∣ctrine, Worship, and that Government which those general Coun∣cells did owne and establish: much more those, who have sworne to such alterations, expresly against such things as the u∣niversal Church in those Councels did decree. 5. Then all Magistrates are deprived of power of Reforma∣tion within their Jurisdictions, before authority derived from the Church, either in General Councel, or from their Committee: And hence is that cited out of our owne Lawyers: Quod omnes tangit: ab omnibus approbari debet. That which concernes all, must be allowed of all. viz.Declar. Parl. ex Floa & All. That are of the same visible corporation. 6. Lastly, (That I may add no more) There must be a so∣lemne meeting for the election of such general Officers as are to governe the universal Church in the absence of the universal Mi∣nisterial Representative Church: For if one Corporation should choose Burgesses that should vote in the businesse of the whole Kingdome, it would not be valid; if there had not been first an agreement of the whole Kingdome in Parliament gathered, that these so and so chosen should be Officers General, and have votes in the publick. Object. If it bee said that Christ himselfe hath appointed such Generall officers,Object. by appointing Ministers in every Congregati∣on, and then Synods for publicke occasions. It is answered, This follows not: 1. Because an Offi∣cer chosen in one particular Corporation,Ansvv. as a Major or Alderman is not an Officer in the whole Kingdome; No though all the Majors in the Kingdom were gathered together are they Officers of the whole Kingdome, unlesse by way of distribution and as in relation to their severall places; and but remotely and by acci∣dent only to the whole Kingdome: so though all the Corpora∣tions of the Kingdome were gathered, yet are they not a Parlia∣ment, and supreme Court, simply because they are meerly gather∣ed together; but it must be on former consent according to such Lawes, whereby they become a New and a Superiour body to all the Kingdome, both joyntly, (so long as they continue a Parlia∣ment) and severally: much lesse should they have any more pow∣er because they are many, but dis-joyned farre asunder: So it is in the Church.
2. They may be officers of Synods and Councels though never so generall, and yet not be officers generall of the whole world, in point of jurisdiction, as one entire body: Because their meet∣ing doth not make them a New body, nor give them as such a body any superiour juridical power (but onely Consultative, and Decretory) whether we look on any Scripture Precept or Practise of the Churches in the New Testament. 3. It is denyed that Christ hath instituted any such Catholicke Visible body, or the Representative thereof: An Oecumenicall or Generall Councell [much lesse the abstract of it a Catholick com∣mittee or Presbyterie] and there is reason for it: for the multitude of persons, difference of spirits, Languages, &c. danger, and want of ground to Delegate from hand to hand, Ecclesiasticke Power, would occasion great confusion, and such as God is not the Au∣thour of. The fourth and last sort of arguments are taken from the end,4 A fine, the Authours of this opinion aime at,1.  from the Issue of the opinion it selfe,§ 4. and from the true scope of Church Government. The former seems to be; either to found the Right of such Presbyteriall Govern∣ment as is now endeavoured; and to deprive particular Churches of intire power in themselves, or at least of Independency in their Go∣vernment from other Churches: or else it is to lay Groundwork of a more effectuall cure and remedy then hitherto, for all distempers of particular Churches, whether nationall or other. Touching the first; What will it profit if they gaine by this no∣tion, the jurisdiction of the whole world for a while, and after∣ward loose their own and others liberty? (and perhaps souls also: for the former being lost, truth will be soone oppressed, as is to be seen in the Papacy) of which straightway. Again Absolute Independency so as no other Church shall have any thing to do with an erring or delinquent Church is disavowed, both in Doctrine and Practise, by the greatest Patrons of that way in this Kingdome, and beyond the seas.Apollog. Narrat. pag. 14, Cottons way of Churches. chap. 6 Concerning the second; All distempers of Churches, as farre as the Apostolicall Churches were cured of them, have beene healed sufficiently without this opinion, yea and better then by those who have owned and practised this principle; for they have cured some, but made others greater and stronger then they were be∣fore; as we see in the Church of Rome.
2. But whatsoever their aime be,2.  they should remember that the true end of Church Government, is not only to avoid Con∣fusion and Disorder &c. but also to preserve the Rights and Pri∣viledges of particular Persons and Churches, to prevent Tyranny and invasion that way, (evils that are as dangerous to the Church and as introductive to Heresie as the former) unto which this opi∣nion, in the Issue of it, opens a wide gappe. My Baynes, (whom the London Ministers quote with Honour) saith, Dioces Triall Q. 1. pag. 21. That those who subject them∣selves to a Presbytery, as being under it by Subordination, may in effect as well be subject to an Episcopall (and by consequence I say, to a Papall) Consistory. For if the Church universall be one visible Governing body, a man will readily conclude it must have universall Officers; and a∣mong many, there must be some one chief: and Christ that hath ordered this,The Anabyst of a Papists faith up∣this principle. hath surely designed by some intimation or other who this should be, and where the seat of the Vniversall Church should reside: and then how readily will that place of Matthew 16. Thou art Peter, &c. be understood to place it upon him, and his succes∣sors: and then the question is, where hee was Bishop; and because the scripture saith nothing, thereforeEuseb. l. 3. c. 1. Ecclesiasticall Writers must be credited, and then the place is Rome: and the rather because 1. Their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole World. 2. There was the seat of the Empire &c. So that this opinion if not in the end of the Authours, yet in the Issue of the things, leads a man by the hand back to Egypt and Babylon again, as it hath done many. If it bee replyed No;Object. For that in this Vniversall body poli∣tique, all Churches and their Elders shall be Equall, and so in the Generall Councell conveened, whereas in the Papacy all (is ) depends upon, and is referred to the Pope. I answer,Ansvv. 1. (Besides what is said above) The Popes themselves in some actions, insinuate that they are not supreme in their owne personall relation, but as the head, president, or chair-man, of the Vni∣versall representative Presbyterie; which are the Colledge of Cardi∣nalls representing the Colledge of Apostles (said to be the Generall Presbyterie, representative of the Catholicke Visible Church) Hence the forme of some Instruments in the Popes name,Densilio Reve∣rendiss. Cardinal. is: By the advice of the most Reverend the Cardinalls, His Holinesse decrees such or
such a thing: In Imitation of Kingdomes (which Christ forbid∣deth his Church, as being of an other nature) where the Parliament represents the Kingdome; and in their absence the King and Councel represent them both: hence perhaps it is, that in Pro∣claimations the forme often is; Wee (saith the King) by the Advice of our Privie councell, &c. 2. Papists of chiefest note,Gerson. Schola Parisienfis. Concil constansien Basiliense &c. yea Popish Vniversities; yea Po∣pish Councells does assert a Generall Councell (which is nothing else, but an Vniversall Presbytery) to be above the Pope. So that it may be really Popish, though all do not depend on, or bee referred to the Pope firstly and primarily. Now that this Catholique Visi∣ble Church, as our Brethren have represented it, may degenerate or rather advance thereunto: let it be considered that Papall Go∣vernment it self had the like originall. It is granted even by Bishops themselves,Bishop Vssher t a conference  Hatfield. That the Bishop at first was but the PRESIDENT or Chaire-man of the Pres∣byterie or assembly of Ministers. Afterwards partly by the Am∣bition of those who were chosen to that place, partly by the sloth, flattery and slavishnesse of the rest of the Ministers and people, all came under him. So also at first each Church did all things a∣mong themselves, as ordaine, excommunicate, &c. Afterwards they associated with the great Churches: in time, what was of voluntary consent, became a necessity and due subjection. So the Bishops of Rome, at first for civilities sake, because it was the Emperours Seat, had the Precedency for a time, at length claimed it as due. So here if an universall coporation,Se also the Cen∣turies, Cent. 2. and 3. cap. de Reg. Eccles▪ there must be universall Officers; over these one President, or super-intendent, or Chaire-man: hee perhaps may have it for his life, if an able man; and may obtaine to act with a Committee as the representative of a Generall coun∣cell in their absence: and what hinders, but if another Boniface and Phocas;Platin. in Bonif. 3. An ambitious President and wicked Emperour meet, hee may be made Vniversall Bishop. Men are more loose in their Ecclesi∣asticall then Civil Liberties: And if this Government bee not of God, he will leave it to corrupt it selfe, even as the other did. But Thirdly, Necessarily and of it self, it tends to the depriving of all particular Churches of their Libertie; yea, though they should be Nationall Churches.
1. Because In them particular Churches are not left to their choise; but are Bound by this opinion to associate and to send El∣ders to the Councells and Presbyteries; so the Reverend Assem∣bly.Leis infra citand. 2. Though they should not doe it, yet are they neverthelesse under the Government of the Catholique Church, which is the first subject of Church power: and so are bound to act according to the Letter or Plaine sence of the determinations of the Catho∣licke Church, without adding, altering or detracting in any Ma∣teriall thing, especially which might concern the whole Church;The Church of Rome writing to Cyprian say, that what concerned the whole Church, was to be determined by a general Councel. And then what will become of the Reformations of all the Reformed Churches. 2. In particular in respect of the Protestant Churches of Europe, 1. Because they are much fewer then the other Churches of the world, that are in the maine Orthodox, (as some whiles since aCypr. Epist. lib. 2. Ep. 7 Presbyterian Writer hath given in the account.) 2. Who shall exclude the Popish and other Heterodox Churches from be∣ing members of the Catholicke Visible Church,Pagets Christia∣nography. till by a Gene∣rall Councell they be heard, and excommunicated, or Non communi∣oned: And whether the major part of the Churches in the world will consent to such an Excommunication or Non-communion is uncertaine, and then they must VOTE also: and so the Or∣thodox Churches will be the more over-borne. Object. 1. But it may be it will be said, the throat of the cause is yet safe, because it seems sufficient, that the major part of those that are of the same judgement ought to governe the lesse. To which I reply, that in all Corporations and Common-wealths, (as our Brethren say, the Vniversall Visible Church is) not the major part of a Part; but the major part of the whole body, are to rule the rest; and that not divided in severall places at a distance, but convened together, at least in some neernesse of place. Object. 2. If it be said that by reason of distance of place, and multitude of persons this cannot be done, viz. the collection of the Catholicke Visible Church. I answer and say, 1. Therefore such an opinion is not to be asserted which unavoidably and ne∣cessarily enforceth such a gathering. 2. That in respect of the Commissioners general, some for ma∣ny Churches (which the Authours of this opinion doe, or must
allow) it may be done for matter of companie or number. 3. Princes from one end of the world to the other, hold leagues and correspondencies together: as doth the Kingdom of England with Russia in the North; and Persia in the East. 4. Rome governs in all parts of the world as a single corporati∣on, notwithstanding distance of place. 5. Lastly, The Churches of Europe at least, might have met for the Reformations they have endeavoured, as many of them did in the Synod of Dort about Arminius. CHAP. V. The Arguments for an Vniversal Visible Governing Church, with the answers to them. HItherto we have, as it were, battered and taken the Assailants Worke: it remains that we seise on their Ammunition and Weapons:Apollon. cap. 3. Sect. 1. & cap. 1. Rejicimus 1. the opposite reasonings produced by them. And first to the Arguments of Appollonius: who (by the way) I observe to give the cause in all particulars but one or two, to those of the Congregational way: and well he could not avoid it; seeing that the Churches of Holland, go by the same principles; except that of the authority of Synods; and baptizing of all chil∣dren: which latter, how it stands with their denying Church-fellowship to all, ipsi viderint. But to his Arguments. The first is taken out of 1 Cor. 12. 28. God hath set in the Church some Apostles,§ 1. some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers: which Church there is said to consist of divers and hetero∣geneal members; but the Ministry, the Apostles, &c. are not given to any particular Church, and the Apostles &c. were the Governours of the Catholick Church; Ergo, The Visible Catholick Church is one Go∣verning body under which all particular Churches are subjected and con∣teyned Answ. At the stating of the Question I premised the distin∣ction of onenesse in Essence and mysterie, and onenesse in Integralls and Accidents. Hence I answer 1. That it is utterly à non sequitur,
and inconsequent to say, because this Scripture, and other like, speak of the Church as of one in mysterie,Profess. Leyd. in nature,Disp. 40. Thes. 33. and in essence, that therefore its one in Number,Aiun; essentialem communitat fide & faram: constare: & hance esse ubi Regiminis, foma inter se differunt. or one Visible single body: that because the Church is somevvay one, therefore Integrally, and by way of single Corporation Visible. Now the Apostle speaks of the Church as one in Mysterie and Nature, not Visibly, and in Number, appears from Verse 13. Where he saith, Ye are all ba∣ptized into one body, and been made to drink into one Spirit. Now compare this with its parallel, Eph. 4. 4. 5. Where the Apostle saith, There is but one baptisme, one faith: and so makes the one∣nesse of the body to consist in these, uniting the members to one Christ, by one spirit, to one God. In which place two things are observable: First, That as he saith the Church is one, so he saith Baptisme is one, and Faith is one; Shall we therefore say that there is but one single Baptisme, or one single Faith, visibly and integrally one in the VVorld? Surely any man would an∣swer that the former are said to be one mystically, invisibly, and in respect of their kinde and Nature, because all true faith is of the same kinde, and so all true Baptisme; but are as many seve∣ral faiths in Number, and Baptismes, as there are several belee∣vers and baptised persons. Secondly, That the onenesse of the Church essentially, consists in the onenesse for kinde of Faith, Hope, Baptisme: as also, in the onenesse of its head, its spi∣rit, and its God: which doth indeed make it one mystical body, but it doth not conclude them to be one, Visibly, Outwardly, and Externally: because some of these things wherein they are one, are invisible, others not on earth: as the faith, the hope, spirit, are invisible: God and Christ are not on earth visibly; and therefore the onenesse here mentioned, makes not one visible corporation on earth, and as one to be considered, and to act. VVe willingly grant that this union Mystical doth imply an union Visible also, as much as may stand with the Institution of Christ, and the edification of the Church: But neither Christs institu∣tion, nor the edification of the Church implies, but opposes such an Vniversal, Visible, Vnited Corporation, as we saw before. But of this more in our Answer to his second Argu∣ment. Now to return. As we say of the body, and of Baptisme, Faith, Hope, &c.
So in the like sence we grant that the Church is one, hath but one VVorship, and but one Government, viz. For Nature, and kinde in the substantialls of it, or that general platforme of it Matth. 18. and what else is to be gathered from the precepts and practise of the Apostles: but as the Church is not one visi∣ble policie, or corporation in number, so neither in the out∣ward Government of it. For this as other accidents follows the nature of its subject. So then, when the Apostle saith, God hath set in the Church some Apostles &c. the Church must be taken for one; not in regard of the outward or accidentall state of it, but indefinitely, and in regard of its inward nature and essence: that is, neither as visible, nor invisible; nor as universal or particular: for all these are outward or accidental to the Church. Object.Object. 1. But he mentioneth Baptisme,Apollo. ubi supra. various gifts, and mem∣bers, divers Ministries, as Apostles, &c. all which are visible, therefore he meaneth the Visible Church. Object.Object. 2. And whereunto belong both Jewes and Gentiles, yea all that are baptised; to which also the Apostles, Evangelists, and various gifts are given; therefore it is the Vniversall Church. Therefore I give a second answer,Ansv. I grant that hee speakes of the Church, whether Visible or Invisible, Vniversal or par∣ticular, but not of it in these respects: but mystically, and total∣ly, as comprehending those in heaven also; and this sence I will stick unto. And it appears from the scope of the place, (theucor in Mat. 13. not attending whereof, hath occasioned (saith Bucer) great calamities in all Ages to the Church, whilest men catch at words that make for their purpose, not weighing the drift of the Au∣thor in such passages:) The Apostles intent there, is plainly this: viz. to perswade the Corinthians to concord among them∣selves (and with the beleeving Jews, as seems to be implyed▪ verse 2. and 13.) and contentednesse in their gifts, and to the right use of them. Now for the fastening of this, he laies for ground, that all Christians, whether Tryumphant or Militant, are but one mystical body of Christ,1 Cor. 12. 2. ex∣plained. vers. 12. and then teaches them that gifts, they are all from one Spirit for mutual edification, and for the distinguishing of the members of one and the same body, and that there might be no Schisme or rent in the body
about these gifts, which are bestowed for the better uniting of it: that all members cannot be in the same office, nor have the same gifts, but yet may be of the same body, whereof the Church of Corinth was a part. This is all the Apostle aimes at here: And so also in that other parallel place,Eph. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. explained, Eph. 4. 3, 4, 5. &c. His scope is the same, to exhort to unity among themselves, and with the beleeving Jews whom they stood at a distance from, as they from them (as appears in Peters withdrawing from the Gentiles when the Jews came, Gal. 2.) and this is implyed Ephes. 3. 6. The Gentiles fellow-heirs, and of the same body: and verse 15. he extends it to those in heaven also: The whole Family in Heaven and Earth: and having named the Church vers. 10. and verse 21. he saith in this Church should be glory to God vvorld vvithout end: but then he must take the Church for the whole mystical body in heaven and earth. And so when afterward chap. 4. he saith there is one body,, and he gave some Apostles &c. for the perfecting of the body, he must mean the whole, and not that on earth onely: for the body of Christ is not one part onely, but the whole, which must be perfected by union of Jews and Gentiles; those on earth to be added to those in heaven. He takes the body entirely, not for the Visible part onely. Now in this Body, or in this Church as chap. 3. 6. or in this Family in heaven and earth, as verse 15. He hath set some Apostles, some Pastors. Though these have exer∣cise of their functions onely, in that part which is one earth, and in that part of it on earth which is visible: yet they are pla∣ced in the whole. Answ. 3. Should I grant (which I doe not) that the Apo∣stle, is to be understood of the Church on earth, yet hee speaks as well of a particular Church, (when he saith, God hath set some in the Church,) as of the Generall. Its evident; 1. If the word Apo∣stle, (which alone grounds the objection) be taken properly, in that he applies his speech particularly, though not exclusively, to the Corinthians; ye are the body of Christ, (to wit yee are a par∣ticular body) and members in particular,Apolles to Apol∣lonius. and so chap. 3. 21. 22. All are yours, whether Paul or Apollos (let Apolonius note) or Paul, or Cephas, or life, or death, all are YOVRS; and ye (Corinthians) Christs, &c. where all are the whole Churches, and each Churches in particular, as their occasions require; each in their order;
some Vniversal Officers which shall have power in Corinth, or any other Church; some particular to each Church. So that the sence i, He hath given or set in the Church: i. e. in this Church of Corinth, and so in that of Ephesus, &c. Some Apostles, &c. as their need shall require: yet not therefore making them one ex∣ternall societie (among themselves) As some generall Officers make not England and Scotland one Kingdome. 2. If we take the word Apostle,Rom. 16. 7. as it is taken in some other pla∣ces,1 Cor. 4. 9. and so may be taken here, for such Officers as were sent out with commission from any Church upon speciall occasion,2 Cor. 11. 13. (which is the literall signification of the word) and is so taken 2 Cor. 8. 23. Barnabas and the rest,Hebr. 3. 1. are called The Apostles of the Churches:Apoc. 2. . and Phil. 2. 25. Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Phi∣lippians: according to which; the sence would bee; God hath set some of Corinth in the office of Apostles, some Prophets, as chap. 14. &c. and so the argument hence were voided. But 4. Were it granted that the Apostle in these places meanes by the Church, the Church visible Catholicke: yet this opinion gaines nothing thereby; for it doth not follow that because it was so then, and in respect of the Apostles, that therefore it was to be so to the end of the world, and in it selfe. Christ who is the King of his Church hath the same liberty in his Kingdome speciall; that God hath over the world, which is his Kingdome general: Now at one time the Lord would have the whole world almost, one Kingdome or Monarchy under Ne∣buchadnezar, Jer. 27. 8. and threatneth with heavy plagues that nation that should refuse to serve him; giving this reason, that himselfe is King of all Nations, vers. 5. which is also repeated again, Dan. 4. 22. so that the whole world was one Kingdome upon the matter; yet it was not the will of God it should alwaies bee so. In the like manner in Moses, the Church and Common wealth affaires were chiefly under the Magistrate; but afterward they were distinct,V. Trigland de po∣testat. Eccles. & civili cap. 12. unlesse under those Kings that were Pro∣phets also. So the twelve Tribes were under Saul, David and Salo∣mon, one Kingdome: yet it was of the Lord, that afterwards they were two: and afterward one againe, after the captivity. So likewise Christ taketh the same power over his Church, when hee saw it, for the advantage of it; hee set over it one Company of
Officers, who ruled it in common, viz. the Apostles, in relation to whom, the Churches were one, though not in themselves; but that doth not argue that hee meant it should alwaies so continue after their decease. It is a Generall rule in all proceedings, that things at their first plantation and beginning need some things that afterward would be inconvenient, as a Stick by a Twigge, a Bladder to him that swimmeth, a Standing-stole to a childe. So at the first constitu∣tion of the Jewish Church, God made Moses an extraordinary Officer, so that hee had no Successor so absolute till Christs time. So at the first erection of the Christian Church, Apostles and Evan∣gelists, which now are generally apprehended to be ceased. Yea also in Scotland,Hist. mouum in Scotia Edit. 1641. (as we heard above) at the beginning of their Re∣formation, they had certaine Officers in the nature of Bishops, whom they called Visitors, which the Authour informes us were then necessary; but the Church being setled, not now any longer needfull. 2. Nor were the Churches one in themselves, (as we said be∣fore) but one in the Apostles, and that by accident also) as Eng∣land and Scotland are one in the King, because he governs both; but they are not therefore one Kingdome in themselves consi∣dered. But 3. Though wee grant this, that whiles the Apostles were living, there was one body of Officers over the whole Church, and so in respect of them the Church might bee said to bee one GOVERNED body, yet I say, it was never one GO∣VERNING body; for whiles the Apostles lived, the Vni∣versall Governing power was committed to the Apostles onely, and not with them to any other Officers, or Churches; no and not to all the Churches together, but they with their officers were all in subjection to them: and when the Apostles deceased, the scripture speaks nothing of instating any other collected and vni∣ted body to succeed them in that Vniversall Government; no nor can it be gathered by consequence: but the contrary, name∣ly; that because the use of that Vniversall power ceased, therefore the Office, Officers and subject of it. Object.Object. But Church government did not cease. Answ.Ansvv. That Kinde or Way, of Church government did, that
is an Vniversall one; but there continued the Government still, though administered in another way, viz. by way of Distributi∣on, Each Church as a Church, (i. e. as having the Essentiall notes of a Church in it, viz. The true Doctrine, or faith of Christ) received that power for it self, though not in so eminent a degree, yet as immediately from Christ, that all the Apostles had for all Churches. 6. But I may deny the former supposition, and rightly af∣firme that the Apostles were not one joynt Ministery: for besides, that each had entire power;Euseb: lib. 3. cap. 1. some had one part committed to them, and some another, as Paul expressly affirmeth, Gal. 2. 8. The uncircumcision was committed to me,Thomas () sortitus est Parthi∣am. the circumcision to Peter. Hence chap. 1. he saith, He went not up to Hierusalem, to those that were Apo∣stles before him; which he ought to have done, if the government had beene committed to the Apostles joyntly,Andreas Scithiam. and not severally; whence also his going up thither,Ioannes Asam &c. Act. 15. about the question of Circumcision, was not on this ground; but to satisfie the Chri∣stians of Antioch, about his Doctrine, as consonant to that of the o∣ther Apostles. On the former principle, he professeth (2 Cor. 10. 13. &c.) he had not intruded into another mans line; alluding, as it seems to the shareing out of inheritances by line, (as Psal. 16. 6.) for this reason, the Epistles of Peter, Iames and Iohn are called Ca∣tholicke, because written to the dispersed Iewes throughout the se∣verall nations, as is the expression in the entrance of those Epistles. Hence also Paul is sent from Ierusalem as not his place, Act. 22. 18. And though sometimes he disputed with the Jews, yet it was but as making way to the Gentiles, neither did hee greatly prevaile with them, as appears, Act. 13. 40. 41. chap. 28. 16. 7. To conclude therefore, our reply to this Argument, If it follow not, when we say, God hath set in the World some Emperours, some Kings, some Princes, some inferiour officers and Magistrates: there∣fore the whole world is but one Governing Kingdome, and all particular Kingdomes do but governe in the right of the Kingdome of the world, in Common; the Officers whereof are the Kings of the severall Kingdomes, who being gathered together, or a part of them, have the povver of giving Lavves to other Kingdomes, according to the Lavv of God and nature, (which are the rules of all just Government) and this also to bee done by the Kings and Princes themselves, vvithout any authority from, or
any dependency on the people, (unlesse for quietnes sake, and as far as they see cause:) If (as was said) this follow not: neither doth it follow, that because the scripture saith, God hath set some in the Church Apostles, &c. Therefore the Church throughout the world is but one Congregation, to whose Officers first, as the generall Of∣ficers of the whole Church, not by way of distribution, but as a Notionally (at least) collected body of Officers: the power of Government is committed: by Authoritie whereof, and de∣pendence upon which common officers and body,Apollon. cap. 3▪ the officers of every particular Church do act:Sect. 4. Asserimus. Ius divin. of the Presbytery, p. 43. and cap. 11. p. 163. and those without any depen∣dency upon the concurrence of the people, as co-operating and acting with them, unlesse for peace sake. By which means (let it be observed by all sorts, The power being given, not to any one Church, but to the whole Church, as one body; and not to the members with the Officers, but to the Officers onely) there is derived a very Transcendent power and Authoritie upon every particular Minister; more then any Parliament-man hath, yea more then a King, (who is limited to his dominion) It makes e∣very Minister one of the standing Officers of the Christian world, to whom with his Collegues (not severally and by distribution, but joyntly, and as one body) is committed the Government of the whole Christian world, and managing of the Affaires of the Son of God throughout the face of the earth. And so hee is one of Christs Vicars Generall, (and not particular onely, which I acknowledge every Minister to be in his place) magnum surely, et memorabile nomen. But if this bee so, great reason is it that the Church of the whole world should choose these Vniversall Of∣ficers, and so the Church of a nation the Nationall Officers, &c. by whom they are to be Governed in that which is of Dearest and highest moment, viz. the precious soule: or else their condition is most sad. If every one that can get a little learning and desires to live upon the Sweat and cost of others; and to become a mini∣ster (though I professe that calling to be most difficult on earth; and also, that the Lord hath appointed that those that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel) and so being willing to submit to such conditi∣ons as is required, shall have a friend, patron, or a purse to make one; and come into the ministery and a living (which is the Kings Road, in some Churches, and is the way whereby many
of those who now are to be Presbyters came in) he shall be∣come a Parliament man, and joynt Governour of the whole Church on earth; by whose one vote, all the liberties and truth of Religion in them may be destroyed: A glympe whereof we have seen in the Convocations or Synods in our owne Nation. This I say is sad; yea more sad then the condition of men in their Civil Liberties In our owne Kingdom: where none attains the honour of being an universal Officer, a Parliament man, but by the consent (formal or virtual) of all, or the major part of them: there having been a precedent act by joynt consent of the whole Nation, that persons chosen by the free Vote of the major part of Corporations &c. should (if loyal) be Officers pro tempore, to their owne Corporations, and to the whole. But such agreement hath not been made, (no not tacitely) by the Catholick Church; nor no such institution of Christ hath ap∣peared yet. And these answers also are applyable to what the same Author hath else where from the word CHVRCH,Apollon. cap. 1. p. 8 Reijcimus. as when he de∣nieth a Particular Church to be the proper subject of the covenant of grace, and priviledges of it; because saith he, the CHVRCH to which these promises are made, is perpetual. Jer. 31. 36. The strength of which reasoning lies on this, that the word Church, and not Churches, is used in these places; and so it is represented as one. Answ. As if it were not common to call that perpetual which is so by succession of those of the like Nature and Kinde; because the Lord saith Day and Night shall not cease to the Worlds end; doth it therefore follow that all the essential properties of day or night do not agree to this or that particular day? Is it not a rule in Na∣ture and Reason,Arist. that all the essential properties of general and common beings, are really existent in the individual and parti∣lars. Man is to continue on earth to the end of the World, does not therefore the essential properties of man agree to Peter or Paul, because they were not to continue. His second and third Argument there, is; That a particular Church cannot be the subject of the covenant of Grace: and consequently of Church power (for the reason is the same) because the Church which hath these is sanctified, is the spouse of Christ, hath the Law written in the heart of it: &c. but a
particular Church [as it is particular] cannot be said to be such. Answ. But 1. It was never said that one particular Church is so the subject of these, as that another is not. Secondly, To speak properly, The Church not as visible, nor as particular, nor as invisible, nor as universal, is the subject of these things, but as a Church; i. e. A society of Beleevers: and under that nation, a particular Church considered as a Church, hath right to all, and is the subject of all these. All are yours, saith the Apostle to the Corinthians, whether Paul or Christ. &c. So that this Author by adding this clause [as particular] hath praevaricated and alte∣red the state of the Question. His last Argument in that place, is from the Testimony of the Professors of Leyden, and Amesius. To which I answer,Disp. 40. Thes. 29, 30, 31. That the former say nothing; but, that the covenant,Antibell. Tom. 2. l. . 10. and promises, and priviledges, belong to true beleevers, and the invisible Church, whether in a [particular Church] or dispersed through the world. So that this Testimony seems rather to make against him. The other is expresly against him, and speaks our very sense, yea and terms almost insomuch that I wonder this Author is brought in as a witnesse: His words are, even as they are cited by Apollonius himself: These things agree not to the whole multitude that professe Christ, but onely to those that are truly faithful: or they agree to the Church militant, in respect of its ESSENTIAL Nature, which is proper to the truly faithful. So then, not to a Church as Vniversal or particular, as Visible or invisible, but as essentially a Church, which a particular Church may be.M. Hudson. And the former replies also will serve unto what the other Au∣thors urge from such like Scriptures and places:M. Noyes. as 1. M. Hudson from Act. 8. 3.The London Mi∣nisters. Saul made havock of the Church,Assembly of Di∣vines. Gal. 1. 13. I perse∣cuted the Church, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Give none offence to the Church of God. 1 Cor. 12. 28. God hath set some in the Church. 1 Tim. 3. 15. That thou mayest know how to behave thy self in the Church of God. Also when it is called the Kingdom of God, a Barne, a Draw-net, a Marriage: and because 1. Cor. 12. the Church is said to be one Body, and one Woman, Apoc. 12. one sheepfold, John 10. one Dove, Cant. 2. 2. All which▪ and other places wherein the word
Church is used, are to be understood, as hath been evidenced, either of the Church in respect of the nature and essence of it: as all beleevers and Churches have the same kind of Faith, Do∣ctrine, &c. or else as one mystical and invisible body of Christ: but doth not at all insinuate, much lesse prove: that they are all one external and visible Corporation. 3. M. Noyes who useth the same places of Scripture as the o∣ther; as also Apoc. 11. 1, 2, 3. the Church is described as one City, one new Jerusalem &c. Answ. That place is taken by great Expositors, to signifie such a state as is not yet in being; what it will be when that shall exist, is uncertain. Secondly, We grant it to be one City and Kingdome as a mysticall body: 1. In respect of Christ the head. 2. In regard that all Churches in their severall places, walke by the same Laws &c. i. e. as essentially agreeing toge∣ther, but not visibly governing as one body. 4. The London Ministers part 1. pag. 3. who urge the forena∣med place 1 Cor. 12. and that the Apostle maketh the whole Church but one Organical body (a contradiction to their asser∣tion Praefat. p. 11. That the Church is a similar body (which over∣throws their present Tenent; for in a similar body all the parts toge∣ther have no more internal power then single; as in drops of water, single Corporations, as single, though united in place.) So part 2. p. 66. where also they say that Eph. 4. 4. Christ is considered mystically, not personally; and if mystically, not visibly.) Answ. First The Apostles scope, and then the supposition he goes on, are to be eyed. The scope is to exhort to humility in great gifts, to contentednesse in mean gifts, and to love and edification by all gifts. The supposition he grounds his Argu∣ment on, is the relation wherein believers stand, viz. of mem∣bers of one and the same body, sil. of Christ mystically consi∣dered (as the Ministers speak) but he neither expresseth nor implyeth the visibility of this body, or the outward onenesse of it: if he mean the Catholick, and not the particular Church of Corinth. 5. Lastly, The Reverend Assembly; who in the places above mentioned, quote Eph. 4. 3. &c. To which Answer hath
been given above; and may again when we come particulary to reply unto them. And thus much in answer to the first Argument of Apollonius and others drawn from expressions that speake of the Church as one: one body, house, Kingdome, family, sheepfold, which is indeed the Achileum, or Fort Royall in this Garison; and which, if I be not greatly overseene, hath been, by the former weapons out of Christs Armory absolutely taken and demolished. The second Argument followes which is:Arg. Gen. 2. There is certaine Societie and Ecclesiasticall communion by divine institution, and therefore a certain universall body: for there is a certain in∣ternall fellowship and obligation to mutuall offices, Eph. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. which doth require an externall and outward Society, and Commuion Ecclesiasticall, in exhorting, reproving, comforting, edifying one another—and that fellowship which the mem∣bers of a particular Church retain among themselves, in a due proportion Churches Provinciall and Nationall ought to keep—by which communion Ecclesiasticall, all Nationall Chur∣ches do grow up to one Vniversall Ecclesiasticall body. Ans. This reason no way concludes the intended proposition: I willingly grant there is a mutuall fellowship, and spirituall com∣munion; which also requires an outward communion in many respects, and particularly, in those named by this Author, viz. ex∣hortation, reproof, &c. And indeed, this was all the combination that was in the most Primitive Churches: and such inward and out∣ward communion there is to bee betwixt all good men, friends, brethren, nations, &c. But this argues not that therefore they must be one body in point of Government. Neighbour Nations are to retain this inward communion, and outward, so farre as may make for mutuall good, and there may bee a society or league betwixt them, as betwixt Solomon and the King of Aegypt, betwixt Solomon and Hiram, King of Tyre. So men of the same trade and profession in regard of the same art, have an internall communion toge∣ther, and this requires some outward communion also, as occasion serves; but it no way concludes, that therefore they must needs be one body or Corporation; Suppose some dwell at London, some at Yorke, some in England, and some in France. 2. It is also gran∣ted, that the same Vnion that the members of a Church have one
with another, the same have the severall Churches among them∣selves, IN A DVE PROPORTION, which are the words of the Author; but this proportion is not IDENTITIE, or samenesse of Relation; that is, it is not so neer a relation, nor gives that power that the former relation doth. As the same re∣lation that the members of a Family have one unto another; the same in a due proportion have particular families one to another; but no man will say that what the members of a family, especially some of them, may doe one to another; the same may a Corpo∣poration of Families do among themselves, there is some neer∣nesse, but not altogether the same. And this also is sufficient for the second Argument. I shall meet with it again anon in the first Argument of the Reverend Assembly. The Third.Arg. Gen. 3. There were certaine meetings in the New Testament which did represent the whole Church, and where∣in the businesse of the whole Church was transacted, to wit, the calling of an Apostle; which was a part of Ecclesiasticall Discipline: and there were the Pastors of the universal Church, for they were sent unto all the world, Matth. 21. 19. and there∣were the brethren out of Galilee and Jerusalem. Answ. 1. I deny (with the Protestant Divines against the Pa∣pists) that there is any Representative Church properly so called, or that this was one; it was onely at present a Particular Congre∣gation whereof the Apostles were members, though principall ones, but not yet actually instituted Officers, neither of this, or the whole Church, which appears vers 4. 8. Tarry ye (saith he) in Jerusalem till you have received power from on high. But it was indeed that first Church from whence all Churches were to be produced, and the Apostles (especially) and the rest of these members were those, who were severally or joyntly to plant those Churches (for some members of this Church did plant other Churches, and not the Apostles onely, as is expressed chap 8.) as one man that is father by generation of many Families; neither is an universal man, nor doth ever represent them; neither is he the Governour alwaies of them, but for a certain time onely. 2. If it were the Representative of the universal Church, because the Apostles, the universal Officers were there; yet it was their priviledge, as was shewed above, to be the universal Officers, and
that severally; so that though the Churches were one body under one number of Officers then; yet they having no successors in the latitude of their power, the Church now becomes many: else you may as well conclude, that all the world must still be one under one sort of Governours, because it was so in the time of Adam and Noah. 3. This act declares very small power in the Apostles or uni∣versal Church; for they could not make an universal Officer; whereas every particular Church can make its particular Officers: and this shews there was then no Catholick government, proper∣ly such, but that was reserved to Christ alone. 4. If it conclude; it argues, that the Catholick Church is for∣mally to chuse its Catholick Officers (for so they did) and to come together for that purpose. 5. It puts the brethren into great liberty and priviledge, for they choose, and the Apostles onely put them upon the work, and pray∣ed over it. But to avoid this, else-where labour is used to prove that here were onely the Apostles or Elders in this election: quid non mortalia pectora cogis (Regni) sacra fames. The second Argument there, is, that the businesse of the univer∣sal Church was transacted, scil. the election of an Apostle. Answ. Adam did represent all mankinde, and transacted the affairs and businesse of the universal Catholick world, both before and after his fall: so likewise Noah and his family after the flood, Gen. 8. doth it therefore follow that the whole world should be but one Kingdom or Corporation. It is usual for Kingdoms to send out Colonies into forraigne parts, and to give them power to become Common-wealths of themselves, without dependence, unlesse voluntary, upon that Kingdom from whence they had their Original, as New-Eng∣land. So fathers of Families yeild their sons an entire governe∣ment in their owne families, without necessarily engageing them to the families of their brethren, further then mutuall love and relations shall require. But before the Colonies be sent out, the Nation from whence they arise, doth represent and transact the businesse both of themselves, and of all those Colonies: and the father of the Families both represents and transacts the busi∣nesse of the Families that spring from him: yet are both the
one and other afterward, without any absolute and necessary de∣pendence either upon the one or other. So in the mat∣ter of Christs Church. The Church of Jerusalem was as it were the mother to the rest; The Apostles &c. spiritual fathers, who represented and transacted the affairs of all Churches that should flow from that; but so, that when such Churches came to be planted, they shewed by their practise that the Apostles had in∣stated them in entyre power, without any necessary dependence on other Churches, whether single or combined, as is evident out of the first and second chapters of the Revelation, noted before, and other places. 3. The third particular is of little moment: for the brethren that are called Galileans, vers. 11. were so by countrey; but now were by habitation and dwelling, in all probability of Hierusalem. And howsoever, the thing is not much material, seeing there was then no other Church or societie of Christians visible, but that at Hierusalem. Besides, the former answers take off this also. And thus the first scripture, viz. from Act. 1. is answered. The second followes out of Act. 15. 22.Apollon. ubi supra. Where that Assem∣bly of Apostles, Elders and Brethren, which by ordinary power prescribed, Ecclesiasticall Cannons and decrees to all the Chur∣ches of the Gentiles, and by authority imposed them on them▪ this Assembly is called the Church; but to doe so could not bee in the power of any Provinciall or Nationall Assembly▪ much lesse of a Congregationall, but it is the Act of the Catho∣lique Church, which therefore this Assembly represented. Answ. 1. The former answers touching the prerogative of the Apo∣stles, and of the mother Church, are equally applyable to this also. 2. It is not called The Church indefinitely, but with reference to THAT PLACE scil.vers.  of Hierusalem, as by the context appeares, for vers. 22. 'Tis said, It seems good to the Church to send chosen men of their OWN company; but the whole Assembly as constituted of the Church of Hierusalem, and the messengers of An∣tioch, &c. is not called the Church. 3. It was not then the representative of the Catholick Church, as it was in the first chapter; there beeing now other Churches planted, which were not there by their messengers. Neither was the Colledge of the Apostles there, the standing and supreme
Court of the Catholick Church, to which all Churches were to appeale, and to whose judgement they were to stand; but every one of the Apostles in the Churches they planted. For Paul as he went not up to Hierusalem himselfe at first (as was noted above and therefore could not teach the Churches any such duty of necessity binding them) so neither did he now either himselfe or others therefore go up from Antioch to Hierusalem,Cartwright on the place. as if he had not plenary and full power to have determined the controversie; but for satisfaction of the Brethren; who either were told by those that came from Hierusalem, (as it seems by what the Apostles wrote in their letter, vers. 24. to whom we gave no such commandement: im∣plying that those persons had given out that they had such com∣mand from the Apostles) or else they desired the mind of the other▪ Apostles also for further confirmation; Therefore doth Paul goe up. Also in divers of his Epistles, hee joynes Timothy, Sylvanus and Sosthenes, &c. with himself; yea, and all the Brethren, Gal. 1. 1. as here the Apostles joyned the Elders and Brethren; yet these examples doe not argue that the Apostle, or the Apostles had not absolute power of themselves to have determined the contro∣versie. 4. It is denyed that this Assembly did act by an ordinary pow∣er; for if the Apostles presence made not the Assembly extraordi∣nary: then was it but an ordinary and particular Church, or two, or three partcular Churches at the most; (there being many other Churches then planted, who had no Elders there, nor were sent to, so farre as is related,) and then it will fall out, either that they did conclude and injoyne onely Doctrinally, (though with authori∣ty) or else that a particular and ordinary Church, or two or three Churches by ordinary power may prescribe, and by authoritie in∣joyne Lawes to all Churches in the world, petit ile, cavento. by way of Jurisdicti∣on. It will not be easie to get safe from betwixt the hornes of this argument. 5. But it will not prejudice me to yeeld it an ordinary Assembly, for it is granted to any Assembly of one Church or more, to do as much as is here expressed this councell to have done, viz. 1. To meet for the discussion of any Doctrine that afflicts the Churches, especially if they bee sent unto as these were. 2. To conferre scriptures together which concerns those points. 3. Light ap∣pearing
by the spirit of God and Scripture, they may represent their results,M. Brinsley of Yarmouth: Sacred and soveraigne Church remedy, pag 45. saith, The o∣ther Churches though they were not bound for∣mally, yet virtu∣tually they were, in regard of the equity of the de∣cree. He implies it was not the Ca∣tholick Church▪ for that would have formally and not virtually one∣ly have bound them, according to his judgment. as the will of God, and minde of the Holy Ghost, and so may 4. MINISTERIALLY IMPOSE and enjoyn to all other Churches what appears to be the clear mind of Christ, as Paul did, 1 Cor. 7. having no expresse command: and as any of our Brethren do when they preach the Word: Do they not injoyne obedience in the name of Christ? but withall they disclaim having sole Jurisdiction, so as to Excommunicate any alone by them∣selves, if they obey not: and yet they do the former by Au∣thority, because the Ministery of the Word is an Ordinance of God. Object. But it was an Assembly representing the Catholick Church because of the Apostles, who were the Catholick Offi∣cers, and the whole acted by the ordinary power of the Ca∣tholick Church.Object. Answ. 1. The Reason overthrowes the Argument:Answ. For if it was therefore an Assembly of the Catholick Church, because of the presence of the Apostles. Then if the Apostles had been absent, it had been but the Assembly of a particular Church. And the Apo∣stles when assembled alone, had made an Assembly of the Ca∣tholick Church. So the universality or Catholicisme of the Assem∣bly, depended wholely and solely on the Apostles. Or else secondly, The Apostles if alone out of this Assembly, neither severally nor joyntly, should have been able to determine and do what was here done. Or else thirdly, The Apostles in this Assembly did denude and strip themselves of their Apostolical power (or at least suspend it it for that time) and acted onely as ordinary Elders of the Ca∣tholick Church: but then it would follow, either, that that particular Church of Jerusalem was the Catholick Church (as Rome is said to be) for there were messengers from few (if from more then one) other Churches: Or that the Apostles though laying aside their being Elders of the universal Church, (for that was their Apostleship) did yet act as Elders of the uni∣versal Church: all which are (,) crasse interfer∣ings. I thinke this Church acted 1. As the mother Church. 2. As having an accesse of Authority by the presence of the Apostles.
3. As being the Church from which the scandal enquired about, was conceived to arise. Neither doth the joyning of the El∣ders and Brethren wholy take off the eminency and authority of the Apostles above the rest (for their speeches onely are recor∣ded) no more then Paul's joyning others with him in his Epi∣stles: though it do argue, that the Church of Antioch had not that esteem of them as infallible alone. And thus much also for that other place brought for confirmation of the third Argument, [A Representative Catholick Church in Scri∣pture.] The fourth and last Argument is from the Testimony of some Reformed Divines;Loc. Com. Loc. de Eccles. p. 458. viz. Walaeus, and the Professors of Leydon. But the first speaks nothing for him but what all acknowledge, and was granted above. scil. The Church saith he, may be considered two waies. 1. Vniversally, for the Church which by the preach∣ing of the Gospel is called out of the world, throughout the world, respectu. which in a certain sense, or in some respect, may e∣ven be called Catholick: or for a particular Flock, tyed un∣to one place. In which sense I know none denie a Catholick Church; it being one of the Articles of the ordinary Creed, that there is a Catholick Church, that is; that the Church is now no longer bound to any one place, as under the Jewish Government. But that the Church in respect of the several members and socie∣ties of it, is dispersed over the face of the earth. But this doth no more conclude that therefore they are one Visible Corporation, then when we say; Mankinde is spread over all the World, that therefore all men are one company or body politick. 2. The Professors of Leyden are against him; for they distin∣guish betweene a Visible and particular Church, and betweene the Invisible and universal:Disp. 40. Thes. 27. Thes. 33. and say, That a Visible Church is con∣sidered two waies, 1. As a company or Society of one Towne, City, or Province, which are united not onely in the unity of Faith and Sacraments, but also in the [Forme of outward Government] or else it is considered as a certain Oecumenical and Vniversal body, dispersed in several pla∣ces throughout the whole World; Although THEY DIFFER IN THE EXTERNALL FORME IT SELFE OF CHVRCH-GOVERNEMENTMultum
and circumstantial Rites very much: yet agreeing in the ESSENTIAL VNITY OF FAITH, and of the Sacraments. Whence that is common in Cyprian: Episcopa∣tus unus est, cujus à singulis in solidum pars tenetur. Wich words evidently destroy this opinion. For first they make the Essentialunion or forme of the Society and onenesse of the Church, to consist in the onenesse of Faith and Sacraments. Secondly, They imply, That Government is one as it is in Christ, but di∣vers as it is in severall Churches, and in the hands of severall Officers; for so Calvine (in Ephes. 4. 11.) expounds that of Cyprian: The Episcopacie he gives to Christ alone, in the administring whereof, every one hath his part. Thirdly, And (which chiefly assaulteth the heart of the cause for which it is brought by this Author) They make the very difference betwixt the universal Church and a particular Church to be this, That they disagree in the outward or visible forme of Church-Go∣vernment; therefore in the sense of the Professors of Leyden, the Vniversal Church is not one Governing Body, for then the Government must be one, not only in Essence, Nature, and Kinde, but one in Number, Existence, single and Indivual being. And thus much for answer in particular to Apollonius, who indeed hath the substance of what hath been said for this opinion: others that follow, having taken his grounds, and dilated them a little but not much strengthened them thereby, as will appear in the sequele. 2. The next Defendant of this opinion is M. Hudson,§ 2. cited in the first chapter:2. M. Hudson▪ his sense is the same, his words and expressi∣ons not so distinct as the former. Before I come to his Arguments (such as seem to differ from those before) 1. note that the Scri∣pture he brings to signifie the whole company of thePage 1. Elect, are the same in sense with those which he brings to signifie onePage 13. Visible Vniversal body: and so are they expounded (as I have done) by the best interpreters, even those he makes use of. His first place is Eph. 5. 26. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, &c. This (saith he) is to be understood of the Elect. So also saith Beza, but Beza parallels and make the same in sense with it 1 Cor. 12. 12. 27. Eph. 1. 22. and Eph. 4. 15. 16. as is to be seen in his larger notes on M. Hudsons second place cited for this Church of
the Elect, viz. Coloss. 1. 18. which placeMeo quidem judi∣cio de Guhernatione loquitur. Calv. in Coloss. 1. 18. Calvin understands of the Church as it is governed by Christ: So that these places, if they be to be understood of the mystical body of Christ, and not of a Visible Vniversal Body, then so are the other in the judgement of those Interpreters. BesidesCalv. Verum inter Christian, longe ALIA est ratio. Neque enim Corpus politicum (loquitur de Civili) duntaxat efficiunt, sed sunt SPIRITVALE & ARCANVM Christi corpus. Sic. v. 17. Calvin on that place whereon M. Hudson and the rest build their greatest strength, 1 Cor. 12. 12. 27. doth evidently make the Body and Corpora∣tion, whereof beleevers are members, to be a spiritual and my∣stical one, and doth so distinguish it from the society and corpo∣ration they have as a politick or a civil body of a Towne or City. 2. This Authors definition doth not reach the subject of his question, but contains what is of all hands confessed, it is this. The Vniversal Visible Church is the whole company of Visible Beleevers throughout the World. Thirdly, He brings the description of the Church visible out of several Authors; none of which (not Austins, nor Calvins, nor Bullingers, nor Kekermans, nor Zuinglius his, nor Gerards, nor Byfields, who all take Vniversal in the sense now described, and not as M. Hudson.) but one or two speak to the question: viz. Apollonius, and perhaps P. Ramus: the former of which was pre-ingaged; and touching the latter, I referre the Reader to M. Be∣za's judgement of him, and that (as it seems) with reference to this opinion.—Predixi, quod in caeteris disciplinis-ausus esset, mox etiam in Theologia tentaturum—Quid non ille ante mortem molitus est, ut & in dogmatibus quibusdam, & in tota Ecclesiastica Disciplinâ Gal∣licas Ecclesias inter se COMMITTERET—Vtinam ipsius scripta periissent, quandoquidem haec est mundi INSANIA. Bezae Epist. ad Vrsinum in Organ. Aristot. 4. He acknowledges among other AuthorsPage 11▪ Ames to be a∣gainst him, and yet in the veryPage 12. next page, cites him as for him. 5. Yet those words of this Author which he cites, speak no∣thing for him,Bellarm. Eervat. if compared with the Authors meaning: they are: We acknowledge a Catholick Visible Church in respect of its external and accidental forme, in its parts (or members) both severally and joyntly. Which is no more but this; that Christians as they are single men, and as they are combined into particular
Churches, are visible. But M. Hudson might have known or re∣membred, that M. Ames doth expresly, and in terminis, reject an universal Visible Church in M. Hudsons sense: his words else∣where are: The Church since Christs coming is not one CA∣THOLIQVE,Medull. l. 1. c. 3. n. 20. 21. so as that all the faithfull dispersed through∣out the whole world should be united in one and the same bond for outward relation) and depend upon one and the same Visible Pastor, or Assembly of Pastors (or Presbyterie, marke it:) but there are so many Churches as there are par∣ticular Congregations. For although the Church mystical, as it is in its members is distinguished into its subject and adjuncts, as the English Church, the French, the Belgick: as we use to call the sea by the name of the coast it beats upon, as the Brittish, the Belgick, the Baltick sea, although it be one and the same sea: yet notwithstanding instituted Churches are several distinct species, or kindes, or single bodies parta∣king of the same common Nature, as severall springs, seve∣ral schools, several families; although perhaps many of them, or all, may be called one Church in respect of some affection which they all have in commune. Like as many Families of one and the same noble and eminent Family, are called by one name, as the house of Nassau, or the house of Austria, which comprehends the Emperour and King of Spain, who yet have no dependence in point of Government one on another. Now wee know who taxes some-body for this fault,M. Edw. Gangr. part 1. of citeing Authors for them, who are known to be in the main, against them. 6. His explication of his question both confutes his opinion, and also contradicteth plainly what he speaks of it. For he saith, That the Church Catholicke visible is one whole body,pag. 20. 21. all whose parts or particular Churches are alike,Totum Integrale similare. and of the same Nature: And avouches for this purpose the authority of Ames▪ who indeed saith so. Now in a body all whose parts are of like nature and quality, as so many drops of water, or stones in a heap: each part hath the same vertue and power that the whole, and all the parts together, (the whole Sea, or whole heape of Stones) have no other kinde of Vertue or power then one drop, or one stone. Or to make it cleer by another similitude, severall King∣domes in the world, and severall Corporations in a Kingdom, and
severall families in Corporation, if they bee all but members a∣like of the same Kingdome, and not of a higher body, whereof when they are met, they may be members, (as Kingdomes of an Empire, Corporations of a Parliament, Families of a Corpora∣tion,) They should have no more nor greater power when met, then when assunder? As a multitude of single men, that are not of a Corporation, though they bee met; yet have they not the more power then each one simply, for their meeting; their meet∣ing addes no power, unlesse they meet as members of a body su∣periour to them, when severall. 2. This explication contradicteth expresly what he adds in the same place, (pag. 21.) and which is his opinion, that hee would establish, viz. That the Church, (Visible Catholique) is an Organicall, Ministeriall Governing body; that is; not such a body as is the element of water or ayre, every part whereof is of the same nature, vertue and power in it selfe considered; but such a body as a man hath, which is distinguished by severall mem∣bers, some principall, some lesse principall, some governing, as head eyes; some acting, as hands fee; some governed, as the body by the head eyes, &c. And such a body as all Corporations are. Now this contradicts plainly the former, both opinion and ex∣pression; for if the Church be a similar body, and all Congregations alike; and the whole nothing differing in nature or constitution, or power from the parts; then the Catholick Vniversall visible Church, is no more the Governing Church, then a particular. As the whole sea is no more Water then one drop, nor all men, if they be taken as single men, have no more or higher authori∣ty then one man: nor all families then one family: nor all Cor∣porations then one Corporation. Wee see that 'tis not one sort of men onely that are obnoxious to contradictions, both verball and reall. Besides, the Author he seem to follo,Mr Cadrey, Pre∣face to Vdic. Clavium. (viz. Apollonius) enterprets that place, Eph. 4. 16. The whole body fitly joyned together, to be meant of an Organicall Mi∣nisteriall body differing in members; which Mr Hudson ex∣pounds to be meant of a Similar and body whose parts are all a∣like.Vide Caudrey ubi supra. Wee see here also, that even persons of this opinion cannot a∣gree among themselves, shall wee therefore say they know not what they would have, seeing one would have one thing, another another? We must
then reach out the same ingenuity unto others, differing in like manner, that we stand in need of our selves. About his answers to the objections he brings against his opini∣on,Object. we may note severall things, as first, in his answer to the 1. Objection, he saith, That the dwelling in one Towne where there is a Church, and being member of another Church, is a kinde of dis-church∣ing that Church which is in the Tovvne where he dwells. But the answer is ready according to his opinion;Ansvv. for they re∣maine still of the same integrall body, if the whole Church bee but one visible Congregation: and so we see what way by this opinion is made to the scattering of particular Churches,Instance, seeing men may re∣move, though not in dwelling, yet in relation at pleasure, with∣out danger of Schisme; for they remaine still of the same single (though larger) bodie, as a man may dwell in one Corporation, and be a member of another, yet he still abides a member of one and the same single Kingdome. His 2d. Objection is,Object. 2. That if all particular Churches bee all one Church, they must all meet some times. His answer is,Ansvv. 1. No, It is sufficient that it have the same King, Lavves, Spirit, &c. But was there ever in the world such a King∣dome or Corporation, that the members of it do not meet sometimes, if it be not a meere visible Monarchy,Instance▪ as under Popery. If it have any liberty left to the subjects▪ they must meet sometimes, at least by their Deputies, as the Kingdome of England in Parliament, the Empire of Germanie in the states of the Empire, &c. His 2d. answer is, That the Church Catholicke visible, hath met in Generall Councells, as a ministeriall Church (and mark, it is now ministeriall and heterogeneall, which was before simi∣lar and homogeneall) but this is replyed to above, where was shewed, 1. That the most primitive Churches did not so act. 2. That the whole Church did not meet in them. 3. That they either acted as a similar body acts in the name of those, and within the Churches that sent them each for their owne, and all for all those, whose Deputies they were for ought we have learnt yet: or else that they acted much by Regall power, as by Constan∣tines, in the Councell of Nice, and others by other Emperours: and they acted also in late Councels by Episcopall, Archiepiscopall and Patriarchal power, and not as a similar body. 4. If those were
the Catholick Church visible representative: How dare any par∣ticular Churches at most but (if) national, abrogate and sweare against, the Ordinances and government established by the Ca∣tholicke Church. Let him minde this. Againe he saith, The power of a general Councel, or of the Catholick visible Church, is but EXTENSIVE, and the power of particular Chur∣ches INTENSIVE: but 1. This overthrowes his tenet; for then the Catholicke Church hath no more power in it selfe, and properly, but meerely by accident, then a particular Church. And 2. This plucks up his second Tenet, viz. That this Ca∣tholick Church is the first Church, to whom power is given: for if its power be extensive onely, and not inward, It cannot be the first subject of power. The 3d. Object. Hee moves against himselfe is:Object. 3. A visible Catholicke Church must have a visible (Catholicke) head. His 1. answer is,Answ. That it is sufficient that Christ is the head, though in heaven. But this is altogether an unsufficient an∣swer. For Christ is the Head invisible, and thence our divines af∣firme his body the Church to be mysticall also and invisible, ta∣ken properly. 2. He saith that The Church; in regard of the head, the go∣vernment of it is absolutely Monarchicall, but in regard of the Officers it is Aristocraticall.Instance. But this answers not the objection: for be it Monarchicall or Aristocraticall; yet if the body bee one visible Corporation, then must the Governours of it bee one visi∣ble, either person or company of men usually, or at sometimes or∣dinarily meeting together, or at least to be considered as one body or Colledge of men, by whom this body is joyntly and together, (and not asunder) to be governed. And this is the force of Cal∣vins reason (on Eph. 4. 11.) though applyed to the Papacy. For if wee must bee one visible corporation, there must bee one visible governour, either person or society: which the Apostle omitting, in that place where it was necessary to have been mentioned it, if it had beene an ordinance, cannot, saith he, be excused. His 4th. Objection is:Object. 4. That if the Catholicke Church bee one visible body, it must have a visible existence and being, as it is universall and Catholicke; but universalls have no beeing of their owne, but they exist and have their being onely in par∣ticular;
as Mankinde in generall hath no being a part by it selfe from single men, but hath its being in them onely. His Answer is:Answ. That all gathered aggregated, or collected bodies do exist and have their beings so. As a heape of stones hath its being only in the particular stones: the water in parti∣cular drops: particular Churches consist of particular families: and families of particular persons: and an Army in the severall Brigades, which yet are one, though they should never meet. But this reply amounts not to an answer.Instance▪ For no collected bo∣dy that is made up of severall things, hath its being in these things se∣verally considered and apart, but as united altogether; it is not a heape of stones if one lye at Yorke, some at London, others in France, Spaine &c. So a Church is not a Church, or one companie as the families are severall but as met together in one Assembly; and so an Army; Brigades may be sent out of it, but if that part were never united to the Army by 1000. miles, nor intended to be, and if they be not governed either by one visible head, or by one visible Councell of Warre, no man will say they are one Army: especial∣ly if one be in England and the other in America. Do wee not say, The Parliament hath had severall Armies under severall distinct commanders in cheife, who had no depen∣dence one on another (as it was a good while after the Earle of Essex had his Comission) and yet under the command of the Par∣liament, and Lawes Martiall published by them. So Christ from the Father by the Spirit is the governour of all Churches, which Churches have no necessary dependence, further then that of mu∣tuall love spirit and law, one on another. His 5th. and last Objection is:Object. 5. The Catholicke Church may bee by persecutions, &c. reduced to one Congre∣gation. His answer is:Answ. It may be so; but that in that one Congre∣gation there remaines all the Essence and Priviledges of the Ca∣tholicke Church Visible, though it be but one single Congrega∣tion at present, yea, that it hath then more properly the notion of the Catholicke Church,The like hath Apollnius. then of a particular one, yea, though but of one family, as it was in Noah's family in the Arke. But we see what straights this Large conceipt of the universall
visible Church doth drive into;Instance, for this implyes what was deny∣ed before, namely, That the Church Catholick is a species, or lower kinde, and the particular Churches the severalls of it: for else confounds Vniversall and particular together: making an universall thing reducible to a particular, and this extendible to an universal. 2. How could it bee Vniversall, but as containing the Essence; seeing in respect of its visible and present being it is particu∣lar. In which sence, every Single man is a Catholique and Vniversal creature, because he containes in him the same Essence and nature that is in all men; and Adam should have been so in a special manner, as being the first. 3. A particular thing doth not therefore become an Vniver∣sall one because it is first in its kinde and others that are produ∣ced from it, particulars. Vniversalitie is a notion (though found∣ed in Nature) not an existing thing, to which any order of actual being can be attributed. 4. If the first in each kinde have all the priviledges of that kind whilest it remaines alone, it shall bee a looser when it hath com∣pany, if it then part with them; unlesse it hath somewhat as good in Lieu, which here appears not; but the contrary. 5. It no way followes that because from one, many of the same kinde may spring, that therefore either this first (suppose a Family) must have government over them all, or they over it, or over one another, whether joyntly or severally, unlesse they so agree, or there be an institution of one superiour to them all. Now how should it appeare there hath been, or ought to bee any such grant here; seeing there is no such record in scripture; and besides hath beene the occasion of the rise of Papacy,Vid. Cent. Eccles. as Mr Noyes ac∣knowledges. And thus much of the things to bee noted before his Arguments. 2. Now the Arguments themselves follow to bee answered: they are of two sorts, 1. Certain places of scripture. 2. One argument from reason.. Scriptures. But seeing the former, almost all; runne upon the word CHVRCH, set downe indefinitely, they have been replyed to before. His argument is; If particular Churches be visible, then there is an universall visible Church,2. One Argu∣ment from Rea∣son. for every particular or part, belongs to some ge∣nerall and whole; and such as the particulars are, such the Generall: if those be visible, then this also.
Answ. More are should have beene taken, then to use so lax à medium in so weighty an Argument, as Mr. . in the Licence, acknowledgeth this to be. But to the matter. There is great difference betweene Natural; and betweene Metaphysicall, and ivill or Politicke bodies. For in a Naturall body, all whose parts and members are actually and naturally joyned and united together: the whole is visible because the parts are visible but in a metaphysicall body, or totum, or whole: that is, in Generalls that are, by the reason of man drawne from particulars, the case is farre otherwise, the particulars are visible, the Generall or uni∣versall invisible: Peter, Iames and Iohn, are visible, but manhood or mans nature (animal rationale) which is the Vniversall agree∣ing to them all, is not visible: It is not to bee seene with the eye. So also in Civil bodies or Corporations, though the severall men may be seene, yet the Corporation if great, (an Empire, King∣dome, and large Cittie) cannot be seene, in it selfe: but in the parts, unlesse by way of representation, as in Parliament, Com∣mon-Councell, &c. But 2▪ The whole is visible because the parts are so; It is untrue, even in the smallest bodies, but where the parts are actu∣ally united and joyned together; not where they are thousands of miles aunder: such a body (as a body) cannot bee seene with the eye, but it may be conceived, to be one in the minde, by vertue of some agreement or other betwixt the members of it, or of its union in some Visible head; but it is visible onely in respect of the severall parts of it. Now in this sence, none denies the universall Church to be visible: that is, that all Christians, who are one in respect of their Religion they professe, are visible in the severall places where they dwell. But this is to prevaricate, and to prove that which is not in question. So that this reason is not so much as probable▪A causa necessaria aut effectur, & con∣tra. if it bee taken in the former sence; much lesse any necessary concluding argument, and least of all a demonstrati∣on (which was promised by the Authour.) And in the other sence▪ it is besides the Questio. And thus much for Mr Huson's first Question, viz. ha there is a Catholique visible Church. His 2d. is: That this Church is the first subject of Ecclesiastique Power▪ But because the proofs are much from the same places of Scripture
which are answered above, and the reasoning wholly on the same foundation: viz. that ivers things are spoken of the Church which cannot agree to a particular Church as particular, which also was replyed to before; I shall not after too large a discourse al∣ready, adde any more here, nor shall I need: for if I have acquit∣ted my selfe in the former discourse, in opposition to the notion of one universall visible Church or Corporation; I neede not contend whether it be the first subject of Church power; for it having no actuall being and existence at all, it cannot be the sub∣ject of any power or act, (as non entis nulla sunt attributa; so, non existentis nullae sunt operationes) onely the Reader may observe, that the root of all the mistake in the former, this authour and the rest, about these questions is:The radical mi∣stake in this Question. ither the not distinguishing the Nature and Essence of the Church (in which respect it hath he names and things they urge, given to it) from the relations of Vniver∣sall and particular; which are notions, and accidentall to it: and confounding the Essence, and existence, the nature and the actuall being of the Church together; applying that to the particular being; as Particular; which is spoken of them, being particular, but in respect of the common essence and nature, not as particular. Or 2. Not differencing betwixt the mystical and visible state of it;Compare Beza his exposition of 1 Cor. 12. and Eph. 4. 4. with theirs. much being said in the former respect, which they apply to the latter. The third Defendant, or rather Assaylant, is the Reverend Assembly of Divines;§ 3. Their Assertion is: The whole Church is but one made up of the Collection and aggregation of all who are called out of the World by the preaching of the Word to professe the faith of Christ in the unity thereof:3. Assembly of Divines. Their first Argument (implyed) is this:Reply to the dis∣senting Brethren▪ to the third pro∣posit. p. 48. And Confession of Faith, cap. 25. n. 2, 3, 4. From this union there ariseth unto every one such a relation unto▪ and dependence up∣on the Catholique Church, as parts have to the whole, and are to doe all Christian duties,Arg. 1. as parts conjoyned unto the vvhole, and members of the same (that must be single) Common vvealth and Corporation. Answ. Such is the advantage of Truth,Ansvv. that the greatest abilities grow weak when they dash against it. 'Tis sensible in this Argument and Authors of it. For it doth not at all follow, that every company of men that in some respect have an union toge∣ther, and in that respect may be conceived as one whole Brother∣hood or Fellowship, should▪ herefore be one common-wealth
or corporation. For as was said before: the brethren or fami∣lies of the same first Parent (suppose of the house of Essex, Manchester, or Fairfax) have an union of blood together, and in that respect are called the House in the singular number (not the Houses) of such a Family: from which union there ariseth to every one of that House, such a relation unto, and depen∣dence upon the House or Family in general, as parts have to the whole, and are to do all such brotherly duties, as parts conjoyn∣ed to the whole: yet doth it not hence follow that all these per∣sons and their Families (which possibly may be many) are there∣fore one corporation. The same might more evidently be illu∣strated by the whole race of mankinde, who are one in nature, one in parent, one in office general (the government of the world and worship of God) one in the common laws of Na∣ture; one in the principal Governour: God is the King of all the Earth &c. And from this union, there ariseth unto every man such a relation unto, and dependence upon the catholick world, or mankinde in general, as parts have to the whole, and are to do all humane duties, as parts conjoyned to the whole of man∣kinde: Hence the Philosopher, when rebuked for giving an Almes to a needy,Arist. but naughty fellow, replyed: I give it () not to the man, but to mankinde: yet how will would the Honourable Assembly of Parliament take this con∣sequence from the Reverend Assembly of Divines; If therefore they should conclude; that all the men in the world are but one com∣mon-wealth and corporation: for then, as the former assertion, of the onenesse of the Visible Church, hath made them Schis∣maticks in the Church, and such also as have sworn to be so: In like manner this inference would represent them seditious in the world in the same degree, and with them, all particular Churches, Kings, and Kingdoms likewise. Object. But they say,Object. That the union of the Church is neer∣er, and the relation closer, and obligation strickter betwixt the members of the Church, then betwixt the persons of men, because it is spiritual and heavenly. To which is answered 1. That the relation and union seems to be equally neer and close in their several kindes:Ansvv. Men as Men, are as much, and have as neer an union, and are as much enga∣ged
one to another, Christians, as Christians; and Churches, as Churches; though the relation of Christians is more Noble and excellent; and the motives stronger. As beasts are as much one in their kind as men, though the nature of man be more excellent. 2. But be the relation of Christians yet closer; yet that is in Spirit, Faith, mystical Vnion, &c. not outward and visible further then to carry on the invisible, according to the Institution of Christ: But neither this, nor the former, is by this notion coun∣tenanced, but the contrary, as hath been evidenced. There may be a Society in Faith, as there was in many parts and per∣sons where there was no onenesse in Government: Job was not alone in the World, some other Church God then had; and so he was one in the faith, and profession, and kinde of Church Administration with them; but not united in one body of ou∣ward government. The place alledged for strengthning this Argument, viz. Eph. 4. 3, to 14, hath been ansvvered above; and implies no more but an essential or mystical union; which necessarily implyeth an out∣ward one in all duties in respect of the substance onely, not the subject of them; but prudentially and occasionally: Such an u∣nion integrally (per modum suppositi, & subjecti) and by way of onenesse in a visible way of joynt government; as shall be expe∣dient for edification; which ordinarily is best promoted, with∣in such a society as may (at least upon occasion) meet together in one place; or howsoever live together in some neernesse at least. Which is the more evident; because the largest Churches mentioned in Scripture did so, as the Jewish Church: (all whose Males met thrice a year at one place; and whose whole Territo∣rie or Land was but small, scarce the fourth part of England: and therefore might the better be one entire Congregation or Church: but had they lived some at one end of the World, some at the other, as Christians do; there is no likelyhood they should have been one Church Integral) and as the Christians in Jeru∣salem, and in other cities; at the first plantation of the Gospel. The second Argument: All the Ministers and officers of the Church are given to the vvhole Church. Answ. All the Magistrates and Officers of the World are given to the whole world for the governing of it; but not to the world
conjunctim, and as one single Common-wealth or Corporation made up of several corporations and Common-wealths; but di∣visim in respect of the several corporations and Common-wealths. The places alledged for proof, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Eph. 4. 11. are answered above, whither we refer the Reader. The third Argument is drawn from the third, fourth, and fifth supposition (page 48) When the Church was no more then could meet in one place, the Officers governed them as one un∣divided body respectively: But their number increasing, so as they could not meet altogether, they divided into severall Companies, which are in scripture called Churches: (to some one of which every beleever is bound to joyne himselfe) But these severall Churches should not act or worke as if they were Independent Corporations,Every one to be of some particu∣lar Congregation in the judgement of the Reverend Assembly. but onely as parts of Christs body, and are all to regard the common good of the whole, Eph. 4. 1. &c. and for that end are as much bound (if it may be) to associate (in∣to Presbyteries, &c. as particular men and families into Church∣es, there being as much need of the one as of the other: and so as many men or families make but one particular visible Church; so all particular Churches by this association make but one Ca∣tholick visible Church Ministerial, and Governing of right all the rest. Answ. God and Christ have disposed and ordered the Go∣vernment of the World,Answ. and the Church according to the severall conditions whereinto the providence of the one and the other hath determined to bring them. When wee are Children, God hath appointed one kinde of government for us, viz. to be under tutors and governours until the time of age, and then we are not so: when afterward a man is disposed in marriage, though he have a relation to his Parent, yet not a necessary dependence on him in point of government. So whilst a Family is but one, it is gouerned as one body, by one or more Parents of Officers who in point of government are one single body: but as was said, if this Family multiply beyond the bounds of that first house, they are not now still to be fancyed to be but one Catholick Family, to be governed in common. Take for instance the Family of Adam or Noah; The whole world was but then one Family, and go∣verned by one man &c. shall we need to repeat the absurdity of
the consequence, if therefore we should conclude, that the seve∣rall Kingdoms and Nations are not therefore to act as Indepen∣dent Corporations; but as parts of the body Politick of the World which is Gods kingdom general. And yet there is a rela∣tion betwixt all societies of men, as men, by vertue whereof they are all to regard the common good of mankinde &c. In like manner doth Christ in his Church: when beleevers are babes, he would have them the more absolutely to subject them∣selves to their spiritual Parents: when growne up they have a greater freedom, and are to be otherwise governed: the Apostle bids Timothy not to rebuke an Elder, but to intreat them as Fathers, &c. So when the whole Church was but one company, they were governed as such, and by one company of Officers that had charge over them all, and every one particularly, according to their several offices: As the Pastors to teach every one; the Ru∣lers to watch over every one; the Deacons to provide for every one &c. But this Family of the second Adam, and second Noah (as Peter implies him to be) spreading into many particular Fa∣milies,1 Pet▪ 3. 20. and Nations: the Scripture never (I say never) repre∣sents them as one visible body in respect of their outward Associ∣ation and Government, but still speaks of them as many: the Churches of Judea, which yet under the Legal government was but one (the Church Act. 7.) pray, why this difference of speech; but to confute this onenesse visible of all Churches? When they are called the Church, it reflects upon them as one in Faith, Spirit, kind of worship and Government, as the place alledged Eph. 4. 1. plainly expresses. And yet I denie not that these particular Churches are to have a regard to the common good of all Churches, and not to act as if they were in relation to none but themselves; and for this end also it is convenient and sometimes necessary, if it may be done, to associate with other Churches for mutual assistance, and to meet in Synods and Councels together, as did the Church of Antioch and Jerusa∣lem, and the Churches in the Primitive times. The kingdom of England, and so other Nations are bound in some cases, to associate with other Kingdoms, and are actually associated with them, as also was Solomon with the king of Aegypt, and Hiram king of Tyre: but is England not to act as an Independent
Kingdom; from France, Spain, Scotland, or the Kingdom of Israel, or Independent (saving the Articles of Association) for allSee the House of Commons answ. to the Scots pa∣pers, about the Kings person. Suppos. 7. that. They add in the same place as a prevention of an objection: That as the mutual consent of particular men and families orderly into Churches gives them Power and Authority, (Ecclesiasticall) one over another,Object. without destroying the liberty of such persons and families, but helping of it: so also in this association of Churches, their mutuall consent orderly regulated, gives them a sufficient call for their Elders to exer∣cise their power of Elders, (over the Congregations in com∣mon) without impeaching the liberties, &c. But 1. This similitude doth not truely represent these Bre∣threns opinion:Answ. who hold that the Catholicke visible Church is before any particular Church: and is the first subject of all Church Power: and the mother out of which particular Churches spring: whereas this similitude makes the particu∣lar Churches to exist. First as mothers to the universall: this be∣ing according to their expression, now nothing else but a collecti∣on or aggregation of them. Secondly, This seems inconsistent with the former reasoning; for if by Divine Right all particular Churches are but one universall and generall Church or Corpo∣ration, and all particular men and families: by Gods appoint∣ment are to associate with some particular Church, then have the Churches right to this common government, not from any consent, but from Gods institution: whether the members or per∣sons consent or consent not: yea, and hence is it that Churches and Presbyteries may, by our brethrens principles, bee excommunicated: for we may suppose some Churches will not consent to such associ∣ations. Objection If it bee said,Object. This consent grounds the relation to this or that particular Church with which they shall asso∣ciate. I reply,Answ. that this removes not the objection; for in generall they are ingaged unto subjection to the universall Church, and the particular Church to which they joyne is but a necessary con∣dition, that they may the better bee under the universall disci∣pline.
3. The case is not the same betwixt particular persons, and Families joyning into some particular Congregation; and the association of several Churches into one body: much lesse of all into one generall Common-wealth: For the former in∣stance plainly confutes it. A man or family is ordinarily bound to be of some Kingdom, Common-wealth, or State; but it doth not therefore follow that all States or Kingdoms must needs be associated together into one general Common-wealth: neither is the reason the same. For a whole Kingdom, State, or Society is better able to defend it self against injuries, and to accomodate it self with necessaries, than a particular per∣son or Familie; and what is wanting may be sufficiently supplyed by meer Voluntary, Arbitrary, and Temporary Association in a Common-wealth; which in a Family or Person is not so. 4. It must not be said by rational men, that 1. All men are bound to associate, and so all Churches. 2. They being associated are to be governed; by others which are more then themselves; and yet their liberty is not diminished, but strength∣ned: if the Reverend Assembly shall say, that their security and safety may possibly bee thereby strengthened, it might in some cases be admitted. But surely, as the liberty of a particular man or family, is not the same before he is bound to others, and afterward, though his safety may be the more, so here. 5. How are we slidden from one Integral entire body, flow∣ing from one Church at Jerusalem &c. to a body made up of voluntary Associations. The Kingdom of England is one en∣tyre Common-wealth or body, corporate of it selfe intrinse∣cally (politically:) the Vnited Provinces are one by aggrega∣tions and voluntary Association. But these two Reipublicks do greatly differ: now the Church general is asserted by the Re∣verend Assembly, to be one Common-wealth, and Body cor∣porate; to whom as one, yea and as first, before all particular Churches: The Officers, Ordinances, and Governement of the Church is concredited and commit∣ted. Of like incompossibility is what is there added for illu∣stration
sake, viz. That this joyneing is such as proceeds, Ex charitate, ex debito mutuae societatis colendae: as is be∣tweene Friends and Equalls: Non ex debito inferioris condi∣tionis ad praestandum obsequium. As betwixt Masters and ser∣vants: For what is this? (but Verba dare, rem auferre.) The Honourable Houses of Parliament, and Assembly of Divines, Kingdome and Churches of England: take their liberty now to reforme the State and Church, as they judge agreeable to Law, Reason, and Religion. This opinion by consequence makes this Kingdome but a Depending Member of the Vniversall Monarchy of the World; and doth expresly af∣firme the Church or Churches in this Nation to act but as such in re∣spect of the Vniversal Church. Whence it inevitably and evident∣ly follows; that they ought to be in actuall association with all the rest of the Nations, and Churches of the World: these be∣ing an hundred times more in number, have power at pleasure to over-vote them, and to governe them: and yet must the Parliament, Assembly, the Nation, and Churches of this Kingdome: even when actually so overborne, perhaps a∣gainst their minde, and wills, fancie and coneit themselves as free, and enjoying as much liberty as now they do. May wee not ascend by a predicamentall Ladder (Classibus Vni∣versalium. Kek.) must it bee by a Transcendent, even to Reason it self? Another confirmation of this third Argument,Light of Nature. is taken from the Light of Nature: which requires, say these Reverend Gen∣tlemen, that the meanes for (the edification of) Particular Christians, should be as applyable to whole companies of them; un∣lesse Gods word hath some where forbidden it. To which I return, 1. That this Light of Nature should not be too much urged, for it will plead hard for Episcopacie and a Pope. , will bussle shrewdly here. 2. That the method of the Light of Nature is to follow the Scriptures in matters of Chri∣stian Religion, and not to move in them where the Scriptures stand still, and are silent; hence I note in the ranging of the Ar∣guments of the Ministers of London in their divine right of the Pres∣byterie:Divine right of Presbyterie, in the Analys. of the book. that they place the light of Nature first, which though they do as intending it for the lowest step, yet it is not justifiable to
make it any at all in the things of Christ; but where it hath some precedent hint from Scripture. 3. The light of Nature I have shown before, doth make a difference betwixt the necessity of as∣sociating of particular persons, and of Common-wealths (such as the Church is said to be,) and differenceth also the associations of the one and the other: making the former a necessary one∣nesse and singlenesse of Corporation and Government; but the other meerly an arbitrary and temporary friendship. 4. The Scri∣pture hath more to forbid all Churches to associate into one body Vniversal Politick; then it hath that particular Churches should be entire body Politicks or Corporations of themselves; seeing there is often expresse mention of particular visible governing Churches, but none expresly of an universal one. 5. I retort the way of reasoning; the light of Nature teaches there is not the same reason betwixt particular persons, and Common-wealths in this particular, and therefore not to bee made all one, unlesse the Scripture had commanded it. The last particular which may seem to be (though not brought here by them for that end) a confirmation of this Tenet, is (by occasion) alledged in page 61. from the parallel of the Church of Christ with the Church of the Iews, to whom the whole Tribe of Le∣vi was given as their Ministry. 1. As to one body together, when in the Wildernesse. 2. To them as one body fixed, and dispersed in Canaan. This is replyed to before; I repeat now, That these being and living together in one small Territory; and meeting all the Males three times a yeer in one place, Jerusalem; at one meeting house, the Temple: doth not argue the Church scattered throughout the World to be therefore one: no more then because one Kingdom may be one Common-wealth, and have Officers in common, therefore, all Kingdoms must be one. 2. Besides; this instance engages all the Churches to meet at some one place: to have one chief Governour besides the Elders in common, with such other inconveniences as are usually urged against this parallel. We have done with the Arguments; one passage or two I shall animadvert upon, and (with due respect) take my leave. Whilest they endeavour to maintain: That it is not left free, but is a duty of every Congregation; to associate with others: They say: All are enjoyned to be of some Congregation; but
when they joyn to this rather then to that, the mutual consent between them and the Congregation with whom they joyn, is that which immediately gives them that special relation one to another, &c. From which I note: That here is implyed a liberty in particular Christians, to joyn to such Churches as they shall see cause. If this be so, how is it that the violation of Paro∣chial limits is so insisted on (though oft-times manifestly prejudi∣cial to edification, &c.) and those who keep not unto their Pa∣rishes, presented and persecuted; and those ministers that admit Christians of other Parishes, resented as the destroyers of parti∣cular Congregations, and such who (novo & inaudito exemplo) gather Churches out of Churches? Now it will not salve to say, 1. That at the first constitution of Parishes there was such volun∣tary consent: seeing 1. Which Parishes did so, doth not appear: And secondly, In many, 'tis evident they were cast into parishes by those who were lords of those Mannors. 3. Neither is it ra∣tionally probable, that the whole Nation to one man did volun∣tarily receive the Gospel it self: seeing fraud and force (neither of which are voluntary motives) were the tooles of Popery, un∣der which the conversion National was made. 4. And though at first the union of such might be convenient: yet afterward it may become an hinderance. Yet am not I for the drawing of any Godly, Able, and faithful ministers people from him, who is for the substance of Reformation, though with many defects in lesser things▪ Nor 2. will it be sufficient to say, that when they choose to dwell in such parishes, that then they consent to be of such a Congregation: for we know men do that on civil, and oft-times necessitated grounds, as most convenient for lively-hood; when yet they are altogether unsatisfied either in the Minister or Congregation. A 2. passage is p. 62. the several Congregations chuse or accept their particular Officers, and all the Congregation united, choose or accept their common Presbyterie: yet page 58. 'tis said their office is conferred on them by the Church: either then, the com∣mon Presbyterie is the Church when they choose the Elders for the several Congregations; for they do but accept of them on the matter; or else it was not a plain declaration of their mindes, when they said the Church chooses; or else this is inconsistent with the other.
The 4th Assertor is Mr Noyes,Sect. 4. whose tenet is: That the Church of Christ on earth,Temple measu∣red, cap. 1. is one integral body visible, and hath power to act in Synods and Councels unto the end of the world. His 1. Argu∣ment is: The Apostle were members. 2. Officers of the Catholicke, not any particular Church. These are replyed to above. 3. They ad∣mitted members into the Catholicke Church,Act. 1. c. 10. c. 16. as the Eunuch and Cornelius, the Jaylor, &c. Answ. These persons were admitted into the Church or com∣pany of those who professe Christ; and were made visible members of that societie and corporation which is invisible; as the Sacra∣ments are said to be visible signes of invisible Grace. The Church Ca∣tholique is visible in respect of its severall members and societies or Churches; but not in respect of its whole being, as one Cor∣poration. Society and Corporation, properly so called, differ. All men are one society, but not one Corporation: so in the Church. Now according to nature of the society, are the privi∣ledges: common society hath certain common rights: proper societies have peculiar ones. Now the Church in generall is a so∣ciety to all the members, of which there belong certain common rights and priviledges; as Spirituall food, the word Sacraments, the right of government in the generall, &c. but this implies not, that it should be properly one Corporation, no more then it concludeth because mankinde is a society, and every one that is born, is alrea∣dy by his birth admitted a member of humane societie: and so in∣to all the rights of men, as they are men, as to have right to food, clothes, protection, and government in the generall; that there∣fore all the men in the world are one Corporation or Kingdome. 2. They were admitted by baptisme immediately and di∣rectly into Christ and his mysticall body; but into the visible company onely by accident. If there had beene but one beleever on earth; Baptisme had had its use and end. Argum. 4. Christ is one visible head, &c. by vertue of his Lawes, Ordinances, Providences, walking in the midst of the Church, and of two or three gathered together, as the King of Engl. is visibly King of Scol. though residing at London in Engl. therefore the King being one the Church his Kingdom, is one too. Answ. Hee cites in the margent *Epist. 83. pag, 367. Ecclesia non est Reipubl. non Ari∣stratia, sed regnum▪ Beza: saying that The Church is not a common wealth, nor an Aristocracy, but a
Kingdome: and if so; surely Christ is the absolute monarch of it: But that argues the Church to bee one, in respect of Christ onely, his spirit and lawes, but not at all in respect of its visible Govern∣ment by it selfe; unlesse it be proved that Christ hath instituted on earth one visible single person or society of men to governe as one company together, the whole Church on earth. 2. A King though absent from one place, yet is visible some∣where in his Kingdomes, but Christ not personally visibly now. 3. A king of more kingdomes then one, though they be one as they meet in his person, and in some respects, and have some com∣mon priviledges; yet may their governments be distinct, as Eng∣land and Scotland. 4. As Christ is one, so God is one, and as the Church is Christs Kingdome, so is the world Gods Kingdome: his Law of nature one, his providence governing one: but is it therefore but one outward Kingdome? Arg. 5. The Church of the Jews was a Type of the Christi∣an Church: the great Sanhedrin figured the Apostles, and gene∣rall Councells; they were many tribes, but one Church. Arg. 6. Rev. 11. 1. 2. 3. the universal Church is represented by one city, the new Iernsalem: and called the Church, Mat. 16. 1 Cor. 12. Eph. 4. Answ. The Jewish Church was a Type, but not in all things, for then must wee have one visible high Priest, one Temple, must meet altogether there; &c. but as these ended in Christ, so that national Church, till it be called the second time. 2. That Church was but one single intire Congregation, there they met all of them, thrice a year before the Lord, and the Tabernacle; called the Ta∣bernacle of the Congregation. 4. The Church and Common-wealth were one body *See this Argu. urged for the power of the Magistrate in Church affairs fully answered by Trigland. de Civil. & Eccles. potestat. cap. 12. as such: which I think Mr Noyes will not judge to hold in all nations. 2. To that of one Jerusalem, I say, that it is questionable whether those places speak of the Church, as it shall be before the comming of Christ or after. 3. Whether they speak of the state of it before the calling of the Jews or after; the latter is affirmed by several expositors; and they urge the word Ierusalem, it shall be the State of the Jews: But 4. Howsoever, figu∣rative and symbolical places are not argumentative alone. 5. The Church is no mystical Ierusalem, though not visible; neither doth that vision argue it to be visible; no more then the Holy Ghost his appearing in the shape of a Dove, conclude that the Holy spirit is visible.
Argum. 7. The mysticall union of Brotherhood makes one mysticall body: Ergo the visible union one visible body. Answ. It beggs the Question. For 'tis denyed that there is such a visible Onenesse, as is the mysticall: the mystical union Catholick is reall: the visible notionall only: So all men have a mysticall union of nature, yet not in outward government: nor would it be convenient they should. Argum. 8. All naturall grounds of fellowship in particular Churches in respect of ordinary execution, bespeaks fellowship in one Catholick Church, in respect of lesse ordinary. Bro∣therly union, Christian profession, the celebration of the name of Christ, who is glorified more eminently in the great assembly; all these are prevalent. The notion of a relation doth cherish affection: pride, and independency are inseparable. Answ. 1. Does all relations of persons one to another, and obligations of mutuall duties in regard of those relations, argue that they must be one Corporation, and one Government: The twelve children of Iacob, if God had seene it good, might have beene so many severall Churches and kingdomes, and yet have preserved unitie, and done their duties of their relation of Bro∣therhood.Vid. Cottens keys, ch. 6. The twelve Apostles were independent in power one from another (see Gal. 7. chap. 2.) yet were in relation one to another, and did performe all mutuall offices for the good of the whole. 2. As pride and independency are inseperable, so also pride and usurpation, pride and invasion of the rights of particulars, under notion of a common society; pride and Tyranny, which hath its way paved in the Church by this notion, as hath beene found by experience; and 'tis acknowledged by this Author in this chapter to have beene the occasion of the rising of the man of sinne, viz. some of the Ancients their high doting on the unity of the visible Church. 3. Some kinde of Independency may bee without pride; such as was in the Apostles; and is in the severall Kingdomes, and free States in the world: (whereof New England the place of this Au∣thours habitation is one) and all kinde of it, and an absolute inde∣pendency is disavowed by persons of the greatest note in that way;Apoilg. Narrat. pag. 14. as the Apologists expresly call absolute independency as a proud
and insolent title; so the Elders of New-England, and parti∣cularly M.Keyes of the kingdom of hea∣ven, cap. 6. Cotton. This Author therefore should either have explained himself touching Independency, or else have used some other expression, then that which he could not but know, would be (ad salviam) indeed to the palate of some, but (ad contumeliam) an addition to the pressure that others (good and sober men) are oppressed with. But it may be the superstition of certain of the oldAmamae Epist, ad M. Marsenn. oy∣mum serere cum convitiis. heathen takes at this day; who in sowing some kinde of graine, apprehended it would grow the better, if it were done with reviling and reproaching each other. I would wil∣lingly hope, that example of Tertullian is so well known to Mr▪ Noyes,Hieron. De V. il∣lustr. & ent. Mag. 3. c. 10. Tit. de Doctr that no provocation from the Church should excite him to satisfie himself upon it. Injuriae parentum ferendae sunt. Argum. 9. The Covenant or profession of all Israel together, was to walk before the Lord:2 Chron. 15. 12. c. 34. 31. And converts in the Primitive Church, promised to walk with all Saints, in all the Ordinan∣ces: The Church is one Citie, having many gates; or parti∣cular Churches, by any gate or Church entrance is had into the whole Church, &c. Answ. 1. There must be difference made betwixt the state of the Jewish and Christian Church; because they were joyntly One Common-wealth, and one PARTICVLAR Congregation, and not the universal Church, unlesse by accident, in as much as there was then no other visible Church; except, as we said before, we follow those who hold that Iethro, Iob, &c. lived in those times; and were particular Churches. 2. Whether the Covenant in the Primitive time ran in such a forme, doth not appear to me: but for the sense of it, it may be admitted, according to what hath been often said; men are in∣gaged, and may promise to do the duties of their relations to those to whom they have any tye, and so in that respect are one with them; and yet it followeth not that this body is a visible body or Corporation, it may be a mystical one; or it may be vi∣sible in some respect, and not in point of Government: or yet the government may be visible in several parts; but not as one in the whole. All the Apostles were engaged to assist one another, yet did they not depend one on another in point of Government; as after I had said this above, I found M. Cotton to have taught it
before,Cottons keyes, chap. 6. toward the end. whom then I had not read. All men are bound to offi∣ces to all men; Do good to all men saith the Apostle; are therefore all men one visible corporation or body politick? 3. By one Church we are let into all Churches in respect of their essential being, Rights, and common priviledges, mystical union, &c. not in respect of particular jurisdiction. A man that is borne of one Parent, is let into the whole society of men, and all com∣mon Prerogatives; but not into the Rights of each Citie, &c. His 10. and last Argument, It is generally supposed that all Churches have power to act together, and to expect power of Jurisdiction in a general councel. Calvin is expresse (Inst. l. 4. c. 8. and 9.) therefore the Church is one visible body, else it could not so act. Operari sequitur esse. Answ. 1. It hath been granted that a company in some sense may be a visible body or Corporation, in respect of some more com∣mon and lesser acts; but not properly so, and in respect of the parts of Government and Jurisdiction properly so called. 2. The acting of a general Councel, yea though it were to the highest points of Jurisdiction, as Ordination, and excommu∣nication, may proceed on our grounds, and not on the visible and integral onenesse of all Churches into a Corporation; for it may proceed on the ground of Voluntary association, and communion of Churches, whereby all particular Churches are willing to unite freely, and not of necessity, their power; and to act for the use of their particular bodies, and in order to the whole; but not as being one incorporated Reipublick; nor as having any new, or properly larger power (being met) as such a body, but onely by accident, as being aggregated and collected together. After which manner was the first Presbyterian Church erected,aynes Dioces. Tryal. page 21. viz. at Ge∣neva, the several congregations uniting voluntarily, as so many distinct bodies into one aggregated body. And as the Kingdom of England and Scotland, and some free Cities in Germany upper and lower act together: which neither makes a new or greater power in the assembled or general body, nor destroyes the entire power of the particular societies: in which sense our opinion would admit of the power of a general Councel: but I cannot owne it; because it is partly groundlesse in Scripture; partly impossible, and partly dangerous in the thing it self, as hath been observed above.
3. Not all acting together, nor all acts that in some sense may be said to be acts of power, doth imply an onenesse of Corpo∣ration, or jurisdiction properly so called. I have shewed before that a Colledge of Physicians may meet to consult and give ad∣vice in point of health, which they have power by their pro∣fession, and by the Lawes to do: and the patient is obliged by the lawes of Nature, prudence and conscience; unlesse there appear a sufficient impediment: but this neither argueth that all these Physicians are of one Colledge, yea or Kingdom; nor that they have power to constrain the Patient to obey. Calvin in the very chapters quoted by this Author, he laies down ground for the overthrow of this opinion:Cap. 8, Sect. 9. as where he teacheth, That as the writings of men though godly, so neither the authority either of particular Churches, or of the whole Church in ge∣neral is such, as was the authority of the Apostles, for they may not establish any new Article of Faith,Sect. 11. &c. And also answers divers of the Arguments of this Author, and the other: by affirming that the promises of not leaving the Church, of guiding it in all truth, &c. (and so we might add all the other almost before mentioned) are made NO LESSE TO EACH BELEEVER, THEN TO THE WHOLE CHVRCH: which I desire may be observed.cap. 9. sect. 2. Again, He makes the authori∣tie of a general Councel to depend on that promise:Mat. 18. When two or three are gathered in my name &c. And then saith, That this as well agreeth to any particular company of Christians, as to a generall Councel. 2. It doth not appear to me in those chapters that hee ownes general Councells on any such grounds: nor do I see how he can, by what he saith on Eph. 4. 11. above cited. 3. If these Councells he there approves did excommunicate &c. yet he doth not mention his approbation of them in those things, and wee may apprehend he might count such actions among those particu∣lars of their failings which he there enumerates. 2. After his Argument he makes the objection M. Hudson had done,Object. viz. The whole Church hath no visible head, Ergo, It is no one Visible Corporation or body. He replies to this 1. Particular Churches are visible Churches,Answ. though destitute of Officers. But I Reply, should they be so, if they had not one common bond of particular laws, administred by one
person, or one visible Society of Officers? 2. They may all meet as one visible body: the universal Church then must ei∣ther meet so, or else have some visible officers universal over the whole. Secondly he saith, Christ is supposed the Visible Head in some re∣spect. Answ. But that is not the question, but what visible existent head there is on earth, by whom it may appear one Visible bo∣die: As we saw before out of Calvin on Ephes. 4. 11. 2. How can we contain Christ visible properly. 3. He saith, The Church is one so as to act ordinarily, as one, divisim, dividedly, and yet by reason of the mutual con∣sent in all Churches, one act of power done in one Church, is by authority of the universal Church, and reaches to all Churches as excommunication out of one, is excommunica∣tion out of all. But 1. There was never any Society or Corporation, that acted as one dividedly and in parts unlesse it did first act as one joyntly together, and in a body, wherein power was given to such divi∣ded bodies to act so, unlesse it were upon some sudden and extra∣ordinary accident that required immediate action before the body could convene. 2. Every Society though it may act in parts, as a Kingdome in severall Corporations, and a Corporation in severall Wards, or Halls, and Companies, yet hath it withall one common, ordina∣ry and standing officer or officers visible to governe in chiefe, to whom all maine causes are referred &c. But 3. That the particular Church that acteth in the right of the universall Church by reason of mutuall consent in all Chur∣ches, is not proved by that medium: for mutuall consent, may be voluntary and accidentall, and so a figure onely: whereas hee is to prove that all Churches are necessarily essentially, by way of institution, and for ever to be one body, whether they consent or consent not. But a particular Church acteth, first, In the right of Christ, who is the first subject of Church power, (Matth. 28. 28.) Secondly, it acteth in the right of a Church, that is of a Societie that hath embraced the faith of Christ, which, as a Church inde∣finitely and essentially is the next subject of Church power, be∣cause
we see such power committed to every Church: so we heard even now, Calvin to expound that promise, Matth. 18. when tvvo or three are gathered &c.Cottens keys. ch. . which I finde also the forepraised Author to have said before me, whom at the writing of this above, I had not seene in the particular. 4. That he that is excommunicated out of one Church (if duely) is excluded out of all: is not because the whole Church is one visible body; but because all the particular Churches agree in nature, and essence of Doctrine, Worship and Government, so that he that is unfit to be a member of one, is so of all: because they all require the same essentiall conditions, as he that is cut off by the hand of Justice, for violation of the Lawes of nature, in one Common wealth, is cut out of all, yet it doth not follow that all men are one Common wealth. Or as hee that is out-lawed in one Corporation justly, is outlawed in all Congregations virtually, and upon the matter, though not directly and formally, till hee be so declared by them, if those Corporations go all by the same lawes (for substance) and government; though it doth not follow that these severall cor∣porations are therefore one, or under one generall body, (which as I take it is the case betwixt England and Scotland,See Dr Austin of Allegeance, in Calvins case. where by rea∣son of union under one King, though the governments remaine distinct, yet one that is borne in either Kingdome, is not an Alien, but a Free-borne Denizon of both; and so by consequence (as I apprehend, for I may be mistaken in a Law notion, and I bring it but for illustration) hee that is out-lawed in one Kingdome can∣not remaine under the protection of the Lawes of the other: and yet the bodies are distinct in power and government, though not divided wholy, but in some respect. So in the Church. In the third and last place he comes to authorities: But here ei∣ther he cites those who are nothing for him, or when they dispute the point professedly, are expressly against him; as his first Au∣thor Chamier: who though he say, that if not every Pastor, yet all of them are set over the whole Church. yet when he argueth the point, he explaineth himselfe to mean all distributively, every one in his charge, as all the Maors and Sheriffes governe the whole King∣dome, but not joyntly, but severally: for hee denyeth such an one visible universall Church,Chap. 4. as Mr Hudson acknowledged, and as we saw before.
The 2. Are other moderne Divines,Chap. 4. whom Mr Noyes would have not to consist with themselves, whilest they deny an uni∣versall visible Church, and yet grants Judiciall Power to Synods: But it hath beene shewed before, that this may be granted, though the other be denyed, &c. The 3. Are the Fathers, who (he saith) so predicated an universall visible Church, they laid the foundation for an universall Bishop. If so; then let this Author take heed he lay not a foundation to raise him out of the grave againe,Mr Cotten in his exposition upon the ialls. in his Image, (as I have heard a Reverend Elder of New England called an universal visible Church in respect of the Papacy) and to bury the liberties of all the Christian Churches in his grave. The 4. Author is Polanus, who saith, the things of God are ad∣ministered (Synodali ) by the determination of the Synod; but are confirmed (Regia ) by the Kings authoritie. Wee allow the Power of determining (with Calvin above cited) ac∣cording to the word of God to Synods, and are well content and thankfull that Kings will become Nursing Fathers to the Church. The 5. and last are the Professors of Leyden, who say, that in the Synod is the top of Authoritie, the unitie of the whole Church, the establishment of order. But they speake of particular Synods in parti∣cular Churches, And do not subvert what was shewed out of them above. In fine, he acknowledgeth that the PAPISTS would build their Babell on THIS foundation; which I thinke they well may, or some-what like it; and so I remit this Author to the Reverend Elders of New England, who are much more able to deale with him; and of some of whom, hee will heare about this Argument I suppose very shortly. The 5. and last that to my view have appeared in defence of this notion are the London Ministers:§ 5. Before I come to their argu∣ments I shall (after the example of a Reverend member of the As∣sembly) do right to some of both sides.Divine Rights in Presbytery, in Epist. &▪ part 1. c. 1. pag. 3. & part 2. c. 8. pag. 65. Principal men there are in those waies, and even of the Assembly it selfe, whose judgements and practise have not beene truely represented by the Ministers in their Collation of the opinion of the Presbyterians and the Inde∣pendents.Mr Cheynell Rise of Socinians. pag. 65. I will instance onely in one present question.Preface pag. 13. The Independents are said to hold no other Visible Church of
Christ, but only a single Congregation meeting together in one place to partake of all Ordinances. But this is not their opinion. That it is essentially required to the very being of a visible Church that it meet in one place, they hold it (de benè esse) for conveniency, not absolutely necessary: now it is not ingenuous to fasten upon a way or man generally, that which some (such as wil be in any pro∣fession) particular, and perhaps weak or passionate men may hold. 2. These brethren observe not that themselves are in the whole fault of that which the Independents owne in this charge: scil. making no other a visible Church then a single Congregation, for if the Brethrens opinion bee true; the Catholique Visible Church is made but one single Congregation or Corporation (though too bigge to meet together, but in their Deputies.) For if it have the same visible Lawes, under the same visible order of Officers, and these Officers one visible societie or Colledge, over each, and over the whole, then is it as much one particular and single Corporation, as Stepny or Cripple-gate. Now on the contrary for that opinion that is opposed to this, and said to be the judgement of the Presbyterians: viz. that there is one General visible Church of Christ on earth, whereof all particular Churches and single Congregations are but as similar parts of the whole: There is not onely no one Presby∣terian could hitherto be shewed to be of that judgement, till the sitting of this Assembly, (in favour of whom Apolonius wrote) but also divers above evidenced to be against it, and acknowledged so by the Authors of this opinion: Plain dealing is the best policie: But to their arguments, 1. They urge the forenamed place, 1 Cor. 12. and say, the Apostle speaks of one Generall Church, because he saith [Church,] not Churches. 2. Because he speaks of it in such a latitude, as to comprehend all gifts of the spirit, all members, all officers ordinary and extraordinary, which cannot agree to a particular Church. Answ. 1. Wee have shewed that the Church taken essentially, is one: though Integrally and in respect of its existence and parti∣cular government, it is as manifold, as there are particular Chur∣ches. Now to the Church in the former sence, are those things given, all men in essence and nature are one: to man in this respects is given Governours and Government, arts and gifts, &c. must all there∣fore be one Common wealth?
2. Or else, which I rather adhered to; the Church is taken in that place mystically, for the whole society or family in hea∣ven and earth, as was then evidenced. 3. All these Officers and gifts were given to the Church of Corinth immediately, though not solely and onely. The light of the Sun is given immediately to that particular place on which it shines, with all the brightnesse and influence of it, but not solely. 4. In this superintendency over the whole Church, whether severally or joyntly, the Scripture hath instituted no Successors to the Apostles. 5. By Apostles might be meant the chief Officers of Corinth. A second place (and wherein they handle this subject more expresly) is part 2. chap. 8. where their first Argument is drawne onely from those places that name the Church (indefinitely) as on this Rock will I build my Church. He hath set some in the Church Apo∣stles, &c. And their second taken from such places as compare all visible Professors to one [Organical body] which are some of the same places they used in the first Argument, as 1 Cor. 12. We being many, are one body: so Rom. 12. 4. Ephes. 4. 11. Answ. 1. These have been replyed to above. 2. They do not make the whole Visible Catholick Church one [Organical] but one [Similar] body in our Brethrens first assertion: But Organi∣cal and Similar are opposite, as was shewed in answer to M. Hud∣son, whom in this inconsistencie, opinion and expression, they have either followed, or he some of them. 3. Next they endea∣vour to prove that the word Ministry, Ordinances, and particularly Baptisme, are given to the generall visible Church: (the method Mr Hudson used, Moses mother was his Nurse also) whence it will follow; that there is a Generall Visible or Catholique Church. Therefore I shall take this for a third head of Arguments, and An∣swer to it. 1. The word Ministery, Ordinances, &c. all of them are given immediately to every particular Church, where they are, and where there may be use of them; though not solely: and the first two places quoted, speak immediately of the Church of E∣phesus;1 Tim. 3. 15. Eph. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. and the third immediately of the Church of Corinth; the fourth of the Church at Rome.Rom. 12. 4. to . 2. They are given to the Church, as one Essentiall or Mysti∣call body. But no way concludes they must bee one Visibly, no
more then the gifts of Reason, Arts, Speech, the Govern∣ment of Emperours, Kings, Princes; the order of Inferior and superiour members given by God to mankinde: doth prove that therefore all men are one Visible, General Corpo∣ration or Common-wealth; or Integral, Organical, Similar bo∣die, consisting of parts, as a similar body, altogether alike: and as an organical body of parts heterogene, and nothing a∣like: which even a plain Reader will perceive to be as uncouth Logick as Divinity. CHAP. VI. The Conclusion. 1. Corrollaryes. 2. A word to the Au∣thors of this Opinion. ANd thus (by the assistance of God) an answer hath been given (though 'tis like they will not so be answered) to these Brethren:1 Pet. 4. And therein I hope I have spoken as the oracles of God, both for truth and sobernesse. Sure I am, I have endea∣voured (though perhaps not without some failing) to observe that of the Father (Worthy saith *S▪ Amam. Epist. ad M. Marsenu. one, to be written on the chairs of all Divines and Disputants (uncialibus literis) in Capital Letters:) We pursue not (saith the *Nazians. Orat. 3 . Ancient) our opponents with re∣proches and contumelies, as the most do, sheltring the weak∣nesse of their Reasons and Arguments with revileing speeches; not unlike the (fish) SEPIA, whichPli. lib. 9. they say, casts out a black inkie matter, whereby she avoids the fisher. But that we make war for Christ, we evidence by this Argument, that we contend after the MANNER OF CHRIST, who is meek, and peaceable, and bare our infirmities. Now from the precedent Tractate,§ 1. when I have inferred a Corollary or two, and breathed out a Word of love into our Brethrns eares and bosomes: I have done. As to the former. 1. If there be one Visible Vniversal Governing Church,Corroll. 1. hen the (now endeavoured) Presbyterie (consisting of the Presby∣teries of the whole World as one entire body, and claiming so by
Divine Right, as on the ground of one Catholick Visible Go∣verning Church; hath no foundation in Scripture: and so is in that respect [So Calvin (for the substance of the thing) on Ephes. 4. 11. Ens Fictum] A DIVINE NOTHING. 2. There is no Visible Church or Corporation Ecclesiasticall,Corroll. 2. properly so called; and as the immediate Receptacle of Church-power; but a particular Church (i. e. the Church of one place) though not as particular, but as a Church indefinitely, essentially, and absolutely considered. 3. Then there are no universal GOVERNING Officers at large;Corroll. 3. that being ordained in one Church, are Governours eve∣ry where; no more then a Major of one Corporation, is so in another; or that a Ruling Elder or Deacon of one Church, hath the same power in another, though perhaps in combination with the former. Whence it will follow, First, That no Minister can do an act properly of Power Ministerial out of the Church, whereof he is an Officer, that is formally valid: i. e. as from him, being an Officer. 2. That the Ordinances administred by ministers either of no Congregation, or out of their owne, are void formally and uneffectual. 3. That Churches destitute of Ministers, must remain with∣out Ordinances, &c. The three first main inferences I acknow∣ledge to be consequent to the foregoing discourse: But to the conclusions drawn from them, I must speak something. 1. Some distinguish betwixt power purely Ministerial, and pro∣perly Governing, because we finde the Apostles did preach and ba∣ptise whilest Christ was on earth; and before they were endued with power from on high, to administer discipline and govern∣ment: and they say Ministerial power is of larger extent, and Governing power restrained to a political body or Corporation. 2. Others say, that by vertue of the communion of Churches, all officers are common amongst them (quoadusum, non quoad do∣minium) to use, though not to owne as theirs. But secondly, to avoid dispute, I shall omit these, and what else might be replyed more exactly; and adhere at present to a∣nother
answer, viz. Factum valet, fieri non debuit. That the Vulgar Axiome holds here: Things that are in themselves right, i. e in the Essential causes (matter and forme) good, and according to insti∣tution, though not proceeding by standing rule in some externalls (as in the outward efficient, or minister, or circumstantial manner of doing) are not therefore void formally. For instance, first in na∣tural things: Those creatures that are begotten both by generati∣on of their Dammes; and also by putrefaction, and heat of the Sun (as divers creeping things are) though the latter differ in the outward instrumental cause, yet are they as true in their kinde as the former: so the Serpent, the Lice, the Froggs, &c. that Moses made before Pharaoh; and the Wine that Christ made at the Banquet: were as true in their kinde as those wrought by ordina∣rie causes.Exod. 4. 25. So secondly in spiritualls, Zipporahs circumcising her child (though M. Mead gives another Interpretation of it) The Circumcision administred by the Idolatrous Priests.2 Chron. 30. 11. 17, 18, 19, 20. Jehojadahs, and afterward the Maccabees administration of Ecclesiastick and Civil power, to wit, The Kingdom and Priesthood together: was valid. The high Priests in the time of Christ had no orderly power,Iosephus. as being not the persons designed by God for that office, as not being of Aarons line, nor coming in by a lawful way, &c. yet their Acts were valid, and Christ present at them. 3. To the third particular I say, 1. This is no greater inconve∣nience, then that a Corporation must be without many those acts which onely Officers may doe, whilest they are de∣stitute of them. 2. There would bee ordinarily Ministers enough, and a succession of them in every Church, if the Congregations or Parishes, were divided, and limited by Scripture and reason, that is: according to the number of Christians, and conveniency of Habitation: And not ac∣cording as the bounds of Lordships accidentally fell; or superstition prompted (to get Offerings,See Seld of Tithes, cap. 6. or merit Pardon) or Wealth and pride suggested (when some grown rich would not sit so low as before) which are the common origi∣nalls of the multitudes of Parishes,Sect. 3. and Pa∣pists petition to King Iame, 164. especially in Cities and great Townes. Thus of the Corrollaries. 2. In the next place;Sect. . Exhort to the Brethren. for our brethren, the Assertors of the opposed Tenet. As a Bishop must be apt to teach; so hee must
bee willing to heare also;Tit. 1. 7. for he must not bee self-willed, nor soone angry with those that pt him in remembrance. On these footings, and the evidence of the truth now pleaded; I take liberty, (with due respect unto the Persons and places of them with whom I deale) to advance a step or two neerer to them,2 Iohn and speak (in os ipsum) as the saying is, mouth to mouth. There is a general and sad complaint (and that not without cause) of Novelty, variety and danger of opinions. I shall not injure ye Brethren if I put you in minde, that the opinion (in your sense at least) is ew Light, and cannot but increase the diffe∣rences and disputes exceedingly;Confession of Faith, c. 25. n. 2, 3. 4. especially when men shall be engaged to subscribe it as an Article of Faith; or else be secluded from emploiment in the Church of God; which occasioned so many controversies about Liturgie,cap. 3. Episcopacie, Ceremony, &c. formerly. That it is like also to prove of the greatest danger to the Churches and their Reformations: even your owne; was shewed above. Now how incongruous is it, that those persons who have with so much zeal inveighed against others for like things, should have the beam of that in their owne eye: And how imprudent would it seem to be, if men of repute for wisdom and piety, should be so far transported, either with distaste to any par∣ty, or fear of danger to their owne; as to admit a forraigner (with intent to evert their adversary, and secure themselves) who will prey on both. Now if ye will needs maintain a litigious Title: can ye not live on the inheritance of your Fathers? Presbyterie hath stood without this proppe; and it is not safe to remove a building from its old foundation: this NEW peece put to the old garment, is like to make the RENT:Episcopacy. it proved so in the late Church-go∣vernment. Whilest they held it (Episcopi verint, se magis consue∣tudine (Ecclesiae) quamdispositionis dominica veritate, Presbyteris esse ma∣jores. Hieron. in Tit. 1. 5. ex usu Ecclesiae) by custome of the Church, as of old; or (Quanquam enim sundum Honorum vocabula, quae jam Ecclesiae ƲSƲS ob∣inuit, Episcopatus, Presbyterio, major sit; tamen in multisrebus Augustinus Hieronymo minor est. Aug. Epist. 9. ad Hieron. gratia Regis) by the favour of theIewell, Whitguift, &c. Prince; as of later dayes: they stood even in great stormes, as we know; but when they would settle it on a new bottom: in∣title God to it immediately: it was not long after the returne of light, but (corvuit funditus) it came tumbling downe. Withall, Let bitternesse, and calumny in word and writing: such as a late reproachful and ingrateful book unto ourHonor. Reggius de stat Relig. in Anglia. 1647. Nation
hath: but especially injurious dealing (with orthodox, godly, peaceable, and publikely useful Dissentients) be removed. For be∣sides that experience hath hitherto lessoned us, that the wrath of man worketh not the righteousnesse of God;Capita papaverum. and hence all endeavour of the same will not do as yet; what is desired; let it be remem∣bred,Superstition and oppression the sum of Sathans Decalogue, as Re∣ligion is of Gods. that the Top-weeds that God will strike at till he hath struck off, are superstition and oppression. These ruined those who were in the chair before ye, Kill not the man because he wears his clothes ill-favouredly, or perhaps will go naked. Starve not the children though froward or wanton, if they will take in but some whole∣some food. Tithe not mint and cummine, and neglect in the mean time justice and judgement to the soules of the Gospellesse people. Devour not widdows houses (by depriving their husbands and children of means of livelyhood, for very disputable matters, un∣der pretence of prayer, government. &c. To close:Isaiah There are who rejoyce in such sparks as these, which themselves have kindled; and in the curious (but combustible) Fa∣bricks which they have raised on the foundation: yet when they shall see the fire seise upon their work: and that they must suffer the losse of it: though themselves be saved, and in that respect they depart in peace; yet reflecting on their former damage, have this from the hand of God, that they lie down in sorrow: But I hope better things of many of them, and such, as not onely ac∣company salvation; but as do precede a full reward. The END.
