F1464 99833813 38291
AN ESSAY of Original RIGHTEOUSNESS AND CONVEYED SIN, Wherein the question is rightly stated, the latent venome of some of Dr. Jeremiah Tayler's heretical assertions detected, and accurately im∣pugn'd. By  ord Gentleman. Epist. ad Gal. 1. 8. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospell unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Permissu superiorum, Printed, 1657.
To the RIGHT HONOURABLE AND most truly Noble LORD, the Marquess of Dorchester, the great Example of true Honour, Learning, and Chivalry. Right Honourable Lord, WHereas your Il∣lustrious Ho∣nour is not ig∣norant, and all the World knows, that as Divinity and essential truths are therefore
eternal and because such; so falshood must needs decay and va∣nish, and that the learning of our late reforming Divines consisting onely in some su∣perficial Talent of preaching language or elocution, and not in deep knowledge of Philosophy, Metaphysick, and much less of that most solid profitable and subtile method call'd School Divi∣nity, aims onely at non proce∣dere ad perfectioneni sed ad per∣mutationem, still teaching to go forward not to perfection but to perpetual change, lea∣ping from ignorance to a prejudicate opinion and ne∣ver
taking a good judgment in their way: and this, for that the enemy of mankind moving Hereticks to deride and sleight School Divinity looks at no less then the to∣tal ruine of all Religion and faith—Hence most Honou∣rable Lord, I thought it no ill Office of a Patriot for the undceiving of many to con∣trive this succinct Methodical Treatise of School Divinity, which now runs for shelter to the glorious protection of your Honour, a person in∣comparably Illustrious and accomplish'd in all royal and moral virtues, nam geminas animi nobilitate genus: the
general report, fame and ap∣plause of your rare genius, transcendent worth, and known abilities in most part of all learning hath invited me to the boldness of this ad∣dress; for to whom more fitly should a small Treatise in∣tended for to establish truth (now when most malign'd & despis'd) run or Patronage then to your most illustrious Lordship, a Vigorous ho∣nourer and indefatigable In∣vestigator of truth, the na∣tural pleasing object of our understanding! Pray Hea∣ven it prove worthy your acceptance: for my part I shall ever acknowledge your
greatness, admire your glory, and from your goodnesse raise to my self a hope that you will vouchsafe to cherish these weak fruits of my elu∣cubrations; for such is the sublime, and magnificent amplitude of your soul as it will harbour with benign indifferencie what is spoken against your own sense, judgement, and consent, my scope being to serve and ho∣nour not to instruct you, nei∣ther to engage you in the Patronage of what I deliver more then truth shall con∣vince your judgement. Vale & diu feliciter vive Nobilium decus & magnae Britania orna∣menium
—This shall be the constant humble supplica∣tion of Most truly Noble And Right Honourable Lord, Your humble and obsequious Servant, J. FORD.
To the Reader. Courteous Reader, IN an Age so pregnant of vice, desirous of prophane novelties, affected and ad∣vantagious ignorance, it's no wonder the structures of true Re∣ligion, Devotion, and Antiquity decay and ruine. For if men did but seriously consider how unsatisfactory new Faiths, new Opinions are, they would quick∣ly be convinced of this varity in seeking: For proof of this, I appeal to the Conscience f any
that by misguided zeale have been transported with this fury, whether they have not with in∣dignation beheld their former Tenets, applauing their present condition, as escap'd from the pit of perdition, and yet in that instant of imagined felicity and safety have not an ching desire and of new Lights, and a per∣fecter walking, which in a short time they prosecute so eagerly by ever learning to a Contradi∣ction and Opposition of their ate found happiness, as to account also that state desperate and damnable? In this circular progresse of Religion, what hope cn these have of salvation or comfort in the agonies of Con∣science, o languishings of mor∣tality,
when their recovery may restore them to a defiance of their present belief and uncer∣tainy what Creed to die in? If the Apostle tells us of one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, sure the dviation from this Vity must be Schism▪ and persevering in ; utter destruction; because the multiplying a Deity, oppose its Essence, as much as th deny∣ing it; and he will be no lesse mistaken, that thinks by by∣pathes unknowne and uncer∣tain wayes to goe to Heaven, a he that denees ny. A more illustrious moral reason of this cannot be given then that of the Philosopher, Eutibus via errantibus nulla; because they in the trueway ake their
progresse in righteousnesse, the misguided only in errors. It much importeth men to be very cir∣cumspect & inquisitive after the right way; if neither living or dying they cannot by those un∣godly reflections they now wan∣der in, attain any certain hopes of salvation. I have not with∣out admiration looked upon the incomparable ignorance of the most professing Teachers, who have no other cognizance of their zeale, then the want of good Literature; and I cannot judge the products of their in∣struction to be more then blind devotion, they themselves being such blind Leaders. For if I should ask them a reason of their Faith, or of those many Myste∣ries
contained in the New Te∣stament, or why they have abro∣gated holy Ceremonies, continu∣ed from the Primitive times e∣ven untill these late dayes of A∣postacie; I suppose they could render no other account, then what a great Rabbi, to justifie their abominable proceedings, replied▪ That the pious act∣ings of these later dayes would not have pass'd for religious or devout in the Primitive times. How cauti∣ous then should all good minded Christians be, to bear the Do∣ctrines of such dangerous Prea∣cher, which are Libels and Contradictions to the Primevall Church, and sent only for poli∣tick ends, by special faith to
cast me into a Lethargie of god∣linesse, oblivion, and detestati∣on (out of I know not what fear) of good deeds and just dealings. It's strange, where the Priests lipps should preserve knowledge, the ancient and boy∣ish Elders of our times should zealously affect the contrary; except that being deceived, they may more securely deceive o∣thers, or may with more auda∣cious security precipitate, toge∣ther with themselves, others in∣to destruction, according to that of Thucidides. A , Ignorance is the Mother of confidence, or by want of knowledge the more facil may stupifie the clamours of a corrupt conscience hide
their covetousnesse, and for their private craft the more un∣discernably cry up Great is Di∣ana of the Ephesa. They might easy have avoided these pre∣sent Pass and fearfull Pa∣roxysms for the osse of ithes, they at first had vigorously Preach'd, and shew'd the severe eaces, and damnable puish∣ments for Sacrdge; and may yet free us from raie and un∣just negotiations, if they them∣selves would cease to be cove∣tous, and truly convince men that godliness is great gain. It cannot be expected, that those men who are eneis to Lear∣ning, should be friends to Anti∣quitie, lest by i he folly should be made manifest: For I
assure my self, there is no stron∣ger argument to demonstrate the truth of Christianity, their Tra∣dition; hence the Prophet knew the good way from the old paths; our Saviour shewing the good seed to be soe before the ares; and even in nature truth is be∣fore falshood. It's no marvel, I say, that men no deeper root∣ed should be carried away with every wind of Doctrine; but that Doctor Tay-ler, a man of that universal and profound reading, ingenuity, and grace in writing, such a pillar of the Church of England, should so unseasonably, contrary to the grave advice of very Learned and Reverend Admonishers, not only fall into a grosse and dam∣nable
error, but endeavour by rak'd and false interpretation to make the Church his Patron, is to be look'd upon with pitie and indignation. I think the enemy of mankind, that he might in cur dayes compleat his malice, hath not only by delu∣sion made the vulgar unlearned his instruments, but under pre∣tence of piety, hath imployed one of the best parts to under∣mine the chiefest foundations of Religion; his male sarra argument, and dangerous in∣ferences which from this his O∣pinion may be drawn, I shall leave the intelligent Reader to consider, wondring much that an Opinion maintained in Gods Church in all Ages, and con∣firm'd
by several General Coun∣cils, should at last be stil'd by Dr. Taylor a Vulgar Error; but I am well satisfied with his zeale, to maintain one Error, that hath writ in defence of all. The God of Truth and Order en∣lighten this Nation, that the scales of ignorance and misgui∣ded zeal may fall from their eies, and bring into the way of salvation all such as have erred and are deceived.
THE DOCTRINE OF Original Sin. CHAP. I. Of the happy state of man before his Fall. ALmighty God, who is indepen∣dent of all Beings, Immense in his extent, Eternal in his duration, infi∣nite in all his perfections, immuta∣ble
and absolute over all creatures, and he who was without doubt the mystery hidden under the veile of that ancient Statute which bore for device, I am what is, what shall be, and what has been, whose cover no man hath taken off, seeing no ob∣ject out of himselfe which could deserve his love; & besides this love, being incited by a holy desire of cōmunicating it self, it was requisite to frame a copy of the Intellectual Original which was in his Idea, and in his heavenly mind; and the world being but a lively vacu∣um, but an universal privation of forms and qualities, was chosen as the blank Table whereon he re∣solved to draw the first strokes of his goodnesse; and so all nature, as heavens, earth, sea, light, stars, trees, fishes, flashes, furnaces of fire and flames, vast extent of air,
clouds, abysses, peecipices, all en∣gendred out of it by the sole pow∣er of the Divinity, by the com∣mand of the Word and Love. What I pray doth remain after all these prodigies of power and rare works of love? The Angels are lost without Redemption, and the punishment their insolence hath merited, will pursue them with∣out relaxation, term, or pity. It must therefore be concerning mans creation and redemption that a decree is past; it's on man the great God reflected; it's man who must be substitute in the place of Angels; without man all created works seem not sufficiently perfect Now God, the fountaine, cause, and origin of the Universe, the wise and all-knowing Workman, to whom all things possible, drew ut of dirt, morter, and dust, man
his master-piece and object of his favour, the Image▪ of his divine Eence, the Accomplisher of his commands, and his Lieutenant up∣on earth: It was only man that well deserved the last touches of his omnipotent hands, as the most glorious term of his power, the fa∣rest peece of the Universe, a work so admirable, that it may rather beget admiration, then expressive words: whereas Plato cryes ot, that man is the miracle of all visi∣ble miracles, the Horison of all creatures, the all of all, and as it were, the soule of the World. Finally, Pythgora looks upon man as the measure of all things, in whom are found the longitudes, latitudes, altitudes, and prondi∣ties of all beings; for its known he hath a being common with , a life common with plant,
a sense common with beasts, and an understanding which equals him with Angels; but he excells them all, in that he was crea∣ted from Gods Idea, as the most lively resentation of his great Maker; what ever learned Au∣thos did in general speak in the praise , it's certain, that of all the Encomions given to him, the most noble, most august, and most transcendent, is, that man is created to the Image of God, as a character of his Substance and Divinity. O great God, who hath incited thee to heap together in one vessell wrought so admirably out of clay and dust, all the trea∣sures of wisedom, greatnesse, and sanctity? why so many sciences, so many knowledges, so many splendors in one mans soul? and why in one single man so many
superexcellent graces, perfections, and vertues, the primitive justice, original righteousnesse, a rare re∣ctitude of the inner man, a just subordination of the inferiour fa∣culties to the superiour  cleare light, and the Empire  e U∣niverse? Herehence Gods nature requireth homages, his Majestie, servitudes; his glory, airation; his goodness, all acknowledgments and affections of hearts; and though God is good and liberal, yet is he dread, just, and all fore∣seeing: If then he foreseeth some danger and evill, let him provi∣dently dissolve the occasion, and obstruct the wayes which lead man unto a precipice; let him not u∣nite so many millions of mem∣bers unto a head, which is able to corrupt them all in an instant, and leave unto the heart of man in de∣pendency
on created things, and cause efficaciously his affections to be still fastned unto his Creator, that so he alone may be the source of his motions and effects: No, no, the old Adam, our first Parent, must be created perfect; God saw every thing that he made, and behold it was very good; but mutable, for so it pleased God to prepare a way to the execution of his hidden de∣cree: Adam must be the cause of our good and evill, and on his good or bad fortune ours must wholly depend: It was very con∣venient, that God as absolute Lord and Master, should leave Adam some commandement; and it was likewise very reasonable that A∣dam as his servant and creature, should be pliable and obsequious to so just a command and decree, as that of God, reserving the use of
tree of the knowledge of good and evill, of which he expresly, and upon pain of death forbids A∣dam to taste or gather any fruit amongst all the trees which God hath planted in Paradise: Notwithstanding Adam swallow∣ed down that fatall bit, which hath since infected all his posteri∣ty, his weaknesse not able to de∣ny that to his Wife, which God reserved to himselfe, and blindly have done for the love of a foolish woman, what the eternal wisedom had so expresly forbidden him. O disloyal Adam! that gave more credit to a serpent that deceiv'd thee, then to your Creator, and Truth which can never faile. Here through this act of disobedience in Adam we all fell, and became under sin and death, and all man∣kind were convicted and senten∣ced
to the eternall and temporall death, in the conviction and sen∣tence that passed upon him, Gen. 3. 6, 11, 17. 19. Rom. 5. 12, 18. and this without the knowledge or motions of the individualls or particular persons that were to proceed from Adam, yet so veri∣ly, vertually, really, and indeed, that all that came forth from him by propagation, doe then, and in that birth, and there throughly partake of sin, death, and misery, and in their several persons respe∣ctively bear the image of the first Adam as he was in his all; see Gen. 5. 3. Rom. 17. 19. Job 4. 1: Psalm▪ 51. 5. Rom. 9. 8. Eph. 2. 1, 2. &c, Here we may find out the o∣rigin and source of all our evils: hence our miseries dayly finds de∣plorable increase; and hence the most shamefull portion of a most
sad and disastrous inheritance is dayly transported to the poor children of Adam. Now man being created for a determinate end, and for a state convenient for his nature, and a∣ble to satisfie the original appe∣tences of his soule; and no man by natural means able to arrive to the end and period of happinesse, we must follow henceforward the conduct of a supernatural guide, since nature quitteth us here, ha∣ving led us on as long as she was able We may consider that God, when he created man, did not as∣sign him to remain in the state of pure nature, but did out of his goodnesse confer original righte∣ousnesse and grace upon him, which exceeded the sphere of his nature; for God being in his own Essence goodnesse it selfe, cannot
choose, but doe unto whatsoever proceedeth from him, all that good which the nature of it is capable of (whether by natural or super∣natural means) and his wisedome can readily contrive the meanes to bring that to pass, which his good∣nesse disposeth him to doe, and his omnipotency as easily acteth what his other two attributes have projected so that there wanting an infinite capacity of the soule, and without which she must be eternal∣ly miserable, it remaineth, that he who gave that capacity, must also afford the object, and assign means how to compasse and gain it; all which is out of the reach of na∣ture to discern; and therefore it followeth of consequence, that the Author of nature must needs en∣dow man with supernatural means, if he be in a fit disposition to re∣ceive
them, which may bring him to the supernatural end he was created for. And of the supernatural gifts, the first, and the ground and foun∣dation of all the rest is faith; for whereas that we cannot by any na∣tural meanes attain to the know∣ledge of any object that may ren∣der us compleatly happy in the next life; and yet such knowledge must be had, to the end we may direct our actions to gain the frui∣tion of that object: Therefore there is no way left to compass this, but by the instructions and disci∣pline of some Master, whose good∣ness and knowledge we can no wayes doubt of; by which two perfections in him, we may be se∣cure, that he neither can be decei∣ved himselfe, nor will deceive us. Now the Doctrine that such a di∣vine
Master shall teach for such an end, we call faith: Now we must determine that this Master must be God and man, and that the Au∣thor of that doctrine we must be∣lieve, the instructer of the actions we must perform, and the promi∣ser of the happinesse we may hope for, be God himselfe; who only knoweth of himselfe what is said in matters of these natures, and who only is neither liable to be deceived, nor can deceive others, as being the prime verity it selfe: Therefore it was necessary Christ, God and man, should come into the world to teach us what to be∣lieve, and what to do, and preach unto us by his example, and him∣self be our Leader in the way that he instructed us to take. And we must determine, that those unto whom Christ did immediately
preach this faith, and unto whom he gave Commission to preach it unto others, and spread it through the world after he ascendeth to Heaven, ought to be believed as firmly as he himselfe: The reason of this Assertion is, that their do∣ctrine, though delivered by secon∣dary mouths, yet it proceedeth from the same fountain, which is God himselfe, the prime verity, that cannot deceive nor be decei∣ved. But all the difficulty herein, is to know who had this immedi∣ate Commission from Christ, and by what seale should we discern it to have been no forged one: The solution of this ariseth out of the same Argument, which proveth that Christ himself was God, and that doctrine he taught was true and divine, which is the miracles and wonders he did, exceeding the
power of nature, which could not be effected by any but by God him∣selfe; for he being truth it selfe, cannot by any action immediatly proceeding from him, witness and confirm a falshood. In like man∣ner, the Apostles doing such ad∣mirable works and miracles, as neither by nature nor by Art Ma∣gick could be brought to pass, that must necessarily infer God himself co operated with them, to justifie what they said. It is evident that their doctrine (not their own, but received from Christ) must be true and divine: This Faith thus taught by Christ, and propagated by the Apostles, and necessary to mankind to believe, dependeth in∣trinsecally upon the testimony of the Primitive Doctors, Fathers, and Councels in church Catholike and Apostolike, which is ordained
conserve and deliver it from age to age; and this cannot be but either by the immediate preaching of Christ, or else by the information (either in writing, or by word of mouth) of them that learned it from him, and their delivering it over to others, and so from hand to hand: But from Christs own mouth none could have it but those that lived in the age that he did; therefore there remained no other means to have it derived down to after ages, then by this delivery o∣ver from hand to hand of Fathers dispersed throughout the world to the whole congregation of sons or youngers; which proveth that the Church Apostolike is the Conser∣ver of the whole doctrine of Faith necessary for salvation, and like∣wise of the divine Writ dictated by the holy Ghost, and written by
the Prophets, Evangelists, and A∣postles, which we are also bound to beleeve. Hence we may de∣duce, that into Christs Catholick Church no false doctrine in any age can be admitted or creep in; that is to say, no false proposition whatsoever can ever be received and embraced by the Catholique Church as a proposition of faith. For whatsoever the Church belie∣veth as a proposition of faith, is upon this ground, that Christ taught it as such unto the Church he planted himself, and so left it in trust to be by it delivered over to the next age: And the rea∣son why the present Church belie∣veth any proposition to be of faith▪ is because the immediate prece∣ding Church of the age before de∣livered it as such; and so you may derive it on from age to age, untill
you come to the Apostles and Christ: For to have any false pro∣position of faith admitted into the Church in any age, doth sup∣pose that all they of that age must unanimously conspire to deceive their children, telling them that they were taught by their Fathers to believe as of faith some proposi∣tion which indeed was not; which being impossible (as it will evi∣dently appear to any prudent per∣son that shall reasonably ponder the matter) that so many men spread throughout the whole world, so different in their particular in∣terests and ends, aud of such vari∣ous dispositions and natures, should all agree together in the forgery of any precise lye, which is most im∣possible; though any one man may be liable to be deceived, or out of some indirect end may be induced
to deceive others: Whence I come to say that faith dependeth on these two propositions; First, that whatsoever God said is true Next, that God I said this, whatsoever it be that is delivered thus by the generall practice of the Church. And the primary original na∣tural appetence of mans soule, is the love of truth, which it vehe∣mently desireth, and is alwayes un∣quiet and ardent in the search of it upon what occasion soever; and this acquisition of truth is that which the soule in every action na∣turally aimeth at, and detesteth salshood. Therefore, although a∣ny particular man, as Dr. Taylor, may have his sense or fantasie so depraved, as to take imperfect or maimed impressions of outward objects; or the powers of his un∣derstanding so weak, as to make a
preposterous and disorderly colle∣ction out of them; or his judge∣ment so misguided by preoccupati∣on of any affection or particular end, as he may in himselfe be de∣ceived, and feed his soule with falshood in stead of truth; or else that sinister respects and interests, or sordid apprehensions of com∣modity to himselfe by the sensuall passions tyrannizing over him, a o cause him to swallow mortall baits, making him employ the fa∣culties of his understanding, and the powers of his soul, contrary to their natural inclination, to the maintaining of a lye: Yet it is impossible that all mankinde, or such a vast multitude of men as contain in them all the variety of dispositions and affections inci∣dent to mans nature, and that are dispersed through the world, so as
they can have no communion to∣gether whereby they might infect one another / nor can have finister ends common all alike to them all which should invite them to con∣spire together to forge a falshood. It is impossible, I say, that such a company of Saints and Doctors should so degenerate from their own nature, which is to love truth, as they should invent a lye, and that (in so important a matter as faith is) they should concur to de∣ceive the world of men that should come after them in things of such nature, as their deceit must of ne∣cessity damn for all eternity both themselves and all them that shall receive that lye from them; and take it upon their credit. This ge∣neral deection from truth in man∣kind is as impossible, as that all one entire element, or any primgeni∣al
nature should absolutely perish. Thus I conceive I have made good the Assertion that hath be∣gotten this discourse; which is, that Faith conserved and practised in the Catholick Church, and de∣livered by perpetual Succession, is most certain, and most infallible: But all this is not enough, our dis∣quifition must not rest here, we must not content our selves in this divine affair and supernatural do∣ctine, with a certitude depending only upon natural causes: The wisedome of God proportioneth out congruent means to bring on every thing to their proper end; and mans obtaining beatitude, be∣ing the highest end that any crea∣ture can arrive unto, and altoge∣ther supernatural, it requireth su∣pernatural causes to bring us to that end, and a supernaural infal∣libility
to secure us in that journey: we must therefore not only have a supernatural way to travel in (which is faith) but also superna∣tural assurance of the right way, which we may with an humble confidence expect and claim at Gods divine hands: God therefore hath given to his Church the con∣tinual assistance of the holy Ghost, to confirm it in the true faith, and to preserve it from error, and to illuminate the understanding of it in right discening the true sense of those mysteries of faith that are commited to the custody of it, and to work supe natural effects of true devotion and sanctity in that Church: For Christs doctrine is practical, and aymeth at the wor∣king of an effect, which is the re∣duction of mankind to beatitude; and that this mankinde: conthre
prehendeth not only those that li∣ved in that age when he preached, but also all others that ever were since, or shall be to the end of the world. It is apparent, that to ac∣complish that end it was necessary Christ should so effectually imprint his doctrine in their hearts whom he delivered it unto, as it might upon all occasions and at all times infallibly expresse it self in action, and in the delivery of it over from hand to hand, should in vertue and strength of the first operation pro∣duce ever after like effects in all others. Now unto these rational considerations, let us add the pro∣mises which Christ made to his Church, that the gates of Hell should not prevail against it, that the true Doctrine of Christ is con∣served, that it can never faile, but must infallibly continue until the
end. Thus having produced that a supernatural doctrine is necessa∣ry to bing mankind to beatitude, that Christ taught this doctrine, that from him the Church recei∣ved it, and is the Sacrary in which it is conserved; that this Church planted by him in the delivery o∣ver of his Doctine cannot erre, and that it is perpetual: And that if any particular man should goe about to introduce new doctrine of faith no formerly heard of, or renew old damned erors, as Dr. Taylor doth, drawing the Argu∣ments of confirmation thereof out of his own ratiotination and pri∣vate discourse, that were enough to convince him of falshood, im∣posture, and heesie, since he should theeby undertake to know what were impossible for him of him∣selfe to attain to the knowledge o;
for herefie I count to be an opini∣on repugnant to the grounds of Christian Faith, obstinately main∣tained by any that professe the name of Christ. It remaineth now that I close up this discourse by applying the premisses to my purpose and matter at hand. It is an undeniable truth, that Baptism ordained for the cleansing and ta∣king away of original sin, derived to all the relative descendants of Adam, is a supernatural doctrine absolutely necessary to bring man∣kind to beatitude; that Christ taught this doctrine, and that the same the Apostles and the Church by him planted, received it from him immediately; and that this Doctrine was ever conserved, pra∣cticed, and deliverd over from hand to hand by the Primitive best Fathers and Luminaries of that
Church untill this very day with∣out any interruption; which to deny were not only most impious and heretical, but most absurd to whosoever considereth the infinite goodnesse, providence, wisedom, and omnipotency of the Almigh∣ty, yet notwithstanding Pelagius a Welchman, and is usually stiled Pelagius the Brittan, to distinguish him from Pelagius the Samosaten∣sian Bishop; his name in Welch was Morgan, which signifies the Sea: This pernicious wretch li∣ved in the time of the Emperour Theodosius the younger, and Hono∣rius, about the year of our Lord 416. This man, I say, and his fol∣lowers Julianus & Celestius, main∣tained damnable Heresies against Christs express doctrine; for they taught Adams sin to be noxious to himselfe only, and not to his po∣sterity,
and thee to be no origi∣nal sin: Lust and concupiscence being natural not to be evill, but rather good; and sin not to be propagaed by generation: The former being granted, children to have no original sin from their pa∣rents, and children, though not baptized, to be saved. See Ponta∣nus Cath. Heretic. This Pestilent Heresie was spread abroad in ma∣ny places, but chiefly in England, because Pelagius being driven from Rome, came thither and infected it with his execrable Erros: But by the diligent travels and great zeal of one Germanus Altisidorensis and Palladius, sent from Celestinus Pope, both England and Scotland became free from those his Errors, solemnly condemned in the Synod of Carthage, An. 415. in which there were assembled 27 Bishops
in Numidia, and in the Arausican in Franc. You may find his errors set down by August. Hierome, Am∣brose, Isidor. Prosper, and Fulgent. yet notwithstanding in these our late Error-abounding dayes, part∣ly through the instigation and ma∣lice of Satan, and partly through the power of the Almighties wrath, punishing the contempt of his revealed truth, those damn'd Heresies of Pelagius doth begin to be covertly revived by the crafty insinuating conveyance of one Dr. Taylor, the great Luminary and Pillar of the Protestant Church in England, the only Idol of the Na∣tion, and whose writings are ge∣nerally cryed up, and highly ex∣toll'd by the unsteady multitude, for no other reason that I can ima∣gine, but for his sympathizing cor∣respondency with them in blind∣nesse,
inconstancy, and ignorance; yet he is a man that hath his senses or fantasie so depraved, as to take imperfect and maimed impressions of outward objects, and the pow∣ers of his understanding so weak and perverted as to make preposte∣rous and disorderly collctions out of them, and whose judgment is so misguided by pre-occupation of self affection or particular ends, as himselfe becomes most lamenta∣bly deceived, feeding his soul with falshood i stead of truth, blindly wading too far without and above his obscure capacity, and low pro∣portion of knowledg, into particu∣lar uselesse subtilties, doting about frivolous questions and logoma∣chies, whereof commeth no fruit other then presumption, dissenti∣on, railings, dissolution, vill surmisings, conempt of Christ, of
his Doctrine, Sacraments, and di∣vine Ordinances, leaving every man to the dictamens of his own private judgment, according to the several tempers and circumstances that sway in every particular, which leadeth on inevitably to A∣theism and unchristianity; and all this for sordid apprehensions of base commodity to himselfe▪ ha∣ving imployed the faculties of his understanding contrary unto their naturall inclinations, to the main∣taining of lyes, and the deceiving of others, expresly against Scrip∣ture, and the generally received Doctrine of all the Orthodox Fa∣thers, in all Ages perspicuous and eminent in knowledge of tongues, inight into Antiquity, profound∣nesse in Sciences, Perfection and true Sanctity of life, which have shined most rarely in them, and
none will deny but these are the likeliest meanes to gain a right in∣telligence of the true and deep sense of Scripture, and not the vain dreams and deluding sugge∣stions of the private spirit of any Taylor, Sailer, Cobler, Body sel∣ler, Tinker, or such like swarm of Locusts, which have so miserably invaded and infected this brave Island, all pretending to have their commission and power derived from Jesus Christ, with so much intemperate boldnesse, as if they were the only persons employed and entrusted by him to doe o un∣doe as they please: But let them pretend what they will, its mani∣fest Christ concluded of such, John 10. 1. He that entreth not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. Our Saviour
himselfe was the door to his Apo∣stles, and his Apostles and their Successors the door to all that ever were admitted Shepherds in a re∣gular and Apostolick manner. Now if any desires to know who are the false Prophets, & false Teachers, Dr. Taylor shall resolve him in his Do∣ctrine delivered in his Episcopacy asserted, where he holds forth that Christ did institute a government to order and rule his Church by his Authority, and that this go∣vernment was delegated to the A∣postles by immediate substitution by Christ in traditione clavium, in∣spiratione spiritus, &c. And he holds further, that this power was not to expire with their person; for when the great Shepherd had reduced his wandering sheep into a fold, he would not leave them
without guides to govern them, so long as the woolf might possibly prey upon them, and that is till the last separation of the sheep from the goats; and this Christ intimates in that his promise, E∣vobiscnm, not with your persons, for they dyed long ago; but vobis∣cum & vestri similibus, with Apo∣stolical Successors of yours till the end of the wold; an therefore that the Apostolat might be perpe∣tuall and successive, Christ gave them a power of Ordination, that by imposing hands on others, they might impart tht power which they received from Christ, which was both ordinery and extraordinary; as immediate Milion, unlimited Jurisdiction, and miraculous O∣perations. It followes therefore that there must remain a power of giving faculty and capacity to per∣sons
successively, for the execution of that in which he promised per∣petuall assistance, which were the Offices and Powers of Preaching, Baptizing, Consecrating, Ordain∣ing and Governing, necessary for the perpetuating of a Church, un∣lesse men could be Christians that were never Christned, become Priests without Calling of God and Ordination, have their sins pardoned without Absolution, be Members, Parts, and Sons of a Church whereof there is no co∣dunation, no Authority, no Go∣vernour: It follows therefore out of this Doctrine, that if Dr. Tay∣lor, or all other Proiestant Mini∣sters, Teachers, or Preachers in England, have not received lawful power, mission, Apostalical facul∣ty, or ordination by hand-imposi∣tion from true Apostolical Succes∣sors
they all are reduced to the Nonsuch of their Calling, become meer Laicks, and incapable of a∣ny colourable pretence to any suc∣cessive Ministerial Apostolical Or∣dination or Mission derived from Christ and his Apostles, left as un∣fit dispensers of the mysteries of the Kingdome: Then pray by what power or commission doth Dr. Tayler, and other such giddy pretending spirits, preach, teach, guide soules, plant Religion, in∣terpret Scripture, and administer Sacraments, intruding themselves, and with a sottish arrogancy usur∣ping those sacred Functions? sure the result of this his doctrine, is, that both he, and all other such Ministers, Preachers, Doctors, &c. of the now Protestant Church in Eng∣land, must be Roman Catholicks, or claim not at all a pretence to a∣ny
true Apostolical successive ordi∣nation or mission deriv'd from Christ, ex ore tuo te judico serve nequam. Thus you see the Doctor pledg'd in his own cup, and pro∣ved a destroyer of his own Do∣ctrine and pretended Ministery: I ptty the soules of his misguided and deluded Proselytes▪ Notwith∣standing this his Doctrine in his Episcopacy asserted, you shall find quite contradictory in his Epistle Dedicatory to his liberty of Pro∣phesying, and all along in that his work, where he allowes an in∣differency or countenance to all Sects and new Religions, teaching and encouraging varieties of Sects, and contradictions in opinions, & that men may be saved in any Re∣ligion; what is this other then to o∣verthrow all Successive Apostolical Ordination and Mission derived from the Apostles for Baptizing,
Preaching, Consecrating, and ad∣ministring Sacraments, allowed and taught by him in his Episcopa∣cy asserted, and to open a wide gate, and make way for all Schism, irreverence, pride of understand∣ing, and for a colluvies of Heresies, and by consequence destroy all Re∣ligion: and for to justifie forsooth the new birth of his rebellious brain, the first stroke of his pen must be to lay a taint of ignorance and error upon the whole Current of ancient Fathers of the Church and General Councils, and to blast their authority, whose names and records ought to be sacred with po∣sterity: and to settle a like beliefe in all men, he gives no general and certain rule, but leaving every man to the dictamen of his own private judgment; hence must result (as by dire experience may be seen)
a variety of dayly new opinions as those dictamens of private spirits are different: for who is able to number all the divisions and sub∣divisious of all the new Sects that these later dayes have hatch'd in England, occasioned by the large liberty of Prophesying and inter∣preting Scripture, given by our new Dr. to all Laicks to preach, teach, guide souls, administer Sacraments, interpret Scripture, and invent new Religions▪ and what not? Oh times! oh manners! is this th frt of the new wayes, fresh ws, and dayly inventions, whereby the utter desolation is day by day con∣summated? are these our new pre∣tended Reformers and Lights? Sure they are but meer exhalations, sulphureous Mtors, igues fatu, good for nothing but to lead men into lakes and ditches.
If the Reader will but seriously consider and peruse with attention this loose and Independent doctrine of Dr. Tayler, he will finde him like the Chamelion, changing him∣self unto all colours, and inventing a trick to min this doctrine, as may be most serviceable to his particular Design and Interest; for sometimes he steers according to the expresse doctrine of Roman Catholicks he so much declames against; sometimes according to the face of a rigid Presbyterian; sometimes according to the successe and atchievements of illiterate Anabaptists; sometimes according to the itch and inclina∣tion of Independents; and finally, according to the genius of damned Pelagius, of whom Luther said that he was so called from Pelagus, the Sea; whereas his most impious er∣ors, like the Sea, did in a manner
overflow the world: Might not Dr: Tayler as well out of his name Tayler be, not unfitly, call'd cauda Draconis, the erring tail of the Dragon meant by S. John, Revel. 12. 4. who saw clearly in a Vision that a time would come when the tail of the Dragon should draw the third part of the stars from heaven: A man may think now the time to be i which that Revelation is ful∣filled in Dr. Tayler the posthumus he∣reticorum filius & cauda; for doth not he vigorously endeavour to o∣verthrow and quite abolish the effi∣cacy of Baptism, made the Chara∣cteristick note of a Christian from an Heretick, Jew, or Infidell, shewing himselfe to be of so strange and imperious a spirit, as that he would fain confine all the Wits in England to his particular erroneous fancy; so far mistaking
himselfe, as to think his bare asser∣tions, without competent proofe, should be received for Oracles: What is this but to aime from the blind tail of the people to advance himselfe to such a pitch of presum∣ption, as to pretend to trample up∣on the Head, Sacraments, and all the mystical body of Christ the u∣niversal Redeemer, and bring con∣sequently Religion, State and all to ruine and confusion. Take fom Plutarch to this purpose a story of a serpent whose tayl was disconten∣ted that the head should have the power to govern and carry it which way soever it pleased; the tayle therefore petitioned that the same power might reside in it; which being unwarily granted upon grea importunity, the tayl, a member o a very active and stirring nature▪ but withall blind, carried the head,
breast and body through many holes and crevises, untill at last brought it selfe into such narrow straits that it could not stir, but both head, body, and tayle were all destroyed. This, though but a Fable, hath in it an important mo∣rall truth, and may pertinently be applyed by the ingenious to Dr. Tayler. Doe but observe what a brave flourishing Island, most fa∣mous for Learning, Piety, Sanctity, and true Religion, setled by Christ the divine Architect, has England been while soules were governed and ruled in the way to common salvation by the Head, viz. by the true Apostolical Doctors and Prea∣chers, sent and authorised with di∣vine Power, Ordination, and Com∣mission, by fit and legal Ministers of the mysteries of the Kingdome, by Christs Emyassadors for Peace and
Reconciliation: Then indeed th saving doctrine purely extracted from the true Fountain, did at all times most perspicuously appeare against all avouch'd Heresies and in∣tolerable Blasphemies. Then there has been seen a blessed harmonious union in all fundamental principles of Religion constantly maintain'd and preserv'd both in Church and State: But alas! since the planting of new fangl'd Religions, and the rule and government of soules has been by usurpation assum'd by the over-bufie, blind and erring tayle, viz. by Dr. Tayler, and other such like upstart subpedanean Divines, (made Ministers only according to the new model by humane ordina∣tion, and now justly cast out of Church-government, and levelled to the rank of the unsteady vulgar) this gallant Nation is become in∣glorious,
the light and liberty of the Gospel extremely ecclips'd, if not quite extinguish'd; new inven∣tions and dreams, leading to con∣fusion, death, and perdiion, day∣ly cryed up and entertain'd; the Lords Prayer, Apostles Creed, all Sacraments, and the 39. Articles, antiquated and contemned, perni∣tious doctrines in faith hourly ac∣cruing together with an inundati∣on of vices and corrupted manners; no faith cut fancy and opinion; no hop but presumption; no charity but lust; no God but an Idol; as S. Au. said Ep. 64. Homini extra Ecclesiam Religio sua est cultus phan∣tasinatum suorum, aut error suus est Des suus. Thus leaving the Dr. Tayl to the reclaiming and detesta∣tion of his confused doctrine, I come to my main intendment.
CHAP. II. Of the dismall state of man of his Fall. ADam the great Representative of Mankinde, and the begin∣ner of a temporal happy life, in the first instance of his Creation, a∣mongst many other graces and sin∣gular endowments, did receive from God Original righteousness, which is not the same distributive justice, one of the cardinal vertues; nei∣ther that by which we are justified, which is called the grace of remissi∣on of sins: But this Original Ju∣stice in Adam is a certain kinde of rectitude in the whole man, viz.
of the body to the soule, and of the sensitive appetite to reason meant by the Ecclesiast in these words, Fe∣cit Deus hominem rectum, God made man upright; and because this rare gift of righteousnesse has been receiv'd by Adam from God, and was to be transmitted by original propagation to Adams Posterity, if he had not sinned, its fitly called original. By this original justice mans will was more firmly fastned to God then by grace; for this u∣nites us to our final end as a super∣natural good; but original righ∣teousness unites to the same as both convenient and delectable; and by this rectitude, reason became sub∣ject to God, the inferiour faculties to reason, and the body to the soule: the first subjection being the cause of the second and third; for reason remained subject to God
all the inferiour faculties must also remain subject; which cannot be unlesse grace be conjoyn'd with o∣riginal justice; and this subjection of the body to the soule, and of in∣feriour faculties to the superiour, could not be a natural gift, but ra∣ther a supernatural; otherwise it would have remained in man after his fall, whereas in damn'd soules all natural gifts doth still remaine. By this supernatural gift superin∣duc'd Adam had a title and right to heaven, which with nature was to be transfused to posteity if sin had not hindred it; but the sin of Adam destroyed his original righ∣teousnesse, and lost it to us for ever; it corrupted his nature and ours too, and the consequent and saddest of all is, by it we are borne enemies of God, sons of wrath, and heirs of eternall damnation, carrying
and deriving stil a natural pronesse afomes, or nest of sin imprinted in our soules, despoyled and devested by way of punishment of all the su∣pernatural assistances which God put into our nature, being left na∣ked and in pure naturalls, depriv'd of any title to heaven; that is, it hath in it neither strength to live a supernatural life, nor title to a hea∣venly; so as the sin which was committed in the original of man∣kinde by our first parent, and which had a sad influence upon all his posterity, brought upon Adam and us all that God threatned and no more, which is eternal and tem∣poral death with the proper effects and affections of mortality; and thus we are formally and properly made sinners by Adam, and in him by interpretation we all have sin∣ned, and God does truly and justly
impute his to us to make us as guil∣ty as he that did it, and as much punished and liable to eternal dam∣nation. Whereas all the superna∣tural gifts and eudowments con∣ferr'd on Adam, were not conferr'd on him as he was an individual person, but as he was a publick representative and common head of all humane nature, to be transfu∣sed to posterity by a continual se∣ries of seminal generation; whence original justice comes rightly so to be called; neither Adam became ob∣liged to transmit those preternatu∣ral gifts to his children by any pre∣cept or covenant other then by the same of not eating of the forbidden fruit; for we are bound by no other precept to preserve grace then by the same by which we are obliged to observe Gods Law; because the Author of nature had power to ob∣lige
all mankinde in Adam the fst original and head thereof; so as that he prevariting all his posterity, should likewise be comprehended both in the sin and guilt thereof (now the reason of original sin be∣gins to appear.) But whereas A∣dam then has been not only all hu∣mane nature, but also the seed and seminal root thereof, in whose loyns all mankinde as in the origi∣nal, head, fountain, and seminary were comprehended, involv'd, and included, though not formally, yet originally, radically, representa∣tively, and seminally, by his trans∣gression of the first commandement impos'd under inevitable paine of eternal & temporal death, brought on himselfe and all mankinde both the guilt of sin and death; as S. Aug. hyp. art. 2. saith, Cum Adam peccavit natura in illo tota peccavit.
When Adam sinned, in him all na∣ture likewise have sinned; the rea∣son is, because that sin was volun∣tary in order to us, Adams posteri∣ty; whereas for the preservatio of that original righteousnesse besow∣ed upon all humane nature, Adams will in a manner was accounted and reputed the will of all man∣kinde; as a Kings will is accoun∣ted the will of the whole Kingdom and the will of a Civil Magistrate the will of all the Citizens, mani∣festly expressed by Saint Paul in those words, in quo omnes peccave∣runt; which words have their refe∣rence to the man, not to the sin; for the greek word is the masculine gender, as S. Austust. understood it lib. de peccatorum merit is, cap. 10. his reason is, Quia ait omnes homi∣nes fuerunt ille unus homo, viz. Adam quod intellige non formaliter, sed origi∣naliter,
radicaliter, seminaliter, & representativè quia viz. omnes homi∣nes in illo primo homine quasi radice, parente, & principio suo contenti, censi, & comprehensi fuerunt: nam quidquid Adam fecit omnes ejus posteri fecisse censentur, sicut Rex representat reg∣num, & Magistratus Civitatem. Of this judgement was Origines, Chry∣sost. Theoph. Occumen, and for the most part all the Latine and Greek Fathers. If you'l ask why God was pleas'd that if Adam should sin, we his posterity should contract the guilt of his sin? I answer, that it was done by the occult judgement and decree of God, according to S. Aug. l. 5. contra Julia. c. 3. & S. Bernard Serm. . de Dominica post oct. Epiphan. And if further you'l ask why God did place our merit and demerit in the hand and will of Adam, to the prejudice as
it were of his dominion and pow∣er, by which he could both doe and decree what ever he pleased? I answer with all the wise and lear∣ned, The reason was, that Adam should be the tpe and figure of Christ, in whose hand and will God was pleased to place our hap∣pinesse and redemption, and that he for us may merit grace and glo∣ry, as Adam brought upon us the guilt both of sin and punishment. Before Adam was created or preva∣ricated. God from all eternity by a conditional omniscient know∣ledge did foresee all future contin∣gent things, and according to the same hath will'd and decreed to certain purposes, that both Adam and all his posterity should be in order to Christ, and to be as the type and true figure of Christ, and of all things that were to be brought
to passe by Christ; for God was pleas'd to manifest in Christ all his power, wisedome and glory; and therefore ordain'd and decreed that he should be the origin, exemplar, and period, not only of all elects, but also of his works, as is clearly put down, Coloss. . 15. So that there has been not only in the real execution, but also in the very di∣vine decree of God a mutual con∣tradependency or Anthithesis be∣twixt Christ and Adam: Whereas Adam would not have been the first father, origin, and representative head of all men, for that reason onely, that he might transmit or convey either original righteous∣nesse or sin to his posterity, unlesse it should have been to that end that he might be a true type and figure of Christ, who was to be the com∣mon Father and Redeemer of all
Gods Children. This compara∣tive Analogy, and most rare and specious Antithesis betwixt God and man, twixt the Creator and cerature, twixt the two great re∣presentative heads and beginnings of Sin and Grace, the first and se∣cond Adam is made manifest by many reasons. First, Even as the terrene Adam without any Father was framed from incorrupted earth; even so the Celestial Adam Christ was con∣ceived and borne by the operation of the Holy Ghost from the ever∣blessed Virgin Mary. Secondly As Adam was the be∣ginning of an animal and sinfull life; so Chist was the true foun∣tain and offspring of a pure spiri∣tual life. And thirdly, As Eve for the propagation of monkinde was e∣dified
from a rib of Adams side; even so in Christ, the saving Church his Spouse (which would dayly en∣gender children for him by meanes of the great Sacraments the conduits of his blood) did flow from his sa∣cred side on Mount Calvary: And as Adam by eating of the forbidden fruit did transgresse Gods com∣mand, and therewith brought on all his posterity, even before we could know any thing of it, sin and death. Even so Christ on the fatal beam of the Crosse, obeying the commands of his Heavenly Fa∣ther, redeemed and restored us fro▪ death to life. Finally, as through▪ Adams viiated seminal generation we are dayly borne children of wrath, and heirs of damation, the guilt of sin remaining still occult and hidden: Evenso through Bap∣tism, institued by Christ, we are
dayly regeneratd, grace still re∣maining hidden and occult. CHAP. III. Where the state of the question depending of the right under∣standing of Original Sin, as touching the true sense and verball signification thereof, is held forth. COncerning this; it will not be amisse in order to many good purposes, to observe that Original sin▪ may be considered in order to God, and so it may be call'd death, wrath, and enmity; for by it God was induced to punish both Adam and his posterity; and in this sense
its calle in Scripture ire or wrath; so S. Paul, Ephes. 2. said, that e have been by nature childen of wrath; which Lia expounds thus, we are borne in original sin. Secondly, It may be compar'd to the Vision Beatifical, which is true everlasting life, from which original sin doth avert and turn; fitly thus its cal∣led death, as S. Paul, Rom. 5. By the death of one man many are dead, and by the sin of one man death reign'd. Thus original sin is truly call'd death, for that it averted from God true life. Thirdly, If original sin, considered as in order to the soule of man, may be call'd infirmity, whereas mans soule by it is rendred weak and infirme, hardly able to resist illegal and lustful motions and desires: This kind of infirmity the Royal Pro∣phet complained of, and did ac∣knowledge,
when he said, Miserere mei Domine, quia infirmus sum. It may likewise not unfitly be called feditas, or macula, a stain, or im∣perfection; for the soule by it is maculated and stain'd, according to Jeremi. 2. Si laveris te nitro ma∣culata es in iniquitate tua coram me dicit Dominus. It may also be cal∣led a pronenesse, or propension to evill, by reason that mans will, disrobed of original justice through sin, hath incurr'd an innate and genuine propension to sin and evill motions, Gen. 6. Cuncta cogitati cordis intentae est admalum omni tempore. It may likewise be called a Vice, diminishing natural Ver∣tues, whereas all men conceived in original sin doe feel geat reluctan∣cy to godlinesse, &c. Finally, original sin considered according to its proper sense and meaning,
hath two parts; the one, the ma∣teial part, viz. Concupiscence, which is a kind of infirm and weak quality; the other the formal part, viz. the want or privation of ori∣ginal justice due to nature; as in the actual sin of wilfull murder two things may be considered: a posi∣tive thing in the soule, viz. a cer∣tain deliberate act consented to by the will, as is velle occidere; this is intrinsecal, and is quid materiale, but the formal part is the privation or want of the righteousness which ought to be in that act, which if had been in it, the act could ne∣ver be a sin: So in original sin is included both the guilt of sin and of punishment; the guilt of sin, because its a privation of original justice, a deformity, curuity, or obliquity in the soule; the guilt of punishment, which in Infants is
term'd concupiscibility, and in the adults actual concupiscence: Hence we infer that original sin properly doth consist in the privation of ori∣ginal justice due to humane nature received and lost in Adam; for sin' properly is injustice, and injustice nothing but the privation of ju∣stice: Here we may consider, that of things some are positive, others privative; the positive are all reall substances, together with their pro∣perties and passions, powers and fa∣culties, imprinted by the Almigh∣ty in their nature▪ the privative, are those that doth grant and pre∣suppose the absence of some such reall entity as ought to be in the thing; and such is sin, which pro∣properly is no existing, or real thing, or entity, but rather the ab∣sence of some such substance which ought to be in the creature; and
although it be inherent in positive things as a meer privation, yet it alwayes ought to be really distin∣guished from them; so as that sin is no other then the very want, losse or privation of that good which God ingraff'd in the nature of his creature. For example: Original sin transmitted to Adams posterity, is but the privation or want of original justice and grace ingraffed in Adams nature, to be conveyed to his children; Si A∣dam non posuissem demeritum & ∣bicem. We may further consider to our purpose, that a thing which in its proper nature is evill, in Gods eternal counsel is respe∣ctively good, being ordered as the occasion, meanes, or way to man∣fest Gods glory, his justice, good∣nesse and mercy: For God peri∣teth evill by a certaine voluntary
permission, in that he for saketh the second cause in working evil, ei∣ther by withholding, or detracting the grace it had, or not bestowing that which is wanting; neither in this must we imagine God unjust, who is indebted to none: And that which is thus evill by Gods permission, may be deemd good in order to his glory. First, in that its a punishment for sin, and punishment is accoun∣ted a moral good, it being the part or▪ office of a just Judge to punish sin and transgressions. Or secondly, as a meer action; which if so considered. God is not only a bare emissive Agent in pro∣ducing an evill work, but also a powerful effecter of the same, yet so as neither instilleth an aberrati∣on, curbity, or obliquity in the act, neither yet supporteth or intendeth
the same, but most freely suffereth evill, disposing it best to his owne greater glory; and so he doth not assist man with new grace for to stand, but for just causes forsaketh him, and so leaves him quite to fall from God. Thus we may consider Adam created perfect, yet changeable; for so it pleased God to prepare a way to the executi∣tion of the decrees of his divine providence.
CHAP. IV. Where Original Sin is clearly proved to be formally and pro∣perly a sin, not figuratively, as Dr. Tayler doth dream with Pelagius his curs'd Symmist. ORiginal Sin is attributed to Adams posterity, as relating to nature, & common to all mankind, not to any singular person; for whatever is attributed in respect of nature, is attributed to all men, as if they were all one single man; for Porphirus hath in praedic. de spe∣cie, that Participatione speciei plures homines sunt uus homo. As for ex∣ample: To be rational, is not at∣tributed
to any particular or sin∣gular person; as distinct from all others, but generally to all, as they are one man; because it is attributed to man in respect of all nature; for this, and that man, nay all men, as they are rational, they differ not one from another, but are counted specifice one ratio∣nal man: So that even as actual sin is attributed to some man in re∣spect of his individual person to whom it's proper to act; and sin, according to Aristotle in 1. Metaph. Suppororum sunt actiones: Even so original sin, viz. the sin conveyed by origine or generation, is attri∣buted to man in respect of nature; for whereas generation was ordai∣ned for the conservation thereof, which nature is together with sin communicated to all individually; for even as the hand that commit∣ted
a murther (as is already said) is not culpable, for that it was not moved to the act precisely from it selfe, but by the command of the will; yet in as much as it is a mem∣ber of that man that wilfully com∣mitted the murther, its really and truly counted culpable, and is just∣ly mutilated; even so, though e∣very individual relative descendnt of Adam be not, in respect of the person, culpable, yet every man, having received his nature from him that depraved and voluntari∣ly maculated the same, is in a man∣ner voluntarily become culpable, in just, and a sinner; so as that the original inordination, or natural sin in every natural person, is not voluntary by the will of that sin∣gular person, but by the will of the first man, who as the first ori∣gine, moved, communicated, and
conveyed by way of generation, nature so infected and vitiated to posterity. For example: Adam, after the losse of original righte∣ousnesse begat children, and con∣sequently after he felt and had a rebellion in his flesh against his spi∣rit, and an inordinate motion in his members, and so the act of ge∣neration in him became mixt with lust and concupiscence; and this ever since the losse of original righ∣teousnesse, by which he was to be ruled: And for this reason nature traduced or conveyed from him, is still found with sin and corrup∣tion; and if you look for the narrow way, through which ori∣ginal sin is conveyed, it is the in∣fected slesh transmitted by concu∣piscence, whereby the soule, crea∣ted without any stain, is macula∣ted: This is manifest from Saint
Augustins answer to Julian the A∣postates question: Quid quer ti∣am cum habens apertam anuam? As if the Saint had said, Look for no other conveyance or cause but Adams sin, and the natural propa∣gation of his infected flesh, which by a moral efficiency corrupted and stain'd the soule; neither this pro∣pagation can absolutely be the cause, whereas this would have been in the state of innocency; but its lust, yet not lust absolutely, but the inordinate ardor of lust; so that the soule contracts original sin, be∣cause the same is produced in the corrupt flesh, not Physically, but only Morally, by natural propaga∣tion. Original sin is no stain or spot in the flesh, neither a privation of a∣ny such quality in the same, by which it should become subject or
rebellious to the spirit, or the in∣feiour faculties to the superiour: This is manifest, because sin is in∣justice; but the flesh is incapable of justice or in justice; neither is original sin essentially concupis∣cence, whether it be taken for the natural inclination to evil, or for the voluntary or involuntary mo∣tion of concupiscence, because ha∣bitual concupiscence is a sensitive appetite which is ntural to man, and therefore no sin; neither can it be the inclination of the will, for that is natural, and a real po∣sitive entity; neither is it a privation of any natural rectitude, but of a supernatural; neither is it only pu∣nishment of sin, but hath in it the nature of sin essentially and formal∣ly; and is called the sin of nature, because its derived by natural or seminal generation.
It's therefore most certain, that original sin is no vitious habit, no pronesse or concupiscence of the flesh, neither any infectious dis∣ease, positive stain, or rust in mans soule, but it is a privation of ori∣ginal justice which ought to be in our nature, as due to it, because received and lost in our first Father Adam: But concupiscence, by ma∣ny Saints held to be original sin, may be two ways considered; ei∣ther as it is an act, habit, or a prone∣nesse in the sensitive appetite, and neither of these is formally a sin; for sin is never in the sensitive part; or else this concupiscence is the pronesse in the rational appe∣tite, viz. the will, exciting to the desire of things pleasing, and im∣moderately convenient to the sen∣sitive appetite to which it is con∣joyned: And thus concupiscence
considered is the material part in original sin, because the will, through the want of original ju∣stice, is left prone to rebellion a∣gainst reason. That original sin is formally the want of original justice, is thus prov'd: Every sin formally is in∣iustice; Ergo every sin is the privati∣on of some justice or righteousness due, but the righteousness due to In∣fants, is not actual but original: Er∣go original sin is formally the want of original righteousnesse due to e∣very individual. Further, Even as actual sin is the want or losse of the righteousnesse and rectitude which ought to be in the consented act of the will; even so original sin is the privation of o∣riginal justice and rectitude which ought to be in uature, which recti∣tude is original righteousnesse; for
as every act hath naturally annexed to it a proper rectitude, so humane nature was created by God with its proper natural and supernatural rectitude; whereas original justice as a special gift bestowed by God, not only on Adam, but also on all his relative descendants, was a kind of rectitude and justice due and belonging to nature, so as the loss▪ privation, or want thereof, became a vice or sin in nature; and thus the want of it is the want of due justice or righteousnesse, but the privation or want of it is a sin, not actual, because its not lost by any proper consented act of the will, but rather it is sin original that is contracted and derived to us day∣ly through the actual disobedience of Adam. Further, I say that by original Justice man was made acceptable
and graeful to God; therefore by the losse or privation of original justice, man is out of Gods favour and grac; and for this reason sin is counted the death of the soule, as grace is the life of it; for with∣out habitual grace, which is equi∣valent to original justice, none can become grateful to God, nor be capable of any title to Heaven: Whence we may infer children to be in God Almighties debt for o∣riginal righteousnesse; for they all have received it in Adam from God, who giving the same to him by his antecedent will, gave it likewie to all his posterity; though it was not given by a consequent will, quia Adam posuit demeritum; which is the reason why God doth justly exact the same of us, and so we become in his debt in just and formally sinners: In this all the
Ancient Doctors doe agree. And although original sin con∣veyed to posterity, cannot without special revelation be proved or e∣vinced by any natural ratiotinati∣on; (for how can it by humane dis∣course be evidenc'd that Adam did receive fr himselfe and his poste∣rity the gift of original justice? or that Adam was appointed the great representative head in ess morali of all humane nature? or that by him those principles of morally work∣ing well, viz. grace, righteousness, innocency, &c. should be derived to his posterity? and that as the propagation of humane nature in esse naturali did depend of him, so should likewise the conservation or losse of that happy state in esse morali? or how can it appeare by natural reason, that Adam preva∣ricating, all his posterity not exi∣sting
in rerum natura, should pre∣varicate also?) which without the light of faith, and the beliefe of what is said, cannot be apprehen∣ded; yet we may find out for the explicating of original sin, some congruent Theological reasons: The first is, that ever in Gods Church, from its very beginning, there has been not only in the law of nature, but also in the old and new, a special remedy, instituted for the cleansing of original sin from Infants; so its most manifest, that the Church held and taught that Infants doe contract original sin; for if they had not in them original n to be wash'd away by Circumcision or Baptism, then the form of Circumcision and Baptism in them would prove false; but the consequent is absurd and here∣tical, Ergo &c.
Now let us but further consider what reasons may induce us to sub∣mit to this Doctrine of originall sin. First, For the Antiquity of it: We finde some footsteps thereof under the Law, yea before the Law, though more darkly; but under the Law we may see the footsteps there∣of more manifest, though not so perspicuous as under the Gospel, where truth appeares, as it were, with open face; for you may read Gen. 17. The uncircumcised man∣child whose flesh is not circumcised, that soule shall be cut off from the people. The which Text Saint Au∣gust. lib. 1. de Civitat. Dei c. 27. & lib. 2. de pccato originali, &c. 30. contra Coelestium, understands as relating to Infants not circumci∣sed, and therefore liable to pu∣nishment; which S. August. a∣scribes
to Adams prevarication, in which all Infants have prevarica∣ted, and became sinners upon that account. Secondly, You may read, Psalm 50. the Royall Prophet moaning that he was conceived in niquity and sin, according to the Hebrew Text. Thirdly, You may read in Ec∣cles. 25. A muliere initium peccat & per illam omnes moriuntur. And in Job, Pereat dies in quae naus sum, & nex in qua dictum est con∣ceptus est homo. And in the 14. Chapt. Quis potest facere mundum de imundo concepum semine, &c. And Chap. 25. according to the 70 Interpreters, Nemo mundus a sor∣de neque Infans unius diei: Whence John Baptist cryed out, Ecce Agnus Dei, cce qui tellit peccata mundi. In the Greek Text we read peccatum
mundi, which is Adams sin con∣veyed to posterity. These are ve∣ry plain; but more manifestly clear places you may read in the New Testament. First S. Paul to the Romans, C. 5. Sicut per unum homi∣nem peccatum & per peccatum mors, &c. Which words, the Primitive Church and all the Ancient Fathers doe understand of original sin; which Interpretation is allowed and defin'd by many Councels. The second place is 2. ad Corinth. 4. Si uus pro omnibus mortus est Christus &c. therfore all were dead, then Christ dyed fr Infants: But they died, not by any actual sin; therefore it must be by original sin. The third place is that of S. Paul Ephes. 2. Eramus natura filii irae: From which place S. August. de pec∣catorum merit. & remiss. c. 20. & in Serm. 14. de verbis Apost. Ex∣poundeth
these words, natura filii irae, originaliter, saying, filius au∣tem irae is a sinner: So if we all have been by nature children of wrath, we all must by nature be sinners. And its observable, that Adams sin (as its revealed in holy Scripture) had two far different effects; the one proper and conna∣url to his offence, which was the infection of all his posterity, borne (by natural generation) with original sin; the other effect was also by occasion of that gene∣ral infection of all mankind, but properly of the inexplicable good∣nesse and mercy of God, ordain∣ing for remedy of this universall infection, the Incarnation and death of our blessed Saviour Christ, by whose superabundant grace his faithfull children are cleansed from all sins original and actuall, and
rendred far more exceeding grati∣ous and glorious then otherwis they should have been. Both which effects S. Paul teacheth, Rom. 8. v. 12, 13, 14. concluding this first pol with an Appendix, that Ada wa a figure of Christ to come, signi∣fying, that as by the sin of Adam we all dyed, so by the grace of Christ all his children doe live Touching the other effect, viz. a∣bundance of grace by Christ, he addeth the great difference, say∣ing, But not as the offence, so also the gif. For if by the one, mn died; much more the grace of God, and the gift in the grace of one man Jesus Christ hath abounded upon ma∣ny, v. 15. And not as by one sin, s also the gift for judgement of one condemnation: but grace of my offeces justification, v. . For if  the ence of one, death
reigned by one; much more they that receive the abundance of grace, and of the donation of justice shall reign in life by one Jesus, vers. 17. Thus by S. Pauls▪ Do∣ctrine in that place, and ver. 18, & 19. is verified that which the ue Church so solemnly singeth in the great Festivity of our redempti∣on: O certe necessarium. Adae pecca∣catum quod Christs mirt deletum est. And O  culpa  & autum meritum habre redempt∣rem. Whereto agree many other passages in the rest of S. Paul Do∣ctrine; and the same is briely com∣prised in that which S. John Bap∣tist denounc'd of our blessed Savi∣our, saying. Behold the Lamb of God, behold him: that taketh away▪ the sin of the world. That is, principally Christ came to take away the gene∣ral sin, which being actual in A∣dam,
is original in the whole world; and therefore is call'd the sin of the world. And the same is the general doctrine of S. John A∣post. & Evangelist, saying, If wee walk in the light, as God also is in the light, and the blood of Jesus his son cleanseth us from all sin; first, from original, then also from actual. You may find moreover in S. Luke 10. v. 30. all mankinde devested of grace, and wounded in natural fa∣culties by Adams fall; for our Savi∣our in a Parable saith, How a cer∣tain man went down from Jerusalem unto Jericho, and fell among the , who spoiled him, and giving him wounds, went away leaving him halfe dead. Of no particular man can this Parable be so properly expoun∣ded, as of all mankinde in general, contained in Adam our first Parent, who being indued with all neces∣sary
gifts narural and supernatural, going from Gods commandement, yeelded to false imaginations of bettering his state, as it were des∣cending from Jerusalem the Vision of peace to Jericho, signifying the Moon (which is unconstant and mutable) fell among theeves, the Devils, who spoyled and wounded him, and left him halfe dead; for Adam by sinning, and all men in him were spoyled of original ju∣stice and all supernatural graces, and wounded in natural powers of understanding and fewill, not wholly deprived of all, but spoy∣led of the best part, and wounded in the rest; spiritually dead, and subect both to temporal and eter∣nal death,  relicto, let halfe dead and halfe alive; though left without help by the Priest and Le∣vie, the Sacrifices, and other Mini∣steries.
The result of all is this▪ Original sin is no inherent substan∣tial thing in man, but a privation of original justice; and after the laver of Regeneration and Justifi∣cation by Baptism, sin properly so called, is no longer remaining in the regenerate; yet still there re∣maines an inclination unto sin, called concupiscence, out of which sin notwithstanding cannot be pro∣duced but by our negligence and free consent: All this is affirmed by many Saints, and especially by S. Basil in oratione quod Deus non sit Author malorum. S. Epiphanius, S. Ambrose, Cyprian, S. Hierom, S. Hilarius, S. John Chrysostom, &c. This Doctrine was decreed in seve∣rall general Councels, as hereafter shall appear. But that Infants were holy from their mothers wombe, and may be saved without Baptism,
and that therefore there is no ne∣cessity of the Laver of Regenera∣on to wash away original sin, was the exprest heresie of Pelagis, this day held forth boldly, though co∣vertly, by Dr. Tayler; which per∣verse Doctrine was condemned by several Councels. First in the East, at the first Palestine Councel it was solemnly condemn'd. After in the West, in Efrick, in the Milevi∣t Councel it was decreed Can. 2: That whosoever deny Baptism to new-borne Infants, or aver that they contract not Original staine and sin from Adam, which need∣eth a Regeneration, Anatheia sit. In the  Councel turned out of Greec  Pisanus, and in the first Constantinople Coun∣cel in Simbolo. This was decreed in the fourth Councel of Carthage, where there met 217. Prelates and
most learned Doctors. And in the fifth Constantinople Councel, Zoara, Sus Monachus, Severus Ani∣cher, Petrus Antichenus, and Anty∣mus, were as Parabaptists condem∣ned. You may read in the sixth Tolletan Councel, Can. 2. of the three Divine persons, onely the Son of God became man for the Redemption of mankind from the debt of sin originally contracted from Adams inobedience. In the second Arauscn Councel in France, Can. 2. you have what doth follow. If any man shall hold that Adams sin hurted him alone, and not his Posterity, or that only it brought corporal,  not eternal death, which is , the cause of temporal death upon all mankind, this man doth great in justice to God, and downright contradicts the Apostle S, Paul, who teacheth
that by one man sin came into the world, and by sin death, and so death was derived to all men. I the Maguntine Councel in Germany Can. 5. we read thus: The sin of our first Parent has been conveyed to all men by seminal propagati∣on, and draweth along with it punishment, so as all men are guilty of Gods enmity and eternal damnation, and all are become prone to sin. All which Decrees were renewed in the two last gene∣ral Councels Florentinum & Triden∣tinum, which in literis vniouis tea∣cheth thus; The soules of those that departed in actual or original sin only doth descend into hell there to be punished, though not all alike: Therefore neither our Dr. Tayler, nor the Anabaptists, can without impudent temerity renew or maintain this most pernicious
venom of Heresie, so often and so solemnly condemned. From this uniform ancient Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers, Saints, and ho∣ly Doctors, is discover'd that ma∣nifest grosse error of Doctor Tay∣ler, who doth acknowledge no in∣lent sin but that which is com∣tted by a real proper consent of the will, which is such another pitiful mistake, as that this word original sin was not used or menti∣oned in Scripture or Fathers before by S. Augustine invented, which is notoriously false; whereas this is such another meer illusion as the same of the Arians, who denied ab∣solutely the word homusion to be found in the Gospel: But just as those inveterate Hereticks were con∣futed, and convicted, so is our mo∣dern Dr. Tayler: For as in the Gos∣pel we have these words, I and my
Father, are one, comes to be the same in substance, as if homusion were expresly set down; for where the real thing in sense & substance is found, there the name is inclu∣ded: Thus what is more clearly express'd in Scripture then that our first Parent Adam was created upright, viz. in a rectitude of vertues, grace, and faculties, by which he was left capable of attai∣ning to that final supernatural end for which he was created; and like∣wise all his Posterity had a just ti∣tle thereunto, while Adam would have had continued in his obedi∣ence to God; whence the word o∣riginal justice is derived and e∣vinced, which may be called inna∣ted, connatural, native, and genu∣ine Justice: Even so by S. Paul in many places, All men have sinned in Adam, and are denounc'd by
nature children of wrath and per∣dition; which in expresse signifi∣cant terms is nothing else then that Adams actual sin has been the natu∣ral, innated, hereditary, genuine, and linally descending habitual sin of his posterity, contracted by seminal generation from him; which in effect is original sin super∣induced and conveyed by natural generation by Gods occult decree.
CHAP. V. The former Doctrine proved out of the Fathers, shamefully corrupted by Dr. Tayler. IS it possible that a man that pre∣tends not only to be a Christian, but a Minister, a Preacher of the Word, a Doctor, and such as is generally counted for a learned and spiritual writer among the Protestants, so far to forget him∣selfe, as most shamefully to bring Antiquity it selfe for his Doctrine, and particularly those very Au∣thors who were the greatest oppo∣sers of his Pelagian Heresie, as Chrysostom, S. Ignat. Martyr, S. Am∣brose,
&c. Sure the Dr. cannot gain but dishonour and infamy, in al∣ledging Authors for patronage of his Errors, the whole straine of whose writings are so directly op∣posite unto him and his Doctrine; and in producing these Doctors as of his minde and judgement, he doth but abuse them, and they rightly understood, accuse him: For not one of the passages quoted out of the Fathers by him that give the least shadow of an appro∣bation or countenance to any of those his heretical Assertions; nei∣ther do I find, to my remembrance, throughout his whole Treatise of Original Sin one quotation, ta∣ken either out of Scripture, Fa∣thers, or modern Interpreters, per∣tinently applied, nor any solid thing like an Argument to prove the thing he undertakes to shew,
as the ingenious Reader shall clearly perceive; and that all his Allegations out of Scripture and Fathers help him not at all, but ra∣ther expresly speak against him: Doe but take notice, with what Engines doth he draw his Conclu∣sion from the premisses of S. Dio∣is. Areopag. his doctrine; for no∣thing doth he say that looks his way, but rather against him; here are his words, lib. de Ecclesiast. Hierarch. c. 3 p. 3. where he doth ascribe Adams sin to all humane nature, and at last giveth a reason for it, Quia natura humana cedens fraudibus Satanae vitale jugum ex∣cussit. I refer the Reader to this place in the Author, where he will plainly finde all along the Doctor Tayler impugned; he brings S. Ig∣natius his doctrine to agree with his; but its observable that in him
there is no syllable to prove how or wherein; whereas in his Epistle ad Trallianos he hath thus. Christus dilexit nos dans semetipsum pro no∣bis ut nos sanguine suo mundaret ab antiqua impietate. Here lieth the miserable mistake of the Doctor Tayle, taking impiety for tempo∣ral death, which is most absurd and ridiculous: for impiety here by the Saint is taken for Adams sin conveyed to mankind, for which Christ died: S. Irenaeus; lib. 5. c. 17. hath these words: Delevit Chri∣stus Chirographum, viz. debita nostra affigens illud cruci uti quemamodum per lignum facti sumus debitores Deo, per lignum accipiamus debiti remis∣sionem. Are not these words ex∣presly against the Doctors doctrine; for out of this Author every relative from Adam descendant has contra∣cted a debt through Adams trans∣gression;
for every particular indi∣vidual had obligation in Adam to preserve original righteousnesse; and because it was not preserv'd, but lost by Adam for him and us his posterity, every of us becomes indebted to God for the same, which in effect is original sin, the which is remitted by the sacred blood of Christ in his Sacrament of Baptism. The Reader may finde more to this purpose in this Author, l. 3. c. 20. and in S. Aug. lib. 1. contra Julianum, c. 2. Tertul∣lian in his Book de anima, c. 40. hath Omnis anima eous{que} in Adam censeur donec in Christo recensea∣tur, tamdiu imunda quamdiu re∣censeatur; peccatrix autem quiae imunda. Is no this to make eve∣ry soule a sinner alwayes before Baptism, which taketh away the stain of original sin, contracted by
and in Adam, quite contrary to Dr Taylors judgement. Origines hom. 8. in Leviticum, saith, Quae∣cunque anima in carne nascitur, ini∣quitatis & peccati sorde polluitur, propter quod dictum est nemo mun∣dus a sorde, nec Infans cujus est u∣ui is diei vita super terram: By this Assertion every soule born from A∣dams flesh is counted polluted with sin and iniquity, and every Infant is proved to have the same sin in∣herent in him; which come quite opposit to Dr. Taylers deliration, in applying this iniquity and sin here meant by Origines, to effects of mortality. And S. Eyprian, quoted by the Dr. lib. 3. Epist. 8. ad Fi∣dum, saith, Recens natus nil pecca∣vit nisi quod secundum Adam carna∣liter natus contagium mortis antiquae prima nativitate cntraxit; this Saint, and likewise all the rest, by
ancient death, do mean, sin, and eternal death, whereas from sin came death; according to S. Paul, stipendium peccati mors, the wages of sin is death, sin the precedent cause to death, the subsequent ef∣fect; quite contrary to the Do∣ctors dream, mistaking temporal death for the eternal. I refer the ingenious Reader to S. Athanas. in his Sermon upon those words, Omnia mihi tradicta sunt, &c. and to S. Hilarius, in explicatione, Psal. 32. diligis misericordiam & judici∣um: in which places Doctor Tay∣lor is confuted and impugned most manifestly as a pernicious Impo∣stor. The Doctor boldly avers that all Antiquity is on his side; set∣ting down barely two or three broken ends of Sentences, ground∣ing no Argument, as indeed he cannot, upon those passages for
his opinion. The Doctor seems ra∣ther ambitious to be accounted a∣ble to reade a piece of the Fathers Writings, then able to understand them; he cited the Fathers most impertinently and imperfectly; endeavouring to make his owne face and impure Doctrine clean, by throwing dirt in great Saints fa∣ces. He did not like an honourable Guest expect a meal from them, but like a beggar, their scraps aad fragments onely. I refer the Rea∣der to fol 483. in his Explication of Original sin, where he cites S. Ambrose sor him: est & alia mors quae secunda dicitur, &c. there is an∣otherdeath in hell, which is called the second death, which we suffer not for Adam's sin: this testimony of S. Ambrose is plain against the Doctor, for why doth he leave out that which goeth before, and
which followeth? for the illumi∣nated Doctor in his precedent words affirmed, that we all sinned in the masse of Adam; and his fol∣lowing discourse clearly states the question, and declares down-right, that Adam's sin is derived to his posterity: these are his words in Apologia David, cap. 11. antequam nascimur maculamur contagio, an∣tequam usuram lucis originis ipsius injuriam excipimus, in iniquitate con∣cipimur, quid clarius: and a little after, merito David deploravit in se inquinamenta naturae quod prius inciperet in homine macula quam vi∣ta: and further, lib. 1. de peniten∣tia, c. 2. omnes homines sub peccato nascimur quorum ipse ortus in vitio est. See many more manifest places in S. August. lib. 1. in Jul. c. 2. & lib. de nuptiis & concupiscentia, c. 35. & lib. 1. ad Bonifacium, c. 11: Thus
you see how manifestly Doctor Tay∣lor doth set down some lose frag∣ments of the Saints, as it wee for him, and conceals the rest that declares the Saints minde and tru sense▪ which he doth break and pitifully mangle; not understand∣ing what he reades or writes from Authous against his conscience and truth. And the Authour Co∣mentar▪ in Epistolas Pauli, which are attributed to S. Ambrose, Coment. in c. 5. ad Romanos holdeth forth thus, Manifest est omnes in A∣dam peccasse ut in mss, Doctor Taylor leaves out stolidly that which follows, because it makes expresly against his Doctrine. What doth follow is this, Ipse enim (meaning Adam) per peccatum corruptus, quos genuit, omnes nati sunt in pec∣cato, ex eo igitur peccatores quia ipso sumus omnes. Here S. Ambroseo
doth expresly teach Original sin derived from Adam to all his rela∣tive descendants; so that I can∣not but wonder at the new Doctors frontless boldness, in averring that all Antiquity is for him: when the Reader doth manifestly see all the ancient Doctors and Fathers rather against him. S. Chrysostom hom. 10. in Roman is quoted by the Doctor most maimedly and shamefully pag. 484. it seems to have in it no small question that it is said, that by the disobedience of one man many becaue sinners; for sinning and be∣ing made mortal, it is not unlike∣ly that they which spring from him should be so too: but that an∣other should be made a sinner by his disobedience, what agreement or consequent can it have? &c. here the Saint makes many interiogati∣ons, all which are expressed by
our Modern Doctor; but leaves out quite the ancient Doctors an∣swer, minde, and sound conclusi∣on: these words are omitted, quod autm in questionem cadit est qua de causa id factum est? the Saint in∣quires the cause of the punishment of death derived from Adam to all mankinde, qua de causa nondum addidit exquirit mortis radicem quae igitur est mortis radix? suppli∣cinm ex uno in omnes derivatum fu∣isse Paulus ostendit: quae radix mor∣tis? the Saint answers and resolves his own quaere, that it was sin. Propterea art ut sicut regnaverat peccatum in mortem it a & gratia re∣gnaret per justitiam ad vitam eter∣nam per Christum; hoc dixit osten∣dens peccatum loco Regis fuisse, mor∣tem autem loco militis sub peccato in acies tantem & ab illo armatam: now comes in the Saints Conclusi∣on
expresly against D. Taylor: Ergo speccatum mortem armavit clarum est quod justitia per gratiam ad ve∣cta que peccatum tollt & mortem spo∣liat & dissolvit. And a little after he saith, Quod igitur Christi Crux & Sepulchrum hoc nobis Baptisma fuit; ille enim carni & nortuus & se∣pultus; nos autem peccato & mortui & sepulti ubi peccatum ibi mors nam & suplicio liberati sumus & vitium deposuimus & de integro regenerati sumus & resurreximus, sepulto vetere homine, & redempti & sanctificati & adopti Filii & justificati, & Fratres effecti in eandem corporis unitatem redacti & ut corpus capiti fic illi u∣niti sumu. Hence the ingenious Reader may infer, how that the Saint doth alleadge that temporall death is the effect of sin; and that if we derive no sin from Adam, death we cannot derive, which is
the punishment of sin: and for this reason it was decreed in the Aravsican Councell, Can. 2. Non posse mortem sine peccato ad hominem transire nisi injustitia Deo daretur & contra dicatur Apostolo dicenti per unum hominem peccatum intravit in mundum. I deliver it in English thus: Temporall death (allowed by D. Taylor) cannot be conveyed as punishment to Adam's children without sin, unless great injustice be offered to God, and a contra∣diction to S. Paul's Doctrine, vz. By the sin of one man death entred, &c. This is the express down∣right Doctrine of S. John Chryso∣stom, who vigorously holds forth Baptisme as a laver and sepulcher of sin; saying, Peccato mortui & sepulti, &c. and that beside the bare imputation and communication of Adam's sin, deam'd of by Dr.
Taylor, there is in every Infant newly born Original sin inherent, which is a privation of Originall justice, a guilt of eternall death, a stain, spot, enmity with God, the guilt of punishment: which is an obligation or ordination to pu∣nishment: where the Saint con∣demns Dr. Taylor's folly in aver∣ring that Original sin is nothing other then Adam's actual sin barly imputed to his Posterity. For fur∣ther declaration hereof, S. Cirillus Herosolimitan, Cathechesi 2. hath most important Doctrine, to him I remit the Reader—S. Gregory Na∣zian, Orat. 3. de pace, saith to our purpose, Totus lapsus sum atque ex primigenii hominis inobedientia & diaboli fraude condemnatus sum: S. Herom. in Commentario Oseae, c: 6. in paradiso omnes prevaricati sunt in similitudinem prevaricationis Adam,
non enim est mirum quod in parente precessi hoc in fiis condemnetur this Doctor and S. Cyprian doth admonish Infants to be baptized. The Reader may finde much more to our purpose in S. John Chrysostom in homilia ad Neoptos. Look Ru∣finus in Comentario in Psal. 20. S. Si∣ricius in Eist. 1. ad Himer. cap. 2. with many more in S. August. lib. . in ulianum.
CHAP. VI. That Original sin is properly and not metonimically a sin, proved by Reason; and Dr. Taylor's contrary Doctrine prov'd heretical. HEresie is an adhesion to some private and singular opinion or errour in faith, contrary to ho∣ly Scripture, and the generall ap∣prov'd Doctrine of the Church: but to hold, That Originall sin is not properly and formally, but onely metonimically a sin, is ex∣presly contrary to holy Scripture, and the generall approv'd Do∣ctrine of the Church; Ergo, &c.
That it is contrary to the generall approved Doctrine of the Church, is already proved out of the Do∣ctrine of the primitive Fathers, maintained by Beza, de justifie, lib. 1. cap. 13. where he saith, Omnes homines plane reos nasci, contracta jam inde à primo parnte culpa: and Calvin hath these expresse words, Peccato Adae non per solam imputationem damnamur sed ideo quia & culpae sumus rei, quatenus natura nostra in illo vitiata iniquita∣tis reatu constringitur. That it is contrary to Scripture, any man that is not purblinde may see, in many places; especially in S. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, c. 5. v. 18, 19. Verse 18. As by the offence of one sin came on all men to condemna∣tion: so by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded towards all men, to the justification of life. And v. 19.
For as by one mans disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedi∣ence of one shall many also be made righteous. The conclusion of Saint Paul's most profound Doctrine concerning his comparison be∣twixt Christ and Adam, begun from the twelfth Verse, is fully contained in these two Verses, 18 and 19. and his Divine Apostoli∣call Antithesis perfectly ended and compleated; which Apostolicall Antithesis our D. Taylor doth abo∣minably endeavour to cross, cor∣rupt, and quite overthrow; in holding that Original sin convey∣ed to Adam's Posterity, is only fi∣guratively a fin: for S. Paul saith expresly, that by one mans disobedi∣ence many were made sinners; which word made sinners cannot be un∣derstood figuratively by any solid unbias'd iudgement, but rather
tisnate. And the second Milivetan Councel, in the fift age, c. 2. CHAP. VII. The Objections against the for∣mer Doctrine waved. FIrst objection. S. Chrysostome in some place averreth that none by the sin of our proto- parents can be made a sinner excluded from Heaven, nor liable to eternal dam∣nation: I answer that the Saint did not here exclude absolutly the sin conveyed to mankinde, through the transgression of Adam; but only did advertise that Adam's po∣sterity were not made sinners upon that account onely, that our first
parents have committed actual sins, but that their posterity also in A∣dam, and along with him have sinned, whereas all by the partici∣pation of humane nature were one man with Adam; and as nature to them is conveyed, so is the vice and corruption in nature by them participated: for if they had not really sinned in Adam in whom as in the original and seminal root they were vertually involved; they could not be made sinners by A∣dam's actual sin: Nullus enim (ut recte ai Chysosto.) ex alieno peccato & a se non participato peccator exi∣stit. & Deus in regenerationis lavacro mentem gratia tang it, radicale pec∣catum evellit & hominem illustri∣rem reddit; here the Saint calls Original sin, washed away by bap∣tismal regeneration, radicale pec∣cotum—
Objection 2. S. August lib. 16. de Civit. dei c. 18. saith, we are not properly but originally onely born sinners: I answer, that S. August. is to be understood so as that we are not born sinners by a consented act of our will properly, but by the sinful act of Adam's inobedi∣ence which had a moral influence on all mankinde to bring on them the guilt of sin. Objection 3. Until the Law sin was in the world, but sin is not im∣puted where there is no Law; yet death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that have not sinned after the similitude of A∣dam's actual transgression, who is the figure of the Messias: This place is ignorantly interpreted by our Doctor thus. Death reigned upon them whose sins therefore would not be so imputed as Adam's
sin was, because there was no Law with an expresse threatning given to them as it was to Adam. I answer, the same Law that was given with expresse threatning to Adam in Paradise, was likewise by interpretation given in him to all his posterity; and because A∣dam transgressed that Law, all his posterity with him have trans∣gressed; according to those words of S. Paul, In quo omnes peccaverunt: Hence our Doctor's mistake is de∣tected in not indeavouring to un∣derstand how that the same Law that was given to Adam did extend it self to his relative descendants, and that not only temporal, but also eternal death was threatned both to him and his posterity. Objection 4. Taken out of those words of S. Paul, By one mans dis∣obedience many were made sinners,
&c. Whence the Dr. Tayler doth strive to prove that if Adam's sin were imputed to his posterity as a guilt of an inherent sin, then it should extend to all his posterity but out of this place it doth onely extend to many, not to all: Erg not Original sin, but temporal death is absolutely derived. I answer, that the B. Apostle doth use both words, many, and all; whereas in the preceding Chapter he expresly averred that Adam's sin, and Christs righteousnesse was derived and conveyed to all A∣dam's posterity; and in this verse 19. he avers that only many were made sinners by Adam's inobedience; and that by Christs righteousness many also are maderighteous. Now I ask who be those that are born sinners from Adam? and who be those that are regenerated in
Christ through baptisme? these are understood to be both all and many. They were not all abso∣lutely because Christ and Evae were not made sinners by Adam, neither Infidels are by Christ justi∣fied; but those onely that are in Christ regenerated, and those only that are borne by seminal gene∣ration from Adam, are here meant by the B. Apostle: After this manner we may understand those words in Gen. 17. Patrem multarum gentium constitui te, & in semine tuo bene∣dicentur omnes gentes, c. 22. Where it's most manifest, that those who are promised to Abraham as chil∣dren are counted in one place many, and all, in an other; because they all are in some sense understood, yet not absolutely all, if considered in order to all humane kinde. 5. Object. From the 18th. of Ezekel.
The childe shall not beare the iniqui∣ty of the father. To this may be opposed another place in Exod, the 20. I am a zealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the chil∣dren, &c. I thus reconcile both these places in answer to the Objection: that temporal punishment, as the losse of meanes and estates, banish∣ment, infamy, and such like; chil∣dren as being secundum corpus pars patris, may justly suffer by the Law for the sins of their parents: but eternal punishment of the guilt of sin, and an exclusion from Heaven, is onely inflicted on them that are properly and really made sinners propria voluntate or alinae, by in∣terpretation whereas secundum ani∣mam, the son is not pars patris. Furthermore I answer, that the childe shall not beare the fathers sin, if the childe become not parta∣ker
of his fathers sin; as when the childe imitates his fathers sin, or when the son's will and consent be implicitely involved in the fa∣thers will: as it was with Adam, in whose will all the wills of all his posterity are ever by interpre∣tation and by Gods secret decree involved. 6. Object. From S. August. and S. Fulgent. who averreth that In∣fants are punished by eternal flames of hell fire: I answer, that there is an infernal place where in never ending flames the damned soules are eternally punished in their senses; and the holy fathers are of opinion that though unbaptized Infants are in this infernal place, yet are not tormented or punished at all by that fire as the wicked are. 7. Object. It seems horrid to im∣pute
to the goodnesse and justice of God to be Author of so great calamity to innocents as to be damned even to the eternal losse of the sight of Gods glorious face, for this cannot be inflicted upon Infants because they are not capa∣ble of a Law when they had no life, no consent, no act of under∣standing nor of will, &c. which argument, what sense, what piety or what probability it can have in it needs not much inquiery: such a weake friend of God to plead for his justice and goodnesse as Doctor Taylor pretends to be, may very well be answered as Job did answer his mistaken comforters, Job 13. Doth God stand in need of your lye? I wish you would al∣together hold your peace, and it would be your wisedome; though this weake and disingenious argu∣ment
is to satisfaction solued in many places of the preceding Chapters; yet  add what follow∣eth, Gods mercy and goodnesse is abundantly shewn in that he hath provided gracious remedies suffi∣cient for all men to be saved, of which remedies if any be deprived through default either of them∣selves or others, or by chance; then is their being so deprived to be ascribed accordingly either to themselves, or to other men, or to chance, and not to any defect of Gods infinite mercy, goodnesse or justice; and indeed if circumci∣sion and baptism had not been in most divine and merciful provi∣dence instituted by Christ for the salvation of Infants, then Doctor Taylor might justly charge him with in justice and cruelty. The Doctor bringt a great deal
of ridiculous stuff concerning con∣cupiscence to be originall sin: Its true S. Austin called it a sin, viz. the material part or substract signifi∣cation of sin; and as the naturall instrument of generation proving onely concupiscence thus to be pre∣judicial to us, and an evil, against Pelagius who denied the rebellion of the flesh to be an effect of sin, but rather naturale bonum. Read Saint Austin, contra Julian. And its ob∣servable that whosoever will be at the pains to compare Dr. Taylers obsolet doctrine with that of Pela∣gius▪ Julian, and other such horrid wretches, in whom the spirit of the worst Heresies did rage, shall finde that all his late arguments borrow∣ed from them, are both weak, im∣pertinent, and increased to a great number, as the same body put in many divers habits and needlesse
variation of shapes— Thus the Ingenuous Reader hath the misterious question of the pre∣sent subject rightly stated; Christ as universal Saviour, and the re∣vealed truth of his Sacraments vin∣dicated; the horrid impostures odious falshood and latent venome of the pernitious assertions of an aiery and blind Enthusiast unmas∣lied and accurately refuted. As for my particular, pure zeal I assure you was the motive and prevailing argument that set my brain and pen awork about this subject, for the undeceiving of the missed; I hope I have done my duty, having sincerely produced Scripture-rea∣son, and the best authority for to secure the interests and advantages of piety, Gods justice, goodnesse, and truth, and of the lives and salvation of many. I expect
from all the wiser seriously to exa∣mine whether this Orthodox Do∣ctrine, or the contrary of Doctor Tayler in his Vnum Necessarium doth better agree or explicate the truth with greater reason and to better purpose against the patro∣nizing sin and damnation of in∣nocent souls. Let not I pray sordid prejudice forstal the moderate Readers judgement, nor envious passion supplant his reason: For if this short Treatise be perused di∣ligently, compared exactly, and the verdict given uprightly in presence of the all seeing eye: then I doubt not but the Reader seeking, shall find; and finding shall confesse that the truth of Christian Reli∣gion, ever holy, ever victorious, though ever oppos'd by the wic∣ked, is still the same; for the confir∣mation of which God ingaged his
own faith by oath: aud that Do∣ctor Tayler's confused doctrine is Doctrina mendaciorum non desursum descendens, sed terrena, animalis, & diabolica; and that he is wor∣thy of all contempt and unhap∣pinesse for peremptorily distrusting and odiously confounding this eternal divine verity.
The Postscript. IT is a point most worthy of all admiration to behold such a vast number of gracelesse presu∣ming Theologues now in England, perpetually labouring in searching out new whymsical inventions of religion, and filling the Land with ridiculous and shamefull Pam∣phlets, and unprofitable contro∣versies about an object more per∣spicuous then the Sun, preferring their own sorry inventions to the prime substance of Gods heaven∣ly indeavours; the celestial faith which the infinite wisedome of man-God hath planted on earth as the master-piece of all his great works and wonders.
Lord, what can any expect while those that presume to be the godly pillars, and reformers of Re∣ligion are quite corrupted, unsta∣ble, staggering and stealing mens affections and inclinations from embracing the true doctrine of the only saving Religion? how can any that hath but his wits about him, venture to pin the salvation of his soul upon the thred-bare sleeves of any of the giddy spirits of these times, who dayly indea∣vour to trike up anew the great work of Religion, as if it were the work of man? I then demand of you (Noble Reader) whether all this well considered, you ought not to abhor these petty and odiously proud undertakers, who seem to come to the world to prescribe rules of faith in it, and believe and teach what pleaseth them and the
humorous itch of their incredulous Proselytes, to displease God and confound his prime verity? Sure an inevitable malediction is tyed to those that voluntarily withdraw themselves and others from the true light, and shake off the blessed yoak of lawfull revealed Ordinances, which ought rather to be reve∣renced then disputed with unpro∣fitable wranglings and grosse falsi∣ties, impudently denying things most manifest; avouching without shame things odiously false; pro∣posing things impious, as the first principles of faith; condemning of heresie, things Orthodox; boasting and quoting the holy Fa∣thers, when nothing is followed lesse then their Doctrine. Now if I should ask whether or no in the so plausible reformation begun in Queen Elizabeth, for the
glory, light and liberty of the Gospel (as it was pretended) was there salvation to be had or no? Doctor Tayler for fear of shame and laughter will answer affirma∣tively; why then doth he dare sub∣vert the whole fabrick of the same, and quit undo at a breach what hath been so long a doing? sure it was to the end that (God per∣mitting) the monster of reforma∣tion should reveal its own turpitud and horrid basis, and betray it self by sects, divisions, and subdivisi∣ons, that those that are come to some eminency in learning and zeal might easily discern it to be not a City built on a mountain, but a wall raised and dawbed with∣out tempering, Ezekiel 13. 11. A fools Cottage erected upon slying sand where no setled footing can be found; for the old Proverb of
the Hebrews is most sure, that truth hath strong and stedfast footing, and is of a permanent perpetual durance; but a lye of a tottering foundation; easily supplanted and overthrown; therefore all refor∣mations of forged Sectaries, are to be esteemed as weak and ground∣lesse lyes and fooleries; according to the doctrine of Trismegistus, Omne quod alteratur falsitas est non manens in se ipso; every thing sub∣ject to alteration is false. And it is very observable how one of the grave Prelates and first reformers, being asked by an ingenious Gen∣tleman, why did the new refor∣mers accuse the ancient Church of Rome of Idolatry and superstition, which she only had suppressed both in this Nation, and in the whole universe, as all Historians do wit∣nesse: The Prelate ingeniously
and candidly returned answer, that the reformation began with lies, follies and vain inventions, and so it must end in lies and im∣postures. This prediction seems manifestly come to passe this day; for that the reformation began with lies and grosse falshoods, I need not prove, any man that is compos mentis may see: but that re∣formation now ends in lies, is ma∣nifestly evinced by the late doctrine of Doctor Jeremiah Tayler: for how can there be a more grosse and horrid lye then to hold that Infants are saved, and not by Christ? and that any may be sa∣ved in any religion or sect what∣soever? that Laicks have power to administer Sacraments, Preach, interpret Scripture, and what not? and that Original sin is so called abusive? that in the Sacrament of
baptism there is had but a figura∣tive remission of sin? thus doth our brave Doctor end the specious reformation. Thus you may ob∣serve how he brings up the rear of new denials of some part of the ancient faith, which former refor∣mers had not yet obtained the im∣pudent boldnesse to reject: Such and no other be all reformations, a dayly taking away, and nega∣tive abolitions of the antient Te∣nets without any positive institu∣tion: Was not I pray the necessity of faith and merit of works taken away by some, Feast-days, Lents, and all fasting rejected by others; Priest, his power and Mass (which were as ancient in England, and generally throughout the whole world, as Christianity it self) put down by some, contrition and Penance by others: Was not soon
after Sacrificing, Unction, Altars, Vows, Pilgramage, chas'd away by some; the Lords-prayer, the Ten Commandements, cried down and neglected by new Tub praters, and by the unrelenting malice of hel∣lish monsters: Thus by a gradual proceedeng of infidelity and blas∣phemy of the whole fabrick of Christian Religion, there is not left one stone upon another. Only unum baptismae in remissionem pecca∣torum, as the distinctive character betwixt Christian and Pagan left; together with the reall presence in the Lords Supper maintained in the 39. Article, are this day con∣temned by Doctor Tayler, and re∣duced to bare shades, figures, and dreams; so perfecting the work by degrees, leaves us but damnation: Were all reformers before him sent from God with devine commission
to inlighten the world? if they were, why then did they not do their work to the full? must an ig∣norant Taylor or Bungler, at the end of a full age step in to accom∣plish it? yes sure, now our Tayler hath done the deed to the utmost beyond all addition; now the re∣formation consisting of the denial of essential truths, and all practi∣cal principles of Religion, is brought to the non plus ultra, he brings up the rear, having ushered and ed by the hand James Naylor to Pillory, and with him many thousands into horrid blasphemies and atheism; neither doth his im∣piety stay here, but dares deny a∣gainst Scripture ancient Fathers, and the general received practise of all ages; the necessity and reality of Christ's body in the B. Eucha∣rist. For its a general rule approved
by all Divines, that we must never understand any place in Scripture figuratively, unlesse we be evident∣ly compelled thereunto; but no such matter in these words, This is my body; for our Saviour doth not say this bread is my body, neither can his words be so understood, especially seeing the word hoc, this, is both in Greek and Latine Texts of the Neuter Gender, & the word bread is of the Masculine. And by the figures of this most B. Sacra∣ment, the Catholique doctrine is thus proved: the figures ought necessarily to be of a meaner digni∣ty then the thing figured, Colos. 2. But if the Eucharist were no more then simple and natural bread, sig∣nifying Christs body, and not his very body it self, then should the figures thereof be no whit inferiour in dignity to the B. Eucharist it
self, yea some figures should be more excellent then it, which is most absurd; for if we consider a Lamb and bread as they are natu∣ral things, no question but the Lamb is more excellent then bread, if considered only as external signs; for who seeth not that Christs flesh is far better signified by the flesh of a Lamb then by bread? Christs death is better signified by the death of a Lamb, then by breaking of bread; Christs inno∣cency, meeknesse, &c. are better signified by the property of the fame, then by those of bread. As for the Manna it was made with Angels hands; it rained down from heaven; it had all kind of taste; in all which respect it was far more excellent then bread: so as that now Christians would be in a far more sad and more pitious
condition then those of the old Law, if we had figuratively only Christs body and blood, and not really present in the B. Eucharist; and there is no colour in the world why any should admit Christs words to be otherwise taken then really and properly: for the four Evangelists use them unanimously. None of the ancient Fathers ever understood them figuratively, but expresly reach that they are to be understood properly, no place of Scripture, no Article of faith, no decree of Councel, no explication of the Church compelleth us to take them figuratively; therefore we must needs take them real∣ly with all the Saints and pri∣mitive fathers: See the 28. Arti∣cle of the Church of England, and the 94. of Ireland, established in Dublin in the year 1615. Where
the Protestants do teach, that in the Eucharist the body and blood of Christ is not only signified and offered, but also really, substanti∣ally, and truly presented, exhibited and communicated, and conse∣quently that the bread is not a bare sign significative only, but also exhibitive of Christs body: See Vsher's Sermon before the Com∣mons, Page 16. Edit. 2. Sure had Christs body been only figurative∣ly presented, he would have re∣moved the doubt when he saw the Jews offended at the reality (as Hereticks be now a days) John 6. and he would not have confirmed and repeated his saying in terminis with promise of a greater wonder, John 6. 62. The Lutherans believe our Sa∣viour to be as really in the Eucha∣rist as he was upon the Crosse, but
do not adore him; the Roman Ca∣tholiques both believe the reality of it, and adore it. For my part I should clearly hold with these; for S. Paul, and all the four Evange∣lists unanimously teach the Do∣ctrine of the reall presence, and not one single place produceable, that in direct terms calls the B. Eucha∣rist a sign or figure of Christs body; notwithstanding the vain cursed maintainers thereof admit no proof as authentical, but the pr∣cise Text of Scripture; but in this so important controversie they fly to logical inferences and Phi∣losophical discourses, and so make their own bare reason the Judge, and not the word of God; rende∣ring by their new and private in∣terpretations this great Sacrament inferiour in dignity, not only to the Paschal Lamb a type of Christ,
but even to Manna which was but a figure of this very mystery. Surely if we shall add to so many and so evident Texts of Sripture, the constant judgement of the Fathers, and the universal practise of the whole Christian world, for above a thousand years, we may safely conclude the doctrine of our Sa∣viours presence in the B. Eucharist to be most probable and true, and consequently Roman Catholiques in no wise accusable of rashness or obstinacy in believing a positi∣on so efficaciously recommended to them, and conveyed from hand to hand, therefore what can be more dangerous and pernitious to any Kingdom, then to quite abo∣lish such a dread Sacrament plain∣ly invincible, which adorneth and graceth the whole universe, fomen∣teth innocency, extirpats vice, and
by most evident ways demonstrate that a living God lieth under it, and set up in its place a piece of prophane bread which never yet discovered more grace or force in the Ministers hand, then it brought out of the Oven. As its evinced out of Christs repeated words. By this so important digression we have the omnipotencie of God against all weaknesse, idle curiosi∣ties, sophisms and artificial falsi∣ties of new wits, as a pledge suffi∣cient enough to evince and secure the reality of Christ in the Sacra∣ment of the Altar, and believe that under the Sacramental species sensible and corruptible, our Sa∣viour subsisted with a glorious body which is called by S. Paul spiritual body because its dignified with qualities and conditions of spirit though it lose not the essence
of a body, adoring therein with all humility that which cannot be sufficiently comprehended, but by expresse passages of Scripture, clear decision of 40. Councels, the testi∣mony of above 500. Authors, an∣tient and holy; which ought to be preferred to the chimeras, imagi∣nary figments, and bare assertions of any particular Lay-man; and if plain Scripture-Texts, with the Church, Saints and general Coun∣cels exposition be not sufficient for a man to rest both his Science and Conscience upon, I know not where he will find a resting satis∣fiable place; it may shoot at ran∣dome, but never come to take a right aim. It being the most pal∣pable folly which can creep into the brain of man to desire wisedom contrary to the wisedom of Saints; my firm hope is that Doctor Taylor
having with so much labour and charges indeavoured to honour Christ in a meer shadow, will now in the name of God, turn his tongue and pen to honour and glo∣rifie him in his true real and sub∣stantial body, and receive those rules of Religion ever unalterable, eternal, universal, and constant, and not any longer to run with the Jews after simple figures, and weak elements: Now its more then time to look after Christs true Church, still the same without op∣position to it self in any fundamen∣tal doctrine, when all other arising Sects are notoriously known to contradict both their Associates and themselves at the end. Behold more then sufficient cause and ground for all those that pre∣tend to any fear of God, any care or regard of their souls eter∣nal
welfare, utterly to detest and anathematize all novellism and damnable principles; now its time to return to the Catholique Church setled by Christ upon a Rock, never to be prevailed against by humane or divels power: Cause enough there is to take warning for the future, not to remit the planting of religion to every giddy pretending spirit. Now its more then time that truth the centre of our understanding maugre never so long or strong opposition should powerfully work upon those very many Machievillians of our times, that seriously and deliberately say, Pox on it, I'l be of any Sect rather then hazard my liberty, honour or fortunes: I'l keep my consciene to my self, but I'l never lose my Land for want of outward compliance or conformity with the prevailing
lbertines: Alas how many brave ancient families, are quite extin∣guished and brought to nothing for want of compliance or confor∣mity with God and his holy revea∣led Ordinances; as its by woeful experience obvious to any judici∣ous person, for non est prudentia, non est concilium contra Dominum: for my own part I cannot but won∣der that any man acknowledging his sould immortal, and that either Hell or Heaven must be the eternal domicil after this life, & withal ac∣knowledging that a false wavering religion cannot be the way to beatitude, shall not desert that sect of whose falsenesse and damnable∣nesse to mans soul, and inconsisten∣cy with a well ordered Church, he hath so many and pregnant de∣monstrations to the eye. Finally its time for all to begin to follow
the main current and generality of Religion ancient and well grounded Erubescat senectus quae se emendare non potest, nullus pudor est ad meliora transire, S. Ambros. Ep. 31. ad valent. And now that we see the Protestants, fighting, writing and preaching against Pro∣testants for Protestant Religion: The old Catholique Religion must be the white, at which we must all aim, out of which none can hope for salvation. I beseech God the Father of light and mercy may open the heart and eyes of our Doctor and of his Profelytes, and resolve them herein for to receive that faith which hath God himself for ob∣ject. Let me now end with two words concerning the B. Virgin Mother, ever most highly reverenced under
God by all Christians upon earth, as the blessed instrument of our welfare; who but a turbulent Momus or a windy Scolist filled with a spi∣rit of contradiction would dare to disable, & disluster the truth of her immaculate conception, revealed & proposed by the voice and consent of the Church: This truth is most ancient, though not so aparently revealed to the primitive Fathers. Galatinus lib. 7. de arcanis cap. 4. holds this truth to be from the very time of the Synagogue: For the Jews believed for certain that the Mother of the Messias would be without Original stain. In the Apostles time S. Andrew Apostle ex∣presly said, Ad Egeum, ut in gest is ejus refert Abdias lib. . Historiarum sicu primus Adam formatus ▪ ex terra non , it secundus Adam for ex erra virginea &
nunquam maledicta: in the Jeros∣limitan Councel held by the Apo∣stles, Anno 44. Vt inventum est in monte granatensi; these words are. Illa virgo illa Maria santa in instan∣ti suae conceptionis fuit as originali peccato praeservata & qui ita non senserit salutem non consequetur eter∣nam. see Sanzez. Luzero Baptista de Lezana Carmel. Sedulius the Chri∣stian Poet, that flourished Anno 430. in lib. 2. Oper. paschal & habe∣tur tomo 8. Biblioth. PP. hath thus, En velut a spinis rosa mollis surgit acutis Nil quod laedat habens matris{que} obscurat ho∣norem Sic Evae de stirpe Sacra veniente Maria Virginis antiquae facinus nova Virgo piaevit. Wherefore in her conception, nature and grace meeting together (said Damascen) Orat Deativit. Virg. natura gratiam antevertere est usa sed expectavit donec
gratia prius fructum suum produxisset Which was ingeniously verified by a modern Poet. Gratia natunam cum qua est congressa sue∣git Et forti posuit clara-trophea manu. And this is nothing strange to hear she being the first object of Gods predestination as the great work prepared for his habitation: Opus grande est non enim homini pre∣paratur habitatio sed Deo,  Paral. 29. Sexta Sinodus cun. 32. Veneratur Liturgiam D. Jacobi Apost in qua sep haec verba habentur, commemo∣rantes sanctissimam matrem Christi irreprehensam, &c. likewise in the 7. Synod, Actione 3. she is called, immaculata, & omni sensibili & in∣tellectuali natura purior— Leaving many other proofs of the Fathers, and pregnant reasons for another occasion. Now I come to shew our B. Ladies imaculate
conception, is likely to become an Article of faith and defined. That truth which is supernatural and much conducing to Christian piety and belong to divine Worship may be defined and become an Article of faith, but the imaculate concep∣tion is such; Ergo it may be defi∣ned: as the Nativity of our B. Lady, to be preserved from mortal and venial sin, her ascension into heaven are supernatural truths generally allowed of by the Church, as Chri∣stianam pitatem & divinum cultum concernentia: even so her imaculate conception already celebrated, authoritate Ecclesiae, instituted and confirmed a great festivitie sub no∣mine praeservationis, must be a super∣natural truth plurimum referens ad Christianam pietatem & divinum cultum: Ergo it is likely to become an Article of faith: for the Church
cannot err about such things which concerns Christian piety and di∣vine worship: Ergo neither in defi∣ning that which is established, de∣creed, so lemnly proclaimed, prea∣ched and taught, summi pontificis & Ecclesiae authoritate. Whereas there is nothing required for the definibili∣ty of any dogmatical doctrin other then cognitio & deprehensio alioujus infallibilis med, by which may ap¦pear the same to be revealed by God and such is the common sence and consent of the Church manifested and propounded, ut decet sive in concilio sive extra. All which doth concur in the mistery of the ima∣culate conception of our B. Lady; Ergo it may be defined. The major is manifest, ex mate∣ria de fide; for illud est de fide, which is revealed by God: the mi∣nor is proved out of many places in
Scripture, in which the constant assistance of the divine spirit is pro¦mised to the Church, ne erret in re∣bus fidei; hence S. Paul 1 ad Tim. 3. doth call the Church the pillar and foundation of truth: but the universal Church doth celebrate a solemn festivity with an Octave of the imaculate conception not un∣der the name of sanctification, but of preservation: Ergo the B. Virgin was conceived truly without Ori∣ginal sin; Ergo it may be defined: the consequence is clear, because if she were defiled and conspurcated with Original sin, her conception could not be celebrated by the Church: Quae non potest errare in rebus fidei, propounding untruths for truths, which is the reason why S. Bernard in Epist. 174. ad canonicos Lugdiens. did reprehend them for cele∣brating the feast of the imaculate concep∣tion sine Ecclesiae authoritate. Laus Deo. Deiparae{que} Virgini.
