G100 99825754 30141
cartoon panel I Mea Culpa— Mea Culpa— Mea Maxima Culpa. From Poperie to save this Nation A Doctor ventures his Damnation cartoon panel K So help me God— inset cartoon panelTheir Witnesses did not agree. Mar. 4. Commits Idolatry, for our sakes And of false Oaths noe scruple makes. cartoon panel L M Taisborough hides Armes, in open Roomes A Knight in his Fore Fathers Tombes. cartoon panel N Fough—I Smell Gunpouder. An other where noe man woud thinke Gunpowder hides, in filthy sinke. cartoon panel O Something for a poor Scholar. Get you gone and be hang'd. The Popes Cheife Agent was soe poor He Begd an Almes at Pickerin's dore. cartoon panel P How are we cros'd. My Flint was loose And my Silver Bullet's lost. Pickerin had Kild the King, noe doubt But Bullets lost, and Flint dropt out cartoon panel Iohannes Paulus de Oliva One and Twenty And Powder too, was very scarse For w.ch Old Whitebread Whips his Arse. cartoon panel Q How dare you— Oh hold Turns another in my Coate. Our Doctor he does cudgell basely And dare you (says he) to my face lye. cartoon panel Describe Don Iohn. A tall black man— Since naught but blowes is to be got Wise Oates discovers Iesuits Plot. cartoon panel R S God forbid I shoud accuse him. —I know him not. His Eyes are dim, by Candle light And growing faint, does not swear right. cartoon panel T Which hand will you have They life and mony, Al refuse— The fatal Rope, they freely choose. cartoon panel We are Innocent God bless ye King. And forgive our Enemies And to be cut into fowr Quarters— Cause they'd be Canoniz'd for Martirs. Some Notes on the Picture to prevent Popish Cavils. I. Be not scandaliz'd at a word or two of Latine; 'Tis only to shew the folly of the Papists, who pray in an unknown Tongue. K. This is not meant of any Oath against the Papists, but of their wic∣ked Oath of Secrecy; which though the Doctor often took, yet we may charitably believe he never did in∣tend to keep it; since he positively assures us he did but counterfeit: He only seemed to be a Papist, but was all the while a True-Protestant in his Heart. See L. Staf. Tryal p. 123. L. Arms for 5 or 600 Men were hid in his Parlour; yet by Art Ma∣gick were invisible to the Gentlemen of the Country, who often dined with him in the same Room. See his Tryal. M. Sir H. T's. Vault was search'd for Arms, and Coffins opened; but all the Arms they had hidden there were turn'd to Bones. N. Sir R. T's. Sink was searched for Arms and Gunpowder; yet nor so much as one Black-Bill could ever be found there, nor in any other place. O. See Wakeman's Tryal, p. 73. P. Grove, that he might be sure to give an Incurable Wound, did traiterously and maliciously champ a Silver Bullet with his poysonous Teeth. See his Tryal, p. 24, & 81. Q. Either another man in such a Coat, or else (as some believe) the Devil in his likeness, went often to Court, and occasion'd this unlucky mistake, which was the cause of his being beaten. See the Jesuits Tryal p. 16, 17. Many may perhaps wonder, that the crafty Jesuits would suffer him to be in such a miserable beggerly Condition; and much more, that they would beat and abuse one, whom they had trusted with Secrets of so high a nature. But we can easily an∣swer this, and an hundred other seeming Improbabilites, only by say∣ing, They were infatuated. R. See Coleman's Tryal, p. 30. S. Wakeman's Try. p. 55, & 82, T. Langhorn's Memoirs, p. 6. A True Narrative of the Horrid Hellish Popish-Plot. To the Tune of PACKINGTON'S POUND. The Second Part. The Contents of the Second PART. Of Arms under-ground for Horse and for Foot; The KING almost Kill'd, but Gun wiill not shoot, For which Pick'ring is whipt. All of them swear To be true to the PLOT; yet Oats, not for Fear Nor Revenge, (though turn'd away, and well hang'd) Discovers them all; The Jesuits are Hang'd. I. THe PLOT being thus subtly contriv'd as you hear, To God knows how many this (1) Secret th'impart, Some famous for Cheats, yet their Faith they don't fear; To tye a Knave fast they had found a new Art. They (2) swore on a Book, And (3) Sacrament took; But you'l find, if into their grave Authors you look, Forswearing's no Sin, (as (4) Recorder well notes) Nor Treason, Rebellion, nor Cutting of Throats. The truth of my Story if any man doubt, W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out. II. STill blinded with Zeal, and inveigl'd by Hope, Store of Arms they provide for Fight and Defence, Three Lords must command, as Vice-Roys of the Pope, And all over England they raise (5) Peter-pence. Their Letters they send By (6) Bedlow their Friend, Or else by the (7) Post, to shew what the intend. Some hundreds (8) Oats saw, which the Jesuits did write, 'Tis a wonder not One of them e're came to light. The Truth of my Story, &c. III. POunds Two hundred thousand to (9) Ireland they sent; Fifteen thousand to (10) Wakeman sor Potions and Pills; Forty thousand in Fire-works we guess that they spent; And, Item, Ten thousand to pay for Black-Bills; Fifteen hundred more (11) Grove should have they swore; Four Gentlemen Ruffians deserved (12) Fourscore; Pious Pickering they knew was of Masses more fond, And for (13) Thirty thousand they gave him a Bond. The truth of my Story, &c. IV. THese two, to Kill the King by fair promises won, Had watch'd now some (14) years in St. James▪s Park; And Pick'ring, who never yet (15) shot off a Gun, Was about to take aim, for he had a fair Mark: Just going to begin't, He (16) missed his Flint, And looking in Pa, there was (17) no Powder in't; For which he their Pardon does humbly besech, Yet had (18) thirty good lashes upon his bare Breech. The truth of my Story, &c. V. BUt a sader mischance to their PLOT did befall, For Oa, their main Engine, fail'd when it came to't; No marval indeed if he cuzen'd 'em all, Who turn' him a (19) begging, and (20) beat him to boot: He wheeling about, Th' whole Party did rout, And from lurking holes did so ferret 'em out; Till running himself blind, h none of them (21) knew, And fainting at (22) Council, he cou'd not swear true. The truth of my Story, &c. VI. TO cofort our Doctor, brave Beloe's brought in, A mre Credible Witness was not above ground; He vows nd protests, though a Rogue he had been, He wou'd now not swear false for Five hundred pund: And why shou'd we fear They falsly wou'd swear, To damn heir own (23) Souls, and to lose by it here. Poor Oat, who before had no Peny in Purse, Discov'rig the PLOT, was Seven hundred pound (24) worse Th ruth of my Story, &c. VII. TWo itnesses more were let loose from the Jayl, Thogh (25) One 'tis confest did run back from his word; (In danger of Life a good man may be frail) And th' (26) Other they slander for Cheating his Lord. T' every one of these men The Jesuits brought (27) Ten, To disproe 'em in Time and in Place; but what then? One Circmstance lately was sworn most clear By a (28) Man who in hopes has Five hundred a year. Te truth of my Story, &c. VIII. ANd then we are told, We must always suppose, To murder the King a Great PLOT there has been; And who to contrive it so likely as those Who Murder and Treason do hold for no Sin. Things being thus plain, To plead was in vain; The Jury (instructed again and again) Did find them all Guilty, and to shew 'twas well done, The People gave a Shout for Victory won. The Truth of my Story if any man doubt, W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out. IX. TIs strange how thse Jesuits, so subtle and wise, Shou'd all by the Pope be so basely trepan'd, To Hang with much comfort when he shall advise, And go to the Devil too at his command. He may give them leave, To Lye and Deceve; But what when the Rope do's of Life them bereave? Can his Holiness, think you, dispense with that pain, Or by his Indulgences raise them again? The truth of my Story if any man doubt, W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out. X. Yet (like Madmen) of Life a Contempt they express, And of their own happiness careless appear. For Life and for Money not one would confess; Th' had rather be Damn'd, than be Rich and live here. But surely they rav'd, When God they out-brav'd, And thought to renounce him the way to be sav'd; With Lyes in their mouths go to Heaven in a string; So prosper all Traytors, and GOD save the KING. The truth of my Story if any man doubt, W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out. Concordat cum Recordo. Cl. Par. FINIS. I do imagine some will say there never was such another strange Ballad, with marginal Notes and Quotations. But I answer, there never was such another Plot, and I am affraid, that if I did not cite very good Authors, and bring Witnesses of untainted Reputation, the next Generation might be so far deluded by Popish Shams, as not to believe it. Authors Quoted. (1) As it appears in the several Tryals. (2) Ireland's Tryal, p. 23. (3) Hill's Tryal, p. 32, (4) See his Speech in Ireland's Tryal, p, 81. (5) The same Tryal, p. 30. (6) Jesuits Tryal, p. 33. (7) The same, p. 29. (8) Oats's Narrat. all along. (9) See Coleman's Try. p. 23. (10) The same, page 40. (11) The same again, p. 21. (12) The same, p. 24. (13) The same again, p. 21. (14) Ireland's Tryal, p. 24. (15) The same, p. 25. (16) The same again, p. 24. (17) See Jesuits Tryal, p. 33. (18) Ireland's Tryal, p. 24. (19) Wakeman's Tryal, p. 73. (20) Jesuits Tryal, p. 91. (21) Wakeman's Tryal, p. 30, & 55. As also Coleman's Tryal, p. 30. (22) The same again. (23) Wakeman's Tryal, p. 40. (24) Thus Oats and Bedloe af∣firm in Langhorn's Tryal. (25) Mr. Prance. (25) Mr. Dugdale. (26) Jesuits Tryal all along. (27) viz. To prove that Ire∣land was not in Town Aug. 19. See Wakeman's Tryal, p. 22. (28) Mr. Jenison. See th' Authors I quote; there's Witnesses plenty, Approv'd by a—Nemine Contradicente. Yet Juries (for tender Conscience so famous.) To save a True-Protestant, write Ignoramus.
