L1379AA 99825191 29568
A LETTER From a GENTLEMAN at London to his FRIEND at Edinburgh. SIR, I Am inform'd that those, who in the last Meeting of our Parliament appear'd for the Interest of the Country, have taken a Resolution to begin the ensuing Session with an Act declaring the Nations Right to Caledonia; which I presume to be a very wrong step, and such as will prove of very bad consequence. I suppose, the great Argument that has been offer'd for this Method, is, that nothing will more Unite the Members of Parliament, than the sen∣sible Injury done to the Nation by the Destruction of that Colony. But, I hope, that upon better consideration Men of Honesty and good Intentions will not suf∣fer themselves to be led into such a Mi∣stake. For a Declaration of our right to Caledonia can do no real good to the Na∣tion at this time: But the disbanding of the Army will. If they would be even with those who have ruin'd our Colony, they can never do it any way effectually, but by breaking the Army. They are now to chuse upon which of these two Heads they will again break with the Court; for in my Opinion neither of them will be granted. But if it should be thought convenient to yield to either of these Propositions, 'twill certainly be to that of disbanding the Army, on Account of the Interest the Parliament of England might take in it, and perhaps second it for their own Security. Whereas the de∣claring our Right to Caledonia will (how unjustly soever) be attributed to meer pique and humour, because of no present Advantage to the Nation; and will sound ridiculously among our Neighbors, where our Weakness, and ill Conduct in that Affair has but too much expos'd us. So that the Court can never desire a fairer pretence to vindicate themselves both to the English and Dutch, then to break up our Parliament upon such an Account. And we who are crush'd by a Power which we are no way able to resist, ought to have great regard to such things as may engage all Men of good Intentions in those Coun∣tries to be our Friends; and not continue to mistake what is done in both by the Court Party, as proceeding from the Na∣tions themselves. Besides, till the Army be disbanded, there is not the least proba∣bility of obtaining Money from the pub∣lick, for carrying on the Trade of the Company. We must have lost our senses, if we do not see that a quarrel with us is industriously sought, that a pretence may be found to keep up an Army. And if the Court Party should prevail in the Par∣liament of England, who knows, how far our insisting upon the Business of Caledo∣nia, without any prospect of present good to the Nation, might be made a handle to excite that Nation against us? I cannot but think there's just-ground to suspect the Conduct of those who by all means would push the Affair of the Colony at so unseasonable a time. We don't aban∣don our Rights and Privileges in this point, because we think fit in the first place to enter upon another Affair, which threatens us with the utmost dan∣ger. As long as we have a standing Ar∣my, we can have neither Trade nor Li∣berty. We expell'd King James because he would keep up an Army in time of Peace. We are now strugling with this Government about the same thing. And a certain Person, tho' he stand looking on a Crown at such a distance, as amounts to a Vision, is yet so dazled with its bright∣ness, as to make it his business to imploy the present Spirit and Vigor of the Na∣tion in any thing rather than in breaking the Army. I value not Protestations; they are Nauseous things; I look only upon what Men do, and cannot forbear to think, that those, who after due consideration of our present Circumstances, shall in the Ensuing Session of Parliament, prefer any other Business to that of disbanding the Army, are Men seeking their own In∣terest, and not the good of their Country. I am Sir Your, &c. October 13. 1700.
