L1391 12280332 58689
A LETTER from a Gentleman in the Country, TO A Person of Honour in LONDON IN VINDICATION OF THE Church of England. From certain Scandalous Aspersions cast upon them. Honoured Sir, I Received Yours, wherein you hint certain Fears and Jealousies, as if ome that pretend themselves▪ Members of the Church of England, (Tainted with the Popish Leaven, or Infatuated with the Temptations of Imaginary Pro∣fit and Honour, in this Critical Juncture, which requires the greatest Zeal and Courage) should be Bewitched into such a
or rather Inclinable to  udgment for our Sin, should  (which God et) in their ions. And though I hope, nay promise my self, such Suggestions are utterly  and  yet to satisfy you, that if any such t they have taken wrong Measures as well in Policy as  I offer you these few hasty Rea∣son that no  of England ▪ Men can in such a Change, ex∣pect any Termporal Advantages to themselves. First Consider the vast Number of English, Scottish, and Irish  Prests Fars  for the Spoyl and you will find, that the In-come of Ten Thousand  Twenty Six Bishopricks▪ and all their Appurtenances six times more Valuable, than  Author of, Omnia Comesta  Blo) will ne∣ver satisfy the Rapacious Jaws of such a Numberless Troop of Vultures and Cormorants. Secoy, ough ou  Gentlemen may have some Pre∣tence to struggle for their Church Lands; as being Estated in them not only by Act of Parliament, but also the Popes Rem in Queen Mar Time, (which yet by the way, is nothing worth in that Case; the Act being, they will tell you,  and no Pope ested with Power to impoverish the Church)▪ Yet the Ptestant Clergy can claim no such Grace from hi Hness▪ But must certainly turn out. Cedite Majoribus: Begone you Intruders; make room for the Antient Proprie∣tors. Thirdly, Suppose they Comply betimes; this will be no Se∣curity for  or getting New Preferments. For a New Convet in any General Turn, (to which he must be supposed to be sway'd more by Interest than Conscience) is al∣wayes look't upon with an Evil Eye, by the Old preventing Party▪ who will never endure these New Truckers to Reap the Sweets, which they so long have been sweating to obtain.
These came in  Shall they be Equals with us,  have  of the Day? Fourthly,  English Clergy are Mar∣ryed▪ conseq of any Ecclesiastical Office, if Popery prevail▪ Fifthly,  Jesuits have already pretend∣ed to the  ected Harvest: And Quar¦rels for  ween Them and the rest of the Orde  se Gibblets; before She be pluck't. What  full Hugenot Regenado's, ever hope for▪ Sixthly▪ As  Bargain, if any Prince hereafter should be  Barter away the Protestant Religion (which,  Soveraignty) for a Fancied Arbitrary Powe  to the Paramount Plea∣sure of the  bearded in his own Domi∣nions, by every  So 'twill be no less Prejudicial  lergy themselves, when in∣stead of being  gratis,, by the King, for their Merit, thy pay a vast Fine for a Pall and Confirma to the and Seignior at Rome: As Walter Gray  to deposite Ten Thousand Pounds sterling  prick of York; and William de Raley, Eight Hundred M, for that of Winchester, &c. See Matthew Paris, in  & alibi. Seventhly, When can any of our English Clergy, though never so much   of injoying Preferments, when (besides  easons before recited) we find, that here∣tofore under the way of Popery, Forreigners were usually plac'd in the best ▪ As in the Year 1253. on an inquisition  that the Revenues of the Itali∣ans an England (whereof many were Boys, most Dunces, all Aliens)  Threescore and Ten Thou∣sand Marks▪ Per Annum▪  a greater Revenue, than that of the Kin And other e, Matthew Paris tells us,
Tha the Pope made a Bargain with the Peope of Rome, that if they would effectuall d him against the Em¦rour Frederik, their Children should be put into all the Vacant Benefices in England▪ whereupon Order was sent to Edward Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Lincoln, and Salis∣bury; That Provision should be made for Three Hundred Ro¦mane Children to be served of the next Benefices that should fall. I need not mention the slavery they they must be under of Trudging to Rome on every impertinent Appeal; Their be¦ing liable to be Spgll, as oft as the Popish Court pleases; the Hatred they will Incurr from Protestants, and deserv Scorn from Old Papists, with an hundred other Inconvenien∣cies: But shall only add, that as they must needs be Rebels to God. and their own Consciences, so at the same time they must be Traitors to their King, and Betrayers of the Liber¦ties of their Country; whoever shall attempt or submit o any Reconciliation with Rome; which I assure my self no English Man  unbyased Liberal Education, much less any that have er imbib'd the true Loyal Geneous Principles of the Church of England, will be Guilty of: Therefore advise you to silence unjust Suggestions of that nature, as that will Conserve the good Opinion, of▪ Your Friend and Servant, &c▪ FINIS. London, Printed for . D. 1680.
