L1592 R30943 11733371 48429
A LETTER Sent by the COMMISSIONERS OF the Kingdome of SCOTLAND, To the Speakers of both Houses of Parliament. For His Majesties comming to London, To Treat with the Houses about the Proposi∣tions for Peace. AS ALSO A Petition of the Inhabitants of the City of London, and of severall Counties and Corpo∣rations, in Conformity to that LETTER. London, Printed in the Yeare 1647.
A Letter to both Houses of Parlia∣ment, for His Majesties com∣ming to London, &c. Right Honourable: AS upon the removall of his Majesty from Holdenby, against his will, by a party of the Army under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, we expressed our sence, and the resentment of the Kingdome of Scotland of that violent acti∣on, so the Committee of Estates of the Parlia∣ment of Scotland, finding that his Majesty is still kept within the Power of that Army, thought themselves obliged to endeavour to know the certainty of His condition: in obe∣dience to their commands, wee have applyed our selves to His Majesty, that from himselfe wee might know the truth thereof, who was pleased to shew us his usage, ever since Hee came from New castle, but for His present con∣dition Hee really confesseth He cannot, but re∣ferres
us to know it, from the two Houses of Parliament, and the Army. Both Houses (by many Professions, and en∣gagements) have declared to the Kingdom of Scotland that they would take care of the pre∣servation of His Person, His just power and greatnesse, (which both Kingdomes have sworne not to diminish) and the Parliament of Scotland upon the Kings going to Holdenby, did declare against all harme, prejudice, injury, or violence to be done to his Royall Person. Therefore in pursuance of the trust committed to us, we make this addresse to the Honoura∣ble Houses, conceiving it needles to apply our selves to the Army, who we suppose are, and ought to be under their command, desiring to know from them the certainty of His Majesties condition: and the rather that wee are infor∣med, there are intentions in the Army of the removing him from Hampton-Court. The Kingdome of Scotland finding that their stability, and happinesse doth so much de∣pend upon the safety and preservation of His Majesties Royall Person, And being resolved that no alteration of affaires shall ever seperate
them from that duty Allegiance they owe unto him, nor from their constant resolution to live in all loyalty and obedience under His govern∣ment, have often shewen their earnest desires, and contributed their utmost endeavours, to∣wards the composure of these unhappy diffe∣rences. And the Houses of Parliament ha∣ving by their Votes of the 26. of October last, intimated to us their resolutions to apply them∣selves to His Majesty, and that they are prepa∣ring Propositions to be tendred to Him; Wee do desire that they may be expedited and com∣municated to us; that according to our many engagements and relations, there may be still a conjunction of Councells, in those things that are for the Common peace and joynt inte∣rest of both Kingdomes. And for the better assetting of them, for the clearing His Majesties doubts, and for the gi∣ving, and receiving mutuall satisfaction: We doe desire (in the name of the Kingdome of Scotland) that there may be a personall Treaty with his Majesty, as the best and readiest means to obtaine the joynt desires of both Kingdoms; And for that effect, that the King may be invi∣ted
to come for London, with that honour, free∣dome and respect due to His Majesty, or (at least) remaine at Hampton-Court, and not be under the power, and constraint of Souldiers, where both Kingdomes may make their free applications to Him without any danger of such stop, or affront as hath been already com∣mitted against a Commissioner of Scotland: and for which no reparation hath been yet made, and that His Majesty be no more carried about with the Army at their pleasures. These wee conceive to be the most probable and ef∣fectuall meanes for attaining an happy peace, setling of Religion, restoring His Majesty to his just Rights, and continuing, and strengthening, a good understanding betwixt these Kingdomes, which are most earnestly desired by the Kingdome of Scotland, And shall be constantly and faithfully endeavoured by Worcester House the 5. of Novem. 1647. Your Lordships humble Servants. Lowden. Lauderdaill, Charles Erskine, Hugh Kennedy, Robert Barclay. For the Right Honourable the Speaker of the House of Peeres pro tempore.
To the Right Honourable the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of severall Counties. Whereas our Common Burthens, and Civill Dis∣sentions, and Animosities, Continue, and en∣crease daily more, and more, And Christ himselfe hath told us, That a Kingdome devided against it selfe, is brought to Desolation, and a City, and a House divi∣ded against it selfe cannot stand. Out of the deep and piercing sence of the Distract∣ed, and dangerous condition of the City, the Houses, and the Kingdome, and out of an unfeined Desire, of a happy Reunion, and Accommodation on all sides, Wee doe humbly, and earnestly pray, That the Kings most Excellent Majesty may forth∣with Returne to his two Houses of Parliament with Honour, freedome, and safety, To passe, and grant (whiathe hath gratiously proferd)
an Act of Oblivion, and a generall pardon, and to give, and receive satisfaction, to all just, and reasonable Proposalls, to compose the generall differences, to reconcile all parties, to settle the Kingdome, and restore, and establish Trade, & Government, and so enable us to relieve Ire∣land, and pay the areares of the Army, and the Publique debts of the Kingdome. And your Petitioners shall ever pray, &c. FINIS.
