L2635 24023510 109619
THE LEGEND OF Captaine Iones: CONTINUED From his first part to his end: Wherein is delivered His incredible adventures and atchieve∣ments by sea and land. Particularly; His miraculous deliverance from a wrack at Sea by the support of a Dolphin. His severall desperate duels. His combate with Bahader Cham a gyant of the race of Og. His loves. His deep imployments and happy successe in busi∣nesse of State. All which, and more is but the tithe of his owne relation, which he continued untill he grew speechlesse, and died. LONDON, Printed by M F. for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold at his Shop under the Kings-Head Tavern in Fleet-street, neere Chancery lane end. 1648.
To the READER. REader, read on: here you may happ'ly meet Newes, pleasing more, then what's cri'd in your street. Jones is reviv'd; nere start: the danger's past; What he hath done long since, now makes him last. His last brave actions never sung before We offer to your view, nor write we more Then he made good on oath: then (pray) believe What here you'l find: thus by your faith hee'l live. Next, spare your censure on his Poets style; Had it gone high, his ghost had kept a quoile To be surmounted: downe-right were his blowes; Downe-right his speech; downe-right to's grave he goes. Onely his fame by your opinion may Make him still live, though now he's dust or clay.
THE LEGEND OF CAPTAINE IONES, Continued from his first part to his end. WIll nothing please the taste of these rough times But rue and wormwood stuf't in prose or rimes? No verse to make our poets Laureate But smart Iambicks lashing King or State? Must all turne Mercuries, these times to fit By poisoning fame with their quick-silver wit? That name that's got by some notorious ill, And merits Gives, is hatefull to our quill. But if the last brave acts of Captaine Iones Which can move mirth and feare, and break no bones, May be admitted in this ruffling age, Behold him here remounted on our stage.
Yet know wee still are ty'd to our low streine, We must not once transcend his down-right veine. And if you meet ought favoring of a lye, (Reader beleeve't) tis Iones that speakes, not I. We left him priz'd on change, too dear 'twas thought, Twenty foure Donnes,24 Spanish comman∣ders given in ex∣change for him. and all not worth a groat Compar'd to him, though each had had command Over great armies prest for sea and land. Here see him shipt for his dear native coast; Where ere he comes you'l finde hee'l rule the roast With new found foes, who attempt his force to shake; But sleeping Lions 'tis not wise to wake. Now once more Neptune doth his waves inlarge Swoln big with pride, that Fate had giv'n him charge And weighty convoy of this mighty man To whence he came; but ere the ship had ran Ten glasses out, comes Boreas with a cloud As black as ink; the steers-man cries aloud Downe with the topsaile, keep the spritsaile tight, Haile the maine bowling. Whilst this mask of light Usherd with lightening plowes the angry deep High as her selfe in ridges, and as steep As Cair's tall Pyramids: the labouring ship Like a chaf't Beare with Mastives, strives to keep Her beak aloft; some billowes she breakes throw, Others mount over her at poop and prow. Iones heard this stur unmov'd: from Neptune still He hop'd no good, nor ever fear'd his ill. Thus whilest the carefull sea-men work and pray, He carelesse, to his cabbin calles his boy, And makes him read to him the ancient stories Of our old English Worthies, and their glories;
How our S. George did the fell Dragon gore: The like atchievement of Sr. Eglemore: Sr. Topas rime in Chaucer.Topas hard quest after th'Elfe Queen to Barwick: Sr. Bevis cow, and Guy's fierce boare of Warwick, These stories read, exalt his haughty minde Above the servil feare of sea or winde, The ships hard state grew now from ill to worse: Between too hideous seas acrosse her course, Her whole bulk groanes: her beak and maine mast break. Shooke with this shock, she springs a dangerous leak, Which her slye foe soone findes, and to begin Like a dire dropsie, drenches all within. Thus whilst a treacherous in-mate fills her wombe, She's forc'd to be her owne destructions tombe. And over burthend with what bore her before, She's down-right foundred, and can worke no more. Here might be seen the sad effects of feare Which severall wayes in severall men appeare: Some cry'd, some pray'd, whilst others sweare or rave, To leave the land to make the sea their grave. Iones swolne with the brave actions of his Knights, Big as the sea, ascends and Neptune cites To single combate: when a boistrous wave Which Neptune sent to make him Neptunes slave, Whurles him a cables length to sea, the ship Sinks with the rest, who give this world the slip. Well now Sr. Iones 'tis time to shew your skill; You must swim stoutly for't, or drinke your fill. No danger frights thee, thou brave man of merit, Thy body is boyd up by thy blow'n spirit. As a grim Alway portending stormes when they are seen to play. sea-calfe still presaging stormes Wallowes and wantons in cold Thetis armes:
Just such is Iones: as if he had been bred With her finn'd frie within her watrie bed. No ship for help, no land for hope appeares; Horror of billowes roaring in his eares. Nothing supports but confidence alone, as If some prest Whale must take up Iones like Ionas? At last (alasse!) he findes he is no fish, His spirit 'gins to leave his treacherous flesh Continuall laboring makes his limbs waxe stark And stiffe with cold, his optick sense growes dark, Neptune insults, and brandishing his mace Makes his rude billowes dash him ore the face. Now see the fate of noble resolution, When Iones thought nothing but of dissolution, Man's constant friend a gentle Dolphin glidesThe Dol∣phin is alwaies observ'd to be a lover of man. Between his thighes, on whom he mounts and rides In post with mighty speed, through wind and weather; So his kind fish holds out, he cares not whither; Like a bold Centaur bravely he curvets From ridge to ridge; 'twas strange, how fast he sits In this rough road; but Iones learn'd from his cradle To ride without a stirrop or a sadle When on the mountains tops wilde mares he spide, He suckt them dry, and then straight up and ride. At last at this high speed he gets the sight Of land, so neere, hee's ready to alight, When his kind fish much griev'd to leave the burthen She lov'd so well, to sea again doth turn With mighty speed, still Iones doth her bestride Beleeving now he should toth' India's ride. Faine would he turn her, but he knew not how, He never knew a bridles want till now:
At last the faithfull fish preferring higher Her riders safetie then her own desire; She turnes her course about with happy hast, And so our errant Knight on land she cast. Some Spanish writers flatly doe deny He sufferd wrack, and plainly term't a lye: They say the ship that led this dangerous dance Was built by Lewis King Henry's sonne of France, And took that name from him, who beares that name The eldest son of the King of France al∣waies stiled the Dol∣phin.As eldest sonne, who still is styl'd the same: They write Iones got this ground t'augment his glory And cheat the world with this stupendious story; But let the reader judge if this be true, And know pale envy still doth worth pursue. Well now to Iones againe, we may conceave He was not ill apaid to take his leave Of this rough element: nor did account it Much worse to goe on foot, then ride so mounted. 'Tis true, he road this lofty fish in state, But 'twas too neere the boisterous fitt of fate, He fear'd not Fortune nor her wheel, though fickle, Yet loath he was to be laid up in pickle; Or that his manly limbs should be a feast For sharks, or crabs, or congers to digest. His next work is to finde some habitation, Though he came safely there 'twas in meane fashion, The selfe-same clothes which when Alonso brav'd him, He made him weare, and to the gally slav'd him. And though this last foul storme had little harm'd him, It seem'd to some strange thing to have transform'd him Rigid and rough, long wet and feltred lockes, Nebuchad¦uezzar.Like Babels King when turn'd into an oxe:
For a fresh-water souldier none could doubt him, The seas salt teares ran trickling round about him. In this cold plight he leaves the beachy strand, And coasts the maine with many a weary stand. At last he spies a house, not great, but good: For here he findes a brother of his brood, Who had adventur'd in those wayes before, And rays'd some fortune by't, and gave it ore. He quicly finds that Iones had skap'd some wrack; Experience, charity and pity spake On his behalfe; the good man bids him in, And with Y'are kindly welcome doth begin. He spak't in Dutch, which gladded Iones, for he Could speak't aswell as The same in Welch. GRACE dw worth awhee. Which language a Dutch Pilot well had taught him When Greenfield to America had brought him. By this, the Stove's made ready, in goes Iones: Dryes his wet garments, comforts nerves and bones. The table's set with homely wholesome cheere, And to make all compleat, strong Lubeck beere. A Dutch froe was his mate, more fat then faire, But wondrous free, and thereto debonaire. Which made Iones aske what Country 'twas that gave This noble welcome to her humble slave? He's answer'd, 'tis the Netherlands; the States Brave seat of warre, where many broken pates Are got and giv'n, and for his wants supply The good strong towne of Flushing stood fast by, Where Sr John Norrice did command in chiefe For England's glory and the States reliefe. This tickled Iones with joy; for Horace Vere, Norrice, and hee had been (I know not where)
Comrades in armes, ere Iones did entertaine That crosse designe with Cumberland for Spaine. But now a bed does well, to take some rest Where this good host directs his weary guest. And having slept his fill, he timely rose, Takes a most thankfull leave, and on he goes. His purpose is to take his passage over At the next Port he finds: from thence to Dover. But first at Flushing he resolves to touch, Where his old friend, the Bulwark of the Dutch, Brave Norrice holds his troop; Here Iones arrives, Just as he came from Jaile, except his Gives, Clad in his slavish robe of Fryers gray, His cap true blew; no company, but they Lowsie.That will not leave him whil'st he hath a ragge, Such as possesse the Begger with his bagge. Winds, storms, nor seas, nor ought that could undoe him, Could make thē flinch, like friends they stick close to him. And thus accompanied he doth approach To th' Generall's house, neither with steed nor coach; But in his manly foot-march: 'twas the time When Norrice with his Chiefes were set to dine. Iones presseth to the Parler from the Hall, And there accoasts the noble Generall. Who ey'd him quickly, and cryes out (ô fate!) Live I to see the strength of England's State? Breath'st thou brave man at armes? Iones art thou he? Or is it Mars himselse disguis'd like thee? Quoth Iones, The scourge of Spaniards and of Spaine, Whom they have felt and foyl'd, but to their paine, Stands here; and yet would breath some few years longer, To prove King Philip or my selfe the stronger.
The rest was deare imbraces, and his place By Norrice side; and then a hasty grace. Now might I dwell upon the luscious cheare, Which here grew cold, whil'st each mans eye and eare Fed on the person and discourse of Iones, And quite forgot their toasts and marrow bones. And whilst his strange adventures past, hetels; The Captaines, Serjant majors, Collonels Fast to admire him, and are fill'd with wonder, And feel no hunger though their bellies thunder. Here mark his constancy, beyond these men, He eats and talkes, and eats and talkes agen. Their mawes are cloy'd to heare those deeds of his, His stories are his meales Parenthesis. But when he spoke of Spaine, 'tis past beleefe, What fearefull wounds he gave the chine of beefe. A capon garnish'd with slic'd lemmons stood Before him, which he tore as he were wood; And made it leglesse ere he made a pause, Meerly in malice to the Spanish sawce. He wrecks his wrath on every dish that's nigh him, And spoil'd a custard that stood trembling by him; Grow'n pikes and carps, and many a dainty dish, That far excell'd his tame Crotonian fish. At last his fury 'gan to be asswag'd, And then the Generall all his friends ingag'd, To give him Souldiers welcome in a rowse Of lusty Rhenish, till both men and house Turne round. Once two great deities conjoyn'd To worke his fall, with hideous seas and wind: Now onely Bacchus takes the man to taske; And layes sore to him with his potent caske.
And whilest with lusty grape ore-born Iones reeles, H'assaults his head, and so trips up his heels. But up he rose againe with vigor stout, And sweares though foil'd, hee'l try an other bout. They all were now high flow'n, when Collonell Skink Fills a huge bowl of sherry Sack, to drink A health to Englands Queen, and Iones is he Must take't in pledge; and so he did: but see The strange antipathy between this man And Spanish grape as well as Spanish Don. Against them both his stomach fierce doth rise, No sooner drunke but up again it flies. This odde distemper made him halfe asham'd, But there's no helpe, he was with wrath inflam'd. Nor was he pleas'd with Skink for this affront, (For so he took't) he knew Skink could not want The wine of Rhene for healths: why then in Sack, Unlesse it were to lay him on his back? Fir'd with this thought, he catch'd at his buffe coat, Then grapples close; and had pluck'd out his throat, But that the wary Generall interposes His hands and friends betweene their bloudy noses: And with strong reasons, smiles, and smooth allayes, He dampes the fury of these fiery boyes: And left them (as he thought) well reconcil'd, But by th'effect he ound he was beguil'd. The night dispers'd them now to severall wayes, As they were quarter'd. Iones with Norrice stayes, Who sent him the next morne a brave rich sute Intended for himselfe, with all things too't. Scant was he dress'd, when Skink unto him sends A Captaine, boldly to demand amends
For last nights worke, and Iones to doe him right, A bullet must exchange in single fight. For which himselfe and Second would not misse, Where Iones design'd to meet with him and his. This Iones accepts; and sweares before that night He shall heare from him, how and where hee'l fight. He thus dispatch'd; Sr Roger Williams enters, To whom much kind discourse past ore; he venters To tell his difference with Skink; which told, Sr Roger like a Britaine true and bold, Protests himselfe his Second, hasts to Skink, Tells him, h'had need fight well, as well as drink: That Iones and he at the South-posterne gate Early next morne would meet him and his mate, With sword and pistoll hors'd, and there agree To fight it two to two, or Iones and he. Then comes to Iones, supply'd him with a horse Well rid and fierce; Bucquoy had felt his force Before Breda; then gives that sword and belt Which Prince Llwellin wore when slaine neere Bealt.The Prince of South-Wales, who was slain neere Bealt a towne in Brecknock-Shire. The houre come, these champions soone appeare, They spend no time in words; in full careere, Iones charges bravely close up to his brest, And fires, but fortune turn'd it to the best: Makes him through hast forget to prime his pan, So mist his shot, and so preserv'd the man. Vext with this faile, he flings with all his might, Worse then the bullet, had his hand gone right, His pistoll at his face; 'twas aim'd so neere, It raz'd his cheeke, and tooke quite off his eare. Skink's bullet pierc'd the bow of Iones his saddle, And slightly circumcis'd his foremans noddle.
The Seconds stood attending the event Of this first charge, both resolutely bent, If either in th'incounter had been sped, To run the same adventure they both did. But when they saw the bravery of their fight, Both having lost their bloud, the quarell slight: They both detest such men should be destroy'd By which their countrie should be fore annoy'd: With joynt consent their power they unite To ride up to them, and breake off the fight: Thus got between them, all best meanes they use To take it up: which both inrag'd refuse. They urge the equall terms on which they stood, In point of honour: both had lost their bloud, Both fought it well; how light their quarels ground, Not worth one drop of bloud, much lesse a wound. Then bid them looke on theire dear countries woe, Whose brests must suffer for the ill they doe. Reason takes place of wrath, they both accord, And mischiefes engin rests: they sheath the sword. And thus (in few) this dangerous duell ends, Fierce foes they met, and now returne good friends: Their Surgions stanch their bloud, for yet they bled, And clap a cap on Iones his nether head. This newes comes quickly to the Generals eare Who when he heard their lives were out of feare, He gently chides them that they would expose Their limbs unto the various chance of blowes In single duell, when the common good No longer stands then such good members stood. Ten dayes are spent ere Iones could stand upright Through his slight hurt: which come, the noble Knight
Brave Norrice he takes leave of, with the rest Of that brave martiall crew, and then adrest Himselfe for England: Ioy thou happy Isle, Thy Sonne returns, that hath kept all this quoile; Ye blustring boyes of Britain feast and quaffe all: The man's at hand whose presence makes you laugh all. Welcome to Dover thou great sonne of Mavors, So spake the Mayor of Dover on his grave horse, Mounted to meet him with his reverent train, All gownd, who cry him welcome home from Spaine. After some short repast, on post he rides To Non-such where her Majestie resides, Where he was soon brought up, to kisse her hand, By his deare friend George Earle of Cumberland. But then when tooke to private conference, What newes of moment, what intelligence, What Spanish plots, what mysteries of State, Unto her Majestie he did relate, 'Twas wrapt in clouds too high for me to know it; Then pardon Reader that I doe not show it. But 'twas observ'd he gave a written booke Unto her hand: on which she daign'd to look, And seem'd to slight it in the publique face Of Court; yet made some use of't in a place That's privy, so dismist him to his rest Or her Courts welcome; as to him seem'd best. 'Twas now the time when Robert Earle of Essex. Essex was ingag'd In Ireland 'gainst Tyrone, with whom he wag'd A bloudy warre: which to the Queen and State Seem'd long and costly: after much debate It is resolv'd to pick out such a man, Whose active force and spirit dares and can
Put a full period to this warre at once, Without delay, and this was Captain Iones, On whom they pitch, who fed on hopes in vaine To get some small command to conquer Spaine. 'Tis first resolv'd, he must reduce Tyrone, Till that be done he must let Spaine alone. Thus his Commission's seald to raise his force, A compleat regiment of Brittish horse: Hee's thence to waft them ore the Irish brine; And then his force with noble Essex joine. Iones lost no time, goes in five dayes to Wales: Shews his commission, tel's them glorious tales; He need not beat a drum or sound his trumpet, His name's enough to make these Brittons jump at This brave imployment under such a Chief, Whose fame's reserve enough for their relief. Perplext he was in choosing his commanders, For he still fancied best his old Highlanders; But many worthies of the lower parts Offer to him their fortunes and their hearts. But all respects put by, h'inlisteth ten Of his old gang, all hard bred mountain men, For his Life-guard, Thomas Da Price a Pew, Jenkin Da Prichard, Evan David Hugh, John ap John Jenkin, Richard John dap Reese, And Tom Dee Bacgh, a fierce Rat at green cheese, Llewelling Reese ap David, Watkin Jenkin, With Howell Reese ap Robert, and young Philkin; These for his guard, his Officers in chief Lieutenant Collonell Craddock, a stout theif, With Major Howell ap Howell of Pen Crag, Well known for plundring many a cow and nag,
Captain Pen Vaure, a branch of Tom John Catty Whose word in's coulors was, YE ROGVES have at ye; Griffith ap Reese ap Howel ap Coh ap Gwillin, Reese David Shone ap Ruthero ap William, With many more whose names 'twere long to writ, The rest their acts will get them names in fight, We must conceive they all were men of fame For here we see them all men of great name. Iones with these blades advanceth to the A little village by Milford. Dale, There lines himselfe and them with noble Ale Of such antiquity as hath not been there The like since An old Welh pro∣phet who ortold the land∣ing of Henry the seventh there. Robert of the Vale was seen there Who us'd to sink those kinterkins of merit, To raise the heat of his prophetick spirit. His forces shipt, at last a board he goes, A lusty South-east gale so fairely blowes, That forty houres easily brought him in To Dubline Harber where he lands his men, There getting knowledge where the Army lay To the Lord Generall he takes his way From whom a noble welcome he receives, And good fresh quarter to his troops he gives. Iones first informs himselfe in what condition Tyron's made up for warre, what ammunition, How fortifi'd in camp, what force, what watch, How victualled, all occasion he doth catch To take him tripping; when at length he found, He would not give nor take an equall ground, To hazard battell, he resolves to try him In such a way as he should not deny him, Unlesse with losse of honour; he indites This fearefull challenge which his squire writes:
False traitor to thy country and thy Queen, I he who yet my peer have never seen In feats of arms, whose martiall hand hath slain Kings with their armies, halfe unpeopl'd Spain: Done more then I can write; I say, I he Urge thee to single duel: and to thee Give the free choice of weapon, time, and place, On foot or hors-back: think it no disgrace, That I a private captain, thou a Chief, (My deeds make me admir'd, thee thine a thief) Call thee to question, 'twere ambition In thee, to hope to fall by such a one, T'augment my praise I wish thee five times stronger. Live till I meet thee: and but little longer. This done, a Herald is straight charged with it, In publique to Tyron's owne hand to give it, Who to him hast's, and in the publique view Of all his Armie says, (Tyrone) to you I have command to bring from captain Iones This challenge; read it, and resolve at once. He takes it, reads it, and admires the man, That sends him this high Brave, who if he can But halfe he writes, he counts himselfe but lost, To meet him; yet in sight of all his host This brave was giv'n him: thus his honour lyes At stake, and therefore desperately replyes. Tell your brave man I am not conquer'd yet, Nor can by words but blowes, he shall be met, Before to morrow noon, on yon green plot, Surrounded with the bog, neither with shot, Nor head steel'd dart: this sword I weare shall do't, Arm'd cap-a-pe, no horse but foot to foot.
He thus dispatcht, Tyrone doth straight seek out, Brian Mac-kilkow, a strong sturdy lout, Made up with nerves, and brawn and bone so mighty. He felt no burthen were it nere so weighty. The strongest man in all his camp by halfe, Milo's great Bull to him was but a calse, Bred in the Irish wildes 'mongst bogs and woods, And like an outlaw liv'd on others goods. And this is he on whom Tyrone now fixt, To personate himselfe in fight betwixt Him and our Iones, true armes of largest size, He donns on him, then to his loynes he tyes Morglay his trusty sword, then swears devoutly, If in this combate he behave him stoutly Hee'l raise his meanes above two English Barons In lands and sheep and cowes and lusty garrons: Bryan's all confidence and hastens thither Where Iones and he must try their force together, The place design'd was hardly twelve yards square, No traversing of ground, no boyes play there, The rest was bog, ore which some plankes were lai'd To passe them ore: and then to stop all aid, Were took from thence: here Iones our valiant fighter Advanceth first: Bryan with his fell smiter Is hard at hand, they spare no time for words, Their mettle is the whet-stone of their swords. They clap togeher like two sonnes of thunder, Their blads struck lightening, whilst the earth quak't un∣der The burthen she boare; no stroke that's given, but death Seems to attend it, till both out of breath Consent to make a stand, but this short rest Was like a sallet with a muttens brest
To their sharp stomacks, to't they goe again, And lay on load like devils, not like men. Their well tri'd armes doe blush with their own bloud To find their flesh in whose defence they stood, Stand, whil'st it fell: for that their keen swords whipt off As if they would each other make a chipt loaf. At last as I have seen a Man of war Assault a carrick which exceeds him far, In bulk and strength: so Iones deales now with Bryan, With shunn's and shifts, more like a Fox then Lion. For (to speak truly) this fell Pagan lout Doth so belabour Iones from head to foot, That both his eares doe oft with sorrow sing And's eyes see Starres at noon: (a wondrous thing) We must conceive those furious blowes he dealt Were well repaid with use, which Bryan felt. But Iones esteeming it an equall thing To be selfe conquer'd and long conquering, Resolves to put the businesse out of doubt With one Passe more, which was the fatall bout. On this Resolve, with both his hands he prest, The pummell of his sword against his brest Then like a thunder-bolt tilts swiftly at him: With th'feare of this, Bryan had quite forgot him. That 'twas a bog behind, so backward springs, And his whole body up to th'arm pits flings, Amid'st the bog. Iones driv'n with his owne force Missing his thrust falles headlong in the gorse But pitch't upon his foe, by happy fate With which ore boren, our Iones so mawles his pate, That th'helmet flyes, and leaves his head to th'danger, Of being the anvill of our Iones his anger:
And now the day is his, his strength he straines With hand and hilt to beat out Bryan's braines: Who cries out quarter, Man of Mars I yeeld My selfe and sword, the honour of the field. And where the power rests, 'tis much better far To give then take a life in chance of war. This and the bog doth coole the wrath of Iones, He spares his life and drawes him forth at once. Besides he scorn'd posterity should tell, That by his hand Tyrone so nobly fell. And thus O neale his captive (as he thought,) In this foule plight unto the camp he brought.: Presents him to the Generall, and then spake, Sir if you have ten more Tyrones to take, Command, I'le doe't; here see him hither led By me, who all this charge and stirre hath bred. The joy was great, but short; 'twas quicly known, This was but some impostor for Tyrone: And this an Irish Captive at first view Made knowne, who him and his condition knew. This bred a qualme in some, whil'st others smil'd To see their British Champions so beguil'd, And that Tyrone had bobb'd him with this jeer, To match his Cow-herd with our Mountaneer. Iones vext with this, retires unto his tent, An angry, dirty, desperate, malecontent. Three dayes thus spent, his wrath no longer beares This base affront; (like Scaevola) he swearesScaevola against Porsenna in Livie. Hee'l kill Tyrone in midst of all his force, Though in the act himselfe be made a coarce: In this wild mood by night he doth convey Himselfe where he suppos'd the Rebell lay:
Who wisely rais'd his camp the day before, March'd farre through desert woods, and would no more Of these affronts; which to put off agen Might breed contempt of him with his owne men. Two dayes Iones spends in quest to find him out; At last he was incountred with a rout Of ravening wolves, who fiercely all at once Assail'd the back and face of manly Iones. 'Twas time to draw, else these wild Irish dogs Had been so bold to shake him by the logges: But when his sword was out he makes them feel, Their teeth are not so sharp as his true steel. The first good blow he dealt took off a head, The second made one two; the next he sped With a sore thrust at mouth and out at taile: A fourth which his posteriors doth assaile, With his strong heel he hurles against a tree Twelve paces from his kick, and there lyes he: His sword rips out anothers empty paunch; The next limps off from him with halfe a haunch. We must conceive 'twas time to lay about him, For here were those that fought to eat, not rout him. Nor skap'd he free, the rich sword-skarfe he wore About his loynes, they all to fitters tore. His boots pluck'd off by bits, some flesh to boot, No quarter free from skars from head to foot. Lupan∣thropos. Witches that take shapes of wolves u∣pon them in Ireland.And (to conclude) from these wild Irish witches He scapes scant with a hands breadth of his breeches. Wearied with blowes and kicks, at last they fly him, And take a snarling leave as they goe by him. Thus Iones halfe worried, hasts unto the camp; There's none could say the clothes he wore were damp
With night perdues, unlesse they meant to flout him; For (to speake truth) he had no clothes about him. Thus come; he sweares by the immortall Powers, He had maintain'd a battell full five houres, With forty duels, five and twenty kil'd, Routed the rest; who all had tooke the field 'Gainst him alone; all rais'd with him to fight, To his destruction, or t'eclipse his might, By that old timerous treacherous kerne Tyrone, Who durst as well meet Death as him alone. The plight our Iones appear'd in, made none doubt But he had had at lest a divelish bout, If not with Devils; on him each man seeth The fearfull characters of nailes and teeth. We may not stand to shew what Essex's sense Was on these actions, nor the consequence They did import: the progresse of this story, Hastens our Muse to Iones his further glory. Fame these atchievements brings to Englands State; Which held the Queene and Councell in debate About this man; and all at last suppos'd, In policy he's not to be exposd To the close dangerous plots of such a foe Who neither values faith nor honour, so His mischiefs take successe: and thus the State Lose this deare Limme, and then repent too late. Some looking deeper into Iones his spirit, Knowing he knew too much of his owne merit, Hold it not safe he should be open to The windy baits of that so subtle foe, To gaine him to his part; whose haughty mind Would soone take fire; then could not be confin'd.
And if by such a plot they should be crost, They all conclude that Kingdome were but lost. These grounds invite them wholly to decline His warfare there; so on some grand designe Pretended, they invite his quick repaire To Englands Court to act this great affaire. He comes, but leaves his British troopes to fight Tyrone to death; whose acts who please to write, May meet with subjects brave to rant upon, But for my selfe I am quite tyr'd with one. And thus transported from the Irish strands, A Towne and Port in the County of Cardigan.At Aberustwith a Welch Port he lands; Where ere two dayes he fully spent for rest, A goodly vessell with crosse windes opprest, Comes boyling in; Iones by her colours knowes She is of Spaine: his colour comes and goes At sight of hers; that such a goodly prey, Should come (as 'twere) to meet him in his way. He musters straight a troop of British lads, Who on their mountain-geldings clap their pads; With rusty bils in steed of Staves in rest; Such were their horse, such were their armes at best. Then with a fowling peece the ship they haile, With confidence that shee would straight strike saile: But she makes answer, that she was too hot, From her broad side with twenty culverin shot. This struck a stand, till Iones cry'd out, what doubt ye? The day is ours, masters lay about ye, Lead the forlorne up bravely, and be bold, I'le bring the reare, for they know me of old, If once my name or person they descry, My life for yours they'l either yeeld or fly.
Made bold with this, in full careere they ride Up to the ridges of the flowing tide. But when they came brest-high amongst the waves, Their horse more wise by halfe then these mad knaves, Snort at the foaming billowes, turne their tailes, And make a faire retreat from sea and sailes; Which lest it should seeme done on termes of feare, Iones to the front now hastens from the reare, And leades them back again in good array, Neither with hasty flight nor much delay. At his returne he searcheth all that coast, To find a herring boat or two at most; With which he doubts not but hee'l sinke or take This lusty ship; whose bravest men will quake To heare his name. But Fate that had decreed To save her, caus'd her hoyse her sayles with speed: So with a strong fore wind away she flyes, And leaves our Iones to seeke some other prize. Thus crost in this designe to Court he went, Where he is met with noble complement; And from the Queen such grace he doth receive, As he deserv'd and stood with her to give. Now for the great affaire that call'd him back, The Lords must pump for't in a cup of Sack To help invention: Iones must be preferr'd To some imployment, be it nere so hard. In deep consult and long discourse they sat on't, And studied for't; at last they lighted pat on't. It is resolv'd, that he must be the man To goe in ambassy to Prester John. The businesse carried with't a glorious face; Employ'd ambassador unto his Grace.
The dangerous voyage to a place remote, Affects him most to get his name more note In forain Lands; hee'l not refuse the work, Were't to the Great Magul or the Great Turk. A lusty Ship's prepar'd, againe he goes; But what this great imployment was, who knowes? Reader I know thy thoughts are strongly bent To know this great designe, on which he went. But know this first, that Princes secret wayes, Are such as Ships cut thorow deepest Seas, Which shut still as they ope, and him that sounds And enters too far in, their deepnesse drownes. If bare conjectures may give light to thee, Here take them freely; harmelesse thoughts are free. Perhaps this high blown spirit now is sent To forain aire, where it may purge and vent, And so returne more fit the State to serve, In their commands, who yet must him observe. Perhaps he went this Priestly Prince to gaine Unto our Church, who gave good proofe in Spaine Of's power in this; or to negotiate Commerce betweene the AEthiop and our State, For tuskes of Elephants to haft our knives, Apes and Baboones and Pugges to please our wives; Which things satiety makes common there, And curiosity orepriseth here. Be't what it will, our Iones is gone upon't, And we may know he will make something on't. His treacherous friend the Sea his charge receives, And with some flattering gales his hopes deceives, Making the Land his firmer friend appeare Still lesse; untill at last it brought him where
He lost her sight: for three months time he makes Good way; at last the wind his wings forsakes, The Ship's becalm'd, and to the Port she seekes, Shee gaines not halfe a league for thirteene weekes. Iones finds this lazie warre offends him more, Then all those hideous stormes out-rid before. These sad effects this sleepy calme attend; Victuall and beverage spent; lesse hope of end. Then feare of further miseries ensues, The Sea with calmes his patience doth abuse, Turnes divelish States-man, puts on a smooth face, Salutes and kils them with a soft imbrace. 'Twas now farre worse with Iones then erst with Skink; For three weekes his owne urine is his drink, Which his hot body had so oft sublim'd, 'Tis grow'n a cordiall, like gold thrice calcin'd. Breeses of wind at last his sailes display, And waft him into the Barbarick bay, Then to the Arabick, next the Pilot laves His boisterous charge in Mare rubrum's waves. And lastly he attaines beyond all hope, Errocco the sole Port of AEthiope: And here he lands, and empties many a bowle To allay the fury of his thirsty soule. After some rest he gets intelligence, Where 'twas the Prince then kept his residence; Where he repaires, and's told when he comes thither, The Prince and towne are both remov'd together Some ten miles off. The Prince and town? (quoth Iones) I have met my match: here's people make no bones Of thinges beyond beleefe. And yet 'twas true; This towne was tents which fifty thousand drew,
And rais'd in th'instant wheresoere the Prince Sate downe to sport, or shew magnificence. By Mount Amara now his Court he reares; Read Pur∣chas in his relations of AEthi∣pia, tou∣ching this Mount.A Mount far differing from the name it beares: If Paradise had ere a second birth Below the seat of Saints, 'tis there on earth. An humble valley is the Garden where This Mount is rais'd; a vale so rich, so rare; Nature grew banrkupt drawing this rich plot; And striving to be quaint, she quite forgot To keep reserves: for by this worke we know, Shee made it such she could make no more so. Amidst this vale is rais'd this lofty structure, Five leagues upright. It's outsides architecture Unpolish'd Marble; but so rich, so faire, You'd think't a pillar of one stone in th'aire, By some high power unto Atlas given, To ease his shoulders whil'st it proppeth Heaven. This goodly Mount a specious plaine doth crowne, Imbost with Natures gemmes, a velvet down That's alwayes greene; no frost, no winter here, Continuall Spring: here Phoebus all the yeare From rise to set, doth alwayes fire his eye, As loath to put so faire an object by. Here grow those happy trees from whence there springs That precious oyle, which erst anointed Kings, And sacred Priests. Nor croud they here to take One sense alone; the sent and sight partake. So are they rank'd, as well to give a grace, As sweet perfumes, for tribute to the place. No orchard here, nor garden but the plaine; The choisest fruit all Europe doth containe,
Grow here unplanted, here's the luscious Grape, That makes Joves Nectar: 'twas not Helens rape That ruin'd Troy: the The Apple which three god∣desses Juno, Pal∣las and Venus, contended for, which was given by Paris to Venus whereup∣on fol∣lowed the destructi∣on of Troy. Apple got from hence, Had worth enough to do't. Here every sense Would surfet, but each objects rarity Gives appetite without satiety: Roses and Tulips Flora gathers here When we have none, to crown her golden hair, And here Medea pickt (if Iones speak truth) Those herbs which turnd antiquity to youth: The only Phoenix deignes to wether here, The only place like her without a peer: Lest all these sweets should want sweet harmony, A numerous quire of nightingales, comply To warble forth the sweet Amara's praise, Who turnes their mourning notes to merry layes. Amidst this plaine there glides a silver brook, So gently, that the suttlest eye may look, And finde no motion; on his violet banks Thick Cipres trees marshall themselves in ranks, To keep out Phoebus: whose enamor'd beames, Peep through each little crink to view his streames: His pavement azure gravell intermixt With orient pearls and diamonds betwixt, Which as the aires soft breath his surface purles, Vary their glosse, and twinkle through his curles: Like a steel'd glasse presenting to the eye, The spangled beauty of the starry skye. Here Dolphins leave the sea to wanton; here Carps since the deluge their grown bodies cheer: Umbrana's too; such had A great epicure & Emperor of Rome. Vitellius known, A province should have gone to purchace one:
Such is Amara, such is Tempe field, Elysium on earth unparaleld. 'Twas here this royall Priest now kept his Court, A place well suting with his fame and port. And here comes Iones, where having made's addresse, Letters of credence given at his accesse In Latine writ: in the same tongue he gives Iones gratious words, which language Iones conceives To be Arabick, for the Latine tongue He nere indur'd to learn nor old nor young, But that's all one, ther's no reply expected. Unto a rich pavilion he's directed By men of State, where he is well attended, With all that's rich, and to his rest commended. Some few dayes spent and time for audience got, When Prester John in royall State was set; Iones studying how t'expresse his eloquence In some strange language which might pose the Prince, Now trouls him forth a full mouth'd Welsh oration, Boldly deliver'd as became his nation. The plot prov'd right, for not one word of sense Could be pickt from't, which vex'd the learned Prince. His learned Linguists are cal'd in to heare, Who might aswell have stopt each others eare For ought they understood, and all protest It was the very language of the Beast. Iones hath his end, and then to make it known He had more tongues t'expresse himselfe then one; In a new tone he speaks, not halfe so rich, But better known, 'twas English; unto which An English Factor is interpreter Between our Captain and John Presbyter;
His businesse takes effect (what ere it was) And great expresses of respect doe passe To Iones from him, as one he thought most rich In unknown tongues exprest in his first speech, And so admires him for he knowes not what: But Iones may thanke his mother-tongue for that. His businesse done hee's led for recreation, To take the pleasures of that pleasant nation, To mount Amara's top, the chiefest grace, And perfect beauty of that kingdoms face; And finding his great heart was most inclin'd To martiall feats, all in one motion joyn'd T'invite him to their deserts, where he might Make triall of his force in manly fight, With their wild beasts, and promis'd him consorts All truly try'd t'assist him in those sports. The motion takes, a brave accoutred horse, And his owne armes, he and's associate force Advance to hunt; me thinkes I see them all Drawn to the life in canvasse painted cloths in Inns and victualling houses. 'gainst the wall, In some mean house made for good-fellowship, How fierce they looke, how brave they prance and skip; With hounds and horns, and bills and pikes and glaves, And speares and clubs, and many light-foot knaves: In this brave equipage they march away To the known haunts where these wilde creatures pray. 'Twas Iones his trick of old to ride alone: In hard adventures hee'l admit of none To share with him, from them he steales aside, And in the desert by himselfe doth ride. Nor rode he long till just against him stalkes A ramping Lion new come from his walkes,
Iones drawes, the furious beast with fiery eyes And bristled mane, against his bosome flies, But his keen sword met full with his fore pawes, And whipt them off; and so he scap't his clawes. Nor stai'd it there, but gave a cruel wound To his left jaw, and fel'd him to the ground. Then nimbly wheels abont, and stept aside, Leaps from his horse which to a tree he tyde: Then turns again and with his sword falls to't, To end this combat with him foot to foot. The wounded beast with all his power doth hasten, His fearfull fangs in Iones his throat to fasten. Whilst on's hin feet he assaults him bolt upright, With left hand arm'd, Iones stunnes him, with the right, Strikes both his hin legs off: yet on his stumps The noble beast unconquered fiercely jumps Full at his face with open mouth, and there, (For his grim face could raise in Iones no feare) In shoots the deadly blade, and out behinde, Where't makes a second vent for lifes short winde; This thrust with right hand arm'd so home was lent That hand and hilt quite throw together went, Where taking hold of his strong stern (for truth He swares) he drew't quite through his trunck t'his mouth Then with fine force (the like was never seen) He strips his inside out, and 's outside in. Thus tergiverst upon his steed he flings him, Then mounts himselfe, and to the Court he brings him. Never was royall beast so grosly jaded, But 'twas his fate which could not be evaded, Unto the gallants of the Court he shewes, How hard th'adventure was, what thrusts, what blowes;
On every circumstance he doth dilate; Nor addes he much to truth, nor much doth 'bate: For much he spoke, the Lion made it good With losse of his foure legs, and his best bloud. This strange atchievement strikes them all with wonder; 'Twas never seen since Greeces Alexander. Lysimachus, Lisander, nor Perdicas,Read Cur∣tius, tou∣ching these. Nor any of his Chiefs, ere did the like as Our Iones in this: 'Tis true, they write they kill'd, In single fight some few of these in field; But here's a force born with a higher saile, Transtorting tayle to head, and head to tayle. The Prince in words this high atchievement prais'd: But inward feare and jealousy it rais'd Of our brave Queen, whose scepter doth command Such men whose power no Nation can withstand. Iones might so far on his owne strength presume, as To seise his throne, as A private Spanish Comman∣der, that took this great King of Mexico with a handfull of men. Cortez Montezeuma's Had done before. These thoughts he oft revolves With troubled mind, and so in fine resolves To shift him thence: makes for his faire pretence, Matter of high and hasty consequence, To be with speed convey'd unto our Queen; Except her selfe it must by none be seen. This past on Iones, who parts with high content, Nobly presented with faire complement. Amongst the rest, a Parrot that could speak All tongues but Iones his own; that had a beak Of perfect corall, plum'd as white as snow: This he accepts, and so to Sea does goe. Where under saile such welcome he receives, As one dire foe unto another gives.
With calmes, and stormes, and winds, all crosse, that bear The ship quite off the course that she would steer. Long time thus spent, into a Bay he drives, And at a Port unknown at last arrives: Where he beholds a glorious Castle built High on a cliffe, whose walles pure gold, or guilt To him appear'd. Which object caus'd him land, To know who did this Princely seat command. He's told it is the Queen of No-lands place, The onely relict of her royall race, A Maiden Queen that here doth keep her Court, Where many Kings and Princes of high port Make their addresse, and lose themselves in love, To purchase hers, for not a man can move Her heart to wed, though nere so great his state, Or form exact, such was the will of Fate. Here as he lands, a large Cannow was sent To know from whence he was, and whither bent. In this a Dutchman came by happy Fate, Who could his Language to the Queen translate. This man he tels as briefly as he can, His voyage from his Queen to Prester John: How by crosse winds in his return he's blow'n, And forc'd into this Port to him unknown. Iones is resolv'd to see and to be seen Of this great Princesse, that our virgin-Queen Might know when he returns what form, what port This royall Virgin carried in her Court. Thus like an errant Knight all arm'd compleat, He marcheth boldly to her Palace gate, All massie polish'd brasse; at this first ward, Six milk-white Panthers fierce were chain'd for guard.
Thence through a large great specious Court he past, And so ascends twelve ivory steps at last, With ebon columnes, unto which were tide Twelve sharp kept Lions, who all yawned wide When strangers doe approach Iones through them all Is safely guarded to a goodly Hall. From thence ascends to roomes of greater state, And comes at last where this Princesse royall sate Upon a strange rich bed, not stuff'd with down, But closely wrought, and like a bladder blow'n; Three AEthiops on each side, to fanne the air With Ostridge plumes perfum'd as rich as faire. Her beauty could not boast of white and red, But jet-like black; about her crisp curl'd head And cheekes, there hang rich flaming stones and pearls, That past Mark Anthony's Egyptian girls. In briefe; if Tuscan liv'd to limne the night Sparkling with starres, this were her picture right. No sooner to her sight doth Iones appear, Then to her heart his piercing eyes shot fire; Which Cupid blowes and rais'd into a flame, That warmes her zeale to invocate his name. No part of Iones but in her eye exceeds All humane shape; some god he must be needs. But when at her request he doth relate The chances of his past and present state; Never was eare with Orpheus harp possest As hers with Iones, whil'st he his life exprest. Those that have warm'd themselves by these strong fires, May eas'ly guesse what fruits her wild desires Produc'd to Iones; The observance of the Court, With feasts and banquets, and all Princely sport,
Are at his foot: he cannot name nor wish That meat he likes, but straight 'tis in his dish. In this high state some months he takes his ease, Whil'st this sick Princesse feeds on her disease: At last a sharp alarm damps these desires, Which threatned death, but could not quench her fires. A Prince there was mighty in bulk and mind, Whose Kingdoms confines unto No-land joyn'd: Descended in his race from Og of Basan; You'd think his very name might well amaze one, Bahader Cham Mombaza's King; h'had been A long hot suter to this mighty Queen, But still repuls'd: now this unruly fire Supprest with scorn, breaks forth from love to ire. A mighty hoast he rays'd, and marcheth through The heart of No-land, to command, not wooe: Approaching neer her Court, he sends her word She must be his owne Queen at bed and board, Or see her Kingdome burn in higher flames, Then his for her: yet (for his spirit shames To warre with women) if she can find out One man in all her Realm, that is so stout In her defence with him his sword to try, Hee'l bravely win her, or hee'l bravely dye. Her Courtiers quail'd at this, who knew his force Could not be parallel'd by man nor horse. Nor could it chuse but make the Queen look black, Not pale. Th'interpreter at Iones his back Rounds in his eare this proud imperious speech; Had she been thence, h'had bid him kisse his breech For this proud message: up howere he starts, And this loud answer with his mouth he farts;
Goe tell Bahader Cham Mombaza's King, One Mars begot in's wrath will have a fling With him ere night, that one who at one breath Don Dego and Gonzago did to death, Will looke him dead; nor will I only be This Princesse champion, but (thy Cham to see) I'le walke through beds of Scorpions: for I hear He dares enough, and I can brooke no peer. This high reply nere mov'd the haughty Cham, Let Iones be what he will hee's still the same. The day's his owne before the fight's begun: Were Mars himselfe in steed of Mars his son. A back and brest and helmet strong he dond, Well wrought and varnish'd by some Indian hand, A whale-bone bow he takes of speciall strength, With arrowes barb'd, at least two yards in length: A crooked Scimiter whose edge was flint, Queintly conjoyn'd and some tough spell was in't, To make it proof against the strength of steel. Oft had this sword made head-strong Giants reel. By his right side a massie Mace he hangs, With which his sturdy foes to death he bangs. A buckler like a Spanish ruffe he wore About his neck, full halfe yard deep, or more: He wore not this for his defence, or grace, But to keep off his urine from his face. For you must know that member was still mounted: The bravest womans man on earth accounted. And thus prepar'd, this lusty Termagant, Ascends his castle on his Elephant. And then advanceth to a spacious Green, Before the castle of this maiden Queen.
A brave Arabian courser is prepar'd For Iones, his owne true armes he dons for gard, Llwellins sword to doe; and so descends Down to the Green, where the fierce Cham attends. Iones was to seek what kind of fight were best, To make against this Giant and his beast. Both farre exceed in strength himselfe and horse, And therefore art must now be joyn'd with force: No brest to brest, a nimble charge, and gon. His ready steed as soon comes off as on. Had not the well try'd arms he wore prov'd true, The Chams smart whale bone bow had made him rue This bold attempt: but what can whales weak bones, When whales themselves came short to swallow Iones? Thus thrice he charg'd, and thrice he came off cleere, At last he came close up in full career, And turning short, the horses hind feet slipt: Through which mischance the Carry-castle ript His bowels forth, with's tusk; down falles the horse: The furious beast claspt Iones with his probosce; And mounts him high, but in his rise he found The means to give Bahaders face a wound, And cuts in th'instant off, the trunck that claspt him: So downe the Elephant was forc't to cast him. This hard exploit none ere perform'd before, But one of Caesars Read the Commen∣tares de bello A∣fricano. Souldiers, and no more. The wounded beast inrag'd with paine cryes out With hideous voice, and plung'd and pranc'd about The Green, till from his seat the prince he throw'th, And then (for by the Cham from his first growth, This feat he had been taught,) though mad with paine, He strives to mount him on his back againe.
But Iones had lopt off his strong trunck before, Whereby he could performe this feat no more. Here Iones denies he bred this docill beast, Taught to his hand he got him from the East; And his report must have beliefe before us, Who sweares it was the same that carry'd Read Curtius touching that El∣phant of Porus, who often remount∣ed his ma∣ster with his trunck in tha bat∣tell be∣tween him and Alex∣ander. Porus Against the Macedon. I cannot see How by wise natures rules this thing should be, Unlesse in Plinies Volumes it appeares, That Elephants may live two thousand yeares. Now Iones leaps up in hast, and swiftly flyes, With sword in hand, where bruis'd Bahader lyes; And ere he could get up, one washing stroke His head and buckler from his shoulders tooke; Which when twas off, they may compare't that will, To the grim S Johns head on Ludgate hill. His numerous Army struck with grief and sright At his sad fate betooke it selfe to flight, And thus was No-lands Queen redeem'd by Iones From bondage, rape, and No-lands losse at once. Now if she lov'd our Captaine well before, In reason she must love him tenne times more, Which she exprest by laying at his foot Her people, No-land, and her felfe to boot: But whether 'twas the god of loves deep curse, That she refus'd for better or for worse, Those mighty Princes which to her he sent, To make her doe on a non-resident; Flings snow-balles at his heart, and flames at hers, To keep conjunction from these errant Starres; Or whether Iones his genitals had got Some lame defect by Skinks late desperate shot;
And so his noble heart made him refuse, What having got he could not rightly use. 'Tis not in me to Judge, but this I know, Her violent fires scorcht her, and him his snow, So cold that to avoid her amorous sight, He leaves her court, and steales to sea by night: So Jason us'd Medea erst, but hee's So wise to take with him the golden fleece, Which Iones contemn'd to doe, and thought himselfe When safe return'd, his countries Mine of welth. No certain ground I have here to relate, This great deserted Queens unhappy fate, But Sr. John Mandivils, who doth deliver, As Iones reports, he came soon after thither, And found the peoples outside all in black; A sad expression for their Princesse wrack. Who told him lately there arriv'd a man, All white, who for them wondrous things had done, Redeem'd their Queen and kingdome from the shame Of rape and rapine, which Bahader Cham Came there to act, and was in open field, By this white man in single combate kild. Their Queen enamor'd with this matchlesse man, Refus'd and left by him: when nothing can Quench her wild fires but Carthage Queens hard fate; Whilst on the Cliffe with pensive thoughts she sate, A sudden spring she gave, and so commends Her selfe to sea, where life and love she ends. No more of this sad stuffe: let's all at once Joyne in a joyfull welcome home to Iones. In six moneths saile he steers by Goodwin sands, Casts anker at the Downes: the next day lands,
Hasts to the Queen at London, there expresses Every particular of his addresses To Prester John; the great affaires successe As she desir'd: Lastly, in his progresse, He might have married the great Queen of No-land, But this the Queen gave credit to at no hand, 'Till 'twas confirm'd by Sr John Mandevill, Whose strange reports they may beleeve that will. Now let us well observe the happy Fate, Which still provided for the Queen and State. Iones had not rested fully three dayes here, But out there breaks a great and fearfull fire Of strong rebellion; and to quench it, none's So fit in common sense, as Captain Iones. Brave Essex through affronts turn'd male-content, Hatches in's brest a desperate intent, To seise the Person of the Queen, and those He found most neer about her his strong foes. Her Grace and Councell call for Iones, to know What in his judgement now were best to doe. Who first her gratious pardon doth beseech, And then delivers this short pithy speech. First guard the Court with Westminsters strong bands; Call in the neighbouring Counties by commands. Out with your houshold men, shut up your gates; Wee'l make your foes turn taile with broken pates. Then call to you the richest of your Citt's, But seek no cash; for in their bags their wits Are close knit up: but onely thus much make Them know, their wives and fortunes lye at stake; That they shall want no succour, whilst your hand Can grasp the sword, and scepter of this Land.
Thus arme their hearts, and rouse them from their beds, And then let us alone to arme their heads. She now requires, that Iones in person goe To Essex, his intents to sound and know; To use all fairest meanes that may reduce him, From those leud wayes, to which lost men seduce him. He undertakes it; hastens to the Lord, And is admitted in as soon as heard. And here he finds Sr Walter Rawleigh with him; Some ill was in't, his fancy straight doth give him. He knew he came not to the Earl for good, But to provoke him to some madder mood. Therefore from thence our Iones doth Rawleigh rate, Shaking his martiall truncheon ore his pate: Bids him pack thence to th'knaves of his Grand Jury, Hee'l make him else th'example of his fury. Rawleigh was wise, and rul'd by his best sense, Gives place to time, and so withdrawes from thence. Then Iones these Counsells to the Earl began, How full of dangers were the wayes he ran: How weak his power; much lesse unto the force Of Englands, then his Raine-deer's to a horse. Thus his brave Family must be destroy'd, His honours lost, his ancient house made void: Beside, his cause was naught; for though himselfe Nere read the lawes of this great Commonwelth, Yet he had heard some Lawyer say long since, There was no law to captivate our Prince. Thus all the harmlesse blood that shall be spilt In this bad cause, must lye on Essex guilt. Lay hand on heart most noble Peere, (quoth Iones) The Queen can pardon, and inrich at once.
Be you but good, she can be gratious, Your own experience can informe you thus. Thus Iones possest his noble heart so far, He is resolv'd to wave the chance of war; Himselfe and house he yeelds unto the Queen, And her cold mercy, which too soon was seen. This is the last great act I can relate, Of his good service for the Queen and State. Rewards fit for his worth there were prepar'd, Which his high spirit past by without regard: And his great Queen was seriously bent, To put him in some place of government; But Nature onely taught the man to fight, And his rude Mother not to read and write. Which was the chiefest cause that made him hate To be imploy'd in mysteries of State. Besides, he was not pleased that her Grace Cut off this Noble man before his face, Whom he brought in; it may be his owne lot, With axe or cord for nought to goe to pot. Thus ignorance, a discontented mind, And worth ill weigh'd, doe make him fall behind Occasions lock; which lost, he never more, Though bred and breath'd on hills, shall get before. Now time and bruises, and much losse of blood, Had made Iones feel cold age was not so good As fiery youth; he needs must find a fail Of what he was: declin'd from top to tail. Which made him wish he might put up his rest, And breath his last in his own Countries brest. And for this cause he went unto her Grace, And begg'd of her a Muster-masters place,
In Wales, nere his first home: where he may spend His later dayes in peace, and in it end: And yet to leave behind his martiall art, To Wale's posterity, before he part. This sute with speed and readinesse is granted, And so to Wales our Muster-master's janted. Here many years he spent in telling more, Or lesse of those strange things he did before: At last in his old age he growes so wilde, He needs must marry, to beget a child: Which though he mist, the mastery he must have Ore every sex, Iones sent her to her grave. Devotion now with his old age increast, He meditates thrice every day at least. His only prayer was the Absolution In our old Liturgy, with some confusion Of short ejaculations in his bed, For some old slips, and for the bloud he shed; Especially for those six Kings he kild Without remorce at the Juzippian field: At last death comes, whose power he defi'd From first to last, and thus he liv'd and di'd. Now you wild blades that make loose Innes your stage. To vapour forth the acts of this sad age, Your Edghil fight, the Newberies, and the West, And Northern clashes; where you still fought best: Your strange escapes, your dangers voyd of feare, When bullets flew between the head and eare: Your pia maters rent, perisht your guts, Yet live, as then ye had been but earthen buts: Whether you fought by Damme, or the Spirit, To you I speake, still waving men of merit,
Be modest in your tales, if you exceed My Captain's hard atchievements, I'le proceed Once more to imp my rurall muses wings, And tune my lyre so high, I'le break her strings, But I will reach ye, and thence raise such laughter, As shall continue for five ages after. The Captaines Elegie. ANd art thou gone brave man? hath conquering death Put a full period to thy blustring breath? Thus hath she plaid her master-peece? and here Fixt her nil supra on thy sable beere? Scap'st thou those hideous storms, those horrid fights, With many Giants; cruel beasts, fierce Knights? Such dangerous stratagems, such foes intrapping, And now hath death don't? sure she took thee napping. For hadst thou been awake to use thy sword, She would have shun'd thee, and have ta'ne thy word For thy apparence, till the last return Of her long term. Or did thy metle burn Through thy chapt clay unto Elysiums shades T'in counter with the ghosts of those old blades, Great Caesar, Scipio, Annibal; 'cause here Thy fiery spirit could not finde its peer? How couldst thou else finde time to fold thy armes In thy still grave, now Mars raines bloudy stormes, On Christian earth? great Austria would be ours Without pitcht field, without beleaguering tow'rs: Wert thou but here, thy sword would strike the stroke To breake or bring their necks to Brittaines yoke.
Perhaps it was the providence of Fate, To snatch thee up, lest thou shouldest come too late, Now souldiers drop pel-mel, whose soules might thrust Thine from the chiefest place, which thou from first Hast gain'd on earth; now what shall England doe? Limp like some grandame that hath lost her shooe. Put case a new Tyrone again should spring From his old urne, or some such furious thing As fierce Mac-kil-cow, where were then our Iones, To bring these Rebels on their marrow bones? Or say 'gainst Spaine our pikes we readvance, For their old Sack, as such a thing may chance, Where shall we then finde out that Martiall man, That kild six thousand with nine-score? hee's gon. And we that lick the dish that Homer lapt in, What fury now shall our dull braines be rapt in? We must goe sing Sr. Lancelot and rehearse Old Huan's villanous prose in wilder verse; Or else put up our pipes, and all at once, Crie farewell wit: all's gone with Captaine Iones. Well goe thy wayes (old blade) th'hast done thy share For things beyond beliefe time (never feare) Will give thee being here: th'hast left us stuffe, To build thy Pyramid, more then enough, To equall Cayre's, and happily twil out last it, So with thy glorious deeds we may rough-cast it. Fare well great soule, and take this praise with many; Fxcept thy foes, thou nere didst harme to any: And thus farre let our Muse thy losse deplore, Well she may sigh, but she shall nere sing more.
His EPITAPH. TRead softly (mortals) ore the bones Of the worlds wonder Captaine Jones: Who told his glorious deeds to many, But never was believ'd of any: Posterity let this suffice, He swore all's true, yet here he lyes. FINIS.
