L2590 R222217 99833422 37898
The Lively CHARACTER of a CONTENTED AND Discontented Cuckold. Ala-mode de Anglitere, By what Names or Titles soever distinguished. With an Apology for, and a DEFENCE of the Fair and Tender Sex. Suited for the Meridian of London. I Shall make no Preface to the following Epistle, but as the present State, or Change of the Moon offered this Subject indulgently to my Pen; for the satisfaction of the Publick, I shall first give you the Character of a Contented and Discontented Cuckold, by first examining and setting forth what a Cuckold is, and then shall pro∣ceed to the different sorts, which I shall divide into Three Heads, or Branches: So first what a Cuckold is; 'tis my present opinion, and I believe, Sir, yours too, if you are not a Cuckold. That a Cuckold is an He-Moon, a Civil Monster, and a Rational Beast, an Artificial Monster, patch∣ed up between Action and Forbearance, which by his Impotence, and his Wife's Incontinence, is soon brought to perfection: If he is Jealous, then he's always in search of that which he fears to find: If he is not, his Horns are generally visible to every Body but himself: he usually lays the Egg of his own Misfortune, and his Wife hatches it, his Fondness makes her slighting, and his ill usage makes her Revengeful: His Imprudence makes her cun∣ning, and his taking her to Plays and Balls, makes her improve it: His Negligence makes her mistrust∣ful, and his Insufficiency makes her unsatiable. In short, he's either a good natured Fool, or an ill natured Knave; for extreams in Fondness and se∣vere usage are the principal Causes of Cuckoldom in general.—Now I find there are Three sorts of these Monstrous Animals, and all three of different tempers, which may properly go under these Names or Titles, 1. The Stagg-Cuckold. 2. The Goat-Cuckold. 3dly, The Ass-Cuckold. And now to examine what the Stagg-Cuckold is? He is the only Cuckold with huge Horns that like a Stagg, going to the Brook to drink in a Sun-shi∣ney-Day, sees in the Water the shaddow of his Horns, being proud of them, he stalks, because he thinks himself better guarded than the rest of the Beasts; and this Cuckold having a very hand∣some Wife, who maintains him in his Pride with the Sweat of her A—and when his Wants begin to oppress him, he invites all Company home with him, and draws them to his Wife with the eternal praise of her Wit, good Humour, and Beauty; and when he has got them together, he then is glad to find an opportunity of leaving them, in hopes of finding something at his return (for his patience) under the Candlestick to maintain his Pride, and keep his Head strong to bear his Ponderous Horns; so that he for Money takes Pride to have his Horns tiped. 2dly, the Goat-Cuckold, why is he com∣pared to and called a Goat? For this Reason, and Likeness. The Goat cometh to the Brook to drink in manner as aforesaid, and looking into the Water for his Horns, he sees none, because they grow backwards: So he walks away, and thinks himself no Beast, nor indeed this sort of Cuckold thinks himself no Cuckold, he can't see his Horns, or at least his Wife is cunning, and Cuckolds him behind his Back. He loves her, she flatters him▪ one kind Word from her confutes all Reason. When he comes home, and having heard abroad the Cha∣racter of his Wife, he begins to rail in an humble manner, she deceitfully flatters, hatches a Sorrow for his Jealousie, and shows it in a thousand Sobbs, Sighs, and pretended Grief. In fine, she per∣swades him she is Honest, blames him for his suspi∣tion, and on pretence she remains to him Virtuous; and thus he a poor Contented Cuckold, grafts his Horns behind him, for if he carries not his Wife to every PublicK Entertainment, he thinks he breaks an Article of Matrimony; he's commonly in love with the Cuckold-maker, which being a Man of note among both Sexe, is talked on more in the Parish where he lives, than the Parson; for if either the Stagg, or Goat-Cuckolds be Traders, and their Wives pretty, then they are sure to have good Trade, having one Commodity to help off with the rest; Which reminds me of an old Story of such a Contented Cuckold, where in France, a Noble man falling in Love with a Citizens Wife, leaving no means unattempted till he had made her comply; that Lord being one day at Court, and seeing hi
Female Friend's Husband come to the Palace-Royal, and by enquiry, finding that he had Business to do, which required some time to be dispatched, He slunk away from Court to the Citizens House; but being suspected by the Lady's Brother, who detested the Debauchery of his Sister, forthwith dispatched a Messenger to Court, to acquaint his Brother-in-Law what unhappily he had discovered: The Ci∣tizen taking Alarm, takes Coach, and comes Jehu-like to hinder what was already past prevention: The Wife hearing a Coach come in that furious manner, thought her self betrayed, and so advises her Gallant in Bed to rise, and abscond himself in a place she had provided; but hearing one com∣ing hastily Upstairs, for hast left his Cloaths on the Bed, which she seeing, in as great hast and con∣fusion, threw them into a Chest, but so unadvised, that the embroidered Sleeve of the Coat hung out, of which she took no notice, but fell a dressing her self as not concerned: So her Husband entring the Chamber, said, Madam, I understand my Lord such a one came to vit you this Morning, and so I thought he might have Business of Importance to whisper in my Ears and this mae me return sooner than expected. The Lady confidently replied, That he was misinformed, for no Body had been with her that Day: So he look∣ing about, espies the embroidered Sleeve hang out o the Chest, asking whose it was? and how it came there? To which she in subtilty replied, Sir, I bg Pardon for my forgetfulness, for this Morning a Gentlewoman wanting Money, brought it to shew you, desiring to have but 40 Crowns lent upon it. Which he viewing without discovering any Passion, put it on, with Breeches, Hat and Cravat which he found in the Chest; and being thus Lordly attired Cap a pee, like the Stagg, admires and adores himself, asking his Wife if he looked not like a Lord? Yet pittying the poor Gentleman that owed them, say∣ing, That in all probability he had been at Play all Night, and losing all, was forced to Pawn and deposite his Garments, and so must be then in a Cold for his Heat of Fancy. So in hast to Court he returns thus accoutred, where being discovered, was brought before the King, and an Answer ex∣pected, whch was readily performed, saying, That his intent of coming thther in that Garb, was to restore them to the right Owner again, being as he supposed, ome Courtiers, and perhaps stolen from thence; therefore as he judged the best for the Owner to come by his Goods, was, by Sight more than Description of them. So the King knowing the Owner, immediately sends to the Mercers House for him, and being met with, disguised in an old Black Gown, was brought before the King, which asked him, If he had been a Conjuring? seeing he looked like a Conjurer. To which he replied, That this Morning he had raised the Devil, and laid his Dam, but at last had conjured him into Hell-Hole, and so Laid him. To which the King replied, in Rallery as a Check; If for no other Cause than making such a Metamorphesis, for now a Mercer is chanted into a Lord, and a Lord into a Conjurer. So dismissing them, allotted the Mercer the Suit in part of Satis∣faction, and the other only Shame as a just Reward. So 3dly, The Ass-Cuckold is Jealous without Cause, Suspitious without Grounds, and believes all that looks upon his Wife, Cuckolds him, tho' she is honest: He is compared to an Ass, by reason an Ass coming on a Sun-shining-Day to drink (as the Stagg and Goat aforesaid) looks into the Water, and sees no Horns, but a great pair of Ears, which he takes for Horns, and believes they are so. So a Man had as good be Cuckold as think himself so; he believing like the Ass, he has Horns, goes sloath∣fully away, lives discontented, plagues his Wife for her Honesty, which is enough to make him a Cuckold. So it is maniest that the Stagg and Goat-Tuckolds are the Contented ones; and like∣wise it appears plain that the Ass is the Disconted one; and all Discontented Cuckolds frets, fumes, swears, swaggers and makes all People privy to their Disgrace and loss of Reputation, complaining of the Burthen of their Horns, prescribing Cam∣phire to their Wifes, a a Remedy for Inconti∣nency, and indeed lashes themselves with their own Disgrace; the last Remedy they have is to try the Law, and there they find ease by Lopping their Horns; and for a great deal of Money, and Dis∣grace, purchase the Salve of Seperation, to anoint their Forehead, to drive away the Head-ach. But now we should examine what is it makes so many Cuckolds in this our fruitful Nation, and who ought most to be Cukolds? First, I think the mighty Money'd-Men who Marry for Money, know∣ing their own Insufficiency (after Matrimony is mumbled over) their only care is to find ont a hand∣some Whore, to whom they liberally give part of their Wive's Portion to bear with their Insuffi∣ciency▪ and put their Wives to lie alone, which is enough to make the Modestest Woman in nature extravagant with her Joynture, and her Husband's Coppy-hold to a young brisk Gallant; and indeed they have a good Argument on their sides, besides Nature, and I think very prevailing: For what were they made for? or at least what were they Married for? They doubtless would not bring a Portion to an Husband without the expectation of something to be returned or performed to make their — merry; and truly I think it is the Mens fault they are such Cuckolds; For if they are not able, why do they Marry? If they are, why don't they give due to their Wives? Therefore I see no blame upon the Womens side, for following the Ru∣diments of Nature, and I think it is but a modest Folly. But as for the Cuckolds I will put them all together, and conclude with this Character, that
they are Horned, Cornuted, Scorned, Jealous, Le¦ving, Simple, Patient, Conniving, Contented, Poo Good Humoured Animals, which dare not for a Empire go an Hunting, left their Dogs take them f Acteon, and worry them; They are indeed som times resolved to proclaim their Shame, but the fear that by that means they shall increase th Number of their Wives Acquaintances. Since as its observable, its ordinary with some to excaim against Inconstancy, and to decry those which they cause to desert them; whereas at the same tim they are glad to have an Example of Change: For it happens but too often that the best established Friendships, tho' they have the most strict Obliga∣tions and Confidences, yet often insensibly slacken; and then we seek a Quarrel, and seem to be Angry, to the end of finding some Pretence to set our selves at Liberty, and since Crimes in the stronger not only pass for Innocent, but also get Honour and Renown by being committed with more Pomp, and a greater number, when Weakness and Innocency is no pro∣tection against the Arbitrary Cruelty of a Tyranni∣cal Power; for where Malice and Force is joyned in the Prosecution, then Accusing is Proving. And since this wants a President in Heathenish Nations, it will make any considering Person cease to wonder that so little of true Charity is to be found in the Christian▪ Cuckoldom, that Bugbear (in former days as terrible to a Courtier as his Princes Frowns, and more dreadful to an old Citizen than Popery and Slavery) is now advanced to such a Dignity, that its crept into Great Families, and become the Serious Consideration of the Grand Council; and so far from being thought Scandalous now, that its grown the most Useful Liberty imaginable in a Married State, and upon occasion serves to dissolve that Gordion Knot which the Priest so craftily tyes to the Misfortune of many Thousands, who have unwarily fallen under the fatal Conjugation. So that Milton's advice in the case of Divorce, would be very seasonable; and since it is reckoned amongst the Glories of our Nation, that its a Paradise for the Fair and Tender Sex, tho' some in my weak judgment can, and must consist in nothing more than the Faithfulness and Activity of the Stonger Sex, which to its shame and great grief of the Weaker, its observable that there is a very sensible decay, both of the first Faith, and the true Old English Valour. The occasion of all which insuf∣ferable Disaster, after a serious Enquiry and Dis∣cussion of the point among the Learned, we can at∣tribute to nothing more than the Husband's keeping Misses under their Dames Noses, and of excessively using them; and that new-fangled and abominable Heathenish Liquor called Coffee, both which rifling Nature of h r choicest Treasures, and drying up the Radical moisture, has so Eunucht the Husbands, that they are become as Impotent as Age, and as unfruitful as a common Town Jilt, and those Desarts from whence that unhappy Berry is said to be brought. So were it not in a Womn's power to recompence the Slavery of her servile Station, and revenge the Affronts and cool Neglects she is under a Conjugal necessity of enduring from her Husband, which tho' he be a Creature born to the best advantage of things without him, having the start at the begining, but loitering it away be∣fore the end, looking like his Land, as heavily and dirtily, as stubbornly; the Chief burthen of his Brain being altogether the Carriage of his Body, him∣self being less real than his Title; his Virtue is, that he was his Father's Son, and all the expectation of him is to beget an other, which cannot possibly be, seeing the Wife has but the Relicks, and Refuse of the Misses. So as was said before, were it not in the power of the weak Sex to recompence and retaliate, having the same Liberty and Property as the Stronger. Would any Charming Innocence is their Senses, think ye, for the sake of empty Honour, and Coach and Six, a plentiful Estate and Table, suffer an old Withered Hand, and Battered Body, to crop the Flower of her Virginity, and waste her Youth and Beauty in Fruitless Embraces, under the pevish Checks and Snubs of Old Age, and Rottenness, Jealousie and Imptence, for such counts a chast Man, and Maid; the first an Eunuch; the other a Miracle of the Age; this mistrust in all probability creates Jealousie; and what can such a Compound of Infirmities being made, even an Eunuch in the middle Age, by the Debaucheries of his Youth. What, I say, can such expect f om a Wfe possessed of all the Charms and Perfections that can be lodged by Nature in Blooming Juvenility? Can any rationally think that such a Charming Cre∣ature endued with Sense and Spirit, will, or can lng endure with patience a Mistress kept under her Nose, which depriving her of he due, and ap∣proaching the Nuptial Bed, expects from her chosen Husband that which the Apostle calls Benevolence, but being deprived of it, mets only with a Bed or Bag full of Bones, as sapless as Kixes, and dryer than Pumice-stones; this verily would image a she-Bear. So that contrary to the Oath of forsaking all others, and keeping only unto her so long as they both shall live; and also the Laws of both God and Man, and Liberties and Properties of the weaker Sx. I beg leave to make this supposi ion, since as some of the Sex do complain that their Antient Rights and Privileges have not been inviolably preserved, and restored, what if that Sex, supposing and fining their Rights infringed, and themselves imposed upon, which in the beg nning was not so: What, I say, if they finding themselves uneasie, & for a redress should imitate their wise Grandmothers, when the Lurdains were overcome, or turn Amazons, and so like d s∣contented Attoms, to have the privilege of Kent,
betake themselves to Cuckolds-Point, which King John dubded, and endued with Privileges; what I say f such Attoms should fall there into a Conven∣tion, and thence naturally grow into a Parliament of Women, and lke the Amazons, chuse a Queen to give Sanction to their Laws, do you not think that they would redress all the Grievances of their Sex, by enacting? First, That no Man by what Names or Titles soever distinguished, should violate his Marriage-Oath, by keeping of Mistresses, or brea∣ing into other Mens Ground, or drinking too muh of the Stygian Liquor Coffee, which as woful Exper∣ence teacheth infeebles Nature, that its no Prodig now that the Off-spring of such dwindle into Aps, and Pignies, or infernal Consumptive Brats: Thee∣fore the Edictwill put every Husband under the Pena∣ty of being Cuckolded; if they do not give some othr and better Testimonies of their being Men, beside, their Beards and wearing of empty Pantalcons. Secondly, That all Parents in the disposal of their Children i Marriage, make not Smithfield bargains, but match them as  the beginning, with as much care and prudence as they do the Dogs and Horses: which would as in them, if not altogethe mutually preserve the state of Matrimony from any Adultero Invasion, &c. For what understanding Jocky or Sports-man wil endure or suffer that an old surfeited Srallion, which is bo oundred, Wind-galled and Spavined, to Leap his Hunting or Running Mare which he keeps for Breed; or suffer his Fine Shped Grey-Hound to Bastardise her Breed with an old Mangy-Mungil: Yet for all that, his Handsome Darling Daughter must be thrown away upon some Old Rich Miserly Curmudgion, which only Marries to palliate his Gouty Pains, and cherish  eeble Carcass in the Winter of his Age, by her Warm  do∣ing Touches, and  braces: Or else to a Man of Honor and Estate, whose chiefest Studies are his Sports, and Vices having spent his best Blood and Spirits in his Mistresses Service: So to his New Bride grows Drowsy, Lazy, Moroe, and Insufficient; so that the Lady is to be pittied, who either for want of Discretion in her Parents, or her self, has unhappily cast her Pearl before Swine, who knowing not how to use it, gives just occasion to dispose of the precious Jewel to him which can ver it to its Natural Imployment. It's therefore an Unna∣tural Imposition on the Fair Sex to be thus disposed on; for tho' the Worldly Interest, Obedience to Parents, or Importunities of Relations, may prevail upon them to put Nature in Masque∣rade, as to be seemingly satisfied. Thirdly, If it be further Enacted, That if any Man, whether a Stagg, Goat, or Ass-Cuckold, that has thought and reported his Wie to be Vertuous, for which he first loved and afterward Married her, yet by his Unfaithfulness, allienates her Affections, and underhand committeth a base Suit to cause disdain, shall not give this Blow which his own Vice hath caused and given him, or out of Interest and Policy rail sddenly at her, for fear he be no∣d for a Fol and an Ass: but to his, and her Friends, and Rela∣tions in private i may say, that his judgment was blinded by her cunning Disgui, d nding her without provocation wa∣vring in Godness, may its confessed in time, openly profess to a at her▪ bt with a modestly orsooth, as if he was loth to bring his judgment into question; nor would he do it but as a hristian, prefering Truth even out of his own reach; and ranting that Bishop Cozen's Argument is true▪ and valid, viz. hat those Canons which governs the Spiritual Court in the atter of Divorce, are but the Relicks and Remains of Popery. nd so not obligatory to us of the Reformed Religion: But with ll humble Submission to my Superiors, I beg leave to say, that o Divorce for what Cause soever, unless the Person be Innocent, nd not Guilty of the same Sin, can be accounted Lawful, that the Person Divorcing may Marry again; and this I gather from our Saviour's own Words, which are mentioned by St. John 7. from the 4th Verse to the 12th. The Pharisees bring a Woman to him taken in Adultery in the very Act, which was not only Di∣vorcing, but Death by the Jewish Law. Now the Accuser going beyond all Suspition, Surmise and Jealousie, in taking her in the Act; one of which I will beg leave to suppose to be her Husband, with Witness sufficient, and our Saviour being one of the Sanadrim or Seventy Judges, before whom they brought her to be tryed, they telling him that Moses commanded that such an one should be Stoned to Death; But what sayest thou? &c. This they tempt∣ingly said, that they might have to accuse him, v. 5. But lifting up himself, thus replied, That he that was without Sin, let him first cast a Stone at her. Which is as much as if he had said, You Pharisees, or thou Husband, and ye Winesses that know and find that according to Law her Crime being thus plainly pro∣ved by sufficient Witnesses, and her own Confession deserves Death: So if either You or her Husband, whose Hands by the Law must be upon her first, or any of you Witnesses be without Sin, or Innocent, cast ccording to the Law, Stones at her till she dye. So both her Husband, and others, being Convicted in their own Consciences of guilt, went out, and left her alone; Which when Jesus seeing, asked her, (vers. 10.) If no Man had condemned her? To which she Answers, No man Lord. To which he replies, (vers. 11.) Neither do I condemn thee, go and Sin no more. And since for his Releasing and not Condemn∣ing her according to Law, they had or could have no advantage to accuse him; And also his not Di∣vorcing of her, by causing the Husband to give her a Bill, which Moses, as he confesses, commanded, Matth. 20.7, 8. where he tells them, That Moses caused and suffered such things, because of the hardness of their Hearts, but in the beginning (before Moses was) it was not so. So to conclude, you see, that Confessed and Pro∣claimed Cuckoldom is nor was not only Christian, but Jewish also. FINIS. Licens'd according to Order. Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster, 1700.
