L3283 R36486 15701783 104463
LOVES SCHOOL OR A New merry Book of Complements. Being the Language of Love, fitted to the humours of all sorts, Sexes and Conditions: Made up of curious and pleasant Dialogues, and Discourses, eloquent and delicious Letters, Songs and Sonnets. With many other fine Fantacies, and pretty Conceits. woodcut portrait Once learn to Love the Lesson is most plain, And being learnt will neer be lost again. Printed for W. Thackery at the Angel in Duck-lane, 1674.
LOVES SCHOOL OR A New Book of Complements A Complemental Dialogue between a young man and a maid, licensed by her Father to make her own choice of a Husband. woodcut of couple Man. NOw Lady your Fathers goodness hath left you to your selfe: I the ad∣mirer of your virtue, present my best affections. Then save that treasure whose life dependeth upon you, to whom my heart presents its first devotion and in a holy flame remains a sacrifice till you accept of it.
Maid. I should prove my self unjust, in neglect of one that nobly loves me, therefore that af∣fection I may bestow, I were ungrateful should I not present it. Man. May I become a scorn of time, and all mens hate persue me, when I prove so foul, as to give you occasion to call back your love. Maid. Cease to use hasty protestations, I as∣sure my self the pureness of your soul i with∣out spot and whilst you so continue, I shall think my self happy in such a choice. Man. Then let me flée into your bosome and on your lips confirm my happiness. Maid. Fie fie leave for shame, I estéem not golden language, because its seldom bestowed on man but to guild over a copper soul within. Man. Can you be so cruel as to déem my lan∣guage feigned? Far be it from me to speak a word should displease you. Maid. Well? more Oratory would but bring the rest into suspition, let it suffice I love you, Farewell. Man. Farewell excellent Mistriss. A constant heart within a womans brest, Is Ophir gold within an Ivory chest, Then happy sure am I and blest, For thou hast such a heart in such a brest.
Another between Anthony and Constance. stock image of kissing couple and Cupid Ant. GOOD mrrow swee Constance sée here what I have bough thée from the Exchange. Con What mean you s by ths? Ant. Guess that by te circumstance here is a ring, wear it for my sake: twenty anges, pocket them you fool: Come, I know thou art a Maid; say nay and take them. Con. Sir fasten I beseech you no more o me, then at ease I may shake off: Your gifts I reverence, but refuse: Pray tell me why make you so many errands hither, send so many Let∣ters, fasten so many favours on me: whats your meaning in it. Ant. Hark in thy ear, ile tell thée, is it p∣ssible so soft a body should have so hard a sou, nay now  know my pennance, you will b angry and revile me for tempting your mo∣desty, a fig for this modesty, it hinders many a good mn from many a good turn, and that is all the good it doth, but if thou newest but hw I love thee thou would be far more tractale. Con. Sir, if you love me as you say, s me the fruit theref.
Anth: The stock I can, the fruit thou must sée hereafter. Con. Can I believe you love me, when you seek the shipwrack of mine honour. Anth. Honour, there is another word to flap in a mans mouth, why should you and I stand so much on our honor, that were neither of us yet right worshipful. Con. Sir, I am sorry I have lent you so large an ear to so bad a discourse, and I protest after this hour never to do the like: and since I sée your rudeness finds no limits, ile leave you. Ant. No Constance but thou shalt not. Con. Then kéep your tongue in more mode∣rate bounds. Ant. I will as I am vertuous I will, thou hast my heart here already, here in my hand. Con. But in what way sir, Ant. In the way of marriage, in the way o honesty, I hope thou art a Maid. Con. Yea sir, and I accept it, in exchange o this you shall have my heart. Ant. A bargain & here is earnest on thy lips Look lovers look, with passion see. If that any such there be: As there cannot but be such, Who do feel this noble touch; Cy aloud so rare a thing, That all the hills and dales do ring.
A humorous conceited Fellow meeting an old but painted Gentlewoman. stock image of kissing couple and Cupid SAve thee sweet parcel of paint, You come from the oyl shop now. Gent. How sirrah, from whence Man. Why from your scurvyfac'd Physick, To behold the not painted were a miracle. Gent. You are a foolish fellow; call you this paining; Man. No no, but you call it caréening of an old morphewed Lady, there is rough cast phrase to your Plaistriock. Farewel. Gent. Now the curse of Cuckols light on thee; A description of a matchless Beauty. HEr hair like Hemlocks careless fall, To deck her amorous eyes withall; Her curious Forehead well doth show Where Carbuncles in number grow: But the beauty of her Nose, Would fright a man out of his Cloaths: And the pale brightness of her lips, Doth force the Sun to an eclipse:
Her Cheeks of fat and foggy stuff, Like the running dropsie swell and puff: Her precious Neck and Breast display Her skins antiquity; for they Like a dried dunghil chop and break, Until her Snout begins to leak: Her parched Fists defie the Sun, For all the malice he hath done Can't change her Hide, nor any stain Corrupt it for its dy'd in grain, Her spacious Belly and her VVaste Have grease sufficiently to baste A Herd of Swine, they have such store, A Shambles cannot purchase more: A pound of pudding cannot suffice Her Gut, which is of three ell size. Her Thighs like to Colossus seem Proportioned to her bodies teem: But some that have her hoofs espi'd, For fear the fools fell down and did. Yet all this while I have forgot Her tongue as still as a Cannon shot: All parts of her I can't display, The rost unseen the Devil ma, She is the wonder of our age, Nor lacks she ought but a large Cage,
The Resolved Lover. WHat care I though she be fair Hair, snow like hand, or Sun like eye, If in that beauty I not share, Were she deformed what care I, What care I though she be foul, Hair, swarthy-head, or sun-burnt eye, So long as I enjoy her soul, Let her be so, yet what care I, Be she fair, or foul, or either, Or made up of both together; Be her Hart mine, hair, hand or eye Be what it will, why what care I. A Wooer sending his Mistris a pair of white fringed Gloves. WHen on your white hands these Gloves you draw Remember Cupid and his spotless Law? How happy are the skins that may at pleasure Kiss your white hand & rifles all loves treasure But they must be that thing compeld to do But know bright fair one, when my task is don You shall not need like these to draw me on.
A Song in praise of women. ARe Women fair! Yes wondrous fair to see too, Are Women sweet? Yea wonderous sweet they be too. Are Women Saints? No Saints nor yet no Devils. Are women good, not good, but needful evils, So Angel-like, that Devils do not doubt them, So needful evils, few can live without them. Are women proud, yea passing proud and prise them. Are women kind, yea wondrous kind, and please them, The Beggars Song. BRight shines the sun, pla Beggar play, Here's scraps enough to serve's a day, What noise of Viols is so sweet, as when our merry Clappers ring, What mirth doth want when Beggers meet, a Beggers life is for a King. Eat drink and play, sleep when we list, Go where we will so stocks be mist, The world is ours and ours alone. for we alone have world at will.
We purchase not, all is our own, both filds and streets we Beggars fill, Nor care to get, nor care to keep, Doth ever break a Beggars sleep, A hundred herd of blak and white, upon our Downs securely feed: If any dare his Master bite, he dies therefore as sure as Creed. Thus Beggars Lord it as they please, And none but Beggers live at ease. A Parson to his Mistris. My Person is Divine, my Personage fat and fair Then let us joyn in love, and make a loving Pair. Her Answer. Your Person is Divine, your Parsonage during life, But if the Parson die, pray where's the Parsons wife.
A young Gentleman fallen in love with a fair Lady. stock image of man in cape Gent. ALl haile the modle of di∣vine perfections, may al the blessings heaven affords showr down on your head: vouchsafe to cast on favorable look upon a crea∣ture wholly devoted to your service Lady. Pardon sir, a womans weakness if she takes the boldness to say her shallow capacity cannot apprehend the height of your Oratory yet I must render thanks for your wishes, and wish I could be as thankful to wish you in an equal affection: But since af∣fection cannot be forced, you must pardon me, if I say I cannot love. Gent. Not love heavens forbid that so great cruelty should recide in so fair a creature: let not such harsh spéeches procéed from so swéet a outh, unless it be out of miden bashfulness whose strongest negatives do affirm a grant: such I hope and wish i your denial. Lady. I must confess sir, your thoughts I can't hinder, yet would gladly perswade you to believe the truth, that my denial is unegned hwever were I but assued of the reallit of your affecton, I might perhaps meet your loe with an eqal a burning.
Gent. Part on swéet soul, my interrupting you: if my love be not real let me be an object of all mens scorn, and let the Heavens (as a jst revenge of my dissembling) shower down on me their most horrid plagues; but if it be love, chast and real love, let our souls méet in reciprocal affections, and be imparadiced into ruition of each other. Lady. As far as a Virgins modesty will permit her: hereafter I shall be ever ready to ccomplish your desires, and obey your com∣mands, in the mean time be confident that I m intirely yours. But time calls me away. All happiness attend you. A Letter to request Love of a Gentlewoman. COnsidering with my self excellent Lady, the many vertues Nature hath in a super∣bundant measure adorned you: and weighing he insufficiency of any service I can do you; y trembling hand is scearce able to hold the en, and my stamering tongue dare hardly ex∣ress what my afflicted heart desireth to mani∣est to you; yet love who holds in his domini∣n my inflamed heart, forceth me to lay open to our swéetest self the secrets of my love tormen∣ed brest. Excuse then I humbly beséech you, hese humble lines that invisibly present to your ir hands a more humble suit then can be ex∣prest;
I beséech you extend a gracious hand t stay a fainting soul from dying, that withou you is nothing: whose worth and remembranc gives me life, for I desire not to be where you being is not, it is that only betters my joy and makes me sensible of content, being n content equal to the enjoying such a compani¦on of such great worth. To conclude, I shal expect the sentence of my life or death in you answer, and remain so perfectly yours that can say nothing néer it, when I say I am you most faithful, most affectionae, and most obe¦dient Servant, J. D. Let one grief harm us, let one joy fill us, Let one love warm us, let one death kill us. Her Answer. SIr your high commendation of my worth much beyond my desert, and the vehemen of your expressions causeth some admiratio in me: Be assured sir, if I finde your déeds a¦swerable to your expressions, I doubt not but shall answer your expectations. In the me time be confident I much honour your gre worth, and shall ever remain yours, Most humbly in the infringeable bowels of affection, M. J.
To woo a Scornful Maid. stock image of man on horseback Man. LEt not my love be mis∣construed for presump∣tion, if I once again do strive to warm your affections, by decla∣ing unto you how much I ho∣nor your perfection, I pray you at last be merciful, and do not still reward my love with cold disdain. Maid. Sir, I know men have powerful lan∣guage, but I am none of those young ones: you are deceived if that you think your fine words can swéeten me up to betray my self: For my beauty I would not have you dote on it, it suf∣ficeth me without commendations. Man. Should not I commend that all ad∣mire, I were to blame. Maid. Sir, wisemen admire nothing: For if I were beautiful, what is beauty: but a fading flower, blasted often with too much breathing on, & cannot grow safely on the stalk of virgi∣nity, for every one will be reaching to gather it: Pray excuse me if I prevent such a danger: for love and I are quite fallen out. And if you would be more thrifty of your breath, you may spend it to better purposes: for you may inti∣mate your desires, and make tedious discourses, but in a word, I shall never love you.
Man. O say not so, you know not how much misery you will bring on me, for hitherto hope of your gentle disposition hath kept me alive: Maid. Sir, I hope you will not accuse me of your death, pray shake of this Love. Man. Whilst I live I will attend on you, and when I am dead Ile visit you in a dream, and tell you were a cruel Maid: To conclude, let one parting kiss seal my transport to the Eli∣zium, and I am gone. M. Sir since you are thus resolv'd ile strive to give you a better answer at your next return Man. In confidence of that happiness I will presume to sée you again. Love is all eyes admits of no delay, And through all hardship makes his way. A jesting discourse with a Maid. Man. COme will you be an enemy to your self, & let modesty kéep you still in the state of virginty; I come now to offer my ser∣vce to help you out of this trouble. Maid. You are very kind, but I like my present condition. Man. Alass poor ignorance: ile tell thée till thou art married thou art but a ciper, and art of no acount. Maid. O sir you are deceived: for all toe that dye maids go to heaven.
Man. You are deceived, their punishment is to lead Apes in Hell. The Lovers Protestation. PRetty wanton, prethee stay, Did you not see my heart to day. Mark to know it, you shall find, Ever constant, true and kind. Wounds about it doth bear, Drops about it, here and there; In which wounds youl find a dart, Shot by you into my heart, If you see it do not blush, The wounds are fresh, and blood will gush Into your face, and you'l be known, To covet more then is your own: Send it back, then let it be Sound, as when it came to thee. A Letter from a Lover to his Beloved. SWeet Mistriss, Your great worth and good∣ness, compels me to discover my heart in telling you, that I honour you more then all the world: look not on the expressions as only complemental, but take them as indéed they are the real expressions of my heart, dclaring the earnest desire I have to love and serve you, if you shall judge me worthy of so great an ho∣nour: I expect only to know your mind, that
so I may bear the character of your love and favour, & to think my self happy in being your most humble and most affectionate servant. F. L. Her Answer. SIr, I will be so presumptuous séeing you desire it, as to beleive you love me, continue then in loving me as much as you please, for the truth of your affection will appear by your constant continuance in the same, and if you be constant I shall rather lose my life, then ae my resolution, to live and die, your most humble and faithful servant, E. B. Dick-Downright of the Country, his wooing of Doll of the Dairy. NOw Love and Swéetheart, by me troth thou art: I tell thée true Doll, I love thée, Faith Wench I do, though thou art but plain I think thée very sine. Thy face looks brighter then the Moon, Then scoured Pewter or silver Spoon? Thy skin as white as Curds new prest, As soft as wool that is new drest. Thou canst make Chéese and utter, and I can Plough and Cart all day, and at igt we
can have a cup of brown Ale and be merry: come Wench say thou lovest me, and Ie spea to our Parson, and if my high-shooes come home on Saturday, we will be married on Snday next. Dolls Answer. HOnest Dick, for your love I thank you: I think thou art one of the honestest Fel∣lows in the Town, and thou shalt be my Love and Swéet heart, and i'le tell the true Dick, I love thée, and here is vorty good shilling, you shall have it all, and if thou wilt speak to our Parson, Ile have a cup of Ale will make a Car speak against our wedding day, and ile have a whole boul of milk to make us a posset, and that will be as brave as can be: I shall not sléep quiet till that day comes. Dick and Doll are soon agreed, And will be married with all speed. On Women. Women good like Angels are on earth, And of these Angels we have had a earth Therefore all you that have good wives, Respect and love them as your lives.
A Sonnet in praise of Love. CUpid only do I love Him I worship still above, Happy's he that by the same Wisdom to himself doth gain: Worthy is he the bright of day, That doth loyal loe obey, Oh how sweet is that warm desire; To our sense no sweetness is Half so dulcid as is this, Blessed love without all crime, Two souls pleaseth at one time. Then doth love his lover right, When his love he doth requite, Of two souls he makes but one, In two bodies all alone. Love more happy cannot be, Then when we a loving couple see Pleasure none upon the ground, Like to love is to be found, Pleasures pass as transitory, But love doth still remain in glory. A Sonnet. LOve is a sicknes full of woes, All remedies refusing,
A plant that with most cutting grows, Most barren with best using; why so? More we enjoy it, more it dies, If not enjoyed it sighthing cries, high ho. Love is a torment of the mind, A Tempest everlasting. And Jove hath made it a kind, Not well, not full nor fasting, why so? More we enjoy it, more it dies, If not enjoyed it sighthing cries, high ho. The young mans song in praise of his Mistris. I Have a Mistress for perfection rare, In all mens eyes, but in my thoughts fair, she is a modle of divine perfetions, Fortunes darling natures wonder, She is the sweetest of all sweet complexions, And of sure joys the founder; In whose looks are blessings three, Beauty, Love, and Modesty; She is the only jewel I desire, I can but wonder at her beauty; She is the Lady I admire.
To whom I owe submissive duty: Her modest comely shape it so exceeds. That unto her fair Roses seem but weeds; Fairest to your praise, I do affirm and tell, Some may come near, few match, but none excel Shon ap Morgan Shentilman of Wales, his wooing an English Sweet-heart. MOdest, shentle, and fair one, her is pold to to tell her, her loves her, & her was bout o speak her love, put her was fear, cause hee was welch-man, that her would slight her words and therefore her was think good to wrap her love in a letter, and her was pray her to take no exception for her countries sake; for her was shentilman porn and her was take her etti∣gre from King Prute, Arther and Cadwaller was her none cousins, and were as good men as and are: tis true, her was wear Sherking of seiz, but her ha store of Goats milk, cousbob∣by, éeks and Oyon, which if her would sell, would bay hee silks: and her has store of Kid and Cot, and great Cos nother, Runt and C, and if her once but tast her Welch-mut∣on, her wll sw her English sheeps not worth a bun, a erefore if her will not p her pa,  shall shade her soul, was ng hr o her was.
Her Answer. GOd Mr. Shon ap Morgan trouble not your self, but kéep your winde to cool your porridge: for I am confirmed that a welcshman can love this or that, or any woman, let her say what her will, its but the rising of her welch blood: for her fine things her has in Wales, I will not believe her for all her fine tales, for if I should believe and come there, I should sée nothing but barren mountains, and a few goats on them, whch is all the treasures her has; and therefore I am resolved not to love her at all; and therefore let her trouble her self no more, for by St. Taffie I will not love her. The Welchmans Reply. HOw? not love her? then he swears by cats-siter-a-nails her ill vie, and her will pring her out of all her wits: and because her will take no pitty on her, put swears by St. Taffie her will not love her, her is dead, her is dead. Stay Reader stay, more you shall know, Love kill'd this man, no more then so.
Her Epitaph: HEre lies puried under these stones. Shon ap Morgan, ap Shing up Shones; Her lived in Love till new years tide, But her was not loved and so her died. Reader, I am sure thou wilt not repent thee, And I am happy to content thee: stock image of kissing couple and cupid stock image of lady pointing stock image of man on horseback FINIS.
