m1116 r19464 12561243 63206
Humiliations follow'd with Deliverances. A Brief Discourse On the MATTER and METHOD, Of that HUMILIATION which would be an Hopeful Symptom of our Deliverance from Calamity. Accompanied and Accommodated WITH A NARRATIVE Of a Notable Deliverance lately Received by some English Captives, From the Hands of Cruel Indians. And some Improvement of that Narrative. Whereto is added A Narrative of Hannah Swarton, containing a great many wonderful passages, relating to her Captivity and Deliverance. Boston in N. E. Printed by B Green, & J. Allen for Samuel Phillips at the Brick Shop. 1697.
Humiliations, follow'd with Deliverances. At Bostn Lectue; 6 d. 3. m. 1697. The Week before a General FAST. 2 Chron XII. 7. When the Lord saw, that they Humbled themselves, the Word of the Lord came unto Shemajah, saying, They have Hum∣bled themselves, I will not Destroy them, but I will grant them some Deliverance. WHen the Punishment of Srging was used up∣on a Criminal in Israel, it was the O der and Usage, that while the Executioner was Laying on his Thirteen (and therein Forty save one) Blowes, with an Instrument, every soke whereof gave Three Lashes to the Delinqnt, there were still pre∣sent
Three Judges, whereof, while one did Number the Blowes, and another kept crying out, Smite him! a Third Read Three Scriptures, during the Time of the Scourging: and the Scourging Ended with the Reading of them: The first Scripture was That in Deut. 28.58. If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this Law, that be written in this Book that thou mayst Fear this Glorious and earful Name, THE LORD THY GOD; then the Lord will make thy Plagues wonderful. The second Scripture was That in Deut. 29 9. Keep therefore the words of this Covenant, and do them, that you may prosper in all that ye do. The last Scripture was That in Psal. 78 38. But He, being full of Compassion, forgave their Iniquity, and destroy'd them not. This was done, partly for the Admonitin, part∣ly for the Consolation of the Chastised Criminal. Christians, We are all sensible, That the Scourges of Heaven, have long been Employ'd upon us, for our Crimes against the Holy and Just and Good Laws of the Lord our God: Alas, our Plagues have been wonderful! We have been sorely Lashed, with one Blow after another,
for our Delinquencies. Who is there to Number the Blowes? Yea, The Anger of God, is not for all this Turned away, but His Hand stretched out still! It is but proper, while we are thus under our Pu∣nishment, for us, to have a Text of the Sa∣cred Oracles, agreeable unto our present State, Read unto us. Behold, an Agreea∣ble Text, now singled out, for our Enter∣tainment; & I do the rather single it out because the next Week, a General HU∣MILIATION is to be attended among us; for which, I cannot easily do a more Useful Thing, than to give you a Praepa∣rative; while I am speaking unto the Christians of many Churches, here come together, in One Great Assembly. In our Context, we sind the People of God, beginning to Forsake the Law of the Lord: They many wayes Transgressed a∣gainst Him. Sad Calamity overtook them, for this their Iniquity, and Apostasy; But God blessed the Preaching of His Prophet Shemajah unto them, under this Calamity to produce a Notable Humiliaiion in them. The Clauses now before us, re∣present a blessed Effect of that Humiliati∣on; a gracious Promise of some Delive∣rance
from Destruction, was, by that Pro∣phet of the Lord, when they Humbled themselves, brought from the Lord unto them. The Truth which Lies plainly before us, is, That when a Sinful People Humble themselves before the Almighty God, it is an Hopeful and an Happy Symptom, that He will not utterly Destroy such a People. Now, The CASE, which this Encou∣raging Truth, does at this Time Encou∣rage us, to speak unto, is, After what manner is the Self-Humilia∣tion of a Peple that would scape a Sore Destruction, to be Expressed and Excited? Which to speak yet more pertinently and profitably, is to say. After what manner are we our selves, O our Dear People, to Humble our selves before the Lord? Give your Attention. I. When we Paenitently Confess our
Sins, and much more, when we vigo∣rously ficform our Sins, we Then do to good purpose Humble our selves, before the God, against whom we have Sinned. More distinctly; First, A Paenitent Confession of Sin, is that Self Humiliation which our God ex∣pects from such a people as our selves. Thus, in Luk. 18.13, 14. He that said, God be merciful to me a Sinner, is, He that Humbleth himself. Thus, Lev. 26.40, 41. They that Confess their iniquity, and the I∣niquity of their Fathers, have their Uncir∣cumcised Hearts Humbled in their doing so. Accordingly, First, In our Humiliations, we ought seriously to Confess out Provoca∣tions to the Most Holy God, and the Ini∣quities that we have done, before Him who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniqui∣ties. But, what a sad Catalogue of Provo∣cations, have we to bing forth before the Lord. When we Humble our selves, I. Let us Humbly Confess, That th People of this Land, in a growing Apo∣stasy from that Religious Disposition that Signalized the first Planting of these Co∣lonies,
have with multiplied Rebellions against the Almighty, Sinned exceeding∣ly. II. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Spirit of this World, hath brought an Epi∣demical Death, upon the Spirit, and Pow∣er of Godliness. III. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, here Enjoy'd, with much Plenty as well as Purity, hath not been Thankfully and Fruitfully Entertained by those that have been Blessed with the Joyful Sound. IV. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Covenant of Grace Recognized in our Churches, hath been by multitudes not submitted unto; and of them that have submitted unto it, multitudes have not walked according to the Sacred Obligati∣ons thereof. V. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Unreasonable Vices of Rash and Vain Swearing, with Hellish Cursing in the Mouths of many, have rendred them Guilty Sinners. VI. Let us Humbly Confess, That a Flood of Excessive Drinking, hath begun to Drown much of Christianity, yea, and of
Civility it self, in many places among us. VII. Let us Humbly Confess, That some English, by Selling of Strong Drink unto the Indians, have not only prejudiced a∣mong them, the Successes of the Word of Life, but also been the Faulty & Bloody Occasions of Death unto them. VIII. Let us Humbly Confess, That a Vanity of Apparrel, hath been affected by many persons, who have been so vain, as to Glory in their Shame. IX. Let us Humbly Confess, That wicked Sorceries have been practised in the Land; and yet in the Troubles from the Devils, thereby brought in among us, those Errors on both Hands were com∣mitted, which, Who can understand? X. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Dayes of Sacred Rest among us, have been disturbed with so many Profanati∣on that we may not wonder if we See no Rest. XI. Let us Humbly Confess, That the woful Decay of good Family Discipline, hath opened the Flood Gates, for Innu∣merable, and almost Irremediable Woes, to break in upon us. XII. Let us Humbly Confess, That M∣gistrates
Ministers, and others that have served the Publick, have been but great Sufferers by their Services, and met with Unrighteous Discouragements. XIII. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Pyracies, which, 'tis to be feared, some who belong to these, have perpetrated in other parts of the World, are Scandals, that call for much Lamentation. XIV. Let us Humbly Confess, That we have in former years used Unjustifia∣ble Hardships, upon some that have Con∣scientiously Dissented from our perswasi∣ons in Religion. XV. Let us Humbly Confess, That we have treated one another, very Ill, in the Various Temptations, Cententions, and Revlutins, which have been upon us. XVI Let us Humbly Confess, That the Sins of the most Filthy Uncleanness, have horribly Defiled the Land. XVII Let us Humbly Confess, That the Joy of Harvest, hath been filled with Folly, and Lewdness, and Forgotten the Glad Service of God, whom we should have Served in the Abunlance of all things. XVIII Let us Humbly Confess, That much Fraud hath been used in the Deal∣ings
of many, and the Spirit of Oppression hath made a Cry. XIX. Let us Humbly Confess, That Falsehood and Slander hath been common∣ly carrying of Darts through the Land and the Wounded have been many! XX. And, Let us Humbly Confess, That the Successive and Amazing Judg∣ments of God upon us, for our thus Tres∣passing, have not Reclamed us, but we have prodigiously Gone on still in our Tres∣passes. In our Humiliations, Let these things be Reflected on; and with our most Hum∣ble Reflections, Let us do like them, in 1 Sam. 7.6. Gather together, and Draw water, and pour it out, [in a Showre of Tears] before the Lord, and Fast on that Day, and say, we have Sinned against the Lord. But that this our Confession of our Provo∣cations, may be Penitent, we must, Secondly, Incorporate thereinto, a Confession of what we have Deserved by these Provoking Evils. Particularly. We have seen many Troubles: but on our Day of Humiliation, concerning all our Troubles, Let us Humbly make that
Confession, in Ezra 9.13. Thou, our God, best punished us, less than our Iniquities De∣serve. Have we lost many Thousands of Pounds, by the Disasters of the Sea? Let us Humbly Confess, our Sins have Deserv∣ed, that instead of making one Good Voyage, we should have been stript of all the Little that is left unto us. Hath one bad harvest after another, di∣minished our Ordinary Food? Let us Hum∣bly Confess, our Sins have Deserved, that the Earth which hath been thereby Defi∣led, should have yielded us nthing at all. Have Bloody, Popish, and Pagan Ene∣mies, made very dreadful Impressions up∣on us, and Captived and Butchered mul∣titudes of our Beloved Neighbours? Let us Humbly Confess, our Sins have Deserved, that we should be all of us, altogether giv∣en up, unto the will of our Enemies, to Serve our Enemies in the want of all things, and have our Lives continually hanging in Doubt, under their turious Tyrannies. Have we been Broken sore in the place of Dragons, and Covered with the Shadow of Death? Say Humbly before the Lord, with them, in Lam. 3.39. Why should a
man Complain, for the punishment of his Sin? And yet, we have had Comforts, to mi∣tigate and moderate, our Troubles: In the midst of wrath, God ha's Remembred Mer∣cy. Now concerning all our Comforts, on our Day of Humiliation, Let us Hum∣bly make that Confession, in Lam. 3.22. It is of the Lords mercies, that we are not Consumed. Have we not the Tidings of Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, Preac'd unto us, to sweeten the Bread of Adversity, and the Water of Afflction, which the Lord hath given us? Let us Humbly Confess, 'Tis of the Lords Mercies, that this Coun∣trey ha's the Bread of Life, and the Wa∣ters of Life, yet continued unto it, and that it is not become a Region of the Valley of the Shadow of Death. Are our Poor, though greatly Increased and Afflicted, yet more Comfortably pro∣vided for, than in many other parts of the World? Let us Humbly Confess, 'Tis of the Lords Mercies, that we are not all Seat∣tered, and famihed, and perihed in our Poverty. Do we see less of the Distress of Nati∣ons, and Perplexity, with the Sea, and the
waves thereof Roaring, than they do in a great part of Europe 8. Let us Humbly Confess, 'Tis of the Lords Mercies, that all the Things, which the fainting Hearts of men any where do fear, coming on the Earth, are not come upon our selves. Why do not our Adversaries use the Advantages which they have to Con∣found us, but are themselves in such Con∣fusion, that we Endure not an Hundredth part of the Disturbance from them, which they might give unto us? Humbly say before the Lord, with him, in Gen. 32.10. We are not worthy of the least of all these Mercies! This, This would be the Language of a True Humiliatin. But a Second Admoniion, must be added unto This. What Signities Confession, without Reformation? Tis all but Hy∣pocrisy, all but Impiety. We are told in Prov. 28.13. Tis he that Confesseth & For∣saleth, who shall have Mercy. The Ancients, would well call the Con∣fession of Sin, The Vemit of the Soul. But now, if we return, and proceed, unto the Commission of the Sins, which we have by our Confession, as it were Vomited up; what
are we, but the Dogs that Return unto their Vomit? When Sins are Sincerely Confes∣sed, the Repenting Sinners, will say, as in Hos. 14.8. What have we any more to do with them? Come then; We have now and then, that which we call, A Day of Humiliation. But, Sirs, A Day of Reformation; Oh! when shall we see such a Day? When shall it once be! Behold, an Essential Piece of work, to be attended, when, A Day of Humiliation, arrives unto us. Let every one of us, Earnestly Enquire with our selves, What is there, that I am now to Re∣form in my own Heart and Life, and in the Family which I belong unto? and importu∣nately implore, the Help of the Spirit of Grace, to pursue such a Reformation. But then, let all that Sustain any Publick Office, whether Civil, or Sacred, further carry on the Enquiy: What shall we do to Reform any spreading Evils in the Publick? Lei the Pastors of the Churches, in their severat Charges, Labour Watchfully to prevent, all growth of Sin in their Vicinities; and the Churches joyn with their Pastors, in Sharpening their Discipline against Offen∣ces that may arise, and in preserving the
Liberty, and Purity, which they have heretofore been clothed withal. And Let Justices, Grand Jury men, Con∣stables, Tythingmen, have their mutual Con∣sultations, to procure the Executions of Good Laws, and Remember the Oath of God upon them. Were such an Humiliation once obtain∣ed, Then would our God say, I see, they have Humbled themselves, I will not utterly Destroy them! The Land of Canaan, is as much as to say, in English, The Land of the Humbled. Oh! if we were uni∣versally thus Humbled, our Land would soon be a Canaan, for the Rest, the Peace, the Plenty, which would be therein vouchsafed unto us. II. The Exercises of a Sacred Fast have a particular and peculiar Character of Humiliation in them, and we are to Humble our selves with Fasting before the Lord. Thus the Psalmist of old manifes∣ted his Humiliation, in Psal. 35.13. I Hum∣bled my Soul, with Fasting. There is that Call Now, and Often [perhaps not often enough!] heard, thro' the Province, in Joel 1.14. Sanctify
a Fast, Call a Solemn Assembly, Gather the Elders; and all the Inhabitants of the Land, into the House of your God, and Cry unto the Lord. And I perswade my self, that we generally concur in the General Princi∣ple, hitherto Espoused, by the Church of God, in every Generation, That a Reli∣gions Fast, is a Needful Duty, (pro Temporibus et Causis, as Tertullian long since well stated it,) on Just and Great Occasions for it. That Merry Sect, who Explode Fasting, as a thing not Agreeable to our Gospel Times, appear not among us. We know, that Fasting hath, in all Ags, been esteem'd, a Duty incumbent on the People of God. We find such Fasting used in Elder Times, [Judg. 20.26. and 1 Sam. 7.6.] Both more publickly, [2 Chron. 20.30. and Ezr. 8 21.] And more privately; [2 Sam. 12.16 & Neb. 1.4.] What tho' these things were in the Dayes of the Old-Testament? I hope, the Old Testament is not become Apocy∣pha, with any of us. But in the New-Testament also, we have a Praediction, of our Fasting, [Math. 9.15.] Yea, and a Praescription for it, [Mth. 6.16.] For ding it more pubickly, we have  W∣rant,
[Act. 14.23.] and more privately too. [1 Cor. 7.5.] Yea, we are told, that there are certain Blessings, which cannot now be obtained, but in such a way. [Mar. 9.29.] And I am sure of one thing more; when the Apostles, and the Believers in the Primitive Times, were most Filled with the Holy Spirit of Christ, then it was that they were most in Fast∣ing before the Lord! Now, if our Fast, be such a Fast as the Lord hath chosen, we shall therein Humble our selves, most acceptably, most profita∣bly, most efficaciously. And because, the Right Performance of this Duty, is a thing of great Consequence in Christianity; 'tis what is frequently required, and much Weal or Wo will follow upon the manage∣ment of it; I will set before you, the Rules of that Sacred Fast, wherein we are to Humble our Souls. Having first, Praepared our selves for our Fast, as one would for an Extraordi∣nary Sabbath, we have these things to do. First; There is the Internal Humiliation of our Fast; The Duties of Praying, Repenting and Believing, are the Soul of that Fast wherein we are to Humble
our Souls; and we are to Labour in those Duties. The Duties of a Fast, are those, in 2 Chron. 7.14. My People shall then Humble themselves, and Pray, and Seek my Face, and Turn from their wicked wayes. For men to think, that they Serve God, by a Fast wherein they do nothing but Fast from Corporal Sustenance, and they draw not near to God in Devotions all the Day long, 'tis a plece of Ignorance; yea, more than one Commandment of God is broken, by this piece of Ignorance. When we Celebrate a Fast, we are in more than ordinary Prayers, to Ac∣knowledge our own Sinfulness, and the Greatness and Justice of God, in Chasti∣sing our Sinfulness; and we are to Sup∣plicate those Favours of Heaven, which our Sins, our Wants, and our Fears, make Necessary for us. The Thing which we have to do, on a Fast, is what the Pray∣ing Daniel did; in Dan. 9.3. I set my Face unto the Lord God, to seek by Prayer, and Supplications, with Fasting. And ha∣ing thus Quoted, the Ninth Chapter of Daniel, I may Remark, That there are Three Nnths, which admirably well describe the Task of a Fast unto us; the
Ninth Chapter of Ezra, the Ninth Chap∣ter of Nehemiah, and the Ninth Chapter of Daniel. When the Fast comes; Re∣member, Christians, to consult those Three Chapters, with Lively Meditations there∣upon. A Day of Fast, is to be a Day of Prayer. As in Act. 13.3. so elsewhere, Fasting and Praying, are what God has joyn∣ed, and here, Man may not separate them. Would you hear, what you have to Do, when a Fast is to be kept? The words of an Order for a Fast, once ran so, in Jon. 3.8. Cry mightily unto God. Prayer, 'tis That, whereof the Jewes in one of their Ancient Adagies, tell us, Nulla est pulchrior virtus hac ipsa; There is no vertue like it. It is beyond all Oblations. But Repenting and Believing as well as Praying, must signalize our Fast. Reconci∣liation with God, is the End of a Fast; without Repenting and Believing, this Re∣conciliation is not applied unto us. A Fast, is but a Form, an Hungry and Empty Form, if we do not therein hear∣tily Repent of our Miscarriages. Thus we are advised, in Isa. 58.6, 7, 8. Is not this the Fast, that I have chosen? To Loose the Bonds of Wickedness. On a Fast, Let
us be those Ephraimites, who shail bemoan themselves; Thou hast Chastised me, O Lord, and I was Chastised, Turn thou me, and I shall be Turned! On a Fast, Let us take those Directions, in the midst of our La∣mentations, Let us Search and Try our ways, and Turn again unto the Lord. A Fasting Day must be a Soul grieving Day, and a Sin killing Day, or 'tis nothing. Our Fast, are to Slay our Lusts; those are the Beasts, which are then to be slaughtered. Indeed, when ever a Fast recurrs, we should go the whole Work of Conversion over again! Our Fast will notably be, Ci∣us virtutis, if we do so. Again; The Satisfaction and Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ, must on a Fast e Repaired unto; and we must Be∣eve in it for our Atonement. It was the ite appointed for a Fast, in Lev. 16.27 0. The Blood of the Sin Offering, must be. rought in, to make Atonement; On that Day all the Priest make Atonement for you, to eanse you, that you may be clean from all ur Sins before the Lord. Our Lord Jesus hrist is our Priest; What He hath done r our Atonement, must be this Day, ith a strong Faith Laid hold upon. A
Fast is a Day of Expiation; but we know it is only the Lord Jesus Christ, that hath by His Unknown Sufferings (as the Greek Church at this Day expresss it) made Expiation for our Sins. Hence on a Fast, we must Renew the Dependance of our Souls, on the Obedience which our Lord Jesus Christ, our Surety, hath yielded un∣to God for us. Our Sin has procured the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ; In a Fast, our Faith is to Feed upon it. A Fasting Day, is with Faith, a Feeding Day. In our Fasts, we are to Imitate the Acti∣on of the Molossians, who seeking the Kings Good will unto them, took the Son of the King into their Arms, and pre∣senting themselves thus before him, said, Syr, For the sake of this your Son, we hope, you'l be favourable to us. Thus, Let us present our selves before the Eternal King of Heaven, on our Fast, with His Only Begotten, His Dearly Beloved Son, in the Arms of our Faith, and plead, Oh! for the Sake of this thy Son, do Good unto us. But then. Secondly; There is the External Hu∣miliation of our Fast; when we Humble our selves in a Fast, we are to Abstain
from all our Secular Pleasures and Af∣fayrs, that we may the better go tho∣rough our Duties. Like Silly Children, we know not when to Feed, and when to Forbear Feeding. But our Good God, in His Word has taught us! We are Taught, that we must sometimes have a Day for Fasting, which must be a Day of Restraint upon us; and this Restraint must Extend unto the Dimensions of a Sabbath. Of a Fast, it is prescribed, in Lev. 23.32. It shall be unto you, a Sabbath of Rest, and ye shall Afflict your Souls; from Evening un∣to Evening shall ye Celebrate your Sabbath. The Design of the Abstinence thus to be used on a Fast, is, not only that we may be more free for the several Spiritual Employments, which are then incumbent on us, (our Lord, like a wife Falconer, will by keeping of us a little Sharp, fit us for the Highest Flights in our Prayers!) but also to Show, and Speak, the Humilia∣tion of our Souls in those Employments. Tis a Ceremony of Gods Appointment, a Symbolical Ceremony, which God Himself hath appointed, and a part of Worship, whereby we are to Signify, That we  our selves utterly unworthy of all those Bles∣sings,
which we now Deny unto our selves, and therefore of all other Blessings whatsoe∣ever. And the First Sin of man, which Lay in Eating, is to be considered, as ve∣ry particularly herein referred unto. Now, First, A Fast is to be kept with an Abstinence from the Pleasures of this Life. Our usual Diet must on a Fast be Abstained from. It was there∣fore said, in Esth. 4.16. Fast, and neither Eat nor Drink. The very Term of a Fast, implies thus much; and it hath been of old said, They that will not so Fast with the Children of God, must Eat and Drink of the Furious Wrath of God, with the Wicked There are indeed Ca∣ses of Necessity, wherein our merciful God call; for, Mercy rather than Sacrifice; and in those Cases, doubtless the Abstinence may be somewhat Abated and Relaxed. Some cannot Encounter a severe and a total Abstinence, it would utterly Disable them, for the Service of the Day: the Severity may then be mitigated. Yet our Abstinence must be such as to pro∣duce our Affliction. Of a Fast, it is said, in Isa. 58.5. It is a Day for a man to Afflict his Soul; and it is said, in Lev.
23.29. Whatsoever Soul it be, that shall not be Afflicted in that same Day, he shall be cut off from among his people. We may not Eat or Drink so much, nor may we Eat or Drink so well, on such a Day, as at a∣nother Time. In the Fast of a Daniel, we have this Abstinence observed, ch. 10.3. late no pleasant Bread, neither came Flesh nor Wine, into my mouth, neither did I anoint my self at all: And in Tertullians Time, they had their Xerophagiae, a Dry sort of Repast, for such as found that a Rigid Fast, was too hard for them. But by consequence, all other Delights of the Senses, are then also to be avoided. If you read, Joel 2.16. and  Cor. 7.5. You'l find a particular prohibition of this Im∣portance. Hence likewise, our Sleep is then to be Retrenched. If we are in∣clinable to Sleep so long on a Fast, as we do on another Day, we are to Awake our selves, with such a Call from God, as that, What meanest thou, O Sleeper, A∣rise, and Cal upon thy God! And it is not improper here to be noted, That our Alms are to be one Concomitant of our Fasts. It was said, in Isa. 58 7. Is  this the Fast that I have Chosen? Is it
to deal thy Bread to the Hungry? When we come to seek Mercy of God, we should, in Thankfulness for our Hope to find what we seek, show Mercy to men. In our Fasting, we Deny to our selves our u∣sual Nourishments; and we should then Bestow on others at least as much as we Deny to our serves, in Token of our Sense, That we are more Undeserving of the Divine Bounty, than any that we know in our Neighbourhood. Our Alms are to go up with our Prayers, as a Memorial, (we Remember who's did so!) before God. But there is yet one thing more to be added; Fine Cloathes must in a Fast, be Abstained from. If there were no Scripture for this, why might not meer Nature teach it unto us, as well as unto the Ninivites? But we have Scripture for it, in Exod 33.4. The people mourned, and no man did put on him his Ornaments. I have see a Fault in this place, and My Neighbours, 'Tis utterly a Fault among you; That on a Fast, many people, will come to the Worship of God, in as Gay Cloaths, as if they were going to a Feast. Methinks, I hear, the Holy An∣gels of God thus uttering their Indigna∣tion
against such Offenders; What? will those vain people, never have any sign of an Abased, and an Afflicted Soul upn them? Truly, to be arrayed in Gorgeous Appar∣rel on a Fast, is very offensive unto God. Rags are fitter than Robes, for the Children of men therein to appear as Malefactors before God the Judge of all. They that come to the Assembly, in a splendid, and flanting Attire, on such a Day, do but Affront the God, whom they profess to Humble themselves before. Would you Speed in a Fast? Then be able to say, if not with him, in Psal 35.13. My Cloath∣ing was Sackcloth, when I Humbled my Soul with Fasting, yet, My Cloathing is Sober, Modest, Proper, and very Humble! And, Secondly, A Fast, is to be kept with an Abstinence, from the Affayrs of this Life. The Works of our particular Vocations are to be laid aside, when a Fast is Indicted; and All Servile Labour on the said Day is Inhibited. A Fast, is to be kept with the strictness of a Sabbath. It is Enjoined in Lev. 23.28, 30, 32. Ye shall do no work in that same Day, for it is a Day of Atonement. Whatsoever Soul it be, that doth any work in that same Day, the same
Soul will I destroy from among his people. It shall be unto you a Sabbath of Rest; from Evening to Evening shall ye Celebrate it. When the Services of the Congregation are over, we are not presently at Liberty to do what we will: Those persons do but help to Debauch the Land, who take such a Liberty. The Edicts of Heaven run so, in Joel 2 14. Sanctify a Fast. The whole Day of the Fast is to be Sanctified, or, set apart, for Communion with God: When we keep a Day, we must keep it un∣to the Lord. The Expectation of our God, is intimated unto us, in Isa 58.13. Turn away thy Foot from the Sabbath, (take no long Journeys on it) from doing thy pleasure on my Holy Day: Honour him, not doing thine own wayes, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words. In∣deed, the Weekly Sabbath lays a claim to all the things here spoken of; neverthe∣less, I suspect that a Fasting Sabbath is here more peculiarly intended. A Fast, is no less than twice in one verse, Lev. 23.32. called a Sabbath: and why may not that be the Sabbath more especially meant throughout the whole fifty eighth Chapter of Isaiah? An Expression twice used in
the verse newly quoted, namely, Doi thy pleasure, and Finding thy own pleasure, on the Sabbath, occurs in the third verse, In the Day of your Fast, you find pleasure; which finding of pleasure is opposed unto the Affliction, both of Spirit and of Body, wherein we are to Judge our selves on such a Solemnity. Because we do not Fast, with a due conformity, to the Edicts of Heaven, therefore as of old, Pompey Siezed the Jewish Temple, on their Fast-Day, and Sosius on their Fast-Day took the City, so we in this Land, have on, o near our Fast-Dayes often felt such Rebukes of Heaven, that it has become the just Astonishment of many that have wisely ob∣served it, and it should be the Humiliation of us all. But now, conform to this Ex∣pectation of Heaven, on your Fast: Then shalt thou Delight thy self in the Lord, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. III. That our Humiliation may b Quickene, Let us Humbly, Awfully and Mournily, Consider the most Hum∣bling Circumstances, which the Migh∣ty Hand of God, hath brought us into. I was the Counsel, in 1 Pet. 5.6. Humble
your selves under the Mighty Hand of God. Wicked and Hurtful men, have been cal∣led, The Hand of God: see Psal. 17.14.] It may be, Nero, a Mighty man Raised by God, for the Vexation of mankind, may be more particularly designed, in that passage, The Mighty Hand of God. And by a French Nero, have we also been so vexed, that we have cause to Humble our selves under what we have Endured from that Mighty Hand. But indeed, there is the Mighty Hand of God, in all Afflictive Dispensations of His Providence; and now, O Let us Humble our selves, by Considering, how much the Dispensations of His Mighty Hand have Humbled us. The Circumstances of Affliction are Hum∣bling Circumstances. It was said of the Afflicted, in Psal. 107.39. They are brought Low through Affliction. It was said by the Afflicted, in Psal 39 8. We are brought very Lw. An Afflicted people may say, as the Afflicted Paul said, My God Hum∣bles me. Afflictions keep under our Aspi∣ring Spiits, and make us feel and own our own wretchedness. But Oh! what Afflictions has this poor people, been Hum∣bled withal!
It was a Prophecy concerning, The Daughter of Zion, in Isa. 3.26. She being Desolate, shall sit upon the Ground. When Zion was Desolate, by the Roman Conquest, (unto which this Prophecy might Ex∣tend) there were Coins made in Comme∣moration of that Conquest, and on those Coins there was a Remarkable Exposition of this Prophecy. On the Reverse of those Medals, which are to be seen unto this Day, there is, A Silent Woman sitting upon the Ground, and leaning against a Palm∣tree, with this Inscription IUDAEA CAPTA. Nor was any Conquered City or Coun∣trey, before this of Judaea, ever thus drawn upon Medals, as, A Woman sitting upon the Ground. Alas, If poor New-England, were to be shown upon her old Coin, we might show her Leaning against her Thunder∣struck Pine tree, Desolate, sitting upon the Ground. Ah! New England! Upon how many Accounts, mayst thou say with her, in Ruth 1 13. The Hand of the Lord is gone out against me! An Excellent Minister, who dyed a∣mong us, a Young Man, Considerably more than Twenty years ago, [It was Mr. John Eliot, the younger,] when he
lay on his Death-bed, and was Drawing his Presagious Breath, had these Memorable Expressions. My Lord Jesus Christ, hath been a Great while, preparing a Mansion, which is now ready for me. He will quickly take me, as He did John, by the Right Hand, and present me unto the Father, who has Loved me, with an Ever∣lasting Love. As for New England, I believe, that God will not Unchurch it; but He will make a Poor and Afflicted People in it Boston, and the Massachuset Colony, is Coming Down, Coming Down, Coming Down a pace! Expect sad and sore Afflictions; but Oh! Get an Interest in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you may Live on That, all the World over. So spoke an Eminent Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, when he was just Entring into the Joy of His Lord. Now this Praediction, we have seen very terribly Accomplished; It has been Strangely and Sadly Accomplished, ever since the Time that it was uttered: And in almost all our Concerns, our Story hath been that in Judg. 2.15. Whithersoever they went out, the Hand of the Lord was against them for evil, as the Lord had said, and they were greatly Distressed.
We have been Humbled, with an Annual Blast upon our Daily Bread, until at last, the very Staff of the Countrey ha's been broken for Two years together, and an horrible Cry, for Bread, Bread, hath been heard in our Streets. We have been Humbled, with such Los∣ses by Sea & Land, that Strangers afar off, take notice of it, Concluding, Surely Al∣mighty God is in ill Terms with that Country! We have been Humbled by the Angels of Death shooting the Arrows of Death, with direful Repetitions of Mortality, in the midst of us! We have been Humbled by a Barbarous Adversary once and again let loose to Wolve it upon us, and an unequal Contest with such as are not a People, but a Foolish Natin. We have been Humbled by all Adversity vexing us, in our Going out, & our Com∣ing in, and in the Constant Miscarriages of our most Likely Expeditions. We have been Humbled by the Wrath of the Lord of Hosts Darkning our Land, when Evil Angels broke in among us, to do those Amazing Things, of which no Former A∣ges give a parallel.
We have been Humbled, by the Ireful, and the Direful Rebukes of Heaven, upon all our Precious and Pleasant Things: But above all, by Spiritual Plagues whereto we are abandoned. The Plagues of a Blind Mind, and an Hard Heart, and an Asto∣nishing Unfruitfulness under all the Means of Grace; and a Stupid Insensibility of the Causes for which, & the Manners in which, the Almighty God is Contending with us, have Siezed upon us. Some of our Seers have a mist before their Eyes; Some of our Churches fall asleep till they are stript of their Garments; under the Sharpest Chastisements of Heaven, we grow worse and worse, with such a Swift Apostasy, that if we Degenerate the Next Ten Years, as the most Impartial observers do say, that we have done the Last, God be Merciful unto us! What a Swift Destruction are we like∣ly to be overwhelmed withal? Now there is a Loud Voice, in all these things; the Voice of them is, Be Humbled, O New-England; Humble thy self, Lest a fiercer Anger of the Lord yet come upon thee! Oh! Let not that be written on our Doors, in Jer 44.10. They are not Humbled unto this Day! Sirs, We
are every Day Coming down most wonder∣fully; But let us then Fall down most Humbly, in the Consideration thereof, and let our Lamentation be That, in Lam. 3.19, 20. Remembring my Affliction and my Misery; my Soul has them still in Remem∣brance, and is Humbled in me! IV. What will our Humiliation Signify, if it carry us not unto our Lord Iesus Christ? Wherefore, when we Humble our selves, Let us Humbly Rely on our Lord Iesus Christ alone, for our Acceptance with God. So are we Diected, in Jam. 4.10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord: That is to say, With an Eye to the Lord Jesus Christ, in all you do. That the Humiliations of men, are of no Account, with God, while the Lord Iesus Christ is not therein referred un∣to, the poor Jewish Nation have given to us, a doleful Experiment: related in a Book Translated by one Paul Isaiah, a Jew, by that among other motives, con∣verted unto the Faith of our Blessed Ie∣sus. After many former Humiliations, that the End of their Captivity might be Revealed unto them, they did in the year
1502. make a Publick Repentance, thro' all their Habitations, all over the face of the whole World, and both old and young, men, women and children, spent almost a year together in such marvellous Devo∣tions as were never heard of in the world before. But all signified nothing; why? Because they do as the Prophet Isaiah foretold that they would; they still Reject our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom alone it is, that any of our Humi∣liations have Acceptance with the God of Heaven. The Great God has promi∣sed, That He will be favourable unto that Nation, in Lev. 26 41. When their Uncircumcised Hearts be Humbled, and they then Accept the punishment of their Iniquity. The Sacrifice, upon whom the punishment of our Iniquity does fall, [Isa. 53.6. and 2 Cor. 5.21.] is that of the Messiah; and the Messiah therefore is by that Name intended. When the Jewes come to leave off their Thoughts and Hopes, of any o∣ther Sacrifice, or their Dreams of making Satisfaction by bearing the punishment of their own Iniquity, but Accept the Messiah, as the only Help of their Souls against all the Guilt of their Sins; THEN
God will Remember His Covenant. O That they would at Last, and at Least come to such Thoughts, as were in the fa∣mous Rabbi Samuel Marochianus, who up∣on that Prophecy of Amos, where the Lord threatens to punish Israel for Sel∣ling the Righteous for Silver, has these Memorable words; The Prophet A∣mos, Expresly declares the Wickedness, for which we are in our Captivity: It manifestly appears to me, that we are justly punished, for that Sin of Selling the Righteous. A thousand years and more, are spent, in all which Time our condition among the Gentiles is not minded, nor have we any Hopes of mending it. O My God, I am afraid, I am afraid, Lest the IESVS, whom the Christians Worship, should be the Righteous One, whom we have Sold for Silver! In the mean time, Let us that own our selves Christians, now prove our selves to be so, by our Humbling our selves before God, but Looking for the Success of it, only from and thro' our Lord Iesus Christ, our only Mediator. Let the Humiliation of our Lord Jesus Christ, be our Meditation, and our Consola∣tion. Of Him 'tis said, in Psal. 2.8. He
Humbled Himself. And let it provoke our Humiliation, when we meditate on what our Lord Jesus Christ suffered, when God Laid no Him the Iniquity of us all. But when we have Humbled our selves never so much, Let us count that we have cause to be Humbled over again, for the defects of our own Humiliation. As he of old said, Lava meas Lachrymas Domine; Lord, My very Tears want washing! So let us be sen∣sible, There is enough in our best Humiliati∣ons, to call for more Humiliations. Fly then to the Lord Jesus Christ, whose Prayers were alwayes perfect, and whose Fasts were ever Faultless, and whose Blood be∣ing Sprinkled upon our Humiliations, is that, which alone, can render such De∣fective Things Acceptable unto the Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty. Put all into the Hands of the Great Angel of the Covenant: His Incense persuming of them, they will Ascend before God, with glorious Effects following thereupon. Among some of the Americans, 'tis reported, they have a strange Usage, when they are Humbling themselves before their Gods, to bring their Sheep into their Assemblies, that by the Bleats and Cries of their Sheep
they may move the compassion of their Gods. We are better taught than so! when we are Humbling our selves, we are to bring before our God, that Lamb of God, which takes away the Sins of the world. Syrs, There was a Sacrifice for the Congre∣gation, which was on a Day of Humiliation of old Commemorated. Our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, is to be on our Day of Humi∣liation, Look'd unto, as the Sacrifice for our whole Congregation. Our Faith is to Argue it, That God has had more Honour from the Sacrifice of our Lord Iesus Christ, than if all our whole Congregation, were destroy'd for ever. Our Faith is to Re∣solve it, That whatever Salvation is vouch∣safed unto all our whole Congregation, the Sacrifice of our Lord Iesus Christ shall have the Honour and the Merit of it all, ascribed thereunto. Now, who can tell, how far one Humble Soul, may prevail, that shall put in Suit, the Sacrifice for the Congregation? The Faith of one Moses, of one Samuel, yea, of one Amos, one poor, obscure, honest Husbandman, Oh! how far, may it go, to obtain this An∣swer, from the Great God, They have Humbled themselves, I will not destroy
them, but grant them some Deliverance! ¶ AND, I suppose, there happens to be at this very Time, in this Assembly, an Example, full of Encouragement unto those Humiliations, which have been thus called for. In our Solemn Humiliations before the Lord, we have with a very particular Fervency besought His Mercy for our poor Captives, that were become the Prey of the Terrible; Yea, we have done it, with some Assurance, that the Glorious Hearer of Prayer, would Vouchsafe of His Mercy to some of those Miserables. Now, I think I see, among you, at this Hour, Three Persons, namely, Two Women, and one Youth, who have just now, Received a Deliverance from a Cap∣tivity in the Hands of houid Indians, with some very Singular Circumstances; And therefore, Let it not seem an Un∣suitable or Unseasonable Digression, it I Conclude, this Discourse, with making this unexpected occurrence, to be Subser∣vient unto the main Intention thereof.
[A Narrative of a Notable Deliverance from Captivity.] ON the fifteenth Day, of the Last March, Hannah Dustan, of Haver∣hil, having Lain in about a Week, at∣tended with her Nurse, Mary Neff, a Widow a Body or Teile Indians, drew near unto the House where she lay, with Designs to carry on the bloody Devasta∣tions, which they had begun upon the Neigh bourhood. Her Husband, hasten∣ed from his Employments abroad, unto the Relief of his Distressed Family; and first bidding Seven of his Eight Children (which were from Two to Seventeen years of age,) to get away as fast a they could, unto some Garrison in the Town, he went in, to inform his Wife, of the horrible Distress now come upon them. E're she could get up, the fierce Indians were go so near, that itetly des∣pairing to do her any Service, he can out after his Children; Resolving, that on the Horse, which he had with him, he would Ride away, with That, which he should in this Extremity find his Af∣fections to pitch most upon, and leave the Rest, unto the care of the Divine
Providence. He overtook his Children, about Forty Rod, from his Door; but then, such was the Agony of his Parental Affections, that he found it Impossible for him, to Distinguish any one of them, from the Rest; wherefore he took up a Courageous Resolution, to Live & Dy with them All. A party of Indians came up with him; and now, though they Fired at him, and he Fired at them, yet he manfully kept in the Reer of his Little Army of unarmed Children, while they March'd off, with the pace of a Child of Five years old; until, by the Singular Providence of God, he arrived safe with them all, unto a place of Safe∣ty, about a Mile or two from his House. But his House must in the mean Time, have more dismal Tradegies acted at it▪ The Nurse, trying to Escape, with the New born Infant, sell into the hands of the formidable Salvages; & those suri∣ous Tawnies, coming in to the House, bid poor Dustan, to Rise immediately. Full of Astonishment, she did so; and Sitt∣ing down in the Chimney, with an heart full of most fearful Expectation, she saw the Raging Dragons rislle all that they
could carry away: and set the House on Fire. About Nineteen or Twenty In∣dians, now led these away, with about Half a score other, English Captives: but e're they had gone many Steps, they dash'd out the Brains of the Infant, against a Tree, and several of the other Cap∣tives, as they begun to Tire in their sad Journey, were soon sent unto their long Home, but the Salvages would presently bury their Hatchets in their Brains, and leave their Carcases on the ground, for Birds & Beasts, to feed upon [Christians, A Joshua would have Rent his Clothes, & fallen to the Earth on his Face, and have Humbled himself Exceedingly upon the falling out of such doleful Ruines upon his Neighbours!] However, Dustan (with her Nurse,) notwithstanding her present Condition, Travelled that Night, about a Dozen Miles; and then kept up with their New Masters, in a long Travel of an Hundred and fifty Miles, more or less, within a few Dayes Ensu∣ing; without any sensible Damage, in their Health, from the Hardships, of their Travel, their Lodging, their Diet, and their many other Difficulties. These
Two poor Women, were now in the Hands of those, Whose Tender Mercies are Cruelty: but the Good God, who hath all Hearts in His own. Hands, heard the Sighs of these Prisoners unto Him, and gave them to find unexpected Favour, from the Master, who Laid claim unto them. That Indian Family consisted of Twelve persons, Two stout men, three women, and seven Children; and for the shame of many a Prayerless Family among our English, I must now publish what these poor women assure me; 'Tis This; In Obedience to the Instruction which the French have given them, they would have Prayers in their Family, no less than Thrice every Day; In the Morn∣ing, at Noen, and in the Evening; nor would they ordinarily let so much as a Child, Eat, or Sleep, without first saying their Prayers. Indeed, these Idolaters, were, like the rest of their whiter Bre∣thren Persecutors, and would not Endure that these poor Women should Retire to their English Prayers, if they could hin∣der them. Nevertheless, the poor Wo∣men, had nothing but fervent Prayers, to make their Lives comfortable r
tolerable; and by being daily sent out, upon Business, they had opportunities together and asunder, to do like another Hannah, in pouring ut their Souls before the Lord: Nor did their Praying Friends among our selves, forbear to pour out Supplications for them. Now, they could not observe it, without some wonder, that their Indian Master, sometimes, when he saw them Dejected, would say unto them; What need you Trouble your self? If your God will have you Delivered, you shall be so! And it seems, our God, would have it so to be! This Indian Family, was now Tra∣velling with these two Captive women, (& an English Youth, taken from Wor∣cester, last September was a Twelve month,) unto a Rendezvouz of Salvages, which they call a Town, somewhere beyond Penacook; and they still told these poor women, that when they came to this Town, they must be Stript, & Scourg∣ed, and Run the Gantlet, through the whole Army of Indians. They said, This was the Fashion, when the Captives first came to a Town; and they deri∣ded, some of the faint hearted English,
which, they said, fainted and swooned away under the Torments of this Disci∣pline. [Syrs, can we hear of these things befalling out Neighbours, & not Humble our selves before our God!] But on this Day Se'night, while they were yet it may be, about an hundred and fifty miles from the Indian Town, a little before Break of Day, when the whole Crew, was in a Dead Sleep, ('twill presently prove so!) One of these wo∣men took up a Resolution, to Imitate the Action of Jael upon Sisera, and being where she had not her own Life secured by any Law unto her, she thought she was not forbidden by any Law, to take away the Life, of the Murderers, by whom her Child had been butchered. She heartened the Nurse, and the Youth, to assist her, in this Enterprise; & they all furnishing themselves with Hatchets for the purpose, they struck such Home Blowes, upon the Heads of their Sleep∣ing Oppressors, that e're they could any of them struggle into any effectual Re∣sistance, at the Feet of those poor Pri∣soners, They bowed, they fell, they lay down; at their feet they bowed, they fell;
where they bowed, there they fell down Dead. Onely one Squaw Escaped sore∣ly wounded from them, and one Boy, whom they Reserved Asleep, intending to bring him away with them, suddenly wak'd and stole away, from this Deso∣lation. But cutting off the Scalps of the Ten Wretches, who had Enslav'd 'em they are come off; and I perceive, that newly arriving among us, they are in the Assembly at this Time, to give Thanks unto, God their Saviour. [An Improvement of the foregoing Narrative.] IF we did now Humble our selves throughout the Land, who can say, whether the Revenges on the Enemy, thus Exemplified, would not proceed much rather unto the Quick Extirpation, of those Boy and Crafty men. Hor, I may not Conclude, until I have sa mething unto YOU, that I see, now nd before the Lord, in this Assem e Subjects of such a Wonder∣ful Dece, from your Captivity; a Deliver hich hath been Signalized
with such Unusual Circumstances. Words that are spoken in an Ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ, carry with them a pe∣culiar Efficacy and Authority. The Lord Jesus Christ, hath by a Surprising Providence of His, brought you this Day, to wait upon Him, in that Great Ordi∣nance, which is His Power for the Salvation of our Souls. Hear a Servant of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, in His Name, now Publickly & Solemnly calling upon you, to make a Right use of the Deliverance, wherewith He ha's Highly favoured you. The Use, which you are to make of it, is, To Humble your selves before the Lord Exceedingly. As you have had the Extraordinary Judgments of God upon you, to Humble you, so, Except His Ex∣traordinary Mercies do likewise Humble you, you do but Exceedingly Abuse them: The Rich Goodness of God unto you, is to Lead you unto Repentance! When you were Carried into Captivity, We did not say, That you were greater Sinners, than the rest that yet Escape it. You are now Resened from Captivity, and must not think, That they are greater Sinners, who are Left behind in the most
barbarous Hands imaginable. No, you, that have been under the Mighty Hand of God, are to Humble your selves, under that Hand. But it you do indeed so, I know, what you will do. You will seriously consider, What you shall render to the Lord for all His Benefits? And you will sin∣cerely Render your very Selves unto the Lord: You are not now the Slaves of Indians, as you were a few Dayes a∣go; but if you continue Unhumbled, in your Sins, you will be the Slaves of Devils; and, Let me tell you, A Sla∣very to Devils, to be in Their Hands, is worse than to be in the Hands of Indians! I beseech you then, by the Mer∣cies of God, that you present your selves unto the Lord Jesus Christ; Become the sincere Servants of that Lord, who by His Blood has brought you out of the Dungeon, wherein you were lately Lan∣guiing; Oh! Deny not the Lord, who has thus Bought you, out of your Capti∣vity. I tell you truly, The Lord Ex∣pects great Returns of Humiliation, of Thankfulness, and of Obedience, from you; and I therefore Leave with you, one Sentence of Scripture to be often
thought upon; 'Tis That, in Ezra 9.13. 14. After all that is come upon us, for our Evil Deeds, seeing thou, our God, hast given us such Deliverance as this, should we again break thy Commandments, wouldest thou not be angry with us, till thou hadst Consumed us? Now, Let all Consider what hath been said, and the Lord give us Understanding n all things!
APPENDIX. A NARRATIVE of Hannah Swarton, Containing Wonderful Passages, relating to her Captivity, and her Deliverance. I Was taken by the Indians, when Casco Fort was taken, (May) 1690. My Husband being slain, and Four Chil∣dren taken with me. The Eldest of my Sons they killed, about two Months after I was taken, and the rest Scattered from me I was now left a Widow, and as Bereaved of my Children; though, I had them alive, yet it was very seldome that I could see them, and I had not Li∣berty to Discourse with them, without Danger either of my own Life, or theirs; for our Condoling each others Conditi∣on, and shewing Natural Affection, was so displeasing to our Indian Rulers, unto whose Share we fell, that they would threaten to kill us, if we cryed each to
other, or discoursed much together. So that my Condition was like what the Lord threatned the Jews, in Ezek. 24.22, 23. We durst not Mourn or Weep, in the sight of our Enemies, lest we lost our own Lives. For the first Times while the Enemy feasted on our English Pro∣visions, I might have had some with them: but then I was so filled with Sor∣row and Tears, that I had little Stomach to Eat; and when my Stomach was come, our English Feed was spent, and the In∣dians wanted themselves, and we more: So that then I was pined with want. We had no Corn, or Bread, but sometimes Groundnuts, Acrns, Purslin, Hogweel, Weeds, Roots, and sometimes Dogs Flesh, but not sufficient to saiy Hunger with these; having but little at a Time. We had no success at Huning; save that one Bear was killed, which I had part of; and a very small part of a Tittle I had ano∣ther time, and once an Indian gave me a piece of a Mooses Liver, which was a sweet Morsel to me; and Fish, if we could catch it. Thus I continued with them, hurried up and down the Wilder∣ness, from May 20. till the middle of
February; Carrying continually, a Great Burden in our Travels; and I must go their pace, or else be killed presently; and yet was pinched with Cold, for want of Cloathing, being put by them into an Indian Dress, with a sleight Blanket, no Stockings, and but one pair of Indian-Shoes, and of their Leather Stockings for the Winter: My Feet were pricked with sharp Stones, and prickly Bushes some∣times; and other times Pinched with Snow, Cold, and Ice, that I travelled upon, ready to be frozen, and faint for want of Food; so that many times I thought I could go no further, but must ly down, and if they would kill me, let them kill me. Yet then, the Lord did so Renew my Strength, that I went on still further, as my Master would have me, and held out with them. Though many English were taken, and I was brought to some of them, at times, while we were about Casco Bay and Kennebeck River, yet at Norridgawock, we were Se∣parated, and no English were in our Company, but one John York and my self, who were both, almost Starved fo want, and yet told, that if we could not
hold up to travel with them, they would kill us. And accordingly, John York, growing Weak by his wants, they killed him, and threatened me with the like. One time, my Indian Mistress, and I, were left alone, while the rest went to look for Eeles; and they left us no Food from Sabbath day Morning, till the next Sature-day; save that we had a Blad∣der (of Moose I think) which was well filled with Maggots, and we boiled it, and drank the Broth▪ but the Bladder was so tough, we could not eat it. On the Saturday, I was sent by my Mistress, to that part of the Island, most likely to see some Canoo, and there to▪ make Fire and Smoke, to invite some Indians, if I could spy any, to come to Relieve us; and I espied a Canoo, and by Signs in∣vited them to come to the Shore. It proved to be some Squaw's; who under∣standing our wants, one of them gave me a Roasted Eel, which I eat, and it seemed unto me, the most Savoury Food, I ever tasted before. Sometimes we lived on Wortle burres; smetimes on a kind of Wild Cherry, which grew on Bushes; which I was sent to gather,
once in so bitter a Cold season, that I was not able to bring my Fingers to∣gether, to hold them fast: yet under all these Hardships, the Lord kept me from any Sickness, or such Weakness as to disenable me from Travelling, when they put us upon it. My Indian Mistress, was one that had been bred by the English at Black point, and now Married to a Canada Indian, & turned Papist; and she would say, That had the English been as careful to instruct her in our Religion, as the French were, to instruct her in theirs, she might have been of our Religion: and she would say, That God delivered us into their Hands to punish us for our Sins; And, This I knew was true as to my self. And as I desired to consider of all my Sins, for which the Lord did punish me, so this Lay very heavy upon my Spirit, many a Time, that I had Left the Publick Worship and Ordinances of God, where I formerly Lived, (viz. at Beverley) to Remove to the North part of Casco-Bay, where there was no Church, or Minister of the Gos∣pel; and this we did, for large Accom∣modations in the World, thereby Expo∣sing
our Children, to be bred Ignorant∣ly like Indians, and our selves to forget what we had been formerly instructed in; and so we turned our Backs upon Gods Ordinances to get this Worlds Goods. But now, God hath stripped me of these things also; so that I must Justify the Lord, in all that has befallen me, and acknowledge that He hath punished me less than my Iniquities deserved. I was now Bereaved of Husband, Children, Friends, Neighbours, House, Estate, Bread, Cloaths, or Lodging suitable; and my very Life did hang daily in Doubt, being continually in danger of being killed by the Indians, or pined to Death with Fa∣mine, or tired to Death with hard Tra∣velling, or pinched with Cold, till I dy∣ed in the Winter season. I was so ama∣zed with many Troubles, and hurried in my Spirit from one Exercise  other, how to preserve my self in da and supply my slt in the want that was present; that I had not time or leisure so composedly to consider of the great Concernments of my Soul, as I should have done; neither had I any Bible or Good Book to look into, or Christian
Friend to be my Counsellor in these Distresses. But I may say, The Words of God, which I had formerly heard or read, many of them came oft into my mind, and kept me from perishing in my Afflictions. As, when they threatned to Kill me many times, I often thought of the words of our Saviour to Pilate, Joh. 19.11. Thou couldest have no power at all a∣gainst me, except it were given thee from above. I knew they had no power to kill me, but what the Lord gave them; and I had many times Hope, that the Lord would not suffer them to slay me, but deliver me out of their Hands, and in His Time, I hoped, return me to my Country again. When they told me, that my Eldest Son was killed by the In∣dians, I thought of that in Jer. 33.8. I will cleanse them from all their Iniquities whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their Iniquities. I hoped, though the Enemy had barbarously kil∣led his Body, yet that the Lord had Par∣doned his Sins, and that his Soul was safe. When I thought upon my many Trou∣bles, I thought of Jobs complaint, chap. 14 16, 17. Thou numbrest my steps, and
watchest over my Sin; my Transgression is sealed up in a Bag, and thou sowest up my Iniquity. This was for my Humiliation, and put me upon Prayer to God, for His Pardoning Mercy in Christ; and I thought upon Davids complaint, Psalm 13.1, 2 and used it in my Prayers to the Lord; How Long wilt thou forget me, O Lord for ever! How long wilt thou hide thy face from me? How long shall I take counsel in my Soul, having sorrow in my Heart! How long shall my Enemy be Exalted over me? I sometimes bemoaned my self, as Job; chap. 19.9, 10. He hath stripped me of my Glory, and taken my Crown from my Head; He hath de∣stroyed me, on every side, and I am gone, and my Hope hath he removed like a Tree. Yet sometimes Encouraged from Job 22.27. Thou shalt make thy Prayer to him, and He shall hear thee, and thou shalt pay thy Vows. I made my Vows to the Lord, that I would give up my self to Him, if He would accept me in Jesus Christ, and pardon my Sins; and I desired and endeavoured to Pay my Vows unto the Lord. I Pray'd to Him, Remember not against me the Sins of my Youth; and I
besought Him, Judge me, O God, and plead my cause against an Ungodly Nation; deliver me from the Deceitful and Unjust man: Why go I mourning because of the Oppression of the Enemy? And by many other Scriptures, that were brought to my Remembrance, was I instructed, di∣rected and comforted. I Travelled over steep and hideous Mountains one while, and another while over Swamps and Thickets of Fallen Trees, lying one, two, three foot from the ground, which I have stepped on, from one to another, nigh a thousand in a day; carrying a great Burden on my Back. Yet I dreaded going to Ca∣nada, to the French, for fear lest I should be overcome by them, to yield to their Religion; which I had Vowed unto God, That I would not do. But the Ex∣tremity of my Sufferings were such, that at length I was willing to go, to pre∣serve my Life. And after many weary Journeys, through Frost and Snow, we came to Canada, about the middle of February, 1690. and Travelling over the River, my Master pitch'd his Wigwam in sight of some French Houses Westward
of us, and then sent me to those Hou∣ses to beg Victuals for them: which I did, and found the French very kind to me, giving me Beef, and Pork, and Bread, which I had been without, near nine months before; so that now, I found a great Change as to Diet. But the Snow being knee deep, and my Legs and Hams very sore, I found it very tedious to Travel; and my sores bled, so that as I Travelled, I might be Tracked by my Blood, that I left be∣hind me on the Snow. I asked leave to stay all Night with the French, when I went to beg again; which my Ma∣ster consented unto, and sent me East∣ward, to Houses, which were toward Quebeck, (though then I knew it not:) So, having begge Provisions a a French House, and it being ma night, after I was Rereshd my sl, and had Food to cary to the Inis, I sign sied, as well as I could make the French Woman un∣derstand, That I dsird to stay by her Fire, that Night. Whereupon she laid a good Bed on the Floor, and good Co∣verings for me, and there I Lodged comfortably; and the next Mornin▪
when I had breakfasted with the Family, and the men kind were gone abroad, as I was about to go to my Indian Master, the French Woman stept out, and left me alone in her House; and I then staid her Return, to give her thanks for her kindness; and while I waited, came in two men, and one of them spake to me in English, I am glad to see you Country woman! This was exceeding∣ly Reviving, to hear the voice of an English man; and upon Enquiry, I found, he was an English man, taken at the North West Passage; and the other was a French Ordinary Keeper. After some Discourse he asked me to go with him to Quebeck, which he told me, was about four miles off: I an∣swered, my Indian Master might kill me for it, when I went back. Then, after some Discourse in French, with his Fellow Traveller, he said; This French man Engaged, that if I would go with them, he would keep me, from Return∣ing to the Indians, and I should be Ran∣somed: and my French Hostess being now Returned in a doors, perswaded me to go with 'em to Quebeck; which I
did, and was conveyed unto the House of the Lord Intendant, Monsieur Le To∣nant, who was Chief Judge, and the Se∣cond to the Governour; and I was kind∣ly Entertained by the Lady, and had French Cloaths given me, with good Diet and Lodging, & was carried thence unto the Hospital; where I was Physick∣ed and Blooded, and very courteously provided for. And some time after, my Indian Master and Mistrss coming for me, the Lady Intendant paid a Ran∣some for me, and I became her Servnt. And I must speak it to the Honour of the French, they were exceeding kind to me at first, even as kind as I could expect to find the English: so that I wanted nothing for my Bodily Com∣fort, which they could help me unto. Here was a great and comfortable Change, as to my Outward man, in my Freedom from my former Hardships, and Hard hearted Oppressors. But here be∣gan a greater Snare and Trouble to my Soul and Danger to my Inward man. For the Lady my Mistress, the Nuns, the Priests, Friars, and the rest, set up∣on me, with all the strength of Argu∣ment
they could, from Scripture, as they interpreted it, to perswade me to Turn Papist; which they pressed with very much Zeal, Love, Intreaties, and Pro∣mises, if I would Turn to them, and with many Threatnings, and sometimes Hard Usages, because I did not Turn to their Religion. Yea, sometimes the Papists, because I would not Turn to them, Threatned to send me to France, and there I should be Burned, because I would not Turn to them. Then was I comforted from that in 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10. We were pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of Life; but we had the sentence of Death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God, who raises the Dead; who delivered us from so great a Death, and doth deliver; in whom we trust that He will yet deliver us. I knew, God was Able to deliver me, as He did Paul, and as He did the Three Children out of the Fiery Furnace; and I believed, He would either Deliver me from them, or Fitt me for what He called me to suffer, for His Sake and Name. For their Pray∣ing to Angels, they brought the History
of the Angel, that was sent to the Virgin Mary, in the First of Luke. I answered them, from Rev. 19.10. and 22.9. They brought Exod 17.11. of Israels prevail∣ing, while Moses held up his Hands. I told them, we must come to God only by Christ, Joh. 6 37, 44. For Purgatory, they brought Mat. 5.25. I told them, To agree with God while here on Earth, was, to Agree with our Adversary in the way; and if we did not, we should be Cast into Hell, and should not come out until we Paid the utmost Farthing, which could never be paid. But its bootless for me a poor Woman, to acquaint the World, with what Arguments I used, if I could now Remember them; and many of them are slipt out of my me∣mory. I shall proceed to Relate, what Tri∣als I met with, in these Things. I was put upon it, either to stand to the Reli∣gion I was brought up in, and believed in my Conscience to be True; or to Turn to another, which I believed was not Right. And I was kept from Tur∣ning, by that Scripture, Mat. 10.32, 33. Whosoever shall confess me before men, him
will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven, and whosoever denies me before men, him also will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven. I thought that if I should Deny the Truth, and own their Religion, I should Deny Christ. Yet up∣on their perswasions, I went to see, and be present at their Worship, sometimes: but never to Receive their Sacrament. And once, when I was at their Worship, that Scripture, 2 Cor. 6.14. to the end, came into my mind: What Communion hath Light with Darkness! What Concord hath Christ with Bel! What part hath he that believeth with an sidel? and what Agreement hath the Temple of God with I∣dols? Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye Separate, and touch not the Un∣clean Thing, and I will Receive you, and I will be a Father to you, and you shall be my Sons and Daughters, saith the Lord Almigh∣ty. This Scripture was so strong, upon my Spiit, that I thought I was out of my way to be present at their idlatrous Worship, and I Resolved never to come unto it again. But when the time drew nigh that I was to go again, I was so Restless that Night, that I could not
sleep; thinking, what I should say to them when they urged me to go again, and what I should Do. And so it was in the morning, that a French woman of my Acquaintance, told me, if I would not be of Their Religion, I did but mock at it, to go to their Worship, and there∣fore bid me, That if I would not be of their Religion, I should go no more. I answered her, That I would not be of their Religion, and I would go no more to their Worship: and accordingly, I never went more, and they did not force me to it. I have had many Conflicts in my own Spirit; fearing that I was not truely Converted unto God in Christ, and that I had no Saving Interest in Christ I could not be of a False Religion, to please men; for it was against my Conscience: And I was not fit to suffer for the True Religion, and for Christ; for I then feared, I had no Interest in Him. I was neither fit to Live, nor f to Dye; and brought once to the very pit of Despair, about what would become of my Soul In this Time I hd gotten an English Bible, and other Good Books, by the Help of my Fellow Captives. I
Looked over the Scripture, and settled on the Prayer of Jonah, and those Words, I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet will I Look again towards thy Holy Temple. I Resolved, I would do as Jonah did: And in the Meditation upon this Scrip∣ture, the Lord was pleased, by His Spi∣rit, to come into my Soul, and so fill me with Ravishing Comfort, that I can∣not Express it. Then came to mind, the History of the Transfiguring of Christ, and Peters saying, Math. 17.4. Lord, It is Good for us to be here! I thought, it was Good for me to be here; and I was so full of Comfort and Joy, I even Wished I could be so al∣wayes, and never sleep; or else Dy in that Rapture of Joy, and never Live to Sin any more against the Lord. Now I thought God was my God, and my Sins were pardoned in Christ; and now I thought, I could Suffer for Christ, yea, Dye for Christ, or do any thing for Him. My Sins had been a Burden to me: I desired to see all my Sins, and to Re∣pent of them all, with all my Heart, and of that Sin which had been especially a Burden to me, namely, That I Left the
Publick Worship and Ordinances of God, to go to Live in a Remote Place, without the Publick Ministry; depriving our selves & our Children, of so great a Benefit for our Souls, and all this, for Worldly advantages. I found an Heart to Repent of them all; and to lay hold of the Blood of Christ, to cleanse me from them all. I found much Comfort, while I was among the French, by the Opportunities I had sometimes to Read the Scriptures, and other. Good Books, and Pray to the Lord in Secret; and the Conference that some of us Captives had together, about things of God, and Prayer together sometimes; especially, with one that was in the same House with me, Marga∣ret Stilson Then was the Word of God precious to us, and they that feared the LORD, spake one to another of it, as we had Opportunity. And Coloned Tyng, and Mr. Alden, as they were per∣mitted, did speak to us, to Confm and Strengthen us, in the wayes of the Lord. At length, the French debatr'd our com∣ing together, for Religious Conference, or other Duties: And Word was sent us, by Mr. Alden, That this was one kind
of Persecution, that we must suffer for Christ. These are some of the Scriptures, which have been my Support and Com∣fort, in the Affliction of my Captivity, among the Papists. That in Ezek. 16.6.— 8. I applyed unto my self; and I de∣sired to Enter into Covenant with God, and to be His; And I Prayed to the Lord, and Hoped the Lord would Re∣turn me to my Country again, That I might Enter into Covenant with Him, among His People, and Enjoy Commu∣nion with Him, in His Churches, and Publick Ordinances. Which Prayers the Lord hath now heard, and graciously Answered; Praised be His Name! The Lord Enable me to Live suitably unto His Mercy, and to those Publick and Precious Priviledges, which I now En∣joy. So, That in Ezek 11.16, 17. was a Great Comfort unto me, in my Cap∣tivity; Although, I have cast them far off among the Heathen, yet will I be a little Sanctuary to them; — I will gather you from the People,— where you have been Scattered. I found, that God was a Little Sanctuary to me there, and hoped,
that the Lord would bring me to the Country from whence I had been Scattered. And the Lord hath heard the Prayer of the Destitute, and not despised my Prayer, but granted me the Desire of my Soul, in bringing me to His House, and my Re∣lations again. I often thought on the History of the man Born Blind; of whom Christ, when His Disciples asked, Whe∣ther this man had Sinned, or his Parents? answered, Neither this man, nor his Pa∣rents; but this was, that the works of God might be made manifest in him. So, tho' I had deserved all this, yet I knew not, but one Reason, of Gods bringing all these Afflictions and Miseries upon me, and then Enabling me to bear them, was, That the Works of God might be made manifest. And in my Great Distress, I was Revived by that, in Psal 118.17, 18. I shall not Dy but Live, and Declare the works of the Lord: The Lord hath chasten'd  sore, but He hath not given me over to Death. I had very often, a secret per∣swasion, That I should Live to Declare the Works of the Lord. And, 2 Chron. 6.36, 37, 38, 39. was a precious Scripture to me, in the Day of Evil. We have
Read over, and Pray'd over, this Scripture together, and Talk'd together of this Scripture, Margaret and I; How the Lord hath Promised, Though they were Scattered for their Sins, yet there should be a Return, if they did Bethink them∣selves, and Turn, and Pray. So we did Bethink our selves in the Land where we were Garried Captive, did Turn, did Pray, and Endeavour to Return to God with all our Hearts: And, as they were to Pray towards the Temple, I took it, that I should Pray towards Christ; and accordingly did so, and hoped the Lord would Hear, and He hath Heard from Heaven, His Dwelling Place, my Prayer and Supplication, and mentained my Cause, and not Rejected me, but Re∣turned me. And Oh! how affectionate was my Reading of the Eighty Fourth Psalm in this Condition. The means of my Deliverance, were by reason of Letters that had passd between the Governments of New-En∣gland and of Canada. Mr. Cary was sent with a Vessel, to fetch Captives from Quebeck, and when he came, I among o∣thers,
with my youngest Son, had our Liberty to come away: And by Gods Blessing upon us, we Arrived in Safety, at Boston, in November, 1695. our Desi∣red Haven. And I desire to Praise the Lord for His Goodness, and for His Wonder∣ful Works to me. Yet still I have left be∣hind, Two Children, a Daughter of Twenty Years old, at Mont Royal, whom I had not seen in Two years before I came away; and a Son of Nineteen years old, whom I never saw since we parted, the next morning after we were taken. I earnestly Request the Prayers of my Christian Friends, that the Lord will de∣liver them. What shall I render to the Lord for all His Benefits? FINIS.
