N1232 11862243 50037
The Duke of NORFOLK'S Order about the Habit the Ladies are to be in that attend the Queen at her Coronation. His Majesty having been pleas'd to Command the Attendance of the Peeresses of England upon the Queen Consort at her Coronation; And it being for the Honour of so great a Solemnity, that They all be in the same Habit, with Distinction's of the Ranks of those that Wear them: I have, by His Ma∣jesties Command, Order'd a particular Direction to be Printed, whereby every one may know in what manner They ought to appear. THE Train of a BARONESS, a Yard on the Ground, the Ermin Cape to be Poudred with Two Bars, the long Mantle to be Edg'd round with Ermin Un-poudred an Inch broad, the Sur-coat to be of Crimson Velvet, as well as the Mantle, made straight-Body'd, and Clasp'd before, Edg'd with Ermin Two Inches broad, and Scallop'd down the sides from below the Girdle, with a Train a little shorter than the long Robe, Sleeves of Velvet (Scallop'd, Edg'd with Ermin, and Fringe of Gold or Silver,) to reach a little below the Shoulder, the Cap to reach only a little above the Rim of the Coronet. A VISCOUNTESS to have her Train a Yard and a Quarter upon the Ground, the Cape Poudred with Two Rows and a half, the long Mantle to be Edg'd with Two Inches of Ermin, the Sur-coat to be of Crimson Velvet as well as the Mantle, and straight to the Body, Clasp'd before, Edg'd with Ermin Two Inches broad, and Scallop'd down the sides, with a Train something shorter than the Mantle, Sleeves of Velvet (Scallop'd, Edg'd with Ermin, and Fringe of Gold or Silver,) to reach a little below the Shoulder, the Cap to reach a little above the Rim of the Coronet. A COUNTES'S Train to be a Yard and half upon the Ground, the Cape Pou∣dred with Three Rows of Ermin, the Mantle Edg'd with Three Inches of Ermin, the Sur-coat to be of Crimson Velvet, close Body'd, Clasped before, Edg'd with Ermin Two Inches broad, and Scallop'd down the Sides, with a Train half a Yard, Velvet Sleeves, Scallop'd and Edg'd with Ermin, and Fringe of Gold or Silver, the Cap to reach only a little above the Rim of the Coronet. A MARCHIONESS, to have her Train a Yard and Three Quarters upon the ground; the Cape Poudred with Three Rows and a half of Ermin, the Mantle Edg'd with Four Inches of Ermin, the Sur-coat to be of Crimson Velvet, close Body'd, Clasp'd before, Edg'd with Ermin Two Inches broad, Scallop'd down the Sides, with a Train about half a Yard, Velvet Sleeves, (Scallop'd and Edg'd with Ermin, and Fringe of Gold or Silver) to reach a little below the Shoulder, the Cap to reach only a little above the Rim of the Coronet. A DUTCHESS'S Train to be Two Yards upon the Ground, the Cape Poudred with Four Rows of Ermin, the Mantle Edg'd with Five Inches of Ermin, the Sur-coat to be of Crimson Velvet as well as the Mantle, close Body'd, Clasped before, Edg'd with Ermin Two Inches broad, and Scallop'd down the sides, with a Train about half a Yard, Velvet Sleeves Edg'd with Ermin, Scallop'd and Fring'd with Gold or Silver, to reach a little below the Shoulder, the Cap only to reach a little above the Rim of the Coronet. The Petticoats to be of Cloath of Silver, or any other White Stuff, either Lac'd or Embroider'd, according to every ones Fancy. The Mantles to hang back, being fast'ned on each Shoulder with Cords of Silver or Gold suitable to their Fringe, with a Tassel of the same, hanging one of each side down to the Wast. The Sur-coats to open before, that the Petticoats may appear. NORFOLK and MARSHALL. Printed by Nat. Thompson at the Entrance into Old-Spring-Garden near Charing-Cross, 1685.
