O833 12589185 63826
THE LAST TRVE INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND.Being a Letter sent from Chester: Dated the second of Aprill, 1642. from Mr. William Owen, to a friend of his in LONDON. In which is Related, the taking of Carreggmayne-Castle, seven Miles South-East from Dubline, from the Rebels, where Sir Simon Harcott was slaine, being shott from the Castle in the side, with a shan∣ker Bullet, out of a long Peeice. Also, Sergent Major Berry, is mortally wounded in the FLANK.
A LETTER SENT From Chester, dated the se∣cond of Aprill, 1642. Sir, I Saw nothing from you the last weeke, not so much as my printed papers, which I atri∣bute to your absence, or much bussinesse, and doe desire you to make good by the next: I have not much newes to send you, but that wch is
not pleasing,; by the Letters of Ireland, which I understand came well unto your Office, by Master Ware, the last Monday, I doubt not, but that you have heard of the good successe, which then happened, which I passe o∣ver: since which time, the State having notice of some Rebels, to have mett at Careggmayne-Castle, 7. miles South-East from Dublin, sent out Sir Simon Harcott, with a strong party of Horse, to scout and cleere the Country, where at his arivall at the said Castle, he found it to bee of that strength, more then the power which Hee had with Him, could master: and thereupon sent for more men from Dublin; where imediately,
800. Foote, and as many Horse, as made up his party to 250. with which number▪ Hee begirt the Castle, placing a Musketteer between each Horse, and in that Posture, stood all night: the Re∣bels having that Night, made a fire upon the Battlements of the Castle, which was answered by another fire from the Moun∣taine, which our Men tooke to bee the Allarum to the Rebels, and then 400. more was sent for from Dublin, who with two pei∣ces of Battery, came thether at 12. at noone on Sunday last, but in the meane time, neither Party was idle, for the Rebels by breake of day, attempted to Isue out to∣ward the Mountaine, which
Major Berry with his Fire-lockes, forced backe to their Fort; in which Skirmish, He was shot in∣to the flancke, and his wound feared to be Mortall: The rest of the day was spent in exchange of Shott with the Rogues, till the arivall of the Battery, where Sir Simon Harcott being over carefull about his men, exhorting them to Fall on, so soone as they saw any breach made; was unfortunately shott in the right side, with a shanker-bullet out of a long Peeice, which fell him to the ground: this shott was made at him out of the Castle, by a no∣table Marks-man, who by his habit, was knowne to have made many shott, who seldome fayl'd: The noble Collonell was pre∣sently
taken up, and walked of between two, but could not goe farre: VVhereat his Souldiers grew so enraged, to see Him so sore wounded, as that Impati∣ent of the Battery, which did lit∣tle good; fell to undermine a corner of the Wall, where they made a Breach, that two might enter; who going in, were both cut off: yet the rest no wayes daunted, fell in, and in fine, slew both Man, VVoman, and Child, left not one to say, who they were, and after blew up the Castle, Sir Simon Harcott was brought three mile farther to∣wards Dublin, where being not able to travell, stay'd, and upon Munday dyed, whose body is now at Dublin. Sir Major Berry
is also at Dubline, whose Lieu∣tenant was kil'd upon the same ground, as the other was shott: The number of the Common-souldiers of our side, which was lost in this service, is uncertaine, under 40. Of the Rebels 200. and odd of all condition; and this is all I can acquaint you of this bussinesse: In hast I am: Your assured friend, William Owen. Chester, the 2. of Aprill, 1642. FINIS.
