P1948 12430989 61950
Miscellanea Parliamentaria: CONTAINING PRESIDENTS 1. Of Freedom from Arrests. 2. Of Censures. 1. Upon such as have wrote Books to the dis∣honour of the Lords or Commons, or to alter the Constitution of the Government. 2. Upon Members for Misdemeanours. 3. Upon persons not Members, for Contempts and Misdemeanours. 4. For Misdemeanours in Elections. Besides other Presidents and Orders of a va∣rious Nature, both of the House of Lords and Commons. With an APPENDIX, Containing several Instances wherein the Kings of England have consulted and advi∣sed with their Parliaments, 1. In Marriages. 2. Peace and War. 3. Leagues. And other Weighty Affairs of the Kingdom. By William Petyt of the Inner-Temple, Esq London, Printed by N. Thompson, for T. Basset at the George, and J. Wickins at the White Hart in Fleetstreet. 1680.
TO William Williams Esq SPEAKER OF THE HONOURABLE HOUSE OF Commons, The AUTHOR Humbly Dedicates these his Miscellanea Parliamentaria.
THE CONTENTS. FErrers Case. Pag. 1. §. 1. Some few Presidents a∣gainst such as have Wrote Books to the Dishonour of the Lords and Commons, and the Subversion of the Government. Pa. 12. §. 2. Some Presidents, where∣in the House of Commons have for Misdemeanours turned out and discharged their Members. Pa. 90. §. Some Presidents for puni∣shing Persons that were no Mem∣bers, for Contempts and Misde∣meanours. Pa. 96. §. 4. Some Presidents for pu∣nishing Misdemeanours in Ele∣ctions. Pa. 111.
§. Some Miscellaneous Presi∣dents and Orders, both of the House of Lords and Commons, p. 137. An Appendix. Or, A Collection of some few Records and Presidents (out of many other of the like Nature) whereby it appears, That the Kings of England were pleased to consult and advise with their Parliaments, de arduis negotiis Regni, of the weighty and diffi∣cult Affairs of the Kingdom. p. 221
THE PREFACE. I Have seen,Apud Foxum vol. 2. col. 3. & 4 saith Stephen Gardiner, (who was Dr. of Laws, Bishop of Winchester,The Bishop of Winchester's Letter to the Duke of Somer∣set, Protector to E. 6. and after Lord Chan∣cellour of England,) the Councel much astonished, when the King would have done somewhat against an Act of Parliament, It was made then a great matter. The Lord Cromwel had once put in the Kings (our late Sovereign Lords) Head,Plutatchus lib. cum Principi∣bus Philoso∣phos debere disputare. Qui semper corrum∣punt principes, Reges ac Ty∣rannos, nempe Delatores Cri∣minatores, & Adulatores, ab omnibus exi∣guntur, puni∣untur{que} ut qui non in unum Calicem lethale venenum mit∣tant, sed in fontem publicitus scatentem, & quo vident om∣nes uti. Quemadmodum non uno supplicio dignus est, qui fontem publicum, unde bibant omnes, veneno infecit ita no∣centissimus est, qui principis animum pravis infecerit opinioni∣bus, quae mox in tot hominum permiciem redundent. Nam si capite plectitur, qui principis monetam vitiarit, quanto dignior est eo supplicio, qui principis ingenium corruperit. to take upon Him to have His Will and Pleasure regarded for a Law, for that, he said, was to be a very King, and thereupon I was call'd for at Ham∣pton-Court; and as the Lord Cromwel was very Stout; come on my Lord of Winchester, (quoth he,) for that conceit he had whatsoever he talked with me, he knew ever as much as I▪ Greek, or Latine, and all.
Answer the King here, (quoth he) but speak plainly and directly, and shrink not man: Is not that (quoth he,) that pleaseth the King, a Law? Have ye not the Civil-Law therein? (quoth he) Quod principi placuit, and so forth, (quoth he,) I have some∣what forgotten it now: I stood still, and wondered in my Mind, to what Conclusion this should tend; The King saw me musing, and with earnest gentleness said, Answer him whether it be so or no? I would not answer my Lord Cromwel, but delivered my Speech to the King, and told him, I had read indeed of Kings that had their Will always received for a Law;Osorius lib. 5. de Regis insti∣tutione, Oc∣currit alia adu∣latorum turba prudentiae no∣mine commen∣data qui utse in gratiam Re∣gum iusinuent illis persua∣dent eos esse supra leges (& post aliqua.) Nunquam in Regnis & Civitatibus homines scelerati defuerunt, nec hodie de∣sunt qui principes erroribus turbulentis iuficiant, quibus illi quidem annumerandi sunt, qui cum se jure consultos existima∣ri velint Regibus persuadent illos omnino solutos esse legibus: but I told him the Form of his Reign, to make the Laws his Will, was more sure and quiet, and by this Form of Government ye be established (quoth I,) and it is agreeable with the Nature of your People; If ye be∣gin a new manner of Policy, how it will frame no man can tell, and how this
frameth ye can tell, and would never advise your Grace to leave a certain for an uncertain. The King turned his Back, and left the matter after; till the Lord Cromwel turn'd the Cat in the Pan, afore Company, when he was angry with me, and charged me as though I had played his part. This Tale is true, and not without purpose to be remem∣bred. So far the Bishops Letter. And from it, and other passages in History, I shall raise four Observations. That it was a general Rule and Prin∣ciple in most great Ministers of State;Observ. 1. or, as the old Word was, Minions to flatter and poison Princes minds with Absolute and Despotical Power; not for the Honour, or good of the Crown, for that can never be; but for their par∣ticular Advantages, that Themselves might Reign, and be Sovereigns over their Masters; And indeed, not only of our own Country, but of others: Historians are full of the sad and woful Effects thereof in most Ages; which makes me frequently revolve the me∣lancholly Contemplation of Cardan;Cardan lib. de utilitate ex ad∣versis capiend cap. de Princi∣pis Incommo∣dis, p. 288. Inter fures scurras adulatores, consti∣tutus est princeps a furibus bona diripi∣untur, a scurris mores corrumpuntuh, &
ut quis{que} melior est ex aula abigitur, ab adulatoribus veritas, summum inter mor∣tales bonum, ablegatur, unde miseri prin∣cipes propter has larvas, in Cimmeriis ig∣norantiae tenebris perpetuo vivunt. O mi∣seram principum sortem, qui nunquam norunt, quali in statu res suae positae sint, adeo vero aures principum emollitae sunt, ut ad veritatis nomen tanquam ad Nili cataractas obsurdescant. This pessima gens humani generis al∣ways abhorred a Parliament;Observ. 2. and the reason thereof is demonstrative, because they well knew they should then be called to an impartial and strict account, and be punished according to their de∣merit: as de facto it appears, in the Cases of the Lord Cromwel, after Earl of Essex, and the Protector, the Duke of Somerset, (mentioned in the Bishop's Letter,) that they were questioned in Parliament; although possibly the proceedings therein against them were managed with too much Violence and artifice, by the malice and policy of their Enemies. And no man, in all points, can justi∣fie the acts of all Councels, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil. The first was attainted of High-Trea∣son,Rot. Parl. 32. H 8. Act 60. The Attainder of the L. Cromwel in the Parliament, 32. H. 8. a∣mongst other Crimes.
1. For Vsurping upon the Kingly Estate, Power, Authority, and Office. 2. For having the Nobles of the Realm in great disdain, derision and dete∣station. 3. And further also, being a person of poor and low degree, as few were within the Realm pretended to have so great a stroke about the King, that he lett it not, to say, publish and declare, That he was sure of the King;A dangerous Boast of any one Minister. which was detestable and to be abhorred a∣mongst all good Subjects in a Christian Realm, that any Subject should enter∣prize to take upon him so to speak of his Sovereign, Leige, Lord, and King. The second was in the Parliament,Actus Parl. 3 and 4 E. 6.An 3, and 4. E. 6. no. 31. Fined and Ransomed a∣mongst other Offences.An Act tou∣ching the Fine and Ransome of the Duke of Somerset. 1. For desiring the Rule, Authority and Government of the King and Realm by himself only, and getting the Protectorship. 2. That by his own Authority he did stay and lett Justice, and subverted the Laws as well by Letters, Patents, as by his other Commandments. 3. He rebuked, checked and taunted
as well privately as openly, divers of the Privy Counsel, for shewing and de∣claring their advices and opinions a∣gainst his purpose in weighty Affairs, telling them they were unworthy to sit in Councel: That he needed not to open matters to them, and that he would be otherwise advised there∣after; and if they agreed not with his Opinion, he would put them out, and take in others at his Pleasure. 4. That he had held, against the Kings Laws, in his own House a Court of Requests, and forced divers to answer for their Free-holds and Goods, to the subversion of the Law. 5. That he had, without Advice of the Counsel, disposed of Offices for Money. 6. That he would not suffer New-ha∣ven and Blackness to be furnished with Men and Victuals, although adverti∣zed of their defects; whereby the French King was comforted and en∣couraged to invade and win them, to the dishonour of the Realm. 7. And whereas the Privy-Counsel had out of their Love and Zeal for the King and Realm, consulted at Lon∣don to come to the Duke, to move him charitably to amend, and reform
his Doings and Mis-government; he caused to be declared, (by Letters in divers places,) the Lords to be High-Traytors, to the great distur∣bance of the Realm; And further declared, That the Lords endeavou∣red to destroy the King, to the intent to make Sedition and Discord be∣tween the King and Lords. 8. The Duke, at Hampton-Court and Windsor, declared these Speeches, The Counsel at London do intend to kill me; But if I die, the King shall die with me; and if they famish me, they shall famish the King; and so conveyed the King suddenly in the Night to Windsor, whereby he got a Disease, 9. He assembled great numbers in Arms, and after, minding to fly to Jersey or Wales, laid Post-Horses about, and Men for the same Intent. All which Offences and Crimes the said Duke acknowledged, and sub∣mitted himself to the King: After which passed the Act;A remarkable Instance how Dangerous it is for one single Minister to have a Mono∣poly of the King. That for his said Offences and Crimes he should for∣feit a great many Manors, which the Crown had given him: To bring it to the Relation made by the Bishop, not without purpose to be re∣membred
how dangerous a thing it was to break the Law, or an Act of Parli∣ament. The Bishop thus further expres∣seth in the same Letter. Now whether the King may com∣mand against an Act of Parliament,Observ. 3. and what danger they may fall in that break a Law with the King's consent,Apud Foxum, vol. 2d. Stephen Gardiner Bi∣shop of Win∣chester, his Let∣ter to the D. of Somerset, Protector to E. 6. I dare say no man alive at this day hath had more experience with the Judges and Lawyers then I; First I had experience in my old Master the Cardi∣nal, who ohtained his Legacy by our late Sovereign Lord's request at Rome, and in his sight and knowledge, oc∣cupied the same with his 2 Crosses and Maces born before him many years; yet because it was against the Laws of the Realm, the Judges concluded it the Offence of the premunire; which con∣clusion I bare away, and take it for a Law of the Realm, because the Law∣yers so said, but my reason digested it not. The Lawyers, for confirmation of their doings, brought in a Case of the Lord Tiptoft, as I remember, a jolly Ci∣vilian; he was Chancellor to the King, who (because in the execution of the King's Commission he had offended the Laws of the Realm▪) he suffered on Tower-Hill,) they brought in Examples
of many Judges that had Fines set on their Heads in like Case, for doing a∣gainst the Law of the Realm by the King's Commandment, and then was brought in the Judges Oath, not to stay any Process or Judgment for any Com∣mandment from the King's Majesty: And one Article against my Lord Cardi∣nal was,Coke 4. Inst so. 89. Ld. Herbert Hist. of H. 8. fo. That he had granted Injun∣ctions to stay the Common-Law, and upon that occasion Magua Charta was spoken of, and it was made a great matter, the stay of the Common-Law; and this I learned in that Case, sithence that time being of the Counsel, when many Proclamations were devised a∣gainst the Carriers out of Corn; at such time as the Transgressors should be punished, the Judges would answer it might not be by the Laws; whereup∣on ensued the Act of Proclamation,Rast. Stat. 31. H. 8. cap. 8. in the passing of which Act many siberal Words were spoken, and a plain Pro∣viso, That by Authority of the Act for Proclamation, nothing should be made contrary to an Act of Parliament, or Common-Law. When the Bishop of Exeter and his Chancellour were by one Body brought in a praemunire, (which my Lord Privy-Seal cannot forget) I reason'd with the
Lord Audley, then Chancellor, so far, as he bad me hold my peace, for fear of entring into a praemunire my self; whereupon I stayed, but concluded it seemed to me strange, that a man au∣thorized by the King, (as since the King's Majesty hath taken upon Him the Supremacy, every Bishop is such a one,) could fall in a praemunire, after I had reason'd the matter once in the Par∣liament-House, where was free Speech without danger, and there the Lord Audley, to satisfie me familiarly (be∣cause I was in some secret estimation, as he then knew,) Thou art a good fel∣low, Bishop, quoth he, (which was the manner of his familiar Speech) look the Act of Supremacy, and there the King's doings be restrained to spiritual Juris∣dictions: And in another Act it is pro∣vided, That no spiritual Law shall have place contrary to a common Law, or Act of Parliament; And if this were not, (quoth he) you Bishops would en∣ter in with the King, and, by means of his Supremacy, order the Laity as ye listed; but we will provide (quoth he,) that praemunire shall ever hang over your Heads, and so we Lay-men shall be sure to enjoy our Inheritance, by the Common Laws, and Acts of Parliament.
My fourth Observation is this, It had been well for the Protector to have remembred the good and wholsom Advice the Bishop gave him:Observ. 4. that great Man had not lost his Head; for being indicted in Michaelmas-Term, 5. E. 6. upon a Statute made 3 and 4 of that King,Rastal's 3, and 4. E. 6. cap 5 For the punishment of unlaw∣ful Assemblies, and raising of the Kings Subjects: And one of the main points in the indictment, was that Felonice he designed to take and imprision John Earl of Warwick, being one of the Privy-Council;Coke 3. Inst. fo. 12. of which he was found guilty by his Peers, and after suffered Death thereupon. To conclude whose sad Fate, I shall add the Preamble of an Act of Parlia∣ment, more memorable, because in a Subsidy Act; yet common in that, and former, and succeeding Ages, as may appear. For instances, Rot. Parl. 4. H. 8. and by Rastals Statutes, 35. H. 8. cap. 12, 27. 2, and 3. E. 6. cap. 26. 5. Eliz. cap. 27. 8. Eliz. cap. 18. 23. Eliz. cap. 15. 29. Eliz. cap. 8. 31. Eliz. cap. 15. 35. Eliz. cap. 13. 39. Eliz. cap. 27. 43. Eliz. cap. 18. and 3. Ja∣cobi, cap. 26. wherein the State of the Kingdom, both Ecclesiastical and Ci∣vil,
and the Transactions of Foreign Affairs are Historically set down, and taken notice of by the Parliament, and inserted into the Preambles of those Acts. An ACT for the Grant of a Subsidy, and two Fifteens and Tenths, granted to the King's Majesty, by the Temporality. WE the Kings Highness's most Faithful and Obedient Sub∣jects,Rastals Stat. 7. Ed. 6. cap. 12. the Lords and Com∣mons in this present Parliament as∣sembled; Considering, and certainly perceiving, by divers means, the earnest Good-will and Purpose that our said Sovereign Lord hath to pre∣serve, maintain and continue Us, his Natural Subjects, in this most Fortu∣nate Peace, whereunto, after many Storms and Tempests of the Wars, His Majesty hath, by the Goodness of God restored Us; Do also, notwith∣standing his Majesties great Care, and politick Means used for the recovery thereof, easily perceive how hard it shall be for His Highness to continue and kéep us therein, during the time
of this troublesom state of Christen∣dom, being, as it were, lamentably cut, and torn in pieces, and Factions of War, except his Highness be resto∣red to a further Estate and Furniture of Treasure, meet for the Defence of these His Realms, Dominions; And Subjects, and like to other Princes; having such large Realms, Domini∣ons and People; the lack and want whereof, (as we know) shall chiefly redound to all our Losses and Detri∣ments, which must be defended and preserved by the Puissant Power and Might of our Sovereign Lord and Head, not by the multitude of our private Riches and Strength at Home. So also have We séen, of late years, plainly before Our Eyes, and felt in a great part of Our sorrowful hearts, the very Principal, Chief, and first Causes of this lack, during the time of the woful mis-governance of this Noble Realm, and other the King's Dominions, by the late Protector, Duke of Somerset (to whom Almigh∣ty God grant his Mercy,) who first of his insatiate ambition, contrary to the advices of all Wise and Good Coun∣cellors, having gotten into his hands
the sole Governance of the most Sacred Person of our Sovereign Lord, and consequently, the Protectorship of all his Highness's Realms and Domini∣ous, immediately to lay a fit Founda∣tion for his unhappy and unskilful Go∣vernment, brought the King's Ma∣jesty (whom he took by pretence to Govern, being left by His Highness's Father, of most Famous Memory, in tender Years, (but yet in Peace) sud∣denly into open Hostility and Wars against two puissant Realms at once, considering neither the Ability to be∣gin, nor means to continue them; wherein, following always his own singularity, by stirring and increasing of new Quarrels and Causes of War, by unadvised Invasions, by desperate Enterprises and Uoyages, by sump∣tuous, endless, vain Fortifications, both in Foreign Realms, and in the Seas, by bringing into the Realm of costly, and great numbers of Stran∣gers, Men of War, and such other in∣numerable vain Devices, he did not only Exhaust, and utterly Waste the King's Majestie's Treasures and Revenues of His Crown, and of Us His Highness's Subjects, but also en∣dangered His Majestie's Credit be∣yond
the Seas with divers strange Merchants, by taking up, and bor∣rowing great Sums of Money, grow∣ing from time to time more and more indurable: which Gate of Misery be∣ing so wide open, We all know, and the best part of Us felt, what a heap of Calamities fell upon all the Realm immediately; Yea, and to this day what Prests and Memory thereof remaineth not wholly yet filled up. First, the King's Majesties Trea∣sure of all sorts wasted, the great sub∣stance of the Moneys melted, and al∣tered in base Coyn, for the serving of the Charge of these Wars, the Laws and ancient Policies of this noble Realm dissolved and unjoyned, and by Exam∣ples thereof, the whole state of Ire∣land endangered, with Factions and Rebellions, wherein no small Sums of Treasure were also wasted in Armies and Fortifications, part whereof re∣mains unto this day of necessity. In the midst of all these miseries, by the suffering of the said late Protector, rose up a monstrous and dangerous Rebellion of the lewd numbers, and baser multitudes against their Heads; the withstanding and happy stay whereof, although it came through the
mercifulness of God, by the labour and fortitude of others, worthy eter∣nal Praise, subduing the headless ra∣ging people in sundry parts of the Realm, delivering Us, the King's Majesties Natural Subjects, out of our unnatural Subjection to him that ruled Us with disorder, And finally, restoring the Royal Person of the King's Highness to the Fréedom of His Princely Estate, and consequent∣ly to an Honourable Peace with his Enemies. Yet could not, hitherto, the great Breach and Ruine of the King's Majestie's Estate, touching his Trea∣sure, be repaired or re-enforced; which consequently followed upon the first Foundations broken; although in other points of the decay (thanked be God) the King's Majesties own mar∣vellous Intelligence, with the Indu∣stry of good Conncellors, hath no∣tably supplied, and amended the de∣faults. And as these former Errors brought His Majesty into utter wasts of His own Treasure and Riches into the Expences of Our Subsidies, granted for the same Wars, though nothing answerable to the Expence of the same;
Finally, into notable and immeasura∣ble Charges beyond the Seas, Pro∣visions of Money taken up in time of Wars; so yet, to the increase of this former sore, We remember and per∣ceive also, that there were very great Charges left by the late King of fa∣mous Memory, by reason of his Wars, to be discharged, as well beyond Sea towards strangers, as on this side to∣wards his own Subjects; which of their nature beyond the Seas for lack of payment did grow excessively, be∣sides the late evident great Charge and Loss sustained by the Kings Majesty for the only Profit of His publick Weal, in the reducing of part of His Coyn from a notable baseness unto a fine Standard; by the which His Ma∣jesty lacketh a great private Gain in his Mints, being now worth no Re∣venue at all, but rather chargable; and the rest of which Coyn we trust He will shortly reduce to like fineness. All which things We His Majesties Faithful, and natural Loving Sub∣jects, weighing with Our selves, and considering divers great weighty mat∣ters hereupon depending, for the preser∣vation of this Ancient, Noble, and Imperial Crown.
Albeit We see manifestly before Our Eyes, Our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty disposed of His good Nature rather daily to diminish the Re∣venue of His Crown, lately angmen∣ted by His Father of most famous Me∣mory, towards the unburthening of His great intollerable Weights and Charges, lying and growing in stran∣gers hands beyond the Seas, then to call upon us His natural Subjects and People; like as we daily hear and know that all other most Christian Princes do, in Causes of less Importance, and like His Majesties noble Progenitors, have always done in such Cases hereto∣fore. Yet for the preservation of Our selves and Our Posterity in this Peace and Wealth whereunto We have by the great Charges of Our Sovereign Lord been blessed, brought, for the main∣tenance and upholding of the Crown and Dignity Imperial of this Noble Realm, in Honour and Might against all Attempts of Foreign and Ancient Enemies, for the Restauration of this decayed House of the Commonwealth, having suffer'd violation and ruine, by exile of Justice in the former time of the aforesaid evil Governance. For the
comforting and encouraging of our most Christian King in His blessed and fa∣mous Purposes and Proceedings, to the establishing both of true Christian Religion, in this His Church of Eng∣land and Ireland, and of a Christian Po∣licy in the civil State of the same, &c. and after they granted the Subsidies. It is far from my thoughts to delight in raking into the misfortunes of any, much less of great men; but in all Ages it hath been allowed to publish the Me∣moirs of ill men, to the intent to deter Posterity from acting and committing such Crimes and Offences, which we find were severely punished both by God and Men. And whoever will take the pains to run over the ancient Historians and Re∣cords of the Kingdom, will find that the Troubles in Richard the 1st's time, the Barons Wars, the Confusions in E. 2d's time, the woful Distractions in the Reign of R. 2. and H. 6. had their source and rise from one grand Cause, the extravigant and insufferable Dominion and Power of Minions or Favourites, with their Partisans, which K. James rightly calls Pests and Vipers of a Common∣wealth; who, notwithstanding their
spetious glosses and pretences of Loyalty to the Crown, rather then suffer them∣selves to be questioned and punished by Law for their Arbitrary and Illegal Acts, Resolved to run the hazard of; and see the ruine and destruction both of Prince and People. My Lord Bacon,Out of a Paper in the hands of my good Friend Mr. John Rawley, a Worthy Ci∣tizen of Lon∣don, Nephew and Executor to Dr. Rawley, first and last Chaplain to the L. Bacon. after he was Senten∣ced in Parliament, meeting with Sir Li∣onel Cranfield, after Earl of Middlesex, whom King James had then newly made Lord Treasurer. My Lord Bacon, ha∣ving first congratulated his advance∣ment to so Eminent a Place of Honour and Trust, told him, between jest and earnest, That he would recommend to his Lordship, and in him to all other great Officers of the Crown, one considerable Rule to be carefully observed, which was, to Remember A Parliament will come.My Lord Ba∣cons Memento. I do not believe that his Lordship had the Spirit of Divination; But certain it is, that two years after, in the Parliament 21. and 22. of that King, the Commons Impeached the Earl; for what, and what the Judgement was thereupon, hear the Record.
Messuage sent to the Commons by Mr. Serjeant Crew,Ex Journali Domus Proce∣rum, Annis 21, and 22. Jaco∣bi Regis. and Mr. At∣torney General, viz. That the Lords are now ready to give Judgment against the Lord Treasurer, if they, with their Speaker will come, and demand the same. Answered, They will attend presently: The Lords being all in their Robes, the Lord Treasurer was brought to the Bar by the Gentleman Usher and the Serjeant at Arms, his Lordship made low obeysance, and kneeled, until the Lord Keeper willed him to stand up. The Commons with their Speaker came and the Serjeant attendant on the Speaker presently put down his Mace. The Speaker in their Name, to this Effect, viz. The Knights, Citizens and Bur∣gesses in this Parliament assem∣bled, heretofore transmitted unto
Your Lordships several Offences a∣gainst the Right Honourable Lionel Earl of Middlesex, Lord High Treasurer of England, for Bribery, Extortion, Oppressions, and o∣ther grievous Misdemeanours, committed by his Lordship. And now the Commons, by me their Speaker, demand Judgment against him for the same. The Lord Keeper Answered. The High-Court of Parliament doth adjudge, 1. That Lionel Earl of Middlesex, now Lord Treasurer of England, shall lose all his Offices which he holds in this Kingdom; and shall be made for ever uncapable of any Office, Place or Im∣ployment in the State, and Com∣monwealth. 2. And that he shall be Imprisoned in the Tower of London during the Kings pleasure. 3. And that he shall pay unto our So∣vereign Lord the King the Fine of 50000 l. 4. And that he shall never sit in Par∣liament more. 5. And that he shall never come within the Verge of the Court.
Ordered,14 Maii 16 24 That the Kings Coun∣cel draw a Bill (and present the same to the House,) to make the Lands of the Earl of Middlesex liable unto his Debts, unto the Fine to the King, unto Accompts to the King hereafter, and to Restitution to such whom he had wronged,This Bill after pass'd unto a Law. as shall be allowed of by the House. So that the familiar saying of my Lord Coke is very remarkable; That no Subject, (though never so Potent and Subtile,) ever confronted or justled with the Law of England, but the same Law in the end infallibly broke his Neck.
THE CASE OF George Ferrers, Esq IN the Lent Season,Cromptons Ju∣risdiction of Courts, p. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 34 H. 8. An. Dom. 1542. Breach of Pri∣viledge. whilst the Parliament yet continued, one George Ferrers Gent. Ser∣vant to the King, being elect a Burgess for the Town of Pli∣mouth, in the County of Devon, in going to the Parliament-house was Arrested in London by a Pro∣cess out of the Kings-Bench,Ferrers arrested going to the Parl. house. at the Suit of one White, for the sum of two hundred Marks, or there∣abouts, wherein he was late afore∣condemned as a Surety for the
Debt of one Welden of Salisbury; which Arrest being signified by Sir Thomas Moyle Kt. then Spea∣ker of the Parliament, and to the Knights and Burgesses there, order was taken that the Serjeant of the Parliament,The Serjeant of the Parliament sent to the Compter for him. called S. J. should forthwith repair to the Compter in Breadstreet, whither the said Ferrers was carried, and there to demand delivery of the Prisoner.And demands the Prisoner. The Serjeant, as he had in charge, went to the Compter, and declared to the Clerks there, what he had in commandment: But they and other Officers of the City were so far from obeying the said Commandment,But the Offi∣cers deny him. as after ma∣ny stout words, they forcibly re∣sisted the said Serjeant,And assault the Serjeant. whereof ensued a Fray within the Compter∣gates, between the said Ferrers and the said Officers, not without hurt of either part; so that the Serjeant was driven to defend himself with his Mace of Armes,Breaks the Crown of the Mace, & strikes down his Man. and had the Crown thereof broken
by bearing off a stroke, and his Man strucken down. During this Brawl the Sheriffs of London,Complains of it to the She∣riffs, and de∣mands the Pri∣soner. cal∣led Rowland Hill and H. Suckley, came thither, to whom the Ser∣jeant complained of this injury, and required of them the delive∣ry of the said Burgess as afore: but they bearing with their Offi∣cers,Who contemp∣tuously reject the same. made little account either of his Complaint, or of his Message, rejecting the same contemptuously, with much proud language: So as the Serjeant was forced to return without the Prisoner,The Serjeant returns and ac∣quaints the House. and finding the Speaker and all the Knights and Burgesses set in their places, declared unto them the whole Cause as it fell out; who took the same in so ill part,Who highly resent it. that They all together (of whom there was not a few as well of the Kings Privy-Councel, as also of his Privy-Cham∣ber) would sit no longer without their Burgess, but rose up wholly, and repaired to the Vpper House, where the whole case was decla∣red
by the mouth of the Speaker,It was ordi∣nary for either House, upon emergent oc∣casions, to give an account to each other, as in the time of R. 2. H. 6. H. 8. E. 6. & Queen Mary, the great Officers of State, as the Chancellor, Treasurer, &c. went down to the House of Commons to give them par∣ticular ac∣counts. before Sir T. Audley Kt. then Lord Chancellor of England, and all the Lords and Judges there assem∣bled; who judging the Contempt to be very great, referred the pu∣nishment thereof to the Order of the Common House. They return∣ing to their places again, upon new debate of the Case, took order that their Serjeant should eftsoon repair to the Sheriffs of London, and require delivery of the said Burgess, without any Writ or Warrant had for the same, but only as afore.The Ld. Chan∣cellor in Parlia∣ment offers the Commons a Writ to deliver their Burgess, but they refuse it, as being clear of opini∣on, that all their Com∣mandments & Acts were to be done and exe∣cuted by their Serjeant, with∣out Writ. Albeit the Lord Chancellor offered there to grant a Writ, which they of the Common House refused, being in a clear opinion that all Command∣ments and other Acts proceeding from the Nether House, were to be done and executed by their Ser∣jeant, without Writ, only by shew of his Mace, which was his warrant. But before the Serjeants return into London, the Sheriffs having
intelligence how heinously the matter was taken, became some∣what more mild; so as upon the said second demand, they delive∣red the Prisoner without any de∣nial. But the Serjeant having then further in commandment from those of the Nether House, charged the said Sheriffs to appear personally on the morrow by eight of the Clock,The Sheriffs ordered to ap∣pear, and bring with them the Clerks of the Compter. before the Speaker in the Nether House, and to bring thither the Clerks of the Compter, and such other of their Officers as were parties to the said affray; and in like manner to take into his custody the said White, which wittingly procured the said Arrest, in contempt of the Priviledge of the Parliament. Which Com∣mandment being done by the said Serjeant accordingly,And accord∣ingly they did. on the mor∣row the two Sheriffs, with one of the Clerks of the Compter, (which was the chief occasion of the said affray) together with the said White, appeared in the Com∣mon
House, where the Speaker charging them with their Con∣tempt and misdemeanour afore∣said,Who are char∣ged by the Speaker. they were compelled to make immediate Answer,Being not ad∣mitted to any Councel. without being admitted to any Councel: albeit Sir Ro. Cholmley, then Re∣corder of London, and other the Councel of the City there present, offered to speak in the Cause, which were all put to silence, and none suffered to speak but the parties themselves. Whereupon in conclusion the said Sheriffs,The Sheriffs committed to the Tower. and the same White, were committed to the Tower of London, and the said Clerk (which was the occa∣sion of the Fray) to a place there called Little Ease,The Clerk to Little Ease, and the Serjeants to Newgate. and the Officer of London which did the Arrest, called Tailor, with four Officers, to Newgate, where they remained from the 28. until the 31. of March,All at last deli∣vered upon the humble suit of the Mayor, and other their Friends. and then they were deli∣vered, not without humble suit made by the Mayor of London, and other their Friends. And
forasmuch as the said Ferrers be∣ing in Execution upon a Condem∣nation of Debt, and set at large by Priviledge of Parliament, was not by Law to be brought again into Execution, and so the party without remedy for his Debt, as well against him, as his principal debtor; after long debate of the same, by the space of nine or ten days together, at last they resol∣ved upon an Act of Parliament to be made, and to revive the Exe∣cution of the said Debt against the said Welden, which was prin∣cipal debtor, and to discharge the said Ferrers. But before this came to pass, the Common House was divided upon the Question, but in the conclusion the Act pas∣sed for the said Ferrers, who won by 14. Voices.The King takes notice of the proceedings. The King then being advertized of all this pro∣ceeding, called immediately before him the Lord Chancellor of Eng∣land, and his Judges, with the Speaker of the Parliament, and
other the gravest persons of the Nether House, to whom he decla∣red his opinion to this effect: First commending their wisdom in maintaining the Priviledges of their House,The King in the presence of the Chancellor & Judges, with whom he had consulted be∣fore of this matter, com∣mends and ap∣proves the pro∣ccedings of the Commons. (which he would not have to be infringed in any point) alledged that he being Head of the Parliament, and attending in his own person upon the Business thereof, ought in reason to have Priviledge for Him and all his Servants, attending there upon Him; so that if the said Ferrers had been no Burgess, but only his Servant, that in respect there∣of he was to have the Priviledge as well as any other:Here the King from the mouth of the Lord Chancellor, de∣clares the an∣cient priviledg of the Com∣mons, even for their menial Servants, and gives an in∣stance in the Cook of the Temple. For I un∣derstand (quoth he) that you not only for your own persons, but also for your necessary Servants, even to your Cooks and Horse-keepers, enjoy the said Privi∣ledge: in as much as my Lord Chancellor here present hath in∣formed us, that he being Speaker of the Parliament, the Cook of
the Temple was Arrested in Lon∣don, and in Execution upon a Statute of the Staple: And foras∣much as the said Cook, during the Parliament, served the Speaker in that Office, he was taken out of Execution by the Priviledge of the Parliament. And further, we be informed by our Judges, that we at no time stand so highly in our Estate Royal, as in the time of Parliament;The King Head, and the Lords and Commons Members of the High Court of Parliament, in which he stands highest in his Royal Estate. wherein We as Head, and You as Members, are conjoyned and knittogether into one Body politick: so as whatso∣ever offence or injury (during that time) is offered to the mea∣nest Members of the House, it is to be judged as done against Our Person,The Court of Parliament. and the whole Court of Parliament: which Prerogative of the Court is so great (as our learned Councel informeth us) as all Acts and Processes coming out of any other Inferiour Courts,Nota, All Acts and Processes coming out of any inferiour Court, must cease and give place to the Highest. must for the time cease and give place to the Highest. And touch∣ing
the party, it was a great pre∣sumption in him, knowing our Servant to be one of this House, and being warned thereof before, would nevertheless prosecute this matter out of time, and therefore was well worthy to have lost his Debt, which I would not wish, and therefore do commend your Equity, that having lost the same by Law, have restored him to the same against him who was his Debtor: and this may be a good example to others, not to at∣tempt any thing against the Pri∣viledge of this Court, but to take the time better. Whereupon Sir Edward Mountague, then Lord Ch. Justice,Sir Edward Mountague Chief Justice of England, who we cannot believe to be misconusant of the ancient proceedings in Parliament, and of the Priviledge of the House of Commons, together with the rest of the Judges, by Reasons which wanted not Authorities, confirmed what the King had said. very gravely declar'd his opinion, confirming by divers rea∣sons all the King had said, which was assented unto by all the residue, none speaking to the contrary. The Act indeed passed not the Higher
House, for the Lords had not time to consider of it, by reason of the Dissolution of the Parliament. Because this Case hath been di∣versly reported, as is commonly alledged, as a President for the Priviledge of the Parliament, I have endeavoured my self to learn the truth thereof, and to set it forth with the whole circum∣stances at large, according to their instructions who ought best both to know and remember it. 4. Ed. VI. Eight years after the Case of Ferrers,Journal Dom. Com. 4. Ed. VI. Withrington having made an Assault upon Brandling, Burgess for Newcastle; the Parl. being near an end, the Com. sent Withring: to the Councel. Die Jov. 7. Apr. an. praedict. The Bill for Mr. Brandling's Complaint, sent from the Lords of the Privy Councel a∣gain, to be ordered by this House ac∣cording to the Antient Custom of this House: Whereupon the Bill was read in the presence of Henry Witherington, who was sent to the Lords from this place; who confest that he began the Fray upon Mr. Brandling: whereupon the said Henry is committed to the Tower of London.
Some few Presidents against such as have wrote Books to the dis∣honour of the Lords and Com∣mons, and Subversion of the Government. The Case of Arthur Hall Esq UPon sundry Motions made by divers of this House;Journ. Dom. Com. 14 Eliz. 17 Maii, Anno Dom. 1571. Misdemeanors of a Member of the House of Commons, for sundry lewd speeches as well in the House, as abroad. It was Order'd that Arthur Hall Esq for sundry Lewd Speeches, used as well in this House, as also abroad elsewhere, shall have warning by the Serjeant to be here upon Mon∣day next; and at the Bar to an∣swer such things as He shall then and there be charged with. And it was further Ordered,Ordered that those who heard them, to put them in writing, and deliver them to the Speaker. that all such Persons as have noted his words, either in this House, or abroad, do forthwith assemble in the Chamber above, and put the words in writing; and afterwards deliver them to Mr. Speaker, to
the end he may charge the said Hall upon Monday next. This day Arthur Hall EsqMond. 19 Febr, Mr. Hall ap∣pears, and is cleared. be∣ing brought by the Serjeant to the Bar, and charged by the House with Seven several Articles, hum∣bly submitted himself to the House, and humbly confessed his folly,Humbly con∣fesseth his folly. as well touching the said Articles; as also his other fond and unadvi∣sed Speech at the Bar: And was upon the Question remitted,And is remit∣ted by the House. with a good Exhortation given him by Mr. Speaker at large.
The Case of Smalley, Servant to Mr. Arthur Hall, Burgess for Grantham. And the Case of Kirtleton, Hall's Schoolmaster. MR. Lievtenant of the Tow∣er,Journal. Dom. Comm. Anno 18. Eliz. 16. Feb. A. D 1575. Breach of Pri∣viledge, Confe∣deracy, and Contempt. Sir Nicholas Arnold, and Mr. Serjeant Lovelace, were appointed to examine the Matter touching the Arrest of Mr. Hall's Servant, before Mr. Speaker, at his Chamber this Afternoon. Upon the Question,Friday 18. Feb. and also upon the division of the House it was Ordered, that Edward Smalley Yeoman, Servant unto Arthur Hall Esq one of the Burgesses for Gran∣tham, shall have Priviledge.Munday 27. Feb. After sundry Reasons and Ar∣guments,Smalley to be brought to the House by the Mace, and not by Writ. it was Resolved, that Edward Smalley, Servant unto Arthur Hall Esq shall be brought hither by the Serjeant, and set at liberty by the Warrant of the Mace, and not by Writ.
Edward Smalley,Tuesday 28. Feb. Servant un∣to Arthur Hall Esq being this day brought to the Bar in this House by the Serjeant of the House, and accompanied with two Serjeants of London,Smalley brought to the Bar, was presently deli∣vered out of Execution. was presently delivered of his Impri∣sonment and Execution, according to the former Judgement of this House, and the said Serjeants of London discharged of their said Prisoner; and immediately after that the said Serjeants of London were sequestred out of this House, and the said Edward Smalley was committed to the Charge of the Serjeant of this House; and there∣upon the said Edward Smalley was sequestred, till this House should be resolved upon some former Motions, whether the said Ed∣ward Smalley did procure himself to be arrested upon the said Executi∣on, in the abusing and contempt of this House, or not. 1. Upon the Question it was Ordered,Wednesday 7. March post Meridiem. that Mr. Hall be seque∣stred
the House,Mr. Hall, Smal∣ley's Master, withdraws. while the Mat∣ter touching the supposed Contempt done to this House be argued and debated. Edward Smalley upon the Que∣stion was adjudged guilty of the Contempt,Smalley adjud∣ged guilty of a Contempt a∣gainst the House, for frau∣dulently procu∣ring himself to be arrested. and abusing of this House by fraudulent practice, of procuring himself to be arrested upon the Exe∣cution, of his own assent and inten∣tion, to be discharged as well of his Imprisonment, as of the said Exe∣cution. Matthew Kirtleton,Kirtleton in confederacy with him. Schoolma∣ster to Mr. Hall, was likewise up∣on another Question adjudged guilty by this House of like Con∣tempt, and abusing of this House, in confederacy and practice with the said Smalley in the intentions aforesaid. 2. Upon another Question it was adjudged by the House,Smalley to be committed to the Tower for his Misdemea∣nor and Con∣tempt. that the said Smalley be for his Mis∣demeanor and Contempt committed to the Prison of the Tower. 3. Upon the like Question it
was also adjudged by this House,The like Judg∣ment for Kir∣tleton. that the said Kirtleton Schoolma∣ster, be also for his lewd Demea∣nor and Contempt in abusing of this House, committed to the Prison of the Tower. 4. Upon another Question also it was Resolved,Both to be brought into the House, to receive their Judgements. that the Serjeant of this House be commanded to bring the said Edward Smalley, and the said Matthew Kirtleton, Schoolmaster to Mr. Hall, into this House, to morrow next in the forenoon, to hear and receive their said Judgements accordingly. 5. And further,Mr. Hall's pri∣vity in the Mat∣ter to be refer∣red to a fur∣ther Debate. that the Mat∣ter wherein the said Arthur Hall is supposed to be touched, either in the privity of the said Matter of Arrest, or in the abusing of the Committees of this House, shall be deferred to be further dealt in till to morrow. The Bill against Arthur Hall EsqSaturday 10, March. Edward Smalley, and Mat∣thew Kirtleton his Servant, was read the first time.
Edward Smalley, Servant unto Arthur Hall Esq appearing in this House this day at the Bar, it was pronounced unto him by Mr. Spea∣ker, and in the Name, and by the Appointment and Order of this House, for execution of the for∣mer Judgement of this House awarded against him,The Speaker pronounced Judgement up∣on Smalley. That he the said Edward Smalley shall be forthwith committed Prisoner from this House to the Tower of London, and there remain for one whole month next ensuing from this present day; and further, af∣ter the same month expired, un∣til such time as good and sufficient assurance shall be had and made, for payment of one hundred pounds of good and lawful mo∣ney of England, to be made un∣to William Hewet, Administrator of the Goods, Chattels and Debts of Melchisedeck Mallory Gent. deceased, upon the first day of the next Term, according to the former Order in that behalf by
this House made and set down, and also 40 s. for the Serjeant's Fees; the notice of which assu∣rance for the true payment of the said one hundred pounds in form aforesaid, to be certified unto Mr. Lievtenant of the Tower, by Mr. Recorder of London, before any delivery or setting at liberty of the said Edward Smalley, to be in any wise had or made at any time after the expiration of the said month as is aforesaid, and that he shall not be delivered out of Prison before such notice cer∣tified, whether the same be be∣fore the said first day of the next Term, or after.
The 2d. Case of Arther Hall Esq a Member of Parliament. UPon a Motion made unto this House by Mr. Norton,Saturd. 4. Feb. An. 23. Eliz. Journ. Dom. Com. in which he declared that some person of late had caused a Book to be set forth in print,Mr. Hall's Charge for writing a Book derogatory to the Authority, Power and State of the Com∣mons House of Parliament. not only greatly reproachful against some particular good Members of this House of great credit, but also very much slanderous and derogatory to the general authority, power and state of this House, and prejudicial to the validity of the proceedings of the same, in making and establish∣ing of Laws, charging this House with drunkenness, as accompanied in their Councels with Bacchus; and then also with Choler, as those which had never sailed to Anticyra, and the proceedings of this House to be Opera tenebrarum. And fur∣ther, that by the circumstance of the residue of the discourse of the said Book, he conjectured the
same to be done and procured by Mr. Arthur Hall, one of this House, and so prayed that thereupon the said Mr. Hall might be called by this House to Answer, and the matter further to be duly exami∣ned, as the weight thereof in due consideration of the gravity and wisdom of this House, and of the authority, state and liberty of the same,Mr. Hall orde∣red to be sent for by the Ser∣jeant at Arms requireth. It is Resolved, That the said Mr. Hall be forth∣with sent for by the Serjeant at Arms attending upon this House, to make his appearance here in that behalf accordingly. And then immediately Mr. Se∣cretary Wilson did thereupon sig∣nifie unto this House, that the said Mr. Hall had upon his Exa∣mination therein before the Lords of the Councel, heretofore con∣fessed in the hearing of the said Mr. Secretary, that he did cause the said Book to be printed in∣deed. Upon relation whereof, and after some speech then also
uttered unto this House by Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, of the dangerous and lewd Contents of the said Book, the Serjeant was forthwith by Order sent to appre∣hend the said Arthur Hall, and was presently assisted for that purpose with Sir Thomas Scot and Sir Thomas Brown,Two Knights, Members of the House, to assist the Serje∣ant. by the appoint∣ment of this House. A Commission was then also given by this whole House,A Commission to a Committee to send for the Printer, and to examine the Matter. unto Mr. Vice-chamberlain, Mr. Chan∣cellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Secre∣tary Wilson, Mr. Treasurer of the Chamber, Sir Henry Lee, Sir Tho∣mas Cecil, Sir William Fitz-willi∣ams, and Sir Henry Gate, to send for the Printer of the said Book, and to examine him touching the said matter, and afterwards to make Report thereof to this House accordingly.To report to the House, and to take order for Hall's Ap∣prehension. And also to take order and advise further for the sending for, and apprehending of the said Arthur Hall, if it should so fall out that he did withdraw
himself, or depart out of Town, before such time as the said Ser∣jeant could find him: with this further Resolution also,And if any Member should see him, to stay him, and bring him to the House. That any such Member of this House as should happen first to see him, or meet him, might, and should in the name of the whole House stay him, and bring him forth to answer the said matter forthwith before the whole House, with all possible speed. Mr. Secretary Wilson declaring the travel of the Committees in examining of the Printer that did print Mr. Halls Book,Munday 6 Feb. Mr. Secretary Wilson reports the Examinati∣on of Hall's Case from the Committee. signi∣fied unto this House, that the said Printer (whose name is Henry Bynnyman) upon his Examina∣tion before the Committees said, that one John Wells a Scrivener in Fleetstreet, did deliver a Copy to him; and when the Book was printed, he delivered one Book to Henry Shirland in Friday-street, Linen-draper, to be sent to Mr. Hall; and that afterwards about a year past, he delivered to Mr.
Hall six of the said Books, and one more to Mr. Halls man shortly after; and said, that Mr. Hall promised to get him a priviledge, whereupon he adventured (he saith) to print the Book: and saith, that the Copy was written by Wells the Scrivener, and that he received of the said Shirland Linen-cloth to the value of 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. for printing the said Book, and that he staid of his own accord the publishing of the said Books, till he was paid: whereas Mr. Hall was contented they should have been put to sale pre∣fently. Which Report so made by Mr. Treasurer, and withall that Mr. Hall and the Printer were both then at the door, the said Mr. HallHall appears, and was called to the Bar, where he was charged by the Speaker with his Offence. was thereupon brought to the Bar, and being charged by Mr. Speaker in the behalf of the whole House, with the setting forth of the said Book, containing very lewd and slanderous reproach not only against some particular Mem∣bers
of this House, but also against the general Estate and Authority of this whole House. Hall denied not the setting forth of the said Book, protesting the same to be done by him without any malicious intent or meaning, either against the state of this House, or against any Member of the same; praying this whole House (if he had offended in so doing) they would remit and pardon him; affirming with∣all very earnestly, that he never had any more then one of the said Books; and upon due considera∣tion had of his own rashness and folly therein, willed that all the said Books should be suppressed. Then was Mr. Hall sequestred. Henry Bynnyman the Printer was brought to the Bar,The Printer brought to the Bar. who af∣firmed in all things as Mr. Secre∣tary Wilson before reported, and further that he had 80 or 100 of the said Books; and was there∣upon sequestred.
Henry Shirland was brought to the Bar,And Shirland, who was exa∣mined. who there confessed, that Mr. Hall did write a Letter unto him, and sent the said Book unto him, willing him to get it prin∣ted; and thereupon he delivered the said Book to Bynnyman, to have it printed, Wells the Scrive∣ner then being present with him; and said further, that Mr. Hall had paid him again the 20 No∣bles which he before had paid the Printer; and so he was then sequestred. And the said Wells brought to ar upon his Examination,And Wells, who was also exami∣ned. , that when he was Appren∣tice with one Mr. Dalton a Scrive∣ner in Heerstreet, the said Mr. Hall then lying about Paul's Wharfe, sent unto his said Master to send one of his men unto him, and that thereupon his said Master sent him unto the said Mr. Hall, who when he came, delivered unto him a Book in written-hand, willing him to carry it home with
him, and copy it out, and said, that when he had shewed it to his Master, his Master commanded him to write part of it, and his fellows some other part of it, and his said Master (as he remembreth) did write the rest of it, but what his said Master had for the wri∣ting of it, he knoweth not. And being further examined, saith, that yesterday last past he delive∣red one of the said Books to Sir Randal Brierton, from the said Mr. Hall. And then the said John Wells was sequestred. And afterwards all the Privy-Councel being of this House,A Committee appointed to examine fur∣ther the whole Matter. Mr. Knight-Marshal, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Serjeant Flowerdew, Mr. Serjeant St. Leiger, Mr. Crum∣well, Mr. Atkins, the Master of the Jewel-house, Sir Thomas Scot, Sir Thomas Brown, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, Mr. Beale, Mr. Norton, and Mr. Alford, were added to the former Committees for the fur∣ther proceeding to Examination
of the matter touching Mr. Hall, the Printer, the Scrivener, and all other persons, parties or privy to the publishing of the said Book, set forth in print by the means and procurement of the said Mr. Hall, and to meet upon Wednes∣day next at two of the Clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer Chamber. Which done,M. Hall brought to the Bar a∣gain, and committed to the Serjeant to attend the Committee. Mr. Hall being brought to the Bar again, Mr. Speaker declareth unto him, that this House mindeth further to examine the particularities of the matter, wherewith they have charged him, and do therefore order him to the Serjeants ward, with this liberty, That upon Wed∣nesday next in the afternoon, be∣ing accompanied with the Ser∣jeant, he may attend at the Ex∣chequer Chamber upon the Com∣mittees in the Cause: And was thereupon had out of the House. Henry BynnymanBynnyman, Wells, and Shir∣land, ordered likewise to at∣tend the Com∣mittee. the Printer, John Wells the Scrivener, and
Henry Shirland Linen-draper, be∣ing brought all three to the Bar, were by Mr. Speaker injoyned in the name of the whole House, to give their attendance upon the said Committees at the time and place aforesaid, and also at all times in the mean season thereof, if they shall happen to be called by them, or any of them: And so were had out of the House. And further it is Ordered by this House,Dalton also or∣dered to attend That Mr. Speaker do send the Serjeant for John Dalton, late Master of the said John Wells, and to charge him also to attend upon the said Committees, at the said time and place in like manner. Mr. Vice-Chamberlain for him∣self and the residue of the Com∣mittees,Tuesd. 14 Feb. Another Re∣port from the Committee a∣gainst Hall, of new Contempts and Crimes added to his former. appointed to examine Mr. Hall, the Printer, the Scrive∣ner, and all other persons privy to the setting forth and publishing of the Book, declared, that they had charged the said Mr. Hall
with Contempt against this House the last Session, in that being en∣joyned by this House to appear, he departed out of Town, in con∣tempt of the Court, and afterwards testified the same his wilful Con∣tempt, by an unseemly Letter ad∣dressed by him to this House, and charged him further with divers Articles of great importance, se∣lected by the said Committees out of the said Book: As first, with publishing the Conferences of this House abroad in Print, and that in a Libel, with a counterfeit Name of the Author, and no Name of the Printer, and containing matter of Infamy of sundry good particular Members of the House, and of the whole State of the House in general, and also of the Power and Authori∣ty of this House;Mr. Hall char∣geth the House with Injustice. affirming, that he knew of his own knowledge, that this House had de facto judged and proceeded untruely. And was further charged, That he had injuriously impeached the
memory of the late Speaker decea∣sed; that he had impugned the Authority of this House, in appoin∣ting Committees without his assent; and that in defacing the Credit of the Body and Members of this House,Nota. he practised to deface the Authorities of the Laws and Pro∣ceedings in the Parliament, and so to impair the ancient Order, tou∣ching the government of the Realm, and Rights of this House, and the form of making Laws, whereby the Subjects of the Realm are governed. And further was charged, That since his being before the Lords of the Councel for his said offence, and after that he had received rebuke of them for the same, and had offered some form of a submission, he had eftsoon again published the said Book; and that upon his Exami∣nation in the House, he had denied the having any more than one of the said Books, it was yet proved he had twelve or thirteen, and six of them he had given away, since the time
he was called before the said Lords of the Councel. Unto all which things, as the said Mr. Hall could make no rea∣sonable answer or denial, so Mr. Vice-chamberlain very excellently setting forth the natures and qua∣lities of the said offences, in their several degrees, moved in the end that Mr. Hall being without at the door, might be called in to Answer unto those points before the whole House, and so there∣upon to proceed to some end; and therewithall perswading a due consideration of spending the time as much as might be in matters of greatest moment, wherein much less has been done this Session, then in any other these many years in like quantity of time: And thereupon after divers other motions and speeches had in the said matter,The Printer brought to the Bar again, and re-examined. the Printer was brought to the Bar, and being examined, avowed that Mr. Hall after that he had been before the
Lords of the Councel, came to him and told him, that he had an∣swered the matter for the Books before the Councel, and that therefore the Printer might deli∣ver the said Books abroad. And also whereas the said Printer wished unto the said Mr. Hall, since his last committing, that all the said Books had been burned before he meddled with them; Mr. Hall should say to him again, He would not for 100 l. And then being sequestred. Mr. HallMr. Hall at the Bar, and re∣charged by Mr. Speaker. was brought to the Bar, where after some reverence done by him, though not yet in such humble and lowly wise as the state of one in that place to be charged and accused, requireth; whereof being admonished by Mr. Speaker, and further by him charged with sundry of the said parts collected out of the said Book,Submits, refu∣seth to answer, acknowledgeth his Error, prays pardon, and is sequestred. he submitted himself to the House, refusing to make any an∣swer or defence at all in the matter,
but acknowledging his Error, prayed pardon of the whole House with all his heart; and that done, was sequestred. After which, upon sundry Mo∣tionsSundry motions for a proporti∣onable punish∣ment. and Arguments had touch∣ing the quality and nature of his fault, and of some proportionable forms of punishment for the same, as Imprisonment, Fine, banishment from the fellowship of this House, and an utter Condemnation and Retractation of the said Book, it was upon the Question, ResolvedResolved, nemi∣ne contradicente Hall to be com∣mitted to Pri∣son. by the whole House without any one Negative voice: 1. That he should be commit∣ted to Prison. 2. And upon another Question likewise Resolved, That he should be committed to the Prison of the Tower,And that Prison to be the Tower as the Prison proper to this House. 3. And upon another Question, it was in like manner Resolved, That he should remain in the said Prison of the Tower by the space of 6. months.There to re∣main for six months.
4. And so much longer as un∣til himself should willingly make a Retractation of the said Book,And from thence, till he made a retra∣ctation of his Book. to the satisfaction of this House, or of such order as this House shall take for the same, during the con∣tinuance of this present Parlia∣ment. 5. And upon another Question is was also in like manner Resol∣ved,To be fined to the Queen. That a Fine should be asses∣sed by this House to the Queens Majesties use, upon the said Mr. Hall for his said offence. 6.And that Fine to be 500 Marks. And upon another Question also it was Resolved in like man∣ner, That the said Fine should be 500 Marks. 7.To be severed and cut off from being a Mem∣ber of the House. And upon another Question also it was likewise Resolved, That the said Mr. Hall should presently be severed and cut off from being a Member of this House any more, during the continuance of this present Parliament.And the Spea∣ker to issue a Warrant for a new Writ. And that Mr. Speaker, by authority of this House, should direct a Warrant
from this House to the Clerk of the Crown-Office in the Chancery, for the awarding of the Queens Majesties Writ to the Sheriff of the said County of Lincoln, for a new Burgess to be returned into this present Parliament for the said Burrough of Grantham, in the lieu and stead of the said Ar∣thur Hall, so as before disabled any longer to be a Member of this House. 8.His Book and slanderous Li∣bel to be ad∣judged utterly false and erro∣neous. And upon another Question it was also in like manner Resol∣ved, That the said Book and scan∣dalous Libel should, and shall be holden, deemed, taken and adjud∣ged to be utterly false and erronious. And that the same shall be pub∣lickly testified,And that to be publickly testi∣fied and affir∣med by Order of the House. affirmed and set forth to be false, seditious and erronious, in such sort, order and degree as by this House shall be, during this Session of Parliament, further determined in that be∣half, Which done, the said Mr. Hall
was brought in again to the Bar,Hall brought to the Bar to re∣ceive his Judg∣ment, which Mr. Speaker delivered ac∣cordingly. unto whom Mr. Speaker in the name of the whole House, pro∣nounced the said Judgment in form aforesaid, and so the Serjeant was commanded to take charge of him, and convey him to the said Prison of the Tower, and to deli∣ver him to Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, by Warrant from this House to be directed and signed by Mr. Speaker for that purpose. Which done, and the said Mr. Hall had away by the Serjeant, it was agreed (upon a motion made by the Speaker) that the whole course and form of the said proceedings and Judgment of this House against the said Mr. Hall, should be after∣wards orderly digested and set down in due form, to be first read in this House, and then so entred by the Clerk as the residue of the Orders and proceedings of this House, in other Cases, are used to be done. And so it was after∣wards drawn into form, read un∣to
the House, aud entred by the Clerk accordingly, in haec verba: (viz.) Whereas it was informed unto this House,The Procee∣dings against Hall drawn up, read and a∣greed to by the House. upon Saturday being the fourth day of this present Fe∣bruary, That Arthur Hall of Gran∣tham in the County of Lincoln Esquire, had sithence the last Ses∣sion of this Parliament, set forth in print and published a Book, dedicated unto Sir Henry Knyvet Knight, a good Member of this House, without his privity, liking or allowance, in part tending greatly to the slander and re∣proach not only of Sir Robert Bell Knight, deceased, late Speaker of this Parliament, and of sundry particular Members of this House, but also of the proceeding of this House in the same last Session of Parliament, in a Cause that con∣cerned the said Arthur Hall, and one Smalley his man; and that there was also contained a long discourse tending to the diminish∣ment
of the ancient Authority of this House; and that thereupon by Order of this House, the said Arthur Hall was sent for by the Serjeant of this House, to appear on Monday following, which he did accordingly: whereupon be∣ing called to the Bar, and char∣ged by the Speaker with the In∣formation given against him, he confessed the making and setting forth thereof: whereupon the said Arthur Hall being sequestred, the House did presently appoint divers Committees to take a more particular Examination of the said Cause, and of all such as had been doers therein; which Exa∣mination being finished by the said Committees, they informed this House that they had charged the said Arthur Hall with Con∣tempt against this House the said last Session, in that being enjoy∣ned by this House to appear there at a time by this House prefixed, departed out of the Town in con∣tempt
of the Court, and afterwards testified and asserted the same his wilful contempt, by an unseemly Letter addressed by him to this House; and charged him also with publishing the Conferences of this House, abroad out of the House, and that also in print, in manner of a Libel, with a counterfeit name of the Author, and without any name of the Printer: in which Book or Libel was contained mat∣ter of reproach and infamy to sun∣dry good Members of this House in particular, and of the whole state of the House in general, re∣proaching and embasing what in him lay, the Power and Authority of this House; and untruly repor∣ting the Orders of this House, affirming amongst other great re∣proaches, that he knew of his own knowledge that this House had judged and proceeded untruly; and further charged him, that he had therein also injuriously im∣peached the memory of the late
Speaker deceased, affirming that the Orders of this House were not by him truly delivered or set down, but altered and changed. And not herewith satisfied,Rot. Pat. 48 H. 3. m. 6. dorso. Forma pacis in∣ter Regem & Barones. The Articles of Peace à Domino Rege & Domi∣no Edwardo, Praelatis & Proceribus om∣nibus, & Com∣munitate tota regni Angliae communiter & concorditer ap∣probat. were sealed by the Bishops of Lin∣coln and Ely, Earl of Norf. Earl of Oxon. Humphrey Bo∣hun, William de Monte Canisio, & Major. London. in Parliamento London. mense Junii, Anno Dom. 1264. de consensu, voluntate & praecepto Domini Regis, necnon Praelatorum, Baronum, ac etiam Communitatis tunc ibidem praesentium. And not only so, but that Record tells us, Quod quaedam ordinatio facta in Parliamento London. habito circa festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae prox' praeteritum, pro pace Regni conservanda. hath in some part thereof contained a false and slanderous discourse a∣gainst the Antiquity and Autho∣rity of the Commons House, or Third Estate of the Parliament; wherein he hath falsly sought, as much as in him is, to impugn, de∣face, blemish and diminish the Po∣wer, Antiquity and Authority of this House, and the Interest that it hath always, and in all ages had, to the great impeachment of the ancient order and government of this Realm, the rights of this House, and the form of making Laws.
And that since his being before the Lords of the Councel for his said offence,Pultons Stat. 24 H. 8. c. 12. It is unani∣mously decla∣red, adjudged and confirmed, That the King, his noble Pro∣genitors, and the Nobility and Commons of the said Realm, at di∣vers and sun∣dry Parlia∣ments as well in the time of King E. 1. R. 2. H. 4. and other noble Kings of this Realm, made sundry Ordinances, Laws, Statutes and Provisions for the entire and sure con∣servation of the Prerogative, Liberties and Preheminences of the said Imperial Crown of this Realm, and of the Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal of the same, to keep it from the annoyance as well from the See of Rome, as from the Authority of other Foreign Potentates, attempting the diminu∣tion and violation thereof, as often and from time to time as any such annoyance and attempt might be known or espied. and after he had re∣ceived rebuke of them for the same, and had offered some form of submission in that behalf, he had eftsoons again published the said Book; and that upon his Examination in this House, he had denied the having of any more then one of the said Books, yet it was proved he had 12. or 13. of them, and 6. of them since the time he was called before the Lords of the Councel: and that he had by his Letters given order to have—of those Books prin∣ted, which was done according∣ly; and that he had caused one of the said Books, sithence this Sessi∣on of Parliament, to be sent to Sir Randal Brewerton Kt.
Unto all which,Ex vetusto MS. Staeturorum pe∣nes Johan' Pea∣chy de Interior' Templo Armig. King Edw. 2. and the whole Parliament, in the 15. year of his Reign, when the Ordinances which had been made before that time, by certain Pre∣lates, Earls and Barons, by the consent of that King, & la Comunante de la terre, were repealed, be∣cause in many things they re∣strained▪ the Power Royal too much; yet in the Act of Repeal there is a salvo semper jure Regni sive Parliamenti, for they unanimously agree and provide, Mes les choses que sont establer pur le state nostre Seigneur le Roy & ses heirs, & pur le state du Roialme & du Peuple, soient tretez, accordez & establez en Par∣lement par nostre dit Seigneur le Roy, & par l'assent des Prelatz, Comtz, Barons, & tout le Commune du Roialme, auxi come ad estre accustumer ceo en arrear; That those things which are for establishing the Estate of the King and his Heirs, and for the Estate of the Realm, and the People thereof, shall be treated of, accorded and established in Parliament by the King, and by the assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and all the Commons of the Realm, as it had been accustomed in times past. as the said Ar∣thur Hall could make no denial, or sufficient Answer, so the said Committees setting forth the na∣ture and qualities of the said Of∣fences in their several degrees, moved in the end that the said Arthur Hall might be called into the House, to answer unto those Points before the whole House, and so thereupon to proceed to some speedy end, perswading therewithal a due consideration to be had of spending the time as much as might be, in such Matters of the Realm, for which this Parliament was chiefly called.
Whereupon after divers other Motions and Speeches had in the said Matter,Rastals Stat. Anno 38 E. 3. f. 124. the Sta∣tute of Provi∣sors from Rome. And to the in∣tent that the said Ordinances and every of the same, for the ease, quiet∣ness and wealth of the Com∣mons, be the better sustai∣ned, executed and kept, and that all those which have of∣fended, or shall offend against these Ordinances, by prosecutions, accusations, denunciations, citations, or other Process, made or to be made out of the said Realm, or within, or otherwise against any manner of person of the said Realm, be the more covenable, and speedily brought in an∣swer, to receive right according to their desert. The King, the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Nobles, and other Commons, Clerks, and Lay-people, be bound by this present Ordinance to aid, com∣fort, and to counsel the one and the other, and as often as shall need, and by all the best means that may be made of word and of deed, to impeach such offenders, and resist their deeds and enterprizes, and without suffering them to inhabit, abide, or pass by the Seig∣nories, Possessions, Lands, Jurisdictions, or Places, and be bound to keep and defend the one and the other from all damage, villainy, and reproof, as they should do their own persons, and for their deed and business, and by such manner, and as far forth as such Prosecu∣tions or Process were made or attempted against them in especial general, or in common. the said Printer was brought to the Bar, and being examined, avowed, that Arthur Hall after he had been before the Lords of the Councel, came to him, and told him, that he had answered the Matter for the said Books before the Councel; and that therefore the said Printer might deliver the said Books abroad; affirming also, that whereas the said Henry Bynnyman the Printer, sithence this Session
of Parliament,Rot Parl. 21 R. 2. n. 27. Pur le Pape s'accorde∣rent touts les Prelats, Seig∣neurs & Com∣munes en le Parlement. That Pope Ur∣ban was true & lawful Pope, and that the Livings of all Cardinals, Re∣bels to Holy Father, and all others their coadjutors, fau∣tors and adhe∣rents, and all other Enemies of the King and his Realm, shall be seized into the hands of the King, and the King to be answered of the profits thereof; and whosoever shall procure or ob∣tain any Pro∣vision or other Instrument from any other Pope then the said Urban, shall be out of the Kings Protection. and since his last committing, wishing unto the said Arthur Hall, that all the said Books had been burned before he meddled with them; that Arthur Hall should say to him again, he would not so for 100 l. And then he being sequestred, Arthur Hall was brought to the Bar, where after some mean reverence by him done, though not in such humble and lowly wise, as the state of one in that place to be charged and accused, required; whereof being admonished by the Speaker, and further by him charged, as well with the said parts collected out of the said Book, as with other his Misdemeanours and Contempts aforesaid, he in some sort submitted himself to the House, acknowledging in part the Matters wherewith he was charged, and in some other parts denied the same, but not making
any good defence in the Matter,Certaine Priests en Angleterre avoient offend en diverse points en temps R. 2. durant le division de la Papacy, les fue∣ront per Act del Parlement deprives de leur Benefices. 21 H. 7. fo. 34. but acknowledging in part his Errors, imputing it for the most part to his misprision, and that in other parts the Matters were gathered otherwise than he meant; and thereupon he pray∣ed pardon of the House, and that done, was sequestred. After which, upon sundry Mo∣tions and Arguments had tou∣ching the nature and quality of his Faults,Rot. Parl. 2 H. 5. par. 2. num. 10. An Act of Par∣liament made 2 H. 5. agrees and confirms, that it was ever the liberty and freedom of the Commons of England, that no Statute or Law could be made, unless they gave thereto their assent; and the Reason was convincing and certain, which the King and his Councel, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls and Barons in Parliament, agreed to, and never in the least questioned or doubted of, that the Commons of the Land have ever been a Member of Parliament, and were as well Assenters as Petitioners. The Record is thus; That so as it hath ever be their liberte and freedom, that ther should no Statute, ne Law, be made, of less then they yaffe thereto there assent, considering that the Common of your Lond, the which that is and ever hath be a Membre of your Parliament, ben as well Assenters as Petitioners. and of some propor∣tionable forms of such punishment for such grievous Offences, it was upon the Question Resolved and Ordered by the whole House, without any one negative Voice,
that he should be committed to Prison.Rot. Parl. 3 H. 5. n. 11. Nostre Seigneur le Roy per avys & as∣sent des Seig∣neurs & Com∣munes, Enact. That during the Schism at Rome, all Bi∣shops and other persons of Holy Church, shall be consecrated by the Metro∣politan, upon the Kings Writ, without fur∣ther excuse or delay. And upon another Question likewise Resolved and Ordered, that he should be committed to the Prison of the Tower, as the Prison usual for Offenders to be committed unto by this House. And upon another Question it was in like manner Resolved and Ordered, that he should remain in the said Prison of the Tower by the space of 6 months, and so much longer, as until himself should willingly make a particular Revocation or Retraction under his Hand in writing,Pultons Stat, 24 H, 8. c. 12. It was enacted by Authority of Parliament, That all Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm, or of any the Kings Dominions, consecrated, and at this present time taken and reputed for Archbishops and Bishops, may by Au∣thority of this present Parliament, and not by vertue of any pro∣vision, or other foreign Authority, License, Faculty, or Dispensa∣tion, keep, enjoy and retain their Archbishopricks and Bishopricks, in as large and ample manner, as if they had been promoted, elected, confirmed and consecrated, according to the due course of the Laws of this Realm; and that every Archbishop and Bi∣shop of this Realm, and of other the King's Dominions, may mi∣nister, use and exercise all and every thing and things, pertaining to the Office or Order of an Archbishop and Bishop, with all to∣kens in Signs and Ceremonies thereunto lawfully belonging. of the said
Errors and Slanders contained in the said Book,Rastals Stat 25 H. 8. c. 12. It is declared both by the Lords & Com∣mons, That your Royal Majesty, and your Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons re∣presenting the whole state of your Realm, in this your most High Court of Parliament, have full power and authority not only to dis∣pence, but also authorize some elect person or persons to dis∣pence with those and all other Humane Laws of this your Realm, and with every one of them, as the quality of the per∣sons and matter shall require; and also the said Laws and every of them to abrogate, adnul, amplifie or diminish, as shall be seen unto your Majesty, and the Nobles and Commons of your Realm, present in your Parliament, meet and convenient for the wealth of your Realm, as by divers good and wholesom Acts of Parlia∣ment, made and established as well in your time, as in the time of your most noble Progenitors, it may plainly and evidently appear. to the satisfaction of this House, or of such Order as this House shall take for the same, during the continuance of this present Session of Parlia∣ment. And upon another Question it was also in like manner Resolved and Ordered, that a Fine should be assessed by this House to the Queens Majesties use upon the said Arthur Hall, for his said Offence. And upon another Question it was Resolved and Ordered in like manner, that the said Fine should be 500 Marks. And upon another like Questi∣on it was likewise Resolved and
Ordered, that the said Arthur Hall should presently be remo∣ved,Pultons Stat. An. 2 & 3 E. 6. cap. 21. All Laws prohibi∣ting Spiritual persons to mar∣ry, who by Gods Law may mar∣ry, shall be void. severed and cut off, from being any longer a Member of this House, during the continu∣ance of this present Parliament; and that the Speaker by Authori∣ty from this House, should direct a Warrant from this House to the Clerk of the Crown-Office in the Chancery,Be it therefore enacted by our Soveraign Lord the King, with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this pre∣sent Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, that all and every Law and Laws positive, Canons, Constitutions, and Ordinances heretofore made by Authority of Man only, which do prohibit or forbid marriage to any Ecctesiastical or Spiritual person or persons, of what estate, condition or degree they be, or by what name or names soever they be called, which by Gods Law may lawfully marry, in all and every Article, Branch and Sentence, concerning only the prohibition for the marriage of the persons aforesaid, shall be utterly void and of none effect; and that all manner of forfeitures, pains and pe∣nalties, crimes or actions, which were in the said Laws con∣tained, and of the same did follow, concerning the prohibition for the marriage of the persons aforesaid, be clearly and utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect, to all intents, constructions and purposes, as well concerning marriage heretofore made by any of the Ecclesiastical or Spiritual persons aforesaid, as also such which hereafter shall be duly and lawfully had, celebrate and made, betwixt the persons which by the Laws of God may lawfully marry. for the awarding of
the Queens Majesties Writ, to the Sheriff of the said County of Lincoln,Lastly, Knigh∣ton one of our best and most exactest Hi∣storians, tells posterity the ancient ends of calling Parliaments, in the Speeches made by Tho. de Woodstock Duke of Glou∣cester, the Kings Uncle, and Tho. de Arundel Bishop of Ely, to King Richard 2d. at Eltham, in the 12th. year of his Reign, in the name of the whole Parliament then sitting at Westminster, wherein the said Delegates do put that King in mind, Quod ex antiquo Statuto & Consuetudine laudabili & approbata, &c. (saith the Historian) That by ancient Statute and Custom lau∣dable and approved, which no man could deny, the King may once in the year convene his Lords and Commons to his Court of Parliament, as to the highest Court of the whole Realm. [In qua omnis equitas relucere deberet absque qualibet scrupulo∣sitate vel nota, tanquam Sol in ascensu meridiei, ubi pauperes & divites pro refrigerio tranquilitatis & pacis, & repulsione inju∣riarum refugium infallibile querere possent, ac etiam Errata Regni reformare, & de statu & gubernatione Regis & Regni cum sa∣pientiori Concilio tractare, ut Inimici Regis & Regni intrinseci, & hostes extrinseci destruantur & repellantur, qualiter quoque onera incumbentia Regi & Regno levius ad Ediam Communita∣tis suportari poterunt.] In which Court (say they) all equity ought to shine forth, without the least Cloud or shadow, like the Sun in his Meridian glory, where poor and rich refreshed with peace and ease of their oppressions, may always find infallible and sure refuge and succour; the grievances of the Kingdom re∣dress'd, and the state of the King and government of the Realm debated with wiser Counsels, the Domestick and Foreign Ene∣mies of the King and Kingdom destroyed and repelled, and to consider how the charges and burthens of both may be sustained with more ease to the people. for a new Burgess to be returned into this present Parlia∣ment,
for the said Burrough of Grantham, in the lieu and stead of the said Arthur Hall, so as be∣fore disabled any longer to be a Member of this House. And upon another Question it was also in like manner Resolved and Ordered, that the said Book or Libel was and should be holden, deemed, and taken and adjud∣ged, to be for so much as doth concern the Errors aforesaid, con∣demned. Which done, the said Arthur Hall was brought in again to the Bar, unto whom the Speaker in the Name of the whole House, pronounced the said Judgement in form aforesaid; and so the Ser∣jeant commanded to take charge of him, and convey him to the said Prison of the Tower, and to deliver him to the Lievtenant of the Tower by Warrant from this House, to be directed and signed by the said Speaker for that pur∣pose.
Whereas by a former Order of this House,Saturday the 18. of March. A further Or∣der against Mr. Hall. Arthur Hall Esq was committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, there to remain by the space of 6 months, and so much longer, as until himself should willingly make a general Revo∣cation or Retractation under his Hand in writing, of certain Er∣rors and Slanders, contained in a certain Book set forth in Print, and published in part, greatly tending to the slander and re∣proach of Sir Robert Bell Kt. de∣ceased, late Speaker of this present Parliament, and of sundry other particular Members of this House, and also of the Power, Antiquity and Authority of this House, to the satisfaction of this House, or of such Order as this House should take for the same, during the con∣tinuance of this present Session of Parliament, as by the same Or∣der made and set down by this House, upon Tuesday being the 14th. day of February foregoing,
in this present Session of Parlia∣ment, more at large doth and may appear. And where also the said Arthur Hall hath ever since the said Order taken, remained in the said Prison of the Tower, and yet still doth, and hath not at all made any Revocation or Re∣traction of the said Slanders, Errors and Vntruths, to the sa∣tisfaction of the said House, accor∣ding to the said Order;Hall's Retra∣ctation to be referred to a certain Com∣mittee. It is now therefore Ordered and Resolved by this House, that the further allowance of such Revocation or Retractation to be hereafter made as aforesaid, shall be referred un∣to the Right Honourable Sir Francis Knolls Knt. one of her Majesties most Honourable Pri∣vy Councel, and Treasurer of her Highness's most Honourable House∣hold; Sir James Croft Knt. one other of her Majesties most Ho∣nourable Privy Councel, and Comptroller of her Majesties said most Honourable Houshold; Sir
Christopher Hatton Knt. one other of her Highness's said most Honou∣rable Privy Councel, and Vice-Chamberlain to her Majesty; Sir Francis Walsingham Knt. and Thomas Wilson Esq her Highness's two principal Secretaries; Sir Walter Mildmay Knt. one of her Highness' said most Honourable Privy Councel, and Chancellor of her Highness's Court of Exchequer; and Sir Ralph Sadler Knt. one other of her Highness said most Honourable Privy Councel, and Chancellor of her Highness's Dutchy of Lancaster, being all Members of this House, or unto any three of them,The Commit∣tee to Report Hall's Retra∣ctation at the next Session of Parliament. to be by them or any three of them further Declared and Reported over unto this House, in the next Session of Parliament to be holden after the end of this said Session accordingly.
The 3d. Case of Arthur Hall Esq ON Saturday the 12th. day of December,Anno 27 Eliz. Jour. Dom. Com. Saturday 12 December. Contempt in a Member. notice be∣ing given to the House, of one Mr. Hall, a Member of the same, that had not attended all this Parliament, it was Ordered,The Serjeant to give warning to Mr. Hall tu attend the House. that the Serjeant should give him warning to attend upon Munday next. The Business of Mr. Arthur Hall, of which the House had been informed upon their first Meeting this Morning, was be∣fore the rising of the House refer∣red to Mr. Wolley, Mr. Crumwel, Mr. Diggs, and Mr. Sands, to peruse the Order touching the same, against Munday next, being the day appointed by the House for the said Mr. Hall to appear before them.
The 4th. Case touching Arthur Hall Esq ON Munday the 21. day of November,Monday the 21 November, Anno 29 Eliz. An. Dom. 1586 (to which day the Parliament had been on Fri∣day the 18th. day of the said Month foregoing last adjourned) Mr. Markham,Mr. Markham's Complaint a∣gainst Mr. Hall. a Burgess for the Burrough of Grantham in the County of Lincoln, shewed on the behalf of the Inhabitants of the said Burrough, That Mr. Arthur Hall having been in some former Parliaments returned a Burgess for the said Burrough, and in some of the said Parliaments, for certain Causes the House then mo∣ving,That he being for ever disa∣bled to be a Member of the House, had not∣withstanding brought his Writ against the Inhabitants of Grantham for his Wages disabled for ever afterwards to be any Member of this House at all, hath of late brought a Writ against the Inhabitants of the said Burrough for his Wages, (amongst other times) in attendance at the late Session of Parliament holden at Westminster, in the 27th. year
of her Highness's Reign, during which time, as also a great part of some other of the said former Parliaments, he did not serve in the said House, but was for some Causes as aforesaid disabled to be any Member of this House, and was also then committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, and so prayeth the Advice and Order of this honourable House therein;Who pray the advice and or∣der of the House. un∣to the Censure and Order whereof, the said Inhabitants do in most humble and dutiful wise submit themselves, and so shewed the said Writ, which was then read by the Clerk; after the reading whereof, and some Speeches had touching the former Proceedings in this House against the said Mr. Hall, as well in disabling him to be any more a Member of this House, as also touching his said Imprisonment, the Matter was re∣ferred to further Consideration, af∣ter search of the Presidents and Entries of this House heretofore
had and made in the course of the said Cause. On Friday the 2d. day of De∣cember,Friday the 2d. of December. upon a Motion this day renewed on the behalf of the In∣habitants of the Burrough of Gran∣tham, in the County of Lincoln, touching a Writ brought against them by Arthur Hall Esq where∣by he demandeth Wages of the said Inhabitants, for his Service done for them in attendance at sundry Parliaments, being elected and returned one of the Burgesses of the said Burrough in the same Parliaments; For as much as it is alledged, that the said Arthur Hall hath been heretofore disabled by this House, to be at any time afterwards a Member of this House; and also that in some Sessions of the same Parliaments, he hath neither been free of the Corporation of the said Burrough, and in some other also hath not given any at∣tendance in Parliament at all: It is Ordered, that the Examina∣tion
of the state of the Cause be committed to the Right Honoura∣ble Sir Walter Mildmay Kt. one of her Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel,Referred to a Committee. Chancellor of her Highness's Court of Exchequer, Sir Ralph Sadler Kt. one other of her Majesties most Honourable Pri∣vy Councel, and Chancellor of her Highness's Dutchy of Lancaster, Thomas Crumwel, Robert Mark∣ham, and Robert Wroth Esquires; to the end, that after due Exa∣mination thereof by them had, (if it shall so seem good to them) they do thereupon move the Lord Chancellor on the behalf of this House,With directions if they think good, to move the Lord Chan∣cellor to stay the granting of further Process against the Burrough. to stay the granting out of any Attachment or other Process against the said Inhabitants for the said Wages, at the Suit of the said Arthur Hall, and the said Com∣mittees also to signifie their Pro∣ceedings therein to this House, at the next Sitting thereof accor∣dingly.
An Order delivered by Mr. Crum∣wel, Entred by the Consent of the House. WHereas upon Complaint made to this House,Tuesday the 21. of March. upon Munday the 21. day of November, in the first Meeting of this present Parliament, on the behalf of the Burrough of Grantham, in the County of Lincoln, against Arthur Hall Gent. That the said Arthur Hall had commenced Suit against them, for Wages by him deman∣ded of the said Burrough, as one of the Burgesses of the Parlia∣ment, in the Sessions of Parliament holden in the 13. 14. 18. and 23. years of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majecty, where∣in it was alledged, that the said Burrough ought not to be charged, as well in respect of the negligent attendance of the said Mr. Hall at the said Sessions of Parliament, and some other Offences by him
committed at some of the said Sessions, as also in respect that he had made promise not to require any such Wages. The Examina∣tion of the said Cause, on the 2d. day of December, in the last Session of this Parliament, by Order of this House, was committed unto Sir Ralph Sadler Kt. Chancellor of the Dutchy, Sir Walter Mild∣may Kt. Chancellor of the Exche∣quer, Thomas Crumwel, Robert Markham, and Robert Wroth Esqs. This day Report was made by the said Committees, that not ha∣ving time during the last Session of Parliament, to examine the Circumstances of the Cause, they had in the mean season by their Letters advertised my Lord Chan∣cellor, that the said Cause was committed unto them, and hum∣bly requested his Lordship,The Ld. Chan∣cellor, at the request of the Committee, stays further Process against Grantham. to stay the issuing forth of any fur∣ther Process against the said Bur∣rough, until this Session of Par∣liament (or Meeting) which ac∣cordingly
his Lordship had very honourably performed; and the said Committees did further de∣clare, that having, during this Session of Parliament (or Meet∣ing) sent for Mr. Hall, declared unto him the effect of the Com∣plaint against him; they had de∣sired him to remit the said Wages which he had demanded of the said Burrough, whom they found very conformable to condescend to such their Request; and that the said Mr. Hall then alledged and affirmed unto them, that if the Citizens of the said Burrough would have made suit unto him, he would upon such their own suit then remitted the same; so was he very willing to do any thing which might be grateful to this House,Mr. Hall frank∣ly remits his Wages to the Burrough of Grantham. and did freely and frankly remit the same; which being well liked of by this House, it was by them this day Ordered, that the same should be entred accordingly.
§. 1. Mr. Arthur Hall's Case stated. I.Ex Journ. Dom. Com. ANno 23 Eliz. 1580. Mr. Arthur Hall, Burgess for Grantham, for writing a Book de∣rogatory to the Authority, Power and State of the Commons House of Parliament, had Judgment, nemine contradicente. 1.Judgment. To be imprisoned in the Tower for 6 months, and from thence till he had made a Retra∣ctation of his Book. 2.The like Presi∣dent An. 3 Car. 1. Vid. Journ. Dom. Com. To be severed and cut off from being a Member of that or any future Parliament. 3. A Fine of 500 Marks to the Queen. 4. His Book and slanderous Libel adjudged utterly false and erroneous. II.Journ. Dom. Proc. & Com. The Bishop of Bristol's Case. Anno 1 Jacobi, 1603. The Bishop of Bristol publishing a Book, tending to make division and strife, wrong and dishonour,
both to the Lower House, and the Lords themselves, was complai∣ned of by the Commons to the Lords. The Earl of Salisbury at a Con∣ference between the two Houses, rebuked the Bishop, That any man should presume to see more than a Parliament could; the Bishop made his Recantation: 1. That he had erred. 2. That he was sorry for it. 3. If it were to do again, he would not do it. 4. But protested, it was done of ignorance and not of malice. III.Ex Journ. Dom. Proc. & Com. 7 Jac. The Case of Dr. Cowell. Anno 7 Jacobi, 1609. Dr. Cowell, Professor of the Civil Law at Cambridge, writ a Book called the Interpreter, rashly, dan∣gerously, and perniciously asser∣ting certain Heads, to the over∣throw and destruction of Parlia∣ments, and the fundamental Laws and Government of the King∣dom.
He was complained of by the Commons to the Lords,Men despise and reproach those things whereof they are ignorant. It is a desperate and dangerous matter for Ci∣vilians and Canonists, (I speak what I know, and not without just cause) to write either of our Common Laws of England, which they pro∣fess not, or a∣gainst them, which they know not. But their Pages are so full of palpa∣ble Errors, and gross Mistakings as these new Authors are out of our Cha∣rity, and their Books out of our Judgment, cast away un∣answered. Coke lib. 10. Lectori. as equally wounded, who resolved to censure his Errors and boldness: but upon the interposition of the King, who declared that the man had mista∣ken the Fundamental Points and Constitutions of Parliaments, pro∣mised to condemn the Doctrines of the Book as absurd, and him that maintained the Positions, they proceeded no further. His Principles, with the evi∣dent Inferences from them, were these: 1. That the King was solutus à Legibus, and not bound by his Coronation Oath. 2. That it was not ex necessitate that the King should call a Par∣liament to make Laws, but might do that by his absolute power; for Voluntas Regis (with him) was Lex populi. 3. That it was a favour to admit the consent of his Subjects, in gi∣ving of Subsidies.
4. The Doctor draws his Ar∣guments from the Imperial Laws of the Roman Emperors; an Ar∣gument which may be urged with as great reason, and upon as good authority, for the reduction of the state of the Clergy of England, to the Polity and Laws in the time of those Emperors; as also to make the Laws and Customs of Rome and Constantinople, to be binding and obligatory to the Cities of London and York. IV.Blackwood's Case. Jour. Dom. Com. In the same Parliament, Mr. Hoskins a Member of the Commons, produced several other Treatises containing as much as Dr. Cowell's Book, all sold impune; amongst the rest there was one Blackwood's Book, which conclu∣ded, That we are all Slaves by reason of the Conquest.Nota. Upon these pernicious and false principles, our more modern Au∣thors have without controul pub∣lished to the World, these, and
many more dangerous positions, against the very being and honour of Parliaments, and destructive to the ancient fundamental Laws, Priviledges, and Customs of this Realm. POSITIONS. 1.E contra Vide the anci∣ent Rights of the Commons of England as∣serted, or a dis∣course, proving by Records and the best Histo∣rians, that the Commons of England were ever an essen∣tial part of Parliament. That originally the Parlia∣ment consisted only of such as it pleased the King to call, none ha∣ving Right to come else. 2. That all the Subject hath, is the Kings: and he may lawfully at his pleasure take it from us, in re∣gard he hath as much Right to all our Lands and Goods, as to any Revenue of the Crown. 3. That the Saxon Kings made Laws by the advice of the Bishops, and Wise men,The Power of Kings, in parti∣cular of the Kings of Eng∣land, learnedly asserted by Sir Robert Filmer Kt. fol. 1. Printed An. Dom. 1680. which were no other then the Privy-Councel. 4. That the Laws, Ordinances, Letters Patents, Priviledges and Grants of Princes, have no force but during their life, if they be not ratified by the express con∣sent,
or at least by the sufferance of the Prince following, who had knowledge thereof. What then becomes of the Peerage of England? what of the Bishops, Deans, Prebends, and other dignified Clergy? what of the Charters of all Corporations? what of hereditary Offices? and what of Offices and Places for life? and lastly, what becomes of the Charters and Priviledges of the two most famous Vniversi∣ties▪ of England, Cambridge and Oxford? 5. That Taxes and Subsidies were raised and paid without any gift of the Commons, or of any Parliament, in the Saxon times; for instance, Danegelt. 6. For it was matter of Grace for the King to call the Commons to Parliament. Yet afterwards the Commons were called and made a House by the Bishops, in the times of the Barons War, the better to curb them; yet were
they never called to consult, but only to consent. 7. Yet others deny that, and affirm that the Commons had their first birth and beginning by Re∣bellion, Anno 49 H. 3. and that too after the Battel of Lewes, when the Barons had the King and Prince Edward in their power as prisoners, and exercised Regal Au∣thority in his Name. He reigned 57. years. 8. But this is not agreed by some, for they say, ab ingressu of William the First, ad excessum H. 3. they cannot find one word of the Plebs or Commons being any part of Parliament; hence another infers, that the opinion is most like, who think, That the Commons giving their assent to making of Laws, began about the time of E. 1. 9. The Legislative power is wholly in the King, for the Statutes of most antiquity (according to the phrase of penning) may seem
to be the meer will and pleasure of the King, assisted with his Coun∣cel, neither Lords nor Commons being named: witness, inter al. the Statute of Magna Charta, 9 H. 3. &c. 10. Nor did the Commons take into consideration matters of Re∣ligion, which was only the place and function of the Lords Spiri∣tual and Divines to determine, and not at all appertaing to the Laity: semper exclusis Dominis Temporalibus, & Communitate Regni. 11. As for the Priviledges of the House of Commons pretended to, there's none to be found full, and firm, but only their being freed from Arrests, and that hardly. 12. They are not called to be any part of the Common Councel, by the Writ of Summons. 13. Nor to consult de arduis Regni negotiis, of the difficult bu∣siness of the Kingdom.
14. For the Writ saith, That the King would have conference and treat with the Great men and Peers, but not a word of treaty and conference with the Commons. 15. Their duty being only ad faciend. & consentiend. to perform and consent to such things as should be Ordained by the Com∣mon Councel of the Kingdom. 16. Nor is there so much men∣tion in the Writ, as a power in the Commons to dissent. [No more is there in the Lords Writ, what then?] 17. Until H. 7's time the Com∣mons were often petitioning, but never petitioned to, and then di∣rected to the Right Worshipful Commons. 18. That until the time of E. 6. (who was an Infant) for that I suppose was the pretended foun∣dation of the notion, it was pun∣ctually expressed in every Kings Laws, that the Statutes were made by the King alone: and then there
began a dangerous alteration in the phrasing and wording of Acts of Parliament, to the disadvan∣tage of the Crown, and invading the Prerogative. 19. Lastly, for it would be te∣dious to trouble the Reader with all their absurdities, Chimaera's, and false Inferences and Notions with which they have stuffed their Books, and imbroiled the Kingdom, by imposing upon the understan∣ding of many of the Clergy and Gentry in the Nation; They boldly assert, that the Kings Prerogative is a preheminence in cases of neces∣sity, (of which he is the proper and sole Judge) above and before the Law of property and inheritance. And so farewell all Parlia∣ments; and by consequence, fare∣well all Laws. It is God alone who subsists by himself; the Right of Crowns and Kingdoms, and all other things, exist in mutual dependance and re∣lation. The Soveraignty, Honours,
Lives, Liberties and Estates of all, are under the guard of the Law, which when invaded by fraud or wit, or destroyed by force, a dis∣mal confusion quickly veils the face of Heaven, and brings with it hor∣rid darkness, misery and desolation; Rapine, plunder and cheating, both private and publick, will be al∣lowed and protected; continual Rebellions, unjust Proscriptions, villanous Accusations and Whip∣pings, illegal and lasting Imprison∣ments and Confiscations, dismal Dungeons, tormenting Racks and Questions, Arbitrary and Martial Law, Murthers, inhumane Assassi∣nations, and base and servile Flat∣teries, multiplied by Revenge, Am∣bition, and insatiable Avarice, will become the Common Law of the Land. All these and myriads more will be enacted for Law, by force or fraud. All which that wise King James well understood, who saith, That
not only the Royal Prerogative,King James's first Speech to his first Parlia∣ment in Eng∣land. Pulton's Stat. 1 Jac. cap. 2. fol. 1157. but the Peoples security of Lands, Livings and Priviledges, were preserved and maintained by the ancient fundamental Laws, Privi∣ledges and Customs of this Realm, and that by the abolishing or alter∣ing of them, it was impossible but that present confusion will fall up∣on the whole state nnd frame of this Kingdom. And his late Majesty of ever blessed memory,King Charles the I. Declara∣tion to all his loving Subjects, published with the Advice of his Privy Councel. Exact Collecti∣ons of Declara∣tions, pag. 28, 29. was of the same mind and opinion, when he said, The Law is the Inheritance of every Subject, and the only secu∣rity he can have for his Life or Estate, and the which being neg∣lected or dis-esteemed, (under what specious shew soever) a great measure of infelicity, if not an irreparable confusion, must without doubt fall upon them. But to return back. V.Journ. Dom. Com. Dr. Man∣waring's Case. Anno 3 Caroli primi, Dr. Manwaring was impeached in Par∣liament
by the Commons,Juratores prae∣sentant quod Richardus Empson nuper de London mi∣les nuper Consi∣liarius excellen∣tissimi Principis Henrici nuper Regis Angl. 17. die Maii Anno Regni dicti nu∣per Regis 12. & diversis vicibus antea & postea apud London in Parochia sanctae Brigettae in Warda de Farrington ex∣tra, Deum prae oculis non ha∣bens, sed ut filius diabolicus sub∣tiliter imagi∣nans honorem, dignitatem, & prosperitatem dicti nuper Regis, ac prosperitatem Regni sui Angliae minime va∣lere, sed ut ipse magis singulares favores dicti nuper Regis adhibe∣ret, unde magnat. fieri potuisset, ac totum Regnum Angliae, se∣cundum ejus voluntatem gubernaret falso deceptivè & proditoriè legem Angliae, subvertens diversos ligeos ipsius nuper Regis, ex sua falsa covina, & subtili ingenio, contra communem legem Regni Angliae. Anderson's 1. Rep. fol. 156. for preaching and printing several Sermons, with a wicked and mali∣cious intention to seduce and mis∣guide the Conscience of the King, touching the observation of the Laws and Customs of this King∣dom, and the Rights and Liber∣ties of the Subjects thereof, and to incense his Royal Displeasure a∣gainst his Subjects, and to scanda∣lize, subvert and impeach he good Laws and Government of this Realm, and the Authority of the High Court of Parliament, to alien his Royal Heart from his People, and to cause Jealousies, Seditions and Divisions in the Kingdom: Whereupon he had Judgment,
1.Vide Rush∣worth's Colle∣ctions, fo. Judgment a∣gainst the Do∣ctor. To be imprisoned during pleasure of the House of Lords. 2. Was fined a 1000 l. to the King. 3.Journ. Dom. Procerum. To make such submission and acknowledgment of his Offen∣ces in writing, both there and at the Bar of the Commons House. 4. Suspended for the term of 3 years, from exercising the Mi∣nistry. 5. Fo ever disabled to preach at Court. 6. That he should be for ever disabled to have any Ecclesiastical Dignity, or Secular Office. 7. That his said Books were worthy to be burnt; and that for the better effecting of that, his Majesty was to be moved to grant a Proclamation to call them in, to be burnt in London, and both the Vniversities, and to prohibit their Reprinting. This was the Judgment of the Lords. The Doctor made his submission
upon his knees, first at the Bar of the House of Lords, and after on his knees, at the Bar of the House of Commons: His Submission was this, I do here in all sorrow of heart and true repentance,The Doctor's Submission. acknowledge those many Errors and Indiscreti∣ons which I have committed, in preaching and publishing those two Sermons of mine I call Religion and Allegiance,Ex Agupeto Diacono. Assentatores à Regibus tan∣quam pestis vi∣tandi 12. nam non utilia con∣sulunt, sed quae placent 22. 31. sic Diogenes ro∣gatus quaenam bellua pernici∣osissime mor∣deret ex feris inquitobtrecta∣tor ex cicuribus vero adulator. and my great fault in falling upon this Theam again, and handling the same rash∣ly, scandalously and unadvisedly, in mine own Parish-Church in St. Giles in the Fields, the 4th. of May last past; I do humbly ac∣knowledge those three Sermons of mine, to be full of many dangerous passages and inferences, and scan∣dalous aspersions, in most parts of the same. And I do humbly acknowledge the Justice of this Honourable House, in that Sentence and Judg∣ment pass'd upon me for my great
offence; and I do from the bottom of my heart crave pardon of God, the King, this Honourable House, the Church, and the Commonwealth in general, and those worthy Per∣sons reflected upon by me in particu∣lar, for these great Errors and Of∣fences. Roger Manwaring. After all which,The Lords or∣der the Bishop of London to suspend the Doctor. the Lords or∣dered the Bishop of London to suspend him, according to the Clause expressed in the part of the Judgment against him. The Doctor after got a Par∣don, and was made a Bishop, which occasioned great Distur∣bances in the House of Commons, in 4 Car. 1. The Charge and Articles against the Doctor, drawn out of his own Books. Article I. 1. That his Majesty is not bound to keep and observe the
good Laws and Customs of the Realm, concerning the Right and Liberty of the Subject, to be ex∣empted from all Loans, Taxes, and other Aids laid upon them, with∣out common Consent in Parlia∣ment. 2. That his Majesties Will and command in imposing any charges upon his Subjects, without such consent, doth so far bind them in their consciences, that they cannot refuse the same without peril of eternal damnation. Article II. 1. That these Refusers had of∣fended against the Law of God. 2. Against the Supreme Autho∣rity. 3. By so doing were become guilty of impiety, disloyalty, rebel∣lion, disobedience, and liable to many other Taxes. Article III. 1. That Authority of Parlia∣ment is not necessary for the raising of Aids and Subsidies.
2. That the slow proceedings of such Assemblies, are not fit to supply the urgent necessity of the State. 3. That Parliaments are apt to produce sundry impediments to the just designs of Princes, and to give them occasion of displea∣sure and discontent. It was a saying of Themistius in his Consular Oration to Jovi∣nian the Emperor, that Some Bi∣shops did not worship God, but the Imperial purple. This Dr. as I said before, after this so solemn a Judgment, did in the time of Prorogation, between 3 & 4 Car. 1. get a Pardon, and not only so, but the Bishoprick of St. Davids; which occasioned great debates and disturbances in the Parliament when they re∣assembled again, the power and va∣lidity of his Pardon being brought in question, and several times ar∣gued: but the dissolution of the Parliament put an end to the dis∣pute for that time.
But in the Parliament before the Long Parliament of 1640. the Lords highly resented it, as may appear by following proceedings. This day was read the Decla∣ration of the House of Commons made tertio Caroli Regis,Journ. Dom. Proc. die Sab∣bathi, 18 die April. 16 Car. 1 against Dr. Manwaring, since Lord Bishop of St. Davids, and likewise the Sentence pronounced against him by the Lords Spiritual and Tem∣poral in the High Court of Par∣liament, which is committed to the consideration of the Lords of the Grand Committee for Privi∣ledges; and it was moved, that what can be alledged on the Lord Bishop of St. Davids part, either by Pardon, License, or otherwise, that it may be produced and seen at the sitting of the Lords Commit∣tees, for theirfull and clear under∣standing, and better expedition in the business. Having taken into considera∣tion the business concerning Dr.21 April. 1640. Manwaring, it was ordered, that
upon Munday next the Records be brought into the House, that the House may determine the Cause touching Dr. Manwaring. The business appointed this day concerning Dr. Manwaring,27 April. 1640 is re∣ferred until to morrow morning, viz. 28 Aprilis. The Lord Keeper by command from his Majesty was to let their Lordships know,28 April 1640. that his Majesty had understood that there was some question concerning Doctor Manwaring now Bishop of Saint Davids, and that his Majesty had given command that the said Dr. Manwaring shall not come and fit in Parliament, nor send any Proxy to the Parliament: thereupon it was ordered to be entred so. And between that and the next Parl. as I am informed, he died. VI. Anno 3 Caroli primi, Dr. Mountague was complained of in the House of Commons,Journ. Dom. Com. 3 Car. 1. Dr. Mounta∣gue's Case. for writing and publishing several Tenents,
tending toThe Dr. Writ and Published several Tenents, tending to Ar∣minianism and Popery. Arminianism and Popery, and that he had committed a contempt against the House. Lord Brook (friend to Sir Phillip Sidney) in his Alaham. Heli the Priest, who teaching from without, Corrupted Faith, bound under Laws of might, Not feeling God, but blowing him about, In every shape and likeness but the right. We are to desire to conform our selves to former Parliaments; this Cause began here, 21. Jac. and then it was commended to the Archbishop; But after it was so far from cure, that another Book of Appeal came out, and the Parliament, 1 Caroli sent to the Archbishop to know what he had done; who said he had given Mountague Admonition, and yet he Printed that second Book with∣out his consent,Had done a contempt to the Commons and distrubed the Nation, 1 Car. Voted. and so it was then debated; and the House Voted that he had done a contempt to the House of Commons, and that it disturbed the Church and Commonwealth. Since that they find that Book was countenanced,2 Car. resolved by that Parli∣ament that he had Sowen Sedition, and defended by Bishops, and others. At the last Parliament the House
again took it into consideration,And endeavou∣red to reconcile us to Rome. and Voted that Mountague had sowed Sedition, and Endeavoured to Reconcile us to Rome.Articles against Mountague. Now it was thought good that an addition should be made to the Articles against Richard Mountague Clerk. First, That he about 21. Jac. Printed a Book called a Gag for the Puritan, and about the 22. Jac, the Treaty of the Invocation of Saints, and 1 Caroli, an Ap∣peal to Caesar, in every of which he affirmed divers Opinions, con∣trary to the Articles of Religion, and by his so doing, hath broke the Laws, and disturbed the Peace of the Church. He said that the Church of Rome, had ever remained firm in their Doctrine, and that the Sa∣crifice of Masses, &c. And also that contrary to his Duty and Allegiance, under the name of Puritans, he had laid vile Aspersions on divers conform∣able Persons.
And also he labours to draw Men to Popery, by subtile and secret ways. His Appeal hath divers pas∣sages that are contumelious to his Majesties Father King James, and to divers Worthy and Learned Divines. For all which the ommons Pray he may be Punished, for thus disturbing the Peace of the Church and State. Two cautions are observed; first, we meddle not with Infe∣rences and Collections, but with immediate contradictions to the Articles of Religion, and the Book of Homilies; also he is not char∣ged with opinions contrary to the Divines of England. He recites the Articles as if we may depart away from grace the word (away) is not in the Ar∣ticles. Also the Articles do not say that Men justified may fall away from that State; As for the Ho∣milies,
for the word (away) he puts in fall away. Also he seems to make difference between the Church in foreign Parts, and the Church of Eng∣land. As for his charge of Sedition, it is clear by dividing the King∣dom under the name of Puritans, labouring to bring his Majesty in jealousie with  Subjects, and to stir up others in hatred against such. First, he lays the name of Pu∣ritans upon the Kings Subjects, that are dutiful and honest Sub∣jects. In truth at the first this word was given to them that se∣vered themselves from the Church; but he says there are Puritans in heart, and Puritans in Doctrine, as of Predestination and Repro∣bation. Also this division and asper∣sion is new, and under this name he comprehends some of our Bishops.
Also he labours to bring those persons into dislike with his Ma∣jesty, as dangerous persons; he says they are a potent Faction, that Authority is a mote in their eye, and they are cunning and active men. And he concludes, Domine Imperator defende me gladio, & ego te defendam calamo. Also he labours to bring them in scorn; in his Appeal, they hold the Cross of Christ in as great de∣spite as Julian. Also he withdraws the Subjects from their Religion to Popery, and he introduceth those mischiefs that the Law seeks to prevent. By the Law 1 Eliz. and other Statutes, it is Treason to withdraw any from the Religion established; but he cunningly infuseth Popery. He saith, the points of Contro∣versie between Vs and the Papists, are Arbitrary, and that we and they assent in some Opinions, as in the point of Free-will; that their Opinions and ours are all one;
and for the point of real Presence, for which so many have suffered death, he saith, that they jangle without cause. Also it was desired, that those Absurdities and Consequences we lay upon the Papists, for the point of Free-will, may be spared, and that they are Bugbears, &c. And for converting men to Po∣pery, he speaks favourably of the Pope; that he is the first and greatest Bishop, and fit to deter∣mine Controversies; and that the Pope is not Antichrist, he spends a whole Chapter in that; and that the Romish Church is part of the Catholick Church, we mention in our Creed; and for Popish Ceremonies, he commends and approves Pictures in Churches; and so for the Cross he saith, Caro signetur ut anima. Also he labours to reconcile Papists and Vs; whereas if we offer Composition, we lose or part with somewhat. Also he lays
Scandals on us, and our Doctrine, that there is no certainty in our points of difference, and that our Divines themselves differ. Also he favours those Practices that have been used by the King's Enemies: A Spaniard saith, No∣thing is better for the ruine of the English,Campanella de Monar. Hispan. than to establish a Faction amongst them, which he labours to effect. His Tenents Dishonourable to K. James, who was diligent to prevent Arminianism; now he labours to discredit the Synod at Dort. Also K. James in his lear∣ned Works proves the Pope to be Antichrist; but Mountague said, he never had a probable Argument thereof. Also he puts Disgraces on Pro∣testant Divines, that Calvin, Per∣kins, and Beza, are Dictators; and that Beza doth Puritanize; and Dr. Whitacre, that he was a man of their side. His prophaneness in speaking of
Preaching, and other Exercises of Religion; in preaching in Pul∣pits they brawl, &c. and Confe∣rences after Sermons, he calls them Prophetical Determinations, and to chew the Cud as after Le∣ctures, Bible- bearers, &c. It was Ordered, That the Ar∣ticles be presented to the Lords, and that Mountague be transmitted to the Lords. After which, the Parliament was Prorogued to the 4th. year of that King's Reign, where the Commons were upon him again, and questioned a Pardon he had got in the time of Prorogation; but shortly after the Parliament was dissolved. § 2. Some Presidents wherein the House of Commons have for mis∣demeanors turned out and dis∣charged their Members. I. ANno 27 Eliz,Jour. Dom. Com. Anno. 27 Eliz. Dr. Parry's Case. Dr. Parry for several misdemeanors and
crimes, was disabled to be any lon∣ger a Member in the House. II. An. 18 Jac.Journ. Dom. Com. 18 Jac. Sir Giles Mom∣pesson's Case. Sir Giles Mom∣pesson for being a Monopolist, and for other great and insufferable crimes by him committed, to the abuse of his Majesty, and grievous oppression of the Subjects, was 1. Turned out of the House. 2. Committed to the Tower. And after Impeached before the Lords, who gave Judgment upon him: 1.Journ. Dom. Proc. 18 Jac. The Lords Judgment againw him. To be degraded of the Order of Knighthood. 2. To stand perpetually in the degree of a person Outlawed for Misdemeanors and Trespasses. 3. His Testimony never to be received in any Court, nor to be of any Inquisition or Jury. 4. To be excepted out of all ge∣neral pardons. 5. That he should be imprisoned during his life. 6. Not to approach within 12.
miles of the Courts of the King or Prince, nor at the Kings high Court usually held at West∣minster. 7. That the King should have the profits of his Land for life, and all his Goods and Chattels, and should be Fined at 10000 l. 8. He was also disabled to hold or receive any Office under the King, or for the Commonwealth. 9. And lastly, ever to be held an Infamous person. III. And in the Parliament 19 Jacobi, Sir John Bennet Knight,Journ. Dom. Com. 19 Jac. Sir John Ben∣net's Case. Illos extollimus, qui fraudibus ac dolis divites facti sunt, eos patres legum, Justitiae fontes, sapi∣entiae{que} thesauros appellantes, O inconcussa Dei justitia, quamdiu haec pateris? ab horum igitur scholis, in quibus non sat scio an de veritatis inventione, an potius de lucri spe major sit disceptatio, prodeunt Judices, Praesides, at{que} Ministri, manibus tenacibus, oculis impudicis, effrenata libidine, lapideis cordibus, ficta gravitate, lin∣gua melliflua, sed dentibus virulentis, & breviter auri insatiabili fame. Cardan, libro de utilitate ex adversis capienda. Cap. de Temporum & Magistratuum pravitate, p. 649. one of the Members of the House, having been accused for Corrupti∣on, in receiving divers Bribes in
the execution of his judicial place of Judge of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury: All which was proved to the full satisfaction of the House. Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, 1. That a Warrant should issue under Mr. Speakers hand, directed to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, for the safe keeping of the said Sir John Bennet, until they shall receive other directions from the Lords; to whom the Com∣mons had resolved to prefer an Impeachment against him. 2. That he be put out, and no longer to continue a Member thereof. 3. That a Warrant be made for a Writ for a new choice for the Vniversity of Oxford. IV. In the same Parliament,Journ. Dom. Com. 19 Jac. Sir Robert Floid's Case. the Commons House of Parliament for that Sir Robert Floyd had been a projector of a Patent for a Mo∣nopoly,
being a general grievance both in the original creation, and in the execution: Resolved una voce,Turned out for being a Mono∣polist. That the said Sir Robert Floyd was a person unworthy to continue a Member of this House, and adjudged him pre∣sently to be put out. V.Journ. Dom. Com. 3 Car. 1. Mr. John Bar∣bour's Case. Anno 3 Car. 1. Mr. John Barbour a Lawyer, and Recorder of the City of Wells, for subscri∣bing a Warrant for the quartering of Souldiers; though he pleaded fear; yet because he would rather not lose his Place than do Justice, he was thought unfit to make Laws, that violates the Laws, his fault being aggravated by his pro∣fession; he had done well to have remembred 11 R. 2. when Belk∣nap amongst other Judges gave his Opinion for fear, unwilling to lose his Cushion; when he came home he could not sleep, but said, I deserve three H. H. H. a Hurdle, a Halter, and a Hang∣man.
1 H. 4. a Law was made, that fear, much less Ambition or Avarice, should be no good Plea, there being no hope of a Coward. This may serve as an Almanack for the Meridian of England. This Example will prove more and try more than 20 points of Doctrine; it will strike fear, circumspecta agatis: Mr.Barbour was called in to answer for himself, and after withdrew, and Ordered, 1. That Mr. BarbourThe Order of the Commons against Bar∣bour. be sus∣pended the House, and sequestred, till the pleasure of the House be known. 2. That a Committee examine the Cause, and that no motion be made till that be done. 3. And the Order was signified to Mr. Barbour by the Serjeant.
§3. Some Presidents for punishing persons that were no Members of the House, for contempts ànd misdemeanors. I.Journ. Dom. Com. 4 E. 6. Criketost's Case. ANno 4 E. 6. Criketost for confederating in the escape of one Floud, was committed to the Tower, and afterwards dischar∣ged paying his Fees. II.Journ Dom. Com. 1 Jac. Complaint that a Yeoman of the Guard who kept the door of the Lobby of the Upper House, against several of the Members of the House of Commons. Complaint was made by Sir Herbert Croft, of Bryan Tash a Yeoman of his Majesties Guard, for keeping out of the doors of the Vpper House; and Sir Herbert him∣self, and some others of the Com∣mons offering to come in, he re∣pulsed them, and shut the door up∣on them, with these uncivil and contemptible terms, Goodman Burgess you come not here. The Question moved in this was, that for so great contempt, whe∣ther the House of it self should proceed to punish, or Address
themselves to the proper Officcr the Lord Chamberlain, Captain of the Guard, &c. And so was left for this day. A President of the like contempt by a Gentleman-Usher, remem∣bred to have been questioned in this House in a Parliament in her Majesties time. This day the contempt of the Yeoman of the Guard was again remembred,22 Marti. 1603 and propounded as meet to be left to the examination and report of the Committee for Returns and Priviledges. But here∣in an Honourable person, and a special Member of the House, in∣terposed his advice, that there might be some moderate course taken with respect to his Majesties Service, and to the eminent and honourable Officers whom it might concern: which induced the House thus far to be pleased, that the Offender the next day should ap∣pear and answer his contempt at the Bar, with caution and on pur∣pose
(which the House did then utter) that if he seemed to under∣stand his own offence, and be sorry for it, and would submit himself to the pleasure and mercy of the House, praying pardon and favour, they would remit and discharge him; and the Serjeant was com∣manded to attend the said Order for his appearance. Bryan Tash a Yeoman of the Guard, for his contempt to the House, being in the custody of the Serjeant, and brought to the Bar, upon his submission and confession of his fault,Tash brought to the Bar, sub∣mits, and is par∣doned, paying Fees. Mr. Speaker pronoun∣ced his pardon and dismission, paying the ordinary Fees to the Clerk and Serjeant; and in the name of the House gave him ad∣vice and warning, for his better care and carriage hereafter, upon any the like occasions, in the course of his Service and Atten∣dance.
III.Journ. Dom. Com. 18. Jac. Sir Francis Mitchell's Case. Anno 18 Jac. The Commons House of Parliament adjudged Sir Francis Mitchell, a Lawyer, to be prisoner in the Tower, for his many misdemeanors in and about the procuring of a Patent con∣cerning the Forfeitures of Recogni∣zances,Committed to the Tower. and of Alehouse-keepers; and further ordered, that a Ser∣jeant at Arms should forthwith take him into his custody, and that at two of the clock that After∣noon,Carried on foot through London-streets. should carry him on foot through London-streets unto the Tower, there to be delivered to the Lieutenant. After which the Commons im∣peached him before the Lords;After impea∣ched by the Commons be∣fore the Lords. who having examined his arbi∣trary acts, great crimes, and intol∣lerable villanies, by Imprisonments and the ruine of many Families, all proved, as may be seen in the Lords Journal. The Lords agreed of the Sen∣tence of Sir Francis Mitchell,Journ. Dom. Proc. 18 Jac. The Lords send to the Commons. sent a Message unto the House of Com∣mons,
that the Lords have pro∣ceeded against Sir Francis Mit∣chell upon the complaint of the Commons, and they have found him guilty of many exerbitant offences,That they are ready to give Judgment a∣gainst Mitchell, if they would come and de∣mand it. and are ready to give Judgment against him, if they with their Speaker will come to de∣mand it. Answered, They will come ac∣cordingly with all convenient speed. In the mean time the Lords put on their Robes. The Commons being come, and the Speaker at the Bar, after low obeysance he said, There was heretofore related unto your Lordships by the House of Commons,The Commons by their Spea∣ker demand Judgment a∣gainst Sir Francis Mitchell. a complaint of many griivances against Sir Giles Mom∣pesson, and Sir Francis Mitchell, for many offences committed by them, committed against the King and the Commonwealth: your Lordships have proceeded with Mompesson, and given Judgment
also against him; understanding you are ready to pronounce Judgment also against the said Sir Francis Mitchell, I the Speaker, in the name of the Knights, Citi∣zens and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, do demand and pray that Judgment be given against him the said Sir Francis Mitchell, according to his de∣merits. The Lord Chief JusticeThe Lord Chief Justice pro∣nounceth the Judgment. pro∣nounced the Judgment, in haec verba. Mr. Speaker, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal have ta∣ken into due consideration the great care and pains taken by the Commons, to inform their Lord∣ships of the great Complaints, and the qualities and natures thereof, presented unto them against the said Sir Francis Mitchell, and others; whereof their Lordships being well prepared by them to the true understanding of the same, and thereupon have pro∣ceeded to the perfect discovery
thereof, by examination of divers Witnesses upon Oath, do find thereby Sir Francis Mitchell clear∣ly guilty of many great crimes and offences against his Majesty and the Commonwealth, and have te∣solved at this time to proceed to Judgment against him for the same: And therefore the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of this great and high Court of Parlia∣ment, do award and adjudge, 1.The Judgment of the Lords against Sir Francis Mit∣chell. That the said Sir Francis shall stand and be from henceforth degraded of the Order of Knight∣hood, with reservation of the dig∣nity of his now Wife and Chil∣dren, and the ceremony of degra∣dation to be performed by dire∣ction of this Court,There was a Clause in Pa∣tents of Mono∣polies, whereby power was given to impri∣son, and hun∣dreds were committed by colour thereof to Finsbury Gaol, and the Fleet. to the Earl Marshals Court. 2. That he shall be imprisoned during the Kings pleasure in Fins∣bury Gaol, in the same Chamber there which he provided for others; the Tower where he now remain∣eth, being a Prison too worthy for him.
3. That he shall undergo a Fine of 1000 l. 4. That he shall be disabled to hold or receive any Office under the King, or for the Common∣wealth. IV. Anno 18 Jac.Journ. Dom. Proc. 18 Jac. Fowles, Geldard and others committed. The Com∣mons after a Conference with the Lords, referred the Bailment of Matthias Fowles, George Geldard, and other Prisoners, who had been infamous Agents for Mom∣pesson and Mitchell, and by them transmitted to the Lords, (the Parliament being to be adjour∣ned for some time) the opinion of the Commons was, that the Gaol was the best Bail for them. V. Anno 20 Jac.Journ. Dom. Com. 20 Jac. Dr. Harris's Case. Dr. Harris, Minister of Blechingley, who had misbehaved himself by Preaching, and otherwise with respect to Ele∣ction of Members of Parliament there, and being complained of in the House, and referred to a
Committee; the Committee was clearly satisfied that it was a high and great Offence; they are of opinion he should be called to the Bar as a Delinquent, to be admo∣nished, and to confess his fault there and in the Countrey, and in the Pulpit of the Parish-Church,To recant in the Pulpit. on Sunday seven-night before the Sermon. The Doctor was brought to the Bar, and kneeled; the House a∣greed with the Committee, and Mr. Speaker pronounced Judgment upon him accordingly. VI.Journ. Dom. Com. 3 Car. 1. Mr. Burgesse, a Minister, his Case. Anno 3 Car. 1. Mr. Bur∣gesse, a Minister in Oxfordshire, who had abused his Function in the duty of Catechizing, by ma∣king an Interlude full of blasphe∣mous Speeches; and also in a Ser∣mon, which was made only to tra∣duce the Puritans, was sent for by a Messenger; being brought to the Committee, refused to an∣swer, for which he was com∣mitted:
1. To the Tower. 2. After petitioned for his deli∣verance, and humbly submitted; whereupon he was delivered out of the Tower. VII.Journ. Dom. Com. The Case of Sir William Wray, M. Lang∣ton, Mr. John Trelawnie, and Mr. Edward Trelawnie. In the same Parliament, Sir William Wray, Mr. Langton, Mr. John Trelawnie, and Mr. Ed∣ward Trelawnie, being Deputy-Lievtenants of the County of Corn∣wall, assumed to themselves a power to make whom they only pleased, Knights of the Shire, de∣famed Sir John Elliot, and Mr. Corriton, who stood to be chosen, sent up and down the Countrey Letters for the Trained-bands to appear at the day of Election, me∣naced the Countrey, under the title of his Majesties pleasure. It was Ordered, 1.The Judgment of the Com∣mons. That Mr. Langton and Mr. John Trelawnie be committed to the Tower, for their Offence done to the House, there to remain du∣ring the pleasure of the House, and
that they make a submissive ac∣knowledgment of their Offences. 2. And Sir William Wray, and Mr. Edward Trelawnie, be com∣mitted to the Serjeant, and so to remain till they make their Re∣cognition in the House. After all which,The Commons House of Parli∣ament adjudge them. the Question was, whether the Gentlemen should make the Recognition at the Assizes in Cornwall, or no: And it was Ordered, That the Recognition and Sub∣mission should be made in the Countrey;To make sub∣mission in the Countrey at the Assizes. and a Committee was appointed to draw the Recogniti∣on, and they were sent to the Tower. The four Gentlemen were cal∣led in to the Bar, and the Spea∣ker pronounced the Judgment up∣on them, all that while they kneeled. VIII.Journ. Dom. Com. 3. Car. 1. Anno 3 Car. 1. Sir Tho∣mas Wentworth reporteth the Bu∣siness, concerning the Toll gran∣ted
to Levet for—Bridges in Yorkshire,Levet, for exe∣cuting a Patent in time of Pro∣rogation, which was adjudged a Grievance by the House in the last Session, ordered to be sent for by the Serjeant at Arms. to him and his Heirs, to be holden in Soccage of East-Greenwich, at 20 s. Rent, with power to seize Goods, &c. No Grant hereof till 10 Jac. nor any fruit thereof till 15 Jac. the Bridge anciently in good re∣pair, some particularly bound to repair it. This Patent adjudged by the Committee a Grievance to the Subject, both in the original Cre∣ation and Execution. Upon Question so adjudged here:Journ, Dom. Com. 4. Car. 1. The Parliament prorogued. Ordered upon Question, That Levet, that hath peremp∣torily exercised a Patent, here condemned the last Session, for taking Toll at—Bridges in Yorkshire, shall be sent for by the Serjeant at Arms attending upon this House. IX. Anno 4 Car.Journ. Dom. Com. 4 Car. 1. The Officers of the Custom-house. 1. Mr. Rolls a Merchant, and a Member of the House, informed the House that his
Goods were seized by the Custo∣mers for refusing to pay the Cu∣stoms by them demanded, although he told them he would pay what was adjudged to be due by Law. It was ordered, that the Officers of the Custom-house should be sent for. X.Journ. Dom. Com. 4 Car. 1. The Case of Acton, Sheriff of London, for contempt in prevaricating in his Testimo∣ny. Sir John Elliot reported from the Committee for the Exa∣mination of the Merchants busi∣ness, That the Committee finding Acton Sheriff of London in preva∣rications and contradictions, in his Examination, which being con∣ceived to be a contempt to the House, he desires he might be sent for to answer his contempt. Mr. Goodwyn. The Sheriff ac∣knowledgeth his error, and hum∣bly desireth so much favour, that he may once again be called be∣fore the Committee, and if he give not full content by his answer, he will refer himself to the wisdom and justice of the House.
Sir Walter Earl seconded this motion, so did Alderman Moulson, Secretary Cook, Chancellor of the Dutchy, and some others: but this offence being declared to be so great and gross, and that the Committee had given him so ma∣ny times to recollect himself, and he being so great an Officer of so great a City, had all the favour that might be, and yet rejected the same, and carried himself in a very scornful manner. Wherefore it was ordered he should be sent for unto the House as a Delinquent to morrow mor∣ning.Ordered to be sent for. Sheriff Acton was called to the Bar,Tuesd. 10 Feb. Appears, and called to the Bar. as a Delinquent upon his knees, and said, If he hath erred, it was through want of memory, or through ignorance, for he in∣tended not the least dislike or dis∣taste to any Member of the House; and withdraws. Mr. Long. I shall move that he be sent to the Tower.
Mr.His Crime with others aggravated. Littleton. You see the af∣fronts by Books, by Preaching, by Rumours; by being served with Process, these scorns are daily put upon us, that we are become but a meer scare-crow; the neglect of our duty is the cause of this, it is high time to remedy this, or it is in vain to sit here. The Sheriff is again called to the Bar on his knees,Sentenced to the Tower. and senten∣ced to the Tower. XI.Journ. Dom. Com. 4 Car. 26 Jan. The Case of Lewis. A Petition was preferred against one Lewis, who said▪ about the 25th. of December, The Devil take the Parliament: which was avowed by two witnesses. And al∣though it was spoken out of Par∣liament, yet it was resolved to be an offence to the Parliament: And it was ordered he should be sent for.
§ 4. Some Presidents for punishing of Misdemeanours in Elections. I. IN the Parliament of the 18.Journ. Dom. Com. 18 Jac. The Case of the Mayor of Winchelsey. of King James, the Mayor of Winchelsey, for misbehaving of himself at the Election of Parlia∣ment-men for that Town, and ma∣king a false Return. It was Re∣solved upon the Question. 1.Judgment a∣gainst the Mayor. That the Mayor of Winchel∣sey had committed a Contempt and Misdemeanour against this House, and therefore shall stand committed to the Serjeant till Saturday morning, then making his Submis∣sion here at the Bar, to be dis∣charged of any further punishment here. 2. But to make his Acknow∣ledgment in the Town before the new Election. II.Journ. Dom. Com. 20 Jac. The Case of the Mayor of Arundel for Misdemeanour. Anno 20 Jac. Upon the Report of Mr. Glanvile, concer∣ning the Burrough of Arundel, be∣cause
the Mayor had misbehaved himself in the Election, by put∣ting the Town to a great deal of Charge, not giving a due and ge∣neral warning, but packt a num∣ber of Electors: It was Resolved, 1. The Mayor not being in Town, a Warrant be sent for him. 2.Judgment. To pay the Charge, to be set down by 3 Members. Resolved upon another Question, that Mr. Alford, Mr. Bing, and Mr. Lathorn, shall set down the Charges. III.Joun Dom. Com 21 Jac. The Case of Ingry the under She∣riff of Cam∣bridgeshire Anno 21 Jac. Mr. Glan∣vile reports the Misdemeanour of the under-Sheriff of Cambridgshire, who refused the Pole, declaring, Sir Thomas Steward promised him to defend him against Sir John Cutts, and told him, he should have no wrong nor damage. Resolved upon the Question, That this under-Sheriff shall be committed to the Serjeant's Custo∣dy till Thursday next.Judgment. Resolved also upon the Que∣stion, That making his Submission
at the Bar, and acknowledging his offence, he shall be discharged from any further punishment in this place. Resolved also upon a third Question,To make a sub∣mission at the Sessions. That the under-Sheriff shall make a further Submission openly at the next Quarter-Sessi∣ons to be holden in the County, and acknowledge his faults. Edward Ingry brought to the Bar, and kneeling upon his knees, Mr. Speaker denounced upon him the Judgment of the House. IV.Journ. Dom. Com. 3 & 4 Car. 1. Tuesd. Apr. 29. The Case of the Sheriffs of York, and others touching the Election of Sir Thomas Savile. Mr. Hackwell reports from the Committee about the Sheriffs of York, and others, for the Ele∣ction of Sir Thomas Savill. The two Sheriffs, and two Al∣dermen are Delinquents; one of the Sheriffs, and one of the Alder∣men are most faulty: Sheriff Thomp∣son had committed two offen∣ces; First, his hasty and precipitate Judgment of the Election, to pre∣vent the Election of Hoy: Second∣ly,
in denying the Poll, being re∣quired. First, his hasty and preci∣pitate Judgment, was done with∣out acquainting his fellow Sheriff, and it was within a quarter of an hour after the reading of the Writ, and half an hour after nine a clock; and while he was doing of it, he was admonished, and told that he could not answer it, and that he might defer it; yet he did obstinately proceed, and answered them frowardly, and said he would do it, and that he would justifie it. His excuse was thus: that it was indeed suddenly done, but it was done so formerly. But to that it was replied, That ne∣ver before above two were in Ele∣ction. Secondly, he answered, That it was not of his own head, but some Aldermen advised it; but that was Alderman Cooper, a Delinquent for that offence. For the other offence, in denying the Poll after it was demanded, and that was before he had pronoun∣ced
any Judgment; but he was willing that Robinson should have the Poll, for he knew he could not carry it: but he refused Hoy, and he was required ten times, but gave no answer at all. His beha∣viour before the Committee was impudent, and he would answer nothing directly. The Committee found this man to be an engaged man,Nota. and that he was promised to be saved harmless. For Alderman Henlow, he procured the Company of Taylors two days before the Election, and published Sir John Savill's Letters, and pressed it, and upon some he pressed it so much, that they should elect Sir Thomas Savill, and said the Par∣liament will not hold. He dealt with the Sheriffs also, and told them divers words of Sir John Sa∣vill, that he would take it very ill; and, said he, if you will choose Sir Thomas Savill, you shall be sa∣ved harmless. Also he endeavou∣red to procure a Certificate, that
Sir Thomas Savill was duly ele∣cted; when any refused, he said they were factious Fellows, and otherwise threatned. The Com∣mittee censured Sheriff Thompson, and this Alderman Henlow, First, that they should stand committed to the Serjeant during pleasure. Secondly, that they should ac∣knowledge their offences at the Bar in the full House, and pay all due Fees before they be dischar∣ged. Also they should defray all the charges of the Witnesses of Alderman Hoy, to be assessed by four of the Committee.Nota. And that they should make acknowledge∣ment of their fault before the Court of Aldermen at York; and that the Mayor should certifie their submission to the House. As for Alderman Cooper, he as∣sembled the Company of Mer∣chants, and read Sir John Savill's Letter for the Election of his Son, and also he at the Election per∣swaded the Sheriff to give Judg∣ment.
Sheriff Atkins was only passive, and did not refuse to joyn with the other Sheriff. As for the point of charges given to the Wit∣nesses of Hoy, it was doubtful and objected against by some, whether it lay in our power: But it was replied, That in every Court it is necessary to have power to impose Fines, and why we should want power for offences that lye in our cognizance, is not to be questio∣ned; else the party that is duly elected, and that justifies the free Election, and maintains the free∣dom and liberty of the Common∣wealth, shall be more punished then the Delinquent: Also we have power to imprison, which is more then a Fine: Also we have as much as the Lords House, in those things that lye in our Juris∣diction. 13 Eliz. 10 Maii, The Mayor of Westbury in Wiltshire took 4 l. for a Return; Mr. Long fined 20 l. and ordered to bring in a Bond made him for a greater
sum. 23 Eliz. 5 Januar. Mr. Ar∣thur Fall writ a Book to the dis∣honour of this House; It was or∣dered, that the Serjeant should go to apprehend him, assisted by two Knights of this House. 14 Febr. he was brought to the Bar, and sent to the Tower, and fined 500 Marks, and expelled the House, and kept in the Tower six months. 23 Eliz. 18 Martii, a Fine was assessed on every one that was absent without leave. 6 H. 8. cap. 16. our Clerks Book is termed a Record. 21 Jac. the Election of the Burgess of Arun∣del in Sussex; and there it was ordered, that the Witnesses char∣ges should be born: And then there was 10 l. paid down by one, a Member of this House. 12 Jac. a Servant of Justice Whitlock's was Arrested by one Lock and Moon,Nota. who were enjoyned to ride both on Horse-back, with their faces to the Horses tails: And Mr. Hackwell said, he him∣self
self saw the execution of it in Cheapside. 3 Jacobi,Sir Robert Phi∣lips. the Baron of Walton's Sollicitor, being his Servant, was Arrested; he claimed the privi∣ledge, and the party that caused the Arrest was Fined, and it was left to the Speaker to moderate the Fine. 18 Jacobi, certain Con∣stables of York, for Misdemeanors, were sent for up, and one was acquitted, and had 5 l. given him for his charges. At the last Par∣liament, Sir George Hastings Kt. was elected Knight of Leicester∣shire, and was Arrested by the Sheriff at his Election, and com∣plained here, and his Witnesses were ordered to have their costs paid them. Ordered that Thompson and Henlow pay the charges of Wit∣nesses,The Sheriff to pay the charges of the Witnes∣ses, to be set down by four Witnesses. brought up about the proof of the said Election, and that they shall not be discharged from the Serjeant till they pay their Fees; and four Gentlemen of the House
are to moderate and set down the charges in certain. And it is ordered, that they shall be com∣mitted to the Serjeant, till they make their submission at the Bar, and acknowledge their faults on their knees, and read a submission. As for the submission to be made at York, it was through great fa∣vour remitted by the House. To all which I shall add the ensuing President. Lunae 4 Junii, 19 Jacobi. 7.Committment of Davenport to the Tower, for misinfor∣ming the House of Commons, as a Witness. The Commons House of Parlia∣ment hath this day adjudged Randolph Davenport Esq for his offence in mis-informing the same House, in a Cause wherein he was produced as a Witness, to be com∣mitted prisoner to the Tower, for the space of one whole month, and then to be discharged paying his Fees. These are therefore in the behalf of the said House of
Commons, to require and charge you to receive the said Randolph Davenport into your custody, within the Prison of the Tower, under your charge, and him there∣in safely to detain and keep, for the space of one whole month, and then to discharge him, paying his Fees; and this shall be your Warrant in this behalf. Given under my hand this 4th. of June, 1621. To Sir Allen Apsley Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower.
An Act to secure the Debt of Simp∣son,Anno primo Regis Jacobi, Num. 42. penes Joh. Brown, Ar. Cler. Parliamentor. and others, and save harm∣less the Warden of the Fleet, in Sir Thomas Shirley's Case. Soit baile aux Seigniours. A cest Bille ovEsq les Amend∣ments annexes, les Seigniours ont assentus. HUmbly pray the Commons of this present Parliament, That whereas Thomas Shirley Kt. which came by your Highness's Commandment to this your pre∣sent Parliament, being elected and returned a Burgess for the Burrough of Steyning, in your Highness's County of Sussex, was upon the 15th. day of March last past, arrested by the Sheriffs of London, at the Suit of one Giles Simpson, first upon an Action of Debt, and afterwards laid and de∣tained in Execution upon a Recog∣nizance,
of the nature of the Sta∣tute Staple of 3000 l. in the Pri∣son, commonly called the Compter in the Poultrey in London, at the Suit of the said Simpson, and from thence by Habeas Corpus was removed to your Majesties Pri∣son of the Fleet, where for a time he was detained in Execution, as well upon the said Recognizance, as to answer to two Actions of Debt, one of 2000 l. at the Suit of William Beecher, the other of 3000 l. also at his Suit, and to answer one other Action of Debt of 300 l. at the Suit of one John King,Nota. contrary to the Liberties, Priviledges and Freedom, accu∣stomed and due to the Commons of your Highness's Parliament, who have ever used to enjoy the freedom in coming and returning from the Parliament, and sitting there with∣out restraint and molestation, and it concerneth your Commons greatly to have this Freedom and Priviledge inviolably observed:
Yet to the end that no Person be prejudiced or damnified hereby, May it please your Highness, by the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, it may be Ordained and Enacted, That the said Sheriffs of London, the now Warden of the Fleet, and all others, that have had the said Thomas in Custody, since the said first Arrest, their Executors or Administrators, or any of them, may not, nor shall in any wise be hurt, endamaged, or grieved, be∣cause of dismissing at large of the said Thomas Shirley, saving always to the said Giles Simpson, and other the Persons aforesaid, at whose Suit the said Thomas is de∣tained in Prison, his, their, and every of their Executions and Suits, at all time and times, af∣ter the end of this present Session of Parliament, to be taken out and prosecuted, as if the said
Thomas had never been arrested, or taken in Execution, and as if such Actions had never been brought or sued against him, sa∣ving also to your Majesties said Commons, called now to this your Parliament, and their Successors, their whole Liberties, Franchises and Priviledges, in all ample man∣ner and form, as your Highness's said Commons at any time before this day have had, used and en∣joyed, and ought to have, use and enjoy, this present Act and Petiti∣on in any wise notwithstanding. Soit fait come & est desire.
The Petition exhibited to his Ma∣jesty,Anno 3 Car. 1. Pult. Stat. fol. 1433. by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in this present Parlia∣ment assembled, concerning di∣vers Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, with the Kings Maje∣sties Royal Answer thereunto in full Parliament. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. HUmbly shew unto our So∣vereign Lord the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament as∣sembled, That whereas it is De∣clared and Enacted by a Statute made in the time of the Reign of K. Edward the I commonly cal∣led,34 E. 1. Statutum de Tallagio non con∣cedendo:No Tallage or Aid to be laid or levied with∣out Authority of Parliament. That no Tallage or Aid shall be laid or levied by the King or his Heirs in this Realm, with∣out the good will and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Ba∣rons, Knights, Burgesses, and other
the Free-men of the Commonalty of this Realm. And by Authority of Parliament holden in the 25. year of the Reign of K. Edward the III. it is Declared and Ena∣cted,1 E. 3. 6. That from thenceforth no per∣son should be compelled to make any Loans to the King against his will, because such Loans were against Reason, and the Franchise of the Land.11 R. 2. 9. And by other Laws of this Realm it is provided,1 R. 3. 2. That none should be charged by any Charge or Imposition called a Be∣nevolence, nor by such like Charge, by which the Statutes before∣mentioned, and other the good Laws and Statutes of this Realm, your Subjects have inherited this freedom, That they should not be compelled to contribute to any Tax, Tallage, Aid, or other like Charge, not set by common consent in Par∣liament. Yet nevertheless of late divers Commissions directed to sundry Commissioners in several Counties,
with Instructions, have issued, by means whereof your People have been in divers Places assem∣bled, and required to lend cer∣tain sums of Money unto your Majesty; and many of them upon their refusal so to do, have had an Oath administred unto them, not warrantable by the Laws or Sta∣tutes of this Realm, and have been constrained to become bound to make appearance, and give atten∣dance before your Privy Councel, and in other Places; and others of them have been therefore im∣prisoned, confined, and sundry other ways molested and disquie∣ted; and divers other Charges have been laid and levied upon your People in several Counties, by Lord-Lievtenants, Deputy-Lieutenants, Commissioners for Musters, Justices of Peace, and others, by Command or Direction from your Majesty, or your Pri∣vy Councel, against the Laws and free Customs of the Realm.
And where also by the Statute called the Great Charter of the Li∣berties of England,9 H. 3. 29. it is declared and Enacted, That no Freeman may be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold or Liber∣ties, or his free Customs, or be Out∣lawed or Exiled, or in any manner destroyed, but by the lawful Judg∣ment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. And in the 28th.28 E. 3. 3. year of the Reign of K. Edward the III. it was Declared and Enacted by Authority of Parliament, That no man, of what Estate or Condition that he be, should be put out of his Land or Tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor disinherited, nor put to death, without being brought to answer by due process of Law. Nevertheless against the tenour of the said Statutes,37 E. 3. 18. and other the good Laws and Statutes of your Realm to that end provided,38 E 3. 8. di∣vers of your Subjects have of late42 E. 3. 3. been imprisoned without any cause17 R. 2. 6.
shewed; and when for their deli∣verance they were brought before your Justices, by your Majesties Writs of Habeas Corpus, there to undergo and receive as the Court shall order, and their Keepers com∣manded to certifie the causes of their detainer, no cause was cer∣tified, but that they were detained by your Majesties special Com∣mand, signified by the Lords of your Privy Councel, and yet were returned back to several Pri∣sons, without being charged with any thing, to which they might make answer according to the Law. And whereas of late great com∣pany of Souldiers and Mariners have been dispersed into divers Counties of the Realm, and theQuartering Souldiers a∣gainst Law. Inhabitants against their wills have been compelled to receive them into their Houses, and there to suffer them to sojourn, against the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and to the great grievance and vexation of the People.
And whereas also by Authority of Parliament, in the 25th.25 E. 3. 9. year of the Reign of K. Edward the III. it is Declared and Enacted, That no man should be forejudged of Life or Limb, against the form of the great Charter, and the Law of the Land;9 H. 3. 29. and by the said great Charter,25 E. 3. 4. and other the Laws and Statutes of this your Realm,28 E. 3. 3. no man ought to be adjudged to death, but by the Laws established in this your Realm, either by the Customs of the same Realm, or by Acts of Parliament. And whereas no Offendor,Nota. of what kind soever, is exempted from the Proceedings to be used, and Punishments to be inflicted, by the Laws and Statutes of this your Realm; nevertheless of late divers Commissions under your Majesties Great Seal have issued forth, by which certain persons have been assigned and appointed Commissioners, with Power and Authority to proceed within the
Land, according to the Justice of the Martial Law against such Souldiers and Mariners,Martial Law in time of Peace, against the Laws and Sta∣tutes of England or other dissolute persons joyning with them, as should commit any Mur∣ther, Robbery, Felony, Mutiny, or other Outrage or Misdemeanour whatsoever, and by such summary Course and Order, as is agreeable to Martial Law, and as is used in Armies in time of War, to proceed to the Tryal and Condemnation of such Offendors, and them to cause to be executed and put to death, according to the Law Martial. By pretext whereof, some of your Majesties Subjects have been by some of the said Commissioners put to death, when and where if by the Laws and Statutes of the Land they had deserved death, by the same Laws and Statutes also they might, and by no other ought to have been judged and executed. And also sundry grievous Offen∣dors, by colour thereof claiming an exemption, have escaped the
Punishments due to them, by the Laws and Statutes of this your Realm, by reason that divers of your Officers and Ministers of Ju∣stice have unjustly refused, or for∣born to proceed against such Offen∣dors, according to the same Laws and Statutes, upon pretence that the said Offendors were punishable only by Martial Law, and by Authority of such Commissions as aforesaid, which Commissions and all other of like nature, are wholly and directly contrary to the said Laws and Statutes of this your Realm. They do therefore humbly pray your most Excellent Majesty, that no man hereafter be compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Be∣nevolence, Tax, or such like Charge, without common Consent by Act of Parliament; and that none be cal∣led to make answer, or take such Oath, or to give attendance, or be confined, or otherwise molested or disquieted concerning the same,
or for refusal thereof; and that no Freeman in any such manner as is before mentioned, be Imprisoned or Detained; And that your Ma∣jestie would be pleased to remove the said Souldiers and Mariners, and that your People may not be so burthened in time to come; And that the foresaid Commissions for proceeding by Martial Law, may be revoaked and adnulled; And that hereafter no Commissions of like nature may issue forth to any Person or Persons whatsoever, to be executed as aforesaid, least by colour of them, any of your Majesties Subjects be destroyed or put to death, contrary to the Laws and Franchises of this Land. All which they most Humbly Pray of your most Excellent Ma∣jesty,Nota. as their Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws and Sta∣tutes of this Realm; And that your Maiestie would also vouch∣safe to declare that the awards, doings, and proceedings, to the
prejudice of your People, in any of the premisses, shall not be drawn hereafter into Consequence or Ex∣ample; and that your Majesty would be also graciously pleased, for the further comfort and safety of your People, to declare your Royal Will and Pleasure,Nota. That in the things aforesaid, all your Offi∣cers and Ministers shall serve you, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, as they tender the Honour of your Majesty, and the Prosperity of this Kingdom. Which Petition being read the 2d. of June, 1628. the King's Answer was thus delivered un∣to it. THe King willeth that Right be done, according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and that the Statutes be put in due execution, that his Subjects may have no cause to complain of any wrong or oppressions, contrary
to their just Rights and Liberties,Here the good King condemns the Law and Doctrine of Dr. Cowell, Blackwood, Manwaring, Fulbeck, Sibthorpe, Alablaster, Filmer, and their Transcri∣bers and Disci∣ples. to the preservation whereof, he holds himself in Conscience as well obliged, as of his Prerogative. But this Answer not giving sa∣tisfaction, the King was again pe∣titioned unto, that he would give a full and satisfactory Answer to their Petition in full Parliament. Whereupon the King in Person, upon the 7th. of June, made this 2d. Answer. My Lords and Gentlemen, THe Answer I have already given you, was made with so good deliberation, and approved by the Judgments of so many wise men, that I could not have imagi∣ned but that it should have given you full satisfaction; but to avoid all ambiguous Interpretations, and to shew you there is no doubleness in my meaning, I am willing to please you in words as well as in
substance; read your Petition, and you shall have an Answer that I am sure will please you. And then causing the Petition to be distinctly read by the Clerk of the Crown, the Clerk of the Parliament read the King's An∣swer thereunto in these words: Soit droit fait come est desire. §. 4. Several Miscellaneous Presi∣dents and Orders both of the House of Lords and Commons. I. A standing Order of the Com∣mons House of Parliament, tou∣ching Bills delivered to the Speaker. UPon Tuesday the 15th.Journ. Dom. Com. Parl. 1 Jac. of this instant May, a Bill being offered to the Speaker of the Commons House of Parliament,Mercurii 23 Maii, A. D. 1603 in his way coming towards the said
House,A Bill is deli∣vered to the Speaker going to the House, purporting a Declaration of Treason by a Magistrate of the Land, who Gives an Ac∣count of it to the House. he received it, and brought it in; and being set in his Chair, after some time did openly inti∣mate the Head or Title of it, pur∣porting a Declaration of Treason, practised by a Magistrate of this Land, concealing the Name of the Man, and the Particulars of the Bill, adding, that for special Causes, he hoped they would not meddle with it, or expect it should be read; nevertheless the House inclined to have the Bill read; but upon the said Speaker's Motion and better Consideration,Who forbear to read it at that time. resolved to forbear it for that time, expecting the return and reading of it, when Mr. Speaker should think meet to give the House satisfaction, as he promised shortly to do. The next day (as was afterwards in∣formed) it pleased his Majesty to send for the Bill;The King sends for the Bill. and in respect it contained matter of personal Trea∣son, (as was likewise pretended) properly and only touching him∣self, his Majesty assumed unto
himself the Examination of the matter of the Bill, and retained it in his own keeping. In all this time,The House ex∣pected an Ac∣compt thereof from Mr. Spea∣ker, and after demands it. the House for the more part expected an Ac∣compt of the said Bill, which was this day demanded and urged by sundry Members of this House; in which Debate these Questions were handled:Questions handled there∣upon. 1. Whether the House were possessed of the Bill. 2. What might be called pos∣session of a Bill. 3. Whether it might deal with Treason. 4. Examine, commit, and pro∣ceed to Judgment upon Traitors, and with what kind of Treason and Traitors. 5. And lastly, Whether a Spea∣ker receiving a Bill, and reading the Title, may deliver it to any, without special allowance and leave of the House. Hereupon it was finally Resol∣ved and Ordered, that for this
time all Questions should cease touching these matter,To cease with a caution & care of the privi∣ledge of the House. with this caution and care, proceeding from a tender regard of the priviledge of this House, that it should be precisely Registred,To be Regi∣stred as the Judgment of the House, that no Speaker should deliver a Bill, whereof the House was possessed with∣out leave. as the Judg∣ment of the House, that no Speaker from henceforth, should deliver a Bill, whereof the House standeth possessed, to any whomsoever, without allowance and leave as aforesaid, but that he had Power and might, either shew it or de∣liver a Copy; If it seems meet unto him. Who by way of excuse,The Speakers excuse. An∣swered that a Message was deli∣vered unto him by a great Lord, from his Majestie, commanding him to send the Bill unto him, and that he was warranted by for∣mer Presidents, to shew the Bill to the King when he was Com∣manded; As in the Case of Mr. Morrice, Mr. Wentworth, 25. Eliz. Many MotionsMotions by se∣veral Members. ensued in this matter, by Mr. Sollicitor, Sir Her∣bert
Crofts, Sir Francis Bacon, Mr. Brooke, Mr. Wiseman, Sir William Fleetwood, Mr. Crewe, Mr. Martin, Sir Henery Beaumont, Sir Maurice Berkley, Sir William Strowd, Mr. Yelverton, Sir Thomas Hobby. Much Exceptions against the Presidents, Injurious that any Speaker should deliver a Bill to the King, without the privity of the House. No Bill whereof the House is possessed to be delivered to the King, or any other without no∣tice and leave of the House. We loose our priviledge, if we loose our Bill. Mr. Speaker to pray Access to the King himself, and in the name of the House, to desire the Bill from his Majestie. No possession of a Bill, except it be delivered to the Clerk to be Read. If the Speaker Read Title in his Chair, (as he did in this Case) a possession.
Jones the Prisoner to be sent for hither, and to attend his dis∣charge from the House. That the Prisoners Committed by us, cannot be taken from us and Committed by any other. An Order moved and Agreed, that no Bill whereof the House is clearly possessed,No Bill of which the House is pos∣sessed, to be de∣livered without notice and leave of the House. be delivered to any before the House have notice, and give leave. Admitted that a Copy may be delivered, or it may be shewed to his Majestie. II. Mr. Speaker declared to the House,Jur. Dom. Com. Die venris 27. February, 4 Jac. A. D. 1606. A Message from the King. a Message from the King; The Message was to this effect. That his Majestie having entred into a Princely Consideration, of the weight of the great Cause in hand, as also of the great worth and sufficiency of those Gentlemen that have Spoken and Dealt in it,The Union of England and Scotland. he was to put them in mind, that the Writ of Summons that called them thither,That the Writ called them to Consul. de ar∣duis Regi. was to consult de arduis Regi; That every Man did
serve for a Town or a Shire, that his attendance and service of the House was a great duty;Their atten∣dance a great duty. and that the departure of any Member of this House was a greater contempt,Departure a greater con∣tempt than a Noblemans. Adviseth no Lawyer or o∣ther of Note to depart. than any Nobleman's departure, who served only for himself; that therefore he wished and advised, that no Lawyer or other Member of Note might depart the House, until this great Matter were brought to more ripeness and per∣fection; and if the House would enter into course for the stay of them here,Would assist the House for their stay or recalling. or for the recalling of those that be absent, his Highness would assist them by his Procla∣mation, or otherwise as they should conceive fittest. It was hereupon moved,Motions and Debates upon the Message. that many have Tryals at the Assizes, who by their absence might receive prejudice, if some course were not taken to prevent it. Propoun∣ded, that Letters might be writ by Mr. Speaker, to the Justices of Assize, for stay of Proceedings
against any man that would re∣quire it; which was approved and resolved by the House. Mr. Speaker moveth,Mr. Speaker's motions. that a time might be appointed for the Calling of the House, and a punish∣ment agreed on for the absent. Others,Others move. that the House might first be Called, and then a punish∣ment thought on. That the House being Called, the Serjeant might be sent for those which were found absent. That a Law might be thought of to provide for this Mischief here∣after. These Motions ended in these three Questions,3 Questions made. which by dire∣ction was made by Mr. Speaker, viz. 1.1 Question. Whether the House shall be Called. 2.2 Question. Whether the Serjeant shall be sent for such as are absent, ha∣ving no reasonable excuse. 3.3 Question. Whether the House shall be Called on Monday come seven-night in the afternoon.
Which were all resolvedResolves. in the Affirmative, with this further di∣rection, that the absent were to be sent for, by the Order of the House, and by Warrant under Mr. Speaker's hand; And upon the whole matter a Special order conceived; The Copy whereof was sent to sundry Members that were absent, that they might be more sensible of the reason and ne∣cessity of their Attendance. The form of the OrderOrder. was. THis day Mr. Speaker deli∣vered a Message from His Majestie,Veneris 27. February. importing a Considera∣tion of the weight of the greatThe Union of England and Scotland. cause in hand, of the study and travel that hath been taken in the understanding and furtherance of some good Success therein, by sundry Members of the House, and of the duty and necessity of the attendance of every Member, Re∣presenting in his Voice and Person,
a Shire, City, or at least a Town the special use and service of the Lawyers of the House, the great con∣tempt in departure together, with his Highnes's gracious Offer of his Roy∣al power and Assistance, to be added to the Authority of the House, for the recalling or punish∣ing of any Member Deliuquent in this behalf; Whereupon the House entered into dispute and de∣liberation, what course were fittest to be taken, as well for the con∣tinuing of such Members as are here already Assembled; as for the return and attendance of those absent, to partake of, and assist in the great service in hand; And after many courses and new devises of Order propounded to the House. It was at last Resolved up∣on three several Questions, First, that the House should be called, Secondly, that upon the calling such as were found to be absent, and had no just cause of Excuse, should with the privity and di∣rection
of the House by Warrant under the hand of Mr. Speaker; And by the Serjeant at Arms, Attendant upon the House, or by his Deputy, be immediatly sent for, and answer Fees and Entries to the Officers, as in Case of breach of Priviledge, or other Contempts to the House. Thirdly, and Lastly, That upon Munday next come Sevenight in the after∣noon of that day, the House shall be called. Mr.Die Martis 3. Martii. Mr. Hide departs without Li∣cense and is sent for. Hide the last day imme∣diatly upon the Kings Message, Pleading certain businesses of his Clyents, and other his private oc∣casions of profit and necessity (as he pretended,) made known to the House, that he would go out of Town, and so took his leave in open audience, without the Assent or Leave of the House, which was taxed; And Mr. Speaker war∣ranted to Write unto him, which he did in this Form.
The Form of the Speaker's Letter to Mr. Hide. AFter my very hearty Com∣mendations, sithence your departure hence, there hath been Complaints made to the House, that you have gone without Leave and Contrary to His Majesties pleasure, signifyed, and the ex∣press Order of the House; This bred great dispute, and it was in a manner Resolved, that you should be presently sent for by the Ser∣jeant, as being conceived to be a president of ill example and con∣tempt other Mens Cases Consider∣ed with yours, which led me to interpose this motion to the House; That if you came not be∣fore Munday next (the day ap∣pointed for calling of the House,) you might then be proceeded withal as the Case did require; And my self offering to Write to you for that purpose, they de∣sisted
and left it to my care; Ne∣vertheless for many Important reasons, wherewith I will acquaint you at your coming; I do ad∣vise you, as also require you from the House, that you forthwith re∣pair hither, and attend the service in hand, which is now in the greatest heat and hast of proceed∣ing; And so I commit you to God. Directed. To my very Loving Friend, Laurence Hide, Esq It was also moved and resolved,Resolved that other Letters be writ to o∣ther Members who were Law∣yers. That Mr. Speaker should Write another Letter to other Lawyers, being gone down in the same Circuit, where Mr. Laurence Hide was, (viz.) Mr. John Moore, Mr. Giles Tooker, Mr. Edward Digs, and Mr. Nicholas Hide, which also he did to this Effect.
The form of the Letter. AFter my very hearty Com∣mendations;The form of the Letter. sithence your departure hence, there hath been complaint made as well of your absence, as of many others, which hath moved the House to press some speedy course for your re∣turn; and thereupon have com∣manded me forthwith to write unto you, that you make your repair hither without excuse or delay, which I would advise you to do, to prevent further question or danger, such as I would be loth you should undergo, as now the case stands. And so I com∣mend you to the protection of the Almighty. To my Loving Friends, Mr. Giles Tooker, Mr. John Moor, Mr. Edward Diggs, and Nicholas Hide Esqs; Members of the Com∣mons House of Parliament.
III. It is this day Ordered,Jurn. Dom. Com. 27. Jac. Vereris 27. Maii. that a Committee of the whole House, shall this afternoon consider of a fit and satisfactory Answer of the Kings Majesties Letter sent this day to this House;Order that a Committee. take into con∣sideration mis∣informations given to the King, concer∣ning the pro∣ceedings of the House of Com∣mons. and also that they shall take into their Considera∣tion such Misinformations, as are suspected to have been given to his Majesty, concerning the Procee∣dings of this House, this Parlia∣ment, and of all the Circumstances belonging to the same. IV.Jour. Par. Dom. Com. 18. 19. Jac. 15. Martii. Sir Robert Phillips makes Report of two Informations brought,The Case of Dr. Lamley, Chancellor to the Bishop of Peterburrough, and Dr. Cra∣dock a Divine, Chancellor to the Bishop of Durham. the one against Dr. Lam∣ley, Chancellor to the Bishop of Peterburrough, the other against Dr. Cradock a Divine, and Chan∣cellor to the Bishop of Durham. Dr. Lamley is accused for ex∣torting of unlawful Fees in Pro∣bate of Wills,Dr. Lamely accused for Ex∣tortion and o∣ther Misde∣meanours. &c. 2. For vexing of men with impertinent, trivial, and idle Causes, wherein men are
forced to consume their time, and spend their Estates: As for re∣ceiving Money on Holidays, he makes them pay 40 s. and up∣wards for a Discharge; the like of opening half a Shop-window; it cost another that came to Church on Christmas-day with a foul Band 54 s. and for ommitting of Penance, one Bushell paid 100 Marks, and desired it might be imployed to Charity; he said, Cha∣rity began at home. One having no Sermon in his own Parish, went to a Parish where there was a Sermon; for this he was put to the Oath ex Officio, and paid 33 s. V. As for Dr. Cradock,Dr. Cradock accused for Briberies and other Misde∣meanours. Chan∣cellor of Durham, I must consi∣der him in three Capacities, and apply the faults unto them seve∣rally. First, He is Chancellor to the Bishop. Secondly, He is a high-Com∣missioner.
Thirdly, He is a Justice of Peace. 1. As Chancellor, there are two Charges of misgoverning him∣self. In refusing probate of Testa∣ments, and granting Excommuni∣cations before Citations. He takes Bribes on both sides. 2. As a high-Commissioner of the Quorum, and so a principal man, sending out his Process for Recusants; he took of one Collyer 20 l. for not appearing; of ano∣ther 10 l. to shuffle up a clande∣stine Marriage, &c. Lastly, As a Justice of Peace, he took 100 l. for the discharging of a Priest; Newton killed one, he compounded for 100 l. One Allenson a Batchellor of Divinity, made one Hanton his Executor, within 10 days he granted Sequestration of the Te∣stator's Goods; Dr. Cradock sent them that took away his Will, opened his Desk, and took 6 or 7
Bags; and having threatned them, the Doctor made 4 Sequestrators; the Bishop saith, he would seize the Goods of Gilbert Hanton, to the use of the Bishop of Durham; he came as Justice of Peace, and committed Hanton to the Consta∣ble, to be forth-coming; the Doctor broke open another Desk, and took 30 s. in money; he made his Warrant, and sent Han∣ton to the Gaol; he laid a Fine upon him of 50 l. John Widowes came to Hanton, and mediateth to the Doctor, for his Son's Im∣prisonment; he would give his Son 22 l. which he doth; the Sessions indicted him by the Oath of D. Soame, because they thought the Fine too unreasonable; but the Doctor said, that the Lord of Durham would be angry with him. One Clement gave the Doctor 50 l. and a Mare, to have an Ad∣ministration granted. As he was a Commissioner, he took of one Conyers 20 l. of ano∣ther
59 l. and of two others 10 l. a piece, for Adultery; of another 8 l. As a Justice of Peace, for not sending one to the Gaol, 100 l. For Recusancy, of one Tempest for a Murther, 100 l. For Adultery, before the Party could free him∣self, 20 l. Mr. Alford. The Oath Ex Officio in this manner; one having no Sermon, went to another, and he made him pay 23 s. for the Oath, and for the same offence; and he going to another Parish, imprisoned him. Sir Edward Cook. No man speaks against the Jurisdiction, but the corruption of Spiritual Courts, Qui tollit abusum, confirmat usum, For the Oath Ex Officio, there is an Act of Parliament that they may give it, and Lay-men may give it, in some cases, not in all. And herein the ancient Common Law, agreeth with the Canon Law: in the 32 (vel 31) Ed. 3. there was a complaint against Fees: 2 H. 4.
there was a Law to reduce them to their ancient Fees, for now they exceeded: For Cardinal Wolsey of his devotion and charity took for probate of my Lord Compton's Will, 100 marks; hence came the Law of 21 H. 8. We have good Laws, but they are like Swords shut up in their sheaths. Sir Edward Bonstead he hath a Petition of the Ministers of Nor∣thamptonshire, the people have been ready to rise against the abuses in the Ecclesiastical Courts. Mr. Brook.Kelway, Fo. 184. That the Convoca∣tion is not a part of the Higher House, neither the Bishops any part of the Higher House, but are there as they have Temporal Ba∣ronies. Mr. Pym. I would not have us send up to the Lords yet, till we have examined them; for their guiltiness must be stamped here, be∣fore they go up to the Lords. Mr. Noy. 8 H. 6. the Clergy and Bishops are not to be arrested
going to the Convocation-house; we cannot judge them, but com∣plain of them. Mr. Sherwin. It is a complaint, and we must examine him, so that our complaint be certain, and not without great deliberation han∣dled, that it may not be other∣wise proved. Sir Nathaniel Rich. That if the Lords will not punish those, that we complain of, we will enter in∣to Judgment our selves, which is our ancient course. The House would not send for the accused Doctors, because they were of the Convocation: 1. To avoid offence to them of that Assembly. 2. Because of the Stat.Rastall's Stat. 8 H. 6. c. 1. of 8 H. 6. which is thus: Forasmuch as the Prelates and Clergy of the Realm of England, called to the Convo∣cation, and their Servants and Fa∣miliars that come with them to such Convocation, often times and commonly be arrested, molested
and inquieted; our said Sove∣raign Lord the King, willing gra∣ciously in this behalf to provide for the security and quietness of the said Prelates and Clergy, at the supplication of the same Pre∣lates and Clergy, and of the assent of Great men and Commons afore∣said, hath ordained and statuted, that all the Clergy from henceforth to be called to the Convocation by the Kings Writ, and their Ser∣vants and Familiars, shall for ever hereafter fully use and enjoy such liberty or defence in coming, tarry∣ing and going, as the Great men and Commonalty of the Realm of England, called or to be called to the Kings Parliament, do enjoy and were wont to enjoy, or in time to come ought to enjoy. VI.Journ. Dom. Com. 19 Jac. Sabbathi 2 die Junii. The Commons House of Parliament, in Confirmation of a former Declaration therein made,Confirmation of the Order concerning all Patents adjud∣ged Grievances▪ concerning the stay of all Suits, Payments, and other Proceedings,
grounded upon any Patent or Commission, condemned in the said House, as a general Grievance or Inconvenience to the Subject, until further Order and Direction given therein, hath this day a∣gain upon the Question Resolved it to be fit, that none of the Pa∣tents, Commissions, or other things condemned in this House for general Grievances or Inconvenien∣ces to the Subject, shall be put in execution, until the next access to Parliament. VII.Journ. Dom. Com. Lunae 26 Martii. It is thought fit by the Commons House of Parliament,Concerning all Patents adjudged Grie∣vance. that all Suits, Payments, and other Proceedings, grounded upon any Patent or Commission, condemned in the said House as a general Grie∣vance or Inconvenience to the Subject, should stay till further Order and Direction to be given therein.
VIII.Journ. Dom. Com. Sabbathi 17 Martii. Order pro Churchill. March 21. Sr. Robert Phil∣lip's Reports from the Com∣mittee appoin∣ted to examine Keeling and Churchill, who informed them of many Cor∣ruptions a∣gainst the Lord Chancellor. April 25. A Committee for regulating the Chancery, and to consider of Churchill's false Orders, and the Faults of the rest of the Registers. Sir Dudley Diggs saith, that Churchill was Register, Councellor and Judge, referred to the Committee. It is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parlia∣ment, that the Serjeant at Arms attending this House, shall attach the Body of John Churchill, one of the Deputy-Registers of the Chancery, and him shall take into his custody, and bring him to this House upon Monday morning next, at 8 of the Clock; and the said Serjeant is in the mean time to keep him so, as none be suffered to speak with him, but in the hearing of the Serjeant.
IX.Anno 19 Jac. A Copy of the Petition re∣maining with William Goulds borough, Esq Clerk of the House of Commons. To the Honourable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, in this pre∣sent Parliament Assembled. The humble Petition of the May∣or, Bayliffs, and Burgesses of the Town of Northampton. THat whereas your Petitio∣ners have been,The Complaint of the Mayor, Bayliffs, and Burgesses of Northampton, against Dr. Lamb, Chan∣cellor to the Bishop of Pe∣terborough. and still are every way conformable to the Kings Majesties Laws Ecclesiasti∣cal, yet have they for these many years been subject to the great grievances of John Lamb, Doctor of the Laws, Chancellor to the Bishop of Peterborough, who not only scandalizeth the Town in ge∣neral, as factious, rebellious, and re∣fractory to his Majesties Laws, but also countenanceth the lewdest fel∣lows in the Town, in their opposing of the Governours and Govern∣ment; and by himself and his Sur∣rogates, Registers, Proctors and Apparitors, and others whom he
useth as Spies up and down the Town and Country, citeth men and women to his Courts, upon small or no just occasion, but only to en∣rich himself and his Followers, keeping two Courts every fort∣night for the most part, and car∣rying them away from the usual place where they were wont to be kept, (as being most conve∣nient) unto other small Towns far remote; so that his Majesties Subjects are constrained to tra∣vel, some twenty, some four and twenty miles and more, to their exceeding great trouble and char∣ges, and to the hazarding of their lives; many being driven by rea∣son of their Courts being kept so late in the night, by Candle-light, to travel home in the night-time what weather soever be. And he hath made his own Brother Register, and keepeth the Office and Records in his own house, and there maketh Acts, and altereth them at his own plea∣sure,
and hath the most part of the profits of the same to himself, as is reported, his Brother only bearing the name of the Register, but the Chancellor's own men for the most part supplying the Office; by reason whereof there is such pilling and polling of the Town and Country continually, by exact∣ing new Fees, and extorting great sums of Money for Probates of Testaments, and Letters of Admi∣nistrations, and by causing men to prove Deeds of Gift in their Courts, and to examine Titles of Lands, and to prove Wills there also, though they have been pro∣ved above in the Prerogative Courts; and by constraining Wi∣dows to give up Accompts of their Administration, seven or eight years after their Husbands de∣cease, taking five Nobles (at the least) of every one for the same; by refusing of Wills fairly In∣grossed, and causing the Registers men to write them out again, and
so putting the Country to a double charge. As also by taking great sums of Money of divers persons for Com∣muting of Penance, and not be∣stowing it upon charitable uses; by Excommunicating of men for be∣ing in the company of others, stand∣ing Excommunicated though they knew not of it, and taking excessive Fees for the same; by citing men and women to their Courts for trifles, and taking eleven groats Fee of every one, though they clear themselves; by citing some to the Courts in the Churchwardens names, without their consent or knowledge; by delaying of Causes in the same Courts, especially a∣bout Assessments for the repair of Churches, that it hath cost some Parishes 20 l. 30 l. 40 l. some more, some less, before they could have an end of it; by bringing men to their Courts only upon the Judges suspicion, and there ten∣dring the Oath Ex Officio, upon
refusal whereof they have been Excommunicate, whereupon some have been driven to Appeal, which hath cost some 2 l. some 10 l. some more, to their great impoverish∣ing; by citing men and women to their Courts, for going to another Parish to hear Gods Word prea∣ched, when they had no Sermon at their own Parish-Church, and taking great Fees for the same; by citing men to their Courts for opening their Shop-windows upon a Holiday, though it hath been Market-day, as it hath been accu∣stomed, and making men do Pe∣nance, and pay Fees for the same;Nota est Cyclo∣pum vivendi ratio, quibus illa crudelis vox in Tragoedia attribuitur non ulla Numina expavesco Coeli∣tum, sed victi∣mas, uni deorum maximo ventri offero, deos igno∣ro caeteros. In Praef. ad Covar∣ru. opera. and some for taking Money, and delivering of Corn upon Holidays, and for divers other trivial mat∣ters, making men to spend some 20 s. 30 s. 40 s. 50 s. some more, some less, to the great and general grievance of his Majesties poor Subjects: whereupon it is a general complaint, that it were far better for the Country to give his Majesty
an yearly Subsidie, then to be thus in continual vexation by the said Doctor Lamb, and his Officers un∣der him: in so much that there were so many Petitions put up by the Country, to the Honourable Sir Edward ook Knight, sitting as Judge in that Circuit, that the said Doctor Lamb was bound to the good behaviour for the same, and yet the grievances offered by him are still continued. May it therefore please your Honours, in tender consideration of the premisses, and in a feeling com∣miseration of the distressed Estate of the said Town and Country by that means, to take such speedy course for their relief, as to your Wisdoms shall seem most expe∣dient: And they and the whole Country shall ever be bound to praise God for your Honours, and to pray for your prosperities, &c. Math. Sillesby.
Thomas Martin's Grievance. 1. Thomas Martin, late of Nor∣thampton, being of the Parish of All Saints, was presented into Dr. Lamb's Court by William Har∣rison, and Arthur Smith, Church∣wardens of St. Giles's Parish, both common Drunkards; one of them upon Record, by the advice and practice of Mr. Stockwell the Pro∣ctor, upon a Fame, that he having in his hand a Capons Rump, should ay, it would make as good a Churchwarden as the Churchwarden of St. Giles's; Mr. Martin deny∣eth that he spake any such words, and could never have his Accuser come in; and if there were any such Fame, themselves raised it in an Ale-house. 2. They presented him likewise upon another Fame, that the said Mr. Martin should in the Church-Porch of St. Giles's, violently thrust upon the Wife of Humphry
Hopkins, being with Child, to the danger of her life or the Childs. The ground of this Presentment was this: Mr. Bird being pre∣sented to the Viccaridge of St. Giles's, at his Induction there was an horrible Riot committed in the Church,Nota. by the means of Mr. Sib∣thorp.Dr. Sibthorp. (as was supposed) against Mr. Bird, and one base ellow tript up Mr. Bird's heels, and threatned to kill him, if he would not deliver up his Box of Wri∣tings; Mr. Martin being Mayor was called for by the Constable to come to prevent Murther, where he found the Church-Porch full of the basest People of the Parish, and going into the Church, per∣haps some of his Officers might thrust some out of his way; but the Woman protesteth, that he never did her hurt, neither did she say so, neither, could they per∣swade her Husband to bring an Action against him at the Common-Law, though they often urged him
thereto, and so they took this course in the Spiritual Court; yet the Riotters were never presented into the Spiritual Court, because they were Amici Curie. Upon these Presentments Mr. Martin was cited to appear at Rowell, 10 miles from Northamp∣ton, 2 years after the pretended Offences; but being detained about the King's Service, retained a Proctor to appear for him; but the Chancellor said, it was a mat∣ter of Office, and therefore would admit no Proctor to appear for him, and presently excommunica∣ted him; whereupon he was for∣ced to appeal, and since hath used all the means he could to have an end of this Business by some Friends, who wisht him to yield to the Doctor, or else he would weary him out; so that he was forced to give him 50 s. and paid also 3 s. 8 d. for his absolu∣tion, and yet can get no end of it to this day, but is in danger to be
called again, though it hath cost him 10 l. already. 3. Also a Sister of the said Mr. Martins, dwelling at Leice∣ster, and coming to Northampton, was desirous to go to St. Giles's Church, to hear Mr. Bird preach, and requested one of Mr. Martin's Prentices to accompany her to the Church, which he did, and they both went thither, and there staid Divine Service and Sermon: For this the Apprentice was cited to the Court, and there troubled from one Court day to another, from Northampton to Rowell, 10 miles off, to the great hindrance of his Master; and at length they enjoyned him to pay 3 s. 8 d. which for fear of Excommunicati∣on he was forced to borrow, and so to pay them: And she was threat∣ned by the Chancellor, that he would make her keep her Bro∣ther's Parish-Church when she came to the Town. 4. And because Mr. Martin,
and divers other Townsmen, refu∣sed to give him their Voices, to be one of the Burgesses of Parlia∣ment for Northampton, (which he would fain have obtained both by fair means and threatnings) he presently cited many to the Court, and there troubled them. And amongst the rest, the said Mr. Martin, having about 3 years past, by the Consent of the Mini∣ster, Churchwardens, and Parishio∣ners, built a Seat in the Church for his Children and Servants, for their better hearing of Divine Service and Sermons, was cited before him about the said Seat; and the Chancellor took it away from him most unjustly, (having cost him 3 l. building of it) and gave it to 3 of the stubbornest Fel∣lows in the Town, all opposers to Authority, and one of them for his vicious life bound over to the Ses∣sions, and put out of the Com∣mon-Counsel of the Town for the same, and since presented into
the Spiritual Court, for Inconti∣nency with 2 Women; and yet Mr. Middleton, one of the Surro∣gates, graced him publickly in that Court, and said, he was thrust out of the Common-Councel for his honesty. Thomas Martin. 15 May, 19 Jac. Whereas divers Complaints have been made against John Lamb, DoctorThe Speaker's Order upon the Petition. Lamb, Doctor in the Civil Law. in the Civil Laws, Chancellor to the Bishop of Peter∣borough, for divers Extortions, Op∣pressions, and Misdemeanours, by him and his under- Officers com∣mitted, in the execution of the said Office in the said Diocess, and elsewhere. And whereas also it is informed, that you whose Names are hereafter set down, can testifie mutually against the said John Lamb, These are there∣fore by the direction, and on the behalf of the said House of Com∣mons, to require you and every
of you, that you make your per∣sonal appearance at the said House of Commons, the 29th. day of this instant Month of May, to te∣stifie your knowledge in the pre∣misses: Thereof I require you not to fail, as you will answer the con∣trary at your perils. Given un∣der my Hand this 15th. day of May, 1621. And it was further Ordered, that Robert Sibthorp, and Richard Stockwell, should be sent for, as Delinquents. X.Journ. Dom. Com. 21 Jac. 10 Martii. Mr. Glandvile reports from the Committee of Priviledges, the Election of Monmouth, and by an Order from the Committee,The Case of Mr. Steward, a Scotchman, e∣lected to be a Member of Parliament, but rejected, because a De∣nizen. Mon∣mouth was heard yesterday: And they received this morning a Pe∣tition, that Mr. Walter Steward was returned, and that they think his Election not good: They ob∣ject against him, because a Scotch∣man, and not Naturalized. He forbore to come into the House,
till he had leave. The Case of one Lennis Monck, a Denizen, re∣turned andsate here; and so Sir Horace Palavicino. The Commit∣tee delivered no opinion in it: Two Orders and two Petitions delivered in, to have these heard in order as they come in. Resolved that those which are already in, shall be proceeded in, in order as the Petitions were de∣livered. Mr. Glandvile thinks Mr. Ste∣ward ought not to sit here, because at the time of his Election he was uncapable of it; he that is made a Denizen, is not as an Englishman, That but only personal. Sir Dudley Diggs in that Par∣liament when Bacon Attorney was in question, whether he ought to sit here or no, Over-ruled he ought not; yet in favour of him he was suffered to sit here, and an express Order that never any other Attorney after should. To do the like by this Gentleman.
Sir Edward Cook. No Alien Denizated ought to sit here: Tros Tiriusque mihi nullo discrimine habetur. the other passed sub silentio. Some sit here that are under age, and ought not to sit here, because not questioned. Resolved that Mr. Steward hath dealt very worthily in forbearing to come and sit in this House.Veneris 28 Maii. Mr. Glandvile goes on with his Report: Resolved upon Question, the Election of Mr. Walter Steward being no natural born Subject, is void, and a Warrant to go for a new Writ for Monmouth. XI.Journ. Dom. Com. 21, 22 Jac Regis, Veneris 7 Aprilis. Sir Robert Phillips reports from the Committee for Courts of Justice 3 Heads:The Case of the Lady Dar∣cy, against the Bishop of Lin∣coln, Lord Kee∣per of the Great Seal of England. First, The Peti∣tion of the Lady Darcy; in it is a Recital of her Husband's dying seised of the Mannor of Sutton in Surrey; with the Advowson; a Grant was made to her and ano∣ther by the Court of Wards, of
the Body and Estate of her Son,The Lady and another were Grantees of an Heir by the Court of Wards Then presented a Clerk to the Bishop of Lin∣coln, but refused, who pre∣sented another. The Lady sues for a Writ of Quare impedit. The Cursitor denies it by Order of the Bishop being Lord Keeper. Whereupon she complains to the Commons, who refer it to a Committee. Debates in the Committee. 1 Aug. 21 Jacobi, the Incumbent died; so she presented her Clerk to the Bishop; so the Lord Keeper, 3 Septemb. presented Doctor Grant, the King's Chap∣lain. She was advised to seek her ordinary Course by a Quare impedit, which was denied by the Cursitor, who said, the Lord Keeper gave directions for it to be sued to the King, desires of this Assembly to have relief; this Pe∣tition was retained by the Com∣mittees, Parties on both sides ap∣peared, and Councel. It came into question, whether an original Writ might be stayed; the Lawyers vouched some Pre∣sidents for it in Chancery; the Committee concluded these were not proper in the Cause, and not to be followed, desires an Accom∣modation of this Business between the Lady and the Doctor; they gave a time, for yet they are clearly of opinion, that the Lady
had lost her Right,Proposals by D. Grant, whom the Bishop and Lord Keeper had presented. and to the Heir doubtful for him. They received a Petition from Dr. Grant, who made four proffers: First, he would willingly go to a Tryal with this Lady, without ta∣king advantage of lapse of time: If that could not be, he would pass an Act of Parliament to set her in statu quo: 3ly. would refer it to four Judges; to six Lawyers of this House, if they should say the Right was hers, he would resign. The Committee had an Answer from the Lord KeeperThe Lord Keeper's An∣swer and Ex∣cuse. of two parts: First, for the denial of the Quare Impedit, not his purpose to justifie it, but to extenuate his proceedings therein. A Question there was be∣tween the two Courts, and no good correspondency between the Judges; it was presently after his coming into the place, neither corruption nor malice was in his proceedings: he offered a Living equivalent of this, to the Lady:
he would satisfie the Lady by any means this House should direct, and would labour to get Grant from his Majesty to sell to the Heir; he had never before, nor would do the like; and returned thanks to the House, for their fa∣vourable Interpretation of this his Error. The Lady Darcy gave a Nega∣tive Answer to all;The Lady will stand and fall by Judge∣ment of the House. she had appea∣led to the House, could find no better Judgement, and to this she would stand. The CommitteeConsiderations in the Com∣mittee. took two things into their consideration, the Ladies own particular, and the publick; For the first, they thought it the safest way to put in a Bill; she was satisfied with this answer: For the second, the denial of the Writ,Who delivered no Opinion, leaving all to the House. divers proposals made, but at last resolved to present it to the House without any Opinion of theirs, touching the Offence and Error of the Lord Keeper, was di∣rected to report the whole Narra∣tive to the House.
Mr. Brook said,Debates in the House by seve∣ral Members thereof. he had never any person in admiration for ad∣vantage, had read the Law, there is a Market overt of the Law, the Common Pleas, and the Chancery, the Shop of Justice, the Chancery, First, No doubt it's a great fault to deny an original Writ in the Chancery, but not so much as to deny a Fine in the Common Pleas; just Excuse, and the offer of A∣mendments, doth much extenu∣ate the Offence, which is but sin∣gular; the Lord Keeper might do this, to vindicate his Right from the Vsurpation of the Court of Wards; it cannot stand with the Gravity of this House to transmit it; a man for one single offence; this will be admonition enough to him,Nota. that it hath been thus agita∣ted in this House. Sir James Parrot argued the offence of the Lord Keeper, in the denial of an original Writ; some Excuses are alledged: First done within a short time after he came
in ignorantia Juris, in a Judge. Another Excuse offered; a Contention between two Courts; this rather aggravates than exte∣nuates his offence; being his own Case, he ought not to have stay∣ed Justice; this thought a sole fault, yet a great fault; But he thinks it not a sole fault. He is informed, that there are more Faults of the like kind obje∣cted to the Lord Keeper: Pro∣posed, To have that examined; then it will be a sole fault; two other Petitions before the Committees before the Lord Keeper, of Mrs.' Thomas, and Sir Francis Fuliambe; to have these two fully heard to∣morrow, and then to grow to a Resolution of this; in the mean time to have the Cursitor examined about the other, whether ano∣ther Quare impedit, or Ne admit∣tas was not denied. Sir Thomas Hobby moved to be∣gin in order with the parts of the
Reports: First, To the Writ that which is amiss in the Inheritance, and then to consider of the Faults, to have the Bill read. Mr. Price alledged, no corrup∣tion nor ill intention appears in the Lord Keeper; a difference be∣tween things evil in themselves, and evil by success; the Lord Keeper came young to his Place, and from a strange speculation, and found this President; there∣fore to have some course taken to right the Lady, and to limit that vast Court. Mr. Sollicitor thinks the An∣swer of the Lord Keeper's very fair and satisfactory, if it be right∣ly understood; and so the Debate went off. XII.The Debate goes off. Journ. Dom. Com. 21 & 22. Jac. Regis, Ve∣neris 7 Maii, 1624. The Case of the Bishop of Norwich, impeached by the Commons. Sir Edward Cook reports from the Committee of Grievan∣ces, a Complaint against the Bishop of Norwich; the charge is great and strange, consisting of four parts.
First,The first head of his Charge▪ the City of Norwich ha∣ving 34 Parishes, he sent for the Preachers of the City, and told them they had preaching enough, and the morning preaching need∣less, wished them to cease the Mornings Exercise: this aggrava∣ted by divers Circumstances, a Letter written to him by the Me∣tropolitan, about the Kings plea∣sure for preaching after this his Inhibition; the Cathedral Church, the Elbow of the City, not above 2000 can hear, yet all to come thither,The second head. above 20000 people in Norwich. The second,Vide Rot. Parl. 17 E. 3. n. 59, 60 Vide Pult. Stat. 35 E. 1. fo. 92. Fox vol. 1. f. 501▪ Rot Par. 21 E. 3 n. 1. 63. There came up Images and Crucifixes, counted Laymens Books, and the Lord Bi∣shop blessed those that set up those Ornaments; a Dove in the Font,The Stat. of Provisors, 25 E. 3. Rast. f. 98 Rot. Par. 38 E. 3 Rot. Par. 47 E. 3 n. 30. fluttering over the water to san∣ctifie it. Rot. Parl. 18 E. 3. num. 32, 33, 34. the Commons dealt with the Provisors, they complai∣ned they had not Spiritual food,Rot. Parl. 3. R. 2. n. 37. for Cardinals put into ChurchesRast. Stat. 16. R. 2. cap. 5.
Shoemakers and Taylors. 50 E. 3. called bonum Parliamentum, a complaint of the Popes usurpation,Item, The King at the prayers of the Com∣mons, shewing to him by Peti∣tion, how that Priests become very scant after the Pestilence, to the great grievance and oppression of the People, hath spoken to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Bishops, being in the arliament, to set thereupon a Covenable remedy; which Arch∣bishops and Bishops, at the motion of the King, and of the great men, said in the same Parliament, that they have thereupon or∣dained in certain; that is to say, That the pain of Parish-Priests, by any manner of colour, receiving above 6 Marks, and other yearly singing, and not intending the Cure of Sauls, taking above 5 Marks, without the Bishop's dispensation, and suspension of their Office, if they within the Month make not restitution, to the use of the Church in which they sing, of that that they have above received. And the pain of People of holy Church, giving above 6 Marks or 5 Marks to Parish-Priests, or other yearly singing, as afore is said, is to pay the double of that that they do excessively pay, to be converted to the use of Alms, at the Arbitrement of the Diocesan of the Place; and all manner of Priests, intending their proper Service, as yearly singing, shall serve the Parishes, and be attending to the Cure of Souls, as he by the Ordinaries of the Place, or by them to whom he attaineth, shall be required, upon pain of suspension of their Office, which they shall incur upon the deed, if they within the 20 days after that they shall be required, be not obedient to such requests. And that no Priest, passing from one Diocess to another, shall be received there to sing Divine Ser∣vice, unless he shew to the Diocesan of the Place, Letters commen∣datory, of the Bishop in whose Diocess he last before dwelled. Wherefore the King, by the Assent of the Great Men and Com∣mons, hath ordained, That if any secular man of the Realm, pay any more than Five Marks to any Priest yearly in Money, or in o∣ther things to the Value; or if he pay to such Priest, retained to abide at his Table, above 2 Marks, for his Gown, and his other Ne∣cessaries, (his Table accounted to 40 s.) and thereof be attained, he shall pay to the King fully as much as he paid to the said Priest. Rast. Stat. de Anno 36 E. 3. fol. 118. cap. 8.
not feeding the Flock; Rome cal∣led the Sinful City, and that all the Ill that hath befaln this King∣dom, hath come from thence. 17 R. 2. num. 22. 11. H. 4. and a great many more Presidents; so that this complaint is proper for this place. The third was,The 3d. head. Extortion by orders of the Archbishop; and by their own Canons the Iees set down, these very much ex∣ceeded. 4. Old Institutions now regi∣stred,The 4th. head. which is very dangerous for disherisons. They have not heard his defence. 40 E: 3 inter Brevia, a complaint against the Bishop of Hereford for Non-residency, not ly∣ing within his Diocess; all Bishops ought to be Resident, unless they be in the Kings Service: where the People are not taught, the King hath but half Subjects; the readiest way to make Rebellions. The Committee thought it wor∣thy to be transmitted up to the Lords.
Resolved upon Question with∣out a Negative, That this matter shall be transmitted up to the Lords, Sir Edward Cook to do it, and a Message to be sent to the Lords for a Conference about it. The Commons desire their Lord∣ships for a Conference,Die Sabbathi, viz. 8 die Maii, 1624. Jour. Dom. Proc. Message from the Lower House, by Sir Coke, and others touching some Accusations against the Lord Bishop of Norwich, (unto which his Lordship hath not yet been heard) Humbly leaving the time and place to their Lordship. The Lords appointed the 15th.Die Mercurii, 19 Maii. of this Month to confer with the Commons,The Lords ap∣point a day for Conference with the Com∣mons. touching their Com∣plaint against the Lord Bishop of Norwich; being returned, the Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury, reparted the same to the House to this effect, viz. That the Commons had recei∣ved of Complaint exhibited by the Citizens of Norwich,The Archbishop of Canterbury reports the heads of the Conference. against the said Lord Bishop, and to shew that it was ordinary for the Com∣mons to complain of the Gover∣nours
of the Church,Authorities for the Power and Right of the Commons to meddle in this Cause. divers Re∣cords of Parliament; were ci∣ted, viz. Anno 25 E. 3. 17 R. 2. and 11 H. 4. all which were ci∣ted to satisfie tacite objectionis, for their medling with a cause of this nature. That the charge against the Lord Bishop consisted of six parts.Their Charge against the Bi∣shop under six Heads. Preachers. 1. That he inhibited or dis∣hartned Preachers on the Sabath day, in the Forenoon. 2. That ImagesImages. were set up in the Church, and one of the Hoey Ghost, fluttering over the Font, and a Marble Tomb pulled down, and Images set down in the room, and the Bishop blessed them that did it. 3.Prayer towards the East. Catechizing, and singing Psalms. That he punished those that Prayed not toward the East. 4. That he punished a Minister for Chatechising his Family, and Singing of Psalmes.Nota. 5. That he used ExtortionExtortion. ma∣ny ways. 6. That he did not enter In∣stitutionsInstitutions not entred. to the prejudice of Pa∣trons.
For the first,The 1st. head concerning Preachers. it was said that there was 34. Churches in Norwich, and in those Parishes 30 or 40000 People; That the Lord Bishop sent for the Preachers by Appari∣tor, and told them there was no need of Preaching on Sunday in the Forenoon, except in the Ca∣thedral Church, where 2 or 3000 only could hear, many dwelling three quarters of a Mile off, and many being old, and not able for their Age to come so far. That this Inhibition was, when the King had commanded more Preaching. That his Lordship connived at Recusants: All which was to the disheartning of good Professors. It may be objected, his Lord∣ship allowed of Catechizing, ergo no Preaching necessary; but he commanded to ask bare Questi∣ons, and nothing else, ergo no Instructions. That this is done against the Canons of the Church; and that
there is no obedience without knowledge the outward man is not conformed, unless the inward man be reformed, and cited the Canons. Quicunque contrist averit Doctorem veritatis, peccat in Chri∣stum; and the Canon, 1 Jac. c. 45. for Command of Preaching, For the 2d.The 2d head touching Ima∣ges. touching the set∣ting up of Images, it was said to be against Acts of Parliament, against the Canons of the Convo∣cation, the Book allowed in the King's time of 28 H. 8. c. 30. against Images; Pilgrimages will follow, against 3 E 6. and the Homilies approved, Anno 1 Eliz. forbidding of Images in Churches. The 3d.The 3d. head concerning Prayer towards the East. for Prayer to the East, which Gratianus affirms, came by Tradition, part 1. Decret. 11. and that it is Superstitious, Lingwood in his Gloss. Lib. 2. Title de Feri∣is, non refert si versus orientem, &c. That the Lord Bishop Excom∣municated many, and enjoyned
Penance to divers for not Praying to the East, and some did their Penance, with a whith Rod in their hand for proof, whereof it is under the Bishops hand. The fourth,The 4th head touching Ca∣techizing and singing Psalms. one Peck a Mini∣ster Catechized his Family, and song Psalms, and his Neighbours came in on the Sundays after Eve∣ning Prayer, and the Lord Bishop enjoyned them to do Penance, for this their resorting to Cate∣chisme, and singing of Psalms, and to say, I confess my Error; which Acknowledgment is under the Bishops hand, they which re∣fused, were Excommunicated, and paid 7 l. charges. 5.The 5th. head touching Ex∣tortion. Touching Extortions was shewn, That in the Table of Fees, is set down, from Institutions 24 s. 8 d. whereof to the Bishop 10 s. That this Lord Bishop is Register also; and now his Lord∣ship taketh for Institutions 3 l. 5 s. and for united Churches double, viz. 6 l. 10 s. and that Communi∣bus
Annis, there are 100 Iustitu∣tions. For admission into sacred Or∣ders, nothing should be taken; if any, it is Symony; yet the Lord Bishop hath now taken 30 s. or 28 s. the Bishop and Register be∣ing all one. To serve Cure, 5 s. is due, his Lordship taketh 6 s. 8 d. To teach School, 3 s. 4 d. his Lordship taketh 6 s. 8 d. and if of ability, 10 s. For every Consignation of a Decree, 4 d. which cometh to 3 l. per annum, for which there should be nothing paid, no Consignation being in the Table, but with ano∣ther Hand set down in Archbi∣shop Whitguift's Hand. Sixthly,The 6th. head touching non-Registring of Institutions. That the Institutions to Benefices are not registred, which overthroweth Patronages, if it be returned, Scrutatis Ar∣chivis non invenitur, when the Right comes in question; yet the Fees are greater than before:
The CommonsThe Conclusion of the Com∣mons. concluded with these two Remembrances. The first, That they received this Com∣plaint before Easter last, yet they proceeded not in the Examinati∣on thereof, till they received a Certificate of the Mayor of Nor∣wich. The second is, That there is a Law that none shall be puni∣shed for complaining in Parlia∣ment. This Report ended,The Bishop stood up and Answered the Charge of the Commons. His Introducti∣on. the Lord Bishop of Norwich stood up in his place, and answered the same to this effect, viz. The Answer of the Lord Bishop of Norwich, to the Complaint of the Commons. First, his Lordship confessed the Charges in the said Complaint to be so great, and so grievous, that, were he guilty thereof, he would desire himself to be puni∣shed: Which, whether he be guilty, or not, he will leave to
their Lordships most exact and se∣vere Examinations; wherein he desired them not to spare him, and he would ever acknowledge and commend their Justice and Honour. His Lordship protested he was not way guilty of the first part of his Accusation; If he were, then he was unworthy to bear the name of a Clergy-man; and shewed the unworthiness of such as should dishearten Preachers from Prea∣ching the Word of God: His Lordship shewed also, (desired first that he might not be taxed with Ostentation,) his own Pra∣ctice in Preaching, while he was Vicar and Parson, That he Prea∣ched every Sabbath in the Mor∣ning, and Catechized in the Af∣ternoon, and that he continued the like in Chichester, when he was Bishop there. That in Norwich he never mis∣sed the publick Place, and ever Preached there against Popery,
though he had been an unprofita∣ble, yet he had not been an idle Servant, which was now his only comfort. As touching Preaching and non-Residents, he hath been rec∣koned more than half a Puritan. His Lordship remembred his man∣ner of leaving his Service with the late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, that he might go to his Cure. His Lordship wondred why he should be thought a Papist; he thought it might be long of his Disputation, and his Sermon at Paul's Cross of Predestination ne∣gative, unadvisedly preached by him, for which he was checked by the Lord Archbishop Whitguift, and commanded to preach no more of it; and he never did; though Dr. Abbot, Bishop of Sa∣rum, hath since declared in Print, that which he then preached to be no Popery; That Popery is a fire that will never be quiet: He hath preached 100 Sermons since,
and nothing of Popery can be im∣puted unto him out of any of them. That there be divers Obstacles to keep his Lordship from Popery. 1. The Vsurpation of the Pope of Rome. His Lordship affirmed, That no Power on Earth can touch a Prince; and that therefore he abhorred the Usurpation of the Pope over Princes. 2. Their Religion is dyed with Bloud. The practick course of their Religion is all by Jugling and feigned Miracles, of which his Lordship had written a Book against them, which was never yet answered. 3. That he never spake with Priest or Jesuit, nor ever invited a known Recusant to his Table, for they never say Amen to our Prayers. 4. That their Equivocation is the last, worse than which nothing
can be; his Lordship held it much better to talk with the Devil, than with such. Then his Lordship profest himself to be a true Member of this Church, and acknowled∣ged the Church of England to come nearest to the Primitive Church; that we fetch not our Reformation from Wickliff, Hus and Luther, of later Times, but from the first 400 years next after Christ. 1.His Lordships answer to the first head, Preachers. As touching the first part of the Accusation: His Lordship confessed, That 6 or 7 of the abler sort of Mini∣sters in Norwich, used to expound in their own Churches before the Sermon begun in the Cathedral Churches, and many resorted from other Places to those Expo∣sitions, (for all the Churches have not Preachers,) and in the After∣noon to their Sermons. The Preachers themselves found fault with this, being willing to be rid of the pains, as his Lord∣ship thought; for they were to
preach in the Afternoon, and in the Week-days, and shewed him many Disorders therein, which they pretended; as the cutting off part of the Prayers, or their be∣ginning so early, that many could not come to the Common Pray∣ers, and the like; and they be∣sought his Lordship to remedy it, for that they being but stipendary men, were loth to do it, for fear belike to lose their Stipends. Whereupon his Lordship sent for them by an Officer, and willed them to omit those Expositions in the Forenoon; and yet his Lord∣ship hath since taken order for the erecting of three Sermons, in the most remote Places of the City from the Cathedral Church; and his Lordship hath erected many Le∣ctures in several Places in the Countrey. 2. As touching the ImagesHis answer to the second head, Images. in the Church, what was done is done without his knowledge. It is meant by St. Peter's Church, that
his Lordship never saw that Church, till one Evening as he came by; and being often before informed of much Cost done up∣on that Church, he went in, and kneeled down to his Prayers, as his use is; and when he rose up, perceiving that they had bestow∣ed very great Cost, and not seeing or knowing at all of any Image set up there, he said, God's Bles∣sing on their hearts, that had be∣stowed so much Cost on God's House. 3. As touching PrayerHis answer to third head, Prayer towards the East. to the East, he never enjoyned it, nor heard of it till now. 4. For the 4th.His Answer to the 4th. head, Catechizing, and singing Psalms. part of his Com∣plaint, he perceiveth, That he hath been sifted for the whole course of his Life: That this Peck was sent to his Lordship by the Justices of the Peace, for an As∣sembly late at night in his House, his Catechizing being but a colour to draw them thither: That this Peck had infected the Parish
with strange Opinions; as not to kneel when they came to Church; that the Name of Jesus is no more than a common Name, and that it is Superstition to bow down at the Name of Jesus. His Lordship further affirmed, That this Peck had been formerly convicted for non-Conformity, Annis 1615, & 1617. and for Symony, and Con∣venticles in his Neighbour's house, as appears by the Acts of the Re∣gister, Fatetur. And that Anno 1622. he was taken in his House with 22 of his Neighbours at a Conventicle: That he was now bound over by a Justice, and so brought to his Lordship, and his Sentence against Peck was only, That he should confess his Fault. The others mentioned in this part of the Charge, were puni∣shed for their Opinions also, ma∣king no difference between an Ale-house and the Church, till the Preacher be in the Pulpit. His
Lordship said, He much confessed his fault, that in the Penance he enjoyned them, he caused them to confess their Errors, omitting their resort to Conventicles, which he did at their own earnest suit. 5.His Answer to the 5th. head, Extortion. His Lordship absolutely deni∣ed, That he improved any Fees, and affirmed, he hath not any of those Fees that are complained of, only the Fee for Institution, which he took as his Predecessors did; if therein he hath committed any Error, Erravimus cum Patribus; and denied, that he ever had seen that Table of Fees, which is spo∣ken of by the Commons. 6.His Answer to the 6th. head, non-Registring Institutions. His Lordship affirmed, That he had registred all the Instituti∣ons. This was the Effect of the Lord Bishop's Answer; which being ended, The Prince his Highness told his Lordship, That he had not answered touching the Para∣phrase of the Catechism taken a∣way by him.
Whereupon his Lordship re∣plied, That the Preachers used to choose a Text of the Creed, &c. and to ask the Child some one Question, and then to debate ve∣ry long upon it, and never de∣scend to the capacity of the Child: That his Lordship did not forbid the Explanation, but willed, that it might be Catechistically. Thus ended the Lord Bishop of Norwich his AnswerThe Conclusion of his Answer. to the said Complaint. It is this day Ordered,The Lords for want of time refer the Com∣mons Com∣plaint to the High-Commis∣sion Court to examine. And after re∣port to the House. Which will then judge thereof. that in respect of the Streightness of time, that the Complaint of the Commons against the Lord Bishop of Nor∣wich, shall be referred unto the High Commission, to be Exam∣mined by them, and they to make Report thereof to the House. And then the House will judge thereof. XIII.Journ. Dom. Proc. 1 & 2 Car. 1. 10 Mart. Timothy Pinckney who had Petitioned the Lords 21 Jac. to be relieved for a Debt owing
to him and others,The Procee∣dings of the Lords against the Bishop of Lincoln, late Lord Keeper, for refusing to obey their Or∣der. from Sir John Kineday, and that Barne Elmes should be Sold for that purpose, which the Lords then ordered; And appointed a Commission to Issue out of Chancery, directed to certain Judges, to examine the pretences of the Creditors, and see them satisfied, he Complains now of the Bishop of Lincoln, late Lord Keeper, for refusing to grant out such a Commission, and sligh∣ting the Order. The Committee had taken the Depositions of three Persons, who had been first Sworn in the House; The Lords took into consideration this contempt of their Order, heard the Depositions read, and appoin∣ted Sir Charles Caesar, and Sir Robert Rich, to go and Examine one Kelwood, who was also present, when the said Lord Keeper refus∣ed to obey the said Order; and Minister an Oath unto him, to tell what he knows of any notice given to the Lord Keeper of
the said Order, and who was present March the Second,Sir Ch. Caesar and Sir Robert Rich report the Examina∣tion of Kell∣wood. Upon Sir Charles Caesar, and Sir Robert Rich their Report, of their Examina∣tion of George Kellwood, touching the Bishop of Lincoln, not obey∣ing the Order in the business of Pinckney, the Lords Order that the Deposition, after they had heard it read, and the Depositions of the other three Persons for∣merly taken to be sent to the BishopThe Lords or∣der that the Bishop shall answer under his Hand. of Lincoln, who was to return an Answer, under his hand that day following. March the 16th.The Bishop sends his An∣swer. The Bishop of Lincoln sent his Answer to Pinck∣ney's Complaint, according to the order of March the 2d. in Writing, to this essect; First, in general de∣nyed he should have Spoken any thing in contempt of their Lord ships Order in Parliament 21 Jac. having always in his heart, born such a reverence to them, for non Arbitramur quenquam dicere quod
non sentiat, and for the particu∣lars, as he remembers, it being two years since, that there had been a mistake in the Clerks en∣tering it, according to the sence of the House, and Pinckney had then concealed from their Lord-ships, a former Refference by the Parliament, and the King himself, to the Lord Keeper, the Master of the Rolls, and some Judges, who had made a Decree in it; And admit all were true, that is complained, yet he had ommitted the time of the Complaint, of a verbal contempt, near two years being past, and two sittings of Parliament, wherein he had been silent; Verbal Injuries, according to the Civil Law, must be com∣plained of within the year, aliter remissae censentur: Contempts must be pressed the next Term, or sit∣ting of the Court, against which they are committed; Scandalous words against the King, must be Complained of within three
Months; Words of High Treason, are by the Laws confined to be Complained of within 6 Months. All Informations against any Penal Law, made, or to be made, must come within the compass of one year, unless it be Ex parte Regis, who hath a year longer; And it is impossible for any Man to give an Account, of every phrase he shall use Twenty Months after the words Spoken, Lubri∣cum tantum linguae non est ad ju∣dicium trahendum, say the Civili∣ans. And that his Heart did ne∣ver conceive the least Derogation of any Order of that most Honour∣able House, on the bare intimation of any one Peer that sitteth in the same. One passage in his An∣swer, was, That Kellwood, and e∣specially Kennedy (a Man Con∣demned to Death in Scotland for Forgery,) are Persons Infamed, and their Credits to be Examined before they be admitted as Wit∣nessess against a Peer of the Realm,
and a Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, as he then was. At the end of the Paper was Written, Recepi 5. Expedii 9 Martii 1625. John Lincoln. This Answer was referred to the CommitteeThe Bishop's Answer refer∣red to a Com∣mittee. for Petitions, to consi∣der whats fit to be done for the clearing of the aspersion laid by the Bishop, on the Lords Sub-Com∣mittees appointed for the Journal Book, and what for the relief of Pinckney; for those had certified it to be a true Order; Notwith∣standing he said it was mistaken by the Clerk, and had not obeyed it. The Committee Report,17 Martii. The Committee report. they find two defects in this Answer: 1. That he doth not clearly ac∣knowledge his Contempt in not obeying the Order. 2. His As∣persing the Lords Sub-Committees,And give their opinion, that the Bishop ought to ac∣knowledge his error and of∣fence, to be for∣ry, and ask par∣don. by saying, it was a mistaken Or∣der, when they had certified it a true one. Their Opinion is, That the Sub Committee be cleared, and the Bishop acknowledge it a true
Order, and signifie to the House, that he is sorry he was so mistaken, and thereby given just offence to the House, and to the Lords of the Sub-Committee; then Ac∣knowledge his Error,And so ordered by the House. and ask their pardon, so Ordered. May it please your most Honour∣able Lordships. YOur Lordships having resol∣ved the order touching Pinkney of the 28 of May 1624.Die Jovis, 23 Martii. The Bishop pursuant to all which obeys. To be an Order of that Most Ho∣nourable House,Nota. truly and justly entered;His Contempt in a former Parliament censured in this. I do most willingly ac∣cknowledge as much, and am very sorry, that through a weak me∣mory, and information of some parties interessed, who pretend∣ded to have serached the Clerks Book the 29 of May 1624. And to have found there at that day, no ground at all for any such Or∣der; I have had in my thoughts some scruples to the contrary, to
the offending of the most Honour∣able House, or any one of the Lords of the Sub-Committee, who (as I now understand) have Subscribed the said Order; And I do Humbly desire your most Ho∣nourable Lordships in General, and those Noble Lords in Particu∣lar, to Pardon the Errour I have herein committed, and I shall pray unto God to bless and pro∣sper your most Honourable Lord∣ships. John Lincoln. Which Acknowledgment their Lordships all accepted in full sa∣tisfaction from the said Lord Bishop. XIV. Ordered,Journ. Dom. Proc. 3 Car. 1. Die Martis, 27 Maii. The Case of Ensign Reynde, for Misdemea∣nour, and Con∣tempt against the Parliament and the Ld. Say Ensign Reynde to be sent for, and brought up as a Prisoner before the Lords, to answer a high Contempt against the Parliament: The Witnesses who have informed thereof, are to be required to attend when Reynde comes.
Ordered,Die Veneris, 30 Maii, The Serjeant at Arms ordered to take him. the Serjeant at Arms to make such and so many Depu∣ties, for the apprehension of Hen∣ry Reynde, as the Lord Say shall appoint, and his Captain to be warned to bring him hither by a day. These men were sworn tou∣ching the Information against Henry Reynde,Die Martis, 30 Junii. Witnesses sworn against Reynde. Ensign-Bearer to the Souldiers at Banbury, viz. George Phillips. Obadiah Lord. John Hayns, John Hele. And being examined,Who prove the insolent and opprobrious Speeches spo∣ken by Reynde. did te∣stifie the insolent and opprobrious Speeches spoken by the said En∣sign Reynde, against a Peer of the Realm, and his contempt of this High Court of Parliament. The Lords considering that the said Reynde was by Order of this House, sent for by the Serjeant the 27th. of May, and could not be found, but yet came early one Morning to the Clerks Office,
to understand whether any other cause of Complaint was against him, save the Information of those opprobrious Speeches.; and in∣stantly departed,Reynde hides his Head. and ever since hides his head. Their Lordships Order. Elvenston his Captain to be sent for, to be here to morrow Mor∣ning. And the Duke of BuckinghamThe Duke of Buckingham promises he will cause him to be sent for. did declare his opinion, that the said Reynde deserved a severe cen∣sure; and promised to the House, to lay all the Ports for him, and if he can be found, or shall ever come into the Army, he will cause him to be sent, to receive such censure as shall be agreed on against him. Captain Elvenston being called before the Lords,Die Mercurii 4 Junii. The Captain affir∣med he had not seen Reynde. did affirm that he had not seen his Ensign Henry Reynde this Fortnight, and thinks he is not in Town; He was com∣manded
to bring him to the HouseIs commanded to bring him to the House when he finds him. Or inform the House. whensoever he shall find him, and so soon as he shall understand where he is, to inform the House thereof. The Lords taking into conside∣ration,Die Lunae, 9 Junii. The Lords pro∣ceed to censure Reynde. that Henry Reynde will not be found, and Resolving to pro∣ceed to a censure against him, for his Ignominious Speeches of the Parliament, and of the Lord Say, they first voted and adjudged him unworthy to bear Arms hereafter, or to be accompted a Souldier. Then their Lordships propoun∣ded divers other parts of a Censure against him, but the Duke of Buckingham coming in before the Conclusion thereof, his Grace told their Lordships,But the Duke inform'd the House he was found. that the said Reynde is now found. Where∣upon it was Ordered, the said Reynde to be brought hither to morrow Morning. The Duke of Buckingham ex∣cused himself,Journ. Dom. Proc. die Mer∣curii, 11 Junii. for not bringing of Reynde to his answer according to
his promise;The Duke ex∣cuseth himself, because Reynde shifts his Lod∣ging. for that he shifts his Lodging every night, but promised again to do his best to bring him to morrow Morn∣ing. Ordered, If Reynde do not ap∣pear here to morrow Morning, then to proceed against him in the censure. The Lords were put in mind of their Order yesterday,Die Jovis, 12 Junii, 1628. The Lords give Sentence a∣gainst Reynde. if Reynde were not brought this Morning, to proceed to sentence against him notwithstanding. Whereupon the Duke of Buckingham signified unto their Lordships, with what care and industry he had endea∣voured to bring the said Reynde before their Lordships, but he is so apprehensive of their censure which he deserves, that he cannot be found; Yet his Grace said, he doubted not but to bring him to morrow Morning, and desired their Lordships to proceed not∣withstanding; now in their sen∣tence against him, and with the
more severity, because he had so often deceived his Grace. The sentenceThe Sentence. of the Lords Spi∣ritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, against Henry Reynde, Ensign-bearer to the Band of Sol∣diers Billetted in Banbury, for the Ignominious Speeches, uttered by the said Reynde, against the said Lord Say and Seal; And for his contempt of this High Court of Parliament; which sentence was this day pronounced against him, by the Lord Keeper, (viz.) 1. He the said Henry Reynde is never to bear ArmsNever to bear Arms. hereafter, but is accompted unworthy to be a Souldier. 2. He is to be ImprisonedImprisonment during plea∣sure. To stand under the Pillory in Cheap-side and at Banbury. du∣ring pleasure. 3. He is to stand under the Pillory, with Papers on his Head, shewing his Offence; at Cheap∣side, London, and at Banbury. 4. That he is to be Fined at 200 l.Fined 200 l. unto the King.
5. He is to ask forgiveness here,To ask Pardon here, and at Banbury. of all the Lords of Parliament in general, and of the Lord Say and his Son, both here and at Ban∣bury. And it was then also Ordered by their Lordships,The Lord Keeper to move the King for a Procla∣mation to ap∣prehend him. that the Lord Keeper should move his Majesty, for the House of Parliament, to apprehend the said Reynde, with a promise of reward unto him that that shall take him. And it was then also Ordered,The Secretary to write into the Law Coun∣treys, not to en∣tertain Reyne. that the Kings principal Secretary, shall Write unto his Majesties A∣gent in the Low Countries, that he signifie this censure of the Lords, unto all the Colonels and Cap∣tains there, and that his His Ma∣jesties pleasure is, they give no entertainment to the said Reynde. And the Court of Star-ChamberThe Court of Star-Chamber to see the Sen∣tence executed out of time of Parliament. is to put this sentence in Executi∣on against the said Reynde, if he shall happen to be apprehended af∣ter this Session is ended, and out of time of Parliament.
The Lord Say (who withdrew himself, when the Lords gave this Sentence) gave their Lordships Humble thanks, for the sense they had of his Honour, and their Noble zeal they had in preserving of it. Ordered,Die Sabbathi, 14 Junii. the Court of Star-Chamber to put in Execution the Sentence against Reynde. XV. Whereas George Gardiner did lately stand in the Pillory,Journ. Dom. Proc. 1 & 2 Car. 2. 13 Jun. The Case of George Gardi∣ner, for counter∣feiting Prote∣ctions. by the Censure of the House, for coun∣terfeiting of Protections, and sel∣ling them; it was now informed, that he did not only in scorn there∣of say, that he would stand in all the Pillories in England for 2 s. per diem, but also gave out threat∣ning Speeches against the Lord Keeper; wherefore he was this day brought to the Bar, and the Speeches proved against him. It was Ordered, That he should stand in the Pillory here at West∣minster with a Paper on his Head, declaring his Offence, for scanda∣lizing
the Justice of this House, and unjustly slandering the Lord Kee∣per, and to ride backward with the same Paper to the Cross in Cheap∣side, and to stand in the Pillory there, and to ride back to the Fleet in like manner. And whereas George Buttrice and this George Gardiner (But∣trice also having bought a counter∣feit Protection) have commenced Suits against one Henry Lane, who first informed the Earl of Huntingdon thereof, whose Pro∣tections were counterfeited and sold, the said Suits not being for just Debt, but for meer vexation, as in the Petition of the said Hen∣ry Lane is contained. It is Ordered, the said Gardi∣ner and Buttrice to stay all Suits against the said Lane, for the Causes in the said Petition con∣tained. XVI.Journ. Dom. Com. 3 Ca. Friday, 9 May. Sir Walter Earl Reports from the Committee about the De∣duty-Lieutenants.
Sir William Welby,The Case of Sir William Welby a Deputy Lieutenant, for raising Money, and illegal Commitments. a Deputy-Lieutenant for Lincolnshire, is complained of, that he sent a Warrant, as a Deputy. Lieutenant, to commit two Persons to Gaol, for refusing to pay certain Taxes for military Affairs. Also one Mr. Norwood complains, that it is the usual course of the said Sir William Welby, to raise great sums in the Countrey in military Affairs, but it is for the Charges of him∣self and others at Musters. Also he having two Sons Captains in the Countrey, he orders that every Souldier pay their Captain 6 d. a day every time they muster; and though these Causes were complained of the last Parliament, yet he doth not desist. The Warrant was read. For that I. S.His Warrant. refuseth to pay certain sums of Money for milita∣ry Affairs; These are by vertue of our Deputy-Lieutenancy to re∣quire
you, to bring the Body of I. S. &c. before me, or some other Deputy-Lieutenant. I send you herewithal the Bo∣dy of I. S.And Commit∣ment. for that he denieth to pay military Charges; and also denieth to enter Bond to appear at the next Assizes for his said re∣fusal. It was Ordered,Sent for by the Serjeant. that he be sent for by the Serjeant, and brought to the House. Saturday the 10th.His Answer at the Bar. of May, Sir William Welby was called in to answer. There was a Question, whether he should come in a Delinquent, and kneel, or no; and it was Ordered, that he should not kneel, only be asked by the Speaker, about the Warrants ex∣hibited touching the levying of Money for military Affairs: He said, he could not deny them, but said, he never imprisoned any but those two, Palmer and Sparks; and he said, that upon the mee∣ting of Musters, he used to have
his Charges born by the County, and so it was ever used in that Countrey for 40 years; and as for 6 d. a piece, that is paid by every Souldier of the trained Bands, unto the Captains of the Bands who are his Sons, he said, that it was ever used to be done, but he never compelled any. And as to the rate of 1 d. an Acre, he said, it was by vertue of an Or∣der made at the Sessions in the Countrey, and that he knew there was a Complaint of it the last Parliament. After he went forth he was called in again, and told, that the House was not satisfied with his Answer, and that it was the pleasure of the House,To attend the Committee and House. that he should attend the Committee from day to day, and this House also, whensoever he should be required. XVII.Journ. Dom. Com. 3 Car. Wednesday, 21 May. A Complaint was made against the Mayor of Chichester, by one Mr. Higgons, who com∣plained,
that a Lieutenant with four Souldiers came to his House,The Case of the Mayor of Chichester. and surprized him in his Study, and he sent for the Mayor to see the Kings Peace kept; and the Mayor contrary to his duty, sent no aid; and at a Sessions to en∣quire of a Ryot, the Bench and the Hall was full of Captains and Souldiers, so as he withdrew him∣self; and they Indicted him for Assaulting a Souldier, and it was found. Cox also complained against the Mayor there, who sent a Serjeant to them, to demand Twenty Shillings by way of Loan; which being refused, six Soul∣diers were sent to his House; so he was forced to lend the Money. It was proved, the Money was Paid and Enforced; But it did not clearly appear, that the Mayor enforced it, but there were Presumptions, the Cap∣tains and six Souldiers came
from the Mayors House; So there being no proof against the Mayor▪ the Committee Or∣dered, that the Mayor be dis∣missed, till the Pleasure of the House be further known.
A Collection of some few Re∣cords and Presidents, out of many others of the like nature; Whereby it appears, that the Kings of England were pleased to Consult and Advise with their Parliaments, de Arduis negotiis Regni, of the weighty and dif∣ficult business of the Kingdom. Vide the anci∣ent Rights of the Commons of England as∣serted, &c. p. 13. 1. ANno 16. Johannis, Be∣fore the granting and confirming of Magna Charta in his time, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, great Men and the Citizens and Burgesses were at a Parliament at London, to give consilium & auxilium, Coun∣sel and Aid, for the Honour of the King, (being then personally in France, in War with the French King,) their own, and the safety of the whole Kingdom.Inter Commu∣nia 17 E. 3. pe∣nes Rememera∣torem Domini Regis in Scac∣cario Recerda War. de priore de Coventry at tach. pro trans∣gressione. 2. Anno 29. H. 3. The King summoned a Parliament touching the Marriage of his Daughter, where the Magnates & Commu∣nitates Regni, the great Men and
Commons of the Realm, sponta∣nea & mera voluntate, granted a Subsidy to the King. 3.Ibid. Anno 32 H. 3. The great Men and Commons of their free and meer Will gave a Subsidie in Parliament to Marry the Kings Eldest Sister to Frederick the Em∣perour. 4.Rot. Pat. 37 H. 3. m. 12 dor∣so. Anno 37. at a Parliament then held at London, concerning the great Affairs of the King∣dom, and Foreign parts, Magna Charta was confirmed,Rast. Stat. so. 15. Rex Mag∣nates & Communitas populi being present; and by their consent the Grand Excommunication against the Infringers of Magna Charta was denounced. 5.Rot. Pat. 42. H. 3. m. 4. Anno 42 H. 3. In the Par∣liament at Oxford several Ordi∣nances were made for Redress of Grievances, A la request de noz haus homes è prodes homes è de Commune de notre Reaume, at the request of the high Men, the good and honest Men, and of the Com∣mons of the Realm.
6. Anno 48Rot. Pat. 48. H. 3. m. 6. dor. Forma Pacis in∣ter Regem & Barones. H. 3. The Articles of Peace between the King, Prince and Prelates, Peers and all the Commons of England were gene∣rally and unanimously approved of, at a Parliament at London, De consensu voluntate & praecepto Domini, Regis, necnon Praelato∣rum, Baronum ac etiam Communi∣tatis tunc ibidem praesentium, By the unanimous consent, will and command of the King, of the Pre∣lates, Barons, and also of the Commons, being there present. 7. 49Rot. Pat. 49, H. 3. m 13. in∣tus n. 54. H. 3. The King complains that the Earl of Gloucester and others had circumvented Prince Edward. Et ad partem suam, proh dolor proditoriae attraxerunt proprii contemptu Sacramenti. A∣gainst the form of the Kings and Princes Oath, of the Prelates, great Men, & Communitatis Reg∣ni unanimi assensu & voluntate nuper London, provis. 8. Anno eodem,Rot. Claus. 49. H. 3 m. 11. dor. in Schedula The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses were sum∣moned
to Parliament in the U∣tanes of St. Hillary, nobiscum & cum Praelatis & Magnatibus no∣stris tractaturi & Consilium suum impensuri, To treat and give their Counsel with the K. Prelates, and great Men, touching the settling of the disturbed condition and state of the Kingdom. 9. Anno 51.Rot. Pat. 51 H 3. m. 16. pro pace inter Regem & Com Gloucester H. 3. The King, per le Conseil & lassentement leRichard Earl of Cornwal. Rei de Alemaine, & de Countes, & de Barons & del Comman de la∣terre, By the counsel and assent of the King of Almain, and of the Earls, and Barons, and of the Commons of the Land, pardoned and released the Earl of Glouce∣ster, and all his Company, &c. 10.Ibid. And the King in the same Parliament, per le Conseil & las∣sentement le Rei de Alemaine & les Countes, & de Barons, & le Commons de laterre, By the counsel and assent of the King of Almain, and of the Earls, Barons and the Commons of the Land, pardoned
and released the Londoners, &c. 11. Anno 54Rot. Pat. 54. H. 3. H. 3. The King and Prince having undertaken the Crusado for the Holy-land. Quia tamen Praelatis Magnatibus & Communitati Regni non vide∣tur expediens ne{que} ratum, that they should be both out of the King∣dom istis Temporibus. It was a∣greed the Prince should go, and a Subsidie was granted to the Prince by the Parliament. 12. Anno 11Rot. Wal. 11 E. 1. m. 4. n. 2. dorso. E. 1. Lewellin Prince of Wales being in Rebelli∣on, the King undertakes the War against him, de Consilio Prelato∣rum procerum &Rot. Claus. 28 H. 3. m. 8 dor. Rex, &c. Sci∣atis quod de-Communi Con∣silio Regni no∣stri provisum est quod erimus apud Novum Castrum super Tinam cum equis & armis die Sancti Petri Advincula pro quibusdam transgressi∣onibus quas Rex Scotiae Nobis fecit emendas super eum conque∣rendas nisi &c. magnatum nec∣non totius Communitatis ejusdem Regni, by the Counsel of the Pre∣lates, Peers, great Men, also of the whole Commons of the King∣dom.
13. Anno 28.Rot. Claus. 28. E. 1. 1m. 3. dor. E. 1. The King in his Writ of Summons to Parli∣ament,Rot. Claus. 24. E. 1. m. 4. d. de Parliamento tenendo, The French King having invaded Vascony by Fraud and Wickedness The K. in his Summons to Parliament, saith, Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus approbetur sic & inuit evidenter ut communibus periculis per remedia provisa communiter obvietur, for praevisa jacula minus ledant. directed to the Sheriff of Cumberland, saith, volentes cum Prelatis, Commitibus, Baronibus & Magnatibus supradictis & cum aliis de Communitate dicti Regni super hoc & quibusdam aliis ardu∣is negotiis nos & statum Regni tangentibus habere colloquium & tractatum, &c. 14.Plita Parlia∣mentaria p. 318, 320. Anno 35. E. 1. At the great Parliament held at Carlisle, the Record saith, that Knights, Citi∣zens and Burgesses were summoned to the Parliament, Ad tractand. &c. Super ordinatione & Stabi∣bilitate terrae Scotiae, necnon aliis negotiis dictum Regem & statum Regni sui spetialiter tangen. being the same Words which were for the great Lords in their Sum∣mons.
15. Anno 9 E. 2. At the Par∣liamentInter memo∣rand a Parlia∣menta, 9 E. 2. m. 18. at Lincoln, the King in plein Parlement caused to be de∣clared the causes of the Summons thereof, Pro diversis & arduis negotiis ipsum & statum Regni, and especially pro statu terrae suae Scotiae perimimicos suos pro parte occupata supplicans & injungens Praelatis proceribus & caeteris fide∣libus subditis suis ibidem existenti∣bus ut sibi in praemissis consulerint & sibi facerent auxilium oportuni∣um, which they did. An. 16 E. 2. A Marriage being pro∣pounded between Prince E. after E. 3. and the Daughter of Charles of Valois. The King (not when he was under the power and fear of the Barons, but after he had van∣quished them, and had beheaded Thomas Earl of Lancaster his Un∣kle, and was attended and guar∣ded by his two great Minions the Spencers,) declares in his Letter to Charles, thus Recorded.
De Matrimonio inter EdwardumRot. Claus. 16. E. 2. m. 7. dor. primogenitum Regis & filiam Caroli Comitis de Valois con∣trahendo. AVdivimus & super eisdem deliberationem hujusmodi cum aliquibus de nostro Consilio & tra∣ctatum-Verum quia tam nobis quam illis visum est non esse expediens ne{que} decens quod contractus hujus∣modi abs{que} Praelatori & Magnatum Regni nostrim Consilio & assensu in Parliamento requirend. & fir∣maretur, & vestrae sinceritati duxi∣mus intimand. quod cito post festum Sancti Mich. prox. ventur. Parlia∣mentum nostrum proponimus con∣vocare & tunc de Commum Con∣silio super dicto negotio ordinare curabimus quod vobis placitum no∣bis{que} & Regno nostro utile fore videbimus & decorum dat. apud Thorp. juxta Ebor. 6. die Ju∣nii.
And King Edward further writes to Charles King of France and Navar about that Marriage.Rot. Claus. 16. E. 2. m. 7. cor. Set super eodem in prox. Parlia∣mento nostro quod statim post fe∣stum Sancti Mich. prox. futuri te∣nere proponimus deliberationem & tractatum pleniorem habere inten∣dimus & tunc inde taliter ordina∣re quod inde debebetis merito con∣tentari Dat, &c. 16. Anno 13.Rot. Par. 13. E. 3. pars. 1. m. 11. E. 3. licet nuper de Consilio & assensu Praelatorum & procerum & Communitatis Regni nostri nostrum assumentes passagium ultra mare, &c. 17. Anno 14Rot. Parl. 14. E. 3. pars 1. n. 2. E. 3. It was pro∣posed to the Grauntz & autres des Communes in Parliament, to treat and ordain touching the War then with France, the keeping of the Peace of the Land, and the mar∣ches of Scotland, and of the Sea. 18. Anno 17Rot. Parl. 17. E. 3. n. 8, E. 3. It was pro∣pounded in plein Parlement that the War was attempted and be∣gun by the common consent des
Prelatz, Grantz & Communes, and that the King would not treat of Peace without their assent, and thereupon it was commanded to the Prelates and Grantz to assem∣ble themselves in the Chamber Blanch to treat, conclude and as∣sent amongst themselves, whether the King should send Ambassies to Rome, to shew and propose his Title to France before the Pope; and in the same manner it was charged the Knights of the Shire; and the Commons to assemble in the Chamber depeint,Nota. to treat, conclude and assent amongst them upon the same business, and to give their Answer, & lour assent en dit Parlement. 20. In the Parliament 18.Rot. Parl. 18. E 3. n. 5. vide Rast. Stat. fo. 86. E. 3. The King by his Chancellor pray∣ed and charged the Prelates, Earls, Barons and Commons, that they would consider touching the Articles of Truce between the King and France, and that they would mettre leid & le Conseil
give their Aid and Counsel for the Salvation of the Rights and Ho∣nour of the King, & de eux meismes, and of themselves. 21.Rot. Parl. 28. E. 3. n. 58. Sir Bartholomew Burghurst the Kings Chamberlain declared in Parliament, That there was a Treaty of Peace between the King and the French, and good hope of a final Accord, but the King would not conclude sanz as∣sent des Grantz & ses Communs; Whereupon the Chamberlain re∣quired and demanded, on the be∣half of the King, whether they would assenter & accorder to the intended Peace. To which the Commons d'unas∣sent & d'unaccord. Answered, that what Issue the King and Grantz should take in the said Treaty, should be agreeable to them: Upon which Answer the Cham∣berlain said to the Commons, Then you will assent to the Treaty of Peace perpetual, if it may be had; to which the Commons Answe∣red,
Entierment & unement. oil oil, yes, yes; And thereupon it was commanded, that Master Mi∣chel de Northburgh, Gardeyne of the Privy-Seal, and Sire John de Swinley Notair Papal, should make an Instrument publick thereof. 22. Anno 43Rot. Parl. 43. E. 3. n. 1. E. 3. The Chan∣cellor, in his Oration before the King, Lords and Commons, thus expresseth himself: Sires, the King in all his great business which concerned himself and his King∣dom, de tout temps, hath acted and done, by the counsel and ad∣vice of his Grandz and Commons of his Realm, which he hath found in all his Affairs, Bons & Loyalz, good and faithful, for which he thanketh them, de grant euer & volunte, and that it was not unknown to them that the King had taken upon him the Claim and Right to the Realm of France, per lavis & conseil de ses Grantz & Communes, by the ad∣vice and counsel of his great Men and Commons
23.Rot. Claus. R. 2. n. 37. 7. 7 R. 2. The King called a Parliament, to consider of a Peace between him his Kingdom, Lands, Dominions, and Subjects, ex una parte, & magnificum principem Robert of Scotland, and his Lands, Dominions, and Subjects, of the other part; mediante consilio & assensu Praelatorum procerum mag∣natum & Communitatis Regni Angliae, by the counsel and assent of the Prelates, Peers, and great Men and Commons of the King∣dom of England. I will pass over the rest of the several Authorities in this King's Reign, and so of H. 4. except this one. 24.Ex Rot Parl. tenti apud Glouc. 20 die Octobris Anno Regni Regis H. 4. Post Conque∣stum 9. m. 8. n. 21. Indempni∣tie des Seig∣neurs & Com∣munes. In the Parliament 9. H. 4. in that great Record called In∣dompnitié des Seigneurs & Com∣mune, the King, by the advice and assent of the Lords, willed, granted and declared that in that and all future Parliaments, it should be lawful for the Lords to debate and commune amongst themselves,
de Lestate du Roiaume & la re∣medie a ce busoignable of the state of the Kingdom, and the ne∣cessary Remedies; and it should be lawful likewise for the Com∣mons on their part to commune in the same manner. 25.Rot. Parl. 3. H. 5. pars 2. Anno 3 H. 5. The Chan∣cellor at the Re-assembly of the Parliament, declares, (the King being present) the causes of their calling; which was, that Peace had been offered him by his adver∣sary of France; the which, with∣out the assent and good Counsel of the Estates of his Realm, he would not conclude; And that the King of the Romans desiring Peace and Vnity in the Church Vniversal, and also between the Christian Realms, was come o∣ver hither with Propositions, which he had not yet declared to the King, but in a short time would shew them. Upon the which, the King would take the Advice, de son tressage Conseil, of his most wise Counsel.
26.Rot. Parl. 4 H. 5. n. 14. Anno 4 H. 5. The League and Alliance between the King and Sigismund the Emperour and King of the Romans was ratified and confirmed,La confirmati∣on des Alliances perentre le Roy & le Roy des Romains prisez & accordez upon due and solemn Treaty thereof, by the common consent and assent of all the Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Earls, Barons, & toute autres Estates Espiritualz & Temporalz, and other Estates Spiritual and Temporal, and also of the Com∣mons of this Realm, in the said Parliament assembled. 27. Anno 9.Rot. Parl. 9. H. 5. pars 1. n. 14. H. 5. A Peace be∣ing concluded between Henry King of England,Approbatio pa∣cis inter Regem Angliae & Franciae nuper conclusae. and Charles the French King, it was mutually a∣greed, that the Articles thereof be ratified and confirmed per tres Status, of both Kingdoms; which being approved, concluded accepted and allowed of, by the three E∣states in France, videlicet, Praela∣tor. & cleri necnon Procerum & Nobilium, ac etiam civium Bur∣gensium civitatuum villarum &
Communitatum dicti Regni. The Ar∣ticles was after mature deliberation confirmed per tres Status Regni, Angliae vid per Praelatos & clerum nobiles & magnates necnon Com∣munitates Regni ad Parliamentum apud West. qui quantum ad eos & singulos eum pertinet obsequituros & impleturos promiserunt. 28.Rot. Parl. 9. H. 5. n. 18. De potestate tractand de pace cum Dol∣phino, &c. Anno 9 H. 6. It was or∣dained by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons That the Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester and my Lord Cardinal, and others of the Kings Bloud and of his Counsel, may treat of Peace with the Dauphin of France, notwith∣standing the Act formerly made to the contrary; which was, That the King of England H. 5. or the French King should not enter or make any Treaty of Peace, or of Accord with Charles the Dau∣phin, without the assent of the three Estates of both Realms. 29 Anno 23. H. 6.Rot. Parl. 23. H. 6. n. 24. Whereas by the Articles of Peace made be∣tween
H. 5. and Charles the 6th of France, it was agreed there should be no Treaty or Accord made with the Dauphin of France, without the assent of the three Estates of both Realms, which Articles were afterwards Enacted and Authori∣zed here by Parliament; It was Enacted by the assent of the Lords and Commons, that that Article should be void, eryt, cassed adnul∣led and of none Force, and none to be impeacht for advising and acting in the said Peace. 30.Rot. Parl. 25 H. 6. n. 1. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Chancellor of England, declared the causes of the Summons of the Parliament (the King present) and amongst others, that between the Ambassadors of King H. and the French King; There was an appointment de personali conventi∣one of a personal meeting between the two Kings in partibus trans∣marinis, which if it should hap∣pen ut speratur to provide not on∣ly for the safe and secure preser∣vation
of the person of the King, as well in his Conduct, ad dict as partes transmarinas, as in his be∣ing there, but also for the safe and sure conservation of the Peace within the Kingdom, and other his Dominions (during his absence) out of the Realm, and for ordaining a provision there∣of. Tractatum & maturam delibe∣rationem cum sano & salubri Con∣silio trium Statuum dicti Regni ne∣cessario exigit & requirit; and after concludes his Speech: Qualiter prae∣fatus Rex ad tractandum & consu∣lendum cum praefatis proceribus & magnatibus supradictis & Com∣munibus Regni sui hujusmodi pro∣visione saciend. & habend. Parlia∣mentum suum predictum fecerat convocari: Therefore the King had called his Parliament, to treat, consult and advise with the Peers, and great Men and Commons of the Kingdom, how such provisi∣on may be done and had.
31.Rot. Parl. 11. H. 7. n40. An Act concer∣ning the Peace between the King of Eng∣land and the King of France Anno 11. H. 7. The Arti∣cles of Truce and Peace between Charles the French King, and King Henry, was agreed to be ra∣tified, accepted, approv'd and con∣firmed, per tres Status utriusque Regnorum videlicet per Praelatos, & Clerum nobiles & Communi∣tatem eorumdem Regnorum autho∣ritate Parliamentorum; Which was after done. 32.Jur. Dom. Proc Anno 3. H. 8. 15 die Parlia∣menti. Anno 3 H. 8. Dominus Cancellarius ex mandato Regis ostendebat Dominis hic praesenti∣bus causas Secretiores hujus Parlia∣menti summonitionis primam con∣cernentem Regem Scotiae & multi∣modas injurias subditis Regni An∣gliae illatas. Secundam, Et bellum inter Regem Castelli & Ducem Gildriae ejus affinitatem & terram concernentem Dominum summum Pontificem, Tertiam, Et dissensio∣nem inter ipsum & Ludovicum Francorum Regem lectumque fuit per Magistrum Rotulorum breve Apostolicum in vulgari translati∣one
one continens contumelias dampna & injurias Sanctae sedi Apostolicae & Romano Pontifici per Ludo∣vicum Gallorum Regem illatas. Item dictus Dominus Cancella∣rius, cum Domino Thesaurario, & aliis Dominis in Domum Com∣munem descendebat cum premissis ostensur. &c. 33. Anno 21. H. 8.Lord Herbert's Hist. of H. 8. to. 303. The Lords and Commons sent a Letter to the Pope, touching the dilatory Pro∣ceedings, in the Divorce between the King and Queen Katherine before him; in which Letter they declare, Causa Regiae Majestatis nostra cujusque propria est, a Capi∣te in Membra derivata, dolor ad omnes, atque injuria ex aequo per∣tinet, omnes in ejus Majestate compatimur, in relation to the Safety and Succession of the Crown; and that if his Holiness would not determine the cause, or defer it any longer, they plainly tell him that,
Nostri nobis curam relictam, & aliunde nobis remedia conquiramus.Nota. And they were as good as their words;Rast. Stat. 2. 5 H. 8. cap. 13. For in the Parlia∣ment, 25 H. 8. an Act passed for declaring the establishment of the Succession of the Kings most Roy∣al Majesty in the Imperial Crown of this Realm, wherein the Mar∣riage between the King and the Lady Katherine,Nota. was by authori∣ty of Parliameut definitively, clearly and absolutely, declared, deemed and adjudged to be a∣gainst the Laws of Almighty God, and also to be accepted, re∣puted and taken of no value nor effect, but utterly void and anni∣hilated; and that the said Kathe∣rine should be from thenceforth called and reputed, only Dowager to Prince Arthur,Nota and not Queen of the Realm. This Letter was Subscribed and
Sealed by 2 Archcbishops, 2 Dukes, 3 Marquesses, 13 Earls, 4 Bishops, 25 Barons, 22 Ab∣bots. And Milites & Doctores in Parliamento, the Knights and Do∣ctors in Parliament, of the House of Commons, William Fitzwilliam being Speaker, was the first that signed; And notwithstanding the Objection from the date thereof, in time of Prorogation, it is very pro∣bable that it was agreed in Par∣liament, and my Reasous are two, besides what appears by the Letter it self. 1. The Answer of the Pope to the Letter; is directed thus. Venerabilibus fratribus Archie∣episcopis & Episcopis,L. Herbert, fo. 307. ac dilectis filiis Abbatibus Nobilibusque vi∣ris Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comi∣tibus, Baronibus, Militibus, ac Do∣ctoribus Parliamenti Regni An∣gliae.
2. Records and Histories tell us that Parliaments have several times sent Letters to the Pope:Vide the anti∣ent Rights of the Comm. of England asser∣ted, p. 111. For Instances. Anno 29 H. 3. 29 E. 1. 17. E. 3. Where the last,Rot Parl. 17. E. 3. n. 59, 60. Rot. Parl. 21. Es 3. n. 1 63. though agreed to in full Parliament, yet was af∣ter Sealed, Souz les Seales, des Grantz, & totes les Cominaltes, des Citees & Burghes d' Angleterre So that as yet under submission I am of my Lord Herbert's opini∣on, That the Letter or Declara∣tion was by the Parliament. 34. Anno 28 Eliz.Inter Capita foederis arctio∣ris amicitiae in∣ter potentissi∣mos principes Elizabetham Angliae Re∣ginam, & Ja∣cobum ejus no∣minis sextum Scotorum Re∣gem, 5 Julii 1586. Ex Ms. penes meipsum. Item con∣ventum concordatum & conclu∣sum estquod Rex Scotiae, quam∣primum vicesimum quintum suae aetatis, annum impleverit quam primum commode id facere po∣terit per publicum Regni sui con∣ventum dictum foedus approbabit & confirmabit approbari & con∣firmari faciet & item Reginalis suae Majestatis per proceres & alios Regni sui Angliae & Hiber∣niae, Status in Parliamento idem
faciat & praestabit] vel fieri & praestari procurabit. I have seen several Records of Leagues ra∣tified by the Scotish Parliament. 35 POstquam Rex per spatium trium Annorum & amplius in partibus transmarinis remansis∣set & de partibus Vasconiae,Ex Cronico ab anno 1272. 1 E. 1. ad an num 1317. 10. E. 2. Ms. mihi ostens. per Tho. Turner Armig. nuper defunct. & Fran∣ciae in Angliam rediisset valde anxiatus & conturbatus fuit per quotidianum clamorem tam Cleri∣corum quam Laicorum petenti∣um ab eo congruum remedium ap∣poni versus justiciarios & alios Ministros suos de multimodis op∣pressionibus & gravaminibus con∣tra bonas leges & consuetudines Regni illis factis super quo Domi∣nus Edwardus Rex per Regale scriptum Vicecomitibus Angliae precipit,Anno Domini, 2289. Auno{que} Regni Regis E. 1. 18. Certe scimus quam plurimos corum qui Ju∣diciis sub E. 1. prae fuere viros quidem maxi∣mos & aevo in illo Jurisconsul∣tos celeberimos repetundarum & quod lites suas fecerant alios{que} preter Ministros fo∣renses aliquot merito damnatos multis exitio ac carcere punitos esse Seldeni ad Fletam dissertatio p. 548. quod in omnibus comi∣tatibus ciuitatibus & villis Mer∣catoriis publice Proclamari face∣rent quod omnes qui sese sentirent gravati venirent apud Westmona∣sterium
ad proximum Parliamen∣tum & ibi querimonias suas mon∣strarent ubi tam Majores quam Minores oportunum remedium & celerem Justitiam rccuperent sicut Rex vinculo Juramenti die Coro∣nationis suae astrictus fuit ac jam∣jam a dest magnus dies & Judicia∣rius Justiciorum & aliorum Mini∣strorum Consilii Regis quem nul∣la tergiversatione nullo munere nulla arte vel ingenio placitandi valent eludi Coadunatis itaque Cle∣ro & Populo & in magno Palatio Westmonasterii consessis Archie∣piscopis Cantuar. (vir magnae pie∣tatis & Columna quasi Sanctae Ec∣clesiae & Regni) surrexit in medio & ab. alto ducens suspiria. Noverit Vniversitatis vestra (ait) quod convocati sumus de magnis etardu∣is negotiis Regni (heu nimis per∣turbati & hiis diebus enormiter mutilati) unanimiter fideliter & efficaciter simul cum Domino Re∣ge ad tractandum & ordinandum audivistis etiam universi queri∣monias
gravissimas super intolle∣rabilibus injuriis & oppressioni∣bus & quotidianis desolationibus∣tam Sanctae Ecclesiae quam Regni factis per hoc Iniquum Concili∣umVide Fleta cap. 17. p. 18, 19. Authoritas & Officium Ordi∣narii Concilii Regis. Domini Regis contra Magnas Chartas tot toties & multoties emptas & redemptas concessas & confirmatas per tot & talia jura∣menta Domini Regis nunc & Do∣minorum Henrici & Johannis ac per terribiles fulminationes Ex∣communicationis sententiae in trans∣gressores Comunium libertatum Angliae quae in Chartis predictis continentur corroboratas & cum spes preconcepta de libertatibus illis observandis fideliter ab omni∣bus putaretur stabilis & indubita∣ta Rex Consiliis malorum mini∣strorum prevent us & seductus eas∣dem infringendo contravenire non formidavit credens decepi∣tive pro munere absolvi à trans∣gressione quod esset manifestum Regni exterminium Aliud etiam nos omnes angit intrinsecùs quod
Justiciarii subtiliter ex malicia sua ac per diversa argumenta a∣varitiae & intollerabilis superbiae Regem contra fideles suos multipli∣citer provocaverunt & incitaverunt, sanoque & salubri Consilio ligeo∣rum Angliae contrarium reddide∣runt Consilia sua vana impuden∣ter preponere & affirmare non e∣ruberunt seu formidavervnt ac si plus habiles essent ad consulendam & conservandum Rempublicam quam tota universitas Regni in u∣um collecta, Ita de illis possit vere dici, viri qui turbaverunt terram & concusserunt Regnum sub fuco gravitatis totum populum gravi∣ter oppresserunt Pretextu{que} solum∣modo exponendi veteres leges novas (non dicam leges) sed malas consuetudines introduxe∣runt & vomuerunt; Ita quod per ignorantiam nonnullorum ac per partialitatem aliorum qui vel per munera vel per timorem ali∣quorum Potentum innodati fue∣runt nulla fuit, stabilitas legum nec
alicui de populo Justiciam dig∣nabantur exhibere Opera eo∣rum sunt opera nequitiae & opus iniquitatis in manibus pedes eo∣rum ad malum currunt & festi∣nant, ac viam recti nescierunt quid dicam? Non est judicium in gres∣sibus suis. Quam plurimi liberi homines terrae nostrae fideles Domini Regis quafi viles ultimaeservi conditionis diversis Carceribus sine culpa com∣miserunt ibidem carcerandi quo∣rum nonnulli in carcere fame mae∣rore & vinculorum pondere de∣fecerunt, extorquerunt pro Arbi∣trio insuper infinitam pecuniam ab eisdem pro redemptione sua crumenas aliorum ut suas impreg∣narent tam à divitibus quam pau∣peribus exhauserunt ratione quo∣rum incurriverunt odium inexo∣rabile & formidabiles imprecatio∣nes omnium quasi tale incomuni∣cabile privelegium per cartam de∣testabilem de non obstante ob∣tinuerunt &per quisiverunt ut a∣lege
Divina Humanaque (quasi ad libitum) immunes essent. Gravamen insuper solitum ad∣huc sive aliquo modo saevit omnia sunt venalia si non quasi furtiva proh dolor. Quid non mortalia pectora cogit auri sacra fames. Ex ore meo con∣tra vos (o impii) tremibunda Caeli decreta iam auditis. Agnitio vultus vestrorum ac∣cusat vos & peccatum vestrum quasi Sodoma praedica vistis nec abscondistis vae animae vestrae vae qui condunt leges & scribentes in∣justitiam scripserunt ut opprime∣rent in judicio pauperes & vim fa∣cerent causae humilium populi ut essent viduae praeda eorum & pu∣pillos diriperent vae qui aedificant domum suam in justitia & caenacu∣la sua non in judicio, vae qui con∣cupiverunt agros & violenter tu∣lerunt & rapuerunt domos & op∣presserunt virum & domum ejus imò virum & Haereditatem suam vae Judices qui sicut Lupi vespere
non relinquebant ossa in mane Justus Judex adducit Consiliarios in stultum finem & Judices in stu∣porem. Mox ala voce justum judicium terrae recipietis.Vide Mat. Wect. An. 1289. p. 376. l. 13. His auditis omnium aures tini∣ebant totaque Communitas inge∣muerunt dicentes heu nobis heu ubi est Angliae toties empta toties concessa toties scripta toties jurata Libertas.Anno vero 1290. (18 E. 1) deprehensis omnibus Angliae Justiciariis de repetundis (pre∣ter Jo. de Me∣tingham & Eli∣am de Becking∣hom quos hono∣ris ergo nomi∣natos volui) ju∣dicio Parlia∣menti vindica∣tum est in alios at{que} alios carcere, exilio & fortunarum omnium dispendio; in singulos mulcta gravissima & amissione officii, Spelm. Gloss. part 1. fo. 416, Alii de Criminalibus sese a vi∣sibus populi subtrahentes in locis secretis cum amicis tacties latita∣verunt alios protulernnt in medi∣um unde merito fore omnes ab officiis suis depositi & amoti unus a terra exulatus alii perpetuis pri∣sonis incarcerati aliique gravibus pecuniarum sulutionibus, juste ad∣judicati fuerunt.
36. LE Roi a touz ceux {que} cestes lettres verrount ou errount,Pro Rege Angl. de diversis con∣cessionibus ei per Regem Sco∣tiae factis, Anno 8 E. 3. m. 29. Rot. Scotiae. saluz Sachez {que} come en les choses parlees, tretees, & accordees & affermees entre nous & nostre tresch foial & Coysn Sie Edward per la grace de Dieu Roi Descoce, tuschauntes nous & Lestate de nostre Roialme Dengleterre, & le dit Roi Descoce, son Estat, & Lestat de son Roialme Descoce,The Parliament of Scotland. Le dit Roi Descoce, par assent des Pre∣lates, Countes, Baronns, Chivalers, & autres de son dit Roialme Descoce, eit reconuz & grauntez {que} le dic Roialme Descoce, & les Isles ap∣purtenances a y cele sount devient & tut temps passe soleient estre tenus des Rois Dengleterre, {per} ho∣mage lige & foialte. Et auxint eit reconuz & graun∣tez dentrer en nostre homage a lige & foyolte come Souverain Seigneur des ditz Roialme Def∣coce & Isles. Et auxint eit obligez lui, ses Heirs & Successors, de faire a nous & a noz heirs hore de nostre Roialme Dengleterre, & de noz terres de Gales & Dirland, come en Gascoigne & aillours, ou¦nous
& a uoz heirs overoms ter∣res ou clameroms droit ou au∣tres nous voudront empescher par force sur noz terres, our sur possession ou droit {que} nous clame∣rons certeins services. Cestassa∣voir le Roi Descoce p̄ tote sa vie, {per} le garnissement de sys moys les services de deux centz homes darmes {per} un an a ses Custages & Dispens, & {per} ses heirs & successors, {per} au tiel garnissement les servi∣ces de cent homes darmes a lour Custages & Dispens {per} un an. Et silui, ses heirs ou ses successours garniz {per} nous & {per} noz heirs en la maniere avantdite, de faire les ditz services fausissent de faire & parfaire mesmes les services, le dit Roi Descoce eit obligez lui, ses heirs & ses successors, en deux centz mille livres Desterlinges, a paier a nous & a noz heirs. Et auxint eit grauntez {per} lui, ses heirs & ses successours, {que} sils fausissent de faire & parfaire les ditz services; & le dit Roi Descoce ses heirs & ses successours, feussent requis {per} nous ou {per} noz heirs de paire le deux centz mille livres, {que} apres lespace de trois moys a
totes les foitz, & apres ceo {que} le dit Roi Descoce, ses heirs ou ses successors, fuissent issint requis {per} nous & noz heits, & ils fausissent de faire le dit paiement, que nous & noz heirs peussons franchement, & sanz countredit du dit Roi Descoce, ses heirs ou ses successours, entrer le dit Roialme Descoce & totes les Ci∣rees, Villes, Chasteux, Manoirs, terres & tenements de le dit Roi Descoce, tenir & gouverner per noz gentz, & tores manieres des issues & profits ent sur∣dantz lever, cuiller & tenir a nostre oeps, & al oeps de noz heirs, & tan{que} nous soiums paiez des ditz deux centz mille livres pleinement. Et austre ceo le dit Roi Descoce eit obligez lui, ses heirs & ses successours, de assigner, doner & aire liverer a nous deux mille de terre, eit done, graunte & as∣signe a nous le Chastell, la Dille, & la Counte de Berewyk, a la va∣lue {que} serra trove {per} extent a faire en la maniere avantdite, & ceo {que} faudra des dies deux mille livres de terre, il ferra assigner & live∣ter a nous en lieux covenables & greables a nous sur la Marche Descoce, & joignauntes a nostre
Roialme Dengleterre, a avoir & tenir les ditz Chastell, Dille & Countée, & les autres terres {que} le dit Roi nous assignera a nous & a noz heirs, come annexes a no∣stre Roiale dignite, & a nostre Roialme Dengleterre, & suertées del Roiale dignite, & de la Cou∣rone Descoce, a touz jours come plus pleinement est contenuz en les lettres patentes de le dit Roi Descoce de ceo faites. Et auxint le dit Roi Descoce, par ses autres lettres patentes, pur autres certeins causes no∣tées en yeeles de mesme lassent,Nota. eit graunte & oblige lui & ses heirs, a nous & a noz heirs, de venir en persone od tot son poair, & a ses Custages & Despens, ad nostre corps & ad les corps de noz heirs en nostre Roialme Dengleterre, & en noz terres de Gales & Dirlande a∣vantditz, en eid de nous & de noz heirs, countre toutz ceux {que} vou∣dront guerrer nous & noz heirs, ou par force noz foitz empescher es ditz Roialme & terres a totes les foitz {que} le dit Roi Descoce ou ses heirs serrount requis par¦nous & nos heirs del garnisse∣ment
de sys moys, ficome endites lettres plus pleinement est contenuz. Nous voillauntz oustier les en∣chesons dount debatz guerres ou contees pourrount sourdre en temps a venir entre nous & noz heirs, & le dit Roi Descoce & ses heirs, & purvéer totes les choses {per} queles pées & amour soient nurriz & meintenuz entre nous, & a noz heirs & noz souzmys dune part, & le dit Roi Descoce & ses heirs & ses souzmys dautre part, a touz jours par assent des Prelatz, Countes & Barons,These Agree∣ments Ratifyed by the Parliam. of Eugland. & la Communalte de nostre Roialme, as∣semblez a nostre Parlement somons a Everwyk le Lundy proschein avant la feste de Saint Pierre en Cathedra, l'an de grace selonc le cours del Eglise de Rome mille tresrentz trentisme quart, & de nostre regne oytisme, grauntoms, relessoms & quiteclamons, pur nous & pur noz heirs, au dit Roi Descoce & a ses heirs, tot le cleym & le droit  nous aviums ou avoms en le demeigne de tut le reme∣naunt de ditz Roialme Descoce & Isles, outre les terres & choses a
nous grauntées & liverées, & a liverer. Et voloms & grantoms pur nous & pur noz heirs, {que} le dit Roi Descoce eit & tiegne le de∣meigne de tut le remenaunt des ditz Roialme Descoce & Isles, come susestdit a lui & ses heirs, enti∣erement sanz autre subjection a nous ou a noz heirs, pur mesme le demeigne de tut le remenaunt de Roialme Descoee & des Isles come dessus est dit. Horpris & sauve a nous & a noz heirs, totes les choses grauntees a nous & a noz heirs par le dit Roi Descoce, selone le purport des let∣tres patentes le dit Roi Descoce a nous faites. Et eu tesmoignante de quele chose a cestes noz lettres patentes avoms fait mettre no∣stre Graunt Seal. Don a Everwyk eu nostre dit Parlement, le premier jour de Marcz, l'an de grace & de nostre regne susdit. 37. AQuel Lendemain {que} fuist Mardy,Rot. Parl. 7. R. 2. n. 2 Pronuoci∣atio Parliamen. vindrent en par∣lement sibien les Prelatz, Seigneurs Temporelx, come les Justices & autres du Conseil
nostre dit Seigneur le Roi, en le Chambre de peinte a Westm. en presence du Roi mesme appellaz la ejns les Chivaleers des Coun∣tees, les Barons des Cinque Ports, Citizens des Cities, & Burgheys des Burghs {per} lour nosms, sicome les Viscounts lour avoient fait retour∣ner, Mouns Michael de la Poole Chivaler, Chanceller d'Angleterre, {per} Commandment nostre Seig∣neur le Roi, avoit les parols de la pronunciation des causes de la sum∣monce de cest present Parlement. Y dist vous Messieurs Prelatz & Seigneurs Temporelx, & vous mes Compaignons les Chivaleers, & outres de la Noble Comune d'An∣gleterre cy presentz, deviez euten∣dre {que} combien {que} je ne soīe dignes mes insufficient de sce & de tout autre bien touts voies pleust a nostre Seigneur le Roi, n'ad∣gairs de moy tréer en son Chan∣celler, & sur ceo ore moy ad com∣mandez qu'ore en vos honouables presences, {que} vous doie deper suy exposer les causes de la summonce de son present Parlement, & {per} tant purra clearment apparoir {que} si haut busoigne come ceo est de
arler si chargeant matire de∣vant touts & tiels si Nobles & Sa∣ges perfones que vouz estes, ne fer∣roit mye {per} presumption ou sur∣quindrere de moy mesmes einz solement {per} deux enchesons reaso∣nables. L'une est, {que} longement & com∣munement ad estre accustume deins mesme le Roialme, {que} les Chancellers d'Angleterre devant moy si ouut faitz chescun en son temps pronunciation deper le Roy de semblablez Parlements devant ore tenuz, & ne verroie si pleust a Dieu {que} en mon temps defaute y fuist trovez en ma persone ne ar∣rerisement de le stat de mon dit Office, si avant come je le pur∣roie maintenir en tout bien & honour. La seconde est, {que} quoy je as∣sume de present si grant charge sur moy devant touts les autres Sages cy presentz, car le Roy no∣stre Seigneur Leige icy present n'ad commander del fair {que} no∣stre saut a fyn force en ce, & en touts autres ses Commande∣ments tournir au profit de luy & de son Roialme.
Au Terce & issint ne ferroit eest chargeant busoigne en ascun manier si non constreient {per} reson du mon Office, & commandement de mon Seigneur Liege come dit est. Et Seigneurs & Sires, la princi∣pal & primier cause {per} {que} nostre dit Seigneur le Roy ad fait sum∣mondre son present Parlement, {que} touche le Roialme Descoce, st est expresse & contenuée en les Briefs a vous faitz, de mesme la sum∣monce le quel est tiel: Nostre Seig∣neur le Roy apperceivant coment les graunts trieves jadys prizes perentrée les Roiaumes Dengleterre & Descoce, si donient {per} la forme dicelles finir & failer a cest pro∣chein feste de la Purification no∣stre Dame prochein venant. Et pur tant que home my feust des∣garnir en celle partie al dit fyn¦des trieves pleaust a nostre dit Seigneur le Roy, denvoir a la Marche Descoce le puissant & no∣ble Seigneur son treschier Uncle Oepaigne Duc de Lancaster cy pre∣sent, aver autres Seigneurs & Sages du Conseil le Roy, pur affaier & taster si leu purroit hono∣rablement avoir la pair ovEsq
les Escotes, ou auterment Proroga∣tion dicelles trieus pur un temps notable. Et si feuront ils en drte Marche Descoce, & ont avoient parlance & tretée aver mesmes les Escotz, & finalement ont re∣portez a nostre dit Seigneur le Roy relation & lettres del Adver∣saire Descoce, contenantes quil en∣voirer oit suffizantes persones de son Roialme, avec poar & autho∣ritee suffisant deper luy a Londres, pur y treter de mesme la matire & celle report fait a uostre dit Seigneur le Roy, pur ce {que} voirs est que plusors,Nota. de vouz estes inhe∣ritez des plusors Terres & Seigneuries deins le Roialme d'Angleterre, ap∣purtenautz a les Escotz d'aunci∣entée, & auxi atez eu challenge plusors terres & tenemeuts deins le Roialme Descoce▪ dont les Escotz sont auxint de present inheritez. Et si paix se ferroit perentrée les Roialmes aven∣dront ensi pur ce que plusors Translations des droitz a ycelles Ter∣res & Seigneuries d'ambez partes, serroieut faitz ou {per} cas mesmes les droitz serroient surrendez de ceo & {per} celle cause & autres ma∣tieres
plusors incidente que ne veignont ore a memoire, mais pur especiall pur tant que le Roialme Descoce, si est tielment annexe d'auncientee a la Corone d'Angleterre, luy quiel de temps Bruyt primer inhabiter d'prelles Roialmes, le Roialme Descoce avantdir. Et le Roy d'yeelle pur le temps esteant aient este conti∣nualment subjugatz & attendantz au Roy & al Roialme d'Angleterre, on en possession, ou en challenge, sembloit de veritee que home ne poit sur tiel haute & chargeante matiere finalment.Nota. Treter & accor∣der aillours que en Parlement, ou si Paix ou Trieves ne se y pnrroi∣ent prendre uncores la remedy pnr defendre estre purvenir eu Parlement, & eins si nule autre matiere eusex davoir Parlement si est ce que a dit une grant cause. Une autre cause y ad {per} qne le Roy nostre Seigneur ad fait sum∣moudre cest son Parlement, est tiel, si einst avenist que Paix ou Trieves ne se preignent point en Escoce, adonques la pluis peri∣leuse guerre que nous pourroi∣ons
avoir si est tantost overt dont est molt grandement a douter {per} tout fair {per} temps bone purve∣ance en contre lour grant Or∣goill fauxive & force aiant consi∣deration comment ils purront chescun jour entrée ne Roialme a terre Serke, sans impediment de la Méer, ou de Eawe fresh, mes encores non pas soulement de fair purveiance encoutrée les ditz Escotes, eius d'autres partz envers trois de pluis grandes Roialmes & Pais de Christianity, cest a dire France, Espagne. Et ore de novell acrew le Payes de Flan∣dres, avec touz jours Adherents & Alliez, qui sont come inunme∣rables mortelx enemyes a cest Petit Roialme d'Angleterre, qne Dieu salve, touz partz environez {per} terre & {per} mere envers quex, si Dieu de sa grace ny mette reme∣dy, & home de sa party ne face ceo que en luy est de purveyance en resistance de lour malice vrai∣semblable est que le greinder mis∣cheife est hastivement a venir {que}, Dieu ne veule a cest petit Roialme que unques mes ny aveuist. Et pur ceo que mischeife semble pur
les dits causes si dure & si pro∣schein si est droit que home se hast le pluis tost pur ordeiner de bone & effectuall remedy quest princi∣palment apres la grace de Dieu d'avoir de quoy home purra ve∣nir a les dispenses que leu y font mettre que comenca fyn force ve∣nir de la Comune defens demande Comune charge, voirs est & cer∣taine que trois des pluis riches Rois Christiens ne purroient en∣durer les charges de tantz & tiels guerres sans l'aide de lour Comune. Et pur tant l'eu faut ordiner coment defendre. Et de quoy l'en avera despenses neces∣sares. Et quant a defens fair en cell partie salvis meillour advis. Il doit apparoir a chescom Sage que nostre Defens si est d'as∣sailer les Enemyes per de hors nostre Royalme, car tiel assaut le semble estre reasonable, profita∣ble & honourable primerment si est nostre assaut reasonable {per} En∣cheson que Nos sumes Actours, Demandours, & Challengers ou Appellours. Et reson voet, {que} le demandent & challengour as∣saile le defendour. Et non pas
è'converso. Secondment, nostre as∣sault est prositable, car si nous at∣tendismes lour assaut deins no∣stre Roialme l'assemblée & chi∣vachée de nostre host envers lour host ferroit a nostre Roialm, l'un & l'autre est esteant en {per}rel a tant de Damage come serroit lost des Enemies horspris prise de priso∣ners & arsure des villes & me∣sons sicome vous Messers & Si∣res avez mesmes venez estre fait des patties, deper dela & mieltz est & plus profitable {que} nostre ost soit sustenez per les vitailles & Biens des Enemyes {que} de noz Biens proprez: Tiercement, il est plus honourable d'assailer {que} De∣fender, car communement les Co∣wards n'assailant mye. Et {per} es∣chuer les mischeifes de lor assaut d nn part ala vilinie {que} nous au∣rions si nons {que} sumes Deman∣dours & Challengours come dit est {per} Defaute del pursuite de no∣stre droit {que} nous avous comen∣cez devant ore feusons appellez maintenant ou tenuz d'autres nos veisines {que} Dieu ne veulle {per} Cowards si avant come nous purros eschiur leration {per} quoy
tiel non enporterious car il nous fant fair un yes deux choses ou de pursuir nostre droit {per} fort main & assaut ou de lesser houn∣tensement. Et Seigneurs & Sires toutes voies vous ne Durez mye aretter sur la persone du Roy no∣stre Seigneur {que} cestes importa∣bles charges de les guerres a∣vantditz soient {per} luy inroduitz, ou {per} singuleritie de luy comencez devant son temps combien sa∣chez & Auxi avant la honourable Corone d'Angleterre luy est descen∣duz {per} Succession de droit heri∣tage auxy avant luy ont eschuiz avec l'honour & profit de la Co∣rone les chargeantz guerres & Querreles dycelles davant son temps comencez come dit est. Item une autre cause de la Somons de cest Parliament est tiel Cestassavoir D'ordeigner {que} salve gard de la Paix deins le Royalme & I Obeisance due a no∣stre Seignour le Roy de teuts ses Subjects soit mieltz faitz & gar∣dez {que} ce n'adestre fait devant cest heure, car le disobeizance & Rebellion {que} home ad fait devan ore & {que} sont continuez de jour en
autre envers les Petits Mini∣sters du Roy, come Discountz, Es∣cheatours & les Coillours de les Subsidies & autres tielz estoi∣ent sours & cause principale del Traiturous Insurrection n'ad∣gairs fait {per} la Comen Dengleterre deins mesme le Roialme la quiel primerment estoit rebellion as dits petitz Ministers, & puis as grantes Officers del Roialme & al drain au Roy mesmes combi∣en les avez. Et si avant come Rebellion si estoit & est le sours & comencement de mischeif & Trou∣boil deins le Roialme si est arre∣main verroie obeizance au Roy & fes Ministers foundement de tut paix & quiete en mesme le Roi∣alme sicome clearment appiert {per} l'Obeizance {que} les Gentiles fierent au Roy en dit insurrection & {per} cest causes devant ditz. Et {per} pur∣veyances des remedies besoigna∣bles en celle partie & auxint {per} Ordinance faire {per} le salve gar¦des Terres & Seigniories nostre dit Seigniour le Roy cybien de ceo come de la, & {per} Remedy fair & purvoier a touts les leiges le Roy en ceo Parlement s'ils ou
ascun dieux lour vorront com∣plendire de chose {que} ne poit estre remediez forsque en Parlement ad nostre dit Seigneur le Roy fait sumondre ce present Parlement.Nota Et sil ad auxint ordeignez certains Prelatz, Seigneurs & Iustices, Triours, & certain Clerks de sa Chancellerie Receivours des Pe∣titions come vorra bailer avant en ceo Parlement {per} mannire come errez lire {per} le Cleric. de Parlement en escript {que} sensuit de mot a mot. Resceivours des Petitions Dengle∣terre, Ireland, Gales, & Escoce. Sire John de Waltham. Sire Richard Ravenser. Sire Thomas Newenham. Sire John de Freton. Resceivours des Petitions de Gas∣coigne, & d'autres Terres & Pais deper de la. Sire Piers de Barton. Sire John Bouland. Sire Robert Muskham. Sire John Scarle.
Et ceux que veullent bailler lours Billes les baillent avant {per} entrecy, & la feste de Touseintz prochein venantz ycell mesme jour accompte. Et sont assigner Triours des Petitions Dengleterre, Irlande, Gales, & Escoce. Le Roy de Castill, de Leon, Duc de Lancaster. L'Archevesque de Canterbrie. L'Evesque de Londres. L'Evesque de Wyncestre. L'Evesque de Elye. L'Evesque de Salisbrie. L'Abbe de Saint Augustine de Canterbrie. L'Abbe de Waltham. Le Count de Kent, Marall Den∣gleterre. Le Count de Arundell. Le Count de Warr'. Le Count de Northumbr'. Le Seigneur de Nevill. Mouns. Richard de Scroope. Mouns. Guy de Bryen. Mouns. Robert Trisilian. Mouns. Robert Belknapp.
Toutz ensemble ou 6 des Pre∣latz & Seigniors avantditz au¦meins appellez a eux Chancel∣ler, Treasurer, Seneschal & Chamberleyne, & ay les Ser∣geantz nostre Seignior le Roy, quant il busoignera & tendront lour place en le Chambre de Cham∣berleyn apres de la Chambre de Peint. Et sont assignez Triours des Petitions de Gascoigne, & d'au∣tres Terres & Pais de la mere & les Isles. L'Evesque de Nichole. L'Evesque de Norwiz. L'Evesque de St. David. L'Evesque de Excestre. L'Evesque de Hereford. L'Abbe de Westm. L'Abbe de Glastingbrie. Le Count de Cantebruy. Le Count de Buck. Conestable Den∣gleterre. Le Count de Stafford. Le Count de Salisbrie. Le Seignior Fitzwater.
Le Prior de St. Johan Jerusalem en Engleterre. Mouns. Johan de Cobham de Kent. Mouns. William Skipwith. Mouns. Roger Fulthorp. Mouns. David Hannemer. Touz ensemble ou quatre des Prelatz & Seigniors avantditz, appellez a eux Chanceller, Trea∣surer, Seneschall, Chamberleyn, & les Serjeants le Roy, quant il busoignera, & tendront lour place en la Chambre Marcolf. Et la dite Cedule lue en dite Parlement mesme le Chanceller par∣last autrefoitz. Et dit Seigniors & Sires cy presents, qui aves la sum∣monce de cest Parlement, le Roy vous comande sur le paine qu'ap∣peint, {que} aiantz due consideration a les necessaires matires a vouz ore monstrez,Nota. & a les importa∣bles mischeifes apparantz, & aux∣int a la grant necessitée que le Roi ad ore de thresor, & d'avoir pur remedier ycelles mischeifes qu eux sans grant fuison d'avoir ne poent jamais estre remediez vous Messieurs les Prelatz &
Seigniors Temporelx, per vous mesmes & vous Seigniors de la Comune,Nota. per vos mesmes veul∣liez Comuner diligeaument sur cest matires, & des remedyes busoig∣nables a tout le haste que vouz purrez oustant de tout le Com∣munement d'autre matire colla∣terale quelconque en le moien temps, & vos advisent pris re∣porter de temps en temps au Roy nostre Seigneur, ou fyu {que} les matires necessaires touches & a toucherez soient a bone deli∣beration Examinez, Tretez & Exploi∣tez, & toute autre impertinent matire mys aderere {per} le temps: Et le Parlement {per} tant myse a gratiouse & bone fine, que Dieu grant. Et le Roy vouz comande trestouz, que vous retournez de jour en autre pur treter & fair ce {per} quoy vous estes venuz, dont vous avez maintenant vostre charge sans departer de cest Par∣lement {per} voie quelcon{que} si eins ne soit que vous ent averez especiale congie de nostre dit Seignior le Roy, sur le perill avantdit. Item fait a remembrer, que les Seigniours & Comunes en eest Par∣lement
assemblez, considerez les outrageouses charges que nostre Seignior le Roi port parmy les guerres overts de toutes partz, & autrement granterent a nostre dit Seignior le Roy une quinzisme avoir & receiver de eux {per} les forme & conditions en touts points comprise en un Cedule sur ce fait endentee & liveree avant en Parlement par mesmes les Comunes, & nemye en autre ma∣niere par voie quelconque, & pria la dite Comune {per} especiale a no∣stre dit Seigneur le Roy, que la dite Cedule quele ils ont fait come celle que pleinmrnt conti∣ent la maniere de lour grant dont mesme la Comune y fist plein declaration {per} bouche de∣vant nostre dit Seignior le Roy en plein Parlement, st feust entrée en Rolle de Parlement de mot a mot, & en null autre maniere {per} ascun voie que le request lour e∣stoit octroiez de quel Cedule issint leverée le tenure sensuit de mot a mot.
38. Anno 28 E. 1. A Truce be∣ing concluded between the English and French,Anno 28 E. 1. A Truce be∣tween England and France. by King Edward's Ambassadors, who therein had dishonourably agreed to include the Scots; the Ambassadors, at the ensuing Parliament, were sharply rebuked and corrected, not only by the King himself, the Prelates, and Nobles, but by the Commons; But to take away exceptions, let the Record speak. Treugae initae inter Angliae & Franciae Reges per eorum procura∣tores & Nuncios,Ex Rot 29 E. 1 in Turri Lon∣don. Anno gratiae 1031. pro quibus dicti Nuncii Re∣gis Angliae Reprehensi fuerunt non solum per ipsum Regem & Praela∣tos & Nobiles,The Kings, Lords, and Commons, re∣prehend the Ambassadors. sed etiam Com∣munitatem Regni praedicti; pro eo quod promiserunt Regem & Gentes Scotiae includi in Treugis ex parte Francorum Regis, ex par∣te confederationis prius initae inter Francorum & Scotorum Reges praedictos.
39. Anno 12 E. 2, A War be∣ing between England and France,De Treuga per Regem Angliae illis de Franc. concessa. Rot. Pat. 12. F. 3. pars 1. m. 24. the Pope sent two Cardi∣nals to conclude a Truce between the two Crowns; Whereupon King Edward declares, Nos pro eo quod Praelatis & Proceribus ac Magnatibus Regni nostri necnon Confederatis nostris quorum inte∣rest inconsultis dicte Treugae tunc assentire non poteramus Parlia∣mentum nostrum apud westmonast. in Crastino purificationis beate Mariae Virginis ultimo preterito mandaverimus convocari ut tam ip∣sorum Praelatorum & Procerum,Nota. ac Communitatum dicti Regni no∣stri quam Confederatorum nostro∣rum praedictorum habere possemus de liberationem quid agendum fo∣ret consultius in hac parte, &c. And afterwards, the Record says, NosNota. habita in dicto Parliamento cum Praelatis & Proceribus ac Communitatibus Regni nostri prae∣dictis necnon cum Nunciis ad nos
de dictis confederatis nostris ac∣cedentibus super hiis deliberatione pleniori licet consideratis qualitate temporis jam currentis & facti circumstantiis nobis & ipsis visum fuerit periculosum fore multiplici∣ter & dampnosum aliquam cessa∣tionem seu dilationem ulterius con∣cedere, &c. Had we had left us the Parlia∣ment Rolls of H. 3. E. 1. E 2. and some in E. 3. which are destroy∣ed or lost, Truth (to which all owe a submission) would have more plainly appear'd. A QUERE touching the Par∣liament of Scotland. WHat the Constituent parts of the Commune Consili∣um or Parliament of Scotland,Rot. de Anno 29 E. 1. in Tur. London. was in the time of our King E. 1. near 400 years since, (and why not the same before) is (amongst o∣ther Authorities) proved as I conceive by a grand Record
in the Tower of London, which declares that the League between the Scotch and French, was ratifi∣ed and confirmed. Inter ipsum Francorum Regem em una parte & dictum Dominum Johannem de Balliolo ac Prealatos & Nobiles ac Universitates & Communitates Civitatum & Vil∣larum dicti Regni Scotiae pro ipsis & eorum Haeredibus & Successo∣ribus ex altera. Et etiam ad inclu∣dendum dictum Dominum Johan∣nem & caeteros omnes terrae Scotiae predictos in Treugis inter dictos Angliae & Franciae Reges initis proipsis & eorum Heredibus sub∣ditis & confederatis ad fines infra∣scriptos. A Query may arise from this Record, If the Tenants in capite only, compounded and made the Parliament of that Kingdom in former Ages, as some hold. The Query is this. Whether all Prelates, Noble∣men,The Query. Universities and Communi∣ties
of Cities and Towns of Scot∣land, held of the Scotish King in capite, Tempore E. 1. For if they held of any other, or of him otherwise then in capite, How could the Tenants in capite be the only Members of the Parliament, according to the exact Enumeration of the consti∣tuent Parts mentioned and set down in this great Record, which tells us,Nobilitas est duplex, Superior & inferior. Co. 2. Inst. fo. 583 Nobiles minores sunt Equites sive Milites, & qui vulgo generosi & Gentlemen dicuntur. Cam∣den Brit. f. 123. that the League was made 1. On the one part between the King of France; 2. On the other part between, 1. John Balliol, who was then King, 2. The Prelates, 3. The Nobles, 4. The Universities and Com∣munities of the Cities and Towns of the Kingdom of Scotland, 5. And that for themselves, 6. And for their Heirs and Suc∣cessors.
The late proceedings touching Ship-money declared unlawful, and all Records and Process con∣cerning the same made void. WHereas divers Writs of late time,An. 17 Car. 1. cap. 14. Pultons Stat. issued under the Oreat Seal of England, common∣ly called Ship-writs, for the charging of the Port-Towns, Cities, Bo∣roughs and Counties of this Realm, respectively, to provide and furnish cer∣tain Ships for His Majesties Service. And whereas upon the Execution of the same Writs, and returns of Cer∣tioraries thereupon made, and the sen∣ding of the same by Mittimus into the Court of Exchequer, Process hath been thence made against sundry Persons pretended to be charged by way of Contribution, for the making up of certain Sums assessed for the providing of the said Ships; And in especial, in Easter-Term, in the thirteenth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, a Writ of Scire facias was awarded out of the Court of Exchequer, to the then Sheriff of Buckinghamshire, against John
Hampden Esq to appear, and shew cause why he would not be charged with a certain Sum so assessed upon him. Upon whose Appearance and demur∣er to the Proceedings therein, the Barons of the Exchequer adjourned the same Case in the Exchequer-Chamber, where it was solemnly argued divers days, and at length it was there agréed, by the greater part of all Justices of the Courts of Kings-Bench and Common-Pleas, and of the Barons of the Ex∣chequer, there assembled, that the said John Hampden should be charged with the said Sum, so aforesaid assessed on him. The main grounds and rea∣sons of the said Justices and Barons so agreed, being,Rex Angliae neque per se aut Ministros suos subsidia aut alia quaevis onera imponit ligeis suis sine assensu totius Regni sui in Parliamento suo expresso. Fortescue de laudibus Legum Angliae, cap. 36. pag. 84. Philip de Commines, lib. 5. cap. 18. (of the Cabal, or most secret Councels to two French Kings, and a man living about a Century and half ago) tells us, Nul Roy ne Seigneur sur terre ait pouvoir de mettre un denier sur les Subjets sans ottroie & consentement de ceux qui doivent payer sinon par Tyranne ou Violence. No King or Potentate upon Earth (saith he)▪ hath power to levy one penny upon the poor Subject without consent and permission, unless by down-right Tyranny and Ra∣pine. That when the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concern'd and the whole Kingdom in danger▪
then the King might by writ under the Great Seal of England, command all the Subjects of this his Kingdom, at their charge to provide and furnish such manner of Ships with Men, Victuals and Munition and for such time as the King should think fit, for the defence and safe-guard of the Kingdom from such Danger and Peril; and that by Law the King might compel the doing thereof, in case of refusal or refractori∣ness; and that the King is the sole Judge both of the Danger, and when and how the same is to be prevented and a∣voided. According to which grounds and reasons, all the Justices of Kings-bench and Common-Pleas, and the said Ba∣rons of the Exchequer, having been formerly consulted with, by His Ma∣jesties Command, had set their hands to an extrajudicial Opinion, expressed to the same purpose, which Opinion, with their Names thereunto, was also by His Majesties Command, inrolled in the Courts of Chancery, Kings-Bench, Common-Pleas and Exchequer, and likewise entered among the Re∣membrances of the Court of Star-Chamber; And according to the said agréement of the said Justices and Ba∣rons
Judgment was given by the Ba∣rons of the Exchequer, That the said John Hampden should be charged with the said Sum so assessed on him; And whereas some other Actions and Pro∣cess depend, and have depended in the said Court of Exchequer, and in some o∣ther Courts against other persons, for the like kind of Charge grounded upon the said Writs commonly called Ship-Writs,Nota. All which Writs and Procee∣dings as aforesaid, were utterly against the Law of the Land. Be it therefore Declared and Enact∣ed by the Kings most Excellent Majesty and the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled,John Bodin in his Book de Republica, l. 1. cap. 8. de jure Magistratus, fol. 96. A famous Law∣yer and States∣man of the French Nation, who after he had informed his Reader, that the English are not chargeable by their Princes with Impositions, but by consent of their three Estates, presently adds, Ego vero caeteris Regibus non plus in eo genere quam Regibus Anglorum licere puto, cum nemo sit tam improbus Tyrannus, qui aliena bona deripere sibi fase esse putet. For my part (saith he) it is my Judgment, that no other Prince whatsoever, may lawfully do any more in this kind than the Kings of England may, seeing there can be no Ty∣rant so wicked or impudent as to think, he may justly take away another mans Goods from him, without his free leave and good will. and by the Authority of the same, That the said Charge imposed upon the Subjects, for the providing of Ships, commonly
called Ship-meony, and the said extra∣judicial Opinion of the said Justices and Barons, and the said Writs, and every of them, and the said Agreement or Opinion of the greater part of the said Justices and Barons, and the said Judge∣ment given against the said John Hamp∣den, were, and are contrary to, and against the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the right of Propeety, the Liberty of the Subjects, former Resolutions in Par∣liamrnt, and the Petition of Right made in the the third year of the Reign of His Majesty that now is. And it is further Declared and En∣acted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the particulars prayed or desired in the said Petition of Right, shall from henceforth be put in Execu∣tion accordingly, and shall be firmly and strictly holden and observed, as in the same Petition they are prayed and expressed; And that all and every the Records and Remembrances of all and every the Judgments, Inrollments, Entry and Proceedings as aforesaid, and and every the Proceedings whatsoever upon, or by pretext or colour of any of the said Writs, commonly called Ship-Writs, and all and every the De∣pendents on any of them, shall be
deemed and adjudged, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes, to be ut∣terly void and disanulled, and that all and every the said Judgment, Inroll∣ments, Entries, Proceedings and De∣pendents of what kind soever, shall be vacated and cancelled, in such Manner and Form as Records use to be that are vacated. FINIS. By reason of the hast and throng of the Press, the Reader is desired to correct those Errata in the Book. pa. 85. ommons r. Commons, pa▪ 119: in Mar. for Witnesses r. Members, pa. 137. for § 4 r. § 5: p. 185. in Mar. for Sir Cooke r. Sir Edward Cooke. Errata in the Appendix. pa. 3. l. 19. proditoriae r. proditorie, n. 29. in Mar. H 5 r. H. 6. n. 35. the next p. l. 15. Archeipis r. Archiepo, l. 19. Universitatis r. Vniversitas, p. 29. l. 4. for sive r. sine, l. 13. praedi∣ca vistis r. praedicavistis. p. 30. l. 15. tacites r. tacite.
The Antient Right of the Commons of England Asserted, or, a Discourse proving by Records and the best Histo∣rians, that the Commons of England were ever an Essential Part of Parlia∣ment. By William Petyt of the Inner-Temple, Esq JANI ANGLORUM Facies Nova: Or, several Monuments of An∣tiquity touching the Great Councils of the Kingdom, and the Court of Kings immediate Tenants and Officers from the first of William the first, to the for∣ty ninth of Henry the Third, Reviv'd and Clear'd. Wherein, The sense of the Common-Council of the Kingdom mentioned in King John's Charter; and of the Laws Ecclesiastical, or Civil, concer∣ning Clergy-men's Voting in Capital Cases is submitted to the Judgment of the Learned.
