p2696 13736233 101623
A POEM ON THE HISTORY OF Queen Hesther, AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF THE Lord Chief Justice HALES, And other Occasional POEMS. LONDON, Printed for William Leech, at the Crown in Cornhill.
OCCASIONAL POEMS. A Poem on the History of Queen Hesther. VAsti Deceas'd, the Beauties do convene, Each o'th' fair Rivals hoping to be Queen; Ahasuerus, as his Peers do move, Most readily inclines to please his Love; Hesther succeeds. Neither mean Birth, nor State Prevents the Match, nor yet great Haman's hate: The Nobler Virgins, and his Diadem Are void of Lustre, as he views this Gem. Haman at this time was most high in Court, None so in Favour, Splendor, Princely port, To him the People bow'd as he past by, The Admiration of each Heart and Eye. Poor Mordecai (mean-while) lay in the Gate In a forlorn and despicable State. From him the lofty Courtier look'd for more, Seeing such Grandeur, and himself so Poor: The cross-grain'd Captives knee would not conform; So his sweet Calm ends in a dreadful Storm. (Ambition, crost, like to the Sea doth rage, Restless, and boundless, nothing can asswage.) Slighted by one of the Captivity? For this the Nation, Root and Branch, shall dye. Caesar is thus incenst; There is a Sect Mixt with your people, who perversly Act, Foes to your Laws and stablisht Government, Let them be slain, no Treasure there shall want. ('Twas Death enough for Jacob's Seed to be In a strange Land, sad by each Willow-tree
Condoling there in heavy mournful Songs Their own distress, their Nations Woes and Wrongs.) Men, Women, Children, Babes of a span long, And tender Mothers, both the Old and Young, All must become one common Sacrifice▪ So Haman counsels, and the King complies. Unhappy Princes, 'tis too oft their Fate, Thus by surprize to shade the Ills they hate. Like cunning Fowlers corrupt Statesmen walk, They seek themselves, and make their Masters stalk. Mordecai warned Counter-plots the Plot, His Cause is good, the Enemies is not. He Caesar saved: who so fit to bring Help to the Church, as he that sav'd the King? He sav'd his Life, and, in as true a sence, No saves his Honour and his Innocence. (Though the Seal Royal be to the Decree, 'Tis Loyal, to resist Conspiracy.) Cloathed in Sack-cloth he bewails the Harm, Then in the Queens Ear sounds the sad Alarm, Commands her to propitiate the King, (She and her People both are perishing) Puts her in mind of her once low Degree, And how oblig'd by present Dignity. 'Tis threatned Death, if Hesther do obey; 'Tis worse than Death, if the make no Essay. Distracting thoughts perplex her trembling breast; Her feeble Sex can scarce hard words digest; A frowning Look, and from a Royal Eye, Is wound enough to make weak Woman dye. Led by Example of the Ages past. She and her Maids do keep a privy Fast. Flesh suggests Danger, noble Faith saies, Nay, The Path of Danger is the safest Way. Thus Arm'd, she boldly ventures, Fears not Death, Nor the King's wrath, nor Haman's poys'nous breath. (How overcoming is a pleasing Face When it is backed with the pow'r of Grace?)
Great, like her Courage, proves the good success; Fury is turn'd into a kind Embrace. Another Edict now there is dispatcht, The fatal Blow must fall where it was hatcht: (Most righteous Sentence, They who mischief plot Still, in the close, have mischief for their lot.) Hesther is favour'd, Mordecai doth Rise, Proscribed Israel Lives, proud Haman Dies. To the KING. On His Recovery from Sickness, and being expected to D at Guild-hall the last Lord-Mayors-Day. AFter dark, dismal, gloomy Winters day Summer approaching, and bright Phoebus Ray, Each Vegetable buds, the Trees look green, Birds fall a-singing as the Sun is seen; So doth your welcom Royal Presence bring, After Autumnal Grief, a Joyful Spring. The Fogs and Clouds (Great Sir) offending you, Caus'd an Eclipse on your great City too; (Before Consumptive) then she lay ev'n dead, Dangers and Sickness threatning you the Head, Fainted and pined, felt by sympathy Malignant Rome, and your less Malady. But now that your Majestick beams dispence From your own Health a healing Influence. ('Tis as a Resurrection) she Revives, Scorns to be Bed-rid, Lives, and Hopes, and Thrives. Verdure and Blossoms spring up in her Face, With'ring Time ceaseth as you warm the place. This turns October into pleasant May, And makes my Lord Mayors as a Jub'lee day:
Your Sick Lands healed with your Majesty Would raise the Comfort into Extasie. Proel. for Parl. sitting next day af∣ter the Lord-Mayors-Day.Auspicious Edict! Well it did portend, Counsel to Enter as the Feast to End. Kindness dissolves! Kings that are Ir'n to Force Are won by Love to run their proper Course. An ELEGY on the Death of the Lord Chief Justice Hales. BRing your Oblations, Poet Laureat Wits, Here is a Subject your best Art befits; From me a meaner Off'ring must suffice, Who want a Brain for such a Sacrifice. But what needs an Encomium? Silly Verse Does but debase this more deserving Herse. Is he Deceased? Hales the Learn'd, the Just? Once the great Wonder, now but common Dust. What heart droops not at his departing hence? 'Tis as the Sun-set, his Set Influence. Like that great Light, rejoycing in his Sphere, He ran his Circuit, profiting ev'ry where. With an Impartial hand turn'd Justice Scale, The poor man's Patron, helpt where Fees did fail. A Ruling great Example of the Gown, True to himself, his Country, and the Crown. But I offend! His own great worth exprest And better proves, He knew most, and did best. (Enamel'd worth! As he was Learn'd and Just, High above praise, so low as very Dust.) Hence petty Grief, Death here wounds a whole Nation, It calls for more than common Lamentation. Church and State put on black Mourn, friends Mourn all; The loss is vast and Epidemical. This worthy Pillar being faln to ground, Where is another Atlas to be found?
Where's such a Healer? Where so right an Eye, Sage to Discern, and faithful to Apply. You of the Long Robe in each Inns-a-Court, To Cooke's great Name add Hales his good Report; May it prove Seminal of your Excellence, In propagating Law and Conscience. A thousand Phoenix (if it may be) rise Out of his Ashes, good like him and wise; To build up Justice, wrongs and vice asswage, And re-inforce the beggar'd Bankrupt Age. In whom surviving, It may yet be said, The Oracle of Law still Lives though Dead. The Epitaph. Ingenious Reader stay and drop a Tear, England's great Darling and Defence lies here; Weep Widow'd Nation, weep till streams do fall: Like a kind Bride, his Love was Conjugal. To Sir George Jeffreys on his being Knighted. NOt that you need this silly Offering, Nor would I seem to Rival with the King; 'Twere bold and saucy, as absurd and vain, After his Sword, to dare to praise again. I have my Laurel, if my Rhime express A grateful sense of your great Worthiness. That Worth which made you high in hearts before, Now winning Caesar's makes you high much more. So early Wisdom? Gray at such an Age? Ripe in your Spring-time? Who did not presage? Arms to the Gown give place, such Cumbates cease, The Learn'd in Honour much importeth Peace.
No Battels but those bloodless at the Bar, Where wise men Clash, as if 'twere time of War, With Brandisht Tongues, like Weapons in the Field, Each fierce for Conquest as with Sword and Shield. Were Trophies proper in this Civil sence, Triump confer'd on Wit and Eloquence, You might resemble Caesar's self of Rome, And boast, as he, you come and overcome. To Sir Thomas Fitch on his good Fortune and Publick Works. SO we in History behold Brave Men and their brave Deeds Inroll'd, As here presented to our view, The Pourtrait of your Art and you. Worth that's deriv'd from Ancestors Is not so truly and so nobly ours, As that which is like yours acquir'd, This merits to be most admir'd. By wise contrivance you Instruct In building, and in Aqueduct: Where Fabricks are of chief Respect, Who will not guess you Architect? You Grace the City every where, By Land or Water Fitch is there: So in a sense the Saying's true, You London raise, as it rais'd you. Weep Cloudy Suburbs, Widow'd Flood, Now Corn grows there where Troy once stood. The Palace glory is pull'd down Which did give luster to the Crown. The Owners Honour, as the place, Grown Tenement like, mean and base. You, Sir, seem to condole White-hall, Which mourneth for this Place Fall;
And kindly in your Sphere supply That blemish of Nobility. As they do Raze, you Rear a Pile, Which both Convicts their practice vile And helps a little to remove The gloomy sad Eclipse above. May it so live a lasting Monument: You have by mind what they have by descent. To the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor at the Anniversary Entertainment in Guild-Hall. THE wise Apollo Laugheth once a year; So the resembling mortal Gods do here Deign to be jolly, and Triumph together, Over their Cares, and over Romes foul weather. As you (much Honoured Sir) Ascend the Chair, The Heavens so kind and so Propitious are. Redeem'd Religion happily supplies Fresh Comfort to your former solemn Joyes. Let Popery dasht sound sweeter in your Ear Than the sweet pleasing melody you hear. And Hearts as with good Wine be chear'd and warm'd With the good news His Majesty not harm'd; But this ought to your Joyes Excess, His Martyr'd Friend falls by the merciless. Now Exit Babylon's Transubstantiation, Infernal Plots and Hell Assassination; Those Egypt Frogs no more Infest or Croak Within the shadow of the Royal Oak. (Avant Prodigious, Protean, Papal-State.) Avant the curst Raviliack Transmigrate. The noise of Blood, The noise of Bankrupts cease, The Nations Wealth, the Nations Fame increase. This so bright dawning Providential Ray Sweetly presageth Sun-shine Halcyon day. And you my Lord, within your Lower Sphere Are a good Omen. Happy be your year.
On Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. SƲch is Man's Life and Fickle state, Consum'd with Care, expos'd to Hate, Rent by variety of Fate, (At most but of a moments Date) So here in this great Herse we see, The best of Mortals, what they be. The wise and good worst harms molest, The more of worth, the less of rest. As in a Storm the Cedars fall, And Shrubs survive their Funeral. To Sir J. L. on his noble Entertainment at his going out Sheriff. SO in your Bounty you appear Not seen but in your sumptuous Cheer: As Modesty hid in a Cloud The Generous Sun doth needy Mortals good. The well fraught Dishes left behind Impressions of your Noble Mind; What needed further Eloquence, Your welcom such by way of Influence. Wine Bottles Volly-wise did fly, Mess upon Mess two Stories high; No Counter Scuffle in the Rear, That plague of Mock Feasts plenty banisht here. If so Benigne where only sate Poor Livery-men o'th' Lowest Rate, What were you to the upper Guest, Who added Luster to your splendid Feast.
May the kind Cost you did impart Bring a rich Income to your Heart; Not of that Treasure which is told, But Wealth more worthy your pursuit than Gold. To a fair Lady at a Festival Dinner at Sir William Prichards. THanks to the Sheriff for his free Feast, And welcom to so mean a Guest; Good Wine, good Musick, and good Chear Did nobly act, each in their Sphere. The untoucht Dishes in retreat Sounded his Praise, and all Compleat. But, Madam, much more thanks to you, Who did both Feast and heal me too; Your Beauty was that delicate Mess, Which as it mov'd did quell Excess. How could I greedily pursue The grosser Cates beholding you? How could I but ev'n pamper sense Once tasting that rare Influence? Your Sun-shine made me blith and Jolly, Who came in Dead in Melancholy. My Ice did Thaw, my Clouds did Fly, My tongue grew loose which grief did tye. If your more distant casual heat Could make dull pulse so warmly beat, How high and hot had been my Flame Had those beams come from Love and Aim? Thus freed, thus fetter'd by your Eye; Your Captive, yours at Liberty.—
To a Fair Lady unknown. On a Kiss of her Shoe in the Shoe-makers Hand. MAdam, though your Rare Beauty be Magnetick, and so work on me: Yet dare I not aspire so high As to draw near your daunting Eye; Not favour'd with his happy Chance, Who may unto your feet advancer: I thus do with a lowly hears Pay Homage to your shadowy part. No Idol you are made by this, Were Romes but such, who would not Kiss? The Income there is most unkind, Both to be base, and to be blind: But here (methinks) as I do bow I grow more Man and Christian too. I Conquer the whole Host off Folly Encamped in my Melancholy. If in a distant view there be Such Pleasure so to touch to see; Thrice happy he who may ascend To your sweet Lips, to your fair hand.
To a Fair Lady in a Throng, On a Stop upon London-Bridge. IN my way I lately spied A Fair Nymph within a Crowd, She did shine like glittering Venus, Mantled with that homely Could. Darts did enter unresisted As she glanced with her Eye, I was Captiv'd, I was pleased With the sweet Captivity. Love enforcing, I thus vetur'd, Madam, If in Flesh you be, Deign a smile on a poor Mortal, That may heal which woundeth me. Then I boldly did Embrace her, Favour'd with more near access. While I held this noble Treasure I both Indies did possess. But, alas, my short Fruition! She soon vanish'd out of sight, And my hopes and Joyes expired Like a short-liv'd bliss by Night.
To a Fair Lady. On a Damask Rose presented to her. NOt that I think you can need Ornament Or Sweetness, I this Trifle do present; Deign to accept it on the humbler Score Of a poor, mean, Thank-off'ring, and no more. As Pepper-corns are paid but to express A Homage due, not their own Worthiness. You grace Flower more than it doth you, Make it more lovely fair, and Fragrant too; Each Vegetable grows in excellence, As there is added your rare Influence. The Rose it self lies prostrate at your feet, Set in your Bosome then smells much more sweet. Yet let this thought possess your lowly mind, After your Spring an Autumn comes behind. This pretty Bud which (like your self) to day Is in its prime, will wither and deday. If Roses Beauty fade, and fade it must, The sweetest Face must also end in Dust, On the Death of Mr. Tho. Edwards, a Young Accomptant in the Chamber of London, who Dyed as he was to have Married. SUch as are Artists, and do aim at Bayes, May their high Subjects in Heroicks praise: Im my lower Sphere pay Ruder Verse, To this more mean, and more proportion'd, Herse;
But I do wrong his Worth; Was he not High? Vertue as well as blood doth dignifie: Toyl'd like the Bee, had learned of the Ant: Laid up in Summer for the Winters Want. A faithful Steward, an obliging Friend; Good in Bad times, best at his Latter-end. A great Example in his Age and Place, Did much, and well, and in a little space. View'd by the out-side he appear'd so green As if (as yet) in Non-age he had been; But if consulted in the grand Affairs Of Camp, or City, then he spake Gray Hairs. A world of Business passe through his hand, Figures, like Men, did move at his Command. Yet in the Chamber so well kept his heart; He carefully secur'd the better part: Witness his last Act; Then it may be guest Sore was the Conflict in his youthful Breast; Earth presents Wedlock, Heaven forbids the Banes, Life a fair Mistress, Death Salvation gains. Beauty doth Ravish, Riches does the same, (When two Fires meet, the greater is the Flame) But vain their Charms, he eyes the future State, Treads on this sweet, and on the sowre of Fate. Farewel,  now harbour'd in thy Rest, Crowned with Bliss, and Singing with the Blest.
On a Loving Couple, Who died soon after one another, and Buried both in one Grave. UNder Monumental Stone Here lies two whom Love made one, As in Wedlock Knot combin'd, So in Nature, Heart, and Mind. His Soul Mounting up to Bliss, Hers was Restless till with his; To her Mate, deceas'd, so kind; She would not, could not stay behind. In this Spicy fragrant Bed They do yet Embrace and Wed. Even in their Dust still one, Waiting Resurrection. In Praise of Bowling. LEt the Dons of the Town In their Festivals drown Their Wits in Canary and Sherry, We cry Fly, we cry Rub, And kick at the Tub, No Fudler is half so merry. No Politick matters Breaks our Brains into shatters, Yet we aim at a petty Dominion: If we Bowl well, and gain, No King doth so Raign: We are Princes in our own Opinion.
Our Sport and Toyl wean us From minding of Venus: For Misses we are not at leisure; All that see us may know That Delight is below Men taken up with so high Pleasure. FINIS.
