p3115 99833046 37521
THE SPEECH Of the Right Honourable Henry Powle, Esq SPEAKER OF THE House of Commons: On Munday the Sixteenth of December, 1689. AT THE Passing of Four BILLS, ENTITULED, I. An Act for a Grant to Their Majesties of an Aid of Two shillings in the Pound for One Year. II. An Act for Declaring the Rights of the Subject, and Settling the Succession of the Crown. III. An Act for Naturalizing William Watts, an Infant. IV. An Act for Declaring and Enacting John Roger∣son to be a Natural born Subject of this Realm. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Prin∣ters to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. MDCLXXXIX.
THE SPEECH Of the Right Honourable Henry Powle, Esq SPEAKER OF THE House of Commons. May it please Your Majesty, YOur Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Com∣mons in this present Parliament Assembled, taking into Conside∣ration the Great and Necessary Expences Your Majesty will sustain in the Prose∣cution of the War, wherein Your Maje∣sty is now Engaged, did at their first Meeting in this present Session, unani∣mously Agree to Present Your Majesty with a Supply of Two Millions; the greatest part of which they resolved to Charge upon their Lands, as the most
speedy and effectual Way of Raising present Money for this Occasion. But finding that great Abuses had been committed in Assessing the late Supply of the like Nature, they have endea∣voured to Provide against those Abu∣ses in Raising of this present Tax; the Consideration whereof hath taken up much of their Time, and produced a Bill of an unusual length, which I now offer to Your Majesties Gracious Ac∣ceptance. They have likewise Agreed upon a Bill for Declaring of their Rights and Liberties, which were so notoriously Violated in the late Reign, humbly de∣siring Your Majesty to give Life to it by the Royal Assent, that so it may re∣main not only a Security to them from the like Attempts hereafter, but be a lasting Monument to all Posterity, of what they owe to Your Majesty for their Deliverance. Let this be Printed, H. POWLE Speaker.
