P437A 12921147 95390
FIGVRE OF SEVEN. Very Pleasant to Reade, Plaine to Vnderstand, And Profitable to Practise. By M. P. Three, Foure, Five, Six, sufficient proofe have given Of their acceptance; what should hinder Seven? PROV. 9.1. Wisdome hath built her an house, shee hath hewen out her seven Pillars. LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Fr. Coles, dwelling in the Old Bayly, 1647.
THE FIGVRE OF SEVEN. 1. THere be seven things which (especi∣ally) mode any Reader to buy (or reade) a Booke: Affection to the Author, Conceits of the Theame, A promising Title, Performance in the Discourse, The pleasure of the Fancie, The elegancie of the Stile, And encrease of Knowledge. 2. There be seven excellent Motives to∣wards the Government of the World: The People in good order, The Rich faithfull, The Youth obedient, Clergie honest, The old folkes wise,
The Poore humble, And the Women shame-fac'd. 3. By seven manner of meanes man is wisely taught to know God: Trust in God, and love him, Use prayer, and honour him, Denie the World for love of him, Rule rightly, and dread him, Sorrow discreetly, and seeke him, Wake, weepe, and please him, And even in trouble thanke him. 4. There be seven things incident to an old man who marries a young Wife: He hath a Toy to play with, A Child to nourish, A Ship to deck, A Wind-mill to keepe, A Lute to string, A Colt to breake, And a Servant to teach. 5. There be seven things in which a man ought not to be rash or over-hastie: In unnecessarie words, In undecent swearing, In entertainment of Quarrels,
In conceiving an ill opinion of his friend. In Barganes, In Marriage, Nor in giving Counsell. 6. There be seven sorts of Creatures, that the more they are in companie, the more trouble: Many Women much babbling, Many Geese much gaggling, Many Youths, much wanton fashion, Many Sects, much alteration, Many lewd Priests, much ill teaching, Many Gamesters, much o'r-reaching, Many Theeves, much Haler-stretching. 7. There be seven worthy Documents fit for every Christian to learne and practise: To thinke on the time past, To use well the time present, To provide for the time to come, To reveale things doubtfull, To thinke on God and serve him, To thinke on Heaven, to obtaine it, And to thinke on Hell, to avoid it. 8. There be seven Lesson which the Father ought to learne and teach his Sonne.
To learne him laudable Customes, To give him good Education, To keepe him under Obedience, To reach him Divine Duties, To correct him with discretion, To provide for his future welfare, To nourish (and feed) him with sobrietie. 9. There be likewise seven especiall Du∣ties which the Sonne doth owe unto his Parents: To beare them respect and reverence, To obey all their lawfull Commands, To hearken to their good Counsailes, Not to despise them in any thing, Not to slight them in old Age, Nor to scorne them in Povertie, But to provide for their Sustenance. 10. There be seven Duties of a Husband to his Wife: To Love her as himselfe, To provide for her to his Power, To nourish her in Soule and Body, To Apparell her honestly, To avoid causelesse Jealousie, To consider her as the weaker Vessell, And to give her due benevolence.
11. There be also seven Duties of a Wife to her Husband: To love him above all other men, To hearken to his Sayings, To be patient, and forbeare Anger, To give no occasion of (& to shun) Jealousie, To be sober and temperate, To looke well to his House, Children, and Servants, And to honour his person. 12. There be seven things which every young man desireth when he intendeth to marry: That his Wife be young and beautifull, That she be modest and shame-fac't, That she beare correspondent affection, That she be no tatling Gossip, That she be no Scold, That she order well his Family, And above all, that she be constant to him. 13. There be also seven other things which a marryed man delights in: To be sure that his Wife loves him well, To see fine Children prosperous, To have them well instructed, To have obedient servants,
To live in peace and unitie, To thrive by his Calling, And (chiefely) to be Master of the House. 14. There be seven things which kéepe a wo∣man honest: Not to listen to Flatterers, Not to be too conversant with men, Not to use audacious words, Not to demeane her selfe immodestly, Not to weare gawdie Apparell, Not to eate delicious Dyet, And especially not to forget God nor her Husband. 15. There be seven things which cause either man or woman to be well thought, and spoken of: Justice in dealing, Courtesie in behaviour, Modestie in speech, To abstaine from Lying, To abhorre Blasphemie, To loath obscene discourse, And to be faithfull in friendship. 16. There be on the contrarie seven things which make them odious to good societie:
Fraud in buying and selling, Rudenesse in carriage, Churlishnesse in words, To be a noted Lyar, To be a common Swearer, To use filthie talke, And to be trecherous in trust. 17. There be seven things which a n ought to consider of, when he is ask'd any question: Who it is that demandeth? whether supe∣rior, euall or inferior. What it is that he doth demand? The cause why he doth demand it, Whether his demand be to his benefit or detriment? What will be the issue, if he grant? What the end, if he denie? And to answer or not answer accordingly. 18. There be seven things requisit in a Iudge: To heare patiently, To answer wisely, To declare intentively, To shun Partialitie, To hate Briberie,
To incline indifferently, And to Judge justly. 19. There be seven things necessary for a Clyents Instruction: To tell his Case punctually, To shun therein selfe-flatterie, To Fee his Lawyer bounteously, To prosecute with equitie, To use his opposite courteously, To seeke no meanes dis-honestly, And to take the Issue patiently. 20. There be seven things which most men desire, yet none can ever obtayn in this World: Riches enough to suffice him; without wishing for more, To be perfect in all Sciences and Learning, To have his minde alwayes permanent, To suffer no Crosse nor Affliction, To have Ease and Rest continually. To enjoy constant Felicitie, And to have Peace of Conscience per∣petually. 21. There be seven things that the more they be sought for, the lesse they be sound.
The number of Friends, The peace of the Froward, The guilt of the Miser, The truth of a Flatterer, The wayes of the Wind, The submission of the Prowd, And wisdome in a Foole. 22. There be seven things world then Death: Povertie in old Age, Desperation after Sinne, Want of Patience in Adversitie, Insultation of ones Enemies, Labour in vaine, Sicknesse in Prison, And to lye continually in Fire. 23. There be seven things to be had without buying, which being gotten, will seares be sold for Money: An evill Name, An evill Behaviour, An evill Custome, An evill Conscience, An evill Companion, An evill Disease, And an evill (Wife) or Husband▪
24. There be seven things which bring a man to wisdome: Studie of Sciences, Experience of many things, Observation of other mens affaires, Examples of the wise, Advices of the prudent, Inriching the intellect, And the marking of ambiguous Chan∣ces. 25. There be seven duties required in a King or great Potentate: That he render unto God more then he expects from his subjects, That he remember whose Vice-gerent he is, That he be ever mindful of his account to God, That he governe his people with Ju∣stice, That he utterly hate Covetousnesse, as the root of all evill, That he be courteous and affable to all people, And that he obtain friendship of neigh∣bour Natio.
26. There be (also) seven duties requisite in a Princely Heire Apparant: To remember his Creator in the dayes of his youth, To be exceedingly well Learned, To know al Arts and Sciences, To exercise Militarie Discipline, To be liberall and bountifull, To be easily spoken withall, And to get favour of the common people. 27. There be seven things necessarie for all Nobles and Gentry: To put discret and trustie men in Office, To order their Family with wisdome and credit, To be kind loving, and reasonable to their Tenants, To pay Servants heir Wages justly, To have no unpay'd Trades-men exclaime on them, To keepe good Hospitalitie, And to succour the Poore with Charitie. 28. There be seven things incident to a good Governour of a Citie: To seeke Peace, and pursue it,
To gaine the assistance of grave and ho∣nest Counsellors, To procure (to his power) plentie of Vi∣ctuall, To see Justice in Weights and Measures, To mix Mercie with Justice in all his actions, To punish Vice and cherish Vertue, And to procure the love of all people. 29. There be seven things to be considered  in : To have Money enough, To have able and willing Souldiers at command, To have experienced Commanders and Officers, To have plentie of Victuall, To be well furnished with Munition, To have often intelligence from the Ene∣mie, And especially to have a good Cause. 30. There be seven things commendable in the Captaine Generall of an Army: To have Nobilltie, of Bloud, To have large Revenues, To have a faithfull and stout heart,
To have the foure Cardinall Vertues in esteeme, To have confidence in his Cause, To unite Clemencie and Victorie toge∣ther, And to have the love of his Souldiers for his vertue. 31. There be seven things requite  Physician: To know the nature of the Disease, To judge the complection of his Patient, To be well vers'd in Anatomie, To visit his Patient often, To give Medicines according to the Dis∣ease, To comfort his Patient with hopes, And to cure poore people for Gods sake▪ 32. There be seven things to be observed by a sick Body: To obey the Physicians instruction in Diet and Exercise, To spare nothing for Healths sake, To be a true Patient, not onely in name but in practise, To have confidence in the Physician Judgement,
To be carefull of breking his Prscrip∣tions, To be quiet and comfortable. And chiefely, to relie upon God for Cure, or calling away. 33. To conclude, there be seven things which extenuteth the credit of (other-wayes) wis men: To commit error in Knowledge, To be over-sway'd by Opinion, To be partiall in Judgement, To be lavish in Conjectures, To seeke Justice for him who hath not de∣srv'd it, To disprayse others without cause, And to credit all things over-lightly. FINIS.
