R2265 18420897 107548
Rules, Orders, AND DIRECTIONS BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL. C R DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms Dublin Printed by Benjamin Tooke, Printer to th Kings Most Excellent Majesty; And are to be sold by Joseph Wilde, Book∣seller in Castle-street, 1672.
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL. RULES, ORDERS and Directions made and Established by Us the Lord Lieu∣tenant and Councel, for the better Regu∣lating the several Cities, Walled Towns, and Corporations of Cork, Waterford, Kingsale, Youghall, Cashell, Clonmell, Ath∣lone, Londonderry, Carrigfergus, Colerain, Strabane, Charlemont, Trym, Dundalke, Kilkenny, Wexford and Ross, in the Coun∣ty of Wexford, and the Electing of Ma∣gistrates and Officers there. ESSEX. WHEREAS in and by one Art of Parliament, lately made in this Kingdom; Entituled, An Act for the Explaining of some doubts arising upon An Act; Entituled, An Act, for the better Execution of His Ma∣jesties Gracious Declaration for the Settlement of His Kingdom of Ireland, and Satisfaction of the se∣veral
interests of Adventurers, Souldiers, and other Hs ubjects there; And for making some alterations of and additions unto the said Act, for the more spee∣dy and effectual Settlement of the said Kingdom. IT is amongst other things therein contain∣ed, Enacted, That it shall, and may be lawful to, and for the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Go∣vernor, or Governors, and Council of Ireland for the time being, from time to time, and at all times to come, during the space of Seven years, to be ac¦compted from the Nine and twentieth day of Septem∣ber, One thousand six hundred sixty five, to make and stablish such Rules, Orders, and Directions, for the better regulating of all Cities, Walled Towns, and Corporations, both New and Old, and such as shall be created within this Kingdom, and the Ele∣cting of Magistrates and Officers there, and to inflict such penalties for the breach thereof, as they in their wisedomes shall think fit, so as the penalties for breach of the Rules, Orders, and Directions to be made, touching such Corporations, do not extend farther than to the Removal and Disfranchisment of such Persons, as shall be found guilty of the breach thereof; and such Rules, Orders, and Directions, so to be made as aforesaid, shall be as good and effectual in Law, to all intents and purposes, as if the same had been specially and particularly Established by Au∣thority of this present Parliament, and shall remain, continue, and abide in force, for such and so long time, as in the said Rules, Orders, and Directions shall be li∣mited and appointed, any thing in the said Act, or otherwise to the contrary thereof in any wise notwith∣standing.
VVE the Lord Lieutenant and Coun∣cil, in pursuance of the said Act, and the Authority thereby given un∣to Vs, Have thought fit to make and Esta∣blish; And We do hereby Make and Establish the Rules, Orders, and Directions hereafter mentioned, for the better Regulating of the aforesaid several Cities, Walled Towns, and Corporations and the Electing of Magistrates and Officers there. First, That upon all Elections to be hereafter made, after the Last day of December next▪ of any person or persons to serve in any of the Offices of chief Magistrate or Magistrates, Recorder, Sheriffs, or Town Clerk of any of the said several Cities, walled Towns or Corporations, the names of the persons so Elected to serve in the said several Offices, shall be by the said Corporations forthwith af∣ter such Election presented to the Lord Lieute∣nant, or other chief Governour or Gover∣nours, and the Privy Councel of this King∣dom to be approved of by them, and the said persons so Elected for any the said Offices, shall be for ever hereafter incapable of serving in the said several Offices, or any of them, untill they shall be respectively approved of by the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governour or Governours, and the Privy Council of this Kingdom by Order under their Hands; And in case the persons, or any of them, whose names shall be so presented to the Lord Lieute∣nant, or other chief Governour or Governours
and Council of this Kingdom, shall not be so approved of within Ten dayes after their names shall be so presented, then and in such case the said Corporations shall from time to time proceed to a new Election of fit persons for the said respective Offices, for which the per∣sons so presented, shall not be so approved of, and shall in like manner present their names to the said Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Go∣vernour or Governours, and Privy Council of this Kingdom, untill they shall have chosen such persons for the said respective Offices, as shall be so approved of as aforesaid. And that all such of the said Officers that are Annually chosen, who by the Charters of the said respective Cities, Walled Towns or Corporations, or any of them, have not been usually Elected three moneths before the day whereon they are to enter upon the Execution of their said respective Offices, shall for ever hereafter be Elected for the said respective Offi∣ces on that day Three moneths, which shall preceed the day whereon they are to enter upon the Execution of the said respective Offices, unless the said day shall happen on a Sunday, and then the said Election to be on the day fol∣lowing (the said three moneths to be accounted Kallendar moneths) to the end that there may be sufficient time between such their Election, and their entring upon the Execution of their said respective Offices for the obtaining of the approbation of the Lord Lieutenant and Coun∣cil, or other chief Governour or Governours,
and Council of this Kingdom, and for the making of new Elections in the places of such who shall not be so approved of. Provided always that this Rule shall not extend to the Election of any persons in any of the said Cities, Walled Towns or Corporati∣ons, who shall be chosen in the place of any such of the said Officers that are annually chosen who shall dye within the year of their Execution of the said respettive Offices, or within one Moneth before they are to enter upon the Execution thereof. Secondly, That no person or persons, that shall hereafter be Elected, either Mayor, Bayliff, Sovereign, Portreef, Burgomaster, Recorder, Sheriffs, Treasurer, Alderman, Town-Clerk, Burgess, or one of the Com∣mon-councel, or any Magistrate, or such or the like Officer within the said several Cities, Walled Towns, & Corporations, or Master, or Wardens of any Corporation Guild, or Fraternity within the said several Cities Wal∣led Towns, or Corporations shall be capable of holding, enjoying or executing any the said Offices, places or imployments, until he or they shall have taken the Oath of Su∣premacy, Established by Act of Parliament 2do Elizabethae in this Kingdom, and the Oath of Allegiance, besides the Oaths usu∣ally taken upon the admission of any per∣sons
into the said Respective Offices, pla∣ces, or Employments. And also this ensu∣ing Oath, viz. I A. B. do Declare and Believe, That it is not lawful, upon any pretence what∣soever, to take Arms against the KING; And that I do abhor that Trayterous Position of taking Arms by His Authority against His Person, or a∣gainst those that are Commissioned by him. So help me GOD. The said Oaths to be taken, before such person or persons as shall admit them to the said several Offices, places, and employments (who are hereby impowred au∣thorized and required to administer to them the said Oaths) and upon any such person or persons refusal to take the said Oaths, The Election of any such person or persons into any the said Offices, places, or employ∣ments, is hereby declared to be absolutely null and void (such persons onely excepted, with whose taking the said Oath of Supre∣macy, the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governour or Governours of this King∣dom for the time being, for some particular reasons shall think fit, by writing under his or their hand by Name to dispence. Thirdly, That all Foreigners, Stran∣gers, and Aliens, as well others as Pro∣testants, who are or shall be Merchants, Traders, Artizans, Artificers, Seamen, or otherwise skilled and exercised in any Mystery, Craft, or Trade; or in the work∣ing or making any manufacture or in the Art of Navigation, who are at present risiding
and inhabiting within this Kingdom, or who shall at any time hereafter come into the said several Cities, Walled Town, or Corpo∣ration, with intent and resolution there to inha∣bit, reside, and dwell, shall upon his or their resonable suit or request made, and upon pay∣ment down, or tender of Twenty shillings by way of Fine, unto the Chief Magistrate, or Magistrates, and Common-councel; or other persons authorized to admit, & make Freemen of such of the said several Cities, wal'd Towns, or Corporation, where he or they do intend to inhabit, reside, or dwell, be admitted a Free∣man of any of the said several Cities, Walled Towns, or Corporation: And if he or they shall desire it, of all or any Guild, Brother∣hood, Society, or Fellowship of any Trade, Craft, or other mystery within any of the said several Cities, Walled Towns, or Corpora∣tions, during his or their residence for the most part, and his and their Families constant inhabiting within the said several Cities, Walled Towns or Corporations and no lon∣ger; and shall have, exercise, and enjoy all priviledges and immunities of Trading, Buy∣ing, Working and Selling, in as large and ample manner as any Freeman of any the said several Cities, Walled Towns, or Corporation might have, exercise or enjoy by vertue of his or their Freedom: And that every such person or persons, who shall be admitted to be fre as aforesaid, shall from thenceforth be deemed, esteemed, and taken, and be Denizen and Denizens within this Kingdom, any Law Statute, Charter
Vsage, or Custome of this Kingdom, or of any of the said several Cities, Walled Towns, or Corporations to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided alwayes, That all such Strangers, Artificers, and others, to be admitted Freemen as aforesaid, shall take the Oath of Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors, and also such other Oaths as are accustom∣ably taken by all or any Freeman, or members of the said several Cities, Walled Towns, or Corporations or by any the members of any such Guild, or Brotherhood; Society, or Fellowship of the Trade, Craft, or o∣ther mystery, which he or they shall occupy, or exercize, in case he or they shall desire to be incorporated into any such Guild, Brother∣hood, Society, or Fellowship aforesaid, and shall pay all such and like Charges, as all Freemen His Majesties subjects, of the like Trade, Craft, or mystery, shall or do use to pay, and no other or more; And that if any Chief Magistrate or Magistrates, or o∣ther persons authorized as aforesaid, of any the said several Cities, wal'd Towns, or Cor∣porations; or any Master, Warden, or other Governour of any Brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship; or any Trade, Craft, or mystery within the said several Cities, walled Towns or Corporations shall refuse to admit any such Stranger, being a Merchant, Trader, Arti∣ficer, Artizan, Workman or Seaman, resid∣ing or coming into this Kingdom, with intent as aforesaid, to be a Free-man of any the said several Cities, wall'd Towns, or Corporations
where he or they intend to inhabit, reside, or dwell; or to be a Brother or member of any Brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship within them or any of them every such chief Magistrate or Magistrates, Master, Warden, or other Governours respectively, shall upon complaint and due proof made, of such refusal, before the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Gover∣nour or Governours, and Council of this Kingdom, be by their Order Disfranchised, and from thenceforth incapable (without their Licence) of being a Freeman or mem∣ber of any such City, Town, or Corporation; And evey such Stranger being a Merchant, Trader, Artificer, Artizan, Workman or Seaman, upon tender by him made of Twen∣ty shillings, by way of Fine as aforesaid, and taking the Oath of Allegiance before any Iu∣stice of the Peace, of the County next adjacent to such City, Town, or Corporation, or where∣in such City, Town, or Corporation is sci∣tuated (who is hereby authorized and ap∣pointed to administer the said Oath) shall thereupon by vertue hereof, be deemed, re∣puted, and taken to all intents and purpo∣ses to be a Freeman or member of the said City, Town, Corporation, Brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship of any Trade, Craft, or mystery, where he or they shall inhabit, reside, or dwell, and be denied admission as aforesaid; And thenceforth have, exercize, and enjoy the liberty and priviledge of Tra∣ding, Working, Buying or Selling of any commodities whatsoever, in as large and
ample manner, as if he had been admitted a Freeman of such City, Town, or Corporati∣on, a Brother or member of such Brother∣hood, Society, or Fellowship of any Trade, Craft, or mystery within the same, taking the usual Oaths of such Freemen, Brothers or members, which Oaths any one Iustice of Peace near adjoyning, shall have power to ad∣minister, and paying all such charges as aforesaid, any Law, Custome, Charter or Vsage, to the contrary in any wise notwith∣standing: And in case any person or persons shall give any interruption or disturbance to any such Stranger, being a Merchant, Tra∣der, Artificer, Artizan, Workman, or Sea∣man as aforesaid, to the hindring him in his Trading, Working, Buying or Selling as aforesaid, contrary to the intent and mean∣ing hereof, all and every such person and per∣sons so offending, shall upon like complaint and proof made of his or their offence there∣in, before the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governour or Governours and Council of this Kingdom for the time being, be by their Order Disfranchised, and from thenceforth incapable without their Licence of being made a Freeman or member of any of the said se∣veral Cities, Walled Towns, or Corporations And these Our Rules, Orders, & directions, We do hereby Order and Establish for ever hereafter, to continue in force in all the aforesaid several Cities, Walled Towns and Crporations of Cork Waterford, Kingsale, Youghall, Cashell, Clonmell, Athlone, London∣dery,
Carickfergus, Colerain, Strabane, Charlemont, Trym, Dundalke, Kilkenny, Wexford, and Ross. And that the same be forthwith inrolled in the Rolls of His Majesties High-court of Chancery in this Kingdom. Given at the Council-Chamber in Dublin, the Three and Twentieth day of September, 1672. Ja. Armachanus. Mich. Dublin Canc. Drogheda. Arran. Conway & Kilulta. Massereene. Hen. Midensis. Fran. Aungier. Art. Forbese. Jo. Bysse. Rob. Byron. Will. Stewart. H. Ingoldesby. Theo. Jones. Char. Meredyth. GOD save the King.
