R2322 99834917 39563
A LETTER SENT To the Honoble William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons. Concerning Sir Tho: Fairfax's gallant Proceedings IN Cornwal, Since his advance from Torrington and Launceston to Bodman, Where they have taken divers Prisoners, AND PRINCE CHARLS driven into Pendnnis-Castle. APpointed by the Honorable William Lenthal Esq to be forthwith printed and published. London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons, and are to be sold at his Shop at the signe of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet, neer the Inner-Temple. March 7. 1645.
TO The Honourable W. Lenthal Esq Speaker to the Honourable House of Commons. SIR, IN my last I acquainted you with the Armies coming to Launceston, and of the taking 300 horse neer Stratton. By reason of the long marches the Foot had taken, and many straglers behinde, the General and the Army rested at Launceston two dayes; and on Saturday last, the Army advanced five or six miles towards Bodman. And this day the Horse and Foot had a General Rendezvouz upon the Downs within eight Miles of Bodman; the Forlorn Hope being sent out, they met with the Enemies Scouts, there being eight of them toge∣ther, which our men took (not one escaping) they all con∣fesse they had no intelligence of our coming; that they be∣longed to a Guard of 300 Horse that was kept on a Passe within three miles of Bodman; and within two miles where they were taken, the Army advancing neer to that place, we discovered a Body of the Enemies Horse, at about two miles distance, who made a stand, and faced us for a while; but
before ever we came neer them, retreated to Bodman: A we were upon the Moos, intelligence came, That the two Com∣panies of Dragoons that were sent towards Camelford the other and had possest an House, the better to gain intel∣ligence. If the Enemy intended to break through Eastward, were in some hazrd by a great Body of the Enemies Horse that were got between them, and the Rendezvous, and forced them into a Close for their security; whereupon a thousand Horse were sent to relieve them, but before they came, the Dragoons themselves had beaten off the Enemy, and made good their retreat to a Church, without the losse of a man. Sir Iames Smith with his Brigade, was the man that had a Designe to have surprized them; but now we are in a manner gotten between him and Bodman; for the Army quarters in the field, and all the Villages hereabouts, that he can hardly make his retreat, unlesse he took the opportunity before our Horse came up. At our coming into Cornwal, especially at Launceston, we found the people possest with an opinion, That there would be no mercy shewn unto the Cornish; but after a dayes being at Launceston, the Town seeing the carriage of the Souldier so fair, and not one House plundered (not so much as the Governours own house) and the Country being possest with the like opinion of the civil carriage of this Army, came into the Market, and brought in provisions for supply of our Forces; but in regard Gorings Forces had plundred the Countrey of all their Horse, people were glad to bring it in on their backs. And Friday being the day for the Posse of the whole Countrey to appear at Bodman; all the North part of Cornwal refused to appear, they positively affirming, They found us Friends, and not Enemies; and those that were on the Westside of Bodman, likewise refused to come in, saying, They had not greater Enemies then Gorings Horse that were among them. A Gentleman whom I spake withall this day, who was at their meeting said. The Horse onely appeared, the Posse Foot wholly refused to come in; and indeed, there cannot be a greater advantage to us, then to drive Gorings Horse before us; for there carriages are so
barbarous, that they make every mans hand against them where they come: The Army had been this night at Bodman, but in regard the Enemy is numerous in Horse, and that we marched much upon the Downs, and was like to be late be∣fore we could get in, it was held fit to quarter in the Fields and Villages here abouts, and the next day to march in a close Body, Horse and Foot; though it be the slower way, yet it is the more secure: The Prisoners that were taken this day, told me, they were glad with all their hearts they were taken upon so fair quarter, for they knew they should be all taken at last (they said) and that they give themselves already for lost: And indeed, God hath stroken their hearts with a terrour. Some Gentlemen of quality have sent privately for protections, whose not appearing against us, though not for us, keeps all that part of the Countrey in, where they are, And just now we have intelligence, that the Lord Moun is unwilling to obey the L. Hoptons Commands, and rather stands upon his Guard against his Forces, then to assist him with any: as far as I can conceive in my poor judgement, we shall drive the Enemy to a corner; and it may please God to bring their Horse to accept of conditions, as well as formerly they did bring our Foot; for unlesse this very night they do break through, which they can hardly do, considering how our Forces are laid, we have them then before us to the Lands end. St. Blessenden, March 1. 1645. Your most humble Servant, I. R.
THe Messenger staying till the next morning, I thought fit to give you this further account of the Enemies mo∣tion and our proceedings: This morning by break of the day, the Army was drawn to a Rendezvouz upon the Heath within two miles of Bodman, a party being sent out to discover if the Enemy were in the Town, brought Intelligence they quit the Town last night about ten of the clock, Horse and Foot, the Lord Hopton bringing up the Rear himself: The most of the Foot they had were Welchmen, having Leeks in their Hats, and drunk, and went out disorderly: They march'd toward Truro with a good part of their horse; the rest of their Horse we this morning received Intelligence marched towards Ware-Bridge, as if they intended to go Eastward; whereupon Lieut. General Cromwel who went the night be∣fore to Relieve our Dragoons, was sent unto by the General to desire him to secure the passage at Ware-Bridge, by placing some Dragoons there; who being there with One thousand Horse, and Four hundred Dragoons, will give a seasonable interruption to the Enemies advance that way. We finde the Towns-people in Bodman no wayes fearful of our coming, rather desiring it: They say they have had no Market these two Market dayes, by reason that Gorings Horse rob'd the Market people, and take away their Horses. There were two Regiments of Foot and two of Horse sent this morning from their Rendezvouz about nine of the clock, to assist those for∣ces at Ware-Bridge, where by we might the better drive the Enemy before us into a narrow compasse of Land. At this place where we are, we may see the Sea on both hands; if the Enemy had had any gallantry left in them, they would have shew'd it upon our approach to Bodman, their onely strength consisting in Horse, where they had room enough upon the Downs to play their Game, but they never appeared but once, and that at two miles distance, and retreated. I have spoken with some of the Inhabitants of this Town, who were at the grand Posse at Bodman on Friday last, and they affirm, That of the whole County of Cornwal, there
did not appear Eighty men; but Gorings Horse, and the Horse of the County, all appeared in a great body, Those Foot that were in Bodman, were some of the Runawayes from Tor∣rington, and some Welchmen that were left at Launceston, and fled hither, and some others of the Countrey, in all to the number of Four hundred at the most, which is the onely body of Infantry they have left that we can yet hear of: the same Intelligencer confirmed, That the Lord Mahone is either restrained or wounded by the Lord Hopton; yet the certainty thereof, more then the publique report of the Countrey, we cannot yet hear. I doubt it falls out ill we have not a Squadron of Ships towards Falmouth, where no doubt they may have rich booty, and intercept persons of great qua∣lity. Several Letters have been sent unto Plymouth, to the Commander in chief upon these Coasts; we hope that they will yet come seasonable: The Prince is at Pendennis, and I believe within two dayes will be in France if the wind hold. The head Quarter was this night at Bodman; three Regi∣ments marched to Listithiel to secure the passage that way: the Forlorn hope of Horse that went thither, made the Enemy quit their Guard at Listithiel; and receiving Information that four Wain-load of Ammunition was in the way to go from Listithiel to Foy, six of the Troopers rode after it, and made the Convoy desert their charge, and brought back the four load of Ammunition this night to Bodman, there being ten Oxen to every draught: Likewise a party being sent out another way, overtook forty two Musketiers, who had their Matches lighted, and Muskets loaden, four Troopers rode up unto them, and made them all lay down their Arms, and brought them back Prisonets to the head Quarter. Another party was sent towards Truro, to discover whether the Ene∣mies Horse remained in a body, and at Castle-Dennis dis∣covered a body of about a thousand Horse an hour before night, which we conceive onely staid till the darknesse of the night to draw off, after the rest further West; they are so Alarm'd by our parties, that they are forced to keep in bo∣dies, and can hardly go to Quarter, which will quickly make
them weary and over-watcht, and altogether unfit to break through, if they had any such intention, which I believe now they have not: That we keep strong Guards at Listhiel, War-Bridge, and the Fords upon both Rivers. Sir Iohn Green∣viles Lieutenant Colonel, and divers others are taken Pri∣soners. Bodman, March 2. ten at night. THe Messenger staying till Tuesday morning, March 3. I can onely adde, That our Intelligence is, the Enemy bends West, onely a party of Horse to face us: This day some Quarters remove towards St. Cullam, the way to Truro. The Messenger takes pains for so long a journey. FINIS.
