S2577 11982842 51893
A LETTER To the D. of P. IN ANSWER TO THE Arguing Part OF HIS FIRST LETTER To Mr. G. Published with Allowance. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Ex∣cellent Majesty, for His Houshold and Chappel. 1687.
A LETTER To the D. of P. In Answer to the Arguing Part of his First Letter. 1. THAT you may not take it unkindly the Arguing Part of your Letter to Mr. G. should pass unregarded, I have been prevail'd upon to accept of his Commission to hold his Cards, while he is not in Circumstances to play out his Game him∣self. But can assure you beforehand, since Matter of Fact is clearing by other Hands more proper, I mean to confine my self to Matter of Right; and so shall give you the least and most excusable trouble that can be, a short one. 2. Your Letter tells us, that the Conference was for the sake of a Gentleman, who I heard desir'd to be sa∣tisfi'd that Protestants are absolutely certain of what they believe, and made account you could satisfie him, and profess'd, if you could not, he would quit your Communion. And you take care to inform us (p. 2.) that he was satisfi'd, and declar'd immediately after the
Conference, that he was much more confirm'd in the Commu∣nion of your Church by it, and resolv'd to continue in it. But could you not have afforded to inform us likewise by what he was satisfi'd? For there is many a Man who would be as glad, and is as much concern'd to be satis∣fi'd in that Point as that Gentleman; and he would not have been a jot the less confirm'd or the less resolv'd, if his Neighbor had been confirm'd and resolv'd with him. I cannot for my life imagin why you should make a Secret of a thing, which, besides your own and your Churches Honor, concerns the Salvation of thou∣sands and thousands to know. 3. Your Letter I perceive would shift it off to Mr. G. whom you desire (p. 7) to prove that Protestants have no Absolute Certainty, &c. Of this Proposal there will be occasion to say more by and by. At the present I pray you consider how you deal with those Souls who rely on you. If you should move them to trust their Estates with a Man of your naming, of whom you would give no other satisfaction that he were able to manage them, and faithful, and responsible, but only to bid those who doubted, prove the contrary; I fancy there would need all the Credit you have to hinder the Motion from appearing very strange: And yet you have the confidence to make them one as much stranger as their Souls are more worth than their Mony: For you would have them hazard their Souls where they are not safe, for any care you take to satisfie them that they are. Why, suppose Mr. G. could not prove that Protestants are not Certain, are they therefore Certain? Has Peter Twenty pounds in his Purse, because Paul cannot prove he has not? Or, ever the more Title to an Estate, because an Adversary may have the ill luck to be Non-suited? Must not every body speak for him∣self
one day, and bring in his own Account, which will pass or not pass as it is or is not faulty in it self, whe∣ther any fault have been found in it before or no? And will not the Happiness or Misery of their Souls for ever depend on that Account? Can you suffer them to run that terrible hazard, without making them able to ju∣stifie their Accounts themselves, and furnishing them with assurance that they can, and with no more to say but that they hop'd Dr. St. would make his Party good with Mr. G. ? That things so precious to God as Souls should be of no more value with those who set up for Ministers of the Gospel! That their great and only care, as far as I see, should be to make a shew, and pass for some body here, let every one take his chance here∣after! Besides, Truth is therefore Truth, because 'tis built on Intrinsecal Grounds which prove it to be such; and not on private Mens Abilities, or their saying this or that; wherefore till those Grounds be produc'd, it cannot be with reason held Truth: And Dr. St. is more particularly oblig'd to make good he has such Grounds, having had such ill fortune formerly with the Princi∣ples to which he undertook to reduce Protestant Faith, as appears by the Account given of them in Error Non∣plust. 4. But, leaving these Matters to be Answer'd where we must all answer why we have believ'd so and so; pray let us have fair play in the mean time. Let every one bear his own Burthen, and you not think to dis∣charge your self by throwing your Load on another Man's Shoulders. You affirm there is Absolute Cer∣tainty on the Protestants side, and 'tis for him to prove it who affirms it. If you do it but half so well as Mr. G. can, and has, the Infallibility which he asserts, you will earn Thanks from one side, and Admiration from the
other. But it is for you to do it: To trick off proving the contrary upon your Adversary, is to own that Pro∣ving is a thing which agrees not with your Constitu∣tion, and in which your Heart misgives you. 5. Yet even so you were uneasie still, and would not venture what Mr. G. could do, as slightly as you think, or would have others think of him. You know well enough, that to prove Protestants have no Absolute Certainty of their Faith, is no hard Task even for a weak Man:Dr. Tillotson's Rule of Faith, p. 117, 118. You know any Man may find it confess'd to his hand by Protestants. And therefore you had reason to bethink your self of an Expedient to trick it off again from that Point,Pag. 7. and put Mr. G. to prove, That Prote∣stants have no Absolute Certainty as to the Rule of their Faith, viz. the Scripture. The Merits of this Cause too I think will return hereafter more fitly; in this place I mind only the Art.Dr. St's Second Letter, p. 14. Pray, was not the very First Que∣stion at the Conference, Whether Protestants are abso∣lutely Certain that they hold now the same Tenets in Faith, and All that our Saviour taught to his Apostles? And your Answer that They are? Did our Saviour teach, and do Protestants believe no more, than that the Book so call'd is Scripture? Is Certainty of this more, and Certainty of this Book all one? And was not the Question plainly of the Certainty of this, and of All this more? Here is then an Enquiry after one thing plainly turn'd off to another. Yes; but this was one of the two things which the whole Conference depended upon. As if the whole Conference did not depend on that thing which was to be made manifest by the Conference, viz. the Absolute Certainty of Protestant Faith. Mr. G. indeed did himself ask some Questions about your Certainty of your Rule; Questi∣ons, whose course it was wisely done to cut off, before they had question'd away your Certainty of Faith. For,
after they had caus'd it to be admitted, that the Cer∣tainty of Scripture is from Tradition, there was no re∣fusing to admit that Tradition causes Certainty, and makes Faith as Certain as Scripture. And then it would have prov'd something difficult to satisfie even a willing Man, that the Faith is Certain which is oppo∣sit to a Faith come down by Tradition. But it was seen whereto it would come, and thought fit to break off in time, and not let the Conference proceed too far. In the mean time Absolute Certainty of Scripture was not the Point of the Conference nor is it the Point of Concern. Besides that 'tis agreed on all hands, Men are Sav'd by Believing and Practising what Christ taught, not barely by believing Scripture is Scripture: And Salvation is the thing that imports us in these Disputes, and 'twere well that nothing else were minded by Disputers. But it imported you it seems both to shift off Proving from your self, and to stifle any further Talk of the Certainty of Protestant Faith, and keep us from looking that way by fixing our Eyes on another Object. And this is all you do; but with so much Art, that I verily think many a Reader is persuaded you are talking all the while to the purpose. The truth is, you have reason to carry it as you do; for it is good to avoid underta∣king what cannot be perform'd: And you cannot, and I believe know you cannot make out, That Protestants are Absolutely Certain, that they now hold all the same Doctrin that was taught by Christ and his Apostles, as you affirm'd in your Answer to Mr. G's first Question. And this I thought it imported to tell you plainly and publickly, that it might be in your hands to pin the Controversie-basket, and bring all Catholics to your Church; where I will answer you will be sure to find us, if you make us sure we shall find this Certainty there when we come.
6. In the mean time why has not Mr. G. done alrea∣dy as much as should be done? It is plain that where Churches differ in Faith, Infallible Faith in one, cannot stand with Certain Faith in the other. Wherefore if Mr. G. have fix'd Infallibility in his own Church, he has re∣mov'd Certainty from all that differ from her. Let us then take and sift Mr. G's Argument, even as you put it, who had not, I suppose, partiality enough for him, to make it better than it was. You put it thus, p. 4, 5. 7. All Traditionary Christians believe the same to day which they did yesterday, and so up to the time of our Blessed Saviour; and if they follow this Rule, they can never err in Faith, therefore are Infallible. And you (Mr. G.) prov'd they could not innovate in Faith, unless they did forget what they held the day before, or out of malice alter it. And now, That there may be no mistake, let us take each Pro∣position by it self. 8. The First is, [All Traditionary Christians believe the same to day which they did yesterday, and so up to the time of our Blessed Saviour.] You have nothing to say to this, I hope: For since Traditionary Christians are those who proceed upon Tradition, and Tradition sig∣nifies Immediate Delivery, it follows, that unless they believe the same to day which they did yesterday, and so upwards, they cease to be Traditionary Christians, by proceeding not upon an Immediate, but an Interrupted Delivery, or some other Principle. And so there is no denying this Proposition, but by affirming that Tradi∣tionary Christians are not Traditionary Christians. 9. The second Proposition is this. [And if they fol∣low this Rule, they can never err in Faith.] This is pal∣pably self-evident: For, to follow this Rule is to be∣lieve still the same to day which they did yesterday: And so,
if they did this from Christ's time, and so forwards, they must still continue to believe, to the end of the World, the self-same that Christ and his Apostles taught; and, therefore, cannot err in Faith, unless those Authors of our Faith did: Which that they did not, is not to be prov'd to Christians. 10. There follows this Inference: [Therefore they are Infallible.] This is no less plainly self-evident. For these words [They can never err in Faith] in the Ante∣cedent, and [They are Infallible] in the Consequent, are most manifestly the self-same in sense, and perfectly equivalent. 11. The fourth and last (which according to you, aim'd to prove, that they could not innovate) is this. [They could not innovate in Faith, unless they did forget what they held the day before, or out of malice alter it.] And this is no less unexceptionable than its Fellows. For, if they knew not they alter'd Faith, when they al∣ter'd it, they had forgot what they believ'd the day be∣fore. If they alter'd it wittingly, excuse them from Malice who can; who, believing, as all who proceed up∣on Tradition do, that Tradition is the certain Means to convey the Doctrin of Christ, would notwithstand∣ing alter the Doctrin convey'd to them by Tradition, Pray what ails this Argument? and what wants it, save bare Application, to conclude what was intended as fully and as rigorously as you can desire? And, pray, what need was there to apply it to the Roman Church, and say she follow'd Tradition, to you who deny it not either of the Roman or Greek Church? As every thing is true, and every thing clear; who now besides your self would have thought of an evasion from it? And yet you venture at one, such as it is. 12. You tell us then, (p. 5.) That you thought the best way
to shew the vanity of this rare Demonstration, was to pro∣duce an Instance of such as follow'd Tradition, and yet Mr. G. could not deny to have err'd, and that was of the Greek Church, &c. You had e'en as good have said, what Mr. G. says is true, but yet he does not say true for all that. For to pitch upon nothing for false, is, in Disputes, to own that every thing is true. The best way, say you? I should have thought it every jot as good a way to have said nothing when one has nothing to say. But yet the World is oblig'd to you for letting them know what Scholars knew before, that Protestants think it the best way to answer Catholic Arguments, to give them no Answer at all: For you are not to be told that this Instance of yours is not an Answer to Mr. G.'s Argument, but a new Argument against him of your own, which undoubtedly you might have pro∣duc'd as well as my Lord Falkland, if you had been, as my Lord Falkland was, arguing. But it is your turn now to answer. And must you be minded of what every Smatterer in Logic knows, that an Answerer is con∣fin'd to his Concedo, his Nego, and Distinguo, as the Propositions which he is to speak to▪ are True, False or Ambiguous? He may deny the Inference too, if he find more or other Terms in the Conclusion than in the Premises. But these are his Bounds; and Answer∣ing turns Babbling, when they are exceeded. Must you be minded that the Business must be stopt before it come to the Conclusion, and that otherwise there is no speaking against it? For you know that if the Pre∣misses be right, and the Inference good, the Conclusi∣on must be as necessarily. True, as it is that the same thing cannot be, and not be at once; that is, must be more certain than that England, for Example, shall not crumble into Atoms, or be swallow'd up in the Sea to
morrow: For this, and a thousand such things may happen to all material Nature; that a Contradicti∣on should prove True, cannot. And 'tis perfect Con∣tradiction that Terms which cohere in the Premises, by being the same with a Third, should not cohere with one another in the Conclusion. Must you be minded that an Arguer is to prove his Conclusion, and an Answerer to shew he does not, by assigning where and how he fails? Do you do any such matter? Do you so much as go about it? And would you have what you say pass for an Answer? Pray consider the Case: The Church of Rome is Infallible, says Mr. G.: She is not, say you. He brings his Argument, and you your Instance against it. What are People the wiser now? and which shall they be for; the Argument or the Instance? They have reason to think well of the Argument, because you have no fault to find with it; and they may think as they please of the Instance. You would not, I sup∣pose, have them believe you both, and think the Church of Rome for your sake Fallible, and, for his, In∣fallible at once. Pray what assistance do you afford them to determin either way? And what do you more than e'en leave them to draw Cuts, and venture their Souls as handy-dandy shall decide, for you or Mr. G.? 'Tis true, when Zeno would needs be paradoxing against the possibility of Motion, his Vanity was not ill ridi∣cul'd by the walking of Diogenes before him. For 'twas palpably and ridiculously vain to talk against Motion with a Tongue, that must needs move to talk against it. And there may be vanity too in our Case, for ought I know: But where shall it be lodg'd? Why more with Mr. G's. Argument than your Instance? Why is it more vain to pretend to prove Infallibility, upon which depend the Hopes which Millions and Mil∣lions
have of a blessed Eternity, and which is prov'd by Arguments, to which you think it your best way not to attempt to Answer, than it is to except against a Conclusion, against the Premises whereof there lies no Exception? That is, to find fault with a Sum Total, and find none in the particulars or the casting up: For a Conclusion is a kind of Sum Total of the Pre∣mises. But it is infinitely more vain to talk against one Infallibility, unless you will set up another. For, if there be no Means, by which Men may be secur'd, that the ways they take to arrive at their greatest and only Good will not deceive them it cannot be expect∣ed they will take all the pains that are necessary to compass that Good, which for ought they can tell, they may not compass with all their pains. 'Tis a pleasant thing in you to talk of the vanity of Mr. G's. Demon∣stration, when, by seeking to take Infallibility out of the World, you are making the whole Creation vain. For all Material Nature was made for Rational Nature, and Rational Nature requires Rational Satisfaction in all its proceedings, and most of all in the pursuit of Hap∣piness: And what Rational Satisfaction can there be, if there may be Deceit in whatever can be propos'd for Satisfaction? In short, the Result of your Instance, whatever was the Aim, it is to amuse and confound People, and hinder them perhaps from seeing what otherwise would be clear; but it shews them nothing, nor can; for that Argument of yours is not at all of a shewing Nature. 13. 'Tis, at best, but an Argument (as they call it) ad hominem; which you know are of the worst sort of Arguments. They serve for nothing but to stop an Adversaries mouth, or shame him, if he cannot answer without contradicting himself; but are of no use to∣wards
the Discovery of Truth. For a thing is not the more or less True, because such a Man's Tongue is ty'd up for speaking against it. But is it so much as an Argument ad hominem? As all the little force of the Topic consists in the Obligation which a Man may have to grant or deny what it supposes he does, it affords no Argument at all against the Man who has no such Obligation. And pray where does it appear that Mr. G. is oblig'd not to deny that the Greek Church has err'd in matters of Faith? And how can you, of all Men, suppose he is? You, who in your Rational Ac∣count (p. 32.) quote these words from Peter Lombard; The Difference between the Greeks and Latins, is in Words and not in Sense▪ Name Thomas a Iesu, and Azorius, and tell us of other Roman Catholic Authors, of the same judgment, whom I suppose you could name. Pray, how comes Mr. G. to lye under an Obligation, from which Men of Reputation in his own Commu∣nion are exempt? And what a wise Argument ad ho∣minem have you made against him, whom your self have furnish'd with an Argument ad hominem to con∣fute it when he pleases? In fine, he goes to work like a Scholar, puts his Premises, and infers his Conclusion, which you know cannot but be True, if there be no Fault in his Premises: And 'tis for you to find one when you can. You put nothing to shew how the Inference you make should be True, but barely assume, without proof, that he cannot deny it (p. 5.): As if Truth depended on his Denying or Affirming, and that what People say or think, made things True or False. And even, for so much, you are at his Courtesie: If he be not the better Natur'd, and will crossly affirm or deny in the wrong place, you and your Argument are left in the lurch. In a word, one may see he aim'd at Truth, who takes
at least the way to it: what you aim'd at, you best know; but no body shall ever discover what is, or is not True, by your Method. 14. But that you may not complain, your Cock is not suffer'd to fight, let us see what your Instance will do. You put it thus, (p. 5.) The Greek Church went upon Tradition from Father to Son, as much as ever the Ro∣man did. And I desir'd to know of Mr. G. whether the Greek Church notwithstanding did not err in matters of Faith; And, if it did, then a Church holding to Traditi∣on was not Infallible. How! If it did? Why then it is apparent if it did not, your Argument holds not. And will you assume that the Greek Church errs, who believe she does not? Will you take a Premise to in∣fer a Conclusion, upon which the Salvation of People depends, which Premise your self in your own heart think is not true? Can you deal thus with their Souls, who pin them upon you, perswade them of what you are not perswaded your self, and offer them a Securiy for their Eternity, in which your own judgment tells you there is a flaw? For you have declar'd your self upon this Matter in your Rational Account, and ta∣ken great pains to clear the Greek Church, at least upon the Article of the Holy Ghost, in which consists their main difference with the Latins, and to which the other two you mention were added, I suppose, for fashion sake. I know you there propose to free that Church from the charge of Heresie. But pray what difference betwixt Heresie and Error in matter of Faith? unless you will trifle about Obstinacy, and such collateral considerations; which neither concern us here nor were any part of your Defence there. I see too that you word it here conditionally, and with reference to Mr. G's. Answer: As if his Answer made
or marr'd, and the Greek Church did or did not err, as he says, I, or No. Whatever Mr. G. may say, or you have said, unless the Greek Church actually does Err, your Instance is no Instance of a Church that goes upon Tradition and Errs; and your Inference that then a Church holding to Tradition was not Infallible, is wondrous pertinently inferr'd from the Example of a Church that errs not. Pray take it well that I intreat you by all the care you have of your own Soul, and should have of others, to manage Disputes about Faith a little otherwise, and not propose Arguments, in which you must needs think your self there is no force. For there is plainly none in this, if the Greek Church does not err; and you at least think she does not. I am sure 'tis what I would not do my self for all the World. 15. But to proceed to Mr. G's. Answer, (p. 5.) It was say you, that the Greek Church follow'd Tradition, till the Arians left that Rule and took up a new one, &c. And why has he not answer'd well? You assum'd that the Greek Church err'd while it went upon Tradition; If you did not, you said nothing; for, that a Church may follow Tradition at one time, and leave it at another, is no news. 'Tis the case of all erring Churches which ever follow'd Tradition at all. Mr. G's Reply then that Tradition was follow'd till another Rule was taken up, denies that Tradition and Error were found together, as you contended, in the Greek Church. And pray what more direct or more full Answer can there be to an Argument, than to deny the Premises? As slightly as you would seem to think of him, he understood dis∣puting better than to start aside into an Exception against your Conclusion, but answers fair and home by denying the Assumption from which you infer it;
which now he has done, you know it rests with you to prove it; and yet you never think on't, as far as I see; but, as if you had no more to do, fall a complaining against Mr. G. for speaking of the Arians, and not of the present Greek Church; and against his Copy, for leaving out the Inference which you drew. In doing which, if he did so, he did you no small kindness; there being no Premises to draw the Inference from, as has been shewn above; or if any, such as put you to contradict your own Doctrin ere any thing could fol∣low from them. 16. As for the omission of the Inference, I know not how it happen'd, nor mean to meddle with matter of Fact. But I see they had reason, who observ'd before me, that 'tis a thing of no manner of Consequence, I ve∣rily think, in your own Judgment. Unless you think the Age we live in so dull, that, without much ham∣mering it into their Heads, it cannot be perceiv'd, that if a Church has err'd which held to Tradition, a Church may err which holds to Tradition. Or, unless you think it of mighty Consequence to have an Infe∣rence stand in the Relation which fell with the Pre∣mises at the Conference. Mr. G. took them away by his denial, and you must begin again, and bring some∣thing from whence you may draw an Inference, if you will needs have an Inference; for an Inference cannot be drawn from nothing. Pray divert us not perpetu∣ally from minding what we are about; but remember the Question now is, Whether the Greek Church held to Tradition and err'd at once? and bethink your self, if you please of a Medium, which will infer that Point for you; for Mr. G. you see denies it. 17. From his mentioning the Arians you take occasi∣to speak big, and bear us in hand he was hard put to
it, and sought an occasion, and affirm (p. 6.) you could get no Answer at all to the Case of the present Greek Church. As if his Answer pincht on the Arians, and were not as full to the present as past Greek Church. It goes on this, That those who err in Faith, let them be who they will, and the Error what it will, and in what Time and Place you will, all leave Tradition. Whether the Case of the present Greek Church be the same with the Arians, is matter of Fact, with which Mr. G. did well not to meddle; it is for you to make it out, if you will make good your Argument. Modern or Ancient Heresie is all one to his Answer, which is applicable to all Heresie: And you complain of the want of an Answer when you have one. Pray, if a Man should put an Objection to you about an Animal, for Example, and you answer it of all Animals, would you think it just in him to quarrel with you for not mentioning the Rational or Irrational in particular? And yet this is your Quarrel to Mr. G. All your mag∣nificent Talk (p. 6.) of undeniably true, granted by Mr. G. known to every one, &c. as apt as I see it is to make a Reader believe your Instance is notoriously true, and a∣gainst which Mr. G. has nothing to say, cannot make me, or any Man of Reason, who examins the Point, be∣lieve he has any Reason to say more, till you do. He has answer'd directly, and positively deny'd, that Error and Tradition can be found together in the Greek Church, or any other, modern or ancient. There it sticks, and you may drive it on farther (it being your own Argu∣ment) if you please. Only when you tell us (p. 6.) that the present Greek Church in all its Differences with the Roman, still pleaded Tradtion, and adher'd to it, I wish you had told us whether you speak of Differences in matter of Faith, or no. For Differences may be occasi∣on'd
by matters of Faith, which are not Differences in Faith. If you do not, you support your Instance very strongly, and prove the consistence of Tradition with Error in Faith very Learnedly, from Differences which belong not to Faith. If you do, as Nature itches after strange Sights, I long to see by what Differences, or any thing else, it can be made out, That an erring Church can still plead Tradition, and adhere to it. Not but that for Pleading much may be, there are such confident doings in the World. As certain as it is, that the Religion in England now, is not the same which it was before Henry the Eighth, I think there is confidence enough in England to plead Tradition for it. 'Tis but finding some Expression in an ancient Writer, not couch'd with Prophetical foresight enough to avoid being understood, as some will desire it should, and it will serve turn to pretend to Antiquity, and bear the Name of Tradition. So I suspect you take it your self, when you say the Arians insisted on Tradition: For sure you do not think in earnest, that Doctrin contrary to Consubstantiality, was taught by Christ, and believ'd from Father to Son till the Council of Nice. This, or some such thing may perhaps have been pleaded; but for adhering to Tradition, Your Servant. For, pray, did Christ teach any Error? When a Father believ'd what Christ taught him, and the Son what the Father believ'd, did not the Son too be∣lieve what Christ taught? Run it on to the last Son that shall be born in the World, must not every one believe what Christ taught, if every one believ'd what his Fa∣ther believ'd? And will you go about to persuade us, that there actually is a company of Men in the World who adher'd to this Method, all Sons believing always as their Fathers did, whereof the First believ'd as Christ taught, and who notwithstanding err'd in matters of
Faith? They would thank you for making this out, who would be glad that Christ taught Error and were not God. But it is not plainer that Two and Three make Five, than it is that this cannot be. And yet you would top it upon us, and bear us in hand it is not only true, but apparent in the Greek Church, and known to every body who knows any thing of it. The comfort is, there is nothing for all these Assertions but your Word; in which, where you stick not to pass it for an arrant Impossibility, I for my part do not think there is Abso∣lute Certainty. 18. I see not what there remains more, but to bear in mind where we are. At the Conference, instead of answering Mr. G's Argument, you would needs make one of your own, which was in short; The Greek Church goes upon Tradition and errs, therefore another Church may err which goes upon Tradition. There was no need to trouble the Greek Church for the matter: It had been altogether as methodical, and as much to pur∣pose, to have instanc'd in the Latin Church it self, and never gon further; and shorter, to have spar'd Instan∣cing too, and have said without more ado, Mr. G's Con∣clusion is not true: For you do no more, till you make it appear, that the Church you pitch upon for an In∣stance, do's indeed adhere to Tradition and err. But, because this had been too open, and People would have sooner perceiv'd that it had been to say, I know not how to answer Mr. G's Argument, but will notwithstanding stand to it, that his Conclusion is false, you thought the best way to divert the Reader's attention from what's before him, was to travel into Greece; and yet when you come there, do no more than if you had stay'd at home: For you barely say there is both Tradition and Error in the Greek Church, and you might have said
as much of the Latin; or, without mentioning either, have said, Tho' Mr. G. has prov'd a Traditionary Church cannot err, I say it can and has. All is but Saying till you come to Proving: Only to make a formal shew with an Antecedent and a Conclusion, you say it with the Ceremony of an Argument; of which since Mr. G. deny'd the Antecedent, he had no more to do till you prov'd it. 19. So it stood at the Conference, and so it stands still, and for ought I see, is like to stand: For tho' you have writ two Letters since, there appears no word of Proof in either, or sign that you do so much as think on it: You only say your Instance over again, and would have the Face you set upon it, and great Words you give it, make it pass for plain and undeniable, when all the while it is plainly impossible, and actually deny'd. Mr. G. I hope, will bide by his Answer, because it is a good one, true in it self, and direct to the Point: For it denies just what you assum'd, That the Greek Church stood upon Tradition, and fell at the same time into Error. And speaking as you do, or should do, of Er∣ror in matter of Faith, Euclid never made any thing plainer than it is, That where ever Error comes in, Tra∣dition goes out. Of necessity therefore, if the present Greek Church have adher'd to Tradition, it has not err'd: If it have err'd, it has not adher'd to Tradition. Which of the two is the Case, neither concerns Mr. G. nor can he dispute it without following bad Example, that is, falling to Argue now it is his Part to Answer. You would pass it upon us, that the Greek Church has err'd without swerving from Tradition; and you must either make it out, or acknowledge you have made much ado about nothing: For your Instance is no In∣stance, till it appears to be true; Till you do it, there is no Work for Mr. G.
20 At the close (p. 7.) you desire Mr. G. to make good two things, and tell us why you desire it, and what will fol∣low if he accept or decline your Motion. I neither un∣derstand how your Proposals follow from your Reasons, nor your Consequences from your Proposals: But think it no more worth losing time upon them, than you thought it worth boasting of the Victory. The First is, That we [Protestants] have no Absolute Certainty as to the Rule of our Faith, viz. the Scripture; altho' we have a larger and firmer Tradition for it, viz. the Consent of all Christian Churches, than you [Catholics] can have for the Points of Faith in difference between us. 21. I can tell you a better Reason for this Proposal than any you give. There was no avoiding to own Absolute Certainty to a Man who talk'd of quitting your Communion without it. But you knew well enough that your Absolute Certainty would be thwittled into Sufficient Certainty, and Sufficient Certainty into no Certainty at last; and had your Wits about you when you thought of this Proposal: For it is in effect to say, This Certainty of Faith is a troublesom matter, and not for my turn; Let us go to something else, leave Faith and pass to Scripture; of which you, Mr. G. shall prove we have no Absolute Certainty: For, if I should go about to prove we have, I foresee, that while I am seeking harbor in my larger and firmer Tradition, I shall venture to split upon your Infallibility,There can be no necessity sup∣pos'd of any In∣fallible Society of Men, either to attest or ex∣plain these Wri∣tings among Christians. to contradict my 15th Principle for the Faith of Protestants, and fall at unawares into the Snares laid for me in Error Nonplust, from p. 90 to p. 96, which I have no mind to come near. But whatever Reasons you had to make this Proposal, I see none that Mr. G. has to ac∣cept it. Do you prove, if you please, that you have Absolute Certainty; you, who bear those in hand who consult you, that you have;Dr. St. Prin∣ciple 15. and Absolute Certainty
too of that of which you profess'd your self absolutely Certain, viz. That you now hold all the same Doctrin that was taught by Christ and his Apostles;Dr. St's Copy. which by your own confession there, is the true Point. For you know very well, one is not certain of his Faith by being cer∣tain of Scripture: Your self take all who dissent from yours, to have not only an Vncertain, but a Wrong Faith, else why do you dissent from them? And yet they have all as much Certainty of Scripture as you. The truth is, if you were prest to make out your Absolute Certainty even of Scripture in your way, you would perhaps find a hard Task of it, for all your Appeal to Tradition. But it was not the Point for which the Conference was, nor ought it be the Point here, nei∣ther ought Mr. G. to meddle with it, and you trust much to his good Nature to propose it: For, besides that all the thanks he would have for his pains, would be to have the Arguments against your Certainty, turn'd against the Certainty of Scripture one day, as if he did not believe Scripture Certain: You would have him undertake a matter in which he has no concern, to save you from an Undertaking in which you are deeply concern'd, but with which you know not how to go thorow; which is a very reasonable Request. In a word, it is for you either to make manifest now, what you should have made manifest at the Conference, viz. That Protestants have Absolute Certainty, not only of the Scripture, which they call their Rule, but of the Faith which they pretend to have from that Rule; or else to suffer another thing to be manifest, viz. That I said true when I said you cannot do it; and thither I am sure it will come. 22. However, I am glad to hear any Talk from you of Absolute Certainty, even tho' it be but Talk: 'Tis a
great Stranger, as coming from your Quarters, and has a friendly and an accommodating look, and therefore for both regards deserves a hearty welcome. For, this ve∣ry Profession makes a fair approach towards the Do∣ctrin of Infallibility, or rather 'tis the self-same with it; it being against Common Sense to say you judge your self Absolutely Certain of any thing, if at the same time you judge you may be deceiv'd in thus judging. But I accept the Omen that you seem to grant you are thus Absolutely Certain, or Infallible, by virtue of Tra∣dition; for this makes Tradition to be an Infallible Ascertainer in some things at least; and, so, unless some special difficulty be found in other things that light into the same Channel, it must needs bring them down in∣fallibly too. Now I cannot for my heart discern what great difficulty there can be to remember all along the yesterdays Faith, or to be willing to be guided and in∣structed by their yesterdays Fathers, Teachers and Pastors; especially the sense of the Points (to omit many other means) being determin'd by open and daily Practice. Yet I a little fear all this your seeming kindness for Tradition, is only for your own Interest; and that, because you were necessitated to make use of it to abet Scripture's Letter, you allow it in that regard, these high Complements; but in other things, particularly in conveying down a Body of Christian Faith (which is incomparably more easie) it will pre∣sently become useless and good for nothing. In the former exigency you esteem it A worthy Rule, but in the later duty, A Rule worthy— 23. Now to let the Reader plainly see that it was meer Force, and not Inclination, which oblig'd you to grant an Absolute Certainty in Tradition conveying down Scriptures Letter, we will examin what you
allow'd it when you laid your Principles, and so spoke your own free thoughts unconstrain'd by any Adversa∣ry: Your fifteenth Principle is put down (p. 90.) in Error Nonplust, and that part of it that concerns this present Point, is thus reflected upon by your Adversary (p. 92, 93.) [Again, tho all this were true, and that the Scriptures were own'd as containing in them the whole Will of God so plainly reveal'd, that no sober Enquirer can miss of what's necessary to Salvation, and that therefore there needed no Church to explain them: Yet 'tis a strange Consequence, that therefore there can be no necessity of any Infallible Society of Men to Attest them, or to witness that the Letter of Scripture is right. This is so far from following out of the former part of Dr. St's. Discourse, that the contrary ought to follow; or, from prejudicing his own pretence, that it conduces exceed∣ingly to it. For certainly his Sober Enquirer would less be in doubt to miss of what's necessary to Salvation in case the Letter, on which all depends, be well attested, than if it be not; and most certainly an Infallible Society of Men can better attest that Letter than a Fallible one: and those Writings can with better shew of Reason be own'd to contain in them the Will of God, if their Letter be attested beyond possibility of being wrong, than if left in a possibility of being such; for if the Letter be wrong, All is wrong in this case—] As manifest then as 'tis, that to be Absolutely Certain of any thing, is not to be Fallibly Certain of it; that is, as manifest as 'tis, that to be Ab∣solutely Certain of a thing, is to be Infallibly Certain of it; so manifest it is, that you there contradict your self here, and, that, however you may endeavour to come off, you allow not heartily, nor without some re∣gret and reluctancy, an Absolute Certainty to Tradi∣tion, even in Attesting Scripture's Letter.
24. In these words of yours (p. 7) [As to the Rule of our Faith] give me leave to reflect on the word [OVR,] and thence to ask you, who are YOV? A Question which I ask not of your Name or Sirname, but of your Judgment (as you call it) of Discretion. Are you a Socinian, an Arian, a Sabellian, an Euty∣chian, &c. or what are you? Are you a whole, or a half, or a Quarter-nine-and thirty-Article Man? Do you take them for Snares, or Fences, and when for the one, and when for the other, and wherefore? These words [The Rule of OVR Faith] make you all these at once; for all these profess unanimously Scripture's Letter is their Rule of Faith. Mr. G. when he came to your House, imagin'd he was to treat with a Protestant, or something like it, and to have learn'd from you what Absolute Certainty you would assign for your, (that is, Protestant) Faith; and you give him only a Generical Latitudinarian Rule, common to all the He∣resies in the World. The Project of the Comprehen∣sion Bill was a trifle to this: It brings into one Fold all the most enormous Straglers that have been since Christ's time, nay Wolves, and Sheep and all. It blends into one Mass the most heterogeneous and hitherto irre∣concilable Sects. Nay, it miraculously makes Light and Darkness very consistent, and Christ and Belial ve∣ry good Friends. For your own Credit sake then di∣stinguish your kind of Protestants (if you be indeed one of that Church) from that infamous Rabble of stigmatiz'd Hereticks; and let us know what is the Proper Difference that restrains that Notion of a Com∣mon Rule to your particular, as such a kind of Protestant, and shew us that specifical Rule to be Absolutely Cer∣tain. I say, such a kind; for even the word Prote∣stant too is a Subaltern Genus, and has divers Species,
and 'tis doubted by many, who are no Papists, under which Species you are to be rankt. But, why should I vex you with putting you upon manifest Impossibili∣ties? For the Letter being the common Rule to them all, and, as daily experience shews us, variously explica∣ble, that which particularizes it to belong specially to this or that Sect, as its proper Rule, can be only this, [According as my self, and those of my Iudgment under∣stand or interpret it.] The Difference then constituting your Protestant Rule, as distinguisht from that of those most abominable Heresies, can only be [as my own Iudgment, or others of my side, thus or thus interpret Scripture's Letter] and wriggle which way you please, there it will and must end at last. Go to work then, distinguish your self by your Ground of Faith, and then make out this your proper Rule to be Absolutely Cer∣tain or Infallible; and then, who will not laugh at you for attempting it, and assuming that to your self, which you deny to God's Church, and preferring your self as to the Gift of Understanding Scripture right, before the whole body of those many and Learned Churches in Communion with Rome? Nay, and be∣fore the Socinians too; without so much as pretend∣ing to make out to the World, that you have better Means, either Natural or Supernatural, to interpret those Sacred Oracles, than had the others. 25. My last Exception is, that you pretend the Let∣ter of Scripture is a Rule of Faith for your People, which not one in a Million, even of your own Pro∣testants relies on, or ever thinks of relying on, in or∣der to make choice of their Faith, or determining what to hold. This pretence of yours looks so like a meer Jest, that I cannot perswade my self you are in earnest, when you advance such a Paradox. For, 'tis manifest
that while your Protestants are under Age, and not yet at years of Discretion to judge, they simply believe their Fathers and Teachers; that is, they follow the way of Tradition, however misplac'd. And, when they come to Maturity, pray tell us truly, how many of your Sober Enquirers have you met with in your life, who endeavour to abstract from all the prejudices they have imbib'd in their Minoriy, and, reducing their in∣clin'd thoughts to an equal Balance of Indifferency, do with a wise Jealousie, lest this Popish way of be∣lieving immediate Fathers and Pastors should delude them, as it has done the whole World formerly, re∣solve to examin the Book of Scripture it self, read it attentively, pray daily and fervently, that God's Spirit would discover to them, whether what they have learn'd hither to be true or no, and what is; and, in a word, use all the Fallible means (for you allow them no other) which your Sober Enquirers are to make use of to find out their Faith? I doubt, if you would please to answer sincerely, you would seriously con∣fess you scarce ever met with such a one in your life; that is, never met with any one who rely'd upon Scri∣pture's Letter practically for his Rule of Faith, what∣ever you may have taught them to talk by rote. Can any Man of Reason imagin, that all the Reformed in Denmark or Sueden (to omit others) did light to be so unanimously of one Religion meerly by means of read∣ing your Letter-Rule, and your Sober Enquiry? Or can any be so blind, as not to see, that 'tis the following the natural way of Tradition, or Childrens believing Fa∣thers (that is, indeed, of Education) that such multi∣tudes in several places, continue still of the same per∣swasion; and that you consequently owe to this way, which you so decry in Catholics, that any considerable
number of you do voluntarily hang together at all? And that those Principles of yours, which you take up sor a shew, when you write against Catholics, would, if put in practice, in a short time crumble to Atoms all the Churches in the World? Perhaps, indeed, when your Protestants come at Age, they may receive some Confirmation from their Fathers and Preachers, quoting Scripture-places against what Catholics hold, or what they shall please to say they hold; and by the same means come to believe a Trinity, the Godhead of Christ, Christ's Body being absent in the Sacrament, and such like; but do the Hearers and Learners make it their business to use all careful disquisition (for a slubber∣ing superficial diligence will not serve the turn in mat∣ters of such high Concern) whether the Catholics, and those great Scripturists, who deny those other Points, do not give more congruous explications of those places than their own Preachers do? unless they do this, or something equivalent, 'tis manifest the Letter of Scri∣pture is not their Rule, but honest Tradition. And that they do no such thing, is hence very apparent, that they rest easily satisfi'd, and well appaid with their Parson's interpretation of Scripture, they presently ac∣cept it for right and good, and readily swallow that sense, which some Learned Men, of their own Judg∣ment, assign it, without thinking themselves oblig'd to observe your Method of Sober Enquiry. You may rail against the Council of Trent, as you will, for for∣bidding any to interpret Scripture against the Sense which the Church holds; but 'tis no more than what your Hearers perpetually practise, and the Preachers too (for all their fair words) expect from them. And I much doubt even your self (tho' your Principles are the most pernicious for taking matters out of the
Churche's, and putting them into private Hands, of any Protestant, I ever yet read) would not take it very well if some Parishioner of yours, presuming upon his Prayers for Direction, &c. should tell you that you err'd in Interpreting Scripture, and that the Sense he gave it, was sound and right Faith, yours wrong and Heretical; and I would be glad to know what you would say to him, according to your Principles, if he should hap to stand out against you, that he understands Scripture to be plainly against a Trinity and Christ's Divinity, as Iohn Biddle did against the Minister of his Parish, and the whole Church of England to boot. 'Tis plain you ought to cherish and commend him for standing firm to his Rule; But I am much afraid you would be out of humor with him, and esteem your self affronted. You may pretend what you please of high Expressions given by Antiqui∣ty, of Scripture's incomparable Excellency, and Suffici∣ency for the Ends it was intended for, which we do not deny to it; but I dare say, even your self do's not think, that either the Ancient Faithful, or the Modern Reform∣ers, meant that any of the Ecclesia credens, or Believing Church, should have the liberty to Interpret Scripture against the Ecclesia docens, or Teaching Church, i. e. Pastors; or Coyn a Faith out of it, contrary to the present or former Congregation of which he was a Member. 26. The sum is; 'Tis evident hence, that Tradition of your Fathers and Teachers, and not Scriptures Let∣ter, is indeed your Rule; That by it you Interpret Scripture; which then only is call'd your Rule, and made use of as such, when you are Disputing against us; because having thus set it up, to avoid and counter∣balance the Authority of the former Church you left, you make account your own private Interpretation of
it may come to be thought Argumentative against the great Body of those Churches from whose Communion you departed; and yet you judge no private Parishio∣ner should claim the same Priviledge against you, with∣out affronting your great Learning, and Pastoral Au∣thority. But I much wonder you should still venture to call Scripture's Letter a Rule of Faith, having been beaten from that Tenet so pitifully in Error Nonplust, from Pag. 59. to Pag. 72. where I believe you may observe divers Particulars requisit to be clear'd e're the Letter can be in all regards Absolutely Certain, which the Consent of all Christian Churches will never reach to by their meer Authority, unless you will allow the Sense of Christ's Doctrin descending by Tradition, did preserve the Copy substantially right and intire. 27. Your pretended Rule of Faith then, being in rea∣lity the same that is challeng'd by all the Heretics in the World, viz. Scripture's Letter Interpreted by your selves; I will let you see in this following short Dis∣course, how far it is from being Absolutely Certain. I. God has left us some Way to know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught. II. Therefore this Way must be such, that they who take it, shall arrive by it at the End it was in∣tended for; that is, know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught. III. Scripture's Letter Interpretable by Private Iudgments, is not that Way; for we experience Pres∣byterians and Socinians (for example) both take that Way, yet differ in such high Fundamentals, as the Trinity, and the Godhead of Christ.
IV. Therefore Scripture's Letter Interpretable by Private Iudgments, is not the Way left by God to know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught, or surely to arrive at right Faith. V. Therefore they who take only that Way, cannot by it arrive surely at right Faith, since 'tis impossible to arrive at the End, without the Means or Way that leads to it. 28. I do not expect any Answer to this Discourse, as short as it is, and as plain and as nearly as it touches your Copyhold; it may be serv'd as Mr. G's Argument is, turn'd off so so with an Instance, if there be one at hand; or, with what always is at hand, an Irony or scornful Jest, your readiest, and, in truth, most useful Servants: But you must be excus'd from finding any Proposition or Inference to deny, or any thing, save the Conclusion it self: Which, tho' it will not be fairly a∣voided, I cannot hope should be fairly admitted, unless I could hope that Men would be more in love with Truth than their Credit. Till Truth be taken a little more to heart, Catholic Arguments will and must always be faulty; but they are the most unluckily and crosly faulty of any in the World; faulty still in the wrong place. When fault is found in other Arguments, it is always found in the Premisses; in these, 'tis found in the Conclusion: In which, notwithstanding, all who know any thing of a Conclusion, know there can be no fault, if there be none in the Premisses. Indeed, they shew that to be true which Men cannot endure should be true; and that is their great and unpardon∣able fault. That you may not think I talk in the Air,
I declare openly, that you cannot Answer this Discourse, unless you will call some unconcerning Return an An∣swer; and I engage my self to shew the Proposition true, and the Inference good, which you shall pitch upon to deny; And the Distinction, if you will make any, not to purpose. The truth is, I engage for no great mat∣ter; for I know beforehand you can no more Answer now, than you could to Error Nonplust, or can prove an Absolute Certainty in Protestant Faith. 29. To return now to Mr. G. the Second thing which you desire him to make good, is, That the Tradition from Father to Son is an infallible Conveyance of Matters of Faith, notwithstanding the Greek Church is charged by him with Er∣ror, which adher'd to Tradition. That is, you desire him to prove over again, what you tell us your self he has prov'd once already: For you tell us (p. 5), he prov'd, That they [Traditionary Christians] could not innovate in Faith, unless they did forget what they held the day before, or out of malice alter it. Pray, when it is prov'd, that the Conveyance of Faith by Tradition, excludes the pos∣sibility of Change in Faith, save by forgetfulness or malice, is it not prov'd, That, where there could be neither forgetfulness nor malice, there could be no change in Faith? You do not, I suppose, desire he should prove, that Men had always Memories, or that Christi∣ans were never malicious enough to damn themselves and Posterity wittingly; and yet it can stick no where else: If it can, said Mr. G. assign where. Now you know very well, that a Conveyance which makes it impossible that Faith should ever be chang'd, is an In∣fallible Conveyance; and the very thing is prov'd which you desire should be prov'd. What reason has Mr. G. to prove it a second time? And what reason have you to desire it? If Proof would content you,
you have it already; but a second cannot hope to con∣tent you better than the first, unless it be worse. 30. Yes, but you would have him prove, Notwith∣standing the Greek Church &c. (p. 7.) Notwithstanding? Why do you think it is with Arguments as with Writs, where the want of a Non obstante spoils all? When a Truth is once prov'd, is it not prov'd, notwithstand∣ing all Objections? And will any Notwithstanding un∣prove it again? Will your Notwithstanding shew us there was a time in which Men were not Men, nor acted like Men? Will it shew us, that a thing which cannot possibly be chang'd, may yet possibly remain not the same? Will it shew us, that a Cause can be without its Effect, or an Effect without its Cause? Will it shew us, that a thing can be and not be at once? Unless it can do such Feats as these, you may keep your Notwith∣standing to your self, for any Service it will do you here: For all the Notwithstandings in the world cannot hinder a thing which is true, from being true; nor the Proof which proves it to be true, from being a Proof. Mr. G's Proof shews, that Tradition from Father to Son is an Infallible Conveyance of Faith as plainly as that Men are Men: And would you persuade us with the Rhetorick of your Notwithstanding, that we do not see what we see? Tho' you had brought twenty of them instead of one, we could see nothing by them, but that you had a good Fancy; for they shew us nothing of the Object, nor offer at it. You shew us not how the Operations of Human Nature should be suspended in our present Case, nor any thing which should or could suspend them, but would have us believe Men were prodigi∣ously forgetful or malicious, purely for the sake of an Imagination of yours. I pray rub up afresh your old
Logical Notions, and reflect whether it were ever heard of in University Disputes, that when an Argument is advanc'd, the Defendant is allow'd to make Objections against it; and instead of Answering, bid the Arguer prove his Conclusions to be true, Notwithstanding all his Objections? Consider how perfectly this confounds the Offices of the Disputant and Defendent, and makes all Regular Discourse impossible. Consider how this new Method of yours destroys the very possibility of ever concluding any thing that is, the very Faculty of Rea∣soning; For Objections being generally multipliable without end, if all of them must be Solv'd e're any Argument concludes, nothing will be concluded, nor any Conclusion admitted: And so a long so Farewel to Rational Nature. Consider that Truth is built on its own Intrinsecal Grounds, and not on the Solving Ob∣jections. For your own Credits sake then with Learn∣ed Men and Logicians, do not seek to evade with Not∣withstandings, but Answer fairly and squarely to the Ar∣gument as it lies: Consider, that who has found the Cause, has found the Effect. Mr. G. has found us a Cause of Infallible Conveyance, and therefore has shew'd us an Infallible Conveyance. You pretend, that tho' there was the Cause, there was not the Effect; and this 'tis known beforehand cannot be, and you knew it as well as any body: But you knew likewise there was no saving your Stakes without playing a new Game; and therefore, give you your due, did all that could be done, in trying to divert our sight from a Matter plain before us, and amuse us us with a Matter of Fact, which you are sure will be ob∣scure enough, by that time it is handled long enough. The Terms you put, viz. Tradition, Error, and the
Greek Church, must needs bring into Dispute, whether such and so many Quotations, or some one or two Men disclaiming their Tenet to be a Novelty, be a Proof of Tradition from Father to Son; whether the Error be any Error; and whether, and for how much, an Error in Faith, and how much of it belongs to Divinity; whether the Greek Church be ingag'd by a Citation from a Greek Author; of two that be cited, one against another, which shall be preferr'd, and thought to speak the sense of his Church; and which is a Latiniz'd, which a frank Grecian. And who shall see through the Mists which these Dis∣putes will raise? More too will fall in in process of time: There will be wrangling about the sense of Words, the propriety of Phrases, the preference of Readings, and twenty such important quarrels; which will tire out every body, and satisfie no body. In short, you saw that if you could perswade People not to think the Church of Rome Infallible, till all be said, which will occur to be said of the Greek Church, you are safe enough; For Doomsday will come before that day. Till then you may carry it with a shew of Eru∣dition, because there must be abundance of Greek ci∣ted. And this is all which can come of your In∣stance; and I wish it were not all you had in your Eye. 31. In the mean time you have not answer'd Mr. G. because you have found no fault in any Propositi∣on, or in the Inference of his Argument; and there∣fore it rests with you to answer it. He has answer'd you; because he has found this fault with your In∣stance, which you make your Antecedent, that it is not true; and that the Greek Church did not at once
err in faith, and adhere to Tradition: and therefore it rests again with you to prove it; and yet while you are Debtor both ways, you call upon him to pay. Ere we part, Take this along with you, that the Debt which you are precisely bound to satisfie, first is to answer his Argument, and till you do this, you can claim no right to Object or Argue. I am SIR Your humble Servant.
