S824 13593405 100684
Catholick Loyalty: UPON THE SUBJECT OF GOVERNMENT and OBEDIENCE. DELIVERED IN A SERMON, BEFORE THE King and Queen In his Majesties Chappel-Royal at WHITE-HALL, On the Thirtieth of January, 1687. Prov. VIII. 15. Per me Reges Regnant: By Me Kings Reign. Published by his Majesties Command. By the Reverend Father EDWARD SCARISBRIKE, Priest of the Society of JESUS. London: Printed for R. Booker. 1688.
TO HIS Sacred Majesty. SIR, IN Duty and Obedience to Your Ma∣jesties Order, and in a most Profound and Reverential Acknowledgment of the Honour of Your Royal Command, I have presumed to lay these Papers at Your Sa∣cred Feet, as the truly Catholick Do∣ctrine of that Society, whereof the Au∣thor hath the Honour to be a Member; and who is, to the highest degree of Vene∣ration, Sir, The most Dutiful of your Majesties Subjects; EDWARD SCARISBRIKE.
Catholick Loyalty: Upon the Subject of GOVERNMENT and OBEDIENCE, &c. Prov. VIII. 15. Per me Reges Regnant. By me Kings Reign. HEre is a whole Sermon (Sacred Majesty) wrapt up in a short Text, of only four words, Per me Reges Regnant: And in this plain, short Text, the Wisdom of God Preaches to the Sons of men. It Preaches, I say, to All, without Exception; to Rulers as well as to Subjects. It admonisheth Kings, by whose Com∣mission they Govern, and Instructs the People at the same time, whom they are to Obey. If the Ir∣refragable Doctrine, and the Ʋncontestable Authority of this Emphatical Portion of Holy Writ, had been ta∣ken into Thought and laid to Heart, when time was, as it ought to have been; there wou'd have been no occasion for the Ruful Solemnity of this days meeting: No Subject for an Anniversary, in perpe∣tual Memory (and Detestation) of so Execrable,
Treasonous and Barbarous a Regicide: A Regicide, committed in the Face of the Sun in Cold Blood, and under a Pretext of Law; Nay, and to consum∣mate the wickedness, by the Hands of Rebelli∣ous Subjects, and before the very Gate of their So∣veraigns Royal Palace. This is not a place or an Argument for high Flights, or florid Discourses; but without more words, it was a Diabolical Violence upon the Per∣son and Dignity of a Lawful, a Just, a Merciful and most Excellent Prince. Now if Innocent Blood shall desite a Land, even in a private, single case of Mur∣der; and barely for defacing the Image of God in a kind of Theological Allusion or Figure; what Judg∣ments may not a Nation reasonably dread, and ex∣pect, from Gods Justice and Vengeance, for so Nati∣onal, so Daring, so Complicated a Murder as this was! A Murder, that carried Oppression, Treason, Sacriledge, and the whole Roll of Crying Mortal Sins in the Veins of it. A Murder, that struck at the Divinity of Power, as well as at the Administration of it; and at the same time attacqued the Life of the Prince, and bid a defiance to his Royal Character. Upon this consideration it is, that we are called together to Humble our selves before Almighty God, with Fasting and Prayers, to Implore the Divine Mercy to accept of our true Repentance and hearty Contrition for all our by-past heinous Sins, and grant us his holy Grace, that we may live here∣after in perfect Union and Charity, and in a duti∣ful
Obedience to God and our Governours, and in Love, Peace and Agreement with one another. For this reason it is, that we are now met to pro∣strate our selves before the Father of Mercies, most fervently to beseech him in his Infinite Goodness, to be Gratious to our Brethren, as well as to our selves; and to avert that destroying Vengeance which we may so justly fear, and cannot but trem∣ble under the thought of, for the almost inexpiable Sin of Blaspheming Gods Anointed, and for the effusion of his Blood. Not but that I do in Charity hope, and in a full perswasion of Reason presume, that every Soul that hears me this day, can lay his Hand upon his Heart, and acquit himself of ha∣ving had any part in this Hellish Tragedy, either in Thought, Word or Deed, in a direct tendency to so black an end. We cannot so much forget the Duties of our Profession, either as Christians, as Catholicks, or as Subjects, for we have been taught better things; But a National Wickedness we know, calls for a National Punishment. And briefly, Be it what it will, we are all Offenders, all Provokers, and every good Christian is to bear his own Burthen without Criminating Instruments or Parties. No, Beloved Christians, Repentance and Forgiveness is the Work and Duty of the day: and it wou'd have a very ill Grace, whilst we are upon our bended Knees, in Supplications to the Dispencer of all Mercies, for an Act of Oblivion for our selves; at the same time not to allow an Amne∣sty one to another.
But to hasten to my business, Here is a horrid thing done, which most certainly wou'd never have been done, if the Doers of it had but kept seriously in their thoughts these words, Per me Reges Regnant, By me Kings Reign; and I do not know a better preservative for the future, against these Principles and Practices, that wrought all Our former Misery and Woe, than a plain Expound∣ing upon this Text, Per me Reges Regnant. St. Paul speaks to the same purpose, Non est potestas nisi a Deo, C. xiii. V. 1. ad Rom. That is to say, Go∣vernment it self, and all the Powers of Government, are of Divine Appointment and Institution: And this shall be the first point of my Discourse. Now if it be granted, that Government is of God, it follows necessarily, that Subjection must be so too; for Order is the Excellency of Power it self; and they derive both from the same Fountain. Superior is Nonsense without Inferior: and the Relatives can∣not stand one without another. If Governors be from God, so are the Governed; if Power, so is Sub∣jection. Briefly, I find one Proposition here invol∣ved in another; and that the Obedience of the Sub∣ject falls as naturally within the prospect of my Text, as the Power of the Prince: and since they cannot be separated, I shall treat of both. First, of Government, how sacred it is, as being of Divine Authority. Secondly, of Obedience; with Doctrines and Applications suitable to the Matter and Occasion. They are both joyned in the Methods of Gods Pro∣vidence in Nature, Reason, Religion, Policy, Law,
Practice: In a word, the same Power which ap∣points Kings to Command, obligeth Subjects to Obey. To understand these two important Truths, we must beg the Assistance of the King of Kings and and Lord of all Powers, by the Intercession of the Virgin Mary. Ave Maria. The First Part. IT is observable, that in the whole Book of Life, we do not find any thing more plainly set down, more accurately read upon, or oftner inculcated, than the Doctrine of the sacredness of Governing Powers, which is no more at last than what natu∣rally results from the very words of my Text: By me Kings Reign. To begin with the Institution of Power, give me leave to put three short Queries: 1. This Power; Is it so sacred? 2. Are we very certain that it is so? 3. With reverence to the Supposition, What if it be? I answer in order: First, That it is as sacred as the having God the Author of it, can make any thing. Secondly, We have the Veracity of Scri∣pture that so it is; and lastly, If so it be; there is no contending with an Almighty Power, who hath placed Governours and Rulers over us; no expostu∣lating with an Infallible Wisdom, who knows what is best for us; no playing fast and loose with an All-seeing God, who inspects the Thoughts as well as the Actions: There is no room in this case either
for Fallacy, or force; Arms, or Arguments: But the Decretory four words here in my Text, By me Kings Reign, confounds all Sophisms, dissolves all Scruples, stops all mouths, and silences all Disputes. The challenges of the People, as if Authority were radically in them; the contradictory perswasions of Co-ordinacy; that is to say, of a sharing of Sove∣raignty amongst Subjects; the fancy of a Conditio∣nal Power, and a Conditional Duty; (as if Kings were only the Trustees of the People) the Paradox of a singulis major, universis minor; the conceit of erecting Government upon the sandy foundation of a diffusive multitude: Take all these Cavils and Ob∣jections, and as many more of the same kind as were ever hammer'd out by the malice and wit of Hell, and corrupt Nature: In these two little syllables, Per me, By me; they are all answered and put to flight like the dust before the wind, and beyond all thought or possibility of resource: Unless they will appeal from the Potter to the Clay; from Omnipotence to Flesh and Blond; from the Truth of the Scriptures, to the Dreams of some here and there— What shall I say? some disaffected Achi∣tophel, or Man of State. To proceed: By whom was the World made? By me, saith the Divine Wisdom. Whence had the Stars their Influences? the Celestial Orbs their Motions? Vegetables and Mi∣nerals their Vertues? Who was it, in fine, that made every thing out of nothing by one word; and by another drew Order out of that Confusion? This was all done, Per me still; and the original of Government was as much the work of Gods Provi∣dence,
as the Creation was of his Power. The holy Fathers speak so home, and so unanimously to this point, that the multiplying of Instances and Autho∣rities, would but weary out your patience, and burn day-light. You will do well to observe and still keep in your mind, that the Doctrine of the Institution of Power, as I have here delivered it, is no other than that which hath been faithfully transmitted unto us by the blessed Author of Power himself. Per me, By me, is a sufficient Testimonial that it is of Divine Autho∣rity. But then there is Reges and Regnant, yet to come. And here we are to take notice of the extent and term, or duration of this Commission. It is spoken to all Kings, to all Soveraign Powers, under what form soever; and so it is to all People, in all Pla∣ces, at all Times, and for ever; without any sort of condition, limitation, or restriction, in respect of Customs, Decrees, or any Political Sanctions, or Pro∣visions: I speak this with all reverence imaginable to the Dignity of Humane Laws, and to the Order of Humane Society. But my meaning is, that as God is the Fountain, the inexhaustible Fountain of Power; and incomprehensible in all his Attributes, beyond what the Spirit of a Man is able to conceive: so we cannot without Blasphemy so much as fancy to our selves, that Wisdom it self can ever mistake its measures: Which Contemplation brings me to the point I am now speaking of; which is, That all Humane Powers are but as Emanations out of the Bosome of Gods Eternal Providence, without any other respect to mankind, than as a Rule and Di∣rection
for them to Govern by: Not but that Men are apt, instead of carrying the Copy to the Original, to bring down the Original to the Copy. But still By me Kings reign, is a Doctrine not to be questioned; an Authority not to be disputed, and a Foundation never to be undermined. But it will be said perchance, That the Ʋniver∣sality of this Proposition goes too far, and that the Canon of our Scripture is no Rule to a Pagan: I an∣swer, This is a Truth founded in reasonable Nature; A Truth that every Man finds writ in his Heart; and in short, a Truth that is calculated for all Me∣ridians, for all Religions, for all Nations, Civil or Barbarous, with a particular regard to the Comfort, the Peace, and the Well-being of Mankind. There are in the World that take upon them to bound So∣veraign Powers, by certain State-Measures and Mo∣dels, according to popular Conceptions of their own, and to furnish plausible Arguments to the common People upon this subject. But these are Governments of man making, not of Gods: and a sort of Kings, that King Solomon never dream't of, in his Per me Reges Regnant; By me Kings Reign. You have had here the Dignity of Power secu∣red, and the Officer Commissioned; and the last word of my Text does now hand us forward, from the Faculty and Signature of Power, to a Considerati∣on of it in the Exercise, with a respect to the right Ʋse or Abuse of it. I shall not need to enlarge upon
it, that in all Power there is first a Regard to be had to the Character; and then again to the Ʋse or Administration of it. The first is wholy Divine and Perfect; the second lyable to the frailties and passions of Flesh and Blood; so that as the Divinity of the one shall in no sort excuse the personal fail∣ings of the other: Neither shall the Sacred Image of God that is stamped upon Sovereignty suffer any diminution of Reverence for these mistakes; on the other hand it is not in the Power of the Person to Ʋ-nking the Office; and much less in the Power of the People to call Gods immediate Minister to an Ac∣count: It is Per me Reges; by me Kings: Not per me Senatus Populusque: By me the Senate and the People Reign, in an Imperial State. There is no room for Intruders, betwixt the King of Kings and his Vice-gerents. Be this spoken to the shame of Calumniators, and to the confusion of those that in∣stead of Trying the Crooked by the Streight, bring the Streight to the Crooked; and force the Oracles of the Holy Scriptures to the bent of their own Carnal Lusts, Interests and Designs. Is a Prince Religious, Just, Gracious, Merciful? Is he Resolute in War, and Temperate in Peace? Is he Firm to his Honour, to his Word, to his Conscience? Is he Tender of his People and his Friends, and placable to his Enemies? Is he all this, and as much more as might be ad∣ded, to make up the most Consummated Character of a Governour after Gods own Heart? Per me Regnat, He Reigns by me. On the contrary, is his Govern∣ment Heavy upon us by Oppression, by Injustice, by all sorts of Vexations? Per me Regnat still. The
Good and the Bad Prince are Creatures both of the same Power, stamped with the same Impress, and as inviolably Sacred the one as the other. Happy is that People however whose blessed Lot it is to fall under the influence of so Divine a Conjunction; as when the Person that Governs is previously adapted by Grace and Nature to all the ends of his Office and Imployments. I cannot pass this Hint without a thankful Consideration of Gods infinite Mercy and Goodness to us, in the Person of Our Dear and Dread Sovereign. It is no flattery, but Duty, Truth and Gratitude, to own the Comforts we enjoy in the Confluence of all those Royal Endowments in the Ruler whom God hath set over us, which may make a Prince, Great and Glorious, and a People Hap∣py. A Blessing that hath scarce left us any Tem∣poral Comforts further to pray for, beyond the Con∣tinuance of what by Gods Mercy we at this day enjoy. A Prince under whose Protection we are safe; in whose Clemency we are free and easie: A Prince whose Benignity of Nature hath left us no∣thing to fear; and whose overflowing Piety and Goodness hath hardly left us any Place for more to hope for. It would be as endless to Enumerate the Mercys that we are possest of, as it would be diffi∣cult to say what we want. Blessed be Gods Holy Name, for the share we have, (all that are here present) in so inestimable a Blessing; a Blessing that hath been snatched out of the very Jaws of so ma∣ny several deaths, by as many Miracles. May the same Watchful, Powerful Providence, still and for ever cover that sacred Head: and preserve Him
hereafter as hitherto, from his open, and from his secret Enemies; and in one word, from the raging of the Seas and from the tumults of the People. I have done with the Division of my Text in the several parts of it upon the heads of Government: It re∣mains only to speak a word of the whole, by way of Innuendo or Application, taking it all together. Per me Reges Regnant, By me Kings Reign. These few words in the Context, Preach this Doctrine to all Kings and Governours: By me, it is you Monarchs of the Earth, saith the Almighty, that you Reign: You hold your Commission at my Will and Pleasure; There is no other Power that hath any thing to do with you. I have placed you in the Throne of my Greatness, invested you with the Robes of Dignity. I have armed you with the Sword of Justice, I have de∣posited all the Ensigns of Majesty in your hands: Not for your selves to Alienate or Dispose of, but in Trust, as you shall Answer it at my Tribunal. Who then shall dare to Oppose You? You Reign by my Or∣der, and who shall presume to dispute your Autho∣rity? You Reign in my Name, and who shall Que∣stion your Deputation? In few words, You Reign for me, in me, by me; stick to the Order I have given you, and execute it. I will-have no sharers in Royalty; I will suffer no Popular Competitions, whether the Prince or Subject shall be uppermost; or, which is the same thing, whether God or Man shall be Ma∣ster. Do you maintain the Dignity and Preroga∣tive of your Commission; and I'le maintain the Sa∣credness of your Persons. Do not suffer your
selves to be transported in the Contemplation of the dazling Splendor of a Crown: But look up to the Original of all your Greatness and Glory, in whom you Live, you Move and have your Being: and by whom Kings Reign, Per me Reges Regnant. But it is time now that I speak a word to the Subject, upon the point of the Obligation of his Obedi∣ence; for the same Power (as I have said) which ordains Kings to Command, obligeth Subjects to Obey.
The Second Part. IN this member of the Partition I shall observe the same Method of Distribution I did in the former. Per me, &c. By me Kings Reign. That is to say, God makes Kings, and Commissions them to Govern. Do they Govern well? Thank God and bless Heaven for it. Do they Misgovern? There is no affronting the Minister upon any ac∣count whatsoever, without falling foul upon the Ordinance, and consequently breaking in upon the Divine Authority it self. The common Objection upon this Topique is this; Rulers are to be a terror to Evil Doers, not to those who do well; and that the Almighty Wisdom never gave a Commission of Power to destroy the main Ends of Government, which consists in the Order and Peace of humane So∣ciety. Put case that this Power may be sometime perverted. Is Fire and Water ever the less neces∣sary for the Use and Comfort of Life, because of now and then a Deluge or Conflagration? The Pos∣sibility of an abuse of Power is Incontestable; for a Prince cannot Defend or Protect his People, with∣out such a force as may enable him to oppress them. But what need many words? Every man stands or falls to his own Master: he that gives, may take; he that sets up, may cast down. By me Kings Reign, is exclusive of any other Commission. It sounds as much, as by me alone they Reign:
Which is all one with saying in the Inference, To me alone shall they account for the Execution of their Trust. It would be well, if all the Despisers of Dignities, and the Murmurers against the ordinary Cour∣ses of Gods Providence in the Government of the World, would thoroughly weigh and consider the Force, the Intent and Authority of this same Per me, in my Text, before they enter into Censori∣ous Expostulations with God himself, about the Prerogative of his Ordinance of Power; or with Gods Ministers, about certain imaginary Conditions, which they fancy to be imply'd or included in their Original Grant. If they would but give themselves time for one sober Thought upon this matter, it is impossible but they must be convinced of the Vani∣ty and Folly of all those Popular Schemes and Sy∣stemes of Power, which Ambition and Carnal Policy have fashioned to themselves. Are they afraid of Tyranny, and not of Anarchy? The one, at the worst, is only Personal, Temporary, Local; the other extends to all Men, to all Times, to all Purposes, to all Places, and Embroyls Humane Society in a Civil War over the Face of the whole Earth. But what is it at last that the Troublers of Publique Order contend for? Would they be Ʋppermost? There is no Ʋppermost upon a Level; and that's the very point before us. As for Liberty and Property, there's no such thing, where all is Common. Our Reason tells us so, and upon woful Experience we have found it so. There is no thought of removing the
bounds that God hath set us: no place for Reform∣ing or Refining upon the Regulations of Providence; Government and Governours are Sacred and Insepara∣able: God hath joyned them, and Man is not to di∣vide them. It hath a more pardonable appearance, I must confess, to wage War with Man, then with God. But what is the difference betwixt saying to the Almighty, We will have none of your Gover∣nours; and we will have none of your Government. Non te abjecerunt, Sed me, says God to Samuel, They have not cast you off, but in you, Me they have Re∣jected. For it is not only Per me, By me, But Pro me, For me, that Kings Govern: That is to say, It is in Gods stead, as well as by his Divine Commissi∣on that they Reign; they are covered over with the Rayes of his Glory, and are the Instruments of his Wisdom, as well as the Creatures of his Power. Per me (By me) that Kings Reign, is a word of Comfort to the Obedient, seeing they have the Crea∣tor of Heaven and Earth for their Protector: and it is a word of Terror on the other hand, to the Stub∣born or Rebellious; when they consider that they Fight against God, and have the Lord of Hosts for their Avenger. And there is no place neither for doubting whether it be Per me, or not; for Truth it self hath made Proclamatation of it, in the very Syllables of my Text. There seems to be a certain kind of Rhetoritical Dignity in the very Marshaling of the words; a particular Emphasis in this same Per me, that puts a little stop to a mans thought, as if
it were to bespeak a Reverence for that which fol∣lows: the very stile imports a Declaration, with a Be it known to Men and Angels, to Heaven and Earth, that by me Kings Reign. So that as the Obedient are sure of Gods Favour and Indulgence, so the Al∣mighty takes to Himself all the Indignities that are offered to Majesty. They that make no Con∣science of laying Violent hands upon the Thrones or the Persons of Kings, would not spare the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, if they could reach him. Whosoever strikes at the Divine Order of the World, strikes at the Power and Wisdom that Created it. Take a∣way that Order, and what's the remaining Mass without it, more than the Chymists Caput Mor∣tuum, that serves for nouse or purpose? I cannot but take notice here, over and a∣bove, of the Indubitable Truth and Authority of the Assertion; that By me Kings Reign; carries a much greater weight and force with it, then (Kings Reign by Me) the latter imports only a bare Answer to a plain Question. As if a bo∣dy should say, By whom do Kings Reign? By me, says my Text. The other with a wonder∣ful Energy, determines the Question by Antici∣pation. He goes too far that doubts. The whole Scheme of Power is accurately Delineated and in the uttermost extent of it, as fully com∣prehended in these four words: The very Stamp consecrates the Matter; and challenges a Resig∣nation, even before and without knowing what
our Obedience is to be exercised upon. For all the measures we have of Good or Evil, are the proportion our Thoughts, Words and Actions hold to the Holy Will and Pleasure of Our Heavenly Father. It is Per me, that teach∣eth the People their Duty, sets them Right, and keeps them right: It prevents Mistakes, clears all Cavils, and answers all Pious Ends: And in all cases of Difficulty, Claim or Dispute, whe∣ther should we fly, but to the Original of Power, with our last Appeals? It is Per me in fine, and only Per me, that decides all Controversy. We are now come in course to the two re∣maining parts of my Text, Reges and Regnant, Kings and Reign. These words give the People to understand, that their Governors are Gods Ministers, and so there is no medling with them; and as the Prerogatives of Government are Gods Powers, so there is no controulling them. It would be hard after all this, yet if the Op∣posers of Royalty and Royal Preheminences, should not find somthing at last to say for themselves in Excuse, at least, if not in Defence of their depar∣ture from the Doctrine of the Revealed Will of God, as we read it both in his Holy Word, and in the common Principles of Reason and Nature. It is their way to hold their Disciples in hand, that the Per me here in the Text, doth not so much import an Authoritative Institution, as a Permission of Government; as if Order were the
work of Passion, Interest or Chance: and an effect rather of Humane Necessity, then of Divine Ap∣pointment. The very fancy of such a Permission, is little less then Blasphemy: for it lays the Foun∣dation of all Policy, in Blood and Confusion; so that out of War, and from plain Cutting of Throats, comes forth the Whimsey of their distinction of a Divine Permission. There are others again, that will allow Kings to Govern as Gods Ministers; but for the behoof of the People; infer a forfeiture of their Right to Govern, from a violation of their Commission. These People are not aware, that the Character does not depend upon the Administration: for whatever the Man be, the King is Gods Ruler still, and the People are still the Kings Subjects. The Administration I say, does not dissolve the Rela∣tion. To summ up all in a few words; Kings are Gods Deputies, and the Powers of their Com∣mission are of no less Authority than the Character of their Creation. It is God that is the Author of both; and the Duty of our Allegiance is of the same extraction with the function of the Govern∣ment. What is Reigning, without Subjection? What's the Dignity of Power, without the Obli∣gation of Submission or Obedience? Or what is Go∣vernment it self, but such a Chain of Connection, as if but one Link of it be taken out, the whole Frame would be in danger to fall to pieces? To pass now from the Doctrine to the Application. How vain, how foolish, and how impious is it
for men to contend with an invincible, and irresi∣stible Power, and to oppose false Glosses and Rea∣sonings, to the undeniable voice of Truth? In a word, the Foundations of Power are laid in the Decrees of God, and there is no undermining of them. By me Kings Reign; denounces a thou∣sand woes to the Ʋndutiful and Seditious. Who shall dare to say they shall not Reign, when God says they shall? And especially upon the Terms of a Qui resistunt sibi ipsi condemnationem ferent. This minds me of the Celebrity of this day; a day for Sackcloath and Ashes: A day of Blackness and Horror: A day not to be mentioned, not to be thought of, but with weeping Eyes, and bleeding Hearts: A day of Sin, and a day of Judgment, meeting in the same Act; as in a kind of deplo∣rable Contention, which of the two should exceed the other. No Age, no Story can match either the Transcendent Degree, or the Daring Pomp and Ostentation of this wickedness. In short, behold a Great, a Glorious, and a Gracious Prince, ex∣posed upon a Stage as a Criminal of State: Ar∣raigned, Tried and Sentenced as a Traytor to his own Subjects; and his Head severed from his Body by the Common Ax, under a form of Justice. You have here before you the fruit of a Rebel∣lion, that perfected the Ruine of Three Kingdoms in the Murder of their Sovereign. The Common People felt on't too; and by contending for an unnatural Freedom, became the most wretched and contemptible of Slaves: I shall not need to
run into History, and rifle the Journals of those days, for instances of Merciless, and of Inexora∣ble Cruelties. The Havock that was made upon the Subjects Liberties and Properties; the Depreda∣tions upon the Revenues of the Crowns; the Oppres∣sions of Widows and Orphans, the Sacrilegious abuse of Holy Places, and Holy things, the concurring eviednces of the numerous Train of crying sins which were cast in, to enflame the Reckoning. This was our miserable condition. This, and as much worse, as it is possible for any man to imagine. And how could it well be otherwise, so long as the Laws were either silenced, or turned like Guns against their Master: and all Controversies left to the Decision of the Sword? What have I to do now, beloved Christians, but to beseech you to ponder well these things, and by a close and affectionate application of matters, to see what good may be drawn out of evil. Here was Resistance with a Vengeance. A Resistance at∣tended with all sorts of Sins, to draw on all sorts of Calamities: and the Punishment still treading upon heel of the wickedness. I would beg of you, as you love God and your Sovereign, your Souls, Bodies, Liberties and Estates; as you tender your Religion, your Country, Peace of Conscience, and a Good Name; do but look back now into the leading causes to these dismal effects. Consider the Reasonable Tendency and Operation of them; and how naturally one thing passes into another through the whole series of this History, from first
to last. You will find upon the scrutiny, that this Bloody Rebellion began in Thought, Thoughts broke into hard Words, and those Words were followed with Blowes. They began first with Jelousies, Fears, Misun∣derstandings, Misinformations, Invidious Reflections, False Reports, False Appearances of things; and from thence, sprung impotent Passions, Provoking Language, Bold and Intemperate Words, Audacious Prints and Discourses in diminution of the Royal Dignity, Character and Administration: for the ma∣king of the Prince Cheap and Contemptible, And at the same time, Clamorous Remonstrances and Com∣plaints were blown about to render him as Odi∣ous to the Common People; while the multitude in the mean while were misled by false Doctrines about the Original and Sacredness of Power, by false Notions of qualifying Conditions, cases of Govern∣ment mis-stated, false Descants upon the Lawes; and the Liberties of the Subject set above the Prerogative of the Prince: These were the intoxicating Amuse∣ments that poysoned the Understandings of the Ig∣norant; this was that Licence that put things to extremities; and without consideration either of Heaven or Hell, hurried us into those barbarous confusions that brought Charles the First of happy memory to the Scaffold. This was the Root of all our Woes; and from hence we may gather the ne∣cessity of setting a Guard upon our Actions, our Lips and our very Thoughts. Upon our Thoughts, not only by the exclusion of rash Censures, but with a regard to the reverence of Imperial Edicts and
Commands. And so upon our words; for the Re∣viling of a Prince, is a foul step towards the Be∣heading of him. The wounding of him in his Ho∣nour, is only a slyer way of striking him to the Heart. But pray take notice, I do not speak of Words only of Outrage and Disrespect; for the sins of Omission are sins of Commission, in this case: the want of Love and Affection is a grand failure in Duty. Neuters are lost to the ends and service of Government; and men grow cold by example. The ways of Flattery and Reproach are in some sort somewhat akin. That's the most dangerous flattery that is covered under an artificial appear∣ance of Reproof; and that the most Popular and Operative Calumny, that is couched under the countenance of Good Faith, Compassion and Respect; with the sting of a But in the tail of it. We are not only to Obey Kings, but to Please them also, in all things not repugnant to the will and com∣mands of a just and a gracious God. Nay we do but discharge our souls towards God himself in so doing. Let me add, that Obedience at last is not so much the Ornament of a Christian, as a perem∣ptory Obligation upon him: a Duty that he is bound to, upon a Penalty. But to perfect the Character, there must be certain free-will offerings over and above: There must be a study to please, and indu∣stry to find out what will please; a Joy in the Discovery of it, and Cheerfulness in the Performance. Lord, cries out a Pagan upon this Topique, If I had known thy Will, my Obedience should have pre∣vented thy Command: Shall the Feet presume to
direct the Head? or the Animal Nature take upon it self to give Laws to the Reasonable? Such as the Soul is to the Body, such is the Ruler to those that God's Wisdom hath placed in a state of Subjection. 'Tis the Office of the One to Direct, and of the Other to Excuse; without the Indi∣sputable Authority of the One, the Obedience of the Other, is but Precarious; and it is left at the choice of the Multitude, whether they shall think fit to be Above, or Below; what Government to Resolve upon, or whether there shall be any Go∣vernment or no. My words are too scant for my affections, and my Time for my Matter: But before I Conclude, I beseech you turn your Eyes yet once back again upon the Judicial Tragedy that hath occasioned this Anniversary. Be not imposed upon hereafter by false Maxims and Rumors; let us be Wise, though at the cost, upon Miserable Experiment, of Royal Blood, and Three desolated Kingdoms. Beware of Wolves in Sheeps clothing. May God open your Eyes, that you may see and discern the Blessings which you do this day enjoy; and grant that the calami∣ties of the last Age may be documental to the present, and those Ages that are yet to come. In a word, I shall commend to every one this General Rule to walk by. Where ever you find private Medlers in Politicks, commenting up∣on the Kings Prerogatives; or haranguing to the People, upon the subject of Male-Administration; know it to be a seditious Post, and Practice that they have taken up, for the undermining of the
Grown: and that there is most certainly a Snake under that Leaf. These are not Liberties to be ei∣ther given or taken; for when men are once pos∣sest with cross Principles, so as to set up Consci∣ence against Duty, to make God and the King, Plaintiff and Defendant; the Honester the men are, the more desperate is the Conspiracy. I am not unmindful that I have passed my, measures; but it is the goodness of Gods Pro∣vidence many times to turn Mourning into Re∣joycing; and to improve our deepest Humiliati∣ons into an occasion of Thansgiving. We have proceeded thus far in a dutiful, and a sorrowful reflection upon the most execrable Murder of one of the best of Princes; whose Memory ought to be for ever tender and dear to us, not only for the sake of his Royal Blood, Function and Quali∣ties; but as he was moreover the Instrument of Divine Providence, in transmitting unto us the Blessings, (in Compensation of so inestimable a Loss) which through God's Mercy we at this day enjoy, in the Life, Vertues and Government of our most Gracious Sovereign, whom God long pre∣serve. A Prince, in short, of Piety, Tenderness, and Justice, to the Perfect wish of all Good Men, and to the uttermost possibility of flesh and blood. May the Spirit of Grace and Wisdom rest upon his Sacred Head. May his Life be long, and his Reign happy; happy in Himself, in His Illustri∣ous Consort, and in a never-failing Succession, to inherit the Vertues as well as the Crown of their
Royal Progenitors. And it is, finally, our fault, beloved Christians, if we do not contribute all that's possible, by a cheerful and an Indispensable Resignation and Obedience, to the further comfort and satisfaction of a Prince, whom God, in a manner, miraculously hath placed over us. For a conclusion, I wish the words of my Text, Per me Reges Regnant, By me Kings Reign, which have been so often in my mouth, were deeply writ in your hearts; that so having discharged our Duty in this Life towards God, and our King, we may come all in the next to Reign for ever, with the King of Kings; which God of his in∣finit goodness grant us. In Nomine Patris, &c. FINIS.
